Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. IV (1886-1887)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1886 London: Trubner and Co. edition (Parts X-XI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc04soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

:  ' •" ■  OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  IV.
(CONTAINING  PARTS  X.  AND  XL)
1886-87.


London :

TRUBNER  AND  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL.
1887.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc04soci


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
October  29,  1885.

The  seventeenth  General  Meeting  of  this  Society  was  held  at
Queen  Anne's  Mansions.  St.  James'  Park,  on  Thursday,  October
29,  1885.  '*

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Vice-President,  in  the  Chair.

The  following  paper  was  read  : —

I.

HUMAN  PERSONALITY  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  HYPNOTIC

SUGGESTION.

By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

^D.v  iBilsi.,  Tou;  3'  vLxt  x«t  unvoiovzaq  iyiipsi.

The  facts  and  inferences  contained  in  the  present  paper  will  be  novel,
and  even  startling,  to  many  of  my  readers.  Whatever  may  be  thought
of  the  success  of  my  argument,  I  shall  hope  at  least  to  deserve  some
credit  for  candour.  Being  deeply  interested  in  a  particular  method  in
matters  psychological,  and  believing  that  this  method  ultimately  leads
to  certain  positive  results  which  I  hold  to  be  of  the  utmost  value,  I  am
nevertheless  about  to  show  that  this  very  method  leads  in  the  lirst  place
to  certain  negative  results,  which  so  far  as  they  go — and  that  is  very
far — do  at  least  appear  directly  to  contravene  those  very  conclusions
which  I  hold  as  so  uniquely  important.

The  method  to  which  I  refer  is  that  of  experimental  jisychology  in  its
strictest  sense — the  attempt  to  attack  the  great  problems  of  our  being
not  by  metaphysical  argument,  nor  by  merely  introspective  analysis,
but  by  a  study,  as  detailed  and  exact  as  in  any  other  natural  science,  of
all  such  phenomena  of  life  as  have  both  a  psychical  and  a  physical
aspect.  Pre-eminently  important  for  such  a  science  is  the  study  of
abnormal,  and,  I  may  add,  of  super  normal,  mental  and  physical  con-
ditions of  all  kinds.  First  come  the  spontaneous  states ;  sleep  and
dreams,  somnambulism,  trance,  hysteria,  automatism,  alternating  con-
sciousness, epilepsy,  insanity,  death  and  dissolution.  Then  parallel  with
these  spontaneous  states  runs  another  series  of  induced  states  ;  nar-
cotism, hypnotic  catalepsy,  hypnotic  somnambulism,  and  the  like,  which

B


2


Human  Personality.  [Oct.  29,


afford,  as  though  by  a  painless  and  harmless  psychical  vivisection,  an
unequalled  insight  into  the  mysteries  of  man.  Then,  again,  after
studying  the  machinery  thus  thrown  slightly  out  of  gear,  after  isolating
and  exaggerating  one  process  after  another  for  more  convenient  scrutiny,
we  may  return  to  those  normal  states  which  lie  open  to  our  habitual
introspection,  having  gained  a  new  power  of  disentangling  each  par-
ticular thread  in  the  complex  of  mentation,  as  when  the  microscopist
stains  his  object  with  a  dye  that  affects  one  tissue  only  among  several
which  are  indiscernibly  intermixed.

This  method,  though  not  absolutely  novel,  is  relatively  novel.  In
its  germ,  indeed,  it  is  at  least  as  old  as  Aristotle,  to  say  nothing  of  those
obvious  speculations  on  sleep  and  dreams  which  everywhere  form  the
rudiments  of  psychological  inquiry.  But  it  is  now  being  revived,  after
pretty  general  neglect,  in  a  manner  far  more  systematic  than  was  ever
possible  before,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  advance  of  physiology
during  the  last  century  has  supplied  an  unprecedented  quantity  of  raw
material  for  the  psychologist  to  work  up.

The  few  men  who,  like  Wundt,  are  both  physiologists  and  philo-
sophers, have  naturally  a  leading  part  in  such  a  task  as  this.  But
there  is  much  to  be  done  which  such  men  as  M.  Taine  and  M.  Ribot,
not  themselves  practical  physiologists,  are  better  fitted  to  accomplish
than  the  professed  alienist  or  the  practising  physician.  There  is  need
even  of  special  knowledge  in  directions  other  than  biological,  as  the
tractate  of  Professor  Li(^geois,  presently  to  be  mentioned,  will  suffi-
ciently show.  And,  in  fine,  any  student  who  honestly  endeavours
to  assimilate  the  facts  which  lie  ready  to  his  hand,  and  to  make
experiments  wliicli  are  within  the  reach  of  ordinary  intelligence  and
care,  has  at  this  juncture  a  fair  prospect  of  attaining  results  of  per-
manent value.

Such,  then,  is  the  method  of  inquiry  Avhich  will  be  attempted.
Next,  as  to  the  conclusions  to  be  demonstrated — conclusions  which,  as
I  have  implied,  I  should  deeply  regret  to  have  to  accept  as  complete  or
final.  My  own  conviction  is  that  we  possess — and  can  nearly  prove  it
—some  kind  of  soul,  or  spirit,  or  transcendental  self,  which  even  in  this
life  occasionally  manifests  powers  beyond  the  powers  of  our  physical
organism,  and  which  very  probably  survives  the  grave.  Thus  much  I
am  bound  in  candour  to  say,  lest  in  wliat  follows  I  should  seem  to  be
mystifying  the  reader,  or  sailing  under  colours  not  my  own.  But  I  am
not  going  to  attempt  to  prove  these  opinions  here  ■}  on  the  contrary,  I
am  going  to  try  to  show  that  certain  strong,  almost  universal  preposses-

1  The  reader  interested  in  tliis  topic  is  referred  to  an  article  on  "Automatic
Writing,^'  in  Part  viii.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.ll.,  and  to  tlie  forthcoming
book  entitled  Phantasms  of  the  Living.


1885.]


Human  Personality.


3


sions,  which  make  for  my  own  creed,  are  in  fact  unfounded.  I  believe
that  I  have  a  true  and  permanent  self,  but  I  shall  liere  maintain  that  if
I  have  such  a  self,  I  am  certainly  not  conscious  of  him,  and  that,
whatever  he  may  be,  lie  is  at  any  rate  not  what  I  take  him  for.  In
other  words,  the  old  empirical  conception  of  human  personality  must  be
analysed  into  its  constituent  elements  before  the  basis  of  a  scientific
doctrine  of  human  personality  can  safely  be  laid.

It  is  plain  that  if  a  question  of  such  magnitude  as  this  is  to  be  dealt
with  in  a  short  paper,  it  must  be  simplified  in  all  possible  ways,  though
at  the  cost  of  omitting  many  points,  and  of  leaving  many  points  so
stated  as  to  be  open  to  easy  attack.  And  first  of  all  we  want  some  kind
of  definition  to  start  from  as  embodying  the  ordinary  accepted  notion
of  ma-n's  personality.  Were  this  a  systematic  treatise,  it  would  be
necessary  to  discuss  definitions  of  the  Ego  or  Self  advanced  at  diflerent
times  by  such  various  authors  as  Hume,  Mill,  Sijencer,  Kant,  Schopen-
hauer, Maine  de  Biran,  Wundt,  ifec,  and  to  indicate  the  relation  which
the  views  here  expressed  bear  to  their  diflTerent  theories.  But  this  task
inust  be  postponed ;  for  the  first  tiling  needful  is  to  present  certain
novel  facts,  with  the  singular  conclusions  to  which  they  point,  in  as
clear  a  light  as  possible.  And  we  need  to  throw  these  facts  into  relief,
as  it  were,  upon  some  definition  of  man's  personality  which  shall  be
expressed  with  care  and  precision,  yet  shall  not  bear  too  marked
an  impress  of  any  one  philosophical  school.  Such  a  definition  I  find  in
what  is  called  the  Common-sense  philosophy  of  Reid.  The  passage
(from  the  essay  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man)  was  published  a
century  ago,  but  it  will  still,  I  imagine,  express  the  views  of  the  great
bulk  of  my  readers.

' '  The  conviction  which  every  man  has  of  his  identity,  as  far  back  as  his
memory  reaches,  needs  no  aid  of  philosophy  to  strengthen  it  ;  and  no
philosophy  can  weaken  it  without  first  producing  some  degree  of  insanity.
.  .  .  My  personal  identity,  therefore,  implies  the  continued  existence  of
that  indivisible  thing  which  I  call  myself.  Whatever  this  self  may  be,  it  is
something  wliich  thinks,  and  deliberates,  and  resolves,  and  acts,  and  suffers.
I  am  not  thought,  I  am  not  action,  I  am  not  feeling  :  I  am  something  that
thinks,  and  acts,  and  suffers.  My  thoughts  and  actions  and  feelings  change
every  moment ;  they  have  no  continued,  but  a  successive  existence  ;  but  that
self  or  J,  to  which  they  belong,  is  permanent,  and  has  the  same  relation  to
all  the  succeeding  thoughts,  actions,  and  feelings  which  I  call  mine.
The  identity  of  a  person  is  a  perfect  identity  ;  wherever  it  is  real  it  admits
■of  no  degrees  ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  a  person  should  be  in  part  the  same
and  in  part  different,  because  a  person  is  a  monad,  and  is  not  divisible
into  parts.  Identity,  when  apijlied  to  persons,  has  no  ambiguity,  and  admits
not  of  degrees,  or  of  more  and  less.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  rights  and
obligations,  and  of  all  accountableness  ;  and  the  notion  of  it  is  fixed  and
precise."


4


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


This  seems  a  fair  statement  of  the  obvious  verdict  of  introspection,
of  the  conclusion  to  which  we  come  when  we  regard  ourselves  as
complete  articles,  as  the  child  looks  at  her  doll.  But  suppose  that
instead  of  taking  ourselves  for  granted  as  ready-made  articles,  we  look
at  ourselves  not  with  the  child's  but  with  the  dollmaker's  eyes,  and
consider  how  we  could  most  cheaply  be  turned  out.  What  are  the
lowest  elements,  the  simplest  methods,  from  which  we  could  educe  this
apparent  psychical  unity  1

We  start,  then,  with  the  single  cell  of  protoplasm,  endowed  with
reflex  irritability.  We  attempt  a  more  complex  organism  by  dint  of
mere  juxtaposition,  attaining  tirst  to  what  is  styled  a  "  colonial  con-
sciousness," where  the  group  of  organisms  is  for  locomotive  purposes  a
single  complexly  acting  individual,  though  when  united  action  is  not
required  each  polyp  in  the  colony  is  master  of  his  simple  self.  Hence
we  advance  to  something  like  a  common  brain  for  the  whole  aggregate,
though  intellectual  errors  will  at  tirst  occur,  and  the  head  will  eat  its
own  tail  if  it  unfortunately  comes  in  its  way.  We  have  got  here  to  a
state  like  that  of  the  mad  John  Henry,  who  alternately  boxes  his  right
ear,  saying  that  John  is  a  rufiian,  and  his  left,  saying  that  Henry  is  a
fool.  We  rise  higher  ;  and  the  organism  is  definitely  at  unity  with
itself.  But  the  unity  is  still  a  unity  of  co-ordination,  not  of  creation  ;
it  is  a  unity  aggregated  from  multiplicity,  and  which  contains  no
element  deeper  than  the  struggle  for  existence  has  evolved  in  it.  The
cells  of  my  body  are  mine  in  the  sense  that,  for  their  own  comfort  and
security,  they  have  agreed  to  do  a  great  many  things  at  the  bidding  of
my  brain.  But  they  are  servants  with  a  life  of  their  own ;  they  can
get  themselves  hypertrophied,  so  to  speak,  in  the  kitchen,  without  my
being  able  to  stop  them.  Does  my  consciousness  testify  that  I  am  a
single  entity  1  This  only  means  tliat  a  stable  ccenesthesia  exists  in  me
just  now ;  a  sufficient  number  of  my  nervous  centres  are  acting  in
unison  ;  I  am  being  governed  by  a  good  working  majority.  Give  me  a
blow  on  the  head  which  silences  some  leading  centres,  and  the  rest  will
split  up  into  "  parliamentary  groups,"  and  brawl  in  delirium  or  madness.
Does  memory  prove  that  I  was  the  same  man  last  year  as  now  1  This
only  means  that  my  circulation  has  continued  steady  ;  the  brain's
nutrition  has  reproduced  the  modifications  impressed  on  it  by  stimuli  in
the  past.  My  organism  is  the  real  basis  of  my  personality ;  I  am  still
but  a  colony  of  cells,  and  the  unconscious  or  unknowable  from  which
my  thoughts  and  feelings  draw  their  unity  is  below  my  consciousness
and  not  above  it ;  it  is  my  protoplasmic  substructure,  not  my  trans-
cendental goal.

Such,  in  rough  outline,  is  the  theory  of  human  personality  towards
which  psycho-physical  inquiry  seems  at  present  to  point.  A  metaphor
may  perhaps  help  us  to  picture  to  ourselves  these  two  alternatives,  and


1885.]


Human  Personality.


5


the  kind  of  arguments  which  may  be  sought  to  prove  or  disprove  either
of  them.

Let  us  suppose  that  we  are  looking  at  a  ligld,  a  luminous  appearance
which  we  cannot  closely  approach,  and  that  we  are  discussing  whether
the  light  pi'oceeds  from  an  incandescent  solid  body,  or  whether  it  is
a  mere  shifting  luminosity  of  marsh-gases,  a  will-o'-the-wisp.

Our  first  impression  is  that  the  light  proceeds  from  a  solid  body,  for
the  following  reasons  : —

(1)  The  light  is  brilliant,  and  has  a  definite  central  glow.  That  is
to  say,  in  the  parable,  that  our  sense  of  personality  is  sti'ong,  and  our
controlling  tvill  an  unmistakable  and  definite  authority.

(2)  The  light  is  continuous,  with  certain  brief  regular  intermissions
only,  which  we  take  to  be  caused  by  the  supply  of  fresh  fuel.  That  is
to  say,  our  memory  seems  a  continuous  tlu'ead,  with  only  the  regular
intermission  of  sleep,  during  which  we  may  suppose  that  fresh  energy
is  being  gained,  without  any  real  break  in  tlie  personal  con-
tinuity.

(3)  The  liglit  is  stationari/,  and  while  it  lasts  its  general  aspect
remains  much  the  same,  subject  to  a  gradual  steady  growth  when  first
kindled,  and  ultimately  to  decline  and  extinction.

That  is  to  say,  our  tastes  and  character  remain  pretty  much  the
same.  The  special  capacities  for  pleasure  and  pain,  action  and  per-
ception, which  characterise  each  of  us,  do  not  change  suddenly  and
arbitrarily,  but  grow  with  our  growth,  and  slowly  alter  with  our  decay.

Now  let  us  see  how  far  these  three  elements  of  human  personality,
viz.,  centi-al  will,  continuous  memory,  homogeneous  character,  retain
their  definiteness  when  subjected  to  analytic  experiment.  And  I  shall
here  consider  one  form  of  experiment  alone.  I  shall  treat  only  of  the
hypnotic  state,  a  condition  which  afibrds  us  (in  Professor  Beaunis'
words),  "  une  veritable  vivisection  morale,''^  but  a  vivisection,  as  I  have
already  said,  which  is  absolutely  painless  and  harmless — nay,  is  often
accompanied  by  direct  benefit  to  its  subject.  By  thus  throwing  the
psychical  machinery  a  little  out  of  gear,  by  sending  all  the  energy  of

1  This  view  of  liypiiotism.  as  above  all  things  a  method  of  psychological
experiment  (rather  than  as  a  mere  physiological  curiosity,  or  as  a  therapeutic
agency)  pervades  all  that  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  written  on  tlie  subject,  and
was  distinctly  formulated  in  an  article  in  the  National  Review  for  July,  1885,
also  printed  in  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Part  ix.  The  modern  French  school  of
psycho-physicists  have  also  (M.  Richet  especially)  been  tending  for  some  time
towards  this  view,  and  Professor  Beaunis  has  given  it  explicit  expression  in  an
article  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  July,  1885.  Baron  Du  Prel,  in  his
Philosophie  der  Mystik  1885,)  has  insisted,  with  much  ingenuity  and

detail,  on  the  lessons  derivable  from  hypnotic  or  spontaneous  displacements  of
the  threshold  of  consciousness.


6


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


the  engine  through  a  few  looms  arbitrarily  selected  out  of  the  myriads
which  are  hal:iitually  at  work,  we  can  watch  the  effects  of  inhibition  and
exaggeration  as  applied  to  limited  centres  of  psychical  energy  whicli  we
have  no  other  way  of  isolating  from  the  confused  complexity  of  normal
life.  Hypnotism^  is  in  its  infancy  ;  but  any  psychology  which  neglects
it  is  superannuated  already.

One  further  word  is  necessary  before  I  come  to  the  experiments
themselves.  It  may  be  asked  whether  the  French  experiments  which  I
am  about  to  mention  are  altogether  trustworthy  ;  whether  there  has  not
been  simulation  on  the  part  of  the  subjects  who  are  credited  with  such
extraordinaiy  performances.  I  will  briefly  give  my  reasons  for  credit-
ing the  cases  which  I  shall  cite.  In  the  first  place,  I  have  myself  at
various  times  obtained  results,  on  .sulijects  well  known  to  me,  which
were  altogether  analogous  to  these  French  cases,  though  less  striking
and  conspicuous.  I  must  recommend  this  practical  method  of  gaining
conviction,  above  all  others,  to  any  serious  inquirer.  In  the  second
place,  various  groups  of  experiments  carefully  performed  by  committees
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  in  which  I  took  part,  and  recorded
in  our  Proceedinc/s,  give  results  which  are  also  in  liarmony  with  the
results  of  Messrs.  Bernheim,  Beaunis,  ifec.  And  in  the  third  place  I
have,  through  the  kindness  of  Drs.  Charcot,  Fere,  Bernheim,  and
Liebeault,  myself  witnessed  typical  experiments  at  the  Salpetriere  in
Paris,  in  the  Hopital  Civil  at  Nancy,  and  in  Dr.  Liebeault's  private
practice  ;  have  been  allowed  myself  to  perform  experiments  (with  the
aid  of  Mr.  Gurney  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers)  on  the  principal  subjects
wliose  cases  are  recorded  ;  and  have  in  other  ways  satisfied  myself  that
the  cases  vouched  for  by  Drs.  Beaunis,  Bernheim,  Fere,  Liebeault,  Paul
Richer,  Charles  Richet,  and  Professor  Liegeois,  have  been  recorded  with

1  I  have  used  the  term  "hypnotism"  throughout  this  paper,  hut  I  flo  not
concede  that  the  hypnotic  pheiionieiiaare  always  produced  by  mere  monotonous
stimulation  or  other  mechanical  causes.  I  still  hold  to  the  view  of  Cuvier,  that
there  is  in  some  cases  a  specific  action  of  one  organism  on  another,  of  a  kind  as
yet  unknown.  This  theory  is  generally  connoted  liy  the  term  "mesmerism."
Since  the  days  of  Braid  there  has  heen  a  tendency  to  exclude  it  as  unnecessary
and  even  fantastic.  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  (with  Dr.  Despine,  in  France)  stand
almost  alone  among  recent  writers  in  adhering  to  it.  Our  contention  has
steadily  heen  that  no  one  has  as  yet  advanced  experiments  numerous  or  careful
enough  to  disprove  the  specific  influence  in  question,  and  that  certain  of  our  own
experiments,  of  Esdaile's,  &c.,  come  very  near  to  proving  it.  It  is  worthy  of
note  that  Dr.  Liebeault,  of  Nancy,  the  most  experienced  of  all  living
hypnotizers,  after  practising  hypnotism  for  twenty-five  years  on  several
thousand  persons,  and  writing  a  treatise  against  the  theory  of  specific  influence,
has  recently  convinced  himself  by  still  further  experiment  that  such  specific
influence  does  in  some  cases  exist.  {Etude  suv  le  Zoomagnctismc,  par  A.
Liebeault,  188.3.)


1885.]


Hitman  Personality.


7


the  candour  and  accuracy  for  which  the  reputation  of  these  savants  is
in  itself  no  small  guarantee.^

I  may  add  that  although  the  validity  of  the  cases  has  been  assailed
from  an  a  priori  point  of  view  by  several  writers,  I  cannot  find  that
any  competent  person  who  has  actually  witnessed  the  experiments  has
expressed  any  doubt  as  to  their  trustworthiness.  I  am  anxious  that
wider  attention  should  be  directed  to  these  singular  results,  and  further
criticisms  made.  But  in  the  meantime  I  think  that  the  reasons  given
above  justify  me  in  treating  them  as  veritable  acquisitions  to  science.^

I  begin,  then,  with  the  question  of  the  light  thrown  by  hypnotic
experiments  on  human  free-rvill.  The  reader  will  naturally  dread  the
revival  of  so  well-worn  a  controversy.  But  I  venture  to  promise  him
something  really  new,  namely  a  distinct  experimental  proof  that  my
sensation  of  free  choice  in  the  performance  of  an  action  is  perfectly
consistent  with  the  absolute  foreknowledge  of  my  action  on  the  part  of
another  person,  and  even  with  his  distinct  imposition  of  that  action
upon  me.  I  begin  intentionally  with  the  smallest  and  most  trivial
cases.  And  first  I  take  an  experiment  so  common  and  rudimentaiy
that  probably  many  of  my  readers  have  seen  it  tried,  though  its  full
significance  has  hardly  been  realised.

I  partially  hypnotize  a  subject  and  say  to  him,  "  Now  you  can't  open
your  eyes  !  "  He  keeps  his  eyes  shut.  "  Now  laugh  !  "  He  laughs.
"  Now  your  name  is  Nebuchadnezzar.  What  is  your  name  1  "  "  Nebu-
chadnezzar." I  wake  him  him  up  and  say,  "  You  were  hypnotized ;  you
could  not  help  obeying  my  suggestions."  "  Not  at  all,"  he  replies.  "  I
did  exactly  what  I  pleased.  I  shut  my  eyes  because  I  was  tired  of
looking  at  you.  I  laughed  at  your  absurd  belief  in  your  own  powers.  I
called  myself  Nebuchadnezzar  merely  in  order  to  answer  you  according
to  your  folly."  "Vei-ygood;  you  have  had  your  joke,  but  now  the
joke  is  over ;  you  are  not  to  adopt  my  suggestions  if  you  can  possibly

1  I  ought  to  add  that  neither  Mr.  Gurney  nor  I  can  always  concur  with  these
savants  as  to  the  exact  interpretation  to  be  placed  on  the  observed  phenomena  ;
but  this  is  a  different  and  a  more  technical  matter,  which  need  not  here  be
discussed.

2  The  experiments  on  which  this  paper  is  largely  based  will  be  found  mainly
in  the  following  works: — Beaunis  :  Recherches  Hxpei-imentalcs,  ct-c,  ii.,  Paris,
Bailliere,  1886.  Bernheim  :  Dc  la  suggestion  dccns  Vetat  hypnotique  et  dans
Vetat  de  veille  (1884).  Liebeault :  Du  soinmeil  et  des  etats  ancdogues  (1886).
Liegeois  :  De  la  suggestion  hypinotiquc  dans  ses  rapports  avec  le  droit  civil  et  le
droit  criminel  (1884).  Paul  Eicher :  Traite  de  Vhystero-epilepsie  (2nd  Edn.,
1885).  Charles  Riehet :  iV;o»ime  rintclligence  (18S3).  Proceedings  S. P. E.,
Vols.  i.  and  ii.  (Triibner,  1883,  1885).  Dr.  Pitres  and  the  Bordeaux  School  have
obtained  precisely  analogous  phenomena,  though  I  have  not  mentioned  them
here  ;  wishing  to  confine  this  paper  to  cases  of  which  I  have  some  personal
knowledge.  Prof.  Bernheim 's  new  book,  "  De  la  suggestion  et  de  ses  applica-
tions a  la  therapeutique, "  Paris,  1886,  contains  a  great  many  fresh  cases.


8


Huvum  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


help  it."  "  Agreed."  I  make  some  more  passes  and  again  ask  him  his
name.  He  is  silent,  and  I  press  the  question.  "  Nebuchadnezzar,"  he
slowly  and  hesitatingly  replies.  I  wake  him  up  and  ask  him  why  he
said  this.  "  Oli,  when  the  time  came,"  he  says,  "  I  thought  that  I
might  as  well  call  myself  Nebuchadnezzar  as  anything  else."  Here  we
have  a  confusicm  of  will  ;  the  subject  could  not  in  reality  help  making
the  suggested  reply  ;  he  felt  the  hypnotizer's  will  obsessing  him,  but  yet
was  just  able  to  maintain  a  kind  of  awkward  half-belief  in  his  own
spontaneity.  My  next  example  shall  be  a  transitional  case,  extremely
trivial,  but  interesting  because  the  subject  was  able  to  describe  with
exactness  the  mode  of  upspringing  of  the  impulse  in  her  mind.  I  may
remark  that  it  is  usually  more  difficult  to  implant  these  suggestions  in  a
mind  which  has  been  well  educated  and  is  accustomed  to  self-control.
A  suggestion  which  will  take  effect  in  a  heedless,  vacant  mind  will
often  be  crushed  in  its  birth  by  a  habit  of  repressing  inopportune  im-
pulses. The  subject  of  the  present  experiment  had  been  many  times
hypnotized  by  me  and  was  susceptible  to  suggestions,  but  she  opposed
so  much  sub-conscious  resistance  to  doing  anything  outre  or  unusual  that
it  was  hard  to  hit  on  a  suggestion  of  just  the  depth  of  absurdity  which
her  unconscious  mind  would  tolerate.

One  day  when  slie  was  in  the  hypnotic  ti'ance  I  suggested  to  lier  that
soon  after  waking  slie  would  continue  a  task  on  wliicli  she  was  engaged
with  another  lady,  of  colouring  a  large  sketch  which  included  some
brickwork,  and  that  she  would  paint  the  bricks  blue.  I  repeated  once
or  twice,  "  Blue  is  the  prettiest  colour  for  bricks  ;  you  will  paint  them
blue."  I  then  woke  her,  and,  as  usual,  she  remembered  nothing  which
had  been  said  to  her  in  tlie  trance.  Very  soon  she  began  to  paint  the
diagram,  and  when  she  came  to  the  bricks  she  hesitated  awhile,  and
then  said  to  the  other  lady,  "  I  suppose  it  would  never  do  to  paint  these
bricks  blue  .?"  "  Why  blue  T  was  the  rejoinder.  "  Oh  !"  was  the  rather
shame-faced  explanation,  "  it  only  occurred  to  me  that  it  would  look
rather  nice."  She  was  then  told  the  true  origin  of  this  impulse,  and  she
stated  that  the  words  "  Blue  bricks  !  blue  bricks  !  "  had  been  running  in
her  head,  and  that  the  absurd  notion  of  how  well  the  colour  would  look
had  got  such  hold  of  lier  that  she  could  not  help  making  the  childish
proposal  to  use  tlie  blue  paint.  Here  we  have  a  vanishing  trace  of
obsession,  a  subject  feeling  an  apparently  spontaneous  impulse  to  perform
the  act  suggested,  yet  just  aware  of  an  oddness  in  the  way  in  which  the
impulse  came.  Next  to  this  come  the  cases  of  complete  illusion  of  free-
will, where  the  subject  in  performing  tlie  suggested  act  is  urged  by  an
impulse  which  seems  to  him  quite  self-originated,  and  which  he  justifies,
if  called  on  to  do  so,  by  some  imaginary  reason  of  his  own.  I  again
intentionally  select  a  case  where  the  suggestion  is  of  an  absolutely
trivial  kind.


1885.]


Human  Personality.


9


Dr.  Bernheim  suggested  to  a  hypnotized  subject  in  the  Nancy  hospital
that  when  he  awoke  he  would  take  Dr.  X.'s  umbrella,  open  it,  and  walk
twice  up  and  down  the  covered  gallery.  He  woke,  took  the  umbrella,
•and  walked  as  suggested,  though  with  the  umbrella  shut.  Asked  why
he  was  walking  in  the  gallery,  he  answered,  "C'est  une  idee  !  je  me
promene  parfois."  "But  why  have  you  taken  Dr.  X.'s  umbrella  1 "
"  Oh,  I  thought  it  was  my  own  ;  I  will  replace  it."  I  have  seen  many
experiments  of  this  sort,  and  it  is  hard  to  persuade  the  subjects  tbat
any  mind  but  their  own  has  started  the  trivial  act.

The  advantage  of  these  trivial  cases  is,  that  they  exhibit  the  power
of  suggestion  pure  and  simple,  without  any  kind  of  accompanying
emotional  shock.  The  idea  is  placed  in  the  mind  as  quietly  as  a  seed
in  the  ground,  and  it  works  itself  upwards  into  visible  fulfilment  at  the
appointed  time  with  the  same  tranquil  regularity  as  tlie  springing  blade
in  its  season.  But  tlie  infused  idea  may  be  of  a  more  startling  kind.  A
good  subject  may  be  made  to  do  almost  anything,  and  to  justify  the  act
on  any  trivial  ground  which  occurs  to  him  at  the  moment.  Nor  is  this
influence  confined  to  the  period  of  trance.  In  favourable  subjects  the
command  is  executed  even  after  the  subject  has  been  awakened,  and
appears  perfectly  normal.  Professor  Li^geois,  whose  speciality  is
medical  jurisprudence,  has  taken  much  pains  to  induce  Dr.  Li(jbeault's
patients  to  commit  a  number  of  crimes — as  murder,  theft,  perjury,  &c.,
and  has  made  them  give  him  receipts  for  large  sums  of  money  which  he
has  never  really  lent  them.  I  abridge  a  passage  from  his  careful  and
conscientious  tractate.

"  I  have  spoken  of  my  friend  M.  P. ,  a  former  magistrate.  I  must  accuse
myself  of  having  endeavoured  to  get  him  murdered,  and  this  moreover  in  the
presence  of  the  Commissaire  Central  of  Nancy,  who  witnessed  the  occurrence.

"  I  provided  myself  with  a  revolver  and  several  cartridges.  In  order  to
prevent  the  subject,  whom  I  selected  at  random  from  among  the  five  or  six
somnambules  who  happened  to  be  at  M.  Liebeault's  house  on  that  day,  from
supposing  that  the  thing  was  a  joke,  I  charged  one  of  the  barrels  and  fired  it
ofl'  in  the  garden,  showing  a  card  which  the  ball  had  pierced.  In  less  than  a
quarter  of  a  minute  I  suggested  to  Mme.  G.  the  idea  of  killing  M.  P.  by  a
pistol-shot.  With  perfect  docility  Mme.  G.  advanced  on  M.  P.  and  fired  at
him  with  the  revolver.  Interrogated  immediately  by  the  Commismire  Ceidral,
she  avowed  her  crime  with  entire  indifference.  '  She  had  killed  M.  P.
because  she  did  not  like  him.  She  knew  the  consequences.  If  her  life  was
taken,  she  would  go  to  the  next  world,  like  her  victim,  whom  she  saw  (by
hallucination)  lying  before  her,  batlied  in  blood.'  She  was  asked  whether  it
was  not  I  who  had  suggested  to  her  the  idea  of  the  nmrder.  She  declared
that  it  was  not  so — that  she  alone  was  guilty,  and  that  she  would  take  the
consequences."  [It  had  not  been  s^tggestecl  to  her  that  her  act  was  due  to
suggestio'ii.^

Similarly  Mile.  A.  E.  (a  very  amiable  young  person)  was  made  by


10


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


Professor  Liegeois  to  fire  on  her  own  mother  with  a  pistol  which  she
had  no  means  of  knowing  to  be  unloaded.  She  was  also  made  to  accuse
herself  before  a  juge  d'instruction  of  having  assassinated  an  intimate
friend  with  a  knife.  When  she  thus  accused  herself  she  appeared  to  be
in  a  perfectly  normal  waking  state.  And  even  the  most  bizarre  actions,
performed  under  suggestion,  look  perfectly  spontaneous  when  the  subject
carries  them  out.  The  action  may  be  deferred  for  hours  or  days  after
the  suggestion  is  given.  Professor  Liegeois  gave  to  M.  N.  a  paper  of
white  powder,  informing  him  that  it  was  arsenic,  and  that  on  his  return
home  he  must  dissolve  it  in  a  glass  of  water  and  give  it  to  his  aunt.  In
the  evening  a  note  from  the  aunt  arrived  as  follows  :  "Madame  M.  has
the  honour  to  inform  M  Liegeois  that  the  experiment  has  completely
succeeded. Her  nephew  duly  presented  her  with  the  poison."

In  this  case  tlie  culprit  entirely  forgot  his  action,  and  was  unwilling
to  believe  that  he  had  endeavoured  to  poison  a  relative  to  whom  he  was
much  attached.

Experiments  like  these  will  produce  in  the  minds  of  many  readers  a
feeling  of  moral  shock  and  alarm.  In  the  first  place,  they  may
naturally  fear  that  a  power  like  this  may  be  abused  for  evil  purposes,
and  the  subject  induced  to  commit  real  as  well  as  imaginary  crimes.
And  in  the  second  place,  they  may  suspect  that  even  if  no  actual  crime
is  committed,  the  mere  fact  of  the  subjection  of  the  will  to  temptation
must  leave  some  stain  on  the  moral  nature  of  the  subject  who  has  thus
acted  out  a  guilty  dream.  I  do  not  account  the  first  of  these  apprehen-
sions as  chimerical,  nor  the  second  as  squeamish  ;  nay,  I  consider  on  the
other  hand  that  the  advocate  of  hypnotic  experiment  is  bound  in
candour  to  exhibit  as  fully  as  I  have  done  the  grounds  for  moral  demur.

But  speaking  from  the  experience  of  those  best  qualified  to  judge,  I
feel  justified  in  replying  that  there  is  little  fear  that  cases  like  these  will
ever  be  more  than  the  harmless  curiosities  of  the  lecture-room.  As
regards  the  danger  of  the  suggestion  of  real  acts  of  crime,  it  must  be
remembered  in  the  first  place  that  Professor  Liegeois'  subjects  were  the
picked  specimens  of  a  sensitive  nation,  and  that  among  thousands  of
English  men  and  women  perhaps  not  one  case  of  similar  susceptibility
would  be  found.  Again,  there  is  a  simple  precaution  which  the  French
experimenters  recommend  as  effectual.  If  a  subject  feels  that  he  is
becoming  too  sensitive,  let  him  get  some  trustworthy  friend  to  hypnotize
him,  and  to  suggest  to  him  that  no  one  else  will  be  able  to  do  so.  This
suggestion,  it  appears,  fulfils  itself  like  the  rest,  and  tlie  bane  works  its
own  antidote  without  further  trouble.

For  my  part,  especially  where  a  female  sulyect  was  concerned,  I
should  recommend  the  still  further  precaution  of  not  allowing  any  one
except  a  trustworthy  friend  to  hypnotize  her  at  all.  As  to  the  second
ground  of  apprehension,  the  possible  tarnishing  of  the  moral  sense,  or


1885.]


Human  Personality.


11


weakening  of  the  moral  libre,  by  the  mere  performance,  in  however
abnormal  a  state,  of  immoral  acts,  the  requisite  precautions  are,  I
think,  very  easy  to  take.  In  the  lirst  place,  the  subject,  unless  told  to
remember  the  acts,  will  absolutely  forget  them — always  when  they  are
performed  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  and  generally  when  (like  the  poisoning
of  the  aunt)  they  are  performed  by  the  subject  after  he  has  been
awakened  from  the  trance,  and  in  a  condition  apparently  normal.  They
remain  no  more  in  the  subject's  mind  than  if  he  had  read  them  in
a  book  and  forgotten  them.  Certain  precautions,  nevertheless,  may
well  be  taken.  I  should  avoid,  for  instance,  making  any  sugges-
tion which  at  all  resembled  a  possible  temptation  of  the  subject's
waking  state.  I  should  not  myself  like  to  dream  of  injuring  some  real
personal  enemy,  but  should  feel  no  compunction  if  I  dreamt  that  I  had
killed  the  Emperor  of  China.  Now  when  the  dutiful  and  affectionate
Mile.  A.  E.  shot  at  her  mother,  it  was  not  like  a  dream  of  yielding  to
a  temptation,  it  was  like  the  purely  fantastic  dream  which  has  no  root
in  the  moral  nature.

Professor  Liegeois  justly  urges  that  his  experiments  have  a  practical
value  as  showing  tliat  in  the  case  of  a  person  charged  with  some  odd
and  motiveless  olience,  it  is  worth  while  to  find  out  by  experiment
whether  the  act  may  not  have  been  performed  in  a  somnambulic  state.
In  two  cases  already,  persons  thus  accused  have  been  hypnotized  on  a
physician's  suggestion,  and  it  has  been  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
judge  that  they  were  irresponsible  for  the  acts  ascribed  to  them,  which
had  been  performed,  without  waking  intention,  in  a  state  of  spontaneous
trance.^

In  fine,  then,  the  hypnotic  trance,  like  alcohol,  chloroform,  and  other
means  of  acting  on  the  nervous  system,  can  conceivably  be  employed  by
bad  men  for  bad  ends.  But  this  evil  is  not  haixl  to  avert,  and  we  shall
see,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  trance  has,  in  good  hands,  a  moralising
efficacy  of  great  value — that  it  is  a  means  not  only  to  the  advancement
of  knowledge,  but  to  the  improvement  of  character.

For  the  present  I  must  return  to  the  remark  briefly  made  above
that  the  fulfilment  of  the  hypnotic  suggestion  can  be  postponed  at
pleasure  for  days,  even  for  months,  after  the  date  when  it  is  made.  I
abridge  a  characteristic  case  of  Professor  Bernheim's  "  In  the  month
of  August  I  asked  S.  (an  old  soldier),  during  the  trance,  '  On  what  day
in  the  fiirst  week  of  October  will  you  be  at  liberty  1 '  '  On  the  Wednes-
day.' '  Well,  on  that  day  you  will  call  on  Dr.  Liebeault ;  you  will  find
in  his  room  the  President  of  the  Republic,  who  will  present  you  with  a

1  Annates  Medico-psyclwlogiques,  1881,  p.  468.  Bevuc  Scientijiquc,  Decem-
ber, 1883.

^  De  la  suggestion,  p.  29.


12


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


medal  and  a  pension.'  I  said  nothing  more  to  him  on  the  matter,  and
on  awakening  he  remembered  nothing.  On  October  3,  Dr.  Liebeault
wrote  to  me  as  follows  :  '  S.  has  just  called  at  my  house  ;  he  walked
straight  to  my  bookcase,  and  made  a  respectful  salute  ;  then  I  heard  him
utter  the  word  "  Excellence!  "  Soon  he  held  out  his  right  hand,  and
answered,  "  Merci,  Excellence."  I  asked  him  to  whom  he  was  speaking.
"  Mais,  au  President  de  la  Republique  !  "  He  turned  again  to  the
bookcase  and  saluted,  then  went  away.  The  witnesses  of  the  scene
naturally  asked  me  what  that  madman  was  doing.  I  answered  that  he
was  not  mad,  but  as  reasonable  as  tliey  or  I,  only  another  person  was
acting  in  him.'  "

"  I  can  say,"  says  Professor  Beaunis,  "  to  a  hypnotized  subject  during
his  sleep,  '  In  ten  days  you  will  do  such  a  thing  at  such  an  hour,'  and  I
can  write  in  a  sealed  letter  what  I  have  told  him  to  do.  At  the
appointed  hour  tlie  subject  executes  the  suggestion  exactly,  convinced
that  he  acts  thus  because  he  chooses,  and  that  he  could  have  acted
differently  ;  and  yet,  if  I  make  him  open  the  letter,  he  finds  the  deed
which  he  has  just  done  prescri):)ed  for  him  ten  days  beforehand."

I  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  mere  perusal  of  a  string  of  anecdotes
like  these  will  produce  much  effect  on  persons  who  have  never  them-
selves seen  anything  of  tlie  kind.  But  when  one  has  become  practically
familiar  with  the  course  of  the  illusion,  when  one  has  seen  the  look  of
alert  interest  which  accompanies  the  emergence  of  the  suggested  idea,
in  its  due  time,  into  waking  consciousness,  the  look  of  eager  decision
with  wliich  the  subject  carries  out  the  notion  which  he  supposes  to  be  so
entirely  liis  own,  one  cannot  help  feeling  that  the  distinction  between
reflex  and  voluntary  action  has  become  dubious  indeed.  "A  voluntary
act,"  one  is  inclined  to  say,  in  Ribot's  words,  "  is  only  a  reflex  act  of
the  whole  organism."

Far  down  at  the  beginnings  of  life  comes  the  scrap  of  protoplasm
with  its  power  of  re-acting  to  certain  stimuli — a  power  which  at  first
seems  hardly  to  suggest  anything  more  tlian  a  mere  special  complexity
of  molecular  arrangement.  Gradually  the  power  of  reaction  becomes
more  and  more  subtle,  yet  for  a  long  time  no  one  suggests  conscious
will.  Tlien  with  the  higher  animals  we  have  the  controversy  whether
they  are  automdta  or  no, — whether  they  have  a  consciousness  comparable
to  our  own.  Yet,  even  assuming  that  they  have  consciousness,  it  by  no
means  follows  that  they  have  the  sensation  of  free  choice.  It  is  even
doubtful  how  far  children  and  savages  have  this  sensation.  Anyone
who  remembers  his  early  childliood  cleai'ly  will  probably  recall  occasions
when  he  was  performing  what  might  have  seemed  an  act  of  choice,  but
where  the  subjective  sensation  was  merely  of  a  bewildered  waiting  for
some  suggestion  or  impulse  from  without  or  within.  The  act  of  choice,
even  with  many  adults,  is  little  more  than  a  pause  which  gives  the


1885.]


Human  Personality.


13


organism  time  to  respond  with  an  action  which  is  ahnost  as  manifestly
reflex  as  the  knee-jerk  after  a  blow  below  the  patella.^  The  sense  that
"we  are  choosing  rests,  perhaps,  on  nothing  more  than  the  degree  of
attention  which  the  inevitable  act  requires  ;  and  the  so-called  choice,  to
use  M.  Ribot's  phrase  once  more,  is  the  mere  verdict  of  a  jury  which
only  declares  on  which  side  the  preponderating  arguments  lie,  without
itself  adding  force  to  any  of  them.

Now,  in  hypnotic  suggestion,  we  actually  supply  the  arguments
which  go  to  the  subject's  inward  jury ;  we  actually  implant  the
impulses  which,  sometimes  at  once,  sometimes  after  a  long  period  of
incubation,  work  themselves  out  inevitably  in  the  appropriate  acts.
Just  in  proportion  to  the  vigour  and  distinctness  of  our  suggestion  is
the  eagerness  and  accuracy  of  the  fulfilment  on  which  we  can  count.
"  Fixed  fate,  free-will,  foreknowledge  absolute,"  have  been  deljated,  if
we  may  believe  the  poets,  with  somewhat  abstract  arguments,  by  men
and  devils  since  the  epoch  of  the  war  in  Heaven.  The  experiments
above  alluded  to  may  not  be  altogether  acceptable  to  human  or  demonic
pride,  but  they  do  certainly  infuse  into  the  time-worn  discussion  a  little
freshness  and  fact.

I  pass  on  to  the  light  which  our  experiments  throw  on  tlie  nature
of  memory.  And  liere,  perhaps,  more  strongly  than  anywhere,  is
experimental  psychology  upsetting  the  old  metaphysical  views.  How
many  pages  have  been  written  to  show  that  the  persistence  of  the  one
thread  of  memory  through  all  changes  is  a  proof  of  the  true  personality
of  man  !  And  it  used  to  seem  reasonable  to  admit  that  tliere  ivas  in
fact  such  a  continuity  of  memory — that  is,  if  we  ignore  the  years  before
a  man  has  gained  his  memory  and,  sometimes,  after  he  has  lost  it,  and
agree  to  pass  over  the  fact  that  he  ever  either  sleep  or  dreams.  But
here  again,  hypnotism  has  brought  into  prominence  a  class  of  facts
which  used  to  be  cited  only  as  rare  curiosities.  The  phenomena  of
alternating  memory — foi'merly  observed  only  in  a  few  cases  of  acci-
dent or  disease — are  now  commonly  produced  in  normal  persons,
with  every  variety  of  relation  between  the  new  memory  and  the
old.

My  limits  forbid  me  to  enter  on  this  complex  topic,  on  which  much
has  been  already  written.-  The  principal  novelty  which  the  skill  and
good  fortune  of  the  school  of  Nancy  has  enabled  them  to  illustrate  is
the  curious  state  of  passage  from  one  train  of  memory  to  another — the
fading  away  of  all  recollection  of  a  "  suggested  "  action,  though  that

1  I  am  speaking  here  of  onlinary  life  ;  I  am  not  discussing  what  kind  of
contra-impulsive,  power  we  can  bring  to  bear  in  a  moral  crisis.

-  ^e.e>  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Vol.  i.,  p.  22'2  sqq.,  287  sqq.  ;  Vol.  ii.,  p.  66  sqq.,
282  sqq.,  &c.


14


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


action  may  have  been  carried  out  in  apparently  complete  wakefulness.
I  give  an  instance  from  Professor  Beaunis^  : —

"Mile.  A.  E.  had  just  arrived  at  Professor  Liebeault's.  As  soon  as  she
came  in  I  said  :  '  In  one  minute  you  will  go  and  change  the  places  of  the  two
busts  (Thiers  and  Beranger)  which  are  on  that  bracket. '  At  the  suggested
moment  she  performed  the  action,  and  had  entirely  forgotten  it  the  moment
after.  Mme.  H.  A.,  who  had  come  with  her,  said  :  '  I  am  sure  that  I  should
not  have  acted  like  that.'  '  Very  well,'  I  said,  '  in  one  minute  you  will  take
a  sou  from  my  waistcoat  pocket  and  put  it  in  your  pocket.'  When  the
minute  was  over,  after  a  moment  of  hesitation,  Mme.  H.  A.  rose,  put  her
hand  into  my  waistcoat  pocket,  took  out  a  sou,  and  pocketed  it.  Shortly
afterwards  I  said  to  her,  '  Emjity  your  pocket.'  She  looked  at  me  with
surprise,  but  did  so,  and  in  sju'eading  out  the  contents  found  the  sou,  which
she  looked  at  for  a  moment,  and  then  put  in  her  purse.  '  That  sou  is  not
yours,' said  a  bystander,  'You  have  just  taken  it  from  M.  Beaunis.'  She
could  remember  nothing  about  this,  and  was  by  no  means  convinced  that  the
sou  was  not  her  own."

Most  persons  liave  observed  how  easily  a  dream  slips  from  the
mind.  We  wake  from  an  amusing  dream,  and  resolve  to  repeat  it  at
breakfast,  but  in  a  few  minutes  every  trace  of  it  has  disappeared.  The
case  given  above  is  precisely  similar.  The  act  performed  in  obedience
to  suggestion  did  not  in  reality  belong  to  the  train  of  waking  nif^mories,
and  affected  no  permanent  lodgment  among  them.  Although  the
subject  looked  perfectly  normal,  and  was  normal  in  all  other  respects,
both  when  the  act  was  suggested  and  when  it  was  performed,  that
special  act  was  originated  by  nervous  centres  still  affected  (in  some  way
at  present  inexplicable)  by  previous  hypnotization.  It  would  be
remembered  no  doubt  in  a  subsequent  trance,  though  rejected  by  the
waking  current  of  memory.

I  tried  myself  an  experiment  of  this  sort  on  Madame  H.  A.,  Dr.
Liebeault  having  hypnotized  her,  on  August  31st,  1885.  I  requested
him  to  tell  her  that  at  seven  o'clock  that  evening  she  would  see  me
entfr  her  salon,  that  I  would  pay  her  a  few  compliments,  and  ask  to
be  introduced  to  M.  A.  if  he  were  present.  She  was  then  awoke,  and
remembered  nothing  that  had  been  said.  On  September  1st,  Dr.  Lie-
beault's  servant  was  sent  on  some  pretext  to  call  on  Madame  A.,  who
immediately  said  to  her  that  one  of  the  English  gentlemen  (describing
me)  had  called  on  her  the  previous  evening  at  seven.  On  September
2nd  Madame  A.  came  to  Dr.  Liebeault's  again.  I  alluded  to  my
imaginary  visit,  at  which  she  looked  much  astonished,  and  said  that
she  had  certainly  not  seen  me.  We  then  asked  whether  she  remem-
bered the  servant's  visit  on  September  1st,  but  though  this  visit  had
lasted  some  time,  and  had  been  marked  liy  one  or  two  trifling  incidents,


'  Rcvuc  Philosopliiquc,  July,  1885,  p.  14.


1885.1  •  Human  FenGn.%Uty  ' >'  15

it  had  all  but  entirely  faded  from  Madame  A.'s  mind.  It  was  still,  as
it  were,  a  prolongation  of  the  dream  ;  the  conversation  which  had  kept
her  thoughts  on  the  hallucinatory  incident  belonged,  in  fact,  rather  to
the  hypnotic  than  to  the  normal  stream  of  lier  existence.  I  then  myself
hypnotized  Madame  A.,  and  asked,  "  Have  you  seen  me  since  I  met
you  last  at  Dr.  Liebeault's  T  "  Certainly  ;  you  called  on  me  at  seven  on
August  31st."  "  Did  anyone  show  me  into  or  out  of  the  room  ?"  No,
you  walked  in  alone."  [No  servant  or  other  person  had  been  ordered
to  appear  in  the  hallucination,  so  my  figure  alone  was  seen.]  "  Was
M.  A.  present  T  "  No,  I  was  alone."  [This  was  tinfortunate,  as
Madame  A.  would  certainly  have  introduced  the  phantasmal  visitor  to
her  husband  had  he  been  there.]  "  Wliat  did  I  say  1"  "  You  thanked
me  very  politely  for  coming  to  Dr.  Liebeault's."  "  Do  you  know  that
you  just  now  denied  that  I  had  called  1"  "  Impossible  ;  I  remember
your  visit  perfectly  well."

The  hallucinatory  visit,  it  will  be  observed,  was  suggested  in  the
trance  state,  though  realised  in  the  midst  of  waking  life.  It  therefore
belonged  properly  to  the  trance-memory,  and  soon  faded  from  the
waking  memory,  like  a  dream.

If,  however,  the  hallucination  is  very  strongly  impressed,  and
remains  long  dormant  before  realisation,  it  acquires  lodgment  enough
in  the  mind  to  place  it  in  the  train  of  waking  memory.

I  abridge  a  i-eport  made  by  Professor  Beaunis  to  the  lately  founded
"  Society  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,"  of  which  Dr.  Charcot  is
President  ^  : —

•

"  On  July  14th,  1884,  having  hypnotised  Mile.  A.  E.,  I  made  to  her  the
following  suggestion,  which  I  transcribe  from  )iiy  note  made  at  the  time  : —
'  On  January  1st,  1885,  at  10  a.m.,  you  will  see  me.  I  shall  wish  you  ahajjpy
new  year,  and  then  disappear. '

' '  On  January  1st,  1885,  I  was  m  Paris.  I  had  not  spoken  to  any  one  of
this  suggestion.  On  that  same  day  Mile.  A.  E.,  at  Nancy,  related  to  a
friend  (she  has  since  narrated  it  to  Dr.  Liebeault  and  myself)  the  following
experience.  At  10  a.m.  she  was  in  lier  room,  when  she  heard  a  knock  at  the
door.  She  said,  '  Come  in, '  and  to  her  great  surprise  saw  me  come  in,  and
heard  me  wish  her  a  hapi)y  new  year.  I  went  out  again  almost  instantly,
and  though  she  looked  out  of  the  window  to  watch  me  go,  slie  could  not  see
me.  She  remarked  also,  to  her  astonishment,  that  I  was  in  a  suit  of  summer
clothes — the  same,  in  fact,  which  I  had  worn  when  I  had  made  the  sugges-
tion which  thus  worked  itself  out  after  an  interval  of  172  days."

I  was  anxious  to  know  how  far  Mile.  A.  E."s  memory  of  the
imaginary  visit  had  resisted  the  proof  that  it  had  never  taken  place.  I
asked  her  on  September  2nd,  "  Do  you  still  imagine  that  Professor
Beaunis  called  on  you  on  January  Istl" "  He  certainly  called  on  me


^  See  Revue  Philosophique,  Sept.,  1885,  p.  330.


16  :  i'.  ^Mf^naj}.  Bers-onaHty., [Oct.  29,

on  that  morning."  "  But  you  know  quite'  well  that  he  gives  you
hallucinations,  and  that  this  was  one  of  them — that  he  was  not  even
in  Nancy  at  tlie  time'?  "  "He  certainly  called  on  me,"  was  again  the
reply  ;  "  tJtat  time  it  was  no  imagination."  I  might  as  well  have  argued
with  the  heroine  of  We  are  Seven.  The  hallucinatory  idea  had  persisted
through  so  long  a  period  of  incubation  that  the  waking  brain  liad,  if  I
may  so  say,  ended  by  adopting  and  assimilating  it.

These  brief  hints  must  suffice  for  the  present  to  indicate  that
memory,  as  we  know  it,  cannot  prove  the  personality  of  man.
"Memory's  record"  is  not  a  book  on  clean  paper,  wliich  we  print  as
we  go.  It  is  a  parchment  palimpsest,  on  which  one  recent  text  is
fairly  legible,  but  which  may  show  all  forms  of  unknown  scripture  when
the  right  re-agents  are  applied.

It  is,  perhaps,  not  strictly  logical  to  discuss  character  under  a
separate  heading  from  will  and  memory.  Our  character  is  a  collection
of  hahits  of  choice^  determined  partly  by  what  we  are  hereditarily
inclined  to  do,  and  partly  by  what  we  recollect  of  tlie  results  of  pre-
vious actions.  The  required  modifications  of  our  brain  represent  the
up-stored  memories  ;  our  idiosyncratic  reactions  to  special  stimuli  form,
as  we  have  seen,  the  organic  basis  of  what  we  call  our  will.  Any
change  in  the  contents  of  our  memory,  or  in  the  sensibility  of  our
organism,  will  be  a  change  in  our  character  too.  But  the  effect  of
hypnotization  in  the  formation  of  character  needs  to  be  dwelt  on  as  a
point,  no  longer  of  mere  speculation,  but  of  practical  importance.

The  civilised  cliaracter  differs,  as  we  know,  from  the  savage
character  in  the  gradual  triumph  of  the  higher  centres  of  cerebration
over  the  lower — of  the  centres  which  co-ordinate  many  ideas  and
memories,  witli  a  view  to  things  abstract  or  remote,  over  the  centres
wliich  respond  to  immediate  excitations,  with  a  view  to  the  present
moment's  ease  or  enjoyment.  The  moralising  process — the  u.-nyo^j
oLTziyj-M  of  the  Stoic — is  therefore  a  process  of  continually  strengthened
inhibitions  ;  the  higlier  centres  learn  to  "  bear  and  forbear  "  when  the
lower  centres  would  fain  snatch  or  rebel.

Now  liypnotism,  like  education,  is  mainly  a  process  of  inhibition.
Can  we  get  the  processes  to  coincide,  and  make  people  virtuous  by
hypnotic  suggestion "?

I  believe  that,  to  a  great  extent,  we  can  do  tliis  ;  I  believe  tliat  we
can  strengthen  the  brain's  inhibitive  power  by  hypnotism,  much  as  we
can  weaken  it  by  opium  or  alcohol.

And  before  going  further,  I  must  distinctly  affirm  that  the  liypnotic
state  is  not  per  se  a  morl)id  phenomenon.  It  is  no  more  morbid  than
sleep  is  morbid,  and  I  hope  to  show  elsewhere  that  it  is  in  some  ways
even  higher  tlian  the  common  sleepirjg  or  waking  states.  We  must
put  on  one  side,  moreover,  the  grotesque  anecdotes  which  I  have  given


1885.]


Hiivian  Personality.


17


as  showing  how  far  hypnotic  susceptibility  may  go.  These  things  are
but  the  experiments  made  with  a  new  drug,  to  show  iis  dangers  and
determine  its  dose,  before  it  is  introduced  into  ordinary  clinical  practice.

Putting  all  these  bizarreries,  then,  out  of  the  question,  let  us  first
observe  what  is  the  moral  tone  of  the  somnambule  when  left  to  himself,
as  far  as  possible,  without  suggestions.  In  some  important  points  it
is  the  precise  opposite  of  the  drunken  condition.  Alcohol,  apparently
by  paralyzing  first  the  higher  inhibitory  centres,  makes  men  boastful,
impure,  and  quarrelsome.  Hypnotization,  apparently  by  a  tendency
to  paralyze  lower  appetitive  centres,  produces  a  contrary  effect.  The
increased  refinement  and  the  increased  cheerfulness  of  the  developed
somnambule  is  constantly  noticed.  It  is  a  moot  point  whether
any  "  sleep-waker "  has  ever  told  an  untruth  •}  and,  so  far  as  I
know,  no  angry  or  impure  gesture  has  ever  shown  itself  spontaneously
in  the  hypnotic  state.  ^

We  start  then,  as  it  seems,  from  a  favourable  moral  diathesis  ;  and
we  have  next  to  inquire  as  to  the  result — (1)  Of  often  repeated  hyp-
notization ;  (2)  Of  definite  suggestion  of  a  moralising  kind.

The  first  of  these  questions  is  complicated  by  the  efiects  of  hypno-
tization on  bodily  health,  on  which  I  cannot  enter  here.  I  will  merely
remark  that  Mile.  A.  E.,  so  often  alluded  to,  has  probably  been
hypnotized  oftener  than  almost  anyone  living,  and  that  the  eff'ect  on
her  character  seems  to  have  been  unmixedly  good.  I  can  answer  for
her  being  now  a  particularly  sensible,  cheerful,  and  kindly  person;
whereas  she  is  said  to  have  been  moody  and  frivolous  before  the  course
of  hypnotism  began.  Here,  however,  there  has  been  coincident
recovery  of  health  (also  ascribed  to  hypnotism) ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to
discriminate  between  the  moral  and  the  physical  improvement.

More  definitely  provable  are  the  benefits  resulting  from  direct  sug-
gestion— from  the  persistence,  after  waking,  of  some  impulse  or
aversion  inspired  in  the  hypnotic  state.  It  is  especially  in  checking
the  abuse  of  stimulants  that  this  treatment  has  proved  useful.  Char-
pignon'^  long  ago  recoi'ded  a  case  of  a  woman  thus  cured  of  a  habit  of
over-indulgence  in  coffee.  Alcohol  is,  of  course,  a  moi'e  serious  matter,
and  unfortunately  chronic  alcoholism  I'enders  its  victim  very  hard
to  hypnotize. On  the  other  hand,  certain  cases  where  cerebral  shock  has

1  See  Professor  Beaunis  in  Revitc  Philosojihique,  July,  18S5.

-  It  was  long  ago  remarked  by  Elliotson  and  others  tliat  the  attraction
sometimes  felt  by  a  female  siiTiject  for  her  hypnotizer  is  invariably  the  feeling  of
a  child,  not  of  a  woman.  Dr.  Perronet,  of  Lyons,  who  has  seen  striking  instances
of  this  attraction,  holds  that  it  is  a  mere  reflection  of  the  hypnotizer 's  own  self-
love.  "II  jouait  mimiqueinent  et  plioniquement  le  drame  qui  se  deroulait  au
fond  de  mon  inconscient,  et  dont  le  principal  acteur  etait  I'amour  de  moi-
meme." — Du  MagnHisme  Animal, -p.'lQ.

^  Physiologic  da  Magnttisme,  p.  238.

C


18


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


altered  the  relation  of  the  system  to  alcohol,  afford  a  favourable
augury. Tlius  one  of  the  incidents  in  the  extraordinary  life-history  of

Louis  V  1  is  the  alternating  inclination  or  dislike  for  alcoliol  after

attacks  of  hystero-epilepsy.  We  need  not,  then,  be  surprised,  if  the
effect  which  may  be  produced,  as  it  were,  accidentally,  roughly,  and
unstably,  by  the  shock  of  disease  should  also  be  produced,  more  gently
and  permanently,  by  repeated  hypnotic  suggestion.  Professor  Beaunis
vouches,  from  his  own  observation,  for  the  following  case  ^  : —

M.  T>.  was  a  great  smoker,  and  at  the  same  time  a  great  beer-
drinker.  His  liealth  was  seriously  menaced.  Dr.  Liebeault  hypnotised
him,  and  suggested  to  him  that  he  would  smoke  no  more  and  drink  no
more  beer.  The  subject  followed  with  docility  the  programme  thus
traced,  and  thus  attained  the  result  which  his  family's  remonstrances
and  his  own  efforts  had  failed  to  secure.  A  few  hypnotizations  and
suggestions  had  been  enough  to  effect  it.

Dr.  Perronet  has  had  a  similar  case,  when  he  inspired  an  habitual
drunkard  with  a  loathing  for  spirits  which  had  persisted  for  some
months  at  the  date  of  writing.  Such  suggestions,  however,  will  pro-
bably require  occasional  renewal,  and  Dr.  Lit^beault  gives  two  cases
which  illustrate  this  need.  A  physician,  addicted  to  drink,  was  in-
duced by  hypnotic  suggestion  to  abstain  for  three  months ;  but  the
taste  for  drink  returned,  and  he  did  not  visit  M.  Lidbeault  again.  On
another  occasion  an  idle  boy  was  taken  to  this  potent  moraliser,  and  it
was  suggested  to  him  that  he  would  henceforth  be  a  model  of  diligence.
The  boy  did  actually  work  hard  for  some  months,  by  an  impulsion
which  he  could  neither  understand  nor  resist,  and  rose  rapidly  to  the
top  of  his  class.  But  the  suggestion  wore  off,  and  then  he  obstinately
refused  to  be  hypnotized  again,  having  by  no  means  relished  his  in-
voluntary role. His  mother  was  weak  enough  to  let  him  alone.

This  young  recalcitrant  against  hypnotic  moralisation  (if  I  may  coin
the  phrase)  no  doubt  said  to  his  mother  that  it  was  a  great  shame  to
make  a  fellow  diligent  against  his  will,  and  that  there  was  no  good  in
learning  things  just  because  you  could  not  help  it.  And  other  persons,
who  "  would  rather  see  an  Englishman  free  than  see  him  sober,"  may
be  inclined  to  side  with  the  boy.  They  will  say  that  you  cannot  get
virtue  into  any  man's  head  "  by  a  surgical  operation,"  and  that  where
there  is  no  moral  effort  there  is  no  improvement  wortli  wishing  for.  I
partly  agree  with  this  principle  ;  but  we  are  here  among  the  rudiments  of

^  Annalcs  Medico-psychologiques,  Jan.,  1882.  Revue  Philoscrphiqw,  Oct.,
1885. See  also  the  article  on  "  Telepathic  Hypnotism  "  in  this  volume.

2  Revue  Ph.ilosophiquc,  July,  1885,  p.  23.  Dr.  Richet  lias  succ&ssfully  used
suggestion  to  give  appetite  to  an  invalid. — VHomme  et  rintelligence,  p.  193.
Dr.  Despine  quotes  some  similar  cases.

^  Dit  MagnHisme  Animal,  p.  40.


1885.]


Human  Personality.


19


morality,  and  we  need  not  fear  that  we  shall  lead  our  subject  on  unto
perfection  without  his  knowing  it.  His  moral  effort  will  have  plenty
of  worlds  to  conquer  even  when  he  is  no  longer  tempted  to  get  drunk.

In  its  scientific  aspect,  at  any  rate,  this  power  of  touching  the  part
of  the  brain  desired  is  a  forward  step  of  just  the  kind  that  we  are
always  looking  for.  We  are  gradually  learning  to  localise  and
specialise  our  curative  methods  ;  we  inspect  and  inject,  if  I  may  so  say,
with  arms  of  precision  ;  we  hit  a  definite  point  instead  of  hurling  our
boluses  vaguely  at  "  the  system."

Well,  here  we  have  a  method  of  cerebral  localisation,  which —
whether  or  not  it  gives  us  anatomical  indications — is  at  least  on  the
psychical  side  self-acting  and  almost  infallible.  The  suggestion  once
made  to  the  hypnotized  brain,  the  brain  itself  picks  out  the  centres
which  it  is  desired  to  stimulate  or  to  inhibit.  After  what  I  have  wit-
nessed of  suggestion,  I  hesitate  to  impose  a  limit  to  this  power.  I  do
not  despair  (for  instance)  of  isolating  or  suspending  at  pleasure  the
different  classes  of  sensibility — sensory,  thermic,  tactile,  dolorous,  or
even  classes  more  specialised  than  these.  I  do  not  despair  of  dissociat-
ing the  intellectual  from  the  nutritive — perhaps  even  from  the
emotional — current  of  our  being,  and  hushing  into  the  absorption  of  an
Archimedes  the  stomach  and  spirit  of  a  Carlyle.  We  hold  the  wand  of
Hermes,  which  we  have  not  yet  learnt  to  sway.

There  is,  however,  no  need  for  prophecy.  What  has  been  done  and
is  doing  is  enough  to  show  that  here  as  everywhere  the  real  advantage
lies  in  knowing  the  facts.  If  we  are  multiplex  beings,  let  us  get  the
advantage  of  our  multiplicity.  If  we  are  modifiable  by  circumstance,
let  us  learn  to  modify  ourselves.  So  long  as  we  proclaim  ourselves
incompressible  atoms,  we  shall  not  discover  how  to  deal  with  our  mole-
cular structure.  Until  we  confess  what  we  are,  we  shall  never  become
what  we  may  be.

The  task  assigned  to  this  paper  has  now,  though  briefly  and  inade-
quately, been  performed.  It  has  been  shown  that  hypnotic  experi-
ments throw  new  light  on  the  intimate  nature  of  man's  will,  memory,
character ;  that  the  flame  of  personality  (to  recur  to  our  first
metaphor),  is  found  on  inspection  to  be  neither  definite,  permanent,
nor  stationary  ;  but  rather  that  the  sense  of  free-will  is  shifting  and
illusory,  and  memory  multiplex  and  discontinuous,  and  character  a
function  of  these  two  variables,  and  directly  modifiable  by  purely
physiological  means.  We  have  thus,  indeed,  the  consolation  of  finding
that  hypnotism  can  not  only  dissect,  but  to  some  extent  amend  us  ;  yet
this  will  seem  to  most  minds  a  paltry  counterpoise  to  the  depressing
view  of  man's  dignity  and  destiny  which  this  train  of  argument
implies.

I  cannot  here  enter  on  the  reasons  which,  as  already  stated,  con-


20


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


vince  me  that  this  method  of  experimental  psychology,  when  carried
farther,  will  conduct  us  not  to  negative  but  to  positive  results  of  the
most  hopeful  kind.  It  must  suffice  to  say — still  in  terms  of  our
metaphor — that  I  believe  tliat  there  is  an  incandescent  solid,  but  that
that  solid  is  beneath  our  line  of  sight.  Tliis  fact  can  only  be  recog-
nised when  the  visible  flames  are  examined  not  only  with  the  telescope
but  with  the  spectroscope ;  that  is  to  say  when  the  phenomena  of
abnormal  states  are  so  scrutinised  as  to  discover  whether  any  of  them
are  in  fact  supernormal,  transcending  the  powers  of  man  as  hitherto
unknown  to  us,  and  pointing  to  a  higher  stage  of  evolution.  One  such
discovery,  that  of  telepathy,  or  the  transference  of  thought  and  sensa-
tion from  mind  to  mind  without  the  agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of
sense,  has,  as  I  hold,  been  already  achieved.  This  is  in  itself  enough
to  revolutionise  the  whole  aspect  of  the  problem,  and  to  suggest  tliat  if
so  transcendent  a  capacity  be  indeed  lurking  among  the  obscurer  and
rarer  vital  phenomena,  then  the  shifting  phosphorescence  which  we
feared  might  hang  above  decay,  may  in  truth  resemble  rather  that
blaze  of  turbulent  vapours  which  hides  and  bears  witness  of  the  sun.
The  proof  of  this,  if  it  comes,  must  be  slow  in  coming.  But  it  has
ever  been  men's  error  to  lack  patience  when  their  highest  interests  were
at  stake.  We  hope  too  proudly,  despair  too  decisively,  from  the  half-
conscious  feeling  that  questions  of  primary  importance  must  needs  be
settled  one  way  or  tlie  other.  For  my  part,  I  believe  that  many  ques-
tions which  the  religious  world  deems  to  be  already  closed  in  one  sense
and  the  materialistic  world  in  the  other,  are  really  only  just  l)eginning
to  come  within  the  purview  of  science.  I  maintain  that  we  are  just
learning  to  understand  the  first  elements  of  problems  which  so  many
preachers  have  solved  with  a  peroration,  so  many  philosophers  with  a
formula,  so  many  physiologists  with  a  smile  or  a  sneer.  It  is,  as  I
hold,  to  experimental  psychology,  to  an  analysis  whose  growing  power
we  can  as  yet  hardly  realise,  tliat  we  must  look  for  a  slow  but  incon-
trovertible decision  as  to. whether  man  be  but  the  transitory  crown  of
earth's  fauna,  between  ice-age  and  ice-age,  between  fire  and  sea ;  or
whether  it  may  truly  be  that  his  evolution  is  not  a  terrestrial  evolution
alone,  not  bounded  by  polar  solitudes,  nor  measured  by  the  sun's  march
through  Heaven,  but  making  for  a  vaster  future,  by  inheritance  from  a
remoter  past.  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


APPENDIX.

Since  this  paper  was  read  to  the  S.P.R.  (October  29th,  188-5),  very-
great  activity  has  been  shown  in  France  in  the  direction  of  hypnotic
research.  The  "  Bulletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,
1885  "  (published  by  Felix  Alcan,  Paris,  1886),  contain  various  cases


1885.]


Human  Personality.


21


of  high  importance.  It  must  suffice  here  to  say  that  the  experiments
detailed  in  this  paper  have  been  repeated  and  improved  upon  in  many
ways.  An  account  of  some  experiments  at  Havre  will  be  found  else-
where in  this  present  part  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.

And  it  seems  desirable  to  add  here  a  brief  notice  of  the  later  de-
velopment of  the  case  of  Louis  V  ,  which  T  gave  to  the  General

Meeting  of  March  6th,  1886. A  full  account  of  Louis  V  's  case,

compiled  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  will  be  found  in  the  Journal  of  Mental

Science  for  January,  1886. Louis  V  is  no  longer  at  La  Rochelle,

and,  with  impro\'ing  health,  has  ceased  to  exhibit  these  changes  of
personality.

At  the  end  of  1885,  however,  he  was  in  the  asylum  at  La  Rochelle,
and  the  account  here  given  represents  his  then  state,  as  described  by
Drs.  Bourru,  Burot,  and  Berjon.  I  retain  the  present  tense,  for  clear-
ness' sake,  though  I  have  altered  a  few  expressions.

Louis  V is  now  in  the  asylum  at  La  Rochelle,  and  has  six  per-
sonalities. I  speak  here  only  of  the  transition  from  State  I.  to  State  II.  In
what  is  now  classed  as  State  I.  (though  it  was  not  the  patient's  earliest
condition),  he  is  paralyzed  and  insensible  on  the  right  side.  He  is  talkative,
violent,  and  arrogant.  His  language  is  coarse,  and  he  addresses  everyone
with  rough  and  impudent  familiarity,  giving  nicknames,  and  making  bad
jokes.  He  is  a  Radical  in  politics,  and  an  atheist  in  religion.  He  is
extremely  fond  of  holding  forth  on  these  topics,  but  his  speech  is  indistinct
and  defective.  Of  his  past  life  he  remembers  only  certain  portions,  more  or
less  akin  to  his  present  state.  Among  the  six  states,  this  is  the  only  one  in
which  there  is  right  hemiplegia ;  and  it  is  the  only  one  in  wliich  the
character  is  violent  and  bad.  Whenever  the  left  brain  predominates,  Louis
V  's  disposition  is  good,  though  there  are  many  variations  in  his  intelli-
gence and  his  memory,  linked  with  variations  in  liis  motor  and  sensory
systems.

Now  let  a  bar  of  steel  be  placed  on  his  right  arm.  His  respiration
becomes  quick,  his  expression  anxious  ;  in  about  a  minute  the  paralysis  and
the  anfesthesia  are  transferred  from  the  riglit  side  to  the  left.  At  the  same
time  the  difficulty  of  speech  disappears,  and  the  patient's  pronunciation
becomes  easy  and  clear.  Thus  far,  though  the  case  is  remarkable,  it  is  not
quite  unique.  But  now  comes  the  unique  point.  Together  with  the  sensory
and  motor  changes  there  is  a  change  in  memory  and  a  change  in  character.
He  is  now  gentle,  well-mannered,  and  modest.  He  speaks  respectfully  to
the  physicians  whom  a  couple  of  minutes  before  he  has  been  calling  by
abusive  nicknames.  Asked  his  opinion  on  politics  or  religion,  lie  prefers  to
leave  those  matters  to  wiser  heads  than  his  own.  He  is  obedient  to  disci-
phne,  and  his  expression  of  countenance  is  gentle  and  sympathetic.  His
memory  embraces  part  of  his  stay  at  Sainte  Anne,  and  at  Bicetre,  at  which
latter  asylum  he  imagines  himself  still  to  be.

And  now  I  may  point  out  a  curious  connection  between  this  case  and
certain  phenomena  of  automatic  writing,  previously  discussed  in  these
Proceedings. It  will  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Newnham,  puzzled  to  account


22


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


for  the  freakish  and  non-moral  character  of  some  of  the  replies  written  by
Mrs.  Newnham's  hand,  suggested,  as  a  possible  hypothesis, that  "  if  the  un-
trained side  of  the  brain  be  suddenly  stimulated  to  action,  its  behaviour  is
apt  to  resemble  that  of  a  child  whose  education  has  not  been  properly
attended  to."  In  commenting  on  this  and  other  cases,  I  endeavoured  to
show  that  there  was  reason  to  suppose  that  the  right,  or  less-used,  hemi-
sphere was  concerned  in  supernormal  mentation  ;  and  I  traced  especially
analogies  between  aphasia  and  cerebral  automatism  ;  the  inference  being  that
in  each  case  work  was  thrown  on  dextro-cerebral  centres  which  was  habitually
performed  by  sinistro-cerebral.  I  summed  up  (p.  60)  by  saying  that
"  although  I  hold  that  the  right  hemisjjhere  has  much  to  do  with  Mrs.
Newnham's  replies,  ...  I  cannot  find  any  well-recognised  doctrine  of
cerebral  localisation  which  authorises  us  to  draw  any  conclusion  as  to  the
way  in  which  a  temporary  predominance  of  dextro-cerebral  centres  might
affect  the  manifestation  of  moral  character  ;  .  .  and  I  should  of  course  be
unwilling  in  such  a  matter  to  go  a  step  beyond  the  consensus  of  the  best
scientific  opinion.  So  far  as  the  questions  at  issue  are  purely  physiological,  I
can  aim  at  nothing  more  than  attentive  study  of  the  labours  of  others."  I
do  not  regret  the  caution  of  the  tone  here  used,  for  I  hold  it  eminently
important  that  we  who  are  thus  speculating  in  a  novel  realm  should  not  im-
provise a  fancy  physiology  to  suit  our  own  ideas — that  we  should  cite  chapter
and  verse  for  any  physiological  fact  or  theory,  on  which  we  base  further
deductions.  But  now  I  find  that  the  suggestion  which  I  hesitated  to  accept
in  full,  although  all  my  own  arguments  pointed  directly  that  way,  simply  for
lack  of  a  recorded  case  where  right  hemiplegia  had  involved  a  moral  tone
different  from  that  involved  in  left  hemiplegia  in  the  same  subject, — I  find,
I  say,  tliis  very  suggestion  of  the  moral  difference  of  the  two  hemispheres  j^ut
forth  and  endorsed — though  of  course  not  as  yet  in  a  very  confident  tone —
by  physicians  of  eminence,  apropos  of  a  case^  on  which  no  theory  of  the  kind
had  been  founded  at  the  time  when  my  paper  was  written.  Corroborative
instances,  of  course,  are  still  needed,  for  the  coarse  organic  injuries  of  the
brain  which  are  most  commonly  met  with  do  not  show  themselves  in  nuances
of  character.

But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  most  crucial  test  which  could  have  been
devised  for  the  theory  in  question  would  have  been  one  where  (as  in  Louis
V  's  case)  the  functions  of  the  two  hemispheres  were  subject  to  so  pro-
found a  disassociation  that  there  was  actually  a  co-exclusive  alternation  of
memories  according  as  one  or  the  other  hemisphere  assumed  the  pre-
dominance. Suppose  that  in  an  ordinary  case  of  hysterical  hemiplegia  the
hemiplegia  is  transferred  by  metallic  contact,  suggestion,  or  otherwise,  from
the  right  side  to  the  left. Sujjpose,  further,  that  the  patient  exhibits  more

'^Proceedings,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  22.

-  M.  Jules  Voisin  writes  in  the  Archives  de  Neurologie,  September,  1885,  and
Anri.  Mid.  Psych.,  January,  1886.  The  opinion  of  MM.  Bourru  and  Buret
is  given  (with  complete  adhesion)  by  Dr.  Berjon  in  his  tractate  La  Grand
Hystaie  chcz  r Homme  (Paris  :  Bailliere,  1886),  p.  53.  I  need  hardly  say  that
the  transfer  of  activity  between  the  two  hemispheres  is  almost  certainly  not  the
only  alteration  of  cerebral  action  which  occurs  in  these  changes  of  state.  See
Proceedings  iii.,  p.  43.


1885.]


Human  Personality.


23


irritability,  &c.,  when  paralyzed  on  the  right  than  on  the  left  side.  Such  a
case  would  hardly  afford  a  presumption  that  the  highest  ideational  and
emotional  centres  were  directly  affected  by  the  transfer  of  the  paralysis  ;  the
change  in  temper  might  merely  dejjend  on  the  greater  or  less  malaise  caused
by  some  change  in  the  affection  of  lower  centres  ;  for,  of  course,  we  cannot
assume  that  a  hysterical  hemiplegia,  whose  external  signs  may  be  sym-
metrical whether  it  affects  the  right  or  left,  side,  is  in  reality  symmetrical  in
its  internal  or  subjective  manifestation.

But  in  Louis  V  's  case  the  character,  as  it  were,  starts  fresh,  with  the

transfer  of  the  hemiplegia  ;  it  can  exhibit  itself  untrammelled  by  any  con-
tinuity of  memory  with  the  previous  state  ;  we  can  judge  it  de  novo,  and,  so
to  say,  from  top  to  bottom.  And  we  find  that  the  predominance  of  the  right
hemis2>liere  comports  a  marked  reversion  to  savage  characteristics,  a  marked
emotional  exjilosiveness  and  ideational  crudity.

Let  us  see  how  this  view  coheres  with  what  we  already  know  of  the
difference  between  the  two  hemispheres.  We  start,  of  com-se,  from  the
notorious  fact  that  our  right  hands  are  more  "dexterous"  than  our  left;
that  is,  that  the  sinistro-cerebral  hand-governing  centres  are  superior  in
development  to  the  dextro-cerebral  hand-governing  centres.  There  has  been
some  controversy  as  to  how  far  this  is  the  result  of  education  in  the  in-
dividual, or  how  far  it  depends  on  some  asymmetry  of  the  circulatory  system.
I  cannot,  of  course,  give  any  opinion  as  to  the  original  anatomical  reason  for
the  selection  of  the  right  as  the  dominant  hand,  but  I  can  hardly  doubt  that
the  superiority  in  the  sinistro-cerebral  centres  concerned  is  now  a  hereditary
thing, — does  not  depend  merely  on  the  education  of  the  individual  child.

Going  one  step  higher,  it  is  now  pretty  generally  admitted  that  the
sinistro-cerebral  speech-centres  are  more  evolved  than  the  dextro-cerebral.
And  here  we  come  very  near  to  an  actual  difference  in  the  power  of  summing
up  ideas  or  emotions.  For  signs  are  so  closely  connected  with  thinking  that
it  would  surprise  us  to  see  an  aphasic  patient  retaining  for  long  the  same
mental  clearness  as  before  his  affliction.  And  our  emotions  themselves  are
greatly  modified  by  the  expression  which  we  give  to  them.  An  aphasic  (for
instance)  who  can  express  disagreement  only  by  an  oath  is  likely  to  lose
his  sense  of  controversial  deference  and  courtesy.  Well,  what  is  now
contended  is,  that  just  as  there  may  be  a  right  hemij^legia  which  does
not  involve  aphasia,  and,  again,  a  right  hemiplegia  so  far  involving  the
higher  centres  that  aphasia  accompanies  it,  so  also  in  this  case  of  a  dissocia-
tion almost  unique  in  its  profundity  between  the  activities  of  the  two  hemi-
spheres, there  was  made  manifest  a  difference  in  stage  of  evolution  between
the  highest  sinistro-cerebral  and  dextro-cerebral  centres — tliose  which  preside
over  emotion  and  ideation.  And  I  go  farther,  and  conjecture  that  tliis
difference  may  exist  in  all  of  us,  and  that  just  as  certain  of  our  visceral
arrangements  retain  the  traces  of  our  pre-human  ancestry,  and  just  as  our
dextro-cerebral  speech-centres  are  often  stammering,  childish,  or  wholly
inefficient,  so  also  our  dextro-cerebral  "  character- forming  "  centres — the
centres  which  on  that  side  of  the  brain  sum  up  or  represent  our  highest
activities — may  retain,  in  their  inferior  evolution,  traces  of  that  savage  an-
cestry which  forms  the  sombre  background  of  the  refinements  and  felicities
of  civilised  man.


24


Human  Personality.


[Oct.  29,


And,  furtliennore,  I  suggest  that  while  we  habitually  use  our  sinistro-
cerebral  character-centres  with  the  same  unconscious  choice  as  leads  us,  for
instance,  to  catch  a  rope  tiung  at  us  with  our  right  hand  and  not  with
our  left,  there  are  nevertheless  certain  states — supernormal  as  well  as  ab-
normal— in  which  our  Ego  (whatever  that  may  be)  expresses  itself  more
readily  through  the  dextro-cerebral  centres,  and  assumes,  therefore,  a  com-
paratively savage  character.

If  this  be  so,  much  light  will  be  thrown  on  almost  all  that  class  of
Spiritualistic  manifestations  which  have  been  ascribed  to  diabolic  agency.
And  if  we  are  not  ashamed  of  possessing  a  digestive  system  which  includes
the  rudimentary  "vermiform  appendix," — a  motor  system  which  includes  the
comj^aratively  defective  motor  innervation  of  our  left  hands, — then  surely
we  need  not  be  ashamed  of  possessing  an  emotional  and  ideational  system
which  includes  dextro-cerebral  elements  some  twenty  generations  or  so  in
arrear  of  the  epoch  to  which  our  brain,  taken  as  a  whole,  entitles  us  to
belong.  For  those  who  believe  that  our  evolution  has  no  assignable  limit,
there  may  even  be  something  pleasing  in  such  a  token  as  this  of  the  rajjidity
with  which  we  are  mounting  on  the  endless  way.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

Saturday,  January  2,  1886.

Tlie  eighteenth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Rooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Saturday,  January  2,  1886.

Professor  Sidgwick,  Vice-President,  in  the  Chair.


Mr.  E.  Gurney  read  part  of  a  paper  on  "  Collective  I-Tallucinations,"
since  embodied  in  Plicintasms  of  tke  Living.


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


25


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

Saturdarj,  March  6,  1886.

Tlie  nineteenth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Rooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Saturday,  March  6,  1886.

Professor  Sidgwick,  Vice-President,  in  the  Chair.


The  following  paper  was  read  : —

II.

ON  SOME  PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA,  COMMONLY  CALLED
SPIRITUALISTIC,  WITNESSED  BY  THE  AUTHOR.

By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

In  the  printed  statement  of  the  objects  of  this  Society,  one  of  tlie
subjects  which  the  Society  was  founded  to  investigate  is  described  as
foUoAvs  : — "  An  inquiry  into  the  various  phenomena,  commonly  called
'  Spiritualistic,'  with  an  attempt  to  discover  their  causes  and  general
laws."

Whether  Spiritualism  be  regarded  as  worthy  or  unworthy  of  serious
inquiry  depends,  to  a  large  extent,  upon  the  place  wliere  each  pei'son
draws  the  boundary  line  that,  in  his  opinion,  divides  the  possible  from
the  impossible.  There  are  some  things  upon  wliicli  it  would  be  sheer
folly  for  any  intelligent  man  to  waste  his  time,  such  as  circle  squaring,
or  a  search  for  the  perpetual  motion.  These  and  such  like  things  are
placed  beyond  the  pale  of  rational  investigation  at  the  present  day  by  the
extent  of  our  already  existing  knowledge  in  those  particular  regions.
There  are,  liowever,  other  matters  which  appear  impossible,  not  from
the  range  of  our  knowledge,  but  from  the  extent  of  our  ignorance  in
those  directions.  Under  this  class  of  improbable  phenomena  miglit  be
included  such  things  as  fireballs,  the  sea-serpent,  thought-transference,
and  what  is  known  by  the  name  of  Spiritualistic  phenomena ;  a  few
years  ago  the  telephone  and  the  phonograph  would  also  doubtless  have
been  here  included.  The  essential  difference  between  the  two  classes
of  improbable  events  is  that  the  first  involves  a  contradiction  of  laws
whicli  investigation  has  well  established,  whilst  the  second  involves  no


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


contradiction,  but  only  an  extension  of  our  knowledge  in  an  unfore-
seen direction.

Forgetful  of  this  broad  distinction,  some  of  our  Members  and
Associates  consider  Spiritualism  a  subject  so  contemptible,  because  to
them  it  is  intrinsically  impossible,  that  it  ought  not  to  have  been
included  within  the  objects  of  our  Society.  I  would  venture  to  beg
such  of  our  friends  to  read  the  two  masterly  addresses  which,  as
the  first  President,  Professor  H.  Sidgwick  delivered  at  the  foundation
of  this  Society,  or  Professor  De  Morgan's  inimitable  preface  to  a  volume
called  From  Hatter  to  Spirit.

On  the  other  hand  some  of  our  friends  have  gone  to  tlie  other
extreme,  and  vigorously  express  their  opinion  that  the  subject  of
Spiritualism  should  have  occupied  the  first  place  in  the  programme  of
our  operations.  They  urge  that  in  importance  and  interest  this  sub-
ject surpasses  all  the  other  problems  included  within  the  scope  of
Psychical  Research,  and  they  complain  that  the  Society  has  dis-
played far  too  great  caution  and  reserve  in  dealing  with  a  class  of
phenomena  that  has  received  the  attestation  of  men  of  indubitable
scientific  repute,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  To  such  I  have  only  to
say  that  the  Council  of  this  Society  recognised  from  the  outset  the
interest  that  is  attached  to  this  question,  and  soon  after  the  foundation
of  the  Society  a  committee  was  organised  for  the  purpose  of  investi-
gating Spiritualistic  phenomena.  If  no  report  of  this  Committee  has
been  published,  this  has  arisen  not  from  any  disregard  of  the  import-
ance of  this  subject  on  the  part  of  the  Council,  but  simply  because  the
Committee  itself  lias  failed  to  make  any  report.  I,  for  one,  regret
this  omission,  which  no  doubt  arose  from  the  Committee  being  unable
to  obtain  any  conclusive  evidence.  But  I  think  it  would  have  been
better  if  a  report,  even  of  repeated  non-success  in  obtaining  trust-
worthy evidence,  had  been  drawn  up  and  duly  presented  to  the  Society.
The  failures  of  one  generation  are  the  stepping  stones  to  success  in  the
next,  and  in  a  subject  so  obscure  and  so  full  of  pitfalls  as  that  which
goes  under  the  name  of  Spiritualism,  it  is  desirable  that  each  investi-
gator should  state,  with  judicial  fairness  and  scientific  exactness,  the
conditions  and  the  results  of  every  experiment.  Moreover,  if  the  first
instalment  of  evidence  had  been  unfavourable  to  Spiritualism  it  would
lead  the  public  to  have  more  confidence  in  the  sincerity  of  purpose
which  animates  us  all,  than  if  we  only  published  evidence  that  told  in
favour  of  the  marvellous.

I  am  aware  that  this  is  not  the  usual  scientific  method  ;  thousands
of  experiments  are  made  whicli  never  see  the  light  simply  because  they
have  a  negative  result  as  regards  the  particular  object  of  search.  It  is
not  worth  publisliing  these,  for  all  that  could  be  said  would  be  that  no-
thing has  been  found  out  that  was  not  perfectly  well  known  before.  But


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


27


the  psychological  problem  before  us  is  of  a  different  character.  We
cannot  at  pleasure  command  the  instruments  necessary  for  the  inquiry,
for  they  are  living  beings  asserted  to  be  comparatively  few  in  number  ;
hence,  whenever  it  is  claimed  that  with  such  and  such  an  instrument
such  and  such  results  ensued,  I  think  our  primary  duty  is  to  obtain
permission  to  submit  the  instrument  to  a  rigid,  though  it  should  also  be
a  perfectly  courteous  and  friendly  examination.  If  the  results  of  an
adequate  examination  of  say  one  or  two  dozen  sucli  living  instruments
of  note  show  that  in  no  single  instance  do  they  exhibit  any  phenomena
new  to  science,  then  I,  for  one,  think  tliat  we  should  publish  this
negative  evidence,  and,  leaving  Spiritualism  aside,  pass  on  to  other
more  profitable  fields  of  inquiry.  Conclusive  evidence  unfavourable  to
Spiritualism  has  not  yet  been  made  public  by  any  competent  body  of
investigators,  or  by  any  single  authority.^  The  sorry  stuff  that  in
general  passes  as  criticism  of  any  unfamiliar  psychological  phenomenon
can  only  be  explained  by  the  general  liurry  in  which  everybody  lives,
so  that  the  critics  have  no  time  to  investigate  or  even  to  read  the
evidence  which  they  profess  to  criticise.

Experience  shows  that  the  real  difficulty  with  Spiritualism  is  in
arriving  at  sufficiently  conclusive  evidence  pointing  one  way  or  the
other.  Non-professional  instruments  or  mediums  are  difficult  of  access  ;
professional  mediums — who  make  a  living  by  their  powers — are,  very
naturally,  open  to  the  charge  of  being  conjurers  in  disguise,  who  can
fail,  without  discredit,  whenever  they  are  too  closely  watched,  and  it  is
notorious  how  helpless  an  ordinary  mortal  is  in  the  hands  of  a  clever
conjurer.  But  I  think  the  difficulty  of  arriving  at  conclusive  evidence
has  by  some  been  over-estimated.  Conjurers  have  not  super-human
skill.  Let  us  obtain  from  the  best  authorities  on  conjuring  tlie  limits
of  what  they  deem  possible  in  their  art ;  then  if,  after  imposing  our  own
private  tests  in  our  own  private  rooms,  results  are  obtained  which  con-

1  Since  the  foregoing  was  written  Mrs.  Sidgwiek  has  read  an  account  of
her  prolonged  personal  investigation  into  the  pliysical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,
and  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  distinctly  adverse  to  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomena  she  witnessed.  But  though  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  adverse  testimony  is  the
most  damaging  blow  which  Spiritualism,  or  rather  a  certain  class  of  Spiritualistic
phenomena,  has  yet  received,  it  will  be  noticed  that  Mrs.  Sidgwiek  is  careful  to
point  out  that  her  evidence  is  not  conclusive  of  the  whole  question ;  on  the
contrary,  she  expressly  states,  in  the  last  paragraph  of  her  able  paper,  that  her
own  view  is  that  "it  is  more  probable  than  not  that  such  things  [that  is  the  so-
called  Spiritualistic  phenomena]  do  occasionally  occur."  Every  lover  of  truth
must  feel  grateful  to  Mrs.  Sidgwiek  for  her  laborious  and  valuable  inquiry.
At  the  same  time  one  cannot  but  regret  that  some  of  the  simpler  physical
phenomena,  occurring  with  unpaid  mediums,  were  not  accessible  to  Mrs.
Sidg-«ack.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  if  any  reader  of  this  paper  knows  of  the
existence  of  such  manifestations  he  will  at  once  communicate  with  the
Hon.  Secretary  of  the  S.P.R.


28


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


[March  6,


siderably  surpass  the  limits  of  conjuring,  and  are  otlierwise  inexplicable,
we  should  be  encouraged  to  persevere  until  a  mass  of  evidence  had
been  obtained  commensurate  with  the  very  great  antecedent  improba-
bility of  the  phenomena  themselves.  It  is  because  I  know  much  has
already  been  done  in  this  direction  by  men  of  high  scientific  position,
such  as,  e.g.,  the  late  Professor  De  Morgan,  and  Professor  Zollner,  and
Mr.  Crookes,  that  I  feel  it  is  worth  making  a  strenuous  effort  to  obtain
more  evidence  of  the  kind.  Hence,  at  the  risk  of  incurring  scientific
odium, — and  I  may  add  with  much  personal  dislike  to  the  subject  itself
- — I  feel  it  my  duty  to  reiterate  publicly  my  conviction  that  at  any
rate  some  of  the  simpler  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  are  inexplicable  by
any  causes  at  present  recognised  by  science.  The  object  of  the  present
paper  is  to  place  on  record  some  of  the  evidence  upon  which  that  con-
viction is  based.  I  am  not  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  anything  I  can  say
will  make  an  appreciable  difference  in  public  opinion,  or  that  my  testi-
mony is  superior  to,  or  ought  to  have  more  weight  attached  to  it,  than
that  of  several  other  observers.  But  it  will,  I  hope,  lead  some  of  our
members  and  friends  to  come  forward  and  inform  us  of  any  unexcep-
tionable evidence  they  possess,  until  "we  drive  the  objector  into  the  posi-
tion of  being  forced  to  admit  the  phenomena  as  inexplicable,  at  least  by
him,  or  to  accuse  the  investigators  either  of  lying,  or  of  cheating,  or  of
a  blindness,  or  forgetfulness,  incompatible  with  any  intellectual  condi-
tion except  absolute  idiocy."

I  freely  admit  that  very  much  of  what  passes  among  some
Spiritualists  as  evidence  has  really  no  claim  at  all  to  this  distinction,
except  as  being  evidence  of  the  difficulty  of  preserving  a  sound  judgment
when  dealing  with  these  phenomena.  How  far  my  rnvn  judgment  is  at
fault  is  not  for  me  to  decide.  It  is  impossible  for  anyone  to  be  entirely
free  from  mental  bias,  but  so  far  as  I  can  I  have  striven  to  be  an
impartial  witness  to  phenomena  coming  within  the  scope  of  my  own
observation.

Reviewing  the  numerous  public  and  private  stances  which  I  have
attended  with  different  private  and  professional  mediums,  during  the
last  15  years,  I  find  that  by  far  the  larger  part  of  the  results  obtained
have  absolutely  no  evidential  value  in  favour  of  Spiritualism  :  either  the
condition  of  total  darkness  forbade  any  trustworthy  conclusions,  or  the
results  were  nothing  more  than  could  be  explained  by  a  low  order
of  juggling.  A  few  cases,  however,  stand  out  as  exceptions  ;  the  ones  I
will  cite  occurred  in  the  years  1875  and  1876.  Though  notes  of  the
cases  to  be  cited  were  taken  at  the  time,  the  evidence  is,  I  admit,
fragmentary  and  somewhat  remote  in  time.  This  partly  arises  from  my
lessened  interest  in  the  phenomena  and  partly  from  the  difficulty  of
obtaining  anything  like  satisfactory  evidence.  I  should  add,  moreover,
that  moral  considerations  also  weigh  with  me ;  owing  to  the  constant


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


29


recrudescence  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  many  mediums  with  whom  I  sat,
it  became  ^\^th  me  a  doubtful  question  whether  the  gain  to  science  was
worth  the  moral  risk  to  which  one  exposed  the  paid  medium.  The
temptation  to  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  medium  is  of  course  very  great,
as  must  always  be  the  case  when  a  man's  livelihood  depends  on  the
recurrence  of  phenomena  which  if  genuine  are  out  of  his  own  control.

In  the  first  two  of  the  cases  I  am  about  to  describe  there  was
certainly  no  pecuniary  inducement  to  fraud,  as  the  sittings  were  with
private  family  circles,  and  in  none  of  the  cases  to  be  cited  was
there  total  darkness,  that  easy  adjunct  of  fraud ;  furthermore,  the
phenomena  occurring  in  all  these  cases  were  of  so  simple  a  character,
the  same  thing  being  several  times  repeated,  that  one's  attention  was
not  distracted  by  the  occurrence  of  various  novel  and  unexpected
results.

The  first  case  I  will  describe  came  under  my  notice  a  year  or  two
after  I  went  to  reside  in  Ireland.  .  A  solicitor,  Mr.  C,  with  his  wife
and  family,  had  come  to  reside  for  the  season  in  the  suburban  house
of  a  friend  and  neighbour  of  mine,  an  Irish  country  gentleman,  who  had
an  utter  disbelief  in  Spiritualism.  I  was,  therefore,  not  a  little  amused,
upon  making  Mr.  C.'s  acquaintance,  to  find  that  he  had  in  liis
own  family  what  appeared  to  be  Spiritualistic  phenomena  actually
then  and  there  going  on.  When  Mr.  C.  found  I  was  interested  in
the  matter,  he  kindly  permitted  me  every  opportunity  of  close  and
frequent  investigation.  The  following  observations,  noted  at  the  time,
were  in  part  published  in  a  review  I  was  then  engaged  in  writing,
and  also  referred  to  in  the  course  of  a  paper  which  I  read  before  the
British  Association  at  Glasgow,  in  1876.^  They  embrace  the  record  of
numerous  sittings,  extending  through  the  months  of  August  and
September,  1875.  Present,  besides  myself,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  and  their
young  daughter  F.,  a  bright,  frank,  and  intelligent  child  tlien  about  ten
years  old.  Time,  10  a.m.  We  sat  at  a  large  dining-room  table  facing
the  French  windows,  which  let  in  a  flood  of  sunlight,  so  tliat  tlie  sitters'
feet  as  well  as  hands  could  be  perfectly  seen.  Sliortly  a  sort  of  scraping
sound  was  heard  on  the  surface  of  the  table,  the  sound  movins:  about,
but  was  loudest  when  near  the  medium  F.  Raps  were  also  heard,
sometimes  on  the  table,  sometimes  appearing  to  come  on  the  backs  of
the  chairs  on  which  we  sat.  F.'s  hands  and  feet  were  closely  watched  ;
they  were  absolutely  motionless  when  the  sounds  were  heard.  After  a
few  sittings  the  sounds  grew  in  loudness,  often  being  as  loud  as,  and
very  nmch  resembling,  the  hammering  of  small  nails  into  a  floor.  They
came  more  readily  and  more  loudly  when  music  was  played,  or  a  merry
song  struck  up. Usually  they  kept  time  with  the  music,  and  altogether

1  fiee  Proceedings  S.P.R.  vol.  1,  p.  238.


30


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


displayed  a  singular  degree  of  intelligence.  Sometimes  a  loud  rhythmic
scraping,  as  of  a  violoncello  bow  on  a  piece  of  wood,  would  accompany
the  music.  Again  and  again  I  placed  my  ear  on  the  very  spot  on  the
table  whence  this  rough  hddling  appeared  to  proceed,  and  felt  distinctly
the  rhythmic  vibration  of  the  table,  but  no  tangible  cause  was  visible
either  above  or  below  the  table.  Experiments  were  made  on  the  possi-
bility of  localising  sounds  such  as  were  heard,  and  so  far  as  my
experiments  went,  I  found  that  I  could  tell,  approximately,  the
position  where  a  knock  was  made  by  a  friend  hidden  underneath  a  large
table.  The  ability  to  localise  a  sound  depends  veiy  much  on  the  nature
of  the  sound.  The  sounds  made  by  a  siren  or  by  a  singing  flame  are
extremely  diflicult  to  localise,  they  may  be  anywhere  about  the  room  ;
but  I  feel  pretty  confident  that  tlie  knocks  and  scraping  sounds
proceeded  from  a  source  certainly  within  a  foot  or  two  of  the  position
assigned.  Now  I  noticed  particularly  that  the  sounds — though  fainter,
it  is  true,  than  when  near — were  sometimes  heard  far  away  from  the
medium.  On  one  occasion,  when  no  one  else  was  in  the  room,  and  it
was  broad  daylight  as  usual,  I  asked  my  young  friend  the  medium  to
put  her  hands  against  the  wall  and  see  how  far  she  could  stretch  her
feet  back  from  the  wall  without  tumbling  down.  This  she  did,  and
whilst  in  this  constrained  position — with  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and
legs  all  in  tension — I  asked  for  the  knocks  to  come.  Immediately  a
brisk  pattering  of  raps  followed  my  request.  All  the  while  the  child
remained  quite  motionless.  My  reason  in  making  this  experiment  was
to  test  the  late  Dr.  Carpenter's  muscular  theory  of  the  cause  of  the
sounds.  Had  Dr.  Carpenter  been  present,  I  feel  sure  he  would  have
admitted  that  here,  at  any  rate,  that  theory  fell  through.  Besides
knocks  there  were  occasional  movements  of  the  furniture.  Seated  one
day  at  a  large  dining-room  table,  in  full  sunlight,  Florrie  and  Mr.  and
Mrs.  C.  and  myself  being  present,  all  our  Angers  visibly  resting  on  the
surface  of  the  table,  three  legs  of  the  table  rose  off  the  ground  to  a
sufficient  height  to  allow  me  to  put  my  foot  easily  beneath  the  castor
nearest  me.  Attempts  to  move  the  table  by  muscular  effort,  under
similar  conditions,  entirely  failed  ;  it  could  be  pushed  about,  not  raised.
On  one  occasion  I  asked  that  the  knocks  should  come  upon  a  small  table,
the  medium  being  seated  near  to,  but  not  touching  the  table.  The
sounds  occurred  as  requested,  and  I  placed  one  hand  flat  on  the  upper
surface  of  the  table,  and  the  other  on  the  under  surface,  and  in  this
position  I  felt,  or  thought  I  felt,  the  slight  jarring  made  by  the  taps  on
that  part  of  the  table  enclosed  between  my  hands.  The  sounds
frequently  occuri-ed,  as  I  have  said,  wlien  the  child  was  the  only  person
present  in  tlie  room  besides  myself.  Under  such  conditions  they
occurred  when  I  made  lier  lie  on  a  sofa  and  firmly  held  lier  hands  and
feet. On  any  occasion,  upon  repeating  the  alphabet,  raps  would  occur


1886.]


071  Some  Physwal  Phenomena.


31


at  certain  letters.  Thus  I  was  told  that  a  lad  named  "  Walter  Hussey  "
was  the  in\'isible  person  engaged  in  making  the  sounds.

Though  there  was  manifest  intelligence  in  the  sounds,  it  was  a
childish  intelligence,  and  a  hasty  observer  might  therefore  jump  to  the
conclusion  that  it  was  the  little  medium  herself  playing  tricks  ;  and  he
would  find  incidents  which  might  give  a  plausible  support  to  his  conclu-
sion. Thus  one  day  a  word  was  misspelt  by  raps,  exactly  as  the  child
would  have  misspelt  that  word,  as  I  afterwards  ascertained.  Yet  I  can
only  say  that  a  long  and  careful  examination  convinced  me  tliat  trickery
on  the  part  of  the  child  was  a  more  improbable  hypothesis  than  that
the  sounds  proceeded  from  some  unknown  agency.

Nor  could  the  sounds  be  accounted  for  by  trickery  on  the  part
of  the  servants  in  the  liouse,  for  in  addition  to  my  careful  inquiries
on  this  point,  Mr.  C.  informed  me  that  he  had  obtained  the  raps
on  the  handle  of  his  umbrella  out  of  doors,  when  the  child  was
by  his  side,  and  that  the  music  master  complained  of  raps  pro-
ceeding from  inside  the  pianoforte  whenever  the  child  was  listless  or
inattentive  at  her  music  lesson.  Mrs.  C.  told  me  that  almost  every
night  she  heard  the  raps  by  the  bedside  of  her  child  when  she  went  to
bid  her  child  good  night ;  and  that  after  she  had  left  the  room  and
partially  closed  the  door,  she  would  hear  quite  an  animated  conversation
going  on  between  her  daughter  and  her  invisible  companion,  the  child
rapidly  spelling  over  the  alphabet,  and  the  raps  occurring  at  the  right
letters,  and  the  child  thus  obtaining,  with  surprising  rapidity,  a  clue  to
the  words  spelt  out.

Still  more  violently  improbable  is  the  supposition  that  the  parents
of  the  child  were  at  the  bottom  of  the  mystery,  stimulated  by  a  desire
to  impress  their  friends  with  tlie  wonderful  but  imaginary  gifts  their
child  possessed.  The  presence  of  the  parents  was  not  necessary  for  the
occurrence  of  the  sounds  which,  as  I  have  said,  often  took  place  when  I
was  the  only  person  in  the  room  besides  the  child.

Hallucination  was  the  explanation  which  suggested  itself  to  my  own
mind  when  first  I  heard  of  the  phenomena,  but  was  dismissed  as  wholly
inapplicable  after  the  first  day's  inquiry  ;  nor  do  I  tliink  anyone  could
maintain  that  difierent  people,  individually  and  collectively,  for  some
weeks  thought  they  heard  and  saw  a  series  of  sounds  and  motions
which  had  no  objective  existence.

No !  I  was  then,  and  am  still,  morally  certain  tliat  the  phenomena
had  a  real  existence  outside  oneself,  and  tliat  they  were  not  produced  by
trickery  or  by  known  causes,  hence  I  confess  I  could  come  to  no  other
conclusion  than  that  we  had  here  a  class  of  phenomena  wholly  new  to
science.i In  reviewing  the  evidence  the  critic  must,  however,  make  what

'  It  may  be  urged  that  the  occTilt  phenomena  alleged  by  the  Tlieosophists
were  of  this  inexplicable  character,  and  believed  in  by  nniiibers  of  intelligent


32


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


alloM'ance  he  thinks  proper  for  my  mental  bias  during  the  investigation,
and  furtlier  take  into  account  the  hypothesis  that  some  children  do
exhibit  an  amazing  passion  for  deceiving  their  elders,  and  some  possess
an  extraordinary  love  of  notoriety.  For  instance,  I  could  a  tragic
tale  unfold  where  these  causes  led  a  clever  boy,  in  good  position  in
society,  and  of  juvenile  piety,  for  twelve  months  to  deceive  his  father,  a
distinguished  surgeon,  and  all  his  family,  by  pretended  Spiritualistic
manifestations,  which  appeared  at  first  sight  inexplicable  until  the
cunning  trickery  of  the  lad  was  discovered.  But  the  two  cases  radically
differ  in  this,  tliat  after  examination  by  an  outsider  one  case  hopelessly
broke  down,  the  other  did  not.  In  the  one  case  the  phenomena  were
not  beyond  the  capacity  of  a  clever  and  wicked  child,  in  the  other  the
phenomena  were,  I  venture  to  think,  beyond  the  capacity  even  of  the
most  clever  and  diabolical  child.  It  was  in  assuming  the  goodness  of
their  child  that  one  family  were  misled  ;  no  such  assumption  was  made
in  the  other  case,  for  the  parents  sensibly  enough  punished  their  child
when  the  phenomena  first  broke  out.

After  some  three  months  the  sounds  disappeared  as  unexpectedly  as
they  had  arisen.  Assuming  Miss  C.  to  be  an  accomplished  trickster
animated  by  the  love  of  notoriety,  one  would  not  expect  the  phenomena
to  droop  and  die  away  when  constant  practice  had  made  the  trick  easy,
and  when  the  acme  of  success,  as  regards  the  growing  interest  of  friends
and  the  attention  paid  to  herself,  was  within  the  performer's  reach.

In  a  letter  which  I  received  a  few  days  ago  from  Mrs.  C,  she
writes  : —

Florrie  has  never  had  any  return  of  her  mediumship  since  1875,  when
we  were  in  Ireland.  It  died  a  sudden  death  tliere  and  then.  I  was  not
sorry  for  it,  for  I  feared  that  had  it  continued  wlien  she  was  growing  up,  it
would  probably  have  developed  more  than  we  cared  for  or  than  was  good
for  herself.  Of  tlie  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  I  have  never  had  the
slightest  doubt,  then  or  now.

And  in  a  subsequent  letter  Mrs.  C.  gives  her  opinioii  which,  though
I  do  not  agree  with  it,  I  quote  : —

I  have  no  doubt  that  the  intelligence  which  manifested  was  outside
the  circle,  and  though  my  mere  conviction  on  such  a  matter  is,  of  course,
quite  valueless,  I  still  believe  it  was  a  so-called  "  spirit  "  totally  disconnected
from  ourselves,  and  dominating  lier  for  a  time.  The  manifestations  were
often  violent,  and  for  the  most  part  very  frivolous  in  their  nature.  I  thought

and  honest  men.  Nevertheless,  after  Mr.  Hodgson's  investigation  in  India  no
other  conclusion  is  possible  but  that  the  High  Priestess  of  Tlieosophy,  Madame
Blavatsky — round  whom  these  marvels  clustered, — is  one  of  the  most  "accom-
plishe<l  impostors  in  history."  But  what  are  the  facts?  Directly  circumspect
and  painstaking  investigation  was  brought  to  liear  upon  these  phenomena  they
were  found  to  be  fraudulent,  and  the  mystery  collapsed.


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


33


therefore  they  could  bring  no  advantage  to  the  sitters  to  counterbalance
the  disadvantage  to  my  daughter,  then  a  mere  child  and  easily  excited.
Hence,  when  the  phenomena  ceased  I  was  not  sorry  for  it  on  her  account.^

The  next  case,  which  I  will  cite,  is  of  somewhat  less  e\'idential  value,
as  my  opportunities  for  testing  the  phenomena  under  varying  conditions
"were  not  so  great  ;  but  the  case  is  of  interest  owing  to  the  medium
being  a  middle-aged  lady  in  private  life,  who  found  this  abnormal
power  gradually  develop  in  her  presence.  In  the  spring  of  1877,  I  was
informed  by  a  ilr.  L.,  a  w^ell-kno^\^l  photogi'apher  in  Dublin,  that  his
cousin,  Miss  I.,  had  mediumistic  power,  and  I  was  invited  to  her  house
to  make  a  careful  investigation.  I  went  a  great  many  times  during  the
spring  and  autumn  of  1877,  and  took  notes  of  what  occurred.  In  moder-
ate gaslight,  enough  to  see  to  read  small  print,  knocks  and  spasmodic
movements  of  the  table  at  which  we  sat  occurred,  and  long  religious
messages  were  rapidly  spelt  out,  sometimes  by  raps,  sometimes  by  quick
tilting  of  the  table,  which  latter  may,  however,  be  disregarded,  as  it  is
impossible  to  eliminate  the  effects  of  unconscious  muscular  action
except  by  a  clear  space  intervening  between  the  hands  and  the  table,
which  was  not  the  case  here  as  a  rule.  I  will  quote  the  record  of  one
stance  on  Jlay  10,  1877.  There  were  present  only  myself,  Mr.  L.,  and
Miss  I.  The  seance  took  place  at  Mr.  L.'s  house  in  the  evening,  one
gaslight  burning  in  the  room.  Seated  at  a  small  table,  tiny  raps  soon
occurred,  like  the  ticking  of  a  hard  point  on  the  oil  cloth  which  covered
the  floor  of  the  room.  I  confined  my  attention  to  these,  and  l^egged
Miss  I.  to  move  to  a  larger  and  heavier  table,  some  4  feet  square,  and
to  adjust  her  dress  so  that  I  could  see  her  feet.  This  she  did.  I  sat
close  by  her,  carefully  watching  her  feet  and  hands,  which  were  however
quite  motionless.

Presently  loud  raps  were  given  at  this  table  beneath  the  hands  of
the  sitters,  so  loud,  in  fact,  they  quite  startled  me.  In  character  the
sounds  in  general  resembled  the  snapping  noises  occasionally  made  by
furniture  when  the  joints  open  under  the  heat  of  a  room.  But  the
sharpest  and  loudest  cracks  can  be  well  imitated  in  strength  and
character  by  smartly  striking  a  table  ^vith  the  edge  of  an  i\  ory
paper-knife.  In  obedience  to  my  request  a  definite  number  of  knocks
were  given  :  four  double  knocks  were  asked  for  and  given  ;  knocks
were  asked  to  indicate  the  number  of  fingers  held  open,  and  were
correctly  given  ;  in  two  instances  this  was  tried  and  correctly  done

1  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  were  present  when  this  paper  was  read.  jNIr.  C.
quite  corroborated  the  opinion  given  by  his  wife  of  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomena,  and  informed  me  of  several  other  remarkable  plienoniena,  in
connection  -\vith  the  mediumship  of  his  daughter,  which  had  not  come  imder  my
notice.

D


34


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


[March  6,


when  I  held  my  hand  out  of  sight,  so  that  the  opened  fingers  were  known
to  no  one  but  myself.  Knocks  of  different  kinds  were  now  heard  all
over  the  table  ;  they  kept  time  to  the  whistling  of  a  tune,  and  showed
an  actuating  intelligence  that  Avas  most  undeniable.

Addressing  the  table,  I  now  asked  if  knocks  could  be  given  without
the  contact  of  the  hand.  Three  knocks  in  reply  were  to  be  the  signal
for  yes.  Three  knocks  quickly  came.  The  hands  of  both  Mr.  L.  and
Miss  I.  were  now  held  up,  and  whilst  they  partially  withdrew  from  the
table,  the  knocks  still  came,  not  so  vigorously,  but  still  there  they  were.
This  went  on  for  some  minutes,  till  they  ceased  to  be  heard.  A  refresher
was  then  given  in  the  shape  of  a  few  moments'  contact  with  the  hands.
Once  more  the  knocks  returned,  and  continued  some  time  after  the
hands  were  removed.

Whilst  noticing  these  facts,  I  observed  a  frequent  uneasy  movement
of  the  entire  table,  and  now  it  sidled  about  in  a  most  surprising
manner.  Lifting  their  hands  completely  off  the  table,  the  sitters  placed
themselves  back  in  their  chairs  with  their  hands  folded  across  their
chests ;  their  feet  were  in  full  view,  and  under  these  conditions,  and  in
obedience  to  my  request,  the  table  raised  the  two  legs  nearest  to  me
completely  off  the  ground,  some  8  or  10  inches,  and  thus  suspended
itself  for  a  few  moments.  Again  a  similar  act  was  performed  on  the
other  side.  Next  came  a  very  unexpected  occurrence.  Whilst
absolutely  free  from  the  contact  of  every  person  the  table  wriggled  itself
backward  and  forward,  advancing  towards  the  arm-chair  in  which  I
sat,  and  ultimately  completely  imprisoning  me  in  my  seat.  During  its
progress  it  was  followed  by  Mr.  L.  and  Miss  I.,  but  they  were  at  no
time  touching  it,  and  occasionally  were  so  distant  that  I  could  perceive
a  free  space  all  round  the  table  whilst  it  was  still  in  motion.  When
thus  under  my  very  nose  the  table  rose  repeatedly,  and  enabled  me  to
be  perfectly  sure  by  the  evidence  of  touch  that  it  was  off  the  ground,
and,  further,  that  no  human  being,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  had
any  part  in  this  movement.

This  sitting  lasted  two  and  a-half  hours  altogether.  The  results,  it
is  true,  were  very  remarkable  and  unaccountable  ;  but  though  I  had  not
the  slightest  doubt  of  the  good  faith  of  Mr.  L.  and  Miss  I.,  yet  I  do  not
adduce  this  evidence  as  unexceptionable.  I  should  have  preferred  to
have  taken  precautions  which  were  not  so  easy  to  impose  on  a  lady,  and
I  should  also  have  preferred  to  have  had  the  se'ance  in  my  own  house.
This  latter  objection  was  met  by  Mr.  L.  and  Miss  I.  coming  to  my  own
house  in  the  first  week  of  September,  1877,  and  as  before  we  three  were
the  only  persons  present.  The  time  was  the  afternoon,  and  there  was
plenty  of  daylight.  Though  the  drawing-room  was  carpeted,  the  curious
ticking  sounds  again  occurred  ;  these  soon  developed  into  louder  raps,
always  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  medium,  but  I  could  not  discover


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


35


the  slightest  movement  of  the  muscles  of  the  hands  or  feet  which
would  account  for  tlie  sounds ;  nor  were  they  muffled,  but  clear
and  distinct  raps.  There  was  always  a  remarkable  intelligence  and
often  a  jocosity  about  the  sounds,  and  when  a  tune  was  played  on  the
piano  the  raps  kept  time  to  it.  Suddenly,  only  the  tips  of  our  fingers
being  on  the  table,  the  heavy  loo  table  at  which  we  were  sitting  made  a
series  of  very  violent  prancing  movements  (which  I  could  not  imitate
afterwards  except  by  using  both  hands  and  all  my  strength) ;  the
blows  were  so  heavy  that  I  hurriedly  stopped  the  performance,  fearing
for  the  safety  of  the  gas  chandelier  in  the  room  below.

Here,  too,  I  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  tliat  the  phenomena
described  are  inexplicable  on  any  known  hypothesis.  It  is  true  the
character  of  the  pious  platitudes  spelt  out  by  the  table  were  just  such
as  the  medium  herself  (a  Methodist)  would  be  likely  to  concoct ;  and  it
was  quite  possible  or  even  probable  that  unintentional  muscular  move-
ments on  her  part  caused  the  table  to  tilt  and  spell  out  these  platitudes.
Nor  must  we  exclude  from  our  view  two  considerations,  first,  how  very
difficult  if  not  impossible  it  is  to  keep  up  a  continuous  vigilant  watch
on  the  hands  and  feet  of  any  person — tlie  whole  of  legerdemain  is  based
upon  this  known  failure  in  our  habits  of  observation  ;  and  second  (though
there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  Miss  I.  was  sufiering  from  this  malady),
we  must  remember  the  extraordinary  vagaries  of  hysteria :  even
experienced  physicians  have  sometimes  been  led  astray  by  the  morbid
and  amazing  cunning  of  patients  suffering  from  this  disease.  But
supposing  that  Miss  I.  had  some  ingenious  mechanism  concealed  about
her  person  whereby  she  could,  by  an  imperceptible  movement  of  her
body,  produce  the  sounds  that  were  heard,  this  explanation  would  fail
to  account  for  the  undoubted  motion  of  a  lieavy  table  free  from  the
contact  of  all  present.  After  giving  due  weight  to  every  known
explanation,  the  phenomena  remain  inexplicable  to  me,  but  each  reader
will  form  his  independent  opinion,  which  will  be  so  much  the  more
valuable  than  mine  as  his  knowledge  is  larger  and  his  experience  of
these  phenomena  wider  than  mine.

With  some  hesitation  I  will  now  adduce  a  case  of  anotlier  order,
namely,  with  a  paid  professional  medium,  who  has  since  become  well-
known  for  his  slate-writing  performances,  and  who  is  therefore  either  an
accomplished  trickster  or  the  possessor  of  most  wonderful  occult  power.
This  is,  therefore,  a  case  wherein  I  should  like  to  have  had  the  co-opera-
tion and  opinion  of  a  good  conjurer ;  I  confess  I  distrust  my  own
judgment.  I  will,  however,  endeavour  to  describe  what  occurred  as
faithfully  as  my  notes  of  the  performance  admit.  My  principal  reason
for  citing  this  case  is  that  it  affords  an  illustration  of  what  appears  to
be  utterly  incomprehensible  as  a  piece  of  trickery,  and  yet  I  cannot

D  2


36


On  Some  Physical  Phe^iomena.


[March  6,


conceal  from  myself  the  fact  that  if  the  moral  character  of  the  medium
should  be  found  open  to  suspicion  the  chances  are  that  it  was  after
all  only  a  piece  of  adroit  legerdemain.

On  January  5th,  1878,  Mr.  Hensleigh  "Wedgwood  kindly  arranged
that  I  should  have  a  seance  in  his  own  house  in  Queen  Anne  Street,
London,  with  Mr.  Eglinton.  The  observers  present  beside  myself
were  Mr.  Wedg^vood  and  his  sister,  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  and  Mr.  F.
W.  H.  Myers.

The  stance  was  held  in  Mr.  Wedgwood's  library  at  the  hour  of
4  p.m.  When  the  medium  arrived  I  was  permitted  to  take  whatever
precautions  I  thought  necessary  to  prevent  fraud  on  his  part.
Accordingly  I  asked  him  to  take  off  his  coat  and  waistcoat  and  put  on
a  black  coat  of  Mr.  Wedgwood's.  The  description  of  what  follows  is
tedious,  but  I  fear  it  is  necessary,  though  no  verbal  description  can  ever
be  entirely  satisfactory  to  one  Avho  was  not  present.  Anticipating  that
the  medium  might  easily  slip  his  arms  out  of  tlie  coat  sleeves,  but  that
he  would  tind  it  extremely  difficult  to  get  them  out  of  his  shirt  sleeves,
I  took  a  needle  and  thread  and  stitched  each  sleeve  of  the  white  shirt
he  had  on  to  the  corresponding  sleeve  of  the  coat  I  had  just  put  on
him.  I  then  stitched  the  wristband  of  eacli  shirt  sleeve  so  as  to  make
it  fit  tightly  around  his  wrists.  He  was  then  asked  to  sit  down  in  a
chair  in  tlie  corner  of  the  room  and  place  his  hands  behind  him  ;  in
this  position  thread  was  tied  to  each  wrist  and  fastened  to  a  nail  driven
in  the  woodwork  of  the  adjacent  bookcase.  To  prevent  accidental  break-
ing of  the  thread,  and  as  a  further  security,  a  piece  of  red  tape  was  passed
through  the  button  liole  of  his  shirt,  then  through  a  button  hole  of  the
coat,  then  carried  over  his  arms  and  the  two  ends  tied  very  securely  behind
him  ;  the  two  long  loose  ends  of  the  tape  were  finally  fastened,  one  to
the  nail  in  the  bookcase  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other  to  the  nail  in
the  bookcase  on  liis  left  hand  side.  I  now  asked  him  to  place  his  hands,
which,  as  I  have  said,  were  behind  him,  palm  to  palm  ;  he  did  so,  and  I
then  tied  his  thumbs  togetlier  very  securely  with  a  piece  of  black  linen
thread.  It  will  thus  be  obvious  he  could,  if  lie  chose,  move  his  legs
freely  and  also  turn  or  nod  his  head,  but  he  could  not  move  the  trunk
of  his  body  nor  his  hands  nor  arms  without  breaking  the  fastenings,
which  I  may  add  were  sealed  with  sealing  wax  on  to  the  bookcase
as  well  as  tied  to  the  nails.  A  couple  of  small  curtains,  running  on  a
rail  over  the  medium's  head,  Avere  now  drawn  nearly  togetlier  in  front
of  the  medium,  leaving  a  space  of  a  few  inches  exactly  opposite  the
central  line  of  his  body.  Through  this  space  his  face  and  front  of  his
body  could  of  course  be  seen.  The  curtains  hung  down  on  eacli  side  of
the  chair  on  wliich  the  medium  sat,  so  that  his  legs  from  tlie  waist
downward  were  entirely  in  front  of  the  curtain.  A  gas  jet,  which  was
the  principal  light  in  the  room  (the  heavy  window  curtains  having  been


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Plienomena.


37


drawn)  was  now  lowered,  but  there  was  plenty  of  light  to  allow  of  our
seeing  each  other.  We  then  seated  ourselves  close  to  the  medium  ;  I
was  so  close  to  him  that  not  a  foot  intervened  between  us.  I  could  see
that  his  head  presently  drooped  and  he  went  into  a  sort  of  trance,
whether  real  or  assumed  I  could  not  say.  Knockings  were  now  heai'd,
and  upon  repeating  the  alphabet  over  slowly,  a  message  was  spelt  out.
I  asked,  "  Can  you  move  anything  in  the  room'? "  It  said,  by  knocks,  it
would  try,  but  nothing  was  moved.  Either  one  of  us  or  else  the
knocks  suggested  putting  some  objects  near  the  medium.  I  got  up,
went  to  the  bookcase,  and  took  out  some  three  or  four  books  at  random.
These  I  placed  in  a  pile  on  the  lap  of  the  medium,  and  then,  catching
sight  of  a  small  hand  bell,  added  this  on  the  top  of  all.

Upon  seating  myself  close  in  front  of  the  medium,  our  knees  almost
touching,  I  noticed  there  was  enough  light  in  the  room  to  read  the  time
by  my  watch  true  to  a  second.  In  a  few  minutes  after  this,  whilst
watching  the  motionless  ligure  of  the  medium,  I  distinctly  saw  the
upper  half  of  the  pile  of  books  move,  the  cover  of  the  middle  book
opening  and  causing  the  ones  above  it  and  the  bell  to  incline  to  a  con-
siderable angle,  so  that  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  the  bell  did  not  fall
oS ;  in  fact,  it  did  not  stir  relatively  to  the  cover  of  the  book.  The  leaves
of  the  book  were  now  dropped  one  after  another,  and  then  opened  up
again.  Then  the  lower  book  opened,  and  its  leaves  were  deliberately  let
fall.  The  whole  proceeding  was  exactly  such  as  would  occur  if  two
hands  were  placed  on  each  side  of  the  volumes  and  their  leaves  slowly
run  over  by  first  lifting  up  the  body  of  tlie  book  and  then  allowing  the
leaves  to  drop  past,  the  fingers  rubbing  against  them  as  they  fell.
During  this  process  some  unseen  support  would  be  required  to  keep
the  bell  in  its  place.

Now,  if  the  medium  had  skilfully  depressed  or  raised  his  knees,
the  books  would  have  moved  as  a  whole,  and  this  is  what  did  not  occur.
If  he  had  cunningly  contrived,  unseen  by  five  pairs  of  eyes,  to  fasten  a
thread  to  the  cover  of  any  of  the  books,  he  must  have  done  so  in  full
view  of  us  all  after  he  had  been  secured  in  his  chair,  and  then  the
upper  cover,  or  the  book  as  a  whole,  would  have  moved,  and  this  also  is
what  did  not  occur.

When  the  curtains  were  drawn  back  the  medium  appeared  to  be
fast  asleep  ;  the  gas  was  turned  fully  up,  and  every  fastening  was  found
intact.  As,  however,  I  could  see  the  body  of  the  medium  the  whole
time,  the  fastenings  were  of  no  particular  value  in  this  case,  except  to
satisfy  those  who  were  not  there.  The  medium  presented  the  usual
dazed  appearance  when  he  awoke  shortly  afterwards.

What  hypothesis  can  we  frame  to  account  for  what  took  place  1  If
hallucination  be  the  explanation  it  was  a  case  of  collective  hallucination,
for  every  one  of  the  five  observers  present  saw  the  same  thing  and


38


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


described  it  in  similar  words  afterwards.  The  occurrence  was  not
expected  beforehand,  not,  therefore,  talked  over  as  likely  to  happen,
and  accordingly  no  dominant  idea  had  taken  possession  of  our  minds
that  this  particular  phenomenon  would  occur.  Moreover,  I  was
specially  on  my  guard,  for  the  mesmeric  hypothesis  was  a  favourite
one  of  mine,  but  in  this  case  it  is  certainly  out  of  court.  If  fraud
be  the  explanation,  who  was  the  operator  1  The  good  faith  of  the
observers,  all  friends  of  each  other,  is  unquestionable  ;  but  if  this  were
not  the  case  it  was  quite  light  enough  to  see  that  nobody's  hands  were
meddling  with  the  books.  The  medium  may  have  been  the  operator,
but  I  cannot  myself  conjecture  how  he  accomplished  the  performance,
even  allowing  he  may  have  distracted  our  attention  at  a  critical
moment  so  as  to  make  his  preparations  unperceived.  The  most
plausible  explanation  of  tlie  whole  affair  is  mal-observation  and
misdescription  on  my  part,  a  clever  bit  of  juggling  in  moving  the  books
being  mistaken  for  a  larger  movement,  and  ultimately  exaggerated  into
the  effect  described.  I  have  however  quoted  from  my  notes  and  am  not
conscious  of  any  exaggeration.  But  I  think  we  are  bound  to  admit  that
if  such  an  inexplicable  physical  phenomenon  stood  alone  it  is  far  more
probable  that  my  observation  was  inaccurate  or  my  description
exaggerated  than  that  the  occurrence  actually  took  place  as  I  have
described.  1

The  question  remains  how  far  is  it  legitimate  to  apply  this  exaggera-
tion hypothesis  to  each  case  as  it  arises  and  so  in  detail  dispose  of  an
imposing  array  of  evidence.  When  the  first  observers  of  a  slowly
moving  electric  tire-ball  recounted  what  they  had  seen  they  were
naturally  suspected  of  exaggeration,  or  as  the  victims  of  some  illusion.
But  as  concordant  testimony  from  other  independent  observers  came  in
disbelief  had  to  be  given  up,  and  electric  fire-balls  are  now  accepted  as
an  enigmatic  freak  of  that  inexplicable  agency,  electricity.

Similarly,  if  we  had  adequate  evidence,  physical  phenomena,  such

^  I  ought  here  to  mention  that  I  have  had  numerous  sittings  with  "Dr.
Slade  "  and  Mr.  Eglinton,  and  other  mediums,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  what
are  called  "  PsycliogTaphic  "  phenomena,  that  is,  writing  by  unseen  agency  on
slates  or  other  material.  Whilst  I  was  very  much  impressed  with  the  successful
results  that  I  liad  with  Slade  in  l>road  dayUglit  and  under  conditions  tliat  seemed
to  render  fraud  impossible  (and  until  I  am  shown  how  the  writing  could  be  accom-
plished by  legerdemain  I  find  it  stupendously  ditticult  to  accept  that  hypothesis),
nevertheless  one  notable  fact  must  be  set  against  Slade ;  namely,  he
entirely  failed  to  obtain  any  writing  within  a  carefully  sealed  box,  albeit  I
left  the  box  in  his  possession  for  some  time.  "Dr.  Monck,"  another  known
medium,  equally  failed  with  the  same  box,  and  subsequently  I  caught  the
"Dr."  in  a  gross  bit  of  fraud,  a  piece  of  white  muslin  on  a  wire  frame  with  a
black  thread  attached,  being  used  by  the  medium  to  simulate  a  "^jcwim^^y
materialized  spirit "  !


1886.]  On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.  39


as  I  have  described,  might,  without  intellectual  confusion,  be  regarded
as  unaccountable  freaks  of  that  mysterious  agency  we  call  mind.  Of
whose  mind  is  another  question,  or  whether  that  mind  belong  to  a  living
human  brain  or  to  an  invisible  being.  The  real  point  at  issue  is  simply
this,  have  we  at  the  present  day  a  sufficient  accumulation  of  good
evidence  from  trustworthy,  independent  observers,  to  outweigh  the
antecedent  improbability  of  the  alleged  facts  ?

For  my  own  part,  and  with  much  diffidence,  I  venture  to  think  we
have  now  enough  evidence,  and  have  had  enough  any  time  this  last
dozen  years,  to  establish  in  an  unbiassed  mind  a  presumption  in  favour
of  the  existence  of  certain  physical  phenomena  inexplicable  by  the
physical  science  of  to-day.  We  have  not  anything  like  enough  evidence
to  convince  the  scientific  world,  or  even  to  remove  all  doubt  from  an
impartial  jury  who  demand  scientific  precision.  It  may  be  the
very  nature  of  the  phenomena  will  prevent  our  ever  obtaining
the  kind  of  evidence  that  physical  science'  demands.  Still  more
remote  is  the  probability  of  our  being  able  in  this  region  to
exercise  that  successful  prevision  which  science  justly  regards  as  the
test  of  accurate  knowledge,  and  of  laws  built  thereon.  Possibly  the
pursuit  of  experimental  psychology,  which  our  Society  is  stimulating
throughout  both  Europe  and  America,  will  in  time  throw  much  light
upon  the  causes  of  phenomena  such  as  I  have  ventured  to  bring  before
the  Society  this  evening.

But  along  with  more  evidence  of  the  right  kind  I  am  convinced  we
need  a  somewhat  freer  use  of  hypotheses.  The  popular  theories  and
easy-chair  explanations  of  Spiritualistic  phenomena  are  manifestly
inadequate.  As  a  stimulus  to  investigation  let  us  be  bold  in  discussing
novel  hypotheses  whilst  we  are  rigidly  careful  in  experiment.  "  Never,"
remarks  De  Morgan,  "  has  any  way  been  made  by  observations  alone.
Pacts  have  sometimes  started  a  theory  ;  but  until  sagacity  had  con-
jectured, divined,  guessed,  surmised  what  these  facts  pointed  to,  the
facts  were  a  moh,  not  an  army."  I  am  therefore  of  opinion  that  the
most  hopeful  advance  in  this  subject  will  be  made  by  daring  hypotheses
based  upon  a  study  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  private  mediumship.
Of  course,  many  erroneous  explanations  will  be  made  at  first ;  our
theories  are  almost  sure  to  be  wrong.  Intellectual  progress,  like
walking,  is  a  perpetual  falling  and  recovery.

With  much  respect  for  the  opinion  of  those  who  have  arrived
at  an  opposite  conclusion,  and  quite  admitting  that  future  evidence
may  show  that  I  am  wrong  and  they  are  right,  so  far  nothing  that
I  have  myself  seen  has  given  me  sufficient  reason  to  believe  that
an  extramundane  intelligence  operates  in  Spiritualistic  phenomena.
So  far  as  the  evidence  is  trustworthy,  I,  for  one,  believe  it  points
to  the  conclusion  that,  under  conditions  which  are  so  restricted  that  we


40


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


are  not  put  to  intellectual  confusion  by  frequent  interruptions  of  the
ordinary  course  of  material  laws,  7nind,  occasionally  and  unconsciously,
can  exert  a  direct  infliience  upon  lifeless  matter.  Upon  the  living
organised  matter  of  the  brain  mind  can  and  does  act,  i.e.,  if  we  admit
mind  apart  from  matter.  Obviously  pure  materialism  must  reject  all
Spiritualistic  evidence,  and  hence  the  great  theoretic  interest  which
attaches  itself  to  this  branch  of  psychical  research.  The  hypothesis  I
have  suggested  will  be  considered  less  presumptuous  by  those  who  have
followed  the  weighty  evidence  we  have  obtained  in  favour  of  tlie  direct
action  of  ndnd  upon  mind  in  thought-transference.

It  is  however  a  recognised  and  wholesome  axiom  of  science  that  before
unknown  causes  are  assumed  to  exist  all  known  causes  should  have
been  exhausted,  and  not  until  they  are  shown  to  aflord  an  inadequate
explanation  are  we  at  liberty  to  take  a  new  departure. This  axiom  we
have carefully borne in mind in our experiments in  tliought-
transference  ;  let  us  be  equally  cautious  and  equally  free  from  timidity
here. Mrs.  Sidgwick,  in  the  paper  that  is  to  follow  this,  will,  I  believe,
conclusively  show  how  hopelessly  inattentive  our  observation  usually  is  ;
with  the  firmest  resolution  we  mentally  relax  our  attention  from  time
to  time. Students  of  optics  know  that  whilst  we  think  we  clearly  see
the  whole  figure  of  a  man  or  a  group  of  things,  with  one  simultaneous
act  of  vision,  the  opposite  is  the  case ;  we  can  only  see  clearly  one  point
at  a  time,  and  unconsciously  our  eyes  sweep  from  point  to  point  over  the
objects  before  us. Thus  the  muscles  of  the  eyes  require  intervals  of
rest,  which  intervals  come  and  go  unbidden  and  unknown,  and  at  these
moments  we  are  oblivious  of  all  but  a  speck  in  the  scene  before  us.
Furthermore,  to  gain  the  needful  rest  or  relief  from  monotony,  our
eyes  outwit  our  will,  and  surreptitiously  wander  at  the  slightest  dis-
traction.

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  acute  observations  will  probably  explain  by  known
causes  much  that  now  passes  as  good  evidence  in  favour  of  Spiritualism,
just  as  unconscious  muscular  action  and  extreme  tactile  sensibility  ex-
plain much  that  passes  as  thought-reading.  It  seems  to  me  however  almost
as  irrational  to  explain  away  the  whole  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  by
fraud  and  mal-observation  as  is  the  attempt  of  some  of  our  hasty  critics
to  attribute  to  collusion  and  "  muscle-reading  "  the  experiments  upon
which  we  base  our  belief  in  thought-transference.  Such  critics  forget
that  every  honest  investigator  is  sure  to  strain  known  causes  to  their
utmost  limit  before  he  is  driven  to  adopt  an  explanation  that  runs
counter  to  the  generalised  experience  of  mankind.  No  doubt  astute-
ness beyond  the  ordinary  lot  of  mankind  is  the  inalienable  birthright  of
all  critics,  but  they  might  spare  us  a  little  common-sense.

But  hypotheses  of  the  conditions  of  success  in  experimenting  are
even  more  useful  at  present  than  hypotheses  of  the  cause  of  the


1886.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


41


phenomena. I  do  not  know  that  we  have  any  right  hastily  to  reject
the  woi-king  hypothesis  of  Spiritualists  who  say  that  sympathy,  or  at
any  rate  the  absence  of  mental  antagonism,  is  a  condition  of  success.  I
may  be  wrong,  but  I  think  sympathy  is  compatible  with  a  calm
judgment  and  clear  and  accurate  observation  ;  and  it  may  be  that  in
the  psychological  world  it  is  as  necessary  as  certain  material  conditions
in  the  physical  world. Imagine  for  a  moment  the  problem  reversed,
that  we  were  living  in  a  spiritual  world  where  the  properties  of
ordinary  matter  were  unknown,  where  thought  was  supreme,  thought-
transference  the  mode  of  comnmnication,  and  where  our  affections
without  bodily  effort  determined  our  actions  and  our  position  in
space. Imagine  now  a  stranger  from  the  material  world  coming  to
tell  us,  say,  of  the  discovery  of  the  electric  telegraph. He  explains  all
the  phenomena,  brings  the  instrumental  appliances,  and  shows  that  by
this  means  he  can  talk  to  a  friend  who  is  invisible. He  now  leaves  us
to  repeat  the  experiment  for  ourselves. We  bend  our  minds  to  this  new
and,  as  it  appears  to  us,  rather  useless  and  ridiculous  experiment ;  for  it
appears  absurd  that  the  thought  of  an  absent  person  should  require  to
come  to  us  through  the  ticking  of  a  needle,  or  the  jumping  up  and  down
of  a  bit  of  iron,  when  we,  by  mere  volition,  can  at  once  sympathetically
communicate  with  any  person,  however distant. Overcoming  our
contempt  we  try,  arrange  the  apparatus,  and,  as  is  our  habit  in  the
spiritual  world,  summon  up  our  volition,  but  no  answer  comes ;  we
exercise  our  utmost  belief  in  and  sympathy  for  our  unknown  friend  at
the  other  end  of  the  line,  but  the  experiment  is  a  failure — no  response
arrives. Whereon  the  stranger  from  the  material  world  comes  to  our
aid  and  says, "  Your  states  of  mind have  nothing  to  do  with  any
material  phenomenon,  you  have  omitted  an  important  experimental  con-
dition, for  you  have  forgotten  to  close  the  circuit." But  when  we
discuss  this  question  with  our  neighbours  we  all  come  to  tlie  conclusion
that  the  electric  telegraph  is  silly  and  useless  even  if  true  ;  and  it  can't
be  true  because,  we  argue,  mental  forces  operate  at  enormous  distances
and  therefore  the  interval  of  a  hundredth  of  an  inch  or  less  that  was
required  to  close  the  circuit  can  make  no  appreciable  difference  in  the
transmission  of  thought. So  we  disbelieve  in  the  electric  telegraph,
and  look  upon  the  stranger  as  a  knave  or  a  fool,  probably  both.

I  tliink  this  is  not  an  unfair  nor  uninstructive  analogy.  It  is
because  all  working  theories  on  these  debateable  Spiritualistic
phenomena  are  so  unrelated  to  our  existing  knowledge  of  the  physical
world,  that  the  psychological  problems  before  us  receive  such  scant
recognition  at  the  hands  of  scientific  men.  But  let  us  take  courage ;
the  author  of  the  Vestiges  of  Creation,  referring  to  the  ridicule  with
which  his  views  were  received,  remarked  : — "  A  novelty,  however  true,
if  there  be  no  received  truths  with  which  it  can  be  shown  in  liar-


42


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena. [March  6,


monious  relation,  has  Httle  chance  of  a  favourable  hearing."  And  yet
within  a  single  generation  from  the  time  these  words  were  written,
thanks  to  the  labours  of  Mr.  Darwin  and  Mr.  Wallace,  the  theory  of
Evolution  has  become  a  recognised  part  of  biological  science.  In
science,  as  in  politics,  the  happier  tendency  of  modern  thought  is
"  neither  to  mock,  to  bewail,  nor  to  denounce  men's  actions,  but  to  try
to  understand  them."

In  conclusion,  I  liave,  therefore,  good  hope  that  whilst  Spiritualistic
phenomena  will  be  of  little  use  to  physical  science,  and  I  fear  can  never
be  demonstrated  by  purely  physical  methods  of  investigation,  they  may
yet,  in  time  to  come,  be  accepted  as  an  integral  part  of  the  dual  world
of  matter  and  mind  in  the  midst  of  which  we  live.  And  if  so,  the  gain
to  human  thought  Avill  be  immense  ;  the  present  despairing,  materialistic
attitude  of  mind  will  give  place  to  a  more  hopeful  and  withal  a  more
humble  attitude  towards  the  infinite  possibilities  that  are  within  our
reach.  And,  if  a  personal  allusion  may  be  forgiven,  I  find,  as  I  re-
gard these  phenomena,  more  and  more  help  in  understanding  the  laws
of  a  spiritual  kingdom,  the  mysteries  of  which  Spiritualism  cannot
unfold,  but  the  mental  conditions  of  our  approach  to  which  it  seems  to
shadow  forth.


NOTE  ON  THE  ABOVE  PAPER.
By  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.

I  have  read  with  mucli  interest  the  paper  by  Professor  Barrett,  on
some  Physical  Phenomena  commonly  called  Spiritualistic  witnessed  by
him.  He  expresses  his  conclusions  in  the  following  words  :
"  Assuming  the  evidence  to  be  trustworthy,  I,  for  one,  believe  it
points  to  the  conclusion  that,  under  conditions  which  are  so  restricted
that  we  are  not  put  to  intellectual  confusion  by  frequent  interruptions
of  the  ordinary  course  of  material  laws,  mind  occasionally  and  uncon-
sciously can  exert  a  direct  influence  upon  lifeless  matter."

As  this  is  a  subject  to  which  I  have  given  a  good  deal  of  thought,  I
trust  the  Psychical  Society  will  allow  me  to  make  one  or  two  remarks
upon  it,  and  I  am  very  sure  my  friend,  Professor  Barrett,  will  not
object  to  this  course.

Viewing  the  "Conservation  of  Energy"  as  the  representative  of
physical  laws,  I  nevertheless  do  not  regard  it  in  its  birth,  at  least,  as
anything  else  than  a  scientific  assertion — a  very  sagacious  one,  no  doubt,
but  yet  an  assertion. We  are  in  profound  ignorance  not  only  of  the


1S86.]


On  Some  Physical  Phenomena.


43


intimate  constitution  of  matter,  but  of  the  nature  of  those  forces  which
animate  the  atom  and  the  molecule.  Under  these  circumstances,  chiefly  to
advance  physical  knowledge  by  means  of  a  working  hypothesis,but  partly,
it  may  be,  as  a  weapon  against  visionaries,  we  have  formulated  an  asser-
tion known  as  the  "  Conservation  of  Energy."  It  is  unquestionable  that
this  so-called  law  has  greatly  extended  our  knowledge  of  physics  ;  nor
have  we  met  with  any  strictly  physical  experiment  capable  of  repetition
under  fixed  conditions  that  is  inconsistent  with  this  law.  Now,
what  should  be  our  course  of  action  when  a  visionary  comes  before  us
with  some  variety  of  "  Perpetual  Motion  "  1  The  moral  certainty  that
we  ai'e  invaded  by  presumptuous  ignorance  is,  no  doubt,  a  sufficiently
good  excuse  for  not  discussing  the  project.  But  we  have  a  less  objec-
tionable method  of  dealing  with  such  a  man  by  asking  him  to  put  his
project  in  execution,  and  to  produce  his  machine,  which  we  will  then
carefully  examine.  The  fact  that  no  such  machine  has  been  produced,
and,  as  I  said  before,  that  no  physical  experiment  contradicts  the  great
laws  of  Energy,  goes  surely  very  far  to  justify  us  in  regarding  these
laws  as  true — as  laws  which  hold  in  what  I  may  call  the  physical
market  of  the  world,  ruling  the  physical  transactions  between  man
and  man.

But  there  are  many  who  are  not  content  with  such  a  limited  appli-
cation of  physical  laws.  In  the  firat  place,  they  repudiate  the  doctrine  of
free-will  because  they  regard  it  as  being  inconsistent  with  such  laws ;
secondly,  they  repudiate  the  possibility  of  what  are  called  miracles  ;  and,
lastly,  they  repudiate  (with  contempt)  the  evidence  for  telepathy  and
more  especially  that  for  Spiritualistic  phenomena  which  has  come  before
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.

One  consequence  of  this  mental  posture  is  that  interminable  discus-
sions have  arisen  between  a  certain  class  of  men  of  science  and  the
supporters  of  Christianity,the  latter  of  whom  have  been  far  from  judicious
in  their  method  of  defence.  These  have  until  recently  considered  miracles
as  Divine  interferences  with  ordinary  laws,  and  hence  as  abnormal  and
intellectually  incomprehensible  occurrences,  while  the  Protestant
theologians  have  imagined  that  the  power  to  work  miracles  ceased  with
the  Apostles.  This  latter  doctrine  was  probably  assumed  as  a  polemical
weapon  at  the  time  of  the  great  controversy  with  the  Church  of  Rome.
It  goes  without  saying  that  this  method  of  looking  at  things  will  not
recommend  itself  to  men  of  science,  and  thus  an  embittered  and  useless
discussion  has  continued  between  two  classes  of  men,  neither  of  whom
has  seemed  to  be  either  able  or  willing  to  enter  into  the  position  assumed
by  the  other.

Of  late  years,  however,  miracles  have  come  to  be  regarded  not
as  breaks  of  law,  but  as  phenomena  embracing  a  higher  law — a
doctrine  which  is  a  great  advance  upon  its  predecessor. Now  the


44


On  Some  Pliysical  Phenomena.


[March  6,


question  naturally  arises,  if  there  be  tliis  higher  law  may  there  not  be
occasional  traces  of  it  to  be  met  with  in  the  woi'ld,  even  at  this  present
age  1  It  is,  I  think,  exceedingly  unfortunate  that  a  large  class  of
theologians  have  attempted  to  decide  this  question  in  the  negative.  It
is  not  a  question  for  them  to  decide,  but  for  those  who  investigate
matters  of  fact.  This  is  in  reality  the  question  upon  which  the  Psychical
Society  are  engaged,  and  the  circumstances  wliich  I  have  mentioned
appear  to  me  to  lend  an  unusual  importance  to  their  investigations.  Let
us  begin  by  allowing  that  the  laws  of  Energy  dominate  the  scientific
market-place,  and  the  scientific  dealings  between  man  and  man.  We  are,
I  conceive,  amply  justified  in  extending  this  scientific  assertion  so  far.
But  are  we  justified  in  extending  it  further  1  Are  we,  for  instance,
justified  in  asserting  that  under  the  very  difierent  conditions  of  things
contemplated  by  the  Psychical  Society  there  may  not  be  at  least  an
apparent  and  ■prima  facie  breakdown  of  these  laws  ;  and  more  especially,
are  we  justified  in  absolutely  shutting  our  eyes  to  all  evidence  that  may
be  brought  before  us  in  favour  of  such  apparent  interruptions  1  I  cannot
think  so.  We  must  examine  everything.  Because  a  scientific  statement
applies  to  one  set  of  conditions,  must  it  necessarily  apply  to  everything
else  1  I  have  always  thought  that  this  had  to  be  ascertained  by  investi-
gation, and  not  by  dogmatic  assertion,  and  I  therefore  conceive  tliat  our
Society  is  abundantly  justified  in  applying  the  Baconian  method  of
research  to  all  occurrences.


1886.] The  Physical  Phenomenon  of  Spiritualism.  45


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

Monday,  May  3,  1886.

The  twentieth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Rooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Monday,  May  3,  1886.

r.  W.  H.  Myers,  Esq.,  ix  the  Chair.


The  following  paper  was  read  : —

III.

RESULTS  OF  A  PERSONAL  INVESTIGATION  INTO  THE
PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA  OF  SPIRITUALISM.

WITH  SOME  CRITICAL  REMARKS  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  FOR  THE
GENUINENESS  OF  SUCH  PHENOMENA.

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


By  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  I  mean  those  which,  if
correctly  described,  and  not  due  to  conscious  or  unconscious  trickery^
nor  to  hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  observer,  exhibit  a  hitherto
unknown  force  acting  in  the  physical  world,  otherwise  than  through
the  brain  or  muscles  of  the  medium.  They  are  thus  distinguished  from
the  automatic  phenomena,  of  which  writing  by  the  medium's  hand,
trance-speaking,  and  table-turning  ^vith  contact  are  examples.

The  physical  phenomena  alleged  to  occur  consist  in  raps,  or,  as
Mr.  Crookes  calls  them,  percussive  sounds ;  in  movements  and  le^atation
of  furniture  and  other  objects  without  contact ;  the  playing  of  musical
instruments,  the  appearance  of  lights,  the  liuman  voice  and  musical
sounds  produced  without  instruments ;  the  materialisation  of
human  hands,  faces,  and  complete  figures ;  psychography,  or  direct
writing  and  drawing  without  human  intervention  ;  spirit  photography,
or  photographing  of  human  and  other  forms  invisible  to  all  but  specially
endowed  seers ;  unfastening  of  cords  and  bonds,  elongation  of  the
medium's  body,  the  power  of  handling  red  hot  coals,  and  the  passage  of
solids  through  solids  %vithout  disintegration.

My  own  experience  does  not  include  the  whole  of  these  phenomena,
and  is  entirely  inconclusive  as  to  the  genuineness  of  any,  except,  I


46  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


regret  to  say,  in  certain  cases  where  I  clearly  ascertained  them  to  be
spurious  and  fraudulent.  In  the  first  part  of  my  paper  I  shall  give  an
account  of  some  of  this  experience.  It  is,  of  course,  but  one  small
contribution  to  the  discussion,  and  does  not  in  any  way  settle  the
important  question  whether  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism
are  ever  genuine.  Many  other  witnesses  have  given  their  testimony,
and  there  is  a  mass  of  literature  on  the  subject.  A  good  deal  of  this,
however,  seems  to  have  been  written  rather  in  order  to  call  attention
to  the  subject  than  to  convince,  and  at  any  rate  gives  so  little  detail
either  as  to  the  Phenomena  themselves,  or  as  to  the  precautions  taken
to  avoid  deception  and  mistakes,  that  it  can  scarcely  claim  any  scien-
tific value.  As  regards  the  rest,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  in  the
second  part  of  my  paper,  that  the  difficulties  of  the  investigation  have
been  underrated,  and  that,  consequently,  tests  have  been  too  easily
accepted  as  decisive.  On  this  ground  much  even  of  the  remaining
evidence — though  not  all — has  also,  in  my  opinion,  to  be  rejected.  I
shall,  however,  only  enter  into  general  considerations,  without  giving
the  results  of  my  examination  of  particular  cases,  since  it  would  require
a  volume  to  do  this  in  detail.

I.

My  own  practical  experience  in  Spiritualism  began  in  1874,  at  a
stance  with  Miss  Showers,  which  I  well  remember  on  account  of  the
interest  excited  by  the  idea  that,  notwithstanding  the  very  inconclusive
character  of  the  phenomena  that  occurred,  we  might  possibly  be
communicating  with  beings  belonging  to  another  world.

But  my  first  seance  of  any  importance  was  with  Mrs.  Jencken,
formerly  Kate  Fox,  one  of  the  three  sisters  who  started
modern  Spiritualism.  The  most  striking  seance  I  had  with  her
was  the  fourth  of  a  series  held  at  my  own  residence,  when  we
obtained  a  woi'd  written  on  a  sheet  of  our  own  paper,  under
the  table,  in  light  which  I  believe  would  have  been  good
enough  to  read  ordinary  print  by.  We  tliought  that  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Jencken  both  had  tlieir  hands  above  the  table,
and  we  could  not  detect  any  movement  of  their  legs.  But  we  were
not  well  placed  for  observing  this,  as  we  were  continually  instructed
by  the  "  spirits "  to  lean  over  the  table.  The  seance  must  have
very  much  resembled  one  with  Mrs.  Jencken's  sister,  Mrs.  Underliill,
described  by  Mr.  Dale  Owen  in  the  Dehateable  Land,  p.  298.  It
impressed  me  a  good  deal,  though  even  at  the  time — in  those  early  days
of  our  investigation,  when  our  experience  was  less  than  it  is  now — ■
we  thought  that  Mrs.  Jencken  might  have  written  the  word  with  her
foot,  and  the  writing  is  just  of  the  quality  which  can  be  so  written
without  nmch  difficulty.


1886.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  47


Within  the  last  three  years  I  have  again  had  two  short  series  of
st^ances  with  Mrs.  Jencken ;  but  again  with  no  conclusive  results,
except  the  discovery  that  she  or  her  "  spirits"  are  willing  to  claim,  as
Spiritualistic  phenomena,  accidental  occurrences  quite  unconnected  with
her  presence,  and  that  she  endeavours,  as  far  as  possible,  to  obtain  from
oneself  the  information  required  to  answer  one's  question.

The  raps  that  occur  with  Mrs.  Jencken  are,  as  is  well-known,
peculiar — quite  unlike  what  one  can  produce  oneself  by  rapping  with  the
foot.  They  are  loud  double  knocks,  acquiring  a  special  sound  from  the
table,  floor,  door  or  other  object  on  which  they  appear  to  be  made.  They
will  occur  on  the  floor,  causing  it  to  vibrate,  when  she  is  standing  up
and  her  hands  and  the  front  part  of  her  feet  are  visible  and
apparently  motionless,  and  they  will  occur,  if  I  remember  rightly,
both  when  her  shoes  are  on  and  when  they  are  ofl'.  In  short,  they  are
distinctly  puzzling.  As  early  as  1851,  however,  three  medical  pro-
fessors of  the  University  of  Buffalo  in  America,  Drs.  Flint,  Lee,
and  Coventry,  investigated  the  double  rap  occurring  in  the  presence  of
Mrs.  Jencken's  sisters — (Margaretta  Fox  now  Mrs.  Kane,  and  Mrs.
Fish  now  Mrs.  Underhill) — and  concluded  that  they  were  produced  by
rapid  partial  dislocation  and  replacement  of  the  knee  joints  and
perhaps  others.^  They  stated  that  they  had  experimented  with
another  lady  who  could  "exhibit  all  the  phenomena  of  the  sounds  belong-
ing "  to  what  were  then  known  as  the  Rochester  Knockings  (from  the
place  where  they  first  became  known).  She  did  it  by  partially
dislocating  the  knee  joint  by  an  act  of  the  will  without  any  obvious
movement  of  the  limb,  occasioning  a  loud  noise ;  the  return  of  the  bone
to  its  place  giving  a  second  sound  and  thus  making  the  double  rap.
Challenged  by  Mrs.  Fish,  they  tried  some  experiments  with  her  and
Margaretta  Fox,  which  strongly  supported  their  view.  When  the
mediums  placed  themselves  as  they  pleased,  raps  occurred  as  usual,
but  when  they  were  placed  by  the  Professors  with  their  legs
extended  in  front  of  them,  their  feet  not  touching  each  other,  and  their
heels  resting  on  cushions,  in  which  position  the  necessary  leverage
was  unattainable,  no  raps  occurred.  Nor  did  they  when  Miss
Fox  had  her  feet  down,  and  Dr.  Lee  held  her  knees  at
the  side  over  her  dress,  except  when  he  intentionally  relaxed
the  pressure,  when  two  or  three  faint  raps  were  heard.  Knockings
■went  on  as  usual  when  these  precautions  were  not  taken,  but  stopped
the  moment  the  knees  were  seized  hold  of.  Mrs.  Fish  did  not  deny  that
the  raps  failed  to  occur  under  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  Professors
■while  they  were  present,  but  she  asserted  that  they  had  occurred
afterwards  under  the  same  conditions  in  the  presence  of  other  gentlemen

^  See  E.  W.  Capron,  Modern  Spiritualism,  Boston,  1856.


48


The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


whom  she  named,  but  who  do  not  seem  to  have  come  forward  ^viih  their
testimony.  I  regret  that  I  was  unaware  of  this  explanation  when  I  saw
Mrs.  Jencken,  but  our  own  experiments  to  some  extent  supported  it,
though  not  directed  to  tliat  object,  for  no  raps  occurred  when  Mrs.
Jencken  sat  with  her  feet  in  my  lap,  nor  while  she  stood  on  a  hassock
with  her  hand  on  tlie  door  on  which  tlie  raps  were  to  be  made,  while  I
held  back  her  skirts  with  a  shawl ;  nor  when  she  stood  on  the
floor  and  I  clasped  her  round  the  knees ;  but  I  do  not  lay  stress  on  this
last  case  as  I  do  not  think  the  pressure  was  of  the  kind  required  to
prevent  the  lateral  displacement  of  the  joints  described.

Our  next  medium  was  again  an  American — a  professional  medium
— Mrs.  Eva  Fay.  Besides  a  dark  stance  of  an  utterly  inconclusive
character,  Mrs.  Fay's  ordinary  performance  consisted  in  a  seance,
during  which  she  sat  with  her  hands  tied  together  behind  her  back
to  a  staple  in  the  wall,  and  her  neck  tied  to  another  staple.
"Various  objects  were  placed  on  her  lap,  a  curtain  held  up  in  front
of  her,  and  immediately  tlie  objects  on  her  lap  were  moved  about
in  various  ways,  a  glass  of  water  drunk,  a  pattern  cut  out  of  paper  with
scissors,  (fee.  Without  quite  understanding  how  she  did  these  things,  we
thought  a  simpler  mode  of  fastening  would  be  more  satisfactory,  and
accordingly  carefully  sewed  a  tape  or  ribbon  tightly  round  each  wrist
and  fastened  them  to  two  separate  staples,  one  on  each  side  of  her.i
This  position  must  have  been  much  more  comfortable  than  the  one  she
prescribed,  but  no  phenomena  occurred,  and  she  declined  a  proposal
for  further  experiments.  Later  on  we  were  shown  by  a  conjurer  a  trick
by  which  her  own  method  of  tying  might  have  operated.

So  far  our  experiences  were  not  very  encouraging,  but  in  the
autumn  of  this  yeai-,  1874,  our  hopes  were  considerably  raised  by  hearing
at  first-hand  of  some  remarkable  physical  phenomena — raps,  levitation
of  the  table,  transportation  of  obiects  which  took  place  in  a  party
consisting  entirely  of  friends.  Unfortunately  these  sittings  were  dis-
continued by  tlie  medium  of  the  party,  on  account  of  health,  after  a  very
short  time.

I  now  come  to  what  was  by  far  the  most  important  series  of
experiments  we  have  made,  those  with  Miss  Wood  and  Miss  Fairlamb
(now  Mrs.  Mellon),  of  Newcastle,  who,  I  believe,  first  developed  as
mediums  for  materialisation  in  the  summer  of  1874.  Our  attention
had  been  called  to  this  branch  of  the  subject  by  Mr.  Crookes's  experi-
ments with  Miss  Cook,  accounts  of  which  were  published  in  this
same  year. I  need  hardly  explain  to  my  present  readers  that  in  a

'  I  write  this  from  recnllection,  having  kept  no  notes  of  seances  with  Mrs.
Fay.  Almost  all  the  other  experiences  I  describe  were  recorded  in  note-books
immediately  after  their  occurrence.


1886.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.


49


materialisation  stance  the  medium  generally  sits  apart  from  the  rest
of  the  circle  in  what  is  technically  called  a  "  cabinet,"  but  may  be  an
adjoining  room,  or  any  portion  of  the  seance  room  suitably  screened
off  from  the  rest,  so  that  he  or  she  may  be  in  almost  total  darkness,
while  the  remainder  of  the  circle  enjoy  a  subdued  light — usually  very
subdued.  It  is  the  business  of  the  investigators  to  satisfy  tliemselves
that  any  figure  which  may  come  out  of  the  cabinet  is  neitlier  a
made-up  figure,  nor  the  medium,  nor  a  confederate.  While  the
materialisation  goes  on  the  medium  is  usually  supposed  to  l:ie  in  a
trance  and  unconscious.

Mr.  Sidgwick,  Mr.  Myers,  and  Mr.  Gurney  had  a  series  of  stances
for  materialisation  with  Miss  Wood  and  Miss  Fairlamb  in  January,
February,  and  March,  1875,  at  Newcastle.  I  was  not  there  myself
nor  at  six  stances  held  in  April,  in  London,  at  the  lodgings  of  one  of
the  party.  The  precautions  taken  to  prevent  the  medium  coming  out
of  the  cabinet  consisted  in  various  modes  of  tying  and  sealing,  to  the
wall  and  into  bags.  They  seemed  "pretty  complete,  the  hypothesis  of
confederacy  was  diSicult,  and  living  figui'es  undoubtedly  came  out  into
the  room.  Still,  though  we  did  not  see  how  the  tiling  could  be  done
by  trickery,  we  did  not  consider  that  decisive  evidence  had  yet  been
obtained.  The  seances  were  now  adjourned  to  the  house  where
I  lived.  It  was  decided  to  discard  the  bag  as  too  complicated,
and  tying  round  the  neck  with  silk  and  sealing  because  it  had  so
often  been  necessary  to  cut  the  silk,  and  because  it  seemed
better  to  dispense  with  seals,  which  might,  we  thought,  in  the  long
hours  spent  by  the  mediums  in  the  dark  cabinet,  be  undone  and
reproduced  by  means  of  impressions  taken  in  clay  or  bread.  It  would
have  been  difficult  to  use  a  light  for  this  purpose  without  detection,
but  perhaps  not  impossible,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  seals  cannot  be
manipulated  without  a  light.  In  all  our  tests  from  this  time  forward  we
aimed  at  avoiding  all  possibility  of  physical  discomfort  to  the  medium.
Long  leather  straps,  cut  out  of  single  hides,  so  as  to  have  no  joining  in
them,  were  first  used  to  secure  the  mediums,  and  were  fastened  round
their  waist  and  ankles  by  means  of  letter  padlocks,  which  were  thought
superior  to  ordinary  locks  as  avoiding  the  possibilities  of  duplicate  keys
and  of  picking.  The  other  ends  of  the  straps  were  similarly  attached
to  marble  pillars  that  supported  the  mantelpiece  in  the  room  which
was  used  as  a  cabinet, — a  small  boudoir  opening  out  of  the  drawing-
room  where  the  investigating  circle  sat.  A  door  opening  from  this
boudoir  on  to  the  landing  was  carefully  secured  to  avoid  all  danger
of  confederacy.  It  was  not  only  locked  in  the  usual  way,  but  a  leather
strap  was  passed  through  the  keyhole  and  through  a  hole  in  tlie  door-
post and  fastened  with  a  letter  lock.  Of  course  the  words  used  for  the
different  letter  locks  were  different,  and  were  changed  every  day.

E


50  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


I  may  here  remark  parenthetically  that  I  have  been  very  much
surprised  in  reading  accounts  of  seances  at  the  confidence  sometimes
placed  in  locks,  in  cases  were  the  medium  could  have  no  difficulty
whatever  in  possessing  himself  of  a  duplicate  key.  Some  other  pre-
cautions taken  to  secure  doors  and  other  fastenings  seem  very
inadequate  ;  for  instance,  the  gummed  paper  recommended  by  some
mediums,  which,  in  most  cases,  could  easily  be  removed  and  replaced
without  detection.

Having  arranged  our  tests  as  described,  we  began  a  series  of
four  stances.  At  the  first  a  vague  white  figure,  which  might  have
been  a  doll  or  perhaps  mere  drapery,  appeared  at  the  doorway,
but  did  not  come  out.  The  second  was  a  complete  failure.  At
the  third  a  small  vague  figure  again  appeared,  and  raps  were  made
in  places  beyond  the  reach,  we  thought,  of  the  hands  or  feet  of  the
medium,  but  of  course  she  might  have  brought  something  with  her  to
make  these  with.  We  were  getting  depressed,  especially  as  on  this  last
occasion  the  disentrancement  took  a  very  long  time,  and  finally  left
Miss  Wood  talking  wildly,  and  apparently  under  the  delusion  that  she
had  shot  some  one  and  was  in  gaol.  We  tried  to  get  her  upstairs  to  bed  in
the  house,  but  she  resisted  so  much  that  we  had  to  give  it  up,  and
finally  she  was  taken  home  to  her  lodgings  about  6.15  in  the  morning,
quiet,  but  still  seemingly  under  the  same  delusion.  The  stance  had
begun  at  7  p.m.  She  did  not  apparently  recover  her  sanity  till  the
following  day.  Whether  all  this  was  simulated  it  is  difficult  to  say.  There
is  some  evidence  on  both  sides.  Somewhat  similar  phenomena,  long
entrancement,  &c.,  occurred  on  other  occasions.  Once  Miss  Wood
remained  apparently  in  a  sort  of  trance  for  about  51  hours,  but  the
doctor  who  was  called  in  thought  it  probable  that  she  was  pretending,
as  she  would  not  allow  him  to  feel  her  pulse.  On  the  other  hand,
Miss  Fairlamb  had  once  to  be  brought  out  of  the  cabinet  in  a  state
which  a  doctor  who  was  present  said  was  a  real  faint — low  fluttering
pulse,  &c. — impossible  to  simulate,  though  not  impossible  to  induce
artificially.

But  to  return  to  the  stances  I  was  describing.  At  the  fourth  Miss
Fairlamb  was  the  medium — Miss  Wood  not  present  at  all — and  an
undoubtedly  material  human  figure  came  to  the  doorway,  stood  tliere
with  its  right  foot  on  a  chair,  and  allowed  two  members  of  the  circle  to
come  close  to  it  and  touch  it.  The  only  question  was  as  to  the  sufficiency
of  the  tests.  The  medium  had  been  fastened  round  the  waist  and  the
left  ankle,  and  when  we  experimented  with  the  same  fastenings  our-
selves, we  found  that  she  had  come  forward  exactly  as  far  as  the  ankle
fastening  would  allow,  supposing  she  had  got  free  from  the  waist
fastening.  The  left  ankle — the  one  that  was  fastened — had  not  been
shown. All therefore turned on the waist strap, and  this  we


].886.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.


51


reluctantly  concluded  on  examination,  had  not  been  so  tight  as  to
make  it  certain  that  she  could  not  get  out  of  it.  This  was  not
creditable  to  me,  who  helped  to  fasten  her,  but  in  my  defence  I  must
say  that  she  was  intentionally  not  fastened  very  tightly,  in  order  to
avoid  the  plea  of  discomfort  which  had  been  urged  on  previous  occa-
sions as  a  reason  for  i-emoving  certain  fastenings,  or  as  interfering  with
the  manifestations,  and  the  margin  in  the  case  of  the  waist  is  small.

So  ended  this  series ;  and  at  the  next,  which  was  held  at  the  same
place  in  the  following  July,  and  lasted  three  weeks,  a  different  test  was
used.  The  medium  lay,  without  any  fastening,  in  a  hammock  which
was  suspended  over  a  pulley  fixed  to  the  ceiling  of  the  cabinet,  the
other  end  of  the  suspending  rope  being  attached  to  a  spring  balance
which  recorded  ^  the  weight  of  the  hammock  and  its  contents,  and
which  was  watched  by  one  of  the  circle.  There  was  an  arrangement  by
which  the  member  of  the  circle  sitting  by  the  spring  balance  could
lower  the  hammock  while  the  form  was  out  (should  one  appear),  so
as  to  defeat  any  attempt  to  produce  a  constant  pull  on  the  balance  by
fastening  the  hammock  to  the  floor  or  other  part  of  the  cabinet.  The
seances  were  nearly  unsuccessful  until  the  last.  On  the  Friday  and
Saturday  preceding  the  sitters  had  been  brought  up  one  by  one  to  what
purported  to  be  materialised  forms,  but  the  face  was  not  in  a  place  in
which  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  medium's  face  to  be,  and
on  the  Friday  it  appeared  to  some  members  of  the  circle  that  the  face
was  not  satisfactorily  connected  with  the  drapery  that  purported  to  con-
ceal the  body.  On  Saturday,  the  24th,  at  the  last  of  the  series  of  twelve
seances,  Miss  Fairlamb  was  placed  in  the  hammock,  and  Mr.  Sidgwick
observed  the  indicator  of  the  balance.  After  some  time  Miss  Wood
went  into  the  cabinet  for  a  few  moments  "  to  give  power,"  as  it  was
said,  and  took  in  a  light  chair  with  her.  Of  course  the  cabinet  was,  to
the  best  of  our  belief,  destitute  of  furniture,  or  of  any  objects  which
could  be  placed  in  the  hammock,  and  so  far  as  we  knew  the  mediums
were  never  alone  there  before  the  seance  began.  After  Miss  Wood
had  joined  the  circle  again,  the  weight  went  down  to  about  601b. — a
very  little  over.  Then  a  form  came  out  and  kissed  me  through  the
white  veil  in  which  it  was  wrapped.  Miss  Wood  was  still  in  her  seat,
and  this  kiss  could  not  have  been  given  by  Miss  Fairlamb  without
leaving  the  hammock,  and  at  the  moment  it  was  given  Mr.  Sidgwick
lowered  the  hammock  a  few  inches  without  producing  any  change  in  the
weight  indicated.  So  far  things  looked  promising,  for  a  certain  fall  of
weight  was  not  to  be  taken  in  itself  as  a  presumption  against  the  genuine-

1  The  apparatus  was  self -registering  so  far  as  the  extreme  changes  of  weight
were  concerned,  but  did  not  record  the  times  at  which  the  changes  took  place.
It  was  for  this  reason  that  it  required  watching.


62  Tlie  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


ness  of  the  phenomena,  since  it  is  thought  by  some  Spiritualists  that  the
medium  may  lose  weight  during  a  materialisation.  Afterwards  Miss  "Wood
was  called  up  to  the  form,  which  looked  small  and  did  not  move  very
easily — it  miglit  have  been  a  woman  on  her  knees — and  led  it  to  various
members  of  the  circle.  Two  other  forms  afterwards  came  out  in
succession;  the  weight  remaining  approximately  constant.  When  the
last  had  retired,  the  disentrancement  began,  Miss  Wood  going  again
into  the  cabinet  to  help  it.

After  the  stance  I  asked  leave  to  search  Miss  Fairlamb.  This  she
sharply  and  decidedly  declined.  She  was  reminded  that  she  had  agreed
to  be  searched,  but  she  said  that  was  before  not  after  the  stance.  This
refusal  produced  an  unfavourable  impression  on  us,  and  left  the  evidence
at  best  inconclusive.  It  was  not  impossible,  though  rather  remarkable,
that  the  amount  of  weight  required  should  have  been  brought  in  to  the
cabinet  by  Miss  Wood  when  she  went  in  "  to  give  power,"  and  the  idea
that  extra  weight  had  been  carried  by  the  girls  was  rather  supported
by  the  fact  tliat  they  had  that  day  come  in  a  cab  instead  of  walking,  as
I  believe  they  usually  did.

However,  we  still  did  not  think  it  right  to  drop  the  investigation,
and  as  some  friends  of  the  mediums  at  Newcastle  offered  a  more  or  less
plausible  explanation  of  the  refusal  to  be  searched,  another  series  of
stances  was  lield  with  them  through  a  period  of  three  weeks,  in  August
and  September,  1875,  at  Cambridge.  The  results  were  again  incon-
clusive, and  in  some  respects  suspicious.  For  the  form  came  out  of
the  cabinet  three  times,  and  it  was  found  by  trial  afterwards  that  the
medium  could  each  time  have  come  just  so  far  without  breaking  loose
from  the  fastenings. This  coincidence  was  suggestive.

In  the  following  October  Mr.  Myers  had  some  further  stances  with
the  two  girls  at  Newcastle,  and  once  saw  Miss  Wood  come  out  of  the
cabinet  accompanied  by  a  form,  which,  if  not  a  materialised  spirit,  was
an  accomplice,  and  it  was  difficult  to  suppose  that  an  accomplice  could
have  got  in  without  detection,  though  not  absolutely  impossible.  This
was  again  encouraging,  and  in  January,  1877,  we  tried  a  final  series  of
stances  for  materialisation  at  Newcastle.  Miss  Wood  and  Miss
Fairlamb  had  by  this  time  quarrelled,  and  used  to  sit  separately.  We
first  used,  as  a  means  of  securing  Miss  Wood,  a  long  bag  of  machine-
made  white  net,  which  she  got  into  head  and  all.  The  bag  was  so  long
that  the  end  could  be  brought  outside  the  cabinet,  where  it  was  drawn
together  with  tape,  and  the  ends  of  the  tape  nailed  and  sealed  to  the
wall  close  to  the  mouth  of  the  bag.  We  held  four  seances  in  this  way
with  no  result,  and  then  the  "  spirits,"  through  Miss  Wood,  told  us  to
give  up  that  test.  Then  we  substituted  a  graduated  tape,  tied  round
the  neck,  and  another  round  the  ankle.  The  tape  was  sealed  below  the
knot  on  to  a  piece  of  paper,  and  the  seals  traced  round  with  pencil,  and


1886.] Tlte  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  53


later  with  sympathetic  ink,  which  we  thought  woukl  betray  the  fact  if
ieat  were  applied  to  the  seals.  The  ends  of  the  tapes  were  brought  out
of  the  cabinet,  nailed  through  large  sheets  of  white  paper  to  the  floor,
and  sealed  over  the  nails.  The  light  allowed  at  these  seances  was
exceedingly  poor.  A  small  white  tigiire  came  to  the  entrance  of  the
cabinet — a  briglitish  but  irregularly  shaped  object,  which  on  one
occasion  danced  up  and  down,  and  which  I  remember  thinking  at  the
time  might  be  the  pillow  provided  for  Miss  Wood's  liead.  This  occurred
at  three  successive  stances.  At  the  fourth  we  were  told  by  I'aps  that
the  medium  was  choking.  I  went  to  examine,  and  found  that  the  knot
had  been  moved  an  inch  or  more  away  from  the  seal,  and  close  up  to
the  neck,  so  that  the  tape  appeared  too  tight.  The  "  spirit,"  speaking
through  Miss  Wood,  claimed  to  have  done  tlais  in  playing  with  it.
After  vainly  attempting  to  loosen  the  knot,  which  I  could  not  do  in  the
bad  light,  I  cut  the  tape  and  removed  it,  leaving  the  ankle  tape  as  the
only  security.  We  heard  a  good  deal  of  rustling  of  the  paper  to  which
this  was  sealed,  more  than  at  any  previous  seance.  After  a  consider-
able time,  and  much  singing  and  talking,  a  figure — apparently  that  of
a  full-grown  woman — draped  in  white,  came  out.  The  light  was  too
low  to  distingiusli  anything  but  the  general  outline  of  the  figure.  I
think  the  face  was  veiled,  and  when  she  touched  my  hand  I  could  feel
something  like  soft  muslin  between  her  hand  and  mine.  The  figure
(twice  at  least)  came  out  too  far  from  the  point  where  the  tape  was
attached  to  the  floor  for  it  to  be  possible  that  it  could  be  Miss  Wood,
with  her  ankle  still  bound.  AVhen  the  figure  had  finally  retreated,  we
were  kept  a  long  time  waiting  and  singing,  before  the  seance  was
declared  at  an  end.  We  then  examined  the  fastening,  and  found  the
attachment  to  the  floor  intact,  but  the  seal  near  the  knot  torn  from
the  paper  and  split,  one  half  remaining  attached  to  each  tape.  A
slight  strain  required  to  bring  the  two  halves  of  the  seal  together
showed  that  the  knot  was  not  exactly  as  it  had  been,  and  judging  by
knots  made  on  other  nights  which  I  had  kept,  it  was  much  tighter  than
I  had  made  it.  Also  the  part  of  the  tape  round  the  ankle  was  creased,
strained,  and  dirty  all  over,  as  if  it  had  been  much  handled  and  pulled,
while  after  the  previous  seances  it  had  been  quite  flat  and  unstrained,
only  dirtied  in  some  spots  obviously  by  the  blacking  on  the  boot,  not
by  handling.  We  felt  sure  that  either  it  had  been  forced  over  the  heel,
or  that  a  loop  large  enough  to  pass  over  the  foot  had  been  obtained  by
moving  the  knot  to  a  place  below  the  seal, — an  operation  which  the
splitting  of  the  seal  rendered  just  possible.  At  any  rate  the
indications  of  deception  were  palpable  and  sufiicient,  and  we  were  not
surprised  to  hear  a  few  months  later  that  a  more  aggressive  investigator
had  violated  the  rules  of  the  seance,  and  captured  Miss  Wood  per-
sonating the  "  spirit."


54  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


Some  persons  may  perhaps  wonder  why  we  had  not  adopted  such
summary  methods  of  investigation  ourselves,  but  there  was  an  implied
understanding  with  the  medium  that  we  should  not  do  so,  which
we  should  not  have  felt  justified  in  breaking.  It  used  to  be
alleged,  too,  at  that  time,  that  great  injury  to  the  medium,  and  even
death  miglit  ensue  from  interfering  with  the  materialised  form  ;  but
though  such  seizures  have  now  been  very  nvimerous,  no  permanent
injury  has  ever  been  done  by  them  to  a  medium,  so  far  as  I  have  been
able  to  learn.  Temporary  disturbance  seems  to  have  occurred,  but  not
more  than  might  be  expected  as  the  result  of  a  sometimes  severe
struggle  with  the  captor,  or  of  the  shock  and  annoyance  of  exposure.
For  my  own  part,  though  I  have  no  wish  myself  to  adopt  such  methods
of  investigation,  I  think  that  both  Spiritualists  and  non-Spiritualists
ought  to  recognise  that  "  exposers  "  have  thrown  valuable  light  on  the
subject.

While  these  final  seances  were  going  on  with  Miss  Wood,  we  were
also  holding  seances  with  Miss  Fairlamb  under  different  conditions,
but  with  the  same  general  result,  namely,  that  all  that  occurred  was
within  the  power  of  the  medium.  We  were  also  then  concluding  a
series  of  collateral  investigation  with  some  other  Newcastle  mediums —
the  Petty  family,  wlio  exhibited  somewhat  similar  manifestations.  This
investigation  had  been  carried  on  as  long  as  those  with  Miss  Wood  and
Miss  Fairlamb,  and  with  equally  unsatisfactory  results  ;  but  it  would  be
tedious  to  go  into  details.

I  have  abandoned  chronology  in  following  our  experiences
with  the  Newcastle  mediums.  I  have  now  to  observe  that  several
other  unsuccessful  and  unsatisfactory  series  of  seances  contributed  to
the  thoroughly  unfavourable  impression  left  by  that  last  set  at  New-
castle. Thus,  in  the  summer  of  1876,  we  had  an  insti'uctive  series
of  four  seances  witli  a  medium  named  Edward  Bullock.  At  the
first  three  very  little  occurred.  The  medium  was  accompanied
by  his  mother,  and  perhaps  she  perceived  that  the  conditions  were  not
sufliciently  favourable  for  fraud,  and  warned  him.  To  the  fourth
seance  he  came  alone.  For  the  first  part  of  the  stance  darkness  was
required,  but  as  it  was  afternoon  it  was  difficult  quite  to  exclude  the
daylight,  and,as  a  matter  of  fact,  a  little  got  round  the  curtains  and  faintly
illumined  tlie  wall  of  the  room  behind  the  medium,  enabling  my  sister
and  me  to  see  him  as  a  dark  figure  against  a  comparatively  light  back-
ground. Mr.  Sidgwick  and  another  gentleman  who  completed  the  circle
faced  the  source  of  light,  and  could  not  see  him.  We  all  lield  hands
round  a  Pembroke  table,  the  medium's  hands  being  held  by  me  on  one
side  and  by  the  gentleman  already  mentioned  on  the  other.  The
medium  made  slight  twitching  movements  as  on  former  occasions.
Presently  I  saw  him  lean  forward  over  the  table  with  his  head  low


1886.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  55


down,  but  carefully  keeping  the  hand  I  held  in  the  same  position  as
before.  On  the  table  were  a  musical  box,  a  tambourine,  and  a  bell.
Tlie  two  former  were  moved  about  and  raps  made  with  them,  and  both
lids  of  the  musical  box  were  opened  and  shut.  But  none  of  these  things
occurred  except  when  the  medium  was  leaning  over  the  table  sufficiently
to  enable  him  to  reach  them  with  his  nose  and  teeth.  The  bell  was
quite  out  of  his  reach,  and  was  not  moved  at  all.  Sometimes  he  seemed
almost  to  stand  with  a  view  to  leaning  over  further,  and  when  anything
occurred  that  would  require  considerable  exertion,  I  felt  his  hand  grasp
mine  more  tightly.  The  tambourine  also  floated  about  in  the  air.  When
this  happened  we  saw  the  medium's  head  and  body  mo^'ing  from  side  to
side  with  an  object  like  a  tambourine  projecting  horizontally  from  his
mouth.  The  tambourine  was  finally  dropped  on  my  lap,  where  it
remained.  The  medium  was  not  entranced,  and  was  undoubtedly
cheating  deliberately,  for  he  volunteered  remarks  about  the  phenomena,
e.g.,  about  the  tambourine  touching  him  in  its  passage  through  the  air.
The  gentleman  who  held  the  medium's  left  hand,  and  who  was  not
placed  so  as  to  be  able  to  see  what  was  going  on,  was  of  a  sensitive
organisation,  and  felt  during  the  performances  the  sensations  which  he
always  experienced  at  successful  spiritualistic  stances — shudderings
and  convulsive  movements  of  the  arms,  I  think  they  were — which  shows
that  sensations  of  this  kind  afford  no  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of
the  manifestations.

This  dark  seance  was  followed  by  a  so-called  light  one.  The  light
allowed  was  feeble,  but  as  will  be  seen  it  was  too  strong  for  the  medium's
purpose.  He  sat  behind  curtains  wliich  were  pinned  in  front  of  his
body  so  as  to  allow  his  legs,  with  his  liands  resting  on  his  knees,  to  be
visible.  The  light  was  sufficient  to  enable  us  dimly  to  see  the  hands.
Presently  we  perceived  that  a  handkerchief  was  placed  on  the  left
knee  so  as  to  bear  a  coarse  resemblance  to  a  hand,  and  subsequently
by  looking  closely,  the  hand  on  the  right  knee  was  discerned  to
be  a  left  hand.  Lights  then  appeared,  tambourine  and  bell  were
vigorously  moved  about  in  the  cabinet,  &c.  Afterwards,  in  the  course
of  futile  attempts  to  draw  the  musical  box  into  the  cabinet,  an  arm
was  exhibited  with  a  sleeve  very  like  the  medium's.  We  then  observed
the  handkerchief  slowly  removed  and  the  hand  substituted,  and  the
seance  was  declared  at  an  end.  Just  before  the  removal  of  the  handker-
chief, it  was  observed  that  the  hand  on  the  right  knee  was  noAv  a  right
hand.

Probably  Mr.  Bullock  was  not  a  really  skilful  performer,  and  he  may
have  acted  ^visely  in  Ins  own  interests  when  he  gave  up  the  career  of
medium  and  took  to  that  of  exposer  of  Spiritualism,  as  he  did  six  or  seven
months  later.  We  never  told  him  what  we  had  seen.  Even  Mr.
Bullock,  however,  took  in  some  people  and  enjoyed  a  brilKant,  though


56  Tlie  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


brief  career  as  a  medium.  Wonderful  accounts  of  him  maybe  found  in
the  Medium,  newspaper  for  1876.  At  our  seance  the  gentleman  whom
I  have  already  spoken  of  as  present  saw  none  of  the  indications
of  the  medium's  own  agency,  except  a  movement  which  he  thought
suspicious  when  tlie  handkerchief  was  first  placed  on  tlie  knee.

About  this  time  we  had  some  private  seances  with  Mr.  Williams,  but
notliing  of  the  least  interest  occurred.  These  with  some  in  1874  made  up
about  eight  or  nine  stances  which  Mr.  Sidgwick  has  had  with  Williams.
Only  one  manifestation  of  any  importance  took  place,  and  tliat  was  tlie
transference  of  a  cliimney  ornament  from  the  mantelpiece  to  the  table,
which  happened  at  the  very  moment  when  Mr.  Sidgwick  jumped  up  to
meet  a  late  arriving  member  of  the  circle,  and  in  doing  so  let  go  of  the
medium's  hand,  so  that  the  solitary  phenomenon  coincided  with  a  solitary
opportunity  for  performing  it  by  natural  means.

I  pass  over  several  single  seances  of  an  inconclusive  character  with
various  mediums,  of  which  the  chief  value  was  the  experience  gained  at
them,  and  come  next  to  Dr.  Slade's  visit  to  England  in  1876.  We  had
about  ten  seances  with  him  for  slate-writing  chiefly  at  his  lodgings,
but  once  in  our  own  room  and  with  our  own  table.  We  always
obtained  writing,  but  never  under  circumstances  which  appeared  to  us
completely  satisfactory,  and  wlien  at  the  last  stance  he  presented  to
us  unasked,  and  under  cii-cumstances  peculiarly  favourable  to  a
change  of  slates,  a  slate  full  of  conversation-book  phrases  in  five
languages,  and  a  text  out  of  the  Greek  Testament,  we  had  no  longer  any
hesitation  in  drawing  up  a  report  to  the  effect  that  we  thought  he  was
probably  merely  a  conjurer.

I  give  this  report,  which  is  dated  September  10th,  1876,  in  full,
though  it  is  not  written  exactly  as,  in  the  light  of  further  experience,
I  should  liave  written  it  now.

The  impression  on  my  mind  after  about  10  seances  with  Dr.  Slade —
(about  five  in  July  and  August,  and  five  last  week) — is  that  the  phenomena
are  produced  by  tricks.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  no  one  ever  sees  the
slate  quite  continuously  from  tlie  moment  tliey  see  it  blank  on  both  sides  to
the  moment  they  see  writing  on  it.  I  think  it  probably  always  disappears
for  one  or  more  intervals  (however  short)  under  the  table,  and  that  during
those  intervals  Dr.  Slade  sometimes  changes  it  (having  another  concealed
about  his  person,  about  the  table,  or  about  his  chair),  and  sometimes  rests
it  on  his  knee,  or  against  the  table,  supporting  the  other  end  with  his  sleeve
or  liis  little  finger,  and  writes  on  it.  It  is  easy  to  write  noiselessly  on  a  slate
with  his  fragments  of  pencil — quite  as  easy  or  easier  than  to  make  the  loud
sound  visually  heard.

I  doubt  the  continuous  seeing  of  the  slate,  because  at  the  last  four
seances  when  we  were  carefully  watching  for  that,  we  never  once  saw  it  con-
tinuously. At  the  previous  seance — at  which  I  was  in  the  best  place  for
observation — my  attention  was  concentrated  on  observing  whether  he  turned


188G.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.


57


the  slate  in  bringing  it  from  under  the  table,  which  he  certainly  did  not  do.
On  thinking  over  the  seance  afterwards  I  could  not  'remember  that  I  had
seen  it  continuously,  though  I  had  a  very  strong  impression  that  I  had  done
so. I  now  think  that  impression  was  probably  false.

We  took  our  own  marked  slate  to  these  five  last  seances,  and  told  Dr.
Slade  we  were  very  anxious  to  get  it  written  on  while  we  held  it  in  our  own
hands,  or  while  it  lay  on  the  top  of  the  table.  We  did  once  get  writing
apparently  done  while  the  slate  lay  on  the  table,  but  had  no  ojoportunity  of
seeing  the  under  surface  immediately  before.

Dr.  Slade  had  arranged  that  the  last  seance  on  Friday  should  take  place
in  the  evening  after  dinner.  On  Thursday  he  made  me  (I  sat  opposite  him)
hold  our  slate  between  me  and  Mr.  Sidgwick  in  hopes  of  getting  it  written
on.  No  writing  came.  On  Friday  when  we  arrived  he  told  us  that  he  felt
extremely  ill  owing  to  a  trying  seance  with  a  man  who  had  a  bad  influence  on
him,  and  who  had  besides  searched  him  more  or  less  and  generally  made
himself  very  disagreeable.  He  had  been  sufliering  from  palpitations  ever  since.
The  spirits  also  informed  us  through  him  in  a  trance  that  they  meant  to  do
great  things  ;  would  write  on  the  slate  lield  by  me  if  they  could,  and  that  if
Dr.  Slade  suffered  from  the  effort  they  must  be  responsible.  Dr.  Slade  made
us  hold  our  slate  between  us,  and  himself  held  one  of  his  own.  Mr.  Sidg-
wick was  next  him,  I  opposite.  After  a  few  scrawls,  &c..  Dr.  Slade  held  his
slate  tight  against  the  table,  and  a  long  message  (apparently)  began  to  be
written.  At  the  same  time  Dr.  Slade  began  to  look  very  uncomfortable  and
to  complain  of  feeling  so.  In  a  faltering  voice  he  told  Mr.  Sidgwick  to  take
hold  of  one  corner  of  the  slate.  Mr.  Sidgwick  made  attemjjts  to  see  more
under  the  table,  but  every  time  he  moved  Dr.  Slade  begged  him  to  sit  still,  as
every  movement  he  made  affected  him  (Dr.  Slade).  Presently  he  became
entranced,  and  the  spirits  told  us  through  him  that  the  moment  the  writing
ceased  (the  sound  was  going  on  all  this  time)  we  must  go  into  the  next  room
and  send  in  the  secretary  with  a  glass  of  wine,  or  Dr.  Slade  would  go  into  a
rigid  trance.  After  10  minutes  we  were  to  return  and  continue  the  seance.  He
came  out  of  the  trance  a  little  before  the  writing  ceased,  then  brought  the
slate  up  on  to  the  table  and  gave  it  to  us.  We  took  it  into  the  next  room  and
sent  in  the  wine  as  directed.  The  slate  was  written  on  all  over  one  side
with  sentences  (of  no  interest)  in  each  of  the  following  languages — French,
Greek,  Italian,  Portuguese,  Spanish,  English.  The  Greek  was  a  quotation
from  the  New  Testament,  the  others  complimentary  phrases.  The  remainder
of  the  seance  was  short,  and  nothing  of  interest  occurred.  The  writing
described  above  was  rather  neatly  done,  and  the  dots  and  accents  put  with
so  much  precision  where  they  were  meant  to  be  that  it  is  impossible  to  sup-
pose the  writing  was  done  by  any  man  who  could  not  see  what  he  was  doing.

The  more  we  think  over  this  seance  the  more  suspicious  it  appears  to
us.  The  arrangements  seemed  so  well  contrived  for  decejition.  Being  in  the
evening  the  light  was  necessarily  less  good,  and  though  there  was  bright  gas-
light it  was  above  the  table,  which  threw  a  shadow.  It  was  ingeniously
contrived  that  Dr.  Slade  should  use  his  own  slate  (thus  getting  an  opi:(or-
tunity  of  changing)  tliough  we  brought  one  ourselves.  The  illness  gave
him  an  opportunity  of  getting  us  hastily  out  of  the  room  so  that  he  could
safely  dispose  of  the  second  slate. I  also  thought  the  time  occupied  in


58  Tlie  PJtysical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


apparently  writing  seemed  unnecessarily  long,  but  as  I  did  not  time  it  this
impression  goes  for  very  little.

At  the  first  seance  we  were  at  in  July,  I  saw  part  of  his  hand  moving
as  though  writing  and  fancied  the  slate  was  resting  on  his  knee.  This
occurred  for  two  successive  messages,  a  longish  one  and  a  short  one.  Each
time  the  hand  moved  backwards  and  forwards  about  as  much  as  would  have
been  required  to  write  the  message,  and  each  time  I  had  no  opportunity  of
seeing  the  portion  of  the  slate  on  which  the  message  was  written,  between  this
movement  of  his  hand,  and  the  time  when  the  sound  of  writing  came  and  the
slate  was  produced  written  on.  At  the  time  I  thought  we  were  on  the  way  to
discover  the  trick,  but  at  the  next  seance  I  observed  the  same  movement  and
afterwards  saw  the  slate  with  nothing  on  it.  I  now  think  he  probably  makes
the  same  movements  without  producing  results  that  he  does  in  order  to  produce
them,  with  a  view  of  disarming  suspicion.  Thus  on  one  occasion  he  laid  the
slate  on  the  table  to  get  it  written  on  and  made  a  difficulty  about  showing  us
the  under  side.  We  insisted,  and  there  was  nothing  there.  He  then  said
we  had  broken  the  joower  for  that  time  by  insisting  on  seeing  the  under  side.

I  have  never  thought  any  of  the  phenomena  other  than  writing  which  1
have  seen  with  Dr.  Slade  worth  considering  as  evidence.  My  chair  was  raised
with  me  on  it.  Dr.  Slade's  knee  being  against  the  side  of  the  chair,  and
his  hand  on  its  back.  The  chair  in  the  well-known  place  on  the  fourth  side  of
the  table,  quite  within  Dr.  Slade's  reach  I  think,  was  several  times  raised  and
upset.  A  table  ran  forward  from  the  corner  behind  Dr.  Slade,  but  he  was
leaning  very  much  forward  at  the  time  (because  the  slate  insisted  on  being
allowed  to  go  far  under  the  table)  and  I  think  his  leg  probably  stuck  out
behind  him,  and  his  foot  hooked  to  the  leg  of  the  moving  table.  Touches  and
grasps  under  the  table  can,  I  think,  be  done  with  the  foot.  A  particular  soft
touch  on  the  right  side  of  the  right  leg  of  the  person  next  Dr.  Slade  was
often  repeated,  and  though  it  must  be  rather  difficult  to  get  his  foot  there
without  ever  letting  his  leg  touch  other  people's,  I  think  it  would  be  possible,
and  it  is  suspicious  that  the  touch  so  often  comes  in  the  same  spot.  We  saw  a
hand  one  day  in  raj^id  movement  between  Mr.  Sidgwick's  body  and  the  table,
but  it  was  when  Dr.  Slade's  hand  was  under  the  table  by  way  of  holding
the  slate.

So  much  for  our  own  experience.  With  regard  to  other  people's,  it  is
noticeable  that  there  is  no  record,  as  far  as  I  have  seen  in  the  Spirit') uilist,
of  a  long  message  being  written  on  a  marked  slate — thus  excluding  the
possibility  of  the  slate  being  changed.  In  Miss  Jeiirey's  case  (as  in  ours)  an
excuse  seems  to  have  been  made  to  use  Dr.  Slade's  slate,  instead  of  the  one
she  brought,  for  the  long  message.  As  to  the  really  important  point  of
whether  the  slate  was  seen  quite  continuously — I  do  not  think  it  is  stated  in
any  communication  to  the  Spiritualist,  except  one  from  W.  Whitear  in  the
Spirititalist  for  August  25th.  I  cannot  recall  whether  private  friends  have
stated  that  they  saw  the  slate  continuously  from  the  moment  they  saw  it
blank  to  the  moment  they  saw  it  written  on.'-

My  theory  of  the  way  the  writing  may  be  done  does  not  account  for  the

1  As  will  be  seen  later  in  this  j)aper,  further  experience  has  led  me  to  the
conclusion  that  observers  may  be  easily  deceived  as  to  the  fact  of  their  own
continuous  observation.


1886]. The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  59


person  holding  the  slate  feeling  a  pressure  which  seemed  to  follow  the
course  of,  and  to  be  due  to,  the  writing.  This  happened  to  Mr.  Sidgwick
when  the  writing  in  many  languages  was  by  way  of  being  done,  and  also  to  a
friend  of  ours.^  Nor  does  it  account,  I  think,  in  all  cases  for  the  sound,
which  cannot  be  produced  by  Dr.  Slade  scratching  the  slate  when  his  hand
is  nob  on  it.

There  remains,  too,  Serjeant  Cox's  positive  statements  that  various  move-
ments of  objects  occurred  when  Dr.  Slade's  hands  were  on  the  table  upon
his  hands,  and  his  whole  body  to  his  feet  fully  before  his  eyes,  and  when  he
was  certain  that  not  a  muscle  moved.  (See  S2)irih(alit<t  for  August  11th  and
25th,  1876.)  We  were  seldom  able  to  see  the  whole  of  Dr.  Slade's  body,  nor
"  by  moving  our  heads  slightly  to  see  the  whole  space  below  the  table,"  owing
to  the  position  in  which  Dr.  Slade  kept  our  hands.  I  think  Serjeant  Cox's
statement  that  the  chair  which  was  lifted  was  far  beyond  any  possible  stretch
of  Dr.  Slade's  legs,  and  that  the  knee  grasped  was  beyond  his  reach,  must
from  his  own  account  be  (to  say  the  least)  exaggerated.

I  have  not  stated  five  general  grounds  of  suspicion  which  probably  occur
to  everyone — namely,  his  conjurer-like  way  of  trying  to  distract  one's  atten-
tion, his  always  sitting  so  as  to  have  his  right  hand  to  manipulate  the  slate,
the  vague  and  general  character  of  the  communications,  his  compelling  one
to  sit  with  one's  hands  in  a  position  that  makes  it  difficult  to  look  under  the
table,  and  his  only  allowing  two  sitters  at  a  time.

A  few  days  after  I  wrote  this  report,  Professor  Lankester  had  his
celebrated  seance  with  Dr.  Slade,  and  his  exposure,  so  far  as  it  went,
supported  the  view  to  which  our  experience  had  led  ;  but  some  of  the
evidence  elicited  at  the  trial  which  followed,  shook  for  a  time  our
confidence  in  our  conclusions.  Further  experience,  however,  of  the
possibilities  of  conjuring,  and  of  the  extent  to  which  even  intelligent
people  may  be  deceived,  combined  with  Dr.  Slade's  persistent  objection
to  using  securely  locked  and  sealed  slates  brought  by  the  sitters,  have
brought  us  back  to  the  conviction  that  his  performance  is  conjuring,
and  nothing  but  conjuring  ;  the  more  so  that  other  persons  besides
Professor  Lankester  affirm  that  they  have  caught  him  tricking.  But
his  tricks  certainly  are  and  were  clever,  and  as  I  know  of  two  conjurers
who  visited  him  with  friends  of  ours  and  failed  to  discover  his  7nodus
operandi,  I  do  not  think  it  argues  stupidity  in  a  vdtness  unacquainted
with  conjuring,  if  he  fails  to  find  it  out  either.

1  From  experiments  I  have  since  tried  I  think  this  experience  must  be  due
to  imagination.  By  resting  a  slate  on  two  tables,  placing  the  hand  on  it,  and
getting  some  one  to  write  on  the  under  side,  it  can,  I  think,  be  ascertained  that
the  vibrations  cannot  be  followed  in  this  waj'.  I  have  also  learnt  experimentally
that  tlie  sound  of  slate-writing  cannot  easily  be  localised  with  certainty,  and
that  there  are  several  ways  of  imitating  it.  It  is  worth  remarking  that  one  of
the  worst  positions  for  localising  the  sound,  if  it  be  not  on  tlie  slate,  is  with  the
ear  on  it.  The  illusion  that  the  writing  is  being  done  on  the  slate  is  then  easily
prodaced  in  a  person  who  does  not  know  that  the  sound  of  real  writing  on  it
■would  generally  under  the  circumstances  be  quite  startlingly  loud. — May,  1886.


60  The  Physical  Plienomena  of  Spirihialism. [May  3,


I  have  never  seen  slate-writing  with  Mr.  Egiinton.  Three  sittings
I  have  had  with  Iiim  have  been  perfect  blanks,  and  lie  is  almost  the
only  medium  out  of  18  or  20  I  have  sat  with,  with  whom  I  have
witnessed  no  phenomena  at  all.

As  an  appendix  to  my  naiTative  of  personal  experiences,  I  will  add
an  account  of  some  seances  at  wldch  I  was  not  present  but
which  were  conducted  by  the  group  of  investigators  to  which  I
belonged,  and  have  in  various  ways  strongly  influenced  my  view
of  the  subject.  They  were  a  series  with  Mr.  Haxby  at  the  house
of  some  friends  of  ours,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.,  in  1878.  A  sister
of  mine  was  present,  and  I  have  her  written  account,  which  is
almost  the  same  to  me  as  my  own,  because  she  and  I  have  investigated
so  mucli  together  that  I  know  the  exact  value  of  hei'  statements.  At
the  seance  I  shall  first  speak  of  there  were  present  the  host  and
hostess,  Serjeant  Cox,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Volckmann,  my  sister,  two  other
ladies  and  a  gentleman,  and  the  medium.  The  cabinet  consisted  of  an
oblong  space  curtained  off  in  one  corner  of  the  room.  Mrs.  Guppy-
Volckmann  sat  at  one  end  of  the  circle,  or  rather  horseshoe,  next  the
cabinet,  and  not  more  than  two  or  three  feet  from  it ;  Mrs.  H.  next
to  lier,  and  my  sister  at  the  otlier  end  of  tlie  circle,  so  that  slie  and
Mrs.  Volckmann  were  the  two  sitters  nearest  to  the  cabinet.  "  The
liglit  was  that  of  a  small  oil  lamp,  with  a  coloured  opaque  shade,
turned  low,  and  with  two  books  in  front  of  it."  It  stood  behind  the
sitters  near  the  corner  of  the  room  (a  small  one)  furthest  from  the
cabinet.  "  Tliere  was  also  a  little  light  from  the  fire."  During  the
seance  Abdullah  and  Toby — two  supposed  materialised  spirits — suc-
cessively appeared. My  sister's  account  goes  on  as  follows  ; —

The  difference  between  Toby  and  Abdullah  is  simply  that  the  former
always  appears  considerably  more  bent  than  the  latter,  without  beard  or  head
ornaments,  and  with  sleeves  (I  think).  All  that  would  be  necessary  to  turn
Abdullali  into  Toby  would  be  to  pull  the  large  handkerchief  which  hangs
[from  Abdullah's  head  down  his  back]  over  the  forehead,  so  as  to  conceal
the  ornaments,  and  to  pull  down  the  sleeves.  Abdullah  [dematerialised  and
materialised  in  the  circle,  that  is,  he]  apjieared  to  most  of  the  circle  to
diminish  in  size,  and  finally  vanish  in  front  of  the  opening  of  the  curtains
of  the  cabinet,  and  also  to  appear  in  the  same  place  and  gradually  gr(.)w  up
to  his  full  size.  This  liappened  more  than  once.  From  my  position  being
nearer  tlian  anyone  else's,  and  from  my  seeing  Abdullah  more  in  profile
while  growing  and  diminishing,  I  was  able  to  see  the  whole  process  distinctly.
He  went  down  on  his  knees — rather  hastily — (others  observing  this  too) — and
then  gradually  bent  down  and  forwards,  moving  his  body  back  into  the
cabinet  as  he  did  so,  and  keeping  the  curtains  closed  above  him.  Finally
he  went  flat  on  tlie  ground,  leaving  only  his  head  exposed,  and  then  drew  it
in.  I  was  able  to  see  that  he  was  lying  down  inside  the  cabinet,  as  the
curtains  do  not  quite  reach  the  floor,  and  I  saw  the  long  line  of  white


1886]. The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.


Gl


drapery  all  the  way  from  the  opening  of  the  curtains  towards  the  wall.  The
growing  was  done  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  a  small  bit  of  white  being
shoved  out  first,  and  then  the  head,  &c.  The  ornaments  on  Abdullah's  fore-
head do  not  appear  till  he  is  nearly  grown  up,  and  I  am  almost  certain  that
I  saw  him  throw  back  the  flap  of  his  head-handkerchief  just  as  he  became
full-grown.  Three  times  while  Abdullah  was  in  the  circle  we  distinctly  heard
noises  in  the  cabinet.  First  rattlings  as  of  something  knocking  about  the
chair,  next  as  of  a  stick  striking  the  floor.  This  was  done  both  in  and  out
of  time  with  the  musical-box,  and  at  the  same  time  Abdullali  moved  about

and  carried  the  musical-box,  waving  it  in  his  arms  The  third

noise  was  the  banjo  knocking  about.  Abdullah  went  into  the  cabinet
between  the  times  when  the  difierent  sounds  were  heard.  All  these  noises
(as  we  found  by  trying  ourselves  afterwards)  could  bo  made  by  tying  a  weiglit
or  a  banjo  to  a  string  attached  at  the  other  end  to  Abdullah's  foot,  and
passing  it  over  the  bar  of  the  chair  in  the  cabinet.  Little  jogs  of  Abdullah's
foot  could  thus  make  all  the  somids.

*  *  *  *  *  *

The  last  time  that  Abdullah  vanished  in  this  way  he  did  it  close  to  the
wall,  between  Mrs.  Volckmann  and  the  cabinet.  We  saw  him  go  down  on
his  knees,  and  then  all  of  a  sudden  he  was  gone.  Mrs.  Guppy- Volckmann
declared  that  he  was  not  close  to  the  wall,  and  that  he  disapjieared  through
the  curtain  and  not  at  the  opening,  and  that  the  curtain  had  never  moved^
Most  of  the  circle  saw  the  curtain  move,  and  I  saw  him  make  a  rush  into
the  cabinet  close  to  the  wall,  and  saw  his  white  drapery  trailing  behind.

After  this  an  indistinct  black  object  came  out  from  the  cabinet,  close  to
the  wall  near  Mrs.  Gui)py-Volckmann,  where  there  was  a  deep  shadow,  and
disappeared  under  the  train  of  her  voluminous  black  velvet  gown.  Others
in  the  circle  thought  the  black  object  disappeared,  but  did  not  see  how  or
where  to.  Soon  after  Abdullah  materialised  from  under  the  gown.  As  the
white  object  first  appeared  it  was  obvious  to  me  that  it  was  the  head  and
shoulders  of  a  man  lying  on  his  right  side.  I  was  sure  that  his  legs  were
concealed  behind  Mrs.  Guppy-Volckmann's  chair,  and  this  Mrs.  H.  made
sure  of,  as  she  stretched  out  her  hand  and  felt  the  cloth  of  his  coat  there.

Serjeant  Cox  maintained  that  the  noises  made  in  the  cabinet  while
Abdullah  was  out  would  require  half  a  day's  preparation  beforehand.

The  last  thing  that  occurred  at  the  stance  was  the  appearance  of
Haxby  (still  entranced)  at  the  opening  of  the  curtain,  and  with  him  some
white  drapery  purporting  to  be  Abdullah.  At  the  same  time  Joey  spoke,
having  previously  informed  us  that  it  was  impossible  to  do  this  while  a  spirit
was  materialised.  This  appearance  of  Abdullah  and  medium  together  was
quite  similar  to  what  we  had  seen  on  a  former  occasion.

At  the  next  seance  my  sister  sat  in  the  place  previously  occupied
by  Mrs.  Volckmann,  who  was  not  this  time  present. She  says  : —

Abdullah  professed  to  dematerialise  before  us  once  as  at  the  previous
seance.  My  head  was  only  about  lift,  from  him,  and  I  saw  him  g(j  through
the  same  process  as  he  did  then. I  saw  his  arms  plainly  till  he  was  right


62  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


down  on  the  floor.  Then  he  put  up  his  hands  to  the  cloth  on  his  head
bringing  the  jDai't  hanging  behind  over  the  top  and  front,  to  hide  the  tiara,
and  then  jjulled  the  whole  ofT  his  head,  the  white  cloth  remaining  as  the
last  bit  of  Abdullah  for  a  few  moments.  I  saw  his  hair  plainly  as  the  cloth
came  ofi',  and  also  his  back  inside  the  curtains.

Before  this  stance  all  the  members  of  the  circle,  includins"  an
enthusiastic  Spiritualist,  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  X.,  had  been  told  what
to  expect.  Mr.  Sidgwick  was  present,  and  he  appends  this  note  to  my
sister's  account.

I  was  seated  at  the  furthest  point  in  the  circle  :  at  the  same  time  in
witnessing  Abdullah's  disaj^pearance  I  was  unable  even  to  imagine  it  any-
thing else  than  the  medium  withdrawing  gradually  into  the  cabinet,  having
first  fallen  on  his  knees,  and  then  gradually  lowered  his  head.  But  Mr.  X.,
who  sat  nearly  as  far  otf  as,  but  certainly  not  farther  than  I  did,  remarked
when  the  performance  was  over  that  "  all  our  doubts  must  now  be  removed,"
and  afterwards  to  Mr.  H.,  on  going  away,  that  our  materialisations  were
better  than  theirs  in  Paris.

Experiences  like  this  make  one  feel  how  misleading  the  accounts  of
some  completely  honest  witnesses  may  be.  For  the  materialisations  in
Paris  were  those  Avhich  the  Comte  de  Bullet  had  with  Firman,  where
near  relatives  of  the  Count  were  belieA'ed  constantly  to  appear,  and  which
are  among  the  most  wonderful  recorded  in  Spiritualistic  literature.  And
after  all  it  appears  that  these  marvellous  stances  were  no  better  than
this  miserable  personation  by  Haxby.

II.

Those  who have followed me  in this  I fear lengthy,  though
yet  incomplete,  account  of  niy  own experiences,  will  agree  with
me that  they certainly point to trickery as  a more  probable
explanation  than  hallucination  of  most  of  the  physical  phenomena
of Spiritualism. The hypothesis  of  hallucination has often  been
suggested,  and  has  recently  been  again  advanced  by  E.  von  Hartmann.
So  far  as  we  yet know,  liowever,  sensory  hallucination  of  several
persons  together,  who  are  not  in  a  hypnotic  state,  is  a  rare  phenomenon,
and  not  therefore  a  probable  explanation. Moreover,  I  think  that  all
who  have  had  a  large  experience  of  Spiritualistic  stances  will  agree  in
thinking  that  it  is  not  at  all  generally  applicable,  partly  because
material  traces  of  what  occur  so  often  remain,  and  partly  because  of
the  general  agreement,  not  only  of  all  the  witnesses  but  of  all  the
senses,  as  to  what  is  perceived,  as  distinguished  from  what  is  inferred.
There  is,  however,  some  I'eason  to  think  that  collective  hallucination
does  sometimes  occur  at  seances,  and  if  so,  tlie  fact  is  very  interesting,
and  it  is  important  that  careful  independent  records  should  be  kept  by


1886]. The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  63


sitters  with  a  view  to  throwing  light  on  the  subject ;  but  I  feel  sure
that  nothing  of  the  kind  has  occurred  witliin  my  own  experience.

I  must,  however,  carefully  distinguish  sensory  hallucinations, — that
is,  perceptions  which  have  no  objective  counterpart — from  erroneous
interpretations  of  what  is  perceived.  Erroneous  interpretations  which
arise  from  confusing  what  is  observed  with  what  is  inferred — from  a
failure  to  "distinguish  between  facts  and  inferences  from  facts,"  as
G.  H.  Lewes  put  it — are,  I  think,  very  common  at  seances.  Our  conclu-
sions as  to  what  we  see  or  hear  are  always  founded  on  a  combination  of
observation  and  inference ;  but  in  daily  life  it  is  seldom  necessary  to
distinguish  between  the  two  elements,  since,  when  the  object  and  its  mode
of  presentation  are  familiar,  our  inferences  are  generally  correct.  But  it
is  different  when,  owing  to  circumstances,  such  as  a  bad  light,  we  have
to  infer  more  in  proportion  to  what  we  perceive  than  usual ;  or  when
some  one,  e.g.,  a  conjurer  or  a  ventriloquist,  is  trying  to  deceive  us  by
presenting  one  object  under  the  familiar  aspect  of  another  and
suggesting  false  inferences.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  iind  people  at  seances
encouraging  each  other  in  the  belief  that  they  see,  say,  a  living  human
figure,  when  all  that  they  actually  see  is  something  moving  which  is
about  the  size  of  a  human  being ;  the  rest  is  inference.

This  is  a  simple  form  of  the  kind  of  error  in  question,  but  I  believe  it
extends  to  cases  much  less  easy  to  understand — namely,  recognitions  of
departed  friends.  I  have  never  myself  been  at  a  seance  when  any
relatives  of  the  sitters  have  been  supposed  to  appear ;  but  I  know  at
first-hand  of  a  case  where  a  gentleman  recognised  his  aunt,  and  then
turned  to  the  other  sitters  for  information  as  to  the  presence  of  her
most  characteristic  feature.  Tlie  following  is  quoted  by  Mr.  D.  D.
Home,  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Spiritualism,  p.  3-1:2,  as  the  confession
of  an  exposed  medium  : — "  The  first  seance  I  held  after  it  became
known  to  the  Rochester  people  that  I  was  a  medium,  a  gentle-
man from  Chicago  recognised  his  daugliter  Lizzie  in  me  after  I
had  covered  my  small  moustache  with  a  piece  of  flesh-coloured  cloth,
and  reduced  the  size  of  my  face  with  a  shawl  I  had  purposely  hung
up  in  the  back  of  the  cabinet.  From  tliis  sitting  my  fame  com-
menced to  spread."  The  following,  again,  I  quote  from  an  account  of
a  seance  in  a  recently  published  Spiritualistic  work  : — "  In  this  figure
we  both  instantly  recognised  a  sister  of  my  wife,  called  Emily,  who  had
been  dead  about  six  years.  As  Emily  had  been  of  a  sallow  complexion
with  black  hair  and  eyes,  recognition  was  easy.  We  Ijoth  expressed
our  belief  in  the  appearance  of  our  relative,  but  tlie  other  members  of
the  circle  thought  it  was  some  one  else."  One  party  or  the  otlier  (if
not  both)  must  have  been  mistaken  here.

The  same  thing  has  happened  as  regards  so-called  spirit  plioto-
graphs. These  have,  in  common  with  figures  seen  at  materialisation


64  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


stances  in  a  bad  light,  the  characteristics  of  being  in  general  not
very  well  defined,  and  of  being  draped  in  a  way  not  common  in
ordinary  life.  At  the  trial  of  Buguet,  the  spirit-photographer,  in
Paris,  in  1875,  it  came  out  that  different  people  claimed  the  same  photo-
graph as  a  likeness  of  their  respective  friends,  and  some  photographs  I
have  seen  by  Hudson,  a  spirit-photographer  in  London,  which  have  been
differently  recognised  by  different  sitters,  seem  to  me  to  have  been  taken
from  the  same  model.  I  observe  that  "  M.  A.  (Oxon),"  speaking  of
spirit-photographs,  says  :  "  Some  people  would  recognise  anything.  A
broom  and  a  sheet  are  quite  enough  for  some  wild  enthusiasts  who  go
with  the  figure  in  their  'eye,  and  see  what  they  wish  to  see.
I  have  had  pictures  that  might  be  anything  in  this  or  any  other  world
sent  to  me  and  gravely  claimed  as  recognised  portraits."  [Human
Nature,  May,  1875,  p.  202.)

There  is  a  negative  inference  often  even  more  hastily  made  as
regards  recognition — namely,  that  the  figure  seen  cannot  be  the
medium.  I  do  not  think  tliat  nearly  enough  margin  is  usually  allowed
for  the  effect  of  disguise  and  acting.  A  friend  of  mine  once  dressed  up
as  a  stranger  and  paid  an  afternoon  call,  with  a  letter  of  introduction,
on  her  own  mother,  witli  whom  she  was  living  at  the  time,  and  was
not  detected.  Her  motlier  liad  some  time  previously  dared  her  to
succeed  in  disguising  herself  from  her,  which  made  it  more  remarkable.
Wliy  sliould  a  disguised  medium  be  more  certainly  recognised  1

For  reasons  of  this  kind  much  of  the  evidence  from  recognition
obviously  fails  to  come  up  to  the  required  standard,  and  it  is  impossible
to  lay  stress  on  any  of  it  unless  we  have  reason  to  know  tliat  the
witnesses  are  on  their  guard  against  the  possibilities  of  error,  and  have
practised  themselves  in  avoiding  it.  These  remarks  about  recognition
apply  not  only  to  materialisation  but  also  to  professed  reproduction  of
the  handwritings  of  dead  friends.  I  am  sure,  from  what  I  have  seen,
that  these  are  liable  to  be  hastily  identified  from  a  very  superficial
resemblance.

If  then  we  must  distrust  the  evidence  from  recognition,  and  can
regard  the  explanation  by  hallucination  as  at  most  of  extremely
limited  application,  the  only  important  question  that  remains  to  be.
asked — and  this  applies  not  only  to  materialisations  but  to  all  the
physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism — is  whether  the  precautions  taken
to  exclude  what  may  broadly  be  called  conjuring  have  been  sufficient.
In  the  vast  majority  of  I'ecorded  cases  we  have  no  evidence  that  they
have  been  sufficient.  In  many  it  is  indeed  obvious  they  have  not,
and  only  tliose  who  have  a  very  inadequate  idea  of  the  possibilities
of  conjuring  can  doubt  it ;  but  one  cannot  investigate  Spii-itualism
for  long  without  learning  that  some  people  quite  sincerely  think


1886]. Tlie  Physical  Phenomena  of  Sinritualism.  65


things  inexplicable  which  they  could  do  themselves  if  they  tried.  In
other  cases  the  absence  of  any  mention  of  certain  precautions  leads  one
to  doubt  whether  they  were  taken. ^  Other  cases  again  are,  no  doubt,
inexplicable  as  described,  but  this  is  not  enough  unless  a  very  wide
margin  has  been  allowed  for  conjuring,  for  descriptions  of  conjuring
tricks  are  also  often  inexplicable  owing  doubtless  to  the  omission  of
some  important  detail  which  has  escaped  observation,  or  the  insertion
of  some  item  which  is  a  mere  inference.  No  one — not  even  a  conjurer
— can  expect  to  know  all  the  possibilities  of  conjuring  and  to  observe
all  the  accidental  circumstances  which  may  on  any  particular  occasion

1  It  seems  to  me  undesirable  tliat  even  men  of  established  scientific  reputa-
tion like  Mr.  Crookes  and  Professor  Ziillner  should  hold  themselves  exempt
from  mentioning  even  the  simplest  precautions.  (Crookes'  Researches  in  the
Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  p.  43;  Ziillner's  Transcendental  Physics,  trans-
lated by  C.  C.  Massey,  2nd  ed.,  p.  79.)  It  is  a  matter  of  common  experience
among  scientific  experimenters  tliat  they  sometimes  omit  precautions  which,
when  once  thought  of,  seem  obvious,  even  in  their  own  line  of  work,  and  such
omissions  are  especially  likely  to  occur  in  the  present  investigation,  owing  to  its
highly  novel  character  and  the  complicated  sources  of  error  to  be  guarded
against.  That  Professor  Zrillner  did  not  always  perceive  and  avoid  important
sources  of  possible  error  may,  I  think,  be  inferred  from  his  writings.  For
instance,  in  describing  the  stance  on  December  17th,  1877,  when  he  obtained
four  knots  in  a  string  of  which  the  ends  were  tied  and  sealed  together,  he  omits
to  mention  that  the  experiment  had  been  tried  and  failed  liefore.  We  learn
that  this  was  so,  accidentally  as  it  were,  from  his  mentioning  it  in  another  place
and  in  another  connection  {Abha.ndlmigen,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  1191),  where  he  tells
us  that  it  Avas  a  long  time  before  tlie  "  spirits  "  understood  what  kind  of  knot
was  required  of  them,  and  that  before  they  did  so  he  obtained  knots,  but  not
such  as  he  wanted — knots,  I  infer,  which  could  be  made  by  ordinary  beings
without  undoing  the  string.  Now  this  fact  obviously  greatly  afiects  the  value
of  the  experiment,  for  it  makes  it  possible  that  Dr.  Slade  may  have  prepared  a
string  similar  to  Professor  Zrillner's  at  liome,  and  brought  it  with  him,  and,
notwithstanding  Professor  Zollner's  watchfulness,  have  changed  it.  (Professor
Ziillner  put  the  string  round  his  neck  during  a  portion  of  the  time  before  they
sat  down  to  the  table,  in  order  not  to  lose  sight  of  it.  Afterwards  it  was  placed
with  the  sealed  end  on  the  table,  Professor  Zollner  holding  it  in  position  and
the  greater  part  of  it  hanging  down  below  the  table  ;  and  it  was  while  so  placed
that,  as  was  supposed,  four  knots  were  made  in  it.  It  is  generally  hazardous  to
infer  from  a  description  when  a  conjurer's  opportunity  occurred,  but  if  pressed
I  should  say  that  the  most  likely  time  seems  to  me  to  have  been  after  the  string
was  taken  off  the  neck  again, — perhaps  while  it  was  being  arranged  on  the
table. )  Whereas  if  Dr.  Slade  had  been  totally  unprepared  for  the  experiment,
we  sliould  have  had,  on  the  view  that  it  was  conjuring,  to  make  the  much  more
difficult  supposition  that  he  had  prepared  a  similar  string,  or  undone  anil  re-done
one  of  Professor  Zollner's,  after  the  latter  went  to  the  house  for  the  seance.  The
omission  to  mention  this  fact  in  describing  the  incident  seems  to  me  so  unac-
countable except  on  the  supposition  that  the  possible  importance  of  it  had  not
occurred  to  Professor  Zollner,  that  we  must  I  think  assume  in  other  cases  that
he  may  not  only  have  omitted  to  mention,  but  failed  to  see  the  importance  of
even  obvious  precautions.


F


66  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Siyiritiialism. [May  3,


favour  deception  and  perhaps  never  exactly  recur.  It  may,  I  think,
be  fairly  inferred  that  some  leading  Spiritualists  do  not  allow  a  sufficient
range  for  the  possibilities  of  conjuring  from  the  fact  that  they  have  on
several  occasions  avowed  their  belief  that  certain  public  conjuring
performances  showed  tlie  conjurers  to  be  mediums. ^

Other  believers  in  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  or  the
same  at  other  times,  lay  stress  on  the  advantage  that,  as  they  urge,
conjurers  have  over  mediums.  Conjurers,  it  is  said,  require  their  own
stage  and  apparatus,  whereas  mediums  will  come  to  the  investigator's
own  room,  bringing  nothing  but  wliat  they  wear,  and  often  allow  them-
selves to  be  searchefl  :  moreover,  prizes  have  been  offered  to  conjurers
who  will  produce  the  same  phenomena  as  tlie  medium  under  the  same
conditions,  and  none  have  come  forward  to  claim  them,  though,  it  is
ai'gued,  "  imposture  can  be  reproduced  at  will."  This  last,  however,
seems  to  me  a  most  unjustifiable  assumption,  since,  as  I  have  above
observed,  the  success  of  imposture  may  frequently  depend  on  accidental
and  unobserved  opportunities ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  mediums
possess  an  advantage  far  greater  than  stage  and  machinery  in  being
allowed  to  fail  whenever  they  please.  The  conjurer  would  only  compete
with  them  on  equal  terms  if  he  could  secure  witnesses  doubtful
whether  what  they  saw  was  conjuring  or  not,  and  if  he  enjoyed  the  same
immunity  from  any  necessity  to  succeed,  or  to  adhere  to  any  programme.
The  following  statement  by  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  bears  on  this  point.  He
says  {Human  Nature,  for  1876,  p.  267): — "The  balance  is  largely
against  'prepossession'  influencing  spiritual  manifestations  in  any
appreciable  degree,  so  far  as  my  experience  goes.  In  99  out  of  every  100
cases  people  do  not  get  what  they  want  or  expect.  Test  after  test,
cunningly  devised,  on  which  the  investigator  has  set  his  mind,  is  put
aside  and  another  substituted."  In  other  words  the  evidence  is  rarely,
properly  speaking,  experimental,  which  makes  it  necessary  to  allow  a
much  larger  margin  than  would  be  required  in  experimental  evidence  not
only  for  trickery,  but  also  for  accidental  mistakes  and  mal-observation,
even  if  trickery,  conscious  or  unconscious,  were  out  of  the  question.
And  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  most  excellent  moral  character
in  the  medium  is  no  guarantee  against  trickery  unless  it  can  be
proved  that  he  was  in  no  abnormal  mental  condition  when  the
phenomena  occurred ;  and  tliat extraordinary  deceptions  have  been

1  Thus  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  considered  Dr.  Lynn's  entertainment  to  be
clearly  mediuraistic,  and,  as  he  describes  it,  it  is  certainly  difficult  to  explain.
Mr.  B.  Coleman  and  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  asserted  the  same  of  Maskelyne  and
Cooke's.  Others  have  also  declared  themselves  in  the  same  way  about  tliese  and
other  conjurers.  See  the  Spiritualist,  May  loth,  1873,  p.  205  ;  Dec.  18tht
1874,  p.  297;  Oct.  15th,  1875,  p.  189;  August  17th,  1877,  p.  78.  Medium
aiid  Daybreak,  August  24th,  1877,  p.  538  ;  April  2nd,  1886,  p.  212,  &c.


1886]. Tlie  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  67


carried  on  by  hysterical  patients  and  others  with  no  conceivable  motive
but  a  desire  to  secure  attention.

There  is  another  reason  why  conjurers  would  often  compete  on
unequal  terms  with  mediums,  and  that  is  that  it  would  not  pay  pro-
fessional conjurers  to  practise  the  particular  tricks  required.  Slate-
writing,  for  instance,  is  not  adapted  to  public  performances,  and  the
number  of  people  who  would  pay  guineas  for  the  chance  of  perhaps
seeing  writing  produced  on  a  slate  by  conjuring  is  small.  I  have,
however,  been  fortunate  myself  in  meeting  with  an  amateur  conjurer
whom  I  will  call  Mr.  A.,  who  had  given  some  attention  to  the  subject  of
slate-writing  and  could  produce  some  of  the  phenomena.  He  very
kindly  gave  me  three  or  four  seances,  none  of  them  in  his  own  house
nor  with  his  own  table,  but  otherwise  under  conditions  externally
similar  to  Dr.  Slade's  and  Mr.  Eglinton's,  and  I  consider  the  experience
gained  most  valuable.  Dr.  Slade  had  already  taught  me  how  very
little  I  could  observe  at  a  time.  Nevertheless  it  was  a  shock  to  me  to
find  how  easily  Mr.  A.  could  deceive  me.  At  one  of  these  seances  a
lady  friend  of  mine  was  present  who  had  not  been  told  beforehand  that
I  knew  this  was  conjuring.  She  was  interested  in  slate-writing,  had
seen  some  very  good  slate-writing  phenomena  with  a  medium,  and
observed  Mr.  A.  in  the  same  state  of  mind.  She  sat  next  him.
The  next  day  she  wrote  an  account  of  what  took  place,still  without  know-
ing that  it  was  conjuring. This  is  her  account  of  the  first  occurrence.

I  took  slates  with  me,  two  ordinaiy  ones  and  a  folding  slate.  We  first
used  the  ordinary  slates  ;  they  were  cleaned,  dried,  and  i^laced  one  on  the
other  upon  the  table,  a  nib  of  pencil  between  them,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
medium's  and  my  hands  resting  on  them.  No  writing  being  heard,  Mr.  A.
and  I  held  them  underneath  the  table.  Eventually,  however,  writing  was
produced  whilst  the  slates  were  on  the  table  in  jjosition  I  have  before
described.  The  message  was  a  long  one,  covering  completely  one  side  of  slate.
We  examined  them  when  they  were  placed  the  second  time  on  the  table,
and  satisfied  ourselves  that  they  were  clean.  I  am  sure  that  the  slates  were
not  changed.

Those  who  have  studied  the  records  of  slate-writing  seances  will
have  noticed  that  it  is  rare  for  sitters  to  have  long  communications,
such  as  this  was,  written  on  tlieir  oimi  slates.  Short  remarks  of  a  few
words  or  even  lines  on  the  sitters'  slates  are  common,  and  long  messages
covering  one  side  of  the  slate  are  common  too,  but  on  the  medium's
slates.  At  the  time  I  had  this  sitting  with  Mr.  A.,  I  was  under  the
impression  that  long  messages  on  slates  brought  by  the  sitters  never
occurred,  and  consequently  I  was  even  more  surprised  than  my  friend  at
the  result.  To  cover  one  side  of  a  slate  with  writing  obviously  requires
consideraV^le  time,  and  it  seemed  to  me  so  inconceivable  that  Mr.  A.  could
have  had  the  opportunity  to  do  it  unobserved,  that  notwithstanding  my


68  ' The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritiialism. [May  3,

friend's  certainty  that  it  was  her  own  slate,  and  my  own  impression  to
the  same  effect,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  must  have  been  changed.
But  I  was  wrong.  It  ivas  my  friend's  slate,  and  Mr.  A.  had  found  an
opportunity  of  writing  on  it.  I  was  told  afterwards  how,  and  saw  the
possibility,  but  I  do  not  believe  I  should  ever  have  discovered  it  if  I
had  not  been  told.  I  need  hardly  say  that  it  was  not  done  while  we
heard  the  sound  as  of  writing  going  on.  This  is  my  friend's  account  of
the  next  incident  : —  ,^

The  medium  next  asked  me  to  fetch  a  book  from  the  other  room.  I  took
one  at  random  from  the  shelves  of  the  library.  [The  shelves  contained
several  hundred  volumes.]  Mr.  A.  saw  me  take  it  out,  but  did  not  touch  it.
I  brought  it  into  the  room,  and  put  it  on  a  chair  between  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and
myself,  whilst  we  prepared  another  slate  and  bit  of  pencil.  Being  again
satisfied  that  the  slates  were  clean,  the  book,  into  which  I  had  not  looked  and
the  name  of  which  I  did  not  know,  was  placed  on  the  slate,  all  our  hands
resting  on  it  as  before.  I  mentally  thought  of  a  page  and  line,  from  which  a
quotation  was  to  be  made — both  numbers,  at  medium's  request,  being  under
10.  After  a  short  time  writing  was  heard.  On  the  slate  was  written
"  Cantor  lecture  will  be  given  on  Monday,  at  the  Kensington  Museum.
This  is  all  we  have  power  to  do."  We  looked  at  p.  2,  line  7,  the  numbers  I
had  thought  of,  but  did  not  find  the  words  quoted.  The  medium,  however,
was  very  sure  that  they  would  be  fcjund  somewhere  near,  and  he  soon  dis-
covered on  last  line  of  p.  7,  "  Cantor  lecture,"  and  on  second  line  of  p.  8,
"  will  be  given  on  Mondays,"  and  a  few  lines  further  down,  "  at  the  Ken-
sington Museum."

The  test  having  been  only  a  partial  success  the  medium  proposed  that  we
should  try  it  again.  He  asked  me  to  fetch  a  second  book  from  the  other
room.  I  took  up  a  "Journal"  lying  on  the  table.  I  did  not  look  to  see  which
number  I  had  chosen.  Medium  asked  me  to  think  again  of  two  numbers
under  10,  to  determine  page  and  line  from  which  quotation  should  be  made.
I  did  so,  and  very  sliortly  after  was  written  in  red  chalk,  "no  such  page."
This  was  true,  for  on  opening  volume,  we  found  it  commenced  at  a  hundred
and  something.

Assuming,  as  we  must  do,  that  the  slates  could  l)e  changed  under  our
very  eyes,  without  our  perceiving  it,  these  two  incidents  are  not  very
mysterious,  but  the  next  is,  perhaps,  more  surprising.

Mr.  A.  wished  to  try  this  test  again,  so  I  fetched  a  third  book.  This
happened  to  be  Time — both  he  and  I  saw  the  title.  This  time  I  told  him  the
numbers  I  was  thinking  of,  p.  8,  line  5.  We  held  one  slate  under  the  table
and  another,  with  the  book  on  it,  remained  on  the  table  ;  both  these  slates
were  Mr.  A.'s.  After  a  time  writing  was  heard,  and  it  was  on  the  upper  slate
that  we  found  the  quotation,  correctly  given  this  time,  "  The  Imperial  Par-
liament "  [p.  8,]  line  1,  and  then  a  few  words  taken  frum  line  5.  (The  slate
used  was  a  large  folding  one  with  a  lock  belonging  to  the  medium.  Into  this
he  slipped  a  sheet  of  jjaper  and  a  bit  of  pencil. It  was  on  the  paper  that  the


1886]. The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  69


quotation  was  written.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  the  key,i  and  it  was  she  who
opened  the  slate.) The  stance  was  held  by  full  gaslight.

The  following  incidents  of  the  same  stance  are  also  instructive  : —

Mr.  A.  asked  hmi  [the  supposed  spirit]  to  tell  us  any  secrets  about
either  of  us,  and  we  heard  the  sound  of  writing  on  the  slate  lying  on  the
upper  surface  of  the  table.  The  sound  continued  when  Mr.  A.  withdrew
his  hands  a  short  distance  from  the  slate,  but  ceased  when  he  withdrew  them
to  a  greater  distance.  A  long  message  was  written  again,  covering  the  whole
side  of  the  slate,  and  commencing  at  a  spot  where  the  medium  had  jjreviously
requested  it  to  commence  by  putting  a  small  cross.

******

One  of  our  messages  at  request  was  written  in  different  coloured  chalks,
the  bits  of  which  had  been  placed  on  the  table  underneath  the  slate.

******

Before  he  left,  Mr.  A.  held  a  slate  with  me  under  the  table,  and  asked
that  the  name  of  the  animal  written  on  the  slip  of  jiajier  I  had  chosen  should
be  written  on  the  slate.  Writing  was  heard,  the  slate  brought  up,  and  I
found  rhinoceros  in  red  chalk.  This  was  correct,  though  how  Mr.  A.  knew,
or  by  what  means  the  word  was  written,  I  have  no  idea,  for  the  slate  appeared
to  me  to  be  clean  when  we  put  it  under  the  table.

Without  for  an  instant  maintaining  that  Mr.  A.'s  performance  was
as  good  as,  from  the  description  of  others,  I  suppose  that  Dr.  Slade's
and  Mr.  Eglinton's  sometimes  is,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  he  too
could  have  supplied  Professor  Zollner  with  experimental  proof  of  the
existence  of  four  dimensional  beings,  if  Professor  Zollner  could  have
seen  him  without  knowing  he  was  a  conjurer.

Another  conjuring  performance,  with  which  I  had  nothing  to  do
myself,  but  of  which  a  written  account  w-as  sent  to  me  by  the  gentle-
man concerned,  may  be  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection,  because  it
has  the  special  interest  of  having  been  performed  in  the  presence  of  a
witness  who  was,  as  it  were,  behind  the  scenes.  I  should  add  that  I  have
discussed  the  incident  with  this  witness.  A  gentleman,  whom  I
will  call  for  convenience  Mr.  X.,  sat  with  a  conjurer  for  slate-writing.
Mr.  X.  held  one  slate  in  his  left  hand,  and  another  lay  on  the  table
before  him  in  such  a  position  that  he  "  could  easily  watch  both."  The
latter  was  a  double  slate,  hinged  and  locked,  belonging  to  the  conjurer.
This  Mr.  X.  unlocked,  placed  in  it  three  pieces  of  coloured  chalk,
and  re-locked  it,  putting  the  key  in  his  pocket His  account  pro-

1  The  precaution  of  keeping  possession  of  the  key  of  the  medium's  locked
slate  is  one  often  adopted  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  but  it  is  of  course  perfectly
useless,  as  there  may  be  any  number  of  keys.


70  Tlie  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


ceeds  thus  (I  have  italicised  the  part  to  which  I  wish  most  to  call
attention)  : — "  After  some  few  minutes,  during  which,  to  the  best  of  my
belief,  I  was  attentively  regarding  both  slates,  Mr.  —  whisked  the  first
away  and  showed  me  on  the  reverse  a  message  written  to  myself.
Almost  immediately  afterwards  he  asked  me  to  unlock  the  second  slate,
and  on  doing  so  I  found,  to  my  intense  astonishment,  another  message
written  on  both  the  insides  of  the  slate — the  lines  in  alternate
colours,  and  the  chalks  apparently  much  worn  by  usage.  My  brother
[who  was  looking  on]  tells  me  that  there  was  an  interval  of  some  two  or
three  minutes,  during  which  my  attention  was  called  away,  but  I  can
only  believe  it  on  Ids  word."

The  fact  is  that  slate-writing  as  generally  exhibited  by  Dr.  Slade  and
Mr.  Eglinton  is  not  at  all  the  simple  phenomenon  it  is  sometimes
supposed  to  be.  The  table  may  be  mentioned,  for  instance,  as  one  of
the  complications  apparently  superfluous  if  the  phenomena  be
genuine,  but  most  useful  as  a  screen  and  in  other  ways  if  they  be
due  to  conjuring.  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  absence  of  simpli-
city in  the  conditions  under  which  not  only  slate-writing,  but  the
other  physical  phenomena  are  generally  produced  aflfords  an  important
presumption  against  their  genuineness.

And  there  are  two  further  arguments  against  their  genuineness
which  are  gaining  in  force  every  year.  The  first  of  these  is  that  almost
every  medium  who  has  been  prominently  before  the  public  has  at  some
time  or  other  been  detected  in  trickery,  or  what  cannot  be  distinguished
from  trickery  except  by  hypotheses  which  appear  to  me  violent  and  base-
less. And  the  second  is  the  absence  of  evidence  which  does  not  depend  on
the  investigator's  power  of  continuous  observation.  By  continuous
observation,  I  mean  observation  which  is  uninterrupted  during  a
certain  interval  of  time,  varying  in  length  according  to  circum-
stances,— this  observation  extending  of  course  to  all  circumstances
which  can  have  affected  the  evidence.  This  kind  of  observa-
tion is  seldom  or  never  required,  either  in  ordinary  life  or  in
scientific  investigations,  so  that  we  have  but  little  practice  in
it,  or  opportunities  of  estimating  our  power  of  exercising  it.  It  is
often  on  our  want  of  power  of  exercising  it  that  the  success  of
conjuring  depends,  and  it  should  be,  and  in  many  cases  is,  the  aim  of
investigators  into  Spiritualism  to  make  the  evidence  independent  of  it
It  is  easy  to  devise  experiments  of  various  kinds  which  apparently  in-
troduce no  new  difficulties  if  the  phenomena  are  genuine,  which  resemble
in  kind  those  we  see,  and  omit  none  of  the  conditions  said  by  (or  through)
mediums  to  be  necessary,  and  which,  if  successful,  would  place  some  of
the  physical  phenomena  beyond  all  question  of  conjuring  by  eliminating
the  necessity  for  continuous  observation  or  accurate  recollection  on  the
part  of  the  investigator. But  as  far  as  I  can  ascertain  no  really  good


1886]. The  Phydcal  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  71

evidence  exists  that  such  experiments  have  ever  succeeded.  ^  Pro-
fessor ZoUner  devised  some  good  ones,  but  they  failed.  He  wanted,
for  instance,  to  have  a  knot  tied  in  a  continuous  band  cut  out  of
bladder.  The  "  spirits"  explained  that  they  had  failed  in  this
because  "  the  band  was  in  danger  of  '  melting  '  during  the  operation
under  the  great  increase  of  temperature,"  affirmed  to  occur  during
the  passage  of  solid  through  solid.  One  would  not  have  supposed
that  cat-gut  (made  up  into  a  string)  melted  less  easily,  but  knots
were  found  in  a  piece  of  cat-gut  with  the  ends  sealed  together.  This,
however,  is  not  necessarily  an  occult  phenomenon  and  the  evidence
that  it  was  done  at  the  seance  after  the  ends  were  sealed,  and  not  done
by  Slade  at  home  and  his  piece  thus  prepared  exchanged  for  Professor
ZoUner's,  depends  on  the  latter's  power  of  continuous  observation.

The  necessity  of  continuous  observation  at  a  slate-writing  seance
can  hardly,  I  think,  be  eliminated  except  by  obtaining  writing  on  a  slate
securely  covered.  Many  people  have  tried  to  obtain  this  with  Mr.
Eglinton,  but  I  have  never  heard  of  any  successful  attempt  except  one
of  Mr.  Wedgwood's.  He  took  a  pair  of  slates,  tied  and  sealed  together,
to  Mr.  Eglinton,  but  obtained  no  writing  and  put  the  slates  aside.  Some
months  later  he  again  took  the  slates  to  Mr.  Eglinton's  as  they  were,
adding  only  gummed  paper  round  the  edges.  This  tinie  he  obtained  a
long  message,  but  the  experiment,  as  one  eliminating  the  necessity  for
continuous  observation,  is.  vitiated,  because  we  have  no  complete
guarantee  that  (1)  the  slates  were  not  tampered  with  in  the  interval,
and  (2)  that  a  pair  prepared  in  imitation  was  not  substituted  at  the
second  seance.  For  Mr.  Wedgwood  had  no  reliable  means  of  identify-
ing his  slates  or  his  gummed  paper  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  learn.
He  has  never,  I  believe,  obtained  writing  on  a  securely  closed  slate  except

'  There  is  an  alleged  case  of  pieces  of  platinum  being  introduced  into
hermetically  sealed  glass  tubes  in  Professor  Hare's  laboratory  tlirough  the
niediumship  of  a  Mi.  Ruggles,  but  in  the  only  description  I  have  seen  there  is
no  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the  tubes  seen  empty  and  those  seen  with  the
platinum  in  them  55  minutes  later,  except  what  depends  on  the  watchfulness  of
the  observers.  Dr.  S.  A.  Peter's  description  of  this  phenomenon  is  quoted  in
TioXhiQT's  Transcendentcd  Phijsics,  yix.  Massey's  translation  (2nd  Ed.  1882,  p.
152).  An  experiment  which  may  have  been  important  is  given  in  Dansken's
Hoiv  and  why  I  became  a  Spintiudist  (Baltimore,  1869).  He  tells  us  of  an
anonymous  medium  who  had  an  iron  ring  put  on  and  off  his  neck,  which  he
says  was  seven  inches  less  in  circumference  than  the  medium's  head.  But  the
evidence  in  several  essential  points  is  very  incomplete.  It  is  also  asserted  that
private  mediums  have  obtained  phenomena  independent  of  continuous  observa-
tion. Baron  du  Prel,  in  Sphinx  for  June,  1886,  says  "  Ich  kenne  persiinlich  drei
Privatmedien  bei  Avelchen  direkte  Schriften  nicht  nur  in  Doppeltafeln  sondcrn
iiberhaupt  in  unzugdnglichen  Orten  vorkommen."  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  these
persons  will  place  their  evidence  before  the  world  with  the  detail  required  to
make  it  scientifically  valuable.


72  Tlte  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3,


on  this  occasion,  tliough  lie  has  frequently  tried.  Another  gentleman,
Mr.  F.  W.  Bentall,  who  gives  us  an  account  of  his  experiences  with
Mr.  Eglinton  (see  Journal  of  the  Society  for  June,  1886),  and  who  was
successful  in  obtaining  writing  on  slates  not  securely  closed,  tried  a
large  number  of  times  and  quite  in  vain  with  securely  closed  ones.  At
some  of  these  trials  he  used  a  slate  covered  with  a  sheet  of  glass.  The
"  spirits  "  explained  that  "  the  vital  fluid — call  it  what  you  may — cannot
be  retained  sufficiently  long  in  the  enclosed  space  to  enable  us  to  move
the  pencil  with  force  enough,"  ifec.  Afterwards  Mr.  Bentall  substituted
wire  gauze  for  the  glass,  so  that  there  was  no  longer  an  enclosed  space
in  the  same  sense,  but  the  result  was  no  better.  ^

I  mention  these  experiences  with  Dr.  Slade  and  Mr.  Eglinton  merely
as  illustrations  of  the  kind  of  evidence  I  mean.  Various  other  experi-
ments, designed  with  the  view  of  obtaining  evidence  of  this  kind,  might
be  mentioned.  For  instance,  some  friends  of  mine  have  made  many
attempts  to  obtain  writing  in  a  hermetically  sealed  glass  retort,
containing  paper  and  pencil,  at  dark  stances  with  Mrs.  Jencken,  but
they  never  succeeded.  The  tests  described  in  connection  with  our
investigation  into  materialisation  phenomena  were  also  intended  to  be
of  this  kind.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  all  conditions  which  elimi-
nate the  need  of  continuous  observation  are  also  such  as  exclude  the
operation  of  occult  forces — if  such  exist.  And  if,  as  time  goes  on  and
experiments  are  varied,  it  is  found  that  crucial  tests  invariably  fail — •
that  the  phenomena  continually  stop  short  exactly  at  the  point  to  which
conjuring  could  conceivably  go — the  improbability  that  this  is  due  to
chance  becomes  greater  and  greater,  and  ultimately  greater  than  the
difficulty  of  supposing  any  amount  of  defective  observation.

At  present,  however,  notwithstanding  this  absence  of  what  may  be
called  crucial  evidence  for  the  existence  of  these  physical  phenomena
beyond  the  recognised  laws  of  nature,  there  is  still  some  evidence  which
ought  not  to  be  set  aside,  and  which,  though,  in  my  judgment,  not
enough  to  establish  so  vast  a  conclusion,  still  affords  a.primd  facie  case,
and  makes  it  our  duty  to  seek  opportunities  for  further  investigation.
Without  attempting  here  to  go  into  the  details  of  this  evidence,  I  may
refer  the  reader  to  that  of  Comte  Agenor  de  Gasparin  as  to  the  move-
ment of  tables  without  contact  in  what  seem  to  have  been  careful  experi-
ments carried  on  with  his  own  family  and  friends  (see  De  Gasparin,  Des
Tables  Tournantes  et  du  SurnafAiral  en  General,  Paris,  1854);  also  to
the  experimental  evidence  for  similar  phenomena  obtained  by  the  sub-
Committee,  No.  1 ,  of  the  Dialectical  Society  (see  Report  on  Spiritualism

^  Of  course,  had  these  experiments  of  Mr.  Bentall's  succeeded  they  would
only  have  been  crucial,  if  he  had  some  satisfactory  way  of  identifying  his  slate,
and  of  proving  that  it  had  not  been  tampered  witli.


1886.] The  Physical  Phenomena  of  SxAritualisin.


73


of  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,  1871).  Also  to  some
of  Mr.  Crookes'  experiments  with  Mr.  Home  on  the  alterations  of
weight  of  a  partially  suspended  board  (see  Researches  in  the  Phenomena
of  Spiritioalism,  by  W.  Ci'ookes,  reprinted  from  the  Quarterly  Journal
of  Science,  London,  1874).  And,  finally,  I  would  refer  him  to  "  M.  A.
(Oxon's)  "  account  of  phenomena  occurring  through  his  own  mediumship
(see  Hiiman  Nature  for  1874).

Evidence  of  this  kind  makes  me  think  that  the  investigation
should  go  on,  and  may  yet  be  fruitful  ;  but  I  think  we  have  enough
experience  to  show  that  it  is  not  worth  while  continuing  it  with
established  mecUums  under  the  conditions  at  present  imposed.

This  brings  me  to  what,  if  these  be  genuine  phenomena,  is  a  point
of  great  impoi'tance,  namely,  that  there  has  been  a  large  amount  of
hasty  assumption  as  to  the  conditions  under  which  the  phenomena  can
and  cannot  occur.  This  can  easily  be  proved  by  quotations  from  works
on  the  subject.  In  some  investigations  this  would  be  of  comparatively
little  consequence — if  a  hypothesis  has  been  mistaken  by  one  investigator
for  a  fact,  the  next  investigator  will  probably  find  out  the  mistake  and
correct  it ;  a  little  time  would  be  wasted  and  that  is  all.  But  in  our
investigation  it  is  very  different.  If  there  are  genuine  physical
phenomena  it  is  almost  certain  from  the  analogy  of  the  automatic
phenomena  that  they  depend  largely  on  the  nervous  and  mental
condition  of  the  medium,  and  therefore  on  his  beliefs.  If,  there-
fore, he  believes,  e.g.,  that  the  phenomena  can  only  occur  in  the  dark,
the  consequence  may  be  that  with  him  they  will  only  occur  in  the  dark,
and  thus  a  mere  conjecture  may  become  a  real,  though  quite  artificial,
condition.  For  instance,  De  Gasparin  believed  it  essential  that  the
circle  should  hold  hands  and  form  a  chain,  but — as  I  understand  their
description — the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  did  not  hold
hands,  and  certainly  there  was  no  chain  in  Mr.  Crookes'  experiments
with  Mr.  Home.  The  failure,  therefore,  of  De  Gasparin's  circle  to
obtain  phenomena  when  the  chain  was  broken  may  be  witli  some
probability  referred  to  their  belief  in  the  necessity  of  the  unbroken
chain.  De  Gasparin  himself  has  some  good  remarks  on  tlie  influence  of
such  belief,  though  he  does  not  apply  them  in  the  instance  I  have  men-
tioned. Now  I  believe  not  only  that  many  of  the  conditions  supposed
to  be  necessary,  and  which  greatly  complicate  and  hinder  the  investiga-
tion, have  beezi  assumed  on  very  insufficient  evidence,  but  that  some  of
them  at  least  have  been  deliberately  invented  to  facilitate  fraud.

And  there  is  even  another  danger  peculiar  to  this  investigation,
namely,  that  conditions  may  be  invented  unconsciously,  so  far  as  the
medium  is  concerned,  for  it  is  known  that  the  invention  of  false  excuses
for  failure  is  one  of  the  curious  things  that  occur  in  automatic  writing.
It  is  very  important,  therefore,  that  those  who  find  in  themselves  or


74


The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism. [May  3.


their  friends  what  seems  to  be  mecliumistic  power — whatever  that  may
be — sliould  approach  the  subject  in  as  unprejudiced  a  way  as  possible,
and,  in  order  to  establish  the  genuineness  of  the  physical  phenomena,
that  they  should  aim  at  obtaining  them  under  the  simplest  possible
conditions.

In  conclusion,  I  would  repeat  that  it  is  not  because  I  disbelieve  in
the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  but  because  I  at  present  think
it  more  probable  than  not  that  such  things  occasionally  occur,  that  I  am
interested  in  estimating  the  evidence  for  them.  I  feel  bound,  however,
to  admit  that  by  far  the  larger  part  of  the  testimony  put  forward  as
affording  solid  ground  for  a  belief  in  them,  which  I  have  been  able  to
examine,  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  justify  the  contempt  with  which
scientific  men  generally  regard  it  ;  and  though  it  is  to  be  regretted,  it  is
hardly  under  the  circumstances  to  be  wondered  at,  that  this  contempt  is
hastily  extended  to  the  whole  of  the  testimony.  If  what  I  have  written
should  contribute,  in  however  small  a  degree,  to  the  improvement  of  the
evidence  on  this  subject  in  tlie  future,  I  shall  feel  that  it  has  not  been
written  in  vain.


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


75


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

Monday,  July  5,  188G.

The  twenty-tirst  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Rooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Monday,  July  5,  1886.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  President,  in  the  Chair


The  following  paper  was  read  : —

IV.

THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  MAL-OBSERVATION  IN  RELATION
TO  EVIDENCE  FOR  THE  PHENOMENA  OF  SPIRITUALISM.

By  C.  C.  Massey.


In  his  opening  address  at  the  first  general  meeting  of  this  Society,
the  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  while  expressly  evading  "  the  diffi-
culties of  determining  in  the  abstract  what  constitutes  adequate
evidence  "  of  tlie  phenomena  called  Spiritualistic  (as  well  as  of  thought-
reading  and  clairvoyance)  nevertheless  concluded  witli  the  following
general  statement  of  the  sort  of  proof  at  which  we  ought  to  aim.

"We  must  drive  the  objector,"  he  said,  "into  the  position  of  being
forced  either  to  admit  the  phenomena  as  inexplicable,  at  least  to  him,
or  to  accuse  the  investigators  either  of  lying  or  cheating,  or  of  a  blind-
ness or  forgetfulness  incompatible  with  any  intellectual  condition  excej^t
absolute  idiocy."  ^

As  I  am  about  to  maintain  that  much  of  the  existing  evidence  for
the  phenomena  in  question  already  places  objectors  in  the  dilemma
thus  succinctly  indicated  by  Professor  Sidgwick,  I  must  ask  leave  to
point  out,  with  some  approach  to  particularity,  how,  and  under  what
circumstances,  I  conceive  the  dilemma  to  arise.  This  is  the  more
necessary,  because  it  will  have  at  once  occurred  to  all  of  us  that  the
dilemma  does  not  arise  in  the  case  of  conjuring  tricks,  to  which  the


''■Proceedings. (Vol.  i.,  p.  16.)


70


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [J^^ly  5,


phenomena  we  are  considering  are  usually  referred  by  the  incredulous.
No  one  thinks  the  worse  of  his  own  or  another's  intelligence  for  not
discovering  a  conjurer's  trick ;  but  most  of  us  would  feel  ashamed  of
mistaking  a  conjurer's  trick  for  a  genuine  manifestation  of  an  unknown
force.  Nor  is  there,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  any  mediumistic  phenomenon
on  record  whicli  absolutely  defies  simulation  under  all  circumstances
and  all  conditions  of  observation.  The  whole  evidence  is  a  question  of
these  circumstances  and  conditions,  and  to  demonstrate  that  a  conjurer
can  baffle  observation  under  inferior  conditions  of  these  phenomena  is
quite  beside  the  mark.  We  have  to  judge  the  evidence,  as  to  answer
an  argument,  at  its  best.  The  success  of  the  conjurer  with  even  the
most  intelligent  spectators,  depends  on  their  overlooking  the  true  con-
ditions of  the  performance,  and  this  again  depends  on  their  attention
not  being  directed  to  the  particular  operation  which  decides,  or  is  the
condition  of,  the  result.  Any  spectator  who  knew  exactly  what  to
observe  would  have  already  discovered  the  trick,  and  a  very  little
practice  in  observation  would  enable  him  to  detect  the  actual  tour  de
force  by  which  it  was  accomplished.  This  remark,  of  course,  does  not
apply  to  the  secrets  of  machinery,  or  elaborate  scientific  apparatus,  and
it  is  perliaps  true  tliat  pseudo  mediums  and  thaumaturgists  have  availed
themselves  of  such  mechanical  means.  But  none  of  the  phenomena
relied  upon  by  Spiritualists  and  the  maintainors  of  a  psychic,  or  nerve,
force  are  at  all  explicable  by  contrivances  which  could  baffle  the  well-
informed  observation  of  even  an  adept.  If  the  medium  is  a  conjurer,
he  may,  of  course,  have  some  simple  preparations,  but  to  bring  them
into  play  he  must  succeed,  as  other  conjurers  do,  by  the  ignorance  of  the
witnesses  of  the  particular  thing  to  be  done,  on  which  all  depends.  By
this  particular  thing  I  mean,  as  will  appear  when  we  come  to  consider
the  opportunities  of  a  conjurer  at  a  mediumistic  seance,  one  definite  act
or  operation  whicli,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment,  has
become  the  indispensable  condition  of  the  conjurer's  success.  In  an
ordinary  conjurer's  performance  this  never  is  known,  and  observation,
therefore,  wavers  and  is  distracted  by  this  uncertainty.  Tlie  most
important  thing  is,  perhaps,  just  what  never  would  occur  to  the  mind
as  impoi'tant  at  all.  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  (1)  that  at  mediumistic
sittings,  under  the  best  conditions,  this  uncertainty  does  not  and  cannot
exist ;  and  (2)  that  even  inferior  powers  of  observation,  equipped  with
knowledge  of  the  exact  thing  to  be  observed,  and  associated  with
average  intelligence,  are  competent  to  baffle  any  conjurer  in  the  world,
provided  only  that  the  conditions  of  observation  are  physically  easy.
There  must  be  suflicient  intelligence  to  know  that  a  conjurer's  sole
chance  in  that  case  lies  in  the  possibility  of  withdrawing  your  attention
from  the  single  perception  required  of  you.  Very  little  will  is  required
to  be  secure  against  this,  because  a  dominant  idea,  even  if  for  a


1886.]


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


77


moment  in  abeyance,  is  immediately  re-excited  by  any  foreign  action,
possibly  designed  to  lay  it  completely  asleep.  This  especially  applies,
as  I  know  by  my  own  experience  in  the  slate-writing  sittings,  to  oflers
of  conversation,  changes  of  hand  induced  by  fatigue,  and  so  forth  ;
jealous  -sdgilance  is  aroused  by  the  smallest  modification  in  the
conditions.

In  the  June  number  of  our  Journal,  only  issued  a  few  days  ago,
Mrs.  Sidgwick  takes  up  a  position  apparently  opposed  to  the  reception
of  general  testimony  of  these  phenomena,  so  far  as  they  occur  in  the
presence  of  professional  mediums,  and  must  be  established  by  obser-
vation of  any  degree  of  continuity.  This  is  a  plain  issue,  and  one  on
which  it  behoves  us  to  have  a  clear  opinion.

Now  there  is  one  broad  distinction  between  the  medium  and  the
conjurer  which  makes  it  possible  to  get  e\ddence  with  the  one  which
the  performances  of  the  other  can  never  afford.  On  the  hypothesis  of
mediumship  we  should  expect  to  be  able  to  reverse  one  essential
relation  of  conjurer  to  spectator,  so  that  the  latter  shall  be  no  longer  a
mere  observer  or  looker-on,  but  sliall  be  himself  the  principal  actor  in
all  the  preparations,  while  the  physical  activity  of  the  medium  is
reduced  to  the  minimum.  The  conjurer  can  only  mask  his  essential
performance  by  his  incidental  and  apparent  performance.  By  this
acti-\dty  he  obtains  two  indispensable  advantages.  For,  first,  he
imposes  on  the  spectator  a  multitude  and  succession  of  observations  in
uncertainty  of  the  precise  essential  point  to  which  attention  should  be
directed  to  prevent  or  detect  trickery.  And,  secondly,  he  is  enabled
to  distract  attention,  or  to  impose  inferior  or  impossible  conditions  of
observation  with  regard  to  the  particular  operations  which  have  to  be
concealed.  We  may,  therefore,  be  quite  sure  that  in  order  to  baffle  a
conjurer  it  is  only  necessary  to  undertake  all  preliminary  manipula-
tions ourselves,  and  so  to  make  our  arrangements  that  mere  observation
has  only  to  be  directed  to  a  single  fact  of  sense  perception,  or  at  most
to  two  or  three  such  facts  well  "within  an  average  capacity  of
simultaneous  or  successive  attention ;  and,  further,  that  the  conditions
of  this  observation  should  be  the  easiest  possible.  If,  moreover,  we
can  reinforce  the  confidence  which  everyone  must  feel  in  his  own  senses
up  to  a  certain  point  by  adequate  contrivances  to  dispense  mth  actual
observation  of  any  important  particulars,  we  shall  reduce  the  problem
to  the  most  extreme  simplicity  that  human  experience  admits  of.  For
testimony  to  plienomena  obtained  under  such  conditions  to  be  of  the
highest  evidential  value,  it  is  only  necessary  that  the  witness  should  in
some  way  assure  us  that  the  observation,  thus  simjDlified  and  directly
designated  by  the  preparations,  was  in  fact  made,  or  that  when  this
assurance  is  not  explicitly  given,  it  is  only  because  failure  of  the
observation,  under  the  circumstances,  would  have  been  inconsistent


78


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [July  5,


with  a  sane  and  waking  condition.  If  there  is  any  possibility  left  for
observation  to  guard  against,  we  must  be  satisfied  that  it  was  either
such  as  could  not  have  escaped  attention,  or  one  to  which  attention  was
actually  directed.  In  that  case,  he  only  can  question  whether  observa-
tion lias  really  performed  its  office  who  doubts  the  capacity  of  the
human  mind  and  senses  to  take  in  the  most  elementary  facts  of
perception.

Now  I  submit  that  testimony  of  this  highest  value  exists,  and  exists
even  in  abundance.  But  it  will  be  perfectly  idle  to  adduce  cases  in
illustration  of  this  pi'oposition,  if  every  case  in  which  the  evidence  is
apparently  free  from  defect  is  assumed  to  be  incorrectly  described.
Tliat  is  the  assumption  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  is  prepared  to  make,
because  in  lier  vieAv  observation  is  defective,  not  only  in  wliat  it
omits,  but  in  what  it  seems  to  assert. ^  I  shall  presently  endeavour
to  show  that  tliis  can  only  be  true  of  general  statements  which
fail  to  discriminate  the  elements  of  an  observation,  and  which
under  the  name  of  observation  give  us  only  a  mental  result  instead
of  testifying  to  individual  and  indivisible  acts  of  perception.  And
as  to  important  elements  which  are  assumed  to  be  lost  for
observation,  we  shall  have  to  see  of  what  nature  they  must  be,
of  what  character  and  dimensions — in  order  that  they  may  affect  the
result.  And  then  the  ajspeal  must  be  to  universal  expeiience  of  the
degree  to  wliich  the  senses  can  and  cannot  be  stimulated  by  external
occurrences  without  arousing  attention  sufficient  for  lively  perception
with  notice  by  a  waking  man.  It  is  true  that  mental  preoccupation  is
pro  tanto  sleep  in  regard  to  everything  upon  which  the  mind  is  not
actually  engaged,  and  this  preoccupation  it  is  which  the  conjurer  is
supposed  to  induce.  But  it  is  always  the  nature  of  the  particular
act  in  each  case  to  be  performed  by  the  conjurer  unobserved,
which  must  determine  the  degree  of  preoccupation  in  the  witness
necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  former's  purpose.  Now,
as  regards  this,  if  the  positive  observations  of  the  witness  respecting
the  physical  conditions  are  generally  trustworthy,  we  get  thereby  a
measure  of  the  conjurer's  indispensable  physical  interference,  and  thus
of  tlie  degree  of  stimulation  to  tlie  witness's  senses  by  such  interference.

"  The  juggler's  art  consists  largely  in  making  things  appear  as  they  are
not.  Can  we  suppose  that  it  has  caused  facts  which  did  not  occur  to  be
imagined,  and  facts  whicli  did  occur  to  1)6  overlooked,  to  the  extent  required  to
make  the  cases  before  us  explicable  liy  ordinary  human  agency?"  [Journal
p.  332.)  As  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  "  no  liesitation  in  attributing  the  performances"
(those  with  wliicli  she  was  dealing)  "  to  clever  conjuring,"  though  she  says  that
"  certainly  some  of  the  phenomena  as  described  seemed  to  be  inexplicable  by  the
known  laws  of  nature,"  this  positive  conclusion  evidently  requires  the  2^ositive
assumption  of  mis- description.


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


79


In  proportion  to  that  stimulation  must  be  the  degree  of  preoccupation
for  observation  to  fail.  So  that  it  will  not  do  to  urge  the  abstract  truth
or  experience  of  the  liability  of  the  mind  to  momentary  preoccupation
during  a  prolonged  observation  :  we  must  in  eacli  case  compare  the
degree  of  preoccupation  supposable  with  the  degree  that  is  then  and
there  requisite  for  the  conjurer's  purpose.  And  here  the  appeal  must
again  be  to  common  experience.

Having  regard  to  the  limits  of  our  time,  I  am  obviously  unable  to
do  more  on  the  present  occasion  than  offer  a  few  samples  from  the
bulk,  and  even  as  to  some  of  these  I  must  content  myself  with  a  brief
reference  to  the  essential  character  of  the  evidence  as  illustrating  the
points  I  have  in  view.

Now  I  will  tirst  take  two  or  three  of  the  experiments  devised  and
instituted  by  the  late  Professor  Zollner  with  the  medium  Slade,  select-
ing the  briefest  suitable  accounts  that  I  can  find.  The  following  will
be  found  at  p.  39  of  the  translation  entitled  Transcendevital  Physics.
Zollner  says  : —

I  took  a  book-slate,  bought  by  myself  ;  that  is,  two  slates  connected
at  one  side  by  cross-hinges,  like  a  book,  for  folding  up.  In  the
absence  of  Slade,  I  lined  both  slates  within,  on  the  sides  applied  to  one
another,  with  a  half-sheet  of  my  letter-paper,  which  immediately  before  the
sitting,  was  evenly  sj)read  with  lamp-black  soot.  This  slate  I  closed,  and
Slade  consented  to  my  laying  it  (which  I  had  never  let  out  of  my  hands  after  1
had  spread  the  soot)  on  my  lap  during  the  sitting,  so  that  I  could  continually
observe  it  to  the  middle.  We  might  have  sat  at  the  table  in  the  brightly-
lighted  room  for  about  five  minutes,  our  hands  linked  with  those  of  Slade
in  the  usual  manner  above  the  table,  when  I  suddenly  felt  on  two  occasions,
the  one  shortly  after  the  other,  the  slate  pressed  down  upon  my  lap,  with-
out my  having  perceived  anything  in  the  least  visible.  Three  raps  on  the
table  announced  that  all  was  completed,  and  when  I  ojiened  the  slate  there
was  within  it,  on  the  one  side,  the  impression  of  a  right  foot,  on  the  other
side  that  of  a  left  foot.

And  this  was  just  what  Zollner  had  himself  desired  with  a  view  to
obviate  possible  objections  to  a  similar  phenomenon  obtained  pre-
viously under  inferior  conditions.

Now  I  submit  that  this  experiment  reduces  the  supposition  of  mal-
observation  to  the  extreme  of  absurdity.  It  would  appear  from  the
account  that  the  experiment  was  proposed  to  Slade  only  immediately
before  it  was  tried,  so  that  there  was  no  time  for  the  preparation  by
Slade  of  a  slate  to  be  substituted  for  ZoUner's.  But  as  we  are  now  on
the  point  of  observation,  I  will  suppose  for  the  moment  that  possibility.
It  will  then  be  seen  that  Zdllner's  statement  expressly  excludes  the  possi-
bility of  a  substitution  before  he  placed  the  slate  on  his  lap,  so  that  Slade
would  have  to  effect  it  with  his  feet  afterwards,  and  that  though  the  slate


80


Tlte  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation. [July  5,


"was  all  tlie  time  partly  in  ZoUner's  view,  and  when  the  least  sensation
would  have  instantly  drawn  his  eyes  to  the  spot.

I  pass  to  another  case  from  the  same  source  (p.  81).

The  experiment,  says  ZoUner,  was  as  follows  : —

I  took  two  bands  cut  out  of  soft  leather,  44  centimetres  long  (about
15  inches)  and  from  five  to  10  millimetres  broad  (i  to  f  inch),  and  fastened
the  ends  of  each  together,  and  sealed  them  with  my  own  seal.  The  two
leather  bands  were  laid  separately  on  the  card-table  at  which  we  sat  ;  the
seals  were  placed  opposite  to  one  another,  and  I  held  my  hands  over  the
bands  (as  shown  in  the  plate).  Slade  sat  at  my  left  side,  and  placed  his
riglit  hand  gently  over  mine,  I  being  able  to  feel  the  leather  underneath  all
tlie  time.  Presently,  while  Slade's  hands  were  not  touching  mine,  hut  were
removed  from  them  about  two  or  three  decimetres  (from  eight  to  12
inches),  I  felt  a  movement  of  the  leather  bands  under  my  hands.  Then
came  three  raps  on  the  table,  and  on  removing  my  hands  the  two  leather
bands  were  knotted  together.  The  twisting  of  the  leather  is  distinctly  seen
in  the  plate,  coj^ied  from  a  j^hotograph.  The  time  that  the  bands  were  under
my  hands  was  at  most  three  minutes.  The  experiment  was  in  a  well-lighted
room.

Here  the  arrangements  had  reduced  the  office  of  observation  to  the
simple  points  ( 1 )  whether  the  bands  lying  before  his  eyes  on  the  table
were  in  fact  connected  at  the  moment  ZoUner  covered  them  with  his
hands ;  (2)  whether  Slade  could  and  did  touch  them  when  they  were
thus  covered  ;  (3)  whether  Slade  could  or  did  either  knot  them  at  the
moment  Zollner  removed  his  hands,  or  then  substitute  otliers  for  them.
If  anyone  thinks  that  either  of  these  things  could  have  happened  un-
observed, I  can  only  say  that  I  am  sure  he  will  not  get  any  honest
conjurer  in  the  world  to  agree  with  him.

The  following  fact,  from  my  own  experience  with  the  same  medium,
Slade,  may  be  fitly  adduced  here.

It  was  in  New  York,  on  the  evening  of  the  14th  October,  1875,
and  was  publicly  recorded  by  me  shortly  afterwards,  from  notes  taken
immediately  on  my  return  to  my  hotel  after  the  sitting.  And  my
recollection  of  it  is  still  perfectly  distinct.  It  was  at  Slade's  own  room,
brightly  lighted  with  gas.  The  floor  was  carpeted.  We  sat  at  a  table
in  the  centre  of  the  room,  three  of  us,  Slade  opposite  to  me,  my  friend
Colonel  Olcott  at  the  end  on  my  left  and  on  Slade's  right.  There  was  no
one  else  present.  Slate-writing  experiments  were  proceeding  between
Olcott  and  Slade,  when  a  chair  on  my  right — at  the  end  of  the  table
opposite  Olcott — was  thrown  down  by  some  undetected  force.  I  got
up,  felt  round  the  chair  for  any  attachments,  and  then,producing  a  tape
measure  I  carried  with  me  for  the  purpose  of  my  investigation,  I  took
the  shortest  distance  between  the  medium  and  the  chair,  as  the  latter
lay  upon  the  floor. It  was  just  five  feet,  and  on  resuming  my  seat  I


1886].


Tlie  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


81


could  see  a  good  clear  space  between  the  table  and  the  prostrate  chair.
Meanwhile,  Slade  had  not  moved  from  his  seat,  and  I  requested  him
not  to  stir,  and  asked  that  the  chair,  which  lay  on  my  right,  and  which
I  could  watch  as  nothing  intervened  between  me  and  it,  anight  be  picked
up  and  be  placed  by  me.  There  was  an  interval  of  perhaps  two  minutes,
during  which  time  the  medium,  still  engaged  with  Colonel  Olcott,
remained  seated  in  the  same  position,  as  I  know,  because  my  range  of
vision  from  where  I  sat  took  in  the  whole  general  situation,  though,
as  the  prostrate  chair  and  the  free  space  of  floor  between  it  and  the
table  were  the  main  tilings  to  be  observed,  I  kept  my  eyes  steadily  in
that  direction,  and  never  lost  sight  of  chair  and  floor  for  a  moment.
Suddenly  I  saw  the  chair  move  along  the  ground  a  few  inches  towards
me,  and  in  a  direction  slightly  oblique  to  the  table,  and  then,  as  I
watched  it  and  the  open  space  between  it  and  the  table,  medium,  and
everything  else,  it  was  jumped  upon  its  legs  and  deposited  at  my  right
side,  j  ust  as  if  some  one  had  picked  it  up  in  order  to  take  a  seat  beside
me.  No  mediumistic  phenomenon  that  I  have  witnessed  has  made
stronger  or  more  lasting  impression  upon  me  than  this  one.

On  another  occasion  I  was  sitting  alone  with  Slade  in  bright  daylight,
when  his  chair  was  drawn  suddenly  and  considerably  back,  with  him
upon  it.  I  at  once  pushed  back  my  own  chair  from  the  table  so  as  to
command  a  full  view  of  Slade's  whole  person.  I  then  asked  that  my
chair,  with  me  upon  it,  miglit  be  drawn  back.  This  was  done  almost
immediately,  to  the  extent  of  two  or  three  inches.  There  could  be  no
question  either  of  Slade's  agency  in  this,  or  of  any  unconscious  action
of  my  own,  as  I  could,  and  did,  see  Slade  from  head  to  foot,  and  there
was  no  time  for  gradual  tension  of  the  muscles  of  my  own  legs  and  feet
against  the  floor  in  analogy  with  the  process  which  no  doubt  often
occurs  in  table-turning  or  tilting  with  contact  of  hands.  I  could
multiply  instances  from  my  own  experience  in  which  observation  has
been  similarly  simplified  and  facilitated.  When  this  is  the  case — and
it  will  be  found  to  be  the  case  in  a  very  large  number  of  records — I
contend  that  it  is  perfectly  indifferent  whether  we  are  experimenting
with  a  professional  or  with  a  private  medium;  and  that  the  largest
margin  we  can  rationally  allow  for  unknown  possibilities  of  conjuring
cannot  prevent  the  issue  being  reduced,  as  is  desired,  to  one  simply  of
the  veracity  of  the  witness.

I  must,  therefore,  take  exception  to  the  statement  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
in  the  paper  read  at  our  last  meeting,  that  the  evidence  is  "  so  seldom
experimental  ;  that  is,  that  the  observer  so  seldom  knows  beforehand
what  will  be  the  precise  phenomena  and  conditions."!  The  precise  pheno-

1  Abstract  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  Paper  in  the  May  number  of  the  Journal.
I  had  not  before  me  the  full  text,  now  publi.slied  in  this  volume.

G


82


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [July  5,


menon  in  the  case  of  the  slate-writing  mediums,  for  instance,  is  always
known  beforehand,  unless  we  confuse  the  term  "  phenomena "  and
"  conditions,"  i.e.,  conditions  of  observation.  The  only  variation  is  in
the  possibility  of  imposing  tests  supplementary  to  ocular  observation,
and  these  usually  originate  with  the  observer  himself.  I  may  instance
a  case  recorded  only  the  other  day  (Light,  May  22nd),  in  which  the
observer.  Major  le  Taylor,  went  three  times  to  Mr.  Eglinton,  each
time  obtaining  the  writing  under  a  new  test  premeditated  by  himself.
He  did  this  on  the  very  principle  recommended  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  of
allowing  a  very  large  margin  for  conjuring  and  for  defects  of  observa-
tion. As  to  the  conditions  of  observation,  they  are  known  beforehand
in  all  those  cases — and  very  numerous  they  are — in  which  the  pheno-
menon is  obtained  under  conditions  of  observation  prescribed  by  the
observer  himself.  In  Zdllner's  above  cited  cases  (and  others  could  be
adduced  from  his  book)  phenomenon,  test,  and  conditions  of  observa-
tion, were  all  prescribed  by  himself.  In  both  my  cases  of  the  chairs
(especially  the  first  mentioned)  the  phenomenon  was  prescribed  by
myself,  and,  equally  in  both,  the  conditions  of  observation  were  the
best  conceivable,  because  the  very  simplest.  Mr.  Eglinton's  mediumship
is  especially  remarkable  for  successes  obtained  under  tests  and  conditions
imposed  by  observers.  In  addition  to  Major  le  Taylor's  case,  may  be
mentioned,  as  illustrations,  several  others  with  this  medium.  Thus,  on
January  5th,  of  last  year,  Mr.  D.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  goes  with  his  wife
and  sister  to  Mr.  Eglinton — these  four  being  the  only  persons  present.
Mr.  Wilson  suggests  obtaining  by  psychography  an  extract  from  a
closed  book.

Accordingly  (he  says)  Mrs.  Kimber  (his  sister)  wrote  on  a  slate  the
number  of  a  page ;  Mrs.  Wilson  the  number  of  a  line,  and  it  remained  for
me  to  choose  the  book  from  which  Mrs.  Wilson's  line  of  Mrs.  Kimber's  page
was  to  be  written  by  psychography  on  the  slate.  For  this  purpose,  with
closed  eyes,i  I  took  a  book  from  the  medium's  shelves,  which  held  about
200  volumes.  A  crumb  of  pencil  was  placed  upon  the  slate,  on  which  Mrs.
Kimber  and  Mrs.  Wilson  liad  written  the  number  of  the  page  and  line
respectively.  A  second  slate  of  exactly  the  same  size  and  form  was  placed
over  this  one,  and  the  book  was  put  by  myself  on  the  top  of  the  two  slates.

Mr.  Eglinton  and  Mrs.  Kimber  rested  their  hands  on  the  book.

It  should  be  noted  that : —

1.  Precaution  had  been  taken  that  no  tine  besides  Mrs.  Kimber  knew
what  number  she  had  written  on  the  slate  to  express  the  page  to  be  recited,
the  same  being  true  of  the  number  Mrs.  Wilson  had  written  to  express  the
li7ie  of  that  page.

1  The  experiment  was  partly  devised  to  test  the  presence  of  an  intelligence
outside  tlie  minds  of  all  the  sitters.


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


83


2.  The  slates  and  book  were  all  on  the  top  of  the  table  immediately
before  the  eyes  of  all  present. (The  sitting  was  by  daylight. )

3.  The  medium  did  not  touch  the  book  untU  the  moment  when  he  and
Mrs.  Kimber  rested  their  hands  thereon.  It  had  been  handled  by  myself
alone.

After  the  lapse  of  a  few  seconds  the  sound  of  writing  was  heard
■within  the  slates.  Upon  the  usual  signal  of  three  raps  (also  seemingly
within  the  slates)  to  indicate  the  end  of  the  experunent,  I  examined  the
slates,  and  found  the  following  sentence,  wTitten  on  the  under  one,  with
the  pencil  resting  on  the  full  stop  at  the  end.  (I  may  mention  that  all  the
writings  throughout  the  entire  seance  were  conscientiously  punctuated,  and
that  every  t  was  crossed  and  every  i  dotted.)

"  Page  199,  line  14,  is  a  table,  the  last  word  is  '0'."

Mrs.  Kimber  had  written  199,  and  Mrs.  Wilson  had  written  14,

I  then  opened  the  book  (Ghose's  Indian  Chiefs,  Rajahs,  &c..  Part  II.)
and  turned  to  p.  199,  which  commences  thus  :  "  Table  A.  Estates  belong-
ing to  the  Hon.  Maharaja  Jotundra  Mohun  Tagore  Behadur,''  &c.

The  14th  line  is  as  follows  : —

"  Shikharbate,  24  Pargannas,  210  0  0."

Now  though  the  form  of  Mr.  Wilson's  statement  that  the  book  had
been  handled  by  himself  alone,  before  he  put  it  on  the  slates  as  they
lay  upon  the  table  before  the  eyes  of  all  present,  does  not  expressly  or
necessarily  import  that  it  had  never  been  out  of  his  hands  from  the
moment  he  removed  it  from  the  shelf,  I  do  not  think  anyone  can
seriously  suggest  that  Mr.  Eglinton  had  tlie  several  opportunities  un-
observed : —

1.  Of  reading  page  and  line  on  the  slate,  although  we  are  told  that
precaution  (very  easy  to  take)  was  taken  against  this  very  thing.

2.  Of  getting  possession  of  the  book,  opening  it,  and  finding  page
and  line.

3.  Of  writing  those  12  words  and  figures  with  their  six  t's  and  i's  all
crossed  and  dotted  on  the  slate.

Were  that  possible,  my  own  conclusion  would  be  that  human  obser-
vation, under  the  simplest  and  easiest  conditions,  and  with  attention
directed  to  the  self-devised  tests  to  be  guaranteed  by  the  observation,  is
absolutely  worthless  for  any  purpose  and  under  any  circumstances
whatever.  And  I  would  here  refer  to  the  sensible  remarks  of  Mr.  G.
A.  Smith,  upon  a  similar  experience  of  his  own  with  Mr.  Eglinton,
which  will  be  found  at  p.  .301  of  the  Jcmrnal.

Other  investigators  with  Mr.  Eglinton  have  obtained  tests  similar
to  the  above,  Avith  variations  de\'ised  by  themselves,  making  the
operations  to  be  performed  unobserved  by  the  medium  still  more  com-
plicated. I  will  only  here  refer  to  the  experiment  recorded  by  Mr.  J.
S.  Farmer  and  Mr.  J.  G.  Iveulemans  in  Light  of  October  17tli,  1885.  It
is  too  long  to  quote,  but  should  be  referred  to  as  showing  what  elaborate


84 '  ' The  Possihilities  of  Mal-Ohservation. [Ji-^ly  5.


and  ingenious  arrangements  observers  can  sometimes  make  for  their
satisfaction  with  results  entirely  successful.  Other  cases  will  be  found
in  the  June  number  of  the  Journal.  The  following  instance,  recorded
by  Mr.  Alfred  Russel  Wallace  in  the  Spectator  of  October  7th,  1877,  is
another  illustration  of  tlie  security  an  investigator  can  command  by
taking  all  the  arrangements  into  his  own  hands.  The  medium  was
Dr.  Monck. Mr.  Wallace  says  : —

The  sitting  was  at  a  i^rivate  house  at  Richmond,  on  the  21st  of  last
month.  Two  ladies  and  three  gentlemen  were  present,  besides  myself  and
Dr.  Monck.  A  shaded  candle  was  in  the  room,  giving  light  sufficient  to  see
every  object  on  the  table  round  which  we  sat.  Four  small  and  common
slates  were  on  the  table.  Of  these  I  chose  two,  and  after  carefully  cleaning
and  placing  a  small  fragment  of  pencil  between  them,  I  tied  them  together
with  a  strong  cord,  passed  around  them  both  lengthways  and  crosswise,  so  as
effectually  to  prevent  the  slates  from  moving  on  each  other.  I  then  laid  them
flat  on  the  table,  without  losing  sight  of  them  for  an  instant.  Dr.  Monck
placed  the  fingers  of  both  hands  on  them,  while  I  and  the  lady  sitting
opposite  placed  our  hands  on  the  corners  of  the  slates.  From  this
position  OHT  hands  ivere  never  moved  till  I  untied  the  slates  to  ascertain  the
residt.  4fter  waiting  a  minute  or  two.  Dr.  Monck  asked  me  to  name  any
short  word  I  wished  to  be  written  on  the  slate.  I  named  the  word  "God."
He  then  asked  me  to  say  how  I  wished  it  written.  I  replied  "  Lengthways  of
the  slate,"  and  then  if  I  wished  it  written  with  a  large  or  small  g.  I  chose
a  capital  G.  In  a  very  short  time  writing  was  heard  on  the  slate.  The
medium's  hands  were  convulsively  withdrawn,  and  I  then  myself  untied  the
cord  (which  was  a  strong  silk  watchguard,  lent  by  one  of  the  visitors),  and
on  opening  the  slates  found  on  the  lower  one  the  word  I  had  asked  for,  written
in  the  manner  I  had  requested,  the  writing  being  somewhat  faint  and
laboured,  but  jDerfectly  legible.  Tlie  slate  with  the  writing  on  it  is  now  in
my  possession.

The  essential  features  of  this  experiment  are  that  I  myself  cleaned
and  tied  up  the  slates,  that  I  kept  my  hands  on  them  all  the  time,
that  they  never  went  out  of  my  sight  for  a  moment,  and  that  I
named  the  word  to  be  written  and  the  manner  of  writing  it  after  they  were
thus  secured  and  held  by  me.  I  ask,  how  are  these  facts  to  be  explained,
and  what  interpretation  is  to  be  placed  upon  them  ?

Alfred  R.  Wallace.

1  was  present  on  this  occasion,  and  certify  that  Mr.  Wallace's  account  of
what  happened  is  correct.

Edward  T.  Bennett.

In  other  cases  it  is  the  character  itself  of  an  unexpected  pheno-
menon which  leaves  no  escape  from  the  evidence  other  than  suppositions
of  mendacity  or  hallucination.  The  following  instance  of  this  from
Zollner  is  so  remarkable  that  at  the  risk  of  again  quoting  what  is
already  known  I  must  give  it  at  length,  which  I  am  the  rather
induced  to  do,  because  Mrs.  Sidgwick  lias  apparently  not  thouglit  the


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.  85


evidence  of  this  distinguislied  man  of  science  to  be  woi'thy  of  any
special  mention.  ^  The  seance  was  at  tlie  house  of  Zdllnei''s  friend,  Herr
von  Hoifman  mid-day  on  May  6th,  by  blight  sun-liglit. ZoUner  says: —

I  had,  as  usual,  taken  my  place  with  Slade  at  the  card  table.  Opposite
me  stood,  as  was  often  the  case  in  other  experiments,  a  small  round  table
near  the  card-table,  exactly  in  the  position  shown  in  the  photograph
illustrating  further  experiments  to  be  described  below.  The  height  of  the
round  table  is  77  centimetres  (about  2ft.  4in. ),  diameter  of  the  surface  46
centimetres  (about  16in. ),  the  material  birchen  wood,  and  the  weight  of  the
whole  table  45  kilogrammes.  About  a  minute  might  have  passed  after
Slade  and  I  had  sat  down  and  laid  our  hands,  joined  together,  on  the  table
when  the  round  table  was  set  in  slow  oscillations,  which  we  could  both  clearly
perceive  in  the  top  of  the  round  table  rising  above  the  card  table,  while  its
lower  part  was  concealed  from  view  by  the  top  of  the  card  table.  The
motions  very  soon  became  greater,  and  the  whole  table  approaching  the  card-

1  This  was  true  so  far  as  my  recollection  went,  from  hearing  the  paper
read.  But  it  will  be  seen  from  the  text  as  now  imblished,  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick
does  advert,  in  some  detail,  to  parts  of  Zcillner's  testimony.  So  far  as  her
objection  to  it  refers  to  the  absence  of  tests  excluding  the  necessity  of  all
"  continuous  observation,"  it  would  be  obviously  beyond  the  scope  of  a  paper
designed  to  vindicate  the  trustworthiness  of  observation  to  reply  to  it.  But
with  regard  to  the  objection  (see  foot-note,  ante  p.  65)  to  the  celebrated  experi-
ment of  the  true  knots  in  an  endless  cord,  I  think  the  value  of  the  objection
will  be  best  appreciated  by  a  reference  to  some  conditions  of  the  experiment,  as
the  latter  is  not  to  be  confounded  witli  the  one  with  the  leather  bands,  of  which
I  have  given  the  account  above.  (I  liave  italicised  the  word  "  imniediately,"  in
Zollner's  statement,  for  its  obvious  importance  in  relation  to  any  suggestion  of
substitution  before  the  experiment  actually  began.  The  emphasization  of  other
words  is  by  Zollner.)  After  describing  the  cord,  its  dimensions,  mode  of  knotting,
and  sealing  the  ends,  &e.,  Zollner  says  :  "  The  above  described  sealing  of  two
such  strings,  with  my  own  seal,  was  effected  bij  myself  in  my  apartments,  on  the
evening  of  December  16th,  1877,  at  nine  o'clock,  imder  the  eyes  of  several
of  my  friends  and  colleagues,  and  not  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Slade.
Two  other  strings  of  the  same  quality  and  dimensions  were  sealed  by  Wilhelm
Webber  with  his  seal,  and  in  his  own  rooms,  on  the  morning  of  the
17th  of  December,  at  10.30  a.m.  With  these  four  cords,  I  went  (17th
December)  to  the  neighbouring  dwelling  of  one  of  my  friends,  who  had
oflfered  to  Mr.  Henry  Slade  the  hospitalities  of  his  liouse,  so  as  to  place  him
exclusively  at  my  own  and  my  friend's  disposition,  and  for  the  time  withdraw-
ing him  from  the  public.  Tlie  seance  in  question  took  place  in  my  friend's
sitting-room  immediately  after  my  arrival.  I  myself  selected  one  of  the  four
sealed  cords,  and,  in  order  never  to  lose  sight  of  it  before  we  sat  down  at  the
table,  I  hung  it  round  my  neck — the  seal  in  front  always  within  my  sight. "
The  knots  were  obtained  in  a  few  minutes,  the  seal  and  Shade's  hands  having
never  been  out  of  sight.  The  suggestion  being  that  Slade  suljstituted  a  previously
prepared  cord  of  his  own,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  such  a  -substitution  was  the
very  possibility  which  Zollner  showed  that  he  had  in  view  by  his  precaution  of
hanging  the  cord  round  his  neck.  As  there  was  no  delay,  such  as,  sui:iposing
Zollner  to  have  previously  parted  with  tlie  custody  of  his  cords,  would  have


86


Tlie  Possihilitie.s  of  Mal-Ohservation. [July  5,


table,  laid  itself  under  the  latter,  with  its  three  feet  turned  towards  me.
Neither  I,  nor,  as  it  seemed,  Mr.  Slade,  knew  how  the  phenomenon  would
further  develoiD,  since  during  the  space  of  a  minute  which  now  elapsed
nothing  further  occurred.  Slade  was  about  to  take  slate  and  pencil  to  ask
his  "  spirits  "  whether  we  had  anything  still  to  expect,  when  I  wished  to
take  a  nearer  view  of  the  position  of  the  round  table  lying,  as  I  supposed,
under  the  card-table.  To  my  and  Slade's  great  astonishment  we  found  the
space  beneath  the  card-table  completely  empty,  nor  were  we  able  to  find  in
all  tlie  rest  of  the  room  that  table  which  only  a  minute  before  was  present
to  our  senses.  In  the  expectation  of  its  re-appearance  we  sat  again  at  the
card-table,  Slade  close  to  me,  at  the  same  angle  of  the  table  opposite  that
near  which  the  round  table  had  stood  before.  We  might  have  sat  about  five
or  six  minutes  in  intense  expectation  of  what  should  come,  when  suddenly
Slade  asserted  that  he  saw  lights  in  the  air.  Although  I,  as  usual,  could  per-
ceive nothing  whatever  of  the  kind,  I  yet  followed  involuntarily  with  my

imposed  on  him  the  task  of  "  continuous  observation  "  of  them,  and  have  con-
ceivably afforded  a  conjurer  an  opportunity,  we  cannot  put  the  supposed  substi-
tution before  the  exj^eriment.  But  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  .suggestion  that  it  may
have  been  a/iterwarf/s,  i.e.,  "after  the  string  was  taken  oft"  the  neck  again,
perhaps  wdiile  it  was  being  arranged  on  tlie  table,"  is  equally  inadmissible,  (1)
because  we  can  say,  with  as  near  approach  to  certainty  as  possible,  tliat  the
presence  or  absence  of  the  four  knots  must  have  been  ascertained  at  the  moment
of  removal  from  the  neck,  or  already  before  the  removal,  when  the  indication  of
success  would  induce  an  instant  examination;  and  (2)  because  there  is  no  interval
assignable  for  "  continuous  observation  "  in  the  ascertainment  of  so  simple  a
fact  as  the  jjresence  or  absence  of  knots  on  a  cord  in  a  clear  light,  even  if  the
fact  had  not  been  already  ascertained  by  sight  or  touch  before  Zollner  actually
took  the  cord  from  his  neck.  I  confess  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  me  to
anticipate  such  a  suggestion  as  this.  Nor  can  I  see  the  least  necessity  for
Zollner  mentioning  the  fact  of  trials  on  previous  days.  He  showed  his  own
appreciation  of  that  fact,  and  of  tlie  supposable  jjossibilities  consequent  upon  it,
by  the  very  precautions  taken.  Indeed,  I  think  the  fact  of  former  trials  still
further  evinces  Zrillner's  extreme  caution,  since  he  would  not  trust  to  the  strings
already  used,  but  either  sealed  new  ones,  or  at  least  re-sealed  the  old,  on  the  eve
of  the  successful  experiment.  This  circumstance,  the  tlien  careful  and  elaborate
sealing  of  the  cords,  even  suggests  that  this  particular  precaution  was  a  new
one  altogether,  for  which  Slade  would  be  unprepared,  especially  as  Zollner
emphasises  the  fact  that  the  sealing  was  performed  in  the  absence  of  Slade.
But  the  evidence  stands  in  no  need  of  this  inference,  for  the  reasons  already
stated.  Lorjiralhj,  there  was  of  course  no  obligation  upon  Zollner  to  mention
a  fact  which  it  would  be  legitimate  to  suppose  in  criticising  evidence  of  this
character,  if  the  evidence  did  not  expressly  exclude  it.  The  reader  will  judge
whether  there  is  any  opening  for  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  inference  tliat  the  possible
importance  of  the  fact  liad  not  occurred  to  Ziillner,  or  whether  her  consequent
assiimption  that  he  may  "  not  only  have  omitted  to  mention,  but  failed  to  see,
the  importance  of  even  obvious  precautions  "  is  as  violent  and  unwarranted  as
it  seems  to  me  to  be.  And  I  may  here  add  the  remark,  that  if  "  continuous  "
observation  means  ^ro^o?;(/crf  observation,  none  was  necessary  in  this,  as  in  many
other  successful  experiments;  wliereas  if  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  definition  refers  to  any
interval,  however  short,  it  would  apply  to  all  observation  wliatever,  and  the
word  "  continuous  "  is  misleading.


1886.]  Tlie  Possihilitief^  of  Mal-Observation.


87


gaze  the  direction  to  which  Slade  turned  his  head,  during  all  which  time  our
hands  remained  constantly  linked  together  on  the  table  ;  under  the  table  my
left  leg  was  almost  continually  touching  Slade's  right  m  its  whole  extent,
which  was  quite  without  design,  and  owing  to  our  proximity  at  the  same
corner  of  the  table.  Looking  up  in  the  air,  eagerly  and  astonished,  in
different  directions,  Slade  asked  me  if  I  did  not  perceive  the  great  lights.  I
answered  decidedly  in  the  negative  ;  but  as  I  turned  my  head,  following
Slade's  gaze  up  to  the  ceiling  of  the  room  behind  my  back,  I  suddenly
observed,  at  a  height  of  about  five  feet,  the  hitherto  invisible  table,  with  its
legs  turned  upwards,  very  quickly  floating  in  the  air  upon  the  top  of  the  card-
table.  Although  we  involuntarily  drew  back  our  heads  sideways,  Slade  to
the  left  and  I  to  the  right,  to  avoid  injury  from  the  falling  table,  yet  we  were
both,  before  the  round  table  had  laid  itself  on  the  top  of  the  card-table,  so
violently  struck  on  the  side  of  the  head,  that  I  felt  the  pain  on  the  left  of
mine  fully  four  hours  after  this  occurrence,  which  took  place  at  half-past  11.

But  1  am  not  prepared  to  admit  that  it  is  necessary  to  have
recourse  to  exceptional  manifestations,  or  even  to  manifestations  under
exceptional  conditions  of  observation,  to  establish  these  facts  in
rational  belief.  With  regard  to  psychography,  for  instance,  I  contend
that  locked  slates,  tied  up  slates,  folding  slates,  your  own  slates,  slates
above  the  xable  when  the  writing  is  obtained,  are  all  really  dispensable
precautions.  What  we  most  require,  in  order  to  be  secure  that  the
essential  facts  are  within  the  compass  of  our  observation,  and  that
observation  itself  has  not  been  distracted  or  relaxed,  is  that  the
phenomenon  shall  occur  with  simplicity  and  directness.  If  there  is
delay  with  changes  of  conditions,  you  must  regard  every  such  change
as  the  beginning  of  a  new  sitting,  and  make  a  careful  re-examination  of
the  slates.  If  you  do  this  effectually,  not  merely  taking  a  careless
glance  to  be  able  to  say  you  have  done  it  at  all,  the  task  of  observation
is  thoroughly  simplified  under  usual  conditions.  The  following  case
from  my  ovn  experience  with  Mr.  Eglinton  will  show  the  extent  of
the  claim  I  make  for  average  powers  of  observation  as  against  the
possibilities  of  conjuring.  The  sitting  was  on  April  10th,  1884.  I
wrote  the  account  of  it  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  and  it  was
reported  ir  Light  of  April  19th.  The  only  other  sitter  besides  myself
and  the  medium  was  one  of  our  Vice-Presidents,  the  Hon.  Roden  Noel,
who  fully  corroborated  my  statement.  We  sat  in  broad  daylight.  We
used  Mr.  Eglinton's  slates,  of  which  there  was  a  pile  upon  the  table  at
which  we  sat.  I  sat  next  to  the  medium,  on  his  right,  Mr.  Noel  was
on  my  right.  Passing  over  some  preliminary  experiments,  in  which
v  riting  in  small  quantities  was  obtained,  I  desire  to  challenge  judg-
ment on  the  question  of  mal-observation  in  what  follows,  which  I  copy
from  my  own  report  in  Light : —

Mr.  Eglinton  now  laid  one  of  two  equal  sized  slates  (10|-  inches  by  7f )


88


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation. [July  5,


flat  upon  tlie  other,  the  usual  scrap  of  pencil  being  enclosed.  Both  slates
were  then,  as  I  carefuUy  assured  myself,  perfectly  clean  on  both  surfaces.  He
then  forthit-ith ,  and  without  any  previous  dealing  with  /A cm,  presented  one
end  of  the  two  slates,  held  together  by  himself  at  the  other  end,  for  me  to
hold  witli  my  left  hand,  on  which  he  placed  his  own  right.  I  clasped  the
slates,  my  thumb  on  the  frame  of  the  one  (^-inch),  and  three  of  my  fingers,
reaching  about  four  inches,  forcing  up  the  lower  slate  against  the  upper  one
We  did  not  hold  the  slates  underneath  the  table,  but  at  the  side  a  little
below  the  level.  Mr.  Noel  was  thus  able  to  observe  the  position.  Mr.
Eglinton  held  the  slates  firmly  together  at  his  end,  as  I  can  assert,  because
I  particularly  observed  that  there  was  no  gap  at  his  end.  1  also  noticed  his
thumb  on  the  top  of  the  slates,  and  can  say  that  it  rested  quite  quietly
throughout  the  writing,  which  ^ve  heard  almost  immediatehj,  and  continuously,
except  when  Mr.  Eglinton  once  raised  his  hand  from  mine,  when  tte  sound
ceased  tiJl  contact  was  resumed.

We  heard  the  sound  of  writing  distinctly,  yet  it  was  not,  I  think,  quite
so  loudly  audible  as  I  remember  with  Slade.  When  the  three  taps  came,
denoting  that  the  "  message,"  was  finished,  Eijlint on  simply  rernovei  his  hand
from  tlie  slates,  leacimj  them  in  my  left  hand,  also  quitting  contact  of  his  other
hand  with  my  left,  I  took  off  the  upper  slate,  and  we  saw  that  the  inner
surface  of  one  of  them  was  covered  with  writing,  20  lines  (118  words),  from
end  to  end  written  from  the  medium,  and  one  line  along  the  side  by  the
frame,  and  "  good-bye  "  on  the  other  side.  The  writing  was  in  straight  lines
across  the  slate,  all  the  lines  slanting  from  left  to  right.  It  begias  about  an
inch  from  the  top  ;  from  tlie  bottom  it  is  continued  along  one  side  (one  line)
and  then  there  are  three  lines  in  the  inch-deej)  space  at  the  top,  written  in  the
reverse  direction  to  that  of  the  body  of  the  message.  The  ability  to  produce
the  writing  in  any  direction  is  thus  shown.  The  writing  is  flowirg,  easy,  and
with  a  distinct  character,  as  of  an  educated  penman.  I  took  the  slate  away,
with  me,  and  it  is  now  in  my  possession.

I  am  glad  that  I  took  this  latter  precaution,  for  a  reason  to  be  men-
tioned. Everyone,  I  suppose,  will  agree  tliat  the  pi'oduction  of  all  this
writing,  as  described,  by  the  medium  while  we  held  the  slates,  was
absolutely  and  entirely  impossible.  The  question  is  thus  ajjparently
reduced  to  the  single  point  to  which  I  wish  to  reduce  it,  whither  such
average  powers  of  observation  as  mine  and  Mr.  Noel's  ATould  be  so
deceived  as  to  make  our  statement  that  Mr.  Eglinton,  after  enclosing
the  pencil  within  the  slates  which  we  then  "  carefully  assured "  our-
selves were  hath  quite  clean  on  &o<A  surfaces,  "forthwith"  and  "without
any  previous  dealing  with  them,"  presented  those  same  slates  to  me  to
hold — whether,  I  say,  our  observation  could  be  so  deceived  as  to  make
that  statement  inconclusive  on  that  important  point.  But  as  it  is
imaginable  that  a  tliin  sheet  of  slate,  already  inscribed  on  one  side,
might  be  loosely  fitted  into  the  frame  of  one  of  the  slates  used,  clean
surface  uppermost,  so  as  to  fall  into  the  frame  of  the  other  slate,  wi-itten
side  uppei-most,  when  the  first  was  placed  uj^on  the  second,  it  is
fortunate  that  I  was  able  to  exclude  that  suggestion  by  my  possession


1886.]


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


89


of  the  slate  on  wliich  the  writing  appeared,  wliich,  by-the-bye,  was
wrapped  in  paper,  either  by  myself  or  by  Mr.  Eglinton — under  my  eyes,
at  my  request,  and  carried  away  by  me,  immediately  after  we  had
•examined  the  writing,  tlie  sitting  being  then  closed.

The  above  case,  therefore,  aptly  raises  a  question  which  I  think  has
been  greatly  confused  by  vague  apprehensions  of  unknown  possibilities
of  conjuring,  apprehensions,  I  may  add,  not  at  all  sanctioned  by  the
pretensions  of  conjurei's  themselves.  So  far  as  the  art  of  conjuring
relies  on  the  fallibility  of  observation,  the  success  of  the  conjurer
depends  on  his  being  able  to  impose  the  conditions  of  observation  at  the
critical  stage  in  his  proceedings.  For  very  simple  observations,  such,
that  is,  as  are  resolvable  into  two  or  three  elementary  acts  of  perception,
are  not  fallible  if  these  acts  of  perception  are  really  performed.  The
conjurer  has  to  prevent  their  being  performed,  while  he  deceives  the
mind  into  the  impression  that  they  have  been  performed.  Under  cer-
tain conditions  this  is  easy  to  him ;  whereas  under  conditions  not
imposed  by  himself  it  is  totally  impossible.  JSTow  in  studying  e\-idence
adduced  by  others  there  is  one  sure  test  for  determining  whether  the
conjurer's  opportunity  is  or  is  not  excluded  by  the  evidence — I  mean  in
cases  where  the  statements  of  the  witness,  if  taken  simply  at  their
verbal  worth,  would  sufficiently  exclude  all  possibilities  of  conjuring.  It
is  only  the  best  testimony — perfect  Iwnesty  of  statement  being  supposed
— of  which  the  verbal  or  apparent  worth  is  a  true  measure  of  its  real
worth.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  that  very  composite  facts  are  often
not  analysed  by  the  witness,  and  that  an  observation  comprising  sevei'al
distinct  acts  of  sense-perception  is  stated  generally,  as  though  it  were  a
single  and  indivisible  perception.  We  have  then  imposed  upon  us  as
evidence  a  conclusion  of  the  witness's  mind  in  place  of  an  observation
of  his  senses.  The  proof  is  not  then  reduced,  as  we  desire  to  reduce  it,
to  a  question  of  veracity.  For  this  purpose  we  must  have  particularity
of  statement,  evidence  that  the  witness  has  himself  analysed  the  observa-
tion into  the  acts  of  perception  constituting  it,  and  that  at  the  time  of
the  observation.  But  however  people  may  unconsciously  misrepresent
or  exaggerate — as  undoubtedly  happens — this  innocent  looseness  or
inaccuracy  belongs  only  to  general  statements  of  matters  of  fact,  and  as
soon  as  the  demand  is  made  upon  the  witness  for  greater  dehnitude,
either  at  least  a  confessed  lapse  of  memory  exposes  the  worthlessness  of
the  evidence,  or  the  latter  degenerates  into  conscious  mendacity.  Much
of  the  value  of  cross-examination  in  judicial  proceedings,  for  instance,
depends  upon  the  presumption  that  precise  and  definite  misstatements
cannot  be  hond  fide.  And  the  art  of  cross-examination — so  far  as  this
has  for  its  genuine  aim  the  discovery  of  truth — largely  consists  in
reducing  a  general  statement  to  the  particular  ones  wliich  it  really
involves. Now  a  scientific  statement  of  fact  is  such  a  statement  as


90  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [July  5,


leaves  nothing  to  be  elicited  by  this  sort  of  cross-examination.  And  in
considering  the  evidential  value  of  the  observations  with  which  we  are
now  concerned,  we  have  always  to  see  if  possibly  essential  facts  in  the
narration  are  capable  of  further  analysis.  The  note  of  an  un-
critical judgment,  either  in  making  or  receiving  statements  which
should  be  scientifically  accurate,  is  the  unconscious  presumption  of  the
component  elements  of  the  fact  stated,  or  to  speak  more  accurately,  of
the  several  facts  of  observation  by  which  the  resultant  fact  is  ascertained.

I  submit  that  we  have  here  tlie  whole  secret  of  the  possible  success
of  a  conjurer  who  is  without  confederates  or  artificial  appliances.  We
have  at  the  same  time  a  sure  test  for  determining  the  value  of  observa-
tions with  professional  mediums,  who  must  continue  under  the  suspicion  of
being  conjurers  till  these  phenomena  are  generally  recognised,  which  will
perhaps  not  be  until  the  laws  of  their  occurrence  are  a  little  under-
stood. I  therefore  respectfully  urge  that  the  objection  to  rely  upon
investigations  with  professional  mediums  is  especially  unworthy  of  the
scientiiic  spirit  in  which  this  Society  professes  to  examine  evidence.  Our
standard  should  be  the  highest,  our  criticism  the  severest ;  but  the  best
testimony  will  leave  no  room  for  suggestions  of  mal-observation,and  then
it  will  only  remain  to  see  if,  supposing  the  allegations  to  be  strictly
honest,  the  facts  are  still  explainable  by  any  recognised  agency.  We
have  heard  of  the  necessity  of  allowing  a  wide  margin  for  unknown
possibilities  of  conjuring,  and  that  sounds  plausible  enough  until  we
come  to  ask  what  coniuring  means,  and  must  mean,  under  the
conditions  of  these  experiments.  We  then  see  that  the  margin
for  possibilities  of  conjuring  is  really  a  margin  for  possibilities  of
mal-observation.  But  when  we  get  to  the  ultimate  unit  of  observation
— the  indivisible,  elementary  fact  of  sense-perception — mal-observation
by  the  attentive  mind  is  no  longer  possible,  and  testimony
which  shows  that  there  existed  a  mental  direction  to  these  particulars
is  testimony  which  excludes  the  margin  for  everyone  who  will  not  cheat
himself  with  woi'ds  for  the  evasion  of  his  critical  responsibility.  I  am,
of  course,  aware  that  what  I  have  liere  called  "  the  indivisible,
elementary  fact  of  sense-perception  "  is  further  resolvable  with  regard
to  the  primary  functions  of  mind  and  sense  ;  but  for  all  that,  the
simplest  nameable  fact  remains  tlie  starting-point  of  all  experience,  and
illusion  in  experience  begins  with  the  mental  combinations  of  which
that  is  the  unit.  For  all  mere  illusion  or  misinterpretation  in  relation
to  this  simplest  element  of  experience — as  when  a  rope  upon  the  path
is  taken  for  a  snake —  results  from  imperfect  conditions  of  observation,
or  (what  is  the  same  thing  from  the  subjective  side)  from  pre-occupation
of  the  mind  by  its  own  concepts.  It  follows  that  as  long  as  the
attention  is  given  to  an  indivisible  fact  under  proper  conditions  of
observation,  the  conjurer's  opportunity  has  not  arisen. It  arises  first


1886.]  Tlte  PcmiUlities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


91


with  the  opportunity  of  the  observer's  own  mind  for  self-deception.  And
if  the  ^vitness  is  strictly  veracious,  it  is  logically  certain  that  his
evidence  will  itself  betray  to  the  critical  eye  the  point  or  points  at
which  the  conjurer's  operations  were  possible,  if  possible  they  in  fact
were.

But  as  general  remarks  on  such  a  subject  as  the  present  require  to
be  illustrated,  let  us  consider  what  may  be  supposed  to  happen  on  a
particular  occasion,  and  what,  in  that  case,  an  honest  witness  will  and
will  not  say.  Suppose  that  at  a  conjuring  performance  for  the  simula-
tion of  psychography,  the  conjurer  has  already  succeeded  in  writing-
unobserved  upon  one  side  of  the  slate,  and  wishes  now  to  make  you  believe
that  both  sides  are  clean  before  depositing  the  slate,  with  the  inscribed
side  downwards,  on  the  table,  to  be  turned  up  when  the  phenomenon  is
supposed  to  have  come  ofi  in  that  position.  Now,  if  at  this  critical
moment  you  do  not  prescribe  your  own  mode  of  examination,  either  by
taking  the  slate  in  your  own  hand  and  turning  it  over,  or  by  seeing  that
the  conjurer  turns  it  slowly  round  before  your  eyes,  he  may  be  able,  by
a  little  manipulation,  aided  by  a  little  talking  and  delay,  or  with  the
assistance  of  another  slate  for  purpose  of  confusion,  to  present  the  same
side  to  you  twice  over  and  make  you  think  that  you  have  seen  both
sides.  (This,  I  should  .say,  is  the  explanation  recently  suggested  by  the
famous  German  conjurer,  Hermann,  of  Berlin,^  of  the  modus  ojm'andi  in
such  a  case.)  But  if  that  were  so,  the  witness  could  not  innocently  use
terms  expressly  and  definitely  inconsistent  with  what  really  happened  ;
he  could  not,  for  instance,  honestly  say,  as  I  said  in  the  report
I  have  read  to  you,  that  the  medium  did  something  "  forthwith,"
"  without  any  previous  dealing  with  the  slates,"  which  the  witness  "^Am
carefully  assured  himself  "  to  be  "  both  clean  on  both  sides,"  whereas
it  was  in  the  veiy  fact  of  delay,  of  previous  dealing,  and  of  neglect  of
"  careful"  assurance  that  the  supposed  medium  has  found  his  fraudulent
opportunity.  The  honest  witness  could  not  so  frame  his  statement,
because,  though  he  might  honestly  forget,  he  could  not  honestly  invent
specific  and  positive  acts  of  perception,  for  the  appearance  of  which  no
mental  inference  or  interpretation  could  be  responsible.  But  we  have
an  instance — an  actual  instance — -ready  to  our  hands  of  how  he  might
express  himself  in  such  a  case.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  quotes  accounts  from  a  lady  friend  of  hers  of  several
conjuring  experiments  in  slate-writing  as  illustrating  the  fallibility  of

^  As  this  paper  is  going  to  press,  I  have  received  information  that  the
Hermann  here  referred  to  (author  of  the  article  in  the  German  Sphiiix,  from
which  the  ahove  and  a  subsequent  statement  is  taken)  is  not  the  true  Hermann
of  conjuring  renown,  but  only  a  manufacturer  of  conjuring  apjiaratus.  The
true  Hermann  is  said  to  be  now  in  London  and  about  to  exiDeriment  with
Mr.  Eglinton.


92


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [J^^ily  5,


observation. 1  ISTow  I  think  every  careful  reader  of  these  accounts  will
be  struck  by  the  abbreviated  form  of  them,  and  by  the  frequent  viola-
tion of  the  canon  of  evidence  above  mentioned,  namely,  that  a
composite  observation  shall  not  be  stated  generally,  as  if  it  were  a
single  and  indivisible  perception.  We  should  want  to  cross-examine
this  lady  upon  nearly  every  line  of  her  statement  in  order  to  appreciate
its  evidential  worth.  But  I  will  here  confine  myself  to  the  single  point
of  due  examination  of  the  slates  in  the  experiment  in  which  the  writing
was  apparently  on  one  of  the  same  slates  of  which  the  lady  says  :  "  We
examined  them  when  they  were  placed  the  second  time  on  the  table  and
satisfied  ourselves  that  they  were  clean."  Continuous  observation  of
the  slates  after  they  were  thus  deposited  the  second  time  is  not  alleged
nor  is  any  interval  of  time  stated.  But  assuming  that  one  of  the
slates  was  then  already  inscribed,2  everything  depended  on  the  observa-
tion of  their  condition  at  that  critical  moment.  Now  you  can  only
ascertain  that  a  slate  is  "  clean  "  by  successive  examination  of  both  its
surfaces,  the  evidence  of  which  must,  in  the  reasonable  intendment  of
the  witness's  language,  exclude  all  possibility  of  deceptive  manipulation
by  the  conjurer  while  the  surfaces  seem  to  be  displayed.  Otherwise
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  witness  appreciated  the  prime
importance  of  this  observation.  And  as  it  is  perfectly  possible  for  a
conjurer  under  certain  conditions,  or  if  he  is  allowed  his  own  way,  to
make  it  seem  to  a  spectator  that  slates  are  clean  when  they  are  not,  so
it  is  perfectly  possible  for  an  honest  witness  in  such  case  to  use  this
form  of  expression:  "We  examined  the  slates  and  satisfied  ourselves
that  they  were  clean."  But  with  every  approach  to  definiteness  and
particularity  of  statement,  we  approach  the  limit  beyond  which  honest
mis-statement  is  no  longer  possible.  How  these  pai'ticular  ti"icks  were
performed  exactly,  I  do  not  profess  to  know.^ But  so  far  as  we  have

1  Mrs.  Sidg-vvick's  own  observations  on  these  occasions  are  not  given  in
detail  in  lier  paper.  As  the  criticism  of  them  I  read  at  the  meeting  referred  to
an  account  slie  had  sent  me,  and  which  I  erroneously  su])posed  to  be  part  of  her
paper,  that  criticism  is  now  omitted.

2  As  is  very  doubtful  upon  the  evidence,  even  without  having  to  suppose
such  a  failure  of  observation  as  would  permit  the  writing  to  be  performed  after
the  slates  were  deposited.  For  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  slates  then
deposited  (the  second  time)  were  both  the  same  slates  afterwards  ascertained  to
be  the  lady's  ("  Miss  Z.'s ").  The  "message  "  may  have  been  written  on  one  of
her  slates  at  an  earlier  period  of  tlie  sitting,  when  the  slates  were  under  the
table,  and  when,  as  I  learn  from  the  account  sent  me  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  one  of
"Miss  Z.'s"  slates  was  for  a  time  discarded,  no  observation  of  it  meanwhile
being  alleged.  In  that  case,  the  substitution  of  the  inscribed  slate  ("Miss  Z.'s")
for  one  of  those  upon  the  table  is  easily  supposable  in  the  absence  of  any  aver-
ment of  continuous  observation  of  them.  It  is  just  such  defects  of  testimony  on
the  face  of  it,  in  the  case  of  conjuring,  which  illustrate  and  confirm  my  argunaent.

3  I  had  only  the  first  case  before  me  wlien  my  paper  was  written.  As  to  the
second  and  third  I  will  only  point  out  that  we  are  not  told  that  the  slates  were


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


93


the  evidence  positively  before  us,  it  is  rather  useful  as  an  illustration  of
what  evidence  ought  not  to  be  than  of  what  it  commonly  is,  or  as
affording  any  ground  whatever  for  distrusting  other  evidence  which  on
the  face  of  it  is  free  from  defect.

In  the  course  of  her  paper,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  urged  that  the  medium
has  an  advantage  over  the  avowed  conjurer  in  being  allowed  to  fail
should  the  conditions  be  inconvenient.  Now  if  the  medium-conjurer
could  confidently  foresee  at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  either  that  he
would  or  could  not  get  all  the  conditions  required  for  success  in  the
several  successive  operations  he  might  have  to  perform,  this  privilege  of
failure  would  no  doubt  be  veiy  advantageous.  But  in  many  cases,
especially  in  the  slate-writing,  the  conjurer's  conditions  may  break  down
at  any  point,  and  should  strict  conditions  of  observation  be  insisted
upon  at  a  late  stage,  no  harmless  failure,  but  exposure,  must  result.
If,  for  instance, we  suppose  that  "Miss  Z.'s"  slate was  already

continuously  wnAex  the  \\a,n(bi  oi  the  whole  party,  or  even  that  they  seemed  to
be  continuously  observed  at  all.  Before  we  are  called  upon  to  criticise  evidence,
it  must  at  least  present  npnma  facie  case  for  explanation.  In  the  fourtli  case  it
was  "Mr.  A."  who  "slipped"  the  sheet  of  paper,  on  which  the  writing  was
found,  into  the  locked  slate,  and  this  appears  to  have  been  done  after  "Mr.  A."
was  told  the  page  and  line  selected.  I  cannot  agree  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that
this  case  "is,  perhaps,  more  surprising."  (It  will  be  understood  that  I  do  not
attempt  to  exhaust  tlie  possible  ojjportunities  of  the  conjurer,  with  regard  to
evidence  which  seems  to  me  so  entirely  lacking  requisite  exactitude  and  detail. )
Passing  to  the  account  of  the  (other?)  conjurer's  performance  in  "Mr.  X.'s"case,
the  simultaneous  use  of  two  slates  apart  from  one  another  offers  us  a  rather  easy
explanation  without  supposing  such  a  total  abstraction  of  attention  for
"two  or  three  minutes"  out  of  "some  few  minutes"  (the  duration  of
the  wliole  experiment)  as  is  suggested.  We  are  told  nothing  of  the
position  of  the  conjurer's  hands  (a  point  seldom  omitted  in  the  mediumistic
reports),  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  suppose  tliat  by  successive  feints  he
could  first  excite  "Mr.  X.'s"  suspicions  in  relation  to  one  slate,  and  then
in  relation  to  the  other,  thus  getting  him  to  fix  attention  on  one  at  a  time  while
the  other  was  being  written  upon.  The  "whisking  away  "  of  the  slate  held
by  ' '  Mr.  X. "  was  probably  necessary  on  account  of  the  writing  having,  under  the
conditions,  to  be  executed  on  the  upper  surface  and  having  to  be  made  to  appear
on  the  reverse.  A  still  easier  supposition  would  be  that  the  writing  was  indeed
thus  performed —  probably  a  very  few  words — on  the  held  slate  with  a  much
shorter  diversion  of  attention  to  the  other  one,  and  that  the  latter — the  locked
slate — was  a  trick  slate  with  message  as  described  all  prepared  beforehand.  A
quite  inexperienced  observer  mth  two  separate  objects  to  watch  may  easily  be
self-deceived  as  to  continuous  observation  of  both  on  one  and  the  first  occasion.
But  a  total  abstraction  of  attention  from  a  single  object,  and  that  for  two  or
three  minutes  out  of  some  few  minutes,  and  with  perfect  ignorance  of  the  fact,
the  witness  believing  himself  intent  on  observation  all  the  time,  could  only
be  abnormal.  But  that  is  what  we  should  have  to  suppose  in  a  large
proportion  of  the  genuine  slate-writing  si^ances,  nay,  that  the  same  thing
could  happen  repeated  I  y,  with  experienced  observers,  and  even  with  two  or
three  such  observers  at  the  same  time  !


94


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation. [July  5,


written  upon  when  it  was  to  be  deposited  on  the  table,  where  would
"  Mr.  A."  have  been,  if  "  Miss  Z."  or  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  resolved  to
examine  the  slates  in  her  own  way,  and  not  as  "  Mr.  A."  chose  that  she
should  seem  to  do  so  ?  The  conjurer  in  such  a  case  has  really  two  tricks
to  perform  for  one  success,  and  usually  he  will  have  parted  with  the
privilege  of  failure  as  soon  as  he  has  performed  the  first.  So  that
though  now  and  then  an  ingenious  professional  or  amateur  may  succeed
in  one  way  or  in  another,  repeated  observations,  reflection,  and  public
discussion  would  soon  lay  bare  all  his  resources,  and  there  would  be  an
end  of  him.  The  professional  conjurer  has  a  large  repertory  of  tricks,
and  is  constantly  inventing  new  ones  with  all  the  aid  which  mechanical
appliances,  confederates,  and  his  own  stage,  can  afford.  He  can  drop
a  trick  as  soon  as  it  is  in  danger  of  discovery,  and  vary  his  entertain-
ments indefinitely.  The  public  go  for  amusement,  and  do  not  study  or
hear  of  the  discoveries  made  by  critical  experts,  by  which  the  conjurer
is  soon  warned  off  dangerous  ground.  Nor  are  professional  experts
interested  in  exposing  each  other's  performances,  but  in  repeating  them
for  their  own  benefit ;  whereas  against  tlie  medium  they  are  all,  with
a  few  exceptions,  banded.  The  medium,  on  the  other  hand,  is  especially
developed  for  a  comparatively  few  phenomena,  which  recur  with  him
for  many  years  as  the  main  feature  and  attraction  of  liis  mediumship.
A  cei'tain  proportion  of  his  visitors  are  habitual  students  of  the  subject,
whose  attention  is  open  to  every  explanation  that  is  put  forward,  and
who  have  the  advantage  of  their  own  systematic  observations  with  the
same  and  similar  mediums.  They  are  constantly  obliged  to  defend
themselves  from  the  chai'ge  of  credulity  and  mal-observation ;  each  time
they  go  to  a  seance  they  have  the  keenest  inducement  to  obviate  some
objection  to  their  own  or  others'  evidence,  or  to  meet  some  more  or  less
possible  suggestion  as  to  the  modus  operandi.  They  improve  their
methods  of  observation,  they  direct  it  to  fresh  points,  they  devise  and
obtain  new  tests.  Psychography  alone  has  now  been  before  the  public
of  this  country  for  10  years.  Some  of  tlie  most  famous  conjurers,  and
many  acute  minds  have  engaged  in  criticism  of  the  facts  and  of  the
evidence,  and  yet  it  has  survived  the  ordeal  as  no  single  trick,  or  varia-
tions of  a  single  trick,  of  such  a  character  and  under  such  conditions  as
this  slate-writing  could  possibly  survive  it.

To  deal  at  length  with  general  objections  to  the  genuineness  of
these  phenomena  is  not  within  the  limits  of  my  present  subject.  Yet
I  may  be  allowed  to  advert  to  two  or  three  which  have  been  lately
brought  before  us  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  Tliere  is  the  detected  trickery —
real  and  reputed — of  mediums.  As  Eduard  von  Hartmann  has  pointed
out,  occasional  trickery  is  antecedently  to  be  expected  from  the
exigencies  of  professional  mediumship,  having  regard  to  the
uncertainty with which the true force is developed. And  the


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.  95


whole  theory  of  mediumship  points  to  influences  and  conditions
which  must  result  sometimes  in  actual  deception,  and  sometimes
in  the  mere  appearance  of  it.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  we
can  make  this  branch  of  psychical  research  quite  independent  of
psychology.  And  there  are  features  in  this  trickery  which  should  make
us  look  a  little  deeper  than  the  conjuring  and  fraud  theory  for  its  ex-
planation. Slade,  for  instance,  now  often  cheats  with  an  almost
infantile  audacity  and  naivete,  while  at  the  same  or  the  next  seance
with  the  same  investigators  phenomena  occur  which  the  most  consum-
mate conjurer  might  well  envy.  Then  it  is  made  an  objection  that  tests
designed  to  dispense  altogether  with  observation  in  the  presence  of  the
medium  have  not  been  obtained,  although  they  could  not  be  conceived
to  present  greater  physical  difficulties  to  a  genuine  occult  agency  than
things  actually  done.  There  is  in  this  a  quiet  assumption  that  we  have
not  here  to  do  with  independent  wills  and  intelligences,  or  with  laws
other  than  physical,  which  is  quite  illegitimate  at  the  outset  of  our
researches.  But  without  having  recourse  to  such  suggestions,  I  need
only  point  out  that  if  human  observation  under  the  easiest  conditions  is
at  all  to  be  relied  upon,  the  evidence  can  become  perfect  without  these
tests,  and  can  only  be  illogically  prejudiced  by  the  absence  of  them.
A  third  objection  which  weighs  with  many  is  the  failure  of
mediums  with  some  investigators  who,  of  course,  on  that  account
are  credited,  if  they  do  not  credit  themselves,  with  too  much
astuteness,  and  with  too  great  powers  of  observation  for  the  medium
to  venture  on  his  tricks  with  them.  It  is  a  remarkable  illustration
of  this  theory  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  tells  us  that  personal
experience  has  made  her  form  a  very  low  estimate  of  her  o^\^l  as
well  as  of  others'  powers  of  continuous  observation,  and  who  failed
to  detect  the  opportunities  of  an  amateur  expert  in  slate-writing,
although  she  knew  that  a  trick  was  to  be  performed,  is  one  of
those  \vith  whom  that  accomplished  conjurer,  Mr.  Eglinton,  has
been  uniformly  compelled  to  exercise  his  "pri^dlege  of  failure.'"'
It  is  another  commentary  on  this  view  that  I  myself,  and  others
upon  whom  Mr.  Eglinton  has  found  it  very  easy  to  impose,  have
had  with  him  as  many  failures  as  successes,  under  precisely  the  same
apparent  conditions  in  both  cases.  The  causes  of  failure  as  of  success  are
at  present  too  obscure  for  such  arguments  to  be  other  than  prejudicial
and  opposed  to  the  scientific  character  at  which  we  aim.  No  doubt  it
is  a  disappointment — and  perhaps  no  one  has  felt  that  more  severely
than  myself — that  some  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  this
Society  have  failed  to  obtain  evidence  through  Mr.  Eglinton.  But  we
must  remember  the  idea  with  which  we  started,  and  which  was  so  well
expressed  by  Professor  Sidg^vick  in  his  fii'st  address  to  us.  It  was
never  supposed  that  these  phenomena  had  the  scientific  character  of


96


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation. [July  5^


being  reproducible  with  certainty  for  any  and  every  one  who  took  the-
trouble  to  sit  for  them  a  few  times.  We  were  to  accumulate  testimony,
to  overcome  opposition  by  the  gradual  accession  of  witnesses  of  good
intelligence  and  character.  There  was  no  necessity  for  that  if  we
could  say  to  all  the  world — go  to  this  or  that  medium  and  we  guarantee
to  you  personal  evidence.  The  physicist  does  not  rely  upon  testimony
or  ask  others  to  rely  upon  it.  But  we  pre-suppose  that  the  phenomena
with  which  we  deal  are  not  accessible  to  all.  If,  then,  they  are  not
accessible  to  some  of  ourselves,  is  our  position  in  relation  to  them
altered  %  No ;  we  are  estopped  from  making  that  demand  of  personal
experience,  and  from  making  that  objection  of  personal  failures — we
are  "  hoist  with  our  own  petard  "  !  Seeing  that  innumerable  observa-
tions, by  new  witnesses  of  undoubted  character  and  intelligence,  have
accumulated  since  Professor  Sidgwick  first  addressed  us  four  years  ago,
it  will  be  asked,  it  has  been  asked,  whether  there  was  indeed  a  mental
implication  in  his  words,  so  that  the  new  evidence  which  was  to  subdue
the  world  must  be  that  of  himself  and  a  few  especial  friends.  I  suppose
that  would  be  disclaimed,  but  is  it  disclaimed  in  favour  of  a
criticism  which  discovers  all  other  evidence  to  be  bad  1  By  further
and  further  depreciating  the  powers  of  human  observation,  by  more  and
more  magnifying  the  resources  of  conjurers,  it  is  nearly  always  possible
to  suggest  a  chink  or  cranny  for  escape  in  this  case,  and  another  and
different  chink  oi'  cranny  in  that  case.  But  the  very  object  of  accumu-
lating evidence  is  to  make  such  suppositions  increasingly  violent  the
larger  the  area  of  experience  which  they  have  to  cover,  until  the
liypothesis  of  mal-observation  becomes  tlie  last  resort  of  those  who  will
not  or  cannot  credit  testimony  until  their  own  senses  have  had
cognisance  of  the  facts.  I  believe  that  distrust  of  human  observation,
to  the  extent  to  which  that  distrust  is  now  carried,  is  not  justified  by
experience,  which  would  be  almost  impossible  for  the  simplest  acts  of
attentive  perception  if  it  were  justified.  Surely  there  is  a  larger  view,
a  deeper  insight  into  this  already  long  chapter,  swelling  to  a  prodigious
volume,  of  human  evidence,  than  is  afforded  by  this  miserable  theory  of
conjuring,  and  cheating,  and  imbecility.  Are  we  not  shocked  by  its
inadequacy,  by  its  disproportion  to  the  total  effect  ?  That  effect  is
dwarfed  in  popular  imagination  for  a  time,  because  the  dominant  culture
has  refused  to  recognise  it,  and  has  encountered  the  facts  with  the  very
narrowest  conceptions  in  tlie  armoury  of  its  intelligence.  But  the  effect
is  already  one  of  the  appreciable  influences  on  human  life  and  thought.
Many  a  delusion  has  perhaps  been  that,  but  not  delusions  of  observation
which  depend  for  their  vitality  upon  an  ever  springing  supply  of
recurrent  fraud.  Again  and  again  has  phenomenal  Spiritualism  been
"  exposed  "  and  "  explained  "  ;  every  such  incident,  every  such  attempt,
has  been  a  new  instruction  to  investigators,  a  new  difficulty  to  the


1886.]  Tlte  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


97


supposed  conjurer.  Yet  fresh  observers,  with  full  knowledge  of  all
that  has  happened  and  of  all  that  is  suggested,  go  to  mediums  and
come  away  with  the  certainty  that  the  phenomena  are  genuine.  Even
the  first  of  living  German  conjurers,  Hermann  of  Berlin,  who  had  con-
sidered the  subject  of  this  slate-writing  very  carefully,  went  to  Slade,
and  after  witnessing  the  phenomenon  under  very  ordinary  condi-
tions, professed  his  present  inability  to  explain  it.i  He  adds,  I  am
glad  to  say,  that  he  is  to  have  a  series  of  sittings  with  Mr.  Eglinton
in  a  few  months,  the  results  of  which  will  be  published.  Dr.
Herschell,  a  well-known  amateur,  has  recently  written  to  Mr.  Eglinton
in  the  following  terms  : —

For  some  time  after  my  first  sitting  with  you,  I  candidly  confess  that
I  worked  very  hard,  both  by  myself  and  in  consultation  with  well-known
public  performers,  to  find  out  a  method  of  imitating  psychography,  and  I
do  not  think  that  there  is  a  way  that  I  have  not  tried  practically.  I  have
come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  a  few  words  on  a
slate  if  the  minds  of  the.  audience  can  be  diverted  at  the  proper  time
(a  thing  perfectly  impossible  under  the  eyes  of  conjurers,  who  know  every
possible  way  of  producing  the  result  by  trickery,  without  instant  detec-
tion). Beyond  this,  conjuring  cannot  imitate  psychography.  It  can  do
nothing  with  locked  slates,  and  slates  fastened  together.  It  cannot  write
answers  to  questions  which  have  not  been  seen  by  the  performer,  as  you
are  constantly  doing.  At  the  best  it  only  produces  a  mild  parody  of  the
very  simplest  phenomena  under  an  entire  absence  of  all  the  conditions  under
which  these  habitually  occur  at  your  seances.

Allow  me  also  to  take  the  present  opportunity  of  thanking  you  most
sincerely  for  the  opportunities  you  have  given  me  of  satisfying  myself
of  the  genuineness  of  psychography  by  discussing  openly  with  me,  as  you
have  done,  the  various  possible  ways  of  imitating  the  phenomena,  and  of
letting  me  convince  myself,  in  detail,  that  you  did  not  avail  yourself  of
them.

I  hope  that  you  have  had  a  successful  visit  to  Russia,  and  that  your
health  is  now  quite  re-established. — With  kind  regards,  yours  sincerely,

George  Herschell,  M.D.

W.  Eglinton,  Esq.

Our  English  conjurer,  John  N"evil  Maskelyne,  has  publicly  testified  from
his  own  experience,  to  the  existence  of  an  unrecognised  force  productive
of  physical  efi'ects.  2  But  with  the  acknowledgment  of  such  a  force  in
the  human  organism  must  disappear  the  presumption  against  those  more
developed  manifestations  which  depend  on  its  relations  to  intelligence
and  will. The  ascertainment  of  those  relations  are  among  the  highest

1  See  an  article  by  Hermann  in  the  June  number  of  the  German  magazine
Sphinx. (But  see  note,  ante,  p.  91.)

2  See  correspondence  in  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  Mr.  Maskelyne's  letter,  23rd
April,  1885.


H


98  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Obseivation. [July  5,


functions  of  a  society  for  psychical  research,  and  I  am  not  alone  in
oelieving  that  we  should  liave  found  our  scientific  reward  in  beginning
with  a  provisional  faith  in  the  material  of  our  inquiries.  In  this
region  the  laws  and  conditions  are  still  almost  wholly  obscure,  but  of
one  thing  in  it  we  may  be  generally  sure — that  there  can  be  no  greater
mistake  than  to  investigate  phenomena  of  psychical  origin  with  a  total
disregard  of  psychical  conditions.  We  are  false  to  our  hypothesis  if  we
assume  tliat  adequate  precaution  against  fraud  is  the  prime  condition  of
success,  and  tliat  beyond  this  it  is  only  necessary  to  bring  an  unpre-
judiced mind  to  the  investigation.  These  are  indeed  indispensable  con-
ditions, but  there  may  well  be  other  and  more  positive  ones  not  less
indispensable.  If  we  entertain  the  hypothesis  of  mediumship  at  all —
and  why  else  are  we  investigating? — it  must  mean  for  us  something
more  than  that  in  the  mere  presence  of  certain  persons  certain  pheno-
mena may  occur.  A  medium  is  not  like  a  bar  magnet  which  can  and
must  exhibit  its  special  charactersistics  under  certain  exclusively
physical  conditions.  It  is  antecedently  probable  that  something  more
is  required  of  the  investigator  than  the  attributes  of  a  fair-minded
judge — a  co-operation,  namely,  which  will  be  best  if  it  include  some
contribution  of  that  unknown  force  on  which  the  phenomena  primarily
depend,  but  wliich  shall  at  any  rate  favour,  and  not  repress,  the
development  of  that  force  in  the  medium.  This  sort  of  co-operation  is
a  mental  disposition  perfectly  consistent  with  the  most  scientific  vigi-
lance, and  which,  in  my  own  case,  I  have  found  even  promotive  of  it,
because  I  was  well  resolved  not  to  be  conducive  to  my  own  deception.

It  would  be  strange  if  in  this  Society  we  were  to  ignore  the  proba-
ble application  of  telepathy  to  the  phenomena  now  in  question.  For
telepathy  in  its  principle  must  be  far  more  than  a  mere  emotional  or
ideal  transfer  upon  special  occasion.  The  inter-action  of  our  psychical
natures  must  be  more  intimate  and  influential  than  superficial  conscious-
ness betrays.  I  once  heard  it  remarked,  jestingly  or  seriously — ^I  hardly
know  which — that  the  composition  of  an  ideal  circle  for  the  investiga-
tion of  these  phenomena  would  be  a  man  of  physical  science,  a  pro-
fessional conjurer,  a  detective  policeman,  and  an  Old  Bailey  barrister.
That  suggestion  represents  the  spirit  which  brings  failure,  and  must
bring  failure,  to  every  investigation  of  this  character.  And  if  you  as
a  society  wish  for  useful  original  research  by  your  own  agents,  you
must  not  choose  your  agents  upon  that  principle.  -They  must  be
persons  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  great  importance  of  exact  obser-
vation and  exact  statement,  but  who  combine  with  these  pre-requisites
some  positive  experience  and  some  reasonable  regard  to  the  hypothesis
on  which  you  are  investigating  at  all.

But  original  research  is  not  necessary  in  the  first  instance.  Many,
of  whom  I  am  one,  are  of  an  opinion  that  the  case  for  these  phenomena


1886.]  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohsei'vation.


99


generally,  and  for  "autography"  in  particular,  is  already  complete.
And  probably  many  of  yourselves  are  of  opinion  that  the  time  has
arrived  for  your  Literary  Committee  to  deal  with  this  question  as  it
has  already  dealt  with  other  heads  of  evidence.  It  might  begin  with
the  evidence  of  this  "writing  at  a  distance."  But  unless  it  is  to
arrive  at  a  foregone  negative  conclusion,  its  judgment  must  not  be
guided  by  those  who  think  that  human  observation,  with  the  most
express  direction  of  the  mind,  is  not  to  be  trusted  to  ascertain  the
fact  that  a  slate  has  been  untouched  for  five  minutes  on  a  table  before
the  eyes  ;  or  who  are  prepared,  when  they  have  before  them  exact
statements  of  facts  of  observation,  to  assume  that  the  facts  have
been  mal-observed  and  misdescribed.  For  that  way  lies  interminable
doubt,  and  not  progressive  science.


NOTE  ON  MR.  MASSEY'S  PAPER.

In  the  paper  that  precedes  this  note  Mr.  Massey  refers  to  certain
remarks  made  by  me  at  the  first  meeting  of  our  Society,  in  a  manner
which  suggests  that  he  has  misunderstood  their  drift.  If  Mr.  Massey
has  misunderstood  me,  it  is  likely  that  others  also  may  have  done  so  :
and  since  his  comment  on  my  present  attitude  is  thrown  in  the  form  of
a  reported  question  that  challenges  an  answer,  it  seems  convenient  that
I  should  at  once  answer  him  by  explaining  the  phrases  that  have  been
misunderstood.  Mr.  Massey  begins  his  paper  by  quoting  a  sentence  in
which  I  described  the  sort  of  proof  at  which  we  ought  to  aim  ;  he  then
gives  several  specimens  of  what  he  seems  to  regard  as  unexceptionable
evidence  for  the  genuineness  of  the  pliysical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  ;
then,  on  pp.  95-96,  he  refers  to  me  (correctly)  as  urging  the  Society  to
accumulate  testimony,  to  overcome  opposition  by  the  gradual  accession
of  witnesses  of  good  intelligence  and  character ;  and  finally  says,  "  Seeing
that  innumerable  observations,  by  new  witnesses  of  undoubted
character  and  intelligence,  have  accumulated  since  Professor  Sidgwick
first  addressed  us  four  years  ago,  it  will  be  asked  whether  there  was  a
mental  implication  in  liis  words,  so  that  the  new  evidence  which  was  to
subdue  the  world  must  be  that  of  himself  and  a  few  especial  friends."

My  answer  is  there  was  no  such  "  mental  implication "  ;
but  that  the  evidence  which  Mr.  Massey  affirms  to  have
been  accumulated,  and  of  which  his  paper  contains  examples,  is  not
the  kind  of  evidence  which  I  intended  to  urge  the  Society  to  accumu-
late. The  evidence  I  had  in  view  was  evidence  obtained  in  private
circles  of  relatives  or  friends,  where  no  professional  medium  was
employed.  That  this  was  before  my  mind  is  apparent  from  several
passages  of  my  address : — e.g.,  fi'om  the  sentence  preceding  the  one


100


Tlie  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


first  quoted  from  me  by  Mr.  Massey ;  in  which  I  say  that  "  it  is  due  to
the  private  families  or  private  circles  of  friends  whom  we  hope  to
persuade  to  allow  us  to  take  part  in  their  experiments  "  that  we  should
bring  our  evidence  to  the  highest  possible  pitch  of  cogency.

So  far  as  I  know,  there  has  been  no  important  accumulation,  during
the  last  four  years,  of  the  kind  of  evidence  which  I  had  in  view  :  the
testimony  of  which  Mr.  Massey  has  spoken  is  testimony  to  marvels
occurring  in  the  presence  of  persons  who  exhibit  them  professionally  for
money.  Now  when  I  addressed  the  Society  at  its  first  meeting  I
intended  to  make  it  plain  that  we  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  avoid  paid
mediums  "  as  much  as  possible  "  ;  I  did  not  indeed  think  that  it  would  be
wise  to  preclude  ourselves  by  a  hard  and  fast  rule  from  employing  the
services  of  such  persons  :  but  I  certainly  hoped  that  we  should  be  able
to  confine  our  investigation  to  phenomena  "  where  at  any  rate  " — as  I
said — "  no  pecuniary  motives  to  fraud  can  come  in."  It  is,  in  my
opinion,  upon  evidence  of  this  latter  kind  that  the  ^jrima  facie
case  for  investigating  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism
mainly  depends.  Certainly,  if  we  had  nothing  but  testimonies  to
marvels  occurring  in  the  presence  of  persons  who  charge  a  guinea  a
stance  for  exhibiting  them,  I  for  one  should  never  have  thought  it
worth  while  to  consider  seriously  whether  such  reported  marvels  were
due  to  anything  more  than  skilful  trickery  on  the  one  side  and
defective  observation  and  memory  on  the  other.  The  testimony  that
excited  my  interest  in  the  subject  was  mainly  testimony  to  pheno-
mena occurring  in  private  circles  composed  of  persons  who  were  very
unlikely  to  liave  plotted  to  deceive  each  other  or  the  public,  or  very
nnlikely  to  possess  a  high  degree  of  conjuring  skill.  There  exists
already  some  noteworthy  evidence  of  this  kind — enough,  in  my  opinion,
to  justify  further  inquiry,  though  not  enough  to  constitute  an  adequate
scientific  basis  for  the  momentous  conclusion  to  which  it  points.  I  hoped
that  the  operations  of  our  Society  might  be  directed  towards  improving
the  quality  and  increasing  the  quantity  of  this  kind  of  testimony ;  and
it  was  this  hope  that  I  intended  to  express  in  the  address  to  which
Mr.  Massey  has  referred.

But  this  is  not  all.  The  cases  which  Mr.  Massey  has  brought
forward  do  not  merely  exemplify  a  kind  of  experiment  different  from
that  to  which  I  announced  tliat  our  Society's  attention  would  w  the
main  be  directed  ;  they  exemplify  a  kind  of  experiment  which  I  hoped
that  we  should  avoid  altogether.  The  three  persons  through  whose
mediumship  Mr.  Massey's  marvels  are  supposed  to  have  been  produced
are  not  merely  persons  who  make  a  trade  of  exhibiting  phenomena  :  they
are  persons  to  whom  imposture  has  been  brought  home  by  irresistible
positive  evidence.  We  learn  from  the  Spiritualist  (November  3rd,
1876)  that  when  Monck  was  charged  at  Huddersfield  in  1876- with


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


101


imposture  under  the  Vagrancy  Act,  it  appeared  that  conjuring  apparatus
had  been  found  in  his  room ;  and  J\[r.  Henry  Lodge  and  another  well-
known  resident  in  Hudderstield  deposed  on  oath  that  Monck  had
confessed  to  them  that  he  practised  deception  on  sitters.  In  the  case
of  Slade,  Mr.  Massey  himself  admits  that  he  "now  often  cheats,"
though  he  pleads  that  this  cheating — when  discovered — shows  an
"  almost  infantine  audacity  and  naivete  "  :  for  my  own  part,  I  cannot
doubt  that  Slade  attempted  to  cheat  me  in  1876,  in  a  manner  which,
though  "  audacious  "  was  not  exactly  "  naive."  As  regards  Eglinton
— if  Mr.  Massey  has  read  the  statements  of  Archdeacon  Colley  in  the
Medium  and  Daybreak  (November  1st  and  November  15th,  1878),  and
the  reports  in  the  Spiritualist  (February  14th  and  March  21st,  1879),
of  statements  by  Mr.  Owen  Harries,  he  will  scarcely  doubt  that  Eglinton
was,  some  10  years  ago,  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  spurious
"  materialisations  "  with  the  aid  of  a  false  beard  and  muslin  :  and  I
thirds  it  clear  that  in  1882  Eglinton  co-operated  with  Madame  Blavat-
sky  in  the  production  of  a  spurious  Theosophic  marvel.

If  it  had  occurred  to  me,  when  I  addressed  the  Society  four  years
ago,  that  we  should  be  seriously  urged  to  investigate  the  performances  of
"  mediums  "  whose  trickery  was  proved  and  admitted,  I  should  certainly
have  repudiated  the  suggestion  with  all  the  emphasis  that  I  could
command.  But  I  then  believed — and  ventured  to  say — that  Spiritual-
ists had  been  impressed  by  the  "  evidence  accumulated  in  recent  years
to  show  that  at  least  a  great  part  of  the  extraordinary  phenomena
referred  to  spiritual  agency  by  Spiritualists  in  England  and  America
are  really  due  to  trickery  and  fraud  of  some  kind."  I  hoped,  therefore,
that  educated  Spiritualists  would  generally  agree  with  me  in  condemn-
ing what  I  called  "  the  obstinacy  with  which  mediums  against  whom
fraud  has  been  proved  have  been  afterwards  defended,"  and  in  re-
gretting that  such  persons  should,  as  I  said,  "  have  been  able  to  go  on
with  their  trade  after  exposure  no  less  than  before."  I  never  thought
that  we  should  be  called  upon  to  give  direct  encouragement  to
this  trade  by  undertaking  a  formal  investigation  of  the  "  phenomena  "
exhibited  by  such  persons.

H.  SiDGWICK.


FURTHER DISCUSSION BETWEEN MR. MASSEY  AND
PROFESSOR  SIDGWICK.

Since  I  have  misunderstood  Professor  Sidgwick  as  to  the  exclusive
character  of  the  evidence  he  proposed  we  should  accumulate,  I  can  only
urge,  after  careful  re-perusal  of  his  first  address  to  the  Society,  that  I
had  some  excuse.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  suggestion  in  that  address
is  not  that  we  should  "  confine"  our  investigations  to  phenomena
occurring  with  private  mediums,  but  that  we  should  "  as  much  as


102


Tlie  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


possible  direct "  investigation  thereto.  Secondly,  Professor  Sidgwick
had  said  in  the  same  address  : — "  I  do  not  presume  to  suppose  that  I
could  produce  evidence  better  in  quality  than  much  that  has  been  laid
before  the  world  by  writers  of  indubitable  scientific  repute — men  like
Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wallace  and  the  late  Professor  de  Morgan,"  and  he
went  on  to  urge  that  evidence  of  this  superior  quality  should  be  accu-
mulated. Now  it  is  notorious  that  the  authorities  named  appealed
largely  and  chiefly  to  evidence  they  had  obtained  through  mediums
who,  at  one  time  or  another,  were  professionals,  and  against  some  of
whom,  moreover,  acts  of  imposture  have  been  alleged  on  apparently
strong  grounds.  Then,  again,  when  Professor  Sidgwick  said  : — "  But
we  can  no  longer  be  told  off-hand  that  all  the  marvels  recorded  by  Mr.
Crookes,  Professor  Zollner,  and  others,  are  easy  conjuring  tricks,  because
we  have  the  incontrovertible  evidence  of  conjurers  to  the  contrary,"  I
was  surely  entitled  to  infer  that  evidence  thus  referred  to — Professor
ZoUner's  being  exclusively  with  Slade — was  part  of  the  prima  facie
case  of  the  Society.  There  is  nothing  in  the  address  at  all  suggestive,
even,  of  the  proposition  that  evidence  with  professional  mediums  can-
not be  raised  to  a  point  at  which  suppositions  of  "  skilful  trickery  on
the  one  side,  and  defective  observation  and  memory  on  the  other  "  would
bring  the  investigator's  intellectual  condition  within  the  description  of
"  absolute  idiocy."

It  is  also  allowable,  I  think,  to  refer  to  the  facts  that  Professor
Sidgwick  himself,  and  several  other  active  members  of  the  Society,  have,
since  the  date  of  that  address,  made  repeated  attempts  to  obtain  per-
sonal evidence  of  the  phenomenon  of  '  Psychography "  with  Mr.
Eglinton,  and  that  several  conjurers  have  been  employed  by  or  on  be-
half of  some  of  these  gentlemen  to  investigate  with  the  same  medium.
I  am  quite  unable  to  understand  on  what  ground  a  conjurer  could  be
employed,  if  not  the  supposition  that  he  might  encounter  conjuring.
It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  "  conjuring  "  and  "cheating"  are  not
convertible  terms.  It  is  rather  a  strange  inference  that  because  a  man
has  been  detected  in  trickery  he  is  therefore  a  consummate  conjurer.
And  the  known  trickery  of  mediums  is  of  such  a  character  as
to  raise  no  presumption  whatever  that  they  are  conjurers.  The
trickery  has  been  most  frequent  in  so-called  materialisations,  when  it
was  facilitated  by  the  worst  conditions  of  observation,  and  by  the
absence  of  precautions  against  the  introduction  of  disguises,  &c.  And
with  all  respect  for  Professor  Sidgwick,  I  should  say  that  if  he
detected  Slade  in  attempts  to  cheat  him  in  the  slate- writing,
the  conjuring  could  scarcely  have  been  of  a  high  order,  or  such
as  (in  his  own  words),  "  conjurers  cannot  find  out."  The  fact
probably  is  that  conjuring,  like  other  arts,  is  rarely  self-taught  from
the  first,  but  requires  instruction  by  trained  experts. Now  the  early


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


103


antecedents  of  most  of  the  better  known  mediums  have  been  ascertained,
and  not  only  is  there  no  trace  of  any  connection  with  conjurers,  but
usually  their  mediumsliip  for  the  simpler — but  not  therefore  easily
simulated — phenomena  has  been  observed  in  their  childhood  or  very
early  youth,  before  they  could  be  credited  with  ability  to  carry  out
habitual  deceptions,  and  before  the  pecuniary  motive  could  present
itself.  I  may  add  that  though  Professor  Sidgwick  now  rests  his  objec-
tion to  professional  mediums  chiefly  on  a  presumption  of  their  conjuring
capabilities,  I  And  nothing  of  that  in  his  first  address,  the  preference
for  private  mediums  being  there  put  merely  upon  the  absence  of
ordinary — or  at  any  rate  pecuniary — motives  to  fraud.  I  have
always  thought  this  a  weak  point  in  his  position,  if  our  aim  is  to  obtain
exact  proof.  There  would  be,  I  think,  more  force  in  his  present  objection,
if  (1)  the  presumption  of  conjuring  ability  were  legitimate,  which  I
believe  it  is  not,  and  (2)  if,  admitting  that  presumption,  it  can  in  no
case  be  repelled  by  observations,  or  by  precautions  combined  with
observation.  My  paper  was  an  attempt  to  deal  with  this  second
question,  and  will  no  doubt  be  appreciated  at  whatever  worth  the
argument  may  possess,  in  connection  with  Professor  Sidgwick's  state-
ment of  his  own  position.

C.  C.  Massey.

1 ■■  ■  ■ -  .


In  pointing  out  Mr.  Massey's  misrepresentation  of  the  drift
of  my  remarks,  I  said  nothing  to  imply  that  it  was  an  inexcusable
misrepresentation.  I  had  no  wish  to  raise  this  personal  question ;  but,
as  Mr.  Massey  has  raised  it,  I  may  perhaps  make  my  position — which
he  still  misunderstands — clearer  by  answering  it.  I  think,  then,  that
Mr.  Massey  was  not  justified  in  representing  me  as  having  urgeA  the
accumulation  of  the  kind  of  evidence  with  which  his  paper  deals — the
records  of  the  "  phenomena"  exhibited  by  paid  mediums  admitted  to  be
tricksters — in  the  face  of  my  distinct  statement  of  opinion  that  we  ought
to  work  with  private  mediums  "as  much  as  possible,"  and  my  expres-
sion of  surprise  at  the  encouragement  given  by  Spiritualists  to  detected
impostors.  But  I  quite  admit  that  it  was  excusable  in  him  to  suppose
that  CAridence  of  this  kind  might  have  more  weight  with  me  than  is  in
fact  the  case  :  for  in  the  address  which  he  quoted,  while  I  tried  to
trace  clearly  the  lines  of  investigation  which  our  Society  ought — in  my
opinion — to  adopt,  I  intentionally  left  obscure  my  estimate  of  the  value
of  the  evidence  that  had  already  been  collected.  My  reason  for  this
reserve  will  be  readily  understood.  I  was  speaking  as  president  of  a
society  newly  formed  by  the  combination  of  two  heterogeneous  elements
— persons  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  the  alleged  efi^ects  of  spiritual
or  occult  agency,  and  persons,  like  myself,  who  merely  thought  the


104


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


evidence  for  their  genuineness  sti'ong  enough  to  justify  serious
inquiry.  In  tliis  situation,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  lay  stress  on  the
points  on  which — as  I  hoped — the  audience  I  was  addressing  might
agree,  leaving  in  the  background  the  points  on  which  I  knew  that  we
differed.  I  hoped  we  might  agree  on  the  manner  in  which  evidence
was  to  be  collected  in  future  ;  I  knew  that  we  differed  on  the  value  of
the  evidence  that  liad  been  collected  in  the  past.  Hence  I  expressly
disclaimed  any  intention  of  discussing  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  this
evidence  ;  in  speaking  of  the  past  I  merely  said  on  behalf  of  my  new
allies  what  might  in  my  opinion  be  said  with  truth.  They  had  been
stigmatised  as  dupes  of  coarse  and  bungling  tricksters  ;  it  seemed  to
me  only  fair  to  point  out  that  some  of  the  tricks  had,  at  any  rate,
baffled  experts  in  conjuring.  Taken  alone,  indeed,  this  fact  would  have
seemed  to  me  of  little  importance.  I  have  no  great  difficulty  in  sup-
posing that  certain  unscrupulous  persons,  skilful  enough  in  certain
peculiar  kinds  of  trickery  to  bafffe  the  insight  of  conjurers,  find  the  best
market  for  their  skill  in  exhibiting  their  tricks,  at  a  guinea  a  seance,  to
Spiritualists  and  investigators  :  at  any  rate,  this  suggestion  is  not  so
improbable  as  to  render  it  necessary  to  resort  to  the  hypothesis  of
spiritual  agency  or  occult  forces  in  order  to  avoid  it.  But,  taken  in
connection  with  the  testimonies  to  private  mediumship,  these  inex-
plicable phenomena  of  professional  mediums  seemed  to  me  worth
noting.

Mr.  Massey  further  quotes  a  sentence  in  which  I  disclaim  the  pre-
sumption of  supposing  that  I  could  produce  evidence  better  in  quality
than  much  of  that  produced  by  men  like  Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wallace,
and  De  Morgan ;  and  infers  that  as  these  gentlemen  largely
experimented  with  professional  mediums,  some  of  whom  lie
under  grave  suspicions  of  imposture,  therefore  I  must  have  in-
tended to  encourage  investigation  with  paid  mediums  and  detected
impostors,  in  spite  of  my  explicit  statements  to  the  contrary.  This
inference  seems  to  me  stiained  and  unreasonable.  In  uttering  the
disclaimer  in  question  I  was  not  thinking  at  all  of  the  character  of  the
mediums  employed — that  was  a  point  I  intended  to  discuss  afterwards —
but  merely  of  the  scientific  position  of  the  investigators  and  the  im-
pressiveness  of  their  accounts.  The  phrase  was,  indeed,  stronger  than  any
I  should  now  use,  after  four  years'  additional  experience.  Still,  if  I
had  now  an  opportunity  of  repeating,  with  a  private  medium  of  un-
blemished character,  some  of  Mr.  Crookes'  "  further  experiments  on
pyschic  force"  (see  his  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  pp.  36,  37),  or  De
Morgan's  most  sti'iking  experiment  with  Mrs.  Hayden  (see  p.  xliii.  of
the  preface  to  From  Matter  to  Spirit),  I  would  spare  no  pains  to  avail
myself  of  it ;  and  if  I  could  obtain  similar  results  with  sufficient
repetition  and  -variation  of  conditions, I should  regard  them  as


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


105


evidentially  important.  But  I  should  certainly  not  jaut  them  forward
as  evidence  if  I  knew  the  supposed  medium  to  be  a  detected  impostor.
Nor  should  I  seek  evidence  from  such  tainted  sources ; — not  because  I
hold  that  evidence  involving  tricksters  cannot  be  raised  to  a  pitch  that
would  exclude  explanation  by  trickery,  except  on  the  supposition  of  the
investigator's  idiocy ;  but  because  an  extended  experience  has  led  me  to
regard  the  chance  of  its  being  so  raised  as  too  slight  to  counterbalance
the  palpable  evil  of  encouraging  an  immoral  trade.  Suppose  that  such
descriptions  as  Mr.  Massey  and  others  have  given  of  Eglinton's  slate-
writing  had  been  given  of  the  performances  of  an  avowed  conjurer :
surely  no  one  would  have  suggested  that  we  were  forced  to  the  sup-
position of  idiocy  or  mendacity  or  hallucination  on  the  part  of  the
observers  :  and  if  not,  the  supposition  cannot  be  any  more  necessary
in  the  case  of  Eglinton.

Mr.  Massey  holds  that  my  preference  of  private  mediums  to  admitted
impostors  is  a  "  weak  point  in  my  position  "  if  "  our  aim  is  to  obtain
exact  proof."  It  is  clear  from  this  that  he  mistakes  my  position.  He
regards  unblemished  character  and  stringency  of  tests  as  alternatives  :  I
regard  them  as  conditions  which  we  should  aim  at  combining.  But,  as
I  have  often  said,  I  do  not  expect  to  obtain  cogent  proof  of  an  unknown
law  of  nature  by  a  single  experiment  :  I  do  not  hope  to  get  it  by  any-
thing less  than  a  large  accumulation  of  experiments  of  the  best  attain-
able quality.

Mr.  Massey  further  suggests  that  I  have  changed  my  ground  in
now  resting  my  objection  to  paid  mediums  partly  on  a  presumption  of
their  conjuring  capacities.  He  will  lind,  however,  that  I  have  drawn
attention  to  this  characteristic,  as  belonging  to  professional  but  not  to
private  mediums,  in  an  address  which  I  delivered  a  year  later.  (See
Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  p.  249.)  The  reason  that  I  did  not  mention  this,
as  well  as  the  pecuniary  motive  to  fraud,  in  prescribing  the  lines  of
investigation  in  my  first  address,  was  merely  that  it  seemed  less  easy
to  eliminate  with  certainty.  We  can  be  sure  that  we  have  not  paid  a
given  person,  but  we  cannot  be  sure  that  he  has  not  long  practised
trickery,  though  in  some  cases  we  can  show  it  to  be  highly  improbable
that  he  has  practised  it  sufficiently  to  become  an  expert  trickster.

By  the  way,  I  entirely  agree  with  Mr.  Massey  that  cheating — even
successful  cheating — and  professional  conjuring  are  quite  different
things.  I  do  not  suppose  that  Slade  and  Eglinton  could  succeed  as
rivals  of  Maskelyne  or  Yerbeck.  But  I  have  no  reason — nor  has  Mr.
Massey  offered  any — for  regarding  their  powers  of  slate-writing  as
altogether  self-taught ;  nor  do  I  think  it  marvellous  that,  even  without
any  training  by  avowed  conjurers,  they  should  have  acquired  a  high
degree  of  skill  in  this  special  line  during  their  many  years  of  practice.

Mr.  Massey  seems  to  think  it  inexplicable,  supposing  Slade  to  be  a


106


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


■mere  trickster,  tliat  I  should  have  seen  through  him  on  one  occasion  (in
1876),  whereas  some  of  his  performances  have  baffled  professional
conjurers.  I  cannot  think  that  the  art  of  finding  out  unknovt'n  tricks
is  so  entirely  technical  as  this  inference  assumes  ;  nor  does  it  seem  to
me  improbable  that  Slade  should  be  sometimes  careless  with  persons
who  appear  easy  to  take  in,  or  sometimes  clumsy  in  adapting  himself
to  the  supposed  tastes  of  his  customers.  In  my  case,  as  I  conceive,  he
hoped  to  impress  an  academic  mind  by  presenting  unasked  a  slate  in-
scribed with  five  sentences  in  different  modern  languages,  obviously  taken
out  of  a  conversation-book,  and  one  phrase  out  of  the  Greek  Testament.
I  did  not  exactly  see  the  trick  done  ;  but  I  saw  when  substi-
tution might  have  taken  place  ;  and,  considering  the  performance  in
the  light  of  later  exposures,  I  cannot  doubt  that  it  was  a  prepared  trick.

Finally,  Mr.  Massey  is  surprised  that,  my  views  being  what  they
are,  I  should  have  attempted  to  obtain  personal  experience  of  Eglinton's
"phenomena,"  with  the  assistance  of  experts  in  conjuring.  I  certainly
should  not  have  done  this,  had  I  known  what  I  now  know  of  Eglinton's
antecedents ;  nor,  I  think,  even  without  this  knowledge,  if  it  had  not
been  for  the  situation  in  which  I  was  at  the  time  placed,  as  President
of  the  Society.  In  accordance  with  my  wishes — expressed  in  the
address  above  referred  to — our  "  Physical  Phenomena  Committee "
avoided  the  employment  of  paid  mediums  ;  but  their  efforts  to  obtain
evidence  elsewhere  led  to  no  satisfactory  result,  and  murmurs  began  to
be  heard  from  Spiritualists  among  us  that  we  were  neglecting  an
unequalled  opportunity  of  obtaining  conclusive  phenomena  through  the
mediumship  of  Eglinton.  I  was  anxious  that  our  committee  should
adhere  to  their  rule,  so  far  as  their  official  investigation  went,
and  that  none  of  the  Society's  funds  should  go  in  paying  guineas  to
a  professional  slate-writer ;  but  I  thought  it  better  to  make  some  con-
cession to  the  murmurers,  and  I  preferred  to  make  it  by  ari-anging  pri-
vately for  a  series  of  experiments  with  Eglinton.  Having  come  to  this
resolution,  it  seemed  clearly  desirable  to  seek  the  co-operation  of  a  con-
jurer. The  scientific  object  of  any  such  investigation  must  be  to  exclude
possible  known  causes  of  the  apparently  inexplicable  phenomena.  In  the
case  of  slate- writing,  the  most  obvious  of  such  causes  was  trickery,  at  any
rate  somewhat  similar  to  a  conjurer's  :  I  therefore  thought  it  impor-
tant to  get  the  aid  of  an  expert  in  conjuring  as  a  means  of  bringing  our
experiments  up  to  the  highest  attainable  pitch  of  conclusiveness,
whether  the  result  was  positive  or  negative.  And  I  thought  that  we  were
fortunate  in  obtaining  the  assistance  of  an  accomplished  amateur — Mr.
Angelo  J.  Lewis — who  was  prepared  to  enter  on  the  investigation  with
a  perfectly  open  mind.  That  he  obtained  no  satisfactory  result  does
not  surprise  me,  knowing  what  I  now  know  of  Eglinton.

H.  SiDGWICK.


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


107


I  am  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  take  up  some  further  space  in  conse-
quence of  Professor  Sidgwick's  latest  remarks.  Here  is  the  passage,  in
his  first  Address,  which  immediately  follows  the  already  quoted  reference
to  the  evidence  of  Crookes,  Wallace,  and  de  Morgan,  and  on  which  I
chiefly  base  the  representation  considered  by  Professor  Sidgwick  to  be
without  justification  (italics  are  mine)  : — "  But  it  is  clear  that  from  what
I  have  already  defined  as  the  aim  of  the  Society,  however  good  some  of
the  evidence  may  be  in  quality,  we  require  a  great  deal  more  of  it."  If
the  recommendation,  that  we  should  as  much  as  possible  direct  our
investigation  to  phenomena  with  private  mediums,  is  to  be  read  as  a
"  distinct  statement  of  opinion  "  that  we  ought  to  avoid  paid  mediums
as  much  as  possible,  I  can  only  remark  that  that  either  is  or  is  not
consistent  with  what  Professor  Sidgwick  said  elsewhere  in  the  same
Address.  In  my  view,  it  is  consistent,  because  we  may  well  prefer
investigation  witli  private  mediums,  and  may  yet  attach  high  im-
portance to  the  accumulation  of  the  best  evidence  with  professional
mediums — such  evidence  as  that  of  Zollner,  &c. — whether  obtained
within  or  without  the  Society.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  I  was  not
speaking  of  original  research  by  the  Society,  and  that  I  said  nothing  to
imply  that  Professor  Sidgwick  had  encouraged  this  or  that  sort  of  direct
investigation  by  the  Society.  We  get  our  facts — our  evidence — from
alien  sources  at  least  as  much  as  from  our  own  experience.  Estimating
more  highly  than  I  do  the  difiiculty  of  avoiding  imposture  with  paid
mediums.  Professor  Sidgwick  might  well  deprecate  the  regular  employ-
ment of  them,  as  bad  economy  of  time  and  resources,  and  might  neverthe-
less recognise  the  importance  of  accumulating  testimony  equal  to  that  of
which  he  said  we  want  "  a  great  deal  more  of  it."  Professor  Sidgwick
has  therefore  not  quite  correctly  stated  the  inference  I  drew  from  his
words,  and  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  insist  on  such  passages  as
"  it  is  highly  desirable  that  the  investigation  of  these  matters  should  be
carried  on  by  men  who  have  tried  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the
performances  of  conjurers,"  though  I  fail  to  see  the  high  desirability  of
this  if  investigation  is  to  be  restricted  as  Professor  Sidgwick  thinks  it
should  be.  And  further,  as  he  even  now  admits  that  evidence  with
those  he  calls  tricksters  may  be  raised  to  a  pitch  that  would  exclude
explanation  by  trickery,  it  is  obvious  that  my  worst  mistake  lay  in
supposing  that  he  would  feel  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  such  evidence
had  been  accumulated  since  he  addressed  us  in  1882,  and  not  in  the
supposition  that  he  had  recognised  the  possibility  of  this  happening
with  paid  mediums  who  had  been  under  suspicion.  I  thought  we  had
reached  the  pitch  of  evidence  at  which  the  question  of  the  sort  of
medium  would  be  admittedly  as  indifferent  to  Professor  Sidgwick  as  it
is  to  me.  He  thinks  otherwise.  But  I  am  still  unable  to  see  my
"  misrepresentation."


108


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation.


I  need  not  now  dwell  on  what  seems  to  me  the  petitio  jyrincipii
involved  in  the  supposition  of  such  descriptions  as  I  and  others  have
given  of  Eglinton's  slate-writing  being  given  of  the  performances  of  an
avowed  conjurer,  because  much  of  my  paper  was  an  attempt  to  show
that  such  a  supposition  is  an  impossible  one.  No  mere  conjurer  has
ever  yet  submitted,  and  none  ever  will  submit,  to  some  conditions
under  which  the  slate-writing  has  heen  repeatedly  observed  with
Eglinton,  or  will  ever  undertake  to  produce  the  appearance  of  such
conditions,  so  as  to  induce  a  witness  to  give  such  an  account  as  I
consider  really  good  evidence.

Professor  Sidgwick  seems  to  have  misunderstood  the  bearing  of  my
observation  with  regard  to  his  supposed  detection  of  Slade  (which  it
seems  was  no  detection  at  all).  It  is  not  in  the  least  "  inexplicable  "  to
me  that  a  good  conjurer  should  occasionally  be  careless,  and  should
thus  be  detected  by  one  who  is  not  an  expert.  But  my  argument  was
that  such  trickery,  so  detected,  certainly  raises  no  presumption  of
consummate  conjuring  capabilities.  I  do  not  say  it  excludes  the  hy-
pothesis of  the  latter,  though  I  think  it  is  decidedly  unfavourable  to  it.
All  I  say  is  tliat  you  must  have  other  grounds  to  go  upon,  and  that  even
if  you  think  you  have  such  other  grounds,  the  detected  cheating  is
rather  in  your  way  than  otherwise.  It  is  a  fact  jorima  facie  so  far
at  variance  with  great  conjuring  capabilities  that  it  would  have  to
be  exlained  in  some  such  way  as  that  in  Avhich  Professor  Sidgwick
explains  it.

And  this  brings  me  to  Professor's  Sidgwick's  references  to  my
admissions  of  trickery  by  mediums.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  I
believe  that  a  very  great  deal  of  what  seems  to  be  trickery  is  only
apparently  such.  And  I  hold  that  the  appearance  of  it  is  not  only  ex-
plainable, but  is  actually  necessitated  by  the  hypothesis  of  mediumship.
To  make  good  this  remark  would  require  a  distinct  paper.  But  even
where  the  physical  agency  of  the  medium  is  undeniable,  I  cannot,  upon
grounds  well  understood  by  Spiritualists,  always,  or  even  commonly,
infer  that  the  agency  is  voluntary.  That  there  is  a  residue  of  con-
scious, intentional  fraud  I  am,  of  course,  aware.  But  as  regards  Mr.
Eglinton  in  particular,  I  must  in  justice  say  that  I  have  made  no
admissions,  and  that  I  do  not  believe  he  has  ever  tricked — consciously
or  unconsciously — in  the  slate-writing,  though  I  am  quite  prepared  to
hear  that  with  him,  as  with  other  mediums,  deficient  power  has  had  its
usual  accompaniment  of  "  suspicious  "  results.  But  as  my  opinion  of
his  "mediumship"  is  quite  independent  of  any  estimate  of  his  character,
I  am  exempt  from  the  obligation  to  form  a  decided  judgment  on  certain
of  liis  alleged  antecedents — a  judgment  I  should  find  more  difficult
than  Professor  Sidgwick  has  found  it.

C.  C.  Massey.


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.


109


Should  any  reader  still  feel  an  unexhausted  interest  in  the  question
"whether  Mr.  Massey's  misrepresentation  of  my  advice  was  justifiable,  I
must  ask  him  to  read  the  address  itself — which  he  will  find  at  the
beginning  of  the  first  volume  of  our  Proceedings — along  with  the
polemical  reference  to  it  in  Mr.  Massey's  paper.  He  will,  I  think,
easily  convince  himself  (1)  that  the  "  we  "  who  were  urged  to  "  accumu-
late fact  on  fact  "  were  precisely  and  palpably  the  same  "  we  "  who  had
previously  been  advised  to  "  direct  investigation,  as  much  as  possible,  to
phenomena  where  no  pecuniary  motives  to  fraud  can  come  in;"  (2)  that
my  aversion  to  encouraging  the  trade  of  detected  impostors  was
expressed  quite  unmistakably  ;  and  (3)  that  the  complimentary  phrase
in  which  I  referred  to  the  investigations  of  our  predecessors  could  not
reasonably  be  understood  to  qualify  my  subsequent  distinct  recommen-
dations. But  I  can  hardly  imagine  that  any  reader  will  take  this
trouble ;  it  is  now  very  unimportant — even  to  myself — whether  I
expressed  my  opinion  as  clearly  as  I  intended  four  years  ago.  What  I
chiefly  desire  is  to  prevent  any  further  misapprehension  of  my  views.  I
have  long  held  that  the  great  scandal  of  modern  Spiritualism  is  the
encouragement  it  has  always  given  to  the  nefarious  trade  of  professional
impostors.  I  feared  that  the  formation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  would  almost  inevitably  have  some  effect  of  this  undesirable
kind  ;  and  I  determined,  at  any  rate,  to  do  all  I  could  to  reduce  the
extent  of  the  evil.  I  did  not  propose  a  rigid  rule  of  avoiding  "  paid  "
mediums  or  "subjects";  partly  thinking  that  some  pecuniai-y  compensa-
tion for  loss  of  time  might  be  found  necessary,  in  the  case  of  prolonged
investigation  with  any  persons  of  limited  leisure.  But  I  certainly
hoped  that  we  might  avoid  altogether  the  kind  of  evidence  on  which
Mr.  Massey's  paper  entirely  relies — the  reports  of  the  "phenomena  "  of
persons  like  Monck,  Slade,  and  Eglinton.  In  the  case  of  Monck,
Mr.  Massey  tacitly  admits  that  imposture  has  been  proved  ;  that  Slade
"  often  cheats "  he  has  expressly  stated ;  as  regards  the  evidence
against  Eglinton  he  declares  that  he  would  have  some  difficulty  in
forming  a  decided  judgment.  This  point,  then,  I  must  leave  for  the
reader  to  decide,  after  studying  the  evidence  to  which  I  have  directed
his  attention  ;i  if  he  should  still  think  it  right  to  spend  his  guineas  on
Eglinton,  he  will  at  any  rate — I  hope — not  suggest  that  he  is  acting  in
accordance  with  my  recommendation.

For  my  own  part,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion — not  by  a  priori
reasoning,  but  from  much  personal  experience  and  examination  of  the
experience  of  others — that  it  is  only  under  very  exceptional  circum-
stances that  the  serious  student  of  Spiritualism  should  investigate  the

^  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Researcli  will  find
the  evidence  given  in  the  Journal  for  June.  1SS6,  ])]}.  28'2-287.


110  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation.

"phenomena"  of  a  professional  and  paid  medium.  That  any  one  who
is  induced  by  narratives  of  marvel  to  enter  on  this  line  of  investigation
should  first  take  all  the  pains  in  his  power  to  acquaint  himself  with  the
possibilities  of  producing  by  trickery  the  appearance  of  such  marvels —
this  proposition,  I  conceive,  will  be  generally  admitted.  But
Mr.  Massey  at  least  seems  to  think  that  no  trouble  of  this  sort  need  be
taken  by  the  investigator  who  confines  his  attention  to  private  mediums.
This  is  not  my  view.  On  the  contrary,  I  hold  that  in  the  case
of  private,  no  less  than  professional  mediums,  it  is  very  important
that  the  investigator  should  be,  if  possible,  competent  to  judge  how  far
the  results  that  he  describes — or  rather  his  impressions  of  them — could
be  produced  by  trickery  ;  at  least,  if  his  evidence  is  to  afibrd  any
effective  corroboration  of  the  medium's  own  assertions.  I  am  far  from
aying  that  the  study  of  conjuring  will  always  enable  him  to  judge
correctly  on  this  point,  nor  do  I  even  think  that  it  would  be  in  all  cases
the  best  method  of  training  his  judgment,  but  I  think  that  it  is  likely
to  be  useful  in  most  cases  ;  it  would  at  least  tend  to  prevent  his  testi-
mony from  being  vitiated — as  much  Spiritualistic  evidence  now  is — by
expressions  of  confident  reliance  on  the  most  palpably  inadequate
tests.

H.  SiDGWICK.


/


Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transference.  Ill


EXPERIMENTS IN  MUSCLE-BEADING AND  THOUGHT-

TRANSFERENCE.i

By  Max  Dessoie.

There  appeared  recently  in  Leipzig  a  work  by  the  well-known  Pro-
fessor of  Physiology,  Dr.  W.  Preyer,  entitled  "  The  Exjjlanation  of
Thought-Reading. "  In  this  book  the  author  gives  a  detailed  explanation
of  muscle-reading,  as  exhibited  in  the  late  performances  of  Messrs.  Bishop
and  Cumberland,  but  denies  the  possibility  of  any  other  kind  of  thought-
transference.  It  may  be  not  out  of  place,  then,  to  describe  some  experiments
which  I  made  in  the  summer  of  1885.

I  began  my  investigations  by  seeking  to  determine  the  range  of  muscle-
reading,  and  I  found  that — apart  from  all  other  modes  of  contact — a  gentle
touching  of  the  shoulder  sufficed  for  definite  guidance.  In  what  follows,  the
person  willing  and  thinking  is  spoken  of  as  the  "agent,"  and  the  person
searching,  or  receiving  the  "transference,"  is  spoken  of  as  the  "per-
cipient."

1. — Sitting  on  June  15th,  1885.
Agent  :—Ewal(li  Weiss,  Stud.  Mus.,  Berlin,  S.  W.  Wilhelmstrasse,  28.
Percipient : — Max  Dessoir.

Herr  Weiss  thought  of  this — that  the  percipient  was  to  go  through
several  rooms  to  a  bronze  figure,  take  it  down  from  a  cupboard,  stroke  it,
and  then  put  it  down.  He  was  then  to  go  further,  and  sit  down  on  a  parti-
cular chair. Complete  success.

It  is  clear  how  the  result  was  attained.  The  percipient  has  his  eyes
bandaged,  and  his  attention  concentrated  upon  himself.  By  unconscious
muscular  guidance  he  is  led  to  the  bronze  figure.

The  question  now  arises,  how  can  there  possibly  be  a  guidance  uptvards  ?

As  regards  this  point,  I  have  had  the  following  instructive  experiences  :
First,  if  the  percipient  wants  to  move  away  from  the  spot,  the  agent
always  guides  him  back,  so  that  he  notes  :  "  There  is  something  more  to  be
done  here."  Secondly,  the  pressure  on  his  shoulders  diminishes,  since  the
hands  of  the  agent  involuntarily  rise  a  little,  in  consequence  of  his
thoughts  being  fixed  on  the  higher  position.  The  percipient  concludes
with  certainty  from  these  signs  that  his  activity  is  to  be  concentrated  in  an
upward  direction.  The  stroking  of  the  figure,  which  at  first  sight  seems
remarkable,  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  every  agent  has,  as  it  were,  a
code  of  confirmatory  muscular  movements  expressive  of  satisfaction.  When
I  let  my  hands  slip  down  along  the  figure — entirely  by  accident— I  was
clearly  sensible  of  this  approving  pressure  ;  this  induced  me  to  repeat  the
movement  until  a  cessation  of  the  pressure  indicated  to  me  that  this
part  of  my  task  was  accomplished. I  was  then  guided  by  the  unwitting

The  original,  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation,  woe  sent  to  us  at  the  close
of  1885.


112


Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transference.


agent  to  the  chair  which  had  been  chosen,  and  a  strong  downward  pressure
impelled  me  to  the  natural  movement  of  sitting  down.

2.  — Sitting  on  June  25th,  1885.

Agent: — Ewald  Weiss.
Percipient : — Max  Dessoir.

The  percipient  was  to  fetch  a  walking-stick  out  of  the  corridor,  carry  it
to  the  window,  and  lay  it  there  in  the  window-groove  {Fensterrintie).

Complete  success.  Nevertheless  (my  notes  continue),  when  the  per-
cipient came  to  the  window  he  wanted  first  to  place  the  stick  in  the  corner,
then  he  hung  it  to  the  window-sill  (Fensterbrett),  and  afterwards  twice  moved
it  about  over  the  sill. Then,  finally,  he  laid  it  down  correctly.

The  first  part  of  the  experiment  was  obviously  successful  on  the  principles
with  which  we  are  already  familiar  ;  but  the  hesitation  in  the  second  part
deserves  further  consideration.  The  chief  condition  of  course  is  that  the
percipient  shall  above  everything  be  as  far  as  possible  "  without  thought  "
{gedmikenlos),  in  order  to  submit  completely  to  the  guidance  ;  but  if  he  is
compelled  to  take  a  line  of  his  own,  he  will  try  whatever  it  is  easiest  and
most  natural  to  do  under  the  circumstances.  Acting  on  this  canon  of
experience,  I  first  placed  the  stick  in  the  corner  ;  but  as  I  was  about  to  move
away,  the  pressure  on  my  shoulders  prevented  me,  and  1  knew  that  I  had
made  a  mistake.  I  then  tried  until  I  discovered  the  right  thing,  and  could
then  describe  this  trial  also  as  successful.  After  these  indications,  the  one
additional  experiment  which  I  select  for  attention,  out  of  many  others,
is  easily  comprehensible  ;  it  shows,  however,  an  interesting  variation.  I
quote  it  from  the  notes.

3.  — Sitting  on  June  10th,  1885.

Agent : — Heinrich  Biltz,  Student  of  Chemistry,  14,  Schellingstrasse.
Percipient : — Max  Dessoir.

A  match-box  had  to  be  found,  a  match  struck,  and  a  candle  in  another
room  to  be  lit  with  it.

The  percijiient  found  the  match-box,  opened  it,  took  a  match  from  it,
and  seized  the  right  candlestick.  But  then  it  occurred  to  him — as  he  imme-
diately said  himself,  before  he  knew  what  he  ought  to  have  done — that  there
was  no  candle  in  the  candlestick,  and  tliat  hence  it  was  useless  to  strike  the
match. He  therefore  left  it  undone.

This  case  shows  clearly  how  detrimental  it  is  for  the  percipient  to  depend
upon  deliberate  reflection  (regelrechte  Ueberlegitagen)  instead  of  following  his
instinct.  A  single  trial  would  have  sufiiced  to  show  whether  the  match
ought  to  be  kindled  or  not.

In  the  experiments  which  now  follow,  any  unconscious  muscular  move-
ment, such  as  I  have  described  in  the  preceding  cases,  is  altogether  excluded.
They  were  so  arranged  that  agent  and  percipient  sat  at  one  table  at  a  dis-
tance from  each  other  of  between  half  a  metre  and  three  metres.  There
was  either  no  contact  at  all,  or  in  a  few  cases  the  agent  placed  his  hands
gently  upon  those  of  the  percijiient.  Under  these  conditions,  experiments
were  made  in  guessing  numbers.  The  percii^ient  did  not,  of  course,
write  the  number  down,  but  spoke  it. When  the  percipient  wished  to


Muscle-Heading  and  TItoaght-Travsference.  113


speak,  the  contact  sometimes  made  was  discontinued,  lest  the  pressure  of
the  hand  should  afford  any  clue.

4. — Sitting  on  June  1st,  1885.
Agent : — Heinrich  Biltz.
Percipient : — Max  Dessoir.


THOUGHT.

GUESSED.

2

  4

2

  7

10

  53

20

  75

35

  35,  85

19

  18

78

  11

The  percipient  was  [previously]  informed  whether  the  number  consisted
of  one  digit  or  of  more.

5. — Sitting  on  June  25th,  1885.
Agent : — Ewald  Weiss.
Percipient  : — Max  Dessoir.

THOUGHT.  GUESSED.

8 1,  8.

33 ... ... Percipient  continually  sees  a  "3"  in  all  possible  shapes,

but  cannot  discover  the  second  figure,  which  in
truth  was  also  "3."

6 G.

10 Nothing.

11 44.

3 ... ... "  I  see  a  7,  but  it  oscillates  above."  Pause.  Then — "3."

Insignificant  as  these  results  may  be,  I  think  that  some  conclusions
may  still  be  drawn  from  them.  Whereas  at  the  first  sitting  of  this  sort
the  only  success  was  a  single  half-correct  result  out  of  the  Avhole  seven  trials ;
24  days  later,  out  of  six  trials  one  was  right  at  the  first  attempt,  two  at  the
second  attempt ;  another  was  half  right  ;  and  only  two  were  failures.
Even  of  these  two,  the  case  11 — 44  should  not  count  as  an  absolute
failure,  owing  to  the  great  similarity  in  the  appearance  of  the  two  numbers.

Thus  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  an  increase  in  the  capacity  of  the  percipient,
and  I  am  convinced  that  nothing  more  than  further  practice  was  neces-
sary in  order  to  get  splendid  results. ^  In  this,  as  in  other  matters,
practice  makes  perfect.  In  the  course  of  this  paper,  we  shall  encounter
yet  further  proof  that  the  susceptibility  to  affection  from  the  thoughts
of  others  can  be  developed  by  practice.  The  best  pi'oof  is,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  results  were  always  the  poorest  at  the  beginning  of  any  special  class
of  experiments,  and,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  classes  of  experiments
only  more  recently  practised  had  comparatively  the  fewest  results  to  show.

Experiments  in  the  discovery  of  objects  thought  of,  where  there  was  no
contact  with  the  agents,  show  no  better  results  than  the  ordinary  proba-

1  This  opinion  seems  far  too  confident ;  and  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  Herr
Dessoir's  theory  as  to  the  effect  of  practice  heightening  the  percipient's  suscepti-
bility is  at  all  generally  borne  out. — Ed.


I


114 Muscle- Reading  and  Thought-Transference.


liilities  would  warrant.  But  as  I  have  conducted  only  11  experiments  of  this
kind,  the  question  of  practice  and  improvement  does  not  enter  ;  and  it  has,
moreover,  to  be  remembered  that  the  effort  to  jierceive  is  apt  to  bring
the  would-be  percipient  out  of  the  completely  passive  state  in  which  he
ought  to  be.  At  any  rate,  I  have  seldom  succeeded  in  perceiving  mentally
an  object  (pencil,  pen,  &c.)  thought  of  ;  and  the  number  of  trials  (8)  has
been  too  small  for  any  safe  conclusion.  Unfortunately,  my  time  did
not  enable  me  to  go  thoroughly  then  into  every  branch  of  the  experi-
ments ;  and  I  thought  it  better  to  make  myself  familiar  with  some  portions,
instead  of  going  on  with  all  of  them  and  getting  only  small  results.

I  proceed  to  give  my  few  observations  on  the  transference  of  words
thought  of.

6. — Sitting  on  June  16th,  1885.
Agent : — Ewald  Weiss.
Perclpieni  : — Max  Dessoir.
In  the  first  two  cases,  the  percipient  was  told  that  the  words  were  names
of  towns  ;  in  the  others  only  that  they  were  nouns.

THOUGHT.  GUESSED.

Rome ... ... ...  Hamburg.

Como ... ... ... The  first  is  round — towards  the  left  ;  the

second  like  an  a  ;  then  something  whicli  I
can't  distinguish  ;  then  an  a  or  o.

Antwort  ... ... ... A  .

Lesen ... ... ...  Ehie.

Ja  . . . ... ... ... The  word  has  only  two  letters. The  first  is  a

K  or  J,  the  second  like  a  small  d.
Here  also,  I  think,  a  progress  is  unmistakable,^  although  not  one  of  the
cases  can  be  described  as  entirely  successful.

Similarly  in  the  following  exi)eriments,  which  I  will  not  consider  in  any
further  detail,  there  can  be  no  question  of  a  satisfactory  result  ;  ^  it  is,
indeed,  only  the  beginning  of  a  series,  which  I  was  unable  to  continue.

The  modus  operandi  was  as  follows  : — The  experimenters  sat  two  metres
apart ;  the  agent  imagined  the  j)articular  card  2>lainly  on  the  ground  ;  the
percipient  had,  as  also  in  every  other  case,  his  eyes  bandaged  with  a  thin
silk  handkerchief.

7. — Sitting  on  May  24th,  1885,  and  on  the  following  Days.
Agent : — Heinrich  Biltz.
Percipient : — Max  Dessoir.
thought.  guessed.

1.  Knave  of  Spades  ... ... ... 1.  Queen  of  Spades.

2.  Ten  of  Spades ... ... ... 2.  Nine  of  Diamonds.

3.  King  of  Hearts 3.  King  of  Clubs.

^  The  trials  are  too  few  to  justify  any  such  conclusion,  even  had  the  success
been  more  appreciable  than  it  was. — Ed.

-  It  is  not  clear  what  is  meant.  The  series  shows  an  amount  of  success  beyond
what  chance  would  be  likely  to  produce.  But  it  is  all  too  short;  and  moreover  the
cards  were  not  {as  they  always  should  be)  .selected  at  random  from  a  pack,  but
were  apparently  fixed  on  at  will  by  the  agent,  who  almost  confined  himself  to  aces
and  court  cards. — Ed.


Muscle-Reading  and  Thouglit-Transference.  115


THOUGHT.

4.  Knave  of  Diamonds

5.  Eight  of  Diamonds

6.  Queen  of  Diamonds

7.  King  of  Spades

8.  Knave  of  Diamonds

9.  Ten  of  Spades

10.  Ace  of  Hearts

11.  Queen  of  Hearts . .

12.  King  of  Clubs

13.  Ace  of  Spades

Without  wishing  to  draw  any  conclusions  from  these  trials,  I  pass  on  at
once  to  that  branch  of  the  inquiry  to  which  I  have  given  the  most  attention,
the  reproduction  of  diagrams.

The  modus  operandi,  was  as  described  above.  Herren  Weiss  and  Biltz
acted  alternately  as  agents,  except  in  No.  7,  where  Herr  Wilhelm  Sachse  [of
10,  Kirchbachstrasse,  Berlin,  S.W.]  was  the  agent.  Twenty-one  trials^  were
made  in  all,  the  following  account  of  which  I  for  the  most  part  quote  from  the
notes.  I  have  copied  the  diagrams'^  as  accurately  as  possible  from  originals
which  I  have  preserved,  and  give  them  in  the  order  of  the  experiments.  I  may
remark  that  the  success  was  affected  by  the  mood  of  the  agent  and  of  the
percipient  at  the  time.  The  sittings  were  held  between  June  4th  and  June
20th,  1885  ;  as  the  experiments,  therefore,  are  spread  over  very  many  days,
it  is  more  difi^cult  than  in  the  previous  observations  to  estimate  any
development.


GUESSED.

4.  Queen  of  Diamonds.

5.  Eight  of  Spades.

6.  Knave  of  Spades.

7.  King  of  Hearts.

8.  Ten  of  Clubs.

9.  Ace  of  Diamonds.

10.  Ace  of  Hearts.

11.  Queen  of  Hearts.

12.  King  or  Queen  of  Clubs.

13.  Ace  of  Hearts,  Ace  of  Spades.


^  The  21  include  all  the  cases  where  Herr  Dessoir  himself  was  either  agent  or
jjercipient,  but  do  not  inchide  three  trials  in  which  Herr  Biltz  tried  to  act  as
percipient ,  and  which  were  failures.  These  must  be  set  against  three  successes  of
Herr  Biltz  (Nos.  iii.,  vi.,  and  x.)  in  the  series  given.  In  that  series,  two  attempts  of
Herr  Dessoir  as  percipient— one  of  them  (to  the  eye)  a  success,  and  one  a  faikire— are
omitted,  owing  to  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  conditions. — Ed.

"  The  diagrams  on  pp.  llG-123  are  not  taken  from  Herr  Dessoir's  copies,  but
from  the  originals  themselves,  which  Herr  Dessoir  forwarded  for  the  purpose  at  our
request. — Ed.

I  2


Orio.


Agent's  name  nmitted.


III.


Rep.


It  apjjears  here  that  the  agent's  image
included  an  hnpi-e-ssion  of  the  left  i^art
of  the  frame. M.  D.


Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transference.  117

IV.

Orig.


Agent:  H.  B.


Rep.


V

Okig.


Agent :  H.  B.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  3.


Rep.  4.


118 Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transfevence,

VI.

Orig.


Agent :  M.  D.


Rep.  1.

A


Rep.  2.


Orig.


VII.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


While  the  second  reproduction  was  proceeding,
an  interruption  occurred  which  prevented  its
completion.


Agent  :  W.  S.


Muscle-Reading  and  TIwught-Transference.  119

VIII.

Orig.


Agent :  H.  B.

Eep.  1.  Rep.  2.  Rep.  3.  Rep.  4.


IX.

Orig.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  3.


Muscle- Read ing  and  Thought- Trans fo -ence.


121


XII.

OniG.


Agent  :  H.  B.


Rkp.  1.


Rep.  2.


Orig.


Agent :  E.  W.


XIII.
Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


The  percipient  said,  "It  looks  like  a  window."


122 Muscle- Reading  and  Thought-Transference.


Oeig.


Agent :  E.  W.


XIV.

Rep.  1.  Rep.  2.


Rep.  3.


XV.

Obig.


Agent :  E.  W.


XVII.


Oeig.  Rep.  1.  Rep.  2.


Agent :  E.  W.


Muscle- Reading  and  Tltougl it-Transference.  123
XVIII.


Orig.


Agent :  E.  W.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


The  percipient  said,  "  I  see  two  bright  triangles,  but  I
cannot  tell  exactly  how  the  second  is  situated."


XIX.

Orig.  Rep.  1.  Rep.  2.  Rep.  3.

ZX7  -e-

Agent :  E.  W.


In  concluding  this  brief  account,  I  will  summarise  the  results  which  I
would  venture  to  draw  from  my  experiments.

I  have  always,  as  has  been  seen,  taken  part  myself  in  the  experiments,
and  have  never  been  a  mere  looker-on.  This  was  for  the  purpose  of  guarding
against  every  form  of  deception  to  which  I  might  otherwise  have  fallen  a
victim,  and  of  finding  the  key  to  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenon.
Although  this  last  hope  has  not  been  fulfilled,  owing  to  the  small  amount  of
time  that  I  could  devote  to  these  observations,  I  have,  nevertheless,  noticed
some  not  unimportant  points.

The  iireliminaiy  conditions  of  a  successful  sitting  aj^pear  to  me  to  be  : —
A  very  quiet  locality,  with  plenty  of  fresh  air  and  a  moderate  temperature.
Only  persons  ought  to  take  part  in  the  experiments  whose  presence  is  agree-
able to  the  percipient,  and  who  he  knows  wUl  not  be  disturbed  or  annoyed
by  occasional  failure.  The  percipient  must  be  in  a  calm  and  contented  frame
of  mind  ;  the  agent  must  be  in  sympathy  with  him,  and  must  himself  have
the  knack  of  conducting  the  experiments  easily  and  pleasantly.  The
eyes  of  the  percipient  should  then  be  bandaged  with  a  light  silk  handker-
chief, in  such  a  way  that  the  bandage  passes  also  over  the  ears.

The  agent  and  percipient  then  proceed  respectively  in  the  manner
described  above.

The  agent  should  now  form,  as  vividly  as  possible,  a  mental  picture  of
the  object — best  imagined  as  a  shining  white  on  a  black  background.
This  picture  he  should  hold  fast  with  the  greatest  energy,  and  let  no  other
thoughts  interfere  with  it.  The  percipient,  on  the  contrary,  must  endeavour
above  everything  not  to  strain  expectation  in  looking  for  the  emergence
of  the  image,  but  simply  to  wait  quietly.  He  should  empty  his  brain,  as  it
were,  of  all  disturbing  imaginations,  and  gaze  with  closed  eyes  into  a  deep


124 Muscle- Reading  and  Tliouglit-Transference.


darkness.  There  will  then  soon  emerge  in  it  images  of  objects,  diagrams,
&c.,  which  seem  to  change  into  one  another.  He  should  be  patient  until  one
of  these  remains  quietly  before  him,  and  seems  definite  to  him.  Then  he
should  take  the  bandage  ofi',  and  draw  what  he  has  seen.

Frequently,  at  the  moment  of  drawing,  the  image  disappears,  and  cannot
be  correctly  fixed  on  the  paper.  In  this  case  another  trial  ought  to  be  made.
When  he  has  drawn  he  should  ask,  "Is  it  right  ? "  And  the  answer
should  be  only  No  or  Yes.  If  he  now  desires  it,  a  second  experiment  may
be  attempted  ;  but  more  than  two  should  not  be  made^  as  this  fatigues
both  agent  and  percipient.

I  have  only  one  further  remark  to  inake — that  deception,  conscious  or  un-
conscious, is  altogether  out  of  the  question  as  regards  the  foregoing  cases.
The  above-named  gentlemen,  as  well  as  myself,  pledge  their  word  to  that
effect.  1  Max  Dessoir.

The  following  shorter  record  is  taken  from  the  monthly  journal  Sphinx
(Leipzig),  for  June,  1886,  and  we  have  not  seen  the  original  diagrams.  The
experiments  were  made  at  the  house  of  Baron  Dr.  von  Ravensburg,  whose
wife  was  the  percipient.  Herr  Max  Dessoir  drew  the  originals  on  the  spur
of  the  moment,  out  of  the  Baroness  von  Ravensburg's  sight,  and  taking  care
that  his  pencil  should  move  noiselessly.  He  and  the  Baron  then  concen-
trated their  attention  on  the  figure,  which  the  Baroness,  sitting  at  another
table,  endeavoured  to  reproduce,  after  a  time  varying  from  20  to  45  seconds.
(The  Baron  did  not  take  part  in  the  first  experiment,  which,  it  will  be  seen,
was  a  failure.)


1  Herr  Weiss  and  Herr  Biltz  are  known  to  us,  through  correspondence,  inde-
pendently of  these  experiments.  They  and  Herr  Sachse  have  sent  us  certificates  of
the  accuracy  of  the  record  of  the  experiments  in  which  they  were  respectively
concerned. — Ed.


Muscle-ReoMwj  and  Tlioughf -Transference.  125

II.

Orig.  Rkp.  1.


126 Muscle-Reading  and  TJiought-Transference.


Rep.


The  percipient  said,  "It  is  a  circle  outside,  and  there  is  something  else  inside
it ;  "  then,  after  a  pause,  "A  triangle."  She  then  drew  the  reproduction,  and  added
that  the  circle  was  an  imperfect  one.


With  respect  to  these  experiments,  the  Baron  and  Baroness  von
Ravensburg  have  sent  a  note  of  corroboration,  of  which  the  following
is  a  translation  : —

"  18,  Zietenstrasse,  Berlin,  W.

"July  9,  1886.

' '  We  certify  that  the  report  of  our  sitting  for  a  trial  of  thought-
transference,  which  appeared  in  the  sixth  number  of  /S/j/uncc,  is  throughout
in  correspondence  with  the  facts,  and  has  been  drawn  up  with  complete
accuracy.

"  Frbihbrr  Goeler  von  Ravensburg.
"Elizabeth,  Fbeifeau  Goeler  von  Ravensburg."


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


127


VI.

ON  TELEPATHIC  HYPNOTISM,  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO
OTHER  FORMS  OF  HYPNOTIC  SUGGESTION.
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


§  L  The  nucleus  of  the  following  paper  consists  of  some  personal
observations  of  a  remarkable  hypnotic  subject — observations  which  tlie
kindness  of  Dr.  Gibert  and  Professor  Pierre  J anet  enabled  me  to  make
at  Havre,  April  20-24,  1886.

The  most  striking  feature  in  this  case  was  the  som.meil  a  distance,
or,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  teUpathic  liypnotism  ; — the  production,  that  is  to
say,  of  sleep  and  other  hypnotic  phenomena  by  the  will,  or  mental  sugges-
tion, of  a  person  at  a  distance  from  the  subject.

This  is  not,  of  course,  the  first  time  that  such  a  phenomenon  has
been  observed.  In  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  Chap.  3  ;  Vol.
II.  Supplement,  Chap.  1  ;  and  Additional  Chapter)  will  be  found
a  collection  of  the  more  trustworthy  cases ;  and  Mr.  Gurney  has
pointed  out  their  analogy  to  the  sj^ontaneous  cases  of  telepathy,  of  which
that  book  furnishes  many  examples.  But  from  the  side  of  hypnotism
no  attempt  whatever,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  been  made  to  correlate  this
hypnogenous  ^  force  or  suggestion  at  a  distance  with  hypnogenous  agencies
employed  in  the  subject's  actual  presence, — hypnogenous  suggestion
which  actually  reaches  his  ear.  The  mesmerists  proper,  talking  of  their
vital  influence,  have  said,  "  This  influence  can  sometimes  act  over  great
distances."  And  more  recently  the  suggestionists,  if  I  may  so  term  them,
have  sometimes  spoken  of  this  distant  command  as  though  it  were
merely  a  form  of  suggestion — as  if  it  fell  under  that  heading  with  as
little  difficulty  as  the  mere  deferred  suggestion,  which  works  itself
out  at  a  distant  time,  instead  of  working  itself  out  at  the  same  time,
but  at  a  distant  point  of  space.

The  confusion  involved  in  both  these  modes  of  expression  is  great.
The  mesmerists  have  ignored  the  difficulty  of  supposing  that  an  effluence
which  they  hold  actually  to  emanate  from  eyes  and  fingers  can  operate
through  stone  walls  and  across  streets  filled  with  the  interfering
influence  of  other  men  and  women.  And  the  suggestionists  seem  to  me
never  to  have  analysed  what  is  meant  by  suggestion — a  word  of  indis-
pensable convenience,  but  which,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  has  been
used  to  include  methods  of  hypnogeny  which  diff'er  widely  from  one
another.

I  must  adopt  from  the  French  the  word  hypnogmy  for  the  production  of
hypnotic  states  :  hysterogcny  for  the  production  of  hysterical  states  ;  dynain-
ogeny  for  the  production  of  increased  nervous  activity ;  cesthesiogen  for  a  substance
whose  contact  or  proximity  gives  rise  to  unexplained  nervous  action.


128


On  TeleiKdhic  Hypnotism.


After  narrating,  therefore,  my  observations  on  Madame  B.'s  sommeil
a  distaticp,  I  felt  unwilling  to  leave  the  case  as  a  mere  isolated  marvel,
and  unwilling  also  to  connect  it  with  more  familiar  forms  of  hypnotism
by  what  seem  to  me  mere  vague  phrases  about  an  extension  of  "  the
range  of  mesmeric  influence,"'  or  of  "  the  scope  of  suggestion."  So  I  have
briefly  reviewed  some  other  recent  cases — Dr.  Hericourt's,  Dr.  Dusart's,
Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot's — and  have  then  endeavoured,  in  a  provisional
and  very  imperfect  manner,  to  analyse  the  various  forms  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  and  to  correlatfi  them,  in  an  intelligible  series,  with  the
numerous  and  disparate  methods  of  experimentally  inducing  the
hypnotic  trance  which  have  been  practised  by  competent  observers.  I
have  been  obliged  to  do  this  very  briefly,  and  to  omit  any  discussion
of  the  true  definition  and  limit  of  "  liypnotic  phenomena  "  themselves.
This,  too,  needs  doing  on  a  more  comprehensive  plan  than  has  been  yet
attempted.

§  2.  Before  giving  my  own  notes  on  Madame  B.'s  case,  it  will
be  necessary  to  furnish  some  account  of  M.  Pierre  Janet's  previous
observations,  as  recorded  in  liis  "  Note  sur  quelques  phenomenes  de
somnambulisme."  {Bxdletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,
Tome  I.,  p.  24.)  ^  Professor  Janet  was  kind  enough  to  allow  me  to
peruse  his  notes,  taken  mainly  at  the  actual  moment  of  observation  ;
and,  although  I  am  naturally  not  at  liberty  to  print  any  matter  as  yet
unpublished,  I  can  vouch  for  the  scrupulous  care  with  which  he  has
compiled  his  account  of  the  case.

I  had  also  the  advantage  of  conversation  with  Dr.  Gibert  and
his  family,  who  are  well  acquainted  with  Madame  B.  Dr.  Gibert
is  the  "  Doyen  du  Syndicat  Medical  de  la  France,"  and  a  leading
physician  at  Havre.  He  has  long  practised  hypnotism,  which  he  has
directed  mainly  to  therapeutic  ends.  Madame  B.,  while  at  Havre,
is  received  into  the  house  of  a  sister  of  Dr.  Gibert's ;  and  his
family,  who  have  access  to  the  somnambule  at  all  hours,  confirm
Professor  Janet's  estimate  of  her  simplicity  and  honesty  of  character.

Of  tlie  genuineness  of  the  induced  somnambulism  in  this  case  no
doubt  has  been  felt,  so  far  as  I  know,  by  any  observer.  The  anaesthesia,
the  contractures,  the  variations  in  reflex  action,  &c.  (as  well  as  the
woman's  previous  history),  supply  sufficient  evidence  on  this  point.  But
even  after  this  fundamental  fact  has  been  proved  (which  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  of  hypnotism  is  not  very  difflcult),  there  remains
a  question,  less  definite  indeed,  but  highly  important,  as  to  tlie  temper
of  mind  which  the  subject  carries  with  her  into  the  trance.  Thus,  for
instance,  there  is,  of  course,  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  the  trance  of
"la  nommee  Wit-" — whom,  thanks  to  Dr. Fertj's  kindness,  I  liave


See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  679.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


129


observed  at  tlie  Salpetriere — the  asylum,  or  ratlier  the  arena,  of  her
liystero-epileptic  exploits.  But  "  Wit-"  is  the  very  type  and  culmina-
tion of  the  hysterical  diathesis,  and  her  trickiness  and  love  of  notice
are  so  integral  a  part  of  her  that  while  she  runs  through  her  phases  of
catalepsy,  lethargy,  and  so  on,  one  still  suspects  (if  I  may  so  say)  a
cataleptic  cunning  and  a  lethargic  A-igilance  as  to  the  operator's  will.

Madame  B.,  the  subject  of  these  researches,  is  of  a  very
different  type.  She  is  a  heavy,  middle-aged,  peasant  woman,  with  a
patient,  stolid  expression,  and  a  very  limited  iiitelligence  and
vocabulary.  She  has,  indeed,  been  more  or  less  somnambulic  from
childhood,  and  a  Dr.  Feron,  since  dead,  and  other  persons,  seem  to  have
experimented  on  her  long  ago.  But  she  has  never  made  hypnotism  her
business ;  she  was  drawn  to  Havre  by  some  medical  kindness  received
from  Dr.  Gibert ;  and  care  is  taken  that  she  shall  not  make  money  out
of  her  stay.  Her  trance-state  is  never  mentioned  to  her  in  her  normal
state  ;  nor  does  she  in  any  way  seek  notice  as  a  "  sensitive  "  ;  on  the
contrary,  she  plainly  dislikes  being  sent  to  sleep  from  a  distance,  and
has  repeatedly  tried  to  prevent  it.i  I  have  seen  her  only  in  the  trance-
state,  and  I  share  the  general  impression  that  what  she  says  in  that
state  is  naively  and  sincerely  said,  and  probably  gives  a  true  account
of  her  own  feelings  and  actions.

I  will  now  briefly  summarise  M.  Janet's  principal  results.

«.  Induction  of  trance  in  presence  or  close  proximity  of  subject.

Sleep  usually  induced  by  holding  her  hand.  She  is  then  onlj
responsive  to  the  operator.  He  alone  can  make  contractures  disap-
pear, ifec.  Gaze  from  operator's  eye  unnecessary.  Slight  pressure
of  thumb  suffices  ;  but  no  pressure  (except  severe  pressure  on  thumb)
is  efficacious  without  mental  concentration — operator's  ivill  to  put
her  to  sleep.  "  This  influence  of  the  operator's  tliouglit,  extraordi-
nary, as  it  may  seem,  is  here  quite  preponderant ;  so  much  so  that
it  can  take  the  place  of  all  other  influences."  Will  witlioxd
toucli  induces  sleep.  Taking  precautions  to  avoid  suggestion,  it  is  found
that  (1)  M.  Janet,  while  sitting  near  her,  sends  her  to  sleep  when,  and
only  when,  lie  wills  it;  (2)  M.  Gibert  from  adjoining  room  sends  her  to
sleep,  M.  J anet  remaining  near  ner,  but  not  willing  ;  thei-e  is  evidence
that  the  sleep  is  of  M.  Gibert's  induction,  for  she  is  in  rapport  with  him
only;  whereas  had  sleep  come  from  suggestion  of  operator's  proximity,  the
suggestion  would  probably  have  been  derived  from  M.  Janet's  close
presence.  Nevertheless,  she  did  know  that  Dr.  Gibert  was  in  the  house.
(The  question  as  to  degrees  of  proximity  will  be  discussed  later  on.)

p.  Induction  of  trance  at  a  distance  from  subject.

1  M.  Janet  says  (Eev.  Philosophique,  August,  1886)  that  Madame  E.,  wlien
awake,  is  not  aware  tliat  she  can  be  hypnotised  from  a  distance.  'Sly  remark
applies  to  her  knowledge  and  acts  in  the  incipient  or  completed  trance. "

K


130  On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


Oct.  3,  1885.  M.  Gibert  tries  to  put  her  to  sleep  from  distance  of
half-a-mile  ;  M.  Janet  finds  her  awake  ;  puts  her  to  sleep  ;  she  says,  "  I
know  very  well  that  M.  Gibert  tried  to  put  me  to  sleep,  but  when  I  felt
him  I  looked  for  some  water,  and  put  my  liands  in  cold  water.  I  don't
want  people  to  put  me  to  sleep  in  that  way  ;  it  puts  me  out,  and  makes
me  look  silly."  She  had,  in  fact,  held  her  liands  in  water  at  the  time
when  M.  Gibert  willed  her  to  sleep.

Oct.  9.  M.  Gibert  succeeds  in  a  similar  attempt ;  she  says  in  trance,
"Why  does  M.  Gibert  put  me  to  sleep  from  his  house'?  I  had  not  time
to  put  my  hands  in  my  basin."  That  the  sleep  was  of  M.  Gibert's
induction  was  shown  by  M.  Janet's  inability  to  wake  her.  M.  Gibert
had  to  be  sent  for.

It  is  observable,  however,  that  MM.  Janet  and  Gibert  can  now
(April,  1886)  operate  interchangeably  on  the  subject  ;  her  familiarity
with  both  seems  to  enable  either  to  wake  her  from  a  trance  which  the
other  has  induced.

Oct.  14.  Dr.  Gibert  again  succeeded  in  iiaducing  the  trance,  from  a
distance  of  two-thirds  of  a  mile,  at  an  hour  suggested  by  a  third
person,  and  not  known  to  M.  Janet,  who  watched  the  patient.

7.  Influence  exercised  from  a  distance  during  trance.

On  Oct.  14  she  had  been  put  to  sleep  at  4.15,  as  aforesaid.  At  5,
at  5.5,  and  at  5.10  she  rose,  exclaimed,  "Enough,  don't  do  that,"  then
laughed  once,  and  added,  "You  can't ;  if  you  are  the  least  distracted  I
recover  myself,"  and  fell  back  into  deep  sleep.  At  those  moments
M.  Gibert  had  attempted  to  make  her  perform  certain  acts  in  her  sleep.
Similar  results  followed  from  a  mental  command  given  in  her  proximity
during  her  sleep.  ^

S.  Deferred  mental  suggestion.

On  Oct.  8  M.  Gibert  pressed  his  forehead  to  hers,  and  gaA^e  a
mental  order  (I  omit  details,  precautions,  <tc.)  to  offer  a  glass  of
water  at  11.30  a.m.  next  day  to  each  person  present.  At  the  hour
assigned  she  showed  great  agitation,  took  a  glass,  came  up  from  the
kitchen,  and  asked  if  she  had  been  summoned,  came  and  went  often
between  salon  and  kitchen ;  was  put  to  sleep  from  a  distance  by
M.  Gibert  ;  said,  "  I  had  to  come ;  why  will  they  make  me  carry
glasses  1  I  had  to  say  something  when  I  came  in."  Two  somewhat
similar  experiments  were  made  October  10th  and  13th.2

§  3.  Thus  far  M.  Janet's  account  of  the  autumn  experiments,
postponing  any  description  of  the  stages  through  which  the  subject

1  Before  our  arrival  in  April,  1886,  Dr.  Jules  Janet  effected  a  curious  trans-
ference of  sensation. He  w&ni  into  an  adjoining  room  ami  Imrnt  liis  right  wTist
severely. Madame  B.  uttered  piercing  cries,  and  clasped  her  wrist  in  the  same
place. See  Rev.  Phil,  for  August,  1886,  p.  222,  for  details.
-  Some  further  cases  are  given  in  Rev.  Phil,  for  August.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


131


passed.  In  Februai-y  and  in  April,  1886,  Madame  B.  was  again  brought
to  Havre,  and  some  successful  experiments  (tabulated  below)  were  made
before  my  arrival  on  April  20tli.

I  give  next  my  own  notes  of  experiments,  April  20-24th,  taken
at  the  time  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and  forming  the
bulk  of  a  paper  presented  to  the  Societe  de  Psychologic  Physiologique
on  May  24th.

"  I  have  been  asked  to  write  an  account  of  some  instances  of  somnam-
bulic sleep  induced  at  a  distance,  which  I  observed  at  Havre,  through
the  kindness  of  Dr.  Gibert  and  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  April  20-24th,
1886.  This  account  is  founded  on  notes  taken  by  me  at  the  time,  and
revised  on  the  same  or  following  days  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  who  was
present  at  the  experiments  throughout.  Other  observers  were  Dr.
Gibert,  Professor  Paul  Janet,  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Dr.  Jules  Janet,
Dr.  Ocliorowicz,  and  M.  Marillier,  some  of  whom  have  given,  or  are
about  to  give,  independent  accounts.

"  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the  cases  of  production  of  sleep  at  a
distance  by  mental  suggestion,  with  one  case  of  deferred  mental  sugges-
tion of  an  act  to  be  performed.  In  order  that  the  phenomenon  of
sommeil  a  distance  may  be  satisfactory,  we  have  to  guard  against  three
possible  sources  of  error,  namely,  fraud,  accidental  coincidence,  and
suggestion  by  word  or  gesture.

"  The  hypothesis  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  operators  or  subject  may
here  ije  set  aside.  The  operators  were  Dr.  Gibert  and  Professor  Piei're
Janet,  aiid  the  detailed  observations  of  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  else-
where published,  sufficiently  prove  the  genuineness  of  IMadame  B.'s  som-
nambulic sleep.  And,  in  fact,  to  anyone  accustomed  to  hypnotic  pheno-
mena the  genuine  character  of  Madame  B.'s  trance  is  readily  apparent.

"  The  hypothesis  of  accidental  coincidence  would  be  tenable  (though
not  probable)  did  tlie  events  of  April  20-24th  constitute  the  Avhole
of  the  observed  series.  But  the  number  of  coincidences  noticed
by  Dr.  Gibert,  Professor  Janet,  and  others  has  been  so  large  that  the
action  of  mere  chance  seems  to  be  quite  excluded.  It  is  to  be  observed
that,  as  Professor  Janet  tells  us,  the  subject  has,  during  an  observation
of  several  weeks  (maintained  by  Mile.  Gibert  when  Professor  Janet
is  not  present),  only  twice  fallen  spontanetmsly  into  this  somnambulic
sleep  (when  no  one  willed  her  to  do  so) ;  once  before  our  arrival,  on
looking  at  a  picture  of  Dr.  Gibert,  and  once  on  April  21st,  as  narrated
below.  1 On  the  other  hand,  the  observed  cases  of  sleep  deliberately

1  Of  the  spontaneous  .sleep  on  April  21  (mentioned  in  e.g.  Case  i.),  M.  Janet
writes  (Rev.  Phil.,  August):  "  Elle  se  rendormit  spontanement  deux  heures
apres  avoir  ete  reveillee,  mai.s  elle  etait  dans  una  periode  oil  je  I'endorniais  tons
les  jours  plusieurs  fois,  et  elle  avait  siniplenient  ete  nial  reveillee.  D'ailleurs,
pendant  ces  deux  heures  d'intervalle,  elle  n'avait  pu  ni  parler  ni  manger  :  elle
etait  done  restee  niallieureusement  dans  un  etat  de  demi-sommeil."

K  2


132


On  TelepatJdc  Hypnotism.


induced  from  a  distance  amount,  I  believe,  to  at  least  a  dozen. ^  I  exclude,
of  course,  the  very  numerous  occasions  when  sleep  has  been  induced  by
an  operator  present  with  the  patient,  l)y  holding  her  tliumbs,  looking  at
her,  &c.  This,  however,  brings  us  to  the  third  source  of  doubt,  whether
the  sleep  may  not  on  all  occasions  have  been  induced  by  some  suggestion,
given  perhaps  unconsciously,  by  word  or  gesture.  It  was  thus  that  I
was  at  first  inclined  to  explain  Cases  I.  and  II.  among  those  that  follow,
but  tlie  other  cases  here  given  seem  to  negative  the  supposition.

"  I  still,  however,  would  explain  by  mere  suggestion  all  the  experi-
ments whicli  I  saw  made  with  the  magnet.  On  one  occasion,  when  I
had  gone  into  an  adjoining  room  witli  the  magnet,  and  this  was  known
to  all  present,  Madame  B.  followed  me,  as  though  attracted.
She  was  taken  back  to  her  place,  and  shortly  afterwards  I  came  and
sat  beside  lier  with  the  magnet  in  my  pocket,  no  one  knowing  that  it
was  there.  No  effect  whatever  was  pi'oduced  on  the  subject.  I  made
some  other  experiments  with  the  magnet,  with  a  similarly  negative
result.  I  would  strongly  recommend  that  Avhen  magnetic  experiments
are  made  with  sensitives  the  following  precautions  should  be  used,
which  our  experience  in  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  shown
to  be  necessary  for  the  exclusion  of  suggestion.

"1.  Only  electro-magnets  should  be  employed,  in  order  to  effect
sudden  and  noiseless  ti'ansitions  from  the  presence  to  the  absence  of
magnetic  force.

"  2.  The  operator  in  charge  of  the  commutator  should  be  in  a
different  room  from  the  subject.

"3.  Care  should  be  taken  that  no  indication  as  to  the  state  of  the
magnet  sliould  be  drawn  from  the  '  magnetic  click  '  which  accompanies
the  magnetisation  of  the  electro-magnet.  [The  subject's  ears  may  be
stopped,  or  the  click  repeated  many  times  running,  so  that  it  is
impossible  to  tell  whether  there  have  been  an  even  or  uneven  number
of  clicks,  and  consequently  whether  the  condition  of  the  instrument  is
or  is  not  changed.]

"It  is  not  necessary  here  to  go  into  further  detail.  Suffice  it  to  say
that  it  is  not  safe  to  trust  to  an  apparently  lethargic  or  anajsthetic
state  in  the  subject  as  a  guarantee  against  her  gathering  suggestions
from  the  words  or  manner  of  persons  present.  If,  moreover,  she  be
susceptible  of  mental  suggestion,  the  effects  of  such  suggestion  may  be
mistaken  for  the  effects  of  magnetic  influence.

"I.  I  pass  on  to  describe  the  lirst  case  of  sommeil  a  distance,  April
21st.  At  5.50  p.m.  (an  hour  which  was  selected  by  drawing  lots  among
various  suggested  hours),  Dr.  Gibert  retired  to  his  study  and  en-
deavoured to  send  Madame  B.  to  sleep  in  the  Pavilion,  at  a  distance  of

1  This  number,  as  will  be  hereafter  seen,  has  since  been  increased.


On  Telepathic  Hi/pnotism.


about  two- thirds  of  a  mile.  She  was  to  fall  asleep  in  the  salon;
whereas  slie  habitually  sits  in  the  kitdten  of  the  Pavilion  (a  house
occupied  by  Dr.  Giberfs  sister).

"  It  was  supposed  that  the  command  would  take  about  10  minutes  to
operate,  and  at  about  six  Professor  Janet,  Dr.  Ochorowicz,  M.  Mariliier,
my  brother  and  myself  entered  the  Pavilion,  but  found  that  Madame
B.  was  not  in  the  salon  but  in  the  kitchen.  We  immediately
went  out  again,  supposing  that  the  experiment  had  failed.  A  few
minutes  later  Professor  Janet  re-entered  with  M.  Ochorowicz,  and  found
her  asleep  in  the  salon.  In  the  somnambulic  state  she  told  us  that  she
had  been  in  the  salon,  and  neai-ly  asleep  when  our  arrival  startled  her,
and  had  then  rushed  down  to  the  kitchen  to  avoid  us  ;  had  returned  to
the  salon  and  fallen  asleep  as  soon  as  we  left  the  house.  These  move-
ments were  attested  by  the  honne,  but  it  of  course  seemed  probable  that
it  was  merely  our  arrival  which  had  suggested  to  her  that  she  was
expected  to  fall  asleep.

"  On  this  day  she  was  ill  and  exhausted  from  too  prolonged  experi-
ments on  the  pre^dous  days.  In  the  afternoon  she  fell  asleep  of  her
own  accord,  and  in  the  late  evening  (11.3.5  p.m.),  when  slie  had  long
been  in  bed,  M.  Gibert  willed  that  her  natural  sleep  should  be  trans-
ferred into  somnambulic,  and  that  she  should  dress  and  go  into  the
garden  of  the  Pavilion.  Nothing  followed  on  this  attempt,  unless  an
unusually  prolonged  sleep  and  complaints  of  unwonted  headache  next
day  were  to  be  in  any  way  connected  herewith.  On  the  whole,  had  I
left  after  these  experiments  only  I  should  have  referred  the  phenomena
to  suggestion  of  the  ordinary  hypnotic  kind.

"  II.  On  the  morning  of  the  22nd,  however,  we  again  selected  by  lot
an  hour  (11  a.m.)  at  which  M.  Gibert  should  will,  from  his
dispensary,  (which  is  close  to  his  liouse,)  that  Madame  B.  should
go  to  sleep  in  the  Pavilion.  It  was  agreed  that  a  rather  longer
time  should  be  allowed  for  the  process  to  take  effect ;  as  it  had  been
observed  (see  M.  Janet's  previous  communication,)  that  she  sometimes
struggled  against  the  influence,  and  averted  the  effect  for  a  time  by
putting  her  hands  in  cold  water,  itc.  At  11.25  we  entered  the  Pavilion
quietly,  and  almost  at  once  she  descended  from  her  i-oom  to  the  salon,
profoundly  asleep.  Here,  however,  suggestion  might  again  have  been
at  work.  We  did  not,  of  course,  mention  M.  Gibert's  attempt  of  the
previous  night.  But  she  told  us  in  her  sleep  that  she  had  been  very  ill
in  the  night,  and  repeatedly  exclaimed  :  '  Pourquoi  M.  Gibert  m'a-t-il
fait  soufFrir?  Mais  j'ai  lave  les  mains  continuellement.'  This  is  what
she  does  when  she  wishes  to  avoid  being  influenced.

"III.  In  the  evening  (22nd)  we  all  dined  at  M.  Gibert's,  and  in  the
evening  M.  Gibert  made  another  attempt  to  put  her  to  sleep  at  a
distance from  his  house in the Hue Sery, — she being at  the


134


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


Pavilion,  Rue  de  la  Ferme, — and  to  biing  her  to  his  house  by  an
effort  of  will.i  At  8.55  he  retired  to  his  study ;  and  MM.
Ocliorowicz,  Marillier,  Janet,  and  A.  T.  Myers  went  to  the
Pavilion,  and  waited  outside  in  the  street,  out  of  sight  of  the
house.  At  9.22  Dr.  Myers  observed  Madame  B.  coming  halfway
out  of  the  garden-gate,  and  again  retreating.  Those  who  saw  her
more  closely  observed  that  she  was  plainly  in  the  somnambulic  state,
and  was  wandering  about  and  muttering.  At  9.25  she  came  out  (with
eyes  persistently  closed,  so  far  as  could  be  seen),  walked  quickly  past
MM.  Janet  and  Marillier,  without  noticing  them,  and  made  for
M.  Gibert's  house,  though  not  by  the  usual  or  shortest  route.  (It
appeared  afterwards  that  the  bonne  had  seen  her  go  into  the  salon  at
8.45,  and  issue  thence  asleep  at  9.15  :  had  not  looked  in  between  those
times.^')  She  avoided  lamp-posts,  vehicles,  &c.,  but  crossed  and  re-
crossed  the  street  repeatedly.  No  one  went  in  front  of  her  or  spoke
to  her.  After  eight  or  ten  minutes  she  grew  much  more  uncertain  in
gait,  and  paused  as  though  she  would  fall.  Dr.  Myers  noted  the
moment  in  the  Rue  Faure  ;  it  was  9.35.  At  about  9.40  she  grew  bolder,
and  at  9.45  reached  the  street  in  front  of  M.  Gibert's  house.  There
she  met  him,  but  did  not  notice  him,  and  walked  into  his  house,
where  she  rushed  hurriedly  from  room  to  room  on  the  ground-floor.
M.  Gibert  had  to  take  her  hand  before  she  recognised  him.  She  then
grew  calm.

"  M.  Gibert  said  that  from  8.55  to  9.20  he  thought  intently  abouther;
from  9.20  to  9.35  he  thought  more  feebly  ;  at  9.35  he  gave  the  experi-
ment up,  and  began  to  play  billiards  ;  but  in  a  few  minutes  began  to
will  her  again.  It  appeared  that  his  visit  to  the  billiard-room  had
coincided  with  her  hesitation  and  stumbling  in  the  street.  But  this
coincidence  may  of  course  have  been  accidental.

"  IV.  Later  in  the  evening  M.  Gibert  made  to  her  a  mental  sugges-
tion, by  pressing  his  forehead  against  liers  without  other  gesture  or
speech.  The  suggestion  (proposed  by  me)  was  that  at  11  a.m.  on  the
morrow  she  should  look  at  a  photographic  album  in  the  salon  of  the
Pavilion.  She  habitually  sat  in  the  kitclien  or  in  her  own  bedroom  and
sewed  ;  so  this  was  an  unlikely  occupation  for  a  morning  hour.

"  On  April  23rd,  MM.  Marillier  and  Ochorowicz  went  to  the
Pavilion  before  11  and  ensconced  themselves  in  a  room  opposite
the  salon.  At  11  Madame  B.  entered  the  salon  and  wandered
about  with  an  anxious, preoccupied air. Professor Janet,  Dr.

1  It  will  be  seen  from  tlie  synopsis  of  experiments  given  below  that  the  after-
noon and  not  the  evening,  was  the  time  of  day  usually  chosen.

"  It  was  not  unusual  for  her  to  sit  in  the  salon  in  the  evening,  after  the  day's
occupations  were  over.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


135


Myers,  and  I  entered  the  Pavilion  at  11.10  and  found  her  obviously
entranced  ;  eyes  open,  but  fixed  ;  anxious  ;  wandering.

"  She  continued  tlius  till  11.25.  We  remained  in  a  room  where  she
could  not  see  us,  though,  by  looking  through  the  partially-opened  door,
we  could  see  her.  At  11.25  she  began  to  handle  some  photographic
albums  on  the  table  of  the  salo7i  ;  and  at  11.30  was  seated  on  the  sofa
fixedly  looking  at  one  of  these  albums,  open  on  her  lap,  and  rapidly
sinking  into  lethargic  sleep.  As  soon  as  the  talkative  phase  of  her
slumber  came  round  she  said,  '  M.  Gibert  m'a  tourmentee,  parce  qu 'il
m'a  recommandee — il  m'a  fait  trembler.'

"  I  believe  that  this  was  a  genuine  instance  of  deferred  mental
suggestion.  But  where  a  suggestion  is  known  to  so  many  persons  as
was  the  case  here,  it  is  hai'd  to  feel  sure  that  no  word  has  been  uttered
by  any  one  which  could  give  a  clue  to  its  nature.

"  V.  On  this  same  day,  23rd,  M.  Janet,  who  had  woke  her  up  and  left
her  awake,  lunched  in  our  company,  and  retired  to  his  own  house  at
4.30  (a  time  chosen  by  lot)  to  try  to  put  her  to  sleep  from  thence.  At
5.5  we  all  entered  the  salon  of  the  Pavilion,  and  found  her  asleep  with
shut  eyes,  but  sewing  vigorously  (being  in  that  stage  in  which  movements
once  suggested  are  automatically  continued).  Passing  into  the  talka-
tive state,  she  said  to  M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  fait  dormir
a  quatre  heures  et  demi.'  The  impression  as  to  the  hour  may  have  been
a  suggestion  received  from  M.  Janet's  mind.  We  tried  to  make  her
believe  that  it  was  M.  Gibert  who  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  but  she
maintained  that  she  had  felt  that  it  was  M.  Janet.^

"  VI.  On  April  24th  the  whole  party  chanced  to  meet  at  M.
Janet's  house  at  3  p.m.,  and  he  then,  at  my  suggestion,  entered
his  study  to  will  that  Madame  B.  should  sleep.  We  waited
in  his  garden,  and  at  3.20  pi'oceeded  together  to  the  Pavilion,  which
I  entered  first  at  3.30,  and  found  Madame  B.  profoundly  sleeping  over
her  sewing,  having  ceased  to  sew.  Becoming  talkative,  she  said  to
M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  commandee.'  She  said  that  she  fell
asleep  at  3.5  p.m.^

Professor  Janet's  paper  in  the  Revue  PMlosophique  for  August,
1886,  enables  me  to  give  a  conspectus  of  the  experiments  on  sovimeil  a
distance  made  with  Madame  B.  up  to  the  end  of  May.  M.  Janet
makes  his  total  22  trials,  16  successes,  but  he  seems  to  have  omitted
the  experiments  of  October,  1885.  The  distance  was  in  each  case
between  ^  mile  and  1  mile.

1  M.  Gibert  was  not  with  us  ;  but  M.  Janet  often  came  to  see  her  after  M.
Gibert  had  hypnotised  her.

2  On  these  two  occasions  (V.  and  VI.)  no  one  actually  saw  her  asleep
before  we  entered  the  Pavilion,  since  we  desired  Mile.  Gibert  not  to  watch  her,
for  fear  that  she  might  guess  that  an  experiment  was  going  on.


13G


On  Teleixdhic  Hypnotism.


NO.  OF
EXPER'.
ME.MF.

DATE.

OPERATOR

HOl'R  WHEN
GIVEN.

Tl  TP  AT  \  T>  ir  C

SUCCESS

OR
FAILURE.

1885.

1

Oct.

3

Gibert

11.30  a.m.

She  washes  Iiands  and  wards

off  trance.

1

2

9

.lo.

11.40  a.m.

Found  entranced  11.45.

1

3

14

do.

4.15  p.m.

Found  entranced  4.30  :  had

been  asleep  about  15  minutes

1

1886.

4

Feb.

22

Janet

Slie  washes  hands  and  wards

oif  trance.

5

25

do.

5  p.m.

Asleep  at  once.

]

6

26

do.

Mere  discomfort  observed.

0

7

Marcli

1

do.

do.  do.

0

8

2

do.

3  p.m.

Found  asleep  at  4  :  has  slept

about  an  liour.

1

9

4

do.

Will  interrupted:  trancecoin-

cident  but  incomjdete.

1

10

5

do.

5.  -5. 10  ji.m.

Found  asleep  a  few  minutes

afterwards.

1

11

6

o  p.m.

lM>und  asleeji  8.3.

1

12

10

do.

Success — no  details.

1

13

14

Janet

3  p.m.

Success — no  details.

1

14

16

Gibert

9  p.m.

Brings  her  to  his  house  :  she

leaves her  house a  few

minutes  after  9.

1

15

April

18

Janet

Found  asleep  in  10  minutes.

1

16

19

Gibert

4  p.m.

Found  asleep  4. 15.

1

17

20

do.

8  p.m.

Made  to  come  to  his  house.

1

18

21

do.

5.50  p.m.

My  case  I.  :  trance  too  tardy.

0

19

21

do.

11.35  p.m.

Attempt at  trance  during

sleep  :  see  my  case  I.

0

20

M

22

do.

11  a.m.

Asleep 11.25  : trance  too

tardy  :  my  case  II.  :  count

as  failure.

0

21

22

do.

9  p.m.

Comes  to  his  house  :  leaves

her  house9.15:  my  caselll.

1

22

? )

23

J  (inet

4  OA

4.ou  p.m.

I  ound  asleep  5.5,  says  she  has

slept  since  4. 30:  my  caselV.

1

23

24

do.

3  p.m.

Found  asleep  3. 30,  says  she  has

.slept  since  3.5  :  my  case  V.

1

24

May

5

do.

Success — no  details.

1

25

6

do.

Success — no  details.

1

19

We  have  thus  19  coincidences  and  6  failures ^ — the  failures  all  more


or  less  explicable  by  special  circumstances.  During  Madame  B.'s  visits
to  Havre,  about  2  months  in  all,  she  once  fell  into  ordinary  sleep  during
the  day,  and  twice  (as  already  mentioned)  became  spontaneously
entranced,  one  of  these  times  beiiig  on  April  21,  a  day  of  illness  and
failure. She  never  left  tlie  house  in  the  evening  except  on  the  three

'  Cases  1  and  4  were  practically  successes,  but  I  have  counted  them  as  one
Bucce.ss  and  one  failure.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


137


occasions  on  which  she  was  willed  to  do  so  (experiments  14,  17,  21).
Trials  of  this  kind  had  to  be  made  after  dark,  for  fear  her  aspect
should  attract  notice.  Tlie  hours  of  the  other  experiments  were
generally  chosen  at  the  moment,  to  suit  tlie  operators'  convenience  ;
sometimes,  as  I  have  said  above,  they  were  cliosen  by  lot.

§  4.  I  pass  on  to  a  brief  analysis  of  a  similar  case  contributed  by
Dr.  Hericourt  to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,  November
30th,  1885  {Bulletins,  Tome  I.,  p.  35.)i

«.  Induction  of  trance  in  presence  or  proximity  of  subject.  M.
Hericourt  oljtained  trance  by  holding  Madame's  D.'s  hand,  then  by
touching  her  liand,  then  by  willing  alone.  Passes  or  gi'asp  of  hand  had
no  effect  unless  accompanied  by  will.  He  induces  trance  without  visible
suggestion,  fi'om  one  end  of  the  room  to  the  other,  by  sudden  effort  of
will  while  she  is  talking,  etc. ;  if  he  relaxes  his  will  she  recovers  herself.

p.  Induction  of  trance  at  a  distance.  One  day  he  tries  to  send  her
to  sleep  from  his  own  house,  at  Perpignan  (say  300  yards  off),  at  3  p.m. ;
then  foi'gets  her;  then  at  5  p.m.  wills  to  wake  her.  She  tells  him
spontaneously  that  at  3  she  fell  asleep  (quite  unusual  with  her  during
the  day) ;  servant  came  in  ;  could  not  wake  her  ;  shook  her ;  made  her
partly  conscious,  with  violent  headache,  which  suddenly  disappeared  at
5  p.m.  Experiment  tried  from  adjoining  room  in  a  way  to  avoid  expec-
tant attention.  Success.

7.  Influence  exercised  from  a  distance.

M.  Hericourt  could  impress  no  definite  suggestion  from  a  distance,
but  when  he  thought  fixedly  of  Madame  D.  she  experienced  severe  pain
in  the  precordial  region.  This  gradually  increased,  and  led  to  cess-
ation of  the  experiments.  [Compare  cases  where  an  abortive  epileptic
attack  is  replaced  by  epileptiform  migraine.]

§  5.  The  next  case  which  I  shall  notice  is  perhaps  the  most  remark-
able of  all.  I  quote  it  from  a  paper  presented,  December  28th,  1885,
to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,  by  Dr.  Gley,  the  well-known
physiologist.^  But  the  case  is  Dr.  Dusart's,  recorded  by  him  in  the
Tribune  Jlcdicale,  May  16th  and  30th,  1875.  Dr.  Gley  knows  Dr.
Dusart ;  and  assures  me  that  the  account  is  compiled  from  careful  notes
taken  at  the  time.

u.  Induction  of  trance  in  presence  or  proximity  of  subject.

Dr.  Dusart  induces  trance  on  Mile.  J.  by  passes  :  observes  that
they  are  ineffectual  without  his  vjiU. :  tries  will  alone  :  succeeds  more
than  100  times  :  never  fails.

p.  Induction  of  trance  at  a  distance.  M.  Dusart  forgot  one  day  to
order  Mile.  J.  to  sleep  till  a  certain  hour  on  the  morrow,  which
he  usually  did.

1  See  also  Phantasms,  &c.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  683.
"  See  also  Phantasms,  &c.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  685


138  On  Telepathic  Hyjmotism.


At  a  distance  of  700  metres  from  lier  house  he  remembers  the
omission  ;  gives  order  mentally  to  sleep  till  8  :  finds  her  asleep  next
morning.  "  How  is  it  that  you  are  asleep  1  "  "I  am  obeying  you."
"  You  mistake  ;  I  left  you  without  giving  any  order."  "  True  ;  but
5  minutes  afterwards  I  perfectly  heard  you  tell  me  to  sleep  till
8  o'clock."  To  test  this  Dr.  Dusart  leaves  her  asleep,  telling  her  to
sleep  till  he  gives  order  :  gives  mental  order  two  miles  away,  at  2  p.m.  :
she  wakes  at  2  p.m.  Experiment  successfully  repeated  several  times  :
once  he  keeps  her  awake  by  mental  order,  from  a  distance,  while  her
father  tries  to  induce  trance  ;  she  is  aware  that  his  influence  is  at  work.

§  6.  These  cases,  and  others  like  tliem,  seem,  then,  to  enforce  on  us
the  conclusion  that  telejaathic  hypnotism  is  a  fact — that  certain  of
the  phenomena  commonly  described  as  hypnotic  are  occasionally
produced  by  the  influence  of  an  operator  at  a  distance,  under  such
conditions  that  no  previous  suggestion  could  have  been  given.

We  must  return,  in  fact,  to  tlie  conclusion  arrived  at  by  the
committee  of  the  French  Academy  of  Medicine  which  sat,  as  is  well-
known,  from  1826  to  1831,  and  reported  through  M.  Husson.  The
fifteenth  section  of  that  Report  runs  as  follows  : —

' '  Lorsqu'on  a  fait  tomber  una  f ois  une  personne  dans  le  sommeil
magnetique,  on  n'a  pas  toujours  besoin  de  recourir  au  contact  et  aux  passes
pour  la  niagnetiser  de  nouveau.  Le  regard  du  magnetiseur,  sa  volonte  seule,
ont  sur  elle  la  meme  influence.  Dans  ce  cas,  on  j)eut  non-seulement  agir  sur
le  magnetise,  mais  encore  le  mettre  completement  en  somnambulisme  et  1'  en
fairs  sortir  a  son  insu,  hors  de  sa  vue,  a  une  certaine  distance  et  au  travers
des  portes  ferniees."

This,  liowever,  is  a  statement  which,  taken  by  itself,  would  notbelikely
to  obtain  effective  lodgment  in  the  mind.  That  it  may  become  truly  credible,
it  must  be  co-ordinated  with  cognate  facts  ;  it  must  be  presented,  not  as
a  mere  isolated  anomaly,  but  as  an  item  in  some  wider  group  of  pheno-
mena. It  suggests  two  inquiries;  first,  whether  other  non-hypnotic  cases
of  telepathy  exist  ;  and  secondly,  wliethei"  the  hypnotic  agencies  already
recognised  can  be  so  arranged  as  that  this  telepathic  agency,  this  hypnoti-
sation  from  a  distance,  should  be  presented  as  the  culminant  phenomenon
in  a  continuous  series.  Now  to  tlie  first  of  these  questions,  our  whole
work  on  PlbantaHins  of  tlip,  Livimj  supplies  the  answer.  There  do  in
fact  exist  (we  maintain)  so  many  cases  and  classes  of  telepathic  influence
that  this  hypnotic  class  falls  naturally  into  its  place  as  a  species  which  we
should  liave  felt  bound  to  look  for  on  merely  analogical  grounds.  To  the
secoyid  question  (as  I  have  already  said)  no  answer,  so  far  as  I  know,  has
been  yet  attempted.  I  do  not  recall  any  attempt  to  correlate  this  telepathic
hypnotism  with  the  other  methods  of  hypnotisation  on  wldch  diflferent
experimenters  have  relied. The  elder  Englisli  school  of  Mesmerists —


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


139


believers,  I  mean,  in  a  specific,  vital  effluence  or  influence — (as  opposed
to  the  Hypnotists  proper,  or  believers  in  a  mechanical  agency  alone  in
the  induction  of  trance), — the  mesmerists,  I  repeat,  have  alto-
cether  missed  the  distinction  between  the  exercise  of  vital  influence  in
the  presence  of  immediate  proximity  of  the  subject,  and  its  exercise  at  a
distance,  say,  of  half-a-mile.  When  they  have  had  cases  of  this  distant
kind  to  record  they  have  mentioned  them  as  mere  extensions  of  the
specific  vital  power,  without  even  attempting  to  show  how  it  can  be
that  an  effluence  emanating  from  one  man's  nervous  system,  and  per-
vading anotlier  man's  nervous  system  by  some  sort  of  actual  diflusion,
can  operate  in  precisely  the  same  manner  at  distances  across  wliicli  no
physiological  activity  (with  the  one  exception  of  the  skunk's)  has  been
known  to  project  itself.

And  the  difficulty  which  is  tlius  ignored  by  Elliotson  and  Townshend
is  consciously  dismissed  as  insoluble  by  the  more  cautious  observers
whom  I  have  been  quoting  in  this  paper.  For  convenience'  sake  they
use  the  analogy  of  sxiggestion  and  speak  of  "  suggestion  at  a  distance  "  ;
but  they  make  no  attempt  to  connect  this  distant  suggestion  witli  tliat
suggestion  in  the  subject's  actual  presence  with  the  efiicacy  of  which  we
are  now  so  abundantly  familiar.

And  I  need  hardly  say  that  in  my  own  view,  also,  no  complete  solution
of  the  problem  is  possible.  We  are  entirely  ignorant  of  the  nature  of
the  force  which  may  be  supposed  to  be  operative  in  the  production  of
telepathic  phenomena, — to  impel  or  facilitate  the  passage  of  thoughts
or  sensations  from  one  mind  to  another  without  tlie  intervention  of
the  recognised  organs  of  sense.

§  7.  Yet  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  something  which  it  is  possible
to  attempt ;  something  which  must  needs  be  now  attempted,  in  however
fragmentary  and  provisional  a  manner,  if  there  is  to  be  any  unity,  any
sense  of  ensemble  in  hypnotic  experimentation  ;  if  the  results  wliich
difierent  observers  obtain  in  such  difierent  ways  are  to  throw  upon  each
other  the  light  which  they  are  capable  of  aflording.  Some  attempt,  I
repeat,  must  be  made  to  show  the  possibility  of  a  transition  from  tlie
merely  mechanical  hypnogeny  wliich  the  majority  of  modern  writers
admit,  to  the  vital  or  mesmeric  hypnogeny  which  Mr.  Gurney  and  I
(in  accordance  with  Cuvier,  Esdaile,  Elliotson,  (fee.)  have  defended
in  these  Proceedings,  and  which  now  again  (apart  from  our  directer
arguments)  is  receiving  a  kind  of  reflected  or  inferential  probability  from
these  well-accredited  cases  oi  "  somnieil  a  distance."  And,  furthermore,
such  an  attempt  should  show  also  what  kind  of  connection  is  empirically
found  between  this  vital  hypnogeny  and  the  telejmtldc  hypnogeny  with
which  this  paper  is  mainly  concerned — between  the  eflfect,  that  is  to  say,
of  the  operator  on  tlie  subject  in  the  subject's  presence,  and  his  effect  at  a
distance. And  in  order  to  get  any  clearness  into  our  notions,  we  mu.st


140


On  Telepathic  Hyiraotism.


attack  at  once  the  extremely  diificult  question :  What  do  we  mean  by
suggestion  ?  When  we  say  that  a  subject  is  hypnotized  by  suggestion,
what  is  the  nature,  what  are  the  analogies  of  the  force  which  we
suppose  to  be  brought  to  bear  upon  him  1 1

First,  then,  we  must  observe  that  the  word  suggestion,  as  a  cause
of  the  hypnotic  trance,  may  have  at  least  four  different  meanings,  viz.,
(1)  verbal  suggestion,  (2)  self-suggestion,  (3)  mental  suggestion  from  a
person  present,  (4)  mental  suggestion  from  a  person  absent.

Ordinary  verbal  suggestion  is,  of  course,  a  method  of  inducing  the
trance  as  to  which  all  are  agreed.  No  one  accustomed  to  these  experi-
ments is  surprised  if  when  an  operator  says  "  Sleep  ! "  to  a  subject
whom  lie  has  often  previously  hypnotized,  that  subject  falls  into  the
trance.  Very  little  attempt,  however,  has  been  made  to  co-ordinate
this  method  of  hypnogeny  with  the  other  metliods  generally  admitted
(viz.,  monotonous  stimulation  and  similar  mechanical  pi'ocesses),  and
confusion  is  frequently  introduced  at  this  point  by  mixing  up  psychical
with  neural  terms — by  talking  in  the  same  breath  of  "  inhibition  of
nerve-centres  "  and  of  "  expectant  attention."  But  when  we  come  to
consider  any  of  the  wider  problems — such  as  whether  or  not  mechanical
stimulation  is  the  sole  originator  of  hypnotic  phenomena — we  find
ourselves  obliged  to  reduce  our  terms  to  a  common  denominator,  and
(however  vaguely  or  hypothetically)  to  form  some  conception  of  the
neural  side  of  each  operation.

Such  an  inquiry  of  course  takes  us  on  to  very  insecure  ground.  We
know  next  to  nothing  of  the  neural  correlates  of  ideas  or  states  of  mind
so  complex  as  some  of  those  which  occur  in  the  hypnotic  state.  We  are
dealing  with  a  problem  which  bristles  with  unknown  quantities, —
where  the  physiological  correlate  of  "  will,"  if  I  may  so  say,  is  x,  and  of
"  consciousness  "  y,  and  of  "  attention  "  z.  But  the  hopeful  peculiarity
of  hypnotic  phenomena  is  that  in  them  the  unknown  x  y  z  are  mixed
up  and  interchanged  in  all  kinds  of  ways  with — I  do  not  say  known, —
but  less  completely  unknown — elements,  namely  with  sensory  stimuli  of
various  kinds,  familiar  and  unfamiliar,  which  form  a  sort  of  a  b  c, — •
quantities  indefinite  indeed,  but  varying  only  within  certain  assignable
limits.  And  though  no  complete  solution  to  our  equations  is  possible,
we  may  so  manipulate  them  as  to  get  a  rather  better  notion  of  what
X  y  z  are  likely  to  be  than  if,  (as  the  pure  nieta.physician  seems  some-
times to  do),  we  merely  arranged  and  rearranged  the  unknown  symbols

1  The  chapter  on  "  Sujets  et  Precedes  "  in  Dr.  Cullerre's  Magnitisme  et
Hypnotisme  (Paris,  1886)  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  incoherence  of  our
present  knowledge  of  liypnogenous  processes.  Dr.  Cullerre  lias  taken  pains  to
collect  a  good  many  recent  experiments,  but  he  arranges  them  in  a  confessedly
empirical — almost  haphazard — fashion.  [See,  however,  Dr.  Chandiard's  scheme
in  niy  Addendum.]


On  Tdepathic  Hypnotism.


141


as  fancy  prompts.  If,  liowever,  we  try  to  use  only  terms  of  neural
action,  we  incur  a  new  danger — the  danger  of  using  words,  originally
definite,  in  such  a  way  as  to  imply  more  knowledge  than  we  really
possess.  The  use  that  has  been  made  of  the  word  "inhibition"  has
often,  I  think,  landed  us  in  quite  as  much  vagueness  as  the  "exj^ectant
attention  "  which  is  the  common  ■psychical  attempt  to  give  the  mot  de.
Vmigme..  For  myself  I  hold  that  the  enigma  of  hypnotism  has  no  single
answer  which  solves  it.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  methods  by  which
hypnotic  phenomena  can  be  induced — any  more  tlian  those  phenomena
themselves — form  a  distinct  class,  or  can  be  altogether  separated  from
other  modes  of  acting  on  the  nervous  system.  And  I  shall  therefore
prefer  myself  to  use  a  quite  general  expression,  and  to  speak  through-
out of  "  stimulation  of  nervous  tracts."  For  all  these  nervous  changes
involve,  at  any  rate  to  begin  with,  some  sort  of  stimulation,  and  it  is
presumable  that  few  or  none  of  them  affect  the  whole  bi'ain,  or  the
whole  nervous  system,  in  an  identical  manner  throughout.  But  after
making  these  explicit  reservations  I  must  ask  the  reader  to  bear  them
in  mind  once  for  all, — since  their  repetition  in  every  paragrapli  would
render  this  paper,  already  cumbrous,  altogether  unreadable.

Once  more.  In  the  remarks  which  follow  I  shall  class  as  "  hypnotic"
or  as  "quasi-hypnotic"  certain  phenomena  which  may  seem  to  have
little  connection  with  the  familiar  phases  of  the  hypnotic  trance — to  be
more  plausibly  referable  to  the  all-embracing  category  of  Jiysferia.  In
a  survey  such  as  I  am  attempting,  some  such  laxity  of  demarcation  is,
I  think,  unavoidable  I  am  not  going  to  attempt  a  formal  definition
either  of  hysteria  or  of  hypnotism — an  attempt  from  which  those
writers  have  abstained  most  carefully  who  have  had  the  widest
acquaintance  with  both  affections.  The  word  hysteria,  as  has  been
often  remarked,  designates  a  mere  congeries  of  nervous  symptoms.  We
cannot  deduce  these  symptoms  the  one  from  tlie  other  ;  we  cannot
present  them  as  radiating  from  a  central  lesion.  And  as  regards
hypnotism  we  are  scarcely  more  advanced.  We  have  not  reached — we
shall  probably  be  long  in  reaching — any  physiological  conception  which
can  co-ordinate  its  Protean  phenomena.  From  the  view  which  would
class  the  "  nevrose  hypnotique  "  as  a  mere  branch  of  hysteria  I  dissent
strongly  and  altogether.  I  hold  emphatically  that  hypnotic  changes
are  primarily  physiological  rather  than  pathological ; — supernormal,  let
me  say,  rather  than  abnormal ;  that  while  on  the  one  hand  they  may
gradate  imperceptibly  into  hysterical  and  epileptic  instabilities,  yet  on
the  other  hand  they  may  resemble,  or  even  surpass,  the  beneficent  and
developmental  changes  which  follow  a  judicious  moral  and  physical
regimen.

But  while  thus  repudiating  a  conception  of  hypnotism  which  seems
to  me  to  result  from  a  too  exclusive  practice  among  subjects  already


142


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


diseased,  I  admit,  and  even  maintain,  that  the  French  hospital  experi-
ments of  the  last  few  years  have  thrown  much  additional  light  on  the
connection  between  hypnotism  and  various  abnormal  states.  They
have  shown  us  intermediate  cases,  interchangeable  symptoms,  un-
suspected transitions  of  every  kind.  As  the  briefest  way  of  illustrating
what  I  mean  I  wil]  describe  a  single  case  of  Dr.  Pitres' — a  case  which
seems  to  stand  just,  halfway  between  what  is  definitely  hysterical  and
what  is  definitely  hypnotic.

Albertine  M.,  one  of  Dr.  Pitres'  best  hysterical  subjects,^  is  liable,
beyond  the  ordinary  hysterical  accidents,  to  a  rarer  affection  of  her
own.  Every  now  and  then  she  irresistibly  falls  asleep.  Her  sleep  is
perfectly  placid,  her  pulse  and  respiration  normal.  Closer  inspection
reveals  two  singularities.  Her  eyelids  constantly  tremble.  A  limb
raised  into  the  air  remains  in  the  attitude  where  it  is  placed.  Both  of
these  are  characteristically  hypnotic  symptoms.  And  yet  more  con-
clusive characteristics  remain.  Speak  to  her,  and  she  will  reply.
Suggest  hallucinations,  and  she  will  adopt  them.  Blow  on  her  eyes,
and  she  will  awake.

This  seems  the  description  of  a  spontaneous  hypnotic  trance.  And
when  we  learn  further  that  Albertine  can  in  fact  be  hypnotized  by
ordinaiy  means,  and  that  in  the  induced  hypnotic  ti-ance  and  in  this
spontaneous  trance  she  presents  certain  phenomena  both  of  anajstliesia
and  of  sensibility  to  metals  which  she  presents  in  no  other  state,  the
identity  of  the  two  trances  may  seem  established.

Yet  Albertine's  history  shows  us  that  the  "  attaque  de  sommeil  "  is
in  reality  the  survival  or  residue  of  hystero-epileptic  attacks  of  the
ordinary  kind,  which  have  disappeared  under  treatment.  When  she
first  came  under  Dr.  Pitres'  care  she  suffered  several  times  a  day  from
.such  attacks,  preceded  by  a  complex  aura,  and  including  a  idliase
epileyptoide,  a  phase  de  convulsions  cloniques,  and  a  phase  delirante.  In
the  phase  delirante,  (like  many  similar  sufferers,)  she  maintained  the
attitude  imposed  on  her,  and  could  reply  to  questions,  and  was
susceptible  of  provoked  hallucination.  And  gradually  tlie  attacks  have
dwindled  down,  so  to  say,  into  the  phase  delirante  witliout  the  delirium,
— into  the  state  of  gentle  sleep,  which  has  never  yet  spontaneously
terminated,  in  which  I  first  described  her.  The  prodromic  aura
remains  recognisable  ;  but  tliis  too  has  suffered  transformation  ;  it  has
assumed  a  more  prolonged,  a  more  psychical  character  ;  it  is  diluting
itself,  if  I  may  so  say,  into  a  mood  of  mind.

I  have  thought  that  this  concrete  example  might  best  illustrate  the
points  of  contact  between  hysterical  and  hypnotic  states. In  what

1  See  his  two  tractates,  Des  suggestions  hypnotiqucs  (1884);  Des  zones
hiistirogincs  {1885).


On  TelepatJdc  Hypnotism.


143


follows  I  shall  keep  as  far  as  possible  to  what  must  be  deemed  hypnotic,
avoiding,  at  any  rate,  the  distinctly  morbid  causes,  the  distinctly
degenerative  phenomena,  to  which  the  name  hysterical  is  with  least  ques-
tion to  be  applied.

§  8.  Let  us  try,  then,  to  arrange  the  various  modes  of  hypnogeny
in  the  order  of  their  simplicity.

As  simplest  of  all  I  should  place  mere  massive  stimulation. ^  I
suppose  that  most  animals  and  most  men  are  capable  of  being  "  thunder-
struck " — of  being  thrown  into  a  state  which  our  ancestors  called
sideration,  and  which  we  now  call  cataplexy.  -

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  it  is  probably  in  some  state  of  this
kind  that  animals  really  are  when  they  are  supposed  to  be  "  shamming
dead,"  the  shock  of  terror  having  exhausted  for  the  time  their  nervous
energy,  and  rendered  them  incapable  of  motion.

This  is  the  condition  so  often  induced  at  the  Salpetriere,  where  the
sudden  sound  of  a  gong,  or  a  briglit  light  suddenly  introduced,  will
throw  many  of  the  hystero-epileptics  into  a  quasi-cataleptic  state.  The
Iconographie  de  la  Salpetriere,  and  Dr.  Paul  Richei-'s  treatise  on  La
Grande  Hysterie,  contain  striking  pictures  of  this  sudden  conversion  of
the  excited  woman  into  the  senseless  statue.  A  crash  of  a  brass  band,
the  bark  of  a  dog,  will  sometimes  check  the  fierce  volubility  as  if  a
spring  had  snapped. As  in  Virgil's  battle  of  the  Ijees,

Hi  motus  aniniorum  atque  haec  certamina  tanta
Pulveris  exigui  jactu  conpressa  quiescunt.

This  instantaneous  inhibition  may  be  made  useful  in  various  ways.

One  of  Dr.  Paul  Richer's  plates  represents  a  whole  string  of  women
assembled  to  be  photographed,  and  then  immobilised  in  attitudes  of
astonishment  and  terror  by  a  sudden  stroke  of  the  gong.  On  one
occasion  a  thief  was  accidentally  detected  by  this  method.  Her  hand
was  in  a  drawer  when  a  gong  sounded,  and  she  was  found  some  time
afterwards  dumbly  and  fixedly  grasping  the  pilfered  goods.

Madame  B.,  I  may  add,  was  hei-self  susceptible  to  this  form  of
massive  stimulation.  On  April  24th,  while  she  was  in  the  sleep-talking
state,  a  clap  of  thunder  was  heard,  and  immediately  induced  in  her

1  In  opposing  massive  to  localised  or  to  specialised  stimulation,  we  shall
of  course  remember  that  all  stimulation  is  more  or  less  local  and  more  or  less
special  in  character.  Under  massive  stimulation  I  ])lace  tlie  cases  where  the
quatititij  seems  more  operative  than  the  quality  of  the  stinuilus  applied.  With
some  subjects  shock  of  any  strong  kind  seems  equally  elfective  ;  others  will
respond  to  feeble  stimulations  of  special  kinds,  but  are  unaffected  by  the  loud
noises,  bright  lights,  &c. ,  which  are  here  ranked  as  massive  stinuili.

-  This  word  was  coined,  1  believe,  by  Preyer,  and  applied  to  the  condition
of  hens  staring  at  a  chalk  line  ;  but  it  is  now  more  commonly  used  for  sudden
nervous  shock  which  immobilises  the  subject.


144


On  Telepaihic  Hyionotism.


violent  convulsions  and  marked  opisthotonos  of  the  usual  hysterical
kind.

These  experiments  on  the  cataplectic  effect  of  massive  stimulation
have  naturally  been  made  for  the  most  part  either  on  animals  or  on
hysterical  subjects,  who  can  be  thus  impressed  by  shocks  vvhich  (like  the
gong's  sound  or  the  electric  flash)  are  in  themselves  insignificant,  and
leave  no  injurious  results.  To  apply  the  requisite  degree  of  shock  to  a
healthy  subject  would  be  quite  indefensible.  But  occasions  of  terror
and  astonishment  will  sometimes  spontaneously  arise;  and  real  life  offers
many  an  intermediate  stage  between  the  minute  of  stunned  bewilder-
ment and  tlie  stuj^oo-  attonittis  of  the  asylums,  where  one  over-
whelming moment  seems  to  have  paralyzed  the  mind  for  ever  after.

Shocks  of  this  generalised  kind  can  admittedly  initiate  almost  any
amount  of  visceral,  circulatory,  vaso-motor  disturbance.  It  is,  therefore,
antecedently  probable  that  other  hypnogenous  methods — being,  as  it
were,  secondary  or  specialised  forms  of  general  shock — will  be  able  to
exercise  a  powerful  influence  of  this  same  kind.  Remembering  (say)
the  eflects  of  fright  on  a  rabbit,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  in  Dr.
Li^beault's  practice  on  the  impressionable  poor  of  Nancy  hypnotic
suggestion  should  be  found  a  cheap  and  easy  substitute  for  cathartics.
Remembering  that  a  startling  disgrace  may  set  up  diabetes,  we  need
not  think  it  incredible  that  slight  temporary  bleeding  or  blistering
should  follow  the  command  impressed  on  a  previously-sensitised  subject.
On  purely  analogical  grounds  it  is,  I  think,  probable  that  every  con-
stitutional disturbance  (and  some  such  disturbances  result  in  good,  and
not  in  evil)  which  sudden  shock  can  produce,  will  be  capable  of  being
reproduced  or  adumbrated  among  the  results  of  technically  hypnotic
methods — of  methods,  that  is  to  say,  which  by  concentration  and
specialisation  economize  the  amount  of  sliock  necessary  to  aflfect  the
system.  And  here  it  may  be  well  to  point  out  that  I  am  classing  the
eflfect  of  sudden  shock  as  Ji,ypnotic,  although  such  shock  does  not,
perhaps,  directly  j^roduce  the  most  interesting  phase  of  hypnotism, —
namely,  the  sleep-waking,  or  somnambulic  state.  ^  It  directly  pro-
duces the  two  phases  known  as  catalepsy  and  lethargy,^  and  some-

1  'Deii]yme  ( Etude  Scientifqiic  siir  Ic  somiuvnibulismc,  p.  205)  cites  a  case
where  a  fright  induced  first  "  lethargic  lucide"  then  "  somnambiilisnie. "

-  See  Richer,  La  Grande  Hystirie,  p.  524,  sqq.  I  niay  say  here  that  though  on
some  important  points  I  cannot  bring  myself  into  accord  witli  the  school  of  tlie
Salpetrifere,  I  recognise  in  the  fullest  manner  that  theirs  is  the  leading  collection
of  instances  ;  that  Dr.  liicher's  l)ook  embodies  a  greater  mass  of  skilled
observation  of  these  abnormal  states  than  is  contained  in  any  other  single  volume.
Dr.  Fere's  numerous  and  important  observations  Jiave  issued  from  tlie  same
school.  [As  this  jiaper  passes  through  the  press  Dr.  Bernheim's  new  and  larger
book  on  Suggestion  takes  a  foremost  place  among  works  dealing  with  the
therapeutic  aspect  of  hypnotism.]


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


145


times  a  state  of  wandering  dream.  And  this  (with  M.  Richer)  I
consider  amply  enough  to  rank  sudden  shock  among  hypnogenous
agencies.  No  one  can  feel  more  strongly  than  I  the  primary  interest  of
the  somnambulic  state.  But  it  is  not  a  constant  element  in  the
hypnotism  produced  by  any  inethod  whatever.  There  is,  in  fact,  no
one  symptom  which  by  itself  can  be  taken  as  essential  to  a  hypnotic
case.  As  the  results  of  shock  we  have  cataleptic  retention  of  attitudes
impressed  on  the  limbs,  open  and  fixed  eyes,  ansesthesia,  suggestion
from  gesture,  contractures,  increased  muscular  irritability, — all  these
in  various  combinations,  suddenly  checked  by  means  which  dissipate
hypnotic  states,  and  leaving  no  trace  in  the  memory.  This  is  enough,
I  think,  to  justify  us  in  treating  the  effect  of  sJwck  as  a  kind  of  rude
primary  type  of  hypnotic  change.

§  9.  Next  in  order  to  general  shock,  or  the  change  or  exhaustion
produced  by  massive  stimulation,  may  be  placed  monotonous  stimulation,
as  from  the  tick  of  a  watch,  &c.  This  is  usually  alleged  to  be  much  the
same  thing — the  exhaustion  being  now  efiected  by  repeated  small
stimuli,  instead  of  by  a  single  stimulus  of  excessive  strength.  ^
The  process  is  an  interesting  one,  though  it  has  not  often  been
successfully  applied.  It  is  noticeable  that  Dr.  P.  Richer  dismisses  it  in
a  few  lines  when  he  is  discussing  the  various  methods  in  use  at  the
Salpetriere.''^  Yet  monotonous  stimulation  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  if
it  were  the  accepted  type  of  hypnotic  procedure.  What  is  the  reason
of  this  ?  The  reason,  as  I  take  it,  is  a  curious  and  complicated  one  ;
namely,  that  two  common  modes  of  procedure  have  been  classed  under
monotonous  stimulation,  whereas  this  phrase  is  an  inadequate  descrip-
tion of  one  of  them  and  a  misleading  description  of  the  other.  The
two  modes  of  pi^ocedure  to  which  I  refer  are  Braid's  upward  and  inward
squint,  and  the  "  passes  "  of  the  ordinary  mesmerist.

And  first  as  to  Braid's  method  of  the  fixation  of  the  gaze  on  a  point
above  and  between  the  eyes.  It  is  at  once  obvious  to  anyone  who  tries
the  experiment  that  the  sensation  thus  induced  is  totally  different  from
the  sensation  of  hearing  a  watch  tick.  The  ordinary  person  will  not  be
hypnotized  by  either  the  one  or  the  other,  but,  while  he  will  very  soon
become  unconscious  of  the  watch's  tick,  he  will  feel  a  constantly
growing  and  very  peculiar  fatigue  as  he  continues  the  upward  conver-
gent gaze.  This  fatigue  is,  of  course,  in  part  merely  muscular,  from  the
strain  put  simultaneously  on  the  two  internal  recti  muscles,  but  there  is

1  I  do  not  myself  feel  sure  tliat  tlie  exhaustion  usually  alleged  in  such  cases
actually  exists.  I  think  that  the  ticking  is  very  likely  a  mere  form  of  suggestion.
Life  is  full  of  monotonous  stimuli  (the  movement  of  the  screw  in  a  steamer,  &c.)
which  veiy  many  people  have  attended  to  for  long  periods,  without  any  record
of  trance  thus  induced.

^  La  Grande  Hysterie,  p.  530.

L


146  On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.

also  an  ache  which  can  be  imitated  by  sharp  pressure  with  thumb  and
finger  on  each  side  of  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  which  partly  results,  as
I  conceive,  from  the  actual  pressure  of  the  ball  of  the  eye  against  the
nerves  of  the  orbit — when  the  eye  is,  as  it  were,  jammed  into  the
position  into  which  it  normally  sinks  gently  in  sleep.  And  the
correctness  of  this  interpretation  is  sustained  by  two  facts, — one  well-
known,  and  the  other  a  personal  observation  of  my  own,  which  I
doubt  not  that  many  other  persons  have  made  before  me.  The  first
fact  is  that  mere  pressure  on  the  ball  of  the  eye  (pressioii,  des  globes
oculaires)  is  a  frequent  method  in  France  for  inducing  Iiyj^notic  trance,^
especially  in  hysterical  subjects.  The  second  fact  is  that  a  pinch  applied
to  the  root  of  the  nose,  or  a  strong  pressure  between  the  eyes,  is  often
similarly  effective  in  the  mesmerisation  of  healthy  subjects, — more
effective  than  the  "  passes,"  whose  monotony  is  sometimes  deemed  so
essential.-

And  passing  on  from  these  ciosely-analogous  pressures,  we  come
next  to  Richer's  pressure  of  the  vertex  (first  advocated  by  Dr.  Richer
in  1878),  which  he  finds  to  produce  hypnotic  trance  and  contracture;
and  the  pi'essure  on  the  heads  of  hens,  which  the  practical  benwife
employs  before  any  operation  of  minor  surgery  on  her  restless  brood.
The  jealously-concealed  attouchements  of  Rarey, — perhaps  even  the
cruder  practice  of  dropping  leaden  plugs  down  the  ears  of  horses,'^ — ■
belong  to  the  same  category.  And  these  lead  us  on  to  Pitres'  and
Charcot's  doctrine  of  "  hypnogenous  zones," — special  points,  that  is  to
say,  which  are  found  (symmetrically  arranged  or  otherwise)  on  the

^  M.  Las^gue  is  cited  as  the  originator  of  this  method. — llicher,  op.  cit.,
p.  524.

2  The  precise  mechanism  and  effects  of  the  upward  and  inward  squint  have
never  been  satisfactorily  worked  out.  Professor  Macalister  has  kindly  promised
to  make  certain  jfos^-OTorfewi.  experiments  bearing  on  these  points,  and  to  com-
municate the  results  to  the  Society.  Pending  an  exacter  inquiry,  he  thinks  it
possible  that  the  forced  upward  gaze  involves  a  strain  on  the  capsule  of  Tenon,
and  consequent  drag  on  the  sclerotic,  with  intra-ocular  tension  of  the  vitreous
chamber ; — as  well  as  intra-orbital  pressure  on  certain  branches  of  the  fifth
nerve.  If  this  be  so,  Braid's  squint  would  combine  the  intra-ocular  tension  of
the  French  pressure  of  the  eyeball,  with  the  pressure  on  the  fifth  nerve  which  is
effected  by  squeezing  the  root  of  the  nose.  I  find  that  this  squeeze  is  used
empirically  for  checking  hysterical  attacks,  quite  apart  from  any  belief  in
"  zones  hystero-f r6natrices. "  It  is  a  familiar  fact  that  the  same  pressure  arrests
a  sneeze.

3  Of  course  the  stupifying  effect  of  sudden  deafness  is  operative  here  ;  but
see  Dr.  Taguet's  case  {Ann.  Medico-Psych.,  Vol.  xi.,  I8S4,  p.  328),  where  the
"  occlusion  dii  conduit  auditif  a  I'aide  d'une  boulette  de  colon,"  finds  its  place
as  a  hypnogenous  agency  along  with  ' '  la  compression  digitale  des  opercules, "
and  the  "  pression  sur  I'ovaire  droite," — this  last  a  typical  instance  of  ordinai-y
action  on  a  liysterogenous  or  hypnogenous  zone.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


147


surface  of  many  patients,  of  such  a  nature  that  pressure  on  them
induces  hypnotic  trance.^  Braid's  squint,  therefore,  is,  I  think,  best
defined  as  a  pressure  on  a  rudimentary  hypnogenous  zone  of  wide
diffusion, — a  region,  that  is  to  say,  whicli  is  in  many  persons  endowed
witli  that  peculiar  sensitiveness  which  sets  up  a  sudden,  and  suddenly-
removable,  nervous  disturbance  of  a  pervasive  kind.  As  we  shall  see
later  on,  this  amounts  to  saying  tliat  Braid's  squint  is  a  form  of  localised,
rather  than  of  nwnotontnis,  stimulation.

Secondly,  as  to  the  passes  of  the  ordinary  mesmerist.  Here,  as  it
seems  to  me,  there  has  been  a  curious  antagonism  of  theories,  extreme
on  one  or  the  other  side,  whicli  has  obscured  the  actual  phenomena
encountered  in  practice.  On  the  one  side  the  ardent  believers  in  a
"  vital  effluence  "  have  often  exaggerated  the  importance  of  "  passes  "  ;
have  often  spoken  as  though  every  detail  of  manipulation  produced  a
separate  specific  effect.  And,  on  the  other  side,  opponents  of  Mesmer's
theory  have  sometimes  been  anxious  rather  to  explain  away  the  effect

1 1  cannot  go  into  the  elaborate  experiments  which  Charcot,  Richer,  Pitres,
&c. ,  have  made  on  these  ' '  zones  hypnogenes,  hyst^rogenes, "  &c.  But  a  few  words
may  indicate  the  connection  thus  established  between  hysterical  and  liypnotic
phenomena.  Tliere  have  been  few  observations  of  the  Ivind  in  England,  wliere
hystero-epilepsy  is  comparatively  rare,  and  in  the  following  sentences  I  shall
mainly  follow  Dr.  Pitres.  If  a  hystero-epileptic  patient  be  carefully  examined
it  will  almost  always  be  found  that  there  are  one  or  more  points  or  tracts
pressure  on  ^^'hicll  either  provokes  or  arrests  tlie  hysterical  attack.  Among  these
points  are  often  the  top  of  the  head,  the  ball  of  the  eye,  tlie  orbital  region  ;  just
the  points  with  pressure  on  which  we  are  so  familiar  in  hypnotic  experiment.
That  these  points  are  not  merely  imagined  by  or  suggested  to  the  patient  is
shown  hj  such  incidents  as  tlie  fall  of  hair  growing  thereon,  or  by  their  acci-
dental discovery  while  the  patient  is  unconscious.  [See  also  Ch.  V6r6  in  the
Progr^s  Medical,  1882,  p.  42.]  They  disappear  temporarily  under  the  iiiHiience
of  electricity,  local  an;emia,  &c.,  and  have  sometimes  been  permanently  abolished
by  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  trance, — another  indication  of  their  kinship  witli
hypnotic  changes.  Patients  possessing  these  zones  are  also  frequently  exposed
to  attacks  on  hearing  some  word  wliich  recalls  a  particular  set  of  memories, —
the  specialised  suggestion  having  the  same  effect  as  the  localised  pressure.  [See
Pitres,  Des  zones  hijsterogines,  p.  30.]  Furthermore,  on  the  same  or  other  patients
points  are  frequently  found,  pressure  on  wliicli  will  not  produce  a  hysterical
attack,  but  will  produce  a  sleep  of  tlie  nature  ordinarily  classed  as  hypiKjtic,  or
will  modify  the  phases  of  such  a  sleep,  or  will  awaken  into  ordinary  life  patients
previously  hypnotized  by  other  means.  [These  last  points  are  styled
hyjono-frenatrices  ;  for  they  check,  instead  of  generating,  the  hypnotic  trance  ;
but  I  shall  avoid  all  terms  not  absolutely  needful.]  Sometimes  a  s^/y/i^  pressure
on  a  certain  point  induces  a  hypnotic  trance  (which  can  be  conducted  through  its
characteristic  phases),  while  a  violent  pressure  on  the  same  point  induces
hysterical  convulsions.  Galvanism,  local  anremia,  hypodermic  injections,
&c.,  are  found  to  aboUsli  for  a  time  the  Iiysterogenous  zones  but  to  leave  the
hypnogenous  unaltered.  On  the  whole,  it  would  seem  that  the  hypnotic  elfects
are  not  indeetl  a  mere  branch  or  a  mere  commencement  of  the  hysterical  effects,
hut  are  nevertheless  related  thereto  in  a  manner  as  yet  unknown.


148


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


of  such  passes  than  to  explain  it,  rathei'  to  show  that  no  vital  effluence
was  proved  thereby  than  to  determine  by  experiments  of  their  own  how
much  of  truth  might  lurk  in  those  enthusiastic  assertions.  And  since
these  mesmeric  passes  were  of  the  nature  of  slight  stimuli  to  sight,
touch,  or  hearing,  many  times  repeated,  it  seemed  that  monotonous
stimulation  was  an  obvious  and  sufficient  cause  for  the  effect  produced.

Yet  I  venture  to  say  that  persons  who  have  themselves  practised
this  form  of  hypnotization  will  be  inclined  to  ascribe  its  effect  to  any
one  of  several  causes  rather  than  to  the  monotony  of  the  procedure.
As  commonly  practised  now,  by  Dr.  Lidbeault,  for  instance,  who  has
mesmerised  some  thousands  of  persons  during  the  last  20  years,
the  passes  and  touches  made  are  brief  and  variable,  and  although  Dr.
Lidbeault  was  till  lately  a  strong  opponent  of  Mesmer's  theory,  his
actual  experience  prevented  him  from  crediting  the  results  of  his  pro-
cedure to  monotonous  stimulation,  and  he  ascribed  them  rather  to
suggestion,  to  the  concentration  of  the  subject's  mind  on  the  idea  of
going  to  sleep.  1

§  10.  And,  in  fact  (as  I  have  implied  above  in  speaking  of  the
value  of  pressure  between  the  eyes),  there  would  often  be  much  more
reason  to  attribute  the  efiect  of  mesmeric  manipulation  not  to  mere
"  passes "  but  to  pressure  on  a  hypnogenou,s  zone,  of  which  I  have
already  sj^oken,  and  which,  under  the  heading  of  localised  stimulation,
I  would  place  next  to  the  massive  and  the  monotonous  stimulation
which  we  have  already  considered.  For  here  we  have  a  pressure  ap-
plied to  certain  points  or  tracts,  empirically  discovered  and  varying  in
each  case,  which  serve,  as  it  were,  as  the  trains  of  gunpowder  to  fire,
if  a  nervous  explosion  is  to  be  induced.  I  speak  of  a  nervous  explosion,
because  these  specially-endowed  points  are  more  often  hysterogenous
than  hypnogenous, — that  is  to  say,  it  is  oftener  possible  to  induce  a
hystero-epileptic  attack  by  localised  pressure  than  to  induce  a  mere
hypnotic  trance.

"I  have  shown,"  said  Brown-Sequard,^  who  was  one  of  the  first  to
draw  effective  attention  to  these  zones,  "that  certain  points  in  the  cere
bro-spinal  centres  are  able  to  cause  the  disappearance  of  the  properties
of  other  parts  of  the  nervous  system  ;  and  that  the  same  or  other  points
are  endowed  with  another  property  not  yet  studied,  by  virtue  of  which
iri'itative  lesions  of  these  points  can  augment  the  activities,  or  intensify
the  properties,  of  more  or  less  distant  parts.  The  influence  thus
manifested  is  dynamoqenic."

As  an  instance  of  well-defined  inhibitory  points,  I  will  cite  the
case of Louis V  . In him, as  in most cases  of  hysterical

1  Du  sommcil  et  dcs  etats  analogues,  p.  18,  &c.

"  Comptcs  Rcndus  de  rAcad^mie  des  Sciences,  March  29tli,  1880.  See  also
Comptes  Jiendus  ioY  1879,  pp.  657,  888.


On  Tele2KUhic  Hypnotism.


149


hemiplegia,  the  inhibitory  points  vary  symmetrically  with  the  trans-
ference of  the  hemiplegia  from  the  one  to  the  other  side.  When  he  is
in  his  state  of  dextral  hemianesthesia  and  hemiplegia,  a  linger  (query,
also  a  stick  or  other  neutral  substance  1)  applied  to  his  left  forehead
produces  "  the  immediate  and  complete  arrest  of  the  functions  of  the
life  of  relation  "  ; — of  all  perception  on  the  patient's  part  of  the  world
outside  him.  So  long  as  the  linger  remains  pressed  to  the  forehead  he
is  senseless  and  motionless, — "  suspendu  et  inhibe  "  altogether. ^

Here  then,  by  a  localised  pressure  of  the  simplest  kind  can  be
induced  at  once  the  very  maximum  of  inhibition.  And  liere  again,  as
in  the  case  of  massive  stimulation,  I  would  point  out  that  we  may  well
expect  that  a  number  of  minor  phenomena  and  earlier  stages  of  sleep
may  in  other  cases  be  produced  by  a  method  which,  in  one  case  at
least,  is  so  profoundly  eflective."

The  subject  of  localised  stimulations  is  one  of  wide  importance  in
these  studies.  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  researches  of  Brown-
Sequard,  Pitres,  and  Paul  Richer,  and  will  merely  observe  that  we
have  here  a  sjiecialised  liyperastltesia  of  a  very  significant  kind.  It
appears  that  the  peripheral  terminations  of  various  nerves,  without
inducing  any  modification  of  the  surface  which  is  obvious  to  ordinary
inspection,  have  acquired  the  power,  when  pressure  is  applied  to  them,
of  setting  on  foot  definite  and  varied  processes  of  systemic  change.
The  eflect  produced  by  touching  some  of  these  inhibitory  points  can
only  be  compared  to  the  effect  of  an  electric  shock.

§  11.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  fourth  head  of  my  enumeration  of
hypnogenous  agencies.

"We  have  discussed  the  massive  stimulation  of  the  whole  nervous
system ;  monotonous  stimulation,  tactile,  auditory,  or  visual,  and
localised  stimulation  of  specially  sensitive  points,  any  one  of  which
methods  may  induce  in  appropriate  subjects  the  state  of  trance.

And  now  we  come  to  a  class  of  cases  where  the  agencies — still  testify-
ing by  the  suddenness,  vigour,  and  specificity  of  their  elfects  to  the
existence  of  certain  internal  tracts  of  supernormal  sensibility — gradually
come  to  indicate  something  as  yet  unreached.  They  gradually  cease  to
be  mere  exaggerations  of  influences  felt  by  ordinary  persons, — they  show
powers  of  aflecting  the  organism  possessed  by  substances  which  we  have

1  Dr.  BruUard,  of  Nancy,  has  met  with  a  case  where  the  mere  closure  of
the  subject's  eyes,  apparently  by  any  person,  induced  somnambulism. — Brullard,

ConddHxUions  generales  sur  Fctat  hypnotiquc,  p.  84,  (Nancy,  1886).

2  Madame  B.'s  two  thumbs  are  hypnogenous  points.  Pressure  on  them
(by  whomsoever  exerted)  induces  trance,  sometimes  accompanied  by  convulsions.
This  was  so,  at  least,  when  Dr.  Myers  and  I  saw  her,  but  one  would  desire
always  to  trace  such  cases  from  the  beginning,  to  make  sure  that  suggestion  has
nowhere  intervened.


150


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


been  accustomed  to  regard  as  inert,  or  as  operating  only  in  other  ways.
Here,  then,  the  interest  centres  rather  on  the  specialisation  vnthout
the  subject  than  on  the  specialisation  within  him ; — we  can  more  easily
hope  (that  is  to  say)  to  detect  or  classify  the  "  tiesthesiogens "  which
affect  the  organism  thus  supernormally  than  to  detect  or  classify  the
centres  of  internal  susceptibility  whose  ready  response  disturbs  the
subject's  nervous  equilibrium.

And  here,  too,  recent  experiments  are  to  some  extent  bridging
over  a  gulf  which  at  first  appeared  insurmountable.  The  efiect
of  medicamentoits  substances,  in  mere  contact,  is  so  extending  our
conception  of  hyperaesthesia  that  the  effect  of  metals  in  contact  is  not
so  absolutely  isolated  a  concej)tion  as  when  it  was  first  observed  that
the  touch  of  gold  or  iron  induced  or  removed  spasmodic  rigidity.

I  must  confess  that  in  this  region  I  depend  entirely  on  the  experi-
ments of  others.  I  have  seen  nothing  myself  of  a  nature  to  persuade  me
that  the  external  application  of  a  substance  habitually  inert  when  thus
exhibited  can  have  any  eff"ect  upon  the  nervous  system.  Nor  can  I
here  enter  fully  into  the  evidence  which  has  nearly  convinced  me  that
such  is  the  case.^  It  must  suffice  to  say  that  the  advocates  of  these
specific  influences  (almost  all  of  them  French  medical  men)  seem  to  me
to  be  at  present  in  possession  of  the  field  ;  and  that  the  palmary  case

1  The  question  as  to  the  possiMlity  of  i>roving  the  influence  ot  metals,  &c.,
seems  to  stand  somewhat  as  follows.

On  the  afiirmative  side  it  is  necessary  to  show  that, —

1.  Definite  a?stliesiogens  have  produced  definite  and  constant  eft'ects,  while

other  su.bstances  have  produced  no  effects.

2.  The  subject  has  not  been  aAvare  (either  by  permission  or  by  fraud)  of

what  tlie  substance  under  trial  was.

3.  There  has  been  no  suggestion,  by  any  word  or  gesture  of  the  operator,

that  any  given  result  was  expected.  To  this  it  is  desirable  to  add  a
fourth  condition,  namely,

4.  That  the  operator  himself  has  no  expectancy  of  the  result  attained.  This

last  proviso  is  meant  to  guard  against  thought-transference.  Unless,
indeed,  there  is  some  independent  evidence  of  thought-transference
between  the  operator  and  subject,  this  explanation  can  hardly  be
pi-essed ;  but  I  suspect,  nevertheless,  that  thought-transference  has
vitiated  many  experiments.
On  the  negative  side  it  has  sometimes  been  shown  : —

1.  That  on  some  subjects  any  substance  indifferently  produces  the  supposed

effect  [e.g.,  mustard,  Dr.  Adler,  of  Berlin,  in  "  A  contrilration  to  the
Study  of  the  Bilateral  Functions,"  &c.,  in  British  Medical  Journal,
Vol.  i.  of  1879).

2.  That  many  cases  depend  on  suggestion  only;  e.g..  Dr.  Hughes  Bennett,

British  Medical  Journal,  Vol.  ii.  of  1878.,  p.  759  [only  one  case  cited].
Dr. Carpenter, British  Medical  Journal,  Vol.  ii.  of  1871,  p.  867.
Dr.  Reynolds,  Lancet,  Vol.  i.  of  1877,  p.  728.
There  have,  no  doubt,  also  been  instances  of  fraud,  though  I  cannot  find  any
case  cited  in  detail. [Mr.  Wakley's  so-called  exposure  of  the  Okeys,  still  cited


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


151


of  Louis  V  ,  reported  upon  concordantly  by  at  least  four  physicians,

must  be  taken  into  account  in  any  future  discussion  of  this  subject.

Hypnotic or quasi-hypnotic phenomena can be induced  in

Louis  V  by  certain  metals,  by  certain  medicaments  (other  than

metals),  by  magnets,  and  by  electricity.^

I  must  not  enter  into  the  details  of  tlie  elaborate  experiments
■which  have  now  been  made  on  him  and  on  other  subjects  by  MM.
Eourru,  Burot,  Mabille,  Richet,  &c.

There  are  two  points  only  which  I  need  notice  here.  One  is  the
confirmation  which  certain  earlier  experiments — English,  French,  and
German — say,  for  instance,  those  recorded  in  the  Zoist — afford  to  these
more  recent  and  exact  observations.  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  else-
where pointed  out  (Froceedinos,  Vol.  TIT.)  the  reservations  with  which
Dr.  Elliotson's  evidence  in  the  Zoist  should  be  taken — his  eagerness  to
ascribe  any  improvements  in  his  patient's  health  to  mesmerism  ;
his  impatient  neglect  of  the  precautions  necessary  to  estaljlish  a  real
connection  of  cause  and  effect.  But  though  he  had  the  faults  of  a
headstrong  temperament,  there  was  no  doubt  either  as  to  his  capacity

in  1877  by  the  Lancet  in  an  editorial  (Vol.  ii.  of  1877,  p.  646)  as  vaUd,  was
altogether  inconclusive.  ]

It  must  be  remembered  that  suggestion  is  undoubtedly  a  vera  causa  of  effects
of  this  kind.  In  some  cases  the  metals  may  be  really  inert,  and  the  suggestion
may  produce  all  the  effects.  In  other  cases  the  metals,  &c.,  may  be  operative,
but  suggestion  may  either  exaggerate  or  counteract  their  operation.  The  ques-
tion is  whether  there  are  or  are  not  cases  where  suggestion  is  excluded,  and  I
think  that  there  is  a  sufficient  residue  of  such  cases  to  justify  a  provisional
belief.  Without  going  exhaustively  into  the  subject,  it  niay  be  enough  to  give
the  following  references  in  support  of  this  view.  Report  of  Committee  of
Society  de  Biologie  (Charcot,  Luys,  Duraontpallier)  in  Gazette  MecUcale,  April
28th,  1877  ;  Dumontpallier  and  Magnin,  Comptes  Rendas,  SocUte  de  Biologie,
1881,  p.  349  ;  1882,  p.  147  ;  Charcot's  lectures,  translated  in  Lancet,  Vol.  i.  of
1878,  pp.  81,  158,  302,  393  ;  Wilks,  British  Medical  Journal,  Vol.  ii.  of  1878,
p.  102;  McCall  Anderson,  Lancet,  Vol.  ii.  1879,  p.  41,  Vol.  ii.,  1880,  p.  207;
Stone,  St.  Thomas'  Hospital  Reports,  Vol.  ii.,  1880  {cite.A  Proceedings  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  59)  ;  Landouzy  and  others  cited  by  Chambard,
Dictionncdre  Encyelopediquc  dcs  Sciences  MMicales,  third  series,  Vol  x.,  p  367
("  Influence  of  Magnet  "),  and  especially  Bourru  and  Buret's  case,  above  cited.
As  regards  the  transference  of  hemi-anfesthesia  by  magnets  (the  form  of
sesthesiogeny  which  has  been  most  debated)  the  reader  should  especially  consult
Fere's  VHypmtisme  chez  les  Hysteriques  (Revve  Philosophique,  Vol.  xix.,
p.  1).  See  also  Y\gourouyL,  Metalloseojnc,  mctallotherapic,  esthesiogencs'"
(Archives  de  Neurologie,  1881),  and  for  transference  in  healthy  subjects,  Rumpf,
Archives  de  Neurologie,  January,  1885.

1  Phosphorised  water,  for  instance,  produces  sleep  and  hallucinations  ;
jaborandi  produces  catalepsy  ;  and  these  and  other  states  can  be  made  to  pass
into  a  typical  hypnotic  somnambulism,  in  which,  and  in  which  alone,  the
memory  of  the  states  induced  by  the  festhesiogens  is  retained.  (Berjon,
La  Grande  Hysteric  chczVhommc,  Paris:  Baillifere,  1886,  p.  65,  &c.)


152


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


or  his  good  faith,  and  his  scattered  observations  on  the  effect  of  the
contact  of  gold,  iron,  cfec,  on  his  patients — observations  which  are  not
pressed  into  the  support  of  his  own  therapeutic  theories — still  possess,
I  think,  a  serious  importance.^  '  ■

My  second  reflection  is  obvious  enough,  though  I  do  not  remember
to  have  seen  it  in  print.  It  is  that  if  these  specific  influences  of  a  long
range  of  substances,  some  of  them  previously  supposed  to  be  inert  (as
here  applied)  in  reference  to  the  human  organism,  be  admitted,  then  it
becomes  far  more  readily  conceivable  that  the  human  organism  itself  is
not  inert  in  reference  to  another  human  organism  ; — that  there  is  some
specific  vital  influence  such  as  the  mesmerists  have  claimed.

In  Dr. Berjon's  tractate  we  find  records  of  tlie  influence  on

Louis  V  ,  and  on  a  female  patient,  of  the  following  substances  or

forces. With  contact  :  Copper,  platinum,  gold,  hydrogen,  sulphate  of

copper,  potassium bromide,  potassium iodide, sulphur,  antimony,

ammonium,  chloride,  carbonic  acid,  electricity  (dynamic  and  static)  ;

magnet  : human hand. Without  actual  contact  : Gold,  mercury,

hydrogen, chloride of  gold, acid  nitrate of mercury, cyanide  of

mercury, sulphate of iron,  perchloride of iron, iodine,  opium,

chloral,  and other narcotics  ; tartar  emetic,  &c.  ;  scammony  and

podopliyllin  ; champagne, and other alcoholic drinks ;  valerian,

caiitharides, camphor, jaborandi, pilocarpin  ; magnet ;  or  a  human

hand  held  near  the  body.

1  See,  for  instance,  his  jmper  on  "A  Cure  of  Convulsive  and  Rigid  Fits,"
Zoist,  Vol.  ix.

"  Among  the  actions  of  medicaments  at  a  distance  wliicli  Dr.  Berjon  records
tliere  is  one  which  is  all  the  more  curious,  inasmuch  as  the  physicians  concerned
do  not  appear  to  liave  been  aware  of  its  special  oddity.

Among  the  medicaments  wliich  were  held  in  stoppered  (not  sealed)  bottles,  at

about  3  inches  from  the  back  of  the  neck  of  Louis  V  and  a  female  subject

were  laurel-water  and  nitro-benzol  ("  essence  de  itiirbanc  ").  Now  tliese  are  very
odorous  substances,  and  Ave  cannot  exclude  the  supposition  that  the  subject
smelt  tliem,  and  was  led  by  the  mere  suggestion  to  act  in  a  certain  definite
manner,  when  lie  or  she  smelt  that  special  odour.  But  there  is  a  difficulty  here.
Nitro-benzol  is  to  ordinary  senses  pretty  nearly  identical  in  smell  with  laurel-
water, — and  is,  in  fact,  liabitually  used  in  tlie  cheap  confectionery  and  other
trades  as  an  inexpensive  substitute  for  oil  of  bitter  almonds,  the  scent  of  prussic
acid  being  precisely  reproduced. But  these  two  subjects,  the  Jewess  and

Louis  V  ,  invariably  distinguished  nitro-benzol  from  laurel-water,  and  acted

consistently  in  each  case.  There  was  a  remarkable  hj'per.T?sthesia  of  some  kind,
and,  considering  the  effects  of  the  non-odorous  substances,  it  is  far  from  clear
that  the  sense  of  smell  was  even  in  this  case  primarily  concerned.

Dilute  nitro-benzol  provoked  convulsive  shocks  of  the  arms,  and  movements

as  though  of  drawing  with  a  pencil.  Laurel-water  with  Louis  V  gives  rise  to

convulsive  movements  of  the  chest,  hiccough,  salivation, and  tingling  of  the  chest.

With  the  Jewess  it  gives  rise  to  a  religious  ecstacy  wliich  takes  about  a
quarter  of  an  hour  to  run  its  course.  Her  eyes  are  upturned  and  fill  with
tears  ;  her  arms  and  hands  are  raised  heavenwards  ;  her  face  expresses  beatific


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


153


A  further  and  fuller  account  of  these  experiments  is  still  expected.
I  may  here  give  a  few  samples  of  the  results  obtained.  The  first  experi-
ments were  made  with  metals,  which  were  applied  to  the  skin,  to  see
whether  transference  of  the  hemiplegia  could  thus  be  produced.  Lead,
zinc,  and  silver  produced  no  effect.  Copper  produced  a  temporary
return  of  sensibility,  and  a  temporary  vaso-motor  modification,  so  that
a  prick  on  the  skin  which  had  not  previously  bled,  bled  while  a
sheet  of  copper  was  superposed.  Platinum  produced  an  itching  sen-
sation, but  no  transference.  Steel  produced  transference.  Gold
produced  transference,  but  along  with  the  transference  it  produced
severe  pain.  The  objective  character  of  this  influence  of  gold  was  shown
by  a  curious  incident.  Dr.  Mabille  one  day  supported  Louis  V —  during  a
«  crise,"  and  the  doctor's  gold  ring  touched  the  patient's  hand  for  several
minutes.  When  the  epileptic  recovered  consciousness  he  complained  of
pain  in  that  spot,  a  "brulure"  appeared  there,  and  the  redness  lasted
for  several  weeks. "Les  phenomenes  physiques  persistants,"  says  Dr.

vision.  She  then  prostrates  herself  in  adoration  and  weeps  with  her  head  on
the  ground.  Finally  she  throws  herself  backwards,  with  convulsive  movements
of  chest  and  diaphragm  and  an  expression  of  grief.  This  ends  in  sleep,  and
she  can  be  thrown  into  soninanibulisni  and  questioned  on  what  slie  has  seen.
She  says  that  she  has  seen  the  Blessed  Virgin  in  a  blue  dress  starred  with  gold  ;
that  " malheureusement  elle  n'est  pas  de  sa  religion,"  (for  she  is  not  a  converted
Jewess),  and  that  the  Virgin  has  reproaclied  her  with  her  misdoings  (which
exist,  in  fact,  independently  of  any  form  of  creed),  and  has  thrown  her  down  on
the  ground  as  a  sinner.  When  awakened  to  ordinary  consciousness,  "elle  se
moque  des  personnes  qui  lui  parlent  de  la  Vierge."

By  varying  the  substance  applied,  the  experimenters  have  discovered  that
it  is  the  essential  oil  of  laurel  Avhich  produces  the  ecstacy,  while  the  hydrocyanic
acid  produces  the  convulsions.

Now  I  need  hardly  remind  my  readers  of  the  prominence  of  the  laurel  in
the  descriptions  of  the  procedure  of  the  Pythoness  at  Delphi.  The  ha.(pvr],
indeed,  generally  means  the  hay  or  laurus  nobilis,  hut  in  such  vague  traditional
descriptions  as  we  have  in  Plutarch  (Pyth.  Orac.  6)  of  the  burning  of  laurel
leaves  before  vaticination,  or  in  'LviC\&.\\(Bis.  Accused.  1)  of  the  Pythias  chewing
the  laurel  leaf,  it  is  impossible  to  he  sure  what  genus  is  meant.  [For
vaticinatory  dreams  generated  by  laurel,  see  Botticher,  Baumkultus  der  Hel-
lenen,  p.  346.]  The prunus  lauro-cerasus,  or  cherry  laurel,  may  perhaps  have
grown  along  with  the  hay,  yvdKois  vwo  Uapv-naadto.  And  it  becomes,  surely,  a
very  possible  supposition  that  some  early  Pythia  was  accidentally  sus-
ceptible to  something  of  the  same  specihc  influence  as  these  hysterical
patients  at  Rochefort ;  and  that  some  part  at  least  of  the  tremors  and
ecstacies  of  later  prophetesses  consisted  in  a  repetition  by  suggestion  or  tradition
of  the  excitement  which  in  some  TrpwrdfiavTis  was  genuine  and  uncontrollable.
We  should  thus  have  a  hystericcd  succession,  such  as  that  which  (if  we  are  to
trust  the  comments  of  the  rival  school  of  Nancy)  "  la  nommt^e  Wit — "  is  likely
to  found  among  many  generations  of  patients  in  the  hystero-epileptic  wards  at
the  Salpetriere.  [As  this  paper  passes  through  tlie  press,  similar  instances  of  the
effect  of  magnets  and  medicaments  at  a  distance  are  given  by  Dr.  Dufour  ;
Ann.  Med.-Fsych.,  Sept.,  1886.]


154


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


Berjon,  cit.,  p.  19)  "  rendaient  toute simulation  inadmissible."

The  next  step  was  the  discovery  that  gold  would  act  at  a  distance.
"  II  suiEt  d'approcher  un  objet  d'or,  une  montre,  une  piece  de  vingt
francs  a  10  centimetres,  pour  que  le  sujet,  qui  n'a  pas  vu  ce  qu'on
lui  pr^sente,  accuse  une  vive  douleur."  Mercury,  acting  through  the
glass  bulb  of  the  thermometer,  was  similarly  painful.  Hydrogen,  on
the  other  hand,  produced  a  quite  different  effect.  "  Une  eprouvette
contenant  du  gaz  hydrogene  est  niise  au  contact  de  la  main ;  le
malade  nianifeste  une  vive  satisfaction  et  il  rit ;  le  rire  est  continu
et  spasmodique  : — aucun  ph^nomene  de  transfert  ne  se  produisit."

The  medicaments  were  for  the  most  part  held  in  stoppered  (not
sealed)  bottles,  wrapped  in  paper,  a  few  inches  from  the  back  of  the
subject's  neck.  The  eifects  produced  were  curiously  connected  with
hypnotism  by  the  fact  that  though  they  often  constituted  a  crisis  which
left  no  waking  memory,  and  could  not,  at  its  height,  be  suspended  by
hypnotization,  yet  when  the  effect  of  the  drug  was  declining  it  was
possible  to  throw  the  subject  into  the  somnambulic  state,  and  then  to
obtain  from  him  an  account  of  the  sensations  which  the  drug  had  pro-
duced. Tlie  effects  of  the  several  drugs  were  roughly  analogous  to
their  known  effects,  but  presented  some  new  and  constant  features.  It
is  claimed  that  these  characteristic  effects  were  produced  when  the
experimenter  was  not  aware  what  drug  lie  was  holding  in  his  hand ;
nay,  even  that  when  the  experimenter  was  mistaken  as  to  what  drug  he
held  in  his  hand,  the  phenomena  were  still  such  as  the  drug  actually
presented  should  induce.

These  experiments  are  still  under  discussion ;  nor  have  I  myself
seen  any  effects  of  this  kind  which  might  not  have  been  due  to  sugges-
tion. Nevertheless,  as  already  implied,  the  evidence  for  the  specific
effect  of  contact  with  gold,  for  instance,  on  certain  subjects  seems  to  me
very  strong  ;  and  I  therefore  recur  to  the  point  urged  above ;  namely,
that  it  seems  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  if  a  human  body  is  so
abnormally  sensitive  as  to  enter  into  contracture  at  the  touch  of  gold,
and  to  distinguish  gold  by  contact  alone,  or  by  proximity  alone,  from
other  metals,  it  may  not  be  altogether  insensitive  to  the  touch  of  another
human  body — another  centre,  that  is  to  say,  of  forces  and  perceptions
like  its  own.i

^  Between  susceptibility  to  metals,  &c. ,  and  susceptibility  to  the  influence  of
living  bodies,  susceptibility  to  the  proximity  of  dead  bodies  would  occupy  an
intermediate  place.  Perhaps  we  may  thus  explain  the  following  narrative
sent  to  us  as  a  "  ghost  story  "  of  unusual  type  and  good  attestation.  It  comes
from  Mrs.  Wheeler,  106,  High-street,  Oxford,  who  is  known  to  Mr.  Podmore.

"  In  the  summer  of  1874  we  moved  into  the  house  we  now  occupy,  106,  High
street,  Oxford. We  had  the  house  on  lease  for  some  years,  but  had  never  lived
in  it,  having  let  the  upper  part  of  it.

We  took  as  our  bedroom  the  lower  of  two  rooms  built  over  an  archway  at


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


155


Rather  it  seems  probable  that  just  as  the  hypnotic  effect  of  mere
massive  or  mere  monotonous  stimulation  may  be  connected  by  the
intervening  link  of  localised  stimulation,  with  the  hypnotic  and  other
neural  effects  of  the  contact  or  even  the  proximity  of  specific  inanimate
substances  or  specific  non- vital  forces,  viz.,  magnetism  and  electi-icity,
even  so  may  these  specific  effects  be  themselves  connected  with  the
specific  efiects  of  vital  contact,  vital  proximity.

the  side  of  the  house.  On  the  first  night  that  we  slept  there  I  woke  up  just  at
12.45  (I  heard  a  church  clock  striking  the  quarters),  with  a  feeling  that  there
was  something  terrible  up  in  the  roof.  I  don't  know  what  it  was,  but  I  lay
awake  with  this  feelLag  for  nearly  an  hour,  and  then  I  woke  my  husband
and  told  him  of  it,  and  he  fetched  me  some  brandy.

I  found,  however,  that  I  could  not  shake  off  the  feeling  and  go  to  sleep  again.
I  could  not  even  stop  in  the  room,  but  came  out  into  the  sitting-room,  and  sat
up  there  until  5  a.m.,  when  I  went  back  to  bed.  I  did  not  have  the  horrid
feeling  at  all  when  I  was  out  of  the  room.

The  next  night  I  woke  again  at  12.45  a.m.,  with  the  same  dreadful  feeling,
though  not  quite  so  bad  as  the  first  night.  The  same  thing  happened  night  after
night  for  some  weeks,  and  I  woke  up  at  the  same  time  with  tlie  same  feeling  of
something  horrible  up  in  the  roof.  I  did  not  sleep  any  night,  I  believe,  from  the
time  I  awoke — 12.45 — till  after  5  o'clock.

Once,  I  remember  that  I  went  up  into  the  passage  over  our  room,  and  tried
to  get  at  the  space  under  the  roof,  but  found  that  I  could  not  do  so  ;  and  once,  in
the  day-time,  I  tried  to  get  into  the  space  under  the  rafters,  through  the  bed-
room, where  there  had  once  been  a  means  of  communication,  but  I  found  that  it
was  built  up,  and  that  I  could  not  get  there.

At  last  my  health  would  not  stand  it  any  longer,  and  I  went  away  on  a  visit
to  a  brother  at  Cambridge.  Whilst  there,  I  heard  that  the  roof  over  the  two  bed-
rooms had  fallen  in,  and  forced  a  bedstead  through  the  floor  of  the  upper  room
into  our  own  bedroom.  That  I  took  as  a  sufficient  explanation  of  my  feeling  of
horror.

It  was  not  for  some  weeks  afterwards  that  I  learnt  by  accident  (my  husband
had  purposely  concealed  the  fact  from  me,  fearing  the  effect  on  me  in  my  weak
state  of  health),  that  the  dead  body  of  a  chUd  had  been  found,  hidden  under  the
rafters  of  the  roof,  over  our  bedroom.  The  body  was  dried  up  like  a  mummy,
and  the  head  was  twisted  round.  It  was  evidently  the  body  of  a  new-born  child
that  had  been  murdered  and  placed  there  for  concealment.

Ellen  M.  Wheeler."

"  Mr.  Wheeler  fully  confirmed  his  wife's  account  of  the  incident,  and  assured
me  that  he  recollected  distinctly  his  wife's  distress  of  mind,  and  her  saying  that
she  felt  sure  that  there  was  something  wong  up  above  their  heads.

"  F.  PODMOEE.

''May  Q.Uh,  1884."

The  following  corroboration  is  extracted  from  a  local  paper : —
"  Oxford  Times"  Saturckaj,  2Qth  September,  1874.

"A  Skeleton  in  the  Roof. — Yesterday  week  (e.g.,  the  18th)  the  decayed
rafters  of  a  corner  of  the  roof  of  premises  in  the  occupation  of  Mrs.  AVheeler,
bookseller.  High-street,  suddenly  fell  in,  when  the  skeleton  of  a  chUd  was  dis-


15G


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


§  12.  But  here  let  us  pause;  for  we  have  arrived  at  a  point  where
we  may  hope  to  get  some  insight  into  the  mechanism  of  suggestion;
that  is  to  say,  of  the  first  of  the  four  forms  of  suggestion  which  I  dis-
tinguished earlier  in  tliis  paper — the  verbal  suggestion  of  a  person
present  with  the  subject.

And  first  let  us  try  to  realize  exactly  what  verbal  suggestion  will  do.

covered,  which  appeared  from  its  condition  to  have  been  secreted  there  for  a
number  of  years. "

Somewhat  similar  is  another  case,  received  from  a  lady  well  known  to  me,
who  prefers  not  to  give  her  name.

"  Jane.  Uth,  1883.

"  In  the  summer  of  1872,  my  father  occupied  a  rectory  house  not  far  from
Blisworth,  in  Northamptonshire,  for  a  few  weeks,  and  I  went  down  to  spend
three  days  with  him  and  my  mother  at  Whitsuntide  ;  my  two  children  and  their
nuise  being  already  there.  The  room  given  to  me  was  over  the  dining-room  ;
next  door  to  it  was  the  night  nursery,  in  which  my  nurse  and  children  slept,
the  rest  of  tlie  inmates  of  the  house  being  quite  at  the  other  end  of  a  rather  long
passage.  I  hardly  slept  at  all  the  first  (Saturday)  night,  being  possessed  with
the  lielief  that  some  one  was  in  my  room  whom  I  should  shortly  see.  I  heard
nothing,  and  I  saw  nothing.  The  next  morning,  Sunday,  I  did  not  go  to
church,  but  betook  myself  to  the  dining-room  with  a  book.  It  was,  I  remember,
a  peifectly  lovely  June  morning.  Before  I  had  been  a  quarter-of-an-hour  in  the
room,  and  whilst  wholly  interested  in  the  book,  I  was  seized  with  a  dread,  of
Avhat  I  did  not  know  ;  Imt  in  spite  of  the  sunshine  and  the  servants  moving
about  the  house,  I  found  it  more  intolerable  to  sit  there  than  it  had  been  to
remain  in  the  room  above  the  night  before,  and  so,  after  a  struggle,  and  feeling
not  a  little  ashamed,  I  left  the  room  and  went  to  the  garden.  Sumlay  night  was
a  repetition  of  Saturday.  I  slept  not  at  all,  but  remained  m  what  I  can  only
descrilje  as  a  state  of  expectation  till  dawn,  and  very  thankfully  I  left  on  the
Monday  afternoon.  To  my  father  and  mother  I  said  notliing  of  my  two  bad
nights.  The  nurse  and  children  remained  Ijeliind  for  another  week.  I  noticed
that  the  nurse  looked  gloomy  when  I  left  her,  and  I  put  it  down  to  her  finding
the  country  dull,  after  London.  When  she  returned  she  told  me  that  she  hoped
she  would  never  have  to  go  to  stay  in  that  house  again,  for  she  had  not  been
able  to  sleep  there  during  the  fortnight,  being  each  night  the  prey  of  fears,  for
which  she  could  not  account  in  any  way.  My  father  left  this  rectory  at  the  end
of  the  summer  ;  and  some  time  afterwards  he  was  talking  of  the  place  to  me,
and  mentioned  laughingly  that  before  he  entered  it  the  rector  had  '  thought  it
right  to  let  him  know  that  that  end  of  the  house  in  which  I  and  my  children
were  put  up  was  said  to  be  haunted,  my  room  especially,  and  that  several  of  his
visitors — his  sister  in  particular — had  been  much  troubled  by  this  room  being
apparently  entered,  and  steps  and  movements  heard  in  the  dead  of  night.  I  do
not  like  to  let  you  come  in,'  he  added,  '  without  telling  you  this,  though  my
own  belief  in  it  is  small.'  Within,  I  think,  a  year  or  18  months  at  most  of  my
father's  leaving,  the  house  had  to  undergo  considerable  repair,  and  amongst
others,  a  new  lloor  had  to  be  laidiin  the  dining-room.  On  taking  up  the  old
boards  four  or  five  (I  forget  which)  skeletons  were  found  close  under  the  board-
ing in  a  row,  and  also  close  to  the  hearth-stone."

Some  analogous  cases  are  recorded  by  Stilling  and  other  writers.  This
physical  explanation  would  apply  only  to  a  small  proportion  of  the  narra-
tives sent  to  us  as  indicating  the  continued  operation  of  deceased  persons.


On  Telepathic  Hy2onotism.


157


Here  again  we  may  most  conveniently  begin  with  its  most  advanced
or  conspicuous  effects, — cases  where  the  mere  utterance  by  a  casual
bystander  of  one  special  but  apparently  harmless  word,  like  "  frogs  "  or
"  telegram,"^  throws  the  subject  instantly  into  the  convulsions,  delirium,
and  insensibility  of  a  hystero-epileptic  attack.  At  first  sight  this  might
seem  the  strangest  of  all  effects  of  verbal  suggestion ;  yet  it  is  soon  seen
to  be  a  mere  intensification  of  familiar  phenomena, — an  exaggeration  of
the  brain's  reflex  irritability  quite  in  keeping  with  the  other  exaggerations
which  characterise  tlie  hysterical  state.

We  are  all  familiar  with  the  extraordinary  sensitiveness  which  a
particular  group  of  memoiies  may  acquire  in  healthy  minds, — the
mother's  sudden  start,  at  her  child's  wail,  from  the  slumber  which  her
husband's  snoring  has  left  undisturbed, — the  access  of  blinding  uncon-
sciousness to  the  surrounding  scene  which  follows  on  the  casual  mention
of  some  secretly-loved  or  secretly-dreaded  name.  Here,  then,  the  touch,
so  to  say,  which  falls  on  a  definite  region  within  the  brain, — the  region
occupied  by  that  hypersensitive  group  of  memories,  —  produces  an
effect  analogous  to  the  effect  produced  by  a  touch  on  some  hypersensitive
peripheral  tract, — say  the  drum  of  the  ear  or  the  scar  of  an  old  wound.
And  just  as  this  natural  or  traumatic  sensitiveness  of  particular  points
on  the  surface  is  (so  to  say)  parodied  and  exaggerated  by  the  morbid
and  arbitrary  sensitiveness  of  the  hysterogenous  zone,  and  tlie  patient  is
thrown  into  convulsions  by  a  touch  which  would  merely  have  tickled
the  healthy  subject,  even  so  the  instinctive  or  acquired  sensitiveness
which  certain  groups  of  memories  in  most  of  us  possess  is  parodied  and
exaggerated  by  the  morbid  and  arbitrary  sensitiveness  of  the  girl  who
because  her  companions  once  put  frogs  in  her  bed  cannot  hear  the  word
"  frogs"  without  a  hystero-epileptic  attack.

If  then  we  can  thus  compare  the  hysterogenous  suggestion  to  the
pressure  on  a  hysterogenous  zone,  may  we  compare  the  hyjmogenous
suggestion,  which  more  directly  concerns  us,  to  pressure  on  a  hypno-
genous  zone  1  To  a  great  extent  I  think  that  we  may.  Note  in  the  first
place  that  hypnogenous  suggestion  is  not  really  so  simjale  and  easy  a
thing  as  is  sometimes  represented.  I  doubt  whether  it  is  ever  the  case
that  non-hysterical  patients  can  be  hypnotized  for  the  Jirst  time  by  a
mere  verbal  command,  without  the  gaze  or  touch  or  will  of  the
operator.  I  think  that  all  that  we  can  fairly  say  is  that  when  a  subject
has  been  previously  Iiypnotized  by  other  means,  or  has  previously  under-
gone hysterical  attacks  which  involve,  or  at  least  predispose  to  hypnotic
changes,  that  subject  can  often  be  hypnotized  again  by  the  mere  verbal
revivification  of  that  group  of  organic  memories  which  have  been  origin-
ated by  the  previous  trance. If  this  be  so,  the  hypnogenous  suggestion


1  Pitres,  Des  Zones  Hysterogines,  p.  30


158


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


would  be  allied  to  the  hysterogenous  suggestions  somewhat  as  the
pressure  on  the  one  class  of  zones  was  allied  to  the  pressure  on  the
other, — the  lesser  and  more  definite  eflect  not  being,  indeed,  a  mere
branch  or  commencement  of  the  larger  and  more  confused  effect,  but
being  related  tliereto, — say  somewhat  in  the  way  in  which  the  act  of
pressing  the  foot  on  the  pedal  of  a  piano  is  related  to  the  act  of  sitting
on  its  keyboard.

But  the  hypnotic  suggestions  with  which  we  have  to  deal  comprise
many  other  suggestions  besides  that  of  falling  asleep.  They  comprise
tlie  definite  hallucinations,  the  definite  commands,  of  which  we  have  of
late  had  so  many  examples.  But  here  again  it  would  be  a  mistake  to
assume  that  induced  hallucinations,  for  instance,  are  a  mere  outcome  or
incident  of  the  hypnotic  state.  E,ather  we  may  say  that  even  as
pressure  on  the  pedal  modifies  the  loudness  and  continuity  of  the  sounds
produced  by  striking  each  individual  note,  so  (and  in  a  much  greater
degree)  do  the  general  nervous  changes  of  the  hypnotic  trance  increase
the  deliniteness,  isolation,  persistency,  of  the  faint  instinctive  impulse
to  belief  which  follows  when  we  hear  a  statement  confidently  made.^
Hallucinations,  though  more  easily  induced  in  hypnotized  persons,  can
often  be  induced  in  persons  in  the  waking  state,  who  have  previously
been  hypnotized,  and  sometimes  on  persons  who  have  never  been
hypnotized  at  all.  I  have  myself  repeatedly  made  a  certain  subject
believe  for  a  minute  or  two  that  she  both  saw  and  smelt  a  hole  sinsed
in  her  dress  by  an  imaginary  coal,  although  I  could  not  hypnotize  lier,
nor  had  she  ever  been  hypnotized  by  anyone.  The  sight  of  children,  or
the  remembrance  of  one's  own  early  childhood,  is  enough  to  explain  this
state  of  mind.  I  can  remember  my  own  feelings  at  four  years  old,  when
a  respected  elderly  friend  stated  that  he  was  a  bear,  and  simulated  to
some  slight  extent  the  movements  of  that  quadruped.  I  knew  all  the
time  that  it  was  Mr.  S.  ;  but  the  idea  of  bears,  pre-existing  in  my  mind,
was  so  strongly  stimulated  tliat  I  was  paralyzed  with  terror.  It  was  an
incomplete  hallucination,  induced  not  in  a  hypnotized  but  in  an  im-
mature brain  by  a  definitely-localised  stimulation — by  a  touch  on  a
group  of  exciting  mental  pictures  which  experience  had  not  yet
sufficiently  partitioned  off  from  the  milder  scenes  involving  only  old
trentlemen  and  sofas.

The  susceptibility  to  suggestion,  then,  which  characterises  tlie
hypnotic  trance,  involves  in  effect  an  exaggeration  of  the  sensibility  of
groups  of  images  within  the  brain,  which — in  the  absence  of  control
from  inhibitory  or  co-ordinative  centres — develop  with  greater  readiness
into  hallucinatory  perception,  impulsive  acts.  Observe,  however,  that
with  hardly any subject are all suggestions equally  efficacious.

1  See  Bemlieim  Dc  la  suggestion  dans  Vetat  hypnotiguc  et  dans  Vetat  de
veille,"  (Paris,  1884),  on  this  topic.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


159


Even  when  the  opei\ator  seems  to  have  obtained  complete  con-
trol— to  be  able  to  prompt  a  well-bred  subject  to  tlieft  and
murder —  he  may  still  be  unable  to  prompt  to  rudeness  or  indecorum.
The  explanation  of  this  odd  fact  I  take  to  be  that  the  nexus  of  habit
which  opposes  the  infraction  of  rules  wliich  we  constantly  obey,  though
constantly  in  a  position  where  we  could  break  them,  is  stronger  than
the  nexus  of  habit  which  opposes  an  act  which  we  theoretically
disapprove,  but  have  never  been  within  measurable  distance  of
committing.^

Somewhat  similarly,  we  find  that  hypnogenous  zones  generally  occur
in  seldom-touched  parts  of  the  body,  where  the  habitual  link  between
sensation  and  responsive  action  is  not  strongly  established.

I  venture,  then,  to  suggest  that  were  the  whole  plexus  of  brain-
operations  unrolled  before  us,  we  should  see  the  specific  sensibility
gaining  one  ideational  centre  after  another,  as  suggestion  is  repeated,
very  much  as  one  point  after  another  on  the  periphery  may  become
modified  into  a  hypnogenous  zone.  And  tlie  stimulus  of  appropriate
suggestion, — still  in  tlie  first  place  peripheral,  as  given  by  voice  or
gesture,  through  ear  or  eye, — touches,  as  Iconceive,  a  hypnogenous  tract
within  the  brain,  and  though  no  longer  massive  like  the  gong,  makes
up  in  precision  for  what  it  lacks  in  volume  and  intensity.

Thus  far  I  am  supposing  that  the  subject  will  accept  the  suggestion
to  sleep,  or  other  suggestions,  with  equal  readiness  at  anyone's  command.
But  this  is  not  universally  the  case, — with  healthy  English  subjects  is
almost  never  the  case.  Far  more  frequently  there  is  a  further
specialisation, — again  a  specialisation  ivitliout  the  subject  superadded  to
the  specialisation  withwt,  him, — and  we  find  that  he  can  only  be
entranced  by  certain  definite  persons, — possibly  by  one  pei'son  alone
among  very  many  who  make  the  attempt.  On  what  does  this  diff"erence
depend  1 What  are  the  qualities  in  that  complex  entity,  the  human

1  Different  subjects  vary  greatly  in  this  particular,  atl'ording  sometimes,  as
Professor  Beaunis  has  observed,  a  singular  insight  into  the  relative  vigour  of
their  inward  motives.  Some  experiments  of  Mr.  Langley's  on  animals,
interesting  in  this  connection,  are  described  in  his  paper  "  On  the  Physiological
Aspect  of  Mesmerism,"  read  before  the  Royal  Institution,  March  14tli,  1884.
"  In  man,"  he  says,  "the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  are  of  a  very  much  more
striking  character  than  they  are  in  the  lower  animals.  Speaking  generally,  this
seems  to  be  due  to  a  greater  interdependence  of  the  various  parts  of  the  nervous
system  in  tlie  lower  animals.  In  these,  when  any  one  centre  is  stirred  up  by
exciting  impulses,  an  irradiation  of  exciting  impulses  is  apt  to  take  place  to  all
other  centres,  and  the  mesmeric  state  is  in  consequence  apt  to  be  broken.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  when  a  centre  is  inhibited,  an  irradiation  of  inhibitory
impulses  is  apt  to  take  place,  and  the  whole  nervous  system  is  in  consequence
apt  to  lie  inhibited.  Hence  the  activity,  or  suppression  of  activity,  of  particular
parts  of  the  central  nervous  system,  which  forms  so  conspicuous  a  feature  of
mesmerism  in  man,  can  be  only  partially  produced  in  the  lower  vertebrates."


IGO


On  Telepctthic  Hypnotism.


operator,  whose  pi-esence  or  absence  involves  these  differing  degrees  of
hypnogenous  efficacy  1

Heidenhain  has  suggested  tliat  differences  in  warmth  or  moisture
between  the  hands  of  various  operators  are  enough  to  account  for  these
variations  in  power.  To  say  nothing  of  other  objections  to  this  view,
it  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that  the  touch  or  immediate  proximity  of  the
operator's  hands  is  by  no  means  an  essential  part  of  the  mesmeric
process.  Again,  this  apparent  electivity  has  been  explained  by  sugges-
tion of  the  ordinary  kind — as  tliough  when  A  can  entrance  a  subject
and  B  and  C  cannot,  this  were  because  the  subject  had  an  idea  to  begin
with  that  A  alone  could  entrance  him.  But  this  view  also  has  been,  I
think,  sufficiently  disproved  by  experiments  on  unconscious  persons,  on
sleepers,  and  on  young  children.

And  if  previous  suggestion — preconceived  idea — cannot  explain  the
fact  of  entrancement  by  one  special  person  rather  than  another,  then
neither  can  it  explain  the  incidents  of  the  rapport  which  continues  to
exist  during  (or  even  after)  the  trance  between  the  subject  and  the
operator  thus  elected.  That  rapport  shows  itself  in  various  ways.
There  may  be  a  special  sensitiveness  to  the  operator's  voice,  so  that  his
mere  whisper  is  heard  and  recognised  amid  a  Babel  of  other  sounds.
There  may  be,  as  in  Dr.  Taguet's  case  and  in  several  of  Elliotson's
cases,  a  special  sensitiveness  to  the  scent  of  the  operator,  recalling  the
dog's  power  of  discovering  articles  which  his  master  has  touched.
There  may  be  a  vaguer  sensitiveness  to  his  presence, — or  even,  as  I
am  inclined  to  hold,  to  his  mere  approach, — till  the  perception  verges
into  what  can  no  longer  be  called  hyper jesthesia,  but  rather  a  clair-
voyance or  clairaudience,  which  does  not  strictly  follow  the  lines  of
any  special  sense,  but  specialises  itself  in  what  seem  arbitrary  and
unexpected  ways,  and  detects  qualities  which  have  never  before  proved
so  directly  discernible.

And,  moreover,  besides  these  sensory  (or  supersensory)  elements  in
the  mesmeric  rapport,  there  is  commonly  what  is  called  a  psychical
connection  as  well,  an  obedience  of  the  subject  to  the  operator's
will,  aiid  his  will  only — a  concentration  of  the  enthralled  attention  into
that  single  channel.

Various  as  are  these  phenomena,  and  impossible  as  it  at  present  is
to  co-ordinate  them  adequately,  I  may  perhaps  venture  to  give  to  all
of  them  alike  the  title  of  "  selective  hyperajsthesia," — implying  that
the  sensitised  organism  of  the  subject  responds  to  one  particular  class
of  stimuli  with  more  than  normal  readiness,  and  in  other  than  normal
ways. And  I  should  compare  the  special  sensitiveness  to  the  operator's

scent  or  voice  to  Louis  V  's  sensitiveness,  say,  to  opium  in  mere

external  contact  ;  while  the  subject's  sensitiveness  to  obscurer  facts
concerning  the  operator  (as  his  mere  approach  or  his  maladies)  may  be


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


161


paralleled  with  the  sensitiveness  of  other  subjects  to  the  touch  or
proximity  of  gold,  or  of  other  substances  which,  when  thus  exhibited,
are  ordinarily  inert.

§  1 4.  May  not  this  notion  of  selective  hyperassthesia,  when  carefully
dwelt  upon,  suggest  to  us  that  the  "  mesmeric  rapjwrt,'"  the  "  vital
effluence"  of  which  EUiotson,  &lc.,  were  wont  to  speak  as  of  a  single
force  or  entity,  may  in  reality  be  a  varying  complex  of  different
elements  1  and  that  among  these  elements  may  be  something  which
is  neither  "  will-power"  nor  "  character"  in  any  psychical  sense,  but
simply  the  specific  effect  of  the  jiroximity  of  certain  living  organic  com-
pounds 1  The  subject  feels  Brown's  "  influence"  and  not  Jones's,  or  feels
Brown's  influence  soothing  and  Jones's  distressing.  But  Brown  and
Jones,  whatever  else  they  may  be,  are  at  any  rate  aggregates  of  organic
compounds,  and  it  is  possible  that  to  these  hyper-sensitive  per-
ceptions, Brown  may  differ  as  much  from  Jones  as  podophyllin  from
jaborandi.^

And  thus  we  gradually  find  ourselves  led  up  to  the  conception  of
a  vital  influence  or  effluence  by  a  method  which  does  not  present  this
vital  effluence  as  a  unique,  isolated,  incomparable  force,  but  rather  as
an  advanced  term  in  a  series  of  influences,  each  one  of  which  needs
to  be  discovered  by  direct  experiment,  while  the  discovery  of  any  one
of  them  corroborates  the  efficacy  of  the  rest.  It  is  in  this  way,  perhaps,
by  gradually  fitting  together  a  number  of  results  obtained  at
separate  points  of  a  far-reaching  line,  that  modern  science  has  the
best  chance  of  conflrming  whatever  may  be  sound  in  the  interesting  but
enigmatical  experiments  of  Reichenbach, — experiments  which  the
writers  in  these  Proceedings  have  never  consented  to  set  aside  as
illusory,  though  we  have  thus  far  found  them  almost  impossible  to
repeat.

Returning  to  the  special  inquiry  on  which  we  are  now  engaged, — as
to  the  true  modus  operandi  of  hypnotic  suggestions  of  various  kinds,  let
us  note  the  results  now  reached.  We  have  seen  that  suggestion  in  its
simplest  form — the  verbal  suggestion  of  any  person  taken  at  random —
is  analogous  to  the  localised  stimulation, — stimulation  of  a  simple  kind,
but  applied  to  particular  nervous  tracts, — which  in  some  patients
induces  hypnotic  or  hysterical  phenomena.  And  we  have  seen,  again,
that  suggestion  somewhat  more  differentiated, — the  verbal  suggestion  of
some  one  person  who  is  alone  capable  of  reaching  the  subject's  attention,
— is  analogous  to  the  specicdised  stimulation,  as  from  metals  or  drugs

^  Dr.  Despine  maintains  (Etude  Scientifiquc  snr  le  Soiinianihulismc,  pp.  134,
sqq.)  that  "  convulsive  epidemics"  are  propagated  by  actual  infection, — without
sight  or  other  suggestion  of  an  ordinary  kind.  His  instances  seem  to  nie
inconclusive;  but  the  point  needs  attention.  (See  Ann.  Med. -Psych.,  1870,
Vol.  ii.,  p.  141.)

M


162


On  TeleioatMc  Hypnotism.


exhibited  in  a  manner  which  ■would  ordinarily  leave  them  inert,  which
in  certain  patients  is  followed  by  results  of  such  a  singular  kind.

§  15.  We  come  now  to  the  third  class  of  suggestion  which  we
mentioned  at  the  outset,  namely  self-suggestion  ;  giving  this  name  to
cases  where  the  trance  does  not,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  follow  on  any
hint  supplied  to  the  patient  by  another  mind,  or  on  any  external
stimulus  whatever, — where  the  subject'  does  not  suppose  that  anyone
orders  him,  or  desires  him,  or  expects  him  to  fall  into  the  abnormal
condition,  but  falls  into  it,  as  we  say,  "  of  himself."

This  self-suggestion  is  one  of  the  most  difficult,  and  one  of  the
least  explored,  branches  of  our  subject.  It  involves,  in  fact,  the  whole
connection  between  what  we  call  spontaneous  and  wliat  we  eallinduced
nervous  changes ;  and  moreover,  as  is  commonly  the  case  when  the  word
sjwntaneous  is  introduced,  the  chief  of  all  dilemmas — -free-ivill  or
necessity  ? — looms  in  the  background  of  the  inquiry.

First,  let  us  consider  what  are  the  cases  which  we  have  to  explain.
Under  what  circumstances  do  hypnotic  or  quasi-hypnotic  nervous  states
appear  without  manifest  external  stimulus  ?  I  am  bound  to  add  the
word  "  quasi-hypnotic,"  for  I  have  insisted  on  the  close  connection
between  hypnotism  and  certain  hysterical  states,  such  as  Albertine's
"  attaques  de  sommeil  "  ;  so  that  I  must  face  the  difficulty  of  their
origination  as  well.

We  find,  then,  that  there  are  a  few  cases  where  subjects  can  throw
themselves  into  trance  by  a  mere  effort  of  will.  There  are  a  few  cases
where  subjects  can  maintain  themselves  in  the  trance  by  a  mere  effort
of  will ;  and  there  is  a  case  where  a  subject  in  a  state  of  complete
inhibition  originates  phenomena  otherwise  producible  only  by  the
strongest  hypnotic  suggestion.

Again,  we  find  that  there  are  cases  where  thei'e  is  no  question  of
deliberate  choice  on  the  subject's  part ;  where  the  special  nervous
condition  is  hereditary,  as  in  a  famous  family  where  "  the  sons  in  their
nightly  discursions  ran  against  and  awakened  each  other "  ;  or  where
the  trance  appears  as  an  idiopathic  symptom  in  an  otherwise  normal
person,  as  is  so  often  the  case  with  ordinary  somnambulism  ;  or  where  a
tendency  to  trance  and  similar  conditions  follows  upon  some  definite
injury.

Now  I  think  that  most  of  these  instances  may  be  shown  to  be
analogous  to  the  "  deferred  suggestion  "  of  recent  hypnotic  experiments,
— nay,  I  hold  that  the  perception  of  that  analogy  is  essential  to  our
comprehension  of  the  experimental  "  deferred  suggestion  "  itself.  Thus
much,  therefore,  I  am  bound  to  try  to  show.  But  J  suspect  that  this
is  not  the  only  analogy  involved.  I  suspect  that  in  some  of  tlie  cases
of  self-suggestion  where  tlie  element  of  ivill  is  markedly  present,  we  have
an  analogy  to  another  mode  of  hypnogeny,  namely,  to  the  induction  of


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


163


trance  by  an  actual  "  vital  effluence  "  from  operator  to  subject.  At  any
rate,  whether  this  be  so  or  no,  I  feel  sure  that  we  shall  not  get  at  the
root  of  the  matter  witliout  trying  to  realise  what  would  be  meant  by
such  an  hypothesis.

First,  then,  let  us  try  to  understand  deferred  suggestion,  and  its
connection  with  heredity.  We  start  with  the  fact,  which  to  us  is  at
present  ultimate,  that  living  matter  has  a  tendency  not  only  to  respond
to  a  stimulus  A,  but  to  be  so  modified  by  tliat  stimulus  that  it  there-
after responds  in  a  rather  different  manner  to  A,  when  A  recurs — and
sometimes  also  to  other  stimuli,  B,  C,  D.  This  is  rudimentary  or
unconscious  memory.  As  we  get  higher  in  the  scale  consciousness  is
superadded,  and  the  memory  of  A  persists  while  B,  C,  and  D  are
occurring,  even  if  it  does  not  actually  modify  them.  Suppose  a  physician
says  to  me  at  dinner,  "  You  have  heart  disease  ;  you  must  go  upstairs
very  slowly  or  you  may  die."  This  is  a  deferred  suggestion  to  me  to
move  slowly  when  the  time  comes  for  me  to  go  upstairs.  I  need  not
think  of  it  till  that  moment  comes.  But  it  impresses  my  mind  so  much
that  I  continue  to  think  of  it  while  I  am  merely  sitting  at  dinner — the
consciousness  of  A  persists  through  B,  C,  and  D,  tliough  it  will  only
modify  my  action  when  the  cognate  moment  recurs — the  going  upstairs,
which  is  a  sort  of  A'  if  the  physician's  warning  were  A.  Here  we
have  a  deferred  suggestion,  consciously  received,  and  consciously  borne
in  mind  till  the  time  to  work  it  out  in  action  arrived.

But  neither  of  these  intrusions  of  consciousness  is  necessary  to  the
efficacy  of  a  deferred  suggestion.  In  the  iii-st  place,  we  know  from
common  experience  that  the  brain  receives  many  impressions  which  do
not  at  once  rise  into  consciousness,  but  do  so  when  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity oifers  itself.  Only  a  small  proportion  of  the  impressions  which
certain  powerful  stimuli  (as  incipient  asphyxiation  or  certain  forms  of
fever)  can  summon  into  retrospective  consciousness  do  actually  rise  into
consciousness  at  the  moment  when  they  are  received.  These  are  de-
ferred suggestions,  not  consciously  received.  Take  the  most  trivial
and  familiar  case.  I  glance  down  a  list  of  books  to  see  if  a  book  by
Helinholtz  is  in  it.  It  is  not,  and  I  remember  absolutely  nothing  of  the
list.  Some  time  afterwards  I  see  a  book  by  Herzen  advertised.  I  at
once  feel  that  I  knew  that  there  was  an  author  of  that  name.  His
name,  in  fact,  was  on  that  former  list,  and  I  unconsciously  received  the
deferred  suggestion — only  capable  of  revival  by  seeing  tlie  word
Her  zen  again — that  tliere  was  a  scientific  author  of  that  name.  Jsow
deferred  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  state  offers  an  exaggeration  of  such
a  case  as  this.  I  suggest  to  the  hypnotized  subject  tliat  when  he
leaves  my  room  (after  an  hour  of  waking  life)  he  will  perceive  that  his
hat  is  blue  instead  of  black,  or  that  he  will  send  a  telegram  to  tell  me
that  it  is  a  fine  day. (For  my  present  argument  there  is  no  difference

M  2


164  On  Telepathic  Hyjmotism.

between  the  suggestion  of  a  hallucinatory  percept  or  of  an  unmotived
action.)  When  the  fixed  moment  comes — the  moment  whose  arrival  is
as  A'  to  my  suggestion  A, — that  suggestion  recurs  and  works  itself  out,
though  during  B,  C,  and  D,  the  events  of  the  intermediate  hour,  no
knowledge  of  A  was  present  nor  could  be  summoned  into  the  con-
scious mind.

Yet  between  this  absurd  act  and  my  forgetfulness  of  the  name
Herzen  there  is  only  a  difterence  of  degree.  In  the  hypnotic  subject's
case  one  loom  (so  to  say)  in  the  vast  manufactory  within  him  has  been
disconnected  from  the  general  system  of  driving-gear,  attached  to
driving-gear  of  its  own,  and  set  to  turn  out  a  special  pattern,
independently  of  the  orders  executed  by  the  remaining  looms  in  the
factory.  And  similarly  in  my  case  the  little  bobbin  (so  to  say)  with
the  name  Herzen  inscril^ed  on  it,  went  on  spinning  by  itself  witliout
connection  with  my  general  scheme  of  memories.  Only  it  was  so  small
an  item  that  its  disconnected  action  and  its  subsequent  attach-
ment to  the  main  system  attracted  no  notice,  or,  at  least,  excited  no
surprise.  Deferred  hypnotic  suggestion,  in  fact,  like  the  immediate
hypnotic  suggestion  of  which  I  have  already  spoken,  is  an  advantage
taken  of  the  increased  dissociability  of  mental  elements  which  results
from  the  inhibition  of  certain  co-ordinative  mental  centres  or  activities
in  the  hypnotic  trance.

There  are  other  conditions  also  in  wliich  suggestion  can  take  a
hold  of  the  mind  wliich  the  co-ordinative  centres  cannot  check.  I  have
spoken  already  of  tlie  excessive  sensitiveness  of  certain  groups  of
memories  in  childhood  ;  for  instance,  the  idea  of  bears.  Well,  this
sensitiveness,  prior  to  the  age  of  co-ordination,  may  be  taken  advantage
of  to  effect  a  deferred  as  well  as  an  immediate  suggestion.  Just  as  my
friend  who  told  me  that  lie  was  a  bear,  gave  me  for  the  moment  some-
thing approaching  to  a  hallucinatory  percept  of  himself  as  a  bear,  so
do  some  nurses  talk  to  children  about  ghosts  in  a  way  which  implants
a  deferred  suggestion  of  liorror  in  traversing  churchyards,  which  no
adult  reason  can  overcome.

"  Trunken  mussen  wir  alle  sein  ;
Jugend  ist  Trunkenheit  ohne  Wein,"
says  the  poet.  And  just  as  youth,  with  its  strong  in-eflective  impulses,
its  organic  exhilaration,  resembles  the  state  of  incipient  intoxication,  so
does  childhood,  with  its  ready  receptivity  and  want  of  co-ordinative
power,  resemble  the  hypnotic  or  sleep-waking  condition.  By  hypnotiz-
ing the  adult  we  restore  to  him  the  trustfulness  of  childhood,  much
as  by  slightly  intoxicating  tlie  elderly  we  restore  to  them  (as  Plato
has  it)  the  vigour  and  enterprise  of  youth.

There  is,  however,  a  state  in  which  we  are  even  more  susceptible  to
suggestion,  have  even  less  of  co-ordinating  faculty,  of  resisting  power,


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.  165

than  either  in  childhood  or  in  the  hypnotic  trance.  I  allude  to
our  condition  before  we  are  born — to  the  period  at  which
the  various  looms  are  actually  being  placed  iu  our  manufactory,  in
rough  accordance  with  the  arrangement  of  similar  looms  in  the  factories
of  ancestral  minds.  And  we  most  of  us  know  to  our  cost  that
although  we  may  improve  the  working  of  these  looms  in  detail  we  have
little  power  to  modify  their  general  type,  or  the  principal  driving-
gear  which  connects  them.  And,  to  take  the  defect  with  which  we  are
now  concerned,  some  original  weakness  in  that  driving-gear  may
subject  us  to  liystero-epileptic  attacks,  with  their  concomitant  hypnotic
phenomena.

I  liave  perhaps  said  enough  to  explain  what  I  mean  by  extending
the  analogy  of  deferred  suggestion  to  this  wide  range  of  hereditary  and
(so-called)  spontaneous  manifestations  of  hypnotic  phenomena.  The
impulse,  as  I  hold,  which  ultimately  induces  those  phenomena,  has  been
already  given  to  the  organism, — either  in  that  organism's  first  inception,
or  during  the  course  of  life, — in  much  the  same  way  as  the  hypnotizer
can  communicate  the  impulse  to  sleep,  or  to  perform  some  act,  at  a
future  moment  which  he  determines  by  his  own  choice.

It  is  probable  that  many  of  those  who  accept  this  analogy  at  all
may  consider  that  it  covers  the  whole  extent  of  self-suggestive
phenomena.  They  may  think  that  spontmieous  cases  include  volimta/ry
cases,  as  a  mere  sub-division  distinguished  by  the  concomitance  of  a
purely  subjective  sensation  of  choice.  They  may  say  that  the  pre-
existent  conditions  of  the  organism  determine  in  every  case — in  the
so-called  voluntary  cases  as  fully  as  in  the  involuntary — the  phenomena
which  that  organism  proceeds  to  manifest.

I  do  not  here  directly  controvert  this  view  ;  but  I  cannot  help
suspecting  that  there  is  a  diflerence  between  hypnotic  phenomena
which  occur  spontaneously  and  those  which  seem  self-induced  by  a
direct  effort  of  will  ; — or  at  any  rate  that  this  second  class,  in  the  ap-
parent mode  of  their  operation,  afford  an  analogy  with  the  influence
which  the  "silent  will"  of  an  operator  can  sometimes — as  our  experi-
ments have  gone  to  show — exert  on  a  sensitive  subject.

I  am  not  sure,  however,  that  such  words  as  will,  merited  effort,  and
attention,  are  the  right  words  to  use  in  such  a  connection.  I  think
that  we  must  not  take  for  granted  that  this  influence  is  necessarily
accompanied  with  ordinary  consciousness  on  the  agent's  part.  It  ap-
pears, for  example,  that  a  person  himself  in  the  sleep-waking  state
can  mesmeiise  another  person, — exerting  apparently  the  same  kind  of
influence,  and  the  same  kind  of  volition  in  directing  it,  as  a  normally-
waking  man  can  exert.  Yet,  in  the  case  to  which  I  specially  allude,  when
the  sleep-waker  "  came  to  himself  "  he  was  quite  unconscious  that  he
had  mesmerised — and  had  for  a  long  time  refused  to  demesmerise — the


166


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


other  subject.  It  would  seem  then  that  in  considering  the  genesis  of
hypnotic  phenomena  which  are  apparently  self-4nduced,  yet  not  pre-
cisely spontaneous,  (as  hereditary  hysteria  is  spontaneous,) — we  shall
do  well  to  consider  phenomena  originated  in  various  nervous  conditions
besides  that  of  normal  wakefulness.

I  shall  cite  three  cases.  In  the  first  the  subject  was  in  a  state  of
general  "suspension  and  iiihibition  "  profounder  than  any  ordinary
phase  of  the  hypnotic  trance.  In  the  second  the  subject  was  already
hypnotized. In  the  third  the  subject  was  in  the  normal  state.

The  first  of  these  three  cases  may  seem  from  one  point  of  view  to
be  eminently  Mivoluntary, — eminently  a  case  where  the  previous  history
of  the  organism  determined  the  recrudescence  of  an  impressive  scene.
But — as  will  be  seen — it  has  some  puzzling  features.  Oddly  enough
we  have  here,  and  here  alone,  an  actual  suggestion  made  in  so  many
words  by  a  man  to  himself ; — and  here,  too,  we  have  the  remarkable
production,  without  external  stimulus,  of  those  vaso-motor  dis-
tui'bances  which  form  at  present  the  extreme  limit  of  the  hypno-
tizer's  power  over  the  subject's  physical  organism.  Who  could
expect  the  somnambule  to  direct  his  spontaneous  energy  to  the  produc-
tion of  haemorrhage  or  vesication  1  Yet  the  history  of  Louis  V  ,  one

of  the  most  important  documents  which  Nature  has  ever  submitted  to
the  psychologist,  aftbrds  an  example  of  self-suggestion  pushed  to  this
almost  incredible  length.

In  the  first  place  it  mvist  be  explained  that,  according  to  the
testimony  of  four  physicians  who  have  tried  experiments  with  Louis

V  at  two  separate  asylums,^  haemorrhage  and  bleeding  stigmata  can

be  evoked  in  him  by  external  suggestion.  The  first  recorded  experiment
of  the  kind  was  as  follows.  The  patient  being  in  the  somnambulic
state,  one  of  the  doctors  said  to  him:  "  At  four  o'clock  you  will  fall
asleep,  come  into  my  study,  sit  on  that  chair  with  your  arms  crossed,
and  bleed  at  the  nose."  The  crossing  of  the  arms  was,  of  course,  to
prevent  his  touching  his  nose.  When  four  o'clock  came  he  fell  into
the  hypnotic  trance,  went  and  sat  in  the  chair  with  his  arms  crossed,
and  after  a  few  moments  began  to  l^leed  at  the  nose.

Again,  the  doctor  traced  the  subject's  name  on  his  two  fore-arms
with  a  blunt  instrument,  and  told  him,  in  the  somnambulic  state,
"  At  four  o'clock  you  will  go  to  sleep  and  bleed  on  the  lines  which  I
have  ti-aced on your arms."^ Shortly  before  four  o'clock  he  was

See  Drs.  Bonrru  and  Burot,  Comptcs  Rcnrlus  cle  U  SocieU  de  biologic,  12
juillet,  1885,  for  experiments  at  Rochefort,  and  Dr.  Mabille,  Frogris  Medical,
29  aofit,  1885,  for  experiments  at  La  Roelielle.  See  also  Berjon,  02).  cit.,
p.  36,  sqq.

-  The  fact  that  the  arm  was  ^J?f7)«7,  though  witli  a  lilnnt  instrument,  may
suggest  tliat  the  suhsetiucnt  redness  and  even  l:)leeding  were  the  mere  effect  of


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


167


examined,  and  his  arms  were  then  witliout  marks.  At  four  he  fell
asleep,  and  on  his  left  (non-paralysed)  arm  the  tracings  stood  out  in  red
I'elief,  and  a  few  small  drops  of  blood  oozed  from  them.  On  the  right,
or  paralysed,  side,  there  was  nothing  apparent.

And  this  leads  us  to  the  phenomenon  of  self-suggestion  on  which  I
wish  to  dwell.  I  translate  from  Dr.  Mabille's  paper,  read  at  the
Congres  scientifique  de  Grenoble,  1885,  and  reprinted  in  the  Progres
Jl/eiiicfflZ,  as  already  cited.  "On  August  5,  1885,  at  my  visit,  about
8.30  a.m.,  in  presence  of  Dr.  Ramadier,  assistant  physician  of  the  asylum
of  Lafond  (La  Rochelle),  and  of  M.  Chauvelot,  house-physician,  I
plunged  V into  somnambulism,  and,  anxious  to  check  his  sleep-
lessness, I  said  to  him  :  '  This  evening,  at  eight,  you  will  say  to  the
attendant,  Ernest  :  "  Ernest,  come  and  help  me  to  bed,  I  want  to  sleep."
Then  you  will  go  to  bed  and  you  will  sleep  till  five  in  the  morning.
During  your  sleep  you  will  hear  nothing,  see  nothing,  feel  nothing.
You  understand  me,  Y  ? ' '  Yes,  sir.'

"  At  about  7.57  p.m.,Y  ,who  was  walking  in  the  court-yard,  stood

still  with  a  fixed  gaze,  underwent  some  slight  convulsions  of  the  face,  as
is  usual  with  him  when  the  moment  fixed  for  a  suggestion  draws  nigh,

contact.  We  do  not,  in  fact,  know  how  far  vaso-motor  reflex  excitability  may
go  in  the  production  of  phenomena  analogous  to  the  so-called  "  taclie  C(^rebrale,"
or  red  mark  produced  by  jsressure  on  the  skin  in  many  morbid  conditions.  It
Avould  have  been  more  satisfactory  had  Dr.  Mabille,  &e.,  explicitly  taken
account  of  this  possibility. Nevertheless,  it  certainly  appears  : —

1.  That  Louis  V  was  so  frequently  touclied  in  various  ways  that  any

tendency  to  tache  cerebralc,  or  subcutaneous  hpemorrhage,  must  have
been  observed  ;  and  if  the  marks  lasted  for  months  (as  is  recorded  of
the  marks  on  the  arm,  Berjon,  p.  36),  he  must  have  been  covered  with
such  marks.

2.  Tliat  precautions  were  taken  (p.  36)  to  prevent  his  touching  himself  for

"  some  minutes  "  before  the  bleeding  appeared.  The  tache  cerebrate^
so  far  as  I  know,  appears  within  two  or  three  minutes  after  the  touch,  if
at  all.

3.  Professor  Beaunis'  experiments  {Becherches  Expeiimentales,  &c. ,  Paris,

Bailliere,  1886,  p.  29)  on  the  production  of  redness  and  cutaneous  conges-
tion on  Mile.  A.  E.  bysuggestion,  are  confirmatory  of  Dr.  Mabille's.  Here
also  Professor  Beaunis  does  not  state  that  he  tried  whether  other  points
touclied  without  suggestion  would  become  equally  red,  no  doubt  con-
sidering that  it  was  obvious  that  Mile.  A.  E.,  who  leads  an  active  life,
was  not  thus  affected.  Fortunatelj',  on  Sept.  3,  1885,  I  had  myself  an
opportunity  of  trying  the  experiment  on  this  same  subject.  I  quote
from  Mr.  Gurney's  note  made  on  the  same  day  : —

' '  Mile.  A. ,  hypnotized  by  M.  Liebeault  in  about  three  seconds,  and
immediately  afterwards  most  severely  pinched  by  E.  G.  on  the  arm,
without  giving  the  slightest  sign  of  sensation.  Liebeault  slightly
pricked  the  knuckle  of  the  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand,  and  told  her
that  a  patch  of  redness  about  the  size  of  a  50-centime  piece  would  form
there  ;  and  also  that  a  similar  patch  would  form  on  the  corresponding


168


On  Telepathic  Hypnotimi.


and  fell  into  the  sleep,  or  rather  into  that  intermediate  state  which  M.
Dumontpallier  has  described.  His  hyperfiesthesia  of  the  left  side  dis-
appeared. He  repeated  to  his  attendants  the  words  previously  cited,
and  at  8  p.m.  precisely  slept  profoundly.  From  that  moment  onwards,
while  I  was  unable  to  wake  him,  for  he  saw,  heard,  felt  nothing,  and
the  pressure  of  his  hysterogenous  zones  had  no  effect,  V spon-
taneously renewed  tliis  series  of  experiments  to  which  he  had  been
previously  submitted.  Thus,  he  pressed  with  his  lingers  on  the  balls
of  his  eyes,  as  if  to  be  thrown  into  lethargy,  opened  his  eyelids  to  pass
into  catalepsy,  rubbed  the  top  of  his  head  to  pass  into  somnambulism,
and  entered  on  the  following  dialogue,  putting  the  questions  and
making  the  answers  himself.

"  Q.  You  hear  me  1 A.  Yes,  sir.

"  Q.  Give  me  your  arm. A.  Yes,  sir.

"  Q.  V  ,  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  you  wake  there  will  be  a  Y  on

your  arm  at  the  place  which  I  mark  (here  he  marked  a  place  on  his
arm),  and  it  will  bleed.  You  understand,  I  wish  it  to  bleed.  A.  Yes,
sir.

"  Q.  V  ,  count  to  ten  and  awake  at  seven.  ~  '  '

part  of  the  other  hand.  The  other  hand  was  not  pricked  or  touched  in
any  way.  F.  W.  H.  M.  also  gave  her  a  scratch  on  the  arm,  in  order  to
see  whether  this  Avould  also  become  red  after  a  short  interval.  She  was
then  woke,  and  in  about  15  minutes  the  patches  had  formed  as  pre-
dicted ;  that  on  the  left  hand  being  a  little  less  red  and  distinct  than
tliat  on  the  right.  Half  an  hour  after  this  both  marks  had  completely
disappeared.  There  was  no  redness  wliere  the  scratch  had  been  given.
Mile.  A.  's  hands  were  not  under  the  strictest  scrutiny  throughout,  but
she  was  close  to  us,  and  talking  during  the  whole  time  that  elapsed
between  her  waking  and  observation  of  the  patches,  and  anytliing  like
continuous  ruTdiing  must,  we  think,  liave  been  noticed.  M.  Liebeault
lias  complete  confidence  in  her  integrity,  and  all  his  experience  of  her
goes  to  show  that  she  retains  no  memory  on  waking  of  what  has  passed
during  her  hypnotic  sleep.  "
The  following  rules,  I  think,  should  be  observed  in  experiments  of  this
kind  : —

1.  Before  asserting  that  a  result  is  obtained  by  suggestion  alone,  repeat  the

experiment  on  the  same  subject  with  all  the  other  circumstances,  but
without  the  suggestion.

2.  Before  asserting  that  a  result  is  due  to  a  particular  process  alone  (as

shutting  or  opening  the  subject's  eyes,  rubbing  the  top  of  the  head,  or
special  points  on  the  head,  t&c. ),  let  that  process  be  repeated  on  a
subject  Avho  does  not  know  what  to  expect  by  an  operator  Avho  has  no
theory  on  the  subject  whatever.
The  rigid  application  of  these  rules  might,  I  fear,  reduce  certain  well-rounded
theories  to  a  somewhat  lean  and  scrappy  condition.

Professor  Delboeuf  (Revue  Philosophique,  August,  1886)  has  amusingly  shown
how  readily  one  subject  will  imitate  while  entranced  the  hypnotic  phenomena
which  he  has  observed  in  another.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


169


"  V  counts  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  seems  to  wake  from  his  sleep  ;  then

continues  to  count  8,  9,  10  and  stops. Loud  snores  then  indicate  that

he  is  asleep.  Then,  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  this  dialogue  V

was  seized  with  the  crisis  which  we  usually  observe  in  him  when  the
stigmata  have  been  suggested  to  him.  At  the  end  of  this  crisis  we
examined  his  arm  and  we  saw  a  V,  and  the  V  was  covered  with  blood.
This  Tiloody  eflusion  was  produced  at  a  place  where  a  V  had  been  sug-
gested by  me  on  August  3,  in  the  presence  of  Drs.  Barth  and  Delarue,
of  La  Rochelle,  according  to  the  method  of  Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot.

"The  same  phenomena  were  twice  produced  during  the  same  night,  in

the  same  place,  and  by  the  same  procedure.  V  then  awoke  exactly

at  5  a.m.,  without  knowing  that  he  had  been  asleep,  and  with  the  convic-
tion that  he  had  just  been  picking  flowers  in  the  garden  of  the  asylum.
We  have  here,  then,  a  haemorrhage  produced  during  induced  somnam-
bulism, without  any  external  agency,  in  the  place  of  the  pre-existing
stigmata,  by  what  I  tliink  I  may  call  auto-suggestion.  And  this  auto-
suggestion (as  well  as  all  the  other  phenomena  which  I  observed  during
the  night  of  August  5-6  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Ramadier  and  M.
Chauvelot)  was  of  cortical  origin,  since  the  initiation  of  peripheral  im-
pressions was  for  the  time  supj^ressed.  It  was  like  the  awakening  and
exteriorisation  of  sensations  already  stored  up  in  the  organism."

Here  at  last,  I  may  observe  incidentally,  is  the  true  explanatory
parallel  to  the  case  of  Louise  Lateau.  Here  is  a  case  where  there  is
no  pretence  of  miracle  and  no  possibility  of  fraud  ;  a  case  where  the  A'ery
mechanism  of  stigmatisation  is  laid  bare  from  beginning  to  end,  and
the  asylum-patient  retraces  the  doctor's  visit  with  the  same  reality  of
starting  drops  of  blood  with  which  the  pious  ecstatic  renews  the  story
of  the  Crucitixion.i

Passing  from  this  exceptional  state  of  profound  entrancement  to
the  commoner  phases  of  hypnotism,  I  will  next  cite  a  remarkable  case

^  The  difficulty  of  keeping  abreast  of  modern  experiment, — and  the  danger
of  confident  negations, — are  illustrated  by  tlie  following  passage  from  a  little
book  of  Dr.  Maudsley's,  entitled  Natural  Causes  and  Supernatural  Sccniings,
(London,  1886).

"  There  is  not  on  record,"  he  says  (p.  261),  "  a  single  well-authenticated
case,  nor  is  there  any  sound  argument  to  justify  the  preposterous  opinion,
which  has  been  broached  by  some  quasi-scientific  authors,  that  these  stigmatic
bleedings  might  be  produced  naturally  l)y  the  exceeding  and  specific  intensity
of  the  imagination  acting  upon  the  particular  areas  affected.  The  supposition
that  the  zinc  [in  a  well-known  case  of  fraud]  Avas  perforated  by  the  intensity  of
the  imagination,  would  be  scarcely  less  preposterous."  Whether  an  idea  is
"  preposterous  "  or  not  is  a  subjective  question,  and  depends  on  what  goes  before
and  what  behind  it  in  the  speaker's  mind.  But  "quasi-scientific"  is  a  more
objective  term;  and  Dr.  Maudsley's  u.se  of  it  here  seems  to  prove  that  he  lias  not
had  time  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  experiments  of  Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot,
nor  with  those  of  Professor  Beaunis,  contained  in  the  Eecherches  Exjxrimentales


170


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


of  Dr.  Pitres'i,  where  the  subject,  in  tlie  somnambulic  state,  was  able  to
suggest  to  herself  that  it  was  impossible  to  awaken  her.

Dr.  Pitres' subject,  "  Albertine,"  (already  mentioned,)  is  liable  to
accesses  of  hysterical  aphasia,  which  she  greatly  dislikes.  One  day
Dr.  Pitres  suggested  to  her,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  that  she  would  be
unable  to  speak  when  she  awoke,  and  would  continue  apliasic  for
24  hours.  The  suggestion  succeeded  ;  all  that  day  she  could  not  speak.
Some  time  afterwards  Dr.  Pitres  again  hypnotized  her,  and  made  the
same  suggestion.  But  she  rebelled,  and  said  that  if  he  persisted  in
giving  her  this  order  she  would  not  let  herself  be  awakened.  He  did
not  believe  that  she  could  prevent  him  from  waking  her,  and  blew  on
her  eyes  and  tried  other  accustomed  means.  Nothing  would  wake  her,
and  he  was  obliged  at  last  to  promise  that  she  should  only  be  aphasic
for  five  minutes.  Then  he  woke  her  without  difficulty.  The  experiment
was  repeated  many  times.

Here,  then,  we  have  a  well-marked  case  of  self-suggestion  in  the
hypnotic  trance  itself.  M.  Pitres  does  not  state  whether  Albertine
can  hypnotize  herself,  by  a  mere  effort  of  will,  in  the  waking  state.
From  the  account  given,  it  rather  appears  that  the  trance  itself  has
facilitated  the  self-suggestion, — that  the  same  condition  of  super-
normal susceptibility  which  renders  her  subject  to  the  commands  of  her
hyjjnotizer  renders  her  subject  also  to  a  command  of  her  own.  And  I
would  point  out  that  this  accords  with  my  hypothesis  that  in  self-
suggestion  the  subject  may  be  exercising  on  himself,  from  within,  a
force  or  influence  truly  analogous  to  the  force  or  influence  which  the
hypnotizer  exercises  on  him  from  without.

Passing  on,  again,  from  the  self-suggestion  of  the  subject  already
hypnotized  to  the  self-suggestion  which  throws  the  waking  subject  into
trance,  we  find  ourselves  on  a  path  of  "  yogism  "  and  mysticism  which
would  lead  us  far  from  the  present  discussion.  I  shall  cite  one  case
only,  where  the  act  of  will  is  strongly  marked, — the  waking  choice  even
determining  the  hallucinations  which  are  to  adorn  the  self -induced  trance.

Dr.  Liebeault '  was  acquainted  with  a  "somnambule  naif," — a  deaf-
mute  of  the  name  of  Loue,  who  apparently,  even  before  the  scene
which  I  am  about  to  relate,  was  able  to  entrance  himself  by  an  effort
of  will.  Dr.  Liebeault  told  this  man  that  the  dead  could  appear  to  the
living,  and  that,  if  he  concentrated  his  mind  on  his  father,  his  deceased

already  cited.  Applied  to  Dr,s.  I3ourru  and  Burot,  such  an  epitliet  would  be
unwarrantably  discourteous.  Applied  l)y  Dr.  Maudsley  to  Professor  Beaunis,
it  would  provoke  a  smile.  But  I  repeat  that  it  would  be  unjust  to  charge  any
such  intention  on  Dr.  Maudsley, — who  wrote,  it  is  clear,  in  mere  ignorance  of
the  recorded  facts.

1  Pitres,  Des  suggestions  hypnotiques,  Bordeaux,  1884,  p.  54.

'•^  Du  sommeil  et  des  Hats  analognes,  pp.  259,  282.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


171


father  would  probably  appear,  and  that  he  (Loue)  would  remember
the  interview.  "  Le  somnambule,"  says  Dr.  Liebeault,  "  se  mit  aussitot  a
baisser  la  tete  ;  sa  respiration  devint  bruyante,  sa  figure  prit  une
expression  serieuse,  et  au  bout  de  quelques  minutes  il  se  leva,  I'oeil  fixe,
et  se  dirigea  vers  la  porte  de  I'appartement.  Les  temoins  de  son  reve  et
moi  nous  le  vimes  tendre  la  main,  deposer  un  baiser  dans  le  vide,' — and,
in  fact,  he  went  through  the  scene  of  an  interview  with  the  phantom
of  his  evocation.!  From  that  date  he  frequently  repeated  the  process,
firmly  believing  that  it  was  veritably  the  dead  who  ca.me.  He  profited
also  by  his  new-found  power  to  procure  himself  imaginary  interviews
with  living  personages  of  a  less  sacred  character.  These  interviews,
though  they  also  seemed  real  at  the  time,  he  always  knew  to  have  been
mere  hallucinations.  But  as  regards  the  interviews  with  the  dead,  the
kindly  doctor,  kinder  than  those  unwelcome  friends  of  Horace's
hallucine, — allowed  the  poor  man  to  rest  in  a  belief  whose  destruction
would  have  robbed  him  of  his  most  valued  joy.

'  Pol  me  occidistis,  amici,
Non  servastis,'  ait,  '  cui  sic  extorta  voluptas
Et  demptus  per  vim  mentis  gratissimus  error.'
Cases  like  this, — where  choice  and  effort  seem  so  deeply  engaged,
do  certainly  take  us  far  away  from  the  mere  '  attaques  de  sommeil,'  for
instance,  of the  congenitally-unstable  Albertine. They bring  us
face to  face with the question  : Is this uill or  attention  of
the  subject's,  which  he  uses  to  induce  the  trance,  a  new  force  introduced
amongst  the  forces  of  his  organism  from  some  source  independent  of  or
pre-existent  to  that  organism  1 This,  of  course,  leads  us  at  once  to  the
old  problem  as  to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  anything  which
may  be  properly  termed  a  soul,  independent  of  the  known  physical
organism.

But,  nevertheless,  without  directly  grappling  with  such  a  problem
as  this,  we  can,  I  think,  discern  an  instructive  diflerence  between  this
direct  self-suggestion  and  the  mere  accidental  stirring  or  gradual  matu-
ration of  external  excitations  received  in  the  past.

1  A  parallel  instance  of  self-suggestion  will  be  found  in  the  Archivio
Italiano  per  Ic  Malatie  Nervose  for  1883,  Part  4:  thus  summarized  in  Ann.
Med. -Psych.,  1884,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  467.  "Une  fillette  de  dix-sept  ans,  a  demi
idiote,  est,  quel  que-  Iieures  avant  la  mort  de  son  pfere  prise  d'un  sommeil  niag-
netique  ;  hallucinations  celestes  (?).  On  arrive  plus  tard  h,  'Ihypiiotiser  ;  les
memes  scenes  se  reproduisent,  niais  on  cesse  les  experiences,  la  malade  ayant
tente  a  la  suite  de  Tune  d'elles  k  se  suicider.  Actuellement  cette  jeune  fille  se
met  elle-meme  en  etat  d'hypnotisme,  et  s'en  tire  par  les  metliodes  connues  qu'elle
pratique  spontanement,  tant  I'extase  lui  est  devenue  agreable.  On  t  st  oblige
de  Fen  deshabituer. "

Dr.  Charles  Despioe's  patien%  Estelle  L  ,  could  also  induce  and  modify

trance  at  will. — Ohservations  de  Medecine  Pmtique,  p.  62,  »S:c. (Anneci,  1838.).


172


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


First,  let  us  suppose  that  wlaen  Dr.  Liebeault's  deaf-mute  Loue,  for
instance,  throws  himself  into  a  trance  by  an  eifort  of  will,  without  any
mechanical  stimulus,  that  efibrt  is  really  a  new  force,  cognisable  by  us
only  on  the  psychical  side,  and  imported  into  the  sum  of  forces  pre-
viously manifest.  In  that  case  the  new  force  will  be  a  vital  force
exercised  by  himself  on  himself  ;  and  its  nearest  apparent  analogy  will
be  to  the  assumed  vital  force  which  Dr.  Liebeault  can  exercise  on  him.

Next,  let  us  suppose  that  he  does  not,  by  this  act  of  will,  import
any  fresh  force  from  an  unknown  plane  of  being.  Nevertheless
he  effects,  by  unknown  means,  some  kind  of  change  in  a  previously-
existing  vital  equilibrium.  He  transforms  some  kind  of  latent  capacity
into  a  force  which,  after  intermediate  steps  unknown  to  us,  ends  by
throwing  him  into  that  special  condition  into  which  the  "  vital
influence "  of  an  external  operator  can  also  throw  him.  May  we
not,  then,  here  again  conjecture,  as  the  simplest  way  of  correlating  the
two  phenomena,  that  the  self-suggestion  which  sends  the  subject  into
sudden  trance,  at  the  bidding  of  his  mere  caprice  of  the  moment,  may
involve  some  disengagement  within  him  of  the  same  force  which,  when
exercised  upon  him  from  without,  is  that  very  "  vital  influence "  or
"  efHuence,"  in  whose  real  existence  we  have  independent  grounds  for
believing  %

A  few  more  words  may  make  my  meaning  clearer.  In  most  cases
of  successful  hypnotism  there  is  some  amount  of  voluntary  attention
on  the  subject's  part.  He  co-operates  with  the  operator  by  "  fixing  his
mind  "  on  the  process  ;  and,  in  fact,  some  theorists  have  thought  that
his  fixation  of  his  mind  was  the  sole  cause  of  the  eflects  which  follow.
But  what  makes  him  fix  his  mind  1  He  chooses  to  do  so ;  that  is  all
we  can  say.  And  it  is  this  apparent  act  of  choice,  this  voluntary
direction  of  the  attention  to  a  particular  idea,  which  is  the  stronghold
of  those  who  maintain  that  there  are  mental  processes  within  us  which
are  not  inevitably  determined  by  physical  antecedents.  I  am  not
arguing  either  for  or  against  this  view  ;  I  am  only  reminding  the  reader
that  this  voluntary  attention  of  the  subject's  is  something  separate  from
the  mere  reflex  psychical  response  to  the  operator's  suggestion,  and  that
it  is  an  element  whicli  enters  in  varying  degrees  into  all  inductions  of
hypnotic  trance,  except  those  effected  by  sudden  shocks,  or  upon  sleep-
ing, unconscious,  infant,  or  insane  persons  or  animals.  And  the  question
is  whether  we  can  get  a  little  deeper  than  this  mere  statement,
whether  we  can  detect  an  analogy  between  this  idiosyncratic  impulse,
this  "  reaction  2)erso7inelle,"  and  any  hypnogenous  agency  which  a  man
can  exert  upon  others  than  himself.

And  to  this  question  I  tentatively  reply  that  perhaps  when  I  attend
to  a  thing,  or  will  a  thing,  I  am  directing  upon  my  own  nervous  system
actually  that  same  force  which,  when  I  direct  it  on  another  man's


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.  173


nervous  system,  is  the  "vital  influence"  of  mesmerists,  or  the  "tele
pathic  impact "  of  which  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  said  so  much.  And
when  I  say  "  directing  the  force  on  my  own  nervous  system,"  I  am  not
speaking  of  myself  as  a  kind  of  angelus  rector  without  and  above  my
organism.  How  the  force  is  generated  is  an  open  question  in  the  case
of  the  suggestion  which  I  exert  within  myself  as  in  the  case  of  that
which  I  exert  ivithout  myself.  But  whether  the  essence  of  those  acts  of
will,  or  of  attention,  be  an  illation  and  infusion  of  forces  which  do  not
pre-exist  in  my  organism,  or  a  concentration  or  conversion  of  forces
which  do  so  pre-exist,  I  urge  that  that  essential  element  may  be  the
same  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.

§  17.  Whatever,  then,  the  precise  explanation  of  this  form  of  self-
suggestion  may  be,  it  forms  a  step  between  mere  mechanical  hypnogeny
and  that  "  vital  influence,"  which  in  its  turn  serves  as  the  starting
point  for  so  many  fresh  perplexities.

For  no  sooner  do  we  fix  our  attention  on  what  we  have  defined  as
the  third  class  of  suggestions — suggestions  made  inentally  by  persons  in
the  presence  or  proximity  of  the  subject — than  we  recognise  that  the
theory  of  vital  influence,  already  assailed  on  one  side  by  the  advocates
of  a  merely  mechanical  hypnogeny,  is  assailable  also,  on  the  side  further
from  ordinary  experience,  by  anyone  who  should  choose  to  maintain
that  the  true  agency  which  travels  from  man  to  man  is  a  cause  uncon-
nected with  corporeal  proximity — that  is  to  say,  that  it  is  never  the
"  pass,"  or  the  gaze  of  the  eyes,  or  the  touch  of  the  fingers  which  sends
the  subject  into  trance,  but  always  an  agency  of  that  unknown
"  psychical  "  kind  which  our  evidence  shows  sometimes  to  accompany
the  exercise  of  intense  tJtmight  or  will.

The  cases  which  bring  this  question  into  prominence  are  especially
those  where  the  influence  of  the  mesmerist  (as  in  Dr.  Esdaile's  mesmeri-
sation  of  a  blind  man)  has  been  exercised  from  the  distance  of  some
yards,  by  gazing  steadily  at  the  subject.

Are  we  to  suppose  that  there  was  here  a  real  opfiiaTwv  dnoppoii — a
veritable  efllux  of  nervous  energy  from  Dr.  Esdaile's  eyes,  which  im-
pinged in  some  physical  manner  on  the  blind  and  unsuspecting  subject  1
Or  was  the  transfer  of  a  purely  telepathic  kind  ?  and  was  the  direction
of  Esdaile's  eyes  on  the  subject  a  mere  aid  to  concentration  of  thought
or  will  1

Mesmer  would  have  said  that  a  real  efllux  from  the  eyes  was  here
the  efiicient  cause.  The  writers  in  the  Zoist  (including  Esdaile  himself),
so  far  as  they  faced  the  problem  distinctly,  would  liave  made  the  same
reply.  And  recently  Dr.  Barety  (Force  JS^eurique  Rayonnante,  1882)
has  attempted  to  sliow  that  actual  "  neuric  rays  "  are  emitted  by  eyes
and  fingers,  which  are  susceptible  of  reflection  from  mirrors,  concentra-
tion by  lenses,  kc.  "  Nous  croyons,"  he  says  (p.  37),  "  qu'il  n'y  a  aucune


174


On  TelepatJiic  Hypnotism.


tdmerite  a  conclure  .  .  que  la  force  neurique  .  .  n'est  qu'un
mode  particulier  de  uiouvement  .  qu'elle  agit  par  rinterniediaire  de
cette  matiere  subtile . que  les  pliysiciens  appellent  ether."

I  think  that  there  is  temerity  in  such  a  conclusion,  and  I  do  not  like
to  see  the  ether — tlie  deus  ex  machind  of  a  certain  school  of  modern
theorists — dragged  in,  if  I  may  so  say,  by  the  head  and  shoulders,  to
explain  anything,  whether  physical  or  psychical,  which  particularly
puzzles  us.  Yet  I  think  that  Dr.  Barety's  experiments  should  be
repeated,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  we  can  have  no  a  prior-i  certainty
that  such  rays  as  he  alleges  do  not  exist.

On  the  othei'  hand  Professor  Janet's  experiments  with  Madame  B.
(and  many  older  experiments,)  seem  to  show  that  the  action  of  thought
or  wish  may  overbear  the  influence  of  proximity,  even  when  operator
and  subject  are  sitting  side  by  side.

"  Cette  influence  de  la  pensee  de  I'operateur,"  lie  says,i  "  quelque
extraordinaii-e  que  cela  paraisse,  est  ici  tout  a  fait  preponderante,  a  un
tel  point  qu'elle  peut  remplacer  toutes  les  autres.  Si  on  presse  la  main
de  Madame  B.  sans  songer  a  I'endormir,  on  n'arrive  pas  a  provoquer  le
sommeil ;  au  contraire,  si  Ton  songe  a  I'endormir  sans  lui  presser
la  main,  on  y  reussit  parfaitement."

Professor  Janet  is,  of  course,  alive  to  the  danger  of  mere  suggestion
in  such  a  case ;  and  (as  already  mentioned)  he  goes  on  to  say  that  he
thinks  that  this  supposition  is  met  in  several  ways,  especially  by  the
fact  that  in  sleep  thus  induced  by  mill,  Madame  B.  was  under  the
influence  of  the  person  who  had  really  willed  her  from  the  next  room —
not  of  the  person  who  had  been  placed  near  her,  and  to  whom,  if
mere  suggestion  induced  the  sleep,  that  suggestion  miglit  naturally  have
pointed.

Again,  in  the  experiments  in  wldch  we  obtained  localised  anit^stliesia,
of  a  single  finger  only,  and  in  a  manner  which  seemed  to  exclude  both
monotonous  stimulation  and  expectant  attention  as  operating  causes,^
it  nevertheless  appeared  that  it  was  necessary  for  Mr.  Smith  to  concen-
trate liis  attention  on  the  subject's  finger,  as  well  as  to  point  his  own
fingers  towards  it.  But  the  concentration  of  attention  did  not  sufiice
without  the  physical  approacli  of  the  fingers  as  well.

The  approach  of  Mr.  Smith's  fingers,  it  will  be  remembered,  was
concealed  from  any  ordinary  cognizance  of  the  subject's  senses.  But
before  we  can  he.  sure  of  a  specific  vital  infiuence  we  have  to  guard  our-
selves against  possible  hypercesthesia  of  the  ordinary  senses  ; — and  this
is  difficult  to  do  while  the  operator,  however  liidden,  is  himself  present
with  liis  subject. We  must  desire  cases  where  his  influence  shall  in

1  BulletinH  dc  la  SocMe  de  Psijchologie  riii/siologiquc,  Vol.  i.,  p.  27.  (Paris,
Alcan. )

-  See  Pron-vdi/igs,  S.P.R.,  Vols,  i.,  iii.,  reff.  in  Index.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


175


some  way  persist  after  liis  own  removal,  or  become  embodied  in  some
substance  otherwise  inert.

§  18.  The  most  direct  way,  therefore,  of  testing  the  reality  of  "vital
effluence  "  would  cei'tainly  seem  to  be  the  so-called  "  mesmerisation  of
objects."  Personally,  I  have  witnessed  very  few  experiments  of  this
kind  which  led  to  any  positive  result  •}  but  (as  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have
elsewhere  insisted,)  the  testimony  of  Esdaile  and  others  in  the  matter  is
too  strong  to  be  set  aside  witliout  diligent  attempts  to  imitate  their
proceedings.  Yet  even  here  new  ambiguities  present  themselves  as  our
knowledge  of  deferred  and  of  telepathic  suggestion  increases.

Professor  Beaunis,  of  Nancy, ^  gave  some  counters  to  Mile.  A.
(already  often  mentioned)  in  her  waking  state,  and  said  :  "If  you  at
any  time  put  one  of  these  counters  into  a  glass  of  eau  sucree  and  drink
it,  you  will  go  to  sleep."  Mile.  A.  forgot  the  liquid  thus  ordered.  She
tried  wine,  water,  wine  and  water,  in  vain  ;  at  last  she  tried  putting  the
counter  into  a  glass  of  emi  sucree,  drank  it,  and  went  to  sleep  at  once.
The  suggestion,  that  is  to  say,  which  had  disappeared  from  conscious
memory  was  still  operative  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness.  But  if
a  case  like  this  had  occurred  before  the  efficacy  of  deferred  suggestions
was  understood,  it  Avould  probably  have  been  thought  by  the  mesmerists
of  the  day  that  the  counter  had  been  mesmerised  by  Professor  Beaunis'
contact,  and  that  the  eau  sucree,  for  some  inscrutable  reason,  was  a
liquid  peculiarly  qualified  to  draw  that  counter's  mesmeric  virtues  out.

So  niucli  for  the  possible  confusion  between  deferred  suggestion  and
vital  effluence.  And  if  we  introduce  tlie  hypothesis  of  mental  or
telepathic  sriggestion,  sucli  as  Dr.  Gibert's  mental  suggestion  to
Madame  B.,  that  she  should  look  at  a  certain  book  at  a  certain  houi",  a
fresh  source  of  ambiguity  is  introduced.  Suppose  that  Professor  Beaunis
had  mentally  suggested  to  Mile.  A.  that  when  she  put  the  counter  into
eau  sucree  and  drank  it  she  would  go  to  sleep  ;  and  that  this  suggested
result  had  actually  occurred.  It  would  then  look  precisely  as  though  the
eaw  s?icre'e  had  undergone  some  mysterious  change;  whereas  the  only
change  would  have  been  that  telepathically  impressed  on  Mile.  A.'s
mind  by  tlie  mental  suggestion  previously  made.

It  would,  of  course,  be  easy  so  to  arrange  the  experiment  as  to
avoid  possibilities  of  tliis  kind  ;  but  it  is  important  that  they  sliould  be
recognised ;  for  experimenters  who  have  been  fortunate  enough  to
encounter  the  rarer  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  have  often  overlooked
the  precautions  which  are  needful  if  any  conclusive  proof  of  one  or
other  hypnogenous  agency  is  to  be  acquired.

§  19.  It  is  plain  that  we  have  here  arrived  at  one  of  the  hardest

1  See  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  i.,  reft',  in  Index.

"  Eecherches  Experinmitales,  ii.,  p.  89. (Paris,  Bailliere,  1886.)


176


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


knots  in  the  whole  inquirj' ,  It  resolves  itself  into  this  :  Is  there  one  and
only  one  form  of  influence  which  is  not  communicated  by  the  ordinary
channels  of  sense  1  Or  is  there  an  influence  which  is  felt  by  a
percipient  only  when  the  agent  is  very  near  himl  and  another  influence
which  the  percipient  feels  equally  when  the  agent  is  at  an  indefinite
distance  1  Readers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Liviniy  will  see  that  this
problem — there  dealt  with  on  its  psychical  side  alone — presents  itself  in
an  urgent  manner  when  we  attempt  to  establish  an  analogy  between  our
experimental  results  in  thought-transference  and  those  spontaneously-
arising  impressions  or  apparitions  which  sometimes  coincide  with  the
death  or  crisis  of  a  distant  friend.  Our  parallel  halts  in  so  far  that  we
have  not  yet  succeeded  in  experimentally  obtaining  (in  the  sense  of  the
direct  communication  of  a  thought,  image,  or  sensation  from  one  person
to  another,)  thought-transference  otherwise  than  between  persons  in
close  proximity.  In  Phantasms  of  the  Living  this  difficulty  has  been
pointed  out,  but  no  complete  solution  has  been  attempted. i  Speaking
for  myself  only,  I  am  inclined  provisionally  to  accept  the  hypothesis
that  more  than  one  form  of  force,  or  at  least  more  than  one  form  of
receptivity,  is  concerned  in  the  phenomena.

The  action  of  medicaments  at  a  distance — at  a  distance  measured  by

inches — on  Louis  V  and  others,  has  led  MM.  Bourru  and  Buret  to

suggest,  in  a  tentative  manner,  that  there  may  be  a  zone,  immediately
surrounding  the  person  of  a  hypersesthetic  patient,  to  which  his
hypersesthesia  extends  ;  so  that  certain  objects,  when  placed  within
that  zone,  exercise  a  direct  efTect  on  his  nervous  system.

Hypotheses  somewhat  similar  have  been  suggested  by  various  other
experiments,  and  analogy  seems  to  me  to  point  (though  not  decisively)
in  this  direction.  On  the  other  hand  one  obvious  objection  to  the  view,
namely  the  comjslexity  which  it  introduces  into  the  conception  of  tele-
pathic action,  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  important.  We  have  given  the
name  telepathy  to  a  mass  of  phenomena  which  have  in  common  only  the
fact  that  they  involve  transmission  of  thoughts  or  feelings  from  one  mind
to  another,  without  the  agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense.  But
it  would  be  rash  to  go  beyond  this,  and  to  assume  that  we  have  at
once  lit  on  a  single,  simply-acting  force  or  energy.  So  long  as  we  can
detect  forces  only  by  their  influence  on  ourselves,  not  on  registering  in-
struments, we  are  likely  not  only  to  ignore  what  may  be  the  most
characteristic  action  of  each  force,  but  to  confuse  together  disparate
forces  which  exert  on  us  something  of  the  same  effect.

g  20.  But  here,  I  repeat,  we  come  to  one  of  the  most  difficult  points
in  the  whole  inquiry.  What  is  the  relation  between  the  supersensory
transmission  of  thoughts  and  feelings  in  close  proximity,  and  a  similar

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  96-97. Note  the  case  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


177


transmission  between  persons  separated  by  the  wliole  diameter  of  the
planet

In  order  to  answer  this  question  we  ought  to  be  able  to  compare
very  many  cases  of  telepathy  at  varying  distances.  PJimitasms  of  the
Living  contains,  I  think,  almost  all  the  cases  on  which  reliance  can
be  placed,  and  they  are  not  yet  enough  to  admit  of  an  assured
comparison  between  the  phenomena  which  occur  (1)  between  persons
in  contact ;  (2)  between  persons  in  the  same  room  ;  (3)  between  persons
in  adjoining  rooms  ;  (4)  between  persons  at  a  distance  of  less  than  a
mile ;  (5)  between  persons  many  miles  distant  from  one  another.  We
do  not  know  where  the  breaks,  if  any,  occur  in  this  chain ;  we  do  not
know  what  is  the  effect,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  material  obstacle
such  as  a  wall,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  of  what  I  may  call  a  psychical
rajyprochement,  as,  for  instance,  a  previous  familiarity  on  the  agent's
part  with  the  scene  where  the  percipient  sits.  But  (speaking  in  a
guarded  and  provisional  manner)  we  may  note  the  following  points : —

(1)  Contact  seems  generally  to  facilitate  transmission  of  thought
and  feeling,  and  the  induction  of  the  hypnotic  trance.  ^

(2)  Presence  in  the  same  room  seems  to  be  essential  to  most  of
our  definite  experiments  in  thought-transference,  and  to  the
induction  (in  the  first  instance)  of  the  hypnotic  trance.

(3)  Presence  in  an  adjoining  room  has  occasionally  sufliced  for  a
direct  experiment  in  thought-transference  ;  and  occasionally
for  the  reproduction  of  the  hypnotic  trance  when  it  has  been
previously  induced  by  the  same  operator.

(4)  Perhaps  hypnotisation  at  a  distance  is  easier  when  the  distance
is  (say)  of  one  mile  rather  than  ten.  Perhaps,  too,  there  is  a
certain  difference  in  the  quality  of  the  subject's  sensations
when  the  mesmeriser  is  at  a  distance.  Thus  Mme.  B.  (in  this
resembling  one  at  least  of  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson's  subjects-)
always  professed,  not  only  to  feel  who  it  was  that  was  thus
influencing  her,  but  to  have  a  vague  sense  as  of  that  operator's
presence  in  the  room.  This  I  heard  her  say  repeatedly  in  the
hypnotic  trance  (in  which  she  seems  always  to  tell  the  truth
as  to  her  own  sensations),  nor  has  she,  as  I  understand,  been
ever  mistaken  as  to  whether  it  was  M.  Gibert  or  M.  Janet
who  had  sent  her  to  sleep  from  a  distance.

(5)  Lastly,  when  the  telepathic  influence  is  exerted  over  long
distances  we  have  very  much  less  of  direct  experiment,  but

^  I  need  hardly  repeat  here  tliat  cases  in  which  contact  is  permitted  are  not
in  themselves  a  proof  of  anything  beyond  unconscious  muscular  pressure,  if  tlie
image  or  action  be  sucli  as  any  form  of  pressure  can  suggest.

^  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  i.,  page  99,  and  see  note.


178


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


very  much  more  of  spontaneous  apparition.  Our  distant
cases  include,  as  we  liave  often  pointed  out,  all  varieties  of
objectivation,  from  the  mere  sense  of  presence,  or  the  "mind's-
eye"  view,  to  the  actual  phantom  in  apparent  bodily  form.  But
,  though  these  distant  cases  offer  many  phenomena  not  hitherto

observed  in  experimental  or  contiguous  cases,  they  present
also  many  points  of  contact.  Sometimes,  for  instance,  it
seems  to  be  the  tvill  of  the  distant  agent  which  impresses  his
phantasm  on  the  percipient — sometimes  the  death  of  a  distant
friend  seems  to  produce  a  quasi-hypnotic  effect  on  the  per-
cipient, which,  in  one  case,  at  least,  seems  to  have  amounted
to  a  sort  of  agitated  trance.  ^

Now  there  is,  of  course,  a  temptation  to  simplify  the  problem  by
assuming  that  in  all  these  cases  of  supersensory  transmission  a  force  is
acting  which  in  the  first  place  is  identical,  cognate,  or  correlated  with
known  forces,  and  in  the  second  place  is  the  same  for  all  supersensory
action  whether  in  contiguity  or  at  great  distances.  Such  expressions
as  "  braiu-waves  "  (Knowles),  "mentiferous  ether"  (Maudsley),  "force
neurique  rayonnante"  (Barety),  "  ondulationnisme  "  (Perronet) — to
which  many  others  will  doubtless  ei'e  long  be  added — testify  to  this
natural,  though  premature,  desire  to  ticket  or  identify  a  force  which
(in  the  opinion  at  least,  as  I  think  I  may  say,  of  those  who  have
expended  most  pains  on  tracing  its  effects)  cannot  at  present  be
correlated  with  nerve-force,  or  with  magnetism,  or  with  ethereal
vibrations  of  any  kind,  by  any  true  physical  demonstration.

And  here,  again,  there  is  a  temptation  to  the  attainment  of  some-
thing of  apparent  simplicity  by  a  just  opposite  road.  We  may  say  that
telepathy  is  a  'psychical  agency,  and  that  there  is  an  impassable  gulf
between  all  agencies  which  can  be  classed  as  physical  on  the  one  hand,
and  on  the  other  hand,  all  agencies,  whether  apparently  operating  in
proximity  or  at  a  distance,  which  we  can  as  yet  cognise  on  the  psychical
side  alone.

But  this  view  seems  to  me  to  involve  a  metapliysical,  as  those  other
views  involved  a  physical  assuinption.  I  do  not  like  to  assume  that
any  effect  perceptible  to  human  senses  is  without  a  physical  cause  of
some  kind — a  cause,  that  is  to  say,  which  intelligences  of  adequate
elevation  could  cognise  objectively  and  deal  with  mathematically,  as
we  deal  with  those  forms  of  matter  and  force  which  our  minds  can  at
present  embrace.  Such  physical  cause  or  basis  may  no  doubt  be  so
remote  from  our  ordinary  physical  conceptions  that  the  philosopher  may
be  justified  in  leaving  it  altogether  out  of  the  question,  and  in  dealing
with  the  interrelations  of  thought  and  emotion  exclusively  on  the

^  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  42.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


179


psychical  side ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  telepathy  forces  us  into  a
position  where  it  is  no  longer  safe  to  assume  any  sharply -defined  dis-
tinction of  mind  and  matter, — where  we  must  rid  ourselves  of  every  meta-
physical preconception  and  look  to  experiment  and  observation  alone.

We  must  remember  that  it  is  only  quite  recently  tliat  we  have
frankly  accepted  a  physical  basis  or  concomitant  for  all  the  operations
which  go  on  within  our  own  minds.  It  was  in  this  century  that  Lord
Jeffrey  maintained  that  "there  is  not  the  smallest  reason  for  supposing
that  the  mind  ever  operates  through  the  agency  of  any  material  organs,
except  in  its  perception  of  material  objects,  or  in  the  spontaneous  move-
ments of  tlxe  body  which  it  inhabits."  And  even  Mill,  as  is  well
knoAvn,  regarded  the  concomitance  of  a  neural  change  witli  all  mental
changes  as  an  open  question.  We  are  now  pretty  well  agreed  that  such
concomitance  does  always  and  inevitably  subsist  within  us ;  but  we  still
speak  of  the  interaction  of  thought  and  emotion-  of  the  "world  of
mind" — as  of  a  realm,  or  of  operations,  where  no  physical  basis  must  be
assumed.  I  think  it  possible  that  the  facts  of  telepathy  may  compel
us  to  extend  our  conceptions  of  physico-psychical  concomitance,  and  to
face  the  supposition  that  though  forces  may  exist,  and  agencies  operate,
which  the  ordinary  materialistic  view  altogether  denies,  yet  these  also
may  be  correlated — though  above  the  limit  of  our  intelligence — with
the  force  and  matter  with  which  our  mathematical  science  already  deals.

It  will,  of  course,  be  apparent  from  the  line  of  argument  here
adopted  that  I  do  not  consider  that  tlie  problem  of  the  relation  of  near
to  distant  supersensory  transference  admits  at  present  of  even  approxi-
mate solution.  Our  recorded  instances  must  receive  many  in  addition,
— nay,  our  notions  of  matter  and  of  mind  must  pass  through  many  a
phase  as  yet  unimagined, — before  we  can  tell  in  what  degree  the
mesmerist's  gaze  across  the  room  resembles  that  strange  and  mighty
impulse  which  carries  the  dying  father's  image  across  seas  and  con-
tinents to  his  unexpectant  child.  All  that  I  have  suggested  is  that
there  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of  some  connection,  sorne  continuity;
that  the  mingled  similarity  and  dissimilarity  of  the  phenomena  at
diflering  distances  is  such  as  may  lead  us  to  conjecture  the  joint  action
of  cognate  causes  in  vaiying  proportion — of  causes  cognate  but  not
identical,  implying  no  single  capacity  of  percipience,  no  single  energy
of  communication.

§21.  I  can  but  note  these  points,  on  which  fuller  knowledge  may
come  in  time.  For  the  present  it  must  suffice  to  have  endeavoured,
in  the  first  place,  to  supply  additional  evidence  of  the  existence  of
telepathic  hypnotism,  or  hypnotic  suggestion  at  a  distance ;  and,  in  the
second  place,  to  trace  a  kind  of  series  or  gradation — often  inter-
rupted, indeed,  and  largely  hypothetical — between  the  simplest  and
commonest,  and  the  rarest  and  strangest  modes  of  hypnotic  influence.

N  2


180


On  Telepathic  Hyimotii^m.


Some  of  the  hypotheses  which  I  have  thus  advanced  may  be
erroneous,  but  they  cannot  justly  be  said  to  be  gratuihnis.  For  they
are  advanced  in  order  to  correlate  certain  actually-observed  phenomena,
which  must  bear  some  relation  to  each  other,  and  whose  relation  can
only  be  properly  discussed  if  some  tolerably  clear  scheme  is  set  forth
as  a  basis  for  such  discussion.  I  have  cast,  therefore,  the  suggestions
of  the  preceding  pages  into  a  tabular  form.

There  are,  indeed,  several  items  in  this  scheme  as  to  which  ihe
evidence  seems  to  me  at  present  inadequate.  But  I  include  these
phenomena  simply  because  the  authority  of  competent  physicians  on
the  whole  supports  them.  And  by  competent  physicians  I  mean  not
men  who,  tliough  competent  in  other  lines,  have  made  few  or  no
hypnotic  experiments,  but  men  who  having  shown  medical  or
physiological  ability  of  a  more  general  kind,  have  also  taken  real  pains
to  experiment  for  themselves  in  this  special  direction.  I  am  sorry  to
quote  so  small  a  proportion  of  English  names  ;  but  the  fact  is  that  during
the  last  ten  years  this  inquiry  has  been  very  eagerly  pursued  by  French
savnntft,  with  some  success  also  by  Germans  and  Italians,  but  by
Englishmen  hardly  at  all.  I  have  no  controversial  aim  ;  and  I  desire
to  see  the  experiments  of  the  French  schools  repeated  and  analysed  by
as  many  English  men  of  science  as  possible.^  But  until  such  experi-
ments are  actually  made,  and  reason  shown  for  explaining  the  results
otherwise  than  as  the  school  of  the  Salpetriere  (for  instance)  explains
them,  I  feel  bound  to  disregard  the  mere  a  priori  negations  of  men
who  have  done  little  work  of  the  kind  themselves,  and  are  not  always
familiar  with  the  work  done  elsewhere.  The  difference  in  this  matter
between  England  and  France  is  one  which  a  few  years  will  probably
do  much  to  remove.  In  England  a  practising  physician  is  even  now
half  ashamed  of  knowing  much  about  hypnotism  ;  the  savour  of
charlatanism  still  liangs  about  the  topic ;  and  if  lie  writes  a  book  in
whicli  he  has  to  allude  to  it,  he  shows  more  anxiety  to  disclaim  error
than  to  discover  truth.  Much  the  same  was  the  case  in  France,  till
Charcot,  Richet,  Beaunis,  and  a  few  other  well-known  men  took
the  subject  up, — and  in  Germany,  till  Heidenhain  took  it  up.  The
fashion  lias  now  changed,  and  the  danger  in  France  is  now  rather  of
over-eagerness  to  register  new  extensions  of  the  fascinating  inquiry.
Under  such  circumstances,  it  seems  plainly  the  duty  of  an  English
student  to  set  forth  tlie  outlines  of  the  subject  as  it  stands  at  present,
not  vouching  hastily  for  results  as  yet  unconfirmed,  but  illustrating  them
wlienever  he  can  by  some  observation  or  reflection  of  his  own.  Such  is
the  course  which  I  liave  tried  to  follow  ;  and  the  more  pains  which  my

^The  schools  of  Nancy,  Bordeaux,  the  Salpetriere,  and  the  Pitie  are  on  many
points  strongly  opposed  to  each  other.  I  cf)nsidei- such  opposition  as  a  necessary
and'  advantageous  characteristic  of  this  stage  of  the  inquiry.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


181


instructed  readers  may  take  to  demolisli  my  "  provisional  scheme,"  the
more  light  will  there  be  thrown  on  a  subject  which  greatly  needs  it.

§  22.  Provisional  Scheme  of  Modes  of  Induction  of  Hypnotic

Phenomena.


I.  Massive  nervous  stimulation.  •{


II.  Monotonous  stimulation.


III.  Localised  stini'^ilation  ;  i.e.,

stimulation  of  ordinary
kinds,  but  applied  to
abnormally  sensitive
points.

IV.  Verbal  suggestio)i;  i.e.,  local-

ised stimulation  of
special  tracts  of  a  brain
rendered  previously  sen-
sitive as  a  whole,  or
locally.

V.  Specialised  stimulation;  i.e,
from  inanimate  sub-
stances, in  contact,  but
not  normally  active  in
this  manner  ;  and  from
non-vital  forces.

VI.  Self-siuigestion,  i.e.,  deter-
mination by  causes  in-
herent in  the  organism.

VII.  Specialised  stimulation  from
inanimate  substccnces  in
proximity.

VIII.  Vital  or  mesmeric  stimida-
tion.


IX.  Mental  suggestion  without
contact,  or  telepathy ;
perhaps  in  more  than  one
form.


Sudden  danger  ;  cataplexy  of  insects ;

fascination  of  birds,  &c.
Sudden noise or  light  ;  esp.  with

hystero-epileptics.
Sudden  grief  :  "  stupor  attonitus."
Tactile  ;  fanning  and  perhaps  manual

passes.

Auditory  ;  tick  of  watch,  &c.

Visual ;  prolonged gaze on  bright

object  ;  or  human  gaze.
Mere  touch  on  unaccustomed  parts  ;

holding  heads  of  hens,  &c.
Braid's  upward  and  inward  squint  (a

kind  of  strain,  or intra-orbital .

pressure.  1)
Pressure  on  hypnogenous  points  or

zones,  esp.  in  hystero-epileptics.
Command  of  operator,  in  waking-life,

in  trance,  or  in  "  veille  somnam-

bulique."

Deferred  commands  :  (suggestions  k
longue  echeanco).

Medicamentous  substances  in  contact.

Metals  in  contact.

Magnets.

Electricity  :  (unless  the  rare  hypno-
genous effect  of  an  electric  shock
falls  under  Class  I.).

Hereditary  hysteria,  &c. ,  as  it  were  the
deferred  suggestion  of  ancestors.

Idiopathic  somnambulism.

Self-induced  or  self-ijrolonged  trance.

Exjjeriments  of  MM.  Bourru,  Burot,
Mabille,  Richet.  Medicaments
and  metals  without  contact.

Touch,  of  all  or  certain  persons,  not
necessarily  on  hypnogenous  zones.  ^

Passes  without  contact,  or  mere  prox-
imity ov  human  gaze."

Mesmerised  objects.

Exercise  of  will  without  touch  or  gaze,
in  the  same  or  adjoining  room,  or
at  longer  distances.  Tendency
to  feel  presence  and  to  see
phantasm  of  distant  operator ;
link  with  quasi- percepts  tele-'
pathically  originated  by  death  or
crisis  of  distant  asent.


J  This  must  he  prolonged,  so  comes  also  under  Class  II.
-  Both  these  methods  appear  also  in  Class  II.


182


On  Telepatldc  Hypnotism.


I  must  once  more  remind  the  reader  that  the  above  scheme  is
expressly  intended  to  be  criticised,  not  to  be  accepted  as  definitive.
Truth,  as  we  know,  emerges  more  readily  from  error  than  from
confusion,  and  it  may  be  useful  thus  to  substitute  even  the  rudest
ground-plan  for  the  unmapped  wilderness  of  modern  hypnotic  experi-
ment. All  the  phenomena  which  I  cite  are  phenomena  which  have
received  strong  attestation.  If  they  do  not  exist,  let  them  be  dis-
proved in  detail.  If  they  do  exist  they  must  bear  some  relation  to
each  other  ;  they  must  be  capable  of  some  sort  of  logical  arrangement.
I  shall  be  grateful  for  any  hints  which  may  enable  me  to  improve  this
first  rough  sketch.  In  the  meantime  I  may  at  least  hope  that  the  "sommeil
a  distance"  with  which  this  paper  primarily  deals,  no  longer  appeals  to
the  reader  as  an  entirely  isolated  hypnotic  marvel.  It  has  been
connected — by  questionable  and  imperfect  links,  it  may  be — but  still
connected  with  a  great  number  of  other  scattered  hypnotic  experi-
ments, which  were  themselves,  when  taken  alone,  scarcely  less  strange
and  incomprehensible.

§  23.  Before  concluding  this  paper  I  must  briefly  describe  certain
other  phenomena  which  I  witnessed  in  the  case  of  Madame  B.  Besides
the  fact  of  their  occurrence  in  the  same  subject  they  have  thus  much  of
connection  with  the  topics  on  which  I  have  so  far  dwelt,  that  they
tend  to  show  how  premature  at  present  is  any  attempt  to  define  the
limit  of  hypnotic  phenomena.  For  the  attempt  to  restrict  the  nervous
changes  induced  to  catalepsy,  lethargy,  and  somnambulism,  is,  as  I  hold,
equally  misleading  with  the  attempt  to  restrict  the  methods  of
hypnogeny  to  monotonous  stimulation  and  sudden  shock.

Madame  B.  exhibits  a  phenomenon  which  is  curious  enough,  even
if  it  be  a  mere  reflection  from  the  mesmeriser's  expectation  ;  while  if  (as
M.  Janet  holds)  it  is  entirely  spontaneous,  the  interest  attaching  to  it
is  very  great  indeed.  When  hypnotised  she  falls,  like  most  subjects,
into  a  deep  lethargic  sleep,  but,  even  if  left  undisturbed,  she  does  not
remain  long  in  that  condition.  She  passes  through  a  kind  of  circular
series  of  changes,  sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less  distinct,  which
bring  her  back  again  into  lethargy,  only  to  renew  the  series  once  more.

M.  Janet  has  since  described  these  phenomena  at  length  in  the
Revue  Scientifique,  May, 1 886.1 j  j^gt  attempt  to  reproduce

his  article,  but  will  give,  in  a  slightly  expanded  foi'm,  the  notes  taken
at  the  time  by  Dr.  Myers  and  myself,  adopting  M.  Janet's  schematism
as  our  basis.  The  remarks  within  square  brackets  show  the  degree  of  con-
firmation which  each  point  received  in  our  presence.  Her  first  state  is —

1.  Lethargie  (vraie).

Sight,  hearing,  and  sense  of  pain  absent.

^  See  also  M.  Richet  in  Revue  Scientifiqiie,  June  12.


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


183


[This  appeared  to  be  so,  but  I  did  not  think  it  needful  to  ask  for
severe  tests  of  anaesthesia.]

Firm  pressure  on  dilferent  parts  of  arm  induces  contraction  of
muscles  of  hand  and  arm,  removed  by  friction.  [Yes.]

If  a  magnet  is  applied  (say)  to  contracted  left  arm,  contraction  is
transferred  to  right  side ;  and  this  dextral  contraction  can  then  only  be
removed  by  stroking  the  left  arm,  viz.,  the  arm  originally  contracted.
[Yes,  but  this  variety  of  the  familiar  experiments  of  Charcot,  Ac,  in
transference  of  hemiansesthesia,  is  of  course  liable  to  the  usual  suspicion
of  being  a  mere  result  of  suggestion.'\  In  one  experiment  of  this  kind
in  our  presence  the  little  finger  of  one  contracted  hand  was  not  relaxed
by  the  magnet ;  and,  correspondingly,  the  little  finger  of  the  hand  to
which  the  contraction  was  transferred  was  not  stiffened.

2.  Lethargie  catalejjtiqtie.  Persistence  of  attitudes  impressed  from
without,  and  slight  contracture  of  muscle  on  deep  pressure.  [This
state  resembles  spontaneous  idiopathic  catalepsy  more  closely  than  do
the  next  two.]

3.  Catalepsie  IHliargique.  Persistence  of  movements  externally
initiated.  [Simple  movements  of  arm  persisted  ;  not  so  a  less  familiar
movement  of  foot.  I  doubt  whether  this  stage  can  be  fitly  classed
separately.]

4.  Catalepsie,  (vraie,  ou  catalepsie  de  Charcot.)  Eyes  fully  open
and  staring  :  suggestion  of  some  familiar  action  (as  folding  of  hands  in
prayer,  raising  of  finger  in  command)  carried  out  automatically  thi'ough
various  stages,  habitual  behaviour  in  church,  &c.  In  this  state  she  was
subject  to  the  "prise  du  regard,"  i.e.,  if  M.  Janet  looked  at  her  steadily,
and  then  moved  his  head,  she  followed  with  her  eyes.  She  did  not
follow  the  eyes  of  other  persons.  But  M.  Janet  believes  that  if  he
touches  a  neutral  person, — or  if  he  touches  A  and  A  touches  B,  and
B  touches  C,  and  C  gazes  on  the  subject,  then  the  subject's  eyes  follow
C.'s  so  long  as  M.  Janet  is  touching  A.  [We  tried  this  repeatedly,  but
the  result  was  doubtful — the  subject  could  not  be  kept  long  enough  in
the  required  state  to  eliminate  chance.]

5.  Catalepsie  somnambulique.  Susceptibility  to  hallucinations,
(subject  agitated  when  told  that  there  are  parrots  before  her),  but  no
power  of  speech.  [Another  state  as  to  whose  separable  individuality
I  feel  much  doubt.]

6.  Somnambulisme  cataleptique.  Susceptibility  to  hallucination.
M.  Janet  holds  her  hand  and  tells  her  that  there  are  birds ;  she  calls
"  Petit !  petit ! "  Here  again  M.  Janet  believes  that  she  only
sees  the  birds  when  he  holds  her  hand,  or  forms  one  of  a  chain.  [The
hallucinations  provoked  were  so  slight  that  I  could  not  be  sure  of  this.
The  word  "  cataleptique  "  hardly  seems  in  place  here.]

7.  Somnambulisme  (Jucide).  In  this  stage  her  eyes  are  shut,  but  her


184


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


demeanour  is  alert  and  lively.  She  talks  spontaneously,  exhibiting  a
childlike  character  and  freedom  from  shyness  not  seen  in  her  normal
state,  and  contrasting  oddly  with  the  patient,  stolid  cast  of  her  features.

8.  Somnavibulisme  lethnrgiq^ie.  In  this  state  contracture  is  evoked
by  superhcial  friction.  Suggestions  are  still  possible,  but  there  is
apparent  sleep  instead  of  apparent  waking.

9.  LHhiwgie,  somnamhulicpie.  In  this  state  she  dreams  aloud ;
imagines  that  she  visits  distant  places,  &e.  ;  and  M.  Janet  loses  control
over  her.  From  this  condition  she  relapses  into  the  "  true  lethargy  "
with  which  we  began.

§  24.  The  order  in  which  I  have  given  these  states  is  that  in  which
we  saw  them  follow  each  other.  I  perceive  that  M.  Janet  in  his  article
{Revue  Scientifique)  gives  them  in  the  opposite  order  ;  and  says,  "  the
pressure  of  the  thumb  makes  the  subject  pass  through  all  the  states,
proceeding  from  lethargy  to  catalepsy,  while  blowing  on  the  eyes  makes
her  pass  through  them  in  the  direction  of  catalepsy  to  lethargy."

Such  a  distinctioii  as  that,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  must  be  in  great
measure  accidental ;  some  slight  association,  once  set  up,  probably  tends
to  repeat  itself  more  and  more  readily.  And  with  regard  to  all  these
variations,  it  certainly  seemed  to  Dr.  Myers  and  myself  that  they  must
not  be  insisted  on  in  detail  ;  that  the  only  fact  of  clear  importance  was
the  subject's  tendency  to  pass  spontaneously  through  a  cycle  of  nervous
changes,  which  was  no  sooner  ended  than  it  began  again.  A  similar
tendency  to  recurrent  states  has  been  observed  and  systematised  by
Charcot  and  P.  Richer  among  the  hystero-epileptics  at  the  Salpetri^re.^

§  25.  M.  Janet  concludes  liis  description  of  Madame  B.'s  phases  by
some  reflections  wliich  I  will  here  summarise.  "  Some  observers  accord
great  importance  to  the  phases  of  hypnotism,  and  consider  them  as
states  entirely  distinct ;  otliers  see  in  them  only  insignificant  pheno-
mena produced  artificially  by  the  operator.  Madame  B.'s  case  shows
us  that  the  three  primitive  states  {i.e.,  lethargy,  catalepsy,  somnam-
bulism) are  not  of  fundamental  importance,  since  other  states  can  be
induced,  in  number  as  yet  undetermined,  •which  are  equally  definite
and  durable.  On  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  regard  these  phases  as  mere
accidents  ;  they  arise  too  naturally  and  recur  too  regularly  for  such  a
supposition.  I  consider  them  as  stages  of  sleep  ( degres  de  sommeil)
tlii'ougli  which  the  subject  passes  in  going  to  sleep  and  waking  up, —
stages  at  which  it  is  sometimes  possible  to  arrest  her.  At  each  different
stage,  perhaps,  different  parts  of  the  brain  are  excited  or  paralyzed.
During  lethargy  the  lirain  seems  entirely  paralyzed,  and  the  con-
tractures of  this  period  seem  to  be  mere  exaggerated  spinal  reflex
movements  ;  then  the  different  cerebral  centres  seem  to  awake  gradually

^  La  Grande  HysUrie,  Dr.  Paul  Richer,  second  edition,  Paris,  1885.  See
page  147,  &c.


On  TeleiKdhic  Hyimotism. '  185


during  the  succeeding  phases  ;  the  musculai-  sense,  touch,  sight,  hearing,
— then,  during  the  somnambulism,  the  regions  wliich  preside  over
intelligence  and  will.  Thus  all  the  phases  of  hypnotism,  or  even  of
[spontaneous]  somnambulism  which  have  yet  been  observed,  may  merely
represent  different  stages  of  this  sleep  at  which  different  subjects
happen  to  be  arrested."

I  concur  with  the  general  drift  of  these  remarks, — more  philo-
sophical, as  it  seems  to  me,  than  any  attempt  to  fit  the  constantly-vary-
ing phenomena  of  hypnotism  into  one  Procrustean  scheme.  Still,  in
my  view,  we  need  to  go  much  further  still.  We  need  to  free  ourselves
altogether  from  the  notion  that  the  stages  which  a  hypnotized  subject
passes  through  are  necessarily  degres  de  sommeil, — that  his  changes  are
changes  undergone  en  s'endormant  et  en  se  reveillmtt, — or  even  that
there  is  likely  to  be  between  stage  and  stage  any  familiar  connection,
any  discernible  filiation  at  all.

But  with  this  hint  I  must  conclude.  As  I  have  here  tried  to  ana-
lyse some  of  the  methods  of  hypnogeny,  so  also  I  should  have  liked
to  try  to  analyse  some  of  the  hypnotic  phenomena  thus  induced.
But  this  paper  is  already  full  enough  of  disputable  matter.  My  hope
must  be  that  it  may  stimulate  other  observers  to  fresh  experiment, —
though  they,  like  myself,  may  spell  out  but  a  few  words  of  the
ciphered  message  in  which  hypnotism  writes  for  us  the  secret  of  the
psychical  mechanism  of  man.

ADDENDUM.

Since  this  paper  was  in  print,  I  have  come  across  a  scheme  of
hypnogenous  agencies  in  Dr.  Chambard's  tractate,  Du  Somnamhidisms
en  general,  Paris,  1881.  Dr.  Chambard  has  since  been  selected  to
write  the  article  on  "  Somnambulism  "  in  the  new  Dictionnaire  des
Sciences  Medicates,  and  even  in  his  "these"  of  1881  bespeaks  from
a  good  deal  of  experience  in  several  hospitals.  I  translate  his  scheme
below.  As  compared  with  the  scheme  which  has  been  suggested  in  this
paper  both  its  concordances  and  its  variations  may  aflbrd  us  some  instruc-
tive hints.

Chambard's  Scheme  of  hypnogenous  processes.

A.  Empirical  or  mixed  processes,  termed  magnetic.

B.  Analytical  or  simple  processes.

1.  Psychical  action.

a.  Affective.  Faith.  Expectant  attention.  (Carpenter.)  Moral

emotions  and  expressions. Expressive  gaze,
p.  Intellectual.  Mental  inertia.  Fatigue  of  the  attention.


186


On  TelepatJdc  Hypnotism.


2.  Sensorial  action.

«.  Suppression  of  sensorial  excitations. Simple  closure  of

eyes.  (Lasegue.)
p.  Monotonous  sensorial  excitations,  feeble  and  repeated.

a.  Of  sight. Fixed  gaze  on  an  object,  brilliant  or  not.

h.  Of  hearing.  Musical  tone  or  noise.  Watch  (Weinholt,)
diapason,  &c.

c.  Of  touch.  Contact.  Pressure.  Temperature.  Frictions.

Shocks.  (Heidenhain.)

d.  Cutaneous  excitation  determined  by  passes.  (Heiden-

hain.)

e.  Excitation  of  erogenous  regions  ;  ovarian  pressure.

3.  Mechanical  action.

a.  Modification  of  intra-ocular  pressure.

a.  By  convergence  of  the  optic  axes.

b.  By  compression  of  the  eyeball.

4.  Physical  actions. Action  of  magnet. (Landouzy.)  Metallic

plates. Static  electricity.

5.  Toxic  action.

«.  Anaisthetics  ;  Ether,  chloroform,  ifec.
p.  Inebriants ;  Alcohol,  haschisch,  &c.
Now  on  this  scheme  I  have  to  remark  as  follows : —

A.  — A  number  of  empii'ical  methods  are  avowedly  left  unexplained.

B.  1. — I  object, as  already explained,  to classing  "psychical

action  "  separately,  as  if  it  were  altogether  disparate  from  other
effects  produced  on  the  nervous  system.  Such  a  word  as
"  Faith  "  tells  us  nothing,  in  this  connection.  Moreover,  I
do  not  believe  tliat  "  mental  inertia  "  produces  the  hypnotic
state  at  all.  And  "  fatigue  of  the  attention  "  should  surely
come  under  "monotonous  excitations  of  hearing,"  if,  as  I
suppose.  Dr.  Chambard  means  the  kind  of  fatigue  which  is
induced  by  prolonged  listening  to  the  ticks  of  a  watch.

B.  2.  «. — "  Simple  closure  of  eyes "  surely  does  not  produce
the  hypnotic  trance  on  sulyects  who  have  never  been  pre-
viously hypnotized.  I  should  rank  it  as  one  of  the  sugges-
tions whicli  succeed  only  when  recognised  as  suggestions,  not
as  in  itself  an  efficient  cause  of  trance.

B.  2.  [3.  a  and  h. — Massive  stimulations  are  here  confounded  with
monotonous  stimulations.  The  gaze  at  an  electric  light,  or
the  sound  of  a  gong,  is  not  a  feeble  stimulus,  and  need  not  be
repeated.

B.  2.  (3.  c. — Pressure,  again,  is  not  necessarily  a  "  feeble "  or
"  repeated  "  form  of  excitation. Some  of  Dr.  Chambard's  own


On  Telepathic  Hyimotism.


187


cases  (Appendix  to  his  tractate)  strikingly  illustrate  the
effect  of  a  single  touch  on  abnormally  sensitive  regions  in  a
hysterical  patient.  I  doubt  the  hypnogenous  effect  of  changes
of  temperafMre.  A  cold  wind  will  often  wake  a  subject,
(Esdaile,  Elliotson,)  but  I  do  not  know  any  cases  where  a
mere  rise  or  fall  of  external  temperature  has  induced  trance.
B.  2.  p.  d. — I  have  already  maintained  that  on  whatever  cause  the
efficacy  of  "passes"  may  depend  it  is  certainly  not  on  moyiotony
alone.  The  "  passes "  may  often  be  varied  and  interrupted
without  appreciable  detriment.  I  believe  their  efficacy  to
depend  partly  on  the  "  vital  influence"  of  the  old  mesmerists,
partly  on  suggestion,  and  partly  on  pressure  upon  hypnogenous
zones.  Of  course,  monotonous  movement,  dai'kness,  silence,
and  the  mere  effluxion  of  time,  may  contribute  to  sending
the  subject  to  sleep.  But  something  more  than  monotony
will  generally  be  needed  to  cause  that  sleep  to  merge  into
hypnotic  trance.

B.  2.  p.  e. — This  sub-class  is  plainly  referable  not  to  monotonous
excitations  but  to  pressure  on  specially-sensitive  zones.

B.  3. — I  agree  with  Chambard  that  the  fatigue  induced  by  con-
vergence of  axes  resembles  the  pain  felt  on  compression  of  the
eyeball.  I  should  class  both  under  the  heading  of  hypno-
genous zones.  Heidenhain's  view  that  Braid's  squint  operates
by  altering  the  cerebral  circulation,  (which  I  shall  not  here
presume  to  contest,)  is  not  inconsistent  with  this  classification.
It  is  perfectly  possible  that  some  or  all  of  these  localised
pressures  act  by  means  of  a  mechanical  influence  on  the  cir-
culatory system  as  well  as  by  an  influence  of  unknown
character  on  the  nervous  system.

B.  4. — Chambard's  "  actions  physiques  "  are  included  in  my  class
of  "  sjDecialised  stimulations."  I  do  not  like  his  term  ;  for  his
"  sensorial  "  and  "  mechanical  "  actions  are  physical  too.  A
fresh  term  is  plainly  needed  to  express  such  actions  on  the
human  fi'ame  as  that  of  magnets  and  those  of  metals  in  con-
tact (beyond  mere  effects  of  weight,  temperature,  ifcc).  Pend-
ing the  suggestion  of  a  more  suitable  term  I  should  call  such
actions  supernormal,  as  being  unusual,  but  indicative  of  a  more
penetrating — not  a  diseased — sensitiveness  on  the  subject's
part.

B.  5. — I  entirely  agree  that  the  effect  of  these  toxic  agencies  is
analogous  to  the  hypnotic  trance.  But  I  do  not  think  that
trance  dependent  on  chemical  changes  (deficient  aeration  of
blood,  diffusion  of  volatile  ethers,  etc.,)  should  be  classed  as
coordinate  with  the  trance  induced  by  the  hypnogenous  agencies


188


On  Telepathic  Hypnotism.


already  discussed.  In  all  of  those  classes  the  nervous  change
has  been  induced  without  the  introduction  of  any  material
substance  into  the  body ;  and  though  it  is  very  diihcult  to
define  what  agencies  are  to  be  called  hypnotic,  it  seems  plain
tliat  liere  at  least  a  line  can  be  drawn,  and  that  changes  depen-
dent on  wounds  or  poisoning — on  meclianical  rupture  or  toxic
alteration  of  the  tissues  or  fluids  of  tlie  body — cannot  be
classed  as  hypnotic  without  making  the  word  too  vague  to
be  of  any  real  service.^

Finally,  it  will  be  observed  that  Chambard,  while  decisively
admitting  several  non-telepathic  agencies  wliich  I  have  noted  as  ques-
tionable, (magjiet,  electricity,  (fee),  has,  of  course,  nothing  to  say  as  to
telepathic  influences.  His  scheme,  therefore,  is  in  my  view  inadequate
to  cover  the  cases  adduced  in  this  paper.

I  must,  therefore,  consider  Dr.  Cliambard's  ai'rangement  as  shallow
(in  his  want  of  coordination  of  psychical  and  physical  agencies) ;  as  con-
fused  (in  his  cross  divisions,  as  I  have  indicated,  of  the  agencies  which
he  does  adduce  ;)  and  as  incomplete  (in  his  entire  omission  of  hypnotiza-
tion  at  a  distance).  But  I  say  this  with  all  i-espect  for  what  seems  to
me  to  have  been  nevertheless  a  serviceable  forward  step.  If  my  own
classification  is  thought  to  be  in  any  degree  an  improvement,  this  is  due
to  the  rapid  advance  in  hypnotic  experiment  which  the  last  five  years
have  seen,  and  more  especially  to  new  light  thrown,  (as  I  venture  to
claim,)  on  all  these  topics  by  the  establishment  of  telepathy  as  an  actual
and  efficient  cause.  If  my  proposed  scheme  should  so  far  subserve
precision  of  thought  as  to  lead  to  its  own  speedy  supersession  by  some
truer  conspectus,  its  object  will  have  been  sufficiently  attained.


1  I  may  perhaps  protest  here  against  an  occasional  use  of  the  word
"  hypnotic,"  both  in  French  and  EngUsh  medicaf  writings,  as  a  mere  equivalent
for  "soporific"  or  "  anasthetic,"  in  spealving  of  drugs,  &c.  Tliis  is  to  obliterate
the  whole  distinctiveness  of  a  word  to  whicli  it  should  be  our  aim  to  give  all  the
precision  possible.


The  Ccdcidiis  of  Probabilities.


189


VII.

THE CALCULU8 OF PROBABILITIES  APPLIED  TO
PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.  II.

By  F.  Y.  Edgeworth.


In  a  former  paper  I  stated  the  principal  proljlenis  which  this
subject  presents,  and  I  showed  that  they  are  reducible  to,  or  at  least
involve  the  following : — The  total  number  of  trials  being  JV,  the  chance
of  success  at  a  single  trial  u,  Nii  =  (as  near  as  may  be)  m,  the  number
of  successes  m  +  n  (>n  and  n  both  integers)  ;  what  is  the  probability  of
at  least  that  degree  of  success  being  obtained,  supposing  that  chance  is
the  only  agency,  under  a  regime  of  pure  chance.  I  stated  that  the
solution  of  this  problem  depends  upon  the  summation  of  the  last
iV— (m  +  n)  +  l  terms  of  the  binomial  +  ~u)'\^\  As  the  approxi-
mate value  of  that  sum  I  put  the  expression —


J-Jo e «rj  J2n{l-u)N'

a  formula  of  very  general  application  in  analogous  inquiries.  The
conditions  on  which  its  validity  depends  are  for  the  most  part  fulfilled
in  statistical  investigations.  They  fail,  however,  in  many  of  the
problems  which  the  Editors  of  this  journal  have  submitted  to  me.  It
appears  desirable,  therefore,  to  take  account  of  cases  which  lie  outside
what  may  be  called  the  normal  case  and  are  not  amenable  to  the
received  formula  above  written.  Accordingly  I  propose  ^  in  this  paper,
first  (I.)  to  take  a  theoretic  survey  of  the  methods  appropriate  to
different  conditions  ;  and  then  (II.)  to  diagnose  and  prescribe  for  the
various  cases  which  arise  in  practice.


A  distinction  of  great  theoretical  importance  is  between  those
cases  where  ( a )  the  binomial  series  which  is  to  be  summed  (the
binomial  locus  the  area  under  which  is  to  be  evaluated)  may  be
adequately  represented  by  a  probability-curve  according  to  a  well-

^  For  an  extension  of  the  follomng  theory,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the
writer's  paper  on  "  Tlie  Law  of  Error,"  m  London  Philosophical  Blagazine,
April,  1886.


190


The  Calculus  of  P robahilities.


known  theory  ^  of  Laplace  and  Poisson,  and  ( a  )  those  cases  where  such
an  ancillary  probability-curve  is  not  available.

a.  In  order  to  see  how  far  a  law  extends,  the  proper  course  is  to
ascend  to  the  sources  from  which  it  is  derived. In  this  investigation


let  us  take  Poisson "  for  our  guide.  Let  us  remount  to  the  rugged
heights  from  which  he  reasons  down  to  the  simple  normal  case  and  the
received  formula.  While  following  in  his  steps  let  us  adopt  his
notation ;  observing  that  his  fi  is  our  JV,  his  j)  is  our  u,  his  q  is
our  (1  -  u),  his  ?/t  is  our  m  +  71,  his  71  is  our  JV—  (m  +  n).  And  we  may
conhne  ourselves  to  the  case  in  which  (iV+ l)i6,  or  (/x+l)j:>,  is  an
integer,  both  because  no  theoretical  difficulty  is  presented  by  the
absence  of  this  condition,  and  because  whatever  difficulty  may  arise
can,  in  the  researches  under  consideration,  be  avoided  by  taking  iV
properly.  This  being  conceded,  we  shall  have  Poisson's  p  very  nearly
equal  to  our  71,  and  liis  r  equetable  to  our  T.

It  is  shown  by  Poisson  that  the  probability  of  obtaining  at  least  m
successes,  at  most  n  failures,  is  represented  by  a  fraction  of  which  the
numerator  and  denominator  are  integrals  ;  the  subject  of  integration
being  the  same  for  both,  but  the  limits  different  :  the  subject  of
integration  is  of  the  form  IIe^\h'  +  2h"t  +  3h"'fi  +  &c.),  where  h'  h"  h'".  .  .

are  respectively  of  the  order -  - ~  .  .  .  .  ;  ii  7n  n  and  ^  be

V  .  . /2  {fl  +  l)7l,

regarded  as  of  one  and  the  same  order. For  instance  h  is  / , ., ,  3

and  h"  is  — tvT  ■ Here,  then,  is  presented  a  first  condition  upon
3  (m  + 1)'^  ^

which  the  applicability  of  the  Laplace-Poisson  analysis  depends :
namely,  that  m  and  71  should  be  large  enough  to  allow  of  their  liigher
inverse  powers  being  neglected.

A  second  condition  is  imposed  by  the  inferior  limit  of  the  numerator
integral. It  is


+


r ,  H / ix  , m  +  l  ~|i  .


a  quantity  wliich  Poisson  calls  k.  In  the  case  before  us,  where  n  is
supposed  less  than  q  (the  number  of  failures  less  than  what

might  have  been  expected),  the  sign  of  k  is  positive.  The  superior
limit  of  the  numerator  integral  is  +  co  .  The  limits  of  the  denominator
integral  are  ±co  .

If  we  perform  the  work  of  integration  for  the  numerator,  so  far  as
is  possible  by  the  ordinary  formulae  of  reduction,  we  shall  find  that  the
result  consists  of  two  parts,  one  under,  and  the  other  outside,  the

1  The  analysis  to  which  I  allude  is  well  expounded  by  Mr.  Todhunter  at
p.  576  of  his  History.

-  See  Poisson,  Eccherches  sur  la  ProbabilUi,  &c.,  Chap.  iii.
3  Cf.  Poisson,  No.  76.


The  Calculus  of  Frobabilities.


191


sign  of  integration.  The  former  involves  k  only  as  its  limit.  The
latter  is  affected  by  k  in  this  -wise  : —

He''%]^2h"  +  3h"'k  +  4h''{J^-  +  l)  +  &c.

The  denominator  is  independent  of  k,  being  of  the  form  ^
jVS[h'  +  lh"'  +  &c.].
Hence  the  quotient  will  be  of  the  form

j\  e^dl  ^  +  ^"  +  ^"' + ]+  /'[v  +  X'7o  +  X"'A;2  .  .  .  .  ;

where  the  /'s  and  the  X's  descend  with  the  same  rapidity  as  the  h's.
The  convergency  of  the  first  part  of  this  expression  is  unaffected  by
the  size  of  k.  But  the  convergency  of  the  portion  outside  the  sign  of
integration  is  destroyed  if  X-'''^^^  &c.,  do  not  constitute  a  descending
series.

At  this  point  a  new  division  presents  itself ;  between  (/3)  those
cases  where  the  data  allow  us  to  attain  the  degree  of  precision  usually
ascribed  to  the  Laplace-Poisson  method  :  such  that  fractions  (of  the

sought  probability)  which  are  of  the  order  — zr,  or  more  correctly

1  .  _  .

—  ,  are  retained ;  and  (jS)  where  the  regulation  degree  of  pre-

cision  is  not  attainable.

a/3.  To  satisfy  the  condition  imported  by  /3,  it  is  necessary  that  the
series  X',  \"k,  \"'k^,  should  descend  as  rapidly  as  h'  h"  h'" ;  therefore
that  k  should  not  exceed  the  order  of  unity.  To  satisfy  this  require-
ment, it  is  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  that  p  (the  excess  of
successes  over  the  number  most  probable  on  hypothesis  of  mere  chance)
should  not  exceed  the  order  Jji2pq.  That  this  is  a  sufficient  condition
may  thus  be  shown.  -  Put

F^(,(,+i)-p).,,.  [i

"where  p  =  m-l-l-|j(p  +  l)  =  (p  +  l)-'>i.

Expand  k  in  ascending  powers  of  p ;  and,  putting with  Poisson

r= ^ ,  you  have  k  =  r\  I-  ,+ |l?!^e+£%-2-^.c

See  Poisson,  op.  cit.,  p.  193.

'  The  proof  here  given  presupposes  that  ^ pq^i.  is  considerable;  as  it  is
except  when  p  or  q  are  very  small.  The  proposition  is,  however,  independent
of  this  condition.  See  my  paper  "On  the  Law  of  Error,"  Phil.  Mag.,  1886,
pp.  313,  320.

■3  Op.  cit,  No.  78.


192


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


Now,  as  p  is  of  the  order  ^l2pq^i,  r  (our  T  approximately)  is  of  the  order
unity. Hence  the  terms  of  the  above  written  expansion  above  the  second

are  of  the  order  — ,  and  therefore  may  be  reiected. And  the  value  of  k

thus  presented  is  of  the  order  unity.  Again,  while  this  limitation  of
the  size  of  p  is  sufficient,  it  is  also  necessaiy.  For,  differentiating  k^
with  regard  to  p,  we  observe  that  the  first  differential  is  continually
(from  the  zero  of  p  and  k  upwards)  positive.  Hence  k  (taken
positively)  continually  increases  with  the  increase  of  p.  Hence,  if  k
is  as  large  as  is  allowable  when  p  is  of  the  oixler  ^2pqp,,  k  will  be  too
large  when  p  is  above  that  order.  Hence  the  stated  limitation  of  the
size  of  p  is  not  only  sufficient,  but  necessary.

Here  arises  a  new  principle  of  division  :  according  as  (y)  we  do  not
insist  upon  the  full  degree  of  precision  whicli  is  attainable,  but  are
content  with  an  approximation  which  does  not  take  account  of  terms

of  the  order  — ;  or  (y)  we  seek  the  full  degree  of  accuracy  to  which

J  P-  . .  1 .  .

we  are  entitled  :  an  approximation  true  up  to  the  order  — rejecting

1  'Jim
only  terms  of  the  order .

vm

aj3y.  In  the  first  case  we  may  reject  tlie  second  term  of  the  above

written  expansion  of  k. For  it  is  evidently  of  the  order  —  .  We

may  reject  also  the  unintegrated  portion  ^  of  our  result. For  that

portion  is  an  expression  of  the  form  e'"X',  where  X'  is  of  the  order  —

s/h-

And  it  may  be  shown  that  for  the  values  of  r  with  which  we  are

1 %  -i-

concerned,  the  ratio  of  e^'  to  ~~3r  i e  at  (the  integrated portion  of

J  TV  J  r

our  result)  is  small  in  comparison  with  the  oixler J  ^ . For,  as  to
values  of  r  between  0  and  1,  the  ratio  in  question  ranges  from  2  to
And  for  values  of  r  above  unity,  the  integral  may  be  written  (by  an
approximation  due  to  Laplace) : —

Hence  the  ratio  in  question  is  of  the  order  r,  which  by  liypotliesis  is
small  with  regard  to  ^7^.  Hence,  in  every  case  (under  a/3y)  the
unintegrated  portion  of  tlie  result  may  be  rejected.  And  we  have
thus  tlie  formula  given  in  the  former  paper  ;  which,  as  the  last  degree
of  accuracy  is  not  required  for  tlie  purpose  in  hand,  the  elimination  of
chance,  may  be  regarded,  I  think,  as  the  best  formula  for  the  case
usually  occurring  in  statistical  inquiries,  the  normal  case.


»  Above,  p.  191. Poisson,  p.  196.


Tlhc  Calculm  of  Frohahilities.  193

To  exhibit  the  character  of  the  assumptions  made,  let  us  consider
the  following  example. Let  /j-he  999,  2^^,  q^,  p{l^+^)  1 00,  and  m  126.

Thenp  =  27. r2= -_/!—-  =  ^  =4-5 r  =  2-12.  .  . The  value  in  the
^  2pq{fi  +  l)  180

tables  for


_1_ ?.  -t-


is  '0014.  In  order  to  make  the  approximation  correct  up  to  quantities
of  the  order  - ,  Ave  must  first  put  for  r  r  -  h^  where

'  =  10x3?i3-417....  =  -089  nearly.

Expanding  the  integral  thus  modified,  we  see  that  in  respect  of  the

term  before  rejected  (the  second  tei-m  of  the  expansion  of  k),  there  is

■89  -4-ri

to  be  added  to  our  result  — =:  e  .  Also  in  respect  of  tlie  unin-
tegrated  expression  there  is  to  be  added  :  -


2{fi  +  n)  1 2  1873


•008


V  TT  3  ^2(^  + 1)  (m  +  l>t ^  TT  3  ^2  X  1000  x  127  x  873 ^  n  nearly.

The  total
logarithms


1 —4-5  ,  A
The  total  addendum  then  is  — rz;  e \  '089+ "008  \. In  ordinary


log.  — =  =  -  -2486  =  1  +  7514

-  l^g-'""  = - 1-954  =  2+  -046

log.  {-089 +-008)  =  log.  -097 =  2"+  -987
log.  Addendum  =  4  +  '8

.•.  the  Addendum  =  -0006  nearly,  a  quantity  whicli,  tliougli  certainly
a  considerable  fraction  of  the  result  before  obtained,  viz.,  -0014,  may
yet,  I  think,  safely  be  neglected  for  the  purpose  in  hand  :  which  is  to
ascertain  the  probability  of  the  given  plienomenon  (a  certain  degree  of
success)  occurring  by  accident.

a0y.  But,  if  greater  accuracy  is  required,  then  we  have  only  to
make  the  two  corrections  whicli  have  been  just  described.

a^.  We  revert  now  to  tlie  case  where  the  data  do  not  admit  of  our

obtaining  the  regulation  degree  of  accuracy. Here  — —  must  still  be

'^^  1

supposed  fractional,  though  no  longer  a  fraction  of  the  order  .  In
this  case  the  expansion  of  k  in  ascending  powers  of  p,  the  value  of  r,

I  Cf.  Poisson,  p.  200,  above.  -  Ih.,  p.  196.


194


The  Calculus  of  Prohahilities.


no  longer  afford  us  guidance.  k  may  still  be  small  with  regard  to
^  ^ ,  though  p  greatly  exceed  sj^pqjji  ■ We  may  have  still  a  result

accurate  to  the  fraction  —  '  ,  viz.  :  ■

-k-

1 r  /•  2  (/x  +  ^O  e

U k ^  3V2(/x  +  l)  (m  +  l)  ;i_

There  is  apt  to  occur  here  the  difficulty  that  the  ordinary  tables  do  not
suffice  for  the  evaluation  of  the  integral,  when  k  is  large.  The  ordinary
scales  are  unsuited  to  the  enormous  probabilities  (in  favour  of  a  cause
other  than  chance)  which  occur  in  psychical  research.  To  obviate  this,
expand  the  integral  in  descending  powers  of  t,  and  write  for  the
sought  probability  :

j_  f  n  _  j_  ^ ^  — — ^

^  L2/C


To  illustrate  this  case,  let  us  take  the  following  example  :  as  before,
/x  =  999,  and  /)  =  ;  but  now  m  =  299,  and  n  accordingly  700.  Here  k-,
evaluated  by  ordinary  logai-ithms  according  to  tlie  formula  on  p.l91  (where
the  logarithms  are  jSTapierian),  becomes  66-7352-  •  x  Zo(7.(.10  =  153-757.

k  =  12-4. Meanwhile  r  =  — - —  = =  15  ;  so  that will  no  longer

J^im 13-4  '

do  duty  for  And,  if  we  resort  to  the  expansion  of  k  in  terms  of  r,
we  shall  have  at  best  a  tedious  route ;  since  it  is  not  now  by
hypothesis,  nor  in  fact,  safe  to  stop  at  the  second  term  of  the
expansion.

Substituting  the  values  of  k  /x  m  n  in  the  formula  just  written,  I
find  for  the  sought  probability  -Q 10  x  [-04  + 'OoG]  = -0 1,  or  ;

r.c,  _  (5  7

where  -0  is  used  as  a  symbol  for  6G  ['0  for  67]  ciphers  intervening
between  the  decimal  point  and  the  significant  figures  of  the  decimal.
By  another  method,  to  be  mentioned  presently,  I  find  that  the  sought

67  G7

probability  is  between  "0  15  and  '0  19.  The  jJi'esent  method,  there-
fore, gives  a  sufficiently  accui'ate  value.

a.  Having  now  exhausted  all  the  branches  of  case  a,  we  come  to  its
negative,  a ;  which  may  be  subdivided  according  as  there  does  (fi),  or
does  not  (§),  exist  a  simple  approximative  form  for  the  sum  of  the  series
under  consideration.

aS.  To  this  category  belongs  the  case  discussed  by  Poisson  in  his
No.  81  ;  where  N  (to  revert  to  our  own  notation)  is  large,  u  is  very

small,  and  m  +  n  is  small,  so  that  the  fraction ^  -  is  negleotible.  If

we  observe  that  Poisson's  n  in  this  section  corresponds  not  now  to  the
number  of  failures  in  our  problem,  but  to  the  number  of  successes,  a


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


195


little  attention  will  show  that  a  fonnula  appropriate  to  our  case  (where
our  7n  +  n,  though  small,  is  still  apt  to  be  considerably  above  Ku)  is  the
second  formula  given  by  Poisson  (at  the  foot  of  p.  206).  Only  for  our
purpose  to  ascertain  the  probability  of  the  failures  being  at  most
Jf-  (m  +  n),  it  will  be  proper  to  put  for  the  Poissonian  n  not  our  m  +  n,
but  m  +  n-  1  ;  and  to  take  not  the  whole  of  the  second  formula  referred
to,  but  the  latter  portion  of  it.  In  short,  if  we  put  a  =  Hu^  then
according  to  this  method  the  probability  of  obtaining  at  least  m  +  n
successes  is


01  X  e


'  CO  CO"  \

^  +  ^1  +  {n  +  1)  {n  +  2)  +  )

I  have  applied  this  method  with  success  to  the  table  of  results  given  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  25  ;  where  the  condition  that


n


should  be  negiectible  was  peculiarly  well  fulfilled.

5S.  There  remain  over  the  cases  which  do  not  possess  any  simple
ancillary  form.  As  far  as  I  know,  these  cases  do  not  admit  of  a  solution
comparable  with  the  methods  which  have  been  described,  in  respect  of
concinnity  and  elegance.  There  exists,  however,  a  rougher  procedure,
which  has  the  advantage  of  being  most  efficacious  exactly  when  the
conditions  upon  which  the  general  method  (a)  depends  are  least
perfectly  fulfilled.

The  series  which  we  have  to  sum  is

N-{m  +  n) m  +  ii

[N-im  +  u)]!  [m  +  n].' ^ ''^  ,

(  Jvr-(m  +  ii  +  l)  \

(1-u)  1(


+  j^7\^-(iii  +  ')t  +  l)J.' j|m+/t  +  lj-'

(where,  as  usual,  the  note  of  admiration  imports  the  continued  ^aroduct
of  all  the  integer  numbers  up  to  and  including  that  preceding  the  note).
This  sum  may  be  otherwise  written  :

+ ^  NI  (. N-im+u) n ,  f,\

(l-n)  X  n'"^+"'^[^_(,„i  +  ,„)]/  l;n+n]!V^  m  +  n  +  1

The  second  term  within  the  bracket  is  a  proper  fraction.  For,  even
if  71  were  zero,  the  term  in  question  would  be  only  just  equal  to  unity ;
and  by  the  increase  of  7i  the  numerator  is  continually  diminished,
while  the  denominator  is  increased.  Call  this  fraction  v.  It  is  easy
to  see  that  the  third  term  is  less  than  v'^,  the  fourth  term  less  than  f
and  so  on.  Accordingly,  the  expression  witliin  the  brackets  forms  a
convergent  series  ;  which  we  can  either  sum  by  evaluating  as  many
terms  as  we  think  tit,  or  by  putting  at  once  tlie  expression  without  the

o  2


196  The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.

brackets  as  an  inferior  limit,  and  the  same  multiplied  by  *

superior  limit,  of  the  sought  probability.  It  will  be  observed  that  the
series  within  the  brackets  is  most  convergent  when  v  is  smallest,  and
that  ^'  is  smaller  ceteris  'parilnis  according  as  n  (the  excess  of  success)
is  larger,  and  u  (the  probability  of  success  at  a  single  trial)  is  smaller.
Now  these  are  exactly  the  conditions  upon  which  the  increase  of  the
Poissonian  k,  and  therefore  the  failure  of  the  Laplace- Poisson  approxi-
mation, turns  ;  so  that  the  present  method  may  be  regai-ded  as
complementary  to  the  Laplace-Poisson  approximation.

As  to  the  expression  outside  the  brackets  in  the  above-written
expression,  for  the  evaluation  of  N  f,  ()>i  +  n).',  [^^ -  {m  +  71)  ]  /,  recourse
may  be  had  to  a  table  of  the  values  of  loff.  T  (x  +1) ;  such  as  is  given  by
De  Morgan  at  the  end  of  his  treatise  on  the  Calculus  of  Probabilities.
In  so  far  as  such  a  table  is  only  available  for  small  nvimbers,  in  this
respect  again  the  present  method  is  complementary  to  method  a  ;  of
which  large  numbers  form  an  essential  condition.

Where  tables  of  the  Gamma-Function  are  not  available,  we  must,  I

suppose,  fall  back  upon  the  formula  ^r^^^'-  '^^ ^2lr  (^^  + '
which  it  is  not  very  trouljlesome  to  evaluate  by  the  aid  of  logarithms.

Let  us  take  by  way  of  illustration  the  example  above  (p.  193),  solved
by  another  method;  wliere  iV=999,  u  =  ^,  m=299,  =  700,  the
required  probability  is

/Jj  \^°"/ 1  \' 999! J 700  1 699  1
VlO/ VIO/ 700  !  299  !  I-"- 300  9 301  9  +

TOO

log.  (^—^ = 33-9698  log.  299  !  =  612-00868


2  9  9


log.  700  !  =  1689-38418


2301-39286

log. 999  !  =  2564-6046
2233-5744
2233-5744 -(2301-39286)  =  68-1815

8T

Hence  for  an  inferior  limit  to  tlie  sought  probability  we  liave  -0  15  ;

and  for  a  superior  limit  the  same  quantity  multiplied  by =  '0  2.

I  have  applied  this  method  with  advantage  to  the  problems  pre-
sented in  Phantasms  0/  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  16-7.

If  we  distinguish  within  this  category  the  case  in  which  the
numbers  are  small  enough  to  )je  manipulated  by  ordinary  arithmetic,
we  shall,  I  think,  have  exhausted  all  the  branches  of  the  subject.
They  are  presented  in  the  following  logical  tree  : —


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


197


si'

H-C5

S  IS


"CD


§5^

_.(K>  .


■2  »  ■


a

pa


"CDi


*0  JO

1^


■9


M  CD
(D  (P,


»

H

O

n

M
O
(0
><


^5


3  o


I


3  »•

as


=  B

3'H,


•S  ?


198


The  Calculus  of  Probahilities.


II.

I  propose  now  to  sum  up  the  practical  conclusions  of  this  and  the
preceding  paper  in  a  form  adapted  to  tlie  requirements  of  the  general
reader.

The  problems  which  the  subject  j^resents  ai'e  mainly  three.  It  is
required  to  appreciate  by  means  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities  the
evidence  in  favour  of  some  extraordinary  agency  which  is  aiforded  by
experiences  of  the  following  types  :  (1)  One  person  chooses  a  suit  of
cards,  or  a  letter  of  the  alphabet.  Another  person  makes  a  guess  as  to
wliat  the  choice  has  been.  This  experiment — a  choice  V)y  one  party,  a
guess  by  another — is  performed  iV  times.  The  number  of  successful
guesses  exceeds  the  number  which  is  the  most  probable  on  the  suppo-
sition of  mere  cliance,  viz.,  m,  where  m  =  Nt(,  (in  the  above-mentioned
cases  respectively  \N  and  JjiV^),  by  a  consideraljle  number  n,  where
n  —  Nv.  (2)  There  are  given  a  second  and  a  tliird  similar  series  of
trials,  in  each  of  wliich  the  number  of  successes  exceeds  the  number
most  probalale  on  the  hypothesis  of  pure  chance,  viz.,  N\h  N"u",  by
n'  ii"  respectively.  Or  (.3)  along  with  a  number  of  such  series  there
occur  some  in  which  the  number  of  successes  falls  below  the  most
probable  number.  What  probability  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  some
agency  other  than  chance  is  afforded  by  (1)  a  single  series,  in  which  the
successes  are  in  excess ;  (2)  a  set  of  series,  in  each  of  which  the
successes  are  in  excess  ;  (-3)  a  chequered  set  of  series  in  some  of  which
the  successes  are  in  excess,  in  others  in  defect?

The  answer  to  the  first  of  these  problems  depends  upon  the  answer
to  the  following  question  :  What  is  the  probability  that  under  a  regime
of  pure  chance — su2:>posing  that  there  were  no  disturbing  cause  at  work
— the  observed  excess  of  successes  would  occur?  Call  this  probability
Then  tlie  measure  of  the  sought  probability — that  some  agency
other  than  chance  has  operated — is  1  -  7^.  ^  The  first  problem  is
thus  made  to  depend  upon  a  simple,  or  at  least  straightforward,
calculation.  The  second  problem  is  made  to  dejDend  upon  the
first — or  rather  the  question  upon  which  the  first  depends — in  the
following  maimer.  For  each  of  the  given  series  find  the  proba-
bility corresiDonding  to  the  whicli  has  been  just  defined.  Call
the  set  of  values  thus  found  respectively  ])^,  p.,,  etc.  The  evidence
in  favour  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  which  is  afforded  by  tlie  whole
set  of  series,  the  complete  concatenation  of  data,  is  1  -  x  p.2  x  (fee.
Lastly,  the  third  problem  is  thus  resolvable  into  the  second.  Re-
arrange, without  manipulation  and  cookeiy,  but  in  a  random  fashion —
the  given  chequered  set  of  series  into  a  smaller  set  of  larger  series  :
sucli  that  each  of  the  new  seiies  may  present  excess. An  example  of


^  See  Xote  ' ,  at  the  end  of  Part  II.


The  Calculus  of  Prohabilities.


199


this  process  is  afforded  by  the  jiroblem  mentioned  by  Mr.  Gurney.
There  the  data  consisted  of  a  set  of  ten  series :  each  of  them  containing
a  thousand  trials,  and  07ie  of  them  presenting  defect  of  successes —
fewer  successes  than  upon  the  hypothesis  of  pure  chance  would  be
most  likely.  If  we  lumjj  tliis  defective  series  with  cmy  of  the  nine
remaining,  there  will  result  a  composite  series  of  2,000  trials  which
presents  excess  of  success.  Our  data  will  then  be  eight  series  of  1,000
and  one  series  of  2,000  trials ;  each  series  presenting  excess.  The
data  thus  modified  exemplify  our  second  problem.

Everything  then  depends  ultimately  upon  the  calculation  of  pro-
babilities such  as  the  above-dehned  p.  In  the  preceding  paper  I  stated
the  method  of  calculation  which,  as  being  required  and  proving
sufficient  for  most,  or  at  least  many,  statistical  investigations  analogous
to  those  of  Psychical  Hesearch,  may  perhaps  be  described  as  the  general
or  normal  metliod.  In  this  paper  there  is  attempted  a  more  complete
statement  of  the  possible  cases,  and  the  treatment  appropriate  to  each.

The  cases  constituted  by  the  variety  of  our  data  may  be  divided
according  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  each  of  the  following-
attributes  : —

(a)  The  numbers  of  trials  JV  small  enough  to  admit  of  direct
arithmetical  computation,  i

(b)  The  quantity a  small  fraction.^

■n

(c)  The  quantity not  greater  than  2  [or  31"^

^  ' ^  ^  J2Nu{l-u) *  L

(d)  N  not  exceeding  1200  (or  the  highest  number  for  which  the
value  of  log.  r  {N  + 1)  is  given  in  tables  accessible  to  the  operator). ^

The  presence  of  one  of  these  attributes  may  be  expressed  by  the
corresponding  letter,  e.g.,  h ;  its  absence  by  the  same  letter  with
a  negative  sign  superscribed,  e.g.,  b. Thus  the  heading  dbg  refers  to

the  case  in  which is  a  large  number,  the  quantity  9,^  (^-^^  is

'11

a  small  fraction,  and  the  quantity  —  =  does  not  exceed  2.

As  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  foui'th  attribute  nothing  is  stated ;
N  may  be  either  above  or  below  the  limit  1200.  The  variety  of
species  thus  constituted  are  represented  by  the  accompanying  logical
tree.


See  Note  -.  -  For  the  meaning  of  these  symbols,  see  p.  198  above.

3  See  Note  ^  *  See  Note  ^  s  gee  Note  K


200


The  C(dculuf<  of  PvobahiUties.


C3


w
o

O
<

Ph

&<
o

H
K
M

H


•I


s


s


8


u


o

O

r-l

M


o
M

o


to
c

o


60

g

o

o
C


<D
bo


a

do

■i

.Q.


ID
U


o

II
e


o
a

e3

6

II


o


The  Calculus  of  Prohahilities.


201


In  examining  these  divisions  I  propose  to  give  priority  to  the
branches  on  the  left,  and  to  exhaust  all  tlie  ramitications  of  each
branch  before  proceeding  to  the  branch  next  on  the  right.  The  order
exactly  resembles  the  devolution  of  real  property  according  to  English
law.  Our  table  corresponds  with  that  given  by  Mr.  Joshua  Williams,
in  his  lucid  chapter  on  the  descent  of  an  estate  in  fee  simple  ;  if
for  the  trunk  of  our  tree  we  put  Mr.  Benjamin  Brown,  tlie  purchaser,
for  a  his  elder,  and  for  d  his  younger  son.

A  complete  logical  tree  which  has  four  bifurcations  ought  to
present  16  ultimate  divisions.  But  the  task  of  examining  so  many
cases  is  abridged  by  the  observation  that  some  of  the  brandies  are
withered  nonentities,  and  others,  though  existent,  are  unfruitful,  and
will  not  repay  cultivation.  Of  the  first  sort  is  ad ;  also  dbc,  which  will
be  found  to  involve  a  contradiction  in  terms,  except  in  the  very  rare
case  where  the  quantity  2u  (I  —u)  approaches  unity,  where,  though
is  large,  is  exceedingly  small.  That  case  falls  into  the  second
category  of  rejectible  branches.  For  the  distinction  of  db  into  dbc
and  dbc  subserves  no  useful  purpose,  does  not  constitute  a  Natural
Kind. To  the  same  category  belong  the  (existent)  sub-divisions  of  a.

I  proceed  now,  without  further  j)reface,  to  prescribe,  for  and
exemplify  the  particular  cases.


This  is  the  case  of small  (say  not  exceeding  10).

Rule:  Expand  [m  +  (1  —  ?<)  by  the  binomial  theorem;  and  add
together  the  last  N  —  (ni +  7i)  terms  of  the  expansion,  those  written  in
the  second  of  the  two  following  lines  : —

(1  -  u)  +N{l-n)^~\i  +  &c.

,  N(N-l)  ....  (N-  (m  +  n)  +1)  , ,  ,  -v-i

12  (m +  ■((-)  '

The  sum  of  tlie  terms  in  the  second  line  is  the  required  probability  (of
the  observed  degree  of  divergence  occurring  by  mere  chance).

•  Example:  In  the  experiment  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney  at  p.  251  of
Vol.  II.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  the  "  name  thought  of  "  was
DOREMOND,  and  the  "  letters  produced  "  were  EPJYEIOD.  Here,
out  of  eight  guesses,  there  are  four  successes  ;  if  success  consist  in
guessing  either  the  very  letter  thought  of,  or  either  of  its  nearest
alphabetical  neighbours,  in  short  any  one  of  an  assigned  consecutive
triplet.  The  probability  that  a  letter  taken  at  random  should  fall
within  any  assigned  triplet  is  \.  Accordingly  (on  the  supposition  that
cliance  is  the  only  agency),  the  probabilities  of  obtaining  in  the  course
of  eight  trials  no  successes,  one  success,  two  successes,  &.C.,  are  given  by


202


The  Calculus  of  Prohahilities.


tlie  first,  second,  tlaird,  etc.,  terms  respectively  of  the  binomial  (i  +  if.
Tlie  proljability  of  obtaining  at  least  four  successes  is  equal  to  the  sum
of  the  fiftli  and  remaining  terms  ;  that  is

or  -Oil.

The  proljability  in  favour  of  an  agency  other  than  chance  is
about  '99.  The  odds  against  the  oljserved  event  occurring  by  mere
chance  are  about  a  hundred  to  one.


abc.

This  is  the  case  of  iY  large, tlie  quantity  _  — -r^  a  small

*  2v,{l-v)N

fraction (say less than 1), and the quantity —  —  not

^/2u(l  -  u)N

exceeding  2.

Mule:  Put  7'=  —  =  ;  and  find  the  value  of  the  integral

2

— ~  I <}  lit  '■'y  iiisans  of  the  ^  tables  attached  to  many  treatises  on

the  Calculus  of  Probabilities.  Call  that  value  F.  Then  ^  [1  -  P]  is
the  required  probability.

Examples :  (1)  In  the  instance  given  by  Mr.  Gurney,  at  p.  241  of
Psycldcal  Remareh,  December,  1884,  N  is  2927,  u  is  j,  and  n  is  57.

Here  2?6  (1  -  m)  iV=  |  2927  =  1097-6. „  , is  less  than  and

^ ' ^  2/((l -■!(.)  iV

T=\-l.  The  case  therefore  falls  under  the  category  abc.  Referring
to  the  table  given  with  the  article  on  Probabilities  in  the  Encyclojmdia

Britmmica,  8th  and  9tli  editions,  I  find  for  the  value  — =  I  g

corresponding  to  T=\-1  the  entry  -9838.  Hence  for  the  sought
probability  we  have  h  [1  -  -9838]  =  *  [-016]  = -008.

The  probability  of  agency  other  than  chance  =-992.  The  odds
against  the  observed  event  being  purely  fortuitous  are  about  a  hundred
to  one.

(2)  In  the  next  instance  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney  in  the  same
passage,  #=1833,  m  =  |-,  and  n  is  52. Here  2m  (1  - iV=-|  1833.

J- — j-^ — is  less  than  tV  ;  so  that  the  case  belongs  to  h.  But  the
2n(l-n)^  ^  H  .  .

attribute  c  is  not  perfectly  fulfilled. For  —  —  is  just  over  2,

J2u  (1  -u)N

^  If  the  values  given  in  the  tables  consulted  are  of  the  integral
—=  I e  (It  tlien  put  I  m  a  dt ^^^^  sought  probability.


The  Calculus  of  Frohahilities.


203


namely  2-1.  However,  cle  minimis  non  curat  ccdcuhis.  We  may  take
the  value  given  in  the  tables  for  T=2 —  cum  yrano ;  taking  into
account  that  we  shall  be  over-rating  the  probability  of  mere  chance,
under-rating  the  evidence  of  a  disturbing  cause.  For  T=  2  we  have  P,
as  defined  in  the  Rule,  -99532.  Hence  'p  the  sought  probability
=  (is  less  than)  i  [•00266]  =  -0013.i

The  probability  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  =  '997.  The  odds
against  the  observed  event  being  purely  fortuitous  are  about  five
hundred  to  one.

ahc.

In  this  case  a  and  b  are  fulfilled  as  in  the  former  case,  but  the
condition  that  T  should  not  exceed  2  is  no  longer  fulfilled.

Rule:  Evaluate  T-=  ,  Put  «  =  (2'-  x  434  •  •  •  +-2485).

1  r  1 2  (2-h) n  . , .  ,

The  required  value  is  ^7- ^77,+  —====. ;  an  expression  which
lUa  L-^J. 3  ^2u{l  —  u)N_i

may  be  simplified  by  ordinary  logarithms.

Examples:  (1)  iVis  976,  u  is  1,  n  is  35.

Here  2u  (1  -  u)  lY  is  =271, ^  =  ^  .  ^ =  2-14,

^ ^  2((.(l-i(.)iV 8  J2it{l-'ii.)N

an  excess  over  2  so  slight  that  the  case  might  safely  be  referred
to  the  former  category."^ Keeping  to  the  rule,  however,  we  have

=4.5203.

a  =  r-x  434  +-2485  =  1-962  +-248  =  2-21.

1  2  (2  - ')/)

Also  -L  =  -23  ^  =  -08.

Hence  for  the  sought  probability  ^^^i  ^  '3.  Which  is  reducible
by  logarithms  to  '002.

The  probability  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  =  '998.  The  odds
against  the  observed  event  being  purely  fortuitous  are  about  five
hundred  to  one.

(2)  The  general  result  of  .  .  .  lA'is  17653,  u  is  ^,  m  =  347.

Here  '2u{l  -u)  iV=6620,  and  n  divided  by  this  quantity  is  a  small

fraction. T^  =  ^  =18-189.
bb'Z

a  =  2'2x  434-^-248  .  .  .  =844.  Whence  for  the  sought  probability
^Qa.u  -F  -Ol  J  ,  which  with  the  aid  of logarithms  is  reducible

to  -000,000,000,8.

1  See  Note  -  See  Note


204


The  Galcidus  of  P vohahilities.


The  probability  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  -999,999,999,2.  The
odds  against  purely  fortuitous  origination  are  about  ten  thousand
million  to  one.

abd.

Tliis  is  the  case  in  which  N  is  large,  but  not  so  large  as  to  exceed
the  range  of  values  covered  by  Table  V.  at  the  end  of  De  Morgan's
essay  on  the  Calculus  of  Probabilities  {Encycl.  Metrop.),  or  a  similar

table  accessible  to  the  operator ;  while  the  quantity  9,^  _y
approaches  or  exceeds  unity.  ^

Rule  :  Wi-ite  for  the  souglit  probability

T{N+1)  m  +  n  N~{7n+n)

T(m  +  n  +  l)  r(iV-(m  +  H)  +  l)'^

[l  N-{m  +  n)  {N-{m  +  n  +  l)  {N-{m+n)  )  "l

Evaluate  the  expression  outside  the  brackets  by  means  of  a  table
for  log.  r  (such  as  De  Morgan's  Table  V.)  and  an  ordinary

logarithm  table.  Continue  the  series  witliin  the  brackets  as  long  as
may  seem  i-equisite  for  accuracy.  It  will  usually  be  sufficient  to  take
account  of  the  second  term.  Call  tliis  term  v,  and  the  expression
outside  the  brackets  J. Then  J — and,  still  more  accurately,  ^(l+i') —

is  an  inferior  limit  of  tlie  sought  pi-obability  ;  j — -  is  a  superior  limit.

Example :  In  one  of  the  experiments  recorded  N=  505,

u  =  \, 'Hi  +  M=261. Here  2iV(l  - «)  ?t=189. And,  consequently

'n  145 . ,  ,  ,

2i^(l-n)n  '  189  ' dangerously  large.

We  resort,  tlierefore,  to  the  method  appi-opriate  to  h,  log.  J=
log.  r(505  + 1)  -  %.  r  (261  + 1)  -  %. r  (244  + 1 )  +  244  fof/.(|)  +  261  log.  {\).
Evaluating  tliese  quantities  by  means  of  De  Morgan's  Table  V  and
ordinary  logarithms,  I  find  for  the  logaritlnn  of  J.  —38  + •823,  and  for

J  -Q  666. For  a  fairly  accurate  value  of  the  sought  probability,  we

have -0  66  L^+g^igJ  66xl-355  =  -0  1,  tlie  symbols  -0  -0

being  employed  to denote  respectively  36  or  37  noughts  following

:;7  I '  tin

the  decimal  point.- For  a  superior  limit  -0  66  - — ='0  13

The  true  value  lies  between  the  two  given,  if  my  work  is  correct.

37

The  probability  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  =  '9  .  The  odds
against  purely  fortuitous  origination  are  a  trillion  trillion  to  one.


I  See  Note  ».  Or  is  it  easier  to  say


37


The  Ckdculiis  of  Probah'dities.


205


ahd.

This  case  is  like  tlie  formei',  except  that  we  liave  not  the  advantage
of  the  tables  for  Jog.  V.  We  are  therefore  reduced  to  the  laborious
pi-ocess  of  evaluating  loy.  V  for  ourselves.

Rule :  For  the  expression  of  the  form  log.  V  (x'+l),  which  occurs  in
the  last  case,  put  now  the  following  i — {^  +  ^)  fog.  .T+-399,  and  other-
wise proceed  as  before.

Example:  .  .  .  i\^=1403, = m  +  n=W2, N-{m  +  n)=l1i\.

Here  — — - — =  ^t^t  >  that  is  far  above  unity. We  have,  there-
2i(.  (1  -■it.jJSl  AO.o

fore,  an  aggravated  case  of  b. Put  for  the  (juasitum

where  log.  J"=(140;3-o)  %.U03  -  162-5  %.  162  -  -399  -  1241-5  log.  1241
+  162  log.  t/,7+1241  log.  (f§)  =  1403-5  log.  1403  -162  [log.  162  +  log.  90]
-  1241  [%.1241  +%.90  -  log.89]  - 1-[%.1241  +%.162]  -  -399  Evalu-
ating  this expression, I land for log.  J -  107  + -921.  Whence

lOfi

J=-0  8,  (if  as  before  we  denote  by  -0^  the  sequence  of  x  ciphers

loi;

after  a  decimal  point). And  for  the  answer  -0  9.^

107

The  probability  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  =  -9  The  odds

against  the  observed  event  having  a  purely  fortuitous  origin
are  a  '^trillioii  trillion  trillion  trillion  trillion  trillion  (a  nonillion
nonillion)  to  one — odds  to  describe  whose  vastness  "  number  fails."


Notes  to  Part  II.

^  On  the  nature  of  this  inference  see,  in  addition  to  the  preceding
paper  in  this  Jourtird  (No.  8),  my  paper  on  "Observations  and  Statistics"
in  the  Cambridge  Philosojjhical  Trayisactions  for  1885,  p.  148,  et  seq.

^  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  fix  where  a  ends  and  a  begins.
The  boundary,  like  otliers  in  this  paper,  is  not  a  hard  and  fast  line.

^  The  ground  of  the  distinction  between  b  and  b  is  twofold.  Fii-st
and  foremost  is  the  circumstance  that,  when  b  as  defined  in  the  text  is
realised,  then  it  is  allowable  to  substitute  for  the  troublesome  k  of

^  See  Note  ^  -  Or  ahout  .  3  See  Note  ^

^  As  I  understand,  a  million  iiiillioii  is  a  billion,  a  million  billion  is  a  trillion,
a  million  trillion  is  a  quadrillion,  and  so  ou  up  to  a  nonillion.


206  The  Calculus  of  ProhaMlities.

Poisson  (Hecherches,  Art.  76)  the  much  more  manageable  r  (Ibid.,

{m  +  'it.  +  l)^(N+l)2)  k

Art.  78),  in  our  notation  ,  . For  -  is  expansible  in

j2p<i{N+l)  r

ascendina-  powers  of  (  , =  \  ,  the  iirst  term  beino-  1.  Accord-

\j-2pq{N+l))  ^

ine'ly,  if  h  is  present,  that  is  if r  is  a  small  fraction,  the

first  term  only  of  the  expansion  need  be  retained.  Further,
the  Poissonian  o-  may  be  reduced  to  the  still  simpler  expres-
sion which  corresponds  to  the  7'  of  Mr.  Todhuntei"  (the
Poissonian u, Raclierches, Art. 79). It will be observed  that

these  simplifications  take  for  granted  that  —=-  is  a  quantity  of

sJ'2pqN

negiectible  order. This  has  not  been  formally  j)Ostulated ;  but  it

follows  from  the  condition  that  — ~=  is  small  (deductible  from  6),

especially  if,  as  universally  the  case  in  the  problems  of  Psychical
Research,  and  indeed  most  problems  of  the  sort,  that  n  is  considerably
greater  than  unity.

It  follows,  then,  from  condition  h,  that  the  integral  portion  of  the
sought  probability  may  be  written  in  its  simplest  form,  viz.,  that
employed  hj  Mr.  Todhunter  in  his  formula  for  the  central  poi'tion  of
the  binomial  (^tlistory,  p.  576) ;  in  our  notation


^•2pqN

But,  further,  the  same  condition  allows  us  to  neglect  the  term  outside
the  sign  of  integration.  Tliis  term,  in  its  unreduced  form,  is  in  our
notation

V2"(i\r+l  +  i\r_(m  +  «)  )
3V7r(iV+l)  (m  +  vt-1)  (iV^-(//i  +  -/0

Now,  if  condition  h  is  fulfilled,  it  is  allowable  to  expand  the  non-
exponential  part  of  this  expression  in  ascending  powers  of  ^  and

neglect  terms  after  the  first. Remembering  that  m  =  N'p  (approximately
at  least,  see  above,  p. ),  we  have  for  the  first  term  of  the  expansion
/T (i  +  'z)

— ,  X  e . And  p may,  as above,  be  reduced  to  e

3 ^iiNpq  _

Now  this  quantity  may  be  neglected  in  comparison  with  the  integral

1  ,  Y  X

which  is  retained. For  the  latter  may  be  written e ( +"•''-■•  )

Whence  tlie  ratio  of  the  unintegrated  to  tlie  integrated  portion  is  of

2T  .((,

the  order  —  ,  or —  ,  to  unity. Whence  the  proposition.

To  avoid  mistakes,  it  may  be  added  that  if — as  we  approach  the


The  Calculus  of  Prohahllities.


207


case  of  ah — it  seems  worth  while  to  take  some  account  of  the  term
outside  integration,  then  it  must  be  remembered  that  its  primitive
form  is  modified,  not  only  by  its  own  expansion,  but  also  by  tlie  change
from  r  to  T  in  the  integral  part. See  Rule  uhc.

*  The  ground  of  the  distinction  between  c  and  c  is  the  fact  that
in  many  of  the  books  the  table  of  the  integrated  error-function  does
not  extend  beyond  the  argument  2  ;  in  few  or  none  beyond  3.  The
circumstance  that  the  tallies  have  not  been  carried  further  is  connected
with  an  important  property  attaching  to  cases  where  the  observed  ecart
exceeds  two  or  three  times  the  modulus,  i.e.,  to  class  b  :  namely,  that
in  these  cases  the  evidence  in  favour  of  a  cause  other  than  chance  has
been  regarded  by  the  autliorities  as  amounting  to  practical  certainty.
Where,  as  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  editions  8  and  9,  the  table
is  continued  as  far  as  3,  then  the  latter  limit  should  be  taken  for  our
dehnition.  In  this  case  Example  2  of  abc  and  1  of  ahc  (pp.  202-3)
fall  unequivocally  under  ahc.  Employing  the  tables  in  Encyclopoidia
Britannica,  edition  9,  I  find  for  the  former  example  -0015,  and  for
the  latter  (interpolating  between  the  entries  for  2-1  and  2-2)  -0012.

5  The  second  term  need  only  be  added  when  there  is  some  suspicion
that  the  condition  b  is  not  perfectly  fulfilled  ;  the  case  considered  at
the  end  of  note  ^.

6  It  will  be  gathered  from  the  theoretical  analysis  that  it  is
possible,  with  due  caution,  for  one  who  knows  the  nature  of  the
ground,  to  advance  a  great  way  along  the  lines  of  the  received  method
of  approximation.  Thus  many  cases  of  ab  ai'e  amenable  to  tJie
received  general  exponential  formula ;  corrected  not  only  by  taking
some  account  of  the  term  outside  integration  (as  suggested  in  the  rule
for  abc)  but  also  by  taking  account  of  the  second  term  of  tlie  expansion
of  k  (Poisson,  Art.  78).  For  instance,  in  the  example  under  cibd
N=bOb,  2^  =  \,  TC=135); if  we  employ  the  uncorrected  exponential

1 /•  ^  — 4 ")

formula  — =  I  g  we  shall  get  a  value  -0  G,  which  exaggerates  by
about  a  million  times  the  odds  in  favour  of  a  cause  other  than  chance.

, ^  1  1  43

To  this  value  should  be  added  :  first  — =z  e  — ^= al)out  -0  14,

which  still  gives  a  very  inaccurate  result.  For  a  better  approximation,
write

where  r  has  the  value  assigned  on  p.  191,  and  5 is  the  second
term of the expansion of k (Poisson, Art. 78). Here,  then,
r 1  135 'on

r-fS  =  9-84  1-  g  ig9-4  '  Substituting  which,  we  have  still  an
inaccurate  result,  but  which  has  at  least  the  advantage  of  erring  on


208


Tlie  Ccdculus  of  Probabilities.


the  safe  side.  It  might  be  possible,  by  proceeding  to  another  term  of
expansion,  to  bolster  up  the  familiar  formula.  But  I  think  that  such
corrections  could  not  safely  be  employed  by  those  who  might  not  see
the  reason  of  them — the  class  to  whom  these  rules  are  addressed.  The
method  recommended  in  the  text  has  the  advantage  of  being  straight-
forward and  uniform.  And,  doubtless,  the  feeling  of  those  whom  I
address  is  "  sit  quidvis,  simplex  dumtaxat  et  unum."  Nor,  indeed,  is
the  method  here  recommended  more  laborious,  while  it  is  much  safer,
than  to  correct  the  generally  received  formula  (as  Professor  Lazarus
proposes,  Assurance  Magazine,  Vol.  XX.)  in  some  such  way  as  that
which  I  have  just  indicated.

It  need  liardly  be  pointed  out  that  the  factor disappears  by
division  in  the  expression  under  treatment ;  and  that  '399  is  log.

^  By  the  Poissonian  unreduced  formula  (Jiecherches,  Art.  77),  I

lOfi

have  found  for  this  example  -0  13.  It  may  be  observed  that  the
formula  here  prescribed  for  ab  is  very  similar  to  the  unreduced
Poissonian  formula,  but  in  extreme  cases  at  least — I  venture  to
think — simpler.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  and  uniformity,  I  have
thought  it  best  to  exclude  the  less  familiar  Poissonian  solutions  (see
Part  I.)  from  a  Praxis  designed  for  the  use  of  the  lay  reader.


Automatic  Writing.


209


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GEl^ERAL  MEETING  ON
October  25,  1886.

The  twenty-second  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Ptooras
of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk-street,  Pall  Mall,  on
October  25,  1886.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  F.  "VV.  H.  Myers  gave  an  account  of  a  novel  class  of  experi-
ments— some  of  which  he,  Mr.  Gurney,  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  had  lately
seen  and  shared  in — conducted  by  Dr.  Babinski,  a  physician  of  the
Saltpetriere,  at  Paris,  and  pointing  to  the  transfer  of  hysterical
affections  from  one  patient  to  another,  under  the  influence  of  a
neighbouring  magnet.  If  suggestion  be  excluded,  the  phenomenon
seems  clearly  to  be  telepathic  in  nature  ;  and  the  results  which  took
place  in  the  presence  of  the  English  observers,  though  not  conclusive,
were  decidedly  striking  and  suggestive.  A  full  account  of  these
appeared  in  the  Journal  for  November,  1886.


PHOCEEDIIsGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
January  28,  1887.

The  twenty-third  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Rooms
of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk-street,  Pall  Mall,  on
January  28,  1887.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  in  the  Chair.

Part  of  the  following  paper  was  read  : —

I.

AUTOMATIC WRITING.— III.
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

Physiological  and  Pathological  Analogies.

I  purpose  here  to  continue  a  discussion  which  has  already  occupied
two  papers  in  these  Proceedings,^  and  which  I  cannot  hope  to  conclude
in  the  present  essay. The  phenomena  of  automatism, — the  indications

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  217,  and  Vol.  III.,  p.  1.

P


210


Automatic  W'i  "iting.


[Jan.  28,


given  by  unwilled  or  unconscious  action  of  mental  processes  going  on
"witliin  us, — offer  a  field  for  investigation  whose  importance  is  gradually
beginning  to  be  recognised.  G-'/-a^j7/,ic  automatism — the  topic  with  which
these  papers  have  more  especially  dealt — had  hardly,  so  far  as  I  know,
been  alluded  to  previously  ;  except,  indeed,  by  Spiritualistic  writers,  to
whom  the  merit  of  the  first  express  recognition  of  the  phenomenon  un-
doubtedly belongs,  whatever  may  be  our  opinion  as  to  the  explanation
which  they  assign  to  it.

For  my  own  part  I  have  thus  far  dwelt  mainly  on  three  theses.  In
the  first  place,  I  tried  to  show  that  an  automatic  impulse,  arising,  so
far  as  we  can  tell,  wholly  within  the  writer's  own  brain,  may  sometimes
prompt  him  to  write  words  or  sentences  whose  meaning  he  does  not
discern  while  he  is  writing  them, — nay,  whose  meaning  he  sometimes
does  not  discern  till  after  a  tedious  process  of  decipherment.  In  the
second  place,  I  showed  that  in  some  cases — in  the  case  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Newnham  especially, — the  content  of  these  automatically-written
messages  seemed  to  be  derived,  not  from  the  writer's  brain  wholly,  but,
in  part  at  least,  telepathically  from  the  unspoken  and  unhinted  thoughts
of  another  person.  And  thirdly,  by  a  comparison  of  some  peculiarities
of  automatic  writing  with  some  peculiarities  of  speech  and  script  which
we  have  some  reason  to  suppose  initiated  by  the  ri(/ht  hemisphere  of
the  brain,  I  tried  to  form  some  intelligible  conception  of  a  possible
cerebral  mechanism  of  automatic  script  in  general.  This  last  inquiry
had  a  special  bearing  on  the  problems  of  telepathy  ;  since  we  have  seen
cause  not  unfrequently  to  associate  telepathic  impulses — both  in  their
inception  and  in  their  reception — with  the  unconscious  rather  than  with
the  conscious  operations  of  the  brain.  We  seemed,  as  I  thought,  to  be
getting  a  hint  as  to  such  operations  which  might  be  of  service  in  more
than  one  branch  of  psychical  inquiry.

The  discussion  of  automatism,  even  as  thus  far  pursued,  has
suggested  so  many  problems  that  it  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what  direction
the  general  argument  should  incite  vis  to  attempt  our  next  forward
step.  From  one  point  of  view,  indeed,  the  answer  to  this  question
would  be  easy.  If,  like  previous  writers  on  this  topic,  already  men-
tioned, I  were  to  treat  automatic  writing  from  the  Spiritualistic  point
of  view  alone,  as  affording  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  presumption  of
the  communication  with  us  of  departed  souls,  it  would  be  my  business
to  pass  at  once  to  an  analysis  of  the  facts  contained  in  messages  which
have  been  automatically  written.  Some  of  the  facts  thus  found  I
should  be  able,  as  my  already-cited  instances  show,  to  refer  to  telepathy;
to  tlie  influence  of  minds  still  in  the  flesh.  And  I  should  have  to
discuss  whether  any  items  of  the  messages  were  7iot  so  referable  ;
whether  they  pointed  to  the  influence  or  communication  of  a  "departed
soul."


1887.]


Atotomatic  Writing.


211


All  this  will  sooner  or  later  have  to  be  clone  in  detail.  But  I  am
anxious  rather  to  defer  than  to  hasten  the  moment  of  attempting  it.
And  I  say  this  from  no  aversion  from  the  Spiritualistic  theory,  a  theory
which,  if  it  can  be  sustained,  will  obviously  be  more  interesting,  to  say
the  least,  than  any  other.  Still  less  do  I  say  it  with  any  bias  for  any
exclusive  theory  of  my  own.  The  surprise,  indeed,  would  be  if  we  were
to  discover  that  tliis  great  range  of  phenomena  could  wholly  be
comprised  within  tlie  limits  of  any  single  hypothesis.  ,v

But  in  so  complex  a  matter  nothing  but  confusion  can  ensue  if  we
attempt  to  decide  on  what  I  may  call  the  advanced  questions  without
some  rather  fuller  knowledge  of  the  preliminary  questions  than  we
have  as  yet  gained.  Let  it  be  said  at  once  that  the  extreme  theory —
the  Spiritualist  theory — of  some  of  these  communications  is  not  to  be
dispelled  with  a  breath.  The  evidence  for  it — though  it  is  soon  seen
to  be  decidedly  scantier  than  certain  loose  assertions  would  have
us  suppose — is,  as  we  shall  perceive,  of  a  nature  to  perplex  a  candid
inquirer.  Stated  nakedly,  indeed,  it  might  beget  in  the  cautious  mind
nothing  beyond  perplexity.  Tlie  canons  by  which  it  should  be  judged
are  as  yet  undetermined.  If  it  is  to  be  profitably  approached,  this  must
be  after  attempt  shall  have  heen  made  to  frame  such  canons,  or  at  least
to  turn  some  of  the  simpler  cases  over  and  over,  and  to  try  to  bring
them  into  some  sort  of  relation  with  more  familiar  physiological  or
pathological  facts.

In  the  present  paper  then,  and  in  a  paper  with  which  I  hope
to  follow  it,  I  shall  dwell  mainly  on  two  questions.  The  Jirst
of  these  will  take  us  back,  in  one  sense,  to  an  earlier  point
than  that  which  the  previous  papers  reached.  In  those  papers  I  was
concerned  to  prove  that  automatic  writing  was  really  automatic, — that
it  was  not  in  all  cases  the  mere  product  of  a  half-conscious  fancy, — of
a  hand  idly  wandering,  and  a  dreamy  cajarice.  Having  now,  as  I  trust,
shown  this  sufficiently  by  an  analysis  of  some  of  the  messages  thus
received,  I  shall  go  back  to  a  more  general  discussion  of  the  significance
and  origin  of  automatic  messages  taken  per  se,  as  admitted  facts,
without  special  reference  to  their  content.

And  secondly,  we  shall  find  that,  in  order  to  understand  the  true
meaning  of  graphic  automatism,  we  shall  have  to  consider  other
cognate  automatic  manifestations, — messages  given  by  automatic  speech,
by  other  automatic  movements,  and  even  by  sensory  perceptions  of
various  kinds.  In  this  way  we  may  perhaps  get  some  sort  of  familiarity
with  the  general  type  of  these  phenomena, — some  sort  of  notion  as  to
the  way  in  which  they  stand  related  to  hypnotism,  to  insanity,  and,
(if  clairvoyance  exists,)  to  clairvoyance, — which  may  serve  as  a  guide
when  we  come  to  deal  with  messages  whose  content,  as  well  as  their
mechanism,  offers  matter  of  debate  and  perplexity.


212


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


I  start  afresh,  tlien,  with  wliat  may  be  termed  the  simple,  typical
form  of  automatic  writing.  The  case  communicated  by  Professor
Sidgwick  {Proceedinys,  Vol.  III.,  p.  2.5)  may  serve  as  an  example.  An
ordinary  man,  woman,  or  child,  of  normal  health  and  intelligence,
finds,  either  suddenly  or  more  often  after  sevei-al  trials,  that  his  hand
will  write  sentences  of  which  he  is  not  cognisant  till  they  are  actually
written.  Let  us  omit  f  ro]ii  consideration  all  those  specific  points  in  the
messages  on  which  we  have  already  dwelt, — anagrams,  telepathic
information,  mirror-writing,  &c.  Let  us  simply  suppose  (what  is  in
fact  the  commonest  case)  that  the  automatist  can  at  any  time,  or  at
least  can  frequently,  induce  insignificant  messages,  mainly  resembling-
each  other  in  handwiiting  and  signed  with  the  same  name.  And  note
that  so  long  as  the  messages  are  insignificant  in  content,  (as  moralising
reflections,  trivial  comments  on  passing  events,  and  the  like,)  we  can
hardly  attach  importance  of  any  kind  to  the  signature.  Sometimes,  as
in  the  case  of  the  Messrs.  Schiller,  presently  to  be  given,  the  signa-
tures are  merely  fantastic,  and  illustrate  the  tendency  (already  noted)
of  automatic  script  to  a  grotesque  puerility,  quite  independent  of  the
intellectual  level  of  the  automatist.  Sometimes,  following  another
tendency  of  automatic  script,  the  signatures  seem  designed  to  7neet
expectation  :  and  the  name  of  some  deceased  friend  is  appended  to
matter  which  conveys  no  internal  evidence  of  his  authorship.  Again,
the  secret  inclination  wliicli  many  persons  feel  to  suppose  themselves
favoured  above  other  men,  special  receptacles  of  grace,  &c.,  exteimalises
itself  in  automatic  signatures  of  a  very  lofty  type, — reaching  in  some
instances  to  tlie  very  highest  conceivable  names.  And  here  I  must
frankly  say  that  I  think  that  comnmnications  thus  signed  should  be  at
once  discouraged,  and  the  process  of  automatic  writing  discontinued  for
the  time,  in  just  the  same  way  as  in  tlie  occasional  cases  where
"  planch ette  begins  to  swear."  I  certainly  do  not  suppose  that  there  is
a  diabolic  influence  in  the  one  case  any  more  than  a  Divine  influence
in  the  other.  But  in  either  extreme  there  is  some  slight  fear  of  injury
to  the  wiiter.  If  oaths  and  rough  expressions  come  persistently,
this,  (as  was  explained  in  my  last  paper,)  may  probably  indicate
nervous  exliaustion.  If  "Divine  revelations"  come,  there  is  a
danger  tliat  the  writer  may  flatter  himself  into  the  belief  that  he  is.
singled  out  by  heaven  itself  to  convey  a  new  message  to  men.  Much
moral  teaching  of  a  noble  and  suggestive  kind  has,  indeed,  been  often
conveyed  tlirougli  automatic  messages.  But  where  it  has  been  in  trutli
highest,  it  has  at  the  same  time  kept  clear  of  any  irreverent  assumptions.

These  extravagances,  however,  are  of  rare  occurrence.  The  general
type  of  automatic  message  is  entirely  unobjectionable,  I  may  even  say
entirely  commonplace.  But,  nevertheless,  a  series  of  such  messages,
will  show  qualities  very  hard  to  explain. Tliere  will  be  2)ersistence,  the


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


213


influence  seeming  to  be  on  the  watch  for  opportunities  of  communica-
tion, sometimes  calling  the  attention  of  the  automatist  by  preliminary-
jerks  of  the  hand,  and  thrusting  in  its  comment,  so  to  say,  when  least
expected.  There  will  be  a  kind  of  indiciduality  ;  several  influences
maintaining  each  a  definite  character,  each,  perhaps,  moving  tlie  arm
in  a  special  manner,  so  that  the  automatist  knows  what  the  signature
will  be,  before  he  receives  the  actual  communication.  And  tliere  will
be  an  apparent  thread  of  memory  througli  the  messages  of  the  same  in-
fluence ;  that  is  to  say,  the  so-called  "  guide  "  will  sometimes  refer  to
passages  in  his  previous  messages  whicli  the  automatist  does  not  con-
sciously remember.

All  this, — as  those  who  have  witnessed  such  cases  can  attest — forms
a  sufficiently  curious  ensemble  ;  nor  need  we  wonder  that  in  nine  cases
out  of  ten  the  automatist  attributes  his  writing  to  some  influence
external  to  himself.

With  this,  then,  as  the  problem  before  us,  I  propose  now  to
develop  in  a  fresh  direction  a  suggestion  made,  and  partly  acted  upon,
in  my  last  paper.  I  there  dwelt  on  my  conviction  that  if  we  are  to
understand  sniper  normal  phenomena — phenomena  transcending,  ap-
parently, the  stage  of  evolution  at  which  we  have  admittedly  arrived, —
we  must  first  compare  them,  as  fully  as  possible,  both  with  normal  and
with  abnormal  phenomena ; — meaning  by  abnormal  phenomena  those
which,  while  diverging  from  the  ordinary  standard,  fall  below  or,  at
least,  do  not  transcend  it.  1  insisted  also  that  we  must  exjaect  that
supernormal  phenomena,  if  they  occur  at  all,  will  show  many  points
of  resemblance  to  abnormal — nay,  to  positively  morbid — phenomena,
without  therefore  themselves  necessarily  deserving  to  be  classed  as
morbid  in  any  degree.  When  unfamiliar  impulses  arise  in  the
organism — whether  those  impulses  be  evolutive  or  dissolutive  in
character — their  readiest  paths  of  externalisation  are  likely  to  be  some-
what similar  ; — just  as  (to  repeat  a  previous  illustration)  the  same  kind
of  ache  in  the  gums  may  indicate  to  our  sensation  either  the
formation  of  an  abscess  or  the  growth  of  a  tooth.

I  cannot  find  that  this  principle  is  set  forth  in  any  accredited  text-
book. Yet  I  must  believe  that  it  will  come  to  be  recognised  as  a
guiding  principle  in  psycho-physiological  inquiry ;  nay,  that  this  view
will  be  seen  to  have  been  inevitable  so  soon  as  external  signs  of
psychological  facts  were  grasped  Avith  a  certain  degree  of  precision.
Thus  far  the  cerebral-psychical  changes  which  go  on  after  the  frame
has  once  been  built  up  have  been  watched  by  the  psychologist  mainly
in  their  evolutive,  by  the  physiologist  mainly  in  their  dissolutive
aspect.  The  psychologist  feels  an  interest  in  the  life-long  develop-
ment of  the  mind  of  a  Shakespeare  or  a  Goethe.  The  physiologist,
when  he  has  surveyed  his  subjects  advance  to  matui'ity,  finds  little


214


Automatic  Writivg.


[Jan.  28,


more  to  notice  till  senile  degeneration  sets  in.  He  does  not  often  care
to  note  such  external  signs  as  may  tell  of  processes  of  cerebral  develop-
ment which  are  still  going  on  during  adult  life.

Yet  such  external  signs  there  are ;  and  it  is  important  for  us  who
are  concerned  with  one  special  branch  of  automatism  to  recognize  how
large  a  part  is  played  in  civilized  life  by  automatic  movements, —
movements  which  a  man  does  not  know  that  he  is  making,  or  cannot
avoid  making,  and  which  give  expression  to  cerebral  action  of  which
he  is  pai'tly  or  wholly  unconscious.

In  the  first  place,  there  are  the  movements  which  are  known  as
secondarily  cmtmnatic : — such  movements  as  walking,  speech,  piano-
playing,  which,  having  been  acquired  by  voluntary  effort,  become  by
use  gradually  instinctive,  and  illustrate  to  us  in  our  own  persons  both
the  advantages  and  the  disadvantages  of  instinct  as  compared  with
reason.  The  girl  can  remember  the  sonata  better  with  her  fingers  than
with  lier  head  ; — there  is  the  advantage  of  an  instinct  which  is  "  lapsed
intelligence,"  but  which  is  more  rapid  and  more  certain  than  conscious
intelligence  can  be.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  girl  has  learnt  a  given
passage  in  the  sonata  wrongly,  and  played  it  often  in  that  way,  she
will  hnd  it  far  more  difficult  to  correct  the  mistake  than  it  would  be
were  the  passage  new  to  her.  There  is  the  disadvantage  of  lapsed
intelligence ; — the  comparative  ffxity  of  the  nervous  and  muscular
synergy,  when  once  established,  makes  it  hard  for  the  organism
to  adapt  itself  to  slightly-changed  circumstances.  I  repeat  that  the
parallelism  between  these  personally-acquired  instincts  of  our  own  and
the  mainly-inherited  instincts  of  the  animal  kingdom  is  very  close  ;  and
just  as  we  find  animal  instincts  becoming  more  complex  and  numerous
as  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  living  things,  so  do  we  find  human  secondary
automatisms  becoming  more  complex  and  numerous  as  we  ascend  in
the  scale  of  civilization.

But  of  course  we  inherit  instincts  as  well  as  acquire  them,  and  it  is
with  inherited  instincts — with  jyvimarily  automatic  acts,  that  I  am  here
mainly  concerned.

One  important  branch  of  this  primary  automatism  consists  of  the
movements  which  give  expression  to  face  and  voice.  And  my  point  is
that  these  automatic  movements  acquire  a  continually  greater  relative
importance  both  in  the  race  as  it  advances  in  culture  and  in  the
individual  as  he  advances  in  cerebral  development, — in  middle  and  even
in  later  life.  The  expression  of  Ijenevolence,  wisdom,  command,  is  capable
of  being  more  intense  and  impressive  in  the  old  man's  face  than  in
the  face  of  the  youth  ;  and  the  look  and  accent  of  great  men  forms  no
small  part  of  their  power.  It  matters  little  in  comparison  that  the
adult's  power  over  his  voluntary  muscles  gradually  declines.  He  can
no  longer  compel  the  muscles  of  his  legs  to  adapt  themselves  to  some


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


215


new  feat  of  gymnastic.  But  tlie  muscles  of  his  eyes  and  mouth — quite
apart  from  his  conscious  volition — have  learnt  to  exj^ress  his  central
current  of  thought  and  feeling  more  delicately  and  more  forcibly  than
in  the  flush  of  youth.  This  fact  needs  some  insistence,  for  it  is
constantly  obscured  by  a  quite  different  phenomenon  ; — the  power  of
youth  to  express  the  simpler  emotions  with  pleasing  openness.  "  The
beautiful,"  it  has  been  said  ,  "  by  the  unconscious  look  of  a  moment  can
utter  all  that  is  in  them."  What  this  means  is  that  a  fair  young  face
can  show  love,  pity,  reverence,  &c.,  in  a  way  that  stimulates  the
observer's  imagination  ;  but  the  girl's  expression  may  nevertheless  be
in  reality  of  a  less  developed,  a  less  complex  kind  than  the  minute
muscular  shiftings  round  the  eye,  say,  of  an  elderly  stockbroker,  as
he  glances  down  the  share-list.  The  stockbroker's  countenance  is
not  interesting ;  but  what  I  mean  is  that  years  and  knowledge
have  effected  in  him  the  same  evolution  of  automatic  action  which
they  effect  in  the  sage  or  statesman,  and  which  makes  the  expression
of  the  sage  or  statesman,  if  we  "  sit  down  in  a  cool  hour  "  and  look
at  him,  even  more  interesting  than  the  girl's.

We  see,  then,  that  as  the  race,  or  the  man,  evolves,  the  primarily
automatic  actions,  and  the  secondarily  automatic  actions,  form  a
constantly  more  important  portion  of  the  motor  outcome  of  his
mentation.

And  more  than  this.  We  see,  also,  that  if  any  sudden  call  is  made
on  the  organism  which  evokes  its  maximum  capacity,  and  as  it  were
shows  by  a  lightning-flash  the  next  stage  towards  which  the  evolu-
tionary process  is  striving,  there  is  an  immediate  extension  of  the
domain  of  automatic  action.  A  man  not  only  runs  from  a  lion  faster
than  he  ever  ran  before,  because  tlie  checks  commonly  imposed  by  pain
and  fatigue  are  unfelt,  but  also  he  goes  on  to  climb  up  into  a  tree  with
a  purposive  complication  of  muscular  movement  which  he  would  have
needed  to  think  out  with  conscious  planning  at  a  less  excited  moment.
And  still  further ;  a  great  orator  rejaelling  extemporaneously  a
calumnious  charge,  or  appealing  to  a  deeply-moved  multitude  of  men,
will  sometimes  for  a  few  moments  perform  with  complete  automatism
intellectual  feats  which  few  men  could  rival  with  full  time  to  prepare.
He  will  be  unconscious  of  his  attitude,  his  gestures,  his  tones  of  voice
— nay,  of  the  words  which  he  uses,  the  metaphors  which  he  introduces,
the  oi'atorical  effects  of  pause,  reiteration,  pathetic  or  majestic  emphasis.
Ho  will  be  conscious  of  nothing  beyond  the  torrent  of  indignation  or
patriotism  which  is  surging  within  him.  When  automatism  reaches
this  point,  (as  is  said  to  have  been  sometimes  the  case,  for  instance,  with
M.  Gambetta),  it  is  felt  to  be  far  moi'e  impressive  than  conscious  pains
and  choice.  The  orator  is  repaid  for  constant  effort  at  self-expression
by finding that on  great  occasions  he  can  (/et  himself  expressed


216


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


automatically  ; — that  he  can  live  wholly  in  the  stream  of  thought  and
emotion  which  is  his  essential  strength,  and  that,  meantime,  his
organism  will  utter  more  of  what  is  going  on  inside  him  than  if  he  had
weighed  each  word  to  the  full.

This  seeming  digression  is  really,  I  think,  important  to  my
argument.  For  it  is  essential  that  the  reader  should  understand,  (and
I  know  of  little  already  written  which  will  help  to  such  under-
standing), that  in  studying  these  automatic  manifestations  of
inentation  otherwise  unguessed,  we  are  not  necessarily  studying  some-
thing morbid,  retrograde,  hysterical;  but  that  it  would  be  quite  in  accord-
ance with  analogy  if  it  should  turn  out  that  thoughts  and  feelings
thus  found  issue  which  were  in  some  respects  deeper  than  the  subject's
ordinary  consciousness  could  reach,  or  his  ordinary  effort  exhibit.

In  a  word,  there  are  evolutive  as  well  as  degenerative  parallels  to
the  strange  phenomena  which  we  shall  presently  encounter.  We  must
not  prejudge  them  in  any  way  whatever  ;  we  must  not  ticket  them  as
hysterical  any  more  than  we  must  ticket  them  as  Spiritualistic.

And  I  may  perhaps  best  resume  my  discussion  of  them  by  citing  at
length  a  typical  case  ; — a  case  typical  at  least  in  its  main  features,  and
specially  suitable  for  record  on  account  of  the  care  with  which  the
phenomena  were  noted  down  as  they  occurred.  The  case  was  sent  to
us  by  Mr.  F.  S.  Schiller,  B.A.,  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  and  I
have  myself  been  present  at  one  of  the  experiments  where  Mr.  F.
C.  S.  Schiller  and  his  brother,  Mr.  F.  IST.  Schiller,  of  St.  John's  College,
Cambridge,  obtained  some  of  the  old  French  writing.

In  the  following  accounc  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  in  speaking  of  the
"spirits  "  of  planchette  under  their  soi-disant  names,  I  intend  to  endorse  the
Spiritualist  explanation,  any  more  than  I  consider  the  reproductions  of  the
"  mediums' ''  latent  knowledge  to  be  conclusive  in  favour  of  any  form  of
"  unconscious-self"  theory.

The  experiments  in  question  were  conducted  during  a  great  part  of  the
Long  Vacation,  with  my  brotlier,  whom  I  will  call  F.,  and  my  sister  L.,  as
"  mediums,"  writing  conjointly  at  first,  but  afterwards  separately.  Of
course,  there  could  thus  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  good  faith  of  the  "  mediums,"
even  if  the  course  of  the  experiments  had  not  afibrded  convincing  proof  that
the  phenomena  were  independent  of  their  conscious  mind.  There  appeared  at
different  times  no  less  than  nine  "  spirits,"  of  whom  four  wrote  exclusively
with  F.  and  one  mainly  ;  another  freelj'  with  either  or  both  but  chiefly  with
L.,  and  three  exclusively  with  L.  or  with  F.  and  L.  conjointly.  They  all  wrote
with  a  more  or  less  distinctive  style  of  their  own,  and,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,
there  was  not  any  marked  difference  of  style  when  the  same  spirit  wrote  with
different  mediums.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  was  there  sufficient  evidence  to
justify  the  assertion  that  the  style  was  so  unmistakably  similar  that  it  must
have  proceeded  from  the  same  intelligence.  But  although  the  evidence  was
not  conclusive  in  establishing  the  identity  of  the  various  "spirit  "  personages,
there  could  be  no  doubt  of  their  complete  independence  of  the  mediums'  con-


1887.]


Aiitom atic ntii ig.


217


scious  will.  Both  F.  and  L.  were  at  first  entirely  ignorant  of  what  planchette
was  writing,  and  F.  remained  so  to  the  end,  nor  did  the  occupations  of  his
conscious  self  appear  in  the  least  to  affect  the  progress  of  the  writing.  I  have
seen  plancliette  write  in  the  same  slow  and  deliberate  way  both  while  he  was
telling  an  amusing  anecdote  in  an  animated  way  and  while  he  was  absorbed
in  an  interesting  novel  ;  and  frequently  whole  series  of  questions  would  be
asked  and  answered  without  his  knowing  what  had  been  written  cjr  thinking
that  anything  else  than  unmeaning  scrawls  had  been  produced.

In  L.'s  case  it  is  true  that  after  some  time  she  came  to  know  what  letters
were  being  formed  and  was  able  to  interpret  tlie  movements  of  her  hand.
This,  of  course,  made  it  difficult  to  avoid,  at  times,  a  certain  half-conscious
influence  on  tlie  writing,  and  makes  it  necessary  to  allow  for  the  personal
equation.  But  it  is  clear  that  this  influence  must  tend  to  harmonise  the
answers  of  planchette  with  the  opinions  and  will  of  the  medium,  and  as  a
matter  of  fact  I  observed  frequent  cases,  especially  with  L.,  of  a  conflict
between  her  will  and  oi^inions  and  those  of  planchette.  Nothing,  in  fact,
can  be  more  striking  than  the  entire  independence  of  planchette  in  matters
of  Will  and  Thought,  or  more  unexpected  than  the  answers  frequently
obtained.  This  will  be  exemplified  by  one  of  our  earliest  results.  Planchette
had  been  unable  to  write  plainly  the  name  of  the  "  si>irit "  communicating,
and  so  we  had  asked  whether  it  was  man,  woman,  or  child.  The  answer  was
at  length  deciphered  as  "triangle."  For  a  whole  day  we  tried  in  vain  to
make  out  this  enigmatical  response,  and  were  in  doubt  whether  we  should
ascribe  it  to  the  unconscious  cerebration  of  my  mathematical  brother,  or
whether  we  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  intelligent  two-dimensional
being.  Next  day  we  discovered  that  the  "  triangle  "  called  itself  "  Eudora,"
and  we,  of  course,  asked  what  it  had  meant.  "Three  in  one."  "How
then  can  you  be  both  male  and  female?"  "By  mere  accident."  After
some  other  questions,  a  doubt  was  raised  by  L.  whether  "  Eudora  "  and  the
name  of  the  only  other  "spirit"  that  had  communicated  might  not  be
"  aliases,"  and  she  asked,  "  Are  you  and  Johnson  one  ?  "  "  Yes,  one,  man
and  wife."  Here  we  seemed  to  get  a  clue  to  two  sides  of  the  "triangle,"
and  proceeded  to  ask  whether  there  was  a  child  still.  "Coming,"  was  the
unexpected  reply.  Next  day  we  were  informed  that  the  baby  was  "  never  "
going  to  be  born,  "  because  it  had  not  been  born  on  earth."  This  surj^rising
piece  of  information  was  then  explained  by  the  assertion  that  it  was  being
"  spiritually  evolved,"  and  not,  therefore,  "6orn."  I  have  told  this  story
at  some  length  because  it  was  the  first  thing  that  made  us  think  we  might  be
in  the  presence  of  something  more  than  ordinary  unconscious  cerebration,
and  I  think  it  well  illustrates  several  of  the  most  remarkable  points  about
this  automatic  writing.

It  exemplifies  : —

1.  The  unexpectedness  of  the  answers.

2.  Its  independent  thought  and  disagreement  with  the  conscious  opinions
of  the  mediums  (for  I  sujjpose  no  one  has  ever  held  planchette's  absurd
doctrine).

3.  Its  independent  memory.

4.  On  the  moral  side,  its  mendacity  and  sense  of  humour.

Altogether  it  seemed  as  if  this  silly  riddle  had  been  propounded  expressly


218


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


to  pique  our  curiosity  on  the  first  clay,  with  the  intention  of  giving  the
solution  on  the  next,  though,  of  course,  it  is  possible  to  maintain  that
"  unconscious  cerebration  "  first  accidentally  propounded  it,  and  then,  after
working  it  out,  produced  the  solution.

Of  a  conflict  of  will  between  planchette  and  the  medium  T  will  give  a
characteristic  though  trivial  instance.  I  had  agreed  with  L.  to  go  for  a
walk  after  supj^er,  and  when  supper  was  brought  in  we  said  good-bye.
"  Don't  go."  We  said  we  must,  but  at  lengtli  gave  way  and  promised  to
return  after  supper.  "Good."  "  Have  you  got  anything  to  tell  us?"
"Yes,  very  important. "

Of  direct  thought-transference  such  as  that  recorded  by  Mr.  Newnham,
we  obtained  but  one  instance,  wifcli  the  possible  addition  of  a  few  of  the
card  experiments.

One  day  when  F.  was  reading  a  book  and  had  not  been  attending  in  the
least,  I  thought  I  might  as  well  put  the  question  mentally  and  wrote  it  down
without  asking  it  aloud.  It  was  answered  in  a  perfectly  unequivocal  manner,
and  this  was  the  more  striking  as  I  had  changed  tlie  subject  in  asking  it,  and
reverted  to  a  point  in  one  of  planchette's  previous  answers  which  I  had
before  ignored.  But  for  this  and  the  great  difficulty  of  supjjosing  that  this
particular  answer  could  have  been  an  accidental  shot,^  one  would,  of  course,
have  been  inclined  to  ascribe  it  to  chance,  but  under  the  circumstances  it
must  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  thought-transference  at  least,  although  I
have  never  been  able  by  any  conscious  effort  to  transfer  imi:)ressions  to  F. ,
who  is  a  fairly  good  thought-reader.

It  will,  of  course,  be  suggested  that  the  question  as  to  the  nature  of  these
phenomena  could  have  been  at  once  decided  by  obtaining  information
unknown  to  the  medium  and  to  the  company.

But  for  several  reasons  this  is  more  easily  said  than  done.  In  the  first
place  the  "  spirits  "  were  extremely  chary  of  giving  information  respecting
their  personal  antecedents,  and,  in  fact,  generally  made  their  appearance  with
obviously  feigned  names,  such  as  "  Heliod  Ecblaza,"  "  Irktomar,"
"Euphorbia,"  &c.

When  pressed  they  used,  after  much  ingenious  fencing,  either  to  refuse

to  tell  anythmg  or  to  utter  obvious  falsehoods  The  spirit  of

a  "careless  rhymer,"  after  writing  verses  in  English,  French,  and
German,  professed  its  aliility  to  do  so  in  the  classical  languages.
And  as  F.  said  he  had  never  read  the  Iliad,  we  asked  the  rhymer  for
a  quotation.  This  he  was  at  first  unable  to  do,  but,  some  hours  after,  he,
unasked,  produced  the  following:  "  Eratimoi  kekaloseiai  "  and  "  Kouridion
potheoumenos  posin."  These  extraordinary  tags  were  found  to  be  derived
from  the  5th  book  of  the  Biad  (421,  414),  and  to  represent  rj  pa  tL  fxoL
(cexoXcotreat  and  Kovpldwv  irodeovaa  ivoaiv.  F.  then  remembered  that  he  had
read  this  very  book,  and  this  alone,  a  long  time  ago.  This  was  certainly  the
incident  pointing  most  directly  at  unconscious  cerebration,  and  may,  perhaps,

1  The  conmuinicating  "  spirit"  was  giving  a  long  description  of  the  house
where  it  had  lived,  and  a  staircase  up  wliich  somebody  had  run  "  when  the
police  came."  After  about  lialf-a-dozen  questions  I  asked  mentally,  "What  did
the  police  come  into  the  house  for  ?  "  The  answer  was,  "  There  was  some  crime."


1887.]


A  utomatic  Writi  ng.


219


help  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  an  entirely  unknown  language,  namely
Hindustani.  A  "  spirit  "  gave  his  name  as  "  Lokenadrath,"  and  wrote  in  an
extraordinaiy  Oriental  style,  rather  resembling  some  of  JMarion  Crawford's
rhapsodies'.  On  introducing  the  words  "Allah  il  Allah,"  he  was  asked
whether  ho  was  a  Mohammedan.  "Hindi  apkahai."  I  have  since  been
informedi  that  these  words  mean  "lam  yours,"  "  At  your  service,"  and
that  "  Lokenadrath "  should  be  "  Lokendranath,"  and  means  "lord  of
princes "  ;  and  one  or  two  other  fragments  of  Hindustani  were  similarly
inaccurate.^  Now,  asF.  left  India  as  a  baby  of  eight  months,  and  has  never
since,  to  the  best  of  my  behef,  heard  any  Hindustani  spoken,  this  is  surely
a  most  curious  case  of  unconscious  memoiy,  if  such  it  was.

As  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  nearest  approach  to  a  verification  of  "spirit
identity  "  was  in  the  case  of  a  Freirch  Positivist  artist,  who  gave  his  address
as  "109  Wankhurst-road,  Wandsworth."  Of  course  this  name  was  entirely
unfamilar  to  us,  but  on  a  reference  to  a  directory  we  found  a  Wakehurst-
road  in  Wandsworth.

But  all  these  attempts  at  getting  unknown  information  are  more
or  less  unsatisfactory,  and  perhaps  the  most  striking  results  were
afforded  by  some  experiments  with  cards,  which  it  seems  at  first  sight
difficult  to  explain  on  any  "  unconscious  self  "  hypothesis.

A  card  ivas  drawn  at  random  from  a  pack  without  being  looked  at,  held
out  of  sight,  generally  beneath  the  table,  and  planchette  was  then  asked  to
name  it.  These  experiments  were  carried  on  from  the  beginning  with  F .  and  L.
conjointlyor  F.  alone,  but  failed  with  L.  alone  ;  but  it  was  difficult  to  nmltiply
them,  as  planchette  strongly  disliked  tliem,  and  frequently  wrote  nonsense
{e.g.,  "elest  of  fordes,")  or  refused  to  answer  at  all.  Moreover,  it  never
professed  to  be  able  to  guess  them,  but  "would  tiy"  at  the  most,  and  constantly
complained  that  it  was  "too  dark."  Hence  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  many  or
most  of  the  answers  were  guess-work,  but  do  not  the  following  totals  of  all
the  experiments  made  indicate  that  something  other  than  mere  chance  was
also  at  work  ?  In  some  of  the  earlier  experiments  the  card  was  known  to
some  of  those  present,  though  not  of  course  to  the  medium .  The  result  of
these  experiments  is  as  follows  :

Experiments. Quite  right. Number  only  right. Suit  only  right. Total  Failure.
11  4^3  0  2  4P

1  On  the  aiithority  of  (1)  an  Anglo-Indian  lady;  (2)  a  Balliol  Brahmin
of  Bombay.  [The  Oriental  rhapsodies  have  now  been  found  to  be  mainly
centoes  of  Mr.  Isaacs,  worked  together  so  as  to  make  sense.]

-  I  have  now  found  out  (December,  1S86)  that  Lokenadrath's  description  of
his  nationality  is  not  as  totally  unintelligible  as  I  had  hitherto  thought  it.  He
called  himself  a  "Jude  poerano,"'  and  I  have  been  told  that  "  poerano  "  is  Eomany
for  gipsy.

In  one  experiment  two  cards  were  chosen  by  difierent  persons — Vaefivc  of
hearts  and  the  seven  of  clubs.  The  seven  of  clubs  was  guessed.  This  is  put
dow-a  approximately  as  h.  Chance  alone  might  be  expected  to  give  the
following  results: —


—or  rather,  since  the  actual  numbers  could  not  be  fractional,  the  last  four
results  would  be  0,  0,  2,  8.


220


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


This  result  is  decidedly  more  favourable  than  the  results  of  the  series
where  the  card  was  unknown  to  any  of  the  persons  present,  a  fact  possibly
due  to  the  action  of  telei^athy.  There  is  however  a  great  difference  between
the  conditions  of  these  experiments  and  of  ordinary  experimental  thought-
transference.  The  latter  requires  great  and  exhausting  concentration  of  the
mind  on  the  part  both  of  the  agent  and  of  the  percijjient,  while  in  the  case
of  planchette- writing  there  is  no  conscious  effort  on  the  part  of  the  agent
to  visualise  or  of  the  percipient  to  receive  an  impression  of  the  card  chosen.
And  moreover  if  telepathic  impressions  originate  in  the  unconscious  part
of  the  mind,  and  if  planchette  be  supposed  to  bring  out  the  "thoughts"  of
this  unconscious  mind,  it  might  be  urged  that  the  impressions  of  the  medium,
if  he  has  any,  should  correspond  with  what  is  written  by  planchette.  But
we  found  that  in  one  of  these  cases  where  the  bystanders,  and  sujjposed
agents,  were  cognisant  of  the  card,  the  medium  thought  of  the  wrong  card,
while  planchette  gave  it  correctly  ;  and  on  another  occasion  he  thought  of
the  right  suit,  while  planchette  got  it  wrong  entirely.  The  results  of  the
series  where  telepathy  was  excluded  are  as  follow  : — ^

Experiments. Quite  right. Number  only  right. Suit  only  right. Total  Failure.
52  2  11  9  30

64  7  10  11  36

116  9  21  20  66

The  series  of  52  experiments  were  made  at  different  times,  but  the  series
of  64  were  made  continuously  in  one  afternoon,  and  at  this  time  the
planchette  was  very  wild,  and  frequently  wrote  before  any  card  had  been
drawn  at  all.

Also  in  one  case  the  7  of  clubs  was  guessed  instead  of  the  9,  but  when  the
cai  d  was  examined  it  was  found  that  the  two  lowest  pips  had  been  accidentally
covered  by  a  piece  of  joaper,  so  that  it  apipeared  like  a  7.  This,  too,  is
estimated  as  a  partial  failure.

In  another  case,  the  card  having  been  drawn  in  the  usual  manner,
planchette  wrote  first  "  Spad,"  broke  off  and  wrote  on  the  line  below
"  Hearts  Queen."  The  card  turned  out  to  be  the  queen  of  spades.  This
was  the  n^ost  striking  instance  of  a  confusion  between  hearts  and  spades,  which
occurred  several  times  in  these  experiments,  and  which  1  have  also  noticed
in  ordinary  thought-transference  experiments  with  F.

On  another  occasion  I  drew  a  card,  placed  it  on  the  top  of  the  pack,  and
handed  it  to  F.  beneath  the  table.  In  so  doing  I  could  not  help  catching  a
glimpse  of  the  card,  and  saw  that  it  was  black,  and,  I  thought,  clubs.  After


^  In  several  cases  more  than  one  guess  was  made,  but  only  the  first  has
been  estimated. Chance  alone  might  be  expected  to  give  the  following  results  :

Experiments. Quite  right. Number  only  right. Suit  only  right. Total  failure.
52  1  3  12  36

64  1,%  3^%  Uig  Uj%


116  2i%  6x\  26i§  80,%


18S7.]


Automatic  Writvng.


221


a  time  planchette  wrote  "  No  card  turned  up, "and  to  our  astonishment  this
turned  out  to  be  the  case.  I  was  of  course  as  certain  as  possible  that  a  card
was  turned  up,  and  cannot  understand  to  this  day  how  it  got  turned  down,
and  F.  of  course  couhl  have  no  suspicion  that  so  vital  a  part  of  the  experiment
had  been  omitted. This  exp)eriment  has  been  excluded  in  making  the
estimate. In  a  few  cases  the  suit  was  not  written,  but  drawn.

Finally  I  must  describe  another  kind  of  experiments,  in  which  planchette
had  to  spell  out  words  on  an  alphabet  while  the  "medium"  was  closely  blind-
folded. At  iirst  we  used  an  alphabet  which  he  had  seen  beforehand ,  and  with  the
lettersin  the  customary  order,and  on  this  "Heliod"  succeeded  in  spelling  out
his  name  three  times.  After  this  another  alphabet  was  used  which  had  never
been  seen  by  him,  and  with  the  letters  scattered  at  random  about  the  paper.
On  this  H  E  were  spelt  out  correctly,  but  the  next  letter  was  Z,  and  after
this  planchette  stopped  and  failed  to  spell  any  other  words.  A  few  hours
afterwards,  however,  it  spelt  out  its  name  correctly,  and  answered  several
questions,  correcting  slight  errors  on  repetition.  (F.  had  not  seen
the  alphabet  in  the  meantime.)  Altogether  we  obtained  intelligible
combinations  of  nearly  60  letters.  The  movements  of  planchette  on
this  occasion  too  were  rather  striking,  as  it  seemed  to  move  like  a  living
creature,  circling  round  the  required  letter,  and  finally  concentrating  itself
upon  it.  We  have  never  been  able  to  get  a  repetition  of  these  experiments,
which,  though  telepathy  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  excluded,  for  the  others  pre-
sent were  aware  of  the  position  of  the  letters  on  the  alphabet,  are  perhaps  as
valuable  as  the  card  experiments.  And  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  thought  of
the  bystanders  unconsciously  guided  planchette,  how  are  we  to  explain  a
correction  of  that  thought  in  its  answers  I  I  had  asked  "  Heliod  "  what  he
meant  by  saying  he  was  in  the  "  fluid  state  "  of  feeling  on  the  day  before.
The  answer  was  "Blind,  Point,"  and  on  reference  we  saw  that  he  had
previously  asserted  he  was  at  the  fluid  jjo/nf.

Perhaps,  in  conclusion,  I  should  make  a  note  on  the  linguistic  attainments
of  i^lanchette.  Of  the  nine  "  spirits,"  six  wrote  only  in  English,  and  several
of  them  failed  ignominiously  with  all  other  languages.  The  Hindustani  of
"  Lokenadrath  "  1  have  already  mentioned.  "Irktomar,"  the  French
Positivist,  gave  us  specimens  of  English,  French,  and  Latin.  Lastly,  the  poet
"  Closcar  "  rhymed  in  English,  French  and  German,  Latin  and  Greek,  and
even  sometunes  wrote  the  last  of  these  with  Greek  letters.  But  with  this
exception,  planchette  never  wrote  any  German,  though  both  the  mediums  are
l^erfectly  familiar  with  it,  and  in  their  childhood  pi-obably  knew  it  far  better
than  English.  If,  then,  these  jihenomena  are  a  dream-like  recrudescence  of
long-forgotten  thoughts,  this  absence  of  German  seems  to  require  some
explanation.-  As  regards  the  mode  of  writing,  we  were  unable  to  distinguish
any  differences  of  handwriting  between  the  various  "  sijirits,"  except  that  one
of  F.  's  wrote  from  right  to  left,  mirror- writing,  whether  or  no  the  left  hand
was  used. I  trust  I  have  given  an  accurate  account  of  the  chief  points  in

1  Possibly,  as  Mr.  F.  N.  Schiller  suggests,  the  sense  of  touch  might
unconsciously  have  informed  him  that  the  card  was  not  turned  up.

-  Since  this  was  written  "  Heliod  "  has  shown  a  knowledge  of  German  and
Latin.


222


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


tliese  experiments,  and  can  only  hope  that  members  of  the  Society  may  be
able  to  throw  some  light  on  the  problems  which  they  raise,

(Signed) F.  C.  S.  Schiller,

Associate  S.P.R.

Balliol  College,  Oxford,  26th  October,  1886.

Appendix.

Since  writing  the  preceding  paj^er  the  experiments  have  been  continued
with  F.,  and  I  will  give  a  short  sketch  of  the  results  subsequently  obtained.
The  first  thing  to  be  noted  is  that  F.'s  power  of  writing  seems  to  have
diminished  sensibly,  so  that  wliereas  he  would  formerly  write  on  three  out  of
every  four  occasions  lie  can  now  only  do  so  about  once  out  of  every  three.
Under  these  circumstances  it  has  been  impossible  to  repeat  the  card  and  alpha-
bet experiments.  But  an  interesting  experiment  was  tried  of  writing  with  two
planchettes,  F.  having  oiie  hand  on  each.  I  suggested  this  in  order  to  eluci-
date the  connection  between  left-hand  writing  and  "  mirror-writing,"  and
fully  expected  that  tlie  two  hands  would  write  the  same  communications.
To  my  astonishment,  however,  the  connnunications,  though  written  simul-
taneously, were  different  and  proceeded  from  diflferent  "spirits."  I  regard
this  as  conclusive  I'^roof  that  the  phenomena  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
medium's  consciousness,  for,  as  every  one  can  easily  experience  for  himself,
it  is  quite  impossible,  at  least  without  long  practice,  to  write  two  d  ifferent
words  at  the  same  time.

Whenever  F.  wrote  -^vith  two  planchettes,  the  left  hand  wrote  mirror-
writing,  which  was  often  very  hard  to  decijiher,  but  we  did  not  observe
anything  like  a  fixed  rule  in  this  respect  on  other  occasi(3ns.  For  though
planchette  generally  wrote  in  the  ordinary  way  even  when  the  left  hand  was
used,  it  sometimes  produced  mirror-writing  with  the  right  hand  also.  We
have  also  had  some  instructive  experiments  in  what  I  may  call  conjoint
writing.  I  must  begin  by  saying  that  ordinarily  I  am  quite  unable  to  make
planchette  move  at  all.  But  one  night  1  imt  my  hand  also  on,  after  F.  had
failed,  as  on  several  preceding  days,  to  make  it  write.  Planchette  soon
began  to  move  and  to  write  intelligibly.  I  rej^eatedly  took  my  hand  off  and
the  writing  stopped  at  once.  Similarly,  wlienever  F.  took  liis  hand  oS",  the
writing  also  ceased,  except  that  on  one  occasion,  when  he  did  so  without
my  knowledge,  it  apjjears  to  have  written  two  or  three  letters  before  stop-
ping. I  am  inclined,  therefore,  to  regard  the  phenomenon  of  conjoint
writing,  whatever  may  be  its  explanation,  as  genuine,  i.e.,  that  the  second
operator  really  contributes  to  the  result.

Passing  from  the  method  to  the  matter  of  the  communications,  I  should
note  that  "  Heliod  "  has  shown  a  knowledge  of  German  and  alluded  to
Goethe's  Eioig  Welbliche,  but  that  the  bulk  of  the  communications
were  in  French  and  produced  by  "  Irktomar."

In  addition  to  some  dialectical  variations  which  appear  to  be  Provengal
(e.g.,  Irktomar  n'a  pas  lou  tems.  Pour  vous  faire  des  coumplimens),  he  pro-
duced an  extraordinary  jargon  which  he  called  "  Romaunce  "  and  ascribed
to  the  time  of  "Roland"  and  of  "Charlemagne."

Afterwards  it  was  found  to  bo  old  Norman  French,  and  mostly  quoted


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


228


from  tlie  Chanson  de  Roland  of  the  12th  century,  as  will  appear  from  the
following  comparison  : —


"Chanson  de  Roland."

1.  Carles  li  reis,  nostre  emf)erere
magnes.

Set  auz  tuz  2:ileins  ad  estet  en
Espaigne.  (C.  de  E.  1-2.)

2.  Ne  reverrunt  lur  meres  ne  lurs
femmes.

Necels  de  France  ki  as  porz  les
afendent. (C.  de  R.  1402-3.)

3.  Jo  vus  ai  mult  servit.  (C.  de  R.
3492.)

4.  Passet  li  jurz  si  tarnet  a  la
vespree.  (C.  de  R.  35G0.)


Planchette.

(1st  time.)  Car  [1]  es  li  reis
magnes  empere  [re]  set  auz  nt  'pleln,
estet  en  Esjmigne.

(2nd  time.)  Carles  li  reis  magnes
emjjere  [re]  set  auz  Intans  estet  en
Esjiaigne.

2.  Ne  reverrunt  ne  jjeres  ne
parenz  ne  Charlemagne,  ki  as  porz  les
ate'ut.

3.  Jo  vous  ai  mult  bleu  servit.

4.  ti'enfuit  li  jourz  de  bleneut  la
vespree.


F.  does  not  know  old  French  at  all,  and  cannot  remember  to  have  ever
read  or  heard  any,  but,  being  strongly  inclined  towards  the  unconscious  self
theory,  suggests  that  the  passages  produced  may  have  been  quoted  in  some
magazine  article,  and  thus  met  his  eye.i  In  any  case,  however,  these  quota-
tions throw  an  interesting  light  on  the  mode  of  thinking  of  the  intelligence
that  dictated  them.  It  will  be  seen  that  they  are  evidently  quoted  from
memory,  and  by  no  means  accurate.  Aud  in  No.  I.  the  first  version  was
nearer  the  original  than  the  second  ;  but,  as  quoted,  the  words  "  ut  plein  "
made  no  sense,  and  hence  "lutans,"  a  word  which  does  not,  I  believe,
occur  in  the  Roland,  was  substituted  for  them  to  complete  the  sense.  That
is  to  say,  the  second  version  is  no  mere  reproduction  of  an  impression  in  the
memory,  but  has  been  subjected  to  a  process  of  emendation  which  by  us
would  be  held  fco  imply  the  action  of  conscious  thought.  Yet  during  this
time  F.  's  conscious  mind  was  entirely  void  of  any  knowledge  of  the  dialect,
and  a  fortiori  could  not  possibly  have  corrected  what  appeared  to  him  quite
meaningless.  In  No.  2  it  is  evident  that  only  the  general  drift  of  the  passage
was  remembered.  But  corresponding  to  the  change  of  subject  from  "eels
de  France"  to  "Charlemagne,"  the  verb  "atendent"  is  changed  from
plural  to  singular,  which  seems  to  imply  a  knowledge  of  the  grammar  of
the  language.

Lastly,  planchette  volunteered  the  information  that  "  Carles  fu  carles  li
caux  "  (Charles  was  Charles  the  Bald),  which  is  certainly  wrong,  and  as  cer-
tainly could  not  be  derived  from  the  Roland  or  any  similar  poem,  while  it  is
nevertheless  linguistically  correct.  It  must,  therefore,  I  think,  be  admitted
that  the  intelligence  which  produced  it  must  have  possessed  a  considerable
amount  of  what  we  should  call  conscious  knowledge  of  old  French,  and  such
as  F.  certainly  does  not  possess.

To  sum  up  then  I  will  only  say  that  the  matter  of  the  various  communi-
cations (i.e.,  excluding  the  card  aad  alphabet  experiments,  &c.)  does  not

1  Neither  had  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  read  any  old  French.


224


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


seem  to  me  to  afford  absolute  proof  that  the  knowledge  disi)layed  could  not
possibly  ha\e  been  latent  in  the  writer's  mind,  while  at  the  same  time  this  is
extremely  improhahle  in  a  large  number  of  cases.  Moreover,  both  the  matter
and  the  manner  of  the  communications  display  powers  bej'ond  any  at  present
recognised  as  normal.  (Signed),  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.

January  22nd,  1887.

This  case  will  have  to  be  afterwards  considered  from  more  than  one
point  of  view.  The  card  experiments  indicate  thouglit-transference,
and  possibly  something  beyond  this.  The  substance  of  the  old  French
messages  will  need  notice  when  we  are  dwelling  on  the  curious  deposits
of  memory  which  these  psychical  excavations,  if  I  may  so  say,  throw
up  to  the  surface.  But  for  the  present  I  treat  the  Schiller  messages
only  in  tlieir  first  and  superficial  aspect,  as  writings  apparently
emanating  from  several  personalities  apart  from  the  writer's  own  ;
.  personalities,  moreover,  which  showed  a  kind  of  persistence  ;  which
seemed  to  lie  in  wait,  and  to  be  ready  at  any  hour  to  emerge  into
characteristic  activity.  Each  of  these  personalities  had  a  distinctive
character,  and  apparently  a  clear  memory  of  its  previous  manifesta-
tions ;  that  memory  being,  in  one  recorded  instance  at  least,  more
accurate  than  was  the  automatist's  conscious  recollection.  Each
personality  seems,  too,  to  liave  a  will  of  its  own  ;  they  sometimes
refuse  to  come  when  called  for;  and  one  pe7-sona — the  so-called  Jolmson
— disappears  altogether  in  a  liufi'.

All  this,  of  course,  would  be  to  the  last  degree  childish,  if  looked
upon  as  a  mere  amusement ;  to  the  last  degree  lamentable,  if  looked
upon  as  indicating  the  kind  of  occupations  reserved  for  ourselves,  after
quitting  the  body.  But  as  a  psychological  puzzle  it  is  interesting  from
one  end  to  the  other  ;  and  the  very  puerility  of  the  automatic  jokes
is  not  the  least  curious  element  in  the  problem.

And  I  would  ask  tlie  reader  to  remember  that  messages  more  or  less
resembling  these  are  no  rarities  ;  that  perhaps  one  in  every  three  or  four
families  who  have  given  the  thing  a  trial  have  actually  obtained  them.
And  where  were  the  recipients  of  such  messages  to  go  for  any  sort  of  dis-
cussion as  to  their  true  nature?  What  recognition,  even,  could  they  find  of
the  bare  fact  that  such  messages  were  possible,  except  the  recognition
offered  by  Spiritualists,  coupled,  of  course,  with  what  seemed  after  all
the  most  obvious  explanation  ?  Those  who  sneer  at  Spiritualists  as  the
mere  dupes  of  vulgar  impostors  can  hardly  have  realised  how  much
evidence  that  at  least  seemed  to  make  for  Spiritualism  has  actually
been  attained  by  many  a  family  group  of  perfectly  honest  inquirers.
Some  attempt  to  explain  automatic  messages  should  surely  have
preceded  the  sneer  at  those  who  could  hardly,  without  previous
knowledge  of  a  special  kind,  have  judged  these  messages  otherwise
than  as  they  did.


1S87.]


Automatic  Writing.


225


For  my  own  part,  (while  I  would  still  avoid  any  general  state-
ment until  many  more  cases  have  been  discussed),  I  hold  that  the
apparent  uniqueness  of  such  a  phenomenon  as  the  Schiller  messages,
— the  apparent  externality  of  the  dictating  intelligence,  —  do
undoubtedly  grow  fainter  and  more  questionable  as  we  pass  under
review  a  number  of  more  or  less  analogous  cases  which  can  be
adduced  ; — cases  where  two  or  more  psychical  currents  have  manifested
themselves,  alternately  or  coincidently,  in  the  life-history  of  the  same
man.  I  believe  that  the  tendency  to  a  severance  of  this  sort  may  be
detected  in  more  forms  than  is  commonly  supposed.  I  believe  that
whenever  there  is  any  habitual  alteration,  physiological  or  pathological,
of  the  threshold  of  consciousness  we  shall  find  an  incipient  formation  of
a  secondary  chain  of  memories,  linking  together  those  periods  of  altered
consciousness  into  a  series  of  their  own.  And  when  once  a  second
mnemonic  chain  is  woven,  the  emergence  of  a  second  personality  is
only  a  matter  of  degree.  For  any  dilFerence  in  memory  involves  a
certain  difference  in  character,  and  in  proportion  as  the  two  memories
are  co-exclusive,  (which  they  may  be  in  very  differing  degrees),  the
moral  and  intellectual  habits  founded  on  the  differing  memories  will  be
likely  themselves  to  diverge.  The  first  analogy  which  I  shall  offer  is
derived  from  the  phenomena  of  dream.

There  are  two  main  ways  in  which  dreams  afford  a  parallel  to  the
automatisms  which  we  are  considering.  In  the  first  place — and  this  is
the  most  important — there  is  the  dramatisation  of  dream-characters  ]
their  seeming  independence  of  our  own  personality,  from  which  yet  they
are  undoubtedly  derived.  But  this  topic  I  shall  defer  until  we  come
to  deal  with  inward  voices — "the  daemon  of  Socrates,"  and  the  like.
In  the  second  place — and  this  is  what  we  must  now  consider — there  is
a  tendency  to  the  creation  of  a  secondary  dream-memory  of  our  own,
so  that  we  recollect  a  first  dream  while  Ave  are  dreaming  a  second  more
fully  than  during  the  waking  interval.  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that
the  great  bulk  of  our  dreams  attach  themselves  in  any  discernible  way
to  a  secondary  personality.  Rather,  I  conceive  that  most  of  our
dreams  represent  little  more  than  that  tumult  of  fragmentary  images
which  I  believe  to  be  perpetually  proceeding  within  us,  beneath  the
level  of  anything  which  can  be  called  an  identity.  If  we  doze  for  a
moment,  we  feel  this  tumult  going  on ;  and  the  dreams  which  emerge
into  waking  memory  are  for  the  most  part  a  mere  jumble  of  this  kind —
the  mere  disjecta  menibra  or  raw  material  of  a  self.

Sometimes,  however,  there  is  a  faint  continuous  current  through  this
tossing  whirlpool  of  dream.  There  are  certain  patterns  into  which  the
confusion  tends  to  shape  itself,  and  wheii  one  of  these  patterns  recurs,
we  remember  in  our  dream  its  previous  presentation.  The  flying
sensation,  for  instance,  which  most  dreamers  have  experienced,  often

Q


226


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


brings  with  it  a  vivid  recollection  of  previous  flights.  And  the  case  is
similar  with  dreams  not  distinctly  dei'ived  from  the  attitude  or  sensa-
tions of  the  sleeper.  Many  of  us  know  a  dream-house,  a  dream-land-
scape, which  does  not  reproduce  any  scene  familiar  to  our  waking  life,
but  which,  each  time  that  we  revisit  it  in  dream,  appears  familiar  and
seems  to  i-emind  us  of  previous  visits.  Here,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  a
first  trace  of  that  tendency  which  sometimes  in  hypnotised  subjects
revives  spontaneously  in  a  fresh  trance  the  hallucination  which  has  been
suggested  to  them  in  a  previous  trance.^  These  dream-scenes  are  more
or  less  remembered  in  waking  hours  ;  but,  (in  my  own  experience  at
least),  it  is  difficult  to  retain  any  distinct  image  beyond  the  few
minutes  after  awakening, — which  are  in  some  ways  analogous  to  the
period  during  which  a  post-hypnotic  hallucination  persists  after  the
trance  is  removed.

By  the  nature  of  the  case  it  is  almost  impossible  definitely  to  prove
that  in  a  second  dream  we  really  have  recollected  something  of  a  first
dream  which  our  waking  thought  could  not  recall.  The  following-
account  from  Mr.  J.  G.  Keulemans  (dated  December  6th,  1886)  comes
perhaps  as  near  as  can  be  expected  to  such  a  demonstration.

Some  six  months  ago,  I  dreamt  I  had  travelled  to  New  York,  by  sailing  ship.
On  my  arrival  I  found  that  the  voyage  had  been  made  in  just  two  hours  time.
I  had  five  hours  to  spare  for  business  and  otlier  occupations,  (then  I  intended
to  return  to  London  the  same  day)  audi  thought  of  going  through  a  new  part
of  the  town.  There  I  found  everything  new  :  houses  in  course  of  construction,
and  a  newly  laid-out  park  was  at  some  distance.  I  found  myself  on  a  boule-
vard with  rows  of  pyramid-shaped  trees.  I  did  many  other  things,  but
could  not  remember  afterwards.  In  fact,  I  knew  my  dream  from  beginning
to  end  when  I  woke  up,  but  the  remaining  portion  faded  from  my  memory
just  at  the  moment  I  was  relating  the  dream  to  my  wife.

This  ha25pened  about  10  minutes  after  waking  from  my  dream.  I  think
dream-consciousness  had,  by  this  time,  made  room  for  waking-consciousness
— the  latter  supervening  on  account  of  my  wife's  interruption  which  caused
me  to  reflect  upon  other  matters.

But  on  Thursday — the  night  of  25-26  November — I  was  again  dreaming
of  New  York,  and  was  at  about  the  same  place  where  1  landed  in  my  first
dream.  I  knew  the  place.  I  was  under  the  impression  of  having  resided
some  time  in  that  town.  I  recollected  that  I  had  been  dreaming  of  it  before.
Although  in  my  dream-consciousness  it  seemed  that  I  enjoyed  my  waking
state  of  reasoning,  and  even  considered  my  dream  as  something  very  silly
because  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  new  suburb  near  the  landing-place  ;  in
fact,  I  dreamt  ihai  I  ivas  not  dreaming  but  had  dreamt  of  it  previously,  yet,
after  reconsidering  my  dream  in  my  dream,  it  at  once  struck  me  that  it  might
have  been  no  dream  after  all,  but  a  reality.  I  began  to  doubt  whether  I  had
not  been  there  long  ago. The  locality  which  I  liad  visited  might  have

^  See  for  instance,  Biiiet  and  Fere's  Le  Magiietisme  Animal,  ^p.  165;  Gilles
de  la  Tourette's  L' Hypnotismc,  p.  314.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


227


changed  or  grown  older,  or  might  be  farther  away.  I  began  to  force  my
memory  to  get  hold  of  past  times,  and  then,  suddenly,  I  was  again  in  that
j^articular  part  where  the  houses  were  being  built,  where  I  saw  the  park  and
the  boulevard — there  they  were,  the  trees,  too.  I  looked  at  them  carefully,
and  now  discovered  them  to  be  young  specimens  of  Wellingtonia  gigantea —
they  had  grown  considerably  since  my  j^revious  visit.

When  I  had  come  thus  far,  all  the  incidents  of  my  previous  dream
recurred,  and  there  were  many  places  I  visited  now  for  the  second  time
which  I  remembered  were  there  on  my  first  visit.  It  would  be  tedious  and
unimportant  to  relate  the  whole  of  my  nocturnal  expeditions.  The  only  re-
markable fact  is  that  I  knew  and  remembered,  in  dream-life,  what  I  had
forgotten  in  my  waking-state.  I  was  certain  I  was  not  dreaming  on  the  last
occasion,  and  then  came  to  the  conviction  that  the  dream  I  dreamt  of  was  a
reality  also,  but  belonging  to  the  forgotten  past.

Of  course  when  we  get  to  developed  accesses  of  somnamhulism,  this
continuity  of  memory  between  one  access  and  another  is  admitted,  just
as  much  as  in  hypnotism  itself.  I  need  not  argue  these  points  here.  My
object  is  rather  to  show  that  the  sleep-waking  state,  natural  or  induced,
does  not  stand  alone  in  its  tendency  to  generate  a  secondary  memory,  a
secondary  manifestation  of  the  Self,  but  that  this  tendency  shows  itself
wherever  there  is  any  habitual  shaking-up  of  those  elements.  To  look  at
life  through  the  hypnotic  trance,  some  persons  might  say,  is  like  looking
at  it  through  a  prism.  Of  course  you  get  the  same  effects  repeated  each
time  that  you  do  so.  Well,  I  am  here  arguing  that  to  look  at  life
through  dreams  is  like  looking  at  it  through  a  kaleidoscojje, — a  poor  and
broken  one, — but  that,  nevertheless,  random  though  the  results  may
seem,  there  is  a  certain  tendency  here,  too,  to  a  repetition  of  the  same
effects.  In  fact,  I  may  generalise  and  say,  "  Whatever  mode  of  distur-
bance be  applied  to  the  psychical  elements,  there  will  be  a  certain  con-
gruity  between  the  results  of  eacli  application  of  each  special  disturb-
ing agency,  and  every  recurrence  of  such  congruity  will  tend  to  the
formation  of  a  mnemonic  chain."

Let  us  turn  now  to  another  form  of  psychical  disturbance,  —that
caused  by  drugs.  Here,  too,  we  know  that  in  such  cases  as  De
Quincey's  the  visionary  scenes  which  opium  summons  up  resemble
each  other, — and  seem  to  the  patient  to  be  connected  by  a  thread  of
memory.  I  do  not,  however,  know  of  any  definite  case  where  a  man
who  did  some  deed  under  the  influence  of  opium  remembered  it  when
Tinder  opium  again,  and  not  in  the  intervening  period.

More  familiar  to  English  experience  is  the  case  of  alcoholic
intoxication.  And  here  the  similarity  of  the  stages  through  which  any
given  man  passes — of  the  remarks  which  he  makes — in  each  successive
fit  of  drunkenness — is  obvious  enough.  Could  we  persuade  some
correspondent  to  write  us  a  letter  each  time  that  he  was  in  (say)  the
maudlin  phase  of  drunkenness,  the  series  of  letters  would  resemble  a

Q  2


228


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


series  of  planchette-messages  in  several  ways.  In  the  first  place,  they
would  express  a  character  dilfering  from  his  normal  character,  but
congruous  with  itself.  In  the  second  place,  the  handwriting  would  be
larger  and  laxer  than  his  ordinary  script.  And  in  the  third  place,  our
correspondent,  when  sober,  might  very  probaljly  know  nothing  of  the
contents  of  the  epistles,  and  might  even  contest  their  authenticity.

I  do  not  doubt  that,  with  more  careful  experimentation,  we  might
go  further  than  this,  and  find  frequent  cases  where  a  drunken  man
recollects  an  act  done  in  a  previous  drunken  fit,  but  lost  to  memory
during  the  sober  interval.  One  such  story — too  trite  to  repeat  here —
has  done  duty  in  many  a  treatise  since  the  days  of  Macnish  and
Abercrombie.  I  am  glad  that  a  communication  which  Mr.  Keulemans
has  kindly  sent  me  enables  me  to  give  another,  and  more  detailed,
example.

Whilst  travelling  in  Africa,  I  had  a  negro  who  used  to  indulge  in  over-
doses of  brandy.  One  evening  on  coming  into  my  tent,  I  found  him  busy
moving  my  instruments.  Some  moments  after  I  discovered  he  was  drunk.
After  turning  him  out,  I  went  to  sleep.  Next  morning  I  missed  a  scaljiel  and
a  pair  of  pincers.  Remembering  that  my  negro  had  moved  them  the  evening
before,  I  interrogated  him  as  to  what  he  had  done  with  the  instruments.  He
swore  he  had  never  touched  them.  (Negroes  as  a  rule  swear  to  anything,  but
my  man  was  an  excejjtion  to  this  rule.)  I  made  him  look,  and  searched  my-
self, but  in  vain.  Two  days  later  he  was  again  slightly  intoxicated,  though
sober  enough  to  understand  me.  I  mentioned  the  loss  of  the  instruments.
He  began  to  reflect,  but  brandy  was  gaining  on  his  mind,  and  he  went  away
to  his  hut.  Later  in  the  evening  another  negro  returned  the  instruments  to
me,  saying  he  had  taken  them  out  of  my  servant's  hands,  fearing  he  would
do  harm  to  himself  or  to  others  whilst  drunk.  I  then  learnt  that  he  had  been
watched  taking  them  from  a  box  belonging  to  a  friend  of  mine.  My  friend
told  me  that  the  negro  went  straight  for  the  box  and  took  the  instruments
away,  without  seeming  to  notice  my  friend  or  discovering  that  he  was  noticed
going  to  the  box,  and  that  he  was  requested  to  state  what  he  wanted.  The
next  morning  he  knew  nothing  of  what  had  occurred.  All  he  did  recollect
was  that  he  had  been  very  drunk,  and  had  gone  to  sleep.  The  distance  from
my  rooms  to  those  of  my  friend  was  about  thirty  yards.  Although  in  the
same  house,  my  drunken  negro  had  to  go  round  several  corners,  descend  two
staircases  and  mount  another — all  this  in  pitch  darkness.  On  his  way  to
and  fro  he  passed  several  servants,  but  did  not  appear  to  notice  their
presence.

I  may  briefly  cite  here  a  well-known  case  of  Dr.  Dufay's,^  which
affords  a  precise  somnambulic  parallel  to  this  revival  of  drunken
memory  in  a  second  intoxication  : —

A  respectable  servant  girl  was  accused  by  her  mistress  of  having
stolen  certain  objects  of  value,  which  were  missed  from  their  usual


1  Bevue  Scientijique,  December  1st,  1885,  p.  703.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


229


place.  She.  was  committed  for  ti'ial,  protesting  her  innocence ;  but
could  make  no  suggestion  whatever  as  to  wliere  the  valuables  could  be.
Fortunately  for  her,  Dr.  Dufay,  who  was  then  physician  to  the  prison
at  Blois,  recognised  her  as  a  girl  who  had  previously  been  in  the  service
of  Dr.  Sirault,  who  had  frequently  hypnotised  her.  He  asked  the  girl
whether  she  thought  that  she  ever  walked  in  her  sleep  ?  but  she  knew
nothing  of  doing  so.  The  nurse,  however,  told  Dr.  Dufay  that  the  girl
did  in  fact  walk  about  every  night  in  the  dormitory.

Dr.  Dufay  took  the  hint  and  hypnotised  her — and  the  girl  then  at
once  told  him  where  the  objects  were.  She  had  put  them  in  a  fresh
place,  during  a  somnambulic  access,  for  greater  safety.  When  she  did
so  she  had  of  course  meant  to  tell  her  mistress  ;  not  kiiomng  that  when
she  next  saw  her  mistress  she  would  have  awaked  from  her  trance,  and
would  know  nothing  of  what  she  had  done.

All  was  now  put  right.  The  objects  were  found  ;  the  girl  was
released  ;  the  mistress  apologised  ; — and  probably,  though  we  are  not
told  so,  locked  the  young  woman  into  her  bedroom  at  night  henceforth,
to  avoid  suffering  from  her  somnambulic  zeal.^

I  have  suggested  that  whatever  mode  we  may  choose  of  modifying
the  arrangement  of  our  psychical  elements  we  shall  find  that  each
several  disturbance  tends  to  a  certain  congruity  of  result  on  each  repeti-
tion. If  in  dreams  we  shuffle  the  mosaic  of  our  psychical  fabric  as  in  a
kaleidoscope,  we  may  perhaps  say  that  in  drunkenness  we  look  at  it
through  a  superincumbent  layer  of  semi-transparent  liquid.  Well,  the  re-
sult of  pouring  this  liquid  will  not  be  only  to  dull  the  original  picture, —
there  will  be  phenomena  of  refraction,  as  we  look  at  the  picture  through
the  liquid,  which  will  be  congruous  among  themselves.  Such  is  the  simi-
larity of  successive  drunken  fits,  tending  here  also  to  the  creation  of  a
new  mnemonic  chain.

Now  let  us  disturb  our  psycliical  mosaic  in  a  still  more  violent
way.  Let  us  explode  a  mine  under  it ;  let  us  assume,  that  is,  an
attack  of  epilepsy.  Now,  as  regards  epilepsy,  my  contention  will  be
readily  admitted  up  to  a  certain  point ;  but  beyond  that  point  the
evidence  will  be  found  as  yet  very  scanty.

Both  as  regards  pre-epileptic  and  post  epileptic  states,  it  will  be
admitted  that  on  successive  occasions  these  states  are  apt  to  be
congruous  in  the  same  patient.  The  "  psychical  aura "  or  "  dreamy
state  "  will  be  much  the  same  before  each  of  his  attacks.  And  where
there  are  post-epileptic  hallucinations  involving  more  than  mere  con-
fusion, the  same  type  of  hallucination  generally  recurs  pretty  regularly
for  any  given  patient. It  is  hard  to  say  how  far  in  one  such  access

1  Observe  in  this  case  the  homogeneity  of  the  spontaneous  and  the  induced
somnambulism.  It  is  probable  that  many  spontaneous  somnambulists  would,  if
hypnotised,  be  able  to  tell  what  they  had  done  in  their  nocturnal  excursions.


230


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


the  patient  remembers  the  feelings  of  the  previous  access  ;  but  I
should  conjecture  that  further  inquiiy  might  show  traces  of  the
gradual  formation  of  a  new  chain  of  memory, — turbid,  indeed,  and
confused, — but  existing  separately  from,  and  parallel  with,  the  memory
of  normal  life.

On  this  view,  for  instance,  I  sliould  rather  expect  that  in  cases  of
definite  cure  of  epilepsy  some  of  the  features  of  the  aui-a,  as  previously
experienced  and  recollected,  might  altogether  fade  from  recollection.
I  know  not  how  far  this  has  been  noticed  hitherto.  But  I  observe  a
recent  case  where  frequent  attacks  of  epilepsy  were  preluded  by  the
vision  of  a  bright  red  light  and  followed  by  hallucinations
"  Singularly  enough,  since  his  recovery  the  patient  has  forgotten  all
about  either  the  lights  or  the  hallucinations,  and  is  now  unable  to
recall  their  nature,  although  formerly  he  described  them  with  some
accuracy."  ^

I  should  infer  from  a  case  like  this  that  there  was  an  incipient
formation  of  a  separate  mnemonic  chain ; — that  is  to  say,  that  the  pre-
and  post-epileptic  hallucinations,  like  hypnagogic  and  post-hypnotic
hallucinations,  tended  to  form  a  separate  epileptic — like  the  separate
hypnotic — memory ;  and  consequently  dropped  out  of  normal  memory
when  the  latent  possibility  of  their  epileptic  revival  disappeared.

And  I  have  one  case — cataleptic,  as  it  would  seem,  rather  than
epileptic  in  character, — which,  distant  and  imperfectly  reported  though
it  is,  illustrates  this  view  with  singular  vividness.

The  case  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett,  in  1876,  by  a  clergyman,
then  vicar  of  a  London  parish,  and  father  of  the  subject.  He  did  not
choose  to  give  further  particulars  or  to  allow  his  name  to  be  published.

My  son  was,  in  his  17th  year,  attacked  by  what  was  said  to  be
cataleptic  hysteria.  At  their  first  commenceinenfc  they  were  little  more  than
prolonged  fainting  fits  ;  afterwards,  each  attack  began  by  his  passing  in  an
instant  into  a  state  of  complete  rigidity.  Occasionally  he  would  remain  for
five  minutes  to  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  that  state,  retaining  the  attitude  in
which  he  was  when  attacked,  as  if  made  of  marble,  with  his  eyes  open  and
fixed  and  perfectly  unconscious.  After  a  time  he  would  rise  with  a  sigh,
move  about,  and  speak  without  the  slightest  hesitation  or  incoherency,  and
thence  continue  for  hours  or  days,  leading  an  entirely  separate  existence,  not
recognising  friends  or  relations  or  even  the  way  to  his  own  bedroom,  and
taking  no  notice  if  addressed  by  his  own  name,  writing  letters  with  another
signature,  always  imagining  himself  to  have  arrived  at  middle-age,  and
alluding  to  incidents  of  his  imaginary  youth  which  teemed  with  echoes  of
his  past  reading  ; he  was  most  courteous  and  pleasant  in  his  manner,

1  Case  of  epilepsy  of  six  years'  duration  :  complete  recovery  after  surgical
operation  on  the  skull  and  brain.  Hughes-Bennett  and  Gould,  British  Medical
Journal,  Jamiaiy  1st,  1887.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


231


excepting  when  any  doubt  was  implied  as  to  the  accuracy  of  any  statement
which  he  made.

At  times  all  his  faculties  were  in  a  most  excited  state.  He  would  continue
for  hours  playing  games  of  skill  with  almost  preternatural  dexterity  ;  he  would
repeat  to  the  air  pages  of  poetry  ;  and  he  would  play  and  sing  in  a  wild  and
original  manner,  of  which  he  was  incapable  at  other  times,  quite  unconscious
of  the  presence  of  others  and  impervious  to  any  interruptions.  In  this  state
he  has  continued  for  a  week  at  a  time,  going  out  with  us  to  dine  with  old
friends,  whom,  however,  he  never  recognised,  but  treated  as  new  acquaint-
ances. He  always  spoke  of  his  parents  as  far  off  in  some  distant  Eastern
country,  in  which  he  himself  had  been  born,  and  spoke  to  us  (his  father  and
mother)  as  kind  hosts  and  friends  whom  he  was  soon  to  leave.  Suddenly
he  would  fall  to  the  ground,  roll  about  in  convulsive  agony  with  loud  groans,
and,  a  little  water  being  poured  into  his  lips,  would  get  up  and  go  on  talking
upon  the  subject  of  conversation  on  which  he  had  been  engaged  at  the  time
of  his  seizure,  and  without  the  slightest  remembrance  of  anything  that  had
passed  meanwhile.  These  attacks  continued  every  few  days  for  more  than
two  years,  during  which  he  was  forbidden  all  kinds  of  study.  At  the  age  of
19  we  were  advised  to  send  him  on  a  voyage,  and  accordingly  he  paid
a  visit  to  an  uncle,  a  military  officer  at  Madras  ;  from  thence  he  returned  in
six  or  seven  months,  quite  cured,  went  up  to  the  University  of  Cambridge,
where  he  went  out  in  honours,  and  is  now  at  the  bar.  These  attacks  never
came  upon  him  whilst  actually  employed,  but  generally  at  church,  in  bed,
or  during  quiet  conversation  ;  they  were  often  induced  by  anything  that
vexed  or  startled  him.  He  has  since  told  me  that  he  might  have  resisted
them,  but  that  they  came  upon  him  with  a  sensation  of  pleasant  drowsiness  that
fascinated  him.  Certainly  he  was  the  worse  for  any  display  of  sympathy.  I
may  add  that  he  suffers  now  at  times  from  some  defect  in  the  circulation
which  prevents  great  bodily  exertion  and  which  produces  pain  in  his  heart
and  head  ;  in  all  other  respects  he  is  hale  and  hearty.

This  clergyman  and  his  wife  are  now  dead,  and  the  publication
of  the  name  was  not  permitted.  A  lady,  who  also  objected  to  tlie
publication  of  her  name,  and  who  also  is  now  dead,  wrote  at  about
the  same  date  to  Professor  Barrett  as  to  this  case.

I  have  known  from  infancy  the  son  of  a  respected  clergyman  in
London  (also  known  as  an  author  and  artist),  who,  being  overworked  some
few  years  ago  in  competing  for  a  scholarship  at  Canabridge,  became  subject
to  fits  resembling  epilepsy  for  a  period  of  several  months.  After  one  of
these  he  would  apparently  recover  ;  be  perfectly  quiet,  kind,  and  courteous,
and  a  thorough  gentleman  in  every  respect.  But  in  this  condition  he  did
not  recognise  any  of  his  friends,  and  on  one  occasion  he  exjilained  to  me
"  the  extraordinary  fact  that  the  lady  who  had  just  left  the  room  was  under
the  delusion  that  she  was  his  mother,  and  that  excellent  old  clergyman
called  himself  his  father."  At  such  times  his  habits  and  tastes  were  very
difi'erent  from  his  ordinary  ones,  and  his  father  told  me  that  his  powers
were  heightened  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  especially  in  the  classics,  of
which  (at  16)  he  seemed  a  master,  and  in  music.  In  his  normal  condition  he
was  a  fair  classic,  good  for  his  age,  and  he  could  play  an  easy  accompani-


232


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


ment  by  ear, — just  a  few  chords, — but  in  this  secondary  state  he  played  tlie
most  difficult  music  of  Mendelssohn  and  Beethoven  with  perfect  execution
and  extraordinary  taste.  ^  Another  fit  would  restore  him  to  his  normal
state,  when  he  knew  nothing  of  the  other  ;  and  for  several  months  he  thus
lived  a  life  of  double  identity,  taking  up  each  unconsciously  just  where  ic
was  broken  oS.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  there  is  no  medical  report  of  this
case  ;  but  the  account  given  shows  that  it  must  have  been  in  some  ways
intermediate  between  ordinary  instances  of  post-epileptic  hallucina-
tion and  the  alternating  personalities  on  which  Krishaber,  Ribot,  &c.,
have  dwelt.  The  exaltation  of  faculty  during  the  secondary  state
deserves  especial  notice  in  relation  to  some  similar  exaltations  which
we  shall  find  accompanying  automatic  action.

An  interesting  connecting  link,  again,  is  afforded  by  the  accounts
of  possession  which  have  come  down  to  us  from  the  "Ages  of  Faith."
I  take  as  an  example  the  recently-published  autobiography  of  Soeur
Jeanne  des  Anges.^  Sceur  Jeanne  was  the  Superior  of  the  Ursulines  of
Loudun,  about  16-30-1665,  and  was  one  of  the  most  ardent  admirers,
afterwards  one  of  the  fiercest  enemies,  of  the  unfortunate  Urbain
Grandier,  who  was  burnt  alive  in  1634,  on  the  charge  of  having
bewitched  the  Ursuline  nuns.  Her  manuscript  autobiography  has
fallen  into  the  hands  of  editors  of  a  type  which  she  can  hardly  have
foreseen,  Drs.  Gabriel  Legue  and  Gilles  de  la  Tourette.  These  physicians
have  carefully  analysed  the  symptoms  which  she  narrates,  and  have
shown  that  her  affliction  may  be  classed  as  a  well-developed  case  of
hystero-epilepsy,  of  the  kind  now  so  often  described  by  the  Salpetriere
school.

Our  present  interest  lies  in  the  personalities  which  she  gives  to  the
demons  whom  she  supposes  to  possess  her, — who  are  in  reality  mere
objectifications  of  different  series  of  hysterical  attacks.

Just  as  the  automatic  writer  has  a  group  of  soi-disant  guides  or
"controls,"  who  take  it  in  turns  to  direct  his  hand,  and  each  of  whom
maintains  a  specific  character  of  his  own, — even  so  does  Soeur  Jeanne
describe  Asmodeus,  Leviathan,  Behemoth,  Isacaaron,  Balaam,  Gresil,
and  Aman, whose  diverse  presence  she  apparently  recognised  mainly  by
the  special  train  of  undesirable  emotion  which  each  inspired,  but
partly  also  by  their  words  and  writings.  A  facsimile  of  a  letter  of
Asmodeus  is  given  by  the  learned  editors,  but  the  writing  does  not
perceptibly  differ  from  Sceur  Jeanne's  own  script.

And  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  informs  me  that  there  are  letters,

1  This  seeins  to  be  only  an  exaggerated  report  of  the  father's  more
probable  statement  that  "  he  would  play  in  a  wild  and  original  manner."

•  Bibliothiquc  Diaholiqwi  (Collection  Bourneville).  Paris:  Aux Bureaux du
ProgHs  Medical,  1886.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


233


also  in  Soeur  Jeanne's  own  handwriting,  which  pi'ofess  to  come  from
the  other  demons  too — such  letters  being  habitiially  written  by  the
Sister  during  the  process  of  exorcism,  wliich  usually  brought  on  a
hystero-epileptic  attack.  The  substance  of  the  letters  reflected,  no
doubt,  the  foulness  and  malignity  of  the  Sister's  own  mind  ;  but,
nevertheless,  the  modern  hysteriologists  who  have  discussed  the  whole
afiair  do  not  suppose  that  the  Sister  consciously  simulated  the  writing
or  speech  of  devils  through  herself.  Her  diabolic  script  and  utterance
were  probably  (though  not  certainly)  purely  automatic.^

It  must  be  remembered  that  Soeur  J eanne  was  perfectly  sane  during
these  years  of  possession,  sane  at  least  in  the  sense  that  she  governed
her  community,  plotted  savagely  against  her  enemies,  and  made  religious
capital  out  of  her  real  or  fictitious  stigmata  ;  but  that,  nevertheless
there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  she  helieved  in  these  possessing  demons
— who,  as  I  say,  were  in  reality  the  incarnations  of  hystero-epileptic
attacks.

Now,  I  certainly  do  not  mean  to  trace  any  moral  analogy  between
these  distressing  products  of  Sojur  Jeanne's  imagination  and  the
"guides"  of  the  planchette-writer — which,  as  I  have  said,  so  far  as  I  have
seen,  are  almost  always  harmless,  generally  even  sermonising  entities.  So
far  as  my  experience  goes  I  do  not  see  that  planchette-writing  has  any
connection  %vith  disease  of  mind  or  body,  or  any  tendency  to  evil  of  any
kind,  except  in  a  few  cases  of  great  credulity  on  the  writer's  part,  a
credulity  which  such  discussions  as  these  may  render — it  is  to  be  hoped
—somewhat  less  common.  Rather  is  Sceur  Jeanne's  case  parallel
in  another  way  ;  as  showing  the  tendency  of  the  individuality  to  split
itself  up  into  various  co-ordinate  and  alternating  trains  of  personality,
each  of  which  may  seem  for  a  time  to  be  dominant  and  obsessing,  while
yet  the  habitual  sense  of  the  ordinary  self  may  persist  through  all  these
invasions.

We  have  briefly  noted  the  incipient  rearrangements  of  personality
which  follow  on  the  kaleidoscopic  shiftings  of  dream,  the  blurring
refractions  of  narcotism,  the  explosive  scatterings  of  epilepsy.

And  we  know,  moreover,  that  there  are  a  few  instances  where  the
change  in  the  personality,  perhaps  suddenly  induced,  is  profounder
and  more  permanent  than  in  any  of  the  above-cited  cases, — where  it
presents  a  readjustment  apparently  including  nearly  all  the  old
elements,  and  shaping  them,  so  to  say,  into  a  new  person,  in  some  ways,
perhaps,  superior  to  the  old.  Changes  like  those  of  Fe'lida  X.  (so
often  already  alluded  to),  of  course  include  my  present  subject;  for  they
involve  a  series  of  actions  which,  though  conscious  from  the  point  of  view

1  See  Dr.  Legue's  Urbain  Grandicv  et  Ics  Possedees  de  Loudun.  Paris:
Baschet.


234


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


of  one  of  the  two  personalities,  are  automatic  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  other.  But  they  involve  so  much  beyond  what  I  am  here  concerned
witli  that  it  would  only  confuse  my  argument  were  I  to  treat  of
them  here.

There  is,  however,  one  case  of  this  kind  to  which  I  must  briefly
refer,  since  an  actual  experiment  in  automatic  writing  was  made,  which
curiously  illustrates  some  of  those  with  which  we  shall  have  to  deal.

Dr.  Mesnet  ^  records  the  case  of  a  soldier,  F  ,  who  received  a

gunshot  wound  in  the  head  at  Sedan,  and  was  afterwards  subject  to
periodical  attacks,  lasting  for  about  a  day  in  each  month,  of  a  kind  of
somnambulism,  during  which  he  hears,  tastes,  and  smells  nothing  ;  and
hardly  sees  at  all  except  when  the  sense  of  touch  calls  his  attention  to
objects,  which  he  can  then,  as  it  seems,  see  distinctly.

During  these  accesses  his  actions  seem  purely  automatic,and  are  for
the  most  part  an  exact  repetition  of  his  every-day  mode  of  life  at
the  hospital.  But  by  tactile  suggestion  the  memoiy  can  be  made  to
go  back  to  an  earlier  epoch.

Thus  if  a  cane  is  put  into  his  hand  in  a  way  which  suggests  a  rifle,
he  goes  through  the  movements,  and  utters  the  brief  cries,  of  battle  :
"  Henri !  "  "  There  they  are  !  at  least  a  score  of  them  !  "  "  We  must
try  and  settle  this  between  us  !  "  &c.

Now  let  us  see  in  what  way  the  act  of  writing  revivified  past
experience.  I  abridge  Dr.  Mesnet's  account  (p.  18  sqq.)  which
contains  several  points  to  which  we  shall  hereafter  have  to  refer.  "  He
passed  his  hands  over  the  table  ;  felt  the  handle  of  a  drawer  ;  opened
it  and  took  out  a  pen,  whieli  at  once  excited  in  him  the  idea  of  writing.
He  felt  in  the  drawer,  and  took  out  some  slieets  of  paper  and  an
ink-bottle.  These  he  placed  on  the  table,  sat  down,  and  began  a  letter
addressed  to  his  general,  urging  his  own  good  conduct  and  courage,  and
asking  his  general  to  endeavour  to  procure  for  him  the  military  medal.

"  The  faults  of  spelling,  &c.,  in  the  letter  were  neither  more  nor  less
numerous  than  was  habitual  with  the  subject  in  his  normal  state.  The
facility  with  which  he  wrote,  keeping  to  the  true  lines,  showed
that  he  saw  what  he  was  doing.  To  test  this,  we  repeatedly  placed
a  sheet  of  iron  between  his  eyes  and  hand.  He  continued  to  write
a  few  words  illegibly,  then  ceased  to  write,  without  showing  impatience.
When  the  obstacle  was  removed  he  finished  the  imperfect  line,  and
began  another.  The  seiise  of  sight  was  therefore  needful  to  the  written
expression  of  the  subject's  thought.

"The  ink  in  his  inkstand  was  then  rej^laced  by  water.  He  perceived
the  faintness  of  the  letters  traced,  wiped  his  pen  again  and  again,  but

1  Db  r a  tttomatisme  de  la  Mhnoire,  &c.  Par  le  Dr.  Ernest  Mesnet.
Paris,  1874.


1887.]


Aiitomatic  Writing.


235


never  looked  at  the  ink-bottle.  His  field  of  vision,  it  seemed,  was
awakened  by  touch  alone,  and  was  limited  to  objects  with  which  he
was  actually  in  contact.

"He  was  writing  on  a  sheet  of  paper  which  lay  on  a  pile  of  about  ten
similar  sheets.  We  quickly  drew  this  top  sheet  away,  and  his  pen
continued  to  write  on  the  second  sheet.  When  he  had  wi'itten  about
ten  words  on  the  second  sheet  we  snatched  this  also  away,  and  he
continued  his  phrase  at  exactly  the  same  point  on  the  third  sheet.
This  process  was  repeated,  and  on  the  fifth  sheet  there  was  nothing  but
his  signature  at  the  bottom.  ISTevertheless,  he  read  over  and  corrected  his
letter  on  tliis  blank  fifth  sheet,  scattering  stops  and  corrections  over  the
empty  page,  each  of  which  corresponded  to  mistakes  made  on  the  co-
ordinate points  of  the  pages  which  had  been  snatched  away  from  him."

On  a  later  occasion  (p.  23)  pens  were  put  in  his  way  again ;  and  as
soon  as  he  touched  them  he  sat  down  and  began  a  letter  to  a  friend,
this  time  making  an  appointment  for  the  evening,  after  a  concert  at  the
cafe  of  the  Champs  Elysees,  at  which  (as  he  supposed)  he  had  to  sing.
Some  slight  change  in  the  surroundings  had  carried  his  automatic
reminiscence  back  to  this  other  phase  of  his  past  career.

Here,  then,  we  have  automatic  writings  appearing  to  proceed  fi'om
the  writer's  known  personality,  but  projected  backwards  to  an  earlier
point  of  time.  And  I  wished  to  cite  them  here  for  purposes  of  com-
parison with  writings  professing  to  emanate  from  a  personality
other  than  the  writer's,  but  at  the  present  moment  of  time.  We
shall  find,  I  think,  that  this  is  not  necessarily  a  deep-seated  distinction;
rather  that  the  automatic  writing, while  representing  some  dislocation  or
rearrangement — some  "allotropic  form,"  as  I  have  elsewhere  suggested
— of  the  writer's  personality,  yet  may  sometimes  take  its  superficial
colour  from  some  almost  accidental  circumstance,  some  suggestion  round
which  the  flow  of  more  or  less  incoherent  mentation  crystallises  into
definite  shape.

In  this  strange  case  of  Dr.  Mesnet's  we  have  noted  an  experimental
analogy  to  the  spontaneous  automatic  writing  which  forms  our  special
topic.  But  that  experiment  was  practically  irreproducible  ;  it  depended
on  a  cerebral  lesion  which  may  never  again  be  observed  in  just  the  same
form.  Can  we  not  find  any  easier,  commoner  form  of  experiment  which
may  give  graphic  results  comparable  with  our  automatic  cases  ?  What
of  hypnotism  1  the  reader  may  ask.  Cannot  hypnotic  subjects,  in  an
alert  or  somnambulic  state,  be  made  to  write  1  and  what  is  the  nature
of  messages  thus  written  ?

This,  indeed,  will  be  a  specially  close  analogy.  For  in  cases  of
automatic  writing,  quite  apart  from  hypnotism,  we  often  see  the  writer
fall  spontaneously  into  a  state  resembling  the  hypnotic  trance,  during
which  state  the  writing  is  sometimes  continued,  sometimes  interrupted


236


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


by  a  profounder  stage  of  apparent  lethargy.  I  liave  repeatedly  witnessed
this  phenomenon  in  automatists  personally  known  to  me  ;  and  it
constitutes  one  of  the  points  urged  by  Spiritualists  as  showing  the
possession  of  the  writer  by  an  influence  from  without.  "  He  is
mesmerised,"  they  say,  "by  a  spirit."  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that,
whatever  may  be  the  true  explanation  of  this  intermixture  of  trance-
states  with  automatic  writing,  it  at  least  recalls  jjHwira  facie  the  known
effects  of  hypnotism.  1

What  experiments,  then,  have  been  made  on  the  writing  of
hypnotised  subjects  1  There  have  been  MM.  Binet  and  Fere's  experi-
ments as  to  the  influence  of  a  magnet  in  reversing  the  direction  of  the
script — experiments  which  English  observation,  so  far  as  I  know,  has
not  yet  confirmed.  And  there  have  been  the  experiments  of  MM.
Ricliet,  Hericourt,  Ferrari,  de  Rochas,  <tc.,  on  the  modifications  of
handwriting  which  ensue  on  a  suggestion  made  to  the  subject  that  he
is  (say)  Napoleon,  or  an  aged  man,  or  a  young  child.  These
experiments  are  easy  to  repeat,  and  they  will  be  found  of
considerable  importance  when  we  come  to  consider  the  significance  of
changes  in  the  character  of  our  automatic  script.

But  beyond  this,  little  notice  has  been  taken  of  the  writings  of  the
hypnotised, — probably  because  communication  with  them  can  with  less
trouble  be  conducted  verbally.  Nevertheless,  I  have  known  of  one  or
two  subjects  who  could  write,  but  not  speak,  in  the  trance ;  and  I
think  that,  whenever  a  hypnotised  person  refuses  to  speak,  an  efibrt
sliould  be  made  to  induce  him  to  write.  It  was  reserved,  however,  for
M.  Pierre  Janet  to  discover  a  method  by  which,  in  an  exceptionally
sensitive  subject,  hypnotic  writing,  prolonged  by  suggestion  into  the
normal  state,  could  be  made  a  means  of  communication  with  the
hypnotic  self,  coincidently  with  ordinary  verbal  intercourse  with  the
waking  self.

The  case  of  whicli  I  must  now  give  a  summary  may  be  said  to
mark  the  highest  degree  yet  attained  of  proof  of  the  origination  of
automatic  writing  in  the  recesses  of  the  writer's  own  identity.  It  will
be  seen  that  in  this  case  a  secondary  self  was  first  created, — or  rather,
I  should  say,  artificially  detached  from  tiie  complex  of  cerebration, —

^  As  this  paper  passes  tlirougli  the  press,  Mr.  Hugh  Wingfield,  of  Cains
College,  Cambridge,  has  described  to  me  an  experiment  Avliich  additionally
illustrates  the  kinship  between  automatic  writing  and  hypnotic  suggestion.
Mr.  Wingfield  is  a  powerful  liypnotiser,  and  can  often  impress  commands  on
subjects  in  the  waking  state.  He  suddenly  ordered  a  friend  (whom  he  had
never  hypnotised)  to  look  at  liiin,  and  to  icritc.  The  friend  wrote  coherent
sentences  in  several  languages, — especially  in  Servian,  which  he  had  at  one
time  habitually  spoken, — without  having  any  notion  as  to  wliat  he  had  written.
So  soon  as  the  hypnotiser's  will  and  gaze  were  removed,  the  writing  stojaped.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


237


and  that  then  automatic  writing  was  found  to  be  its  best  mode  of
manifesting  itself, — a  path  of  externalisation  which  could  be  maintained
thi'oughout  the  full  apparent  activity  of  the  primary  self.

The  case  is  Professor  Pierre  J anet's  ;  and  I  abridge  his  account  as
given  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  December,  1886.

The  subject  was  a  girl  of  19  (M.  Janet  calls  her  L. — say  Louise,
to  avoid  confusion  from  too  frequent  use  of  initials  in  these  cases),
who  was  highly  hysterical,  having  attacks  daily  of  several  hours'  dura-
tion. Slie  was  also  devoid  of  the  sense  of  pain,  or  the  sense  of
contact,  so  that  sl^e  "  lost  her  legs  in  bed,"  as  she  put  it.  I  may  begin
by  saying  that  M.  Janet  and  Dr.  Powilewicz  completely  cured  her,
mainly  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  so  that  the  phenomena  which  I  am
about  to  describe, — though  morbid  in  the  sense  that  they  occurred  in  a
morbid  person, — were  healthy  in  the  sense  that  they  were  incidental  to
a  process  of  cure.  The  physical  hidicia  of  the  different  stages  of  the
hypnotic  trance  satisfied  the  observers  of  its  reality.

In  the  first  place,  Louise  offered  the  usual  phenomena  of  a  good
hypnotic  subject.  Post-hypnotic  suggestion  succeeded  easily  ; — that  is,
the  subject  could  be  ordered,  when  in  the  trance,  to  perform  some  act
after  waking,  or  to  fall  asleep  again  at  a  given  signal ;  and  after  being-
awoke  she  would  execute  the  act,  or  fall  asleep  at  the  signal, — without,
of  course,  remembering  in  her  waking  state  the  hypnotic  command.
At  first,  however,  it  was  necessary  that  Louise's  own  will  should  accept
the  command ;  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  that  the  hypnotised
subject  should  assent  when  she  was  told  to  do  something  on  awakening.
When  the  command  was  an  unwelcome  one  she  would  say  wo  instead
of  yes,  and  would  not  fulfil  it  on  awaking.

On  her  fifth  hypnotisation,  however,  Louise  underwent  a  kind  of
brief  catalepsy,  after  which  she  returned  to  the  somnambulic  state ;  but
that  state  was  deeper  than  before.  She  no  longer  made  any  sign,
whether  of  assent  or  refusal,  when  she  received  the  hypnotic  commands  ;
but  she  executed  them  infallibly,  whether  they  were  to  take  effect
immediately,  or  after  awaking.  Moreover,  there  was  a  singular  develop-
ment of  a  phenomenon  on  whose  importance  I  have  often  dwelt  in  these
pages.  The  state  of  the  awakened  subject  while  he  executes  a  deferred
suggestion  is  never  a  perfectly  normal  one;  the  suggested  action  is  accom-
plished in  an  abstracted  way,  and  seldom  remains  clearly  in  the  normal
memory,  belonging  rather  to  the  secondary  memory  of  the  hypnotic
state,  of  which  state,  indeed,  the  action  is  itself  a  fragmentary  prolonga-
tion.^ In  Louise's  case  this  went  further,  and  the  suggested  actions
became  absolutely  a  portion  of  the  trance-life. She  executed  them

^  This  applies  to  isolated  suggestions.  If  a  habitual  course  of  action  (as
diligence  in  study)  or  a  habitual  physical  desire  or  aversion,  (as  appetite  for


238


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


without,  appai'ently,  knowing  what  she  was  doing.  If,. for  instance,  in
lier  waking  state,  she  was  told  (in  the  tone  which  in  her  hypnotic  state
signified  command)  to  get  up  and  walk  about,  she  walked  about,  but,
to  judge  ivom  her  conversation,  she  supposed  herself  to  be  still  sitting
quiet.  She  would  weep  violently  when  commanded,  hnt  while  she  wept
she  continued  to  talk  as  gaily  and  unconcernedly  as  if  the  tears
had  been  turned  on  by  a  stop-cock.  One  day  M.  Janet  begged  Louise,
in  her  waking  state,  to  resist  his  next  command.  She  said
that  she  was  not  aware  that  she  had  ever  obeyed  him,  and  would
certainly  resist  now.  The  command  was  given,  and  she  executed  it
unconsciously,  while  still  protesting  that  she  would  certainly  resist.

Here,  then,  was  an  indication  of  a  new  partition  of  the  identity ; —
not  merely  that  partition  which  is  habitually  established  between  the
hypnotic  trance  and  the  waking  state.  For  this  new  partition  subsisted
equally  in  both  states,  and  the  dividing  boundary  was  no  obvious  gulf,
but  a  line  as  imaginary  as  the  Equator.  For  the  line  was  merely  this, —
that  any  suggestion  uttered  by  M.  Janet  in  a  brusque  tone  of  command
reached  the  unconscious  self  alone  ;  any  other  remark  reached  the
subject — awake  or  somnambulic — in  the  ordinary  way.

The  next  step  was  to  test  the  intelligence  of  this  hidden  "  slave  of
the  lamp,"  if  I  may  so  term  it — this  sub-conscious  and  indifferent
executor  of  all  that  it  was  bidden.  How  far  was  its  attention  alert '?
How  far  was  it  capable  of  reasoning  and  judgment  1  M.  Janet  began
with  a  simple  experiment.  "  When  I  shall  have  clapped  my  hands
together  12  times,"  he  said  to  the  entranced  subject  before
awakening  her,  "you  will  go  to  sleep  again  "  There  was  no  sign  that
the  sleeper  heard  or  understood  ;  and  when  she  was  awakened  the  events
of  the  trance  were  blank  to  her,  as  usual.  She  began  talking  to  other
persons.  M.  Janet,  at  some  little  distance,  clapped  his  hands  feebly
together  five  times.  Seeing  that  she  did  not  seem  to  be  attending  to
him  he  went  up  to  her  and  said,  "  Did  you  hear  what  I  did  just
now?"  "No,  whaf?"  "Do  you  hear  this?"  and  he  clapped  his
hands  once  more.  "Yes,  you  clapped  your  hands."  "How  often?"
"  Once."  M.  Janet  again  withdrew,  and  now  clapped  his  hands  six
times  gently,  with  pauses  between  the  claps.  Louise  paid  no  apparent
attention ;  but  wlien  the  sixth  clap  of  this  second  series — making  the
1 2tli  altogether — was  reached,  she  fell  instantly  into  the  trance  again.

meat,  distaste  for  spirits,)  be  hypnotically  inspired,  the  habit  may  become  a
second  nature,  and  the  only  trace,  perhaps,  of  the  extraneoiis  origin  of  the
impulse  will  be  a  tendency  to  sudden  reversion  to  the  earlier  characters.  The
subject's  state  may  then  be  compared  to  that  of  the  negro  child  taken  from  his
savage  kin  and  reared  in  civilisation,  who  may  still  relapse  into  a  barbarism  im-
possible to  his  white  schoolfellow.  In  other  words,  hypnotic  moralisation  is
par  excellence  education,  not  heredity.


1887.]


A  utomat  ic  Writing.


239


It  seemed,  then,  tliat  the  "slave  of  the  lamp"  had  counted  the  claps
through  all,  and  had  obeyed  the  order,  much  as  a  clock  strikes  after  a
certain  number  of  swings  of  the  pendulum,  however  often  you  stop  it
between  hour  and  hour.  M.  Janet  varied  the  conditions  ;  ordering  that
the  girl  should  fall  asleep  when  he  should  mention  the  same  letter  of
the  alphabet  twice  in  succession  ;  or  when  the  sum  of  the  digits  which
he  mentioned  should  reach  10.  The  result  showed  that  the  "slave  of
the  lamp  "  could  successfully  attend  and  obey  so  long  as  the  j^roblem
was  a  simple  one,  but  that  when  the  problem  became  too  complex,
confusion  ensued.

These  experiments,  as  M.  Janet  remarks,  throw  much  light  on  the
mechanism  of  "deferred  suggestion."  Itseemsplain  that  when  a  command
is  given  which  is  to  be  executed  at  a  distance  of  some  months,  we  need  not
suppose  that  the  impulsion  thus  given  works  itself  out  absolutely  without
further  reinforcement.  Rather  it  resembles  a  bill  drawn  on  the
unconscious  self  at  a  certain  date,  but  the  unconscious  self,  watching  the
efHux  of  time,  prepares  for  its  maturation.^

Thus  far,  however,  the  knowledge  gained  as  to  the  unconscious
element  in  Louise  was  not  direct  but  inferential.  The  nature  of  the
commands  which  it  coixld  execute  showed  it  to  be  capable  of  attention
and  memory  ;  but  there  was  no  way  of  learning  its  own  conception  of
itself,  if  such  existed,  nor  of  determining  its  relation  to  other
phenomena  of  Louise's  trance.  And  here  it  is  that  automatic  writing
was  successfully  invoked  ;  here  we  have,  as  I  may  say,  the  first-fruits
in  France  of  the  new  attention  directed  to  this  seldom-trodden  field.  M.
Janet  began  by  the  following  simple  command  :  "  When  I  clap  my
hands  you  will  write  Bonjour."  This  was  done,  in  the  usual  loose  and
scrawling  script  of  automatism,  and  Louise,  though  fully  awake,  was
not  aware  that  she  had  written  anything  at  all.

This  adit,  then,  was  in  the  possession  of  the  subterranean  occupant
of  the  psychical  citadel.  As  yet  this  occupant  was  nameless.  It  was
ordered  to  write  a  letter,  which  it  did  in  a  commonplace  style,  and
signed  "  Louise."  But  Louise  was  unconscious  of  the  letter-writing,
and  when  the  epistle  was  shown  to  her  she  pronounced  it  a  forgery.
The  unconscious  hand  was  again  bidden  to  write  a  letter  ;  it  wrote
word  for  word  the  same  letter  as  before,  as  if  it  were  a  musical-ljox
wound  up  to  repeat  a  particular  tune.

By  means  of  a  simple  artifice,  however,  it  was  found  possible  to  do
more  than  this.  M.  J anet  simply  ordered  the  entranced  girl  to  write
answers  to  all  questions  of  his  after  her  awakening.  The  command  thus
given  had  a  persistent  effect,  and  while  the  awakened  Louise  continued
to  chatter  as  usual  with  otlier  persons,  her  unconscious  self  wrote  brief

1  See  on  this  and  cognate  points  the  instructive  series  of  experiments  inde-
pendently undertaken  by  Mr.  Gurney,  and  recorded  below,  pp.  290  and  309  et  seq.


240


Automcdic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


and  scrawling  responses  to  M.  Janet's  questions.  This  was  the
moment  at  whicli  in  many  cases  a  new  and  separate  invading  person-
ality is  assumed  ; — and  if  Louise  had  believed  in  possession  by  devils —
as  so  many  similarly-constituted  subjects  in  old  times  believed — we  can
hardly  doubt  that  the  energy  now  writing  through  her  hand  would
have  assumed  the  style  and  title  of  a  "  familiar  spirit."  Or  if,  again,
she  had  been  a  modern  Spiritualist,  it  is  probable  that  the  signature
of  some  deceased  friend  would  have  appeared  at  the  foot  of  these
communications.  But  here  the  "  communicating  intelligence  "  was  of
so  obviously  artificial  a  kind  that  it  could  scarcely  venture  to  pretend
to  be  either  a  devil  or  Louise's  grandmother.  A  singular  conversation
gave  to  this  limited  creation,  this  statutory  intelligence,  an  identity
sufficient  for  practical  convenience.  "Do  you  hear  me'?"  asked
Professor  Janet.  Answer  (by  writing),  "  No."  "  But  in  order  to
answer  one  must  hear '? "  "  Certainly."  "  Then  how  do  you  manage  % "
"  I  don't  know."  "  There  must  be  somebody  who  hears  me  ?  "  "  Yes."
"  Who  is  it  %  "  "  Not  Louise."  "  Oh,  someone  else  ?  Shall  we  call
her  Blanche '? "  "  Yes,  Blanche."  "Well  then,  Blanche,  do  you  hear
me  % "  "  Yes."  This  name,  however,  had  to  be  changed,  for  the
following  reason  : — The  name  Blanche  happened  to  have  very  disagree-
able associations  in  Louise's  mind  ;  and  when  Louise  was  shown  the
paper  with  the  name  Blanche  which  she  liad  unconsciously  written  she
was  angry,  and  wanted  to  tear  it  up.  Another  name  had  to  be  chosen.
"  What  name  will  you  have  ?  "  "No  name."  "You  must — it  will  be
more  convenient."  "  Well,  then,  Adrienne."  Never,  perhaps,  has  a
personality  had  less  spontaneity  about  it.

Yet  Adrienne  was  in  some  respects  deejjer  down  than  Louise.  She
could  get  at  the  genesis  of  certain  psychical  manifestations  of  which
Louise  experienced  only  the  results.  A  striking  instance  of  this  was
afforded  by  the  phenomena  of  the  hystero-epileptic  attacks  to  which
this  patient  was  subject.

In  cases  of  this  sort  it  often  happens  that  the  patient's  imagination
during  the  attack  is  excited  by  the  reminiscence  of  some  scene  of  terror
which  perhaps  first  set  on  foot  this  nervous  disturbance.  On  a  smaller
scale  this  recurrence  to  a  still  dominant  moment  of  past  fear  may  be
familiar  to  some  of  my  readers.  I  know  a  lady  who  was  much
frightened  in  childhood  by  a  large  dog  whicli  sprang  out  on  her  ;  and
who  still,  in  moments  of  alarm  or  agitation,  seems  to  see  the  creature
spring  at  her  again.  Well,  Louise's  special  terror,  which  recurred  in
wild  exclamation  in  her  hysterical  fits,  was  somehow  connected  with
hidden  men.  She  could  not,  however,  recollect  the  incident  to  which  her
cries  referred  ;  she  only  knew  that  she  had  had  a  severe  fright  at  seven
years  old,  and  an  illness  in  consequence.  Now  during  these  "crises"
Louise  (except,  presumably,  in  the  periods  of  unconsciousness  which


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


241


form  a  pretty  constant  element  in  such  attacks)  could  hear  what
Professor  Janet  said  to  her.  Adrienne,  on  the  contrary,  was  hard  to
get  at ;  could  no  longer  obey  orders,  and  if  she  wrote,  wrote  only,  ai
peur,  fai  peur.

M.  Janet,  however,  waited  till  the  attack  was  over,  and  then  ques-
tioned Adrienne  as  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  agitated  scene.
Adrienne  was  able  to  describe  to  him  the  terrifying  incident  in  her
childish  life  which  had  originated  the  confused  hallucinations  which
recurred  during  the  attack.  She  could  not  explain  the  recrudescence  of
the  hallucinations  ;  but  she  knew  what  Louise  saw  and  why  she  saw  it :
nay,  indeed,  it  was  Adrienne  rather  than  Louise  to  whom  the  halluci-
nations were  directly  visible.

The  situation  is  a  complex  one.  I  will  try  and  explain  it  by  citing
a  curious  dream  of  my  own  ;  hoping  that  the  petty  personal  details
which  will  be  unavoidable  may  be  excused  by  the  singular  parallelism
of  the  two  cases.

I  must  hrst  explain  that  I  have  long  thought  that  we  are  too
indolent  in  regard  to  our  dreams  ;  that  we  neglect  precious  occasions  of
experiment  for  want  of  a  little  resolute  direction  of  the  will.  I  do
not  only  mean  that  we  ought  to  try  to  remember  our  dreams,  and  to
analyse  them,  and  that  we  may  get  strange  hints,  from  the  dream's
very  grotesqueness,  of  subterranean  processes  going  on  within  us.  I
mean  much  more  than  this  ;  namely,  that  we  ought  to  accustom  our-
selves to  look  on  each  dream,  not  only  as  a  psychological  ohservatio7i,
but  as  an  observation  which  may  be  transformed  into  an  experiment.
We  should  constantly  represent  to  ourselves  what  points  we  should
like  to  notice  and  test  in  dream ;  and  then  when  going  to  sleep  we
should  impress  upon  our  minds  that  we  are  going  to  try  an  experiment ;
— that  we  are  going  to  carry  into  our  dreams  enough  of  our  waking
self  to  tell  us  that  they  «re  dreams,  and  to  prompt  us  to  psychological
inquiry.

I  need  not  say  that,  as  dreamers,  we  are  very  unequally  gifted  by
nature.  My  own  endowments  are  very  poor ;  but  by  mere  pains-
taking eifort  I  have  succeeded  three  times — on  three  nights  only  out
of  nearly  3,000 — in  realising  that  I  was  dreaming,  and  in  attempting
some  scanty  and  hurried  experimentation.  The  dream  which  I  shall
cite  was  the  most  recent  of  these.  As  it  was  not  written  down
immediately  on  waking,  it  would  not  be  evidence  for  any  phenomenon
otherwise  difficult  to  credit.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  only  a  slight
idiosyncratic  development  of  a  class  of  dream  which  many  of  my  readers
have  probably  shared ;  and  its  paltry  commonplaceness  may  perhaps
avert  the  suspicion  that  it  has  been  touched  up  for  recital.

I  was,  I  thought,  standing  in  my  study  ;  but  I  observed  that  the
furniture  had  not  its  usual  distinctness — that  everything  was  blurred

B


242


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


and  somehow  evaded  a  direct  gaze.  It  struck  me  that  this  must  be
because  I  was  dreaming.  This  was  a  great  delight  to  me,  as  giving  the
opportunity  of  experimentation.  I  made  a  strong  effort  to  keep  calm,
knowing  the  risk  of  waking.  I  wanted  most  of  all  to  see  and  speak  to
somebody,  to  see  whether  they  were  like  the  real  persons,  and  how
they  behaved.  I  remembered  that  my  wife  and  children  were  away  at
the  time  (which  was  true),  and  I  did  not  reason  to  the  effect  that  they
might  be  present  in  a  dream,  though  absent  from  home  in  reality.'  I
therefore  wished  to  see  one  of  the  servants  ;  but  I  was  afraid  to  ring
the  bell,  lest  the  shock  should  wake  me.  I  very  cautiously  walked
downstairs — after  calculating  that  I  should  be  more  sure  to  find  some-
one in  pantry  or  kitclien  than  in  a  workroom,  where  I  first  thought  of
going.  As  I  walked  downstairs  I  looked  carefully  at  the  stair-carpet,
to  see  whether  I  could  visualise  better  in  dream  than  in  waking  life.
I  found  that  this  was  not  so ;  the  dream-carpet  was  not  like  what  I
knew  it  in  truth  to  be  ;  rather,  it  was  a  thin,  ragged  carpet,  apparently
vaguely  generalised  from  memories  of  seaside  lodgings.  I  reached  the
pantry  door,  and  here  again  I  had  to  stop  and  calm  myself.  The  door
opened  and  a  servant  appeared, — quite  unlike  any  of  my  own.  This  is
all  I  can  say,  for  the  excitement  of  perceiving  that  I  had  created  a  new
personage  woke  me  with  a  shock.  The  dream  was  very  clear  in  my
mind ;  I  was  thoroughly  awake ;  I  perceived  its  great  interest  to  me,
and  I  stamped  it  on  my  mind — I  venture  to  say — almost  exactly  as  I
tell  it  here.

It  seems  to  me,  then, — so  far  as  any  value  can  be  attached  to
the  memory, — that  there  were  here  three  layers  of  my  personality
which  present  some  analogy  with  three  layers  of  Louise's  per-
sonality, during  (say)  the  apparently  unconscious  period  of  a  hystero-
epileptic  attack.  In  the  first  place,  in  each  case  the  habitual  every-day
personality  was  for  the  time  in  abeyance, — asleep,  or  hysterically
distracted.  In  the  second  place,  my  dream-personality  corresponded  in  a
certain  way  to  Adrienne.  Each  of  these  had  a  knowledge  of  the
ordinary  self,  but  apparently  not  a  complete  knowledge.  Each  was
apparently  behind,  but  not  co-extensive  with,  the  ordinary  identity ;
was  in  one  sense  deeper  than  that  identity,  yet  existed  only  with
reference  thereto,  with  no  separate  desires  of  its  own.  And  in  the  third
place,  there  was  in  each  instance  a  kind  of  psychical  phantasmagoria
behind  and  beneath  both  identities  ;  a  background  of  scenery  which
seemed  created  by  some  organic  necessity.  In  my  case  this  consisted  of
a  mere  commonplace  reproduction  of  every-day  scenes  ;  in  Louise's
case  it  was  the  appalling  resurgence  of  an  ancient  terror.

It  was  neither  my  waking  self  nor  my  conscious  dream-self  which
created  the  ragged  stair-carpet,  &c.  And  it  was  neither  Louise's  con-
sciousness nor  Adrienne's  consciousness  which  evoked  the  horrifying


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


243


picture  of  the  men  hidden  in  the  garden.  In  each  case  the  phantasmal
images  arise  from  depths  below  either  of  the  alternating  consciousnesses.
Would  it  have  been  possible,  one  wonders,  to  have  got  deeper  still  1
Could  the  girl's  divided  spirit  have  been  raised  into  a  state  of  lucidity
in  which  she  could  have  discerned,  as  from  aloof  and  from  afar,  at  once
the  phantasmagoric  images  gathering,  and  the  helpless  and  hidden
Adrienne  scrawling,  "J'ai  peicr,  j'ai  peivr"  and  Louise's  body —
ttoWmv  ovofidrcov  fiopcpr]  fxla — stretched  in  contortions  on  the  ground  ?  Con-
ditions such  as  this  have  in  fact  been  described  by  mystical  writers.  It  is
possible  that  there  may  be  some  reality  in  their  accounts  of  successive
transitions — of  journeyings  inwards  which  were  journeyings  upwards  too.
But  such  writers,  instead  of  endeavouring  to  attach  their  own  case  to
the  ordinary  lot,  have  too  often  tried  to  detach  it  thence.  They  have
forgotten  that  a  man  who  claims  to  have  climbed  a  virgin  peak  must
first  explain  to  us  the  steps  of  his  ascent  before  he  can  expect  us  to
believe  the  extent- of  his  prospect.

To  return,  however,  to  Louise  and  Adrienne.  I  have  spoken  of
Adrienne  as  being  in  a  sense  more  deeply  involved  than  Louise  in  the
hysterical  attacks.  But  it  must  not  be  therefore  supposed  that  Adrienne
represented  a  necessarily  morbid  aspect  of  the  complex  identity.  And
the  experiment  showed  that  her  plane  of  existence  lay  beneath  some  of
the  superficial  evils  from  which  Louise  suffered.

Louise,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  a  hysterical  patient,  very  seriously
amiss.  One  conspicuous  symptom  was  an  almost  absolute  defect  of
sensibility  whether  to  pain,  to  heat,  or  to  contact,  whicli  persisted  both
when  she  was  awake  and  when  entranced.  There  was,  as  already
mentioned,  an  entire  defect  of  the  muscular  sense  also,  so  that  when  her
eyes  were  shut  she  did  not  know  the  position  of  her  limbs.  Nevertheless,
it  was  remarked  as  an  anomaly  that  when  she  was  thrown  into  the
cataleptic  state,  not  only  did  the  movements  impressed  on  her  continue
to  be  made,  but  the  corresponding  or  complementary  movements,  the
corresponding  facial  expression,  followed  just  as  they  usually  follow  in
such  experiments.  Thus,  if  M.  Janet  clenched  her  fist  in  the  cataleptic
stage,  her  arm  began  to  deal  blows,  and  her  face  assumed  a  look  of
anger.  The  suggestion  given  through  the  so-called  musmlar  sense  had
operated  on  a  subject  in  whom  the  muscular  sense,  as  tested  in  other
ways,  had  seemed  to  be  wholly  lacking.  As  soon  as  Adrienne  could  be
communicated  with  it  was  possible  to  get  somewhat  nearer  to  a  solution
of  this  puzzle.  Louise  was  thrown  into  catalepsy  ;  then  M.  Janet
clenched  her  left  hand  (she  began  at  once  to  strike  out),  put  a  pencil
in  her  right  hand,  and  said,  "  Adrienne,  what  are  you  doingl "  The
left  hand  continued  to  strike,  and  the  face  to  bear  the  look  of  rage,
while  the  right  hand  wrote,  "I  am  furious."  "With  whomV
"With  F." "Why?" "I  don't  know, but  1 am very  angry."

R  2


244


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


M.  Janet  then  unclenched  the  subject's  left  hand  and  put  it  gently  to
her  lips.  It  began  to  "  blow  kisses,"  and  the  face  smiled.  "  Adrienne,
are  you  still  angry  ? "  "  No,  that's  over."  "  And  now  V  "  Oh  !  I  am
happy." "  And  Louise  ?  " "  She  knows  nothing,  she  is  asleep."

Now,  so  far  as  I  know,  this  is  absolutely  the  first  glimpse  that  has
yet  been  obtained  into  the  subjective  being  of  the  subject  in  the
cataleptic  state.  We  have  thus  far  only  been  able  to  conjecture
whether  there  was  or  was  not  any  psychical  concomitant  of  the
cataleptic  gestures  of  anger  or  satisfaction.  "  II  n'y  a  que  le
cataleptique,"  say  MM.  Binet  and  Fer(^,i  "qui  m^rite  le  nom  d'automate
On  a  dit  avec  raison  que  le  cataleptique  n'a  point  une
personnalit^  a  lui,  qu'il  n'existe  pas  de  rnoi  cataleptique."  Yet  the  key
of  automatic  writing  has  unlocked  this  closely-barred  chamber,  and  has
shown  us  that  the  clenched  fist,  which  strikes  out  at  our  suggestion  as  if
it  were  moved  by  a  spring,  does  in  fact  imply  a  corresponding  emotion
of  anger,  which  (in  Louise's  case  at  least)  is  definite  enough  to  select
its  own  object,  although  it  cannot  explain  to  us  its  own  origin.

If  even  these  actions  prove  to  have  been  accompanied  by  a  kind  of
consciousness, — to  be  capable  of  entering  into  a  kind  of  memory  ; — of
what  actions  can  we  ever  venture  to  assert  that  they  are  absolutely
unconscious,  absolutely  unrememberable  ?  Dr.  Richer  has  observed
that  the  respiration  of  a  cataleptized  subject  is  not  often  strongly
aflfected  by  suggestions  of  terror,  &c., — is  much  less  affected  than  in  the
somnambulic  state.  (La  Grande  Hysterie,  pp.  680  sqq.)  La  reaction  sur
Vetre  intime,  he  says,  est  nulle  ou  presque  nulle  ; — but  we  have  seen
that  the  Hre  intime  and  its  feelings  are  by  no  means  easy  to  come  at.

The  peculiar  condition  of  Louise  when  awake  adds  a  further
interest  to  this  experiment.  When  awake,  she  suff'ered,  as  I  have
explained,  from  a  grave  sensory  disturbance, — an  entire  absence  of  the
so-called  muscular  sense.  But  here  we  find  this  new  personality
possessed  of  that  sense, — responding  to  muscular  stimuli  in  a  way
which  showed  normal  sensibility.  Adrienne's  intelligence,  indeed,,
showed  little  verve  or  spontaneity  ;  but  she  might  claim  that  if  she
were  beneath  the  level  of  Louise's  waking  intellect  she  was — in  another
sense — beneath  the  level  of  Louise's  sensory  disturbances  as  well : —
somewhat  as  deep-sea  denizens  are  beneath  not  the  sunlight  only  but
the  storm.  This  was,  in  fact,  a  culminant  example  of  the  disappearance,,
in  hypnotic  trance,  of  functional  nervous  derangements.  The  inabilities
which  result  from  organic  lesion  subsist,  of  course,  though  they  may
lose  their  painful  character  ;  but  the  inabilities  which,  for  want  of  a.
better  name,  we  call  hysterical  may  any  of  them,  in  any  phase  of
hypnotism,  change,  diminish,  or  disappear.

^  Binet  et  F^rd,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal,  p.  105.


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


245


And  here  I  must  repeat  my  protest, — a  protest  which  the  writings
of  the  school  of  the  Salpetrifere  seem  to  me  to  render  constantly
needful, — against  the  assumption  that  hypnotism  itself,  and  its
attendant  phenomena,  have  of  necessity  anything  morbid  about  them.
Hypnotism  has  grave  incidental  dangers  of  its  own,  and  it  is  often
witnessed  in  high  perfection  on  morbid  subjects  ;  but  to  call  hypnotism
a  nevrose  seems  to  me  about  as  reasonable  as  to  call  the  act  of  dreaming
a  nevrose,  or  the  habit  of  hard  study.

Phenomena  whose  psychical  side  is  so  important  as  here  must  not  be
considered  fi'om  a  clinical  point  of  view  alone, — as  if  their  only  upshot
could  be  to  take  a  man  into  hospital,  or  to  get  him  out  of  it.  In  this
case  which  we  are  at  present  studying, — as  in  Felida  X.'s  case,  in  Dr.
Dufay's  case,  &c., — the  secondary  or  induced  state  was  in  some  respects
less  morbid  than  the  habitual  state, — free  from  the  nervous  troubles
which  crippled  the  patient's  waking  life.  Unless  "  morbid  "  is  to
become  a  word  as  question-begging  as  the  word  "  natural "  long  has
been,  we  must  be  as  careful  7iot  to  call  these  novel  states  morbid  as  we
should  be  not  to  describe  these  operations  of  Nature  as  unnatural.

In  Louise's  case  indeed  these  odd  manifestations  were — as  the
pure  experimentalist  might  say — only  too  sanative,  only  too  I'apidly
tending  to  normality.  M.  Janet  accompanied  his  psychological
inquiries  with  therapeutic  suggestion  ; — telling  Adrienne  not  only  to
go  to  sleep  when  he  clapped  his  hands,  or  to  answer  his  questions  in
writing,  but  to  cease  having  headaches,  to  cease  having  convulsive
attacks,  to  recover  normal  sensibility,  and  so  on.  Adrienne  obeyed ;
and  even  as  she  obeyed  the  rational  command,  her  own  Undine-like
identity  vanished  away.  The  day  came  when  M.  Janet  called  on
Adrienne, — and  Louise  laughed  and  asked  him  whom  he  was  talking
to.  Louise  was  now  a  healthy  young  woman  ;  but  Adrienne,  who  had
risen  out  of  the  Unconscious,  had  sunk  into  the  Unconscious  again, —
must  I  say  1 — for  evermore.

Few  lives  so  brief  have  taught  so  many  lessons.  For  us  who  are
busied  with  automatic  writing  the  main  lesson  is  very  clear.  We  have
here  demonstrably  what  we  can  find  in  other  cases  only  inferenticdly  ;
—  an  intelligence  manifesting  itself  continuously  by  written
answers,  of  purport  quite  outside  the  normal  subject's  conscious  mind,
while  yet  that  intelligence  was  but  a  part,  a  fraction,  an  aspect,  of  the
normal  subject's  own  identity.

We  must  bear  this  ascertained  fact — for  it  is  as  near  to  an
ascertained  fact  as  anything  which  this  perplexing  inquiry  can  bring
us — steadily  in  mind  while  we  deal  with  future  cases.  And  we  must
remember  that  Adrienne, — while  she  was,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  unconscious
self  reduced  to  its  simplest  expression, — did,  nevertheless,  manifest
certain  differences  from  Louise,  wliich,  if  slightly  exaggerated,  might


246


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


have  been  very  perplexing.  Her  handwriting  was  slightly  different, —
though  only  in  the  loose  and  scrawling  character  so  frequent  in
automatic  script.  Suppose  the  handwriting  had  been  rather  more
different  1  and  had  vaguely  resembled  that  of  some  deceased  member  of
the  family  ?  It  is  easy  to  understand  what  inferences  might  have  been
based  on  such  a  fact.  Again,  Adrienne  remembered  certain  incidents
in  Louise's  childhood  which  Louise  had  wholly  forgotten.  These  events
occurred  at  a  grandmother's  house.  Suppose  that  the  sentence  recording
them  had  been  signed  with  the  f/7-a7idmother's  name,  instead  of  with  the
merely  arbitrary  name  selected  for  the  convenience  of  a  cool  observer  1
Here  too,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  the  confidence — in  one  sense  the  well-
grounded  confidence — with  which  any  knowledge  on  Louise's  own  part
of  those  long  past  events  would  have  been  disclaimed.

Once  more  ; — and  this  last  suggestion  points  to  positive,  rather  than
to  negative,  conclusions  : — Adrienne  possessed  a  faculty — the  muscular
sense — of  which  Louise  was  devoid.  I  am  anxious  that  this  point
especially  should  be  firmly  grasped ;  for  I  wish  the  reader's  mind  to  be
perfectly  open  as  regards  the  relative  faculties  of  the  conscious  and
of  the  unconscious  self.  In  Mr.  Newnham's  case  we  have  had  the
unconscious  self  (as  I  interpret  that  story)  superior  to  tlie  conscious
self  in  faculty  of  one  kind  ;  here  we  find  it  superior  in  faculty  of  another
kind.  It  is  plain  that  we  must  be  on  the  watch  for  completion,  for
evolution,  as  well  as  for  partition,  for  dissolution,  of  the  corporate
being.

Since  the  above  words  were  written  Professor  Pierre  Janet  has
been  kind  enough  to  send  me  a  manuscript  account,  which  he  allows
me  here  to  translate  and  publish,  of  another  series  of  experiments,
analogous  to  the  above,  which  he  has  tried  upon  Madame  B.,  who  has
been  already  introduced  to  readers  of  these  Proceedings  in  my  paper  on
"  Telepathic  Hypnotism "  in  Part  X.  I  will  translate  the  account
almost  at  full  length ;  for  the  experiments  seem  to  me  extremely  signi-
ficant ;  and  the  very  fact  that  the  subject  had  never  learnt  to  write
renders  the  series  a  most  fitting  introduction  to  the  discussion  of
automatic  movement  and  gesture,  which  my  next  paper  must
contain.

"  After  concluding  my  experiments,"  says  Professor  Janet,  "  on  the
hypnotic  sleep  of  the  young  woman  whom  I  have  called  L.,  I  resolved  to
try  whether  I  could  obtain  analogous  phenomena  with  a  veiy  different
subject, — namely,  with  Madame  B.,  the  honest  peasant- woman  whom
you  saw  at  Havre.  I  did  not  try  for  mental  suggestion  ;  I  sought  only
to  discover  whether  ordinary  suggestions  worked  themselves  out  for
Madame  B.  in  the  same  manner  as  for  L.

"It  must  be  remembered  that  Madame  B.'s  trance  is  very  different
from  L.'s — far  deeper  and  far  more  complex. With  L.  the  trance  was


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


247


induced  by  a  single  gesture ;  it  continued  for  the  most  part  unchanged,
and  ended  in  a  moment  at  my  bidding.  It  was  '  the  lesser  hypnotism,'
if  you  choose  so  to  call  it.  Madame  B.'s  trance,  on  the  other  hand,
needed  some  minutes  to  become  deep,  and  divided  itself  spontaneously
into  a  certain  number  of  phases,  which  seemed  to  represent  different
stages  of  profundity.^  Her  awakening  was  difficult  and  needed  at
least  ten  minutes  to  effect.  This  was  '  the  greater  hypnotism,'  or
'  magnetism,'  if  you  choose  so  to  call  it.  This  difference  between  the
two  forms  of  trance  prevented  me  from  repeating  my  experiments  in
precisely  the  same  way.  As  you  know,  I  made  the  suggestions  to  L.
during  the  trance,  and  then  woke  her  some  time  afterwards  to  see  her
execute  them  in  the  waking  state.  I  would  then  put  her  to  sleep  again
and  make  another  suggestion, — sometimes  entrancing  and  awakening  her
ten  times  at  one  sitting.  This  could  not  be  done  with  Madame  B.,  who
when  once  asleep  was  unwilling  to  be  awakened  till  some  hours  had
elapsed.  I  was  obliged  to  make  my  experiments  with  her,  not  in  her
waking  but  in  her  somnambulic  state  ;  and  this  fact  led  to  some  novel
details  which  may  have  interest  for  you.

"Among  the  various  phases,  elsewhere  described,  of  Madame  B.'s
trance,  two  alone  were  of  importance  for  our  present  inquiry.  The
first  of  these  was  the  state  of  lethargic  somnaiabulism,  as  I  have  termed
it,  during  which  the  sleep  was  profound,  the  muscles  relaxed,  the
subject  motionless,  speechless,  and  apparently  deaf  to  my  questions.
This  state,  however,  was  not  a  complete  lethargy,  for  the  characteristic
contractures  produced  in  that  stage  of  hypnotism  by  deep-seated
excitation  of  the  muscles,  could  not  be  evoked.  The  second  state  here
necessary  to  describe  was  that  which  I  have  termed  'lucid  som-
nambulism' ;  attaching  no  occult  sense  to  the  epithet,  but  using  it
simply  to  signify  that  the  subject's  intelligence  and  freedom  of  action
seemed  almost  intact.  In  this  stage  the  subject  looked,  listened,  talked,
and  acted  with  gay  spontaneity,  resembling  a  waking  person  in  all
respects  except  two,  that  her  eyes  were  shut  and  could  not  be  opened
without  inducing  a  change  of  state,  and  that  the  hypnotiser  could
easily  provoke  contractures  by  lightly  touching  the  skin.

"Let  us  consider  the  degree  of  susceptibility  to  suggestion  existing
in  each  of  these  phases.  If,  during  the  second  phase — that  of  lucid
somnambulism — I  interrupt  a  conversation  with  Madame  B.  by
some  sudden  order,  she  hears  me  perfectly  well,  but  does  not  obey.  If
I  insist,  she  laughs,  asks  me  why  I  want  her  to  raise  her  arms,  or  the
like,  and  simply  refuses  to  do  so.  One  may  gradually  persuade  her  to
obey  by  argument,  but  there  is  no  real  hypnotic  suggestion.  Occasion-

^  See  "  Les  phases  intermediaires  de  Fhypnotisme,"  Revue  Scientifique,
May  8th,  1886.


248  Automatic  Writing.  [Jan.  28,

ally,  indeed,  by  strong  insistence  for  some  minutes,  one  can  provoke  a
simple  movement  or  a  hallucination, — but  more  commonly  the  subject's
resistance  is  so  strong  that  she  will  throw  herself  into  a  state  of  general
contracture  rather  than  obey.

"  During  the  phase  of  lethargic  somnambulism,  on  the  other  hand,
suggestion  was  easy  ;  I  had  but  to  make  the  subject  attend  to  me,
by  holding  her  hand,  touching  her  forehead,  and  giving  the  order
distinctly.  The  suggestion  was  not  executed  at  once ;  for  the
trance  continued  without  apparent  modification  ;  but  when  the
subject  woke  up  into  the  second  state — that  of  lucid  somnambulism —
she  executed  the  order  without  making  any  resistance.  It  thus  seemed
that  the  somnambulic  trance  itself  was  composed  of  two  phases — a
phase  of  waking  and  a  phase  of  sleep.  During  its  waking  phase
suggestion  was  hardly  possible ;  but  suggestions  made  during  its  phase
of  sleep  realised  themselves  during  its  waking  phase ;  just  as  post-
hypnotic suggestions  realise  themselves  when  the  hypnotic  trance
is  over.

"  The  acts  thus  executed  possessed  this  striking  characteristic, — that
Madame  B.  was  unaware  of  them  at  the  moment  when  she  was
performing  them.  If  during  the  lethai'gic  somnambulism  I  had  ordered
her  to  walk,  to  move  her  arms  or  legs,  ifec,  she  did  so  in  the  lucid
somnambulism  automatically, — while  she  talked  about  something  else.
If  one  drew  her  attention  to  the  movement — as  by  asking  her  where  her
arms  were — she  lowered  the  arms  at  once — as  though  to  look  at  them
■ — and  the  movement  ceased ;  but  she  retained  no  recollection  of  having
moved.  Similarly  if  I  had  suggested  a  hallucination  she  saw  it  when
she  woke  into  the  lucid  state,  felt  the  pleasure  or  the  fear  which  it  was
calculated  to  inspire ;  and  then,  the  hallucination  over,  recollected
nothing  of  it.

"Was  there  not  here  a  kind  of  duplication  of  psycliological  phe-
nomena analogous  to  that  which  I  had  observed  in  L.  1  The  following
experiments  seem  to  point  in  that  direction.  During  the  lucid  state, —
in  which  direct  suggestion,  as  will  be  remembered,  was  impossible, — I
asked  a  friend  to  talk  to  Madame  B.  in  such  a  way  as  wholly  to  distract
her  attention  from  me.  When  her  attention  was  completely  held  hy
my  friend  I  suddenly  said,  '  Faites  un  pied  de  nez.'  (Spread  your  thumb
and  fingers  from  your  nose.)  Her  hands  went  up  at  once  and  the  joiie(i
de  nez  was  executed, — Madame  B.  continuing  her  conversation  mean-
time with  unbroken  vivacity.  Without  interrupting  her,  or  addressing
myself  to  her  directly,  I  added  :  'When  I  have  clapped  my  hands
five  times  you  will  rise  and  walk  round  the  room.'  I  clapped  my  hands
twice  and  asked,  '  Did  you  hear  me  ? ' — taking  her  hand  and  obliging
her  to  listen.  'Why,  you  said  nothing,'  she  replied,  and  turned  away
to  talk  to  my  friend. I  clapped  my  hands  again  three  times,  and


1887.]


Auto  viatic  Writ  ing.


249


Madame  B.  got  up  automatically  and  walked  round  the  room,  without
interrupting  her  conversation.  ^

"Madame  B.  has  never  learnt  to  write  ]  which  was  unfortunate,  as
otherwise  I  might  have  repeated  the  experiments  on  automatic  writing
made  ^vith  L.  But  I  was  able  to  procure  something  closely  analogous.
Speaking  to  IMadame  B.  in  the  same  manner, — that  is,  so  that  she  should
not  directly  listen  to  me, — I  said,  '  You  will  raise  your  hand  to  signify
Yes ;  you  will  shake  it  to  signify  No.'  I  thus  managed  to  hold  a
conversation  with  her — of  course  of  a  very  simple  kind — while  she
talked  eagerly  with  another  person,  and  was  quite  unaware  of  the
second  dialogue  which  her  hand  was  carrying  on  all  the  time.

"  Thus  the  suggestions  which  it  was  so  difficult  to  efiect  during  the
lucid  somnambulism,  while  Madame  B.  was  listening  attentively,
became  perfectly  easy,  and  could  be  carried  out  in  a  complex  manner,
while  she  was  talking  to  another  person  and  not  listening  to  me.  In
this  case  it  was  not  her  expectant  attention,  but  the  distraction  of  her
attention,  which  effected  her  compliance  with  the  command.

"  I  could  never  succeed  in  getting  these  automatic  acts  to  enter  the
subject's  consciousness  in  her  lucid  state.  They  seem  quite  separated
from  her  personality.  But,  through  a  chain  of  circamstances  which  need
not  here  be  detailed,  I  succeeded  in  developing  in  the  same  subject  a
new  somnambulic  condition,  which  can  be  induced  by  a  long  series  of
passes  made  before  her  face.  In  this  phase  the  face  is  pale,  and  the
limbs  paralysed  and  insensible ;  but  it  differs  from  the  lethargic
somnambulism  already  described,  insomuch  that  in  this  new  state  the
subject  hears  and  answers  my  questions,  though  she  only  hears  me  when
I  actually  touch  her,  and  only  answers  in  a  low  voice,  after  herself
repeating  the  question.

"  The  state  is  a  curious  one,  and  I  hope  some  day  to  describe  it
further.  The  point  at  present  interesting  is  that  I  questioned  her  one
day  in  this  new  state  as  to  the  acts  which  she  had  just  been  accomplish-
ing automatically  in  the  state  of  lucid  somnambulism  which  had
preceded — acts  of  which  the  subject  had  never  before, in  any  phase,  mani-
fested the  least  recollection.  Now,  however,  she  recited  these  acts  with
ease:  '  You  made  me  rise  ;  you  made  me  take  up  an  engraving,'  &c.
And  to  this  she  added,  '  The  other  one  was  talking  while  I  got  up  from
my  seat ;  she  is  so  stupid  that  she  knew  nothing  about  it.'  In  short,  this
new  somnambulic  phase  had  brought  to  light  a  new  personality,  which

1  Observe  that  the  point  is  that  Madame  B. ,  in  the  lucid  state,  would  obey
no  order  unless  she  had  previously  been  told  in  the  lethargic  state  that  she
would  obey  it  on  waking  into  the  lucid  state.  And,  by  a  kind  of  parity  of
impression,  these  new  orders,  so  uttered  as  not  to  reach  the  lucid  consciousness,
did  in  fact  reach  the  specific  personality  of  the  lethargic  state,  underlying  that
of  the  lucid  state.— [F.  W.  H.  M.]


250


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


assumed  as  its  own  all  the  acts  unconsciously  performed  during  the
state  of  lucid  somnambulism.  Suggestions  made  in  this  new  condition
were  either  acted  out  at  once  and  consciously,  or  were  acted  out  in
the  state  of  lucid  somnambulism,  but  automatically,  and  while  Madame
B.  talked  of  other  things.

"  I  may  add  that  Madame  B.  is  susceptible  of  catalepsy,  and
that  the  acts  performed  in  the  cataleptic  condition  liave  always
remained  unconscious, — not  entering  Madame  B.'s  memory  at
any  stage.  But  in  the  new  state  the  new  personality  retained  recollec-
tion of  the  acts  performed  in  catalepsy,  along  with  the  automatic  acts
of  the  lucid  somnambulism.  It  seemed  as  though  this  newly-evoked
personality  consisted  of  the  synthesis  of  all  the  psychological  phenomena
of  which  the  primary  personality  was  unconscious.

"  It  would  seem,  at  any  rate,  that  in  Madame  B.,  as  in  L.,  the
psychological  phenomena  were  synthetised  into  two  groups,  which
groups  produced  two  distinct  conceptions  of  the  self.  One  of  these
selves, — the  completer, — say  Madame  B.,  talked  with  me  in  lucid
somnambulism,  and  refused  to  obey  my  orders  if  she  heard  them  with
direct  attention.  The  other  self — let  us  call  her  Madame  X. — obeyed
my  orders  at  once,  if  they  were  given  during  Madame  B.'s  sleep,  or
during  her  ludicity,  if  she  was  not  attending  to  me.  And  by  inducing
one  special  phase  of  profound  trance  I  could  cause  Madame  B.  to
disappear  altogether,  and  address  myself  to  Madame  X.  alone,  who
then  retained  the  memory  of  the  acts  previously  performed  by  her,
unknown  to  Madame  B.

"Complicated  though  this  description  may  seem,  the  reality  was
more  complex  still.  Remember  that  all  which  I  have  related  took
place  during  various  phases  of  somnambulism  ;  and  that  outside  all
this  lay  the  true  state  of  waking,  after  the  trance  had  been  wholly
dispelled.  You  know  already  that  Madame  B.  when  awake  is  by  no
means  the  same  person  as  Madame  B.  even  in  the  lucid  phase  of  her
somnambulism.  You  know  that,  when  once  awakened,  she  retains  no
recollection  of  any  act  performed  during  somnambulism — whether  by
Madame  B.  or  Madame  X.  Her  ordinary  waking  state  is  therefore
practically  a  tldrd  personality.  And  when  you  reflect  that  it  is  possible
to  make  either  to  Madame  B.  or  to  Madame  X.  post-hypnotic
suggestions  which  will  be  worked  out  in  the  waking  state,  you  will
realise  how  strangely  intermingled  are  the  phenomena  of  the  subject's
psychical  life.

"We  have  here  that  dissociation  of  the  flienomena  of  consciousness
which  seems  to  me  to  be  the  essential  fact  of  somnambulism,  of
suggestion,  of  automatic  writing,  of  hysteria  itself,  and  of  many  other
nervous  phenomena.  But  this  purely  psychical  dissociation  may  be
pushed  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  and  may  form  two,  three,  or


1887.]


Automatic  Wo^itmg.


251


four  groups  according  to  circumstances, — or  even  many  more  in
certain  stages  of  dementia.  In  somnambulism  this  dissociation  leads
to  the  existence  of  several  degrees  of  unconscious  action,  of  several
personalities  encased,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  the  one  in  the  otlier.  The
knowledge  of  this  fact  may  throw  much  light  on  many  of  these
apparently  inexplicable  phenomena."

I  will  conclude  this  series  with  a  case  which,  though  of  a  less
unusual  type  than  the  last,  shows  in  a  clear  and  striking  way  how
deeply  post-hypnotic  suggestion  may  modify  the  self-sujjposed  personality
and,  incidentally,  the  handwriting  of  the  subject.  I  shall  abbreviate
the  case,  but  shall  keep,  as  far  as  I  can,  the  phraseology  of  the  Com-
mandant de  Rochas,  to  whom  it  is  due.^

'■^Subject.  Benoit  ;  18  yeats  old;  clerk  in  an  office;  intelligent  and
healthy  ;  trained  for  some  months  to  post-hypnotic  suggestion.

"Suggestion.  'Beginning  with  to-morrow,  Thursday,  you  will  come  to
my  house  for  three  days  running  at  5. 30.  When  you  enter  my  room  you  will
believe  that  you  are  my  son  Henri ;  when  you  leave  the  house  you  will  be
Benoit  again.'

"Effect.  On  Thursday  at  5.30  Benoit  arrives  ;  he  enters  the  house  with-
out ringing,  runs  upstairs  and  sits  down  in  my  study  in  Henri's  place,  saying,
'  I  have  just  liad  a  good  long  walk,'  which  is  not  true,  since  he  has  just  come
from  his  office.  '  With  whom  did  you  walk?  '  '  With  M.' — a  friend  of  my  son's
whom  he  barely  knows — 'he  has  lent  me  this  book.'  'Have  you  seen
Benoit  ? '  '  No,  not  for  three  months. '  '  Well,  I  shall  try  some  experiments
on  yon  then. '  '  It  will  be  no  use,  papa,  you  know  that  you  can't  do  any-
thing with  me. '  I  make  him  rigid,  insensible  to  pain,  &c. ,  which  surprises
him  greatly.  I  read  him  the  notes  of  my  experiments  with  Benoit  ;  he
remembers  some  of  them  (those  at  which  Henri  was  present),  is  sorry  to  have
missed  others.  I  make  him  write  a  sentence,  and  his  writing  resembles  my
son's  (which  is  not  the  case  with  his  normal  writing),  and  this,  although  he
does  not  know  my  son's  writing,  or  has  only  seen  it  long  ago  and  by  chance.
I  then  impose  upon  him  various  personalities  and  make  him  write  in  each
ease  ;  and  thus  obtain  a  series  of  handwritings  differing  one  from  the  other."

This,  it  will  be  seen,  is  the  important  point  for  us.  A  handwriting
supposed  to  be  unknown,  or  at  least  unfamiliar,  to  the  subject,  is
reproduced  tolerably  when  the  subject  believes  himself  to  be  that
Henri  whose  script  he  presumably  could  not  have  imitated  in  the
normal  state.^  A  few  more  details  will  be  of  interest,  as  sho^ving  the
way  in  which  the  personality  is  kept  up, — the  evasive  answers  resorted
to  when  puzzling  questions  are  proposed.  Note,  also,  Benoit's  ready
familiarity  with  the  family  circle  of  which  he  supposes  himself  to  be  a
member,  which  may  remind  us  of  the  affectionate  manners  of  certain

1  Bevue  Philosophiqiie,  March,  1887,  p.  330.

-  I  have  seen  facsimiles  of  the  writings,  and  have  also,  through  M.
de  Rochas'  kindness,  myself  witnessed  similar  experiments  with  Benoit  at  Blois.


252


Automatie  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


"  communicating  spirits,"  which,  nevertheless,  are  liable  to  sacl  blunders
as  to  their  relations'  names.

"  We  pass  into  the  adjoining  room,  where  my  family  are  assembled.  He
sits  down  by  the  fire,  talks  with  his  'mamma,'  with  his  sister,  with  his  little
brother,  tutoyant  them  all.  Seeing  that  I  am  standing,  he  jumps  up  and  offers
me  his  seat  with,  '  I  beg  your  pardon,  papa. '

' '  As  soon  as  we  have  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  house  he  becomes  Benoit
again,  calls  me  'mon  commandant,'  and  tells  me  that  he  has  passed  the
day  at  his  office  desk.

' '  Next  day  Benoit  comes  in  again  without  knocking,  sits  down  by  the  fire,
and  begins  to  read.  I  question  him  on  his  studies  of  the  day  ;  he  becomes
confused,  and  answers  that  his  head  is  stupid,  and  he  cannot  remember.
.  .  .  .  On  Saturday  at  5.30  I  see  Benoit  from  the  wiiidow,  running  bare-
headed through  the  street ;  I  go  to  meet  him  and  find  him  in  the  vestibule,
puzzling  himself  as  to  what  he  can  have  done  with  his  hat.  When  he  had
come  in,  he  says,  and  wanted  to  hang  it  up,  he  found  it  was  not  there.

"  1  take  him  out  into  the  garden  (where  he  becomes  Benoit  again)  and  ask
him  what  he  has  done  with  his  hat ;  he  tells  me  that  his  chief  at  the  office  had
tried  to  prevent  him  from  leaving,  and  had  hidden  his  hat  to  keep  him,  but
that  he  felt  that  I  wanted  him,  and  ran  off  without  his  hat,  so  as  not  to.  be
late.  We  re-enter  the  house,  and  at  once  he  begins  to  puzzle  himself  again
as  to  what  on  earth  he  has  done  with  his  hat.

"We  enter  my  study,  and  I  show  him  the  sentences  which  he
wrote  the  day  before  ;  he  has  no  recollection  of  them,  and  is  astonished
to  find  that  he  has  become  as  good  a  subject  as  Benoit.  He  is  insensible
to  pinches  or  pricks,  but  feels  heat  and  cold.  I  try  to  destroy
the  suggestion  by  placing  my  hand  on  his  head,  '  en  heteronome ' ;  the
only  result  which  I  obtain  is  to  make  him  think  of  Benoit.  I  pass  a  voltaic
current  through  his  neck  ;  the  thought  of  Benoit  recurs  more  strongly ;  I  tell
him  that  I  was  trying  to  make  him  tliink  that  he  tvas  Benoit.  '  Oh,  you
won't  get  quite  as  far  as  that !  '  he  replies  with  a  laugh.  We  go  to  dinner  ;
he  had  never  sat  at  my  table  before.  He  sits  down  in  an  easy  way  ;  I  remark
that  that  is  not  his  usual  place.  '  True  !  what  was  I  thinking  of  ? '  He
criticises  the  food  and  orders  the  servants  about.  Suddenly  I  put  him  to
sleep  again,  and  say,  '  You  are  no  longer  Henri ;  you  are  Benoit  ;  you  will
remember  that  you  have  been  dining  here. '  I  wake  him  ;  he  shakes  his
head  ;  opens  his  eyes  wide  ;  rises  timidly  and  confusedly,  thanks  me
and  takes  his  leave. "

This  case,  strange  though  it  sounds,  is  but  a  well-developed  speci-
men of  the  post-hypnotic  suggestions  which  during  these  last  few  years
have  been  inspired  in  so  many  subjects,  in  more  and  more  complex
forms.  But  it  deserves  to  be  remembered  when  we  come  to  consider  the
relative  value  of  the  various  items — similarity  of  style,  demeanour,
handwriting,  knowledge,  which  go  to  make  up  the  evidence  that  an
apparent  personality  is  really  what  it  assumes  to  be.^

1  I  may  add  here  another  anecdote  of  Benoit,  which  M.  de  Roclias  has  not
included  in  his  book,  but  has  sent  to  me,  with  permission  to  publish  it  in


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


253


We  have  now  made  a  survey — rapid,  indeed,  and  imperfect — of  a
wide  range  of  phenomena.  Let  us  briefly  realise  what  light  they  have
thrown  on  our  primary  problem — the  origin  of  such  messages  as  those
written  by  Mr.  Schiller's  hand.  The  first  impression,  as  I  have  said,
of  an  automatic  writer  of  such  messages  is  generally  that  they  proceed
from  some  intelligence  external  to  himself.  And  apart  from  all  dis-
cussion (which  we  are  avowedly  postponing)  as  to  facts  contained  in  the
messages  and  unknown  to  the  writer,  he  will  be  likely  to  base  this
presumption  of  externality  on  the  following  considerations.

1.  He  is  in  normal  health,  and  there  is  no  trace  of  morbid  or
hysterical  disturbance  in  his  psychical  being.

English.  It  is  much  to  our  purpose — as  showing  hypnotic  moralisation  eftected
by  the  agency  of  recurrent  dream.  I  slightly  abridge  M.  de  Eoehas'  account,
dated  March  25th,  1887.

"  Benoit  is  a  young  fellow  18  years  old,  employed  in  the  prefecture  of
Loir  et  Cher.  He  is  the  son  of  an  honest  artisan  family  ;  but  has  been  some-
what led  astray  by  foolish  companions, — somewhat  puffed  up  by  the  notice
taken  of  him  in  connection  with  my  hypnotic  experiments.  His  parents  com-
plained to  me  that  he  had  not  been  behaving  well  towards  them,  and  asked  me
to  use  my  influence  to  modify  his  conduct.  This  was  not  easy,  for  Benoit  could
tell  very  well,  by  pinching  himself,  whether  he  was  under  the  influence  ot  a
suggestion, — and  if  he  were  so,  he  could  dispel  the  suggestion  by  rubbing  his
forehead.

"  I  had  recourse,  therefore,  to  a  subterfuge.  I  put  him  to  sleep  by  surprise, in
the  middle  of  an  ordinary  conversation,  and  I  then  read  to  him  the  following-
suggestion,  which  I  had  written  down  in  order  to  give  it  without  hesitation.

"  'You  will  dream  for  three  nights  running  that  you  are  married,  that  you
have  a  grown-up  son,  that  you  and  your  wife  have  denied  yourselves  the
necessaries  of  life  in  order  to  educate  him.  Now  that  this  son — thanks  to  your
sacrifices — has  gained  a  certain  little  position,  he  thinks  himself  a  great  man,
never  enters  your  house  except  for  meals,  and  spends  all  he  earns  with  good-
for-nothing  friends.  In  your  dream  you  will  be  greatly  distressed  at  this  ;  you
will  try  to  remonstrate  with  him,  but  he  will  run  ott'  whenever  you  begin  to
talk.  Allien  you  wake  you  will  remember  your  dream  and  will  act  accordingly.
You  will  not  remember  that  I  gave  you  this  suggestion,  and  you  will  not  be
able  to  remove  it. '  Having  read  this  to  Benoit,  I  woke  him  by  the  word
'  Wake  ! '  and  continued  the  conversation  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  Benoit
was  not  aware  that  he  had  been  sent  to  sleei^.

"  Two  days  later  he  came  to  tell  me  that  he  was  troubled  by  terrible  night-
mares, which  he  begged  me  to  remove.  I  asked  hiui  for  details,  and  he  narrated
to  me  part  of  the  story  which  I  had  inspired,  passing  lightly  over  the  points
which  most  humiliated  him.  I  pointed  out  to  him  that  the  story  was  somewhat
like  his  own  ; — and  that  perhaps  his  nervous  system,  excited  by  hypnotism,  was
giving  a  striking  embodiment  to  the  secret  voice  of  conscience.  If  he  acted  as
the  dream  suggested,  it  would  doubtless  disappear  ; — and,  moreover,  I  would
now  hypnotise  him  and  suggest  that  his  sleep  should  be  tranquil.  The  dream
vanished,  and  from  that  day  onwards — it  is  now  two  months  ago — his  conduct
has  been  entirely  changed,  and  his  parents  are  astounded  at  the  improvement
which  has  taken  place  in  him."


254


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


2.  The  messages  are  connected  with  one  another  in  a  continuous
series.

3.  They  are  written  while  he  is  conscious  in  the  usual  way, — perhaps
talking  on  some  quite  different  topic.

4.  They  are,  themselves,  entirely  outside  his  consciousness.  Neither
at  the  time  nor  afterwards  is  he  aware  of  their  origination.

On  all  these  points  the  analogous  cases  which  have  been  cited  in
this  paper  may  throw  some  illumination.

1.  In  the  first  place  I  have  tried  to  show  that  automatism  affords
no  real  presumption  of  the  existence  of  any  morbid  action  whatever.
My  contention  is  that  each  case  of  apparent  automatism  should  be
considered  simply  on  its  own  merits,  without  being  supposed  to  imply
either  disease  or  inspiration.

2.  Then  again,  the  manifestation  of  a  new  character,  kept  up
throughout  a  long  series  of  these  automatic  writings,  has  been  paralleled
by  the  cases  given  of  the  origination  of  a  new  chain  of  memories — and
character  is  in  great  measure  a  function  of  memory — under  very  varied
circumstances  of  psychical  commotion.  The  graphic  automatist  tells  us
of  insurgent  quasi-personalities, — not  momentary,  but  of  indefinite
persistence  ;  not  co-ordinate  with  his  whole  normal  personality  (as  in
Felida's  case),  but  susceptible  of  considerable  multiplication,  as  one  new
"  guide  "  or  "  control "  is  added  to  another,  without  appreciably  dis-
turbing the  ordinary  current  of  life.  But  we  have  seen  that  this  fissi-
parous  multiplication  of  the  self, — if  I  may  so  term  it — is  by  no  means
so  rare  a  phenomenon  as  has  sometimes  been  supposed.  We  have  seen
that  something  of  a  subordinate  personality  tends  to  be  created  within
us  whenever  any  set  of  recurrent  ideas  and  sensations  are  sufficiently
isolated,  by  whatever  cause,  from  the  primary  series  with  which  we
are  accustomed  to  associate  our  personal  identity.

It  is  impossible  to  find  any  simile  which  will  give  an  adequate
notion  of  the  complexity  which  we  must  assume  in  processes  like
these.  Yet  the  view  which  I  wish  to  present  stands  in  great  need  of  such
clearness  as  a  concrete  analogy,  however  imperfect,  may  give  it.  I
wish  to  show,  then,  how  we  may  conceive  that  subordinate  personalities
may  manifest  themselves  from  time  to  time,  either  coincidently  with
the  primary  personality,  or  in  its  temporary  abeyance,  and  may  appear
to  be  (within  certain  limits)  distinct  from  that  primary  personality,
while  yet  they  are  mere  modifications  in  the  functioning  of  the  same
individual.

Let  us  compare  the  brain,  then,  to  a  musical-box,  far  more  complex
than  any  musical-box  actually  existing.  It  contains  thousands  of
barrels,  many  of  which  are  always  going  under  any  circumstances.  The
sound  made  by  any  of  the  barrels  can  be  easily  muffled.  My  ordinary
waking  life  is  represented  by  a  tune  played  by  barrel  A. This  tune  is


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


255


always  proceeding  :  when  I  sleep  it  is  muffled  ;  when  I  wake  I  catch  it
up  again.  As  life  proceeds  it  becomes  more  and  more  elaborate.
Each  fresh  experience  introduces  variations,  subsidiary  barrels  A',  A",
Arc.  But  the  essential  tune  is  so  far  the  same  that  a  competent  ear  can
detect  its  persistence  through  all  my  life, — can  see  that  at  forty  years  of
age  my  character  is  a  development  of  my  character  at  four.  When  I  doze
or  dream  confusedly,  this  means  that  the  barrels  A,  A',  A",  &c.,  are  all
muffled,  but  that  some  of  the  pins  are  imperfectly  muffled,  and  give  out
scattered  musical  phrases,  not  amounting  to  tunes.  When  my  dreams
are  distinct,  that  means  that  there  are  enough  of  these  imperfectly
muffled  pins  to  make  a  tune  of  their  own.  This  tune  will  be  poor  and
incorrect  ;  but  the  pins  are  so  disposed  that  certain  harmonic  combina-
tions occur  more  readily  than  discords  (this  is  the  law  of  mental
association),  and  that  any  musical  phrase  which  has  once  occurred  tends
to  repeat  itself.  Thus,  in  the  slight  link  of  memory  between  one  dream
and  another  dream,  I  have  a  new  tune  B,  composed  from  the  musical
elements  existing  in  A,  A',  <fcc.,  but  independent  of  them.  As  soon
as  the  new  tune  B  exists  we  must  suppose  that  by  some  phonographic
process  a  new  barrel  is  so  impressed  as  to  repeat  tune  B  under  favour-
able circumstances,  and  this  in  its  turn  becomes  subject  to  variations
B',B",  &c.

Next,  suppose  that  I  am  hypnotised.  The  various  degrees  and  states
of  hypnotisation  correspond  to  all  kinds  of  mufflings  and  slowings  of
the  barrels  A,  A',  &c.,  and  even  of  the  minor  barrels  a,  a',  a",  &c.,
which  form  the  sub-conscious  substratum  of  A,  A',  (regulating  vaso-
motor and  circulatory  phenomena,  &c.).  But  I  take  here  the  special
case  of  a  hypnotically-suggested  personality.  I  am  told  (say)  that  I  am
a  schoolboy.  The  effect  of  this  is  a  selective  evocation  of  sound  from
all  the  pins  which  are  of  a  particular  timbre, — many  of  them  belonging,
say,  to  the  variation-barrel  of  A",  which  I  acquired  at  the  schoolboy
period  of  life.

These  pins  produce  a  tune,  so  to  say,  of  schoolboy  quality  ; — of  more
purely  schoolboy  quality  than  any  tune  which  I  could  have  produced
without  having  the  non-schoolboy  pins  muffled.  But  this  schoolboy
tune  will  not  have  much  substance ;  its  effects  will  tend  to  recur,  for
it  has  not  at  its  disposal  the  complex  mechanism  of  the  great  barrels
A,  A',  (fee.

That  is  to  say,  if  I  write  a  schoolboy  story  in  my  normal  state  1
have  the  advantage  of  my  matured  intelligence,  which  enables  me  to
introduce  plot  and  variety ;  but  I  have  the  disadvantage  of  an  adult
mode  of  looking  at  things  which  prevents  me  from  really  reproducing
the  schoolboy  aroma.  If  I  am  turned  into  a  schoolboy  by  hypnotic
suggestion,  I  am  more  truly  schoolboyish  in  talk  and  manner, — I  perhaps
even  enjoy  a  revival  of  schoolboy  memories  otherwise  lost, — but  ]  have


256


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


not  the  adult's  resources  of  plot,  &c.,  and  soon  begin  to  repeat  my
schoolboy  jokes  and  gestures  over  and  over  again.

Each  time,  however,  that  I  am  hypnotised  into  a  schoolboy  I
improve  slightly  in  resource ;  for  each  tune  when  once  set  going  within
me  tends,  as  already  said,  to  imprint  itself  on  a  new  barrel  by  some
phonographic  process,  and  then  to  acquire  variations.

We  have  seen,  moreover,  that  not  only  hypnotism,  but  also  alcoholic
and  other  narcotisms,  epilepsy,  and  (we  may  of  course  add)  some  forms
of  insanity  evoke  .similarly  subordinate  or  adventitious  personalities.

Now  what  reason  is  there  for  supposing  that  these  are  the  only
agents  which  thus  detach  a  quasi-personality  from  the  main  current  of
our  life "?  There  is  no  sucli  reason  ;  on  the  contrary,  analogy  may
naturally  lead  us  to  suppose  that  such  disturbance  may  be  idiopathic
as  well  as  incidental.  It  is  at  any  rate  antecedently  more  probable
than  not  that  there  is  a  tendency  during  vigilance  to  all  cerebral
processes  to  which  there  is  a  tendency  during  sleep.  And  just  as  it
seems  to  be  what  we  call  a  chance,—  i.e.,  a  point  determined  by  obscure
and  minor  agencies — whether  our  dream-adventures  persist  into
waking  memory — so  also  it  may  be  a  chance  whether  our  waking
dreams — the  subordinate  quasi-personal  operations  which  coincide  with
our  waking  hours — do  or  do  not  manifest  themselves  in  a  way
perceptible  to  waking  consciousness.

To  write  a  thing  down  automatically  and  then  to  read  it  is  much
the  same  as  to  dream  a  thing  and  then  to  remember  it.

There  would  be  nothing  that  need  much  surprise  us  were  we  to
learn  that  dreams  of  a  considerable  degree  of  consistence  were  habitu-
ally occurring  within  us, — and  that  the  occasional  power  to  write
automatically,  like  the  occasional  power  to  recollect  a  dream,  did  but
give  us  a  glimpse  into  a  constantly  functioning  complex  of  cerebration
which  is  habitually  excluded  from  our  primary  mnemonic  chain.

Our  simile  has  led  us  into  some  remarks  appropriate  to  the  third
difficulty  above  mentioned  ; — the  co-existence,  namely,  of  the  unconscious
with  the  conscious  waking  life  of  the  automatist,  which  seems
to  differentiate  his  case  from  any  of  those  where  there  is  alternation
between  normal  vigilance  and  something  like  a  recurrent  dream.  It
was  partly  to  meet  this  difficulty  that  I  brought  forward  the  hypothesis
of  the  simultaneous,  but  separate,  action  of  the  two  cerebral  hemi-
spheres in  cases  like  these.  But  waiving,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  any
such  theory  of  dual  cerebration,  I  think  that  the  whole  question  of  the
relation  of  consciousness  to  personality  may  now  be  met  in  a  distincter
manner  than  was  possible  on  metaphysical  grounds  alone.

We  can  no  longer  draw  a  broad  line  between  the  conscious  and  the
unconscious,  and  say  that  what  a  man  is  conscious  of  is  part  of  his  true
self,  and  that  phenomena,  however  complex,  which  never  enter  into  his


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


257


consciousness,  must  be  considered  as  lying  outside  his  true  identity.  We
cannot  say  this,  because  the  cases  here  cited  (amongst  others)  have
shown  us  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  predict  what  acts  will  ultimately
enter  into  a  man's  consciousness,  and  what  will  not.  I  use  the  phrase
"  enter  into  his  consciousness  "  in  order  to  imply  that  the  mere  fact  of
being  recollected — of  entering  into  the  "  memory  of  evocation  " — as
M.  Richet  has  happily  termed  it — constitutes  the  only  test  of  conscious-
ness which  we  can  apply.  The  only  way  in  which  a  man  can  prove  to
us  that  he  was  conscious  of  any  act  is  by  describing  it  afterwards.  And
what  acts  he  may  be  able,  at  some  date  or  other,  and  in  some  condition
or  other,  to  describe  or  to  show  recollection  of,  it  is — as  hypnotic
experiments  teach  us — absolutely  impossible  to  foretell.

We  do  not  know  how  deep  the  "  memory  of  fixation  "  goes  ;  we
cannot  determine,  that  is  to  say,  the  inferior  limit,  below  which  an
excitation  is  too  feeble  to  leave  an  impress  on  our  nervous  system
capable  of  subsequent  revival.  We  may,  of  course,  say  that  it  does  not
seem  likely  that  a  man  should  ever  be  able  to  remember,  for  instance,
so  purely  vegetative  an  operation  as  the  growth  of  his  hair.  But
observations  during  recovery  from  fainting,^  and  under  narcotics,  shows
us  that  when  the  action  of  the  hemispheres  has  been  wholly  or  partially
in  abeyance,  we  may  find  ourselves  able  to  recollect  nervous  opei'ations
lying — as  it  seems — beneath  the  threshold  of  anything  that  can  be  called
a  sense  of  personality.

And  if  the  limits  of  the  memory  of  fixation  are  thus  uncertain,  equally
uncertain  is  the  relation  which  the  memory  of  evocation  bears  thereto
in  each  individual  case.  No  man  has  ever  evoked  into  recollection  all
the  evocable  memories  within  him  ;  no  man  can  say  what  condition  of
life  or  death  may  suddenly  open  to  him  new  chambers  in  his  own  past.
If  we  are  to  hazard  a  conjecture, the  safest  supposition  would  seem  to  be
that  at  least  any  cortical  operation  whatever  which  had  taken  place  in  a
man's  brain  was  potentially  memorable,  whatever  its  originating
source  ;  so  that  we  might  on  this  view  expect  that  we  should  find
scattered  instances  where  these  automatic  messages — whose  production
must  have  involved  cortical  centres — have,  though  at  first  reckoned
unconscious,  ultimately  become  a  part  of  the  writer's  conscious  being.

I  do  not  mean  that  he  will  then  necessarily  recognise  them
as  emanating  from  himself.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  possible
that  he  may  then  recognise,  with  strong  subjective  conviction  at
least,  that  they  proceed  from  some  intelligence  other  than  his  own.
My  point  is  that  the  fact  that  he  cannot  get  behind  the  messages —
cannot  realise  their  inception  to  the  same  degree  as  he  realises  the

^  See  especially  Herzen's  Les  Conditions  Physiques  de  la  Conscience.
Geneva,  1886.

s


258


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


inception  of  his  own  habitual  thoughts — is  absolutely  no  proof  that
they  are  not  his  own.  If  he  does  get  behind  them,  if  he  realises  their
inception  in  what  appears  to  him  the  same  intuitive  manner  as  when
he  realises  the  inception  of  his  own  characteristic  ideas,  then,  indeed,
I  do  not  say  that  his  view  of  them  will  be  certainly  the  right  one — but  it
■will  be  an  important  element  in  their  estimation.  We  shall  be  passing,
in  short,  from  the  problems  of  automatism  to  the  problems  of  clairvoy-
ance and  of  ecstasy.

On  discussions  of  this  kind  we  cannot  here  enter.  What  has  been
said  may  be  enough  to  show  that  instead  of  merely  asking,  with
regard  to  a  written  message  or  any  other  manifestation,  "Was  it
conscious  or  unconscious  ? "  we  must  rather  ask,  with  more  precision  :
To  what  extent  was  this  intellectual  operation  included  within  the
series  constituting  normal  memory  ?  or  to  what  extent  did  it  form  a
part  of  any  abnormal,  or  subsidiary,  or  intercurrent  thread  of  memory  1
or  to  what  extent,  finally,  did  it  remain  outside  all  phases  of  memory
which  the  subject  at  any  time  passed  through?

The  answer  to  this  question  will  in  each  case  be  important,  but  will
not,  taken  by  itself,  be  decisive  as  to  the  character  of  the  message  ; —
which  must  be  judged  far  more  by  its  content  than  by  the  subjective
aspect  of  its  manifestation.  Rather,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the  varying
circumstances,  as  regards  immediate  or  postponed  memory,  under  which
messages  closely  analogous  to  each  other  are  given,  may  help  to  teach
us  how  much  less  radical  a  fact  in  our  being  our  immediate  conscious-
ness forms  than  has  often  been  supposed.  Instead  of  treating  our
normal  stream  of  consciousness  as  necessarily  representing  our  true  self,
we  shall  rather  be  disposed  to  see  in  it  a  mere  practical  compromise,  a
mere  prudential  result  of  evolution.  I  am  conscious  of  certain  thoughts
and  not  of  other  thoughts — not  because  the  one  set  of  thoughts  is  more
essentially  mine  than  the  other,  but  because  it  has  been  helpful  to  my
ancestors  in  the  struggle  for  existence  that  consciousness  should  set
that  wa}'.  It  has  been  convenient  that  I  should  come  to  suppose
myself  to  be  an  intellectual  agent  of  this  particular  kind,  just  as  it  has
been  convenient  that  I  should  identify  the  inscrutable  objects  around
me  by  some  staring  distinction, — that  I  should  recognise  oranges  as
yellow  and  grass  as  green.

Now  we  all  know  that  when  we  get  a  little  deeper  we  realise
the  subjectivity  of  our  sensations, — that  the  yellowness  is  in  us  rather
than  in  the  orange  ;  and  the  subjectivity  of  our  ideation — our  thoughts
being  conditioned  by  certain  categories  or  limitations  (as  time  and  space)
which  they  cannot  transcend.  But  I  am  here  contending  that  we  still
are  accustomed  to  take  ourselves  too  much  for  granted  ;  that  we  have
no  warrant  for  assuming  that  the  "  testimony  of  consciousness  " — after
all  our  corrections  and  emendations — does  really  cover  the  most


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


259


important  part  of  the  psychical  operations  which  are  going  on
within  us.

How  can  we  possibly  tell  whether  it  does  so  or  nof?  To  what
confirmation  can  we  appeal  All  that  we  can  say  is,  that  we  are
conscious  of  most  of  the  thoughts  which  conspicuously  influence  our
voluntary  movements.  These  movements  are  definitely  known ;  they
may  be  watched  and  registered  by  others  ;  and  we  can  then  say  what
train  of  ideas  seemed  to  us  to  prompt  each  movement.  And  this  is  all
that  is  needful  to  make  us  rational  agents,  capable  of  taking  part  in
the  struggle  for  existence.

Bat  we  know  that  a  great  deal  more  than  this  is  in  fact  going  on
within  us.  Multitudes  of  involuntary  movements,  both  peripheral  and
internal — multitudes  of  spontaneously  arising  images,  during  both
sleep  and  waking — testify  to  cerebral  activities  of  which  we  are  never
consciously  the  originators.

All  that  we  can  say  of  these  cerebral  activities  is  that  if  it  had  been
of  much  practical  use  to  our  ancestors  to  be  conscious  of  them,
they,  and  consequently  we,  would  probably  have  become  conscious  of
them.  In  this  respect  we  may  compare  them  to  certain  forms  of
sensibility  which  we  perceive,  in  some  rare  examples,  to  be  possible  to
the  human  organism,  but  which  have  not,  apparently,  been  valuable
enough  to  our  ancestors  to  get  themselves  established  among  recognised
human  faculties.  Such  sensibilities  may  sometimes  correspond  to
phenomena  that  are  very  important,  sometimes  to  phenomena  that  are
very  trivial.  One  man  feels  the  approach  of  a  thunderstorm,  another
is  sure  that  there  is  a  cat  under  the  sofa.  The  mere  fact  that  neither
kind  of  susceptibility  has  risen  into  habitual  generic  faculty  tells  us
nothing  whatever  as  to  the  abstract  dignity  or  paltriness  of  its  special
subject-matter.  And  similarly  with  these  centrally-initiated  activities
which  we  are  now  discussing.  The  cerebral-psychical  operations  of
which  we  are  unconscious  may  be  as  trifling  as  the  fact  of  the  presence
or  absence  of  a  cat.  Or  they  may  be  as  important  as  the  whole  theory
of  electricity.  We  cannot  tell  beforehand  ;  and  we  need  experiments  of
the  kind  which  I  have  been  describing  and  advocating  in  order  to  enable
us  to  find  out.  We  need,  in  short,  to  apply  to  the  very  central  fact  of
our  self-consciousness  the  same  analysis  which  we  have  applied
with  more  or  less  success  to  almost  every  other  "  dictum  of  con-
sciousness." To  find  out  what  we  are  we  must  not  trust  to  what  we
seem  to  ourselves  to  be ;  we  must  resort  to  scientific  artifice,  to
mechanical  registration,  to  tortuous  experiment.

And  if,  as  I  believe,  telepathy  is  one  of  the  facts  within  us
which  it  has  been  left  for  artifice  and  experiment — rather  than  for
common  experience — to  establish  as  truly  existent,  then  assuredly  the
harvest  is  already  a  rich  one.


260


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  28,


And  here,  in  conclusion,  I  may  fitly  call  attention  to  what  seems  to
me  a  prevalent  fallacy  connected  with  this  class  of  observations.  It
has  been  assumed — by  some  with  indifierence,  by  others  with  horror —
that  this  view  of  our  personality  as  a  complex,  a  shifting  thing, — a
unity  upbuilt  from  multiplicity, —  an  empire  aggregated  from  the  fusion
of  disparate  nationalities, — must  bring  with  it  also  a  presumption
that  there  is  nothing  in  us  beyond  this  ever-changing  identity,  whose
continuance  depends  but  on  links  of  perishable  memory,  on  organic
syntheses  which  an  accident  may  distoi't  or  decompose.

I  do  not  myself  think  that  this  analysis  of  our  terrene  personality
— pushed  even  as  I  am  pushing  it  now — does  in  reality  introduce  any
additional  difiiculty  whatever  into  the  hypothesis  of  a  transcendental
Self  behind  the  phenomena  ; — of  what  we  call  a  human  soul.  The
difficulties  are  now  made  more  glaringly  visible  ;  but  they  existed  for
any  reasonable  mind  already.  No  one,  surely,  supposed  that  the  soul
was  cohicident  with  the  psychical  manifestation  known  to  us  1  No  one
doubted  that  it  was  expressed  more  fully  at  some  moments  than  at
others,  in  manhood  rather  than  in  infancy,  in  waking  rather  than  in
sleep,  in  sane  life  rather  than  in  dementia  or  in  delirium  %  On  any
hypothesis  the  soul  is  conceived  as  working  tliroiigh  the  body  ;  and
therefore  as  necessarily  finding  in  the  body  an  instrument  of  constantly
varying  responsiveness  and  power.  All  that  is  offered  here  is  but  a
development  of  this  admitted  thesis — a  further  analysis  of  the  machinery
which  must  in  any  case  be  needed  to  bring  transcendental  operatioiis
within  the  purview  of  sense.  If  an  immortal  soul  there  be  within  us,
she  must  be  able  to  dispense  with  part  of  the  brain's  help  while  the
brain  is  living,  as  with  the  whole  of  its  help  when  it  is  dead.  If  the
soul  exist,  she  must  exist  (if  I  may  so  say)  ij)sa  suis  poUejis  opibus,
nihil  indiga  nostri  :  not  needing  that  our  dim  consciousness  should
place  her  unbrokenly  in  evidence,  or  demonstrate  by  any  terrene
continuity  an  existence  more  abiding  than  that  of  earth.

The  true  lesson,  as  it  seems  to  me,  which  these  new  speculations
teach  us,  is  of  a  more  hopeful  though  of  a  vaguer  kind.  It  is  simply
that  we  are  still  groping  among  the  rudiments  of  a  true  knowledge  of
our  psychical  being.  From  whence  it  follows  that  at  least  no  great  ques-
tion as  to  our  nature  or  our  destiny  has  as  yet  been  even  approximately
decided  in  a  sense  contrary  to  the  higliest  hopes  of  men.  So  far  from
our  living,  as  some  would  tell  us,  in  an  age  which  has  had  to  relinquish
all  hope  of  deeper  knowledge,  further  light,  upon  the  chief  concerns  of
man,  we  are  living  in  an  age  when  fruitful  methods  of  experiment  are
just  becoming  possible  ;  when  we  have  just  learnt  enough  of  easier
problems  to  begin  to  interpret  the  faint  indications  which  throw  light
on  the  highest  problems  of  all.

I  do  not  wish  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  the  special  class  o£


1887.]


Automatic  Writing.


261


experiment  which  I  am  advocating  here.  Automatic  writing  is  not  a
key  to  all  the  recesses  of  our  being.  But  it  is  a  key  to  something,  and
it  is  a  key  that  will  actually  turn  in  the  lock.  Automatic  messages
will  come,  i£  persistently  tried  for ;  they  can  be  analysed  ;  the  result
of  the  analysis  must  in  any  case  be  instructive,  and  may  point  towards
conclusions  of  even  startling  magnitude.  Again  I  must  appeal  for
fresh  experiment,  for  fresh  observation.  I  do  not,  of  covirse,  venture
to  demand  that  experimenters,  who  may  think  me  a  mistaken
interpreter,  should  send  their  results  to  me  personally ;  though  I  can
promise  to  study  with  the  iitmost  care  any  records  that  may  reach  me.
But  if  there  are  those  who  believe  that  these  messages  do  demonstrably
come  from  some  intelligence  exterior  to  themselves,  and  especially  from
the  intelligence  of  some  departed  friend,  then  I  would  urge  them  to
give,  in  some  fashion  or  other,  their  reason  for  the  faith  that  is  in
them — to  set  before  the  world,  if  they  can,  some  further  well-attested
instances  which  point  towai-ds  so  momentous  a  conclusion.  Let  them
not  spare  their  utmost  pains  in  such  a  cause  as  this.  koKov  yap  ro  ddXov
(cat  Tj  eXnls  iieyakTj. Worthy  is  that  effort  and  great  would  be  that  hope.


262


President's  Address.


[April  23,


PKOCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
A2Jril  23,  1887.

The  twenty-fourth  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  rooms  of  the
Society  of  British  Artists,  Suflblk-street,  Pall  Mall,  on  April  23,
1887.

The  President,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  in  the  Chair.
The  President  delivered  the  following  address  : —

II.

Let  me  begin  my  few  remarks  by  congratulating  the  Society  on
the  recent  publication,  under  its  auspices,  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  in
two  goodly  volumes.  I  esteem  this  to  be  a  great  work  •  and  if,  in  a
sense,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  preliminary  discussion,  it  is  not  because
the  materials  are  so  meagre,  but  because  the  subject  is  so  large.  For
my  own  part,  I  conceive  that  the  evidence  for  spontaneous  telepathy  is
extremely  strong — that  it  forms,  perhaps,  the  strongest  class  of  evidence
that  our  Society  has  yet  dealt  with.  A  praiseworthy  attempt  has  been
made  in  these  volumes  to  put  part  of  this  evidence  into  a  numerical
form,  and  to  demonstrate  the  very  great  improbability  of  the  recorded
coincidences  being  due  to  chance.  In  view  of  the  fact,  never  before
precisely  established,  that  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  sane
persons  are  by  no  means  extraordinary  or  extremely  rare  occurrences,
this  calculation  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  argument.  My  belief  is,
however,  that  the  strongest  evidence  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  cannot
easily  be  clothed  in  numerical  garments.  Between  a  recorded  vision
and  the  death,  let  us  say,  of  a  distant  friend,  there  are  other  points  of
coincidence  than  that  of  time ;  frequently,  for  instance,  there  are  curious
circumstantial  similarities,  such  as  have  been  described  in  these  volumes,
but  of  which  the  evidential  strength  cannot  well  be  expressed  in
numbers,  although  we  know  that  this  must  be  very  great.

I  may  here  be  allowed,  with  reference  to  our  Society  and  its
prospects,  shortly  to  review  the  present  position  of  those  departments
of  science  with  which  we  are  most  familiar,  as  well  as  the  attitude
assumed  by  the  various  scientific  workers.  First  of  all,  we  see  the
youthful  acolyte  driven  to  science  by  the  operation  of  an  uncontrollable
instinct  that  selects  for  him  not  only  the  spot  where  he  shall  begin  his
mental  labours,  but  the  tools  and  the  materials  which  he  shall  employ.
Here  he  works  indefatigably,  adding  with  sure  but  cautious  hand  stone
upon  stone  to  his  corner  of  the  great  temple  of  knowledge.  Casting


1887.]


President's  Address.


263


his  eyes  around  him,  he  sees  fellow  workers  not  far  distant  doing  the
same  thing,  each  equally  busy  in  his  own  little  corner.

Now  each  of  these  workers  may  have  only  a  very  dim  conception  of
the  shape  and  features  which  the  completed  building  will  ultimately
assume.  But  yet  there  is  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  each  that  these
various  little  works  will  so  fit  in  with  one  another  as  to  form  one  grand
and  harmonious  whole.  Were  we  to  clothe  this  belief  in  Theistic
language  it  would  imply,  amid  great  darkness,  a  trust  nevertheless  in  the
unity  of  design  of  the  Great  Architect  from  whom  each  worker  has
received  his  commission.  It  would  imjjly,  moreover,  a  trust  of  each  in
his  fellow  workers,  a  species  of  faith  without  which  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  rear  any  great  and  glorious  temple,  or  indeed,  for  that  matter,
to  do  anything  else  worth  mentioning  in  the  world.

What  I  have  now  described  is  the  state  of  mind  towards  his
fellows  and  towards  his  work  of  each  individual  in  a  group  of  builders
engaged  in  some  particular  corner  of  the  great  work -field.  We  have
seen  that  there  is  belief  in  his  work  and  belief  in  his  fellow-
workers.  But  there  are  many  such  groups,  some  of  them  very  remote
from  others,  and  the  feelings  entertained  by  the  members  of  one  group
for  those  of  a  distant  group  are  not  always  so  satisfactory.  It  may
be  that  the  microscopical  intentness  with  which  the  man  of  science
has  to  regard  his  near  environment  tends  to  disqualify  him  from
properly  appreciating  distant  objects.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  members
of  one  group  are  too  apt  to  disregard  the  labours  of  another  and
distant  group,  and  to  imagine  either  that  they  are  not  building
at  all  or  that  they  are  not  building  anything  that  will
last.  Tliere  is,  in  fine,  a  comparative  inability  to  see  that  the
distant  group  are  engaged  equally  with  themselves  in  advancing
the  same  great  work.

If  I  have  made  myself  clear,  it  would  seem  that  there  is  a  strong-
practical  faith  amongst  the  neighbouring  workmen  in  each  department
of  science,  and  an  equally  strong  assurance  that  their  united  labours
will  ultimately  have  an  issue  larger  than  any  one  of  them  can  realise.
There  is  not,  however,  the  same  assurance  that  the  various  groups
of  workers  are  equally  trustworthy,  and  that  all  are  striving  with
earnestness  and  success  to  yield  their  contributions  to  the  same  great
cause.  Philosophy  has,  if  I  mistake  not,  her  part  to  play  amongst  these
workers.  I  do  not,  I  must  confess,  think  that  the  union  between
philosophy  and  science  has  hitherto,  as  a  rule,  been  sufficiently  intimate.
Philosophers  have,  as  I  think,  too  exclusively  concerned  themselves
with  successfully  deepening  and  enriching  our  conception  of  the
universe  as  a  whole,  and  hence  have  not  taken  sufficient  j)ains  to  see
that  scientific  workers  liave  been  duly  permeated  with  the  spirit  and
doctrines  of  a  true  philosophy. One  feels  almost  tempted  to  apply  to


264


President's  Address.


[April  23,


some  of  them  the  lines  of  the  poet,  who,  after  describing  tlie  huge  works
erected  by  the  fallen  angels  and  the  great  projects  entertained  by
them,  proceeds  thus  to  describe  the  philosophers  of  the  party  : —
Others  apart  sat  on  a  hill  retired,
In  thoughts  more  elevate,  and  reason'd  high
Of  providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and  fate,
Fix'd  fate,  free  will,  foreknowledge  absolute.
And  found  no  end,  in  wandering  mazes  lost.

But  I  would  not  have  you  suppose  that  I  mean  to  make  a  sweeping
charge  against  all  philosophers.  There  are  some  who  have  come  down
from  those  elevated  regions  on  which  they  have  obtained  a  clear  insight
into  the  great  temple  of  knowledge,  to  enforce  their  views  upon  the
individual  scientific  workers,  amongst  whom  they  have  played  the  part
of  generals  and  directors  of  labour.  Indeed,  I  believe  that  our  Society
owes  its  success  in  a  great  measure  to  this  action  of  our  first  President,
who,  while  mucli  distinguished  as  a  philosopher,  has  not  only  success-
fully enforced  the  claims  of  psychical  research  upon  the  regard  of
men  of  science,  but  has  likewise  taken  a  personal  part  in  the  scientific
labours  of  our  Society.

You  will  perceive  by  these  few  remarks  that  while,  as  I  think,  there
is  not  yet  a  complete  unity  of  purpose  or  action  between  the  scientific
workers  in  distant  fields,  yet  the  time  is  rapidly  approaching  when  this
union  will  be  more  complete,  and  when  (to  use  a  technical  term)  the
diminution  of  internal  friction  will  set  so  much  more  energy  free
towards  the  completion  of  the  one  great  and  glorious  work.  To  vary
the  metaphor,  we  see  before  us  at  present  a  number  of  separate  rivulets
of  knowledge  each  rushing  along  impetuously  within  well  defined  granite
walls.  Let  us,  however,  pursue  the  course  of  these  rivulets  sufficiently
far  and  we  shall  find  tliat  tliey  will  ultimately  merge  into  one  great  and
mighty  river  of  knowledge,  bearing  on  its  bosom  the  means  of  inter-
communion between  distant  regions,  with  fulness  in  all  its  borders.
I  anticipate,  therefore,  at  no  distant  period  the  full  recognition  of  our
labours  by  men  of  science  in  general ;  but  here  I  pause  to  notice  a
friendly  objection  that  has  been  raised  to  the  work  of  our  Society.

It  has  been  urged  that  we  have  not  succeeded  in  formulating  in
precise  language  laws  which  might  embrace  the  various  facts  that  we
have  brought  to  light.  This  objection  was  raised  before  the  publica-
tion of  Phmitasms  of  the  Living ;  but  I  cannot  think  that  it  will  be
maintained  by  anyone  who  has  read  this  work.  The  shadowy  form  of
a  great  reality  is  looming  through  the  darkness,  and  at  least  two  specu-
lators are  busy,  each  from  his  own  point  of  view,  endeavouring  to  render
tiie  outlines  clearer.  Can  we  expect  such  a  work  to  be  definitely  com-
pleted in  a  day  or  a  year  1  It  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  that  there  are
several  possible  explanations  of  the  facts  recorded,  and  of  these  some


1887.]


President's  Address.


265


are  less  likely  than  others  to  yield  us  laws  capable  of  detinite  expression,
or  at  least  of  definite  numerical  expression.  For  what  is  the  phenomenon
before  us?  Adopting  the  well-known,  and  not,  I  think,  unscientific
terms,  mind,  body,  and  medium,  we  find  in  these  volumes  that  an  afi'ec-
tion  of  the  mind  and  body  of  A  produces  an  affection  of  the  mind  and
body  of  B  by  some  unknown  means,  and  often  at  a  great  distance.
Now  there  are  at  least  three  conceivable  hypotheses  by  which  this
action  may  be  explained  : — (1)  The  mind  of  A  may  act  directly  upon
the  mind,  and  through  it  upon  the  body,  of  B  ;  or,  (2)  the  mind  of  A  may
act  directly  upon  the  body,  and  through  it  upon  the  mind,  of  B;  or,  (3)
the  body  of  A  may  act  in  a  peculiar  manner  upon  the  medium,  and  the
medium  may  act  upon  the  body,  and  through  it  upon  tlie  miud,  of  B.
If  the  last  hypothesis  be  correct,  we  may  confidently  hope  to  obtain
something  approaching  numerical  laws  ;  but  if  the  first  hypothesis  be
true,  it  is  more  difficult  to  entei'tain  this  hope.

At  present  we  should  have  three  simultaneous  objects  in  view.  First
of  all,  we  must  accumulate  evidence  ;  secondly,  we  must  sift  it ;  while
in  the  third  place  we  should  discuss  and  speculate  upon  the  confirmed
evidence  in  the  freest  possible  manner.  I  cannot  doubt  that  the
truth  will  ultimately  emerge  from  such  a  discussion,  pursued  with
sufficient  energy  and  perseverance.

Before  concluding,  I  should  wish  to  say  a  few  words  about  another
branch  of  our  programme  of  inqviiry  which  has  assumed  considerable
prominence  in  the  Jo^irnal  and  Proceedings  during  the  past  year
— I  mean  the  phenomena  of  so-called  Spiritualism.  Those  who  are
known  as  Spiritualists  maintain  two  things.  They  assert  in  the
first  place  the  existence  of  certain  phenomena,  while  in  the  second  place
they  maintain  that  the  simplest  and  most  natural,  if  not,  indeed,  the
only  legitimate  explanation  of  these  involves  the  existence  of  spirits
which  are  permitted  on  certain  occasions  to  hold  intercourse  with  man

I  need  not  say  that  many  of  us  believe  in  the  existence  of  other
intelligent  beings  besides  man,  unseen  by  us  as  a  rule,  and  in  all  proba-
bility superior  to  us  in  mental  rank.  Many,  too,  believe  that  the
denizens  of  the  spiritual  world  are  not  indifferent  to  our  welfare,  and
that  we  frequently  receive  aid  from  them  in  impoi'tant  crises  of  our
mortal  life,  while  others  are  not  unwilling  to  solicit  such  aid.  But
probably  all  are  agreed  that,  assuming  the  existence  of  spirits,  there  is,
at  least,  as  great  a  variety  of  character  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  the
unseen  world  as  amongst  ourselves,  if,  indeed,  the  range  of  character
be  not  much  greater,  extending  upwards  to  heights  of  goodness  which
we  cannot  reach,  and  downwards  to  depths  of  guilt  and  ignominy
which  we  cannot  fathom.

Many  will  argue  that  under  these  circumstances  we  must  so  guard
ourselves  in  our  intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world  as  to  be  certain


266


President's  Address.


[April  23,


that  our  advances  will  only  be  responded  to  by  the  good.  And
unquestionably  a  bad  man  who  appeals  to  evil  spirits  to  help  him  in
his  wickedness  deserves  the  reprobation  of  liumanity,  even  although  his
advances  may  not  meet  with  any  response. The  attempts  of  the
modern  Spiritualists  to  hold  communion  with  the  denizens  of  the
unseen  belong  to  neither  of  the  categories  now  mentioned. They  are
not  the  appeals  of  poor  humanity  for  spii'itual  help  from  good  angels,
and  unquestionably  they  are  not  the  endeavours  of  the  wicked  to
procure  assistance  from  the  powerful  and  the  bad. There  is,  as  a  rule,
hardly  any  moral  colouring  about  them ;  and  the  Spiritualists  may  be
regarded  as  a  society  endeavouring  to  obtain  conclusive  proof  of  the
existence  of  spirits,  rather  than  a  confederacy  to  elicit  spiritual  aid  in
the  affairs  of  life. Now  I  have  tried  to  show  in  these  remarks  that  an
indispensable  condition  of  progress  in  any  branch  of  science  is  mutual  co-
operation and  confidence  between  the  various  members  of  that  branch.
A  man  must  trust  his  fellow-workers,  otherwise  he  will  not  be  able  to
advance  the  department  of  knowledge  to  which  he  has  devoted  himself.
And  if  our  object  be  to  receive  scientific  evidence  of  the  existence  of
spirits,  this  assumes  co-operation  between  ourselves  and  these  intel-
ligences.  But  here  we  have  no  guarantee  for  character  such  as  we  have
a  right  to  demand  from  our  fellow-workers  in  science. We  know  very
well  that  our  comrades,  in  any  ordinary  branch  of  science  or  know-
ledge, are  perfectly  honest,  and  that  their  object  is  to  advance  that
branch. But  assuming  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  we  can  com-
municate with  spirits,  what  proof  have  we  of  their  honesty,  or  how  do
we  know  that  their  object,  as  well  as  ours,  is  to  obtain  for  us  good
evidence  of  their  existence  1 Some  of  us  may  be  disposed  to  question
the  likelihood  of  man  being  permitted  in  his  present  state  to  obtain  at
will  scientific  evidence  of  the  existence  of  spiritual  beings. The  spirits
with  whom  I  assume,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  we  are  brought  into
contact,  may  neither  have  the  power  nor  the  will to  prove  their
existence  as  a  scientific  fact,  and  yet  they  may  have  the  power  of
leaving  the  door  of  evidence  partly  open. We  may  in  truth  be  dealing,
not  so  much  with  willing  coadjutors  that  will  assist  us  in  throwing  this
door  completely  open,  as  with  versatile  opponents  who  will  equally
oppose  all  attempts  either  to  throw  it  comjjletely  open  or  to  keep  it
definitely  shut. In  fine,  we  are  not  sure  that  this  research  will  ever  be
decisive  or  tliat  we  shall  be  able  to  prove  either  an  affirmative  or  a
negative.

It  is  not  necessary  to  discuss  the  question  whether  one  who  has
satisfied  him.self  that  he  is  in  communion  witli  spirits  is  acting  wisely
in  continuing  the  iiitercourse.  We  have  not,  I  imagine,  as  yet  pro-
gressed sufiiciently  far  to  entertain  this  question.  The  problem  at
present  before  us  is,  to  determine  whether  certain  alleged  phenomena


1887.]


President's  Address.


267


do  or  do  not  occur,  and  then,  presuming,  for  the  sake  of  argument,
that  this  question  is  decided  in  the  affirmative,  to  give  an  opinion
whether  it  is  not  the  simplest  explanation  of  these  to  suppose  them
due  to  spiritual  agency.  Unquestionably,  certain  members  of  our
Society  are  in  a  good  position  to  afford  help  in  settling  these  questions,
for  they  are  skilled  and  well  practised  in  examining  evidence,  and  they
are  like^vise  capable  of  deciding  whether  telepathy  or  some  extension  of
it  may  not  account  for  the  phenomena  without  the  necessity  of  resorting
to  the  hypothesis  of  spiritual  agency  ;  and  our  friends  the  Spiritualists
are,  I  think,  perfectly  justified  in  challenging  us  to  undertake  this
business  of  investigation.  There  are,  however,  reasons  why  the  Com-
mittee who  undertake  the  task  should  rather  be  one  requested  by  the
President  to  act  than  a  formal  committee  of  our  Society.  Under  these
circumstances  I  have  requested  the  following  gentlemen  to  take  part,
with  myself,  in  a  Committee  of  this  nature,  with  the  view  of  investigating
the  reality  of  such  alleged  Spiritualistic  phenomena  as  may  be  brought
before  them  ; — Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  Professor  O.  J.  Lodge,  Professor
Barrett,  Mr.  Angelo  J.  Lewis,  Mr.  E.  Gurney,  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.
Myers.  These  have  all  agreed  to  serve ;  and  surely  the  composition  of
the  Committee  is  such  that  they  may  be  trusted  to  examine  in  a  receptive
and  impartial  manner  any  evidence  submitted  to  them,  as  well  as  to
detect  any  attempt  at  imposture  that  may  be  practised  upon  them.
Such  attempts  are  greatly  to  be  regretted  ;  but  we  must  perhaps  expect
them  to  cling  more  closely  to  a  subject  of  this  nature  than  to  the
ordinary  branches  of  human  knowledge.


268


Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


III.

PECULIARITIES  OF  CERTAIN  POST-HYPNOTIC  STATES.

By  Edmund  Gukney.

I.

Execution  of  Hypnotic  Commands  in  a  Waking  and  in  a
Trance-waking  State.

To  students  of  hypnotism  it  is  one  of  the  most  familiar  of  truths  that
a  person  on  whom  a  command  has  been  impressed  during  the
trance  will  often  perform  it  afterwards,  however  out  of  place  or
ridiculous  it  may  be.  The  fact  at  once  suggests  two  important
questions,  one  practical  and  the  other  psychological.  (1)  What  limits,
if  any,  can  be  assigned  to  the  operator's  influence  in  this  respect  ?  Could
the  awakened  "  subject"  be  made  to  do  things  completely  alien  to  his
natural  character — e.g.,  to  commit  a  ci'ime  which  would  never  have
spontaneously  occurred  to  him  1  (2)  In  what  state  is  his  mind  during
the  time  that  the  command  is  being  executed  ?

This  second  question,  it  is  plain,  has  practical  bearings  of  its
own;  not  only  because  on  the  state  of  the  "subject's"  mind  will
depend  the  degree  of  his  responsibility  for  his  actions  ;  but  because
by  the  state  of  his  mind  we  must  decide  whether  or  not  it  is  justifiable,
even  for  experimental  purposes,  and  with  no  risk  of  serious  external
consequences,  to  suggest  the  pei'formance  of  any  action  which  is  morally
objectionable.  If  his  state  is  as  remote  from  normality  as  that  of
dream,  it  might  reasonably  be  held  that  acts  performed  in  it  left  no
more  trace  on  the  character  than  those  dream-scenes  in  which  the  most
magnanimous  man  is  often  mean,  and  the  bravest  man  a  coward  ;  but
in  proportion  as  the  state  approximated  in  its  general  character  to  that
of  waking  life,  would  the  risk  increase  of  mischievous  results  from  an
actual  though  artificial  ascendency  of  lower  impulses  1  I  do  not  purpose
to  pursue  this  ethical  question  in  the  present  paper  :  I  have  brought  it
forward  merely  for  the  sake  of  a  word  of  caution,  which  seems  at  this
moment  to  be  peculiarly  needed.  I  seriously  fear  that  the  continuance,
in  the  French  schools,  of  experiments  of  the  sham-criminal  type  may
greatly  prejudice  the  general  investigation  of  hypnotism.  A  certain
amount  of  not  very  reasonable  prejudice  has  already  been  excited  by
the  proof  that,  with  exceptionally  sensitive  "  subjects,"  a  hypnotic
order  will  produce  the  subsequent  commission  of  a  crime. That  is  to


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.


269


say,  hypnotism,  like  strychnine  and  arsenic,  is  an  instrument  that  may
be  abused  ;  and  people  sometimes  fail  to  see  that  this  is  not  a  reason
for  neglecting  to  study  it,  any  more  than  for  exacting  ignorance  of  the
properties  of  strychnine  and  arsenic  from  medical  practitioners.  But
a  much  more  valid  objection  might  be  I'aised  if  the  study  itself  were
misconducted ;  if  the  proof,  already  complete,  degenerated  into
exhibition  ;  and  if  persons  with  no  evil  intent,  merely  by  the
inconsiderate  repetition  of  sensational  experiments,  gave  ground  for
suspecting  a  possible  perversion  or  weakening  of  their  "  subject's  "  moral.
I  believe  myself  that  the  danger  of  producing  unconscious  injury  in
this  way  is  very  slight.  The  "  subject's "  frequent  oblivion  of  his
action  is  a  strong  guarantee  that  it  has  not  left  any  appreciable  trace
on  his  character  ;  and  experimentation  with  healthy  "subjects" — which
I  hope  to  see  more  and  more  made  the  specially  English  branch  of  the
investigation — seems  to  show  that  they  are  not  likely  to  act  in  opposition
to  their  real  character,  except  in  cases  when  their  real  character  is  so
completely  off  the  stage  as  to  run  no  chance  of  taint.  But  as  it  is
certain  that  the  danger,  when  once  it  is  rumoured  abroad,  will  cause
exaggerated  alarm,  and  as  it  is  one  that  can  be  perfectly  easily  avoided,
I  think  the  scientific  rule  should  be  to  avoid  it.

To  pass  now  to  the  purely  psychological  question — it  has  generally
been  assumed  that  the  mind  of  the  "  subject,"  during  the  post-hypnotic
performance  of  a  hypnotic  command,  is  in  its  ordinary  waking-
state,  and  that  the  idea  of  performing  the  action  presents  itself
just  as  scores  of  ideas  whose  immediate  origin  is  not  obvious
present  themselves  every  day,  and  is  carried  out  just  as  any  spon-
taneous whim  might  be  carried  out.  On  this  view  the  abnormality
would  lie  merely  in  the  mode  whereby  the  appropriate  state  of  mind
(including  the  idea  and  the  impulse  to  carry  it  out)  is  evoked  with
certainty  at  the  moment  fore-ordained  by  the  operator  ]  not  in  the  state
of  mind  itself.  Another  view  is  that  at  the  moment  when  the  action
is  about  to  be  performed,  the  hypnotic  trance  again  supervenes,  and
lasts  during  its  performance.  And  a  third  hypothesis  has  been  that
the  action  is  performed  in  a  state  distinct  both  from  hypnotic  trance
and  from  normal  waking,  to  which  the  name  of  veille  somnambulique
has  been  appropriated.  Each  of  these  views  can  claim  facts  in  its
support.  But  my  contention  will  be  that  each  view  in  turn  has
been  maintained  in  a  far  too  sweeping  fashion  ;  that  there  has
been  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  hypnotic  field,  too  much  haste  to
generalise  ;  and  that  the  psychological  condition  of  the  "  subject "  during
the  post-hypnotic  performance  of  hypnotic  commands,  and  also  during
the  intermediate  period  after  waking  and  prior  to  the  performance,
really  admits  of  great  variety.  This  will  be  clear,  I  hope,  when  we
have  considex'ed  some  actual  cases.


270 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,

To  begin  with,  then,  there  are  some  cases  in  which  no  reason  what-
ever appears  for  regarding  tlie  state  in  which  the  action  is  performed  as
other  than  normal.  The  "  subject's  "  account  of  it  afterwards  is  as  of
something  which  it  just  occurred  to  him  that  he  would  like  to  do,  and
which  he  did  because  he  chose.  While  he  does  it,  he  is  in  his  usual  rela-
tion to  the  external  world,  and  can  converse  naturally  and  rationally;
and  both  the  performance  itself  and  the  surrounding  circumstances  are
completely  remembered  afterwards.  He  is  so  much  himself  that,  if  the
act  is  an  odd  one,  he  is  conscious  of  its  oddity,  and  will  make  excuses  or
apologies  for  it.  Thus,  one  of  my  recent  "  subjects,"  who  was  told  that
at  a  certain  time  after  waking  he  was  to  poke  the  fire — which  would,  of
course,  be  an  odd  thing  for  him  to  do  unasked  in  my  room — when  the
time  arrived,  turned  to  me  and  asked  politely  if  I  should  object  to  his
poking  the  fire.  Another  "  subject  "  was  told  during  his  trance  that,
when  I  rose  from  my  seat  for  the  fourth  time,  he  was  to  blow
out  a  particular  candle  close  to  which  my  wife  was  sitting  at  work.
He  was  woke,  and  conversed  with  me  in  a  perfectly  natural  manner.
I  rose  from  ray  seat  at  intervals,  took  a  few  paces  through  the  room  or
stood  at  the  fire  for  a  few  seconds,  and  sat  down  again.  On  the  fourth
occurrence  of  this,  the  lad  got  up,  saying,"  There  is  too  much  light  here  "  ;
but  instead  of  at  once  fulfilling  the  order,  he  had  sufiicient  forethought
and  courtesy  to  take  another  candle  from  another  table,  and  to  place  it
where  the  one  that  he  was  to  blow  out  stood  ;  after  which  he  blew  out
the  right  one.  Questioned  some  minutes  afterwards,  he  perfectly
remembered  what  he  had  done.  Similarly,  Miss  S.,  a  "  subject "  of  Mr.
Myers,  wlio  had  been  told  that  slie  was  to  pluck  ofi"  a  large  withered
leaf  from  a  plant  in  the  drawing-room,  on  waking,  went  up  to  the
plant,  handled  it,  and  asked  her  hostess's  permission  to  pluck  off  the
leaf,  as  she  thought  it  would  be  an  improvement.  She  had  no  sense  at
all  of  anything  exceptional  in  her  impulse.

As  one  might  expect,  cases  where  this  amount  of  recollectedness  is
maintained  shade  into  others  where  the  reasonable  instinct  triumphs
over  the  impulse.  For  example.  Miss  S.  was  told  in  the  trance  that
she  was  to  change  her  dress  for  dinner,  in  a  house  where  on  ordinary
days  this  was  not  the  custom.  She  and  her  hostess  were  sitting
together  in  the  drawing-room,  the  latter  writing,  wlien  the  dinner-
hour  approached.  Miss  S.  suggested  that  it  was  time  to  dress,  and
meeting  with  no  response,  went  up  to  her  room.  She  afterwards
reported  that  she  had  actually  begun  to  take  off  her  gown,  but  at  the
last  moment  changed  her  mind.  On  another  occasion,  she  was  told  to
bring  the  spoons  out  of  the  dining-room  into  the  drawing-room,  which
was  properly  the  parlour-maid's  duty.  She  was  left  to  wake  in  the
dining-room,  and  presently  followed  the  rest  of  the  party  into  the
drawing-room,  saying,  "I  know  what  you  want  me  to  do,  but  I  don't


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post- Hypnotic  States.  271


mean  to  do  it — it  is  too  absurd."  So  here  not  only  was  the  impulse
truly  criticised,  but  its  origin  thence  inferred.

Cases  of  this  sort  are  chiefly  interesting  in  their  contrast  to  those
where  abnormalities  appear — to  which  therefore  we  may  at  once  pass.
It  was  in  relation  to  memory  that  the  first  suggestion  was  found  of
some  peculiarity  in  the  mental  condition  which  accompanied  the  action.
There  are  cases  where  the  action,  though  performed  with  every  ap-
pearance of  naturalness,  and  without  any  impairment  of  the  normal
consciousness,  proves  to  be  completely  forgotten  within  a  few  seconds
of  its  performance.  This  happens  even  in  cases  where  the  action
has  not  been  of  a  simple  sort,  which  could  be  almost  mechanically
carried  out,  but  has  involved  care  and  attention. For  instance,

one  of  my  "subjects"  named  P  11  (a  sturdy  young  fellow  of  22,  a

light  porter  by  trade,)  had  been  told,  in  the  trance,  that  he  was  after-
wards to  take  up  a  pack  of  cards  and  pick  out  all  the  diamonds.  He  did
so,  talking  rationally  the  while,  but  still  in  the  tone  of  a  pei'son  who
does  not  want  to  be  disturbed,  and  bestowing  obvious  pains  on  his  task.
When  it  was  completed,  he  handed  me  the  separate  diamond  suit,  and
replaced  the  rest  of  the  pack  on  the  mantelpiece.  In  a  few  seconds  he
spontaneously  took  up  the  pack  again,  and  went  through  it  to  make  sure
that  no  diamonds  remained ;  and  then  asked  me  for  the  diamonds  and
went  through  them,  to  make  sure  that  they  were  all  there.  Yet  within
half-a-minute  he  was  unaware  that  there  was  a  card  in  the  room ;  when
1  told  him  to  look  for  some,  his  eyes  roamed  about  for  some  little  time
before  they  lit  on  the  pack,  which  was  lying  in  the  same  place  as
before ;  and  on  examining  it  he  expressed  surprise  at  finding  that  all
the  diamonds  (which  I  had  replaced  at  the  top)  were  together.

But  the  failure  of  subsequent  memory  is,  after  all,  only  an  indirect
symptom  of  abnormality  during  the  performance  of  the  act.  Moreover,
it  is  not  a  constant  sign  :  we  shall  have  to  notice  later,  on  the  one
band,  that  there  is  a  condition  of  far  more  decided  abnormality  than
was  involved  in  the  instance  just  given,  where  yet  memory  of  the
action  may  survive  intact ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  memory  some-
times fails  where  the  condition  has  sho^vn  no  abnormality  whatever.
Thus  one  is  led  at  once  to  the  idea  of  applying  some  test  during  the
actual  performance  of  the  action.  What  test  will  be  suitable  ?  None,
surely,  can  be  more  so  than  the  imposition  of  a  7iew  command,  of  a  sort
that  the  "subject  "  would  regard  as  a  joke  and  would  never  carry  out,  if
he  received  it  when  in  a  normal  state,  but  which  would  be  fulfilled  as
a  matter  of  course  if  impressed  on  him  in  a  state  of  hypnotic  sensibility.
I  will  describe  some  experiments  in  which  this  test  proved  completely
satisfactory.  The  hypnotist  in  all  the  cases  hereafter  described  was
Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  to  whom  1  am  greatly  indebted  for  his  skilful  and
patient  co-operation. I  will  call  him  S.


272 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


On  February  26th,  W  s  (a  healthy  and  thriving  young  baker  in

Brighton,  and  an  excellent  hypnotic  "  subject  ")  was  told,  when  hypno-
tised, that  when  next  he  came  he  was  to  take  up  some  loose  string  and
wind  it  up.  As  soon  as  he  arrived,  on  February  28th,  he  took  up  some
loose  string  which  was  lying  in  view,  and  began  making  it  into  a  ball.
There  were  already  some  signs  of  abnormality,  as,  though  usually  most
courteous  in  manner,  he  resented  my  interference  with  him  with  some
rudeness.  While  he  was  busy  with  the  string,  S.  came  in  and  said  to  him  :
"Before  you  go,  you  are  to  blow  out  one  of  the  candles  at  the  piano."

W  s  took  no  notice,  but  went  on  winding  the  string,  and  when  he

had  finished,  handed  it  to  S.,  saying,  "  You  can  have  that."  In  a
minute  or  two  I  asked  him  what  he  had  been  doing  since  he  came  in  ?
He  replied,  "  Only  standing  here,  talking  to  you."  Questioned  about
string,  he  seemed  completely  puzzled,  felt  in  his  pockets,  and  declared
that  he  had  not  got  any ;  nor  did  the  actual  sight  and  touch  of  the
ball  which  he  had  just  wound  up  awaken  any  memory.  Experiments
of  a  different  kind  followed  ;  and,  just  as  he  was  leaving,  he  looked
once  or  twice  towards  the  piano,  remarked,  "  How  that  wax  smells  ;
I'll  put  it  out,"  and  then  crossed  the  room  and  blew  out  one  of  the
candles,  after  which  he  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  You  don't  mind,
do  you,  sir  1 "

The  same  experiment,  tried  with  an  intelligent  young  mechanic

named  S  1,  who  is  in  some  ways  a  less  impressionable  "subject, "failed;

and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  in  his  case  there  was  no  oblivion  of
the  action  during  the  performance  of  which  the  fresh  command  was
given  ;  so  that  to  a  certain  extent  we  may  suppose  that  the  failure  of

memory  and  the  respon.siveness  to  commands  vary  together. S  t's

state  of  mind  during  the  performance  was,  however,  certainly  not
normal.  The  order,  given  two  days  before,  was  to  pull  up  a  particular
window-blind  when  next  he  came.  On  iiis  arrival  he  showed  restlessness
and  uneasiness,  and  in  a  minute  jumped  up,  stripped  off  his  coat,  and
pulled  up  the  blind — explaining,  when  I  expostulated  with  him,  that
someone,  he  did  not  know  who,  had  told  him  to  do  it,  and  oifering
politely  to  pull  it  down  again.  But  the  command  to  blow  out  the
candle,  which  he  received  while  pulling,  remained  unexecuted.

A  second  way  of  testing  the  state  in  which  the  command  is
executed  is  by  imposing,  while  the  execution  is  in  progress,  not  the
command  of  a  future  action,  but  the  suggestion  of  a  future  hallucina-
tion. Here  is  a  case  in  which  something  of  this  kind  was  done.  On

March  1st,  W  s  was  told  that,  as  soon  as  he  came  next  day,  he  was

to  take  an  umbrella  from  a  corner  of  the  room,  open  it,  and  walk
about  the  room  with  it.  He  arrives,  and  at  once  fulfils  the  order ;
and  while  he  is  examining  the  umbrella,  S.  tells  him  that  when
he  (S.)  asks  him  after  his  wife,  I  shall  disappear.  Immediately


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  273


after  this  a  change  came  over  W  s's  face,  and  he  ceased  fumbling

with  the  umbrella,  and  asked  in  surprise  how  he  came  by  it.  Some
other  experiments  ensue;  and  then,  while  he  is  talking  quite
naturally  to  me,  S.  says  to  him,  "  How's  your  vdie,  Fred  ?  "  He
instantly  looks  up  and  around,  asks  where  Mr.  Gurney  has  gone  to,
and  shows  much  astonishment.  In  this  state  he  proves  easily
susceptible  to  yet  a  further  impression — a  command,  this  time,  to  put
his  hat  on  backwards  before  leaving,  which  he  punctually  fulfils.  He  at
first  doubts  if  the  hat  is  his  own,  but  then  corrects  its  position,  and
explains,  "  It  didn't  seem  quite  to  fit,  but  I  had  it  on  backwards."

The  following  case  is  still  more  interesting,  as  in  it  the  two  tests  of
command  and  hallucination  were  combined,  and  the  hallucination  was

of  a  more  positive  sort.  On  March  2nd,  W  s  is  told,  as  on  a  previous

occasion,  to  ^vind  up  some  loose  string  when  next  he  comes.  While  he
is  executing  this  command  on  March  3rd,  S.  tells  him  that  he  is  to  take
the  glass  shade  off  the  centre  ornament  on  the  mantelpiece  ;  and  that
when  I  cough  for  the  fifth  time,  the  room  will  become  dark.  As  soon
as  the  string  was  wound,  he  looked  up  suddenly,  and  asked  how  he
came  by  it.  He  then  walked  to  the  mantelpiece,  removed  the  shade,
and  gave  it  to  S.  Being  told  to  take  it  back,  he  absolutely  denied
having  brought  it— said  he  never  would  have  dared  to  touch  such  a
thmg,  for  fear  of  breaking  it ;  and  he  remembered  no  more  about  the
string  than  that  he  had  found  it  in  his  hands.  During  the  conversa-
tion which  followed,  he  was  perfectly  himself.  I  coughed  at  intervals,
five  times,  without  any  result.  But  either  one  of  the  coughs  was  not
heard,  or  there  was  a  mistake  ia  counting,  which  never  happened  on
any  other  occasion;  for  at  my  sixth  cough  he  instantly  began  to
behave  as  if  the  room  were  in  darkness,  called  for  matches,  fell  against
the  furniture,  groped  for  the  candles,  and  tried  to  light  those  which
were  already  lighted.  The  abnormal  condition  was  in  this  case  so
advanced  that  he  had  to  be  woke  from  it  by  a  clap  and  call.  I  need
not  say  that  no  memory  of  it  remained.

Yet  another  test  was  suggested  by  the  fact  that  things  heard  in  the
hypnotic  state,  though  forgotten  on  waking,  are  remembered  when  the
hypnotic  state  again  supervenes.  If  the  "subject,"  while  post-
hypnotically  executing  an  order,  showed  remembrance  of  some  quite
different  topic  which  had  been  suggested  to  him  while  entranced,  it
would  be  the  strongest  proof  that  the  state  of  trance  was  to  some  extent

renewed. On  March  22nd,  P  11  was  told  in  the  trance  that  when

I  looked  out  of  the  window,  he  was  to  pick  out  the  diamonds  from  a
pack  of  cards;  he  was  also  told  that  there  was  going  to  be  an  exhibition
of  some  performing  fleas  in  a  tent  in  the  New  Steine.  He  was  roused,
and  at  the  appointed  signal  he  took  up  the  cards,  and  began  sorting
them;  and  while  so  doing,  he  was  questioned  as  to  the  fleas,  and  showed


T


274 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hyimotic  States.  [April  23,


complete  remembrance  of  that  topic.  The  memory  both  of  the  cards
and  the  fleas  proved  to  survive,  even  after  the  fulfilment  of  the  order ;
but  on  his  being  hypnotised  for  a  moment  and  then  suddenly  woke,
both  ideas  had  completely  vanished,  and  no  reminders  could  recall
them.  As  on  a  former  occasion,  he  had  to  look  for  the  pack  before  he
found  it,  and  was  surprised  that  all  the  diamonds  were  together.

But  the  experiment  was  more  interesting  and  conclusive  when  the
idea  which  was  thus  revivable  during  the  fulfilment  of  the  command
was  one  that  had  been  suggested  on  some  quite  different  occasion,  and
so  could  not  have  been  in  any  way  associated  with  the  command.  Now
in  previous  experiments  on  the  stages  of  hypnotic  memory  (see  the
paper  on  the  subject  later  in  this  Number)  a  number  of  different  ideas
had  been  impressed  on  the  "  subjects,"  either  in  the  lighter  state  of
trance,  A,  or  in  the  deeper  state,  B.  Of  these  ideas,  three  were  as
follows — that  the  head  of  the  Brighton  pier  had  been  washed  away  ;
that  a  balloon  had  been  seen  floating  over  the  ELing's-road  ;  and  that
two  large  dogs  had  been  having  a  fight  in  the  Western-road.  These,

then,  supplied  the  test  required. On  February  28th  W  s  was  told

that,  when  next  he  came,  he  was  to  play  with  an  air-ball  which  was
lying  about  in  the  room.  Next  day,  while  he  is  thus  engaged,  S.  says
to  him,  "  Fred,  what  was  that  about  the  pier  1 "  He  replies,  "  What,
about  its  being  partly  washed  away  ? " — which  was  one  of  the  things
that  he  had  been  told  in  state  A,  on  February  25th.  S.  then  tells  him
that,  before  he  goes,  he  is  to  strike  some  notes  on  the  piano  ;  and
that  in  four  minutes  he  will  see  his  wife  in  the  room.  Very
soon  after  this  he  puts  down  the  ball,  and  talks  quite  naturally.
He  is  then  questioned  about  the  pier,  but  says  that  he  has  not  heard
of  any  accidents  or  of  anything  relating  to  the  pier.  He  then  begins  to
look  thoughtful,  and  soon  says,  "  Wasn't  I  to  see  someone  here
to-night,  Mr.  S.  ? "  He  could  not  explain,  further  than  by  saying
that  he  had  an  idea  he  was  to  see  someone.  I  now  began  patting  the
air-ball  about,  and  left  it  in  his  hands.  He  squeezed  it  with  his
thumbs,  looked  into  it,  and  said,  "  There  is  a  face  in  it !  Do  you  see
that  face  1 "  (The  surface  of  the  ball  was  shiny,  but  not  enough  so
to  reflect  his  own  face,  or  anything  in  the  room  except  the  fire  and
candles.)  S.  said,  "Whose  face?  Do  you  recognise  if?"  He  replied,
"  No ;  it's  fading  away  now."  It  was  impossible  not  to  notice  the
change  which  came  over  his  own  face  as  this  hallucination  presented
itself.  1  He  has  very  noticeable  eyes,  and  the  sort  of  filmy,  dreamy
expression  which  is  often  seen  during  the  process  of  hypnotisation,  just
before  the  eyes  close,  was  on  this  occasion  quite  unmistakeable. It  was

1  Cf.  Delboeuf,  "  De  la  pretendue  Veille  Somnambulique,"  in  the  Revue,
Philosophique  for  February,  1887,  p.  127.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  275


remarked  by  two  visitors,  who  were  certainly  not  on  the  look-out  for  it.

W  s  was  now  immediately  asked  if  he  had  heard  of  "  that  thing

floating  over  the  King's-road."  "  Oh,  yes,  that  balloon,"  he  at  once
replied — another  of  the  state-A  suggestions.  He  was  then  told  that  he
would  see  his  wife  in  three  minutes,  and  I  took  the  ball  from  him ;
whereupon  he  rubbed  his  eyes,  looked  himself  again,  and  talked  as
usual.  S.  now  went  on  to  talk  about  the  balloon  ;  but  it  awakened  no
memory  in  his  mind,  and  he  seemed  to  think  we  were  poking  fun  at
him.  Then  the  hazy  look  again  appeared,  and  he  said,  "  I  can  see  a
lot  of  faces  floating  before  my  eyes  to-night " ;  but  again  he  did
not  recognise  any  of  them,  and  said,  "  They're  going  now."  He  rubbed
Ids  eyes,  and  S.  said,  "Can  you  see  them  now?"  "What?"  "The
faces " — upon  which  he  gave  a  look  of  comical  reproof,  and  said,
"  You're  trying  to  make  something  of  me  to-night — talking  about
faces  and  balloons."  I  tossed  him  the  air-ball  again,  and  he  began  to
pat  it  up  and  down.  And  now  a  singular  thing  happened.  He  failed
to  remember  the  balloon  over  the  King's-road,  but  he  clearly  re-
membered something  about  the  dog-fight  in  tJie  Western-road,  which
was  an  idea  connected  with  the  deeper  state  B.  It  seems  possible
that,  owing  to  our  persistence,  the  stage  of  trance  which  supervened
this  time  was  really  deeper  than  that  of  a  few  minutes  before.  It  is  in
favour  of  this  view  that,  after  rubbing  his  eyes,  and  rousing  himself  a
little,  he  proved  not  to  have  arrived  at  normal  wakefulness,  but  only  at
stage  A ;  for  as  S.  went  on  talking  about  the  fight,  he  exclaimed,  "  A
balloon  fight !  " — and  when  asked  what  he  meant,  said  that  S.  had  been
talking  of  a  balloon  over  the  King's-road.  S.  said,  "  I  was  talking
about  dogs"  ;  but  he  could  not  now  be  got  to  remember  the  dog-fight ;
and  when  the  balloon  was  mentioned  a  few  seconds  later,  he  had
forgotten  that  too,  and  had  come  back  to  normality.  The  final  incident

of  this  long  experiment  took  place  about  half-an-hour  later.  W  s  was

in  a  hypnotic  state,  from  which  S.  was  just  about  to  awake  him,  as  it
was  time  for  him  to  go — when  he  suddenly  rose,  walked  to  the  piano,
and  stumblingly  played  a  tune  ;  thus  fulfilling  the  order  about  striking
some  notes,  though  in  a  manner  which  had  not  been  contemplated.

As  regards  these  experiments  with  W  s,  I  may  mention  that  I  did

not  expect  the  suggestion  of  seeing  his  wife  in  the  room  to  take  efl'ect ;
I  was  surprised,  indeed,  at  its  going  so  far  as  to  produce  even  dimly  the
hallucination  of  faces.  The  production,  at  some  future  time,  of  so
definite  an  hallucination  as  that  of  the  visible  presence  of  an  absent
person  is  a  very  extreme  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion  which — though
I  have  come  near  it^ — I  have  never  actually  obtained  with  any  of

One  evening,  three  of  my  "subjects,"  when  entranced,  were  impressed
with  the  idea  that  they  were  to  see  me  enter  their  respective  places  of  employ-
ment at  an  early  hour  next  morning. On  no  single  occasion  had  I  ever  actually


276 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


these  "  subjects  "  ;  and  where  a  result  is  not  produced  when  the  sug-
gestion has  been  made  in  an  undoubted  and  completely  established
state  of  trance,  one  would  not  expect  to  produce  it  by  a  suggestion  made
in  the  less  abnormal  condition  which  I  have  been  describing.

And  now  what  name  are  we  to  give  to  that  abnormal  condition  1
There  are  strong  objections  to  multiplying  classes  and  names  of
abnormal  states  unnecessarily  ;  and  in  such  a  subject  as  hypnotism,  the
habit  of  doing  this  may  be  quite  as  misleading  as  the  opposite  tendency
to  generalise  the  facts  too  rapidly.  Recent  French  treatises,  especially,
have  abounded  in  long  lists  of  states  and  sub-states,  of  which  a  good
many,  at  any  rate,  represent  no  general  or  radical  distinctions,  but
merely  unimportant  and  quasi-accidental  peculiarities.  One  writer
makes  his  classification  largely  depend  on  the  detail  whether  the  eyes
are  open  or  shut — though  the  eyes  may  remain  shut  during  the  liveliest
somnambulic  conversation,  and  may  remain  open  during  rigid  and
speechless  trance.  Another  discovers  and  describes  a  peculiar  state  which
he  calls  "  fascination  "  ;  ignoring  the  fact  that  in  a  well-known  work  a
state  which  is  practically  the  same  has  already  been  classified  under
the  head  of  "  charm,"  and  that  no  real  distinction  has  been  shown
between  either  and  the  less  picturesquely  named  state  of  somnambulism
with  open  eyes.  And  so  on.  The  fact  is  that  it  is  impossible  to
arrange  the  phenomena  in  tabular  series,  without  ignoring  a  number
of  possible  combinations,  exceptions,  and  cross-divisions ;  and  the  fancy-
arrangements  of  stages  and  transitions  might  easily  come  to  rival  in
number  and  variety  those  of  the  German  declensions,  without  leaving
a  much  clearer  impression  on  the  student's  mind.  More  especially
does  it  need  recognition  that  not  only  have  hypnotic  "  subjects  "  their
own  little  personal  ways,  bodily  habits,  and  mental  characteristics  ;  but
that  every  operator,  and  every  hypnotic  milieu,  is  likely  to  develop
in  a  particular  group  of  "  subjects  "  habits  which  in  other  conditions  are

been  to  see  them  there  at  any  hour.  Two  of  them  told  me  afterwards  that  for
some  time  in  the  morning  they  had  had  an  odd  feeling  that  I  was  coming,  and
were  on  the  look-out  for  me.  The  third  had  had  no  such  experience.  On  another
occasion,  I  found  that  the  impression  which  refused  to  develop  itself  in  sensory

form  during  waking  moments  would  do  so  in  sleep. On  March  1st,  W  s  was

told,  in  the  trance,  that  on  that  night  he  would  have  a  vivid  dream,  in  which  an
unusual  high  tide  would  wash  away  the  Parade,  and  would  come  up  almost  to
his  shop.  On  INIareh  3rd,  he  spontaneously  told  us  that,  on  the  night  before
last,  he  had  had  a  very  troubled  dream,  which  woke  him  suddenly  ;  but  he
could  not  remember  what  it  was  about.  Asked  if  there  was  anything  about
water  in  it,  he  said  that  he  believed  there  was,  but  bad  no  precise  recollection.  He
was  then  entranced,  and  tentatively  questioned,  when  he  said  that  he  had  had  a
dream  of  a  high  tide  washing  the  Parade  away,  and  coming  up  almost  to  his
shop.  His  memory  in  the  waking  state  of  having  had  an  exceptional  dream
makes  it  reasonable  to  infer  that  this  hypnotic  memory  was  of  the  actual  dream,
and  not  merely  of  the  hypnotic  suggestion  that  he  was  to  have  it.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  277


not  met  with,  or  not  met  with  in  the  same  developed  form  ;  and  which
are  thus  liable  to  be  unduly  emphasised  by  those  who  have  observed  them,
and  unduly  suspected  by  those  who  have  not.  The  real  interest  of  these
differences  is  in  the  wider  general  fact  to  which  they  point — the  delicate
and  far-reaching  susceptibility  of  hypnotic  "subjects"  to  unconscious
education.  This  is  a  theme  on  which  I  hope  to  say  more  on  a  future
occasion  ;  my' immediate  object  is  merely  to  keep  the  moral  in  view,  and
to  inquire  how  far  it  applies  to  the  present  case.  Is  the  state  in  which
the  described  fulfilment  of  hypnotically-impressed  orders  took  place
really  a  distinct  state,  deserving  of  a  separate  name  1  The  question  has
lately  been  raised  in  a  somewhat  aggressive  way  by  the  eminent
Belgian  professor,  M.  Delboeuf,  and  answered  by  him  decidedly  in  the
negative.!  My  own  answer — which  can  be  supported  by  equally  high
authority — would  be  as  decidedly  in  the  affirmative.  On  the  one
hand,  no  one  probably  will  dispute  that  the  various  points  above  passed
in  review  suffice  very  clearly  to  distinguish  the  condition  from  that  of
normal  waking ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  extent  to  which  the
"  subject "  retains  his  natural  relation  to  other  people  and  to  the
external  world,  and  the  fact  that  his  loss  of  memory  is  confined  to  the
single  point  to  which  the  command  or  suggestion  related,  are  surely
points  of  sufficient  importance  to  constitute  a  specific  difference  from
the  oi'dinary  state  of  hypnotic  sleep.  It  is  to  Professor  Beaunis,  I
believe,  that  the  credit  belongs  of  having  first  clearly  recognised  this
double  distinction,'-  and  its  importance  for  purposes  of  classification ;
though  I  cannot  hold  that  the  name  which  he  has  applied  to  the  state
distinguished — veille  somnambulique — is  a  very  happy  one.  For
"  somnambulism  "  surely  suggests  an  absence  of  that  very  awakeness,
that  natural  relation  to  external  conditions,  which  the  performers  in
these  post-hypnotic  cases  are  characterised  by  retaining.  I  am  not
prepared  with  a  convenient  French  substitute ;  but  in  English  I  think
that  trance-waking  might  serve  fairly  well.

I  have  referred  to  the  view  of  M.  Delboeuf — which  he  carries  to  the
length  of  considering  that  "  all  the  states  represented  as  intermediate
between  waking  and  hypnotic  sleep  are  simply  hypnotic  sleep,  and
nothing  else."  An  observer  of  his  calibre  would,  of  course,  not  make
so  forcible  a  statement  without  having  some  grounds  for  it ;  and
these  grounds  consist  in  certain  experiments  made  on  his  own  domestics,
which  are  of  such  peculiar  interest  that  I  make  no  apology  for
briefly  describing  a  few  of  them.  I  conclude  from  them  that  M.  Delbceuf,
so  far  from  showing  that  there  is  no  true  intermediate  state  of
trance-waking,  has  shown,  if  anything,  that  there  are  tvjo  instead  of  one ;

1  Revue  Philosophique  for  February,  1887.
-  Revue  Philosophique  for  July,  1885.


278 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,

to  which  conclusion  I  would  venture  to  add,  as  a  rider,  that  in  so  new
and  complicated  a  branch  of  psychology,  two  maid-servants,  of  how-
ever eminent  a  psychologist,  hardly  afford  sufficient  material  for  the
formulation  of  quite  sweeping  general  laws.

The  following  specimens  will  fairly  illustrate  the  performances  o£
this  remarkable  pair  of  sisters.  On  March  13th,  1886,  M.  Delbceufgave

M  ,  for  the  first  time,  an  order  to  execute  after  waking. The  order

was  to  remove  some  dirty  water,  and  then  to  return  to  the  arm-chair
and  go  to  sleep.  She  executed  the  first  part  of  the  order,  and  when  her
master  asked  her  what  she  had  been  doing,  she  told  him,  and  said  that
she  had  felt  she  ought  to  do  it,  as  he  had  commanded  her  ;  but  instead
of  returning  to  the  arm-chair,  she  said,  "  I  have  woke  up,  sir."  Asked
when  she  woke,  she  said,  "  When  1  emptied  the  pail."  "  You  were
asleep  before  that,  then  1"  "I  don't  know."  "  Then  why  do  you  say
that  you  woke  at  that  moment  ?  "  "  Because  at  that  moment  I  felt
that  I  was  doing  something  unusual."

On  March  21st,  a  friend  of  M.  Delboeuf's  told  J  ,  who  was

hypnotised,  that  when  slie  brought  in  the  second  course  at
supper,  she  was  to  throw  the  contents  of  the  dish  over  one
of  the  guests,  M.  Masius.  M.  Delbceuf  interfered,  and  told
her  to  kiss  his  wife  instead,  as  less  inconvenient.  To  this
she  agreed. When  supper  began,  he  repeated  liis  caution,  and  she

again  reassured  him. On  entering  with  the  second  course,  J  went

up  to  her  mistress,  asked  leave  to  kiss  her,  and  did  so,  and  then  held
the  dish  for  her  to  help  herself.  She  then  stood  undecided.  There  was
not  a  moment  to  lose,  and  M.  Delbceuf  darted  towards  her,  saying,
"  Give  me  the  dish." She  resisted,  and  he  had  to  take  it  by  force,  and

handed  it  to  M  . He  then  blew  in  J  's  face, — when  she  shook

herself,  and  seemed  to  wake ;  but  as  she  still  had  retained  a  look  o£
determination,  and  attempted  to  take  the  dish  from  her  sister's  hands,
she  was  prudently  kept  apart  for  the  remainder  of  the  course.  Next

day  J remembered  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  help  kissing  her

mistress,  and  that  she  had  had  an  impulse  to  drop  the  dish,  not  on  the
floor,  but  over  M.  Masius  or  between  him  and  Madame  Delbceuf;
but  she  was  not  sure  whether  she  would  actually  have  done  so.

On  April  1st,  J  was  told  that,  when  a  particular  guest  put  his

glass  to  his  lips,  she  would  see  his  hair  suddenly  grow  to  an  inordinate
length,  and  that  she  would  fetch  a  comb  and  comb  it  till  it  resumed  its
former  length  ;  and  then  she  was  to  wake.  The  first  part  of  the  order
was  carried  out  precisely,  and  she  answered  a  number  of  questions
correctly  while  the  combing  was  going  on  ;  but  then,  instead  of  at
once  waking,  she  settled  herself  in  the  arm-chair  and  slept  for  some
minutes,  after  vvliich  she  woke  spontaneously,  and  the  sight  of  the  comb
brought  back  the  whole  scene. She  described  the  details  of  the


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  279


hallucination  and  of  her  own  proceedings,  and  remembered  the
questions  that  she  had  answered,  and  the  act  of  waking.  The  only
point  which  she  did  not  recall  was  returning  to  the  arm-chair  and
falling  asleeep ;  and  this  lacuna  in  her  memory  puzzled  her.  But  as
M.  Delbceuf  justly  remarks,  unconsciousness  of  the  moment  of
becoming  unconscious  is  a  species  of  forgetful  ness  with  which  we
are  all  familiar.

The  next  case  is  more  elaborate. On  April  2nd  M.  DelboBuf  said

to  M  ,  who  had  been  entranced  while  she  was  knitting,  "  After  I

wake  you,  you  will  knit  for  five  minutes,  and  then  you  will  write  to
your  father.  You  will  tell  him  that  you  are  happy  at  Liege,  and  that
order  is  re-established  there.  And  you  will  tell  me  what  you  have  done."

M  is  woke,  and  takes  up  her  work  •  after  eight  minutes,  her  eyes

close.  M.  Delbceuf  waited  five  minutes  and  then  woke  her.  She  was
surprised  to  find  that  she  had  been  asleep,  and  disowned  any  desire  to
do  anything  particular.  M.  Delbceuf  re-hypnotised  her,  and  asked  her
what  it  was  that  she  had  been  told  to  do.  "  I  do  not  recollect."  "  I
told  you  to  write  to  your  father."  "  It  is  done."  "  What  do  you  mean'?
"What  have  you  written  to  him  1 "  "  That  I  was  happy  at  Liege,"  &c.
"  You  have  not  written  anything ;  you  have  been  dreaming.  Now  you
are  to  write  to  him,  in  three  minutes."  She  is  woke,  and  resumes  her
knitting.  In  six  minutes,  she  rises  with  an  air  of  resolution,  and  says,
"I  have  got  to  write."  "  Sit  down  at  the  table;  there  are  the  materials."
"  No,  I  shall  go  downstairs."  "  Why  ?  "  "I  don't  want  to  write  here  ;
I  want  to  write  in  the  kitchen."  She  goes  downstairs,  and  demands
writing  materials  in  a  peremptory  tone  which  surprises  her  fellow-
servants.  M.  Delbceuf  follows  her,  and  she  asks  him  whether  she  is
not  entranced,  and  receives  an  evasive  answer.  She  is  supplied,  not
with  note-paper,  but  with  a  piece  of  an  old  bill,  and  shows  no  surprise
at  this,  but  will  not  write  while  her  master  is  present;  he  therefore
tells  her  to  come  up-stairs  and  show  him  her  letter,  when  it  is  finished.
After  a  time  she  appears  without  the  letter,  and  begins  to  knit ;  and
on  being  questioned,  she  says  that  she  has  hidden  the  letter,  because
her  sister  wanted  to  take  it  from  her.  M.  Delbceuf  goes  on  talking  to
her,  but  she  appears  discontented  and  gives  short  answers. "  Are  you

asleep,  M  V  he  asks. "  I  don't  think  so,  sir,"  she  replies.  He

blows  in  her  face,  and  she  comes  to  herself  with  a  start,  and  smiles.  She
then  describes  every  detail  of  what  had  passed.  On  getting  possession
of  the  hidden  letter,  M.  Delbceuf  finds  that  it  runs,  "  My  dear  father,  I
hasten  to  inform  you  that  everything  is  quiet  at  Liege,  and  that  we  are
getting  on  very  happily."

M.  Delbceuf  draws  attention  to  the  two  chief  points  of  interest  in
this  case;  the  independence  and  initiative  which  the  "subject"  showed  in
the  details  of  her  conduct,  while  still  never  transgressing  the  lines  of  the


280 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


order  ;  and  the  first  fulfilment  of  the  order  in  a  dream,  which  may  be  re-
garded as  closely  analogous  to  its  real  fulfilment  in  the  state  of  trance-
■waking.  Another  more  striking  instance  of  this  novel  sort  of  dream-ful-
filment was  given  on  a  later  occasion  when  an  order  was  given  the  actual
fulfilment  of  which  would  have  involved  violent  outrage  to  a  long-
established  habit.  M.  Delbceuf  told  her  to  straighten  a  crooked
knitting-needle  at  a  future  moment  when  he  foresaw  that  to  do  so
would  necessitate  drawing  the  needle  out  of  the  stocking,  and  spoiling
the  work.  When  the  moment  arrived,  she  solved  the  difiiculty  by  going
to  sleep,  and  dreaming  that  she  straightened  the  needle  ;  and  on
waking  she  was  only  with  difficulty  convinced  that  her  fulfilment  of
the  order  had  been  imaginary.

Another  noticeable  point  which  occurred  in  some  cases  was  the
limitation  of  the  "  subject's  "  consciousness  to  the  one  idea  suggested.

M  was  told  that  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  she  was  to  go  and  console

a  statuette  of  a  weeping  monk  on  the  mantel-piece,  and  was  then  woke.
She  rose  at  the  appointed  time,  with  the  customary  change  of
physiognomy,  and  executed  the  order  in  dramatic  fashion ;  and  when
afterwards  asked  what  she  experienced  she  said,  "  I  was  not  here,  I
was  transported  somewhere  else  ;  I  saw  no  one,  I  was  all  alone."  So
after  being  told  to  take  ofi"  her  garter  and  put  it  round  her  mistress's
neck — an  order  the  literal  fulfilment  of  which  was  accidentally  pre-
vented— she  said,  when  asked,  that  she  should  have  carried  it  out,  even
in  M.  Delboeuf's  presence,  as  she  "saw  no  one  but  Madame."

Further  experiments  showed  that  the  "  subjects  "  could  afterwards
describe  ridiculous  scenes  which  they  enacted,  in  the  midst  of  normal

life,  in  obedience  to  previous  hypnotic  commands — as  where  M  was

a  petroleum  lamp,  and  struck  a  match  to  light  herself ;  where  M  was

a  pig,  which  J  was  selling  to  a  customer ;  where  M  was  a  wheel-
barrow full  of  potatoes^ which  J  was  wheeling  about;  and  where  each

which  she  afterwards  recovered.  The  interest  of  these  observations,  for
in  turn  was  taken  to  a  mirror,  and  persuaded  that  she  had  lost  her  head,
M.  Delbceuf,  is  that  the  sort  of  credulity  involved — the  conscious  but
at  the  same  time  wholly  uncritical  acceptance  of  these  absurd  roles — ■
was  entirely  similar  to  what  was  displayed  by  the  same  "  subjects  "  in
respect  of  delusions  that  took  efiect  in  their  ordinary  hypnotic
condition.

The  first  point  to  notice  in  these  results  of  M.  Delboeuf's  is  their
very  exceptional  character  as  regards  memory.  They  show  that  even
Professor  Beaunis — one  of  the  most  careful  as  well  as  one  of  the  ablest
of  the  authorities — has  gone  too  far  in  making  subsequent  oblivion  the
crucial  test  of  his  veille  somyiambulique.  I  know  of  no  cases  where  the
memory  of  the  post-hypnotic  performances  has  proved  so  clear,  while
at  the  same  time  the  state  in  which  they  took  place  was  so  obviously


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  281


abnormal.  But  a  no  less  exceptional  point  was  that  these  "  subjects  "
equally  remembered  what  took  place  during  a  state  of  trance  induced
by  ordinary  means — that  is  to  say,  during  the  deepest  hypnotic  state
to  which  it  was  possible  to  bring  them.  And  furthermore,  M.  Delboeuf
tells  us  that,  when  entranced,  they  were  always  in  rapport  with  every
one  alike ;  thus  we  have  seen  that  the  command  as  to  spilling  the
contents  of  the  dish  was  suddenly  given  to  one  of  them  by  a  stranger.
Now,  to  begin  with,  1  must  maintain  that  the  combined  features  of
bi'each  of  memory  and  special  rapport  with  the  hypnotiser  are  such
common  and  such  important  characteristics  of  hypnotic  trance,  that
cases  which  present  them  and  cases  which  do  not  had  better  not  be
confounded  under  a  single  general  name.  M.  Delbceuf  seems  to  have
some  consciousness  of  this  objection  ;  for  he  tries  to  get  round  it,  as
regards  memory  at  any  rate,  by  treating  the  question  as  merely  one  of
education.  But  in  the  first  place  this  is  certainly  far  less  so  than  he
supposes  ;i  and  in  the  second  place,  the  fact  that  an  abnormality
can  be  removed  by  particular  treatment  does  not  make  it  insignificant.
To  avoid  a  new  term,  M.  Delbceuf  might  still  think  it  enough  to
say  that  his  "  subjects,"  alike  when  hypnotised  by  ordinary  means
and  when  subsequently  carrying  out  hypnotic  commands,  were
in  a  lighter  state  of  trance  than  mine. I  prefer  the  term  trance-waking

1  We  have  seen,  for  instance,  that  M perfectly  remembered  the  first

post-hypnotic  fulfilment  that  she  was  ever  engaged  in.  In  an  interesting
series  of  experiments  (Revue  PhilosoiMque  for  May,  1886),  M.  Delboeuf  found
that  if  he  woke  his  "  subjects "  while  they  were  actuallj'  occupied  in
following  out  some  hypnotic  command  or  hallucination,  they  recalled  what
had  passed,  as  a  dream ;  and  here  again  he  at  once  assumes  that  he
has  established  a  universal  law.  I  have  frequently  seen  English  "subjects"
woke  in  the  same  way,  in  the  midst  of  a  performance  or  a  hallucination,
and  I  have  never  found  memory  to  survive,  except  in  the  case  of  simple
imitative  actions  where  no  delusion  was  involved,  and  very  dimly  in  the  case
of  new  "  subjects  " — that  is  to  say,  exactly  those  who  had  not  had  hypnotic
education.  On  the  very  day  that  I  first  read  M.  Delboeuf  s  account,  I  exactly
repeated  on  two  "subjects"  an  experiment  of  his  in  which  the  hallucination
communicated  was  of  something  catching  tire,  and  having  to  be  extinguished  by
being  plunged  into  (real)  water.  The  "  subjects  "  were  suddenly  woke  with  the
dripping  article  in  their  hands  ;  but  neither  of  them  had  the  slightest  memory
how  it  came  there,  nor  of  the  previous  train  of  ideas.  I  ottered  each  of  them  a
sovereign  to  recall  his  "  dream  " ;  but  it  had  left  not  a  wrack  behind.
Moreover,  in  many  of  the  cases  which  M.  Delboeuf  describes,  he  had  given  the
command  that  the  things  done  or  experienced  were  to  be  afterwards
remembered  and  described.  No  one  familiar  with  hypnotism  would  be
surprised  that  this  means  should  prove  effective  ;  and  it  would  be  interesting  to
know  whether  such  a  command  was  given  in  the  other  eases  where  it  is  not
expressly  mentioned.  I  may  add  that  M.  Delboeuf  seems  to  press  the  resem-
blance of  even  the  remembered  hypnotic  hallucinations  to  ordinary  dreams  much
too  far  ;  for  he  practically  treats  the  latter  as  if  they  were  never  jemembered
in  waking  hours  unless  some  special  sensation  or  experience  recalled  them.


282 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


for  this  lighter  state,  simply  because  it  emphasises  the  fact  that  the
deeper  state,  into  which  his  "  subjects  "  were  apparently  incapable  of
being  brought,  is  also  the  ordinary,  or,  as  we  may  say,  the  normal
one,  in  cases  where  any  decided  hypnotic  peculiarities  apjjear.

But  the  further  point  which  I  want  more  especially  to  bring  out  is
tliis — that  even  his  "  subjects"  exhibited  varieties  of  state  during  their
performances  of  commands.  Sometimes  they  spontaneously  resumed
normal  life  at  the  conclusion  of  the  performance ;  but  even  these  cases
were  not  quite  parallel  to  most  of  mine ;  as  these  girls'  consciousness  of
a  change — of  "  waking,"  as  they  described  it — has  never  been  described
by  my  "  subjects,"  though  with  them  the  frequent  breach  of  memory
might  have  been  expected  specially  to  favour  it.  But  more  often  the
Belgian  sisters  required  to  be  woke  by  external  means,  which  hardly
ever  happened  in  my  experiments,  and  never  unless  some  delusion
which  had  been  imposed  had  been  encouraged  for  an  unusual  time;^
while  on  occasions,  as  we  have  seen,  they  actually  went  so  far  as  to
compose  themselves  in  an  arm-chair,  close  their  eyes,  and  take  a  nap,
before  emerging  into  waking  life.  Further,  there  are  the  occasions  on
which  they  wholly  lost  rapport  with  the  external  world — a  very  marked
feature,  and  conspicuously  absent  in  my  "subjects."  In  a  word,  apart
from  the  memory-test  (which  M.  Delboeuf  himself  regards  as  inconclu-
sive), the  Belgian  "  subjects  "  were  not  in  a  lighter  but  in  a  deeper,  a
more  abnormal,  state  than  the  English  ones.  So  decidedly  was  this  the
case  that,  even  if  M.  Delbceuf  refuses  to  recognise  his  own  variety  of  the
veille  so7miambulique,  I  do  not  see  how,  on  the  symptoms,  he  could
refuse  to  recognise  mine.  It  seems,  in  fact,  to  be  separated  by  an  even
wider  gap  from  the  complete  trance  on  the  one  hand  than,  on  the  other,
from  the  jaerformances  carried  out  without  any  apparent  deviation  from
normality  (p.  270) — a  class,  by  the  way,  of  which  M.  Delbceuf  seems  to
be  equally  unaware.

II,

Automatic  Execution  of  Slight  Physical  Movements.

We  have  now  considered  three  classes  of  cases; — (1)  those  where
the  ordained  action  is  consciously  performed  in  a  normal  state,  and
remembered ;  (2)  those  where  it  is  consciously  performed  in  a  trance-
waking  state,  and  forgotten ;  and  (3)  those  where  it  is  consciously

^  See  p.  273  ;  and  compare  the  case  which  M.  Delbojuf  witnessed  in
the  Salpetrifere  (Ecvuc  Philosophique  for  February,  1887,  p.  115),  where  a
haUucination,  suddenly  imposed  on  a  waking  but  highly  sensitive  "subject,"
developed  a  condition  from  which  apparently  only  the  operator  could  release
her.  It  is  not  surprising  that  hallucinations,  from  their  absorbing  character,
should  have  an  exceptional  tendency  to  induce  an  advanced  form  of  trance.
Another  instance  will  be  found  below,  p.  299.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  283


performed  in  a  trance-waning  state,  and  remembered.^  It  naturallj'-
occurs  to  one  to  ask  if  the  list  can  be  extended — if  there  is  any
fourth  class  of  cases  when  the  action  is  performed  in  a  7iormal
state,  and  forgotten.  For,  on  reflection,  it  is  evident  that  the
mere  fact  of  an  action  being  at  once  or  almost  at  once  forgotten
is  no  sufficient  proof  of  its  having  been  performed  in  an  abnormal
state.  There  is  nothing  unusual  in  the  immediate  oblivion  of  things
which  have  been  done  in  a  perfectly  normal  waking  condition.  A
large  number  of  actions — those  which  we  commonly  call  automatic —
are  performed  in  such  a  condition  ;  many  of  these  are  performed  with-
out consciousness,  and  a  fortiori  many  of  them  leave  no  trace  in  the
memory.  It  would  not,  therefore,  be  at  all  surprising  to  lind  that
certain  actions  induced  by  previous  hypnotic  suggestion  were  of  this
kind — truly  automatic,  and  involving  no  more  consciousness  or  memory
than  things  which  we  often  do  with  our  hands  while  our  minds  are
engrossed  in  thought  or  conversation.  Nor  would  it  be  surprising  if
the  scope  of  such  unconscious  and  unremembered  actions  proved  to  be
rather  larger  when  they  are  the  result  of  previous  hypnotic  suggestion,
than  when  they  are  the  result  of  habit.  It  may  be  said,  I  think,  of
many  of  our  simpler  and  habitual  actions,  that  we  attend  to
them  much  more  than  is  necessary  for  the  performing  of  them ;
and  the  fact  of  their  remaining  to  some  extent  in  our
memory  is  usually  due  to  one  of  two  things.  Either  the
object  for  which  we  performed  them  had  some  interest  and
importance  for  us,  and  the  actions  that  we  went  through  to  attain  this
object  are  remembered  through  their  association  with  it ;  thus  we
remember  opening  an  envelope  five  minutes  after  doing  so,  because  we
had  some  interest  in  getting  at  the  letter  inside,  and  the  greater
memory  draws,  as  it  were,  the  lesser  one  into  its  wake.  Or  else  quite
unimportant  details  of  custom  engage  our  attention,  and  so  are  after-
wards remembered,  merely  because  the  attention  is  not  solicited  in  any
other  direction ;  thus  in  the  course  of  an  ordinary  day  we  may  remem-
ber the  process  of  dressing  in  the  morning,  though  we  quite  forget  it
on  some  exceptional  day  when  we  had  to  go  through  it  after  a  sudden
awaking,  and  while  listening  to  some  agitating  news.  Now  in  the
post-hypnotic  execution  of  commands,  both  these  conditions  of  atten-
tion and  memory  are  often  absent. The  act  is  performed  without  any

1  It  should  be  remarked  that — apart  from  the  exceptional  cases  last
described  where  there  is  an  approximation  to  complete  trance — the  third  class
really  shades  into  the  first  ;  since  normality  is  not  separated  from  trance-
waking  by  any  definable  line.  Subsequent  memory  seems  to  be  the  rule  in
cases  where  abnormality  has  only  reached  the  point  that  the  "  subject"  feels
unable  to  refrain  from  the  action,  though  sensible  of  its  uselessness  or  absurdity,
and  surprised  by  the  strength  of  his  impulse  to  perform  it.


284 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,

purpose  that  could  give  it  interest,  since  the  "  subject"  did  not  conceive
of  it  as  a  means  to  the  fulfilment  of  any  end  of  his  own.  If  he  pokes
the  fire  because  he  is  beginning  to  feel  cold,  he  may  very  naturally
remember  doing  so ;  but  if  he  pokes  it  in  blind  obedience  to  a
forgotten  suggestion,  the  act  lacks  one  chief  ground  for  continuance  in
memory.  And  again,  the  moment  for  the  post-hypnotic  performances
often  falls,  as  it  has  been  expressly  arranged  hy  the  operator  to  fall,  at
a  time  when  the  "  subject's  "  attention  is  being  claimed  in  some  other
direction — for  instance,  when  he  is  engaged  in  animated  talk  ;  so  that
the  actions  have  a  fair  chance,  so  to  speak,  of  being  performed  auto-
matically, if  they  are  performed  at  all.  On  these  grounds,  it  would
certainly  seem  reasonable  to  expect  that  simple  actions,  commanded
during  trance,  but  performed  in  a  conscious  waking  state  and  without
any  relapse  into  a  state  of  temporary  trance  or  trance-waking,  might
sometimes  be  purely  automatic  and  unconscious.

Experiment  confirms  this  view  up  to  a  certain  point.  There  are
transitional  cases  where  the  memory  seems  to  have  vanished,  but  can

with  pains  be  evoked.  Thus,  W  s  was  told  in  the  trance  that,  when  I

coughed  for  the  third  time,  he  was  to  put  his  hand  to  his  head  for  a
moment ;  and  was  then  awoke.  He  obeyed  at  the  third  cough,  and  then
folded  his  arms.  In  a  few  seconds  I  asked  him  whether  he  had  moved;
he  said  "  No,"  and  looked  astonished.  I  then  said  that  I  fancied  I  had
seen  him  put  his  hand  to  his  head,  and  he  then  considered  and  said,
"  Oh,  yes,  I  believe  I  did  put  it  up  a  moment  ago ;  I  believe  I  often  do
so."  He  was  re-hypnotised,  and  told  that  when  I  coughed  for  the
second  time  he  was  to  nod  his  head  at  S.  He  said,  "What,  to  make
game  of  him  1 "  (i.e.,  of  me) — and  is  amused  with  the  notion.  He  was
woke,  and  at  my  second  cough,  while  in  the  act  of  conversing  with  S.,  he
gave  a  distinct  nod,  at  the  same  time  giving  a  sort  of  knowing  wink  in
my  direction,  and  joining  in  S.'s  laugh.  He  apologised  "  for  laughing  at
Mr.  Gui'ney's  cough  ;  "  but  the  nod  itself,  which  seems  by  association  to
have  revived  the  sense  of amusement, proved to be  completely

forgotten. In  the  same  way  P  11  obeyed  a  command  to  nod  his

head  at  my  third  cough,  and  on  my  asking  him  immediately  afterwards
what  he  had  done,  looked  puzzled  and  said,  "  Nothing."  I  said  I
thought  he  had  nodded,  but  he  was  certain  he  had  not.  Shortly  after-
wards, he  obeyed  the  command  to  put  his  hand  to  his  head  when  I
poked  the  fire  for  the  second  time  ;  but  on  my  questioning  him  and
imitating  the  gesture,  he  again  denied  having  made  it.

Here,  then,  we  certainly  seem  to  find  our  fourth  class — actions
performed  in  a  normal  state,  and  forgotten  or  unremembered  im-
mediately afterwards.  Are  we,  then,  justified  in  calling  these  actions
automatic  and  unconscious'?  Only  in  a  strictly  qualified  sense,  as  further
examination  will  show.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Fost-Hypnotic  States.  285


In  the  first  place,  the  actions,  however  easy,  transient,  and  insignifi-
cant, are  remembered  on  re-liypnotisation.  I  cannot,  of  course,  assert  that
this  rule  is  invariable ;  but  I  have  never  myself  observed  an  exception.
For  instance,  two  days  after  the  incident  of  the  forgotten  nod,  above

recounted,  W  -s  was  asked  in  the  trance  whether  he  remembered

"doing  anything  on  Saturday  when  Mr.  Gurney  coughed."  He
replied  in  a  confidential  tone,  "When  I  nodded  my  head  at  himl
He  didn't  see  me,  did  he  ? "  But  even  if  we  had  no  such
direct  proofs  of  a  certain  awareness  accompanying  the  perfor-
mance, we  can  obtain  an  indirect  proof  of  a  peculiarly  interesting
kind.  We  can  so  arrange  that  the  action,  though  in  itself  of  the
slightest,  shall  imply  intelligence — shall  constitute  the  intelligent
reply  to  a  question  or  remark  then  and  there  addressed  to  the
"  subject."  In  a  case  quoted  by  Mr.  Myers  (p.  249)  Professor  Janet's
"subject  "  maintained  a  sort  of  conversation  with  him  by  "  automatic  "
movements  of  the  hand,  while  to  all  appearance  fully  engaged  in  an
ordinary  conversation  with  someone  else.  This  occurred  during
hypnotic  trance ;  but  I  have  lately  obtained  some  similar  results  with
"  subjects  "  in  a  normal  waking  state.  Now  if  there  be  a  consciousness
— beneath  or  apart  from  the  "  subject's  "  normal  consciousness — which
knows  that  he  is  answering  and  vihat  he  is  answering,  we  should
expect  the  same  consciousness  to  know  how  he  is  answering  ;  and
in  my  cases  this  expectation  was  confirmed  by  subsequent  hypnotic
memory  of  the  whole  proceeding.

S  1  was  told,  in  the  trance,  that  he  was  to  answer  my  questions  by

slightly  raising  his  right-hand  for  "  yes,"  and  his  left-hand  for  "  no."  He
was  then  woke,  and  chatted  naturally  with  S.  for  some  minutes.  At
intervals  I  addressed  some  question  to  him  which  admitted  of  a  direct
yes  or  no  reply,  and  the  true  answer  to  which  I  knew  ; — such  as,  "  Has
it  been  raining  this  afternoon  ?  " — "  Have  you  ever  been  to  London  1 "
— and  so  on.  In  every  case,  about  ten  times  in  all,  the  correct  answer  was
given  in  the  way  prescribed,  the  conversation  with  S.  proceeding  freely

meanwhile. Two  or  three  minutes  afterwards,  I  ofiered  S  1  a

sovereign  to  tell  me  what  questions  I  had  asked  him,  and  what  he  had
been  doing  with  his  hands — with  the  usual  impunity  to  my  purse.  A
fortnight  afterwards,  he  was  asked,  in  the  trance,  whether  he  remem-
bered having  ever  carried  on  a  conversation  with  me  by  means  of
signals.  At  first  he  did  not  realise  what  was  referred  to ;  but  when
hands  were  mentioned,  the  memory  recurred ;  and  when  asked  whether
the  signal  with  the  right-hand  had  not  meant  iVo,  he  replied  decidedly,
"  No,  it  meant  yes."

On  another  occasion  the  same  experiment  was  made  with  P  11,

who,  however,  was  more  distinctly  impressed  with  the  idea  that  he  could
not  answer  me  in  the  usual  manner.  The  result  was  slightly  diff'erent —


286 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


the  answers  were  given  correctly  by  the  movements  of  the  hands  ;  but
more  of  what  I  may  call  the  normal  attention  seemed  to  be  bestowed  on
me.  Thus  if  I  asked  a  question  immediately  after  S.  had  made  a  remark
there  would  be  a  moment's  pause,  and  then  the  signal  of  response  to
my  question,  before  S. -received  his  answer;  and  if  I  asked  a  question

while  P  11  was  in  the  act  of  speaking,  his  words  would  become

slightly  incoherent,  as  though  a  conscious  effort  were  being  made  to
listen  at  the  same  time.  I  was  not  surprised,  therefore,  to  find  that
he  had  a  normal  consciousness  of  my  addressing  him.  When  asked  by
S.  if  he  heard  me  speaking,  he  said,  "  Yes,  but  I  cannot  answer  him."
Asked  why,  he  could  not  say.  The  inhibition  was  now  removed,  and
he  talked  to  me  as  usual ;  but  it  was  curious  that  when  his  answers  were
of  the  yes  or  no  type,  his  hands  continued  to  move  as  directed,  the  one
or  the  other  being  slightly  raised  as  the  answer  was  spoken.  Noticing
this,  I  directed  him  to  say  "  yes,  yes,  yes,"  several  times  over ;  the
right  hand  punctually  kept  pace  with  the  lips,  and — what  was  still
odder — it  was  impossible  to  make  him  aware  of  the  movement.
Though  perfectly  himself  in  every  other  respect,  he  obstinately  asserted
that  his  hand  did  not  move,  and  I  think  it  probable  that  he  actually
was  under  the  influence  of  a  special  form  of  "  negative  hallucination  " ;
so  that  here  the  case  recalls  those  of  §  I  above,  when  some  further
abnormality  of  the  trance-waking  species  supervened  during  the  fulfil-
ment of  a  hypnotic  order.  On  being  hypnotised,  he  remembered  all
about  moving  his  hands,  though  he  still  declared  that  he  had  not  seen
them  move.

III.

Post-hypnotic  Reckoning  of  Time  and  Counting  of  Signals.

So  far  we  have  been  considering  the  condition  of  the  "subject''  at
the  time  during  which  the  command  is  performed.  But  questions
of  even  greater  interest,  and  also,  it  must  be  confessed,  of  greater
difficulty,  present  themselves  when  we  consider  the  intervening  period,
between  the  waking  which  follows  the  imposition  of  the  command  and  the
subsequent  fulfilment.  This  period  even  M.  Delboeuf  does  not  venture
to  represent  as  anything  but  a  piece  of  normal  waking  life;  i  and
ostensibly  of  course  that  is  what  it  is.  Yet  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  look
below  the  surface  to  divine  that  it  has  peculiarities ;  and  the  deeper  we
look,  the  more  remarkable  will  they  appear.

If  no  mention  of  time  is  made  when  the  command  is  given,  it  will
be  executed  on  waking.  If  this  is  not  desired,  some  particular  time
must  be  fixed.  Thus  the  command  is  tliat  the  thing  is  to  be  done  in
half-an-hour,  or  in  so  many  minutes  after  waking. Here,  then,  the

^  Bevue  Philosophique  for  February,  1887,  p.  127.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  287


"  subject  "  has  in  some  way  to  reckon  duration  ;  and  he  often  does  so
with  remarkable  accuracy.

Now  in  cases  of  this  sort,  it  does  not  at  first  sight  seem  unreasonable
to  conceive  that  the  reckoning  is  of  a  simply  physiological  sort ;  that
at  the  time  of  receiving  the  command,  the  "  subject,"  as  it  were,  sets  his
organism,  as  he  might  set  an  alarum,  for  a  given  time  ahead,  and  that
when  the  time  arrives  the  action  takes  place,  just  as  the  alarum  runs
down.  This  is  what  is  generally  assumed  to  occur  in  the  common  case
of  determining  to  wake,  and  waking,  at  some  unaccustomed  hour  ;  and
as  long  as  the  hypnotic  command  extends  to  only  a  short  time  ahead,
that  analogy  seems  plausible  enough.  M.  Delbceuf  considers  the  matter
so  plain  tliat  he  dismisses  it  in  a  sentence.  The  explanation  is  "  des
plus  simples,"  and  is  this  : — Every  command  given  to  a  "  subject"  to
perform  a  certain  act  at  a  future  time,  is  at  once  formulated  by  him  in
these  terms,  "  Fou  will  fall  into  a  trance  at  such  arid  such  a  moment,
and  then  you  will  perform  the  act."  The  "  subject's"  mind  is  then
relieved  of  responsibility,  and  goes  off  duty ;  and  his  bodily  machine  goes
to  sleep,  as  the  sleeper's  bodily  machine  wakes,  by  its  own  automatic
machinery.  The  explanation  is  certainly  simple  enough  ;  but  it  has  the
defect  of  being  a  pure  guess,  unsupported  by  a  single  fact  :  no  hypnotic
"subject"  has  ever  confessed  to  formulating  his  orders  in  any  such  fashion
as  M.  Delbceuf  represents.

But  even  if  we  could  accept  the  assumption  of  the  purely  physio-
logical hypothesis  for  cases  of  short  duration — where  the  idea  of  the
period  can  be  distinctly  realised  and  the  setter  of  the  alarum  sees
exactly  what  he  is  about — it  would  be  a  far  cry  to  extend  it  to  the  well-
known  commands  a  longue  echeance,  as  where  the  thing  is  to  be  done
after  6  months'  or  a  year's  interval.  I  do  not  think  that  the  peculiarities
of  the  time-reckoning  over  long  periods  have  ever  received  quite  just  treat-
ment ;  they  have  either  been  too  much  extenuated,  or  magnified  into
something  incredibly  marvellous.

A  distinction  must  first  be  made  between  cases  where  a  date  is
named — especially  if  the  date  be  a  marked  one,  such  as  January  1st,
or  the  anniversary  of  the  day  of  the  command  ^ — and  cases  where
simply  a  length  of  time  is  named,  not  immediately  suggestive  of  a  par-
ticular date,  as  in  the  direction  to  do  such  and  such  a  thing  "  on  the
69th  day  from  this."  In  the  former  case  the  impression  of  the  date
might  be  immediately  registered  in  the  brain,  in  association  with  that
of  the  order,  and  the  mere  arrival'  of  the  date  might  thus  sufiice  to
revive the order. But how is a length of time to be  so

1  It  is  unfortunate  that  in  some  of  the  best  known  cases  of  commands
a  longue  echeance,  such  dates  have  been  selected  ;  but  the  proof  of  the
phenomenon  does  not  depend  on  these  cases.


288 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,

registered  1  Its  further  end,  till  reckoned  out  by  the  aid  of  the
calendar,  is  perfectly  indefinite ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  mere
arrival  of  the  day  calculated  to  revive  the  terms  of  the  order —
it  carries  no  more  sixty-ninthness  about  it  than  any  other  day.
M.  Paul  Janet  has  described  such  a  length  of  time  as  in  fact
an  abstraction — meaning  that  the  mention  of  it  awakens  no
distinct  image  or  series  of  images  ;  and  he  refuses  to  believe
that  abstract  time  can  be  accurately  measured,  since  this  would
imply  some  totally  unknown  faculty.  ^  I  cannot  think  that  Professor
Beaunis  fairly  meets  this  objection  by  pointing  out  that  "  a  day  "
represents  a  series  of  conscious  impressions  and  unconscious
organic  reactions,  and  that  there  are  periodic  organic  changes
which  extend  over  weeks,  months,  and  seasons — that  animals
know  their  feeding-time,  and  that  attacks  of  fever  recur  at  regular
intervals.  His  conclusion  from  these  facts  is  that  "  the  measure-
ment of  time  is  not  an  abstraction,  but  has  its  roots  and
conditions  in  the  very  life  of  the  organism."^  But,  in  the  first
place,  though  "  a  day "  may  be  a  sufficiently  familiar  and  definite
unit  to  present  a  concrete  character,  it  does  not  follow  that
this  is  the  case  with  "  69  days."  And,  in  the  second  place,  the
organic  conditions  which  are  just  what  the  measurement  of  established
physiological  periods  ipso  facto  has,  are  just  what  the  measurement  of
periods  suddenly  and  arbitrarily  fixed  by  human  volition  has  not.  The
vital  processes  will  no  more  work  out  such  a  measurement  as  this  than
a  school-boy's  digestion  will  work  out  a  proposition  of  Euclid.  How-
ever carried  through,  it  is  at  least  not  a  function  of  animal  life.  It
issues  in  a  perfectly  needless  act,  not  in  an  inevitable  bodily  state ;
and  it  depends,  not  on  progressive  changes  in  the  stomach  or  the
blood,  but  on  a  quite  original  course  of  cerebration,  proceeding,  we
cannot  doubt,  in  the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain,  having  been  initiated
by  an  impression — that  of  the  command — which  had  a  distinct
psychical  side.  Now  looking  at  the  brain-side  alone,  we  should
conclude,  I  think,  that  the  passage  of  time  must  be  registered,  not  by
any  general  gradual  change,  but  by  a  series  of  specific  changes,
corresponding  probably  to  the  days  or  units  of  measurement?  We
should  conclude,  that  is,  that  cerebral  events  of  the  sort  normally
correlated  with  the  ideas  "sixty,"  "sixty-one,"  "  sixty -two,"  &c.,  really
take  place ;  for  how  otherwise  could  the  gulf  be  spanned  with
precision  %  how  would  any  other  sort  of  change  know  when  to  stop,  or

1  Revue  Politique  et  Litth-airc,  for  August  16th,  1884.
-  Le  So7nnmnhulisme  Pi-ovoque,  pp.  139-141.

3  Cf.  the  reckoning  and  registration  of  units  in  a  later  case  (p.  313).  The
units  there  were  minutes,  not  days  ;  but  I  do  not  see  that  this  much  impairs
the  force  of  the  analogy.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  289


associate  some  point  that  it  had  reached  with  the  order  given  weeks
before  1  Such  a  cerebral  process  alone  would  wholly  differentiate  the
case  from  that  of  oi'dinary  physiological  time-reckoning.  But  if  the
specific  brain-changes  take  place,  does  it  not  seem  at  least  a  reasonable
surmise  that  their  mental  correlate  may  exist,  though  hidden  from  our
view — that  there  may  further  be  an  actual  watching  of  the  course  of
time  ?  1  Such  a  hypothesis  would  in  great  part  remove  M.  Paul  Janet's
difficulty;  for  the  "unknown  faculty"  would  simply  be  a  known
faculty,  working  in  a  normal  way,  but  below  the  sui'face  of  normal
consciousness.

Most  of  the  evidence  bearing  on  this  subject  will  find  its  appro-
priate place  in  the  next  section ;  but  a  few  facts  may  be  given  here.
M. DelbcEuf's record contains  two cases which are very  much

in  point. M  was  told,  when  entranced,  that  in  10  minutes  {dix  was

very  likely  understood  as  six)  she  was  to  take  Mile.  Delboeuf  s  slipper
from  her  foot,  remove  a  nail  from  its  heel,  and  put  it  back  on  the
owner's  foot.  On  being  woke,  she  looked  at  the  clock,  and  kept
glancing  at  the  clock  and  at  Mile.  Delboeuf  during  six  minutes,  when
she  executed  the  order.  In  this  case  there  was  doubtless  consciousness
(in  the  ordinary  sense)  of  consulting  the  clock,  and  probably  a  waking
memory  of  it,  as  M.  Delboeuf  seems  to  say  that  the  memory  of  the
incident  was  complete.

In  the  next  example  we  have  probably  a  similiar  consciousness  of
watching  the  time,  without  the  waking  memory.  A  chemist  had  beezi
told,  when  entranced,  that  five  minutes  after  waking  he  was  to  fetch  a
bottle  of  ammonia  from  a  neighbouring  shop.  He  was  woke,  and
talked  naturally  to  those  present ;  but  he  looked  at  the  clock
immediately  on  waking,  and  kept  looking  at  it  at  intervals.  At  the
end  of  five  minutes,  he  put  on  his  hat  and  went  out,  re-appeared  with
the  ammonia,  and  took  his  place  again  among  the  bystanders,  remarking,
"Why,  have  I  not  just  been  out?"  He  was  then  informed  what  he
had  done,  to  his  great  astonishment.  This  case  seems  intermediate
between  the  former  one  and  those  where  the  watching  is  of  a  wholly
interior  kind,  and  is  not  only  forgotten  afterwards,  but  is  accompanied
by  no  consciousness  of  which  the  normal  waking  "  subject  "  can  render
any  account ;  but  which  still,  I  believe,  involves  mental  action  of  a  sort.

^  It  is  worth  remarking  that,  if  there  be  such  a  mental  watcking,  then  we
have  a  fresh  argument  for  the  view  of  "  automatic"  actions  maintained  in  the
preceding  section.  For  there  would  at  least  be  a  strong  presumption  that  the
action  up  to  which  tlie  watching  leads,  and  which  puts  an  end  to  it,  however
sUght  and  insignificant  it  may  be,  has  itself  some  sort  of  mental  existence.

I  find  that  the  same  idea  of  a  continued  reckoning  has  occurred  to  Professor
Pierre  Janetand  Mr.  Myers,  «7Jro7>o.s  of  some  experiments  of  the  former  (p.  239).
The  general  view,  in  this  and  in  the  following  section,  as  to  evidence  of  second-
ary intelligence,  is  I  think  identical  with  that  of  Mr.  Myera.

U


290 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


Here  are  a  couple  of  instances  of  this  extremer  kind. My  "  subject,"

W  s,  was  one  day  told  that  on  the  39th  day  from  then,  at  9.30  p.m.,  he

was  to  come  and  call  on  a  gentleman  resident  in  the  house  where  I  was
lodging,  with  whom  he  had  no  acquaintance.  He  of  course  had  no
memory  of  this  direction,  when  awake.  No  reference  was  made  to  the
command  till  March  19th,  when  he  was  suddenly  asked,  in  the  trance,
how  many  days  had  elapsed  since  it  was  given.  He  instantly  said,  16  ;
and  added  that  tliere  were  23  more  to  run,  and  that  the  day  when  he
was  due  was  Easter  Monday. i  All  these  statements  were  correct.  But
the  odd  thing  was  that,  on  further  questioning,  he  misdated  both  the
day  of  the  order  and  the  day  of  fulfilment,  calling  the  former  March  1st,
and  the  latter  April  12th,  whereas  they  were  respectively  March  3rd
and  April  1 1th.  This  makes  it  tolerably  clear  that  he  did  not  originally
arrive  at  the  date  of  fulfilment  by  immediate  reckoning  from  the  date
of  command,  and  then  fix  it  in  his  mind  simply  as  a  date.  (Easter
Monday,  when  so  near  as  23  days,  might  be  arrived  at  in  a  moment  by
remarking  the  day  of  the  week.)  Moreover  if  he  made  March  1st  his
terminus  a  quo,  he  ought  to  have  said  18  instead  of  16,  and  would
probably  have  had  to  pause  to  reckon.  The  reasonable  interpretation
of  the  result  is  surely  that  he  was  in  some  way  actually  counting  the
days  as  they  passed.

In  the  next  case,  which  occurred  after  the  above  remarks  were
written,  I got  an  actual  account  of  the  process,  which  singularly

confirms  them. P  11  was  told,  on  March  26,  that  on  the  123rd  day

from  then  he  was  to  put  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  in  an  envelope,  and
send  it  to  a  friend  of  mine  whose  name  and  residence  he  knew,  but
whom  he  had  never  seen.  The  subject  was  not  referred  to  again  till
April  18,  when  he  was  hypnotised,  and  asked  if  he  remembered  any-
thing in  connection  with  this  gentleman.  He  at  once  repeated  the
order,  and  said,  "  This  is  the  23rd  day ;  a  hundred  more."

S. "  How  do  you  know  ? Have  you  noted  each  day  ?  "

P  LL. "  No  ;  it  seemed  natural."

S. "  Have  you  thought  of  it  often  1 "

P  LL. "  It  generally strikes me in the morning,  early.

Something  seems  to  say  to  me,  '  You've  got  to  count.'  "
S. "  Does  that  happen  every  day  1 "

P  LL. "  No,  not  every  day — perhaps  more  like  every  other

day.  It  goes  from  my  mind  ;  I  never  think  of  it  during  the  day.  I
only  know  it's  got  to  be  done."

Questioned  further,  he  made  it  clear  that  the  interval  between
these  impressions  was  never  long  enough  to  be  doubtful. He  "  may

^  Unfortunately  the  accident  of  the  (cheance  on  Easter  Monday  prevented

the  execution  of  tlie  order,  as  W  s  went  off  on  a  holiday  excursion  for  the

whole  day.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  291


not  think  of  it  for  2  or  3  days ;  then  something  seems  to  tell  liim."  He
was  questioned  again  on  April  20,  and  at  once  said,  "That's  going  on
all  right ;  twenty-five  days  " ;  and  on  April  22,  when  in  the  trance,  he
spontaneously  recalled  the  subject,  and  added,  "  Twenty-seven  days."
After  he  was  woke  on  April  18,1  asked  him  if  he  knew  the  gentleman
in  question,  or  had  been  thinking  about  him.  He  was  clearly  surpi'ised
at  the  question,  said  he  fancied  he  had  once  seen  him  in  my  room
(which,  however,  was  not  the  case),  and  that  the  idea  of  him  had  never
since  crossed  his  mind.

But  there  is  another  way  in  which  the  moment  for  the  performance
of  the  action  can  be  fixed.  The  "  subject  "  can  be  told  to  perform  it
when  some  signal  is  given — as  when  someone  gives  a  cough,  or  pokes
the  fire.  Now  here  again  we  might  perhaps  conceive  that  the  organism
sets  itself  for  the  receipt  of  the  signal,  just  as  it  has  been  supposed  to
set  itself  for  the  expiration  of  a  certain  period  of  time  ;  and  that  the
signal  touches  the  trigger,  so  to  speak,  and  lets  off"  the  associated
action,  without  any  psychical  expectancy  being  involved,  and,  it
may  be,  without  any  consciousness  of  what  is  done.  But  we
can  arrange  the  conditions  in  such  a  way  as  again  to  involve
reckoning  of  a  certain  kind,  and  of  a  kind  which  it  is  hard  to  conceive
as  having  no  mentation  of  any  sort  associated  with  it.  For  instance,
the  direction  may  be  to  perform  the  act  when  someone  coughs  for  the
third  time,  or  pokes  the  fire  for  the  fourth  time.  The  first  cough
comes  ;  it  does  not  release  the  trigger,  but  its  occurrence  is  somehow
marked.  The  second  cough  in  like  manner  does  not  release  the  trigger;
but  it  is  not  only  marked,  but  is  somehow  related  to  the  former  one.
And  when  the  third  cough  comes,  the  trigger  is  released  not  merely  by
tlie  sound  of  it,  but  by  that  sound  as  related  to  the  two  previous  ones.
I  would  not  venture  to  assert  a.  priori  that  all  this  reckoning  cannot  be
of  a  purely  physiological  kind,  though  I  think  that  the  presumption
would  be  the  other  way.  But  again  experiment  comes  to  our  aid.  If
the  "  subject  "  be  re-hypnotised  before  the  final  cough — say  the  fourth
— has  been  given,  and  questioned  as  to  what  has  passed,  he  shows
clearly  that  he  remembers  being  in  the  attitude  of  expectancy  for  the
coming  signal. Sometimes  the  hidden  mental  condition  during  the

time  of  waiting,  has  been  a  very  curious  one. Thus  W  s,  who  had

been  told  that  at  my  fifth  cough  the  candles  would  go  out,  then  woke,
and  then  hypnotised  again  before  the  final  cough  had  been  given,  dis-
owned all  memory  of  the  four  coughs  which  had  been  actually  given,  but
knew  that  the  next  would  be  the  fifth,  "  because  then  the  candles  would
go  out."  At  other  times  the  signals  have  been  clearly  and  correctly
counted  ;  and  the  memory  of  them  on  re-hypnotLsation  is  certainly  not
the  mere  memory  of  observations  made  by  the  normal  waking
consciousness; since  sounds  or  movements  of  which  the  "subject's"

u  2


292 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


normal  consciousness  takes  no  heed  as  they  occur,  and  of  which  his
waking  self,  when  interrogated,  can  give  no  account,  equally  serve  the
purpose  of  signals,  and  are  shown  by  the  answers  given  in  trance  to
have  been  duly  reckoned.  Thus  when  the  signal  has  been  one  of  a
series  of  usual  and  unimpressive  actions,  such  as  coughs  or  pokings  of
the  fire  in  winter,  I  have  several  times,  while  the  series  was  in  progress
but  before  the  critical  point  was  reached,  asked  the  "  subject  "  if  he
had  noticed  that  I  had  a  cough,  or  if  he  could  tell  me  how  often  I  have
poked  the  fire,  and  have  been  answered  in  the  negative.

It  is  easy  to  superpose  one  series  of  signals  on  another.  Thus,  W  s

was  hypnotised,  and  told  to  wind  up  a  ball  of  string  when  I  coughed
for  tlie  tliird  time.  Another  experiment  followed,  and  then  he  was  told
that,  when  I  poked  the  tire,  he  was  to  soi't  a  pack  of  cards,  and  put  all
the  diamonds  together.  Again  an  experiment  of  a  different  kind
followed,  after  which  he  was  woke.  I  gave  two  coughs,  and  then,  com-
pletely forgetting  the  command  relating  to  the  lire,  I  poked  that

element.  W  s  seized  the  cards,  and  in  a  few  moments  I  perceived  how

matters  stood.  I  therefore  gave  my  third  cough,  when  he  at  once  put
down  the  cards,  and  asked  for  some  string.  I  said  I  had  none ;
whereupon  he  got  up  to  look,  found  the  string,  and  began  winding  it,
having  first  repossessed  himself  of  the  cards.  When  the  winding  was
completed,  he  took  the  cards  and  sorted  out  the  diamonds. i  Another

time,  P  11  was  given  6  orders,  each  of  which  was  to  be  fulfilled

at  an  assigned  point  in  one  of  6  different  series  of  signals.  This
however  proved  rather  beyond  his  capacity  ;  all  the  things  were
done,  but  only  two  immediately  on  the  right  signal,  three  others
following  their  signals  by  a  considerable  interval,  and  one  being  done
at  S.'s  eighth  cough  instead  of  at  his  sixth.  It  would  be  interesting
to  discover  with  a  well-educated  "  subject "  to  what  extent  parallel
series  of  signals  of  this  sort  could  be  multiplied,  without  confusion
ensuing.  If  it  proved  to  equal  or  exceed  the  extent  of  his  normal  capacity,
his  subsequent  hypnotic  memory  might  afford  even  stronger  demonstra-
tion as  to  the  psychical  nature  of  the  reckoning  ;  as  he  might  be  able  to
describe  the  relations  between  the  series,  and  his  mode  of  keeping  them
distinct.

IV.

Various  Exhibitions  of  Secondary  Intelligence.

The  experiments  which  follow  are  of  a  more  novel  kind.  Though
tame  and rudimentary  enough,  compared  with  the  only  hitherto-

1  In  this  case  it  proved  impossible  to  recall  to  liis  memory,  during  the
fulfilment  of  the  commands, even  quite  recent  impressions  belonging  to  the  time
of  trance  ;  and  there  was  none  of  that  change  of  physiognomy  wliich  was  so
marked  in  the  case  where  that  experiment  succeeded  (p.  274).


1887.] Pecidiarities  of  Certain  Pod-Hypiiotic  States.  293


recorded  case  to  which  they  seem  at  all  akin — the  dramatic  self-duplica-
tion of  Prof.  Janet's  patient  (pp.  237-45) — they  present  at  any  rate  this
advantage,  that  they  had  no  connection  with  hysterical  conditions,  but
were  conducted  with  normal  healthy  "subjects";  and  can  therefore  be
repeated  and  extended  without  fear  of  a  disappearance  like  Adrienne's.
Their  results  form  a  yet  further  stage  in  the  history  of  the  post-hypnotic
development  of  hypnotic  impressions.  They  present  once  more  the
phenomena  of  intelligent  automatism,  like  the  hand-conversations  of
§  II. ;  and  they  illustrate  the  latent  reckoning  of  time,  and  observation
of  signals,  like  the  cases  of  §  III. ;  but  they  exhibit  in  a  more  direct
and  conspicuous  way  than  either  a  secondary  memory  and  secondary
play  of  mind  in  the  post-hypnotic  state,  and  tlie  severance  of  the
normal  or  primary  from  the  latent  or  secondary  consciousness.  In
the  hand-conversations,  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  this  severance

to  have  been  complete. In  P  ll's  mind  my  questions  and  S.'s

remarks  were certainly  present together,  on the same  plane  of

consciousness ;  and  as  regards  S  1,  though  the  point  needs  further

trials,  my  belief  is  that,  if  asked  by  S.  what  I  had  said  immediately
after  one  of  my  questions,  he  also  would  have  been  able  to  reply.  In
the  cases  which  follow,  the  secondary  "self"  took  its  own  course,
in  such  complete  independence  of  what  passed  dming  its  latent  period,
while  the  primary  "  self "  was  ostensibly  in  possession  of  the  field,
that  external  impressions  then  received  passed  unregarded,  and  there
was  no  moment  at  which  the  doings  of  the  two  selves  were  juxtaposed
or  associated  in  normal  consciousness.  Again,  as  regards  the  hidden
processes  of  mentation  during  the  period  preceding  the  fulfilment
of  a  command,  our  evidence  so  far  has  been  derived  from  the  state-
ments made  by  the  "  subject "  when  once  more  in  a  state  of  trance.
But  we  shall  now  be  able  to  ascertain  the  workings  of  this  secondary
consciousness  in  the  reckoning  of  time  and  signals,  without  any  previous
calling  of  it  to  the  front  by  re-hypnotisation  ;  its  work  i  s  not  only  done,
but  tested,  while  the  normal  self  remains  uninterruptedly  in  the
ascendent,  and  shows  absolutely  no  sign  of  change.  And  yet  again,
we  shall  now  find  manifestations  of  other  sorts  of  reflection  and
calculation,  which  go  considerably  beyond  mere  temporal  measurements
in  the  degree  of  hidden  psychical  activity  which  they  involve.  The
medium  of  all  these  further  results  is  no  other  than  our  old  friend,
planchette — that  delicate  little  recorder  of  which  it  will  soon,  I  believe,
be  said,  with  even  more  truth  and  point  than  of  the  astrologer's  charts
or  the  alchemist's  crucibles  and  re-agents,  that  Time's  revenges  have
turned  the  blindly-handled  tool  of  superstition  into  the  indispensable
instrument  of  science.

I  will  begin  with  the  simpler  cases,  which  involved  memory,  but  not
independent  thought. On  March  16th  I  showed  P — —11  a  planchette


294 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  .23,


— he  had  never  seen  or  touched  one  before — -and  got  him  to  write  his
name  with  it.  He  was  then  hypnotised,  and  told  that  it  had  been  as
dark  as  night  in  London  on  the  previous  day,  and  that  he  would  be  able
to  write  what  he  had  heard.  He  was  woke,  and  as  usual  was  offered
a  sovereign  to  say  what  it  was  that  he  had  been  told.  He  was
then  placed  with  his  hand  on  the  planchette,  a  large  screen  being  held
in  front  of  his  face,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  see  the  paper
or  instrument.  In  less  than  a  minute  tlie  writing  began.  The  words
were.

It  was  a  dark  day  in  London  yesterday .

He  professed,  as  did  all  the  "  subjects  "  on  every  occasion,  complete
ignorance  as  to  what  he  had  written ;  and  I  believe  with  perfect
truth.  I  repeatedly  expressed  a  desire  to  know,  and  offered  the
sovereign  if  they  would  tell  me  ;  but  their  account  was  always  that  the
instrument  took  their  hand  with  it,  and  that  they  could  not  detect
what  letters  it  formed.  They  showed  no  curiosity  in  the  matter,  and
I  did  not  urge  them  to  try  to  interpret  the  movements,  which,  no
doubt,  could  be  done  with  practice.

In  the  next  experiment  the  statement  impressed  on  the  "  subject  "
was,  "There  were  six  inches  of  snow  in  London  this  morning"  ;  but
nothing  was  said  to  him  as  to  subsequently  writing  it.  The  writing,
however,  appeared  as  before,  "  There  was  6  inches  of  snow."  and  then
an  illegible  jumble  of  lines  caused  by  the  pencil  going  over  the  same
spot  again  and  again,  instead  of  progressing  from  left  to  right.  I
observed  this,  but  up  to  this  point  I  did  not  watch  the  process  of

writing — a  rule  which  I  observed  in  nearly  all  cases. P  11  was

then  re-hypnotised,  and  S.  said  to  him  several  times,  emphatically,

"  P  11,  John  Jones  is  coming." He  was  so  deeply  entranced  that

he  showed  no  sign  of  even  hearing.  The  planchette  reproduced  the
whole  remark,

P  II,  John  Jones  is  coming.

The  next  statement  was  "  Robert  Brown  has  gone." Being  roused  a

little,  P  11  remarked,  "  He  must  go,  then  ;  he  needn't  wait  for  me."

When  completely  woke,  he  was,  as  usual,  offered  the  sovereign  to  repeat
what  he  had  been  told. The  planchette  at  once  produced  the  words.
Then  followed  a  curious  example  of  the  reality  of  hypnotic  rapport.

In  the  trance  P  11  is  sometimes  able  to  hear  me,  as  well  as  S.  ;  I

therefore  made  the  next  statement  myself — "  There  is  a  high  tide  to-
night " — to  which  he  replied,  "  I  thought  it  was  a  low  one,"  proving
that  he  had  heard  and  understood.  He  is  now  placed  before  the  planchette
as  before,  but  no  writing  occurs,  and  he  says  his  hand  feels  no  impulse  to
move.  The  same  process  is  repeated  with  the  same  result.  Thinking
that  the  failure  might  be  due  to  my  having  disturbed  his  condition  by


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post- Hypnotic  States.  295


making  passes  with  a  view  to  waking  him,  before  S.  did  so,  I  repeated
the  experiment  without  this  ineffectual  interference  ;  still  no  writing.
S.  now  made  the  statements,  "  There  will  be  a  very  high  tide  to-night,"
and,  "  In  one  minute  from  now  you  will  wake" — adding  that  he  would  be

able  to  write  ;  and  then  left  the  room. In  about  a  minute  P  11

emerged  into  an  odd  state  in  which  he  would  not  answer  me,  or  take
any  notice  of  me  when  I  touched  him.  He  got  up  spontaneously,  walked
to  the  planchette,  put  his  hand  on  it,  and  wrote  as  in  a  kind  of  dream,

There  his  a  going  to  be  a  High  tide.

He  returned  to  the  sofa,  and  sat  without  moving,  with  open  eyes.
When  S.  returned,  and  roused  him  a  little,  he  denied  writing,  and
seemed  unaware  of  having  done  anything.  Re-hypnotised  and  ques-
tioned, he  remembered  writing  about  a  high  tide,  and  said  that  he  did
it  to  remind  himself  of  it.

S.  now  told  him  that  I  was  going  to  tell  him  something,  and  that
he  was  to  wake  in  a  minute  and  write  it  ;  and  then  left  the  room.  I

told  him,  "  It  is  a  good  year  for  salmon." In  about  a  minute  P  11

woke  after  a  fashion,  and  sat  with  open  eyes,  and  his  hands  on  his  knees,
using  gestures  as  if  trying  to  recollect  something.  I  recalled
S.,  who  woke  him  thoroughly,  and  he  laid  his  hand  on  the  planchette.
I  failed  at  first  sight  to  decipher  the  writing,  and  asked  that  it  should

be  repeated. But  the  instrument  did  not  move,  and  P  11  said  that

he  felt  no  tendency  towards  movement.  Here,  we  may  observe,  is  an
indication  that  the  secondary  (writing)  self  ^  had  a  purely  transient
existence.  A  "  subject "  who  is  in  any  state  in  which  he  can  verbally
tell  one  something  that  he  has  heard  in  the  trance,  could  always  be
made  to  repeat  his  words.  But  here  the  "  subject,"  whose  hand  wrote
he  knew  not  what,  was  completely  himself  ;  he  had  not  suffered  the
very  slightest  relapse  towards  a  trance-waking  state ;  and  there  was  no
way  of  getting,  through  his  ears,  at  his  secondary  intelligence,  which,
having  performed  its  task,  had  probably  lapsed  beyond  recall.
Fortunately  its  aid  could  be  dispensed  with,  as  on  examining  the
writing  again,  I  had  no  difficulty  in  making  out.

Write  Mr.  Gnrney  something —

a  crowning  instance  of  the  special  rapport  with  the  operator,  since  the
reproduction  was  of  S.'s  preliminary  direction,  and  not  of  the  remark
of  mine  which  it  was  the  precise  object  of  that  direction  to  get
reproduced.

1  The  word  "  self"  is  too  convenient  to  be  dispensed  with,  but  must  not  be
misunderstood.  In  such  cases  as  these,  the  "  secondary  self  "  is  a  mere  rudi-
ment of  a  personality:  it  is  no  more  tlian  a  short  connected  train  of  intelligence
of  whose  activities  and  products  the  normal  self  is  unaware.


296 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


Throughout  these  and  subsequent  trials, P  11  described  the

sensation  in  his  hand  and  arm,  which  accompanied  the  writing,  as  very
peculiar  and  disagreeable — as  like  "  pins  and  needles,"  and  "  galvanic
shocks."  He  certainly  suffered  considerably,  and  conceived  a  strong
aversion  to  the  instrument.

The  experiments  with  W  s  began  in  a  very  similar  way  ;  but  the

first  results  were  more  striking,  as  no  direction  as  to  writing  was  given
him  in  the  trance.  He  was  emphatically  told,  "  George  Robinson  is
dead,"  was  woke,  offered  a  sovereign  if  he  could  repeat  what  he  had
been  told,  and  then  placed  with  his  hand  on  planchette,  the  screen
being  held  as  usual  between  his  eyes  and  the  paper. Almost  at  once  the

words  George  Rohing07i  were  written. W  s,  like  P  11,  described

a  curious  sensation  in  the  right  arm  (which,  however,  in  his  case  was
less  distressing),  and  also  the  way  in  which  tlie  instrument  seemed  to
take  his  hand  with  it.  Re-hypnotised,  he  was  told  "  Timothy  Stokes
has  died."  He  was  amused  at  this,  and  said  that  if  he  had  such  a
name  he  would  change  it.  He  was  woke,  to  the  usual  oblivion  ;  but
the  planchette  under  his  hand  soon  produced  the  complete  sentence.
He  was  then  re-hypnotised,  and  asked  what  he  had  written. He  said,

"  W  s."  That  was  a  reminiscence  of  his  having  been  made  to  write

his  name  when  he  came  in,  to  teach  him  how  to  hold  his  hand  on  the
instrument.  He  remembered  having  subsequently  had  his  hand  on  it,
and  that  it  had  moved;  but  that  was  all.  This  I'esult  was  exceptional;
on  re-hypnotisation,  the  "  subject "  could  as  a  rule  repeat,  either
perfectly  or  approximately,  what  he  had  written.

In  other  results,  which  were  failures  in  relation  to  what  was

intended,  the  reproduction  was  of  just  the  same  type. Thus  P  11,

after  being  told  in  tlie  trance  to  count  the  number  of  letters  in  "  A
rolling  stone  gathers  no  moss,"  and  then  instantly  woke,  simply
wrote,

A  rolling  stone  never  gathers  no  moss.

Told  that  he  was  to  poke  the  fire  in  6  minutes,  and  that  I  should
want  to  know  how  the  time  was  going,  without  any  directions  as  to
writing,  he  wrote,  soon  after  waking,

P  II  will  you  poke  the  fire  in  6  minuetts.

As  a  rule,  the  writing  was  legible,  uninterrupted,  and  correct,
or  contained  only  such  mistakes  as  the  "  subject's  "  normal  writing
might  show  ;  and  his  manner  and  conversation  meanwhile  were
wholly  free  and  unconcerned.  It  is  important  to  observe  how
distinct  the  difference  is  here  from  the  cases  above  described  of
post-hypnotic  fulfilment  of  commands — even  from  those  when  the
deviation  from  normality  was  the  slightest.  Not  only  does  the
"subject"  show  none  of that  absorption with his  work, or  im-


1S87.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  297


patience  of  interference,  which  we  observed  in  many  of  tlie  cases
when  he  was  fully  conscious  of  his  proceedings — e.g.,  when  he  was
sorting  cards  or  winding  up  a  ball  of  string  ;  but  he  equally  lacked  the
sense  of  impulse  or  desire  which  prompted  and  accompanied  the
performance  of  normal-seeming  acts  (p.  270).  When  his  hand  was
actually  laid  on  the  planchette,  there  was  a  sort  of  physical  impulsion,
which  he  described  as  seeming  to  come  rather  from  the  instrument  than
from  himself  ;  but  if  his  hand  was  removed,  there  was  no  desire  to
replace  it,  or  to  get  the  writing  produced. Each  of  the  "  subjects,"

P  11  especially,  would  have  gladly  been  excused  the  process.  This

is  just  what  we  might  expect,  on  the  view  of  that  more  complete  segrega-
tion of  states  of  which  I  have  spoken.  The  normal  self  has  here  been  from
the  first,  so  to  speak,  relieved  of  all  responsil^ility  ;  no  attention  and  no
volition  on  its  part  had  to  come  into  play,  the  secondary  consciousness
being  wholly  adequate  to  what  was  required.  No  doubt  a  definite
command,  impressed  on  the  hypnotic  state,  to  write  something  with  the
planchette  at  a  given  time  or  signal,  might  be  obeyed  in  the  same  way,
and  under  the  same  mental  conditions,  as  the  sorting  of  the  cards  or  the

winding  of  the  string — as  in  the  case  above  given,  in  which  P  11

wrote  about  the  high  tide.  But  the  rule  was  that  the  hypnotic
impression  should  be  given  in  a  diiferent  way  from  this.  Either  no
direction  to  write  was  given  at  all,  or  the  direction  was  put
hypothetically — as,  ifl  required  to  know  something  afterwards,  it  was
to  be  written  for  me.  The  consequence  was  that  the  "subject"  never
went  to  the  planchette  of  his  own  accord  ;  it  had  no  interest  for  him.
In  the  former  cases,  when  he  did  not  see  the  cards  or  the  string  or
whatever  he  was  to  manipulate,  he  would  ask  for  them,  or  look  for
them  till  he  found  them.  With  the  planchette,  on  the  contrary,  there
was  no  manifestation  of  anything  in  his  mind,  or  of  any  impulse  that
needed  a  vent,  till  his  hand  was  actually  placed  on  the  instrument  at
my  desire  ;  after  which  the  secondary  consciousness  took  undivided
charge  of  the  results.

I  will  give  a  few  more  instances  where  no  suggestion  of  any  sort
was  made  about  writing,  and  where  the  only  difference  between
the  statement  made  to  the  "  subject,"  and  any  other  that  might  be  made
to  him  during  trance,  consisted  in  some  amount  of  repetition  of  it.  On

March  18th,  W  s  (who  is  a  baker)  was  told,  with  considerable  insist-

ance,  "  The  baking  trade  is  failing."  He  was  then  woke,  and  departed.
As  soon  as  he  arrived  next  day,  he  was  set  down  to  the  planchette.
Several  minutes  elapsed,  and  then  the  instrument  slowly  produced  the
words,

The  baking  trade  is-  failing.

There  seems  to  have  been  some  very  slight  emergence  of  the  idea
into  his  normal  consciousness ;  as,  while  the  writing  was  proceed-


298 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


ing,  he  said  that  someone  seemed  to  be  "  holloaing "  in  his  ear
something — he  could  not  make  out  what — about  the  baking  trade.
But  lie  was  quite  unaware  of  what  his  hand  had  produced,  and
even  when  re-hypnotised,  he  could  not  at  first  be  sure  whether  he
had  written  the  words,  or  whether  S.  had  "holloaed"  them  at
him.  After  a  time,  however,  he  remembered,  and  described  the
writing,  which  had  been  very  irregular  as  to  the  arrangement  of  lines, ^
exactly  as  if  he  had  it  before  him.  He  said,  "  Yes,  I  see  the  ;  but  it
ain't  like  my  writing,  it  looks  like  a  little  youngster's.  Look  where's  he
got  to."  (This  was  accompanied  by  appropriate  movements  of  his
finger  on  the  table  at  his  side.)  "  The  baking  <  in  a  line,  then  r  a  d  e"
(pointing  far  to  the  left  on  a  lower  level).  "  And  what's  that  scribbly
thing  1  Then  he  jumps  from  here  right  up  to  the  top — is  /ailing  "
(pointing  above  the  level  which  he  had  indicated  as  that  of  the  first  line).
As  he  had  not  had  the  slightest  glimpse  of  the  actual  writing,  this
seemed  a  good  instance  of  that  remarkable  delicacy  of  muscular
perception  which  is  so  characteristic  of  hypnotic  "subjects"  and
somnambulists.  Clairvoyance  was  out  of  the  question,  as  I  proved  by
testing  him  in  other  cases  where  he  professed  (as  hypnotised  persons  so
often  do)  to  see  things  which  were  out  of  the  range  of  his  normal
vision.

Once  more,  in  the  course  of  an  experiment  on  the  stages  of  memory

(see  my  subsequent  paper)  P  11  had  got  a  confusion  into  his  head

about  a  whale  in  a  green  tank  at  the  Aquarium,  and  a  swimming
entertainment  given  by  Miss  Webb  on  the  pier.  Another  experiment
intervened,  and  he  was  then  put  down  to  the  planchette.  I  did  not
expect  him  to  write  anything,  and  had  no  idea  what  memory,  if  any,
would  be  in  the  ascendant. In  a  few  moments  the  words  appeared,

P  II did  you  see  that  whale  and  Hiss  Webb  his  a-going  to

give  entertainment  on  the  pier  and  that  green  tank.

On  the  same  day  he  wrote,  equally  unexpectedly,

P  II  did  you  hear  of  that  dog  fight  along  the  King^s-road  the

other  day  it  tuas  a  alful  sight  I  caji  tell  you.

This  last  writing,  it  is  true,  was  produced  while  he  was  in  the
hypnotic  state  ;  but  it  still  deserves  attention.  For  since  my  "  subjects  "
had  throughout  conformed  to  the  usual  rule  in  never  volunteering  spoken
remarks  relating  to  anything  that  had  previously  been  impressed  on
them,  the  planchette  seemed  hei-e  once  more  to  open  up  to  us  more
withdrawn mental  processes than any  which other means  could

1  This  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  sheet  of  paper  used  was  inconveniently
small,  and  had  to  be  shifted  several  times  to  prevent  the  pencil  from  getting
off  it.


18S7.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  299

reveal.^  This  appears  still  more  clearly  in  the  next  case,  which  is  of
special  interest.

I  -was  expei-imenting  with  W  s  on  the  abnormality  of  state  pro-
duced during  the  fulfilment  of  a  previous  hypnotic  command  (pp.  273-4).
At  the  right  signal,  he  seized  a  pack  of  cards  and  began  his  task,  which
was  to  arrange  them  in  suits.  I  found  tliat  he  could  now  remember  a
number  of  things  of  which  he  was  ignorant  in  his  normal  state ;  and
I  therefore  thought  it  a  good  opportunity  to  try  whether  a  hallucination
could  be  suddenly  imposed  on  him. At  my  request,  S.  tells  him  that

S  1  has  entered  the  room. He  looks  up  and  says,  "  Ah,  S  1,  sit

down,"  and  addresses  S  1  several  times,  while  continuing  to  sort  the

cards. He  is  now  taken  to  tlie  planchette. He  calls  the  imaginary

S  1  to  come  and  sit  beside  him,  places  a  chair  for  him,  patronises

him,  and  says  he  will  write  his  name. He  then  writes,  very  rapidly,

Cards  are  all  sorted.

He  was  repeatedly  asked  what  he  had  written,  as  at  first  I  could
not  make  it  out,  and  he  answered  repeatedly,  "  Sort  W."  The
word  "  sorted "  on  the  last  piece  of  paper  used  closely  resembled

this. Still  questioned,  he  said  he  had  written  S  t's  name,  and

pointing  to  the  word  "  Cards,"  he  spelt  out  S  1.- He  was  now

roused  into  normality,  and  at  once  hypnotised  again.  Asked  what  he
had  written,  he  instantly  replied,  "Cards  are  all  sorted."  Here,  then,
we  have  the  spontaneous  action  of  the  secondary  consciousness,  giving
information  as  to  the  execution  of  the  order,  while  the  self  which  was
connected  with  the  superimposed  hallucination  had  a  quite  separate  idea.
Without  the  aid  of  the  planchette,  we  shcnild  never  have  been  able  to
get  a  glimpse  beyond  the  hallucinated  state,  which  had  itself  carried  the
deviation  from  normality  to  the  point  of  completely  developed  trance.

Throughout  this  section  I  have  been  speaking  of  the  secondary
processes  as  intelligent — as  involving  mentation.  Let  us  now  examine
for  a  moment  how  far  this  view  of  them  is  justified.  How  far  might
the  results  be  attributed  to  a  purely  physiological  or  unconscious

^  On  two  subsequent  occasions,  however,  P  11  did  spontaneously  speak

of  some  of  these  previous  kypnotie  impressions — carrying  his  confusion  further,
and  remarking  on  the  oddity  of  a  green  whale.  The  connection  of  the  dog-
fight with  the  King's  Road  (the  locality  which  properly  belonged  to  the  balloon
incident)  was  an  instance  of  the  fusion  of  the  two  stages  of  memory  after  a
considerable  time.

^  There  is  nothing  very  extraordinary  in  this;  compare  the  case  described
by  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  (Le  Magnetisme  Animal,  p.  178),  where  the  hallucina-
tion of  a  portrait  was  imposed  on  what  was  really  a  photograph  of  a  view  in  the
Pyrenees,  and  where  it  was  impossible  to  make  the  "  subject "  perceive  that  the
contours  were  really  those  of  mountain  scenerj'  ;  for  her,  there  was  simply  the

portrait  and  nothing  else. The  only  difference  in  W  s's  case  was  that  the

special  hallucination  of  the  writing  had  not  been  suggested  to  him  by  someone
else,  but  was  his  own  development  of  the  suggested  hallucination.


•SOO Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


memory  1  In  the  cases  where  the  idea  of  a  future  writing  was  conveyed
to  the  "  subject  "  at  the  same  time  that  the  statement  was  made,  one
might  recur  to  the  old  hypothesis  of  a  "  setting  of  the  organism,"  and
an  exclusively  automatic  performance.  The  hypothesis  presents  more
difficulty,  perhaps,  in  respect  of  the  cases  where  no  mention  of  writing
had  been  made,  and  where  consequently  there  could  have  been  no  regis-
tration in  the  "  subject's  "  organism  of  the  idea  of  future  manifestation
in  connection  with  the  special  idea  impressed  ou  him.  The  impression,  for
instance,  of  the  whale  and  Miss  Webb  was  made  without  a  hint  as  to
the  future — without  the  slightest  suggestion  that  it  either  must  or
could  or  would  work  out  any  ostensible  result  to  the  end  of  time.  Yet
a  manifest  result  emerges,  in  the  midst  of  quite  irrelevant  surround-
ings and  experiences,  as  soon  as  the  opportunity  of  "  automatic "
representation  is  given.  Here  the  organism  cannot  have  been  specially
set  for  the  etlect.  If  the  action  was  completely  automatic,  we  should  at
any  rate  have  to  attribute  to  hypnotic  impressions  a  very  singular
peculiarity — that  of  storing  up  energy  in  the  brain  which  will
mechanically  work  outwards  along  the  motor  nerves,  as  soon  as  the
means  are  presented  whereby  the  act  of  writing  is  made  sufficiently
easy  for  the  muscles.  But  the  really  strong  argument  for  mentation
of  a  sort  is  the  old  fact,  the  memory  on  re-hypnotisation.  The
"subject"  then  remembers  what  he  has  written,  and  remembers
tlie  writing  of  those  particular  words — not  merely  the  general  act  of
writing,  and  not  merely  the  impressed  formula.  This  is  surely  a  strong
indication  that  the  writing  was  accompanied  by  intelligent  apprehen-
sion of  the  words.

Now  at  this  point  the  question  cannot  but  occur,  what  light  do
such  results  throw  on  the  nature  of  "  intelligent  automatism "  in
general?  In  the  well-known  cases  where  planchette-writers  have
produced  words  and  sentences  which  were  at  first  a  puzzle  to  themselves,
but  wliich,  when  deciphered,  proved  to  have  a  meaning,^  it  has  never
been  possible  to  ascertain  how  far  the  process  was  purely  physiological
and  unconscious,  and  how  far  it  might  have  a  truly  psychical  character.
Now  the  above  experiments  at  any  rate  afford  strong  support  to
the  view  that  a  great  deal  of  planchette-writing,  and  of  other
forms  of  intelligent  automatism,  however  nmch  severed  from  normal
consciousness,  is  nevertheless  accompanied  by  true  psychosis.  It
would  be  extremely  interesting,  if  the  opportunity  ever  offered,  to
try  the  effect  of  liypnotisation  on  some  "  automatic  "  writer  before  he
had  deciphered  or  realised  what  his  hand  had  produced  ;  and  we  might
be  quite  prepared  to  find  that  in  the  trance  he  would  be  able  to  inform
us  what  the  writing  was.

There  is,  no  doubt,  a  difference  between  such  an  experiment  and

^  See,  e.g.,  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Myers,  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  26,37.


1887.] Pecvliarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  301


the  post-hypnotic  cases  above  described,  which  prevents  us  from
predicting  with  certainty  that  the  results  would  be  similar.  For  the
memory  of  the  post-hypnotic  writing  may  have  been  stimulated  and
aided  by  the  memory,  which  would  naturally  recur  on  re-hypnotisation,
of  the  previous  hypnotic  impression  ;  and,  moreover,  it  may  quite
well  be  that  hypnotisation,  though  it  brings  to  the  front  the  memory
belonging  to  a  train  of  secondary  intelligence  which  was  itself  set
going  in  hypnotic  trance,  might  not  have  the  same  effect  in  other
cases.  But  the  general  fact  remains  that  it  is  possible  for  writing
to  be  discerned  and  understood,  in  spite  of  the  normal  self's
complete  unawareness  of  it ;  and  there  seems  no  ground  whatever
for  confining  this  possibility  to  cases  where  the  content  of  the
writing  has  first  entered  the  mind  during  the  hypnotic  trance.
The  hypnotic  remembrance  supplies  the  subsequent  test,  but  the
writing  is  not  produced  in  the  hypnotic  state  ;  and  the  probability
therefore  is  that  the  conditions  of  the  writint^  are  general,  and  have  no
special  peculiarities  connected  with  hypnotism.  So  far  as  discernment
of  the  writing  is  concerned,  we  are  justified  in  surmising  that  post-
hypnotic and  ordinary  "  automatic  "  scripts  are  on  a  par.

But  there  is  a  further  point.  Thei'e  are  cases  where  the  words  and
sentences  produced  by  planchette-writers  have  proved  to  be  revivals  of
latent  or  forgotten  knowledge,  connected  perhaps  with  some  far-distant
period  of  life  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  result  distinctly  implies  memory}

^  The  records  of  such  cases  are  tolerably  numerous  ;  but  the  subject  has
probably  not  yet  got  beyond  the  stage  when  every  piece  of  authentic  evidence
has  a  certain  value.  I  venture,  therefore,  to  record  the  following  experience,
which  made  a  very  deep  impression  on  me,  being  in  fact  my  introduction  to
"psychical  research."  In  1870,  I  watched  and  took  part  in  a  good  deal  of
planchette-writing,  but  not  with  results  or  under  conditions  that  afforded
proof  of  any  separate  intelligence.  However,  I  was  sufficiently  struck  by  what
occurred  to  broach  the  subject  to  a  hard-headed  mathematical  friend,  who
expressed  complete  incredulity  as  to  the  possiliility  of  obtaining  rational
writing,  except  through  the  conscious  operation  of  some  person  in  contact  with
the  instrument.  After  a  long  argument,  lie  at  last  agreed  to  make  a  trial.  I
had  not  really  tlie  faintest  hope  of  success,  and  he  was  committed  to  the
position  that  success  was  impossible.  We  sat  for  some  minutes  with  a  hand
of  each  on  the  planchette,  and  asked  that  it  should  write  some  line  of
Shakespeare.  It  began  by  see-sawing  and  producing  a  great  deal  of  formless
scribble ;  but  then  there  seemed  to  be  more  method  in  the  movements,  and  a
line  of  hieroglyphics  appeared.  It  took  us  some  time  to  make  it  out,  the
writing  being  illegible  to  just  that  degree  which  at  first  baffles  the  reader,  but
which  afterwards  leaves  no  more  doubt  as  to  its  having  been  correctlj'
deciphered  than  if  it  were  print.  And  there  the  line  indubitably  stood — A  little
more  than  kin  and  less  than  kind.  Now,  as  neither  of  us  had  been  thinking  of
this  line,  or  of  any  liue  (for  we  had  been  wholly  occupied  with  the  straggling
movements  of  the  instrument,)  the  result,  though  not  demonstrative,  is  at  any
rate  strongly  suggestive  of  a  true  underground  psychosis.  For  it  would  be  hard
to  believe  that  we  got  what  we  asked  for  through  mere  cerebral  association  of


302 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Po-st-Hyjmotic  States.  [April  23,


Now,  what  is  the  nature  of  this  memory  ?  It  might  be  of  a  purely
physiological  and  unconscious  kind,  even  though  the  content  of  the
writing  was  shown  by  subsequent  remembrance  in  trance  to  have  been
intelligently  discerned  ;  for  the  intelligent  discernment  of  the  content
does  not  in  itself  imply  more  than  what  occurs  wlien  we  look  over  some
one  else's  shoulder,  and  follow  the  words  that  he  is  writing ;  that  is  to
say,  the  words  might  be  intelligently  read,  though  wholly  mechanically
ivritten.'^  What  one  wants  to  know  is  whether  something  beyond  this
is  involved — whether  the  idea  which  the  writing  conveys  presented
itself  to  the  secondary  self  as  a  mental  experience,  prior  to  and  apart
from  the  writing,  just  as  memories,  often  long-buried  memories,  are
liable  to  present  themselves  on  the  ordinary  mental  stage.  Do  our
post-hyi^notic  results  suggest  any  answer  to  this  question  ?  The
majority  of  tliose  so  far  recounted  must  be  allowed,  I  think,  to  be
compatible  with  tlie  hypotliesis  of  a  purely  organic  or  non-psychical

memory, P  ll's  reproductions  of  statements  in  the  exact  form  in

wliich  they  had  been  made  to  him,  commencing  with  his  own  name  in
the  vocative,  have  every  appearance  of  mere  unintelligent  echoes  ;  and
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  any  scripts  which  simply  reproduced  statements
previously  heard,  could  be  decisive  as  to  anything  beyond  this.  One
or  two  of  my  cases  do,  however,  indicate  something  beyond.  Thus

P  11  was  told,  in  the  trance,  to  count  the  number  of  letters  in

the  lines,  "  When  the  day  is  over.  And  the  night  is  drawing  nigh,"
and  was  then  immediately  woke.  The  planchette  produced,  under  his
hand,  not  the  number  of  the  letters,  but  the  line

When  '  the  day  over.
Tills  was  a  failure,  then,  as  regards  the  result  sought,  and  at  first  sight

ideas.  The  association  of  this  verse  with  the  idea  of  Shakespeare  is  com-
paratively a  loose  one — decidedly  looser,  for  instance,  than  its  association  with
the  idea  of  Hamlet,  tliough  closer  than  its  association  with  the  idea  of  English
literature.  That  is  to  say,  a  search  and  a  selection  were  made,  in  conformity
with  an  intelligent  rei[uirement.  If  anyone  would  confidently  assign  such
operations  to  the  domain  of  "  unconscious  cerebration,"  it  would  be  interesting
to  know  where  he  would  draw  the  line.  Is  there  ain/  intelligent  result  of  which
he  would  regard  psychosis  as  a  condition  ?  It  is  worth  adding  that,  if  the
psychical  character  of  "  intelligent  automatism  "  is  ever  made  clear,  there  will
be  ground  for  suspecting  a  psychical  side  to  all  the  supposed  feats  of
''unconscious  cerebration" — e.g.,  where  the  correct  solution  of  a  problem  has
seemed  suddenly  to  occur  in  dream.

^  It  is  worth  noting,  however,  that  in  a  case  where  I  had  guided  W  s's

hand  to  write  some  words  with  the  planchette,  with  the  screen  as  usual  between
his  eyes  and  the  paper,  he  said,  when  afterwards  hypnotised,  that  /  had  written
something  which  he  could  not  read,  though  he  had  seen  it  (p.  298).  That  is,  the
muscular  sight  did  not  involve  comprehension  when  the  writing  was  indis-
putably mechanical.

-  The  only  clear  points  in  this  word  are  the  w  and  the  tall  stroke  of  the  h.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  303


looked  like  a  merely  mechanical  reproduction ;  but  it  was  observable
that,  when  re-hypnotised  and  asked  what  he  had  been  doing,  he  did  not
simply  quote  the  words  he  had  written,  but  said,  "  Trying  to  make  a
little  hymn — a  little  verse,"  which  looks  like  memory  of  a  real  psychical
operation.  Again,  the  case  of  Cards  are  all  sorted  strongly
suggests  intelligent  memory,  if  it  does  not  actually  prove  it  ;  for
no  such  phrase  had  been  used  in  the  "subject's"  hearing,  nor  had
any  suggestion  of  writing  been  made  in  connection  with  the  cards —
the  experiment  having  been  undertaken  for  another  purpose.  It  may
be  hoped  that  repeated  trials  may  yield  further  instances  of  these  self-
originated  remarks.  There  would  be  some  advantage  in  their  ex-
clusively referring — as  I  think  would  prove  to  be  the  rule — to  things
connected  Avith  previous  times  of  hypnotic  trance.  For  it  is  just  the
unlimited  range  of  topics  open  to  the  oi'dinary  non-hypnotic  "  auto-
matist "  which  often  make  his  scripts  uninstructive  as  to  the  degree
of  reminiscence  and  representation  that  may  be  going  on  in  those
mental  strata  which,  it  seems,  we  must  unlearn  the  habit  of  calling
unconscious.  His  secondary  intelligence  is  prone,as  Mr.  Myers  has  said,
to  be  a  "  sermonising  entity  "  ;  and  we  want  not  sermons,  but  autobio-
graphy. Now  the  post-hypnotic  intelligence  evoked  during  hypnotic
trance,  if  akin  to  that  exhibited  in  the  trance  itself,  will  rarely  have
spontaneity  enough  to  sermonise ;  where  it  takes  its  own  line,  its
tendency  will  be  to  I'un  in  old  grooves  ;  and  this  fact,  combined  with
the  fact  that  the  grooves  of  previous  hypnotic  experiences  are  com-
paratively few  and  narrow,  might,  as  time  went  on,  atford  exceptional
opportunities  for  testing  the  coherence  of  secondary  memory  during
normal  life.

Meanwhile  I  have  some  further  results,  superior  in  interest  to  any
of  the  preceding,  as  tending  to  show  that  the  activities  of  these  hidden
strata  may  include  higher  psychical  functions  than  mere  random  spurts
of  memory — processes  of  deliberate  reckoning  and  reflection  which  it  is
almost  impossible  to  conceive  as  having  only  a  physiological  existence.
Advantage  was  taken  of  the  fact  that  the  hypnotised  "  subject  "  could
be  woke  in  an  instant,  by  a  clap  on  the  shoulders  and  a  loud  call.  Thus
questions  could  be  put  and  problems  suggested  to  him,  while  in  trance,
and  all  of  a  sudden  there  he  was  in  his  normal  waking  state,  without  a
second's  interval  having  been  allowed  for  his  hypnotic  consciousness  to
work  out  the  answer.  The  questions  and  problems  varied  in  difficulty.
One  of  the  simplest  was,  "  What  puts  out  fire  1  "  This  was  addressed

by  S.  to  W  s,  who  was  then  instantly  woke. Set  to  the  planchette,

his  hand  at  once  wrote.  Water.  We  may,  perhaps,  suppose  that  so
obvious  and  direct  an  answer  as  this  might  have  formed  itself  in  his
mind  even  in  the  fraction  of  a  second  ;  so  that  the  writing  might  be
explained  as  the  mere  letting  off  of  the  spring  that  liad  been  wound  up


304 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hi/pnotic  States.  [April  23,


before  his  condition  was  changed.  The  same  could  hardly  be  said  of
the  results  which  follow.

W  s  was  told  in  the  trance  to  add  together  all  the  digits  from  1  to

9,  and  was  immediately  woke.  Set  to  planchette,  his  hand  after  some
seconds  prodvxced  the  number  32.  This  is  of  course  quite  wrong,  and
implies  no  calculation  ;  but  the  guess  is  not  a  worse  one  than  I  find
many  people  give,  if  requested  to  give  their  impression — after  a  few
seconds  of  reflection — of  what  the  sum  amounts  to.  The  experiment
was  now  repeated,  the  direction  to  sum  the  digits  being  given,
and  the  "  subject "  awakened  on  the  instant.  He  was  set  to  the
planchette,  which  at  once  began  to  move.  As  usual,  I  was  careful
not  to  attempt  to  read  while  the  writing  was  going  on  ;  but  I  became
aware  that  it  was  proceeding  downwards  on  the  paper,  instead  of
from  left  to  right ;  and  thinking  that  the  result  of  this  would  be

an  illegible  scribble,  I  requested  W  s  to  keep  the  movement,  if  he

could,  in  a  left-to-right  line.  A  certain  difficulty  seemed  to  ensue,
and  on  looking  at  the  paper,  I  found  that  it  contained  the  digits
arranged  thus  : — -

1
2
3
4

5  6

the  position  of  the  5  and  6  being  due  to  W  s's  conscious  interference

with  the  downward  tendency  of  his  hand.  There  had  been  the  custom-
ary screen  between  his  eyes  and  the  paper,  and  he  had  no  idea  what
had  occurred.  I  now  placed  the  instrument,  with  his  hand  upon  it,  on
a  fresh  sheet  of  paper  of  more  convenient  shape,  expecting  the  sum  to
be  recommenced  ;  but  the  writing  continued,

7
8
9

44

The  actual  sum  of  the  nine  digits  is  45  ;  but  a  person  would  not  be
likely  to  arrive  at  so  close  an  approximation  who  had  not,  in  part  at
any  rate,  gone  through  the  calculation.  This  was  one  of  the  few  cases
where  the  "subject,"  on  re-hypnotisation,  had  no  recollection  of  what
he  had  written,  or  even  of  having  written  at  all  ;  so  that  that  important
test  of  psychical,  as  distinct  from  purely  automatic,  activity  was  here
lacking.  I  regret  that  it  did  not  occur  to  me  to  act  on  my
knowledge  of  the  different  stages  of  hypnotic  memory,  and  to  try
whether  the  memory  did  not  recur  in  the  deeper  stage  (see  my  subse-
quent paper). But  it  must be  observed  that  the  memory-test  has


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  305


positive,  but  not  negative  validity ;  its  success  may  amount  to  a
proof  that  psychical  activity  was  present,  but  its  failure  is  no  sui3icient
proof  of  the  contrary.

W  s  was now  told  to  multiply .324  by 12,  and at  once

awakened. The  planchette  produced  the  sum  as  follows  : —

324
12


4008

This  result,  though  incorrect,  would  be  correct  if  the  firstnumber  was
3S4:.  Anyone  is  liable  to  such  a  mistake  as  this  ;  so  that  here  again  there
is  reason  to  suppose  a  genuine  process  of  reckoning ;  but  unfortunately
time  failed  us  to  apply  the  memory-test  after  this  experiment.  Another

day,  W  s  was  told  to  add  together  5,  6,  8,  9,  and  had  just  had  time  to

say  5,  as  though  he  were  going  to  repeat  the  figures,  when  he  was  woke
in  the  fraction  of  a  second  with  the  word  on  his  lips.  The  planchette
immediately  produced  28  (right).  He  was  told  to  add  together  1,  2,  5,
7,  8,  and  instantly  awakened. The  planchette  wrote  23  (right).

The  experiment  in  the  summation  of  the  nine  digits  being  repeated
with  P  -11,  the  first  result  was  39  ;  the  second  4-5  (right).  Re-hyp-
notised and  asked  by  S.  what  he  had  been  writing,  he  said,  "  You  told
me  to  add  the  figures  1-9, — 45."  "  Did  you  write  it  ?  "  "  Yes,  I  wrote
it  down."  "When  did  you  add  them?"  "  When  you  told  me.  I  think
that's  right."  He  added  the  figures  up  again,  half  audibly,  and  ended
by  saying,  "45;  right."  This  addition  occupied  many  more  seconds  than
the  interval  between  the  original  order  and  the  waking  previous  to
writing.  He  was  told  to  add  together  3,  4,  6,  7,  and  was  woke  with-
out a  second's  pause.  The  writing  that  appeared  was  20  (right).  Re-
hypnotised  and  questioned,  he  said  he  had  written  20.

Similar  experiments  with  S  -t  succeeded  equally. The  first

result  obtained  was  exceptional.  He  was  told  to  add  together
3,  4,  7,  8,  9,  and  was  instantly  roused  with  a  clap  and  call.  The
correct  answer,  31,  was  spoken,  immediately  after  the  rousing,  and
within  three  seconds  of  the  conclusion  of  the  order  ;  but  he  clearly  had
not  been  brought  to  a  normal  waking  state.  In  the  subsequent  trials
complete  waking,  the  instant  after  the  order,  was  ensured  by  more
vigorous  means.  He  was  told  to  add  together  4,  7,  8,  11,  12,  and  was
woke  on  the  instant ;  the  written  result  was  42  (right).  He  was  told
to  add  together  2,  7,  9,  12,  13,  and  was  woke  on  the  instant ;  the  written
result  was  43  (right).  He  was  told  to  multiply  683  by  7,  and  was
woke  on  the  instant.  He  was  kept  talking,  while  his  hand  wrote  4681.
On  re-hypnotisation,  he  remembered  writing  tliis,  but  said  he  believed  it
was  wrong — the  6  should  be  7.  He  was  told  to  multiply  534  by  3,  and  was
woke  on  the  instant ;  the  result,  written  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  and

X


306 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


concluded  within  three  seconds  of  the  conclusion  of  the  order, was  1602

(right). These  results  are  the  more  noticeable  in  that  S  1  is  not  by

any  means  a  ready  reckoner.  I  found,  for  instance,  that  in  the  normal
state  it  took  him  about  ten  seconds  to  do  each  of  the  two  last
addition  sums.  On  S  1,  alone  of  the  "subjects,"  the  writing  had  some-
times the  effect  of  re-inducing  a  trance  condition  ;  and  in  one  of  the  sum-
cases  the  mere  sense  of  having  the  sum  to  do  seemed  to  have  the  same
effect.  He  was  told  to  multiply  358  by  9,  and  was  instantly  woke  and
made  to  read  aloud,  which  he  did  excellently  for  some  time  ;  but  on  my
taking  the  book  away,  he  fell  into  trance  and  in  that  state  wrote  3222
(right).

The  following  trials  were  of  a  somewhat  similar  type. P  11  was

told  to  write  the  alphabet,  beginning  at  the  1 6th  letter.  Awakened  on
the  instant,  he  wrote  STUVWXYZ.  Here  was  a  failure ;  but
the  interest  of  the  experiment  appeared  on  re-hypnotisation  of  the
"  subject,"  when  he  seemed  clearly  to  remember  the  mental  effort  to
discover  the  right  letter,  and  excused  his  mistake  by  saying  that  "  that
image  was  there  again"  (see  p.  319).  He  was  told  to  add  up  the  letters
in  the  two  lines,  "  How  doth  the  little  busy  bee  Improve  each  shining
hour,"  and  was  woke  in  about  five  seconds.  The  writing  produced  was
43,  which  is  approximately  correct,  the  real  total  being  45.  Another

day,  S  1  was  asked  how  many  times  the  letter  e  occurs  in  the  same

two  lines,  and  was  woke  on  the  instant.  The  figure  6  (right)  was
produced  ;  and  on  re-hypnotisation  he  remembered  having  written  it.
Most  people,  I  think,  would  require  as  many  as  10  seconds  to  arrive
at  the  correct  answer ;  so  that  it  seems  almost  certain  that  the
calculation  was  performed  after  the  waking.

Another  form  of  trial  was  the  writing  of  the  letters  of  words  and
phrases  in  reverse  order — a  process  which,  for  an  unpractised  person,

undoubtedly  requires  some  amount  of  conscious  reflection. W  s

having  been  told  to  write  "elephant"  backwards,  and  instantly  woke,
the  plancliette  produced  Tneplie.  This  is  a  nearer  approximation  than
at  first  sight  appears,  since  his  hypnotic  idea  of  the  real  spelling  of  the
word  proved  to  be  "  eliphent  "  ;  so  that  the  planchette's  only  mistakes
were  the  1  and  i  unreversed,  and  the  h  omitted.  He  was  told  to  write
backwards  "  I  bake  good  fancy  bi'ead,"  and  was  instantly  woke.  The
planchette  moved  to  tlie  right  of  the  paper,  and  wrote

/  bake  god  fantcy  ^  h^ed

from  right  to  left,  beginning  with  the  last  letter.  Told  to  write
"  Brighton "  backwards,  and  instantly  woke,  he  produced  nothgirB
(right). P  11  was  told  to  write  "  millinery  "  backwards,  and  was


^  The  letter  y  is  uncertain.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  307


instantly  woke  :  the  result  was  gnirellim.  Re-hypnotised  and  asked
wl)at  he  had  written,  he  said  "  millering,"  but  added,  "  gni  is  wrong
— ing  is  wrong."  He  was  told  to  write  "To-morrow  is  Sunday  "  back-
wards, and  was  instantly  woke ;  the  result  was  the  phrase  correctly
written  from  right  to  left,  beginning  with  the  last  letter.  Similar

trials  were  made  with  S  1,  with  the  word  "  Brighton,"  and  the

sentence  "It  has  just  been  raining."  Each  was  correctly  produced
by  the  planchette,  from  left  to  right,  and  beginning  with  the  last
letter.

Such  trials  might  be  indefinitely  extended  with  "subjects"  who,  in
the  normal  state,  were  more  capable  than  mine  of  complex  mental
operations.  I  found  myself  limited  to  very  simple  tests,  and  could  not,
for  instance,  ask  any  questions  relating  to  matters  of  historical  or
scientific  information.  I  did,  however,  make  some  attempts  to  obtain
answers  to  questions  of  a  more  general  kind,  admitting  of  a  choice,  with
results  which  as  far  as  they  went  were  completely  successful.  Thus,

P  11  was  told  to  write  the  names  of  three  places  beginning  with  L,

and  was  instantly  woke ;  the  planchette  wrote

Lewes,  Lanscalion,  Leivinliam,

the  second  name  being  interpreted  as  Lancaster  when  he  was  re-
hypnotised.  A  similar  trial  with  the  letter  H  produced  Hastings,
Hamsted,  Hanover  ;  trial  with  the  letter  T,  Torque,  Torrington,  Totting-
ham  Cort.  During  the  first  of  these  experiments  he  was  engrossed,
during  the  writing,  with  the  hallucination  of  a  wild  cat,i  which,  on
re-hypnotisation,  he  said  he  "  hadn't  liked  the  looks  of  —  it  looked  half-
starved."  While  writing  the  T  names,  he  was  roaring  with  laughter
the  whole  time  at  the  hallucinatory  spectacle  of  a  pantomime,  and
describing  the  doings  of  the  clown.  On  April  18th,  a  wider  field  of
choice  was  given  him,  in  the  direction  to  write  down  anything  that  had
happened  in  Brighton  during  the  past  year,  after  which  he  was  instantly
woke.  Set  to  the  planchette,  he  read  aloud  a  description  of  a  play  from
a  newspaper  ;  and  meanwhile  his  hand  wrote

A  Horse  Rum  away  last  Easter  Monday  along  the  King  Road.

This  was  a  fact,  and  had  caused  considerable  excitement.  Again,
he  was  told  to  write  down  the  earliest  thing  he  could  remember,  and
was  instantly  woke.  He  was  made  to  count  backwards  from  a  hundred,
which  he  did  slowly  and  with  stumbles  ;  meanwhile  his  hand  wrote.

One  day  when  I  whas  going  to  school  I  whas  going  ^vp  the  street  I
pick  up  a  shilling  and  I  gave  it  to  'mother  and  she  tvas  please  u/ith  it.

1  With  these  "  subjects,"  a  hanucination  can  always  be  imposed  for  a  short
period  after  waking, though  otherwise  they  are  to  all  appearance  in  a  completely
normal  state.


308 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post- Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


It  turned  out  that  this  was  a  real  event  which  had  happened  when  he
■was  about  five  years  old. Still  earlier  memories  were  similarly  evoked.

When  I  had  the  scarlet  fever  some  woman  brought  me  in  some  bulls-
eyes  on  a  piece  of  paper.

One  day  when  I  whas  rocking  the  cradle  with  my  little  brother
Charley  I  turn  the  cradle  over.

This  last  occurrence  took  place  when  he  was  about  three  ;  he  over-
turned the  cradle  in  a  passion  at  the  baby's  peevishness.  Such  experi-
ments cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  the  record
of  something  unremembered  in  the  normal  state — as  in  the  case  of
Adrienne  (p.  241).

The  direction  to  "  draw  what  he  liked  "  produced  rough  sketches
which,  on  re-hypnotisation,  he  interpreted  as  a  rifleman,  a  box,  an
egg-cup,  a  rifle,  another  rifleman,  a  pigeon — and  which  were  quite
recognisable  ;  his  left  hand  meanwhile  was  slowly  sorting  a  pack  of
cards  into  suits.  The  direction  to  "  write  what  he  liked  "  elicited  a
common-place  note  to  his  sweetheart.

Having  regard  to  the  subsequent  hypnotic  memory,  I  think  that
even  the  above  simple  and  often  imperfect  writings  afi^ord  an  extremely
strong  presumption  of  an  intelligent  and  not  merely  mechanical  origin.
But  the  next  set  of  results  are  perhaps  still  more  conclusive,  as  they
definitely  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  a  cerebral  registration  of  the  correct
answer,  arrived  at  by  a  preternaturally  quick  calculation  or  reminis-
cence in  the  instant  between  the  compi-ehension  of  the  order  and  the
awakening  to  normal  consciousness.  The  experiments,  like  some  of
those  in  §  III.,  involved  the  reckoning  of  time;  but  their  point  lay
in  the  fact  that  the  reckoning  was  shown,  not  merely,  as  before,  by  the
execution  of  an  order  at  approximately  the  right  moment,  but  by
writing  produced  during  the  period  of  waiting,  at  some  suddenly-selected
moment.,  which  the  "  subject "  could  not  foresee  when  the  process  began
— so  that  there  could  be  no  question  of  the  "  setting  of  the  organism  "
for  a  certain  time  ahead.  And  a  further  novel  point  was  the  proof
afl'orded,  in  some  cases,  that  the  order  itself  was  remembered  and
realised  by  the  secondary  consciousness  during  the  period  throughout
which  the  dominant  primary  consciousness  was  wholly  without  know-
ledge of  it.

W  s  was  hypnotised,  and  told  tliat  in  6  minutes  he  was  to  blow

a  candle  out,  and  that  he  would  be  required,  at  some  time  before  then,
to  write  the  number  of  minutes  that  had  passed,  and  the  number  that
had  still  to  elapse.  He  was  woke,  laughed  and  talked  as  usual,  and  of
course  knew  nothing  of  the  order.  In  about  3|-  minutes,  he
was  set  down  to  the  planchette,  which  wrote

— 1  more.  -


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  309


About  a  minute  passed,  and  then  I  requested  S.  to  re-hypnotise  him  ;
but  just  as  his  eyes  were  beginning  to  close,  he  raised  himself,  and  blew
out  the  candle,  saying,  "  It's  beginning  to  smell."  Hypnotised  and
questioned,  he  remembered  all  that  he  had  done ;  and  when  it  was
pointed  out  to  him  that  4^  and  1  do  not  make  6,  he  explained  the
discrepancy  by  saying,  "  It  took  half  a  minute  for  you  to  tell  me ;  I
reckoned  from  the  end  of  your  telling  me."  Tliis,  of  course,  does  not
explain  his  reckoning  the  time  before  he  wrote  as  a  minute  longer  than
it  was ;  but  that  is  not  a  larger  error  than  any  one  of  us  might  commit
in  computing  such  a  period.

On  March  19th,  he  was  told  in  the  trance  that,  when  he  came
next,  he  was  to  poke  the  lire  6  minutes  after  his  arrival,  and  that
when  he  wrote  he  was  to  record  the  number  of  minutes  that  had  run,
and  that  remained  to  run.  On  March  21st  he  arrived  at  6-57i,  and  I
set  him  down  to  the  planchette  in  about  a  minute.  The  writing,  which
it  took  about  a  minute  to  produce,  was

2 — 3^  more.

At  7.3  he  said  he  wanted  to  poke  the  fire,  and  got  up  and  did  so,  in
spite  ,  of  my  dissuasion.  In  the  course  of  re-liypnotisation,  he  was
asked  what  he  had  been  doing,  and  replied,  "  I  had  my  hand  on  that
thing,"  but  he  could  not  say  what  had  been  written.  From  former
experience  I  knew  that  he  was  not  yet  completely  entranced,  as  he  was
able  to  hear  and  answer  me,  as  well  as  S.  After  a  few  more  passes,
when  he  was  deaf  to  my  voice,  the  question  was  repeated,  and  he  at
once  replied,  "  Two — three  and  a-half  more."  "  What  did  that  mean?"
"  Two  minutes — three  and  a-half  more,  poke  the  lire."

On  March  21st,  he  was  told  that  on  the  morrow,  a  quarter  of
an  hour  after  his  arrival,  he  was  to  pull  up  the  blind  and  look  out  of  the
window.  He  arrived  next  evening  at  7.10,  and  was  soon  set  to  the
planchette ;  but  as  the  instrument  did  not  move  he  was  hypnotised,
told  that  I  wanted  to  know  how  the  time  was  going,  and  immediately
awakened. The  writing

7  minutes  and  8  7nore

was  now  produced.  The  process  began  at  just  7.17,  so  that  at  that
moment  tlie  reckoning  was  exactly  right ;  but,  owing  to  a  wheel  coming
off  the  instrument  and  having  to  be  replaced,  the  writing  itself  was
spread  over  four  minutes.

The  same  "  subject "  was  told  on  March  23rd  that,  a  quarter  of
an  hour  after  his  next  arrival,  he  was  to  open  and  shut  the  door
of  the  room,  and  to  note  the  course  of  time,  as  usual.  The  next  evening
he  arrived  at7.6^.  He  was  set  to  the  planchette  at  7.19.  The  writing,
produced  at  once,  was  13  min.  and  2  more. At  7.22  he  rose,  walked


310 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


across  the  room,  opened  and  shut  the  door,  and  returned  to  his  seat.
Here  the  reckoning  was  not  more  than  half  a  minute  out.

On  March  25th,  the  order  was  to  put  his  hat  on  and  take  it  off
again  20  mintues  after  his  next  arrival,  and  to  write  as  usual.  Next
day  he  arrived  at  7.13.  After  some  experiments  of  a  different  sort,  he
was  set  to  the  planchette,  and  as  it  did  not  move,  he  was  hypnotised,
told  rapidly  to  "write  as  he  had  been  directed,"  and  instantly  awakened,
with  the  words  "  What  last  night  ?"  on  his  lips.  This  was  at  7.31.
The  instrument  at  once  wrote,

18  minutes  gone  li  more.
At  7.35,  he  walked  to  where  his  hat  lay,  put  it  on,  and  took  it  off  again.
Re-hypnotised,  and  reminded  that  18  and  1^  do  not  make  20,  he  said
that  he  had  allowed  half  a  minute  for  the  writing.  It  had  occupied,
I  think,  less  than  a  minute ;  so  that  the  reckoning  was  remarkably
correct.

Another  time,  W  s  was  told  at  7.49  p.m.,  that  he  was  to  put  on

his  hat  in  10  minutes,  and  that  I  might  want  to  know,  meanwhile,
how  the  time  was  passing.  He  was  then  woke,  and  was  set  to  the
planchette  at  7.50. The  writing  produced  was,

1  viin — 7^  more.

The  process  was  exceptionally  slow  and  difficult,  and  occupied  2\  minutes.
Had  it  been  produced  rather  more  quickly,  the  second  part  of  this
statement,  as  well  as  the  first,  might  have  been  exactly  right ;  and  on
several  occasions  it  was  observable  that  the  "  subject  "  did  not  seem
properly  to  realise  the  length  of  the  time  occupied  in  the  actual  writing.

At  8  o'clock  W  s  was  obliged  to  go  ;  but  before  leaving  the  room,

he  took  up  his  hat,  looked  at  it  a  little  oddly,  put  it  on,  and  then
quickly  took  it  off  again,  saying,  "  Needn't  put  that  on  up  here,  need  1 1"
There  was  a  point  in  this  case  which  has  a  special  bearing  on  that
segregation  of  consciousness  which  all  the  experiments  illustrate;  namely,
the  difficulty  which  the  "  subject "  found,  when  re-hypnotised,  in
describing  what  he  had  written  {cf.  p.  298).  In  no  case  was  the  writing
shown  to  him,  but  he  always  spoke  as  if  he  actually  saw  it ;  and  in
this  instance,  on  being  asked  what  it  was,  he  said  at  first  that  he  could
not  make  it  out.  Urged  to  try,  he  went  on,  with  breaks  and  just  as  a
puzzled  person  would,  "  One  min —  don't  understand  what  the  next
letter  is.  Oh,  seven  !  Why  two  has  got  on  the  other  line — Seven
and  a-half  more."  No  words  could  have  agreed  better  with  the  true
aspect  of  the  script.  Now  this  leads  one  to  observe  how  the
perception  of  the  actual  writing,  the  ground  which  in  a  way  is  common
to  both  selves — as  for  brevity  they  may  be  called — is  meted  out  between
the  two.  Each  seems  to  regard  exactly  what  the  other  does  not.  The
normal  self  perceives  that  his  hand  is  moving  up  and  down,  and  hears


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  811


the  pencil's  course  over  the  paper,  but  would  see  the  straggling  marks,
if  the  screen  were  not  interposed,  without  any  real  recognition  of  his
own  handiwork.  This  self  is  alive  simply  to  the  mechanical  part  of
the  writing-process,  and  is  conscious  of  distinct  and  sometimes  very
disagreeable  physical  sensations  accompanying  it.  The  secondary  self,
on  the  other  hand,  never  showed  that  the  process  of  writing  as  such,
had  had  for  it  any  interest,  or  roused  in  it  any  special  sensations ;  and,
as  I  have  said,  it  seemed  unaware  of  the  time  that  the  process  occupied.
Its  whole  interest  was  in  the  content — the  sense  of  what  was  written
and  in  the  appearance  of  the  writing  (conjured  up  by  it  with  such
singular  distinctness)  so  far  as  that  affected  legibility.  In  other
words,  the  relation  of  the  primary  self  to  the  writing  was  that  of  a
child  whose  hand  a  teacher  guides  painfully  over  pot-hooks  and
hangers ;  that  of  the  secondary  self  was  that  of  an  author  who  some-
times has  to  I'egret  his  own  clumsy  penmanship.

The  next  experiment,  though  partially  unsuccessful,  is  not  devoid

of  interest. P  11  was  told  that  in  10  minutes  he  was  to  draw  aside

the  blind  and  look  out  of  the  window,  and  that  he  was  to  record  how
the  time  was  going,  as  usual ;  and  was  then  woke.  He  was  set  to  the
planchette  in  about  3  minutes,  but  nothing  followed  ;  he  remarked,
"  My  right  hand  feels  just  like  my  left."  (It  will  be  remembered  that
this  "  subject "  suffered  greatly  in  the  hand  and  arm  during  the  process
of  writing.)  He  was  re-hypnotised,  and  S.  said,  "  Why  did  you  not
write  just  now  1 "

P  LL.  "  Somebody  disturbed  me.  They  looked  over  my  shoulder

and  made  me  angry.  I  don't  want  everybody  to  know  what  I  write."
(This  may  very  probably  have  been  a  reminiscence  of  an  imaginary
terror  on  a  previous  occasion  ;  see  p.  319.)

S.  "  What  were  you  going  to  write  1 "

P  LL.  "  I  was  going  to  write  3  minutes  had  passed  since  you

told  me  to  look  out  of  the  window,  and  I  was  going  to  write  '7  minutes'
afterwards."

The  time-reckoning,  it  will  be  seen,  was  correct.  But  the  principal
point  to  note  is  the  sense  of  disturbance,  with  the  complete  unawareness
of  it  of  the  normal  self.  We  may  regard  such  immunity  as  the  converse
of  those  painful  sensations  which  used  not  only  to  accompany  but  to
precede  the  writing  on  other  occasions  wlien  the  secondary  self  appears
to  have  worked  with  comfort  and  freedom.

The  value  of  P  -11  for  these  experiments  was  diminished  by  the

fact  that  he  is  by  nature  a  bad  reckoner  of  time.  For  instance,  one
day  when  he  had  arrived  about  five  minutes  before  I  entered  the  room,
he  said  he  thought  he  had  been  waiting  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Still,
considering  how  much  scope  there  was  for  going  wrong  if  the  secondary
intelligence  were  merely  guessing  without  reckoning,  I  think  that  the


312 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,

following  instances  are  significant.  On  April  20tli  he  was  told  that
half-an-hour  after  his  next  arrival  he  was  to  wind  up  a  ball  of  string,
and  to  let  me  know  how  the  time  was  going.  He  arrived  next  evening
at  8.30,  and  was  set  to  the  plaiichette  at  8.43. He  wrote,

1 3  minett  has  passed  and  1 7  more  minetts  to  pass.

Some  more  experiments  followed,  and  it  so  happened  that  at  9,  the
exact  time  vN^hen  the  fulfilment  was  due,  he  was  in  the  trance.  He
suddenly  said,  "Oh  !  "  as  if  recollecting  something,  but  did  not  move;^
he  was  then  woke,  and  at  9.2  he  walked  across  the  room  to  where  some
string  was  lying,  and  wound  it  up.  On  April  18th  an  exactly  similar
order  was  given,  except  that  the  thing  to  be  done  was  to  take  off  his
coat.  He  arrived  at  9.10  on  April  20th,  and  was  set  to  the  planchette
at  9.15,  and  while  reading  a  newspaper  aloud  with  intelligence  and
complete  comprehension,  he  wrote,

5  minett  has  23assed  25  minuett  hass  got  ^Jd-ssed  and  then  I  shas  take
of  my  coat.

The  order,  however,  was  fulfilled  at  9.21,  almost  immediately  after
the  conclusion  of  the  writing.  Again,  he  was  told  at  9.8t}  p.m.,  to  poke
the  fire  in  10  minutes.  He  was  woke,  and  at  9.12  was  set  to  the
planchette. The  writing  began  at  once,  and  ran,

Three  minuetts  has  2}assed  and  now  [f\  there  is  7  more  minuetts  has
got  to  passed  and  then  I  shall  poke  the  fire.

The  writing  was  unusually  slow,  occupying  five  minutes,  so  that
though  it  began  by  being  nearly  correct,  it  became  less  so  as  it  went  on.
He  Avas  then  re-hypnotised,  and  other  experiments  were  made.
When  woke  he  went  to  his  former  seat,  and  after  looking  uncom-
fortably at  the  fire  for  some  time,  said  to  me,  "  You  don't  mind
my  poking  the  fire,  do  you,  sir  '?  " — and  poked  it.  This  was  some  time
after  the  expiration  of  the  10  minutes  ;  but  possibly  the  intermediate
hypnotisation  had  had  a  confusing  effect.  On  March  21st  the  same
"  subject "  was  told,  in  the  trance,  that  he  was  to  put  on  his  hat  a
quarter  of  an  hour  after  his  next  arrival.  He  was  set  to  the  planchette
about  7  minutes  after  his  arrival  next  day,  but  the  writing  did  not
begin  till  he  had  been  hypnotised,  and  the  idea  of  writing  suggested  to
him.  The  instrument  then  beginning  to  move,  he  was  at  once  woke,
and  the  writing  continued  steadily. It  ran,

5  minuetts  has  passed  and  10  minuetts  has  as  got  to  passed  and  then
J  shall  put  on  my  Hat.

This  coinputation  was  certainly  as  much  as  3  minutes  out,  perhaps

^  It  looks  as  if  the  idea  of  fulfilling  an  order  for  which  sight  is  necessary
wera  not  enough  to  wake  a  "  subject  "  who  is  in  the  trance-condition  with
closed  eyes.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.


313


a  little  more  ;  and  again  the  fuliilment  of  the  order  followed  consider-
ably too  soon. The  act  (as  usual  -svith  P  11)  was  completely

forgotten  within  two  minutes  of  its  performance.

The  following  result,  obtained  with  my  thii'd  "  subject,"  S  1,

afforded  a  remarkably  clear  proof  of  the  continuity  of  the  reckoning.
He  was  told,  in  the  trance,  that  he  Avas  to  look  out  of  the  window
7  minutes  after  waking  ;  and  that  he  was  to  write  how  the  time  was
going.  He  was  then  woke.  This  was  at  7.34^  p.m.  I  set  hiia  to  the
planchette,  and  the  writing  began  at  7.36^.  I  did  not  watch  the
process ;  but  where  I  stood,  holding  the  screen  in  front  of  his  eyes,  I
was  so  close  to  his  arm  and  hand  that  I  could  not  help  becoming  aware
that  writing  was  being  produced  at  distinct  intervals.  I  remarked
aloud  that  he  was  going  by  tits  and  starts,  and  seemed  to  have  to  pause
to  get  up  steam.  Immediately  on  the  conclusion  of  the  writing,  which
was  at  7.40,  he  got  up,  drew  aside  the  blind,  and  looked  out.  Examining
the  paper,  I  found

25  34  43  52  61  7.
Clearly  he  had  aimed  at  recording,  at  each  minute  from  the  time  when
he  began,  the  number  that  had  passed  and  the  number  that  remained.
His  first  estimate  was  only  10  seconds  wrong  ;  but  he  somewhat
abbreviated  his  subsequent  minutes,  so  that  the  5  were  condensed
into  3J.

Again,  he  was  told  on  March  27th  that  he  was  to  do  a  particular
thing  half-an-hour  after  his  next  arrival,  and  to  let  me  know  as  to  the
time.  He  came  next  on  April  7th,  at  8.4.5,  and  before  long  was  put  to
the  instrument ;  but  as  no  writing  occurred,  he  was  hypnotised  and
asked  if  there  was  not  something  he  was  to  do.  He  at  once  repeated
the  order — wrongly  as  regards  the  act  commanded ;  but  on  being
woke,  at  8.59,  his  hand  at  once  produced  14-16,  which  was  an  exact
statement  of  the  number  of  minutes  elapsed  and  still  to  elapse.
Another  day  he  was  told  at  5.40^  p.m.  to  poke  the  fire  in  20
minutes,  and  to  let  me  know  how  the  time  was  going,  and  was  then
woke.  He  was  set  to  the  planchette  at  5.59.  Unfortunately  I  cannot
quote  the  writing  in  this  instance,  as  the  paper  on  which  it  was  pro-
duced is  missing ;  but  I  have  my  note  that  the  experiment  was  success-
ful, and  my  remembrance  is  that  the  reckoning  was  correct  to  at  any
rate  within  a  minute. At  6.2  he  got  up  and  poked  the  fire.^

^  In  connection  with  these  time-reckonings,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the
secondary  intelHgence  retains  knowledge  of  the  passage  of  both  hypnotic  and
non-hypnotic  time — as  we  might  have  expected  from  the  fact  that  a  hypnotised
person  is  conscious  of  the  lapse  of  both  hypnotic  and  non-hypnotic  time,  though
in  his  normal  state  hypnotic  time  is  a  blank  to  him. Here  is  an  instance  in

point. "VV  s  arrived  one  day  at  a  few  minutes  before  7,  and  was  hypnotised

after  about  6  minutes.  Various  experiments  were  made,  and  in  about  20
minutes  he  was  told  that  he  would  soon  have  to  let  me  know  how  the  time  was


314 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


V.

To  What  Extent  can  the  Segregation  of  the  Secondary  from
THE  Primary  Intelligence  be  Carried  ?

Finally,  I  must  invite  the  reader's  attention  for  a  few  pages  to
some  more  complicated  cases,  which  will  require  us  to  examine  the
idea  of  "  segregation  of  states  "  a  little  more  in  detail.  How  far  have
the  above  experiments  carried  us  ?  We  have  noted  in  them  the
division  of  interest,  and  of  the  broader  currents  of  attention,  and
how  the  normal  self  was  througliout  unaware  of  the  written  exhi-
bitions of  secondary  intelligence.  But  we  have  had  no  proof  that  the
secondary  intelligence  was  to  the  same  extent  excluded  from  normal
perception — in  other  words,  that  it  would  liave  been  unable  to  exhibit
knowledge  of  something  that  struck  the  "  subject's"  senses,  or  occupied
his  mind,  while  the  writing  was  going  on.  The  contrary,  I  think,  is
what  we  should  expect :  we  should  expect  to  find  that  the  topics  which
the  writiyiy  self  could  write  about  coalesced  in  part  with  the  topics
which  the  talking  self  could  talk  about.  I  have  elsewhere  suggested,
a  j?7-cypos  of  tlie  now  well-known  Newnham  case,  that  segregated  con-
scious states,  when  simultaneous,  may  be  strictly  comparable  to  the
successive  states  in  cases  of  so-called  "double-consciousness."  ^  And  since
in  double  consciousness  the  abnormal  self  remembers  what  the  normal  self
has  known  and  felt,  but  not  vice  versd  ;  and  since  in  hypnotism,  which
really  exhibits  "  double  consciousness  "  on  a  small  scale,  the  hypnotised
"  subject  "  remembers  normal  life,  but  on  waking  forgets  hypnotii:  life  ;
so  in  these  post-hypnotic  trials  it  would  not  seem  surprising  if  the
secondary  self  had  access  to  normal  experiences — in  the  sense  that
intelligent  perception  of  these  was  evinced  behind  the  back,  so  to  speak,
of  the  normal  self — though  the  normal  self  has  no  access  to  the  special

going.  After  two  more  minutes  he  was  woke  ;  and  the  planchette  then  pro-
duced,

Twenty-five  minutes  past  seven.

It  was  really  two  or  three  minutes  later.  This  approximation  formed  a
striking  contrast  to  the  normal  blankness ;  for  on  waking  he  never  had
the  slightest  idea  how  long  his  trance  had  lasted,  and  at  the  end  of  an
hour's  experiments  was  always  surprised  at  being  told  that  it  was  time  for
him  to  go—  often  remarking  that  he  seemed  to  have  been  only  two  or  three
minutes  in  the  room.  I  may  add  that  he  had  no  watch,  and  that  there  was
no  clock  in  the  room,  or  within  hearing  ;  but  this  is  unimportant,  as  he
showed  the  usual  ignorance  both  of  what  had  been  said  to  him  and  of  what
he  had  written.  Similarly  P  11,  though  not  to  be  relied  on,  would  some-
times prove  to  have  reckoned  with  nearly  complete  correctness  periods  of  half
an  hour  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  which  had  been  cut  into  bits  by
interludes  of  trance.

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  69,  70  ;  and  see  Mr.  Myers'  remarks
above,  p.  256-7.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  315


secondary  experiences.  And  that  such  is  indeed  the  case  there  is
experimental  evidence  to  show.i

The  simplest  cases  are  those  where  the  reckoning  of  auditory  signals

is  recorded  by  the  planchette. Thus  P  11  was  told,  in  the  trance,

that,  when  I  coughed  for  the  third  time,  it  would  begin  to  rain.  He  was
woke,  his  hand  was  placed  on  the  planchette,  and  I  gave  three  coughs  at
intervals.  There  was  no  movement  till  the  third  cough,  when  the  words

When  Mr.  Gurney  cough  for  tJtird  tim

were  at  once  produced.  At  this  point  the  writing  seemed  to  labour,
and  then  ceased.  I  found  that  the  "subject's"  arm  had  become  quite
rigid,  and  that  he  could  not  raise  it — an  eftect  which  soon  passed  off.
This  concluded  his  first  day's  experience  of  the  planchette,  which  greatly
impressed  him.  He  said  earnestly,  "  That  is  a  wonderful  thing  !  Why,
it  takes  my  hand  along  without  my  being  able  to  stop  it  !  What  wall
they  get  up  next  1  "

Another  day  the  same  "  subject  "  was  told  that  when  I  coughed  for
the  sixth  time  he  was  to  look  out  of  the  window.  He  was  woke,  and  I
gave  at  intervals  5  coughs — one  of  which,  however,  was  a  failure,  owing
to  its  obvious  artificiality.  He  was  set  to  the  planchette,  and  the
words  produced  were.

When  2Ir.  Gurney  cough  G  times  I  am  to  look  out.

At  this  point  I  read  the  writing,  and  stopped  it.  I  asked  if  he  had
noticed  my  coughing,  and  he  said,  "  No,  sir ; "  but  this,  of  course
showed  no  more  than  he  had  heard  without  attending.  He  was  now
liypnotised,  told  that  I  wanted  to  know  how  often  I  had  coughed,  and
at  once  woke. The  writing  recommenced,

4  times  he  has  cough  and  2  times  more  he  has  to  coiigh.

I  coughed  twice  more,  and  he  went  to  the  window,  drew  aside  the
blind,  and  looked  out.  Two  minutes  afterwards  I  asked  him  what  sort
of  a  night  it  was.  He  said,  "  Fine  when  I  came  in."  I  said  I  thought
I  had  seen  him  looking  out  just  now,  but  he  absolutely  denied  it.

A  precisely  similar  experiment  followed,  the  order  being  to  poke  the
fire  when  I  rose  from  my  seat  the  sixth  time.  The  writing,  produced
on  my  third  rising,  was

1  I  need  hardly  point  out  that  the  proof  could  not  be  found  in  the  mere
memory,  on  re-hypnotisatiou,  of  some  marked  event  which  had  occurred  in  the

course  of  the  writing — as  when  W  s,  on  one  occasion,  in  describing  what  he

had  written,  said  that  a  leg  had  come  off  the  instrument  during  the  process.
The  hypnotised  "  subject  "  naturally  remembers  a  recent  event  of  waking  Ufe;
but  the  fact  that  the  probably  transient  existence  of  the  secondary  intelligence
had  its  origin  during  the  hypnotic  trance  affords  no  ground  whatever  for  identi-
fying its  scope  with  that  of  hypnotic  memory.


316 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


3  times  Mr.  Gurney  got  up  from  his  chair,  and  three  more  times
he  has  got  to  get  up  from  his  chair.

The  fultilnient  of  the  order  was  punctual,  ancl  the  oblivion  of  it
complete,  till  re-hypnotisation,  when  the  memory  recurred.

Later,  P  II  was  told  that  when  I  spoke  the  30th  word,  he

was  to  walk  to  the  door  and  come  back  again ;  and  was  then  woke.  I
made  natural  remarks  at  intervals,  taking  care  to  count  the  words  I
used.  The  30th  produced  no  result.  I  added  one,  and  then  told
him  to  come  and  write. The  writing  was,

Mr.  Gurney  spoke  30  words  Mr.  Smith  I  think  I  am  right  don't

you  think  so  ?

He  then  returned  to  his  former  seat,  and  sat  down  for  a  second  ;  then
got  up,  walked  to  the  door,  looked  at  it,  and  came  back  again.  Re-
hypnotised,  and  questioned  as  to  the  words  I  had  used,  he  remembered
most  of  them  but  not  all.  As  he  is  not  a  ready  counter  or  reckoner  I
gave  him  a  simpler  task,  but  again  he  was  one  out.  He  was  told  to
poke  the  iire  at  my  10th  word,  and  woke.  I  spoke  eight  words,  and
then  set  him  to  planchette. The  writing  was,

Mr.  Gurney  spoke 9  tvord  and  when  he  speak  the  lOth  word
I  am  to  poke  the  fire.

I  made  one  more  remark,  and  the  order  was  at  once  obeyed.  I  offered
him  the  usual  sovereign  to  tell  me  anything  that  he  had  written
— with  the  usual  result.

Again,  he  was  told  to  add  together  1  and  2,  2  and  3,  &c.,  up  to  8
and  9,  and  also  to  write  down  anything  startling  that  happened  in  the
room.  He  was  woke,  set  to  the  planchette,  and  read  a  newspaper
aloud.  Soon  after  Iiis  hand  began  to  write,  I  knocked  the  poker  down
in  the  fender. The  writing  was,

3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 the  Poker  Fell  down  in  Fender.

He  was  told  to  write  down  the  alphabet,  omitting  every  other
letter,  and  also  anything  stai'tling  that  occurred.  He  was  at  once
woke,  and  was  impressed  with  the  hallucination  of  a  drunken  soldier,
which  much  excited  and  alarmed  him,  and  he  made  gestures  as  though
preparing  to  fight.  The  writing  none  the  less  continued,  and  mean-
while I  blew  the  candle  out. The  script  ran,

a c e g I K Mr.  Gurney  blew  the  candle  out  I  see  him.

The  same  openness  to  external  impressions  was  shown  by  the
writing  of  answers  to  questions  put  to  the  "subject"  after  he  had
been  woke,  the  general  direction  to  answer  them  having  been  given

to  him  during  trance. Thus, while  P  U's  hand  was  on  the

planchette,  and  he  was  counting  aloud  the  number  of  times  1  clapped
my  hands,  S.  asked  him  successively  :  "  What  day  of  the  week  is  it  1"


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  317


"  How  many  sisters  have  you  1  " "How  many  brothers  have  youl"
"  When  did  you  begin  work  this  morning '?  "  The  writing  produced  was,
Thursday 3 5 7  o'clock.
Asked  immediately  afterwards,  he  said  he  did  not  think  that  S.  had
been  speaking,  unless  perhaps  he  had  spoken  to  me  (see  p.  320).
Similarly,  having  been  told  to  write  the  numbers  from  100  backwards,
with  omission  of  every  other  number,  then  woke,  and  impressed  with
the  hallucination  of  the  soldier,  he  was  asked,  "  What  day  is  to-morrow  1"
"  What  is  the  opposite  of  black  ?  " "  What  is  a  large  pistol  called  1 "
"  What  does  he  put  in  his  pistol  to  make  it  go  off?  " — and  wrote,
100  98  6  4  Friday  White  Rifle  Powder.
More  interesting,  though  much rarer of attainment,  are  the
cases  where  the percept which enters into the secondary  self's
reckonings  and  writings  is  not  one  that  has  been  in  any  way  fore-
ordained for  that  purpose.  For  example,  S  1  was  told,  in  the  trance,

to  add  together  3,  5,  8,  13,  14,  and  was  instantaneously  woke,  and  his
hand  laid  on  the  planchette.  I  then  at  once  told  him  to  add  together
2,  7,  9,  10,  13.  After  a  little  reflection,  he  said  41,  which  was  right ;
and  his  hand  wrote  45,  which  was  wrong,  the  right  answer  to  tlie  tirst
sum  being  43.  He  was  re-liypnotised,  and  asked  what  he  had  written  ;
he  said  45.  Asked  what  that  meant,  he  said  it  was  the  sum  of  2,
7,  9,  13,  14.  This  sum  is  correct ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  con-
clusion that  the  three  first  digits  which  I  mentioned  to  him  after  his
awaking  got  incorporated  into  his  calculation,  displacing  the  first  three
of  the  previous  list.  The  next  experiment  contained  a  fainter  indication
to  the  same  effect.  He  was  told,  in  the  ti'ance,  to  add  together  4,  7,  11,
12,  13,  and  was  instantly  woke.  His  hand  wrote  49 — again  2  out.  But
-when  re-hypnotised,  and  asked  what  numbers  he  had  added,  he  said  2,
9,  11,  13,  14 — which  would  make  his  result  correct;  again  introducing
the  2,  9,  which  he  had  never  heard  except  in  the  normal  state.

Again,  a  hallucination  which  was  occupying  the  "  subject's "
attention  occasionally  forced  its  way  quite  irrelevantly  into  the  writing.

P  11  was  told  to  write  the  numbers  backwards  from  100,  was  woke,

and  was  once  more  impressed  with  the  idea  of  the  soldier,  who  was
about  to  fire  at  him.  He  was  extremely  agitated,  and  wrote  with  great
speed  and  fury  ;  and  while  he  was  doing  so,  1  at  intervals  let  down  a
Venetian  blind  with  a  clatter,  knocked  the  poker  down,  and  blew  the
candle  out. The  writing  ran,

100  99  Mr.  Gurney  let  the  Blind  fall  doicn  I  will  let  th,e  Soldier  liave
it  when  I  can  get  at  him  give  the  Fender  fell  down  did  you  hear  it  the
candle  blew  out.^

1  Here  was  an  instance,  on  a  small  scale,  of  liypnotic  education.  No
direction  had  been  given  as  to  writing  down  startling  events  ;  hut  in  this  case
the  former  direction  to  that  effect  clearly  retained  its  force.


318 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


He  was  told  to  write  the  names  of  three  places  beginning  with  S,
was  instantly  woke,  and  was  impressed  with  the  delusion  that  his
master  was  standing  there,  and  wanted  to  know  what  he  had  been
doing  in  the  afternoon. He  wrote,

Sir  I  am  verry  sorry  Sutton  I  whas  met  Southa7npton  I  could  not
help  heiny  Salsbiiry  but  I  hope  by  the  next  I  go  to  Suton  Southampton
Salisbury  Southampton  Salisbury  Sutton.

The  repetition  of  the  names  was  due  to  S.,  at  my  desire,  repeating
the  words,  "  We  want  those  places,"  alternately  with  "Your  master

wants  that  letter." On  re-hypnotisation,  P  11  perfectly  realised  the

muddled  nature  of  the  document,  and  said  that  his  master  "  would  stand
on  his  head  when  he  got  it. "

These  cases  leave  no  doubt  that  the  secondary  intelligence  can  show
an  apprehension  of  things  which  are  at  that  moment  engaging  the
primary  consciousness.  The  question  then  occurs,  is  it  possible
to  go  further  than  we  have  yet  gone,  and  to  obtain  evidence
of  an  absolutely  complete  or  mutually  exclusive  segregation  of  two
simultaneous  states  or  streams  of  consciousness  in  the  same
individual  1  Can  we  ever  so  far  shut  off  the  intelligence  whose  work-
ings are  unknown  to  the  primary  self  that  it  is  impossible  for  it  to
obtain  or  betray  knowledge  of  what  is  impressing  or  occupying
that  self  1  It  seems  possible  that  this  may  be  done  (though
it  could  never,  perhaps,  be  completely  proved  to  have  been  done)  by
adjusting  the  things  proposed  for  simultaneous  performance  to  the  total
amount  of  attention  which  the  particular  "  subject  "  can  bring  to  bear.
A  couple  of  cases  which,  though  in  a  way  failures,  were,  I  believe,  true
examples  of  the  mutual  exclusion  in  question,  will  make  my  meaning
clear.

S  1  was  told  to  multiply  697  by  8,  was  instantly  woke,  and  in

another  moment  was  given  a  book  to  read  aloud.  Tlie  passage  was
the  chapter  about  Humpty-Dumpty  in  Through  the  Looking-glass,  of
which  he  read  several  pages  with  great  spirit  and  enjoyment.  But  the
planchette  on  which  his  hand  was  lying  remained  motionless.  He  was
re-hypnotised,  and  S.  said,  "  Why  did  you  not  do  that  sum  1 "

S  T. "  You  didn't  give  me  time  to.  I  lost  it  all  at  once — could

make  nothing  of  it  afterwards."

S. "  What  else  have  you  been  doing  ?  "

S  T. "What  else  ?  "

S. "Yes— what  else?"

S  T. "  I  don't  know — leave  that  in  your  hands."

S. "  Have  you  been  reading  ? "
S  T.  "No."

S. "  Nothing  about  Humpty  Dumpty  ?  "


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  319


S  T. "  Humpty  who  ?  "

S. "  Humpty  Dumpty."

S  T. "  I  read  about  him  when  I  was  a  kid."

S. "  Hasn't  Mr.  Gurney  been  holding  a  book  for  you  to  readi  "
S  T. "  No."

S. "  What  have  you  been  doing  ?  "
S  T. "  Been  sleepy  or  something."

Now  this  oblivion,  on  hypnotisation,  of  what  has  just  before
been  occupying  attention  in  the  waking  state,  is  extremely  excep-
tional. It  would  alone  strongly  suggest  that  the  mind  had  been  in
some  degree  engaged  with  something  else,  and  that  there  had  been  a
sort  of  struggle  between  the  two ;  and  this  is  exactly  what  we  can
readily  suppose  that  the  presence  of  the  unsolved  problem  in  the
secondary  consciousness  may  have  caused.  But  it  is  also  a  strong  in-
dication that  the  forgotten  things  remained  outside  the  scope  of  the
secondary  intelligence.  For  the  oblivion  which  the  segregation  of  the
two  streams  of  consciousness  partially  explains,  would  seem  wholly  un-
accountable if  the  forgotten  things  had  had  a  place  in  both  streams.

The  next  case  is  still  more  significant  in  this  sense. P  11  was

told  several  times,  "  It  has  left  off  snowing "  ;  and  then,  wlien  woke
and  set  to  the  planchette,  he  was  made  to  read  aloud.  The  writing
which  appeared  was.

It  has  Ifeft  sn —

and  while  this  was  proceeding,  the  reading  was  bad  and  stumbling.
When  the  writing  stopped,  the  reading  became  appreciably  more  correct
and  fluent.  Re-hypnotisation  afforded  a  glimpse  of  the  condition  in
which  the  secondary  intelligence  had  found  itself.  Asked  what  he  had
been  doing,  the  "subject"  replied,  "  Trying  to  tvn-ite  '  It  has  left  ofi"
snowing.'  "  Asked  if  he  had  been  reading,  he  said,  "  Reading  !  No,
I  haven't  been  reading,"  and  added,  "  Something  seemed  to  disturb
me."  "  How  was  that  V  "Something  seemed  to  keep  moving  about
in  front  of  me,  so  I  got  back  into  bed  again."  "  Didn't  Mr.  Gurney
hold  a  book  and  make  you  read  aloud?"  "  No,  somebody  kept  moving
about.  I  didn't  like  the  looks  of  them.  Kept  wandering  to  and  fro.
Horrible,  awful !  I  thought  to  myself,  '  I'll  get  into  bed.'  It  looked  so
savage — quite  unnerved  me,"  &c.,  (fcc.  The  experiment  was  repeated.
The  "subject  "  was  told,  "It  has  begun  snowing  again."  The  writing
was  now  an  almost  illegible  scrawl  of

It  begun  snowing.

Meanwhile  he  was  reading  about  Humpty-Dumpty,  slowly  and  with
omission  of  words,  but  with  clear  comprehension  and  decided  amuse-
ment. On  being  re-hypnotised,  he  was  again  completely  unaware
of  the reading, and  gave  the same  description as before  of  the


320 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


way  that  he  Avas  disturbed  in  writing ;  as  to  which  I  can
only  suppose  that  the  sense  of  strain,  involved  in  the  ineffectual
attempt  to  concentrate  attention  on  the  writing,  developed  into
a  sort  of  hallucination,  just  as  in  sleep  discomfort  of  various  sorts
develops  into  dream.  Here,  then,  was  a  remarkable  result.  Not  only
was  the  normal  self,  as  usual,  quite  alert,  and  its  interest  in
Humpty  Dunipty  quite  unalloyed  by  the  dark  fancies  of  its  hidden
fellow  ;  and  not  only  on  re-liypnotisation  was  there  no  memory  of
the  manner  in  which  the  normal  self  had  been  employed;  but  there  was
a  distinct  memory  of  something  else.  An  experience  which  must  have
belonged  to  the  secondary  self  (since  the  primary  had  no  knowledge  of
it)  is  shown  to  have  had  a  very  substantive  reality,  and  actually
prevails  over  a  decidedly  vivid  piece  of  normal  life  on  the  plane  of  subse-
quent memory.  The  result  seems  a  pretty  clear  proof  tliat  the  states
were  mutually  exclusive  in  this  instance;  and  renders  it  probable  that  they
may  be  so  in  any  instance  where  the  available  stock  of  attention  (which
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  to  be  increased  by  the  segregation  of
states)  is  completely  used,  and  where  the  subjects  which  engage  the
two  lines  of  attention  are  themselves  sufficiently  distinguished.  This
was  clearly  not  the  case  in  the  previous  examples  where  the  secondary
consciousness  was  set  to  mark  certain  sounds  which  were  to  meet  the
normal  ear,  and  where  an  effort  was  made  to  get  two  similar  bits  of
arithmetic  done  at  the  same  time.  As  it  happens,  in  the  case  just
described  the  available  stock  of  attention  fell  short  ;  the  double  drain
was  too  much,  and  neither  the  primary  nor  the  secondary  intelligence
was  able  to  perform  its  task  perfectly  when  the  other  was  in  activity  ;
while  the  strain  and  disturbance  introduced  a  new  and  confusing
element.  In  other  cases,  the  one  or  the  other  more  or  less  broke  down  ;
apart  from  actual  mistakes  in  writing  or  in  reading,^  we  have  seen  the
secondary  self  producing  incoherent  phrases  ;  and  on  several  occasions
when  it  was  well  to  the  fore,  and  gave  the  correct  answers  to  spoken
questions  in  correct  form,  the  primary  self,  interrogated  immediately
afterwards,  appeared  not  to  have  heard  these  questions,  even  as
sound,  and  certainly  had  not  understood  them. But  if  my  surmise  be

1  It  was  curious  to  oLserve  how  the  act  of  writing  sometimes  seemed  to

affect  P  ll's  power  of  articulation  ;  the  difficulty  seemed  to  be  of  a

distinctly  physical  sort,  and  he  himself  several  times  remarked  that  it  seemed
to  "draw  "  the  right  side  of  his  mouth,  without  affecting  his  comprehension  of
what  he  read.  It  seems  just  possible  that  this  may  be  connected  with  the
proximity  of  the  cerebral  centres  of  speech  and  of  movement  of  the  right  arm
(see  Lc  Blagnrtisme  Animal,  by  MM.  Binet  and  F^r^,  p.  250).  At  the  same  time
the  difficulty  undoubtedly  seemed  to  be  less  when  the  acts  accomplished  were
of  a  semi-mechanical  kind  ;  as  when  he  had  to  write  the  numbers  from  100
backwards,  and  simultaneously  count  the  numbers  from  1  forwards,  and
vice  versd.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  321


right,  we  might  expect,  by  varying  the  trials,  to  hit  at  last  on  cases
where  two  mental  tasks,  both  of  them  requiring  some  but  neither  of
them  very  much  attention,  were  simultaneously  carried  out,  without
either  of  them  interfering  with  the  performance  of  the  other,  and
leaving  memories  which  should  be  mutually  exclusive,  and  ascertainable
only  in  the  normal  and  the  hypnotic  states  respectively.^

The  following  seem  to  be  examples  of  the  kind. P  11  was  told

to  count  the  number  of  times  the  letter  o  occurs  in  the  lines,  "  Jenny,
my  own  true  loved  one,  Wait  till  the  clouds  roll  by,"  and  was  instantly
woke.  His  hand  being  laid  on  the  planchette,  he  was  made  to  read
a  newspaper  aloud,  which  he  did  excellently.  Meanwhile  5  O  was
written.  On  re-hypnotisation,  he  said  that  he  had  written  the  answer
to  what  he  had  been  asked,  but  he  totally  denied  having  been  reading,
could  not  recall  anything  about  a  newspaper,  and  did  not  even
remember  that  anything  had  been  held  in  front  of  him,  though
admitting  that  he  was  unable  to  see  what  he  was  writing.  Similarly
in  the  case  described  above  (p.  307),  where  he  wrote  about  the  horse
running  away  on  Easter  Monday,  he  was  reading  with  tolerable
fluency  from  a  newspaper  during  the  whole  time  of  the  writing,  and
stood  examination  on  the  passage ;  but  on  re-hypnotisation  he  did  not
remember  to  have  been  reading,  though  he  did  recall  "  that  his  mouth
went  to  and  fro  as  if  he  was  eating."  It  is  worth  adding  that  on
occasions  where  no  hypnotic  suggestion  had  been  made  about  giving
written  answers  to  S.'s  remarks,  and  where  the  appointed  task,  whatever
it  was,  was  not  performed  by  the  writing  self,  S.'s  spoken  appeals — as,
"  Now  what  does  that  come  to?  "  or  "  Now  we  want  you  to  tell  us —
you  know  what " — never  produced  any  efiect ;  which  looked  as  if  the
secondary  intelligence  was  unaware  of  them.

There  is  one  other  experiment,  of  special  interest  as  1  think,  to  which
1  must  again  refer  in  this  connection — the  one  with  W  s  (p.  299),

1  I  must  again  point  out  that  the  mutual  exclusiveness  of  memory,  though
highly  demonstrative,  when  it  occurs,  of  the  mutual  exclusiveness  of  the
remembered  states,  would  not  be  necessarily  involved  therein  ;  for  we  have  no
right  to  expect  the  subsequent  hypnotic  memoiy  to  confine  itself  to  "secondary"
experiences.  At  the  same  time  the  cases  which  follow  in  the  text  do  seem  to
reveal  a  closer  connection  of  the  subsequent  hypnotic  memory  with  the
secondary  than  with  the  primary  experiences.  It  is  worth  noting  here  that  the
failure  on  re-hypnotisation  to  remember  the  primary  experiences  was  never
observed  in  cases  where  the  secondary  task  had  been  easy,  involving  no  reckon-
ing or  reflection. Thus  in  the  case  (p.  .312)  where  P  11  wrote  about  the  time,

5  minett  has  passed,  &c.,  he  was  reading  aloud  from  a  newspaper  about  a
shipwreck,  and  on  re-hypnotisation  remembered  both  the  act  of  reading,  and  the
contents  of  the  passage.  In  the  case  of  the  note  to  his  sweetheart,  he  was  also
reading  aloud,  and  perfectly  remembered  the  passage  when  re-hypnotised.  This,
would  accord  with  the  rule,  if  we  were  cynical  enough  to  suppose  that  the  com-
position of  such  missives  had  become  to  some  extent  mechanical.

Y


322 Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post- Hypnotic  States.  [April  23,


where  the  words  Cards  are  all  sorted  were  produced  by  the  planchette.
The  conditions  of  attention  were  here  exceptional ;  for  the  primary  or
ostensible  self,  instead  of  being  normal  as  in  most  of  the  planchette
experiments,  was  here  under  the  influence  of  hypnotic  hallucination.
Now,  a  hypnotic  hallucination  is  peculiar  in  combining  two  character-
istics— it  is  extremely  absorbing,  in  the  sense  that  it  carries  the
"  subject's  "  mind  along  a  very  distinct  and  narrow  channel ;  while  at
the  same  time  it  involves  no  reflection  nor  reckoning,  and  so  does  not
demand  any  large  amount  of  mental  activity.  It  seems,  then,  exactly
adapted  to  allow  scope  for  a  parallel  but  wholly  dissociated  piece  of
mentation,  if  mutually  exclusive  mental  states  be  a  possibility  in  nature  ;
and  such  a  piece  of  mentation  I  concluded  that  it  was  which  produced
the  spontaneous  written  statement  about  the  cards.  But  it  will  be
remembered  that  the  "  subject's "  expressed  intention  was  to  write
something  else,  and  he  believed  afterwards — even  while  the  actual
word  Cards  was  before  his  eyes — that  he  had  written  something  else.
It  surely,  then,  seems  a  reasonable  conclusion  that,  had  the  writing
intelligence  embraced  the  experience  of  this  impulse  to  produce  a
different  script,  that  is  what  it  would  have  produced,  instead  of
originating  an  unsolicited  remark  of  its  own. Tlie  following  case  with

P  11  points  in  the  same  direction. He  was  told  to  write  down  the

names  of  three  places  beginning  with  H,  and  then  was  instantly  woke,
and  told  that  he  was  to  write  a  letter  to  me,  and  that  the  messenger
was  standing  there,  waiting  for  it  and  bothering  him.  The  hallucina-
tion took  complete  effect,  and  he  talked  to  the  messenger  all  the  time
he  was  writing ;  but  the  words  produced  were  not  a  letter,  but  simply
Hastings  Hamsted  Hanover.^

"With  these  results  it  is  instructive  to  compare  the  somewhat  similar
case  of  Madame  B.  (p.  249).  That  experiment  also  took  place  during
hypnotic  trance  ;  but  a  less  extreme  means  than  hallucination  being
employed  to  engross  the  primary  intelligence,  and  keep  it,  so  to  speak,
out  of  view  of  the  secondary,  the  segregation  seems  to  have  been  less
complete.  For  in  the  subsequent  hypnotic  condition,  the  "  subject,"
recalling  her  secondary  experiences,  remembered  that  "  the  other  one
was  talking" ;  and  one  can  hardly  help  regarding  this  as  a  true
"  secondary  "  memory  :  the  memory  of  the  "  primary  "  experience — of

1  In  other  cases,  however,  as  we  have  seen,  P  ll's  writing  did  show

knowledge  of  a  hanucinatory  idea  impressed  after  his  waking. I  think  it

possible  that  the  diiference  between  these  cases  and  W  s's  was  due  to  the

greater  time  spent  over  the  latter  ;  the  idea  of  the  cards  had  engrossed  W  s

during  several  minutes,  and  this  may  have  given  it  a  more  separate  and
independent  place  in  his  mind.  But  it  is  also  likely  enough  that  "  subjects"
differ  as  to  the  degree  of  ahsorption  and  separateness  that  the  secondary
intelligence  can  attain.


1887.] Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States.  323


the  actual  conversation — would  neither  have  included  such  a  sense
of  dividedness  and  duality,  nor  have  spoken  in  the  name  of  the  secondary
self.  I  suspect,  therefore,  that  if  appealed  to  in  the  course  of  the
experiment,  Madame  B.  would  have  been  able  "  automatically "  to
show  knowledge  of  what  her  conversing  self  was  doing.

The  hint  in  W  s's  case  is,  at  any  rate,  one  that  is  worth  following

up.  We  have  for  some  time  been  familiar  with  hypnotism,  in  general,  as
a  means  of  loosening  the  connections  of  the  mental  machinery,  and  giving
independent  play  to  this  and  that  part  of  it.  On  that  ground  what  we
examine  is  the  hypnotic  state  itself ;  we  study  its  phenomena  directly
for  what  they  are  and  what  they  teach.  Hypnotism  assumes  a  wholly
new  significance  when  it  leads  (as  in  this  paper  and  the  preceding
one  by  Mr.  Myers  we  have  seen  it  do)  to  results  beyond  itself—
when  it  appears  as  the  ready  means  for  establishing  a  secondary
train  of  consciousness,  to  which  when  established  (as  was  pointed  out
above)  there  is  no  ground  for  attributing  any  special  hypnotic
character.  And  it  would  be  a  yet  further  development  if  in  a
particular  hypnotic  phenomenon,  such  as  induced  hallucination,  we
found  the  means  for  straining  such  secondary  consciousness  free  from
any  association  with  the  ostensible  "  self,"  and  assuring  to  it  a
perfectly  independent  flow.  It  would  be  a  short-sighted  \-iew  which
should  see  in  such  refinements  as  this  the  mere  curiosities  of  psychical
chemistry.  In  the  new  psychology,  the  line  between  the  normal  and
abnormal  has  become  so  shadowy  that  not  the  smallest  or  rarest
abnormal  phenomenon  can  be  safely  neglected,  by  those  who  aim  at  the
fullest  possible  realisation  of  human  nature  and  development.  But
our  last  experiment  may  further  contain  some  consolation  for  those
who  view  the  accumulating  proofs  of  the  instability  and  divisibility  of
consciousness  with  perplexity  and  alarm.  For  here,  at  any  rate,  the
secondary  intelligence  was  the  sane,  or,  as  we  may,  the  normal  self.
If  we  find  it  humiliating  to  our  sense  of  human  dignity  to  see  a  fellow-
creature  the  helpless  puppet  of  suggested  delusions,  it  is  at  least  some-
thing to  discover  that  reason  still  reigns  in  a  part  of  his  being — that
he  is  still  capable  of  evolving  sense  and  truth,  even  though  from  a
consciousness  so  "  inner  "  that  special  appliances  are  needed  to  bring
it  to  the  surface.


324  Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


IV.

EXPERIMENTS IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
By  Anton  Schmoll.

(Translated  from  the  original  German.)

These  experiments  were  made  in  the  evening,  in  a  lighted  room  in
my  house,  111,  Avenue  de  Villiers,  Paris,  with  the  assistance  of  M.
Etienne  Mabire  [of  65,  Rue  Blanche,  Paris],  retired  marine  officer.  Mile.
Louise  M.,  and  my  wife.  A  young  officer,  M.  D.,  assisted  at  No.  1.
We  worked  in  the  dining-room,  the  positions  being  shown  in  the
accompanying  plan.


\

%

Table.

A A  A

3  'A  mu,^

I


We  experimented  in  the  following  manner.  The  person  appointed
to  reproduce  the  objects  (drawings  or  real  things)  sat  with  his  back  to
the  others,  in  the  corner  of  the  room  P,  his  eyes  being  covered.  I  call
this  person  the  percipient  because  his  part  is  confined  to  the  passive


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  325


reception  of  psychical  impressions;  while  the  business  of  the  other
persons,  the  agents,  consists  in  producing  the  impression  through
concentration  of  their  attention  and  through  energetic  volition.  In
the  above  plan,  P  represents  the  percipient,  A  the  agents  (only  in  the
first  10  experiments  the  two  outside  agents  sat  at  a),  O  is  the  spot
where  the  object  to  be  guessed  was  laid  or  placed.  The  light,  L,  came
from  a  hanging  lamp. The  arrows  show  the  direction  of  the  eyes.

After  the  percipient  was  comfortably  settled  in  the  corner  P,
about  three  naetres  distant  from  the  object,  and  had  been  blindfolded,  a
figure  in  thick  lines  was  drawn  on  a  sheet  of  white  paper  by  one  of
the  agents,  and  the  drawing  was  laid  down  flat  upon  the  table  at  O.
This  procedure  seeming  to  be  unfavourable  to  the  success  of  the
experiment  in  six  trials,  we  set  the  drawing  upright.  In  the  later
trials,  as  already  mentioned,  the  agents,  whose  line  of  vision  had  at  first
almost  crossed  each  other  at  right  angles,  sat  in  a  line,  side  by  side,  in
order  to  avoid  the  slightest  divergence  in  the  direction  of  their  looks.

In  binding  the  eyes,  the  bandage  should  not  be  drawn  too  tight,  as
the  pressure  them  causes  a  continuous  flickering  of  the  eyelids,  which
interferes  with  good  results.  All  that  is  required  is  to  cover  the  eyes,
so  that  all  direct  vision  is  impossible,  and  for  this  end  great  pressure
is  not  necessary.  The  percipient  is  recommended  to  close  the  eyes
lightly,  and  thus  to  avoid  all  muscular  exertion.

In  the  seven  last  trials  we  chose  a  real  object,  which  we  laid  down
or  set  up  at  O.  It  has  appeared  advisable  that,  with  the  exception
of  the  object  to  be  guessed,  there  should  be  notliing  to  be  seen  on  the
table  which  could  influence  or  distract  the  thoughts  of  the  agents.  (See
trial  22.)  During  the  experiments,  complete  quiet  was  maintained.
The  agents  gazed  uninterruptedly  at  the  object,  and  concentrated  their
whole  will  on  the  desire  to  make  a  mental  impression  on  the  percipient.
The  latter  was  recommended  to  give  himself  up  to  a  completely  passive
condition,  and  carefully  to  avoid  straining  his  mind  in  search  of  the
idea.

The  object  was  of  course  always  hidden  before  the  handkerchief
was  taken  from  the  eyes  of  the  percipient,  except  in  cases  where  the
attempt  had  failed,  and  when  there  was  no  question  of  transference.

The  object  was  placed  quite  quietly  on  the  table,  which  was  covered
with  a  thick  table-cover,  so  that  the  percipient  could  not  hear  the
slightest  noise  on  its  being  laid  down.  Precise  notes  were  at  once
taken  of  the  results  and  details  of  each  trial.

As  to  the  experimenters,  the  following  may  be  said  : — Mile.  Louise
M.,  aged  25,  is  lively  and  cheerful ;  my  wife,  aged  39,  of  a  calm
temperament  ;  M.  Mabire,  aged  59,  earnest,  thoughtful,  and  of
sober  judgments.  As  to  myself,  I  am  45  years,  exceptionally  sensitive,
otherwise  very  well  in  health.


326  Experiments  in  TJiought- Transference.


From  the  beginning  it  was  arranged  amongst  us  that  we  should
most  carefully  guard  against  self-deception,  and  especially  against
exaggeration  of  the  impressions  that  we  received.  We  simply  wanted
to  find  out  what  there  was  in  the  matter,  and  it  would  have  little
profited  us  to  embellish  the  results.

Whether  any  of  us  is  hypnotically  or  somnambulistically  disposed
is  not  yet  ascertained.  Several  sittings  which  we  lately  held  for  the
purpose  of  obtaining  "  raps  "  were  completely  without  result.  If  any
mediumistic  power  exists  among  us,  it  has  certainly  not  as  yet  been
developed.

We  were  none  of  us  sceptical  with  respect  to  psychical  events  in
general ;  but  if  we  did  not  feel  ourselves  justified  in  denying  a  priori
things  which  competent  authorities  assert  to  have  been  established,  still
we  were  more  or  less  inclined  to  the  view  that  the  majority  of  these
phenomena  were  of  a  subjective  nature.

According  to  our  experience,  the  following  are  the  mental  processes
that  took  place  before  the  closed  eyes  of  the  percipient.  For  many
minutes,  sometimes  quite  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  he  sees  nothing.  Soon,
however,  it  appears  as  though  a  white  shimmer  of  a  certain  form  was
periodically  moving  in  the  Held  of  vision.  Little  by  little  this  vague,
inconstant  picture  appears  in  a  manner  to  condense  itself,  and  to  make
its  appearance  at  shorter  intervals.  He  begins  to  seize  certain  outlines,
which  become  clearer  from  minute  to  minute,  till  he  at  last  says,  "  Now
I  believe  I  see  what  it  is."

If  an  attempt  appeared  about  to  fail,  the  percipient,  still  blind-
folded, approached  us,  and  gave  his  hands  to  two  of  the  agents,  while  the
third  closed  the  chain.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  this  proceeding,
with  us,  at  any  rate,  has  any  special  efficacy.  The  intensity  of  the
mental  pictures  was  not  essentially  increased  by  it,  and  if  previously
there  had  been  no  picture,  none  usually  appeared  after  we  had  formed
the  chain. With  us  there  can  be  no  question  of  muscle-reading.

Lastly,  be  it  remarked  that  among  those  who  took  part  in  the  trials
there  existed  no  real  difference  in  the  faculty  for  thouglit-reading.
Neither  did  this  faculty  make  any  progress  during  the  course  of  the
experiments.

l.—July  20th,  1886.

Agents. — M.  Mabire,  M.  Lieutenant  D.,  Frau  SchmoU.
Percipient. — A.  Schmoll.

Object. — A  pair  of  gold  spectacles  were  laid  on  the  table.

BesuU. — Followed  after  8 — 10  minutes  :  "I  see  something  like  showering
sparks,  or  the  short  flashes  of  lightning."

Remark. — The  agents  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  this  vision  was
to  be  ascribed  to  the  reflection  of  light  from  the  spectacles,  which,  in
consequence  of  the  oblique  lighting  up,  really  fell  on  their  eyes.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


327


2.—Juhj  Zlst,  1886.

Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll.
Fercipient. — A.  Schmoll.
Object  (drawn).  1—


Result. — After  10  minutes:  "I  see  something  round,  a  circle,  the  cir-
cumference of  which  seems  to  contract  on  the  inner  side."  (Pause.)
"  The  contraction  ceases. It  is  a  round  or  elliptical  form."

Remark.- — M.  Mabire  had  in  the  first  place  drawn  the  outline  of  the
figure,  and  then  thickened  it  inwards  with  firm  strokes  of  the  pen.

3. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.

Percipient.  — M.  Mabire.

Object. — A  penknife  was  laid  on  the  table.

Result. — Failed.  After  the  lapse  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  M.  Mabire  took
the  bandage  ofl^,  and  after  he  had  seen  the  object  explained  that  he
certainly  had  seen  nothing,  but  still  involuntarily  had  thought  of  a  pen-
knife. He  regrets  not  having  said  this  before  taking  off  the  bandage.

4. — Tlte  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M,  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Fercipient.  — Schmoll.
Object  (drawn). —


Result. — Failed. Nothing  at  all  seen.

5. — The  same  evening.


i^'''*':  ,|AsinNo.  4.
Fereipient.  J

Object  (drawn). —


1  The  drawings  and  reproductions  are  reproduced  from  the  MS.  of  Herr
Schmoll's  record.  He  writes,  "Je  n'ai  malheureusement  pas  conserve  les
originaux  des  experiences.  Quand  jeles  eu  fidelement  copies,  en  les  reduisant,
je  crus  que  ces  feuillcs  volantes  n'avaient  plus  d'int^ret,  et  je  les  jetai  ;  je
m'enrepens  aujourd'hui."


328  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


JResult. — After  15  minutes  :  "It  almost  looks  like  a  Chinese  bamboo  fan  ;  or
also  like  a  heart,  with  its  point  stretched  downwards  in  the  form  of
a  stalk." Then  I  drew  (without  having  seen  the  original)  : —


Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Mile.  Louise.
Object  (drawn). —


Mesult. — After  22  minutes  :  "I  am  not  clear  about  this  figure  ;  now  I  see  a
ladder,  now  it  looks  like  a  flight  of  steps,  now  like  a  foot-stool.  It  is
quite  vague,  but  it  must  be  something  of  the  sort."

Hemarh.  —  A  certain  approximation  is  unmistakable.  ^


jResvlt. — M. Mabire  sees  "a row  of right  angles,  disposed  one  within
another,"  and  drew,  after  the  picture  had  been  hidden: —


Remark. — I  clearly  saw  the  object  doubled  symmetrically.

6. — The  same  evening.


7.— August  4^7i,  1886.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — M.  Mabire.


8.  --  The  same  evening.


Object  (drawn). —


'  This  may  perhaps  be  questioned.


—Ed.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  329


Result. — "  I  see  very  clearly  a  figure  of  parabolic  form,  something  like  the
track  of  a  comet.  At  the  perihelion  of  this  track  I  see  two  little  lines
like  rays  standing  out  from  one  other." Then  M.  Mabire  drew  : —


Remark.  — If  one  divides  the  original  in  two  by  a  vertical  cut,  and  places  one
of  them  upright,  the  figure  approximates  to  what  was  perceived.


Agerds. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Frau  Schmoll.
Object  (drawn). —


Result. — After  5  minutes  :  "  It  appears  to  be  a  flower-pot;  but  it  is  very
indistinct.  What  projects  above  does  not  look  like  flowers.  I  cannot
say  what  it  is."


Result. — "I  see  four  circles  touching  each  other."  (Pause.)  "No,  it  is
two  8's,  which  cross  at  right  angles."  (After  another  pause  of  some
minutes'  duration,  the  chain  closed.)  "Now  I  only  see  the  half  of  the
figure  that  I  saw  last." Then  I  drew  both  the  perceived  figures  : —


9. — The  same  evening.


10.— August  m,  188C.


Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Percipient.  — Schmoll.
Object  (drawn). —


330  Experiments  in  Tkought-Trcmsference.

11.—  A^igust  12th,  1886.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Percipieid.  — Schmoll.
Object  (drawn). —


Besult. — Unsatisfactory: "I  see  confused,  misty  figures,  out  of  which  the
following  alone  stand  out  clearly"  : —


12. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Fercipient. — M.  Mabire.
Object  (drawn). —


Result. — "What  I  see  reminds  me  somewhat  of  a  spiral  nebula  ;  I  cannot
well  describe  it,  but  will  try  to  draw  it." Then  M.  Mabire  drew  : —


13.—Augtist  20th,  1886.


Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Mile.  Louise.
Object  (drawn). —


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  331


BesuU. — "I  see  two  straight  lines,  which  form  an  angle,  now  turned  down-
wards like  an  A  ;  now  upwards  like  a  V."  (Pause  for  some  minutes.)
"Strange!  now  I  see  both  figures  united  by  the  point."  Then  Mile.
Louise  quickly  took  the  bandage  off  and  drew  : —


X


14.-


-The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll,  SchmoU.
Percipient. — M.  Mabire.
Object  (drawn). —


Result. — "  It  is  not  very  clear,  and  difficult  to  describe.  I  see  a  row  of  obtuse
angles,  gradually  diminishing  in  size,  and  pressed  one  within  another ;  the
figure  reminds  me  of  a  mountain  chain,  as  such  are  drawn  on  geographi-
cal maps." M.  Mabire  then  drew  the  following  :  —


15. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Percipient.  — Schmoll .
Object  (drawn). —


K


Besult. — After  a  quarter  of  an-hour  :  "I  see  two  divergent  bright  lines,  quite
like  those  which  one  sees  to  the  east  of  the  double  crater.  Messier,  in  the
moon."  (Three  minutes'  pause.)  "Now  there  are  two  points,  one  within
the  other, but  almost  right  angles."  I  then  drew  both  perceived  figures: —


~Bemark. — The  vertical  line  of  the  original,  therefore,  was  not  seen.


332  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.

16. — The  same  evening.
Agents.—MUe.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Schmoll.
Perc  ipiei  if.  — Frau  Schmoll.
Object  (drawn  by  M.  Mabire). —


Result.—''!  see  an  egg-shaped  object,  very  small,  with  a  point  in  the
middle."  (Mile.  Louise  and  I  protested,  laughing  aloud;  M.  Mabire
remained  serious.)  Frau  Schmoll  corrected  herself  at  once,  and  said,
"You  may  be  right;  for  now  I  see  very  clearly  something  quite
different,  namely,  two  right  angles,  one  within  the  other."  Then  she
took  the  bandage  off  and  drew  both  the  figures  seen  as  follow  :—

<«

Eemarfc.  — Now  for  the  first  time  M.  Mabire  explained  that  he  had  been
much  astonished  by  the  first  perception  :  his  first  intention  had  been,
not  to  draw  a  zigzag  figure,  but  the  rudimentary  form  of  an  eye.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  No.  2  the  angles  are  right  angles,  as  in  the
original— side  by  side  instead  of  one  within  another.  The  number  and
form  of  the  angles  are  the  same.

17. —August  21st,  1886.  {Gontrilided.)
Agents. — Mme.  Renet,  Mile.  Paine,  M.  Renet.
Percipient. — M.  Mabire.


Object  (drawn). —


Result. — "I  see  a  great  number  of  right  angles  one  within  another."
(Pause.)  "  Now  I  see  two  curves  in  contact  with  each  other  with  their
convexities  upwards,  rather  like  a  figure  3  placed  horizontally  and  with
its  terminal  points  downwards.  But  the  two  ends  are  prolonged  down-
wards in  straight  vertical  lines." M.  Mabire  drew  : —


Remark. — Among  several  trials  made  by  the  above-mentioned  persons,  this
was  the  only  one  which  gave  a  satisfactory  result.


Experiments  in  TJiought-Transference.


333


18.— August  24:th,  188G.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Fran  Sclinioll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — M.  Mabire.
Object  (drawn). —


Besult.—-M.  Mabire  saw  "  a  sort  of  semicircle  like  the  tail  of  a  comet,  but
of  spiral  construction,  likfi  some  of  the  nebulte."  What  he  saw  he
reproduced  in  the  following  manner  :


19. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Percipient.  — Schmoll.
Object  (drawn). —


Result— '■'1  see  two  double  lines,  that  cross  each  other  at  about  right  angles."
(Pause.)  "The  two  double  lines  now  appear  single,  but  like  rays  of  light,
and  in  the  form  of  an  X."  (Another  pause.)  "Now  I  see  the  upper  part
of  the  X  separated  from  the  lower  by  a  vertical  line."  I  draw  : —


20. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Frau  Schmoll.

Object. — A  brass  weight  of  500grms.  was  jilaced  on  the  table.


334


Experiments  in  TJiought-Transference.


Result. — "What  I  see  looks  like  a  short  piece  of  candle,  without  a  candle-
stick. It  must  be  burning,  for  at  the  upper  part  I  see  it  glitter."

Remark. — At  the  upper  part  of  the  object  indicated  by  the  arrow,  bright
reflections,  caused  by  the  oblique  lighting,  were  seen  by  all  the  agents
(the  weight  was  rubbed  bright).  The  form  seen  decidedly  resembles  the
original,  especially  the  outline.

21. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Mile.  Louise.

Object.  — My  gold  watch  (without  the  chain)  was  noiselessly  placed  before  us,
the  back  turned  towards  ;  on  the  face  are  Roman  numbers.

Result. — After  five  minutes  :  "  I  see  a  round  object,  but  I  cannot  describe  it
more  particularly."  (During  the  pause  that  followed,  without  causing  the
slightest  noise,  I  turned  the  watch  round,  so  that  we  saw  the  face.)  Soon
Mile.  Louise  called  out  :  "  You  are  certainly  looking  at  the  clock  over  the
piano,  for  now  I  quite  clearly  see  a  clock  face  with  Roman  numbers. "

Remark.  —  Of  all  the  results  so  far  obtained,  this  is  decidedly  the  most  note-
worthy. The  ticking  of  the  watch  could  not  have  served  as  an  indication.
Owing  to  the  constant  noise  of  carriages  in  the  street,  it  was  impossible
for  the  agents  who  were  sitting  near  to  hear  the  ticking,  and  Mile.  Louise
who  sat  three  metres  away  from  it,  was  still  less  likely  to  hear  it.

22.— September  10th,  188G.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll.
Percipient.  — Schmoll.

Object.  — A  pamphlet  (in  8vo. )  was  slantingly  placed  on  the  table.
Result.  — Completely  failed. 1  saw  nothing  whatever.

Remark. — At  the  beginning  of  our  trials  to-day,  we  had  neglected  to  clear  the
table.  The  book  was  surrounded  by  other  objects,  and  also  badly
lighted.

23.  — Tlie  same  eimiing.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  M.  Mabire,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Frau  Schmoll.

Object.  -A  piece  of  candle,  20  centimetres  long,  was  placed  on  the
table.

Result. — After  eight  minutes:  "I  see  it  well,  but  not  clearly  enough  to  say

what  it  is. It  is  a  thin,  long  object."
"  How  long  ? "  asked  M.  Mabire.

Frau  Schmoll  tried  by  separating  her  hands  to  give  a  measurement,  but
could  not  do  it  with  certainty,  and  said,  "A  full  hand's  length,  about
20  centimetres. "  Begged  for  a  further  description,  she  said,  "I  see
nothing  like  a  walking-stick,  but  at  one  end  there  must  be  gold,  for
something  shines  there."  (The  candle  was  not  burning.)

24.  — The  same  evening.

Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Mile.  Louise.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  335


Object.  — A  Faience  tea-pot  was  placed  on  the  table  : —


Result. — After  five  minutes  :  "  It  is  not  a  drawing,  but  a  real  object. I  see
veiy  clearly  a  little  vase,  a  little  pot  or  pan."

25. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — Mile.  Louise,  Frau  Schmoll,  Sclimoll.
Percipient. — M.  Mabire.

Object. — The  stamp  of  the  firm  was  placed  on  the  table  : —


Result. — After  20  minutes  :  "  The  picture  appears  to  be  rather  confused.
But  I  believe  that  I  see  the  lower  part  of  a  drinking  glass. "  (Pause.)
"  Now  it  has  gone  again."  (A  pause  of  five  minutes.)  "  Now  I  see
another  form,  like  two  symmetrical  S  shaped  double  curves,  placed
side  by  side." Then  M.  Mabire  drew:  —


Remark. — Apparently  the  lower  part  was  seen  first,  and  then  the  upper.

26. — The  same  evening.

Agents. — M.  Mabire,  Frau  Schmoll,  Schmoll.
Percipient. — Mile.  Louise.

Object— The  double  eye-glasses  (pince-nez)  belonging  to  M.  Mabire  were
laid  on  the  table.


Result. — After  five  minutes  :  "I  see  two  curves,  open  above,  that  do  not
touch  each  other." Then  Mile.  Louise  drew : —


336  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


The  results  of  the  preceding  trials  clearly  leave  much  to  be  desired  ;
nevertheless,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  in  many  cases  the  reproduction
possesses  the  fundamental  character  of  the  original,  and,  indeed,  in
many  (as,  for  example,  Nos.  2,8,  12,  13,  18,  21,  24,  25)  very  strongly
approaches  precision.  In  no  single  case,  strictly  speaking,  did  there
appear  absolute  discrepancy  between  the  form  of  the  reproduction
and  that  of  the  original.  We  have  therefore  been  able  to  convince
oui'selves  that  the  agents,  concentrating  tlieir  looks  on  the  given  object,
projected  on  the  mental  eye  of  the  percipient  a  picture  more  or  less
resembling  it,  and  we  take  it  as  incontrovertible  that  the  above  results
could  not  have  been  achieved  by  conscious  or  unconscious  guessing.
We  shall  continue  these  psychical  experiments,  and  should  be  glad  to  see
similar  ones  instituted  in  other  family  circles  ;  for  before  science  can
advance  to  the  synthesis  of  these  mental  phenomena,  so  little  known
and  yet  so  important,  as  large  a  supply  as  possible  of  empirical  data
must  be  obtained.  No  doubt  there  may  be  a  difficulty  in  finding  people
in  one's  neighbourhood  who  are  competent  to  aid  in  the  development  of
such  experiments,  and  who  would  bring  to  them  the  necessary  earnest-
ness and  patience.  But  one  should  not  let  oneself  be  discouraged  by  a
little  trouble,  when  there  is  a  chance  of  throwing  light  on  events  which,
correctly  apprehended,  may  lead  us  to  the  psychological  proof  of  our
transcendental,  imperishable  Ego.


Note  by  F.  VV.  H.  Myers.

The  greater  part  of  the  above  series  of  figures  were  given  in  Sphinx
for  February,  1887.  On  seeing  them,  I  wrote  to  Herr  Schmoll,  who
kindly  offered  to  allow  me  to  join  his  group  in  the  Avenue  de  Villiers.
This  I  accordingly  did  on  April  2,  5,  and  8.  I  thus  made  the  acquain-
tance of  Herr  and  Frau  Schmoll,  of  M.  Mabire,  of  Mile.  Louise,  and  of
some  newer  members  of  the  group  ;  and  I  saw  experiments  conducted,
with  good  faith  and  care,  precisely  in  the  manner  above  described.
The  only  point  which  struck  me  as  needing  further  attention  was  the
need  of  complete  abstinence  from  exclamations  until  the  percipient  has
finished  drawing  the  figure.  (See  Exp.  21.)  I  suggested  also  that  the
percipient  had  better  be  called  into  the  room,  already  blindfolded,  when
the  pictures  had  been  drawn  and  concealed  from  view.  I  do  not,
however,  think  that  any  indication  can  have  been  gathered  from  the
sound  of  the  drawing  ;  as  this  was  done  with  the  end  of  a  lucifer-
match,  dipped  in  ink,  and  daubed  noiselessly  on  the  paper.  There  is  a
slight  inaccuracy  in  the  account  of  Exp.  21,  which  we  have
tliought  it  better  to  leave  as  it  stands. The  watch  was  not,  in  fact.


Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference.


337


going  at  the  time — a  point  overlooked  by  Herr  Schmoll,  but  noticed
and  proved  by  Frau  Schmoll  afterwards.  I  will  add  that  Mile.  Louise
was  the  only  percipient  who  attained  real  success  when  I  was  present ;
and  I  suspect  that  she  will  be  found  the  most  gifted  of  the  group.  I
saw  her  only  on  April  8.

Between  March  4th  and  25th,  Herr  Schmoll  continued  the  series  of
drawings,  ifec,  Nos.  27-47,  with  mingled  success  and  failure.  Nos.  48-55
were  tried  in  my  presence,  but  were  on  the  whole  unsuccessful.  Nos.
56-65,  performed  without  me,  included  several  successes.  Nos.  66-69
were  again  performed  in  my  presence,  under  excellent  conditions,  and
of  these,  66  and  69,  where  the  percipient  was  Mile.  Louise,  are  among
the  most  interesting  of  the  series.  We  hope  to  give  a  reproduction  of
some  of  these  on  a  future  occasion.  Herr  Schmoll  has  since,  at  my
suggestion,  tried  the  transmission  of  numbers,  tastes,  and  ^^aijis,  but  as
yet  without  success.

We  hope  before  long  again  to  take  some  personal  part  in  this  inter-
esting series ;  and  we  trust  that  other  groups  may  be  encouraged  by
Herr  Schmoll's  success  to  undertake  similar  experiments  with  patience
and  care.


z


338  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.


V.

ACCOUNTS OF SOME SO-CALLED "  SPIRITUALISTIC  "

SEANCES.

By  Professor  H.  Carvill  Lewis,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  and  Others.

Some  editorial  explanation  is  perhaps  needed,  for  those  who  are  not
familiar  with  Spiritualistic  literature,  of  the  prominence  given  in  the
following  pages  to  a  single  medium.  Eglinton  is  undoubtedly  considered
by  Spiritualists  in  England,  and  throughout  a  great  part  of  Europe,  to  be
the  most  powerful  professional  "  psychic  '  at  present  giving  stances,  and
the  one  through  whom  conclusive  evidence  of  the  spiritual  origin  of  the
phenomena  can  best  be  obtained.  He  even  carries  the  palm  over  the
once  famous  D.D.  Home,  in  the  opinion  of  some  who  have  known  both.
His  phenomena  may  therefore  be  fairly  taken  as  typical,  so  far  as
professional  mediumship  is  concerned,  of  the  evidence  on  which  the
Spiritualistic  belief  rests ;  and  an  examination  of  his  claims  is
therefore  an  important  step  in  the  investigation  of  the  subject.
Eglinton  has  now  been  acting  as  a  medium  for  some  12  years  or  so,
and  his  stsances  are  of  various  kinds.  There  are  the  dark  seances  at
which  lights  appear,  and  objects  are  moved  about  while  the  medium's
hands  are  supposed  to  be  held;  materialisation  seances — also  held  in
darkness  or  semi-darkness — at  which  living  beings  purporting  to  be
"  materialised  "  spirits,  are  seen,  felt,  and  talked  with  by  the  sitters  ;
and  stances  for  slate-writing  or  "  psychography,"  at  which  writing
appears  on  slates  under  circumstances  which,  in  the  opinion  of  most  of
the  sitters,  render  it  impossible  for  Eglinton  to  have  produced  it  him-
self.

It  is  with  this  last  class  of  phenomena  that  we  are  here  concerned.
Slate-writing  is  supposed  to  be  a  phenomenon  specially  easy  to  investi-
gate satisfactorily,  and  specially  adapted  to  convince  the  sceptic.
Reports  on  the  subject  had  been  sent  from  time  to  time  to  the  head-
quarters of  the  Society ;  and  in  accordance  with  a  rather  generally
expressed  wish,  the  whole  body  of  them*  were  printed  in  the  Society's
Journal  for  June  and  October,  1886.  But  since  many  readers  of  the
Proceedings  do  not  see  the  Journal  (which  is  issued  for  private
circulation  among  our  own  members),  it  may  be  well  to  give  here
one  or  two  fresh  specimens  of  the  class  of  cases  on  which  Spiritualists

*  One  report,  sent  by  the  Rev.  A.  J.  Rogers,  was  accidentally  omitted ;  it
afterwards  appeared  in  Light  for  October  16,  1886.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Stances.  339


have  relied.  We  will  take  examples  which  have  been  represented  by
leading  Spiritualists  as  test- cases — as  conclusive  evidence,  for  any
unprejudiced  mind,  that  the  results  were  due  to  some  occult  agency.
In  the  footnotes  appended,  which  have  been  supplied  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  an  endeavour  is  made  to  show,  with  the  aid  of  the  narratives
that  follow  in  this  paper  and  in  Mr.  Davey's,  the  reasons  why  we
regard  these  accounts  as  inconclusive.

The  following  case  was  contributed  by  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)" — a  nom
de  plume  well  known  to  Spiritualists  as  that  of  a  leading  repre-
sentative of  English  Spiritualism,  to  Light  for  November  13,  1886.

On  November  3rd  I  had  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Eglinton  at  his  house,  6,
Nottingham-place.  The  observers  present,  beside  myself,  were  Dr.
Stanhope  Speer  (13.  Alexandra-road,  N.W.),  and  Mr.  W.  G.  Johnson  (68,
High-street,  Bedford).  We  met  at  3.30  p.m.  in  a  room  which  was  amply
lighted,  at  first  by  natural  light  and  afterwards  by  gas,  for  every  2)uri)ose  of
exact  observation.  The  room  is  that  inaccurately  described  by  Professor
Hofiinann  as  "a  ground-floor  back  shut  in  by  adjacent  buildings."  Mr.
Eglinton's  room  is  not  shut  in  by  anything  that  impedes  the  free  entry  of
light.  At  no  time  during  the  sitting  was  there  any  question  as  to  the
possibility  of  seeing  what  was  being  done,  nor,  I  may  add,  of  keeping  the
slates  "under  continuous  observation."

I  took  with  me  two  ordinary  school-slates,  purchased  by  myself.  In
order  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of  these  slates  being  changed  or  the
surfaces  being  reversed,  I  had  marked  one  of  the  two  slates  on  the  frame
of  one  of  its  sides  with  a  blue  cross,  and  on  the  other  with  a  blue  circle.
The  other  slate  was  similarly  marked  with  green.  It  thus  became  a  matter
of  very  simple  observation  to  see  that  the  writing  was  not  produced  by  trick
on  the  under  surface  of  the  slate  when  held  beneath  the  table,  a  change  in
the  slate  being  (as  has  been  suggested)  efiected  while  the  attention  of  the
observers  was  purposely  distracted.  There  was  no  possibility  of  any  such
trick  throughout  the  sitting. ^

1  It  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  any  change  of  slates  in  order  to  explain  the
events  of  this  seance,  and  it  is  most  probable  that  they  were  not  changed.  The
precautions,  as  described,  however,  would  not  afford  complete  security  against
such  change,  since,  so  far  as  appears  from  the  description,  the  marks  might
have  been  imitated.

As  to  turning  over,  there  is  not  enougli  precision  in  the  accounts  to  enable
us  to  judge  whether,  on  the  hypothesis  of  conjuring,  we  must  suppose  the  slates
to  have  been  either  turned  over,  or  turned  in  their  own  plane.  But  I  do  not  see
that  any  mark  would  prevent  this  which  was  not  {a)  visible  all  the  time  the
slate  was  under  the  table  and  (b)  observed  during  all  that  time.  From  what  is
said,  I  shoidd  infer  that  condition  («)  and  therefore  necessarily  condition  {b)
was  absent ;  for  it  is  Mr.  Eglinton's  thumb,  and  not  the  frame  of  the  slate,  or  any
mark  on  it,  that  is  mentioned  as  continuously  visible.  (Compare  Professor
Carvill  Lewis's  description  of  the  position  at  the  beginning  of  his  first  stance,
p.  353. )  Under  these  circumstances,  the  utmost  the  marks  could  do  was  to
make  it  easier  for  the  sitters  to  see  whether  the  side  which  was  uppermost  just


340  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic "  Stances.

Mr.  Eglinton  sat  at  one  side  of  a  square  table,  which  -was  not  covered  by  any
cloth.  At  his  right  hand,  close  to  the  slate  when  held  in  position,  at  the
corner  of  the  table,  sat  Mr.  Johnson,  keenly  scrutinising  every  movement  of
Mr.  Eglinton.  Opposite  to  the  medium  was  Dr.  Speer  with  his  eyes  fixed
on  the  slate  without,  as  I  can  testify  assuredly,-  any  lack  of  "  continuous
observation."  (In  a  letter  to  me  Dr.  Speer  remarks  after  reading  my  narra-
tive, "  I  have  no  alteration  whatever  to  suggest.  I  may  assert,  however,
that  upon  each  occasion  that  the  slate  was  jjlaced  under  the  table  I  never
once  lost  sight  of  Eglinton's  thumb  until  the  slate  was  again  placed  on
the  table.")*  Next  to  Mr.  Eglinton  I  sat,  using,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,
such  powers  of  observation  as  I  am  endowed  with.  I  will  be  so  bold  as  to
say  that  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  three  persons  who,  by  long  experience
of  psychical  phenomena  and  careful  thought  about  them  in  two  of  us,  and  in
the  third  case  by  trained  habits  of  accurate  scientific  obsen'ation  and  thought,
were  more  competent  to  express  an  opinion  as  to  what  occurred.  I  will  say
further  that  any  sane  man,  with  eyes  in  his  head  and  the  power  of  using
them,  would  be  fully  competent  to  testify  to  that  which  we  observed.  The
only  slates  used  during  the  sitting  were  my  two  school-slates,  and  the  folding
slate  with  lock,  familiar  to  the  public  as  being  in  regular  use  at  Mr.  Eglin-
ton's sittings  :  nor  were  there  any  other  slates  on  or  near  the  table  at  which
we  sat.

Mr.  Johnson,  as  an  investigator  new  to  Mr.  Eglinton,  was  requested  to
commence  the  first  experiment  by  writing  a  question  on  one  of  my  slates.
I  suggested  that  the  question  should  be  one  not  involving  special  knowledge,
but  one  that  could  be  readily  answered.  While  Mr.  Johnson  wrote  his
question  we  all  turned  away  from  the  table.  It  is  certam  that  none  of  us
could  see  or  know  what  was  written.-''  The  slate  was  held  by  Mr.  Eglinton
under  the  corner  of  the  table,  between  him  and  Mr.  Johnson.  The  thumb
of  the  hand  which  supported  the  slate  was  continuously  visible  above  the
surface  of  the  table.  The  query  was.  What  is  the  sum  of  50  x  GO  ?  The
answer  was  written  after  considerable  waiting  :  3,000.  The  figures  were
straggling  and  ill-made.*

before  the  slate  was  put  under  the  table,  was  also  uppermost  just  after  it  was
drawn  out.

^  If  "M.  A.  (Oxon)  "  can  assuredly  testify  to  the  continuous  observation
of  Dr.  Speer,  he  must  have  been  continuously  observing  him  ;  in  which  case  he,
cannot  have  been  also  efficiently  observing  Mr.  Eglinton.

3  No  reason  is  given  for  certainty  that  Mr.  Eglinton  could  not  see  or  know
what  was  written.  Probably  lie  did  not  know,  however,  and  hence,  perhaps,
the  necessity  for  the  subsequent  "  considerable  waiting  "  while  he  ascertained.

■4  This  first  experiment  consisted  of  two  parts  ;  the  reading  of  a  question
assumed  to  be  unknown  to  the  medium  and  presumably  written  on  one  or  other
side  of  the  slate  which  he  held  under  the  table  ;  and  the  writing  of  an  answer  on
the  slate  under  the  table.  Compare  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  experiences,
pp.  354,  355.  For  accounts  of  writing  by  an  avowed  conjurer  on  a  slate  held  under
the  corner  of  the  table,  with  the  thumb  of  the  hand  continually  visible,  see  Mr.
Davey's  paper,  Sitting  II,  Reports  1  and  2  [«]  pp.  426,  429.  For  questions  in-
accessible to  a  conjiirer,  read  and  answered  by  him,  see  Mr.  Davey's  Sitting
VI  [ffl]  p.  448,  and  elsewhere.

*  These  bracketed  sentences  appeared  as  a  foot-note  in  the  original.


Accounts  of  some  So-called Spiritualist ic"  Seances.  3-il

The  next  experiment  was  this.  I  took  out  of  my  pocket-uook  five  blank
cheques.  These  clieques  had  been  placed  by  me  in  my  pocket-book  at  the
end  of  last  July.  I  had  not  looked  at  the  numbers  as  I  tore  them  from  ray
cheque-book,  nor  when  I  put  them  into  my  pocket-book,  nor  had  I  ever
removed  them  or  any  of  them  since  they  were  so  placed.  They  were  folded
into  four  parts,  and  the  selected  cheque  was  not  unfolded  before  being  placed
in  the  slate.  I  requested  Mr.  Johnson  to  select  one  of  them.  He  did  so,
and  without  looking  at  its  number,  I  took  it  from  him  and  placed  it  within
the  folding-slate  which  Mr.  Eglinton  uses.  Mr.  Johnson  locked  the  slate,
and  placed  the  key  on  the  table  before  him.  We  first  endeavoured  to  get  a
message  on  one  of  my  slates  as  to  the  possibility  of  getting  the  number  of
the  cheque  written  on  the  locked  slate.  The  experiment  was  difiicult,  and
we  did  not  wish  to  waste  time.  The  answer  came,  "We  will  try."  The
locked  slate,  which  had  been  all  the  time  in  full  view,  and  which  no  amount
of  spare  keys  would  have  made  it  possible  for  Mr.  Eglinton  to  unlock,  was
then  taken  by  Mr.  Eglinton  and  held  under  the  corner  of  the  table  next  to
Mr.  Johnson.  At  once,  without  appreciable  interval,  there  came  the  per-
fectly audible  sound  of  writing.  The  slate  on  being  withdrawn  and  unlocked
by  Mr.  Johnson  was  found  to  have  ujjon  it

^  16046

That  was  the  number  of  my  cheque  as  verified  by  all  of  us  at  once.  It  was
wholly  impossible  for  Mr.  Eglinton  to  have  seen  my  cheque,  or  to  write  on
the  slate,  for  the  reason  that  the  locked  slate  was  held  in  position  under  the
corner  of  the  table  in  such  a  way  tliat  the  thumb  of  the  hand  holding  it  was
continuously  visible."

At  this  point  in  our  experiments  1  suggested  that  the  two  doctors  should
test  Mr.  Eglinton's  pulse.  I  had  noticed  that  he  was  very  considerably  con-
vulsed before  our  ears  attested  that  writing  was  being  done. I  myself  was


^  I  think  it  probable  that  a  lapse  of  memory — a  complete  omission — has
occurred  in  respect  to  this  experiment,  and  that,  though  the  fact  has  been  forgot-
ten, the  locked  slate  was  held  under  the  table  for  a  short  time  directly  after  the
cheque  was  enclosed.  It  was  then,  I  suspect,  that  Mr.  Eglinton  read  the  cheque,
and  wrote  the  number,  after  which  it  was  probably  he  who  led  up  to  the  sug-
gestion that,  as  they  did  not  seem  to  be  succeeding,  they  should  try  to  get  a
message  on  another  slate  as  to  the  possibility  of  obtaining  the  plienomenon  they
desired.  This  proceeding  would  naturally  make  any  previous  dealing  with  the
locked  slate  seem  unimportant,  and  make  it  likely  to  fade  quickly  from  the
memory.  I  am  confirmed  in  this  view  by  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  experience
in  the  course  of  a  similar  experiment,  see  pp.  356,  357.  If  no  such  previous
process  be  supposed,  there  seems  to  be  a  certain  inconsequence  in  the  behaviour
of  the  sitters  ;  for  why,  if  there  was  d  priori  reason  to  think  the  experiment  likely
to  waste  time,  did  they  go  through  the  process  of  selecting  and  locking  up  the
cheque  before  inquiring  of  the  spirits  on  the  subject  ?  Complete  forgetfulness  of
really  important  incidents  undoubtedly  occurs  ;  see  for  example  the  Appendix  to
Mr.  Davey's  article.  Notes  1  and  17  to  Sitting  II  pp.  488,  489,  and  Notes  1
and  6  to  Sitting  III  p.  490.

For  reading  questions  and  writing  answers  in  locked  slates  by  a  conjurer,
see  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sittings  'V^I  [a]  p.  448,  XI  [<a]  p.  469,  XII  [b]  p.  471,
and  XIII  [6]  p.  472.


342  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Stances.

similarly  aifected,  and  I  felt  able  to  tell  by  my  own  sensations  when  the
writing  was  about  to  be  executed.  My  own  sensations  were  of  a  convulsive
character,  with  occasional  spasmodic  jerks  when  (as  I  conceive)  psychic  force
was  being  thrown  off.  Mr.  Eglinton's  pulse,  on  being  tried  by  tlie  two
medical  men,  was  found  to  be  calm,  steady,  healthy,  and  normal,  but  rather
feeble  for  a  person  of  his  excellent  physique.  My  own  pulse  was  not  tested  ;
but  I  fancy  it  would  have  been  found,  on  trial,  to  be  accelerated  in  speed.

Dr.  Sjjeer  now  wished  to  ask  a  verbal  question.  The  slate  having  been
placed  in  position,  he  inquired  whether  any  relation  of  his  were  present.  The
slate  (my  own)  was  held  by  Mr.  Eglinton  as  before,  and  the  writing  came  at
once — I  say,  and  I  mean,  iniynecliately — "There  are  several  present,  but  we
have  no  power  to  tell  of  them.""

I  then  asked,  not  audibly,  but  writing  my  question  on  one  of  my  own
slates,  "  Do  you  see  any  friend  of  mine?  Give  one  name."  Nine  minutes
elapsed  before  the  writing  came.  On  withdrawing  the  slate  we  found  in
quite  distinct  writing  from  that  obtained  before,

+  Imperator.

The  writing  was  very  clear  and  decided  ;  the  letters  carefully  and  prettily
formed  ;  and  it  was  similar  to  that  which  characterises  his  signature  in  my
books  of  automatic  writing.  The  name  was  quite  unexjjected  by  me,  and
came  as  a  surprise,  for  I  had  recently  inquired  for  him  without  success.

It  was  then  suggested  by  Mr.  Eglinton  that  we  should  endeavour  to
obtain  writing  under  an  inverted  tumbler  placed  on  one  of  my  slates  and
pressed  against  the  under  surface  of  the  table.  I,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,
asked  Mr.  Johnson  to  select  a  number  under  ten.  He  picked  five.  Dr.  Speer,
similarly  aslced,  selected  nine.  I  chose  four.  The  combined  numbers  made
594.  I  asked  that  that  combination  of  numbers  should  be  written  under  the
inverted  tumbler.  It  was  done  at  once  ;  with  no  appreciable  interval  of  writing
after  the  slate  was  in  position  ;  the  sound  of  writing  was  quite  audible  ;  the
figures  were  bold  and  decided — very  different  from  those  that  were  made  in
the  first  experiment.* Then  "  Good-bye,"  and  the  sitting  was  ended.

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  only  the  most  perverse  ingenuity  can  distort
evidence  of  this  quality  into  a  mere  record  of  conjuring  tricks  ;  or  suggest


6  For  an  answer  to  a  verbal  question  coming  immediately  on  the  sitter's
own  slate  under  the  table,  see  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  I,  Report  1  [e]  p.  421.

'  The  remarks  in  note  ^  apply  here.  I  need  only  add  that  we  cannot
assume  the  signature  of  "  Imperator  "  to  have  been  unknown  to  Mr.
Eglinton.  The  superiority  of  the  writing  to  tliat  in  the  first  expei'iment  may
probably  have  been  due  to  an  accidentally  better  opportunity  for  executing  it.
I  suspect  that  sitters  are  often  more  watchful  during  the  first  experiment  than
during  later  ones.  Compare,  for  handwriting  varying  in  excellence  with
opportunity,  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  experience,  pp.  365,  366.

^  Compare  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  account  of  a  similar  phenomenon  and
its  mode  of  performance,  p.  362.  I  suspect,  however,  that  in  the  present  case
Mr.  Eglinton  found  the  opportunity  of  writing  the  figures  before  the  slate  was
in  position.  He  may  have  written  each  number  as  it  was  chosen.  For  a  per-
formance by  an  avowed  conjurer  resembling  this,  so  far  as  the  tumbler  is
concerned,  but  perhaps  more  striking,  see  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  II,
Report  1  [6]  p.  428,  and  Sitting  XVI  [h]  p.  482.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  34*3


that  the  experiments  were  vitiated  by  lack  of  "  continuous  observation  "  ;  or
that  we,  the  observers,  were  not  competent  to  observe  and  record  what
occurred  under  the  most  careful  scrutiny  by  our  three  pairs  of  watchful  eyes.^
For  my  part  it  seems  necessary  only  to  mention  such  criticism  in  order  to
brand  it  as  the  outcome  of  ineradicable  prejudice.  It  is  mere  waste  of  time
to  argue  with  it.  It  is,  I  fear,  hopeless  to  expect  that  it  would  be  modified  or
reversed  by  any  amount  of  testimony  even  of  the  highest  quality  and  value.
I  will  not,  therefore,  take  up  space  by  showing  how  ludicrously  inapplicable
is  the  conjuring  explanation  to  what  we  witnessed.

It  is,  I  think,  greatly  to  be  desired  that  the  attention  of  physiologists
should  be  drawn  to  the  state  of  the  psycliic  during  the  time  when  these
phenomena  are  in  process.  For  example,  before  writing  is  heard  on  the
slate,  Mr.  Eglinton  is  nervous,  anxious,  and  his  body  is  usually  much
contorted.  His  face  sometimes  wears  an  expression  of  pained  anxiety  and
almost  of  nervous  apprehension.  When  the  slate  is  withdra^vn  this  gives
way  to  an  expression  of  relief.  His  fingers  are  cold,  as  though  from  the
withdrawal  of  energy.  Sometimes  he  shivers  as  though  chilled.  The  presence
of  a  qualified  surgeon,  who  might  be  able  to  make  a  series  of  careful
observations  at  sittings  for  psych ography,  and  especially  for  materialisation,
is  greatly  to  be  desired.  I  may  add,  by  way  of  fixing  attention  on  the  quality
of  this  evidence  : —

1.  That  most  of  the  writing  occurred  on  my  own  slates  ;  and  that  there

were  no  other  slates  on  the  table  or  within  Mr.  Eghnton's  reach,  so
that  suggestions  of  change  are  excluded.^*'

2.  That  no  one  in  the  room  had  ever  seen  the  number  of  my  cheque,  so

that  suggestions  of  thought-transference  are  excluded.

3.  That  in  two  cases  the  writing  was  immediate  on  the  request  being
made.  It  was  done  on  my  slate,  and  therefore  the  suggestions  of
previous  preparations  and  of  writing  under  the  table  by  the  medium
are  excluded.

4.  That  the  fi'agment  of  pencil  or  chalk  placed  on  the  slate,  and  pre-

viously marked  for  identification,  was  found  in  all  cases  to  have  its
facet  slightly  worn  away  by  use,  and  that  it  rested  on  the  spot
where  the  writing  terminated.^"

s  We  have  no  means  of  knowing  that  the  witnesses  on  this  occasion  were
better  observers  or  more  careful  than  the  recorders  of  similar  marvels  at  Mr.
Davey's  seances,  and  the  lack  of  precise  statement  about  the  position  of  the
slates  under  the  table,  the  position  of  the  -miting — both  questions  and
answers — and  about  the  watching  of  the  marks  made  for  identification  on  the
slates,  suggests  a  lack  of  careful  observation ;  while  there  are  other  indica-
tions— to  some  of  which  I  have  called  attention — that  the  recorder  of  tliis  seance
was  unaware  of  the  difficulties  of  observation.

1°  As  before  stated  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  any  change  of  slates,  but
the  sitters  cannot  have  kno^^■^l  that  Mr.  Eglinton  had  none  concealed,  e.g.
about  his  person,  or  his  chair.

u  See  notes  ^  and  and  for  a  case,  with  a  conjurer,  of  a  long  message
on  the  sitters'  own  slates  on  the  table  beginning  "  almost  instantaneously,"
which  of  coui'se  is  more  than  was  obtained  at  the  seance  under  consideration,
see  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  I,  Eeports  1  and  2  [(/]  pp.  421,  424.

^  Comjpare Mr. Davey's  article. Sitting  I, E,eport 1,  prehminary


344  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic "  Seances.


5.  That  the  thumb  of  the  hand  that  sui>ported  the  slate  was  continuously

visible  to  all  the  observers  ;  and  that  they  severally  noticed  that  it
was  so.i^

6.  That  Mr. Eglinton  voluntarily  presented  his  right  hand  to  Mr.

Johnson  in  order  that  he  might  see  that  he  had  no  trick-thimble  or
conjuring  apparatus  concealed  in  his  sleeve.^*  Nor  would  the  presence
there  of  any  apparatus  whatever  have  enabled  him  to  do  by  trick
what,  in  our  opinion,  proved  conclusively  the  presence  among  us  of
an  intelligence  external  to  our  own,  acting  on  matter  in  a  way  that
no  hypothesis  of  conjuring  will  explain.  "MA (Oxon  )  "

This  account  has  been  submitted  to  us.  We  agree  that  the  phenomena,
witnessed  by  us,  are  accurately  described  in  it,  without  exaggeration,  and
without  omission  of  any  important  detail.  yy- q.  Johnson

Stanhope  T.  Speer.

The  next  case  was  printed  in  Light  for  January  15,  1887,  as  "from
a  correspondent  who  has  had  large  and  long  experience  in  the
observation  of  abnormal  phenomena,"  and  who  also  is  a  graduate  of
the  University  of  Oxford.

Sir, — I  venture  to  send  you  an  account  of  a  seance  which  I  had  with  Mr.
Eglinton  on  Monday,  December  13th,  1886,  as  it  seems  to  me  to  present
some  points  of  special  interest  which  deserve  to  be  placed  on  record.  The
seance  was  held  at  6,  Nottingham-place,  and  I  was  accompanied  by  my  wife
and  her  sister.  Miss  Phillij)ps.  We  met  at  12.30  p.m.  in  a  small  room  at  the
back  of  the  house,  which  was  well  lighted  by  one  large  window.  Mr.
Eglinton  sat  on  one  side  of  a  square  table,  which  was  not  covered  by  any
cloth,  and  was  carefully  examined  by  all  of  us.  At  liis  right  hand,  close  to
the  slate  when  it  was  held  in  position  at  the  corner  of  the  table,  sat  my  wife,
who  has  unusually  good  eyesight,  and  keenly  watched  all  his  movements.
I  was  opposite  to  the  medium,  and  next  to  me  sat  Miss  Phillipps  at  the
corner  of  the  table  opposite  to  my  wife.  Mr.  Eglinton  placed  on  the  table
his  folding-slate  with  a  lock,  so  often  described  in  your  columns,  and  two
school-slates,  which  were  under  our  observation  throughout  the  seance,  and
could  not  by  any  possibility  have  been  changed.  At  the  commencement  of
the  proceedings  the  two  ladies  each  wrote  a  question  on  Mr.  Eglinton's
school-slates,  which  we  had  carefully  cleaned,  holding  them  so  that  no  one
but  themselves  could  see  what  was  written.  Mr.  Eglinton  first  took  the
slate  my  wife  had  used,  and  i^laced  it  in  position  under  the  corner  of  the
table.  We  then  joined  hands  :  Miss  Pliillipj^s  laid  both  her  hands  on  my
riglit  hand  : my  left  was  in  my  wife's  right  hand  : and  Mr.  Eglinton's


observation  5,  p.  420.  Sitting  VII,  Report  2,  postscript,  p.  457.  Sitting  IX,
Reports  1  and  2  [/]  pp.  462,  464.  Sitting  XI  [c]  p.  469.  Sitting  XIII  [b]  p.
472. Compare  also  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  remarks,  pp.  355,  356,  367,  368.

Compare  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  I,  Report  1,  preliminary  observa-
tion 3,  p.  420,  and  Sitting  II,  Reports  1  and  2  [«,]  pp.  426,  429.  Also  Professor
Carvill  Lewis's  experience,  pp.  360,  361,  365.

1*  Probably  most  of  us  have  seen  conjurers  turn  up  their  sleeves  to  prove
that  there  is  no  deception.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic "  Seances.  345


left  hand  was  placed  on  her  left  :  while  his  right  hand  supported  the  slate
when  it  was  placed  in  position  between  him  and  my  wife.  His  thumb  was
continuously  visible  above  the  surface  of  the  table  whenever  he  held  a  slate
under  it.^-^  Nearly  an  hour  passed  without  manifestations,  and  at  length  Mr.
Eglinton  suggested  that  the  slates  should  be  changed. ^'^  He  then  placed  in
position  the  slate  on  which  Miss  Phillipps  had  written  her  question,  and  laid
on  the  table  near  my  wife  the  slate  which  he  had  first  taken,  keeping  the
writing  downwards,  so  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  seen.  Very  soon  after
this  change  had  been  made,  writing  was  heard  by  all  of  us  ;  when  it  ceased,
the  slate  was  withdrawn,  and  an  answer  was  found  to  my  wife's  question,
consisting  of  two  words,  and  the  initials  of  the  friend  to  whom  the  question
had  been  addressed. i''  On  examining  the  piece  of  pencil  placed  on  the  slate,
and  previously  marked  for  identification,  we  found  that  on  this,  as  on
several  subsequent  occasions,  the  facet  had  been  worn  by  use.  My  wife  then
wrote  another  question  underneath  the  same  slate,  and  requested  that  the
answer  might  be  written  with  a  piece  of  blue  chalk  which  was  laid  upon  the
top  of  it.  The  slate  was  placed  in  position,  and  in  less  than  three  minutes  an
answer  was  written  in  six  words  with  blue  chalk,  i''  It  was  then  suggested  by
Mr.  Eglinton  that  each  of  us  should  name  a  number  and  the  colour  of  the
chalk  in  which  we  wished  it  written.  Miss  Phillipps  asked  for  8  in  red,  I
chose  49  in  blue,  and  my  wife  72  in  green.  Taking  one  of  the  school-slates,
Mr.  Eglinton  jtlaced  it  in  position  with  three  j^ieces  of  coloured  chalk  upon
it,  and  almost  immediately  the  numbers  were  written  in  the  colours
asked  for.^"

I  had  brought  with  me  a  small  box  carefully  closed,  tlie  contents  of
which  were  unknown  to  all  of  us,  and  Miss  Phillii:)j3s  a  sealed  envelope,  in
which  she  had  placed  a  bank-note.  This  note  had  been  sent  to  her  by  post,
and  she  had  not  looked  at  its  number.  The  box  and  envelope  were  then
laid  on  a  slate  which  Mr.  Eglinton  held  as  usual,  and  we  requested  that  the
contents  of  the  box  and  the  number  of  the  note  might  be  given.  Writing
was  heard  at  once,  and  the  slate  on  being  withdrawn  was  found  to  have  the
following  sentence  upon  it  :  "A  key  is  in  the  box  :  if  you  put  the  bank-note
in  the  locked  slate  we  will  write  the  number."  Miss  Phillipfis  accordingly
opened  the  envelope,  and  took  out  the  bank-note,  which  was  folded  with  the
number  inside,  and,  without  unfolding  it  or  allowing  any  one  present  to  see

1^  See  references  in  note  i-*.

18  It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  change  gave  him  the  sought  for  opportunity
of  reading  the  question.

See  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  account,  pp.  355,  365.  And  for  an  answer
to  a  known  question  written  by  a  conjurer  on  a  slate  under  the  table,  see  Mr.
Davey's  article.  Sitting  I,  Report  1  [e]  and  [Idhi]  pp.  421,  423.  Sitting  V  [b]
p.  446,  XIII  [«]  p.  472.

18  See  references  in  note  i^.

1^  The  comparative  rapidity  with  which  this  answer  seems  to  have  been
given  suggests,  if  the  account  be  correct,  that  Mr.  Eglinton  may  have  seen  the
question  before  putting  the  slate  under  the  table.

-°  I  conjecture  that  Mr.  Eglinton  wrote  these  numbers  as  they  were
selected,  and  before  placing  the  slate  under  the  table ;  but  there  is  no
insuperable  difficulty  in  supposing  that  he  did  it  afterwards  under  the  table.
Compare  Professor  Carvill  Lewis's  experience,  p.  362.


346  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Sinritualistic  "  Seances.


it,  she  put  it  in  Mr.  Bglinton's  folding-slate  after  marking  it  with  red  chalk.
She  then  locked  the  slate,  and  keeping  the  key  on  the  table  near  her,  and  in
full  view  the  whole  time,  she  handed  it  to  Mr.  Eglinton.  He  and  my  wife
then  laid  their  left  hands  upon  it,  while  with  his  right  he  placed  a  school-
slate  in  position.  Writing  was  heard  at  once,  and  on  looking  at  it  we  found
that  the  number  given  was  97656.  Miss  Phillipps  then  unlocked  the  folding-
slate,  and  looked  at  the  bank-note  :  the  number  was  given  quite  correctly,
and  the  mark  in  red  chalk  was  on  the  note.-'^

At  this  point  the  gas  was  lighted,  as  the  day  was  gloomy,  and  it  was
kept  alight  during  the  remainder  of  the  seance.  Besides  the  box  above
mentioned  I  had  brought  with  me  a  folding-slate  carefully  fastened  by
gummed  j^aper  on  the  side  opposite  to  the  hinges  :  the  frame  of  the  slate
fitted  very  closely,  and  the  hinges  were  perfectly  secure.  I  had  placed  in  it
a  marked  florin,  and  a  small  piece  of  slate  pencil,  and  it  had  been  lying  on
the  table  in  full  view  during  the  whole  of  the  seance.  Placing  his  left  hand
on  this  slate  Mr.  Eglinton  put  a  school-slate  in  position,  and  we  asked  that
the  number  {i.e.,  date)  of  the  florin  might  be  written  in  the  folding-slate.
The  following  sentence  was  then  written  on  the  school-slate  : —

"We  regret  that,  though  our  power  is  strong  to-day,  we  have  not  the
ability  to  write  in  the  closed  slate.  We  do  not  see  the  number  of  the  florin
clearly  because  there  are  no  numerals,  but  we  tlimk  it  is  1876."^^

Now  the  florin  bore  the  date  mdccclxxiii.,  and  was  somewhat  worn,  so
that  the  number  "  iii  "  might  easily  be  confounded  with  that  of  "vi."  We
then  asked  that  the  florin  might  be  taken  out  of  the  folding-slate,  which
Mr.  Eglinton  now  jjlaced  in  position  under  the  table  :  he  soon  became  very-
much  convulsed,  his  wrist,  which  was  in  full  view,  showing  the  strain  put
upon  him  by  the  veins  and  sinews  standing  out  in  bold  relief  :  his  breath
came  spasmodically,  and  we  all  felt  a  strong  influence,  when  suddenly  the
florin  was  thrown  out  with  considerable  force  and  struck  the  wall  three  yards
distant,  rebounding  from  it  and  falling  on  the  ground  about  two  yards  from
the  medium's  chair.  My  wife  saw  the  florin  as  it  passed  under  Mr.  Eglinton's
left  arm,  and  she  made  an  exclamation  as  it  flashed  under  the  gaslight :  owing
to  the  position  in  which  she  sat  she  was  able  to  see  it  before  myself  and  Miss
Phillipps.  The  florin  had  been  marked  with  a  P  in  ink,  and  a  P  scratched  on
the  metal,  and  these  marks  were  distinctly  visible.  On  examining  the  slate,
we  could  not  detect  the  smallest  ajierture,  and  the  gummed  paj^er  was  intact.
Before  this  manifestation  occurred,  the  table  was  violently  agitated,  and  was
entirely  raised  from  the  ground  six  or  eight  inches. 1  then  requested  that  a


21  See  references  in  note

Mr.  Eglinton  was  doubtless  aware  that  florins  are  dated  in  Roman
numerals,  and  hazarded  a  guess  at  the  date.

-3  We  are  not  told  whether  the  folding-slate  in  question  was  varnished  or
not,  nor  its  size,  nor  the  size  and  mode  of  application  of  the  gummed  paper,
and  therefore  cannot  judge  of  the  security  of  the  fastening.  Gummed  paper
generally  adheres  very  insecurely  to  varnished  or  polished  wooden  surfaces,
and  can  easily  be  removed  and  replaced  without  injury.  After  reading  this
account  I  enclosed  a  half-crown  piece  in  a  hinged  slate  of  my  own,  and  fastened
it  along  the  middle  of  the  side  opposite  the  hinges  with  a  piece  of  gummed
paper  two  or  three  inches  long. I  then  with  some  little  trouble  got  out  the


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic "  Seances.  347


number  which  I  gave,  namely,  5420,  might  be  written  in  my  folcling-shxte.
Mr,  Eglinton  placed  it  on  the  table  with  his  left  hand  upon  it,  and  held  a
school-slate  in  position.  We  were  not  aware  at  the  time  whether  my  request
had  been  complied  ivith,  but  a  long  communication  was  received  from  the
medium's  guide,  Ernest,  which  was  written  veiy  rajiidly,  and  quite  filled
one  side  of  the  school-slate.^*  Whilst  this  was  being  written,  my  wife,  at  Mr.
Eglinton's  request,  placed  her  hand  under  the  slate,  supporting  it,  as  he
generally  does  and  she  informed  us  that  she  distinctly  felt  the  vibration
caused  by  the  movement  of  the  pencil.  The  last  communication  was,  "■  We
cannot  do  more.  Good-bye."  On  our  return  home,  we  opened  my  folding-
slate,  and  found  clearly  written  within  it  the  four  figures  5420  which  I  had
asked  for.^**  There  was  no  key  in  the  box,  but  a  small  metal  knife  and  two  or
three  other  things.  The  seance  was  in  many  respects  of  unusual  interest,
and  there  are  several  points  on  which  comment  might  be  made  ;  but  I
must  not  trespass  further  on  your  space.  I  will  only  add  tliat  Mr.  Eglinton
never  left  the  table,  that  he  was  perfectly  willing  to  try  any  experiment  which
we  suggested,  and  that,  so  far  as  the  sitters  were  concerned,  there  was  no
lack  of  "  continuous  observation."

36,  Bryanston- street,  W.  F.  W.  Peecival.

P.S. — I  have  omitted  to  state  that  before  placing  the  closed  slate  in
position,  Mr.  Eglinton  shook  it,  and  we  all  heard  a  solid  object  moving  withiii
it,  tvhich  made  a  sound  such  as  woidd  have  been  made  by  my  marked  florin. —
F.  W.  P.

After  reading  the  above  account  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  phenomena
witnessed  by  us  are  accurately  described  in  it,  and  that  no  important  detail
has  been  omitted.  L.  M.  Phillipps.

Isabella  Percival.

The  Editor  of  Light  adds  : —

There  are  in  this  careful  and  precise  record  some  points  which  receive
an  added  interest  and  importance  from  recent  discussions.

Mr.  Percival  carried  with  him  a  folding-slate  secvned  by  gummed  paper.
We  have  had  opportunity  of  seeing  how  that  slate  was  secured,  and  we  have
no  hesitation  in  asserting  that  it  was  beyond  the  reach  of  human  ingenuity


half-crown.  In  doing  so  I  somewhat  disturbed  one  end  of  the  gummed  paper,
but  was  able  to  replace  it  without  any  ditticulty,  so  as  to  give  it  the  appearance
of  being  intact.  Perhaps  I  could  liave  avoided  disturbing  the  paper  liad  it
adhered  better.

^  Probably  a  previously-written  communication.  A  convenient  oppor-
tunity for  placing  the  slate  containing  it  on  the  table  may  have  occurred  while
the  florin  was  being  picked  up  and  discussed.  For  a  similar  phenomenon
compare  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  XI  [b]  p.  469.

Thus  possibly  setting  free  Mr.  Eglinton's  right  hand,  so  that  he  could
manipulate  the  closed  slate.  It  would,  however,  be  quite  in  accordance  with
the  experience  of  other  sitters  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Percival  had  named  his
number  earlier  than  is  stated,  in  which  case  it  may  have  been  written  under
the  table  at  tlie  time  of  the  removal  of  the  florin.  Compare  Mr.  Davey's
article,  Appendix,  Note  8  to  Sitting  I,  p.  487.  And  for  a  similar  trans-
position of  an  important  act,  Notes  1  and  3  to  Sitting  XV,  p.  494.

26  Compare  Mr.  Davey's  article,  Sitting  XIII  [c]  p.  472.


348  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.


to  get  at  its  inner  surfaces  without  disturbing  the  fastening  in  a  way  that
must  at  once  have  been  obvious.  Yet  from  that  folding-slate  a  marked  florin
was  unquestionably  removed,  and  the  gummed  paper,  carefully  inspected  by
three  witnesses,  was  found  to  be  intact.

Moreover,  within  this  slate,  so  secured,  a  dictated  number,  5420,  was
written  ;  and  this  fact  was  not  verified  until  the  slate  was  opened  in  Mr.
Percival's  own  house. We  have  then  these  clear  facts  in  evidence  : —

1.  That  a  slate  containing  a  marked  florin  and  a  fragment  of  slate-pencil

was  so  securely  fastened  by  Mr.  Percival  before  leaving  home  that
it  was  f)hysically  impossible  for  any  one  by  ordinary  means  to  get  at
its  inner  surfaces.^''

2.  That  Mr.  Percival  himself  carried  that  slate  to  Mr.  Eglinton's  house,

placed  it  on  the  table,  and  kept  it  under  continuous  observation
throughout  the  whole  time  that  he  was  there.

3.  That  during  the  seance  his  marked  florin  was  violently  thrown  from

under  the  table,  was  i>icked  up  from  the  floor,  examined  on  the  spot,
and  identified  :  the  fastenings  of  the  slate  remaining  quite  intact.

4.  That  a  particular  number,  consisting  of  four  figures,  was,  in  obedience

to  Mr.  Percival's  request,  written  within  this  folding-slate,  as  verified
by  himself  on  his  return  home.

5.  That  the  fastenings  of  the  slate  were  intact  when  it  was  taken  by  Mr.

Percival  from  Mr.  Eglinton's  house,  and  that  these  fastenings  were
not  broken  in  his  presence.

There  has  been  much  demand  of  late  for  "continuous  observation"  to
be  exercised  by  observers  of  these  psychical  i^henomena  ;  and  there  has  been
also  much  talk  of  the  powers  of  conjurers  to  simulate  these  phenomena.  We
suggest  that  the  narrative  of  Mr.  Percival  supplies  material  eminently
deserving  of  the  careful  attention  of  those  who  think  that  professed
mediumship  is  a  variety  of  conjuring.  Will  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  ofler  a  suflicient  inducement  to  any  conjurer  who  will  undertake  to
duplicate  some  half-dozen  of  the  phenomena  that  have  been  recorded  in  our
column?  who  will  further  demonstrate  that  he  has  no  abnormal  psychica
gifts  to  aid  him  ;  and,  lastly,  who  will  clearly  show  in  every  case  the
methods  employed  by  him  ?

There  are  many  interesting  and  suggestive  j^oints  in  Mr.  Percival's  narra-
tive. It  would  seem  that  the  agent,  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  abundant


2^  I  have  explained  above  (note  -■')  my  reasons  for  doubting  this.

28  This  statement,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  Mr.  Percival's  continuous  observa-
tion of  the  hinged  slate,  would,  if  strictly  true,  seem  inconsistent  with  his
account  of  this  slate  being  held  under  the  table.  Moreover  it  would  scarcely  be
consistent  with  careful  observation  of  the  earlier  events  of  the  stance,  some  of
which  must  in  that  case  apparently  have  been  described  by  Mr.  Percival  from
the  observation  of  the  other  sitters — e.g.  the  examining  of  the  fragments  of
pencil.

-9  What  is,  in  eff'ect,  an  answer  by  Mr.  Hodgson  to  this  and  similar  sugges-
tions, will  be  found  in  the  next  article,  pp.  389,  390.  I  ought,  however,  to  remind
the  reader  that  the  Society,  as  a  body,  is  not  committed  to  the  views  expressed
by  Mr.  Hodgson  and  myself,  or  by  any  other  contributor  to  its  Proceedings  or
J ournal.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Sinritualistic  "  Seances.  349

"power,"  had  difficulty  in  perceiving,  with  any  exactitude,  objects  that
were  not  enclosed  in  Mr.  Eglinton's  slate.  This  is  in  accordance  with  our
own  experience,  and  is  reasonable  and  intelligible.  The  contents  of  the
closed  box,  not  known  (be  it  observed)  to  any  person  present,  were  wrongly
given,  but  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  that  the  real  object  had  been  imper-
fectly seen.^°  The  date  of  the  florin  was  written  in  a  way  that  suggests  the
same  conclusion.  The  number  of  the  bank-note  could  not  be  seen  at  all
until  it  was  transferred  to  the  closed  slate  always  used  by  the  medium,  when
its  number  was  at  once  correctly  given,  though  the  note  was  folded  with  the
number  inside,  and  was  placed  in  the  slate  without  being  unfolded,  and  was
marked  for  purpose  of  identification.

VVe  confess  we  see  no  room  for  the  exercise  of  the  conjurer's  art  under
circumstances  such  as  those  detailed  by  Mr.  Percival.  It  will  be  for  those
who  rely  on  that  explanation  to  show  that  these  phenomena  can  be  re^^ro-
duced  by  conjurers  who  demonstrably  have  not  abnormal  psychic  powers  to
aid  them.

These  are  favourable  specimens  of  the  results  which  have  given
Egiinton  his  exceptional  position  in  the  Spiritualistic  world,  and  on
the  strength  of  which  he  was  selected  to  read  a  paper  as  an
accredited  exponent  of  Spiritualistic  doctrine,  at  a  recent  meeting  of
the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance.  And  probably  most  persons
who  approach  the  phenomena  of  modern  Spiritualism  in  a  serious
spirit  would  think  that  such  evidence  as  has  been  quoted  consti-
tutes a  certain  primd  facie  case  for  the  conclusion  which
Spiritualists  draw  from  it.  It  seems  scarcely  less  rash  to  deny
than  to  affirm,  as  a  mere  matter  of  general  impression  and  "  common-
sense,"  that  the  conditions  of  observation  were  adequate.  The  question
is  one  that  needs  most  careful  examination  by  special  methods.  The
results  of  such  an  examination  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Davey's  paper  a
little  further  on ;  but  it  may  assist  the  reader  if  he  comes  to  that  paper
with  a  realisation  of  some  preliminary  facts.

In  the  first  place,  then,  even  those  who  regard  the  conditions  of
observation  which  obtained  in  the  above  cases  as  adequate,  must
admit  that  they  are  broadly  the  same  in  kind  as  those  which  obtain  in
conjuring  performances,  where  the  opportunity  for  the  trick  is
found  in  a  temporary  distraction  or  skilful  misdirection  of  the
observer's  attention.  There  may  be  a  difi"erence  of  degree  ;  that
is  to  say,  the  points  to  be  observed  may  have  been  easier  to
observe,  inasmuch  as  they  were  obvious  beforehand ;  and  the
attention  may  have  been  proportionately  harder  to  distract.  But
however  much  allowance  be  made  for  this,  it  is  impossible  to  regard  the
conditions  in  question  as  equally  perfect  with  others  involving  no


If  the  word  "  heard"  were  substituted  for  the  word  "  seen"  in  this
sentence,  the  true  explanation  would  perhaps  be  suggested.


350  Accounts  of  some  So-called "  Spiritualistic "  Seances.

strain  of  attention,  and  no  opportunity  for  distraction.  Such  conditions
"would  be  supplied,  for  instance,  by  a  hermetically-closed  vessel,  whose
weight  and  volume  had  been  accurately  determined  before  the  seance
began.  If  writing  appeared  on  a  slip  of  paper  enclosed  in  such  a  vessel,
it  would  probably  be  admitted,  by  even  the  most  convinced  Spiritualist,
that  security  had  been  made  doubly  secure.  Humanum  est  errare  ;  and
the  fact  that  nothing  at  all  had  depended  on  the  exercise  of  the  experi-
menter's human  and  therefore  fallible  faculties  during  the  critical  time
when  the  mysterious  occurrence  took  place  must,  so  far,  be  an  improve-
ment of  the  evidence.  It  is  at  least  noteworthy,  then,  that  no  such  feat
as  this  has  ever  been  recorded.  So  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  good
evidence  that  results  claimed  for  medium  ship  have  ever  been
unmistakeably  produced  in  a  space  shut  off,  wholly  without  aper-
tures, from  the  external  world  ;  or  in  any  circumstances  whatever
where  there  would  liave  been  a  difficulty  in  producing  them  by  obvious
natural  means,  apart  from  the  question  whether  or  not  the  medium  was
under  adequate  observation  at  the  time.  Tliis  is  a  general  fact,  which
clearly  makes  the  determination  of  the  question  as  to  adequacy  of  obser-
vation all-important.

In  the  second  place,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  presumption,  in
Eglinton's  case,  is  in  favour  of  fraud,  since  he  has  been  undoubtedly
detected  in  the  production  of  fraudulent  phenomena.  Some  evidence  of
this  has  been  given  in  the  Journal  of  the  Society.  In  one  case,  which
occurred  in  1876,  the  muslin  and  beard  worn  by  the  so-called
materialised  spirit,  and  from  which  pieces  were  cut,  were  subsequently
found  in  Eglinton's  portmanteau.  The  details  are  given  in  the
Journal  for  June  and  November,  1886,  as  gathered  from  the  Medium
and  Daybreak  for  November  1  and  15,  1878,  and  the  Sjnritualist  for
February  14  and  March  21,  1879.  In  another  case,  in  1882,
Eglinton  co-operated  with  the  notorious  Madame  Blavatsky  in  pro-
ducing the  appearance  of  the  occult  transmission  of  a  letter  from  the
ship  Vega  in  mid  ocean  to  Calcutta.  The  details  will  be  found  in
Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosoj>hy,  and  in  the  Report  on  Phenomena
connected  toith  Tlieosopliy  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,
pp.  254-256  ;  and  an  abstract  of  the  case  appeared  in  tlie  Journal
for  June,  1886,  pp.  283-287.  In  1880,  Mr.  Eglinton  was  again
detected — as  the  evidence  to  be  found  in  Psychischs  Stiidien  for  June
and  July,  1880,  seems  clearly  to  show — in  himself  producing  tlie
movements  of  objects,  &c.,  at  a  dark  seance  at  Munich ;  though
Spiritualists  allege  certain  special  reasons,  which  will  be  found  in  the
numbers  of  Psyclnsche  Studien  referred  to,  for  doubting  the  validity
of  this  "  exposure."

The  above  facts  seem  conclusive  as  to  Eglinton's  character  during  a
considerable  period  of  his  career  ;  but  they  have  been  objected  to  as


Accounts  of  some  So-called  ''Spiritualistic"  Seances.  351

irrelevant  to  the  more  recent  phenomena  of  slate-writing,  on  the  ground
tliat  in  respect  of  these  no  accounts  of  detected  fraud  have  hitherto
been  published.  It  might  be  replied  that  people  who  detect  fraud  of
the  kind  are  not,  as  a  rule,  disposed  instantly  to  rush  into  print.  They
gain  nothing  by  doing  so  ;  while  they  are  likely  to  encounter  a  certain
amount  of  ridicule  for  having  even  given  the  alleged  phenomena  a  trial,
to  say  nothing  of  the  risk  of  an  action  for  libel.  It  is  within  our
knowledge  that  more  than  one  case  has  occurred  of  the  same  kind  as
that  of  which  the  following  account  has  been  placed  in  our  hands  by
a  lady  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  appear.

''February  bth,  1887.
"  I  will  give,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  an  account  of  our  seance
with  Mr.  Eglinton.  My  friend,  Mr.  Godfrey  Webb,  made  an
appointment  with  him,  giving  his  name,  but  not  my  name.  When  we
arrived  at  Mr.  Eglinton's  house  he  made  us  sit  round  a  table,  which
had  no  cover,  and  was  close  to  a  looking-glass,  which  reflected  every-
thing that  was  done.  He  placed  me  between  liimself  and  Mr.  Webb,
and  we  held  each  other's  hands  wliile  he  placed  a  slate  under  the  table
with  his  left  hand.  After  a  little  while  we  heard  a  scratching  from  the
slate,  and  when  he  produced  it  there  were  one  or  two  words  written  on
it.  This  process  was  repeated  several  times,  but  we  all  thought  it  very
unsatisfactory.  Mr.  Eglinton  remarked  the  spirit  was  not  very
willing,  and  that  we  had  better  talk,  as  it  would  help  it  to  manifest
itself.  I  must  add  that  while  he  was  holding  the  slate  under  the
table,  and  we  heard  the  scratching,  he  seemed  suffering  from  a  kind  of
convulsion.  His  face  was  livid  and  contorted,  and  the  perspiration
was  running  down  it ;  his  breathing  was  also  hard.  He  asked  me  to
think  of  somebody  from  whom  I  should  wish  to  get  a  message,  which  I
did ;  and  then  a  few  words  were  again  scratched  on  the  slate,  but  with
no  particular  meaning — which  I  told  him.  He  then  said,  '  This  is  not
at  all  satisfactory  ;  let  us  change  places.'  I  moved  to  where  Mr.  Webb
was,  and  he  took  my  place.  At  the  same  time  Mr.  Eglinton  said,  '  We
must  also  change  the  slates';  and  while  he  was  doing  so  I  distinctly  saw
him  run  his  hand  over  a  slate  ;  his  hand  was  clenched.  I  asked  him  to
let  me  see  the  writing  on  the  slate,  to  which  he  said,  '  Oh,  there  is
nothing.'  I  said,  '  Yes,  there  is  ;  please  let  me  see  it.'  He  showed  it
to  me,  and  I  saw  the  beginning  of  a  sentence.  He  then  said,  '  I  was
only  scribbling.'  But  as  he  had  no  pencil  in  his  hand,  it  must  have
been  with  a  small  pencil  lead,  which  he  placed  in  his  closed
hand  (not  his  fingers),  and  which  I  could  not  see,  as  it  was  too  small.
He  used  the  same  kind  of  small  lead  for  the  slates  (which  he  placed  be-
tween the  two  slates  before  he  locked  them  up).  After  this  incident  he
became  angry,  and  said,  'It  is  of  no  use  to  try,  as  you  are  incredulous
and  suspicious  the  spirit  "will  not  come,'  and  we  then  left  him."


I


352  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.

Mr.  Godfrey's  Webb's  general  view  is  that  mediums  are  ready  to
"  supplement  any  genuine  power  they  may  possess  by  quite  ordinary
tricks " ;  and  while  unable  to  attribute  to  trickery  some  of  the
phenomena  which  he  has  witnessed  in  Eglinton's  presence,  he  says,  "  I

do  not  wish  to  deny  that  detected  Mr.  Eglinton,  on  the  occasion

you  refer  to,  wiiting  words  on  a  slate ;  and  1  rejoiced  at  her  astuteness
at  the  time."

It  is  impossible  in  this  case  to  doubt  the  conviction  of  both  sitters
at  the  time  that  they  had  detected  trickery,  though  owing  to  the
long  interval  (nearly  3  years)  between  the  sitting  and  the  recording
of  it,  stress  ought  not  to  be  laid  on  the  details.  This  objection  does
not  apply  to  the  careful  record  of  Professor  Carvill  Lewis,  to  which
it  is  now  high  time  that  the  reader  should  be  introduced.


ACCOUNT  FROM  PROFESSOR  H.  CARVILL  LEWIS.

Numerous  and  marvellous  statements  have  recently  appeared  in
various  publications  concerning  the  manifestations  produced  at  the
seances  of  the  famous  medium  Mr.  W.  Eglinton;  and  in  the  Spiritualist
paper.  Light,  for  October  16th,  1886,  an  immense  mass  of  testimony,
by  about  one  hundred  different  obsei'vers,  many  of  them  of  high
intellectual  ability  and  social  position,  is  given  to  show  that  the  slate-
writing  and  accompanying  phenomena  occurring  at  his  seances  are  not
due  to  any  deliberate  action  on  the  part  of  the  medium,  but  to  some
unknown  force,  or,  as  one  writer  puts  it,  "  conclusively  establish  the
existence  of  some  objective,  intelligent  force,  capable  of  acting  exter-
nally to  the  medium,  and  in  contravention  of  the  recognised  laws  of
matter."* These various  statements,! suggesting  a  new  field  of

*  Light,  No.  302,  p.  488.

t  Professors  N.  Wagner,  A.  Boutlerof,  and  A.  Dobroslavin,  of  the
University  of  St.  Petersburg,  concluded  an  account  of  a  stance  with  Mr.
Eglinton  as  follows  : — "After  witnessing  the  experiments  above  described  we
have  come  to  tlie  conclusion  :  (1)  That  the  mediuniistic  autographic-writing  is
genuine,  and  cannot  be  referred  to  the  domain  of  prestidigitation,  or  explained
by  the  help  onlv  of  generally-recognised  mechanical,  physical,  or  chemical
laws.  (2)  That  it  can  manifest  an  intelligence  of  its  own  not  depending  to  a
certain  degree  upon  that  of  those  who  assist  at  the  seances  ;  and  (3)  This
phenomenon,  by  its  objectivity,  especially  afl'ords  facility  for  observation,  and
deserves  full  attention  and  investigation  from  competent  persons  and
institutions."  (Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  331.)  The  President  of  the
London  Spiritualist  Alliance  says: — "It  is  to  me  wholly  inconceival)le  that
anyone  can  entertain  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  those  phenomena."


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  353


scientific  interest,  induced  me  to  visit  Mr.  Eglinton  for  purposes  of
investigation.  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  the  following  account
as  accurate  as  possible,  having  written  it  immediately  afterwards
from  full  notes  taken  during  the  stances.

First  Seance.

Having  called  upon  Mr.  Eglinton  the  previous  evening  and  made
an  appointment,  I  visited  him  at  noon  on  November  16th,  and  was
ushered  into  his  study.  A  common  wooden  table,  which  had  apparently
seen  rough  usage  and  was  covered  by  a  tablecloth,  stood  in  the  middle
of  the  room,  which  was  well  lighted.  Mr.  Eglinton  expressed  disap-
pointment that  I  had  not  brought  a  second  person  with  me,  as  he
had  requested.  He  said  that  it  might  be  difficult  to  get  results  with
only  one.  I  had,  however,  purposely  come  alone,  prepared  to  observe
carefully  and  without  prejudice.

Mr.  Eglinton  asked  me  to  write  one  question  on  the  slate  which
I  had  brought  with  me,  and  another  question  on  one  of  his  own  slates.
He  left  the  room  while  I  wrote  the  questions,  at  my  request,  and
afforded  me  an  opportunity  to  satisfy  myself  that  the  slate  and  table
were  ordinary  ones,  and  in  no  way  prepared,  as  I  was  convinced  after
careful  examination.  He  entered  when  I  called,  and  seated  himself
near  one  corner  of  the  table,  placing  me  on  the  other  side  of  the  same
corner,  the  cloth  having  been  removed  and  a  short  leaf  put  up.  He
took  his  own  slate,  on  the  under  side  of  which  was  my  question,  and
putting  upon  it  a  minute  fragment  of  slate-pencil,  placed  it  tmder  the
table,  holding  it  against  the  under  side  of  the  table-leaf  with  the  four
fingers  of  his  right  hand,  his  thumb  alone  being  visible.  With  his  left
hand  he  stretched  across  the  corner  and  held  my  two  hands.  The  con-
ditions were  such  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  my  seeing  the  slate  or
his  four  fingers.  I  could  see  his  wrist,  however,  above,  and  his  knees
and  feet  below  the  table,  and  could  detect,  I  think,  any  motion  of  his
fingers  by  the  movement  of  the  tendons  of  the  wrist.

We  sat  in  this  position  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  I  paying  strict
attention.  Nothing  whatever  was  done.  As  a  result  of  the  constrained
position  in  which  I  was  placed,  leaning  on  my  right  arm,  my  hand  and
arm  then  began  to  tremble  slightly.  Mr.  Eglinton,  perceiving  this,
asked  if  I  did  not  feel  a  peculiar  current  in  my  arm.  I  assented,  but
in  order  to  determine  whether  this  was  due  to  any  "  magnetic "  or
other  force  proceeding  either  to  or  from  the  medium,  or  was  simply  a
natural  tremor,  I  let  go  of  his  hand  and  leaned  in  the  same  position,
when  I  again  felt  the  same  tremor,  and  on  finding  that  it  ceased  so  soon
as  I  changed  my  position,  even  when  I  held  Mr.  Eglinton's  hand,  I  was
convinced  that  it  was  merely  nervous  and  subjective.

We  went  on  with  the  seance,  Mr.  Eglinton  encouraging  conversa-

2  A


354  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.

tion.  He  said  that  as  the  manifestations  were  entirely  beyond  his  own
control,  it  was  best  to  think  of  other  matters.  He  favoured  me  with
an  extraordinary  explanation  of  hypnotism,  and  recounted  some  of  his
exploits  in  Spiritualism.*  He  repeatedly  asserted  that  his  own  mind
and  will  had  no  effect  whatever  upon  matter,  and  that  the  phenomena
came  from  without.  He  was  quite  correct  in  denying  that  "  Thought-
transference  "  had  any  part  in  the  results,  as  one  of  our  experiments
afterwards  proved.  So  long  as  I  kept  my  eye  on  his  hand  and  the  edge
of  the  slate  nothing  occurred.  He  attempted  several  times  now,
unsuccessfully,  to  divert  my  attention.

It  now  occurred  to  me  that  unless  I  purposely  diverted  my  attention
from  him,  the  stance  might  be  a  failure.  I  therefore  looked  away  from
him  toward  the  window  on  my  left,  hoping  that  now  the  spirits  would
appear.  They  immediately  did  so,  as  I  both  felt  through  Mr.  Eglinton's
hand  held  in  mine,  and  also  partially  saw.  The  slate,  or  one  end  of  it,
seemed  to  be  lowered  beneath  the  table,  and  I  saw  the  medium  look
down  intently  toward  his  knees  and  in  the  direction  of  the  slate.  I
now  quickly  turned  back  my  head,  when  the  slate  was  brought  up
against  the  table  with  a  sharp  rap.  Mr.  Eglinton  seemed  confused,
and,  complaining  of  the  weight  of  the  slate  and  the  heat  of  the  room,
put  the  slate  on  top  of  the  table  and  diverted  the  conversation.

I  suggested  that  we  try  the  other  slate — a  small,  light,  American
slate  of  my  own.  He  put  this  under  the  table  in  the  same  way,  and
again  I  paid  strict  attention.  There  was  no  result.  Having  asked  me
as  to  the  nature  of  my  questions,  stating  that  the  unknown  powers
whose  coming  we  awaited  were  not  omniscient,  I  answered  that  I  had
prepared  three  questions.  The  first  (on  his  large  slate)  was  one  which
a  spirit  would  know,  but  he  could  not  possibly  know  ;  the  second  (on
my  small  slate)  was  one  which  a  spirit  would  not  know,  but  he  might
know ;  and  the  third  (in  a  sealed  envelope)  was  one  which  both  he  and
the  spirits  knew  perfectly  well.  The  questions  were  as  follows  : — The
first,  "Where  is  my  wife?  "  Mr.  Eglinton  could  not  know,  as  I  came
under  an  assumed  name,  but  a  spirit  who  knew  me,  or  could  read  my
thoughts,  or  could  see  as  far  as  Wales  would  have  known.  The  second,
"  Define  Idocrase,"  a  spirit  would  not  know  unless  he  be  a  mineralogist,
but  Mr.  Eglinton  could  readily  know  by  consulting  a  dictionary.  The
third,  "  Multiply  two  by  two,"  would  be  evident  to  both  spirit  and
medium  provided  they  could  get  at  the  question  in  the  sealed  envelope.

We  went  on  with  the  seance,  and  again  I  found  that  I  must  divert
my  attention  if  results  were  to  be  had. I  suggested  trying  the  large

*  One  of  these  was  the  conversion  of  Mr.  Kellar,  the  conjurer,  to
Spiritualism.  So  far  is  this  from  being  the  case,  that  Mr.  Kellar,  whom  I  know
personally,  is  nightly  oft'ering  in  America  £20  to  anyone  who  will  produce
Spiritualistic  phenomena  that  he  cannot  imitate  by  conjuring.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  355


slate  once  more,  and  now,  before  he  could  get  tired  holding  it,  I
deliberately  looked  away.  This  time,  as  I  turned  back  quickly,  he
dropped  the  slate  upon  the  floor,  question  side  uppermost  and  nearest
to  him,  as  if  the  slate  had  been  revolved.  He  excused  himself  as
before,  complaining  of  the  weight  of  the  slate.  Again  we  tried  the
small  slate,  and  again  no  result  so  long  as  I  watched  closely.

I  now  tried  a  different  method.  Agreeing  with  him  that  it  was  best
to  divert  my  attention,  I  proposed  reading  a  book  while  he  held  the
slate.*  He  brought  me  a  book,  which  I  placed  on  the  table  to  my  right,
and,  turning  my  head  partly  away  from  him,  began  reading.  Under
these  conditions  the  "spirits"  immediately  and  without  a  moment's  hesi-
tation set  to  work.  Mr.  Eglinton  began  to  breathe  loudly,  and  to
move  uneasily,  and  in  such  a  way  that  I  judged  he  was  altering  the
position  of  the  slate.  About  this  time  Mr.  Eglinton  left  the  room  for
several  minutes.

Continuing  the  seance  under  the  conditions  just  described,  I  soon
heard,  notwithstanding  his  heavy  breathing,  sighing,  and  jerking,  that
writing  was  being  done  with  a  pencil  on  the  slate.  Unnoticed  by  him,
I  now  slightly  turned  my  head,  so  that  I  could  see  his  wrist.  I
distinctly  saw  the  niovemeiit  of  the  central  tendon  in  his  wrist,  corre-
sponding to  that  made  by  his  middle  finger  in  the  act  of  writing.  Each
movement  of  the  tendon  was  simultaneously  accompanied  by  the  sound
of  a  scratch  on  the  slate.

He  now  pulled  out  the  slate  and  showed  me  on  its  upper  side  the
answer  to  my  question,  "  Define  Idocrase."  There  in  hasty,  yet
distinct  characters  was  written,  "  It  consists  of  Silica,  Alhumina,  and
Lime."  The  true  answer  should  have  been  "It  consists  of  ^iSSxcd.,  Alumina,
and  Lime."  As  will  be  stated  more  fully  at  the  close  of  this  account,
the  answer  is  precisely  such  as  might  be  obtained  by  a  hasty  glance  at
the  definition  in  a  dictionary.  Mr.  Eglinton  was  careful  to  draw
my  attention  to  the  fact  that  one  corner  of  the  slate-pencil  was  worn
down.

We  now  tried  the  large  slate,  on  which  was  the  question,  "  Where
is  my  wife?"  under  the  same  conditions,  i.e.,  that  of  non-attention.  I
again  read  a  book,  turning  my  head  away  from  him,  though  not  so  far
but  that  I  could  see  by  a  side  glance.  Again  the  spirits  promptly
returned,  and  again  I  was  conscious  by  indicative  motions  that  the  slate
was  being  manipulated.  He  then  said  aloud  as  if  to  a  spirit,  "  Shall  we
have  an  answer  VI  looked  away  so  as  to  give  the  spirits  a  chance,  and
immediately  heard  a  vigorous  and  loud  scribbling.  It  sounded  like  a  series

of  sharp  zigzags, — thus,  "/^'^.''^'^^^^•--'^^-'^/''^^-'^^^  •" I  was  sur-

*  It  was  the  small  slate  with  the  question  which  only  a  mineralogical
spirit  could  answer.


356  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.

prised  to  find  only  the  short  word  "  No,"  written  in  a  round  hand,
when  the  slate,  immediately  afterwards,  was  shown  me,  since  the  scrib-
bling I  heard  certainly  lasted  much  longer  than  it  would  have  taken  to
write  this  woi'd.  Again  he  asked  me  to  examine  the  fragment  of
chalk  ;  but  I  found  it  more  worn  down  than  necessary  for  the  short
answer.  In  order  to  test  this,  I  took  another  sharp  corner  of  the
same  pencil  and  wrote  the  word  "  No "  ;  but  found  that  in  order  to
wear  down  the  corner  to  an  equal  degree  it  was  necessary  to  write  the
word  twice,  or  to  make  a  zigzag  figure  of  the  same  length  as  the  sound
had  indicated.  It  occurred  to  me  that  the  wearing  down  of  the
pencil  fragment  was  a  non-essential  portion  of  the  manifestation,  and
that  the  real  writing  was  done  with  another  pencil.

It  appearing  that  neither  Mr.  Eglinton  nor  the  spirits  were
able  to  answer  a  question  which  the  former  did  not  know,  I  proposed
trying  the  question  in  the  closed  envelope,  the  answer  to  which  should
be  easy  to  both  powers.  Mr.  Eglinton  declined  to  attempt  this,  giving
as  his  reason  that  as  I  knew  the  question,  it  might  be  set  down  as
"  thought-reading  "  if  an  answer  was  obtained.  He  proposed  that  I
should  write  in  his  own  folding- slate, — a  handsome  afiair  in  hard  wood
frame,  and  with  a  brass  lock,  being  the  same,  as  he  informed  me,  which
Mr.  Gladstone  had  used.  I  had  no  great  fancy  for  working  with
specially  prepared  apparatus,  and  suggested  dispensing  with  all  slates,
and  asking  the  unknown  powers  to  write  upon  a  piece  of  paper  in  my
pocket.  This  was  declined  on  the  ground  that  just  as  a  chemical  re-
action can  be  obtained  only  by  special  methods  and  apparatus,  so  a
manifestation  of  these  unknown  powers  requires  special  conditions
which  are  learned  by  experience.

I  then  followed  his  suggestion  and  agreed  to  simjily  write  a  number
on  a  piece  of  paper  and  put  it  inside  of  his  folding-slate.  In  order  to
preclude  the  possibility  of  "  thought-transference,"  I  wrote  a  large
series  of  numbers  on  different  slips  of  paper,  and  then  throwing  them
into  a  hat  chose  one  of  tliem,  and,  without  looking  at  what  was  written,
folded  it  in  four,  and,  after  pressing  it  tightly,  put  it  in  his  slate
together  with  a  fragment  of  red  chalk.  The  slate  was  closed  with  a
spring  lock,  and  after  the  key  was  handed  to  me,  the  slate  was  held
under  the  table  as  before.  In  order  to  obtain  the  necessary  condition
of  non-attention,  I  busied  myself  in  writing  notes  for  this  account,  my
left  hand  being  held  in  his  left.  I  listened  intently,  however,  and  also
felt  for  any  indications.  Although  I  could  see  nothing,  I  was  again  con-
scious by  varied  and  delicate  motions  and  sounds  that  some  power  was
opening  the  slate,  lifting  up  the  paper,  unfolding  it,  refolding  it,  and
replacing  it.  I  distinctly  heard  the  rustling  sound  of  the  paper  being
unfolded  and  refolded.  Meanwhile,  Mr.  Eglinton  breathed  heavily,  and
jerked  to  and  from  the  table  as  before. As  the  slate  had  a  spring


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  357


lock  and  shut  with  a  snap,  I  wondered  if  this  could  be  accomplished
without  my  hearing  the  sharp  sound.  Mr.  Eglinton  now  gave  a  sudden
and  strong  sneeze,  and  at  the  same  moment  the  slate  was  clapped
against  the  under  side  of  the  table.  Mr.  Eglinton  had  showed  no  signs
of  a  cold  until  this  moment.

He  now  said  to  me,  "  I  feel  the  influence  strongly,"  and  placing  his
folding-slate  on  the  top  of  the  table  continued,  "  Will  you  ask  if  we
can  get  an  answer  1 "  As  the  answer  had,  as  I  was  convinced,  been
already  written,  this  request  seemed  to  me  superfluous,  but  neverthe-
less, in  as  grave  a  voice  as  the  occasion  seemed  to  require,  I  did  so.
Mr.  Eglinton  having  put  an  ordinary  slate  with  a  bit  of  chalk  upon  it
beneath  the  table,  and  I  having  looked  away,  in  a  few  moments  he
produced  it  again  with  the  words,  "  We  will  try,"  written  in  the  same
handwriting  I  had  already  seen.  Hoth  slates  notv  being  on  top  of  the
table,  but  his  right  hand  being  beneath  it,  Mr.  Eglinton  said  "  Listen,"
and  I  heard  the  sound  of  writing  beneath  the  table,  as  of  the  scratching
of  a  slate-pencil  against  its  under  side.  This  procedure  may  have  been
intended  to  make  me  think  that  the  spirits  were  now  writing  in  the
closed  slate  lying  on  top  of  the  table.  It  would  have  been  more  con-
vincing, however,  had  the  hand  of  the  medium  been  in  sight.  I  hardly
thought,  moreover,  that  the  soft  red  chalk  in  the  slate  would  make
the  shrill  sound  that  I  heard.  Having  been  asked  to  open  the  slate
with  the  key  I  had  kept,  I  found  the  figure  8,  the  same  as  that  on  the
folded  paper,  written  on  the  slate  in  red  chalk.  It  was  thus  proved
that  "  thought-transference  "  was  not  the  agent  which  produced  the
writing  ■  and  as  yet  the  evidence  was  not  convincing  as  to  the  agency
of  any  "  objective,  intelligent  force  capable  of  acting  externally  to  the
medium,  and  in  contravention  of  the  recognised  laws  of  matter."  This
ended  the  seance,  and,  having  paid  my  guinea,  I  departed.

After  reaching  home,  I  found  that  I  had  inadvertently  left  with
Mr.  Eglinton  my  small  American  slate,  with  the  question  "  Define
Idocrase,"  and  its  answer.  I  therefore  sent  him  a  note  asking  for  the
slate,  and  also  for  a  statement  that  the  phenomena  I  had  witnessed
were  not  executed  by  himself,  but  were  due  to  extra-physical  forces
beyond  his  control.  The  next  day  the  slate  was  returned,  and  with  it
a  note  giving  me  the  statement  requested.  This  gave  me  an  opportunity
of  comparing  the  handwriting  on  the  slate  with  that  of  the  note.
Facsimiles  of  the  two  are  here  appended  (Figs.  1  and  2).


358  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic "  Seances.

Fig.  1.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  359


Fig.  2.


7-


-J


360  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.

Although  at  first  sight  no  great  similarity  is  apparent,  a  careful
examination  shows  many  striking  points  of  coincidence.*  A  difference
of  style  was  to  be  expected  ;  but  when  we  find  the  same  round
free  hand,  the  same  characteristic  backhand  curl  at  the  end  of  the
"words,  and  the  same  peculiarities  in  the  shaping  of  the  letters,  both
capitals  and  small,  it  is  difiicult  to  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the
writing  on  the  slate  and  in  the  letter  were  both  made  by  the  same  hand.
The  irregular  spacing  on  the  slate  indicates  that  it  was  done  without
being  looked  at.  It  is  a  suggestive  fact  that  the  first  line  of  the
answer  was  at  a  distance  from  the  lower  edge  of  the  slate  equal  to
that  to  which  the  middle  finger  could  reach  without  shifting  the  slate,
while  the  thumb  remained  visible  above  the  table.  The  other  answers
produced  during  the  stance  were  similarly  spaced.  Careful  examina-
tion of  the  slate  also  showed  finger  marks  extendina;  around  it  in  a
manner  to  indicate  that  it  had  been  horizontally  revolved.

Finally,  as  to  the  answer  itself,  "  It  consists  of  Silica  Albumina  and
Lime,"  we  find  on  reference  to  Webster's  Dictionary,  in  the  definition
of  the  word  idocrase  the  words,  "  It  consists  of  Silica,  Alumina  and
Lime."  Mr.  Eglinton  had  ample  opportunity  to  consult  the  dictionary,
since  he  left  the  room  twice  during  the  seance,  one  of  the  times  being
just  previous  to  the  production  of  the  above  answer.  Either  he  had
taken  too  hasty  a  glance  at  the  dictionary,  or  his  memory  had  failed
him  in  substituting  albumina  for  alumina.  We  can  hardly  suppose  a
"  spirit "  to  have  made  this  error,  or  to  have  imitated  the  dictionary
definition  so  closely.

Although  I  am  aware  of  some  seven  methods  of  mediumistic  slate-
writing,  the  so-called  "  psychography,"  only  two  of  them,  so  far  as  I
could  judge,  were  employed  at  this  stance ;  and  the  main  condition
necessary  for  success  was  that  of  non-attention  on  the  part  of  the
visitor.

Second  Seance.

A  second  visit  was  made  to  Mr.  Eglinton  on  the  morning  of
December  1 6th,  and,  observing  now  the  condition  necessary  for  success,
I  had  a  very  satisfactory  stance.  I  took  with  me  two  ordinary  school-
slates,  purchased  on  the  way.  We  sat  down  at  the  same  table,  the  cloth
having  been  removed,  and  proceeded  at  once  to  business.

We  began  with  the  experiment  of  the  book  and  the  slate,  which  I
had  seen  several  times  described. t Mr.  Eglinton  having  left  the  room,

*  Note  the  initial  "  S"  and  final  "s,"  the  capital  "  L,"  the  final  "a's"
and  "e's,"  the  "o/,  "  the  "i's,"  the  "c's,"  &c.

t  See  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  295,  301,  303,  307,  308,
317,  318,  325,  330,  and  331.  It  is  also  described  in  Light,  October  16th,  1886,  by
Mr.  Wedgwood  (p.  463),  Mr.  Farmer  and  Mr.  Keulemans  (p.  465),  Miss
Symons  (p.  467),  "  G.  J.  R."  (p.  470),  Mr.  Wilson  (p.  473),  Professors  Wagner,


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  361

I  took  down  a  book  (The  Occult  World)  at  random  from  his  bookcase,
and,  without  opening  it,  wrote  on  one  of  my  slates  as  follows  : —
"  Page  27,  line  13.  Word  2  red,  3  white,  4  blue."  I  intended  by  this
that  the  second  word  of  line  13,  page  27,  should  be  written  on  the  slate
in  red  chalk,  the  third  word  of  the  same  line  in  white  chalk,  and  the
fourth  word  in  blue.  Having  turned  the  slate  upside  down,  I  called  to
Mr.  Eglinton  to  come  in.  He  entered,  and  having  put  three  bits  of
chalk,  red,  white,  and  blue,  with  the  book,  on  the  slate,  he  put  the
whole  under  the  table,  and,  taking  my  left  hand  in  his  left,  began  the
seance.  My  right  hand  being  free  I  wrote  the  following  notes  as  the
seance  proceeded  : —

Mr.  Eglinton  places  the  book  on  the  slate  with  the  opeyi  side
toward  him.*  His  thumb  is  not  visible,  his  whole  hand  being  under  the
table.  I  purposely  do  not  look  directly  at  him,  but  busy  myself  with
these  notes.  The  moment  I  begin  writing,  the  manifestations  begin.
He  breathes  heavily,  sighs,  moves  and  rattles  the  slate,  puts  his  right
arm  far  below  the  table,  withdraws  his  body  slightly  backward,  and
then  looks  downward  intently,  in  the  direction  of  the  slate.  I  suddenly
look  up,  and  immediately  he  also  looks  up  with  a  very  distressed
expression  of  countenance.  I  look  down  at  my  notes,  and  again  he
looks  down  intently  and  for  some  time,  apparently  at  what  he  is
holding  beneath  the  table.  From  the  position  of  his  arm,  I  judge  that
by  this  time  he  has  lowered  the  slate  to  perhaps  eight  inches  below  the
table,  even  his  elbow  being  sunk  out  of  sight.  He  now  jerks  the  slate
several  times,  breathing  loudly.  I  look  up  again,  when  he  says  that  he
is  tired,  and  brings  up  the  book  and  slate,  laying  them  on  the  table.
The  pencils  having  been  partly  jerked  ofl'  the  slate,  fresh  bits  are  put
alongside  the  book,  and  the  whole  is  again  placed  beneath  the  table.

I  continue  my  note-taking,  and  immediately  loud  breathing  and
shuddering  begin  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  who  also  assumes  a
most  woe -begone  expression.  He  pushes  his  arm  with  the  slate  far
under  the  table,  and  then  bringing  it  back  towards  him  again  looks
down  (as  if  to  read  the  book).  He  asks  me  if  I  am  not  conscious  of  a
force  going  out  of  me,  and  a  feeling  as  if  his  hand  was  a  battery.
I  am  conscious  of  nothing  of  the  kind.  Now  he  brings  the
slate  up  against  the  under-side  of  the  table,  and  puts  liis  thumb
above,  being  the  same  position  assumed  at  the  first  seance,  when
writing  was  being  produced  on  the  slate. I  now  hear  the  sound  of

Boutlerof,  and  Dobroslavin  of  St.  Petersburg  (p.  474),  "M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  (p.  475),
Mr.  I' Anson  (p.  500),  all  of  whom  regard  it  as  conclusive  evidence  of  the
genuineness  of  "psj-cliography."

*  This  appears  to  have  been  also  the  position  of  the  book  in  the
experiments  described  in  Light.  (I.e.)


362  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.

writing,  as  if  on  the  slate,  and  a  few  moments  later  he  exhibits  it  to  me
with  the  answer  written  as  follows  : — "  of"  in  red,  "  occult  "  in  white,
and  "  forces  "  in  blue.  The  book  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  slate,  the
pencils  at  one  end,  and  the  writing  at  the  other.  On  turning  to  the
page  and  line  of  the  book  indicated,  I  find  the  words  "  of  occult  forces"
in  the  correct  position,  but  on  close  examination  find  marks  made  by  a
Jinger-nail  in  the  margin  precisely  opposite  these  words.  It  is  clear
that  some  power  made  these  scratches  with  a  finger-nail,  apparently  a
thumb-nail,  after  opening  the  book  and  finding  the  place.  I  am  astounded
at  the  simplicity  of  a  performance,  which,  as  described,  has  been  so
strongly  tinged  with  the  marvellous.

The  second  experiment  has  also  been  described.*  A  piece  of  slate-
pencil  was  put  on  the  slate  and  covered  by  a  glass  tumbler,  when  the
whole  was  placed  under  the  table,  so  that  the  top  of  the  tumbler  rested
against  the  under-side  of  the  table.  Knowing  how  easy  it  would  be  to
shove  the  slate  along  under  the  tumbler  when  so  supported,  I  asked  to
be  allowed  to  hold  one  end  of  the  slate  under  the  table  myself,  which
Mr.  Eglinton  permitted  me  to  do.  I  then  asked  to  have  the  word
"  Nottingham  "  written,  but  on  Mr.  Eglinton  saying  that  this  word  was
too  long,  I  chose  "  dog."  So  soon  as  I  looked  away  from  Mr.  Eglinton
the  operations  began.  Holding  the  slate,  I  distinctly  felt  him  tilt  it,
shove  it  slightly  along  from  under  the  tumbler,  and  then,  in-
clining his  end  downwards,  write  on  its  upper  side.  He  also  looked
down  at  the  slate  just  before  he  wrote.  The  writing  was  hastily
done,and  the  slate  then  restored  to  a  horizontal  position,and  shoved  back
so  that  the  glass  should  cover  the  word.  The  performance  was  now
finished,  and  the  slate  brought  up  for  me  to  examine.  The  word  dog  "
was  indistinctly  and  badly  written  in  an  irregular  scrawl  beneath  the
glass.  The  writing  was  not  nearly  so  distinct  as  that  done  in  Mr.
Eglinton's  usual  method,  when  the  slate  is  held  against  the  table.  (This
was,  I  suppose,  due  either  to  the  unsteady  position  of  the  slate  as  com-
pared with  its  position  when  firmly  pressed  against  the  under-side  of
the  table,  or  else  to  want  of  practice  on  the  part  of  the  performer.)

The  third  experiment  consisted  of  a  question  and  answer  written  in
the  ordinary  way.  I  wrote  "  Please  give  a  quotation  from  Kant,"
thinking  that  Mr.  Eglinton  would  probably  have  to  consult  a  reference
book  in  order  to  answer  it.  He  held  the  slate  against  the  under-side  of
the  table,  and  I  held  his  left  hand  with  my  left  and  with  my  right  hand
again  busied  myself  with  these  notes.  He  began  at  once  to  write,
and  in  a  few  moments  brought  up  the  slate,  on  which  the  following
answer  appeared : "  There  is  no  spirit  here  who  knows  Kant  well

*  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  June,  1886,  p.  324,  and
Light,  No.  302,  p.  482.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  363

enough."  This  was  written  in  the  characteristic  handwriting,  in  the
usual  position  on  the  upper  side  of  the  slate  at  the  end  furthest
from  him.  It  began  at  about  the  distance  from  the  end  of  the  slate  to
which  his  fingers  could  reach — some  four  inches  from  the  edge.  A
facsimile  of  this  answer  is  appended  (Fig.  3),  by  which  it  will  appear
that  the  handwriting  has  many  characteristics  identical  with  those  of
former  slate-writing,  and  not  essentially  disguised  from  the  hand-
writing in  his  letter  to  nie.*

Fig.  3.


*  Compare  here  on  slate  wiili  2vcre  in  letter  ;  the/-e  on  slate  with  the  in
letter  ;  who  on  slate  with  ivhich  and  ivkat  in  letter,  &c.


364  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  S2yiritualistic"  Seances.


Mr.  Eglinton  now  intimated  that  the  seance  was  at  an  end.  I
begged  that  it  might  be  continued,  as  I  was  leaving  London  for  the
Continent  the  next  day.  He  said  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  get
further  manifestations  since  the  "power  was  exhausted,"  and  explained
that  this  exhaustion  of  power  was  quite  independent  of  his  volition,  and
occurred  at  various  times,  sometimes  at  the  vei'y  beginning  of  a
seance.  The  thought  occurred  to  me  that,  notwithstanding  this
"  exhaustion  of  power,"  the  spirits  would  perhaps  continue  to  work  if
some  further  inducement  was  offered  to  them.  I  therefore  proposed  to
Mr.  Eglinton  a  double  fee  if  the  seance  was  prolonged.  The  medium
yielded  without  hesitation,  and  the  spirits  continued  to  give  excellent
manifestations.  It  was  interesting  to  learn  that  these  "  unknown
powers"  are  not  removed  from  the  influence  of  pecuniary  inducements.

We  proceeded  to  the  fourth  experiment.  It  was  one  which  would
be  difficult  to  perform  without  detection,  and,  moreover,  since  Mr.
Eglinton  was  ignorant  of  the  answer  to  the  question,  a  direct  one
could  not  be  given  (unless  by  the  agency  of  "  spirits "  or  other
"  intelligent  forces  ").  As  I  had  come  to  Mr.  Eglinton  at  first  under
an  assumed  name,  and  at  the  present  S(3ance  under  my  proper  one,  he
had  no  means  of  knowing  the  correct  a.nswer  to  the  question,  which
was  "  What  is  my  father's  name  ? "  I  wrote  this  question  somewhat
faintly  with  a  lead  pencil  on  a  sheet  of  note-paper,  the  left  side  of
which  was  gummed  to  the  left  edge  of  a  slate  and  then  folded  down  so
that  the  question  should  be  on  the  under  side  next  to  the  slate.  In
order  to  see  the  question,  Mr.  Eglinton  would  have  to  lower  the
slate sufficiently  to  turn  over  the  sheet  of note-paper, thus  : —

•n an  operation  which  I  could  not

fail  to  observe.  It  was  arranged
that  the  answer  should  be  written
in  pencil  on  tlie  other  side  of  the
same  sheet  of  note-paper,  and  a
minute  bit  of  lead  pencil,  freshly
sharpened,  was  laid  on  the  slate
for  the  use  of  the  "spirits."  All
being  thus  arranged,  and  Mr.
Eglinton  having  sharpened  another
pe7icil,  he  put  tlie  slate  under  the
table  in  the  usual  position,  held  my  left  hand  in  his  left,  and  I  began
again  writing  these  notes,  my  head  being  partly  turned  away,  yet  not
so  far  but  that  I  could  see  his  motions.  I  also  moved  somewhat  out
from  the  table  so  that  I  could  watch  his  legs.

The  conditions  being,  as  he  supposes,  favourable,  he  proceeds  to
lower  the  slate  so  that  his  whole  hand  and  arm  up  to  the  elbow  dis-


Accownts  of  some  So-ccdled  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  365


appear  from  view.  I  now  distinctly  hear  the  rustling  of  the  paper  as
it  is  being  folded  back.  This  being  done,  Mr.  Eglinton  looks  down
intently  towards  his  knees,  apparently  endeavouring  to  read  my
question,  which  I  had  purposely  written  in  a  small,  light  hand.  Here
he  drops  the  slate  upon  the  floor.  Having  restored  it  to  its  original
position,  the  same  operation  is  repeated,  and  again  he  stoops  to  look  at
the  question,  this  time  hriyiging  his  head  xoithin  a  few  inches  of  the
table.  His  left  leg  now  slowly  begins  to  rise  and  soon  entirely
disappears  from  my  view,  as  though  to  support  the  slate  upon  his  knee.
His  arm  and  whole  hand  are  at  the  same  time  under  the  table.  I  now
hear  writing  going  on  at  some  length.  On  my  turning  to  look  at  him
the  sound  of  writing  ceases  and  the  leg  is  let  down.  Again  I  look
away,  when  writing  recommences,  his  thumb  now  being  visible  and
resting  on  the  table.  I  watch  his  wrist  and  distinctly  see  the  tendons
move  as  he  is  in  the  act  of  writing.

Mr.  Eglinton  seemed,  therefore,  to  have  written  the  last  part  of
the  message  while  the  slate  was  pressed  against  the  under  side  of  the
table,  in  the  usual  way  ;  but  before  I  interrupted  him  he  had
apparently  been  writing  upon  the  slate  while  it  lay  upon  his  knee.  As
will  be  shown  presently,  the  character  of  the  writing  leads  to  the  same
conclusion.  The  following  answer  now  appeared,  written  as  requested
on  the  paper  : — "  We  regret  that  your  father's  name  is  unknown  to  us.
If  you  had  a  deceased  relative  present  who  knew  the  name  of  your
father  it  is  probable  we  could. We  are  not  omniscient."

As  in  every  other  experiment  in  both  stances  the  answer  indicated
no  superior  intelligence  to  that  of  JEglinton.  It  was  interesting  to  find
two  distinct  styles  of  handwriting  ujjon  the  paper,  a  facsimile  of
which  is  here  given  [see  Fig.  4,  p.  366],  corresponding  to  the  two
positions  in  which  he  wrote.

From  the  beginning  of  the  answer  to  the  word  "  could,"  the
writing  is  angular,  the  words  and  lines  well  spaced,  the  i's  properly
dotted,  and  there  is  every  indication  that  it  was  written  with  the  aid
of  the  eye.  The  words  "  probable  we,"  written  at  right  angles  to  the
preceding  portion  of  the  answer  after  the  slate  had  been  turned,  fill  a
vacant  space  at  the  end  of  the  first  two  lines  in  a  manner  that  clearly
proves  the  use  of  eyesight.  But  the  last  part  of  the  answer,  on  the
other  end  of  the  slate,  is  in  quite  a  difierent  hand  and  was  written
with  a  fresh  pencil  point.  It  is  irregular,  the  lines  are  no  longer
straight,  the  i's  are  not  dotted,  m's  are  twice  used  instead  of  n's,  and
it  was  evidently  written  without  the  aid  of  the  eye.  A  freshly  pointed
pencil,  or  at  least  a  new  corner,  must  have  been  used  to  make  the  thin
lines  here,  which  diff"er  markedly  from  the  dull  heavy  lines  of  the  preced-
ing portion.  This  last  portion  shows  more  clearly  the  characteristic
handwriting  produced  in  former  experiments,  and  it  is  suggested  by


366  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.


Fig.  4.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  367


the  writing  alone  that  the  last  five  words  were  written  while  the  slate
was  held  against  the  under  side  of  the  table,  and  the  preceding  portion
while  it  rested  on  his  knee  in  sight.  The  handwriting  of  the  whole
answer  is  clearly  identical  with  that  produced  in  the  last  experiment,
as  a  direct  comparison  of  Figs.  3  and  4  renders  evident.
■  .  As  Mr.  Eglinton  on  this  occasion  did  not  ask  me  to  examine  the
pencil  point,  placed  on  the  slate  for  the  use  of  the  spirits,  but  on  the
other  hand  was  about  to  throw  it  away,  I  thought  this  an  advantageous
oppoi'tunity  to  examine  it.  I  therefore  quickly  seized  and  pocketed  it.
It  proved  to  be  perfectly  sharp  and  unworn,  and  identical  in  size  and
condition  with  what  it  was  when  placed  on  the  slate  before  the  experi-
ment. It  had  certainly  not  been  used  for  the  production  of  tlie
answer.  The  other  short  pencil  which  I  had  seen  Mr.  Eglinton  sharpen
just  before  the  experiment  was  not  shown  to  me,  but  it  is  not  difficult
to  imagine  its  purpose.  He  assured  me,  however,  that  the  writing
was  produced  by  some  external  agency.

Mr.  Eglinton  now  suggested  telling  me  the  number  of  matches  in  a
matchbox  that  he  held  in  his  hand.  Having  seen  a  description  of  this
operation,  I  declined  participating  in  it.  I  also  declined  having  him
tell  me  the  number  of  a  bank-note  that  I  was  to  put  in  his  famous
folding-slate,  divining  his  method.  T  asked,  however,  for  one  more
trial  with  his  folding-slate,  on  condition  that  he  left  the  room  for  a  few
minutes,  to  which  he  assented.

While  he  was  out  of  the  room,  I  wrote  a  question  upon  a  piece  of
paper  and  put  it  in  the  closed  slate,  which  I  not  only  locked,  putting
the  key  in  my  pocket,  but  fastened  together  by  glueing  a  postage-
stamp  across  the  end,  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  open  it  without
considerable  force,  and  probably  the  use  of  two  hands.  Having  called
in  Mr.  Eglinton  and  got  the  slate  under  the  table  without  his  noticing
the  stamp,  which  was  on  the  edge  of  the  slate  farthest  from  him,  I  went
on  with  my  writing,  leaving  him  and  the  spirits  to  open  the  slate  if
they  could.  I  heard  a  slight  tinkling  sound  as  if  he  were  using  a  dupli-
cate key.  After  several  minutes  (in  which  Mr.  Eglinton  had  probably
been  vainly  endeavouring  to  open  the  slate),  he  brought  it  up,  still  with
the  stamp  upon  it,  and  laid  it  upon  the  table.  Then  putting  a  common
slate  below  in  the  usual  way,  his  whole  hand  being  beneath  the  table,
he  asked  the  spirits,  "Can  we  get  an  answer  V  After  putting  the
slate  for  a  moment  on  top  of  the  table,  and  then  again  placing  it  below,
the  sound  of  writing  was  heard  and  immediately  afterwards  an  answer
appeared  upon  the  simple  slate  in  his  hand,  in  the  usual  position,  reading
"  No. We  have  done  all  that  we  can  for  you."*

*  Had  Mr.  Eglinton  been  aware  that  the  slate  had  been  fastened  with  a
postage  stamp,  he  might  have  removed  it— to  remove  adhesive  paper  from  a


368  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.


The  question  tliat  I  had  placed  in  the  folding-slate  remained
unanswered  and  untouched,  and  I  was  forced  to  conclude  that  a  sealed
slate  as  well  as  a  sealed  envelope,  was  proof  against  the  skill  of  both
Mr.  Eglinton  and  the  "  spirits." Thus  ended  the  second  seance.

Altogether  nine  distinct  experiments  were  performed  or  attempted.
In  reviewing  these,  it  is  possible  to  summarize  the  principal  facts
observed  as  follows  : —

1.  Writing  was  never  obtained  on  any  of  the  slates  unless  they  had

been  held  for  some  time  under  the  table.

2.  In  every  case  where  answers  were  obtained,  Mr.  Eglinton  looked

down  at  the  slate  containing  the  question  long  enough  to  read  it.

3.  Direct  answers  were  given  only  in  cases  where  Mr.  Eglinton,  after

seeing  the  question,  either  knew  the  answer  already  or  obtained  it
by  consulting  a  dictionary.  In  the  last  case  he  left  the  room  for
several  minutes  before  an  answer  was  given.

4.  Whenever  the  question  was  unseen  by  Mr.  Eglinton  it  was  unseen

by  the  "  spirits,"  and  when  the  answer  was  unknown  to  him  it  was
unknown  to  the  "  spirits,"  as  the  written  answers  in  each  case
proved.  In  no  case  was  any  intelligence  other  than  that  of  Mr.
Eglinton  indicated  in  the  answers.

5.  The  movement  of  the  tendons  in  Mr.  Eglinton's  wrist  when  the

sound  of  writing  was  heard,  the  rustling  of  the  paper  as  it  was
being  unfolded  and  refolded,  and  the  motion  of  the  slate  felt  as  it
was  tilted  beneath  a  tumbler,  are  phenomena  perceived  by  the
senses  to  be  in  accord  with  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature  as  applied
to  the  action  of  Mr.  Eglinton's  right  hand.

6.  The  fragments  of  chalk  or  pencil  placed  on  the  slate  do  not  appear

to  be  necessary  for  the  production  of  an  answer.  As  in  one  case
the  chalk  was  worn  down  too  much,  and  in  another  case  the  pencil
was  not  worn  down  at  all,  notwithstanding  a  long  answer,  it
appears  that  the  abrasion  on  them  often  exhibited  was  purposely
made  for  other  reasons.

7.  The  scratching  sound  often  heard  beneath  the  table  like  the  sound

of  writing,  was  certainly  made  by  Mr.  Eglinton,  as  the  corre-

polished  wooden  surface  being  perfectly  easy — and,  after  opening  the  slate,
replaced  the  stamp  as  before.  But  being  entirely  unaware  of  the  cause  of
the  failure  of  the  slate  to  fall  open  as  usual  by  its  own  weight,  he  was
unable  to  do  anything  with  it.  I  secretly  removed  the  stamp  before  returning
the  slate  to  Mr.  Eglinton,  who  perhaps  imagined  that  I  had  tampered  with  the
lock.  It  is  needless  to  remark  that  genuine  "  spirits  "  would  hardly  have  been
deterred  by  a  postage  stamj^,  nor  would  they  afterwards  have  given  a  totally
irrelevant  answer.  The  question  "  By  whose  hand  is  the  answer  to  this  question
written  ? "  can  hardly  be  answered  by  the  sentence,  ' '  No.  We  have  done  all
that  we  can  for  you. "


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  369


spending  motion  of  the  tendons  of  his  wrist  proved.  This
scratching  sound  usually  immediately  preceded  the  exhibition
of  the  answer,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
it  always  had  any  connection  with  the  actual  writing  upon
the  slate.  On  the  contrary,  in  one  case  the  scratching  lasted
too  long  for  the  short  answer,  and  in  another  case  the  scratching
was  done  under  the  table  when  no  slate  was  there,  the  slates  being
on  top  of  the  table  and  Mr.  Eglinton's  hand  alone  being  below.
Like  the  wearing  down  of  the  pencil,  the  sound  of  scratching
appears  to  have  been  in  many  cases  intended  only  for  elfect.

8.  The  answers  produced  on  each  of  the  slates  and  on  the  paper

have  similar  characteristic  points,  and  although  more  or  less
disguised  from  the  ordinary  handwriting  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  a
careful  comparison  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that  all  were  the
work  of  one  hand.

9.  The  position  of  the  writing  on  the  slates  corresponded  to  the

distance  to  which  Mr.  Eglinton's  fingers  could  reach  from  the  edge
of  the  table,  and  sometimes  suggested  that  the  slate  had  been
horizontally  revolved.

10.  During  almost  every  experiment  the  slate  was  either  dropped  on

the  floor  or  brought  up  at  least  once  to  the  top  of  the  table,
ostensibly  to  rest  the  medium,  but  at  the  same  time  aflbrding  him
opportunities  for  revolving  the  slate  or  otherwise  manipulating  it.

11.  In  a  case  which  required  it,  Mr.  Eglinton  appeared  to  support  the

slate  upon  his  knee,  and  put  both  hand  and  arm  beneath  the
table,  and  in  this  case  the  character  of  the  writing  diSers  from
that  produced  when  the  slate  is  in  the  usual  position  supported
against  the  table.

12.  In  the  experiment  with  the  book  and  slate,  the  facts  of  his  hand

being  completely  under  the  table,  his  sight  directed  towards  it,  and
the  marks  of  a  thumb-nail  being  afterwards  found  opposite  the
line  chosen,  afford  evidence  that  the  book  was  opened  while  under
the  table.

13.  No  results  were  obtained  when  the  question  was  enclosed  either  in

a  sealed  envelope  or  a  sealed  slate.

14.  Nothing  was  done  so  long  as  a  strict  watch  was  kept  upon  Mr.

Eglinton,  but  non-attention  was  in  each  case  immediately  followed
by  manifestations.  ^

_  1  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiek  {Proceednigs,  Part  X.,  p.  70)  has  come  to  a  very
similar  conclusion  after  seances  with  many  mediums,  and  has  shown  that  an
absence  of  evidence  of  continuous  observation  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses,  and
of  phenomena  dispensing  with  the  necessity  for  such  observation,  characterises
spirituaHstic  manifestations  in  general.

2  B


370  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.


15.  Pecuniary  inducements  were  found  to  be  capable  of  reviving  an
asserted  "exhaustion  of  power."
It  is  not  for  me  liere  to  discuss  what  Mr.  Eglinton's  motives  may  be
in  exhibiting  these  manifestations  and  in  assigning  them  to  the  opera-
tion of  forces  external  to  himself.  It  is  enough  to  have  proved  that
the  phenomena  witnessed  were  all  capable  of  being  produced  by  his
own  right  hand  while  hidden  beneath  the  table  ;  that  no  superior  intel-
ligence or  external  force  was  at  any  time  indicated  ;  and  that  the  one
condition  necessary  for  success  was  non-attention  on  the  part  of  the
^si^or.  jj  Carvill  Lewis.

The  following  is  Mr.  F.  G.  Netherclift's  Report  on  the  above
facsimiles  : —

10,  Bedford-row,  W.C.

8th  March,  1887.

I  have  very  minutely  compared  the  writings  contained  in  the  four
several  documents  submitted  to  me  for  an  opinion,  namely  :  A  facsimile
of  writing  on  a  slate,  commencing,  "  There  is  no  spirit  here,"  (fee,  which
I  have  marked  1. (Fig.  3.)

Another  facsimile  of  writing  on  a  slate,  commencing,  "  It  consists
of  Silica,"  (fee,  which  I  haved  marked  2. (Fig.  1.)

Some  other  facsimile  writing  not  written  on  a  slate,  commencing,
"  "We  regret  that  your  father's  name,"  (fee,  which  I  have  marked  3.
(Kg.  4.)

Also  the  handwriting  in  facsimile  of  a  gentleman  signing  himself
W.  Eglinton,  and  which  I  have  marked  A  ;  the  said  writing  commenc-
ing, "  I  return  you  the  slate,"  (fee. (Fig.  2.)

I  entertain  a  strong  opinion  that  the  whole  of  the  writings  above
described  are  by  one  and  the  same  hand ;  those  marked  1,  2,  and  3
being  the  disguised  hand  of  the  writer  of  A.

I  am  induced  to  this  belief  by  tlie  following  peculiar  resemblances,
which,  notwithstanding  the  clever  attempt  to  feign  another  distinct
hand,  the  writer  has  betrayed.

Supposing  the  letter  A  to  be  the  hal)itual  style  of  Mr.  Eglinton's
writing,  then  it  appears  to  me  that  he  has  taught  himself  an  eccentric
mode  of  forming  his  letters,  more  especially  the  capitals  D,  P,  W,  T,
and  the  small  "  y,"  a  departure  from  which,  combined  with  writing  in
a  more  sloping  running  hand  fashion,  would  render  his  writing  at  all
times  difficult,  except  to  an  expert,  to  recognise.

The  following  agreements,  in  my  judgment,  are  of  sufficient
importance  to  identify  the  writer  of  A  as  the  writer  also  of  1,  2,
and  3.

1.  Compare  the  printed  style  of  the  letter  S  as  in  "  Silica,"  2nd  line
of  slate-writing  marked  2,  with  the  same  in  "  selves,"  14th  line  A.


Accounts  of  sovie  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  371


2.  Obsei've  that  three  several  formations  of  the  letter  "  r "  are
employed  ;  a  round  one  at  the  top  in  commencing  a  word,  thus,  "
Refer  to  the  same  in  "  regret  "  and  "relative,"  1st  and  5th  lines  fac-
simile writing  marked  3,  and  compare  same  with  the  "  r  "  in  "return"  and
"  result,"  5th  and  9th  lines  A.  A  second  formation  is  a  square-headed
r  like  that  in  the  word  "  your,"  7th  line  facsimile  writing  marked  3,
a  counterpart  to  which  will  be  found  in  the  word  "  control,"  11th  line
A.  And  the  third  formation  presents  the  appearance  of  a  letter  "  i,"
thus,  ^  ."  Compare  the  same  in  the  woi'd  "  father,"  7th  line  facsimile
witing  marked  3,  with  the  "  r  "  in  "  yesterday,"  9th  line,  and  "  yours  "
"  very  truly,"  16th  line  A.

3.  The  letter  "  w  "  is  a  most  remarkable  and  important  agreement,
almost  sufficient  in  itself  to  identify  the  writer.  Compare  the  "  w  "
in  the  word  "  well,"  4th  line  slate-writing  marked  1.  Also  in  the  word
"we  "  head  of  facsimile  writing  marked  3,  with  the  "  w"  in  the  word
"  were,"  9th  line  A.  The  second  or  final  portion  of  the  letter  is  singu-
larly alike.

4.  Observe  that  the  letter  "a  "  is  occasionally  made  open  at  the  top
so  as  to  resemble  the  letter  "u."  See  the  word  "that,"  1st  line
facsimile  writing  3,  compared  with  the  word  "  what,"  11th  line  A.

5.  Notice  the  round  "  c"  in  the  word  "Silica,"  2nd  line  slate-writing
2,  with  same  in  "  convince,"  14th  line  A.

6.  Compare  the  capital  L  in  the  word  "Lime,"  4th  line  slate-writing

2,  with  same  in  the  name  "  Latouche,"  4th  line  A.

7.  Particularly  compare  the  word  "  to  "  in  3rd  line  facsimile  writing

3,  with  the  same  in  the  8th  line  A.  Notice  that  the  letter  "  o  "  is  only
a  half  letter,  simply  an  "  i."  Were  the  writing  of  the  facsimile  3  less
sloping  this  word  would  be  identical.

8.  Compare  the  letter  "  a "  in  the  word  "  deceased,"  4th  line
facsimile  writing  3,  with  the  same  in  the  word  "made,"  15th  line  A.
The  remarkable  point  is,  the  letter  resembles  an  "o."

9.  Compare  the  round  "1"  in  the  word  "  Silica,"  2nd  line  slate-
writing  2,  with  same  in  the  word  "  control,"  11th  line  A.

10.  Remark  the  final  "  e  "  in  the  word  "  name,"  2nd  line  facsimile
writing  3,  and  the  final  "  e  "  in  the  word  "  were,"  9th  line  A.

11.  Compare  the  commencing  letter  "h"  in  the  word  "had,"  4th
line  facsimile  writing  3,  with  the  same  in  the  word  "have,"  13th  line
A. It  is  a  straight  downstroke,  without  leading  upstroke  or  loop.

12.  Compare  the  letter  "p"  commencing  the  word  "probable,"
facsimile  writing  3,  with  same  in  the  word  "physical,"  10th  line  A..
Also  a  straight  downstroke  without  a  leading  upstroke.

13.  Compare  the  letters  "en"  in  the  word  "  enough,"  5th  Hne  slate

2  B  2


372  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.


writing  1,  with  the  same  in  the  word  "  entirely,"  10th  line  A.  Notice
that  the  "  n  "  is  less  bold  than  the  "  e."

14.  Compare  the  letter  "b  "  with  the  diminutive  downstroke  in  the
word  "albumen,"  3rd  line  slate-writing  2,  with  the  same  in  the  word
"above,"  15th  line  A.

If  the  characteristics  I  have  referred  to  are  carefully  examined,  I
feel  confident  that  the  same  conclusions  as  I  have  formed  will  be
arrived  at.  Frederick  George  Netherclift.

Mr.  Hodgson  gives  the  following  opinion  on  the  writings  : — ■

1,  Furnival's  Inn,  Holborn,  E.C.

March  9th,  1887.

I  was  unable  to  make  any  prolonged  examination  myself  of  the
facsimiles  of  the  writings  you  wished  to  be  submitted  to  Mr.  Netherclift.
There  was  of  course  no  doubt  that  all  tlie  writings  might  have  been  by
the  hand  of  Eglinton,  and  I  observed,  during  the  short  comparison
which  I  made,  several  peculiar  indications  that  they  actually  were
written  by  him, — indications  which  would  probably  escape  the  notice
of  the  ordinary  reader.  And  though  the  conclusion  tliat  Eglinton
wrote  them  all  would  not  be  obvious  at  first  sight,  I  think  few  would
hesitate  to  agree  with  Mr.  Netherclift  after  noting  the  points  of
resemblance  which  he  has  enumerated,  and  of  which  additional
examples  may  be  found.  There  are  other  minor  instances  of  resem-
blance which  Mr.  Nethei^clift  thought  needless  to  mention,  and  I
entirely  agree  with  his  opinion  that  all  four  writings  are  by  the  hand
of  EgKnton.  Concerning  Mr.  Netherclift's  remark  about  Eglinton's
habitual  style  of  writing,  it  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  I  have  in
my  possession  a  long  letter  written  by  Eglinton  in  1882,  and  that
it  seems  clear  that  he  has  intentionally  changed  some  of  the  characters
of  his  ordinary  handwriting  ;  and  further  significant  i-esemblances  might
be  pointed  out  between  his  undoubted  writing  of  1882,  and  the
"  psychographic  "  specimens  under  examination.

Richard  Hodgson.


"While  this  paper  is  passing  through  the  press.  Professor  Carvill
Lewis  sends  the  following  Postscript  to  his  account : —

Since  the  above  was  in  print,  two  articles  have  appeared  in
Germany  describing  stances  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  in  both  of  wliicli  the
inquirers  express  themselves  as  convinced  of  the  "  supersensual "
character  of  the  manifestations.

One  of  the  stances,  held  at  St.  Petersburg,  is  described  by  Herr
Julius  Gillis  in  an  article  entitled  "  Sechs  Experimente  mit  Eglinton"
(Sphinx,  III.,  16.,  p.  253,  April,  1887).  The"  six  experiments"  were
very  similar  to  those  performed  for  me  and  already  described  ;  consist-


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  373


ing  of  answers  to  questions  on  a  slate,  writing  on  a  slate  a  name
previously  written  upon  a  piece  of  paper  and  placed  in  the  folding-
slate,  telling  the  number  of  a  banknote  also  put  in  his  folding  slate,  ^
performing  the  experiment  of  the  book  and  the  slate,  &c.  In  all
of  these  the  slate  and  accessories  were  held  beneath  the  table,  and
since  none  of  the  answers  evinced  an  intelligence  beyond  that  of  Mr.
Eglinton,  the  proceedings  seem  to  have  been  practically  a  repetition
of  those  done  for  me,  the  same  methods  being  used,  and  the  same
conditions  being  required.

Herr  Gillis  has  fortunately  published  a  photographic  reproduction
of  one  of  the  answers  (see  Fig.  5)  which  is  valuable  as  evidence.  The
"spirit"  had  been  asked  to  perform  the  experiment  of  tying  a  knot  in
a  stretched  cord,  which  Slade  had  done  for  Professor  ZoUner,  and  after-
wards for  Herr  Gillis  and  others.  Whereupon  the  following  writing-
was  produced  on  the  slate.

The  reader  may  find  it  convenient  to  have  the  contents  in  print  : —

Main  lieber  Herr,

A-'or  Jahrhunderten  wussten  unsere  Vorfahren  diese  Phenomena
und  hatten  auch  die  Kraft,  dieselben  hervorzubringen.  Jedoch  durch  den
Fortscliritt  der  Welt  in  anderen  Dingen  Kiimmerte  sich  man  weniger  mehr
iiber  das  menschliche  Schicksal ;  jedoch  jetzt  sollte  man  es  mehr  denn  jeh.
Wir  hoffen  dass  durch  die  Thatsaehen,  welche  wir  Ihnen  vorfiihrten,  Sie
sich  mehr  and  mehr  mit  diesem  Gegenstand  befassen  werden.

Ihr  ergebener

Ernest.

The  experiments  which  you  demand  would  take  a  very  long  series  of
seances  to  accompUsh,  and  we  could  under  no  circumstances  promise  them.

It  will  be  observed  (1)  That  the  German  portion  of  the  answer  is
totally  irrelevant  to  the  question,  and  had  clearly  been  at  least  com-
posed before  the  seance.  (2)  That  the  German  itself  is  such  bad
German  as  an  Englishman  might  write.  "  Ernest,"  whoever  he  may
be,  is  clearly  not  an  adept  at  German,  else  he  would  not  have
written  "  wussten  "  for  kanyiten,  "  siclo  man  "  for  7na7i  sich,  "  iibe?' "
for  tim,  "jeh  "  for  Je,  "  durch  die  "  for  in  Veranlassung  der,  "  and  "  for
und.  (3)  That  the  two  entirely  different  styles  of  writing,  while
exhibiting  Mr.  Eglinton's  skill  at  disguising  and  varying  his  hand-
writing, still  bear  the  characteristic  marks  of  his  personality.  The
report  [see  p.  376]  from  Mr.  Netherclift,  the  well-known  expert,
to  whom  this  facsimile  was  submitted,  bears  testimony  to  the  truth
of  this  conclusion.

The  other  article,  also  founded  upon  a  seance  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  is
a  very  well-written  one  entitled,  "  Ein  Wort  iiber  den  Spiritismus  "

^  I  have  already  stated  that  Eglinton  proposed  to  perform  this  "ex-
periment "  with  me,  but  that  I  had  declined  it,  suspecting  his  process.


374  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.


Pig.  5.


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "Spiritualistic"  Seances.  375

(Vam  Fels  zum  Meer,  VI.,  Hept  8,  p.  264),  by  Baron  Dr.  Carl  du  Prel,
of  Munich,  one  of  the  ablest  writers  upon  the  subject,  himself  an  earnest
but  liberal-minded  Spiritualist.  He  describes  how,  after  two  unsuccess-
ful seances,  at  the  third  seance,  seven  persons  besides  the  medium  being
present,  all  of  whom  were  now  sympathetic  and  "well-wishing"  toward
him,  the  favourite  experiment  of  the  book  and  slate,  at  Mr.  Eglinton's
suggestion,  was  performed.  As  the  performance  was  slightly  varied
from  his  usual  manner,  it  may  be  well  here  briefly  to  describe  it.

All  being  seated  around  the  table,  with  joined  hands,  and  a  book
having  been  brought  in,  a  page,  line,  and  number  were  privately  written
on  a  slate  by  one  of  the  company,  the  book  placed  upon  the  slate,  and
all  put  beneath  the  table,  one  of  the  ladies  assisting  the  medium  in
supporting  the  slate  at  one  end  against  the  under  side  of  the  table.
After  being  held  beneath  the  table  for  a  long  time  it  was  finally  brought
up,  and  a  second  slate  was  laid  on  top  of  the  book,  when  all  was  tied
together  and  again  held  under  the  table.  Soon  the  sound  of  writing
was  heard,  and,  three  knocks  being  given,  the  slates  were  separated  and
this  writing  found :  "  Page  175,  line  18,  ivord  5,  Grahliugel"  wMch
last,  on  opening  the  book,  was  found  to  be  the  correct  word.

Baron  du  Prel  regards  this  production  as  due  to  the  action  of  an
intelligent,  invisible,  clairvoyant  spirit,  which,  as  indicated  by  its
degree  of  intelligence,  was  neither  an  angel  nor  a  demon,  but  the  spirit
of  a  deceased  human  being.  He  seems  to  consider  that  it  is  phenomena
of  this  nature  which  form  the  true  scientific  basis  of  Spiritualism.  I
quite  agree  with  Baron  du  Prel,  when,  near  the  close  of  his  article,  he
says,  "Unless  there  is  in  the  first  place  a  scientific  foundation  for
Spiritualism,  any  Spiritualistic  code  of  morals  '  floats  in  the  air.'  Before
we  can  pin  our  faith  upon  the  sayings  of  spirits,  we  must  know  beyond
a  doubt  who  these  spirits  are  who  declare  them."

If  the  scientific  basis  of  Spiritualism  consists  of  the  so-called
manifestations  produced  by  such  men  as  Mr.  Eglinton,  or  in  any  facts
of  a  similar  nature,  it  is  no  wonder  that  most  men  of  science  refuse  to
have  anything  to  do  vnth  it.  The  experiment  just  described  in  no
way  invalidates  the  presumption  that  Mr.  Eglinton  opened  the  book
and  wrote  upon  the  slate  while  they  were  under  the  table.  The  state-
ment of  the  lady  who  held  one  end  of  the  slate  that  it  had  not
been  moved,  while  said  with  perfect  sincerity,  is  without  value,  for  as
I  have  proved  by  repeated  experiments,  it  is  almost  impossible  to
detect  the  gradual  lowering  of  the  other  end  of  the  slate  for  a  few
inches  when  held  in  this  position.  Anyone  can  readily  verify  this  point
for  himself.

H.  Carvill  Lewis.

April,  1887.


376  Accounts  of  some  So-called  '^Spiritualistic"  Seances.


Mr.  Netherclift's  report  is  as  follows  : —

I  have  attentively  examined  the  reduced  lithographed  copy  of  slate-
writing,  and  have  compared  the  same  with  the  admitted  habitual  hand-
writings of  Mr.  Eglinton,  with  which  I  am  now  becoming  quite  familiar.

I  am  enabled  to  give  you  the  following  very  decided  opinion  as  to
the  genuineness  of  the  slate-writing  in  question.

I  do  not  understand  German  as  a  language,  but  I  a,m  acquainted
with  the  manner  of  writing  it,  having  had,  in  the  course  of  forty
years'  experience  as  an  expert,  to  give  evidence  as  to  the  formation
of  the  letters  so  as  to  identify  them  with  other  hands  submitted  to  me.

The  slate-writing  now  before  me  is  not  written  by  a  foreigner.  It
is  undoubtedly  an  English  handwriting,  not  German.

The  whole  of  the  writing,  German  and  English,  is  by  one  and  the
same  hand,  being  undoubtedly  the  disguised  hand  of  Mr.  Eglinton.

The  English  writing  is  disguised  in  a  more  upright  style  than  the
German,  so  as  to  give  a  greater  contrast,  and  to  convey  the  notion  of  a
distinct  hand  ;  but  the  characteristics  are  similar  throughout,  and  when
compared  with  Eglinton's  natural  hand  the  same  writer  is  at  once
identified.

Thus,  for  instance,  compare  the  letter  "w,"  which  in  Eglinton's
natural  handwriting  is  peculiar,  and  I  have  called  attention  to  it  in  a

former  report  [p.  371].  This  is  the  shape  of  it,  "  -^yf ."  The  first  por-
tion of  the  letter  is  made  full,  and  round  at  the  bottom,  but  the  final

portion  is  like  the  letter  "v,"  coming  to  a  point,  thus,  "  ."  Notice  the
word  "were"  in  the  9th  line  of  his  letter  of  November  17th  [p.  359],
and  see  how  the  "  w  "  agrees  with  that  in  "  welche,"  12th  line  German
Avriting.  Also  in  "wir"and  "werden."  In  the  English  writing  you
will  see  it  in  "  which,"  1st  line,  and  "  would,"  2nd  line.  In  fact,
Eglinton  cannot  guard  against  this  formation,  and  betrays  it  in  every
disguised  hand,  whatever  the  style.

Then,  again,  his  writing  is  recognised  by  the  final  "  d  "  with  looped

downstroke,  thus  "  <jj^."  See  "and"  in  the  German  writing,  14th
line,  and  "  would  "  and  "and  "  in  the  English  writing,  and  compare  them
with  the  "d  "  in  the  word  "  behind,"  6th  line,  letter  of  November  17th
[p.  359].  This  habit  also  runs  through  all  Eglinton's  disguised  hand-
writings.

The  word  "  to  "  may  always  be  recognised.  There  is  no  word  "to"
in  the  German  writing,  but  that  in  the  4th  line  of  the  English  writing
resembles  precisely  Eglinton's  formation.  A  peculiarity  shown
occasionally  in  the  formation  of  the  word  "to"  will  be  alluded  to  in  my
next  report,  when,  in  connection  with  the  disguised  writings  on  the


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  377


three  slates,  Eglinton's  eccentricities  in  writing  will  more  fully  be
entered  into,  i  I  will  now  mention  only  the  three  ways  in  which
Eglinton  forms  the  letter  "  r."  These  three  formations  will  be  found
throughout  the  disguised  writings.

Frederick  George  Netherclift.


In  the  following  case  the  evidence  for  trickery  is  of  a  different  kind.

ACCOUNT  FROM  MR.  B.  J.  PADSHAH,
Of  Sind  College,  Kurrachee,  India.

September  lith,  1886.

As  Mr.  Eglinton  is  very  aggressive  in  dealing  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
report  on  his  phenomena,  I  feel  bound  to  entrust  to  Mr.  Hodgson
for  publication  whenever  he  thinks  it  necessary,  the  following  facts,
which  can  be  easily  confirmed  by  referring  to  the  individuals  named.

Mr.  Khareghat,  of  the  Indian  Civil  Service  (address.  Treasury,
Ahmedabad,  India,)  and  myself  were  having  sittings  with  Mr.
Eglinton  in  the  last  quarter  of  1884,  when,  to  see  how  far  he  can
degrade  himself  in  trickery,  I  resorted  to  a  dodge  at  the  suggestion
of  a  third  friend.  The  point  of  our  previous  sittings  with  Mr.
Eglinton  was  this  :  that  while  the  reverse  of  incredulous  of  his
powers,  we  wished  for  some  confirmation  of  them  by  getting  some
Gujarati  writing ;  and  if  something  concerning  our  family  afiairs,  so
much  the  better,  as  we  felt  assured  that  Mr.  Eglinton  was  ignorant
of  our  language  probably,  and  certainly  of  our  domestic  affairs.
Mr.  Eglinton  had  favoured  us  with  three  or  four  phenomena  but  none
satisfied  our  conditions.  Once,  indeed,  we  had  two  lines  of  Sanskrit
written  in  Bengali  characters  in  the  course  of  a  somewhat  trashy
dissertation  in  English  ;  but  as  Mr.  Eglinton  had  been  for  six  months
in  Bengal,  and  as  he  had  contrived,  very  much  against  our  wish,
and  I  may  say,  to  my  disgust,  to  get  one  whole  hour's  preparation
previous  to  our  seance,  the  significance  of  the  writing  was
minimised.  At  the  instance  of  a  third  friend,  therefore,  and
improving,  as  I  thought,  and  as  it  turned  out,  upon  such  suggestions
as  were  made  to  me  by  that  friend  and  others,  I  wrote  out  in
Gujarati  a  common  song  of  Bombay  and  translated  it  into  English  ;
the  translation  and  the  superscription  of  the  envelope  being  written
by  Mr.  Mohini  M.  Cliatterji,  (77,  Elgin  Crescent,  Netting  Hill,)

1  This  refers  to  three  other  slates-full  of  writing — the  result  of  sittings
with  Eglinton — which  were  lent  to  us  by  a  friend.  In  framing  the  present
report  and  the  one  referred  to,  Mr.  Netherclift  had  before  him,  as  specimens
of  Eglinton's  admitted  handwriting,  two  short  notes  and  two  envelopes,  in
addition  to  Figure  2. — E.G.


378  AccovMts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.

and  forwarded  it  to  Mr.  Eglinton.  The  original  suggestion  was  that
I  should  write  only  a  line  or  two  of  Gujarati  and  send  that  to
Mr.  Eglinton  without  comment  or  translation.  One  advantage  of
that  is  obvious.  It  gives  the  trickster  less  trouble  to  imitate  or
trace,  and  therefore  less  chances  of  detection,  and  therefore  greater
temptation.  But  I  feared  lest  Mr.  Eglinton  should  think  what
reason  any  anonymous  correspondent  could  have  to  send  him
Gujarati  lines  without  telling  him  what  he  was  to  do  with  them,  and,
lest  he  should  suspect  a  trap  Avas  laid  for  him  (which,  I  am  afraid,
he  must  have  done  in  any  case,)  I  sent  it,  therefore,  as  a  "Spiritual
Song  by  an  Indian  (Guj)  Bard,"  and  translated  it  line  by  line,
literally,  to  allow  him  to  make  use  of  as  much  of  it  as  he  liked.
I,  therefore,  had  some  chance  of  giving  him  the  impression  that  an
anonymous  Gujarati,  finding  from  the  papers  that  he  (Mr.  Eglinton)
was  the  pillar  of  Western  Spiritualism,  had  sent  him  an  Eastern
effusion  for  his  use  on  a  subject  of  such  interest  to  him.  I  also  took
the  opportunity  of  absenting  myself  from  the  sitting  which  Mr.
Khareghat  alone  had  on  a  Satuixlay  (I  think  November  3rd,  1884),  by
going  to  Liverpool  with  Madame  Blavatsky,  to  see  her  off  to  India.
My  friend  Mr.  Khareghat  was  not  admitted  to  the  knowledge  of  what
we  had  done,  and  as  I  was  not  present  there  was  nothing  in  the  sitting  to
encourage  Mr.  Eglinton  to  believe  in  the  trap.  When  I  returned
what  was  my  surprise  when  I  saw  my  own  handwriting  on  the  slate,
and  every  line  of  Gujarati  as  I  had  written  it  on  the  paper.  I
confess  I  became  uneasy  lest  my  friend  should  believe  I  had  wished
him  to  be  deluded  for  my  own  purposes,  and  thus  terminate  the
lifelong  friendship  and  confidence  between  us.  But  that  honourable
soul  only  was  surprised  at  the  formed  hand  betrayed  in  the  writing,
and  as  he  was  not  familiar  with  my  Gujarati  writing  (we  in  India
correspond  mostly  in  English,)  he,  I  hope,  took  my  word  that  the
thing  was  not  genuine.  I  am  certain  that  the  writing  was  mine,  and
it  must  have  been  traced  on  the  slate.  The  slate,  I  believe,  is
preserved  by  Mr.  Khareghat  in  India,  and  it  would  be  possible,
perhaps,  to  ascertain  whether  the  writing  there  bears  marks  of
having  been  traced  or  not.  My  mother,  (198,  Main  Road,  Khetvadi,
Bombay,)  can  furnish  samples  of  my  Gujarati  writing  in  the  shape
of  recent  letters  to  her,  and  thus  my  statement  about  the  identity
of  the  writing  can  be  verified.  I  do  not  append  a  sample  of
my  writing  now  for  the  reason  that  it  will  not  be  quite  natural,
while  my  mother  can  furnish  letters  contemporaneous  with  the  seance.
Every  item  of  this  can  be  verified  by  reference  to  the  people
mentioned,  and  also  to  Miss  Arundale,  (77,  Elgin  Crescent,  Notting
Hill,)  who  was  in  knowledge  of  the  whole  thing.

Lastly,  I  may  say  that  I  sometimes  have  an  uneasy  consciousness


Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  Spiritualistic  "  Seances.  379


that  Mr.  Eglinton  may  have  known  all  along  that  we  wished  him
to  trick  Mr.  Khareghat,  and  may  have  misunderstood  my  object.
If  so  he  is  at  least  guilty  of  complicity  in  a  plot  whose  fruit
he  was  very  ready  to  make  use  of,  for  he  has  since  begged  Mr.
Khareghat  to  give  him  an  account  of  his  impressions  of  the  seances
with  a  view  to  make  a  public  use  of  it.  What  is  the  reliance,  then,
to  be  placed  on  the  Eglinton-Blavatsky  phenomenon  on  the  Ve(/a,
if  he  convicts  himself  of  such  complicity  1

A  theory  was  once  suggested  to  me  that  Mr.  Eglinton's  astral
body,  or  double,  or  any  other  concoction,  might  have  precipitated  the
identical  writing  on  the  slate  with  or  without  the  assistance  of  spooks.

It  was  supposed  a  confirmation  rather  than  the  reverse,  that  the
matter  and  the  hand  were  identical  with  the  copy  I  had  sent  to
Mr.  Eglinton.  Mr.  Eglinton,  along  with  his  double,  it  was  pointed
out,  must  have  intensely  studied  that  writing,  and  hence  floating  in
his  "astral  aura,"  the  double  could  not  help  reading  and  precipitating
it.  If  any  one  can  make  anything  of  and  accept  sucli  a  hypothesis,
it  is  his  affair.  My  point  is  that  we  had  got  no  test  previously  ;  that
when  a  deliberate  trap  had  been  laid,  Mr.  Eglinton  seemed  to  have
fallen  into  it ;  that  Gujarati  writing  came  only  once,  and  that  was
after  we  had  sent  him  a  specimen ;  and  in  substance,  and  style,
and  handwriting  it  was  to  all  appearance  identical  with  our
specimen.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  during  that  seance,  lasting  over
more  than  thirty  minutes,  Mr.  Khareghat  received  no  other  message,
except  perhaps  the  final  and  very  ccaivenient  "  good-bye."

B.  J.  Padshah.
JS^ovember  21th,  1886.

I  believe  Mr.  Hodgson  will  be  able  to  testify  to  these  facts  himself
from  some  independent  evidence  he  obtained  of  the  facts  from  the
principal  parties  within  six  months  of  the  event. — B.  J.  P.

Mr.  Hodgson  writes  : —

I  can  corroborate  the  essential  points  of  the  above  account,  having
heard  of  the  incident  originally  from  Madame  Blavatsky,  whose
narrative  to  me  was  confirmed  by  the  statements  afterwards  made  to
me  by  Miss  Arundale.  Madame  Blavatsky  imposed  secrecy  upon
myself,  but  she  apparently  thought  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  use
of  my  testimony  at  some  time  or  other ;  and  I  have  now  no  hesitation
in  confirming  Mr.  Padshah's  account.  Richard  Hodgson.


With  such  evidence  before  us,  supplementing  that  to  which  I
briefly  referred,  we  must  clearly  regard  Eglinton  as  a  person  who,
being  professionally  interested  in  making  it  appear  that  certain
phenomena  occur  in  his  presence  without  his  physical  agency,  has  no


380  Accounts  of  some  So-called  "  S-piritualistic  "  Stances.

scruples  as  to  the  means  by  which  that  appearance  may  be  produced.
But  to  say  that  the  medium  is  capable  of  trickery  is,  of  course,  quite
a  different  thing  from  saying  that  all  his  performances  are  tricks.
If  the  phenomena  which  occurred  in  his  presence  were  far  and  away
beyond  any  conjurer's  power  of  repetition,  it  might  be  possible  to
accept  them  as  genuine,  irrespective  of  his  character.  Here,  then,
we  come  to  the  final  and  critical  question — Are  any  of  the  phenomena,
recorded  beyond  the  ascertained  resources  of  conjuring  ?  Has  the
observation  and  attention  exercised  by  the  sitters  been  of  a  sort  which
conjui'ers  are  unable  to  distract  or  elude  ?  Practical  answers  to  such
questions  as  these  have  been  attempted,  but  have  generally  consisted
in  imitations,  given  at  public  entertainments,  of  Spiritualistic
phenomena — imitations  often  very  imperfect  and  which  at  the  best
leave  it  open  to  Spiritualists  to  say  that  things  occurring  in  a
prepared  place,  with  any  amount  of  opportunity  for  mechanical  con-
trivances,bear  no  real  resemblance  to  things  occurring  in  private  houses
which  the  medium  had  never  before  entered,  and  in  which  he  had  had
no  opportunities  for  preparation.  The  dispute  on  such  ground  as  this,
might  have  been  interminable.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  certain  conjurers
should  testify  that  they  have  not  been  able  to  detect  the  modus  operandi
of  mediums.  For  conjurers  would  scarcely  profess  to  an  infallible
intuition  of  one  another's  processes  and  inventions ;  and  in  some  ways,
perhaps,  technical  knowledge,  with  the  confidence  that  it  begets,  may
be  a  condition  not  wholly  conducive  to  sound  conclusions.  Expertness
in  conjuring  is  of  course  no  guarantee  whatever  of  scientific  habits  of
thought;  and  the  expert  who  comes  to  a  seance  with  his  preconceived
ideas,  and  who  finds  that  the  solution  of  the  puzzle  does  not  lie  in  the
direction  which  he  had  pictured  as  the  probable  one,  may  jump  more
quickly  than  another  to  the  certainty  that  no  natural  solution
is  possible.  Something  more,  then,  and  something  diflferent  is  needed.
"We  must  seek  to  ascertain  by  definite  experiment,  wliat  sort  of  reports
honest  and  intelligent  persons  will  make  of  conjuring  performances
carried  out  in  private,  without  any  advantage  of  conditions,  and
directed  to  obtaining  results  as  closely  as  possible  resembling  those  on
which  Spii'itualists  rely.  If  such  reports  of  a  conjurer's  slate-writing
prove  to  agree,  both  in  general  character  and  in  special  details,
with  the  reports  by  which  the  hypothesis  of  occult  powers  in  Eglinton's
case  has  been  supported,  that  hypothesis  falls  to  the  ground  ;  for  no
one  probably  will  maintain  the  occult  character  of  events  which
occur  in  a  detected  trickster's  presence,  when  unable  to  name  any
point  by  which  they  can  be  distinguished  from  tricks.  The  reader  will
find  this  subject  amply  argued  and  illustrated  in  the  following  paper,
which  I  may  perhaps  be  excused  for  describing  as  an  original  and
valuable  chapter  in  the  Natural  History  of  Error.  E.  G.


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  c&c.  381


VI.

THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  MAL-OBSERVATION  AND  LAPSE

OF  MEMORY
FROM  A  PRACTICAL  POINT  OF  VIEW.i


INTRODUCTION.
By  Richard  Hodgson.

Concerning  the  physical  phenomena  2  of  Spiritualism,  Mr.  A.  R.
"Wallace  has  said  : — •

They  have  all,  or  nearly  all,  been  before  the  world  for  20  years  ;  the
theories  and  explanations  of  reviewers  and  critics  do  not  touch  them,  or  in  any
way  satisfy  any  sane  man  who  has  repeatedly  witnessed  them  ;  they  have
been  tested  and  examined  by  sceptics  of  every  grade  of  incredulity,  men  in
every  way  qualified  to  detect  imposture  or  to  discover  natural  causes — trained
physicists,  medical  men,  lawyers,  and  men  of  business — but  in  every  case  the
investigators  have  either  retired  bafSed,  or  become  converts.  (Miracles  and
Modern  Spiritualism,  pp.  202,  203.)

It  has  indeed  been  considered  by  perhaps  the  majority  of
Spiritualists,  not  only  that  the  recorded  testimony  to  these  physical
phenomena  is  enough  to  establish  their  genuineness,  but  that  any
honest  investigator  might  establish  their  genuineness  to  his  own  satis-
faction by  personal  experience.  I  agreed  in  a  great  measure  with  this
opinion  when,  some  ten  years  ago,  I  attended  my  first  seance;  but
hitherto  my  personal  experiences,  though  not  by  any  means  extensive,
Iiave  been  almost  precisely  of  the  same  nature  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
{Proceedings,  Part  X.,  pp.  45,  46) ;  the  physical  phenomena  which  I
have  witnessed  were  either  clearly  ascertained  by  my  friends  and  myself
to  be  fraudulent,  or  they  were  inconclusive  and  accompanied  by  circum-
stances which  strongly  suggested  trickery.  I  regarded  this  result
merely  as  negative,  since  I  had  learnt  early  in  my  investigation  that
spurious  manifestations  were  undoubtedly  often  produced  by  professed
mediums  ;  and  three  years  ago  I  was  still  under  the  impression  that  a
large  mass  of  reliable  testimony  existed,  adequate  to  establish  the
genuineness  of  at  least  some  of  the  commoner  forms  of  physical  pheno-
mena, and  especially  of  "  psychography," — that  is  writing  without  any
operation  of  the  medium's  muscles. This  was  also  quite  recently

1  Parts  both  of  Mr.  Davey's  article  and  of  Mr.  Hodgson's  introduction  have
appeared  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.
^  See  Proceedings,  Part  X.,  p.  45.


382


Tlte  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


the  opinion  of  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  who  says  {Proceedings,  Part  X.,
p.  98)  :-

But  original  researcli  is  not  necessary  in  the  first  instance.  Many,  of
whom  I  am  one,  are  of  an  opinion  that  the  case  for  these  phenomena  generally,
and  for  "  autography in  particular,  is  already  complete.

I  have  long  since  concluded  that  I  estimated  this  testimony  much
too  highly.  When,  in  June,  1884,  after  reading  some  accounts  of
"  psychography,"  I  had  a  sitting  with  Egliiiton  for  "  slate-writing,"  I
fully  expected  to  witness  phenomena  that  should  be  as  indubitably
beyond  the  suggestion  of  trickery  as  those  appeared  to  be  of  which  I
had  read  and  heard  descriptions.  Writing  was  produced  at  my  first
"  slate-writing  "  sitting  with  Eglinton,  to  which  I  was  accompanied  by
Mr.  E,.  W.  Hogg  ;  but  Mr.  Hogg  and  myself  were  both  independently
of  opinion  that  Eglinton  produced  the  writing  himself  without  the
intervention  of  any  extraordinary  agency.  In  writing  our  detailed
report  of  the  sitting,  we  appreciated,  as  we  had  never  done  before,  the
difficulties  of  observation  and  of  recollection,  difficulties  which  we  theught
must  almost  effectually  prevent  a  full  and  accurate  description  from
being  given  of  events  analogous  to  those  which  we  attempted  to  record.
Our  report,  and  the  reports  of  various  other  sitters  with  Eglinton,  most
of  whom  were,  however,  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  Eglinton's
phenomena,  were  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  June,  1886,
with  some  explanations  and  criticisms  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  drew
attention  to  two  of  the  incidents  in  his  career  "  which  show  that  we
must  not  assume  any  disinclination  on  his  part  to  pass  off  conjuring
performances  as  occult  phenomena."  ^  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  had
previously  had  the  advantage  of  witnessing  some  of  Mr.  Davey's  per-
formances, and  comparing  her  reports  with  those  of  another  witness,
and  who  had  therefore  been  able  to  form  some  practical  estimate
of  the  frailty  of  human  perception  and  memory  under  the  peculiar
circumstances  involved,  expressed  her  opinion  that  the  phenomena
recorded  in  the  accounts  as  having  occurred  in  the  presence  of
Eglinton  were  attributable  to  "  clever  conjuring."

In  the  meantime,  in  the  course  of  a  visit  to  India  for  the
purpose  of  investigating  the  "  Theosophical  "  phenomena  of
Madame  Blavatsky,  I  had  had  a  somewhat  considerable  and  varied
experience  in  comparing  the  testimonies  of  numerous  bo7id  fide
witnesses  to  events  belonging  to  the  class  of  conjuring  performances.
The  most  instructive  to  me  in  the  first  instance  were  the  different
accounts  which  I  heard  from  eye-witnesses  of  the  tricks  of  the  Hindoo
jugglers. I saw many of these performances, and saw  them

1  A  word  proposed  as  a  substitute  for  "  psychography,"
-  See  the  previous  article,  p.  350.


Introduction.


383


frequently,  and  having  learnt  secretly  from  the  jugglers  them-
selves how  they  were  clone,  I  was  thereafter  in  a  position  to-
compare  the  accounts  of  them  with  the  actual  occurrences,  and  I  was
surprised  exceedingly  to  find  to  what  extent  they  were  misdescribed  by
intelligent  spectators  who  were  unaware  of  the  modus  ojierandi  of  the
tricks.  With  the  advantage  of  this  experience,  I  studied  in  minute
detail  the  testimony  to  Eglinton's  phenomena  recorded  in  the  Journal
for  June,  and  found  that  if  only  the  same  kinds  of  misdescription
were  allowed  for  in  these  reports  as  I  had  known  to  be  honestly
displayed  by  equally  intelligent  witnesses,  the  phenomena  were
perfectly  explicable  by  conjuring.  Not  only  was  this  the  case,  but
there  were  many  little  incidents  mentioned,  for  the  most  part  in-
nocently and  almost  casually,  in  the  reports,  which  afforded  indications
that  if  Eglinton's  performances  were  not  conjuring,  they  were  very
curiously  adapted  to  resemble  conjuring  operations.  And  when  to
these  facts,  besides  the  clear  evidence  of  Eglinton's  previous  imposture,
was  added  the  further  fact,  emphatically  pointed  out  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
that  every  experiment  with  Eglinton  so  devised  and  carried  out  as
apparently  to  exclude  the  possibilities  of  trickery  by  dispensing  with  the
necessity  for  continuous  observation,  had  failed,'^ — there  could,  I
thought,  be  little  doubt,  in  the  minds  of  rational  and  impartial  in-
quirers, of  the  justice  of  the  conclusion  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had
reached.

But  this  was  not  the  case. Correspondence  and  controversy  made  it
clear  that  the  ordinary  reader  did  hesitate  to  agree  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
and  it  soon  became  manifest  that  a  common  but  erroneous  assumption
prevailed  concerning  the  reliability  of  human  testimony  under  the
peculiar  circumstances  at  issue.  It  appeared  that  a  large  number  of  the
readers  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article  in  the  Journal  for  June  were  preju-
diced in  favour  of  ordinary  human  powers  of  observation  and  recollec-
tion under — it  is  to  be  remembered — exceptionally  adverse  circum-
stances ;  and  that  they  were  thus  prejudiced  simply  because  they  had
never  made  any  special  experiments,  with  the  view  of  ascertaining  exactly
how  much  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the  repoi'ts  of  even  acute
and  intelligent  observers  of  the  "slate-writing  "  performances  of  a  con-
jurer known  as  such. They  had  decided  ct  priori  as  to  the  capacity
of  human  perception  and  memory  under  quite  peculiar  conditions,  and
most  of  them,  I  venture  to  say,  had  thus  decided,  not  only  without
possessing  any  familiarity  with  the  various  modes  of  producing  "  slate-
writing"  by  conjuring,  but  without  possessing  any  familiarity  with  con-
juring tricks  in  general,  and  without  being  aware  of  the  extent  to

1  For  the  discussion  of  this  point  see  Proceedings,  X.,  pp.  70-2,  Journal
for  June,  1886,  pp.  332,  333,  Journal  for  November,  1886,  pp.  458-60,  Journal
for  December,  1886,  pp.  475  and  481-85.


384  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  <&c.


which  we  are  all  subject  to  illusions  of  Memory,  which,  in  relation  to
the  reports  of  "  psychography,"  are  more  deserving  of  consideration
than  even  illusions  of  Perception.

It  seemed  desirable,  therefore,  to  carry  out  a  somewhat  more'
systematic  investigation  than  had  heretofore  been  attempted, — to  provide
the  ordinary  reader  with  the  opportunity  of  comparing  for  himself  the
records  given  of  conjuring  performances  by  the  uninitiated,  with  the
testimony  offered  for  the  genuineness  of  mediumistic  phenomena.  To
the  accomplishment  of  this  task  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey  has  given  much
valuable  labour,  as  the  sequel  abundantly  shows.  This,  however,  was
not  enough.  It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  any  report  is  worthless  for
proving  occult  agency  if  a  similar  report  by  an  equally  competent
witness  is  given  of  what  is  known  to  be  a  conjuring  trick.  But  this
in  itself  would  not  enable  us  to  estimate  the  true  worth  of  testimony
in  such  cases ;  on  the  contrary,  it  might  just  as  well  lead  to  a  new  and
irrational  faith  in  the  unlimited  capacity  of  conjuring.  No  doubt  there
are  special  "  dodges,"  unique  wonders  of  workmanship,  staggering
flashes  of  well-nigh  incredible  dexterity,  for  which  we  must  always
leave  ample  margin  in  any  pronouncement  upon  the  limitations  of  a
conjurer.  Still,  with  all  this,  and  after  the  largest  allowances  have
been  made  for  the  possibilities  of  simple  failure  to  observe,  it  will  be
admitted  that  there  are  numerous  records  of  "  psychographic "
phenomena  that  have  occurred  with  mediums  (and  also  with  Mr.
Davey),  which,  as  described,  are  inexplicable  by  trickery.  It  was  of
the  utmost  importance,  therefore,  to  determine  how  far  such  records
might  be  misdescriptions,  and  what  were  the  chief  causes  of  the
misdescriptions.  In  the  course  of  a  paper  contributed  to  the  Journal
I  urged  that  the  principal  cause  of  misdescription,  apart  from  mal-
observation,  was  the  untrustworthiness  of  memory,  and  I  endeavoured
to  classify  roughly  the  main  forms  into  which  the  errors  of  recollection
fell.  That  students  of  mental  science  like  Mr.  Roden  Noel  and  Mr.
Massey  should  put  aside  so  easily  the  considerations  which  I  alleged
with  respect  to  the  treachery  of  memory,  suggests  that  these  considera-
tions had,  in  all  probability,  been  absolutely  unheeded  by  the  ordinary
recorder,  unfamiliar  with  the  more  delicate  processes  of  introspective
discrimination.  And  although  in  the  JowrTCctZ  I  felt  it  almost  needful
to  apologise  for  my  exposition  of  the  lapses  to  which  we  are  all  liable,
on  the  ground  that  they  had  been  "  almost  entirely  overlooked  by  the
antagonists  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  view,"  the  result  has  shown,  not  only
that  they  had  been  entirely  overlooked  in  the  degree  to  which  I  urged
them,  but  that  the  most  eminent  defenders  of  mediumistic  phenomena
refused  to  admit  their  validity  or  their  significance.  But  my  warrant
for  the  importance  of  these  considerations  was  much  more  than  the
experience  of  my  own  lapses  in  recording,  confirmed  as  that  was  by  the


Introduction.


385


discovery  of  radical  discrepancies  between  independent  reports  of  one
and  the  same  stance,  in  the  cases  where  such  independent  reports  were
given  of  sittings  with  Eglinton ;  nor  was  it  restricted  to  the
lessons  which  I  had  learnt  by  a  comparison  of  oral  and  written  accounts
of  common  conjuring  tricks  with  my  knowledge  of  the  real  events  ;  my
warrant  consisted  further  in  the  fact  that  all  the  forms  of  error  to  which
I  alluded  are  actually  embodied  in  the  reports  of  Mr.  Davey's  perform-
ances. In  repeating  these  considerations  here,  then,  I  desire  the
reader  to  bear  in  mind  that  they  are  not  vague  theoretical  speculations
as  to  possibilities  which  have  rarely  if  ever  been  realised,  but  warnings
against  veritable  pitfalls  which  are  dangerous  even  to  the  most  wary
investigator,  into  which  Mr.  Davey's  sitters  demonstrably  fell,  and
Eglinton's  sitters  also  demonstrably,  in  the  cases  which  admitted  of
direct  ascei'tainment.

I  shall  first  recount  an  incident  which  occurred  in  connection  with
a  Hindoo  juggler's  performance  unconnected  with  Spiritualism,  and
which  produced  a  deep  impression  upon  myself  at  the  time.

The  juggler  was  sitting  upon  the  ground  immediately  in  front  of
the  hotel,  with  his  feet  crossed.  Two  small  carved  wooden  figures  were
resting  on  the  ground,  about  two  feet  distant  from  the  juggler.  Some
coins  were  also  lying  on  the  ground  near  the  figures.  The  juggler
began  talking  to  the  figures,  which  moved  at  intervals,  bowing,
"kissing,"  and  bumping  against  each  other.  The  coins  also  began  to
move,  and  one  of  them  apparently  sprang  from  the  ground  and  struck
one  of  the  figures.  An  officer  and  his  wife,  who  had  but  recently
arrived  at  the  hotel,  were  spectators  with  myself,  and  we  stood
probably  within  two  yards'  distance  of  the  juggler.  I  knew  how  the
trick  was  performed  ;  they  did  not  know.  The  officer  drew  a  coin
from  his  pocket,  and  asked  the  juggler  if  this  coin  would  also  jump.
The  juggler  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  the  coin  was  then  placed
near  the  others  on  the  ground,  after  which  it  betrayed  the  same
propensity  to  gymnastic  feats  as  the  juggler's  own  coins.  Two  or  three
other  travellers  were  present  at  dinner  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day,
and  in  the  course  of  the  conversation  the  officer  described  the
marvellous  trick  which  he  had  witnessed  in  the  afternoon.  Referring
to  the  movements  of  the  coins,  he  said  that  he  had  taken  a  coin  from
his  own  pocket  and  placed  it  on  the  ground  himself,  yet  that  this  coin
had  indulged  in  the  same  freaks  as  the  other  coins.  His  wife  ventured
to  suggest  that  the  juggler  had  taken  the  coin  and  placed  it  on  the
ground,  but  the  officer  was  emphatic  in  repeating  his  statement,  and
appealed  to  me  for  confirmation.  He  was,  however,  mistaken.  I  had
watched  the  transaction  with  special  curiosity,  as  I  knew  what  was
necessary  for  the  performance  of  the  trick.  The  officer  had  apparently
intended  to  place  the  coin  upon  the  ground  himself,  but  as  he  was


386


The  Possibilities  of  Mcd-Observation,  Sc.


doing  so,  the  juggler  leant  slightly  forward,  dexterously  and  in  a  most
unobtrusive  manner  received  the  coin  from  the  fingers  of  the  officer  as
the  latter  was  stooping  down,  and  laid  it  close  to  the  others.  If  the
juggler  had  not  thus  taken  the  coin,  but  had  allowed  the  officer  himself
to  place  it  on  the  ground,  the  trick,  as  actually  performed,  would  have
been  frustrated.

Now  I  think  it  highly  improbable  that  the  movement  of  the
juggler  entirely  escaped  the  perception  of  the  officer — highly
improbable,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  officer  was  absolutely  unaware
of  the  juggler's  action  at  the  moment  of  its  happening ;  but  I  suppose
that  although  an  impression  was  made  upon  his  consciousness,  it  was
so  slight  as  to  be  speedily  effaced  by  the  officer's  imagination  of  himself
as  stooping  and  placing  the  coin  upon  the  ground.  The  officer,  I  may
say,  had  obtained  no  insight  into  the  modus  operandi  of  the  trick,  and
his  fundamental  misrepresentation  of  the  only  patent  occurrence  that
might  have  given  him  a  clue  to  its  performance  debarred  him  com-
pletely from  afterwards,  in  reflection,  arriving  at  any  explanation.
Just  similarly,  many  an  honest  witness  may  have  described  himself  as
having  placed  one  slate  upon  another  at  a  sitting  with  a  "  medium,"
whereas  it  was  the  medium  who  did  so,  aiad  who  possibly  eflected  at
the  same  time  one  or  two  other  operations  altogether  unnoticed  by  the
witness.  1

Now  it  is  the  universal  mental  weakness  of  which  the  above
incident  is  an  illustration,  that  forms  one  of  the  main  sources  of  error
in  the  reports  of  "  psychography."  There  are,  of  course,  other  sources
of  error,  such  as  the  direct  illusions  of  perception  caused  by  mechanical
contrivances  or  the  dexterity  of  the  medium  or  the  dominant  expectations
of  the  witness  ;  there  is  also  notably  the  distraction  of  the  sitter's
attention  to  such  an  extent  that  he  is  not  aware  at  all  of  certain  actions
performed  by  the  medium,  but  this  often  results  in  positive
misdescription  owing  to  the  weakness  of  memory  ;  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick
remarks  [Journal  for  June,  1886),  "  we  are  liable  not  only  to  allow
our  attention  to  be  distracted,  but  to  forget  immediately  that  it  has
been  distracted,  or  that  the  event  which  disti'acted  it  ever  occurred
and  the  source  of  error  which  I  desire  in  particular  to  press  upon  the
reader's  notice  is  the  perishability,  tlie  exceeding  transience,  the  fading
feebleness,  the  evanescence  beyond  recall,  of  certain  impressions  which
nevertheless  did  enter  the  domain  of  consciousness,  and  did  in  their  due
place  form  part  of  the  stream  of  impetuous  waking  thought.

It  is,  moreover,  not  simply  and  merely  that  many  events,  which  did
obtain  at  the  sitting  some  share  of  perception,  thus  lapse  completely
from  the  realm  of  ordinary  recollection. The  consequence  may  indeed


1  For  an  example  see  Sitting  II,  Note  7,  p.  487.


Introduction.


387


be  that  we  meet  with  a  blank  or  a  chaos  in  traversing  the  particular
field  of  remembrance  from  which  the  events  have  lapsed  ;  ^  but  this
will  often  be  filled  by  some  conjectured  events  which  rapidly  become
attached  to  the  adjacent  parts,  and  form,  in  conjunction  with  them,  a
consolidated  but  fallacious  fragment  in  memory.^  On  the  other  hand,
the  consequence  may  be  that  the  edges  of  the  lacunoi  close  up — events
originally  separated  by  a  considerable  interval  are  now  remembered
vividly  in  immediate  juxtaposition,  and  there  is  no  trace  of  the
piecing.^

Another  source  of  error  which  bears  a  kinship  to  this  depends
sometimes  upon  the  absence  of  a  prolonged  carefulness  in  writing  out
tlie  original  record  of  the  sitting.  Events  which  occurred  during  the
sitting,  which  made  a  comparatively  deep  impression,  which  had  not,
at  the  time  of  recording,  sunk  beyond  the  possibility  of  recall,  never-
theless do  not  appear  in  the  report,  because  they  were  temforarily
forgotten  ;  and  having  been  thus  omitted,  the  temporary  forgetfulness
is  likely  to  become  permanent,  owing  to  the  very  coherence  given  to
the  defective  account  by  the  recording.*

Last  September  I  spent  many  hours  recalling  and  writing  notes  of
a  slate-writing  seance.  The  task  occupied  me  some  six  or  seven  con-
tinuous hours  on  each  of  the  two  days  following  tlae  evening  of  the
seance.  Taking  the  first  page  of  my  mss.,  I  find,  among  what  are
plainly  interpolations  ^  after  the  page  was  originally  completed,  an
exceedingly  noteworthy  passage.

I  had  held  the  slate  against  the  table  instantaneously  after  the
"  conjurer  "  had  placed  it  in  position  ;  the  slate  was  shortly  afterwards
withdrawn,  and  the  chalk  which  had  been  placed  upon  it  was  found
crushed.  The  chalk  marks  were  cleaned  off'.  A  second  time  I  held
it  similarly,  and  on  withdrawal  a  dash  was  found  on  the  slate,  which
was  again  cleaned.  After  noting  these  and  other  directly  connected
events,  I  had  originally  written,  placing  the  occuri-ence  before  the  pro-
duction of  writing  :  "  He  then  turned  the  slate  over,  and  put  the  nib
of  chalk  on,  and  asked  me  to  hold." My  alteration  of  this  reads  :

1  Partial  omission.  For  an  example  see  Sitting  IV,  Report  I,  Mr.
Padshah's  discussion  of  [/],  p.  440.

2  Substitution. For  an  example  see  Sitting  III,  Note  5,  p.  490.

3  Complete  omission. For  an  example  see  Sitting  II,  Note  17,  p.  489.

*  Complete  omission  temporary.  For  an  example  see  Sitting  IV,
Note  12,  p.  491.

5  I  still  recollect,  as  T  tliink,  my  surprise  at  finding,  while  I  was  engaged
in  making  the  record,  that  I  had  forgotten  at  the  moment  such  an  important
incident  as  that  referred  to  in  the  interpolation  ;  but  apart  from  this,  the
passage  was  undoubtedly  written  afterwards,  as  appears  from  its  position,  &c.
I  may  add  that  I  had  probably  spent  an  hour  or  two  in  originally  noting
the  first  page.


388  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


"  After  holding  some  time,  he  asked  me  to  put  my  holding  hand  upon
his  other  holding  B.'s,  so  as  to  complete  circuit.  With  this  exception
I  held  the  slate  in  each  case  against  the  table.  Later,  he  asked  me  to
hold  again."  I  had  nearly  omitted  this  most  important  exceptional
circumstance  here  described,  correctly  described — as  I  have  since
learnt  from  the  "  conjurer."  I  may  further  notice  that  it  occurred
before  the  first  writing  was  obtained,  as  I  rightly  placed  it.  The
"  conjurer  "  did  turn  the  slate  over  as  I  originally  wrote,  on  three  sub-
sequent occasions  during  the  sitting,  but  he  did  7iot  do  so  previous  to
the  appearance  of  the  first  writing.  My  temporary  forgetfulness  thus
involved  the  temporary  insertion  of  a  conjectured  event.  Or,  since  the
event  thus  inserted  did  actually  occur  later  in  the  sitting,  the  insertion
of  it  in  the  wrong  place  may  be  regarded  as  an  illustration  of  the  ten-
dency to  transposition,  to  which  Mr.  Angelo  J.  Lewis  has  also  drawn
attention  (Jotirnal  for  August,  p.  362),  in  referring  to  the  difiiculty  of  re-
calling in  their  proper  order  such  events  as  those  in  question  ;  it  is  almost
impossible  to  avoid  confusing  the  sequence  if  the  events  are  crowded,
even  if  they  appeared  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence  to  be  of  special
importance.  1

In  addition  to  the  mistakes  which  thus  originate  from  the  lapsing
of  certain  events  beyond  recollection,  there  is  the  further  mistake  to
which  we  are  liable,  of  unwittingly  inserting  events  between  others
which  occurred  in  immediate  sequence.  This  of  coui'se  also  depends
upon  the  weakness  of  memory  ;  the  events  as  they  originally  occurred
may  have  acquired  only  a  loose  coherence  in  consciousness,  so  that
an  event  afterwards  imayined  usurps  easily  a  place  in  the  series  and
becomes  fixed  by  recording  and  repetition.  A  perfectly  pure  interpo-
lation,— that  is,  one  which  does  not  involve  either  substitution  or
transposition, — probably  does  not  occur  very  often,  and  it  would  not  be
easy  to  establish  the  fact  of  its  occurrence  in  any  particular  case  ;
mixed  interpolations  are  not  uncommon. ^

Now  it  is  quite  impossible  to  estimate  rightly  the  reports  of
"  psychogi'aphy  "  and  analogous  performances  without  having  some
experimental  knowledge  as  to  how  far  such  reports  may  be  rendered
untrustworthy  by  these  faults  of  partial  and  of  complete  omission,  of
substitution,  of  transposition,  and  of  interpolation.-^

Suppose  that  we  are  considering  the  testimony  of  a  witness  to  his

1  Transjjosition . For  an  example  see  Sitting  XV,  Note  3,  p.  494.

2  Interpolation.  For  exanqjles  see  SITTING  III  [c],  p.  436,  and  Note  5,
p.  490 ;  Sitting  IV,  Note  15,  p.  492  ;  Sitting  VIII,  Note  1,  p.  493.

3 1  have  not  attempted  to  arrange  the  faults  of  memory  which  I  have
briefly  specified  in  any  system  of  exchisive  division,  but  rather  to  exhibit  them
in  their  modes  of  genesis.  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  them  in  greater
detail.


Introduction.


389


own  separate  and  complete  examination  of  a  slate  immediately  previous
to  the  apparent  production  of  writing.  Then,  according  to  what  I
have  been  saying,  we  have — with  a  perfectly  bond  fide  witness — four
possibilities  to  consider  besides  the  one  that  his  impression  is  correct.
It  may  actually  be  that  no  examination  at  all  was  made  by  the  witness
(interpolation) ;  it  may  be  that,  although  made,  the  examination  was
not  made  in  the  perfect  manner  now  described  (substitution) ;  it  may  be
that  the  examination,  although  faultless  and  made  at  the  sitting,  was
not  made  on  the  occasion  alleged  (transposition) ;  or  it  may  be  that
although  the  examination  was  made  as  described,  and  on  the  occasion
alleged,  events,  perhaps  unnoticed  or  regarded  by  the  witness  as  insignifi-
cant, intervened  between  the  examination  and  the  apparent  production
of  the  writing  (omission).

I  need  hardly  say  that  in  relation  to  these  inherent  faults
of  memory  leading  to  misdescription,  we  must  consider  the
natural  tendency  to  exaggerate  in  recording  phenomena  sug
gestive  of  occult  agency  ;  hence,  in  many  cases,  further  omissions
and  interpolations.  But  we  must  carefully  distinguish  this  tendency
to  exaggerate  from  another  cause  of  transfiguration  which  affects  both
perception  and  memory.  I  refer  to  the  mental  attitude  of  the  sitter
during  the  seance.^  Events  that  under  ordinary  circumstances,  or  if
the  witnesses  were  intent  upon  discovering  a  trick,  would  make  a  com-
paratively deep  and  lasting  impression  upon  consciousness,  glide  past
or  are  swiftly  forgotten,  simply  because  of  the  absorption  of  the
spectator's  interest  in  the  supposed  "  supernormal  "  manifestations.
The  distortion  traceable  in  many  reports  is  largely  due  to  special  lapses
of  memory  for  the  explanation  of  which  we  must  look  cliiefly  to  this
peculiar  emotional  state.  I  shall  refer  to  this  consideration  in
pointing  out  some  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  Mr.  Davey's  investiga-
tions (see  p.  396) ;  and  its  importance,  even  as  regards  mal-observation,
has,  I  am  sure,  been  widely  under-estimated.  We  cannot  doubt
that  many  a  Spiritualist  has  found  his  convictions  confirmed  at
some  seance  by  displays  of  the  most  paltry  imposture,  who  would,
had  he  attended  the  seance  under  the  assurance  that  he  was
about  to  witness  a  conjuring  performance,  have  detected  the  modus
operandi  instantly.  I  may  give  an  instance  which  came  under  my  own
observation.  At  a  materialisation  stance  given  by  Firman,  at  which  I
was  present,  a  supposed  "  spirit-form"  appeared,  draped  in  a  semi-
transparent  flowing  robe, — so  transparent,  in  fact,  that  Firman's  bare
arm  was  visible  behind  it,  waAdng  it  to  and  fro.  When  the  figure
retired  to  the  "  cabinet,"  the  door  closed  upon  a  portion  of  the  robe.
The  door  opened  again  slightly,  and  the  end  of  the  robe  was  drawn  into

I  An  illustration  of  these  remarks  will  be  found  in  th  e  accounts  of  the
different  witnesses  of  Sitting  II. See  p.  426.


390  Tlte  Possibilities  of  Mai- Observation,  &c.


the  "  cabinet. "  Most  of  the  sitters  perceived  this  clearly,  but  one,  a
"  believer,"  averred  conscientiously  that  the  fabric  was  not  withdrawn,
and  that  he  saw  it  slowly  melt  away.

I  think  it  will  hardly  be  denied  that  there  are  extreme  cases  where
unquestioning  faith  incapacitates  an  otherwise  intelligent  witness ;  and
although  I  do  not  challenge  Mr.  Massey's  opinion  that  for  mediumistic
phenomena  a  certain  psychical  co-operation  with  the  medium  on  the
part  of  the  investigator  may  be  necessary,  I  entertain  no  doubt  that
the  witness  who  gives  this  co-operation  is  less  likely  to  discover
trickery  than  the  man  who  is  bent  on  discerning  the  modus  operandi
of  what  he  knows  to  be  conjuring. Nay,  I  shall  go  further  and  say  that
there  is  an  important  difference  between  the  investigator,  however
"  sceptical,"  who  thinks  it  possible  that  supernormal  manifestations  will
occur,  and  the  investigator  who  has  some  solid  ground  of  assurance,
independent  of  liis  own  "  scepticism,"  that  the  manifestations  will  be
conjuring  tricks. The failure  to  understand  this  has  caused  some
Spiritualists  to  put  forward  the  claim  that  Mr.  Davey  should  produce
in  their  presence  a  phenomenon  similar  to,  and  under  the  same  condi-
tions as,  some  phenomenon  which  they  describe  themselves  as  having
witnessed  with  a  professional  medium,  or  that  he  should  at  all  events
produce  the  apjiearcmce  of  those  conditions,  ikc. In  the  first  place,
those  who  have  put  forward  this  claim  do  not  seem  to  have  taken  the
obvious  course  of  demanding  first  that  the  medium  should  reproduce
the  phenomenon  as  they  desire  Mr.  Davey  to  reproduce  it ;  and  in  the
second  place  they  ignore  the  fact  that  their  own  "  psychical  condition,"
so  diflerent  in  the  two  cases — in  one,  a  favouring  co-operation,  in  the
other,  a  resolve  to  expose — might  be  a  bar  to  Mr.  Davey,  but  an  open
door  to  the  medium. Mr.  Massey  thinks  that  the  sort  of  co-operation
required  is  "a  mental  disposition  perfectly  consistent  with  the  most
scientific  vigilance." {Proceedings,  Part  X.,  p.  98.) But  his  belief  in
the  possibility  of  this  is  not  supported  by  what  we  know  of  mental
action,  since  if  any  attention  is  being  giv^en  to  a  favouring  co-operation,
probably  less  will  be  available  in  consequence  for  so  dissimilar  a  task
as  the  exercise of "  scientific  vigilance " ; it  is  certainly  not  in
accordance  with  my own  experience  as  a  psychically  co-operating
sitter  with  mediums,  and  is  directly  opposed  to  the  conclusions  which
I  have  formed  as  an  observer  of  Mr.  Davey's  witnesses.

In  estimating,  therefore,  the  value  of  the  testimony  to  "psycho-
graphy,"  we  must  ask — How  much  misdescription  are  we  likely  to  find
in  the  record  that  may  be  due  to  the  ignorance  of  the  witness  concern-
ing the  points  worth  mentioning  ?  How  much  misdescription  are  we
likely  to  find  owing  to  the  impulse  of  the  witness  to  exaggerate,  possibly
stimulated  by  the  impetus  of  a  new  enthusiasm  or  the  momentum  of  a
cherished  belief  1 We  then  come  to  the  events  as  recollected  at  the  time


Introduction.


391


of  the  record.  How  much  distortion  from  the  events  as  originally
perceived  must  we  expect  to  find  in  this  recollection,  owing  to  the
inherent  weakness  of  memory,  increased  as  that  may  be  by  the  peculiar
mental  attitude  or  emotional  state  of  the  witness  1  How  far,  in  the
next  place,  may  a  description  of  the  events  as  perceived  by  the
witness,  have  differed  from  a  full  and  accurate  description  of  the
events  as  they  actually  occurred,  owing  to  the  special  mal-observa-
tion  displayed  by  the  witness  in  consequence  of  a  peculiar
mental  attitude  or  emotional  state  1  Finally,  how  much  must  we
allow  for  the  mal-observation  that  may  be  caused  by  the  exceptionally
disturbing  influence  of  "a  person  skilled  in  particular  forms
of  deception,  whose  chief  object  is  to  prevent  the  witnesses  from
perceiving  many  of  the  actual  occurrences,  and  to  persuade  them,  by
ingenious  illusions,  to  an  erroneous  belief  concerning  others"?  (Journal
of  the  S.P.R.  for  January,  1887.)

I  endeavoured  to  show  in  the  Journal  (October,  November,
Supplement  to  December,  1886) — making  certain  assumptions  as  to  the
defects  of  perception  and  memory  under  the  special  circumstances
involved — that  the  reports,  printed  in  the  Journal  for  June,  1886,
of  Egiinton's  performances,  were  worthless  for  proving  occult  agency.
The  assumptions  which  I  made  are  completely  justified  by  the  mistakes
which  have  been  exhibited  by  those  witnesses  of  Mr.  Davey's  perform-
ances who  are  known  to  myself — pei'sons  whose  general  intelligence,
knowledge  of  conjuring,  powers  of  observation  and  retentiveness,  &c. —
so  far  as  I  can  judge  of  these — entitle  them  to  be  placed  on  the
same  level  as  the  writers  of  the  reports  printed  in  the  Journal  for
June,  the  majoi'ity  of  whom  I  also  know  personally.  And  I  have
not  yet  seen  any  report  of  "  psychography  "  which,  when  due  allowance
is  made  for  the  untrustworthiness  of  observation  and  recollection,
excludes  the  possibilities  of  conjuring.

By  way  of  illustration  I  shall  here  deal  briefly  with  a  case
concerning  which  Mr.  0.  C.  Massey  specially  challenges  judgment.  It
is  true  that  he  does  this  chiefly  upon  the  question  of  mal-observation,
but  the  case  will  serve  as  well  to  illustrate  the  possibilities  of
memory  illusion  and  trick  mechanism.  Mr.  Massey  quotes  from
the  case  in  Proceedings,  Part  X.,  pp.  87,  88,  and  refers  to  his  report
in  Light  of  April  19th,  1884,  from  which  I  take  the  following-
extract  : —

There  was  a  pile  of  Mr.  Egiinton's  own  slates  upon  the  table,  and  it  was
always  upon  one  or  other  of  these  that  the  writing  was  obtained.  Of  the
two  that  were  used,  I  cleaned  one,  after  it  had  been  well  wetted,  with  a  dry
sponge,  myself,  on  both  sides  -;  the  other  I  saw  similarly  treated  by  Mr.
Eglinton.  Of  course  I  watched  to  see  that  there  was  no  unobserved
change  of  slate,  nor  did  Mr.  Eglinton  rise  from  his  seat  during  the  seance,


392  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  <&g.


except  once,  to  write  down  an  address  I  had  given  him.  It  will  be  under-
stood that  we  sat  in  broad  daylight.

We  noticed  two  facts  (always  observed  likewise  with  Slade),  one  of  which,
cei-tainly,  could  not  result  from  any  voluntary  act  of  the  medium.  This  was
the  lowering  of  the  temperature  of  the  hand  which  held  the  slate,  just  before
and  after  the  writing.  The  other  fact  was  the  cessation  of  the  sound  of
writing  when  Eglinton  broke  the  contact  of  his  hand  with  my  own.

From  my  experience  with  Slade,  I  was  sure  that  success  was  near  when  I
felt  the  coldness  of  the  medium's  hand,  as  he  rested  it,  with  the  slate,  on  the
table,  just  before  the  writing  came.  Mr.  Eglinton  now  laid  one  of  the  two
equal-sized  slates  (10^  inches  by  7f )  flat  upon  the  other,  the  usual  scrap  of
pencil  being  enclosed.  Both  slates  were  then,  as  I  carefully  assured  myself,
perfectly  clean  on  both  surfaces.  He  then  forthwith,  and  without  any
previous  dealing  with  them,  presented  one  end  of  the  two  slates,  held
together  by  himself  at  the  other  end,  for  me  to  hold  with  my  left  hand,  on
which  he  placed  his  own  right.  I  clasped  tlie  slates,  my  thumb  on  the  frame
of  the  upper  one  (J  inch),  and  three  of  my  fingers,  reaching  about  four  inches,
forcing  up  the  lower  slate  against  the  upper  one.  We  did  not  hold  the  slates
underneath  the  table,  but  at  the  side,  a  little  below  the  level.  Mr.  Noel  was
thus  able  to  observe  the  position.  Mr.  Eglinton  held  the  slates  firmly
together  at  his  end,  as  I  can  assert,  because  I  particularly  observed  that  there
was  no  gap  at  his  end.  I  also  noticed  his  thumb  on  the  top  of  the  slates,
and  can  say  that  it  rested  quite  quietly  throughout  the  writing,  which  we
heard  almost  immediately  and  continuously,  except  when  Mr.  Eglinton
once  raised  his  hand  from  mine,  when  the  sound  ceased  till  contact  was
resumed.

The  inner  surface  of  one  of  the  slates  was  shortly  afterwards  found
covered  with  writing.

Mr.  Roden  Noel  corroborates  Mr.  Massey's  description,  saying
"  Every  word  of  this  account  I  am  able  to  endorse."

Now  I  suppose  that  the  writing  had  been  prepared  by  Eglinton
beforehand,  and  that  it  was  upon  one  of  the  slates  which  Mr.  Massey
was  then  holding.  How  much  (a)  mal-observation,  or  (b)  lapse  of
memory,  or  (c)  ignorance  of  conjuring  contrivances  on  the  part  of  Mr.
Massey  does  this  supposition  appear  to  involve  1

(a)  It  must  be  observed,  to  begin  with,  that  the  phenomenon  was
not  a  simple  and  isolated  one ;  nor  was  it,  so  far  as  appears  from  the
account,  suggested  by  Mr.  Massey,  or  previously  prepared  for  by  him  ;
the  slates  were  Eglinton's,  and  there  was  a  pile  of  Eglinton's  slates
on  the  table ;  Mr.  Massey's  attention,  moreover,  seems  to  have  been
partly  given  to  the  temperature  of  Eglinton's  hand.

What  Mr.  Massey  really  meant  when  he  wrote  in  Light,  "  Both
slates  were  then,  as  I  carefully  assured  myself,  perfectly  clean  on
both  surfaces,"  ^ is  by no  means  clear. Wheri did  Mr.  Massey

'  The  above  sentence  (together  with  Mr.  Noel's  endorsement)  hardly  seems
exactly  equivalent  to  "  our  statement  that  Mr.  Eglinton,  after  enclosing  the


Introduction.


393


assure  himself  1  before  or  after  Eglinton  laid  one  slate  upon  the  other  ^
If  after,  are  we  to  presume  that  he  took  the  slates  into  his  own  hands
and  examined  all  four  surfaces  ?  Who,  in  this  case,  placed  the  slates
together  again?  Mr.  Massey,  or  Eglinton? — "we  must  have  particu-
larity of  statement,  evidence  that  the  witness  has  himself  analysed  the
observation  into  the  acts  of  perception  constituting  it,  and  that  at  the
time  of  observation."  (Proceedings,  Part  X.,  p.  89.)  We  should,  I
think,  do  least  violence  to  Mr.  Massey's  report  if  we  suppose  him  to
have  meant  to  say  that  he  had  carefully  assured  himself  just  before
Eglinton  laid  one  slate  upon  the  other ;  and  in  this  case  I  hold  that
Mr.  Massey's  observation  could  have  been  deceived,  that  there  might
have  been  one  side  of  one  slate,  which  he  never  saw,  or  that  another
slate  might  have  been  substituted  for  one  of  two  slates,  both  sides  of
which  he  did  see.  Mr.  Massey  does  not  state  that  he  took  the  two
slates  in  question  into  his  own  hands,  and  I  have  no  ground  for  suppos
ing  that  at  that  time  he  was  an  expert  in  detecting  sleight-of-hand
manipulations  of  slates.^  So  much  for  the  amount  of  mal-observation
required.

(b)  Proceeding  now  to  lapse  of  memory,  let  us  suppose  that
the  slates  were  clean  when  Eglinton  laid  them  together  as  de-
scribed. Mr.  Massey  says  that  Egliiiton  "  then  fortliwith,  and
without  any  previous  dealing  with  them,  presented,"  &c.  The
sitting  was  in  the  afternoon,  and  Mr.  Massey  wrote  his  account  of
it  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day.  We  have  to  consider  there-
fore whether  it  is  possible  that  Mr.  Massey — with  the  grant  of  an
exceptionally  good  memory  —  should  have  remembered  Eglinton's
presentation  of  the  slates  to  him  as  having  immediately  followed  upon
Eglinton's  original  placing  of  them  togetlier,  although  these  events
might  in  reality  have  been  separated  by  an  interval  during  which
Eglinton  might  have  changed  one  of  the  slates  for  a  third.  For  ex-
ample, suppose  that  when  Eglinton  lifted  the  slates  the  pencil  dropped
out,  and  Eglinton  removed  one  slate,  placed  a  scrap  of  pencil  on  the
second  slate,  and  then  replaced,  not  the  first,  but  a  tliird  slate  lying
close  by  on  the  table.  Might  some  apparently  trivial  (to  the  conception
of  Mr.  Massey)  incident  of  this  kind  have  been  completely  forgotten
by  Mr.  Massey  when  he  was  writing  his  account,  so  that  the  preceding

pencil  within  the  slates  which  we  then  '  carefully  assured '  ourselves  were  both
quite  clean  on  6o^A  surfaces,"  &c.  (Proceedings,  loc.  cit.).  There  is  nothingsaid
in  the  original  report  About  B'Ir.  NoeVs  "  carefully  assuring  "  himself,  and  the
meaning  of  then  is  here  less  apparently  ambiguous  than  in  the  original  report.

^  To  avoid  complication  I  am  dealing  with  points  of  observation  and  memory
as  separately  as  possible.  But  in  connection  with  Mr.  Massey's  statement
which  I  have  considered  above,  I  might  have  questioned  whether  he  had  not
misplaced  his  feeling  of  assurance  or  the  process  by  which  he  assured  himself.


394  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  <&c.


and  succeeding  events  became  joined  in  his  remembrance  ^.  So  far  am
I  from  thinkiiag  this  impossible,  that  I  regard  it,  owing  to  my
experiences  with  other  witnesses,  as  not  even  improbable.  Indeed  I
think  it  even  possible  that  Mr.  Massey's  holding  of  the  slates  might
have  been  interru2yted  by  some  analogously  "  trivial  "  incident.  State-
ments most  express  and  definite,  made  by  an  honest  witness,  may,  as  I
have  already  pointed  out,  be  erroneous  from  other  causes  than  simple
mal-observation  or  the  unwitting  interpolation  of  "  specific  and  positive
acts  of  perception,"  though  they  may  be  erroneous  from  these  causes
also.  They  are  often  due  to  other  and  more  frequent  forms  of  the
universal  weakness  of  human  memory,  and  may  be  the  result  of
transposition  in  the  order  of  events,  or  of  a  mere  and  sheer  lapse.

Concerning  the  possibilities,  then,  either  of  mal-observation  or  of
lapse  of  memory,  I  traverse  Mr.  Massey's  assertion  that  "  the  witness
could  not  innocently  use  terms  expressly  and  definitely  inconsistent
with  what  really  happened,"  which  I  must  characterise  as  an  assump-
tion completely  destroyed  by  the  reports  of  Mr.  Davey's  performances.

(c)  But  let  us  now  admit,  for  the  present  purpose,  that  Mr.  Massey's
account  of  the  incident  is  correct.  He  adds,  in  his  report  in  Light
(p.  159),  that  "as  writing  by  the  medium  himself  at  the  time  is
absolutely  out  of  the  question,  there  are  only  three  other  conceivable
suggestions  as  opposed  to  occult  agency."  I  do  not  of  course  question
the  veracity  of  the  witnesses  ;  and  the  other  two  suggestions,  which
Mr,  Massey  offers  reasons  for  rejecting,  are  "  a  change  of  slate,"  and
"  concealed  writing  brought  out  by  heat."  Another  suggestion  has
since,  appareiitly,  occurred  to  him.

"  As  it  is  imaginable  that  a  thin  sheet  of  slate,  already  inscribed  on  one
side,  miglit  be  loosely  fitted  into  the  frame  of  one  of  the  slates  used,
clean  surface  uppermost,  so  as  to  fall  into  the  frame  of  the
other  slate,  written  side  uppermost,  when  the  first  was  placed  upon
the  second,  it  is  fortunate  that  I  was  able  to  exclude  that  suggestion
by  my  possession  of  the  slate  on  which  the  writing  appeared,
which,  by-the-bye,  was  wrapped  in  paper,  either  by  myself  or  by
Mr.  Eglinton — under  my  eyes,  at  my  request,  and  carried  away  by
me,  immediately  after  we  had  examined  the  writing,  the  sitting
being  then  closed."  {Proceedings,  Part  X,  pp.  88-9.)

There  is  clear  indication  that  Mr.  Massey  had  not  contemplated  this
possibility  at  the  time — two  years  earlier — of  the  sitting,  and  it  might
be  contended  that  the  slate  which  Mr.  Massey  took  away  was  not  that
one  of  the  two  slates  upon  which  the  writing  was  first  found,  but
another  similarly  inscribed  slate,  which  Eglinton  had  provided  for  the
purpose ;  it  probably  often  happens  that  sitters  request  permission  to
take  away  the  slates  upon  which  writing  has  appeared.  Mr.  Massey
would  apparently  guard  against  this  hypothesis  of  a  subsequent  change


Introduction.


395


of  slate  by  the  last  sentence  of  the  passage  quoted  above,  but  no
importance  can  be  attributed  to  this, — if  only  on  the  ground  that  Mr.
Massey  was  unaware,  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  of  the  possibility  to
wliich  he  has  more  recently  drawn  attention.  If  the  sentence  in
question  expresses — not  some  record  made  by  Mr.  Massey  on  the  day  of
the  sitting,  but — Mr.  Massey 's  remembrance  after  two  years,  and  if  he
seriously  means  it  to  exclude  the  hypothesis  before  us,  thei'e  would  be  a
vaster  divergence  than  I  have  hitherto  supposed  between  Mr.  Massey
and  myself  as  to  the  ordinary  psychology  of  memory  ;  and  I  should,
especially  when  I'recall  the  rigorous  signification  with  which  Mr.  Massey
professedly  uses  the  word  immediately,  class  the  sentence  as  an  instance
of  bond  fide  transfiguration  of  the  same  character  as  some  which  I
supposed  in  Mr.  Davey's  reports  of  Eglinton.  (Journal  of  the  S.P.R.
for  November,  1886.)

But  I  may  point  out  that  there  is  another  suggestion  still,  which
does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  inconsistent  with  anything  that  Mr.  Massey
has  said.  The  slate  upon  which  the  writing  was  found  may  have  been
an  ordinary  slate,  and  may  have  been  taken  away  by  Mr.  Massey,  and
the  other  slate,  though  apparently  ordinary,  may  have  been  a  trick  slate,
with  room  for  a  false  flap  that  could  be  fixed,  if  necessary,  by  a  spring,
and  that  was  also  adapted  to  fit  the  ordinary  slate,  and  which  had  been
placed  so  as  to  cover  the  prepared  writing.  The  details  of  the  trick  will
be  obvious.

Mr.  Massey's  case  is  thus,  in  my  opinion,  vitiated  on  three
separate  grounds,  by  the  considerations  due  to  the  possibilities  of  mal-
observation,  lapse  of  memory,  and  trick  mechanism.  I  cannot,  therefore,
attach  much  value  to  his  opinion,  which,  when  his  record  appeared  in
Light,  was  : —

"  I  am  as  satisfied  that  this  was  a  genuine  phenomenon  as  I  am  that  the
words  on  this  paper  are  of  my  own  writing."

But  while  in  this  instance  Mr.  Massey's  confidence  in  1884  pi-oves
to  have  been  misplaced,  in  consequence  of  his  ignorance  of  a  possible
piece  of  trick  apjjaratus,  I  do  not  think  that  his  high  estimate  of  the
evidence  for  "  psychography  "  generally  is  invalidated  chiefly  either  by
ignorance  of  this  kind,  or  by  his  large  trust  in  human  observation.  It
is  invalidated  chiefly,  I  venture  to  think,  by  his  a  jjriori  presumption
that  honest  witnesses  cannot  use  terms  "  expressly  and  definitely
inconsistent  with  what  really  happened  "  ;  and  he  could  not  have  made
this  presumption  had  he  given  due  weight  to  the  possibilities  of  memory
illusion.  I  have  already  shown  what  small  lapses  of  memory  may  have
made  his  own  specific  and  positive  assertions  erroneous ;  and  it  is
obvious  how,  by  simple  omissions  and  transpositions,  witliout  any  pure
interpolations  at  all,  the  record  of  an  lionest  witness  may  be  rendered


396


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


full  of  the  most  fundamental  misstatements.  Much  of  Mr.  Massey's
paper,  as  he  himself  says,  was  "an  attempt  to  show"  that  "the
supposition  of  such  descriptions  as  '  he  '  and  others  have  given  of
Eglinton's  slate-writing  being  given  of  the  performances  of  an  avowed
conjurer  .  .  .  is  an  impossible  one."  {Proceedings,  Part  X,  p.  108.)
The  reader  may  decide  for  himself  whether  this  "  impossibility  "  has
been  realised  or  not.  For  my  own  part,  I  maintain  that  the  reports
which  follow  are  a  practical  and  complete  rejoinder  to  the  considera-
tions alleged  by  Mr.  Massey  in  his  reply  to  the  position  advanced  by
Mrs.  Sidgwick.

I  may  here  again  draw  attention  to  some  of  the  difficulties  (which
I  pointed  out  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  October,  1886)  in  the
way  of  obtaining  adequate  reports  of  "  slate- writing "  performances
which  are  known  independently  to  be  the  result  of  conjuring,  and  to
the  manner  in  wliich  these  difficulties  have  been  partially,  though  not
completely,  overcome  by  Mr.  Davey.  In  the  first  place,  proficiency  in
the  production  of  apparently  "  occult  "  slate-writing  requires  not  only
practice  in  the  manipulation  of  slates,  &c.,  but  a  lengthened  experience
of  sitters,  which  cannot  be  acquired  in  a  short  time  by  a  person  who
is  chiefly  occupied  with  other  business.  It  is  hardly  to  be  expected
that  accounts  of  a  novice's  phenomena  should  compare  for  marvellous-
ness  with  the  results  of  "  old  mediumistic  hands  "  like  Eglinton  and
Slade.  Still,  Mr.  Davey  was  able  to  devote  much  of  his  time  during  the
latter  part  of  last  year  to  the  improvement  of  his  methods,  and  has
thus  been  able  to  produce  results  which  in  quality,  if  not  in  quantity,
may  fitly  be  compared,  for  the  pui'poses  of  our  inquiry,  with  the
productions  of  the  best  professional  mediums.

In  the  second  place,  I  must  repeat  that  it  is  impossible  to  induce
the  same  peculiarity  of  mental  attitude  in  the  sitters  with  a  professed
conjurer,  as  they  would  have  assumed  had  they  been  sitting  with  a
professional  medium.  I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  not  a  single  person
of  all  those  whose  reports  were  published  in  the  Journal  for  June
felt  certain  beforehand  that  Eglinton's  performances  were  explicable
by  conjuring ;  indeed,  I  may  go  further  and  say  that  nearly  all,  if  not
all,  thought  it  not  improbable  that  the  phenomena  were  genuine,
and  that  most  of  them  had  been  strongly  impressed  by  reports  which
they  had  pi-eviously  heard  or  read.  Now  the  evidence  of  a  person
holding  this  attitude  is  likely  to  be  of  decidedly  less  value  cceteris  paribus
than  that  of  a  person  who  fully  believes  that  he  is  watching  a  conjuring
trick.  1  do  not  mean  merely  that  there  is  a  reluctance  on  his  part  to
say  or  do  anything  which  may  imply  a  direct  suspicion  of  the  honesty
of  the  "  medium,"  or  that,  so  far  as  his  attention  is  directed  at  all,
it  is  too  exclusively  occupied  with  the  observation  of  the  conditions
at  the  time  when  the  "  occult"  agency  is  su'pp)osed  to  be  actually


Introduction.


397


producing  the  ^yriting  ;  though  from  these  causes  also,  in  many  cases,
his  testimony  is  likely  to  be  less  reliable.  T\Tiat  I  mean  is  that  the  idea
of  communication  from  the  "  spirit-world,"  or  of  some  supernormal  power
in  the  "  medium,"  will,  in  most  persons,  possess  activity  enough,  even
before  any  results  are  obtained,  to  interfere  more  or  less  with  the  obser-
vation of  the  conditions  involved  ;  and  after  the  results  are  obtained,  the
dominance  of  the  idea  will  frequently  be  great  enough  to  contribute
very  materially  to  the  naturally  speedy  oblivescence  of  many  details  of
the  sitting  which  were  hardly  noticed  at  the  time  of  their  occurren  ce,
which  in  the  course  perhaps  of  an  hour  or  two  have  dimmed  out
of  recollection,  but  which,  nevertheless,  would  have  suggested  the
secret  of  the  trick.  Under  this  head  I  may  also  refer  to  the  fact  that
the  conversation  held  by  the  sitters  with  a  professed  conjurer  will
probably  be  of  less  avail  in  distracting  their  attention  than  if  they
were  sitting  with  a  "  medium  "  ^vith  any  the  smallest  expectation  that
"  occult  "  phenomena  might  occur.  In  the  former  case  they  are  well
aware  that  the  conversation  is  for  the  express  purpose  of  distracting
their  attention  from  the  movements  of  the  conjurer  ;  in  the  latter  case,
they  endeavour  to  a  certain  extent  to  occupy  the  mind — according  to
instx'uctions — Avith  matters  foreign  to  the  sequence  of  events  then  and
there  transpiring.

In  the  third  place,  comparatively  few  persons  are  willing  to  write
out  reports  of  slate-writing  experiences  with  a  full  account  of
the  supposed  test  conditions,  if  they  have  any  suspicion  that
the  writing  has  been  produced  by  mere  conjuring.  They  are
afraid  of  appearing  ridiculous,  and  in  this  dread,  if  they  are  per-
suaded to  write  reports  at  all,  they  write  them  Avith  a  meagre
allowance  of  detail,  and  with  an  abstention  from  dogmatic  statement.
No  doubt  the  fear  of  ridicule  has  deterred  many  persons  from  writing
reports  on  behalf  of  the  professed  "  medium,"  but  we  must  not  disguise
from  ourselves  the  fact  that  when  this  fear  has  been  overcome  by  the
enthusiasm  which  often  accompanies  the  formation  of  a  new  belief,  the
reports  then  are  less  to  be  trusted,  by  reason  of  that  very  enthusiasm.
Analogous  to  that  undeliberate  warping  of  evidence  which  arises  from
the  desire  to  justify  the  adoption  of  a  new  faith  and  to  aid  in
proselytising  others,  is  that  which  arises  from  the  desire  to  strengthen
the  grounds  of  a  con\-iction  which  has  already  been  fully  formed  ;
the  spiritualistic  bias  has  been  much  more  operative  in  transfigui'ing  the
accounts  of  mediumistic  phenomena  than  most  Spiritualists  would  be
willing  to  admit.  Possibly  a  wider  experience  may  result  in  our  finding
a  counterpart  to  this  in  the  testimonials  to  professed  conjuring  perfor-
mances, but  my  experience  hitherto  leads  me  to  think  that  such  a  result
is  highly  improbable.

These  difficulties  have  been  partly  obviated  by  the  fact  that  many  of


398


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &g.


Mr.  Davey's  sitters  were  not  informed  until  after  they  had  written  their
reports  that  his  phenomena  were  due  to  conjuring.  It  has,  neverthe-
less, weakened  some  of  the  accounts,  that  Mr.  Davey  felt  himself
restrained  from  asserting  that  the  phenomena  were  produced  by
"  spirits";  he  frequently  asserted  that  they  were  not  produced  by  spirits,
but  that  he  preferred  to  adopt  the  ordinary  procedure  of  the  spiritual-
istic medium  ;  and,  refusing  to  offer  any  explanation,  thus  shrouding
their  origin  in  convenient  mystery,  he  usually  requested  his  witnesses
to  determine  the  causes  of  the  phenomena  for  themselves,  the  possibility
of  trickery  included.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  assured  his  sitters  that  he
would  take  advantage  of  any  carelessness  which  they  displayed  ;  and  on
one  occasion  he  informed  a  sitter  to  whom  the  locked  slate  was  after-
wards entrusted  and  who  placed  it  in  the  tail  of  his  coat,  that  if  he
obtained  an  opportunity  he  would  even  take  the  slate  from  the  pocket
of  this  very  sitter,  and  write  upon  it  surreptitiously.  Later  in  the
sitting  this  witness,  who  I  may  say  had  been  previously  impressed  by
some  writing  obtained  at  a  sitting  with  Eglinton,  was  called  upon  to
produce  the  locked  slate,  and  place  it  upon  the  table ;  yet  so  much
had  he  been  carried  away  by  the  appearance  of  the  writing  just
produced  by  Mr.  Davey  on  a  single  slate,  that  he  had,  for  the  time,
completely  forgotten  the  existence  of  the  locked  slate,  and  did  not
remember  what  he  had  done  with  it  until  the  other  sitters  reminded
him  that  he  had  placed  it  in  his  own  pocket.  This  is  a  very  extreme
case  of  the  influence  of  a  mental  attitude  which  has  undoubtedly  in
some  degree  been  very  prevalent  among  sitters  for  mediumistic
phenomena.

Not  that  it  is  by  any  means  universal ;  and  this  leads  me  to  say
that  one  great  advantage  which  some  mediums,  especially  Eglinton,
have  used  very  freely,  has  been  foregone  by  Mr.  Davey.  He  has  not
been  withheld  from  producing  phenomena  by  the  apparent  observancy
of  the  sitters.  My  own  choice  of  sitters  for  Mr.  Davey  was  deter-
mined chiefly  ^  by  the  desire  to  obtain  educated  and  intelligent
witnesses  wlio  did  not  know  certainly  that  Mr.  Davey's  performances
were  conjuring,  and  who  could  be  relied  upon  to  write  out  a  detailed
account  soon  after  the  sitting.  Mr.  Davey's  unfortunate  ill-health,
soon  after  I  first  met  him  in  September  of  last  year,  alone  prevented
him  from  obtaining  a  much  larger  number  of  reports.  The  witnesses
were  invariably  urged  to  write  their  accounts  as  soon  as  possible  after

1  I  had  another  reason  as  well  for  requesting  Mr.  Davey  to  give  a  sitting
to  Mr.  Padshah.  I  knew  that  Mr.  Padshah  liad  had  some  unconvincing  sittings
mth  Eglinton.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Russell  were  unexpected  witnesses ;  Mr.  Legge
was  also  an  unexjiected  witness.  A  seance  was  given  to  Mr.  Dodds  because  he
had  scoffed  mercilessly  at  Mr.Legge's  account  of  his  experience. — See  Sittings
11,  III,  IV,  VIII.


Introduction.


399


the  sitting,  while  the  occurrences  were  still  fresh  in  their  memory.  It
will  be  difficult  for  persons  who  have  not  had  experience  in  making
records  of  this  kind  to  realise  how  quickly  even  incidents  which  have
been  recognised  as  important  fade  out  of  memory.  And  nothing
betrays  more  fully  the  misappreciation  of  the  value  of  the  testimony
we  are  considering  than  the  reliance  which  has  been  so  commonly
placed  upon  detailed  reports  written  weeks,  months,  and  even  years
after  the  stance.  I  may  refer  here  to  the  Avorthlessness  of  second-
hand accounts  and  of  abridged  accounts.  A  careful  original  account,
however  faulty — if  written  shortly  after  the  sitting,  will  often  be  found
to  contain  some  clues  to  the  trick  operations  of  the  medium,  which  may
be  entirely  absent  from  the  later  account.  An  instance  of  this  was
furnished  by  one  of  the  reports  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.
for  June,  1886.  The  report  was  one  sent  to  our  Society  by  three  of
our  Corresponding  Members  in  St.  Peiersburg.  It  appears  to  have  been
condensed  in  a  German  magazine,  Neue  Sjnritualistische  Blatter,  the
"  principal  occurrences  "  only  being  mentioned  ;  and  a  translation  of
this  condensed  account  is  given  in  Lights  September  25,  1886.  From
this  later  version  of  the  seance  a  sei'ies  of  incidents  which  indicate,  as  I
think,  how  the  chief  trick  was  performed,  are  entirely  omitted ;  and
writing,  which  according  to  the  original  report  is  described  as  having
been  obtained  on  an  ordinary  slate,  is  described  in  the  later  version  as
having  been  obtained  between  sealed  double  slates. ^

Ceteris  parib^is,  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses  to  the  same  occur-
rence is  rightly  regarded  as  better  than  the  testimony  of  one.  We
must,  nevertheless,  be  cautious  in  the  application  of  this  principle  to
the  testimony  for  "  psychographic  "  phenomena.  A  reference  to  the
reports  which  follow  will  show  that  wherever  separate  accounts  are
given  of  the  same  sitting,  the  witnesses  are  never  in  complete  agree-
ment, and  they  sometimes  differ  on  important  points.  This  we  found
also  to  be  the  case  where  independent  accounts  were  given  of  the  same
sitting  with  Eglinton  (Journal  for  October  and  November,  1886).  In
the  large  number  of  cases,  therefore,  where  the  detailed  record  of  a
sitting  has  been  made  by  one  only  of  two  or  more  witnesses,  and  the
record  thus  made  has  been  every  word  of  it  endorsed  by  the  other
witness  or  witnesses,  we  have  another  proof  of  that  plasticity  of
memory  to  which  I  have  drawn  attention.  It  must  be  concluded  that
in  the  majority,  if  not  all,  of  these  cases,  some  of  the  remembrances,
whether  true  or  false,  of  the  later  co-signatories  have  become  trans-
formed to  fit  the  remembrances  of  the  recorder,  and  this,  perhaps,  in
most  instances,  by  the  mere  reading  of  the  record.  It  is  of  course
not  easy  to  obtain  accounts  which  shall  be  absolutely  independent,  since


^  See  Supplement  to  the  Journal  for  December,  1886,  p.  516.


400


The  Possihilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


this  requires  that  no  communication  of  any  kind  connected  with  the
phenomena  should  pass  between  the  witnesses  after  the  commencement
of  the  stance  until  the  reports  have  been  written,  and  probably  only
an  approximation  to  this  absolute  independence  has  been  attained
where  separate  accounts  have  been  given  of  the  same  sitting  with  Mr.
Davey.

It  may  occur  to  some  ingenious  readers  of  the  reports  which  follow
and  the  notes  given  in  the  Appendix,  that  owing  to  illusions  of  percep-
tion and  memory,  Mr.  Davey  and  myself  ^  have  given  misdescriptions
of  what  really  happened  at  the  seances,  that  the  other  witnesses  are
right  and  we  are  wrong.  It  is  unnecessary  to  explain  the  "  psychical "
conditions  under  which  Mr.  Davey  and  myself  were  sitting,  so  different
from  those  of  the  other  sitters  ;  I  may  refer  such  readers  to  the  opinion
of  persons  versed  in  conjuring  tricks,  and  familiar  with  the  misdescrip-
tions given  of  them  by  the  uninitiated — and  especially  to  the  opinion  of
Mr.  Angelo  J.  Lewis  {p.  485).  I  repeat  that  the  "  psychographic  "
phenomena  described  in  the  following  records  are  conjuring,  and  only
conjuring,  performances,  and  I  may  add  that  I  was  very  careful  myself,
in  the  stances  where  I  was  present,  to  take  the  part  of  an  ordinary
sitter,  and  to  avoid  doing  anything  which  would  assist  Mr.  Davey  in
the  smallest  degree.  Indeed,  Mr.  Davey  would  have  preferred  my
absence,  as  part  of  the  task  which  I  had  set  myself  was  to  watch  Mr.
Davey 's  movements  at  the  critical  moments,  in  order  that  I  might  give
my  independent  testimony  concerning  the  mode  of  production  of  the
phenomena.

These  phenomena,  as  described,  may  well  seem  marvellous  enough
to  demand  the  hypothesis  of  occult  agency  :  writing  between  a
conjurer's  own  slates  in  a  way  quite  inexplicable  to  the  conjurer, —
writing  upon  slates  locked  and  carefully  guarded  by  the  witnesses, — ■
writing  upon  single  slates  held  by  the  witnesses  firmly  against  the  under-
surface  of  the  table, — writing  upon  slates  held  by  the  witnesses  above
the  table, — answers  to  questions  written  secretly  in  locked  slates, — •
correct  quotations  appearing  on  guarded  slates  from  books  chosen  by
the  witnesses  at  random,  and  sometimes  mentally,  the  books  not
touched  by  the  "medium," — writing  in  different  colours,  mentally
chosen  by  the  witnesses,  covering  the  whole  side  of  one  of  their  own
slates, — messages  in  languages  unknown  to  the  "  medium,"  including  a
message  in  German  for  which  only  a  mental  request  had  been  made,
and  a  letter  in  Japanese  in  a  double-slate  locked  and  sealed  by  the
witness, — the  date  of  a  coin  placed  by  the  witness  in  a  sealed  envelope
correctly  written  in  a  locked  slate  upon  the  table,  the  envelope  re-

^  Mr.  Davey  agreed  with  my  notes  except  where  I  have  stated  to  the
contrary.


Introduction.


401


maining  intact, — a  word  written  between  slates  screwed  together  and
also  corded  and  sealed  together,  the  word  being  chosen  by  the  witness
after  the  slates  were  fastened  by  himself,  &c.,  &c.  And  yet,  though
"autographic"  fragments  of  pencil  were  "  heard"  weaving  mysterious
messages  between  and  under  and  over  slates,  and  fragments  of  chalk
were  seen  moving  about  under  a  tumbler  placed  above  the  table  in  full
view, — none  of  the  sitters  witnessed  that  best  phenomenon,  Mr,  Davey
loriting.

A  few  words  remain  to  be  said  as  to  the  principle  which  has  been
followed  in  adding  or  withholding  notes  explanatory  of  the  modi
operandi  adopted  by  Mr.  Davey.

The  object  of  the  notes  given  in  the  Appendix  is  not  to  explain
the  tricks,  though  explanations  of  some  of  the  incidents  are  given  or
suggested. To  explain  the  tricks  would  in  itself  be  of  little  advantage
to  the  investigator  of  the  "  physical  phenomena "  of  mediums,  since
many  methods  of  producing  "  psychography  "  may  exist  besides  those
which  Mr.  Davey  has  employed  ;  and  were  all  of  those  in  present  use
to  be  made  public  property,  others  would  doubtless  be  invented,  and
accidental  opportunities  for  producing  successful  illusions  would  still
arise. I  may  point  out  moreover, — and this is a  consideration
frequently  overlooked — that  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that
specific  verbal  explanations,  in  as  far  as  these  are  possible,  of  all  the
methods  practised  by  "  mediums,"  would  efiectually  check  deception
even  by  those  very  methods ;  there  are  tricks  that  can  be  explained  to
a  witness,  and  then  performed  in  his  presence  without  his  detecting
them,  and  while  he  imagines  himself  to  be  fully  on  his  guard  against
them.i It  would  be  a  still  greater  mistake  to  suppose  that  explana-
tions of  the  methods  in  use  would  convince  those  who  have  testified
from  personal  experience  to  the  genuineness  of  the  "  psychography  "  of
Eglinton,  Slade,  &c.,  that  such  methods  were  used  for  the  production  of
the  phenomena  which  they  witnessed. They  will  scarcely  be  likely  to
remember  the  occurrence  of  events  which  they  perhaps  never  observed
at  all,  or  observed  only  partially  and  erroneously  ;  which,  whether
correctly  or  incorrectly  observed,  they  have  afterwards  continually
misdescribed  or  completely  forgotten  ;  and  which,  in  many  cases,  would
be  distinctly  excluded  by  the  acceptance  of their  testimony  as  it
stands. Further,  it  must  be  said, — and  this  will  become  obvious  to  the
careful  student  of  the  reports — that  no description of  particular
movements  or  peculiar  apparatus  would  suffice as an  exhaustive
explanation  of  the performances  recorded ;  the best part  of  the
trickery  is  in  truth  indescribable,  it  is  as  fluent  and  uncertain  as  the

1  I  have  actually  seen  this  done,

2  D


402  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  Sc.


shifting  attention  of  the  witnesses,  and  varies  with  the  variations  of
their  temporarily  dominant  expectations  and  emotions.

The  object  of  the  notes,  then,  is  to  show  to  investigators  the  kind
and  degree  of  mistakes  which  may  be  made  by  educated  and  intelli-
gent witnesses  in  recording  their  impression  of  a  performance  the  main
lines  of  which  are  planned  with  the  deliberate  intention  of  deceiving
them,  but  few,  if  any,  of  the  details  of  which  can  be  described  as
absolutely  fixed.

The  notes,  as  given,  might  suggest  to  the  ordinary  reader  some
unfounded  conclusions.  They  seem  in  some  cases  to  indicate  so  much
carelessness  on  the  part  of  the  sitters,  to  open  out  such  easy
possibilities  of  trick  for  the  conjurer,  that  the  reader  may  fancy  that
the  witnesses  were  unusually  gullible,  and  that  Mr.  Davey  had  in
reality  little  to  do.  To  this  the  supporters  of  Eglinton  may  probably
add  that  an  "  experienced  Spiritualist"  would  have  run  no  risk  of  being
similarly  deceived.  These  conclusions,  I  have  no  doubt,  would  be
mistaken.  In  the  first  place,  the  witnesses  would  certainly  not  have
been  objected  to  before  actual  trial  as  of  less  than  average  competence;
nor  do  I  think  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  have  shown  less  than
average  acumen  or  care.  They  may  be  taken,  too,  as  a  fairly  repre-
sentative group,  including,  as  they  do,  successful  men  of  business,  men
of  ordinary  university  training,  electrical  engineers,  members  of  the
legal  and  educational  professions,  &c.;  they  include  one  professional
conjurer,  and  others — as  Mr.  Padshah  and  Miss  Symons — who  had
given  some  previous  attention,  as  their  accounts  may  sufficiently  show,
to  the  risks  of  mal-observation  on  such  occasions  as  these.  Of  the  great
treachery  of  memory,  indeed,  the  majority  of  Mr.  Davey 's  sitters  have
been  unaware,  but  of  this  the  witnesses  of  other  "  slate-writing  "  per-
formances have,  unquestionably,  been  at  least  equally  unaware.  In
support  of  this  it  is  enough  again  to  remind  the  reader  that  in  all  the
cases  where  separate  accounts,  more  or  less  independent,  of  the  same
sitting  were  given  by  the  witnesses  of  Eglinton's  stances  recorded  in  the
Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  June,  1886,  a
comparison  ^  of  the  accounts  elicits  the  fact  that  the  witnesses  exhibited
forms  of  memory-illusion  precisely  parallel  to  some  of  those  which
have  been  exhibited  by  the  witnesses  of  Mr.  Davey's  performances.

And  be  it  observed  that  mistakes  of  the  kind  illustrated  in  the
notes  are  not,  prior  to  special  study,  any  proof  of  obtuseness  or
particular  deficiency  of  memory.  Mr.  Davey  himself,  before  he  had
studied  the  "  slate-writing  "  forms  of  conjuring,  was  a  decided  offender
in  this  respect  (see  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  October  and  November,

1  See  the  criticism  of  the  evidence  in  the  Journal  for  October  and
November,  1886.  .  i


Introduction.


403


1886)  ;  and  I  have  pointed  out  my  own  shortcomings  and  those  of  my
colleagues  with,  I  hope,  an  unsparing  hand  (see  Supplement  to  the
December  number  of  the  Journal).  I  do  not,  in  point  of  fact,  think
that  this  unpreparedness  and  inobservancy  of  mind,  in  the  presence
of  a  conjurer,  is  a  thing  of  which  anyone  who  is  not  familiar  with  the
tricks  already  need  be  ashamed.  I  have  a  strong  suspicion — founded
by  this  time  on  a  pretty  wide  experience — that  those  of  my  readers
who  may  be  most  disposed  to  deride  the  simplicity  of  the  witnesses
now  to  be  cited, would  themselves  have  come  out  of  the  ordeal  no  better
than  Mr.  Rait,  and  not  so  well  as  Mr.  Padshah.

But,  although  mankind — as  I  believe — are  thus  inattentive  and
careless  and  forgetful  beyond  their  own  common  notion  of  themselves,
it  must  not  be  supposed  that  it  is  an  easy  task  to  play  upon  their
inattention  and  forgetfulness  as  Mr.  Davey  has  done.  On  the  contrary
—  without  making  any  claim  for  him  of  inimitable  skill — it  must  be
pointed  out  that  his  achievements,  simple  as  they  may  seem,  and  by
reason  of  their  very  simplicity,  belong  not  to  a  low  but  to  a  high  class
of  conjuring  performance.  For  the  psychologist,  and  quite  apart  from
the  question  of  effect  producible  on  large  audiences,  there  may  be  said
to  be  three  classes  of  conjuring  of  progressively  deeper  interest.  Least
interesting  to  the  psychologist  are  the  effects  which  depend  on
machinery  or  apparatus,  great  as  the  mechanical  skill  involved  may  be.
More  interesting  are  those  which  depend  on  pure  prestidigitation,  on  an
assured  competence  to  perform  some  given  action  so  swiftly  and
cunningly  that  the  spectator  will  fail  to  see  it.  But  higher  still  in
psychological  interest  comes  a  class  of  conjuring  performances  which
consist  not  so  much  in  eluding  the  perceptions  of  the  witnesses  by  the
speed  and  dexterity  of  one's  own  movements,  as  in  gently  inducing
them,  by  means  different  in  each  case,  to  bewilder  and  entrap  them-
selves. The  conjurer  here  wins  as  by  the  adroitness  of  a  clever  thief,
who  poses  for  the  nonce  as  a  detective,  persuasively  points  out  the  most
subtle  and  efficient  precautions  against  robbery,  and  all  the  while  is
emptying  your  pockets.  In  this  last  class  of  performance,  the  better
the  conjuring  is,  the  less  of  it  is  needed  ;  and  its  greatest  triumph  is
when  the  spectator's  mind  has  been  brought  into  such  a  state  that  he —
so  to  say — does  his  conjuring  for  himself,  and  stands  astounded  at  his
own  interpretation  of  some  entirely  obvious  phenomenon.  Thus  Mr.
Padshah,  in  one  of  the  most  instructive  of  the  incidents  below  to  be
recorded,  turned  the  conjurer's  very  scrawl  into  a  crowning  success,
and  read  Books  into  Boorzu.

Once  more  ;  if  it  be  claimed  in  any  quarter  that  "  experienced
Spiritualists  "  would  have  been  able  to  detect  Mr.  Davey's  methods
more  easily  than  the  witnesses  actually  adduced,  I  trust  that  I  may  be
allowed  to  say,  without  giving  offence,  that  to  my  mind  the  presumption

2  D  2


404


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  Sc.


is  strongly  the  other  way.  I  have  already  explained  that  the  power  of
detecting  conjuring  tricks  is  not  a  test  of  general  capacity,  but  rather
a  result  of  having  studied  similar  conjuring  tricks  beforehand.  The
"experience"  involved  in  much  seance-going  is  assuredly  not  an
experience  that  makes  in  this  direction ;  the  mental  attitude  induced  is
the  very  worst  possible  for  the  discovery  of  trickery,  and  it  has  been
on  "  experienced  Spiritualists  "  that  those  mediums  have  thriven  whom
mere  ignorant  outsiders  have  afterwards  caught  in  palpable  fraud.  I
do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  no  "  experienced  Spiritualist "  has  ever
caught  a  rogue  out ;  but  such  exhibitions,  for  instance,  as  those  of
Haxby  and  Firman  (see  Proceedings,  Part  X,  pp.  60-62),  certainly
show  that  it  is  not  to  the  circles  of  devout  believers  that  we  are  to  look
for  detection  of  even  the  grossest  and  most  transparent  imposture.
But  I  am  anxious  not  to  be  supposed  to  assert  that  "  experienced
Spiritualists"  are  less  acute  than  other  men.  I  must  yet  again
emphasise  the  fact  that  the  difference  depends  on  previous  attitude  of
mind  ;  and  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  to  show  how  many  minds  at
how  many  seances,  have  been  in  much  the  same  condition  as  Mr.
Padshah's  when  he  recognised  the  convincing  word  Boorzu.  I  will
cite  one  instance  only,  which  exemplifies  the  influence  of  the
Spiritualistic  bias  even  beyond  the  sphere  of  professed  mediums.  It
is  a  letter  written  by  perhaps  the  most  experienced  of  all  Spiritualists,
endorsing  an  opinion  held  by  a  man  than  whom  none  more  eminent,
none  more  widely  or  justly  respected,  has  ever  avowed  adherence  to  a
belief  in  Spiritualism.  "M.A.  (Oxon.) "  wrote  as  follows  to  The
Medium  and  Daybreak  of  August  24th,  1877  : —

I  am  glad  to  see  that  Mr.  Alfred  Wallace  agrees,  after  seeing  Lynn's
medium,  with  the  substance  of  my  letter  in  your  issue  of  July  6th.  Given
mediumsliip  and  shamelessness  enough  so  to  prostitute  it,  and  conjuring  can,
no  doubt,  be  made  sufficiently  bewildering.  It  is  sheer  nonsense  to  treat
such  performances  as  Maskelyne's,  Lynn's,  and  some  that  have  been  shown
at  the  Crystal  Palace,  as  "  common  conjuring."  Mr.  Wallace  positively  says,
"  If  you  think  it  is  all  j  uggling,  point  out  exactly  where  the  difference  lies
between  it  and  mediuniistic  phenomena."  (See  Proceedings,  Part  X,  p.  66
and  note. )

Few  readers  indeed  will  question  the  proved  sagacity,  the  absolute
straightforwardness,  of  the  illustrious  naturalist  whose  statement  is
quoted  by  "  M.  A.  (Oxon.)"  Still  fewer  perhaps  will  think  that,
■without  a  strong  mental  predisposition,  the  author  of  Essays  on  Natural
Selection  would  have  committed  himself  to  the  view  that  unembodied
spirits  ran  Dr.  Lynn's  entertainment  at  the  Westminster  Aquarium.
For  myself,  I  can  but  repeat  his  challenge  in  another  sense,  and  say —
let  the  experienced  Spiritualist  "  point  out  exactly  where  the  difference
lies  between  '  Mr.  Davey's  performances'  and  mediumistic  phenomena."


Experimented  Investigation.


405


EXPERIMENTAL  INVESTIGATION.
By  S.  J.  Davey.

For  some  time  past  I  have  practised  "slate-writing,"  and  have  given
up  much  leisure  time  to  the  subject,  with  a  view  to  discovering  how  far
ordinary  witnesses  can  be  deceived  by  conjuring  performances.  I  have
received  reports  of  my  experiments  from  various  persons,  and  these  I
subjoin,  with  comments,  in  some  cases,  as  to  lapses  of  observation  or
memory  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses.  Lest  there  should  be  any  mis-
understanding I  must  explain  what  induced  me  to  take  up  the  subject,
and  the  general  conclusions  to  which  I  have  been  led.

Readers  of  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  are  aware  that  I  sent  reports
of  sittings  with  Eglinton  to  our  Society  in  1884,  and  that  I  had  pre-
viously sent  reports  of  the  same  sittings  to  the  periodical  Light.  I  do
not  now  attribute  any  value  to  these  reports  as  proving  the  reality
of  so-called  "  psych ography,"  for  reasons  which  will  appear  in  the
sequel.

My  chief  interest  in  Spiritualism  generally  was  awakened  by  an
experience  of  my  own,  which  was  as  follows  : — In  1883,  owing  to  a
serious  lung  complaint,  I  spent  several  months  at  a  Continental  health
resort.  During  this  visit,  one  of  my  companions  died  under  circum-
stances of  an  unusually  distressing  character  ;  and  another  friend  and
myself  had  been  in  frequent  attendance  upon  him  during  his  last  ill-
ness. His  body  was  subsequently  dissected,  in  the  presence  of  my
other  companion,  Mr.  C.  Three  weeks  after  this  I  was  startled  one
night  by  seeing  what  appeared  to  be  the  face  and  form  of  my  deceased
friend  under  circumstances  that  greatly  surprised  me,  and  the  next  day,
whilst  visiting  Mr.  C,  who  lodged  in  the  same  hotel  as  myself,  he
informed  me  that  he  had  that  night  experienced  a  remarkably  vivid
dream  in  which  he  had  seen  our  deceased  friend.  I  then  for  the  first
time  related  to  Mr.  C.  what  had  happened  to  myself.  ^

On  my  return  to  England  I  began  to  devote  some  attention  to  the
study  of  alleged  psychical  phenomena,  and  I  perused  several  works
relating  to  the  subject,  including  Zollner's  Transcendental  Physics,
Psychic  Force,  by  Professor  Crookes,  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism,
by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  The  Debatable  Land,  by  Robert  Dale  Owen,
Psychography,  The  Report  of  the  Dialecticcd  Society,  &c.,  and  I  formed
a  circle  of  friends  for  the  investigation  of  the  alleged  phenomena.

^  I  have  since  had  some  correspondence  with  Mr.  C,  who  does  not  look
upon  the  incident  as  anything  moi'e  than  a  dream  coincidence.  At  the  time,  I
attached  particular  significance  to  my  own  experience,  as  my  friend,  when  alive,
had  discussed  the  question  of  Spuitualism  with  nie.


406  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


During  my  first  experiments  I  found  myself  affected  a  good  deal  by
involuntary  movements  which  I  could  not  then  account  for,  though  I
now  have  little  doubt  they  were  caused  simply  by  nervous  excite-
ment 3  however,  nothing  of  any  significance  happened,  and  it  was  at
this  stage  of  my  investigation  that  I  made  the  acquaintance  of
Eglinton,  of  whose  so-called  "  psychography  "  I  had  heard.  At  the
conclusion  of  my  first  seance  with  Eglinton,  which  took  place  in  June,
1884,  I  could  not  account  for  the  phenomena  except  on  the
Spiritualistic  hypothesis,  and  I  was  led  to  believe,  from  the  "communi-
cations "  which  I  then  received,  that  I  possessed  psychic  powers.  My
second  stance  with  Eglinton,  on  October  8th,  1884,  was  a  failure,  but
my  third,  on  October  9th,  1884,  was  a  success.  I  was  somewhat  excited
at  these  results,  and  even  contemplated  making  a  collection  of  cases
to  convince  the  unbelieving  world.  On  October  9th,  1884,  the  sup-
posed invisibles  informed  me  that  I  had  "  developed  my  own  powers
to  an  appreciable  extent,  owing  to  their  former  advice."  Now,  between
my  first  and  third  seances  I  certainly  had  experienced  privately  one  or
two  incidents  which  I  then  regarded  as  genuine  psychical  phenomena,
and  I  will  bi'iefly  relate  one  of  these  experiences.

One  afternoon  in  September,  1884,  I  took  two  slates  and  determined
to  experiment  alone.  I  held  them  together  with  a  small  pencil  grain
between.  I  was  in  my  library  ;  the  slates  were  taken  out  of  a
private  box  by  myself  ;  I  glanced  at  them  and  placed  them  in  the
position  above  described.  In  the  course  of  some  few  minutes  I  lifted
up  the  slates  and  examined  them,  and  found  the  word  "  Beware"  written
in  large  characters  across  the  under  side  of  the  upper  slate.  My
astonisliment  at  this  cannot  well  be  described,  as  I  felt  convinced  I  had
previously  thoroughly  examined  the  slates,  and  I  took  the  first  train  to
London,  and  showed  them  to  my  friend  Mr.  X.  (see  Journal  for
October,  pp.  435,  436).  He  agreed  with  me  in  saying  it  was  almost
incredible.  I  then  attributed  the  above,  and  one  or  two  kindred
phenomena,  to  the  action  of  an  abnormal  power  proceeding  from  myself.

It  was  afterwards  proved  to  me  that  these  experiences  were  neither
more  nor  less  than  simple  hoaxes,  perpetrated  by  some  of  my  friends.
In  the  case  of  the  particular  incident  which  I  have  described,  the
slate  had  been  tampered  with  during  my  previous  absence  from  home.
I  have  no  doubt  that,  not  suspecting  any  interference  with  my  slates,
I  had  not  thoroughly  examined  them  immediately  before  sitting,  as  I
supposed  myself  to  have  done.  Another  incident  of  a  somewhat
ludicrous  character  may  be  mentioned  here.  I  had  bought  a  trick
slate,  which  had  been  sold  to  me  as  an  explanation  of  the  process
used  by  mediums.  I  thought,  however,  that  this  was  scarcely  true,
as  the  trick  seemed  to  be  a  very  palpable  one.  I  had  put  this
slate away  in  my  drawer  with the other slates containing  the


Expervmental  Investigation.


407


writing  of  Eglinton's  supposed  spirits.  One  morning,  on  going  to  this
drawer,  which  I  usually  kept  locked,  I  found  the  following  words,  or
something  to  the  same  effect,  written  across  the  false  surface  of  the
trick  slate  :  "  We  object  to  your  learning  trickery."  I  then  compared
this  writing  with  some  on  Eglinton's  slates,  and  found  it  apparently
identical.  I  was  naturally  somewhat  amazed,  and  I  did  not  then  for  a
moment  suspect  that  my  friends  were  hoaxing  me,  and  that  the  above
sentence  had  been  written  in  careful  imitation  of  the  writing  on
Eglinton's  slates.  Also,  during  seances  held  privately,  I  con-
tinued to  be  frequently  seized  by  spasmodic  movements  when  I
believed  "  uncanny "  manifestations  were  about  to  take  place.
As  a  conjurer,  I  have  been  since  amused  sometimes  at  similar
convulsions  in  others  during  my  conjuring  performances,  when
the  sitters  have  supposed  that  the  writing  was  being  produced  by
supernatural  means  ;  my  own  shudderings  during  these  performances
being,  of  course,  part  of  the  trick.

I  had  several  other  seances  with  Eglinton  after  October  9th,  1884,
all  of  which  proved  blanks,  except  one  held  on  January  15th,  1885.  One
of  my  friends  who  accompanied  me  to  this  sitting  assured  me  he  had
actually  seen  Eglinton  imitating  the  sound  of  writing  at  the  time  when
I  thought  a  long  communication  was  being  written.  I  endeavoured  to
be  more  watchful  at  the  two  sittings  which  I  had  after  this,  the  final
stance  being  on  June  ■25th,  1885  ;  but  at  neither  of  these  did  any
results  occur,  although  I  did  not  inform  Eglinton  of  the  information  I
had  received.  However,  partly  in  consequence  of  my  friend's  convic-
tion that  Eglinton's  performances  were  only  tiicks,  I  began,  after
getting  no  further  results,  to  apply  myself  anew  to  see  what  could  be
produced  by  conjuring.  I  then  met  with  an  individual  who  professed
to  sell  me  "secrets,"  which  he  gave  me  to  understand  he  had  procured
from  an  American  medium.  I  also  bought  one  by  which  words,  (fee,
could  be  made  to  appear  on  the  flesh  after  it  was  rubbed  over  with
burnt  paper.  This  trick  has  evidently  been  exhibited  by  Eglinton  as
a  "  mediumistic  phenomenon  "  (See  'Tivixt  Two  Worlds,  pp.  52,  54).
I  soon  made  use  of  the  knowledge  thus  acquired  by  performing
before  friends  and  acquaintances,  and  I  found  that  even  at  that
early  stage  of  my  practice  many  of  them  could  be  deceived  as  to
my  real  modus  ojjerandi.  Eglinton  has  attempted  to  give  particular
validity  to  the  accounts  of  my  successful  seances  with  him  in  1884,
claiming  my  testimony  as  that  of  one  who  had  "  specially  studied  and
practised  the  art  of  simulating  the  slate-writing  phenomena  under
conjurers'  conditions  "  {Light,  July  31st,  1886).  I  have  already  pointed
out  elsewhere  that  I  was  not  an  expert  in  1884,  when  I  wrote  the
reports  in  question,  which  Eglinton  describes  as  "  among  the  most
favourable  and  decisive  which  have  appeared." The  extent  of  my


408  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


knowledge  on  this  sul^ject  at  that  time  will  be  found  described  by
myself  in  Light,  August  21st,  1886,  as  follows: —

I  went  to  Mr.  Eglinton  on  June  30th,  1884,  and  I  do  not  remember
ever  having  previously  performed  a  single  conjuring  trick  as  applied  to  slate-
writing,  and  also  tlie  question  of  conjuring  in  any  other  form  had  in  no  way
interested  me.  Previously  to  my  second  seance,  October  9th,  1884,  I  made
some  three  or  four  attempts  witli  a  thimble,  pencil,  and  a  slate  held  under
the  table,  and  with  a  trick  slate  made  of  card-board,  with  a  movable  flap  and
blotting-paper.

I  noticed  that  many  persons  made  statements  concerning  my  per-
formances, as  to  tlie  conditions  of  the  production  of  the  writing,
which  were  just  as  emphatic  as  I  made  in  my  own  reports  about
Eglinton,  and  I  also  noticed  that  nearly  all  these  statements  were
entirely  wrong.  Even  when  I  sometimes  revealed  the  fact  that  I  was
merely  a  conjurer,  the  reply  which  I  frequently  received  was  something
of  tliis  kind  :  "Yes,  you  may  say  it  is  conjuring,  but  it  could  not  have  been
done  by  that  means  when  I  did  so-and-so  "  (describing  a  supposed  test)
"and  yet  we  got  the  writing  all  the  same."  The  following  extract
from  a  letter  to  me  is  typical  of  the  views  taken  by  several  of  my
investigators : —

I  certainly  think  your  slate-writing  quite  equal  to  what  we  saw  at
Nottingham-place  [with  Eglinton],  but  till  I  see  how  it  is  done,  and  it  is
thoroughly  explained  to  me,  I  cannot  give  up  my  belief  that  you  yourself
employ  more  than  sleight  of  hand  for  your  results.  Tou  see  I  am  a  St.
Thomas.

As  I  went  on  I  was  gradually  forced  to  the  conviction  tliat
my  own  reports  about  Eglinton  were  just  as  unreliable  as  these
statements  about  myself,  although  I  was  not  then  aware  of  the
serious  discrepancies  between  them  which  Mr.  Hodgson  has  lately
pointed  out  in  the  Journal  (October  and November, 1886).i  In

1  A  critic,  "  C.  C.  M.,"  says  in  Light,  January  22nd,  1887  :— "  Of  course  in
very  many  cases  the  modus  operandi  could  and  would  be  explained,  at  least
privately  to  the  witnesses,  to  their  complete  satisfaction.  These  would  be
really  trick  cases,  as  to  which  the  antecedent  reports  will  always  have  some
evidential  defect,  discoverable  by  a  careful  critique  without  any  presumption  at
variance  with  the  distinct  and  definite  statements  of  the  witnesses  (except  in
the  case  of  witnesses  whose  veracity,  or  capacity  for  ordinary  observation,  is
questionable),  and  such,  therefore,  as  would  not  be  adduced  in  any  judicious
selection  of  evidence  to  prove  the  genuine  phenomena."  Now,  in  a  previous
number  of  Light  (August  14th,  1886)  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  asserted,  concerning
some  of  my  testimony  to  Eglinton's  performances,  that  "there  is  no  room  for
the  hypothesis  of  innocent  misdescription,  which  might  afterwards  come  to  be
recognised  as  such  by  the  witness  himself."  I  believe,  nevertheless,  that  the
performances  of  Eglinton,  which  I  endeavoured  to  record,  were  due  to  trickeiy


Experimental  Investigation.


409


consequence  of  the  change  which  was  taking  place  in  my  opinion,
I  wrote,  on  July  30th,  1885,  to  Mr.  Farmer,  requesting  him  for
"  private  reasons,"  not  to  make  any  reference  to  myself,  either
directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  work  about  Eglinton  {'Tivixt  Two
Worlds),  wliich  he  was  then  preparing  for  the  press.

From  a  study  of  various  exposures  of  slate-writing  mediums,  and
other  incidents  which  have  been  privately  brought  to  my  notice,  I
cannot  now  entertain  a  doubt  that  they  have  frequently  practised
deception ;  and  whether  it  is  a  fact  that  they,  nevertheless,  occasionally
obtain  the  help  of  "spiritual  "beings,  or  manifest  supernormal  powers,
is  a  question  upon  which  I  have  good  reasons  for  being  now  very
sceptical,  though  I  do  not  of  course  profess  to  know  how  all  the
slate-writing  tricks  are  jDerformed.  Indeed,  only  last  month  (February,
1887),  I  was  informed  of  a  special  modus  operandi  employed  by  an
American  medium,  Mrs.  Simpson  ;  this  method  was  entirely  unknown
to  me,  nor  do  I  think  I  should  have  discovered  it  myself.

Until  recently  I  had  not  endeavoured  to  obtain  written  reports
from  persons  who  sat  with  me,  and  I  was  desirous  of  obtaining  them
under  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  conditions,  as  regards  the  mental
attitude  of  the  sitters,  as  those  obtained  by  professional  mediums  for
slate-writing ;  I  did  not  wish  people  to  know  with  absolute  certainty
by  my  own  professions  beforehand,  that  the  slate-writing  was  only  con-
juring, though  I  urged  them  to  treat  me  as  a  conjurer,  to  use  tests,
and  take  precautions  against  trickery,  (fee.  Few  persons  would
imagine  how  difficult  it  is  for  ordinary  witnesses  to  accurately  record  a
"slate-writing"  seance,  even  if  they  are  very  careful  and  quick  observers;
and  how  prone  the  majority  of  witnesses  are  to  exaggerate  or  distort
records  of  events  which  they  believe  to  be  of  an  abnormal  character.
In  consequence  of  the  prominence  given  in  cei'tain  quarters  to  my
name  in  connection  with  "slate-writing,"  I  assumed  the  professional  ^
name  of  David  Cliffi)rd.  The  desirability  of  this  step  may  be  illustrated
by  the  following  incident :  A  short  time  ago,  at  a  seance,  I  met  a
gentleman  who  spoke  in  very  disparaging  tones  of  the  performances  of
a  certain  amateur  conjurer  known  as  Mr.  A.,  and  who  remarked  to  the
effect  that  the  statements  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick  [Proceedings,  Part  X,

on  his  part,  and  that  my  reports,  adduced  by  Mr.  Massey  in  his  "judicious
selection  of  evidence,"  were  vitiated  by  "innocent  misdescription."  I  think  it
not  at  all  unlikely  that  I  was  guilty  of  the  amount  of  misdescription
hypothetieally  attributed  to  me  by  Mr.  Hodgson,  because  precisely  similar
misdescriptions  have  been  given  of  my  own  performances  by  witnesses  whose
intelligence  and  acumen  are  certainly  not  inferior  to  mine,  and  whose  veracity
is  unquestionable.

^  By  the  use  of  this  term  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  I  have  ever  demanded
any  fee  for  a  seance  ;  I  have  never  accepted  any  recompense  whatsoever.


410  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


pp.  67-70)  as  to  this  conjurer's  powers  did  not  in  the  least  explain  the
subject  of  "  psychography."  At  the  conclusion  of  my  performance
this  same  gentleman  (who  knew  me  only  under  the  name  of  Clifford)
declared  in  my  presence,  and  in  that  of  his  co-investigators,  that  the
experiments  he  had  just  witnessed  were  moi'e  conclusive  as  to  the
existence  of  supernormal  phenomena  than  those  he  had  witnessed  in
the  presence  of  a  well-known  professional  medium.  Had  he  then
knoAvn  I  was  Mr.  A.,  the  "  amateur  conjurer,"  T  do  not  think  he  would
have  shown  such  enthusiasm  as  regards  the  "  incomparable  "  nature  of
my  phenomena.

In  some  of  the  reports  which  I  received  I  was  described  as  Mr.  A.,
and  in  several  others  as  Mr-.  Clifford ;  in  these  cases  I  have  substi-
tuted my  real  name,  for  the  sake  of  clearness.

I  think  it  would  be  no  easy  task  to  expose  an  expert  in  slate-
writing,  provided  he  had  made  up  his  mind  not  to  give  his  investigators
the  chance  of  doing  so.  A  practised  conjurer  in  this  particular  branch
of  his  profession  soon  acquires  a  sufficiently  keen  insight  into  character
to  know  when  there  is  no  risk  of  detection.  If  the  performer  has  any
reason  to  think  that  any  part  of  his  trick  will  be  seen,  he  can  take
refuge  in  a  blank  seance  ;  nor  would  it  generally  be  the  case  that  if
the  trick  were  partly  performed  the  observance  of  strict  conditions  by
tlie  sitter  would  result  not  merely  in  failure,  but  in  exposure,  as  Mr.
Massey  seems  to  suggest.  {Proceedings,  Part  X,  pp.  93,  94.)  I  have,
several  times,  had  to  deal  with  this  danger,  and  have  always  been  success-
ful. ^  Of  course,  cases  will  arise  when,  if  the  right  steps  are  taken  by  the
sitter,  exposure  will  result ;  and  this  is  precisely  what  has  happened  on
more  tiian  one  occasion,  with,  for  example.  Dr.  Slade.  There  is  one
danger  to  which  I  think  a  conjurer  is  liable,  unless  he  is  very  careful,  viz.,
to  give  too  little  credit  to  the  shrewdness  of  a  sitter,  just  as  he  probably
often  gives  too  much.  The  remedy  obviously  would  be  to  increase  the
number  of  entirely  blank  seances.  If  I  were  forced  to  give  blank
stances  to  persons  of  whose  keenness  I  was  afraid,  I  should,  of  course,
frequently  give  blank  seances  to  others  whom  I  had  no  reason  to  fear,
and  with  whom  I  could  produce  marvellous  phenomena  whenever  I  liked.
I  have  found,  moi^eover,  that  a  blank  sitting  occasionally,  with  an  in-
vestigator who  at  other  times  gets  good  results,  makes  the  phenomena
look  more  mysterious  than  ever,  and  forms  an  additional  reason  in  his
mind  for  not  attributing  the  phenomena  to  conjuring.  A  plan,  I  under-
stand, that  is  very  frequeiitly  adopted  by  a  well-known  American
medium,  is  to  simulate  sometimes,  in  a  very  marked  manner,  the  ap-

^  Since  the  aljove  was  written,  an  incident  has  occurred  which  some  of  luy
readers  will  probably  think  an  exception  ;  it  happened  at  a  sitting  with  Mr.
Dodds,  and  I  will  refer  to  it  in  niy  comments  upon  his  report.


Experimental  Investigation.


411


pearance  of  trickery  in  his  slate-writing.  Not  unfrequently  one  of  his
investigators  falls  into  the  trap,  observes  what  he  supposes  is  a  clear
case  of  deception,  and  demands  an  instant  exposure  of  the  slate.
The  medium  then  protests  against  the  "unwarrantable  suspicion,"  and
finally  reveals  the  slate,  to  the  chagrin  of  his  would-be  exposer,  who  of
course  finds  it  perfectly  clean.  Then,  by  a  subtle  process,  the  medium
does  write  on  the  slate,  to  the  subsequent  amazement  of  his  witness.
From  the  account  of  a  recent  exposure  by  a  lady  Spiritualist  in  America,
who  detected  Slade  in  the  very  act  of  writing,  I  understand  that  the
speed  with  which  he  wrote  on  a  slate  held  under  the  table  greatly
astonished  the  observer.  I  have  good  authoiity  for  believing  that
the  account  is  to  be  relied  upon.  (See  New  York  Sunday  Times,  July
5th,  1885.)

1  may  now  briefly  refer  to  the  argument  that  "  psychography  "  must
be  of  an  abnormal  (or  supernormal)  character,  since  conjurers  have  been
unable  to  explain  the  phenomena.  My  own  opinion,  as  that  of  an
amateur  conjurer,  has  been  claimed  in  its  favour,  but  1  have  already
pointed  out  that  this  is  only  a  misrepresentation  of  the  facts  of  the
case,  and  that  I  was  a  deficient  observer,  and  an  ignoramus  as  regards
conjuring,  when  I  wrote  the  reports  favourable  to  Eglinton.  At  the
same  time,  1  understand  that  certain  conjurers  have  professed  their
inability  to  explain  the  slate-writing  of  some  mediums  by  conjuring.
But,  after  my  own  experiences,  1  am  not  at  all  surprised  at  this.  That
the  testimony  of  a  specially  skilled  conjurer  in  this  particular  branch  is
of  value  I  do  not  deny,  yet  at  the  same  time  it  does  not,  1  think,
follow  that  he  must  therefore  know  all  the  secrets,  such  as  one  with
more  experience  might  have  acquii'ed.  If  he  is  very  confident  of  his
own  ability  to  find  out  any  trick  and  cannot  explain  the  modus  operandi
of  the  medium,  he  may  possibly  think  it  inexplicable  by  conjuring ;
and  the  remarks  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  at  the  close  of  her  article  in
the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  December  are  particularly  suitable  to  a  case
of  this  kind. A  very  good  instance  of  this  has  come  under  my  notice.

When  Eglinton  was  in  Calcutta,  Mr.  Harry  Kellar,  a  professional
conjurer,  requested  the  "  opportunity  of  participating  in  a  seance,  with
a  view  of  giving  an  unbiassed  opinion  as  to  whether,"  in  his  "  capacity
of  a  professional  prestidigitateur,"  he  could  "  give  a  natural  explanation
of  efiects  said  to  be  produced  by  spiritual  aid."  Eglinton  eventually
met  Mr.  Kellar,  and  the  result  was  that  Mr.  Kellar  came  away  utterly
unable  to  explain  by  any  natural  means  the  phenomena  that  he
witnessed ;  and  he  said  that  the  writing  on  the  slate,  "  if  my  senses  are
to  be  relied  on,  was  in  no  way  the  result  of  trickery  or  sleight  of  hand."
This  occurred  early  in  1882,  and  Mr.  Kellar's  opinion  still  continues  to
be  quoted  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of  Eglinton's  phenomena.  Yet
I  am  not  aware  that  Mr.  Kellar,  before  sitting  with  Eglinton,  had  any


412


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  c&c.


special  knowledge  of  the  different  methods  of  producing  slate-writing
by  conjuring,  and  I  have  little  doubt,  after  reading  his  account  of  a
sitting  in  1882,  quoted  in  Lic/ht,  October  16th,  1886,  p.  481,  that  he
was  ignorant  of  at  least  some  of  these  methods.  But  this  does  not  seem
to  be  my  own  view  only ;  it  seems  to  be  that  of  Mr.  Kellar  himself,
who  since  then  has  apparently  turned  his  attention  to  slate-writing,
and  has  changed  his  former  opinion  about  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomena;  he  now  professes  to  be  able  to  "duplicate  any  perform-
ance given  by  mediums  of  whatever  nature  after  he  has  seen  it  done
three  times."  This  was  mentioned  to  me  by  an  American  gentleman
whom  I  met  recently,  but  I  have  also  seen  a  notice  of  it  in  Light  for
March  28th,  1885,  p.  147,  from  which  I  have  taken  the  above  extract ;
yet  Mr.  Kellar's  former  opinion,  given,  as  I  presume,  when  he  was  not
a  special  expert  in  slate-writing,  is  continually  quoted  by  Spiritualists,
just  as  my  own  opinion,  given  when  I  was  absolutely  incompetent  and
knew  next  to  nothing  about  conjuring  in  any  form  whatever,  has  been
quoted  as  the  opinion  of  a  specially  qualified  conjurer.

1  do  not  myself  place  much  value  upon  the  opinion  of  conjurers  who
have  not  previously  become  thoroughly  versed  in  the  ways  of  deceiving
sitters  in  slate-writing ;  not  only  because  of  this  incident  in  which
perhaps  Mr.  Kellar's  over-confidence  in  his  own  powers  of  detection
led  him  into  a  mistake,  although  he  has  after  long  experience  publicly
proclaimed  his  disbelief  in  "  mediumistic"  phenomena,  but  also  because
I  have  myself  been  able  to  deceive  a  gentleman  accomplished  in  general
conjuring.

On  August  26th,  1886,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  well-known  pro-
fessional conjurer,  whose  programme  includes  several  exposes  of  alleged
spiritualistic  frauds.  In  his  letter  to  me  this  gentleman  ^  informed  me
that  he  had  heard  a  great  deal  about  my  slate-writing,  and  was  most
anxious  to  witness  the  phenomena,  as  he  had  had  stances  with  a  well-
known  professional  medium  ;  and  he  politely  requested  an  interview
with  me.  He  was  a  stranger  to  me  personally,  but  I  at  once  offered  to
give  him  a  seance,  which  was  arranged  for  September  1.3th,  1886.  At
the  conclusion  of  the  seance  -  he  gave  me  his  testimony  as  follows  :  —

September  13th,  1886.
I  can  see  no  explanation  by  trickery  of  the  experiments  in  slate-writing  I
have  seen  performed  by  Mr.  Davey  this  evening.

(Signed)

'  I  have  not  here  disclosed  his  name,  as,  since  I  have  informed  him  of  my
conjuring  powers,  he  has  desired  me  not  to  do  so.  The  names  and  addresses
of  all  the  \\'riters  of  statements  and  reports  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Hon.  Secre-
tary of  the  S.P.R.

2  I  had  a  curious  experience  with  this  gentleman.  I  asked  him  to  think  of
a  number.  A  nundjer  which  I  thought  would  be  right  was  then,  without  his
knowledge,  marked  on  the  slate  by  my  process. I  then  asked  him  to  tell  me


Experimental  Investigation.


413


Some  days  afterwards  he  wrote  to  me  as  follows  : —

September  24th,  1886.
It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  add  my  testimony  to  that  of  many  others
you  have,  and  I  certainly  can  state  that  in  some  mysterious  manner
which  to  me  seemed  quite  inexplicable,  writing  appeared  on  slates  which  I
had  purchased  myself,  which  had  been  previously  thoroughly  washed,
and  while  they  were  held  together  apparently  very  tightly.  And  it  was
specially  remarkable  that  the  writing  was  in  the  very  colour  I  asked  fov,

(Signed  )

Another  professional  conjurer  was  shown  my  locked  slate  by  an
investigator,  the  writing  ha\'ing  been  allowed  to  remain,  and  on  hearing
the  account  of  the  witness,  he  offered  an  explanation,  which  was,  how-
ever, entirely  wrong ;  I  instance  his  opinion  merely  for  the  sake  of
pointing  out  that  his  great  knowledge  of  conjuring  in  general  did  not
enable  him  to  suggest  an  explanation  which  would  I  think  have  occur-
red to  him  if  he  had  been  skilled  in  the  various  special  methods  that
may  be  used  by  conjurers  in  connection  with  slate-writing.

It  has  sometimes  happened  that  an  investigator,  who  knew  before-
hand that  my  performances  were  conjuring,  has  thought  he  had
obtained  a  clue  to  my  methods,  but  in  nearly  every  case  where  I  have
suspected  this,  I  think  his  discovery  has  only  tended  to  perplex  him
more  than  ever.  Whilst  visiting  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick  at
Cambridge  some  few  months  ago,  I  gave  both  Professor  Sidgwick  and
Mrs.  Sidgwick  two  seances  for  slate-writing.  Amongst  other
phenomena,  I  obtained  an  answer  on  my  locked  slate,  written  under-
neath the  question  Professor  Sidgwick  had  written.  I  had  requested
Professor  Sidgwick  to  keep  special  charge  of  the  slate.  He  afterwards
concluded  I  had  obtained  some  means  of  opening  and  writing  on  it,
and  he  informed  me  as  to  when  and  how  he  thought  I  had  done  this.
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  I  did  not  in  any  way  perform  the  trick  in
the  manner  Professor  Sidgwick  surmised,  as  I  have  since  proved  to
him;  he  has  informed  me  that  my  explanation  was  "completely
unexpected,"  and  he  says  : —

I  was  so  satisfied  with  my  own  conjecture  (difficult  as  it  was  for  me  to
imagine  it  actually  realised)  that  the  method  you  actually  used  never  occurred
to  me — nor  anything  at  all  like  it.


the  number  he  had  thought  of.  He  said  98.  I  lifted  up  the  slate  and  showed
him  the  figures  98  that  had  been  written  before  he  had  spoken.  This  may  of
course  have  been  merely  an  odd  coincidence,  but  the  fact  that  I  have  had
several  somewhat  similar  experiences  with  other  investigators  led  me  to  think
that  there  might  be  something  of  the  nature  of  thought-reading  in  it.  I

endeavoured  to  arrange  some  further  experiments  with  Mr.  ,  but  his  many

engagements,  and  afterwards  my  serious  illness,  prevented  our  meetino- .
again.


414  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


To  those  of  my  readers  who  are  specially  interested  in  the  subject,
I  may  recommend  a  book  entitled  The  Bottom  Facts  of  Spiritualism,'^
by  Mr.  John  W.  Truesdell,  who  seems  to  have  had  considerable
experience  in  slate-writing.  He  gives  an  interesting  account  in
Chapter  XVI.  of  a  slate-writing  stance  recorded  by  Mr.  L.  W.  Chase,  of
Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  I  have  no  doubt,  after  my  own  experiences  as  a
producer  of  slate-writing,  that  Mr.  Truesdell's  subsequent  version  of
the  matter  is  the  true  one.  In  the  Daily  Courier  of  Syracuse,  New
York,  December  7th,  1872,  Mr.  L.  W.  Chase  made  the  following
statements  : —

The  medium  (Mr.  John  W.  Truesdell)  then  took  up  a  common  slate,
and,  after  carefully  washing  oif  either  side,  placed  it  flat  upon  the  table,
with  a  bit  of  pencil,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  underneath.  We  then  joined
hands,  and  after  the  lapse  of  about  ten  minutes,  under  the  full  glare  of
gas-light,  we  could  distinctly  see  the  slate  undulate,  and  hear  the  communi-
cation that  was  being  written,  a  copy  of  which  I  herewith  append  : — My  dear
Brother, — You  strive  in  vain  to  unlock  the  hidden  mysteries  of  the  future.
No  mortal  has  faculties  to  comf)rehend  infinity. — Charlotte.

The  above  lines  were  not  only  characteristic  of  my  beloved  sister  while
in  the  form,  but  the  handwriting  so  closely  resembled  hers  that,  to  my  mind,
there  cannot  be  a  shadow  of  doubt  as  to  its  identity.

In  reference  to  a  further  event,  Mr.  L.  W.  Chase  adds  : —

A  short  communication  from  my  mother  (and  in  her  own  handwriting)
was  found  plainly  written.

I  have  quoted  the  above  extracts  since  they  serve  to  show  how  a
person  may  be  deceived  in  the  matter  of  spirit  identity  ;  for  Mr.  John  W.
Truesdell,  at  the  close  of  Chapter  XVI.,  frankly  informs  his  readers
that  he  himself  wrote  the  messages,  and  describes  the  methods  he
employed.  The  resemblance  between  the  handwritings  was,  I  presume,
imaginary.

The  fact  that  "  messages "  occasionally  contain  private  family
details,  &c.,  is  often  quoted  as  a  proof  of  the  Spiritualistic  theory  in
connection  with  slate-writing,  but  many  persons  would  be  surprised  to
find  how  frequently  a  slate-writing  conjurer  may  become  possessed  of
apparently  private  matters  in  connection  with  his  investigators,  and  they
should  also  not  forget  that  peculiar  chance  coincidences  sometimes  occur.
It  is  not  very  long  since  I  met  a  gentleman  who  was  a  perfect  stranger
to  me  personally,  and  I  depicted  scenes  to  him  that  I  knew  had  taken
place  many  years  ago,  with  an  accuracy  that  utterly  bewildered  him,  and
I  went  into  such  private  details  of  his  family  matters  as  convinced  him
I  had  a  strange  insight  into  his  past  life.  Yet  this  was  merely  due  to  a
chance  coincidence. Some  months  previously  these  and  other  details


1  Published  by  Caileton  and  Co.,  New  York.


Experimental  Investigation.


415


had  been  incidentally  mentioned  to  me  by  a  person  well  acquainted
with  his  history,  and  although  he  was  not  a  public  character,  his  name,
in  connection  with  the  events  of  which  I  had  heard,  became  somehow
fixed  in  my  memory.  Nor  is  this  the  only  experience  I  have  had  of  a
somewhat  similar  nature.

Then  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  when  witnesses  become
deeply  impressed  with  the  wonder  of  the  performance,  they  not  un-
frequently  give  way  to  a  little  natural  excitement,  and  whilst  they
have  laboured  under  the  excitement  I  have  picked  up  items  of  informa-
tion from  the  witnesses  themselves,  which  when  reproduced  by  me  at
future  seances  have  been  declared  "  wonderful  tests."

During  the  past  few  months  I  have  given  seances  to  many  total
strangers  who  have  applied  to  me  for  sittings.  In  some  cases  I  have
given  these  performances  away  from  my  own  residence,  and  I  have
requested  the  investigators  to  use  all  possible  caution  to  guard  against
any  trickery,  leaving  them,  however,  to  make  their  own  suppositions
concerning  the  mode  of  production  of  the  phenomena.  Latterly  I  have
stipulated  that  the  sitters  should  write  out  reports  as  soon  as  possible
afterwards ;  and  upon  receiving  these  reports  I  have  informed  them
without  delay  that  the  phenomena  were  only  conjuring.  Formerly  in
some  cases  1  had  given  the  sittings  over  and  over  again  to  the  same
persons,  with  an  occasional  blank  to  stimulate  their  curiosity;  neverthe-
less they  never  detected  the  modus  operandi.

I  shall  now  give  nearly  ^  all  the  accounts  that  I  have  received,  but
before  doing  so  I  wish  my  readers  to  be  clearly  awai'e  that  the  writing
performances  described  in  the  following  records  were  due  to  my  own
unaided  powers  as  a  "  slate-writing "  conjurer.  Two  years  ago  I
should  have  questioned  the  power  of  a  conjurer  to  produce  such  records
from  ordinary  witnesses  as  those  which  I  now  append,  and  that  others
shared  my  doubt  in  this  respect  is,  I  think,  apparent  from  the  follow-
ing Editorial  Note  in  Light,  September  4th,  1886.

If  he  [Mr.  Davey],  or  any  other  conjurer,  can  produce  the  appearance
of  the  conditions  which  he  seemed  to  observe  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  and  the
writing  under  such  apjparent  conditions,  so  as  to  induce  an  inexperienced


1  The  only  reports  which  I  have  not  quoted  are  two  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  one
by  Mr.  Hodgson,  and  three  others.  These  last  three  resembled  the  majority  of
those  which  I  have  quoted  ;  two  of  the  writers  desired  me  not  to  print  their
reports  at  all ;  the  third  desired  me  not  to  print  his  report  unless  it  was  a  correct
account  of  what  occurred  at  the  sitting.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  not  only  aware
that  I  was  a  conjurer,  but  I  had  told  her  a  good  deal  about  my  tricks  before  my
lirst  seance  with  her.  Mr.  Hodgson  was  also  aware  that  I  was  a  conjurer,  and
had  some  knowledge  beforehand  of  my  modus  operandi  ;  his  report  was  written
chiefly  for  comparison  with  an  account  promised  by  the  gentleman  to  whom  I
have  referred  on  pp.  409-10  as  having  exhibited  such  enthusiasm,  but  who,  unfor-
tunately, notwithstanding  my  repeated  requests,  has  never  sent  me  any  report.


416  Tlte  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


witness  to  write  such  a  report  as  those  he  wrote  himself,  it  will  be  time
enough  to  talk  of  mal-observation  as  a  jjossible  explanation.

I  shall  begin  by  quoting  a  few  brief  statements  of  a  general  kind
merely  in  illustration  of  the  impressions  left  upon  some  of  those  from
whom  I  did  not  exact  a  detailed  report.

Statement  of  Mr.  A.  Podmore.

July,  1886.

A  few  weeks  ago  Mr.  D.  gave  me  a  seance,  and  to  the  best  of  my
recollection  the  following  was  the  result.  Mr.  D.  gave  me  an  ordinary
school  slate,  which  I  held  at  one  end,  he  at  the  other,  with  our  left  hands  :
he  then  produced  a  double  slate,  hinged  and  locked.  Without  removing  my
left  hand  I  unlocked  the  slate,  and  at  Mr.  D.'s  direction,  placed  three
small  pieces  of  chalk — red,  green,  and  grey — inside  :  I  then  relocked  the
slate,  placed  the  key  in  my  pocket,  and  the  slate  on  the  table  in  such  a
position  that  I  could  easily  watch  both  the  slate  in  my  left  hand,  and  the
other  on  the  table.  After  some  few  minutes,  during  which,  to  the  best  of
my  belief,  I  was  attentively  regarding  both  slates,  Mr.  D.  whisked  the  first
away,  and  showed  me  on  the  reverse  a  message  written  to  myself.  Almost
immediately  afterwards  he  asked  me  to  unlock  the  second  slate,  and  on
doing  so  I  found  to  my  intense  astonishment,  another  message  written  on
both  the  insides  of  the  slate — the  lines  in  alternate  colours,  and  the  chalks
apparently  much  worn  by  usage.

My  brother  ^  tells  me  that  there  was  an  interval  of  some  two  or  three
minutes  during  which  my  attention  was  called  away,  but  I  can  only  believe
it  on  his  word.

Austin  Podmore.

Statement  of  Mrs.  Johnson.

My  sisters  and  I  being  most  interested  in  the  subject  of  slate-writing  and
anxious  to  see  something  of  it,  Mr.  Davey  kindly  arranged  a  meeting  at  his
house.  We  sat  at  an  ordinary  table  in  a  well-lighted  room,  and  writing  was
quickly  produced  on  the  inner  surface  of  one  of  two  slates  held  firmly
together,  once  by  Mr.  Davey  and  myself,  at  other  times  by  my  sisters  and  Mr.
Davey ;  at  first  just  under  the  edge  of  the  table,  then  above,  and  afterwards  on
one  of  my  sister's  shoulders.  This  was  the  more  wonderful  as  we  had  purchased
the  slates  on  our  way  from  the  station.  Of  course  between  the  slates  were
placed  three  points  of  difterent  coloured  chalks,  after  ivhich^  Mr.  Davey  asked
us  in  which  colour  the  writing  should  appear,  and  it  did  so  in  the  colour  we
elected,  the  slate  being  covered  with  writing.  We  are  all  quite  certain  that
the  slates  were  never  out  of  the  hands  of  one  or  other  of  us,  and  we  are
totally  unable  to  account  for  the  slate-writing.

M.  Johnson.

[September,  1886.]

1  Mr.  Frank  Podmore  had  been  previously  informed  by  me  as  to  the  details
of  the  particular  metliods  which  I  intended  to  employ  in  the  seance  described
above. — S.  J.D.

-  These  words  were  added  by  Mrs.  Johnson  later. — S.  J.  D.


Experimental  Investigation.


417


Statement  of  Mk.  Scobell.

November  25th,  1886.

Dear  Sib, —

I  had  the  pleasure  of  attending  a  seance  given  by  you  some  few
months  ago,  and  beg  to  relate  what  took  place  to  the  best  of  my  recollection.

First,  you  produced  a  framed  slate  which  folded,  and  upon  which  there
was  a  patent  lock.  You  opened  the  slate,  cleaned  it  perfectly  free  from
writing,  put  two  or  three  pieces  of  crayon  or  pencil  therein,  locked  it  up,  and
placed  the  key  in  the  hands  of  one  of  my  daughters,  who  was  present.  The
slate  was  laid  on  the  table,  and  the  hands  of  all  of  us  were  placed  on  and
around  it.  You  then  told  us  to  think  of  some  subject  upon  which  we  should
like  a  few  lines,  and  to  say  the  colour  in  which  we  should  like  them  to  appear.
This  was  left  to  one  of  my  daughters.  You  then  appeared  to  be  invoking
the  aid  of  some  unknown  person,  which  appeared  to  be  attended  with  con-
siderable mental  agitation  to  yourself,  and  a  slight  scratching  was  heard,  and
upon  the  slate  being  finally  unlocked  and  opened,  two  or  three  lines  of  writing
appeared  therein,  and  they  were  upon  the  subject  my  daughter  had  lent  her
mind,  and  in  the  colour  writing  desired  by  us.

The  next  thing  you  did  was  to  solicit  us  to  take  out  any  volume  from  your
bookcase,  turn  to  a  page,  and  fix  our  special  attention  on  a  passage.  This  I
did  without  your  seeing  the  page  or  passage.  The  book  was  handed  to  you,
and  you  in  a  short  time  told  us  the  right  page  and  right  paragraph.

I  can  only  say  that  my  daughters  and  myself  were  perfectly  astonished
with  your  performance,  and  had  we  been  predisposed  to  believe  in
Spiritualism,  we  should  have  been  convinced  in  such  belief  through  your
seance,  as  the  whole  performance  seemed  to  us  a  phenomenon  incapable  of  any
explanation  and  not  to  be  produced  by  any  ordinary  natural  means.  — Yours
faithfully,

R.  W.  Scobell.

Mr.  S.  Davey,  Jun.

Statement  of  Mr.  S.  Ellis.

November  29th,  1886.

Both  Mrs.  Ellis  and  myself  are  pleased  to  have  an  opportunity  of  testify-
ing to  the  intense  gratification  you  have  afforded  ourselves  and  friends  on
several  occasions,  both  at  our  house  as  well  as  under  your  own  roof,  by  the
psychical  phenomena  you  have  exhibited,  and  we  are  nov^  as  much  as  ever
at  a  loss  to  arrive  at  the  natural  means  employed,  as  at  the  startling  results
produced — so  astonishing  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  believe  even  the
testimony  of  two  senses.  The  productions  of  the  "locked  slate  "  fully  bear
out  the  foregoing  statement.

S.  Ellis.

Statement  of  Mrs.  Barrett.

Your  wonderful  performance  on  the  slate  comjjletely
puzzled  me.  I  have  not  got  over  it  yet.  Thinking  over  it  as  much  as  ever
I  can,  I  am  as  far  off  having  any  idea  about  it  as  at  first. You  say  you  did


418  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


the  writing,  so  I  suppose  you  did  ;  but  how  ?  That  is  what  I  want  to  know.
You  gave  me  a  clean  slate  without  a  mark  or  scratch  of  any  kind  upon  it.  I
examined  it  carefully,  I  sponged  it  with  water,  and  at  your  desire  I  locked  it
up  and  kept  my  eye  upon  it.  When  it  was  unlocked  and  the  slate  examined,
I  discovered,  to  my  astonishment,  that  it  was  written  all  over  from  top  to
bottom.  I  never  lost  sight  of  the  locked  slate,  and  I  never  lost  sight  of
you  ;  and  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  it  was  impossible  for  you  or  any  one
present  to  have  done  it  ;  yet  the  wonderful  fact  remains  ;  the  slate  was
l^erfectly  clean  when  it  was  locked  up,  and  written  all  over  when  unlocked.
This  is  a  mystery,  and  as  I  am  unable  to  look  through  a  wooden  cover,  I
cannot  imagine  a  clue  to  it.  Perhaps  some  of  these  days  you  will  en-
lighten me.

Statement  of  Miss  Stidolph.

I  have  much  pleasure  in  recording  my  recollections  of  a  seance  with  Mr.
S.  J.  Davey.  His  j^owers  are  certainly  marvellous,  and  while  I  have  not  the
very  smallest  belief  in  " Sjnritualism  "  or  "mediums"  of  any  kind,  believing
the  things  so  called  to  be  gross  deceptions,  I  was  amazed  at  my  friend's  scientific
skill.  Apparently  he  has  no  appliances.  I  was  seated  with  him  at  a  small
table  when  he  gave  me  the  following  astounding  evidence  of  his  powers.  He
gave  into  my  hands  a  slate  which,  when  locked,  looks  like  an  ordinary  box.
This  box  I  opened,  washed  the  slate,  locked  it,  and  took  the  key  ;  for  some
minvites  we  sat,  he  with  one  hand  on  mine,  his  other  hand  on  the  table.
Presently  a  faint  scratching  was  heard,  and  continued  some  little  time  ;  when
it  ceased  Mr.  Davey  unlocked  the  slate,  and  lo  !  it  was  covered  with  clear,
distinct  writing — a  letter  addressed  to  myself,  and  stating  if  I  would  wait  a
little  while  the  writer  would  go  to  the  Cape  and  bring  me  news  of  my
brother.  Then  I  again  washed  the  slate  ;  again  it  was  locked,  and  again  I
kept  the  key.  Mr.  Davey  then  asked  me  to  take  any  volume  I  liked  from
the  library,  to  look  at  a  page  and  remember  the  number  of  it.  This  1  did,
and  again  we  sat  as  before.  In  a  few  moments  the  slate  was  unlocked,  when
on  it  was  written,  not  only  the  number  of  the  page  I  had  thought  of,  but
some  of  the  words  which  were  on  the  self-same  page,  and  these  not  ordinary
words,  but  abstruse  words,  as  the  book  I  selected  was  a  learned  one.  This  I
considered  a  most  marvellous  feat,  and  utterly  incomprehensible.  That  the
scientific  researches  of  my  friend  will  lead  to  most  important  results  I  have
no  doubt.  His  aim  is  to  expose  deception,  and  if  this  object  be  attained  he
will  benefit  society  and  throw  light  on  a  subject  which  has  hitherto  been
considered  to  belong  exclusively  to  the  "  powers  of  darkness."

E.  Stidolph.

T  would  mention  that  the  shelves  from  which  I  took  the  book  contained
hundreds  of  volumes,  and  Mr.  Davey  had  no  idea  which  I  had  selected  as  he
closed  his  eyes  and  went  to  the  extreme  end  of  the  room.

E.  S.

November  25,  1886.

Proceeding  now  to  more  detailed  accounts  I  shall  first  quote  reports
by  Mr.  J.  H.  Rait  and  Mr.  Hartnall  J.  Limmer,  of  a  sitting  which  I
shall  call


Experimental  Investigation.  419
SITTING  1.*

These  accounts  wei'S  written  independently,  from  notes  taken  during
the  sitting.  Mr.  Limmer  had  had  a  successful  seance  with  me  some
months  previously,  of  ^fhich  he  wrote  no  account.

1.  Report  of  Mr.  Rait.

On  Wednesday  evening,  the  8th  September,  1886,  at  7.30,  I  betook  my-
self, in  answer  to  a  previous  invitation,  to  the  residence  of  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey.
I  had  brought  with  me  at  his  request  three  new  common  school  slates
privately  marked  by  me  and  of  medium  size,  a  box  of  assorted  crayons,  and
a  book  to  take  notes  in.  Arrived  there  I  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Limmer,
who  with  Mr.  Davey  and  myself  formed  the  trio  in  whose  presence  the
manifestations  which  I  am  about  to  record  took  place.

At  8.30  p.m.  we  seated  ourselves  as  shown  in  the  diagram. Mr.  Limmer

'  •  BOOKCASE


WINDOW
A. This  is  where  the  Slate  was  held.


sat  directly  opposite  me,  while  Mr.  Davey  sat  on  my  left,  the  gas  burner
being  directly  overhead  so  as  to  distribute  light  equally  on  all  surroundings.
Before  I  begin,  however,  I  will  call  attention  to  the  following  facts.

1.  During  the  whole  seance,  with  but  one  slight  exception,  the  gas  was
burning  brightly.

2.  The  slates  used  were  the  3  already  mentioned  and  a  double  one  of
Mr.  Davey's  of  superior  make,  with  ebony  backs  and  fitted  with  a  lock,
which,  after  having  cleaned  it  and  inserted  a  small  fragment  of  slate  pencil,  I
locked,  and  at  his  request  put  it  in  the  pocket  of  my  coat,  where  it  remained
till  used.  With  these  slates  there  could  not  possibly  be  any  tampering,  ^
as  during  the  whole  seance  they  never  for  one  moment  left  the  room.


*  I  have  numbered  the  sittings  in  the  order  in  which  I  have  quoted  them,
and  have  also  lettered  the  chief  events  described  in  each,  so  that  where  more
than  one  account  is  given  of  the  same  sitting,  the  reader  may  easily  compare
the  different  descriptions  given.  The  small  index  numbers  refer  to  notes  which
will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  487-95.


420  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


3.  While  the  writing  was  taking  place  under  the  table,  Mr.  Davey's
left  hand  was  held  by  Mr.  Linimer  while  his  right  with  the  exception  of  the
tops  of  his  4  fingers  was  full  in  my  view.

4.  The  chalks  used  were  my  own,  wrapped  separately  in  paper,  and  before
the  seance  had  never  been  taken  out  of  the  box.^

5.  A  fact  that  appears  to  me  most  wonderful  is  that  the  point  of  the
slate  pencil  or  crayon  was  always  worn  and  invariably  formed  part  of  the
last  stroke.

At  Mr.  Davey's  request  I  took  one  of  my  new  slates,  cleaned,  wiped  it,
and  placed  a  minute  fragment  of  slate  pencil  on  its  surface, and  held* it  under
the  table  at  the  corner  of  the  table  with  my  left  hand,  pressing  it  firmly  all


A. Slate.  B. Surface  of  Table.


The  dotted  lines  show  that  part  of  the  Slate  under  the  Table.
A. Extremity  held  by  me. B. Held  by  Davey.

the  time.  Mr.  Limmer  held  my  right  on  one  side  and  Mr.  Davey's  left  on  the
other,  while  Mr.  Davey  also  suj^ported  the  slate  under  the  table  with  his
right  ;  thus  it  will  be  seen  that  a  chain  was  formed  by  the  hands.  After
remaining  a  few  seconds  thus.

[a]  Mr.  Davey  :  "  Are  you  there  ?  " No  answer.

Mr.  D:  "Are  you  going  to  give  us  any  answer  this  evening?"  A
distinct  ticking  sound  was  here  heard  and  after  3  seconds  or  so  it
stopped  and  I  withdrew  the  slate  ;  on  it  was  an  imperfect  scrawl  which  no
one  could  decipher.

[6]  Mr.  D.  :  "  We  will  try  again  ;  please  hold  the  slate  firmly  ;  engage  in
conversation  ;  try  and  not  concentrate  the  thoughts  too  much  on  one  subject."

Mr.  D.  :  "  Are  you  going  to  give  us  any  answers  this  evening  or  not?
Now  do  try."  This  time  the  noise  of  the  ticking  of  a  pencil  was  most  dis-
tinctly heard  as  if  firmly  and  deliberately  writing.  I  called  Mr.  Limmer 's
attention  to  the  fact  and  he  informed  me  the  writing  was  distinctly  audible
to  him. I  withdrew  the  slate  and  on  it  distinctly  written  was  Yes.

[«]  Mr.  D.  :  "  Will  some  one  now  ask  a  question  ?  "


Experimental  Investigation.


421


After  some  thought  it  occurred  to  me  to  ask  what  o'clock  it  was  at  present,
there  being  no  timepiece  in  the  room.

Mr.  D.  :  "  Will  you  kindly  tell  us  what  time  it  is?"  The  ticking  was
immediately^  resumed.  I  watched  Mr.  Davey  while  seemingly  talking  to  Mr.
Limmer,  but  could  detect  nothing  suspicious  in  his  movements  ;  three  dis-
tinct ticks  were  heard  and  I  put  the  slate  on  the  table  and  examined  it.  It
was  written  in  the  same  indistinct  hand,  and  began  with  a  scrawl,  but  in  the
middle  of  the  sentence  I  could  decipher  "  nine  "  plainly.  On  asking  Mr.
Lunmer  to  look  at  his  watch  he  replied  that  it  wanted  a  quarter  of  an  hour
to  9.

[rf,e,/]  On  putting  the  question  "Will  there  be  a  war  with  Russia  ? "
we  got  the  vague  reply  "'Perhaps."  In  reply  to  other  questions  the  answers
obtained  were  "  iry  c/(«ifc  "  (this  refers  to  the  difficulty  experienced  in  dis-
tinctly writing  on  a  new  slate)  and  "a;moer  later."

So  far  nothing  striking  had  occurred  beyond  very  scrawly  writing,  and
replies  which  might  mean  anything  ;  but  something  better  was  in  store
for  us.

[(/]  I  now  suggested"  a  slight  variation  in  the  experiment,  which  both  Mr.
Limmer  and  Mr.  Davey  agreed  to.  I  will  mention  however  that  in  the
right-handed  breast  pocket  of  my  coat  I  had  placed  a  sealed  envelope  con-
taining some  questions  of  a  most  impossible  nature,  and  which  I  had  written
on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  September,  intending  to  produce  them  at  the
seance  with  a  view  to  getting  them  answered  ;  they  being  all  the  time  in  the
envelope  and  their  contents  unknown  to  anyone  but  myself.  I  determined
therefore  to  put  the  question,  "  What  does  the  right-handed  breast  pocket
of  my  coat  contain?"

Requested  by  Mr.  Davey  to  clean  and  again  privately  mark  my  slates,  I
did  so  ;  and  at  his  request  Mr.  Limmer  and  I  chose  3  fragments  of  chalk, —
pink,  green,  and  blue.  These  3  fragments  were  placed  on  the  surface  of  one
of  the  slates.  I  then  placed  another  slate  on  the  top  of  this  so  that  the
chalks  were  between.'''  This  time  the  slates  were  above  the  table;  we  joined
hands  and  began  talking,  the  question  concerning  my  coat  pocket  having
been  put.  It  is  important  to  note  that  during  this  experiment  both  of  Mr.
Davey 's  hands  were  in  view,  also  that  the  writing  began  almost  instan-
taneously on  joining  hands.  Mr.  Davey  became  very  agitated,  his  hands
slightly  trembled  under  mine,  and  he  occasionally  gasped  for  breath  as
though  in  pain.  (These  fits  occurred  at  intervals  throughout  the  seance  and
always  when  the  writing  was  taking  place,  but  on  no  occasion  did  he  move
either  his  hands  or  feet.)  The  writing  distinctly  continued,  cool,  deliberate,
and  steady.  I  could  even  hear  the  occasional  dashes  as  in  stroking  the  t's,
&c. ;  it  invariably  seemed  to  come,  away  from  Mr.  Davey,  immediately  under-
neath my  fingers.  I  could  almost  feel  the  chalk  as  it  moved  along  in  its
weird  progress,  guided  by  what  mysterious  agency  I  know  not.

All  at  once  Mr.  Davey  said,  "  Quick  !  !  in  what  colour  will  you  have  it
written  ? "  Pink  was  chosen.  This  is  what  appeared  on  lifting  one  slate
oflF:—

Dear  Sir, — This  experiment  is  a  very  difficult  one,  and  we  can  but
rarely  repeat  it.  (In  greeny  You  may  rest  assured  that  we  shall  do  all  in  our
power  to  answer  (in  blue)  you  this  evening,  but  we  are  very  anxious  that  you


422  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


 not  this  question  (in  pink)  simply  on  account  of  the  question  we

will  try  and  answer  your  question  later  on  and  the  endeavour  to

convince  any  test  you  may  suggest.  .  "Erneso?."

'  The  latter  part  written  in  pink.  Part  of  the  message  we  could  not
decipher,  and  I  accordingly  cannot  repeat  it  in  full.  This  message  occupied
about  2  minutes  or  less  in  writing,  and  was  on  the  whole  fairly  well  written.

\K\  The  next  exi^eriment  was  with  Mr.  Davey's  closed  slate.  After  it  had
been  produced  from  my  pocket  we  laid  it  on  the  table  locked  and  with  the
small  piece  of  pencil  inside,  joined  hands  as  before  and  the  question  was
put,  "Will  the  Emperor  of  Germany  live  through  the  present  year  ?
Immediately  the  writing  began,  exactly  the  same  as  on  previous  occasions,
and  when  after  the  space  of  4  minutes  (about)  I  carefully  unlocked  the  slate
we  found  the  following  wonderful  message  :  "  My  Dear  Sirs, — It  is  a
popular  error  that  if  we  can  produce  this  writing  under  these  conditions  we
might  at  the  same  time  have  a  knowledge  upon  all  questions  of  a  mundane
nature.  One  is  apt  to  forget  that  j^rophet  seer  and  prophetess  are  children
all  of  '  mother  guess,'  and  this  rule  applies  to  us.  Yet  for  ourselves  we  can
foresee  much  to  happen  in  in  the  year  18S9,  and  to  do  this  we  need  but  carry
Out  the  instructions  of  Bonnet  (?)  who  said,  'Ne  vous  lassez  jamais  d'examiner
les  causes  des  grands  changements,  puisque  rien  ne  servira  jamais  tantavotre
instruction.'  Your  test  is  a  severe  one,  for  we  have  not  the  gift  of  clairvoy-
ance to-night. On  VII  we  think  (or  thank)  your  friend  from  time  to

time  in  explanation  of  this  mystery  try  your  test  again  later  on  and  we  shall

succeed. We  hope  to  "  (here  the  writing  ends). This  is  clearly  a  dii-ect

reply  to  all  our  questions,  and  "the  severe  test"  referred  to,  points  evidently
to  my  coat  pocket's  contents.  What  the  mysterious  VII.  means  I  do  not  know,
except  that  it  may  have  some  allusion  to  the  7th  September,  the  day  on
which  I  wrote  the  (|uestions.  This  belief  is  strengthened'-'  by  the  answer  we
got  in  trying  to  find  out  the  writing  after  the  Roman  letters  VII,  later  on  in
the  evening,  and  which  read  (as  much  as  we  could  make  out  of  it)  Septem.
This  long  message  was  to  my  mind  the  most  marvellous  result  of  all,  and  its
effect  was  strongly  marked  on  Mr.  Davey,  who  seemed  in  a  state  of  great
prostration,  and  called  for  a  glass  of  water.

[(',  Jc]  Mr.  Davey  then  placed  a  slate  on  two  small  boxes  which  rested  on
the  table,  thus  ;  3  pieces  of  chalk, — blue,  pink,  and  red — were  then  chosen


and  jilaced  on  its  surface  (the  slate)  and  over  the  chalk  was  placed  a  tumbler;
the  gas  was  slightly  lowered,  and  we  were  told  to  say  what  figure  we  would


Experimental  Investigation.


423


like  to  have  drawn.  I  chose  an  octagon,  Mr.  Limmer  chose  a  square.  I  saw
a  piece  of  chalk  slightly  raove  and  on  lifting  the  glass  we  saw  two  very  indis-
tinct marks.  We  however  resolved  to  try  again.  This  time  the  red  piece  of
chalk  distinctly  moved,  but  very  quick.  Lifting  the  tumbler  we  found  this
figure /  which  evidently  was  intended  for  part  of  Mr.  Limnier's


square.

[I,  m,  ti]  I  desired^o  after  this  to  have  the  writing  on  the  double  slate  of
Mr.  Davey's  continued  at  the  point  where  it  had  been  broken  off,  and
obtained  this  result  on  one  of  my  slates  which  I  held  underneath  the  table
and  which  began  immediately.  "  We  hope  to  see  you  again — Joey."  I
was  also  anxious  to  know  what  the  VII  signified  as  I  have  already  said
before  ; — on  the  first  attempt  we  got  the  answer — "good-bye  Joey" — but
we  were  more  successful  on  again  putting  the  question,  the  result  being  a

distinct  "  Septe  "  ;  whether,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  was  intended

for  September  I  cannot  tell.

As  it  was  getting  late  (10.30)  the  seance  concluded.  In  finishing  this
statement  I  wUl  add  that  for  my  part  I  am  "  an  outsider,"  have
never  before  given  slate-writing  or  Spiritualism  a  thought  until  Mr.
Davey  lent  me  "  Psychography"  and  a  copy  of  Light  dated  8th
November,  1884,  and  invited  me  to  relate  my  experiences  as  they
appeared  to  my  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  only  ;  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  do  in  as  complete  a  manner  as  possible.  What  the  agency  is
that  moves  the  fragment  of  pencil  I  know  not  ;  I  leave  that  for  the  savants.
It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  part  of  an  answer  was  written  in  French,  a
language  totally  unknown^!  to  Mr.  Davey.  Also  that  3  colours  were  employed
in  writing  another  answer.  Trickery  to  my  mind  is  utterly  impossible  in  any
respect.  How  it  is  all  done  I  cannot  tell  ;  niy  advice  to  the  "sceptics"  is
"  go  and  judge  for  yourselves."  John  H.  Rait.

10/9/86.

2.  Report  of  Mr.  Limmer.

On  Friday,  the  8th  September,  1886,  I  had  the  privilege  of  being
present  at  a  "  Spiritualistic "  seance  given  by  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey  at  his
residence  .  .  .  Mr.  Herbert  Rait  .  .  .  was  the  only  other
person  present  besides  Mr.  Davey  and  myself.

The  only  table  used  was  a  small  one  which  Mr.  Davey  informed  us  was
technically  known  as  a  "  Pembroke."  This  table  I  thoroughly  examined,  and
nothing  that  could  aid  Mr.  Davey  in  any  way  could  I  discover.  The  proceed-
ings then  commenced  by  placing  a  common  slate,  bought  that  evening  and
marked  by  Mr.  Rait,  under  the  corner  of  the  table  and  supported  in  that
position  by  the  right  and  left  hands  of  Mr.  Davey  and  Mr.  Raic  respectively,
while  I  completed  the  circle  by  holding  their  disengaged  hands.

[c,  c]  The  question  "  What  is  the  time  ?  "  was  then  asked  by  Mr.  Rait,
and  after  a  short  interval  I  distinctly  heard  writing,  but  on  looking  at  the
slate  the  answer  was  not  readable  :  the  question  was  therefore  repeated,  and
shortly  after  the  word  "nine"  was  obtained.

\_d,  e,  /  ]  The  next  question  asked  by  Mr.  Rait  was,  ' '  Will  there  be  a


424


The  Possibilities  of  Mai-Observation,  &c.


war  with  Russia  or  not  ? "  in  reply  to  which  Ave  received  the  word
"Perhaps."  The  same  gentleman  then  asked  "Will  the  Emperor  of
Germany  live  through  the  year  ?"  Instead  of  receiving  a  direct  reply  the
words  "  Try  chalk  "  were  found  written  upon  the  slate,  and  on  adopting
that  suggestion  we  obtained  the  single  word  "later."

I  may  mention  here  that  all  the  chalk  and  slates  (with  the  exception  of
the  "  locked  slate  "  mentioned  later  on  in  this  report)  used  during  the  even-
ing were  brought  by  Mr.  Rait,  and  had  never  been  in  the  possession  of  Mr.
Davey.

[g]  The  next  test  was  that  of  two  common  slates  being  placed  upon  the
table,  one  above  the  other,  the  frames  of  which  fitted  so  accurately  that  it
appeared  utterly  impossible  to  insert  anything  by  which  the  pencil  could
be  i)ut  in  motion.  These  slates  were  previously  examined  by  Mr.  Rait  and
myself.  Green,  pink,  blue  and  red  chalk  having  been  inserted  by  Mr.  Rait,
the  circle  was  again  formed  in  the  manner  before  described,  Mr.  Davey
having  this  time,  though,  hoih  hands  placed  upon  the  top  slate.  The  question,
"What  does  my  right  hand  breast  coat  pocket  contain?"  was  put  by  Mr.
Rait,  and  it  was  agreed  that  tlie  colour  in  which  the  answer  should  be  written
should  be  pink.  I  distinctly  heard  the  chalk  passing  rapidly  between  the
slates,  and  in  about  two  minutes  we  had  the  following  message  before  us.

(In  pink)

"  Dear  Sir,

"This  experiment  is  a  very  difhcult  one,  and  we  can  but  rarely
"  repeat  it.  (In  green.)  You  may  rest  assured  that  we  shall  do  all  in  our
"  power  to  answer  (in  blue)  you  this  evening,  but  we  are  very  anxious  that
"  you  should  not  put  this  question  (in  pink  again)  (word  not  plainly  written
"  here)  simply  on  a/c  of  the  (word  not  readable)  question.  We  will  try  and
"  answer  your  question  later  on,  and  the  (word  not  readable)  endeavour  to
"  convince  (word  not  readable)  any  test  you  may  suggest.

"  Ernest."

At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings  Mr.  Davey  appeared  to  be  rather
exhausted,  and  drank  a  glass  of  water.

Mr.  Davey  then  produced  a  "locked  slate,"  which  I  examined  most
minidely,  and  as  far  as  1  was  able  to  judge,  the  surfaces  were  genuine  slate
and  had  not  undergone  any  jjrocess  of  preparation  which  would  aid  him  in
obtaining  writing.  A  small  crumb  of  pencil  was  inserted,  and  the  slate
closed  and  locked  by  Mr.  Rait.  The  key  was  then  given  into  my  possession.
We  then  placed  our  hands  in  an  exactly  similar  position  as  before,  and
Mr.  Rait  having  repeated  the  question  ' '  Will  tlie  Emperor  of  Germany  live
through  the  year  ?  "  I  very  soon  heard  the  pencil  travelling  over  the  surface
of  the  slate.  After  the  lapse  of  about  four  minutes  the  slate  was  carefully
unlocked  by  Mr.  Rait,  and  the  pencil  very  much  worn  was  found  at  the
place  where  the  writing  ended.

The  lines  on  the  first  side  of  the  slate  ran  in  a  diagonal  direction  from  left
to  right,  but  on  the  second  side  it"was  done  in  the  usual  manner,  i.e.,  from
side  to  side.  The  writing  was  of  a  very  neat  character  and  the  majority  of
the  letters  were  well  formed. The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  letter.

"My  Dear  Sirs,  — It  is  a  popular  error  that  if  we  can  produce  this  writing
"  under  these  conditions  we  might  at  the  same  time  have  a  knowledge  upon  all


Exper  imentcd  Investigation.


425


"  questions  of  a  mundane  nature.  One  is  apt  to  forget  that  '  Prophet,  seer,
"  and  prophetess  are  children  all  of  Mother  Guess  '  and  this  rule  applies  to
"  us,  yet  for  ourselves  we  can  forsee  much  to  happen  in  in  (the  word  '  in  '
"  occurred  twice  here)  the  year  1889  and  to  do  this  we  need  but  carry  out
"  the  instruction  of  Bonnet  (this  name  was  indistinct)  who  said  '  Ne  vous
"  '  lassez  jamais  d'examiner  les  causes  des  grands  changements  puisque  rien
"  '  servira  jamais  tant  a  votre  instruction.'

*  ' '  Your  test  is  a  severe  one  for  we  have  not  the  gift  of  clairvoyance
"to-night  on  VII  oz  we  think  (oi  thank)  your  friend  from  time  to  time
"  in  explanation  of  this  mystery.

"Try  your  test  again  later  on  and  we  shall  succeed.

"We  hope  (/


[I,  m,  11]  The  writing  having  stopped  so  abruptly,  two  i-*  ordinary  slates
were  placed  upon  the  table  in  the  manner  before  described,  and  it  was
asked  by  Mr.  Rait  that  the  letter  should  be  concluded.  Within  a  period  of
15  seconds  from  the  time  of  asking  such  question  and  after  completing  the
circle  with  our  hands,  the  words  "  to  see  you  again,  Joey,"  were  written.

The  two  slates  were  again  placed  in  the  same  position  as  before,  and  Mr.
Rait  having  put  an  unimjjortant  question,  after  tlie  conq^letion  of  the  circle  as
before,  I  saw  upon  the  slate  "  Good-bye,  Joey  "  ;  but  on  a  second  trial  a
scrawl  was  obtained  which  looked  very  much  like  "  Sept.  Joey"  but  it  was
impossible  to  say  definitely  what  it  was  intended  for.

[i,  j,  fc]  The  final  test  to  which  Mr.  Davey  was  subjected  was  that  of
writing  under  an  inverted  tumbler  under  the  following  conditions.  An
ordinary  tumbler  was  inverted  and  placed  upon  one  of  the  slates  brought  by
Mr.  Rait.  This  slate  was  raised  slightly  from  the  table  and  supported  by  two
small  boxes  placed  under  the  ends  of  the  slate.  Blue,  pink,  and  red  chalk
were  then  placed  under  the  glass  by  Mr.  Rait,  and  after  joining  hands,  Mr.
Rait  asked  that  an  octagon  should  be  formed  with  the  red  chalk.  After
waiting  for  a  few  minutes  the  red  chalk  was  seen  to  make  two  short  lines
almost  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  thus, —r" The  same  test,  after  the


slate  had  been  cleaned,  was  rei:)eated,  and  with  precisely  the  same  result.  I
then  asked  that  a  square  should  be  formed  by  the  red  chalk,  and  two  sides
of  it  were  made  almost  instantly,  and  in  the  colour  required.  Although

*  This  probably  refers  to  some  questions  whicli  Mr.  Rait  had  written  and
enclosed  in  a  sealed  envelope  and  placed  in  his  breast  coat  pocket  and  known
only  to  himself.  It  Avill  be  remembered  he  previously  asked  "  What  does  my
right-hand  breast  coat  pocket  contain  ?  " — H.  J.  L.


Saw  Pencil  lie  here,  on  carefully  opening  the  Slate.


426  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


looking  to  within  a  few  inches  of  the  tumbler  and  seeing  the  pencil  move,  I
failed  to  discover  anything  which  could  have  caused  it  to  do  so.

I  can  only  say  that  the  whole  thing  was  totally  inexplicable  to  me,  and
to  the  best  of  my  belief  it  was  impossible  for  Mr.  Davey  to  have  produced
any  of  the  above  results  by  the  aid  of  trickery,  as  he  did  not  appear  in  any
way  to  try  to  divert  my  attenti(jn  either  from  himself  or  the  slates,  and  1
watched  him  as  closely  as  it  was  jiossible  throughout  the  whole  proceedings.

HaRTNALL J.  LlMMEK.


SITTING  II.

The  following  three  reports  are  by  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  liis  wife  and  daughter.
I  shall  speak  of  them  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Y.  The  reports  ought
to  be  specially  instructive  in  consequence  of  the  differences  of  attitude
illustrated  by  the  sitters.  Mrs.  Y.  was  unaware,  until  after  her  report
had  been  written,  that  the  phenomena  were  nothing  but  conjuring.
Miss  Y.  was  unaware  of  tliis  fact  during  the  sitting,  but  I  understand
that  she  was  unintentionally  informed  of  the  true  nature  of  my  perfor-
mances before  she  wrote  her  report.  Mr.  Y.  was  aware,  before  any
arrangement  had  been  made  for  the  sitting,  of  the  work  upon  which  I
was  engaged,  and  knew  that  any  phenomenon  which  might  occur  would
be  due  to  my  own  conjuring  powers.

1.  Report  of  Mks.  Y.

On  the  evening  of  September  10th,  1886,  1  went  with  my  husband  and
daughter  to  a  room  in  Furnival's  Inn,  to  witness  the  slate-writing  performances
of  Mr.  Davey.  On  our  way  we  stopjjed  at  a  stationer's,  and  my  husband
purchased  tliree  perfectly  new  ordinary  school  slates.  We  found  Mr.
Davey  to  be  a  young  man  of  manifest  intelligence  and  great  earnestness  of
scientific  purpose.  He  imjDressed  me  as  being  thoroughly  honest  and  above
all  trickery.  He  also  impressed  me  as  being  in  a  very  critical  state  of  health,
and  I  should  say  the  nervous  strain  of  his  slate-writing  performances  was
most  injurious  to  him.

[a]  We  seated  ourselves  at  an  ordinary  Pembroke  table,  brought  out  of
the  kitclien  attached  to  the  chambers  belonging  to  the  friend  who  had  loaned
his  room  for  the  occasion.  A  piece  of  chalk  was  placed  on  one  of  our  slates,
and  the  slate  was  held  tightly  up  against  the  underside  of  the  table  leaf  by  one
of  Mr.  Davey's  hands  and  one  of  my  daughter's.  Their  thumbs  were  on  top  of
the  table,  and  their  hands  spread  underneath  on  the  underside  of  the  slate.
I  held  Mr.  Davey's  other  hand,  and  we  all  joined  hands  around  the  table.
I  watched  the  two  hands  holding  the  slate  without  a  moment's  intermission,
and  I  am  confident  that  neither  Mr.  Davey's  hand  nor  my  daughter's  moved
in  the  least  during  the  whole  time.  Two  or  three  questions  were  asked
without  any  sign  of  response.  ^  Then  Mr.  Davey  asked  rather  emphatically,
looking hard at the corner of the table  under which they  were


Experimental  Investigation.


427'


holding  the  slate,  "  Will  you  do  anything  for  us  ?"  After  this  question  had
been  repeated  three  or  four  times,  a  scratching  noise  was  heard,  and  on
drawing  out  the  slate  a  distinct  "  Yes"  was  found  written  on  it,  the  chalk
being  found  stationary  at  the  point  where  the  writing  ceased.  As  my  eyes
were  iixed  uninterruptedly  on  both  my  daughter's  hand  and  on  Mr.
Davey's  also,  and  as  I  certainly  had  fast  hold  of  his  other  hand  all  the  time,
I  feel  confident  he  did  not  write  this  word  in  any  ordinaiy  way.-

[6]  This  same  result  was  obtained  two  or  three  times.  But  Mr.  Davey
did  not  seem  to  think  it  was  enough  of  a  test,  and  he  proposed  that  we
should  try  it  with  the  slate  on  the  table  in  full  sight  of  us  all,  with  a
candle^  burning  brightly  in  the  middle  of  the  table.

[c]  He  gave  me  a  locked  slate  of  his  own,  which  I  thoroughly  washed  and
locked  myself,  and  put  the  key  in  my  own  pocket.  We  then  joined  hands,
and  Mr.  D.  and  my  daughter  placed  one  hand  each  on  the  slate  as  it  was
lying  on  top  of  the  table.  Different  questions  were  asked,  and  we  waited
some  time,  but  no  response  came.  Mr.  Davey  seemed  to  me  very  much
exhausted,  and  I  urged  him  to  desist  from  any  further  efforts.  But  he
seemed  loth  to  do  this,  and  said  he  would  rest  a  little  while,  and  would  then,
perhaps,  be  able  to  go  on.  After  a  short  time  of  conversation,  the  slates  all
the  while  being  in  full  view  and  carefully  watched  by  me,  we  again  tried  it,
under  the  same  conditions  as  before,  only  that  this  time  Mr.  D.  requested
us  each  to  take  a  book  at  random  from  the  shelves  in  the  room,  and  mentally
think  of  two  numbers  rej^resenting  a  page  and  a  line,  and  he  would  see  if  he
could  reproduce  it.  This  also  failed  of  any  result,  and  Mr.  D.  said  he
feared  he  was  too  tired  to  produce  anything,  as  he  had  been  very  much
exhausted  by  a  long  and  very  successful  seance  the  night  before.  We  again
begged  him  to  desist,  but  after  a  short  rest,  during  which  he  walked  into  the
next  room  for  fresh  air,  I  thought,  he  insisted  on  another  trial.  The  slates
still  remained  all  the  tune  in  full  view  on  the  table.  Mr.  D.  asked  my
daughter  to  choose  another  book,  which  she  did  at  random,  he  having  his
back  to  her  and  standing  at  some  distance  while  she  did  it.*  This  book  was
at  once  tied  up  and  sealed  by  one  of  the  party,  Mr.  D.  never  touching
it  from  first  to  last.  I  then  held  it  in  my  lap,  while  we  joined  hands  as
before,  and  Mr.  D.  and  my  daughter  each  put  one  hand  on  the  slate.
Still  nothing  came.  Then  we  changed  positions,  and  I  placed  my  hand  on
the  slate  instead  of  my  daughter,  giving  her  the  book  to  hold.  During  tliis
change  she  kept  her  hand  on  the  slate  until  I  had  placed  mine  beside  it,  and
the  book  was  awaiting  her  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  table,  my  husband  all
the  while  holding  Mr.  D.'s  other  hand.  1  ei,m  confident  that  Mr.  D.  could
not  possibly  have  manipulated  the  slate  during  this  change,  for  it  was
in  full  sight  all  the  while,  and  our  hands  were  on  it,  and  the  book  was  tied
and  sealed  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  table.  A  few  minutes  after  this
readjustment  Mr.  D.  seemed  to  have  a  sort  of  electric  shock  pass  through
him,  the  perspiration  started  out  in  great  drops  on  his  forehead,  and  the
hand  that  was  touching  mine  quivered  as  with  a  nervous  spasm.  At  once  we
heard  the  pencil  in  the  slate  moving,  and  in  a  few  moments  Mr.  Davey
asked  me  to  unlock  the  slate.  My  daughter  took  the  key  out  of  her  pocket
and  handed  it  across  the  table  to  me,  and  I  unlocked  the  slate,  and  found  it
covered  on  both  the  inner  sides  with  writing. Wheji  read,  this  writing


428


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


proved  to  be  a  sort  of  essay  or  exhortation  on  the  subject  of  psychical
research,  with  quotations  from  the  book  chosen  intermingled  throughout.  I
forgot  to  say  that  Mr.  D.  had  asked  us  all  to  choose  in  our  minds  two
numbers  under  ten  to  represent  a  page  and  a  line  of  the  book,  but  had  finally
concentrated  his  thought  on  what  my  husband  was  thinking.  In  the  writing
there  were  quotations  from  every  page  we  had  any'  of  us  thought  of,  but  not
always  the  line  ;  but  in  the  case  of  my  husband  the  line  was  correct,  but
not  the  page.  He  had  thought  of  page  8,  line  8.  The  line  was  quoted
from  page  3,  and  Mr.  D.  said  this  confusion  between  8  and  3  quite
frequently  occurred,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  numbers.  This  test
seemed  to  me  perfect.  The  slate  was  under  my  own  eye  on  top  of  the  table
the  whole  time,  and  either  my  daughter's  hand  or  my  own  was  placed  firmly
upon  it  without  the  intermission  of  even  a  second."  Moreover,  we  closed  and
opened  it  ourselves.

[d]  After  a  short  rest,  Mr.  Davey  asked  us  to  wash  two  of  our  own  slates
and  put  them  together,  with  pieces  of  chalk  of  different  colours  between,
and  all  of  us  to  reach  across  the  table  and  hold  them  all  together.  This  we
did,''  and  then  Mr.  D.  asked  my  husband  to  choose  mentally  three  colours  he
wished  used  in  writing.  After  all  holding  the  slates  closely  pressed  together
for  a  few  minutes,  we  placed  them  on  the  table,  and  Mr.  D.  and  I  placed  our
hands  on  them  while  the  rest  joined  hands.  In  a  few  moments  the  same
sort  of  electric  shock  seemed  to  pass  through  Mr.  D. ,  and  his  hand  and  arm
which  were  on  the  slates  quivered  nervously,  and  immediately  a  scratching
noise  was  heard.  He  then  asked  me  to  lift  one  slate  off  the  other,  which  I
did,  and  found  one  side  covered  with  writing  in  three  colours,  the  very  three
my  husband  had  mentally  chosen.  I  am  perfectly  confident  that  my  hand
was  not  removed'*  from  the  slates  for  one  single  instant,  and  that  I  never  lost
sight  of  them  for  a  moment.

By  this  time  Mr.  D.  seemed  to  us  to  be  so  much  exhausted  that  we  begged
him  to  give  up  any  further  tests,  but  he  insisted  on  trying  one  more,  which
was  as  it  proved  the  most  remarkable  of  all.

[e]  He  placed  one  of  our  slates  on  three  little  china  salt-cellars  that  lifted
it  up  about  an  inch  from  the  table.  Ujion  tlie  middle  of  this  he  placed  several
pieces  of  difi'erent  coloured  chalks,  and  covered  them  with  a  tumbler.  Then  he
told  my  husband  to  form  a  mental  picture  of  some  figure  he  wished  to  have
drawn  on  the  slate  under  the  glass,  and  to  name  aloud  the  colour  he  would  have
it  drawn  in.  He  thought  of  a  cross,  and  chose  aloud  the  blue  colour.^  I  sug-
gested that  blue  was  too  dark  to  be  easily  seen,  and  asked  him  to  take  white,
which  he  agreed  to.  We  sat  holding  hands  and  watching  the  pieces  of  chalk
under  the  tumbler.  No  one  was  touching  the  slate  this  time,  not  even  Mr.
D.  In  a  few  minutes,  Mr.  D.  was  again  violently  agitated  as  with  an  electric
shock,  which  went  through  him  from  head  to  foot,  and  immediately  after-
wards we  saw,  with  our  own  eyes,  each  one  of  us,  the  pieces  of  chalk  under
the  glass  begin  to  move  slowly,  and  apparently  to  walk  of  their  own  accord
across  the  space  of  the  slate  under  the  tumbler.  My  husband  had  said  just
before  that  if  the  piece  of  red  chalk  under  that  tumbler  moved,  he  would
give  his  head  to  anyone  who  wanted  it,  so  sure  was  he  that  it  could  not
possibly  move.  The  first  piece  of  chalk  that  began  to  walk  about  was  that
very  red  piece  ! Then  the  blue  and  white  moved  simultaneously,  as  though


Experimental  Investigation.


429


uncertain  which  was  the  one  desired.  It  was  utterly  astounding  to  all  of  us
to  see  these  pieces  of  chalk  thus  walking  about  under  the  glass  with  no
visible  agency  to  move  them  !  All  the  while  Mr.  D.,  whose  hands  were  held
on  one  side  by  myself  and  on  the  other  side  by  my  husband,  seemed  to  be
on  a  great  nervous  strain,  with  hot  hands  and  great  beads  of  perspiration.
When  the  chalks  stopped  moving,  we  lifted  the  tumbler,  and  there  was  a
cross,  pai'tly  blue  and  partly  white,  and  a  long  red  line  marking  the  path
taken  by  the  red  chalk  I  We  were  impressed  by  this  test  beyond  the  power
of  words  to  declare.  The  test  conditions  were  perfect,  and  the  whole  thing
took  place  under  our  eyes  on  top  of  the  table  with  no  hands  of  anybodj-  near
the  slate. This  was  the  close  of  the  evening's  performances.

Upon  reading  over  my  account  I  see  that  I  have  put  the  leaving  of  the
room  by  Mr.  D.  in  the  wTong  place.  It  should  have  been  just  before  the
writing  on  our  slates  with  coloured  chalks  instead  of  just  before  the
writing  on  the  locked  slate.  But  in  either  case  the  slates  were  all  the
time  in  full  view  on  the  table  with  the  rest  of  us  who  remained  behind.

I  consider  the  test  conditions  to  have  been  perfect  throughout,  and  see
no  possible  explanation  for  the  very  remarkable  phenomena  that  occurred.

Mks.

September  Uth,  1886.

2.  Bepoi-t  of  Miss  Y.

The  exhibition  was  given  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  sitting-room,  a  medium-sized
room  with  a  large  square  table  in  the  centre,  covered  with  a  cloth.  Mr.
Hodgson  and  my  father  and  mother  and  I  were  in  the  room,  seated  around
this  table,  when  Mr.  Davey  entered.  He  looked  at  the  table,  and  said  it
would  not  do.  So  we  pushed  it  aside,  and  a  Pembroke  table  was  brought  in
in  its  place  ;  I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  the  property  of  Mr.  Hodgson
or  whether  Mr.  Davey  had  brought  it  with  him.  It  was  quite  bare,  and  we
placed  on  it  a  candle  and  three  single  slates  which  my  father  had  bought  at  a
shop  on  our  way  to  Furnival's  Inn.  We  also  had  on  it  a  bowl  half  fuU  of
water,  containing  a  sponge  to  wash  the  slates  with,  and  a  cloth  with  which  to
dry  them.  On  the  large  table  was  a  lamp  and  on  the  manteli^iece  were  three
candles,  so  the  room  was  quite  clearly  lighted.  We  sat  in  a  circle  around
the  table,  my  mother  next  to  Mr.  Davey,  then  my  father,  then  Mr.
Hodgson,  then  I  by  Mr.  Davey.

[a]  Mr.  Hodgson  brought  us  a  little  pasteboard  box,  in  which  were  a
number  of  small  pieces  of  chalk  of  different  colours.  I  chose  two  of  these
and  placed  them  on  one  of  our  slates.  We  had  all  previously  written  either
our  names  or  our  initials  on  that  side  of  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  slipped  the
slate  under  the  edge  of  the  table,  I  holding  on  to  it  all  the  time,  and  -we
held  it  flat  under  the  table  with  our  thumbs  above  the  table.  I  held  the  slate
very  firmly  against  the  table,  and  I  am  sure  I  did  not  relax  my  hold  once.
After  waiting  some  time  and  asking  various  questions,  we  heard,  or  seemed
to  hear,  the  chalk  moving  on  the  slate.  We  drew  the  slate  out,io  and  on  it
was  written  "  Yes,"  which  was  an  answer  to  our  last  question.

[&]  We  again  put  the  slate  under  the  table,  and,  in  order  to  be  sure  that
nothing  had  been  written  on  it,  I  half  slipped  it  out  again  and  saw  that  it
was  perfectly  clean. After  some  more  waiting,  my  father  asked  when  we


430  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


were  to  sail  for  A.merica.  The  clialk  again  squeaked,  and  on  drawing  the
slate  out  we  found  "  the  18th  "  written  very  indistinctly.  This  happened
not  to  be  the  date,  which  was  the  15th.  I  forgot  to  mention  that  while  we
were  waiting  for  the  writing  we  had  all  joined  hands,  and  talked  on  indifferent
subjects.  Just  before  the  writing  came  Mr.  Davey  grew  very  quiet  and
writhed  with  his  arms.  His  left  hand,  the  one  not  holding  the  slate,
pressed  very  hard  upon  the  table.  Meanwhile,  my  father  and  mother  had
changed  places,  because  it  was  indicated  in  some  way,  by  the  writing  on  the
slate,  I  think,  that  we  were  not  all  seated  in  our  proper  places.

[c]  After  these  experiments,  Mr.  Davey  seemed  very  much  exhausted.
But  he  drank  some  water,  and  insisted  on  going  on  to  try  the  experiment  with
the  books.  He  had  previously  brought  out  his  own  little  slate,  a  double
•one  made  of  ebony,  with  a  silver  lock  on  it,  He  said  he  would  use  this  in
tlie  experiment.  We  saw  that  it  was  clean,  and  then  one  of  us  locked  it.
I  tliink  my  mother  put  the  key  in  her  pocket.  Then  we  each  chose  a  book
.at  random  from  a  large  bookcase  at  the  end  of  the  room,  in  which  the  books
were  arranged  apparently  without  any  system.  I  can't  remember  whether
we  left  the  slate  on  the  table  while  we  chose  our  books,  or  whether  one  of
us  held  it.  ^  ^  When  we  sat  down  at  the  table  again,  I  put  my  hand  on  the
^slate  and  leaned  my  elbow  on  my  book.  Then  Mr.  Davey  asked  us  each  to
think  of  two  numbers  under  10,  one  for  a  i^age  in  our  book  and  one  for  a
line  on  that  page.  This  we  did,  and  sat  waiting  for  some  time  with  our
hands  joined,  but  no  writing  appeared  on  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  seemed
so  exhausted  that  we  determined  to  give  up  the  experiment,  and  I  put  my
book  back  in  its  place.  We  sat  as  before  around  the  table,  discussing  the
failure  of  the  experiment. Finally  Mr.  Davey  started  up  and  said,  "We

must  try  it  with  one book  alone. Will  you  choose  one.  Miss  ?  "  I

^supposed  that  he  asked  me  to  do  it  because  my  seat  was  nearest  to  the
bookcase.  I  got  up  and  went  to  the  bookcase.  Mr.  Davey  stood  by  the
table  with  his  back  to  me.  That,  latter  fact  I  feel  as  if  I  remember  most
■{listinctly.  I  mention  it  to  show  that  I  chose  my  book  at  random  and
was  not  influenced  in  my  choice  by  him.  As  I  came  back  to  the  table  he
said,  "Do  not  let  me  see  the  name  of  the  book."  But  as  I  did  not  under-
stand what  the  trick  was  to  be,  I  forgot  his  injunction  and  placed  the  book
<in  the  table  at  my  right  hand.  Mr.  Davey  was  on  my  left.  However,  I
only  left  it  there  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  I  am  sure  that  I  either  looked  at
it  or  held  it  the  whole  time,  so  that  he  could  not  have  opened  it  without  my
knowledge.  Mr.  Hodgson  brought  me  some  string  and  this  I  passed  around
the  book  several  times  and  tied  with  four  knots.  Then  my  mother  sealed
the  knots  and  took  the  book.  She  did  not  hold  it  in  her  hand  the  whole
time,  but  either  let  it  lie  in  her  lap  or  sat  on  it.  But  Mr.  Davey  could  not
have  taken  the  book  or  opened  it  without  her  knowledge,  as  he  sat  perfectly
still  and  we  saw  everything  he  did.  We  opened  the  double  slate,  and  after
we  had  seen  that  it  was  perfectly  clean,  I  put  some  chalk  in  it,  locked  it,  and
put  the  key  in  my  pocket  ;  and  I  also  kept  hold  of  the  slate  during  the
exijeriment.  Mr.  Davey  asked  us  each  to  think  of  two  numbers  as  before.
Finally  he  asked  us  to  write  them  down  on  a  slate.  I  wrote  mine  on  one  of
our  own  slates  so  that  he  could  not  possibly  see  what  I  had  written,  and  I
placed  it  on  the  table  away  from  Mr.  Davey,  and  leaned  my  elbow  on  it.


Experimental  Investigation.


431


I  think  the  others  did  the  same  with  the  other  slates.  To  my  remembrance,
some  of  us  watched  the  locked  slate  all  the  time  while  we  were  writing.

After  a  few  minutes  Mr.  Davey  asked  my  mother  to  change  places  with
me.  This  we  did,  but  I  did  not  relax  my  hold  of  the  slate  until  she  had
her  hand  on  it.  She  gave  me  the  book,  and  I  sat  on  it,  and  we  again  joined
hands.  Mr.  Davey's  right  hand  was  on  the  slate  which  was  on  the  table,
and  my  father  held  his  other  hand.  Mr.  Davey  said  that  the  experiment
was  too  difficult  while  we  all  thought  of  different  numbers.  So  he  asked
my  father  to  think  of  his  numbers,  and  the  rest  of  us  not  to  think  of  ours.
After  a  little  while  the  chalk  inside  the  slate  squeaked  a  good  deal.  I  took
the  key  out  of  my  pocket,  and  one  of  us,  my  mother,  I  think,  unlocked  the
slate.  Both  sides  were  covered  with  writing,  all  of  which  I  will  not  quote.
Then  we  cut  the  string  of  the  book,  having  found  the  seal  untouched.  We
opened  the  book  at  my  father's  page  and  line,  8  and  8,  but  there  was  nothing
there  that  was  quoted  on  the  slate.  So  we  looked  at  page  3,  line  8.  There
we  found  this  line,  "  The  greenest  grasses  Nature  laid."  On  the  slate  was
this  sentence,  "  The  greenest  grasses  will  be  laid  by  Nature."  It  was  not  in
quotation  marks,  although  three  of  the  words  were  underlined.  On  my
mother's  page,  8,  but  not  on  her  line,  4,  was  the  title  of  a  poem,  "The
House  of  Clouds."  This  was  on  the  slate,  underlined.  On  Mr.  Hodgson's
page,  7,  but  not  on  his  line,  9,  was  the  title,  "  The  Deserted  Garden."  This
-was  also  on  the  slate,  underlined.  On  my  page,  1,  we  found  nothing  that  was
quoted  on  the  slate.

[d]  After  this  experiment,  we  put  aside  Mr.  Davey's  slate  and  took  two  of
our  own.  We  cleaned  them,  and  placed  on  one  a  number  of  little  pieces  of
coloured  chalk.  The  second  slate  was  put  on  the  first  one,  and  my  mother
and  Mr.  Davey  held  it  above  the  table.  Mr.  Davey  asked  my  father  to
think  of  three  colours.  We  joined  hands  once  more,  and  in  a  little  while  we
heard  writing  between  the  slates.  When  we  took  one  off,  on  the  under  one
■was  written  : —

In  red,  "  We  are  very  glad  to  be  able  to  give  you  this."
In  white,  "  We  can  do  more  yet."
In  green,  "  Good-bye."

My  father  had  thought  of  red,  white,  and  hlue.  We  could  not  be  sure  by
the  night  light  whether  the  "  good-bye"  was  written  in  green  or  blue.  But
there  was  a  piece  of  chalk  on  the  slate  that  looked  much  more  blue  than  the
piece  with  which  the  "  good-bye"  was  written.

[e]  After  this  we  tried  one  more  experiment.  Mr.  Davey  placed  one  of  our
slates  on  two  little  Japanese  salt-cellars,  made  of  china  covered  with  wickei',
and  one  common  glass  salt-cellar.  On  the  slate  we  put  a  number  of  pieces  of
coloured  chalk,  and  over  this  a  clean  tumbler.  Meanwhile  Mr.  Davey  took
the  candle  from  our  table,  and  put  it  on  the  other  one.  This  made  the  light
a  little  less  distinct,  but  it  was  still  very  good.  Then  Mr.  Davey  asked  my
father  to  draw  a  figure  and  write  a  colour  on  his  double  slate.  My  father
made  a  star,  and  wrote  "  Red."  This  he  showed  to  all  of  us  except  Mr.
Davey,  after  which  he  locked  it,  and  put  it  in  his  pocket,  and  gave  me  the
key.  We  joined  hands,  and  Mr.  Davey's  hands  did  not  touch  the  slate  or
the  glass  at  all. We  sat  for  some  time,  without  any  results.

Finally,  we  gave  it  up,  and  my  mother  and  I  put  on  our  cloaks  to  go  home


432  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


But  before  we  left  the  room,  we  decided  to  give  it  one  more  trial.  We
thought  that  perhaps  we  had  made  too  complicated  a  figure,  so  we  unlocked
the  slate,  and  rubbed  out  what  my  father  had  written  before.  Then  I  drew
a  cross,  and  he  wrote  "  Blue."  We  sat  down  at  the  table  and  watched  the
chalk  with  the  closest  attention.  Mr.  Davey's  arms  shook  violently,  and  once
when  the  chalk  began  to  move,  he  snatched  his  hands  off  the  table.  But
my  father  and  mother  did  not  let  go  of  them.  While  we  were  waiting  for  the
chalk  to  move  Mr.  Davey  seemed  very  much  excited,  and  he  asked  my  father
what  colour  he  had  written.  My  father  said  "  Blue,"  whereupon  my  mother
said,  "  What  a  pity  you  did  not  say  white.  It  would  have  been  so  much
easier  to  seethe  white  move."  So  my  father  said,  "  Very  well,  let  it  be
white."  At  Mr.  Davey's  request,  both  he  and  I  kept  our  minds  fixed  on
white,  and  on  the  figure  I  had  made  on  the  slate.

Finally,  the  red  chalk  actually  did  move  across  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey
snatched  the  glass  off.  I  expected  to  see  a  red  cross,  but  the  red  had  only
made  a  slight  short  mark.  There  was  a  long  white  mark,  and  across  it,  near
the  top,  was  a  green  mark.  But  the  green  mark  was  very  small,  and  not  at
right  angles  with  the  white  mark,  nor  did  it  extend  as  far  on  one  side  of  the
white  mark  as  on  the  other.

That  is  all  that  happened,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember.  It  took  place
two  evenings  ago,  the  10th  of  September.  The  only  curious  thing  I  noticed
about  Mr.  Davey  was  the  odd  way  in  which  his  arms,  and  sometimes  his
whole  body,  writhed,  especially  just  while  the  slate-writing  was  going  on.
At  the  time,  I  was  convinced  that  they  were  not  tricks,  although  I  had  no
other  explanation  for  them.  ^
Septeviher  Uth,  1886.

3.  Report  of  Mr.  Y.

On  September  10th,  1886,  last  evening,  with  my  wife  and  a  daughter  of
nineteen  years  of  age,  I  availed  myself  of  an  invitation  to  see  the  phenomena
of  slate-writing  at  the  rooms  of  Mr.  Hodgson,  No.  1,  Furnival's  Inn,
London.

The  "medium"  was  introduced  as  Mr.  Clifford  [Davey,  see  p.  410],  a
gentleman  of  known  social  standing  who  had  never  accepted  any  pecuniary
returns  for  his  performances.

Mr.  Hodgson's  room  was,  throughout  the  conference,  lighted  by  four
candles  and  one  shaded  lamp,  there  being  no  moment  of  obscuration  of  light
through  the  whole  evening.  Tlie  large  heavy  table  in  the  room  was,  at  Mr.
Davey's  suggestion,  substituted  by  a  smaller  one  with  two  folding  leaves,
the  table  ordinarily  in  use  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  breakfast-room.  The  three
slates  were  wood  bound,  about  8  x  10  in.  size.  They  were  purchased  by  me
at  a  cost  of  threepence  each,  from  a  stationer  in  Holborn,  on  my  way  to  the
conference.  Their  surfaces  were  very  rough,  requiring  much  washing  with
a  sponge  and  dry  rubbing  before  they  were  smooth  enough  for  use.

Mr.  Davey  had  two  much  larger  slates  with  false  black  card  surfaces,
showing  how  persons  were  often  imposed  on  by  professional  mediums  ;  ^  but

1  The  remark  wliich  I  believe  I  made  Avas  that  the  slate  with  a  false  flap
was  often  put  forward  by  pi-ofessional  coiijurers  as  an  explanation  of  the  slate-
writing  tricks  performed  by  "mediums." — S.  J.  D.


Experimental  Investigation.


433


of  these  no  use  whatever  was  made.  He  also  had  a  small  silver-mounted
ebony  framed  locked  slate.  I  shall  distinguish  this  by  "  D.'s  slate,"  and  the
ones  I  bought  by  "  my  slates."  In  a  card  paper  box  were  a  number  of  very
small  pieces  of  pencil  of  six  different  colours.  The  whole  apparatus  has  now
been  described.

[a]  Mr.  Hodgson  sat  opposite  to  me,  on  my  left  sat  my  wife  opposite  to  my
daughter,  between  whom  and  myself  Mr.  Davey  was  placed.  Apencilwas  put
on  one  of  mj'  slates,  which  was  sustained  under  the  edge  of  the  table  by  my
daughter's  fingers  at  one  end  and  by  Mr.  Davey's  at  the  other,  their  thumbs
being  all  the  time  in  sight  on  the  top  of  the  table.  The  hands  of  all  five  of
the  party  were  then  joined,  and  soon  we  heard  a  sound  like  that  of  a  pencU.
My  slate  was  slid  out  from  under  the  table  by  my  daughter.  At  the  first
and  second  examination  nothing  was  on  the  slate,  and  it  was  washed  afresh,
and  soon  the  word  "  yes  "  was  found  scrawled  on  the  upper  side  of  the  slate
as  an  answer  to  some  indiSerent  question.

[6]  This  was  once  repeated.

My  daughter  was  sure  that  her  hand  had  pressed  the  slate  to  the  under
side  of  the  table  during  the  whole  time.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  during  about  a
minute  of  the  time  of  waiting  Mr.  Davey  seemed  seized  with  violent  nervous
contractions  of  his  face,  arms,  and  hands,  which  appeared  to  draw  largely  on
his  strength.  They  were  succeeded  by  a  feverish  condition  of  the  surface  of
his  hand.

[c]  He  next  requested  us  to  select,  each  one,  a  book  from  Mr.  Hodgson's
library.  We  did  so,  and  he  proposed  to  give  us  the  contents  of  lines,  selected
by  page  and  line  by  us,  in  D.'s  locked  slate.  But  nothing  came.  He  then
proposed  to  try  it  again  on  a  single  book,  and  my  daughter,  leaving  him  at
the  table,  replaced^*  on  the  shelves  the  book  she  had  first  taken  down,  and
took  at  random  a  copy  of  Mrs.  Browning's  Poems,  Second  Series.  1880.
London  edition.

He  requested  us  to  mentally  choose  each  one  a  page  and  line  by  numbers
below  10.

I  selected  page  8,  line  8,
My  wife  page  8,  line  4,
Mr.  Hodgson^^  page  7,  line  9,
My  daughter  page  1  line  9,

and  we  each  one  told  aloud^''  the  page  and  line  selected.

During  this  time  and  previous  to  the  announcement  of  the  selection,  a
pencil  had  been  put  into  D.'s  slate,  which  had  lain  on  the  top  of  the  open
table  throughout.  It  was  then  locked,  and  the  key  placed  in  my  daughter's
pocket.  My  wife's  hand  was  then  placed  upon  D.'s  slate  as  it  lay  on
top  of  the  table,  and  it  certainly  so  remained  until,  after  hearing  the
sound  of  writing,  my  daughter  produced  the  key,  and  we  opened  the
slate.  1'  My  choice  had  been  page  8,  line  8,  and  while  the  others  conversed
Mr.  D.  bade  me  fix  my  mind  intently  on  these  figures  during  a  space
extending  probably  to  10  minutes.  Then  my  wife  unlocked  D.'s  slate,  and
found  the  following  words  written  in  legible  hand.  The  italics  are  as
in  the  original.

"  How  far  you  remain,  oh  unbelieving  ones,  from  the  goal  of  your
endeavours. It  is  not  through  the  domain  of  Physical  Phenomena,  but

2  F


434  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohsevvation,  &c.


through  the  empire  of  the  soul's  dominion,  that  man  must  enter  upon  the
higher  paths  that  stretch  away  into  the  Divine.  '  The  Kingdom  of  God  is
within  you.'  Seek  not  to  entangle  the  brightness  of  your  soul  in  the
Labyrinthine  Maze  of  the  physical  world  which  ivill  prove  to  be  merely  a
House  of  Clouds,  and  will  leave  you  more  forlorn  than  a  Deserted  Garden,
where  not  even  the  greenest  grasses  will  be  laid  by  Nature  to  sanctify  her
right.  We  men  a  "  (here  it  ends  with  a  long  irregular  line,  such  as  might
be  made  by  a  pencil  rolling).

On  referring  to  the  book  which  had  been  lying  in  our  sight  tied  up  and
sealed,  we  found  on  page  8  the  heading  to  be  The  House  of  Clouds,  being
the  words  italicised  in  the  slate- writing.  On  page  3  (which,  Mr.  D.  said,
the  power,  whatever  it  was,  might  have  mistaken  for  8  as  being  like  it)
and  line  8,  we  found  "  the  greenest  grasses  Nature,"  words  also  italicised  on
the  slate.

The  other  words,  "  ^vhich  vnll  prove,"  in  italics  were  not  in  the  pages  of
poems  indicated.  There  seems  to  have  been  no  attempt  to  give  any  words
from  the  lines  selected  by  the  other  three  persons.

[d]  We  next  placed  small  pencils,  in  six  colours,  between  two  of  my
newly-bought  slates,  mai'ked  by  ourselves  with  our  names  written  in  pencil,
without  removing  them  from  the  top  of  the  table,  and  the  hands  of  some  of
the  party  were  laid  upon  them  for  some  minutes,  after  which  they  were
held  up  in  the  hands  of  two  f)ersons.  I  had  been  asked  to  choose  the  colours
in  which  the  writing  should  be  made.  I  mentally  chose  red,  white,  and  blue,
but  did  not  tell  my  choice.  After  holding  Mr.  D.  's  hand  for  some  minutes,
with  my  mind  strongly  fixed  on  these  colours,  the  slates  were  opened,  and
we  found,  in  the  order  I  had  mentally  selected  :

(Red)  "  We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  give  you  this."
(White)  "  We  can  do  more  yet."
(Blue)  "Goodbye."

[e]  The  last  performance  was  the  moving  of  the  pencils  on  my  slate  under
a  glass.  Two  Chinese  cups  were  taken  from  the  mantel.  On  these  the
slates  rested,  with  pieces  of  pencil  cut  by  ourselves  from  the  ends  of
coloured  crayons  of  various  colours,  on  its  top,  under  the  glass.  Upon  D.'s
lock  slate,  which  he  could  not  see,  I  wrote  "Blue"  as  the  colour  which
should  be  used,  and  my  daughter  made  a  cross  for  the  figure  to  be  written.
We  then  locked  D.'s  slate,  which  I  placed  in  my  pocket,  while  my  daughter
put  the  key  into  her  pocket.  We  joined  hands  as  before,  but  there  was  no
movement  of  the  pencils.  He  took  the  glass  off,  threw  off  the  pencils,  and
put  them  back  again  in  a  group,  near  the  centre.  Again  we  joined  hands.  I
selected  white  for  the  colour,  at  my  daughter's  outspoken  suggestion,  and
Mr.  D.  became  spasmodically  excited,  trembling  greatly.

Soon  the  red  jjencil  began  to  move  in  full  view  of  all  of  us.  It  stopped
and  soon  began  again  to  move.  The  distance  traversed  was  probably  an
inch.  I  did  not  see  the  other  pencil  ends  move,  though  they  might  have
done  so.

Upon  removing  the  glass  we  found  traces  in  white,  green,  blue,  and  red,
but  scarcely  the  figure  traced  by  my  daughter  on  D.'s  locked  slate.

Having  in  my  boyhood  jiractised  legerdemain  I  am  able  to  see  how  a  large
portion  of  the  publicly  performed  tricks  are,  or  could  be,  done  ;  and  sur-


Experimental  Investigation.  435

prising  as  were  the  very  able  performances  of  Mr.  D. ,  I  could  tell  how  most
of  them  could  be  done^^  without  anything  beyond  a  probable  mind-trans-
ference of  thought  intensely  concentrated  on  my  part.  But  I  stood  in  the
same  relation  to  the  performances  which  I  could  not  unravel,  in  which  others
stood  to  those  which  I  could  perform  or  explain.  I  cannot  therefore  make
my  own  discernment  the  limit  of  the  "  natural,"  and  say  that  the  perform-
ances undiscovered  by  me  are  "  supernatural."  I  am  surprised  when  I  find
that  those  versed  in  conjuring,  when  they  reach  the  limit  of  their  own
ingenuity  and  knowledge,  ascribe  to  supernatural  causes  what  is  beyond  their
ken.

Mr.  Davey  is  a  gentleman,  I  believe,  incapable  of  intentional  deception.
He  makes  no  statement  of  his  performances  beyond  the  fact  that  they  are
phenomena  to  be  accurately  observed.  They  exceed  in  their  apparent
supematuralism  the  displays  usually  made  by  paid  mediums.  I  believe  that
a  full  explanation  of  his  methods  would  "fire  a  shot  heard  round  the
world  "  in  almost  every  civilised  community  where  the  phenomena  of  so-
called  "Spiritualism"  are  perplexing,  and  often  madden,  true  and  good
people.

Whatever  may  be  the  real  psychical  phenomena  which  lie  behind  or
alongside  of  the  supposed  revelation  from  spirits,  they  should  be  separated
from  the  often  proved  deceptions  of  paid  mediums.  And  I  can  conceive  of
no  more  effectual  step  towards  this  than  for  some  one  who  excels  these
magicians  upon  their  own  chosen  field,  to  frankly  tell  the  world  how  it
is  all  done.  Scientists  then  would  have  the  ground  cleared  for  accurate
investigation,  and,  more  important  still,  millions  might  be  saved  from  the
delusions  of  deceitful  "mediums."  For  the  atrocious  wickedness  of  deceit-
fully trespassing  by  fraud  upon  the  most  holy  of  all  human  relationships,  the
sacred  regard  for  the  dead,  it  is  difficult  to  find  strong  enough  terms  to
express  our  contemptuous  reprobation.  •


SITTING  III.

The  sitting  described  by  Mr.  Legge  in  the  following  letter  took
place  on  the  same  evening  as  the  one  described  in  the  foregoing
three  reports,  September  10th,  1886.

Report  of  Mr.  Legge.

12,  Mitre  Court  Chambers,

Temple,  E.G.
12th  September,  1886.

My  Deae.  Hodgson, —

I  said  I  would  let  you  have  a  straightforward  account  of  what  I
saw  in  your  chambers  on  Friday  evening  ;  here  it  is,  written  while  my
recollections  are  distinct.  I  had  been  sitting  with  Hughes,  who  told  me
you  had  a  seance  on.  We  were  talking  on  various  subjects,  and  never
touched  that  of  the  seance  going  on  in  the  next  room,  so  that  in  fact  1
soon  forgot  all  about  it. Presently  however  the  door  opened,  and  you


436  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


came  in  with  Mr. ,  whom  I  liad  never  seen  before,  and  behind  him  were

his  wife  and  daughter.  A  little  embarrassed  by  sudden  introductions,  1
passed  out  into  the  entry  to  your  rooms,  and  there  saw  for  the  first  time
Clifford  (the  name,  is  it  not  ?)  [Davey,  see  p.  410]. In  a  few  minutes  the

 s  left,  and  I  went  into  the  room  where  the  seance  had  been. There  I

was  introduced  to  Davey,  who  suggested,  after  some  talk  on  what  had
gone  before,  that  1  might  like  to  see  something.

[cZ]  I  jumjjed  at  the  proposal,  and  as  a  preliminary  took  Davey 's  locked
slate,  opened  it,  and  cleaned  it  (or  rather  cleaned  it  again,  for  it  was  clean
already),  then,  having  slipped  in  a  bit  of  pencil,  locked  it,  and  put  the  key  in
my  pocket,  keeping  the  slate  also  in  my  hand  or  under  my  arm  all  the  time
afterwards.  ^

[«]  Next  I  chose  one  of  your  slates,  cleaned  it,  and,  at  Davey's
request,  having  put  a  fragment  of  pencil  upon  it,  slipped'-^  it  under  the  table,
so  as  just  to  cover  it  with  the  slab,  the  pencil  of  course  being  on  the  upper
surface.  The  table  was  a  plain  deal  one,  and  I  satisfied  myself  that  there
were  no  projections  on  the  uiider-surface  which  could  leave  a  mark.  We  then
formed  contact,  Davey's  right  hand  being  partly  on  my  left  and  partly  on
the  slate,  i.e.,  where  his  hand  overlajjped  mine  which  held  the  slate  pressed
against  the  table.  The  faint  sound  of  writing  was  distinctly  audible,  and
when  it  ceased  I  drew  the  slate  out.  There  were  merely  indistinct  scrawls
upon  it.

But  it  appeared  that  I  ought  to  have  asked  a  question  to  myself,
and  so  extracted  an  answer  from  the  slate.  So  after  I  had  cleaned  the  slate
I  thought  of  a  question.  I  acted  jjrecisely  as  before.-^  The  sound  of  writing
was  again  heard,  and  the  slate,  when  I  drew  it  out,  bore  clearly  and
distinctly  written  the  word  "yes" — the  final  letter  of  which  was  done  in
particularly  admirable  style.  The  question-^  had  reference  to  some  doubtful
increase  in  my  official  salary,  and  I  am  bound  to  say  I  was  as  much  delighted
as  astounded  by  the  mysterious  writing.

[e]  The  next  experiment  was  the  placing  of  3  bits  of  coloured  chalk
on  the  table,  and  of  a  clean  slate  (selected  and  placed  by  myself)^  over
them.  I  put  my  hand  on  the  slate,  Davey  his  on  mine,  and  we  joined
contact.  Again  we  heard  the  sound  of  writing,  and  when  I  lifted  the
slate  there  was  written  large  and  neatly  in  the  coloured  chalks  (three  lines
or  so  in  each  colour)  this  message: — "Don't  you  think  I've  done  enough
for  you  to-night  I'm  tired  Joey."  I  noticed  the  chalks  seemed  worn,
showing  signs  of  work,  just  like  the  little  bit  of  pencil  in  the  previous
experiment.

[d]  After  this  Davey  asked  me  to  write  a  question  in  chalk  on  one  of  your
slates.  While  I  was  writing  it  he  asked  for  a  drink  of  water,  and  you
pointed  to  a  comer  of  the  room  where  there  was  some.  He  went  there  and
when  he  came  back  seemed  to  have  forgotten  his  request  for  he  now  asked
me  for  the  locked  slate,  which  I  had  latterly  put  in  my  pocket.*'  I  brought  it
out,  placed  it  on  the  table,  set  my  hand  on  it,  Davey  his  on  mine,  and
joined  contact  just  as  before  with  Hughes  and  yourself,  Bughes  holding  my
right  and  your  left,  you  Davey's  left.  Then  we  heard  the  same  writing
sound,  very  faint  this  time,  and  after  a  considerable  interval  I  was  told  to
take  up  the  slate  and  unlock  it. Taking  the  key  out  of  my  pocket  I  did  so,


Experimental  Investigation.


437


and  saw  written  on  both  leaves  a  long  message,  precisely  as  I  give  it : — "  If
you  don't  believe  in  spirit  power  after  this  you  are  not  worth  the  attention
of  any  honest  medum  (sic)  Joey."  After  this,  Davey,  who  seemed
pretty  tired,  had  to  rush  off  to  catch  a  train.  I  should  add  that  the  room
had  been  in  full  lamp^  light  all  the  time,  the  lamp  being  placed  on  a  side
table  thus  throwing  a  certain  light  under  as  well  as  over  the  table  we  were
sitting  at.  Also  that  the  contact  was  not  continuously  perfect,  for  I
remember  that  Hughes  and  yourself  occasionally  left  one  hand  free  for  a
short  time,  and  lastly  that  there  was  no  enforced  silence.

The  above  are  the  facts  as  detailed  as  I  can  give  them  ;  I  offer  no  com-
ment on  them  for  indeed  I  can't.  Though  I  had  heard  of  such  experiments
before,  personal  experience  was  entirely  new  to  me,  and  has  left  me  in
immense  perplexity.

If  you  see  Davey,  please  thank  him  for  his  kindness  in  troubling  after
an  already  long  sitting  to  give  me  some  specimens  of  his  "  craft,"  or  whatever
name  one  can  give  so  nameless  a  faculty.  I  am  also  sincerely  obliged  to
Hughes  and  yourself. — Yours,

J.  G.  Leggb.


SITTING  IV.

The  next  three  reports  are  by  Mr.  Padshah,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Russell.  Mr.  Padshah  had  had  some  previous  experience  vi^ith  a  well-
known  medium,  but  had  not  been  convinced  that  the  phenomena  which
he  had  witnessed  in  the  medium's  presence  were  not  the  result  of
trickery.  His  account  of  his  seance  with  me  shows  that  he  was  in  some
respects  a  careful  observer,  and  that  he  was  still  more  careful  in  record-
ing his  remembrances.  He  was  not  informed  until  after  he  had  written
his  report,  that  the  phenomena  were  due  to  conjuring.  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Pussell,  however,  knew  before  the  sitting  that  they  were  about  to
witness  conjuring  performances.  They  came  on  an  unexpected  visit  to
Mr.  Hodgson,  and  on  learning  that  I  was  about  to  give  a  sitting,
requested  permission  to  be  present.  I  was  perfectly  conscious  of  the
fact  that  they  were  both  using  their  best  endeavours  to  discover  my
exact  modus  operandi.  And  although  Mr.  Russell  failed  to  detect  any
of  my  writing  processes,  he  correctly  observed  and  remembered  some  of
my  manipulations  with  slates  above  the  table,  which,  it  will  be  seen,
entirely  escaped  the  observation  or  remembrance  of  Mr.  Padshah.

1.  Beport  of  Mr.  Padshah.

1,  Furnival's  Inn,  London.

15,  1886.

This  evening  in  Hodgson's  room  we  had  a  seance  with  Mr.  Davey ;  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Russell,  Mr.  F.  S.  Hughes,  Hodgson  and  myself  being  the
party.  Before  sitting  I  had  some  interesting  conversation  with  Mr.  D.  about
the  results  usually  got  by  him  and  some  which  I  had  with  Eglinton. Mr.  D.


438  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.

in  course  of  the  conversation  told  me  he  was  very  anxious  that  his  results
should  be  tried  and  watched  like  those  of  any  professional  medium,  and
indeed,  his  subsequent  proceedings  were  very  agreeably  contrasted  with
those  witnessed  at  the  professional  seances.  There  was  every  apparent
desire  to  get  the  conditions  named  by  members  of  the  party,  and  to
see  that  results  were  obtained  under  those  conditions.  I  had  suggested  in  our
preliminary  conversation  how  important  it  might  be  to  get  my  own  name —
not  surname — which  no  one  except  myself  in  the  room  knew.  The  slates  on
which  we  desired  the  writings  were  three  of  them  Hodgson's,  three  I
had  bought  this  evening  at  Lilley's,  Cambridge,  and  one  Mr.  D.  's  own  double
slate.  I  regret  that  desiring  to  add  some  friends  to  the  party,  I  had  left  the
rooms  to  call  upon  those  friends,  and  during  that  interval,  Hodgson  and
Mr.  Hughes  being  busy,  we  necessarily  could  not  keep  the  slates  in  our  eye
for  a  short  interval  during  which  Mr.  D.  was  in  the  room.

Well,  we  commenced,  I  sitting  all  the  time  next  to  Mr.  D. ,  except  once,
when  Mrs.  Russell  and  I  interchanged  places,  with  no  advantage  ;  and  so  we
resumed  the  original  order.

[/]  There  was  full  light  on  every  corner  of  the  table  ;  two  of  my  (?)  slates,
one  washed  by  myself,  the  other^  by  Mr.  D.,  were  put  very  nearly  in  the
centre  with  a  number  of  small  chalk-pieces  between  them  of  different  colours
—  (five  in  all,  I  find  now  on  inquiry  from  Hodgson — red,  blue,  green,
yellow,  white — but  which  I  was  not  sure  of,  then,  not  having  noticed
them).

[a]  Under  the  table  with  the  frame  projecting  on  Mr.  D.'s  side,  was  a
single  slate,  also  mine,  I  believe,  and  washed  by  I  do  not  know  whom,  Mr.
D.  supporting  it  on  his  side  by  the  four  fingers  underneath,  and  the
thumb  over  the  table  in  sight  of  all  ;  his  left  hand  joining  with  that  of  Mr.
Russell's  right,  Mr.  R.'s  left  with  Mr.  Hughes'  right,^  Mr.  Hughes'  with  Mr.
Russell's,  and  Mrs.  Russell's  left  with  my  right,  all  resting  either  on  the
table,  or  otherwise  always  in  sight  ;  and  my  left  supporting  also  the  slate  just
the  same  as  Mr.  D.  Between  the  slate  and  the  table  were  put  successively
chalks  and  a  small  pencil,  the  chalks  being  crushed,  and  therefore
given  up.

[/]  Mr.  D.  and  Mr.  Russell  often  put  their  hands  on  the  i^aiv  of  single
slates.

[</]  Mr.  D.'s  double  slate,  rtoi  washed,'' I  believe,  that  I  can  remember,
but  locked  up  by  myself  carefully,  with  the  key  always  in  my  pocket  or  on
my  RIGHT  hand  near  Mrs.  Russell,  never  out  of  my  view,  was  in  my  charge,
generally  being  behind  my  back.

[ft]  For  some  time  there  seemed  to  be  no  result,  Mr.  D.  telling  us  that  he
felt  no  "go"  in  the  thing,  and  asking  me  if  it  was  not  due  to  my  undue  sceptic-
ism. Of  course  I  assured  him  that  my  failing  was  rather  in  the  reverse  direc-
tion. The  conversation  was  generally  on  SpirituaUstic  subjects,  being  mostly  a
good-humoured  discussion  of  the  experiences  of  some  Spiritualists.  On  Mr.
D.'s  asking  me  to  select  a  particular  colour  of  chalk  to  write  between  the  two
slates,*  I  suggested  white  ;  but  we  never  got  it.

[6]  He  then  wished  me  to  fix  my  mind  on  a  particular  number.  I
selected  five  (5),  and  drew  an  image  of  it  before  my  mental  eye.  The
number  we  got  was,  however,  6  ;  and  I  must  say,  that  but  for  the  horizontal


Experimental  Investigation.


439


stroke,  I  myself  would  be  unable  to  distinguish  often  between  my  5's  and
6's.  Mr.  D.  then  asked  if  there  were  going  to  be  any  manifestations — the
answer^  was  legibly  "  Yes."

[/]  Then  we"  asked  for  a  writing  on  one  of  the  pair  of  slates,  of  mixed
colours,  mine  being  blue,  and  Mrs.  Russell's  selection  red.  Sometimes  1
think  we  all  put  our  hands  on  the  pair  of  slates  and  then  both  Mr.  D.'s
hands  were  in  full  view,  and  there  could  be  no  mistake  of  what  they  were
doing, — viz.,  that  they  were  shaking  sometimes  with  great  force,  at  the
same  time  that  his  teeth  were  chattering.

[d,  e]  However,  before  any  writing  came  there  as  asked  for,  we  had  first  a
message  on  the  single  slate  "Wait,"  and  at  another  time,  I  noticed  (without
any  clear  sound  of  writing  as  was  unmistakeable  during  the  two  previous
cases) — and  I  believe  nobody  had  observed  it  before  I  drew  their  notice — a
message  on  one  side  of  the  slate,  "  Try  the  (?)  chalks."

[/]  Well,  now  we  all  concentrated  our  attention  on  the  pair  of  slates
very  nearly  in  the  centre  ;  and  I  thought,  as  requested,  of  two  numbers,
5,  7  ;  Mr.  D.  very  shortly  after  a  deal  of  shaking  of  his  hands,  at  length  said
that  we  might  see  the  slates.  There,  to  my  surprise,  I  beheld  a  message
forsooth,  in  two  coloured  pencils,  —blue  and  red,  which  I  copy  below.

(Blue  Pencil)  :

' '  We  are  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  you  this  writing  under  these
conditions,  which  must  or  ought  at  least  to  the  ordinaiy  mind  do  away
with  the  possibility  of  it  being  produced  by  ordinary  means.

(Red  Pencil)  :

"  If  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  wait  patiently  you  may  rest  assured  we
will  do  our  best  to  do  more  for  you.

"  Earnest."

[c]  I  forgot  to  say  that  before  this  writing  appeared ,  on  the  large  slate,
instead  of  the  numbers  we  wanted,  we  got  written''  "Boorzu."  Now  this
as  it  happens  is  the  original  Persian,  the  modern  corruption  of  which  is  my
initial  name.  This  would  be  extraordinary  except  that  it  might  have
happened  by  accident,  and  also  I  had  not  time  enough  to  see  the  last  "  u  "
before  the  word  was  wiped  olf  by  Mr.  D.

[g]  Then  we  tried  to  get  some  results  with  books,  but  as  it  appeared  to
me  Mr.  D.  had  read  almost  every  book  in  Hodgson's  library,  it  was  not  easy
to  select  one  to  preclude  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference.  So  we
attempted  to  get  numbers  again,  and  I  concentrated  my  attention  on  the  same
two  previous  numbers  (5,  7);  we  soongotthe7  on  the  single  slate,  but  instead
of  the  5,  we  got  "  Think  Book."  Mr.  D.  desired  me  to  think  of  one  ;  my
mind  was  unsettled  between  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of  Mind,  by  Basfcian,
and  International  Law,  so  to  avoid  any  interference  with  the  conditions,
I  pitched  upon  the  periodical,  Mind.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Russell  having  left  us,
we  all  concentrated  our  attention  on  the  double  closed  slate,  which,  on
opening  at  frequent  intervals,  we  had  found  unwritten.  The  key  was  now
in  my  pocket,  that  is  certain,  for  on  seeking  to  open  it,  I  found  it  entangled
with  the  coppers  in  my  waistcoat  pocket.  The  double  slate  was  also  un-
doubtedly locked,  for  I  carefully  locked  it  myself. I  mentally,  as  before,


440  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.

concentrated  my  attention  on  getting  the  word  "Mind"  written  within.
After  some  time  Hodgson  said  he  heard  the  sound  of  writing,  and  on  opening
it  we  found  the  slate  full. The  following  is  the  text  : —

"This  phenomenon  is  not  Spiritualistic,  nor  is  it  the  projection  into
objectivity  through  the  higher  faculties  unfolded  by  the  abnormal  issues  of
human  developments — 'Mediumship'?  Yes.  But  mediumship  of  WHAT  ?  Do
you  think  you  could  appreciate  if  we  were  to  tell  you  ?  Ah  no  !  The  Spooks
of  one,  the  Adepts  of  another,  the  transcendental  Egos  of  another,  and  the
fourth  dimensions  of  a  fourth,  are  but  the  frantic  struggling  dreams  of  the
dark  and  ignorant  present  himian  race  who  have  not  acquired  the  possibility
of  CONCEIVING  even  an  approximation  to  the  real  solution.

"  Your  own  predominant  desire  is  to  explain,  but  for  these  and  kindred
facts,  it  will  be  ages  before  the  loftiest  soul  can  touch  the  true  theory,  as  we
find  it  exhibiting  no  distinct  changes  of  form,  and  if  impossible  with  one  or
more  vibration.

"  The  Brain  AN  organ  of  Mind,  ha  !  we  laugh."

This  completes  the  text.  I  opened  the  slate  myself,  and  I  found  some
scratches  made  by  the  pencil  over  the  writing.  Also  the  facet  seemed  to
have  worn  out  a  little  by  writing.  After  this  we  made  some  fruitless  eiforts
at  getting  something,  but  we  could  not,  and  in  a  very  short  time  we  adjourned.
As  the  table  round  which  we  sat  was  removed,  Hodgson  pointed  out  that  it
was  beyond  suspicion, — a  fact  which  I  had  omitted  to  notice.

[/]  How  came,  now,  the  writing  between  the  pair  of  slates,  and  in  the
closed  double  slate  ']  About  the  former,  it  is  certain  that  the  slate  on  which
the  writing  came  was  one  of  the  three  I  had  purchased  that  evening  at  Cam-
bridge ;  as  was  attested  by  its  size  corresponding  with  the  two  others  marked,
and  also  by  the  shape  of  the  frames,  and  the  cracks*  in  them  noticed  by
Hodgson.  I  confess  I  do  not  remember  even  after  such  a  brief  lapse  of  time,
whether  I  had  examined"  the  two  slates  'aot  washed  by  me,  and  found  them
unwritten.  I  imagine  I  must  have,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  very  stupid  ;
and,  besides,  if  there  had  been  any  writing  it  would  not  have  escaf)ed  the
notice  of  Mr.  Russell,  who  seemed  to  be  particularly  careful.  Besides,  we
constantly  looked  to  see  if  there  was  any  writing  there.  Of  course,  a  con-
jurer of  oi'dinary  pretensions  could  deceive  on  the  last  point.  There  might
be  writing  on  the  bottom  surface  of  the  lower  slate,  while  we  could  observe
only  the  three  upper  surfaces,  if  so  many.  Before  we  saw  the  writing  there,
Mr.  D.  gave  a  push,^"  and  though  1  am  almost  sure  that  it  was  I  who  removed
the  upper  slate,  and  found  the  writing  there,  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  be  certain.
Indeed,  I  doubt  if  I  can  with  any  confidence  assert  whether  the  writing  was
on  the  lower  surface  of  the  upper  slate,  or  the  upper  surface  of  the  lower
slate,  even  if  I  was  certain  that  it  was  not  on  the  lowest  face.  When  I  re-
member that  Mr.  D.  is  deliberately  anxious  to  be  tried  by  no  other  than  a
conjurer's  standard,  and  also  that  I  have  omitted  to  notice  things  so  elemen-
tary, and  yet  so  essential,  even  some  of  them  actually  suggested  for  my
observation  by  Mr.  D. ,  I  regret  I  did  not  ask  some  one  else  of  the  party  to
observe  and  act.  For  it  is  evident  that  if  I  did  not  see  the  slates  clean  on  all
the  surfaces  before  commencement,  my  testimony  becomes  absolutely  value-
less. But  now  suppose  that  we  have  satisfaction  on  these  heads,  still
it may  be  considered possible that  the  writing  may  be  precipitated


Experimental  Investigation.


441


by  chemical  means.  Whether,  if  the  writing  disappears  under  the
influence  of  water,  the  chemical  theory  may  still  hold,  of  course  I  can-
not say.  But  if  so,  it  is  curious  that  Mr.  D.  could  pnsli  the  slates  at  a  par-
ticular moment  ;  and  before  that  none  of  us  could  notice,  in  that  full  light,
any  formation  of  letters,  or  gradual  precipitation,  that  I  can  see.  Besides,
Mr.  D.  could  barely  have  had  time  enough  to  tamper  with  the  slates.  He
told  me  himself  that  he  had  observed  them  lying.  He  had  almost  40
minutes  to  himself,  with  little  intervals,  when  Hodgson  would  come  in.  He
might  during  that  interval  have  written  out  all  the  first  message,  without
using  a  chemical  ;  in  that  case  we  are  all  guilty  of  gross  negligence  which  it
is  ridiculous  to  credit  my  colleagues^'^  with.  But  he  might  have  also  used  a
chemical ;  only  he  could  not  have  foreseen  the  ojiijortunity  of  my  going  out  ;
and  as  everyone  is  supposed  to  bring  his  own  slates,  why  he  should  carry
about  chemicals  with  him  it  is  difficult  to  see.  In  this  connection  I  may  also
observe  that  Mr.  D.  remarked  to  me  during  our  conversation  after  tea,  how
great  the  temptation  is  for  the  occultist  to  be  fraudulent  ;  when  pecuniary
remuneration  is  not  the  object,  "the  good  of  the  cause  "  is  supposed  to
justify  them,  and  it  may  not  be  unjust  to  add, — the  desire  to  make  people
talk  about  them  is  not  altogether  a  factor  without  influence.  Just  imagine
the  temptation  in  Vanity  Fair  of  an  *  *  ,  the  guest  of  princes  and  em-
perors, and  having  the  great  honour  of  a  recommendation  from  the  first  of
living  Englishmen — Mr.  *  *  !  But  it  is  only  fair  to  Mr.  D.  to  say  that
he  holds  this  justification,  he  says,  in  great  abomination.  As  for  the  selection
of  colours  being  blue  and  red,  and  turning  out  so,  it  seems  to  me  quite
natural,  and  it  may  not  be  without  significance  that  the  white  writing  with
chalk  we  asked  for  never  came.  Besides,  there  is  nothing  in  the  matter  itself
which  may  not  have  been  written  beforehand,  indeed  it  was  not  what  we  had
wanted.  Now,  though  I  point  out  my  own  defects  of  observation,  it  is  only
to  show  how  little  really  my  testimony  is  worth  except  for  points  of  confirma-
tion ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  remedy  them  next  time.

[g\  Somewhat  different  is  the  case  of  the  double  closed  slate.  I  do  not
remember  it  to  have  been  washed  ;  but  there  never  was  any  writing  on  it
except  a  scratch  occasionally,  whenever  I  opened  it,  with  the  exception  of  the
last  time.  As  I  opened  it  myself  I  think  I  could  easily  have  observed  any
gradual  precipitations.  The  reference  to  "  Brain  as  an  organ  of  Mind  "  is  not
altogether  without  significance.  It  is  also  evident  that  Mr.  D.  must  have
minutely  studied  the  time  it  takes  for  complete  precipitation  ;  or  that  the
whole  precipitation  takes  place  simultaneously  ;  or  that  the  phenomenon
is  undoubtedly  genuine.  The  theory  of  mere  writing  without  a  chemical
and  then  bamboozling  me  would  be  really  contemptible.

[c]  The  reading  of  numbers  was  not  a  failure  ;  but  it  was  not  convincing.
"Boorzu,"  however,  was  remarkable.

On  the  whole,  I  myself  strongly  inclme  more  towards  the  genuineness  of
the  phenomena  than  the  reverse  ;  but  I  cannot  disguise  it  from  myself  that
that  is  largely  due  to  a  previous  impression  gathered  from  Mr.  D.  's  results
with  others  which  were  read  out  to  me.  If  I  get  the  same  things  next  time
with  my  own  double-slate,  and  a  pair  of  slates  that  have  never  left  my
sight,  I  think  I  should  be  justified  in  being  convinced  of  something
abnormal.


442


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  <&c.


2.  Beport  of  Mr.  Russell.

[16,  Somerfield  Road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.]

On  Wednesday  evening,  September  15,  I  was  present  with  my  wife  at
a  slate-writing  seance  given  by  Mr.  Davey.  We  sat  in  the  private  sitting-
room  of  my  friend  Mr.  R.  Hodgson,  at  No.  1,  Furnival's  Inn.  Besides
Mr.  Davey,  Mr.  Hodgson,  my  wife  and  self,  there  were  present  Mr.
Hughes  (another  great  friend  of  mine)  and  .  .  Mr.  Padshah.  I  had  never  seen
either  Mr.  D.  or  Mr.  P.  before.  We  sat  round  an  ordinary  deal  table.  Mr.
P.  was  on  Mr.  D.'s  right  hand,  I  on  his  left.  On  the  table  were  3  or  4
single  slates  which  Mr.  P.  had  brought  with  him,  and  a  double  slate  fitted
with  lock  and  key  belonging  to  Mr.  Davey.

[(/]  As  soon  as  we  were  seated  at  the  table  Mr.  D.  washed  the  double  slate
with  sjjonge  and  water,  and  then  handed  it  round  for  insj^ection.  As  we  ex-
pressed ourselves  satisfied  that  it  was  perfectly  clean,  he  placed  a  small  piece
of  ordinary  crayon  inside,  locked  it  and  gave  it  to  Mr.  Padshah  to  keep.
Mr.  P.  having  put  it  on  his  own  chair  behind  his  back,

[a]  Mr.  D.  took  one  of  the  single  slates,  washed  it  clean,  put  a  small
piece  of  crayon  on  it  and  placed  it  under  one  corner  of  the  table,  holding  it
there  with  his  right  hand  (thumb  in  sight  on  the  table,  four  fingers  out  of
sight  below),  Mr.  P.  holding  it  in  the  same  manner  with  his  left  hand.
We  then  joined  hands  and  talked, waiting  for  the  sound  of  writing.  After
some  minutes  Mr.  D.  brought  up  the  slate,  but  there  was  nothing  on  it.

[/]  He  then  put  some  small  pieces  of  chalk  on  one  of  the  other  slates
lying  on  the  table,  covered  it  with  another  slate,  and  said  he  would  try  to  get
some  writing  there  if  we  would  choose  the  colours  we  would  like  it  in.  Mr.
P.  chose  blue  and  my  wife  (at  my  suggestion)  red.

[a]  Mr.  D.  then  replaced  the  single  slate  under  the  comer  of  the  table,
holding  it  as  before,  but  again  several  minutes  passed  without  any  result.
He  then  asked  my  wife  to  change  places  with  Mr.  P. ,  which  she  did,  holding
the  slate  with  her  left  hand  as  he  had  done.  But  again,  after  several  minutes,
there  was  no  writing.

[6]  Then  my  wife  and  Mr.  P.  took  their  old  places,  Mr.  D.  once  more
put  the  slate  under  the  C(|rner  as  before,  and  asked  Mr.  P.  to  think  of
some  number  under  10,  saymg  that  he  would  try  to  get  it  written  for  him.
He  then  said  aloud  :  "  Please  say  whether  we  shall  get  any  tiling  to-night,"
soon  after  which  Mr.  P.  declared  he  heard  the  sound  of  writing  ;  whereupon
the  slate  was  brought  up,  and  the  word  "yes  "  and  the  number  "  6  "  were
found  upon  it.^'^  Mr.  P.  said  he  had  thought  of  5,  but  explained  that  he  made
his  fives  in  such  a  curious  way  that  they  might  easily  be  mistaken  for  sixes.

[c]  Mr.  D.  now  said  that  a  start  having  been  made,  more  success  might  be
looked  for,  so  the  experiment  was  repeated,  the  slate  being  brought  up  at  in-
tervals of  from  5  to  10  minutes.  The  first  time  it  had  the  letters  BOORZ
upon  it,  which  Mr.  P.  explained  were  the  first  five  letters  of  his  Christian
name  which  was  in  Persian  written  BOORZU.  Neither  Mr.  Hodgson,  Mr.
Hughes,  my  wife,  nor  myself  had  ever  heard  of  this  name  before,  but  I  did
not  quite  understand  whether  Mr.  D.  had  or  had  not  heard  it  from  Mr.  P.
before  the  sitting  began.


Experimental  Investigation.


443


[d,  e]  Next  time  there  was  the  single  word  "Wait,"  and  a  little  later  the
words  "  Try  Chalks."  We  accordingly  concentrated  our  attention  on  the  two
dates  with  the  chalks  between  them,  which  had  been  left  lying  on  the  table.

[/]  Mr.  Davey  and  Mr.  P.  each  placed  a  hand  on  them,  and  we  completed
the  circle.  From  time  to  time  Mr.  D.  opened  the  slates,  but  for  a  long
time  there  was  no  result.

[(/]  Presently  he  got  up  and  went  to  the  bookcase,  saying  he  would  try
to  read  something  from  a  book.  He  asked  Mr.  P.  to  go  and  choose  one.
Mr.  P.  did  so  (taking  the  locked  slate  with  him),  and  suggested  several
books,  to  all  of  which  Mr.  D.  objected  on  various  grounds.  Finally,  how-
ever, a  volume  of  Swinburne's  poems  was  selected  and  placed  on  the  table,
Mr.  D.  saying  he  would  try  to  get  a  reference  in  the  locked  slate  to  any
particular  page  and  line  below  10  Mr.  P.  might  choose.  But  though  the
slate  was  opened  two  or  three  times,  no  writing  was  found  on  it.

[/]  In  the  meantime,  Mr.  D.  had  once  more  examined  the  two  slates
where  the  coloured  chalks  were,  but  finding  nothing,  had  placed  them
side  by  side,  and  carelessly,  as  if  in  a  fit  of  absent-mindedness,  had  taken  the
chalks  from  the  slate  which  had  been  at  the  bottom,  and  placed  them  on  the
other.  He  had  then  put  them  together  as  before,  except  that  the  original
position  of  the  slates  was  reversed,  the  old  bottom  one  being  now  at  the  top,
and  the  old  top  one  at  the  bottom.  Presently,  asking  Mr.  P.  if  in  a  former
sitting  with  Eglinton  the  medium  had  not  got  some  writing  on  his  shoulder,
he  took  up  the  two  slates  and  placed  them  on  Mr.  P.  's  shoulder,  but  in  less
than  a  minute  took  them  oif,  reversing i''  them  as  he  did  so,  and  replaced  them
on  the  table.  The  old  bottom  slate  was  now  once  more  at  the  bottom,  and
the  old  top  one  at  the  top,  but  each  slate  had  been  reversed,  so  that  the  two
sides  which  had  originally  been  turned  to  the  table  were  now  turned  up.
In  a  few  minutes,  Mr.  D.  had  a  sort  of  convulsion,  Mr.  Hodgson  and  Mr.
Hughes  said  they  heard  sounds  like  writing,  the  slates  were  opened,  and
there,  on  the  lower  one,  was  a  message,  half  in  green, half  in  red  (nearly
the  colours  chosen  by  Mr.  P.  and  my  wife),  expressing  a  hope  that  we  should
be  satisfied  with  writing  given  thus,  under  such  excellent  test  conditions.
Mr.  P.  remarked  that  he  had  asked  for  blue,  and  that  the  colour  given  was
green  ;  and  then,  on  being  asked,  said  he  could  not  see  how  Mr.  D.  could
have  produced  this  writing  by  ordinary  physical  means,  and  then  my  wife
and  I  left.

I  am  writing  this  account  without  notes,  on  the  morning  of  Friday,
September  17th.  J.  Russell.

My  wife  and  I  have  written  our  accounts  independently,  but  I  have
since  read  through  hers,  and  find  I  have  omitted  to  say  that  there  was  a
good  light  in  the  room.

3.  Report  of  Mrs.  Russell.

[16,  Somerfield  Road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.]

I  was  present  with  my  husband  at  a  seance  given  by  Mr.  Davey  to  Mr.
Padshah  at  Mr.  Hodgson's  rooms  in  Furnival's  Inn,  on  Wednesday  night,  the
15th  inst.


444  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


There  were  six  of  us  f)resent.  We  sat  round  a  small  deal  table,  which  had
a  drawer  at  each^"  end.  The  one  my  end  was  empty.  I  did  not  examine  the
other.  Two  lamps  were  in  the  room,  and  four  candles,  one  of  which  was  on
the  table. Mr.  Padshah  sat  next  to  Mr.  Davey  and  I  next  to  Mr.  Padshah.

[</]  He  began  by  cleaning  the  inside  of  a  locked  slate  given  him  by  Mr.
Davey,  who  having  chosen  and  put  inside  a  small  piece  of  chalt,  desired  Mr.
Padshah  to  lock  the  slate  and  keej)  it  in  his  possession.  Mr.  Padshah
locked  it  and  put  it  behind  him  in  the  chair  he  was  sitting  in,  and  the  key  in
his  pocket.

[a]  Mr.  Davey  then  took  a  small  ordinary  slate,  and  a  small  piece  of  slate
pencil  with  no  jjoints,  asking  Mr.  Padshah  to  first  clean  the  slate  him-
self on  both  sides.  This  being  done  they  both  held  the  slate  under  the  edge
of  the  table  with  the  fingers  on  the  slate  and  the  thumbs  on  the  edge  of  the
table.  We  then  all  joined  hands,  and  sat  talking  for  some  time.  Once  or
twice  Mr.  Davey  took  out  the  slate  to  examine,  but  found  no  writing.  He
then  asked  me  to  change  places  with  Mr.  Padshah,  and  hold  the  slate,  which
I  did.  Once  or  twice  he  took  out  the  slate  whilst  I  was  holding  it,  and  once
there  was  a  zigzag  pencil  mark  on  it  which  was  not  there  before,  but  no
writing.

[6]  Mr.  Padshah  then  took  the  slate  again.  We  still  went  on  waiting,
and  taking  out  the  slate  to  look  at.  Twice,  some  white  chalk  that  Mr.
Padshah  had  chosen  was  crushed  when  we  looked  at  it.  Mr.  Davey  then
bent  his  head  close  to  the  table  and  asked  in  a  loud  voice,  "  Tell  us  if  we
shall  have  any  manifestations  to-night  or  no  ;  only  one  word  Yes  or  No."
After  waiting  again  Mr.  Padshah  said  he  heard  the  sound  of  writing.  On
looking,  "  Yes  "  was  found  written  on  the  slate.  The  letters  were  very  uneven
and  scrawling.  Mr.  Davey  then  asked  Mr.  Padshah  to  think  of  a  number,
and  a  figure  G  was  given  instead  of  a  5  which  he  had  thought  of.  But  Mr.
Padshah  explained  it  by  saying  that  he  usually  made  those  figures  very  much
alike,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  confuse  them.

\d,  e]  After  waiting  again  the  single  word  "Wait"  was  found,  and  a
little  time  afterwards  "  Try  chalks  "  in  the  same  bad  writing  (so  bad  that
we  turned  it  first  one  way  and  then  another  to  make  it  out)  with  a  very
imperfect  figure  8  that  Mr.  Padshah  had  beeia  thinking  of.  Mr.  Padshah
himself  discovered  this  last  just  as  Mr.  Davey  was  putting  back  the  slate
under  the  table.

[</]  Nothing  was  yet  found  in  the  locked  slate.

[/]  Mr.  Davey  then  put  in  several  pieces  of  coloured  chalks  between
two  slates  which  had  been  lying  on  the  table  all  the  time,  with  one  piece  of
pencil  inside,  and  he  and  my  husband  placed  their  hands  on  it.

[c]  On  again  taking  up  the  slate  under  the  table,  a  curious  word
appeared  written  on  it  which  we  could  not  read,  written  in  much  better
characters,  but  which  apjieared  to  me  to  be  a  foreign  word.  On  Mr.
Padshah's  looking  at  it,  he  exclaimed  "Why  it  is  my  own  name  Boorzu,
which  I  am  hardly  ever  called  by  !  "  No  one  at  the  table  knew  it  was  Mr.
Padshah's  name,  Mr.  Davey  being  positive  that  he  had  never  heard  it
before,  and  indeed  neither  of  us  had.  Mr.  Padshah  then  reminded  Mr.
Davey  that  he  had  asked  him  to  ask  his  name  before  tea,  which  Mr.  Davey
said  he  had  forgotten.


Experimental  Investigation.


445


\g\  Nothing  having  been  written  between  the  two  slates,  Mr.  Davey  then
asked  Mr.  Padshah  to  go  to  the  bookcase  and  choose  a  book.  He  brought
one  and  put  it  on  the  table,  but  Mr.  Davey  objected  that  it  was  too  big.  I
think  it  was  a  book  of  Spencer's.  Mr.  Davey  then  went  to  the  bookcase  with
Mr.  Padshah  and  helped  him  to  choose  a  book,  saying  it  must  be  a  small  one,
and  in  large  print,  that  a  good  clear,  large  print  was  of  the  most  importance.
Mr.  Padshah,  on  going  to  the  bookcase,  took  the  locked  slate  with  him.
They  brought  back  a  volume  of  Swinburne's  poems,  Mr.  Davey  opening  it
here  and  there,  and  observing  that  the  worst  of  it  was  he  knew  that  particular
book  very  well.  Mr.  Padshah  then  thought  of  a  page  under  10,  but  no
writing  was  given.  I  then  went  to  the  bookcase  for  a  book,  and  brought  back
Aurora  Leigh,  which,  on  Mr.  Davey's  seeing,  he  said  it  was  the  same  as  they
had  had  two  or  three  nights  before,  and  it  would  not  do.

[/]  He  then  decided  to  give  up  the  book  test  altogether,  and  con-
centrated all  his  attention  on  the  two  slates  on  the  table.  He  asked  Mr.
Padshah  and  myself  to  choose  a  colour  that  we  would  have  the  writing  in.
Mr.  Padshah  chose  blue,  and  I^^  red.  There  were  3  or  4  different  small
pieces  of  coloured  chalks^^  in  the  slates.  Mr.  Padshah  and  myself  then
held  our  hands  over  the  slates  with  Mr.  Davey  and  my  husband.  Mr.
Davey  became  very  intense,  saying  we  must  get  some  manifestations  that
night.  Mr.  Padshah  said  that  perhaps  they  would  not  write  on  the  table
between  the  slates,  that  although  they  had  said  "  try  chalks,"  they  did  not
say  on  which  slate.  We  waited  some  time  without  any  result.  Once  Mr.
Davey  put  the  slates  on  Mr.  Padshah's  shoulder,  asking  if  Mr.  Eglinton
had  not  tried  him  in  that  way.  He  replaced  them  after  a  few  seconds  on  the
table,  and  turned  them  over  to  look  inside,  but  nothing  was  found.  At  last
Mr.  Davey  became  more  intense,  and  after  a  kind  of  convulsive  shaking,  he
turned  open  the  slates  once  more,  and,  with  some  excitement,  showed  us  one
whole  side  covered  with  even  good  writing,  half  in  green  and  half  in  red.  I
cannot  remember  what  it  was  exactly,  not  having  taken  a  copy.  But  tlie
green  was  something  about  giving  us  a  good  manifestation  that  night,  and
the  red  about  waiting  patiently.  This  last  being  in  my  colour,  struck  me
as  a  curious  coincidence,  as  I  had  been  the  most  impatient  all  the  evening.
Then  Mr.  Padshah  again  unlocked  the  locked  slate,  but  found  nothing,  and
after  our  waiting  some  time  longer,  Mr.  Davey  suggested  we  might  perhaps
be  too  many,  as  he  had  seldom  had  such  bad  results  in  so  hmg  a  sitting.  As
my  husband  and  I  wished  to  get  home,  we  then  left,  it  being  past  10  o'clock,
and  we  began  soon  after  eight.  Mr.  Davey  proposed  going  on  with  the
sitting  after  we  had  left,  with  what  results  I  do  not  know.

I  am  writing  this  account  from  memory,  without  notes,  on  Friday
evening,  September  17th.

Bessie  Russell.


SITTING  V.

Previous  to  my  sitting  with  Mr.  Block  he  had  been  informed  that
my  "  phenomena "  were  not  due  to  the  agency  of  "  spirits,"  and  he


446  The  Possibilities  of  Mai- Observation,  &c.


was  exceedingly  sceptical  as  to  the  occurrence  of  any  phenomena  at
all  under  such  conditions  as  had  been  described  to  him.

Report  of  Mk.  A.  S.  Block.

October  30,  1886.

Dear  Mr.  Davey,

Few  of  the  persons  who  have  witnessed  your  extraordinary  performances
can  have  done  so  with  more  impartial  minds  than  I  and  my  young  son,
Alfred,  did.  He,  a  youth  of  16,  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  whole  subject  of
Spiritualism,  mediums,  or  psychical  science,  with  eyes  quick  to  discern  every
movement  of  hand  or  body  ;  1,  calmly  observing  what  I  saw  without  desiring
to  theorise  or  account  for  the  same,  or  the  way  in  which  it  was  accomplished.

Having  heard  of  what  you  were  doing  I  was  curious  to  witness  myself
your  performances,  and  you  kindly  gratified  me  by  giving  me  what  I  suppose
you  would  call  a  seance.  To  my  own  disappointment,  and  I  fear  to  your  own
inconvenience  and  perhaps  greater  strain  of  mind  in  consequence,  I  had  but
half-an-hour  with  you,  having  to  catch  my  last  train  home.

You,  my  son,  and  I  having  adjourned  to  the  library,  sat  down  at  a  small
ordinary  table  with  folding  flaps,  when  you  jjroduced  several  slates  and  a  small
folding  slate  with  hinges  and  patent  lock.  Giving  me  the  latter  you  asked
me  to  thoroughly  sponge  and  wipe  it,  and  placing  a  very  small  piece  of  pencil
between  the  two  slates,  I  locked  them  and  gave  the  key  to  my  son,  and
placed  the  slate  in  my  right  hand  pocket,  being  the  side  away  from  you.

[a]  You  then  handed  me  an  ordinary  slate  which  you  requested  me  also  to
well  sponge  and  wipe  and  put  a  mark  in  the  corner  of  each  side,  which  I  did.
Then,  putting  a  small  piece  of  pencil  in  the  middle  of  the  slate  you  j^laced
it — or  slid  it — under  the  comer  of  the  extended  flap  of  the  table,  placing
the  fingers  of  your  right  hand  under  it,  and  your  thumb  on  the  upper  side
of  the  table,  and  your  left  hand  on  the  table  ;  I  placing  the  fingers  of
my  left  hand  next  and  touching  yours  under  the  slate,  and  thumb  on
the  table,  and  with  my  right  hand  holding  the  left  hand  of  my  son.  In
a  few  seconds  you  said,  "Will  you  ask  a  question?"  when  I  asked,
"What  shall  I  be  doing  this  time  to-morrow  night?"  In  about  3  or
4  minutes  a  slight  scratching  was  to  be  heard,  and  you  slid  the  slate  from
under  the  table,  and  only  a  mark  of  an  illegible  word  was  to  be  seen.

[6]  The  slate  was  again  sponged  and  wiped  by  me,  and  again  replaced  by
you  in  the  same  position  as  before — when  you,  either  as  part  of  the  per-
formance or  in  fun,  evinced  some  impatience  and  demanded  an  answer  to  my
question,  and  in  a  few  minutes  scratching  was  again  heard,  and  on  with-
drawing the  slate  from  under  the  table,  the  word  "  Reading  "  very  legibly
written,  was  on  the  slate.

[e]  You  then  took  two  slates  which  you  handed  to  me  to  sponge  and  wipe
as  before,  which  I  did,  and  j^lacing  3  or  4  small  pieces  of  coloured  chalk,  which
you  placed  between  the  2  slates,  which  were  placed  on  the  top  of  the  table,
you  asked  my  son  to  take  a  book  from  the  bookcase,  to  think  of  a  page
without  letting  you  know  either  the  book  or  the  page  thought  of,  and  keep
the  book  in  his  possession.  Then  asking  him  in  what  coloured  chalk  the
writing  should  appear — he  desired  it  should  be  in  red — you  placed  both


Experimental  Investigation.


447


your  hands  firmly  on  the  upper  slate  ;  I  placed  both  mine,  and  my  son  did
the  same,  all  of  us  pressing  on  the  slates  firmly.

Waiting  a  few  minutes,  you  again  manifested  impatience  and  excitement
at  the  little  delay,  when  we  soon  after  distinctly  heard  a  scratching  between
the  slates,  which  when  looked  at,  the  upper  slate  was  found  covered  with
writing,  in  red  chalk  as  desired.  The  writing  was  apparently  an  extract  of
some  kind,  but  unfortunately  the  opportunity  of  testing  its  accuracy  was  lost
as  my  son  omitted  to  think  of  a  page.

[d]  Although  the  time  at  our  disposal  was  but  a  few  minutes — a  quarter
of  an  hour  at  most—  you  kindly  performed  another  trick,  which  was  writing
between  the  locked  slates.  As  I  have  said,  these  were  handed  to  me  by  you  at
the  commencement  of  our  sitting,  were  sponged  and  wiped  by  me,  a  piece  of
pencil  placed  between  the  two  slates — locked  by  me,  and  key  handed  by  me
to  my  son  and  the  slates  placed  in  my  pocket,  so  that  it  was  manifest  you
never  had  any  touch  or  handling  of  these  locked-up  slates. Asking  me  to
unlock  them  I  did  so  and  found  them  in  the  same  condition  as  when  I  placed
them  in  my  pocket. I,  however,  again  wiped  them  with  the  sponge—  you
replaced  the  small  piece  of  pencil,  I  locked  them  together  again,  handing  the
key  to  my  son,  and  handing  you  the  slates  thus  locked. These  you  placed
on  the  top  corner  of  the  table,  placing  both  your  hands  ujion  them — I  and  my
son  doing  the same. In  about  3  minutes,  at  most,  you  began  to  press
energetically  upon  the slates,  when  we heard  very distinctly  a  slight
scratching  between  them. You  called  my  attention  to  the  sound,  lifting  your
hands,  called  my  observation  to  the  fact  that  when  you  did  so  the  sound
stopped, — being  again  audible  when  you  replaced  your  hands. In  a  few
seconds  taking  away  your  hands,  you  asked  me  to  unlock  the  slates,  which  I
did  and  there  saw  writing  in  a  good  flowing  hand — not  in  your  style  I
observed,  on  the  whole  of  the  upper,  and  on  part  of  the  lower  slate. I  read
the first  few  lines,  which  were  that  it  was  hoped  I  had  enjoyed  the
entertainment.

I  much  regret  my  hurried  departure.

In  the  above  memorandum,  I  have  repeated  I  believe  faithfully  what
I  saw.  Yours  faithfully,

Alfred  S.  Block.

After  receiving  Mr.  Block's  report  I  asked  him  the  following
questions : —

1.  Kindly  say  on  which  side  the  writing  appeared  when  the  slate  was
held  against  the  table,  viz. ,  was  it  on  the  lower  side  where  my  fingers  were
or  upon  the  upper  side  nearest  the  table  ;  also  when  you  grasped  the  slate
with  me  against  the  table  do  you  remember  if  you  held  it  firmly  or  not  ?

2.  Did  I  endeavour  to  distract  your  attention  from  the  slates  ?

3.  To  the  best  of  your  belief  were  the  slates  devoid  of  writing  when  you
examined  and  marked  them,  and  did  either  Alfred  or  yourself  observe  the
slightest  opportunity  for  my  writing  on  them  by  ordinary  natural  means  ?

Mr.  Block  replied  on  November  6th,  1886,  as  follows  : —

1.  The  writing  was  on  the  side  of  the  slate  nearest  the  table,  and  as  you
held  the  slate  and  I  also  held  it  very  tightly  against  the  under  side  of  the


448  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  c&c.


table  flap,  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  impossible  for  you  to  have  touched  the
pencil  or  that  side  of  the  slate  on  which  the  writing  appeared.

2.  You  certainly  did  not  appear  to  endeavour  to  distract  my  attention
from  the  slate — quite  the  contrary.

3.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  and  as  far  as  the  evidence  of  my  own  and
Alfred's  eyes  could  be  relied  upon  the  slates  were  all  perfectly  devoid  of
writing  or  marking  before  the  performance,  in  addition  to  which  as  I  have
said  I  well  sponged  and  wiped  the  slates  myself  and  marked  them  before  you
received  them  from  me.

I  may  also  state  that  neither  Alfred  or  I  observed  the  slightest
opportunity  for  your  writing  on  them  by  ordinary  natural  means.

A.  S.  Block.


SITTING  VI.

Mr.  Ten  Briiggenkate  had  discussed  v^^ith  me  some  of  the  literature
relating  to  "  slate-writing "  phenomena,  including  some  controversy
concerning  my  own  performances  as  "  A.,  the  Amateur  Conjurer,  "
but  I  had  carefully  refrained  from  making  any  statement  myself  con-
cerning the  exact  nature  of  my  phenomena  until  after  the  sitting.

Eeport  of  Mb.  B.  J.  Ten  Bbuggenkate.

November  30th,  1886.

It  was  my  good  fortune  to  witness  last  night  some  of  the  most  interesting
feats  of  what  ajipeared  to  be  conjuring  that  I  have  ever  seen.  I  had
previously  had  several  conversations  with  Mr.  Davey  upon  the  subject  of
Spiritualism  and  slate-writing,  and  last  evening  when  alone  with  him  at  his
house  he  volunteered  to  give  me  a  seance.

The  room  was  a  well  lighted  library,  the  table  at  which  we  sat  was  an
ordinary  somewhat  old-fashioned  Pembroke  table,  and  the  slates  used  were
of  the  common  school  type,  as  well  as  one  small  folding  slate  fitted  with
hinges  and  a  Chatwood  lock  and  key.

[a]  Mr.  Davey  gave  me  the  locked  slate  and  asked  me  to  examine  it  care-
fully, which  I  did  and  failed  to  find  any  trick  or  anything  of  the  kiad  about  it.
The  "medium  "  then  asked  me  to  write  a  question  upon  the  slate,  to  place  a
small  piece  of  pencil  between  the  two,  to  lock  it  up  and  put  both  slate  and  key
in  my  pocket.  I  did  this  in  Mr.  Davey's  absence,  he  having  been  called  away,
for  a  moment.  Mr.  Davey  then  took  one  of  the  ordinary  slates,  and  placing
a  splinter  of  pencil  upon  it  we  both  held  it  close  under  the  table,  and  after  a
lapse  of  a  few  minutes  got  some  writing  upon  it,  the  writing  I  remarked  at  the
time  being  in  an  ofiposite  direction  to  Mr.  Davey.  Mr.  Davey  then  returned
to  the  locked  slate,  which  had  been  in  my  pocket  all  the  time,  and  upon  placing
this  slate  upon  the  table,  very  faint  scratching  was  heard,  and  a  complete
and  full  answer  to  my  question  was  returned.  What  was  to  me  most  ex-
traordinary was,  that  Mr.  Davey  did  not  know  what  question  I  had  asked,
and  yet  the  answer  was  definite  and  complete.


Experimental  Investigation.


449


[6]  The  next  performance  was  even  more  wonderful.  I  took  two  common
slates,  thoroughly  cleaned  them,  and  placed  some  pieces  of  red  chalk  between
them,  and  we  kept  our  hands  firmly  upon  them  ;  in  a  short  time  faint
scratching  was  heard  and  upon  lifting  the  top  slate  I  found  it  to  be  covered
with  writing  written  in  a  diagonal  direction  across  the  slate,  the  writing  again
appearing  in  an  opposite  direction  to  Mr.  Davey,  i.e.,  as  we  sat  opposite  one
another  it  appeared  as  if  I  had  written  it.

[c]  The  last  experiment  was  only  partially  successful.  Mr.  Davey  asked
me  to  choose  a  book  from  the  shelves,  unknown  to  him,  and  to  sit  upon  it  in
order  that  it  should  be  invisible  to  him — then  to  write  a  number  upon  a
slate  ;  I  wrote  "yiwe  " — then  to  think  of  a  number  ;  I  thought  of  "  seven."
The  locked  slate  was  again  put  upon  the  table,  scratching  was  heard,  and
upon  opening  it  I  found  a  verse  from  page  8  line  4  of  the  book  I  had
chosen,  written  distinctly  upon  the  slate.  I  wish  it  to  be  observed  that  I
did  not  fix  my  mind  attentively  upon  the  number  "  seven  "  I  had  thought  of
— my  attention  being  called  off  by  some  remarks  of  Mr.  Davey  ;  also  that
Mr.  Davey  did  not  know  the  book  I  had  chosen,  so  that  I  quite  fail  to  see
how  he  could  produce  any  writing  from  the  book.  This  ended  the  seance,
and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive  how  the  writing  can  possibly  come  upon  the
slate.  There  was  not  a  chance  of  Mr.  Davey  being  able  to  get  at  the  slates
during  the  performance.  When  I  placed  the  two  open  slates  one  upon
another  with  the  red  chalk  between  them,  I  made  the  remark  that  if  writing
was  produced  upon  either  of  them  I  should  be  ready  to  believe  anything —
for  they  were  covered  with  my  hand  directly  they  were  on  the  top  of  each
other  and  were  never  moved  until  writing  appeared.

B.  J.  Ten  Beuggenkate.


SITTING  VII.

The  next  two  reports  are  independent  accounts  of  a  sitting  held  on
December  1st,  1886.  Mr.  Venner  was  introduced  to  me  by  a  friend
in  1885,  in  order  that  he  might  witness  one  of  my  performances.
He  had  previously  given  the  question  of  Spiritualism  some  thought,
and  had  been  present  at  several  seances  given  by  a  professed  medium.
Since  that  time  he  has  had  frequent  sittings  with  me,  in  company  wdth
his  own  friends.  Mr.  Manville  and  Mr.  Pinnock  I  met  for  the  first
time  at  the  sitting  here  recorded.

1.  Report  of  Mr.  Robert  Venner.

Seance,  December  1st.
On  Wednesday,  December  1st,  my  two  friends,  Mr.  M.,  Mr.  P.,  and
myself  attended  a  truly  remarkable  slate-writing  seance  given  by  Mr.  D.
at  his  own  house.  Neither  Mr.  M.  nor  Mr.  P.  have  had  any  previous
experience  in  slate-writing  seances.  I  have  been  present  at  something  like  a
dozen  of  Mr,  D.'s  ;  the  first  of  the  series  must  have  taken  place  nearly  a


450  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


year  and-a-half  ago.  At  no  seance,  at  which  I  have  been  present,  have  I
heard  any  theory  advanced  by  Mr.  D.  to  account  for  the  production  of  the
phenomena,  and  he  has  always  strictly  guarded  himself  from  any  claims  to
the  assistance  of  the  supernatural.  I  consider  that  this  disclaimer  places
him  in  a  disadvantageous  position,  as  comjDared  to  that  of  mediums  claiming
similar  results  as  the  work  of  spiritual  agency.  In  the  first  place,  it  debars
him  from  imposing  numerous  most  convenient  conditions  on  the  investi-
gator ;  in  the  second,  it  deprives  him  of  much  prestige,  which  cannot  but
assist  the  performer  ;  in  the  third,  it  prevents  him  from  pressing  into  his
service  bad  spirits,  atmospheric  conditions,  &c.,  &c.,  to  account  for  mistake
or  failure.

The  room  in  which  the  seance  took  place  is  a  small  one,  and  is  used  as  a
library  ;  it  was  well  liglited  by  a  couple  of  gas  burners.  The  table  at  which
we  sat  was  of  such  a  size  that  all  four  of  us  could  conveniently  join  hands
when  seated  ;  it  had  two  flaps.  Before  the  commencement  of  the  seance  we
made  a  thorough  investigation  of  its  under-side.  The  slates  emi)loyed  were
all,  with  one  exception,  ordinary  school  ones  ;  no  German  parchment  was
used.  The  exception  was  a  handsome  book-slate,  cased  in  black  wood
resembling  ebony,  and  furnished  with  a  lock.  The  two  halves  of  the  slate
fitted  very  exactly  together  when  closed  and  locked.  The  approximate
outside  dimensions  were  five  inches  by  eight.

All  the  slates  belonged  to  Mr.  D.,  whom  I  shall  in  future  designate  as
the  medium  ;  we  brought  none  of  our  own.  The  medium  also  provided  a
box  of  crayons,  mostly  either  red  or  green,  a  sponge,  a  duster,  and  a  glass
of  water.

Mr.  M.  objected  that  the  contents  of  the  glass  might  contain  chemicals  ;
we  therefore  had  it  emptied  and  refilled.

The  order  of  sitting  was  as  follows  : — Mr.  P.  and  I  occupied  positions  on
the  medium's  right  and  left  hands  respectively,  Mr.  M.  sat  opposite
to  him.

[rf]  At  the  request  of  the  medium,  Mr.  P.  wrote  a  question  in  the  book-
slate  (I  shall  call  this  slate  A  in  future) ;  he  then  locked  it  and  pocketed
the  key.  Neither  Mr.  M.  nor  I  knew  the  nature  of  the  question  at  the  time.
The  slate  was  left  for  some  minutes  upon  the  seat  of  an  arm-chair,  but  was
subsequently  transferred  first  to  Mr.  P.'s  coat,  and  then  to  the  table  at
which  we  sat.  Mr.  M.  suggested  aside  to  me  that  we  should  fix  a  hair  in  such
a  manner  to  the  outside  of  the  slate  that  it  could  not  fail  to  be  broken  if
the  slace  were  opened.  I  thought  the  suggestion  a  very  good  one,  but  we  were
not  able  to  j)ut  it  into  execution,  no  gum  being  forthcoming,  nor  any  oppor-
tunity presenting  itself  of  distracting  the  medium's  attention.

The  medium  showed  and  explained  to  us  a  means  commonly  employed
in  jDroducing  slate-writing  by  fraud.

Experimeibt  No.  1.  [a]

Ordinary  slate  taken,  marked  by  Mr.  P.  and  myself,  and  then  held
beneath  the  table-flap  by  Mr.  P.  and  the  medium.  We  got  no  result  during
the  next  half-hour,  and  Mr.  P.  and  Mr.  M.  therefore  changed  places.
After  a  considerable  interval  the  sound  of  writing  audible,  and  the  word


Experimental  Investigation.


451


"yes"  found  written  ;  the  writing  was  weak  and  straggly.  As  nothing
further  occurred  for  some  time,  the  original  order  of  sitting  was  resumed.

Experiment  No.  2.  [6]

The  medium  requested  Mr.  M.  to  next  ask  a  question.  Mr.  M.'s  question
was  something  to  this  effect : — "  I  had  the  pleasure  of  an  introduction  to  a
lady  last  night,  I  do  not  know  her  address,  and  I  should  be  much  obliged  by
its  production."  After  a  considerable  pause  the  word  "  Marylebone "
written.

Experiment  No.  3.  [c]

Two  ordinary  slates  taken,  cleaned  by  us,  but  not  marked,  pieces  of  red
and  green  chalk  introduced  between  them,  the  slates  then  deposited  in  front
of  the  medium  in  full  view,  and  about  four  or  five  inches  from  the  edge  of
the  table  and  from  the  medium's  body  ;  the  medium  rested  one  of  his  hands
on  the  upper  surface  of  the  top  slate,  and  my  hand  reposed  on  his.

After  a  pause  the  sound  of  writing  distinctly  audible  ;  this  continued  for
about  15  seconds,  then  the  medium  remarked,  "  What  a  pity  I  forgot  to
ask  you  what  colour  you  would  have  it  in."  Mr.  M.  suggested  green  ;  sound
of  writing  continued  for  about  five  seconds  longer,  then  ceased.  On  the
removal  of  the  top  slate,  the  bottom  slate  was  found  to  be  completely
covered  with  writing.  The  writing  ran  in  diagonal  lines  across  the  slate  ;
the  writing  was  upside  down  with  respect  to  the  medium  ;  the  writing
was  firm  and  distinct  in  character.  The  first  three-c^uarters  of  the  message
were  written  in  red,  the  last  quarter  in  green  ;  its  substance  was  as  follows  : —

"We  perceive  that  you  possess  powers  of  a  very  high  order,  but  you  have
not  done  what  is  right  for  their  development.  Success  can  only  be  obtained
by  industry, patience,  and  study,  and  is  not  this  true  as  applied  to  all  branches
of  human  affairs  ?  Why  should  a  man  be  entitled  to  the  assistance  of
astral  angeloids  simply  because  he  sits  at  table  and  thinks  of  nothing  at
all  ?  Ah,  no  ;  should  you  indulge  in  further  investigation  with  a  profes-
sional psychic."

This  is  the  end  of  the  red  message,  the  remainder  is  in  German,
and  written  in  green.  I  am  not  a  German  scholar,  and  I  shall  not  give
the  message  in  the  present  report.  I  understand  from  Mr.  P.*  that  in
construction  and  idiom  it  is  perfectly  correct.  During  the  occurrence  of
the  writing,  as  also  before  it  took  place,  I  watched  the  medium  narrowly,
but  I  could  obtain  no  clue  to  the  means  employed.  As  the  writing  had
been  accompanied  by  some  veiy  convulsive  spasms  of  the  medium,  Mr.  M.

*  Mr.  Pinnock  wrote  a  report,  but  requested  me  not  to  publish  it  unless  it
was  a  correct  account  of  what  occurred.  I  may,  however,  quote  the  following
passage,  which  I  believe  to  be  accurate,  with  reference  to  the  above  incident.
"  At  this  point  Mr.  Davey  had  asked  us  if  we  should  like  to  have  the  rest
written  in  a  different  chalk  (we  had  put  a  red  and  a  green  piece  on  the  slate) ;
we  assented.  I  at  the  same  time  thought  to  ask  Mr.  Davey  to  let  the
remainder  be  written  in  German,  but  I  did  not  express  this  wish  aloud.  To  our
great  astonishment  the  first  part  was  written  in  red  chalk,  and  the  next  in
green,  the  green  writing  being  in  German."  This  miglit  be  described  as  a  com-
munication given  to  the  sitter,  in  answer  to  his  mental  request  for  a  language
unknown  to  the  "medium." — S.J.  D.

2  G  2


452


The  Possibilities  of  Mcd-Observation,  &c.


inquired  if  these  were  beyond  his  power  to  control. A  perfectly  frank
answer  in  the  negative  was  returned.

Experiment  No.  4.  [rf]

The  medium  and  Mr.  P.  placed  their  hands  upon  slate  A,  which  had
remained  in  sight  in  front  of  the  latter  since  the  commencement  of  the
seance.  The  sound  of  writing  audible  almost  immediately.  Mr.  P.  opened
slate,  and  we  found  the  question  he  had  written,  together  with  the  accom-
panying answer.

Question.  "  Give  me  my  name  in  full  if  you  can  ?  "

Ans^ver.  "We  are  sorry  we  cannot  do  this  for  you,  Mr.  Pinnock  ;  perhaps
■we  may  be  able  to  do  so  later  on."

The  writing  was  firm,  and  distinct  in  character  from  that  of  some  of  the
other  messages.

Experiment  No.  5.  [e]

The  medium  requested  each  of  us  to  take  a  small  handful  of  chalks  out  of
the  box  on  the  table.  Mr.  P.  took  11,  Mr.  M.  six,  and  I  three.  The  medium
diyided  the  three  chalks  I  had  selected  between  the  other  two.  We  had
previously  agreed  that  Mr.  P. 's  number  should  represent  a  page,  and  Mr.
M.'s  number  a  line,  of  some  book  to  be  chosen  mentally  by  one  of  the  party,
the  medium  promising  to  endeavour  to  reproduce  on  the  slate  the  line  so
determined.  In  the  present  case  it  was  of  course  the  eighth  line  of  the  12th
page.

The  medium  requested  me  to  choose  a  book.  I  accordingly  left  the  table
and  walked  up  to  a  small  case  containing,  at  a  rough  guess,  60  volumes.  I
had  already  selected  one  of  these,  when  Mr.  M.  raised  the  objection  that,
as  I  was  a  personal  friend  of  the  medium,  it  would  be  a  better  test  if  the
selection  fell  either  to  him  or  Mr.  P. The  medium  acquiesced.

The  slate  A  was  cleaned,  and  a  fresh  fragment  of  pencil  introduced  ;  the
slate  remained  in  full  view  with  one  of  the  medium's  hands  resting  on  it.
Mr.  M.  rose  and  noted  a  volume  mentally. The  sound  of  writing  audible.

The  message,  on  examination,  proved  to  be  an  address  to  Mr.  M.,  but
contained  no  quotation  from  the  book  he  had  chosen.  I  had  not  time  to
make  a  copy  of  the  message  in  full,  but  the  commencement  was  as
follows  : —

"  You,  who  have  studied  the  question  of  electricity,  can  the  more
readily  appreciate  the  wonder  of  these  performances. We  think  you"

The  medium  seemed  angry  at  the  appearance  of  this  message,  which  had
no  bearing  on  the  question  asked,  and  expressed  a  desire  that  we  should  try
a  second  time. Mr.  P.  was  therefore  requested  to  select  a  book.

On  Mr.  Manville  asking  the  reason  of  the  non-success  of  the  experiment,
he  received  the  answer  "  muddle  "  written  on  an  ordinary  slate.

Experiment No.  6.  [/]
Mr.  P.  selected  a  volume  mentally'  without  removing  or  even  touching  it;


'  Mr.  Pinnock  wrote  to  me  on  December  ]4th,  1886: — "In  my  report  I
omitted  to  state  that  I  selected  a  book  mentally  ^\'itllOut  of  course  telling  anyone
which  one  I  had  selected." — S.J.D.


Experimental  Investigation.


453


he  then  returned  to  his  place.  Two  ordinary  slates  taken,  placed  together
beneath  the  flap  of  the  table,  and  held  by  Mr.  P.  and  the  medium.  The
slates  were  not  sjjecially  marked  by  us,  but  Mr.  P.  informed  us  that  the
traces  of  former  mes.«ages  on  them  ofiered  an  easy  means  of  identification.

Writing  audible. On  examination  the  following  message  found

"  The  difference  in  this  respect  Shakespear."

Mr.  P.  went  up  to  the  book-shelf,  opened  the  volume  he  had  selected,
and  handed  it  to  Mr.  M.,who  found  line  8  of  page  12  to  consist  of  the  follow-
ing words  : —

Line  8.  "  The  difference  in  this  respect  between  Shake — •"
Line  9.  "spear  and  Beaumont,"  &c.,  &c.

We  informed  the  medium  that  he  had  only  been  partially  successful.
Slates  held  a  second  time  under  the  table  by  Mr.  P.  and  the  medium.
Words  "and  Beaumont  "  written.

Slates  held  under  the  table-flap  for  the  third  time.  The  omitted  word
"between"  written,  and  "Shake"  instead  of  the  whole  word  Shakespear.
The  message  was  now  perfectly  correct.  The  character  of  the  writing  in
the  above  messages  was  weak  and  straggling.

Experiment  No.  7.

As  we  were  in  doubt  as  to  some  of  the  words  written  in  the  message  com-
mencing "We  perceive,"  &c.,  Mr.  M.  requested  the  medium  to  try  and
reproduce  them.

I Two  ordinary  slates  taken,  cleaned,  and  laid  on  the  table  in  full  view.

Almost  immediately  the  sound  of  writing,  and  the  words  "  perceive"  and
"human"  written.  These  were  the  words  in  debate.  We  also  got  the
meaning  of  certain  German  words  written,  the  translation  of  the  sentence
being,  "The  weather  will  change  to-morrow."  This  likewise  proved  to  be
the  correct  rendering.

Experiment  No.  8.  [h]

The  medium  tore  off  half  a  sheet  of  letter-paper  bearing  the  address  of
his  house  ;  this  he  gummed  to  the  surface  of  an  ordinary  slate,  a  fragment
of  lead  pencil  was  put  on  the  paper,  and  the  slate  then  transferred  beneath
the  table-flap,  and  held  by  Mr.  P.  and  the  medium.  Writing  immediately
audible.  At  our  request  the  slate  was  exposed  before  it  had  ceased.  To  the
best  of  my  remembrance  the  slate  could  not  have  been  beneath  the  table-
flap  for  more  than  20  seconds.  On  examination  we  found  the  following
message  written  in  a  hand  which  bore  a  much  greater  resemblance  to  the
medium's  than  any  of  the  others. Its  purport  was  as  follows:  —

' '  D.  has  not  got  the  mystic  instrument  up  his  sleeve  or  his  left  hand  trousers
pocket ;  we  give  you  this  information  for  the  benefit  of  the  skeptics.  We
do  not  profess  to  be  possessed  of  powers  out  of  the  range  of  ordinary  human
beings,  yet  we  are  anxious  nevertheless  to  show  you  that  we  can  at  times
give  evidence  of  an  intelligence  apart  from  our  friend  D. ,  and  we  shall  be
pleased  to  try  any  tests  you  may  devise.

"  Mr.  v.,  we  are  anxious  to  communicate  with  you  in  reference  to  your
relative,  Sir  R. * * *  although  of  course."


454  The  Possihilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


Here  I  suppose  the  examination  had  caused  the  message  to  break  off
short ;  a  long  pencil  mark  running  from  the  last  letter  of  the  final  word
seemed  to  justify  this  sujjposition.

This  brought  a  veiy  interesting  seance  to  a  close.

In  conclusion,  I  may  remark  that  in  addition  to  the  before-mentioned
slate-writing  seances  with  Mr.  D.  I  have  also  sat  at  a  couple  of  dark  seances
for  materialisation.  I  can  offer  no  explanation  of  the  phenomena  which
took  place.

Robert  F.  Venner.

2.  Report  of  Mr.  E.  Manville.

2ii.eZ  December,  1886.

My  friend  Mr.  Venner  asked  me  to  accompany  him  and  another  friend  of
his  last  evening  to  see  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey,  who,  he  said,  would  show  us  some
phenomena  that  would  probably  astonish  us.  I  willingly  acquiesced,  being
not  only  anxious  to  see  the  phenomena  (of  the  nature  of  which  I  had  been
informed),  but  also  to  try  if  I  could  in  any  way  observe  the  means  utilised
to  produce  the  effects.  I  may  mention  I  had  not  seen  Mr.  Davey  before
this  evening,  neither  had  Mr.  Pinnock  (Mr.  Venner 's  other  friend),  but  Mr.
Venner  had  known  him  for  some  time.

Mr.  Davey  received  us  in  a  small  library,  probably  containing  some  300
[over  1000. — S.  J.  D.]  books,  and  during  the  whole  evening  gave  me  every
assistance  to  examine  everything  used.

[d]  I  first  of  all  examined  a  small  double  slate  about  eight  inches  by  five
inches  ;  this  consisted  of  two  slates,  each  let  into  an  ebony  back  ;  the  ebony
backs  were  hinged  together  on  one  side,  and  there  was  a  hasp  and  lock  on
the  other  side.  When  the  slates  were  folded  together  and  locked,  the  two
slates  were  face  to  face,  with  just  enough  room  between  them  for  a  "  crumb  "
of  slate-pencil  locked  in  between  them  to  move  about  freely.  The  slate  was
washed  quite  clean  with  a  sponge  and  water,  and  dried  with  a  cloth,  and
then  given  to  Mr.  Pinnock  to  write  a  question  on  one  side.  This  he  did,  and
then  locked  the  slates  together,  retaining  the  key.

Mr.  Davey  now  brought  forward  a  table,  which  I  examined  carefully.  It
was  an  ordinary  table  on  four  legs,  witli  a  flap  on  each  side  ;  it  was  made  of
wood  about  half-an-inch  thick  ;  there  was  one  drawer  under  tlie  table,  which
I  removed  altogether,  and  which  was  left  out  all  the  evening.  After  this  was
done,  there  was  nothing  about  the  table  which  could  conceal  anything,  and
had  anything  been  concealed  about  the  table,  as  far  as  I  could  see  it  must
have  been  in  the  thickness  of  the  wood.

Mr.  Davey  then  showed  me  some  ordinary  slates,  in  wooden  frames.
These  I  helped  him  to  wash  and  dry.  We  then  took  our  seats  round  the
table.  I  was  facing  Mr.  Davey.  Mr.  Pinnock  was  seated  on  Mr.  Davey's
right  hand,  and  Mr.  Venner  on  Mr.  Davey's  left  hand.

[d]  Mr.  Davey  asked  Mr.  Pinnock  to  place  the  locked  slate  under  his  (Mr.
Pinnock's)  coat  and  then  button  up  the  coat.

[c]  We  now  took  three  slates,  on  one  of  them  we  placed  three
fragments  of  crayon,  two  of  which  were  red,  the  other  green,  we
then  covered  up  this  slate  with  another  and  left  them  on  the  table  in
full  view.


Experimental  Investigation.


455


[a]  On  the  third  slate  we  also  put  a  piece  of  crayon  and  then  held
the  slate  underneath  one  flap  of  the  table  which  we  put  up  for  the  purpose.
Mr.  Davey's  fingers  were  under  the  slate  and  his  thumb  on  the  table;  Mr.
Pinnock's  fingers  and  thumb  were  in  the  same  position.  Mr.  Venner  held
Mr.  Davey's  free  hand  with  one  of  his  hands  and  one  of  ray  hands  with  his
other.  I  held  Mr.  Pinnock's  free  hand  with  my  other.  1  have  omitted  to
say  that  we  all  three  wrote  our  initials  in  different  comers  of  the  slate  before
it  was  put  under  the  table.  We  sat  in  this  way  talking  and  smoking  for  some
time,  twenty  minutes  to  half  an  hour  I  should  say,  nothing  whatever
occurring.  At  last  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  change  places  with  Mr.  Pinnock.
This  I  did  and  thus  had  one  of  my  hands  on  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  now  said,
that  in  the  manner  usual  at  seances  we  would  ask  questions  of  an  imaginary
being  ;  and  he  said,  "Are  you  going  to  do  anytliing  to  night,  Joey  ?  "  After
a  short  pause  he  repeated  the  question,  and  then  I  felt  the  slate  vibrate  as  if
being  written  on,  and  could  hear  a  scratching  noise  ;  we  took  the  slate  from
under  the  table-flap  and  saw  the  word  "yes"  written  over  Mr.  Venner's
initials,  and  I  particularly  noticed  that  the  writing  was  towards  Mr.  Davey,
and  upside  down  to  him,  and  in  all  we  saw  afterwards  this  was  the  case.

[b]  I  now  asked  a  question  as  to  the  whereabout  of  a  person  at  that  time,
not  knowing  the  answer  myself  ;  we  waited  for  some  time  without  any  result,
when  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  again  change  places  with  Mr.  Pinnock.

[d,  c,  g  &c.]  I  did  so,  and  Mr.  Davey  told  Mr.  Pinnock  to  place  the  locked
slate  on  the  table  beside  the  two  slates  we  had  left  face  to  face,  and  we  also
lifted  the  uppermost  of  these  two  slates  and  found  the  slates  still  quite
clean,  with  the  three  pieces  of  crayon  between  them.  We  again  waited
some  time  with  no  results  ;  meantime,  having  a  discussion  as  to  mediumship
of  different  people,  and  then  Mr.  Davey  asked  if  I  were  a  medium.  After
a  pause  I  heard  vigorous  scratchings  on  the  two  slates  left  face  to  face  on  the
table  and  on  which  Mr.  Davey's  arm  was  resting,  his  two  hands  being
engaged,  one  in  holding  the  slate  under  the  table  flap,  tlie  other  in  holding
Mr.  Venner's  hand  ;  the  scratching  lasted  roughly  under  ten  seconds,  and  I
expected  to  see  a  dozen  words  or  so,  and  was  therefore  amazed  to  discover,
when  the  top  slate  was  lifted,  that  the  underneath  slate  was  covered  with
writing  from  corner  to  comer,  and  also  the  writing  was  not  straight  across
the  slate,  but  was  across  it  diagonally  ;  three-quarters  of  the  writing  was  in
red,  the  other  quarter  in  green,  and  no  crayon  was  left.  We  read  through
the  writing,  a  copy  of  which  will  appear  in  Messrs.  Venner  and  Pinnock's
report,  and  found  that  the  part  in  green  was  in  the  German  language  and
characters;  about  five  words  were  illegible,  and  these,  later  on  in  the  evening,
we  asked  for,  and  obtained  them,  and  still  later  in  the  evening  we  asked
for  whom  the  writmg  was  intended,  when  my  name  "  Manville"  was  written.

[rf]  Mr.  Davey  now  put  his  hand  on  the  locked  slates  which  had  been  left
on  the  table  since  Mr.  Pinnock  took  them  from  under  his  coat  ;  we  heard
scratching  inside.  Mr.  Pinnock  then  took  the  key  from  his  pocket  and
milocked  the  slate  and  handed  it  to  me.  I  for  the  first  time  saw  the  question
written  in  it,  with  an  answer  below  ;  the  question  was  "Give  me  my  name  in
full  if  you  can  ;  "  the  answer  was  "  We  are  sorry  we  cannot  do  this  for  you,
Mr.  Pinnock,  perhaps  we  may  be  able  to  later  on."

[e]  Mr.  Davey  now  said  he  would  endeavour  to  get  a  given  line  on  a


456


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  <&-c.


given  page  of  a  book  written  for  us.  Mr.  Venner  therefore  looked  over  the
titles  of  the  books  ranged  on  the  shelves  and  selected  one  mentalhj,  without
touching  it  with  his  hands  ;  at  this  moment  I  suggested  it  would  be  better  if
I  were  to  select  the  book, as  I  did  not  know  Mr.  Davey  at  all,  whilst  Mr.  Venner
did.  Mr.  Davey  acquiesced.  I  selected  a  title  in  order  to  decide  what  line  and
page  we  should  select.  I  took  a  pinch  of  crayons  from  a  box,  Mr.  Pinnock
doing  the  same.  On  counting,  mine  came  to  6,  Mr.  Pinnock's  to  11,  Mr.
Venner's  came  to  3.  Mr.  P.  and  I  divided  Mr.  Y.'s,  making  mine  8,  and
Mr.  P.'s  12,  so  we  decided  that  it  should  be  p.  12,  line  8.  We
then  washed  the  locked  slates  clean,  locked  them,  Mr.  Pinnock  retaining
the  key.  Mr.  Davey  placed  his  hand  on  the  slates,  and  scratching  was  heard
for  a  few  seconds  ;  on  the  slate  being  unlocked  by  Mr.  Pinnock  and  handed
to  me,  I  found  it  was  full  of  writing  of  a  difl'erent  character  from  that  we  had
seen  before  ;  it  consisted  of  an  appeal  to  either  Mr.  Venner  or  myself,  asking
if  one  who  was  acquainted  with  electricity  could  fail  to  appreciate  the
difficulty  of  producing  phenomena  such  as  we  were  witnessing  that  evening  ;
unfortunately  the  slate  was  washed  before  we  had  taken  a  copy.  The  writing
in  this  case  was  not  diagonal,  but  straight  across  the  slate  ;  it  started  about
a  quarter  of  an  inch  from  the  top  of  the  slate,  went  right  down  to  the
bottom,  then  was  continued  round  one  side  and  finished  up  in  the  quarter  of
an  inch  left  at  the  top  of  the  slate,  with  two  lines  written  itpside  down,  and
was  signed  with  the  initials  T.  P.,  I  think.  This  was  interesting  to  us,  but
Mr.  Davey  was  vexed  we  did  not  get  the  line  out  of  the  book  written,  and
so,  placing  the  slate  under  the  table  flap,  he  asked  the  reason;  the  word
"muddle"  was  written,  and  we  apprehended  it  was  on  account  of  Mr.
Venner  and  myself  both  having  chosen  a  book  ;  we  therefore  thought  it
would  be  best  for  Mr.  Pinnock,  who  knew  Mr.  Davey  no  better  than  I,  to
select  another  book.

[/]  This  he  did.  We  washed  tlie  two  slates,  laid  them  face  to  face  on  the
table,  when  the  following  words  were  written:  "The  difference  in  this
respect."  Mr.  Pinnock  now  took  down  the  book  he  had  selected  from
the  shelf,  and  handed  it  to  me  ;  I  opened  it  at  the  12th  page  and  looked
at  the  eighth  line.  I  found  the  first  two  words  completed  a  sentence  ;
then  came  the  five  words  above,  and  then  two  more  to  finish  the  line.
I  said  the  written  words  were  right,  but  not  complete.  The  slate  was
covered  again,  and  three  more  words  were  written:  "Shakespeare  and
Beaumont."  On  looking  at  the  book  I  found  Shakespeare  was  the  last  word
in  the  line,  the  other  two  being  in  the  next  line.  I  said  a  word  was  still
missed  out.  The  slates  were  put  together  again,  and  two  more  words  written.
On  looking  at  the  book  these  turned  out  to  be  the  two  words  terminating
the  last  sentence.  I  said  there  was  still  the  word  missing,  and  this  time  the
word  "between"  was  written,  making  the  sentence  complete:  "The
difference  in  this  respect  between  Shakespeare  and  Beaumont."  I  then
asked  for  the  last  word  in  the  line  by  itself,  and  this  was  written  "  Shakes,"
which  was  correct,  as  Shakespeare  was  half  on  one  line  and  half  on  the  other.
The  name  of  the  book  was  Lectures  on  Shakenpeare,  cfcc.

[</]  We  next  asked  another  question,  and  this  time  had  the  answer
written  on  the  underneath  side  of  tlie  upper  slate  instead  of  on  the  upjyer  side
of  the  underneath  slate.


Experimental  Investigation.


457


[h]  Mr.  Pinnock  asked  if  we  could  not  get  the  writing  on  a  piece  of  paper
instead  of  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  said  we  might  try,  and  thereupon  tore
a  sheet  of  writing-paper  into  two,  and  pasted  one  half  on  to  a  slate  by  the
four  corners  ;  he  cut  off  a  small  piece  of  black  lead  from  the  end  of  a  pencil,
put  it  on  the  paper  and  covered  the  slate  with  another  slate.  Writing  was
heard  at  once,  and  we  separated  the  slates  and  found  the  paper  written  over
diagonally  as  in  the  case  of  the  first  slate.  The  paper  was  not,  however,  quite
full,  and  it  looked  as  if  the  slates  were  separated  too  soon,  as  the  sentence
was  not  finished.  The  writing  was  evidently  written  with  the  point  of  the
pencil.

[/.]  Mr.  Davey  was  now  very  tired,  but  he  oS"ered  to  try  one  more  experi-
ment. A  slate  was  raised  on  two  glass  blocks  above  the  table,  on  top  of  the
slate  was  placed  a  piece  of  crayon,  and  over  the  crayon  was  inverted  a  glass
tumbler.  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  what  figure  the  crayon  should  draw.  I  said  a
triangle.  We  all  joined  hands  and  watched  the  crayon  through  the  glass.  After
a  few  minutes,  the  crayon  not  having  moved,  Mr.  Davey  placed  a  slate  under
the  table  and  asked  if  it  would  move,  when  the  answer  "No"  was  written,  and
we  then  finished  our  evening's  exjieriments.

I  have  endeavoured  in  this  report  to  merely  give  an  account  of  what  I  saw,
and  not  to  give  any  attempt  at  an  opinion  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  pheno-
mena were  produced  ;  but  this  I  may  say,  that  it  appears  to  me  exceedingly
imprc^bable  that  electricity,  as  we  at  present  understand  it,  was  used.
Everything  occurred  under  full  light  and  between  the  hours  of  9  p.m.  and
1.30  a.m.  E.  Manvillb.

Deah  Mr.  Davey,

I  received  your  note  yesterday  just  before  leaving  town.  The
writing  always  appeared  on  tlie  upper  side  of  the  slate  held  against  the  table-
flap  ;  also  the  pencil  was  in  every  case,  I  noticed,  at  tlie  end  of  the  writing
and  decidedly  worn,,  and  in  one  or  two  cases,  I  recollect,  on  the  last  stroke.
Will  you  kindly  add  this  to  my  report. ...  E.  M.

11th  December,  1886.
Oxford,


SITTING  VIII.

My  object  in  giving  these  seances  has  not  been  so  much  to  "  defy
detection  "  as  to  enable  some  estimate  to  be  formed  concerning  the
possibilities  of  mal-observation  and  lapse  of  memory  under  certain
peculiar  conditions.  Hitherto  I  liave  never  refrained  altogether  from
producing  "  phenomena  "  merely  because  I  was  afraid  that  the  witness
might  discover  my  methods,  although  I  have  on  several  occasions  given
blank  seances  to  persons  who  had  already  witnessed  my  phenomena,
and  whom  I  had  no  reason  to  fear.  At  tlie  commencement  of  the
sitting  I  saw  that  Mr.  Dodds  was  an  investigator  who  was  justly
entitled  to  a  blank  seance,  and  his  account  therefore  is  particularly
interesting  from  the  fact  that  notwithstanding  his  keenness,  he  failed
to  detect  my  real  modus  oper'andi.


458


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  dx.


Beport  of  Mr.  J.  M.  Dodds.

12,  Mitre  Court  Chambers,  Temple,  B.C.

19i7i  December,  1886.

Dear  Mr.  Hodoson,

I  now  send  you  a  report  of  our  seance  as  I  promised,  for  publi-
cation or  not,  just  as  you  please.

On  Mr.  Davey's  kind  invitation  I  accompanied  you  last  night  to  his
house  at  Beckenham.  There  we  dmed,  talking  of  telei^athic  and  hypnopathic
symptoms  and  similar  subjects.  I  ought  to  say  that  my  attitude  was  that  of
one  totally  sceptical  regarding  "spirits,"  very  suspicious  of  trickery,  and
only  in  the  faintest  degree  open  to  conviction  that  some  quasi-explanation
for  the  strange  phenomena  of  which  I  liad  heard  is  to  be  found  in  the
hypothesis  of  a  new  force  or  medium  of  transmission.  I  had  never  before
(as  I  told  Mr.  Davey)  attended  at  a  seance.  I  had,  however,  some  hearsay
knowledge  of  his  wonderful  j^erformances.  But  I  did  not  know  his  point  of
view — i.e.,  whether  he  professed  to  act  through  "  spirits  "  or  otherwise  ;  and
although  I  tried  to  discover  this,  his  answers  and  yours  were  so  vague  that  I
could  not  make  sure.  I  inclined,  when  the  seance  began,  to  the  opinion  that
Mr.  Davey  was  a  "  believer,"  but  was  somewhat  reassured  as  to  his  bona  fides
by  his  professed  inability  to  imitate  a  simple  conjuring  trick  which  you
showed  us,  and  by  his  reminding  me  of  some  precautions  which,  in  my  inex-
perience, I  was  neglecting.  Lastly,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  although  as  Mr.
Davey's  guest  I  felt  a  little  shy  of  showing  my  suspicions,  I  thought  it  all
the  more  desirable  to  keep  a  close  watch.  This  I  was  able  to  do  as  the  room
was  well  lighted  throughout  the  evening.

I.  The  dinner-table  was  cleared  and  wheeled  aside,  and  an  uncovered
ordinary  Pembroke  table  was  brought  in.  You  and  Mr.  Davey  left  the  room
while  I  wrote  a  simple  question  in  a  small  double  slate  belonging  to  Mr.
Davey,  which  I  carefully  inspected,  locked  and  kept  within  sight.  The
three  of  us  then  sat  down  at  the  Pembroke  table,  which  we  had  examined.  I
unsealed  a  packet  in  which  I  had  brought  three  new  school  slates  ;  Mr.
Davey  chose  one  of  them,  which  he  and  I,  after  making  sure  it  was  blank,
held,  in  the  manner  to  be  described,  under  the  corner  of  one  of  the  extended
table-flaps,  with  a  small  piece  of  pencil  lying  on  its  upper  surface  between
slate  and  maliogany.  The  locked  slate  with  the  question  inside  was  laid  on
the  table — I  had  not  let  it  pass  out  of  my  sight.  Mr.  Davey  sat  at  a
corner,  his  right  hand  and  my  left  meeting  on  the  under  surface  of  the  slate
below  the  table-flap,  while  you,  sitting  opposite  him,  held  his  left  and  my
right  hand  in  yours.  The  problem  as  explained  to  me  was  :  Given  my
c|uestion  known  to  me  alone  ;  required  an  answer  to  be  written  upon  my
blank  slate  in  position  under  the  table,  and  to  appear  through  some
miexplained  agency  upon  its  upper  surface  where  the  chip  of  pencil  lay  ;  the
answer  either  to  give  the  information  demanded,  or  at  least  to  show  know-
ledge of  the  question.

For  several  minutes  we  sat  thus,  either  in  silence  or  discussing  psychical
topics.  Mr.  Davey  professed  to  expect  no  great  success  with  me,  and  you
reminded  him  of  several  seances  wliich,  after  bad  beginnings,  had  ended
successfully. I  asked  some  questions  about  the  qualities  required  in  the


Experimental  Investigation.


459


sitter,  and.  as  before,  received  answers  that  did  not  enlighten  me  regarding
Mr.  Davey's  standpoint,  and  therefore  increased  my  vigilance.

No  "  phenomena  "  were  forthcoming.  At  my  request  the  slate  (which,
while  underneath,  I,  of  course,  always  pressed  flat  against  the  table)  was  now
transferred  to  the  top  surface  of  the  table,  another  was  placed  over  it,  and
the  pencil  chip  remained  between,  and  Mr.  Davey  and  I  laid  our  hands  upon
the  upper  slate. No  more  success  than  before.

The  conditions  were  subsequently  twice  varied.  First  my  slate  was
restored  to  its  original  position  under  the  table  (said  to  be  the  usual  one  for
preliminary  manifestations),  but  with  the  stipulation  on  my  part  that  I  should
keep  it  pressed  against  tlie  flap  with  knee  as  well  as  hand  ;  afterwards,
deserting  my  slate  altogether,  we  laid  our  hands  upon  the  locked  double
slate  containing  the  question, — but  all  in  vain.

Finally,  when  more  than  an  hour  had  passed,  two  of  my  slates,  examined
and  found  blank,  were  laid  together,  pencil  between,  and  ijlaced  in  position,
like  the  single  slate  in  the  first  effort,  against  the  lower  surface  of  the  flap —
our  hands  also  remaining  as  at  first.  Very  soon  scratching  was  heard
although  I  could  detect  no  movement  with  my  eyes,  hand,  or  knee  :  and,
when  the  slates  were  brought  to  light,  written  upon  the  upper  surface  of  the
lower  slate  was  the  word  "  Yes."  Now,  as  my  question  had  been,  "  Where
did  I  buy  my  slates  ?  "  I  was  not  much  struck  by  an  answer  that  did  not
apply,  and  might  have  been  written  by  some  quite  conceivable  piece  of  Jug-
glery ;  and  my  doubts  were  increased  when  I  found  upon  the  other  side  of
the  same  slate,  and  therefore  on  the  surface  (such  was  my  belief)  where  Mr.
Davey's  hand  had  rested,  the  word  "  Wait."  I  was,  therefore,  very  little
impressed  by  this  result  ;  and  indeed,  rather  to  my  suri:)rise,  neither  Mr.
Davey  nor  yourself  seemed  to  expect  me  to  draw  any  conclusion  from  it.'^

A  subsequent  experiment — in  which  I  repeated  my  first  question,  carefully
expunged  from  the  double  slate  and  still  unknown,  except  to  myself— upon
one  of  the  open  slates,  came  to  an  abortive  ending  through  Mr.  Davey's
catching  sight^  of  what  I  had  written.

II.  After  an  interval,  Mr.  Davey,  who  acknowledged  that  he  was  not  in
a  good  frame  of  mind  for  "  manifestations,"  was  induced  by  you  to  try  the
"  book  "  experiment.  This  was  explained  to  me  to  consist  in  my  mentally
choosing  from  the  books,  which,  to  the  number  of,  I  should  guess,  about  700,
[1000]  lined  the  room,  any  one  with  a  clear  title  ;  I  was  then  to  take  twice  over
a  handful  of  fragments  of  slate-pencil  from  a  box  on  the  table,  privately
count  each  handful  before  replacing  the  fragments,  and  keep  the  results  to
myself  :  the  fii'st  result  was  to  represent  the  number  of  a  page  of  the  book
chosen,  the  second  the  number  of  a  line  on  that  page ;  Mr.  Davey,  yourself,  and
I  were  to  lay  our  hands  upon  his  double  slate,  laid  upon  the  surface  of  the  table
after  being  examined,  found  blank,  and  locked  with  pencil-chip  inside  by
me  ;  I  was  to  concentrate  my  thoughts  upon  the  book  and  numbers  and  Mr.
Davey  was  to  try  to  dis30ver  (by  some  mode  of  thought-transference,  I
inferred)  book,  page,  and  line  :  the  pencil  locked  inside  the  slate  was  then
to  write  some  words  quoted  from  the  place  thought  of  !

The  preliminary  programme  was  carried  out,  and  I  may  say  that  while
choosing  the  book  I  took  care  to  walk  right  round  the  room  and  not  to  let
my  eyes  linger  on  any  one  spot. Thus  the  problem  was  :  Given  a  book,  page


460


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  d-c.


and  line  known  only  to  me  and  recorded  nowhere — required  to  be  written
in  a  blank  locked  slate  lying  under  our  hands  the  corresponding  quotation,
which,  be  it  observed,  was  unknown  even  to  nie,  for  of  course  I  had  not
touched,  much  less  opened  the  book.

This  appeared  impossible  by  any  amount  of  jugglery,  and  I  could
scarely  take  the  attempt  seriously.  We  sat  down,  however,  and  laid  our
six  hands  upon  the  slate.  I  concentrated  my  mind  with  the  utmost  intensity
at  my  command  uj^on  book,  name,  and  numbers,  and  soon  Mr.  Davey
ap25eared  to  labour  under  some  excitement,  and,  to  my  disgust,  began  (with
an  exj^lanation  tliat  it  was  the  custom)  to  inv(jke  some  unseen  agents  in  an
appealing  tone.  Presently,  to  my  relief,  he  desisted,  and  the  attempt  was
given  up  as  a  failure.  Mr.  Davey  said  he  could  not  decide  between  two  books.

After  a  short  rest  it  was  suggested  that  I  should  name  the  book,  and
that  the  experiment  should  be  resumed  in  a  modified  form.  The  problem
was  now  :  Given  a  certain  book,  viz.,  Taine  on  Jnieii((/e)ice'';  required  to  be
written  in  a  blank  locked  slate,  lying  under  our  hands,  a  quotation  unknown
to  anyone  present,  taken  from  a  page  and  line  known  only  to  myself.  The
book,  of  course,  remained  untouched  on  the  shelf.  We  sat  as  before  with
the  slate  under  our  hands  and  eyes.  I  concentrated  my  thoughts.  Mr.
Davey  soon  appeared  to  reach  a  high  jiitch  of  exaltation;  his  arms  and  body
became  subject  to  a  violent  " friso)vn.eme.nt."  He  again  appealed  to  his
ghostly  helpers,  and  on  this  occasion  his  efforts  were  rewarded,  for,  in  a  few
minutes,  to  my  utter  amazement — Mr.  Davey's  liands  and  your  own  being
well  in  sight  and  unemployed — I  heard  sounds  of  writing  within  the  slate
which  continued  for  half  a  minute  or  more.  On  unlocking  the  slate  I  found,
legibly  written,  a  (quotation,  almost,  but  not  quite,  verbally  correct,  from
page  15  of  Taine's  book,  beginning  at  the  eighth  line.  Some  "clear-
obscure  "  remarks,  which  1  at  once  interpreted  as  relating  to  a  friend  of
mine,  followed.

I  had  thought  of  the  eighth  line  of  the  28tli  page.  The  correspondence
was,  therefore,  not  exact,  the  line  only  being  correct.  What  struck  me,
however,  was  not  the  coincidence  of  the  quotation,  nor  the  gibberish  about
my  friend,  which  hinted  information  easily  ascertainable  by  anyone  who,
like  Mr.  Davey,  had  met  him — it  was  the  occurrence  of  what  the  evidence
of  my  senses  told  me  was  writing  by  a  piece  of  inanimate  pencil  inside  a
locked  slate,  with  no  conceivable  means  of  explanation  !  For  a  moment  I
confess  I  was  completely  staggered  ;  my  notions  of  causation  were  turned
topsy-turvy;  visions  of  "magnetic  force"  and  "occult  action"  danced
before  my  brain.  Then  came  the  reaction  ;  but  instead  of  accusing  my
senses  of  perjury,  I  illustrated  human  nature  by  telling  you  in  plain  English
(during  a  momentary  absence  on  Mr.  Davey's  part)  what  ojiinion  I  had
formed  of  him.  I  regret  to  think  I  used  the  word  "humbug";  none  could
be  less  applicable  !

I  had  not  just  then  much  desire  to  continue  the  seance  ;  but  you  seemed  to
desii'e  it,  and  as  I  recovered  from  my  bewilderment,  one  or  two  slight  circum-
stances— one  of  them  Mr.  Davey's  half  acquiescence  in  a  suggestion  that  he
should  try  to  obtain  writing  without  any  pencAl  mndwiclied  in  the  slates —
occurred  to  me  as  confirmatory  of  my  notion  tliat  he  had  been  slate-shuflBing
in  some  very  clever  way. So  I  asked  him  point-blank,  as  you  remember,


Experimental  Investigation.


461


what  was  his  theory  ;  he  answered  that  he  does  not  so  far  profess  any  theory,
but  merely  undertakes  a  close  imitation  of  the  phenomena  attributed  by
believers  to  spirits.  1  had  not  quite  realised  this  before,  and  was  now  for
the  first  time  able  to  apijreciate  Mr.  Davey's  standpoint — though  no  less  in
the  dark  as  to  his  method.  We  seemed,  as  you  afterwards  remarked,  to
"  have  an  understanding  "  from  this  time  ;  and  with  my  good  temper  I
recovered  my  vigilance.

III.  The  last  experiment  coiisisted  in  my  writing  a  question  as  at  first  in
the  locked  slate,  to  be  answered  by  writing  produced  between  two  of  my
plain  school  slates  by  chips  of  pencil  ;  the  slates  having,  of  course,  been
examined  and  found  blank  as  usual.  The  slates  were  laid  upon  the  table-
top,  and  except  that  I  had  unintentionally  changed  my  seat  to  your  former
one  opposite  Mr.  Davey  —  you  taking  mine  in  exchange — the  conditions  were
as  before.  We  laid  our  hands  on  the  upper  slate,  but  after  several  efi'orts
no  result  was  obtained.  We  were  proceeding  to  make  another  trial,  and
Mr.  Davey,  in  the  act  of  displaying  the  slates  to  show  that  they  were  still
blank,  made  a  remark  to  you  which  had  the  efiect  of  causing  me  to  look  at
you  ;  just  then,  more  by  accident  than  design,  I  noticed  that  before
replacing  the  upper  slate  upon  the  lower  one  he  reversed  its  jjosition.
Seizing  it  at  once,  I  found  one  of  its  sides — that  which  would  have  been
underneath — covered*  with  an  inscription  which  I  certainly  had  not  seen  or
heard  written,  and  which  in  my  delight  I  forgot  to  read.  Evidently  the
next  efibrt  would  have  been  the  success  of  the  evening  !

The  game  was  up  ;  at  least  you  and  Mr.  Davey  chose  to  think  so,  for  you
at  once  let  me  into  the  secret  of  the  great  Psychical  Plant.  I  don't  profess
to  understand  Mr.  Davey's  modus  operandi;  but  of  this  I  am  certain,  that
I  have  to  thank  you  for  an  introduction,  not  to  a  world  where  the  rules  of
nature  are  superseded,  but  to  a  most  surprising  exhibition  of  sleight  of
hand. — Yours  very  truly,  James  M.  Dodds.


SITTING  IX.

I  had  never  seen  either  of  the  writers  of  the  following  accounts
until  the  day  of  the  sitting,  but  I  understand  that  they  liad  already
learnt  beforehand  that  what  they  were  about  to  witness  was  un-
questionably due  to  conjuring.

1.  Rejwrt  of Mr.  A.  B.  T.

Monday,

Grosvenor-place,  S.W.

Dear  Mr.  Davey, —

I  am  just  writing  a  small  account  of  what  I  saw  you  do  last
Thursday  night  (as  you  requested),  at  Mr.  T.  B.'s  house,  when  I  had  the
pleasure  of  meeting  you,  and  witnessing  your  wonderful  feats  of
slate-writing.  The  following  is  as  near  as  ptossible  what  took  place,  by
memory  :  We,  a  party  of  five  (exclusive  of  yourself),  were  sitting  in  the


462  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  <&e.


drawing-room,  round  a  plain  deal  table  with  flaps,  which  had  been  brought
from  the  kitchen.  You  provided  three  ordinary  slates  and  a  small  handsome
lock-up  slate  with  a  lock  and  key.  There  was  also  a  sponge,  cloth,  and  glass
of  water  on  the  table,  with  which  I  cleaned  the  slates.  The  first  thing  you  did
was  to  give  me  the  small  lock-slate  to  examine,  and  having  assured  myself
that  no  trickery  existed  in  it,  I  cleaned  it  and  placed  a  small  piece  of  coloured
pencil  on  it,  locked  it  up,  and  put  it  in  my  pocket.  The  key  I  placed  in  my
waistcoat  pocket.

[ft]  You  then  took  a  point  of  pencil  and  laid  it  on  tlie  table,  over  which
you  placed  one  of  the  common  slates  which  I  am  positive  I  had  thoroughly
sponged  and  wiped.  We  joined  our  hands,  and  you  and  I  placed  ours  firmly
on  the  slate.  You  asked  your  spirit-friend  "  Joey,"  if  he  could  give  us  any
help,  and  very  soon  after  an  extraordinary  sound  of  scratching  was  heard
under  the  slate.  Upon  raising  it,  the  follovving  appeared  in  large  bold  letters
riglit  across  it :  "All  right  ;  here  we  are  again.  Hurrah  ! — Joey."  This  was
very  satisfactory,  and  "Joey  "  worked  very  hard  to  answer  us  afterwards.

[c]  For  you  next  held  a  slate  with  a  small  piece  of  pencil  upon  it  under
the  flap  of  the  table,  and  wished  a  question  to  be  asked.  In  reply  to  mine,
as  to  when  luy  train  would  arrive  at  Victoria,  the  reply  came  very  soon,
"  Walt."

[d]  This  was  not  considered  a  suflicient  answer  from  the  [spirit  ?]  world,
so  you  quickly  rubbed  the  slate,  and  immediately  held  it  again  under  the  flap
of  the  table.  We  waited  some  time,  and  then  got  some  writing  as  before,
"  No  chalks,"  and  on  looking  at  the  slate  1  saw  you  liad  forgotten  to
l^lace  the  chalk  upon  it.  It  was  expecting  too  much  of  "Joey"  to  write
without  a  chalk.

[e]  You  then  took  two  slates,  which  I  once  more  wiped  clean,  and  placed
them  one  upon  the  other  on  the  table,  with  a  tiny  piece  of  pencil  between
tliem.  There  was  a  very  short  wait,  and  then  the  sound  of  quick  writing
was  heard.  This  lasted  for  nearly  a  minute.  Ujion  raising  the  slate,  upon
the  top  one  was  written  as  follows  :  —

"  Dear  Friends, — It  is  not  so  much  the  agency  question  we  would  have
you  set  your  minds  upon,  as  it  is  the  mere  fact  that  the  phenomena  take
place  under  conditions  wliicli  upon  every  reasonable  mind  preclude  the
possibility  (?)  by  known  rational  means.  You  may  rest  assured  we  shall  do
all  in  our  power  to  co-operate  with  you  this  evening  ;  we  must,  however,
ask  you  to  have  patience,  as  we  can't  carry  out  any  tests  or  answer  any
question  until  we  have  become  more  en  rapport  with  one  another.  Rest
assured  and  we  will  do  our  best,  and  remember  Der  Tenfel  is  zu  zvvart  nit
als  hig  wel  geschildered. — Joey."

[/]  next  experimented  with  the  slate  which  I  took  from  my  pocket.
You  asked  me  to  choose  a  book  from  the  bookcase,  and  one  of  the  party  to
think  of  the  page  and  line.  I  went  to  the  bookcase,  and  could  not  make
up  my  mind  between  three  or  four,  and  finally  took  Virgil's  Aeneid.  The
slate  was  placed  on  the  table,  and  "Joey  "  was  again  asked  to  write  a  passage
from  the  selected  book  (in  any  coloured  chalk  I  liked).  Again  the
scratching  of  the  pencil  was  heard  upon  the  slate.  When  it  was  opened,  the
piece  of  chalk  was  nearly  worn  away,  and  rested  upon  the  last  word  of  the
following  : "  We  should  prefer  that  when  you  experiment  for  tests,  such  as


Experimental  Investigation.


463


the  one  you  now  propose,  that  you  should  form  a  smaller  circle,  and  devote
yourself  exclusively  to  this  one  form  of  phenomena,  and  although  it  is  not
impossible  we  may  succeed  to-night,  yet  we  are  greatly  hampered  by  the
co-operation  of  too  many  minds.  We  have  no  objection  to  try  the  tumbler,
although  we  don't  guarantee  a Ernest."

This  was  the  last  experiment  tried,  as  time  drew  on,  and  I  wanted  to
■catch  my  train  back  to  town.  As  to  that  part  of  the  test  relating  to  the
passage  chosen  from  the  book,  it  failed.

I  was  very  sorry  to  see  you  in  such  weak  health,  and  the  excitement
under  which  you  laboured  showed  plainly  that  the  mental  strain  upon  you
must  have  been  great.  I  noticed  upon  every  occasion  of  the  writing
appearing  you  trembled  and  shuddered  as  if  under  great  nervous  pressure,
but  why  this  should  be,  if,  as  you  say,  these  manifestations  are  only  the
result  of  trickery  and  conjuring,  I  do  not  know.  At  all  events,  you  have
mystified  me  entirely.  I  do  not  believe  in  spiritual  manifestation  in  the
least,  but  how  you  manage  to  bamboozle  so  many  people  I  can't  make  out. —
Believe  me,  Mr.  Davey,  sincerely  yours,  A.  B.  T.

2.  Reimrt  of  Miss  M.  T.  B.  »

Whilst  staying  with  ray  uncle  at  Beckenham  I  had  the  good  fortune  to
meet  Mr.  S.  Davey,  and  to  witness  some  of  his  interesting  manifestations.  I
had  heard  of  his  wonderful  powers,  and  was  therefore  very  pleased  when  I
learnt  that  he  had  accepted  my  uncle's  invitation,  and  had  volunteered,  after
dinner,  to  show  us  some  of  his  experiments.

We  were  five  in  number,  and  were  seated  round  an  ordinary  deal  table,
which  had  previously  been  carefully  examined  so  as  to  preclude  any
possibility  of  trickery.

Before  commencing  the  seance,  Mr.  Davey  produced  a  book-slate,  care-
fully cleaned  it,  and  gave  it  to  one  of  our  friends,  asking  him  to  place  a
small  piece  of  pencil  in  it,  lock  it  up,  and  put  it  with  the  key^-into  his
pocket.  There  it  remained  until  later  on  in  the  evening  it  was  required
for  use.

[a]  Our  first  experiment  was  with  an  ordinary  school  slate.  Mr.  Davey
placed  a  piece  of  chalk  on  the  table,  sponged  and  wiped  this  slate  jierfectly
clean,  and  placed  it  upon  the  chalk.  We  all  joined  hands,  Mr.  Davey  rest-
ing his  upon  the  slate.  After  a  few  minutes  a  faint  scratching  was  heard,
and  on  being  examined,  the  slate  was  found  to  have  written  upon  it  in  good
bold  characters,  "Hurrah,  here  we  are  again,  Joey."  This  seemed  to  me
most  wonderful,  as  all  the  time  Mr.  Davey's  hands  were  visible.

[6]  Next,  Mr.  Davey  placed  a  piece  of  chalk  upon  a  slate,  and  put  the
slate  under  the  table,  supporting  it  with  his  right  hand.  After  listening  for
some  little  time,  we  again  distinctly  heard  a  faint  scratching,  and  in  answer
to  the  question  whether  we  should  have  any  manifestations  that  night,  we
found  the  answer,  "Yes."

[c]  Again  a  question  was  asked  as  to  the  time  of  the  departure  of  the
last  train  to  London  Bridge,  and  in  reply  we  found  "Wait"  written  upon
the  slate.


464


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


[e]  Mr.  Davey  tlien  volunteered  to  produce  writing  in  two  differently-
coloured  chalks,  and  the  two  selected  (blue  and  white)  were  placed  between
two  ordinaiy  slates.  Again  we  joined  hands,  Mr.  Davey  resting  his,  as
before,  upon  the  slates.  After  waiting  for  some  little  while  (in  this  case
longer  than  previously)  the  scratching  was  heard,  and  upon  examining  tJie
slate,  it  was  found  to  be  covered  in  writing,  half  being  in  blue  chalk,  the
other  half  in  white.

[/]  Mr.  Davey  now  asked  for  the  book-slate,  and  requested  one  of  our
friends  to  think  of  two  numbers,  then  to  select  a  book  from  the  bookcase,
taking  care  to  keep  the  title  of  the  book  well  in  his  mind.  Mr.  Davey  pro-
posed to  produce  the  quotation  from  the  chosen  page  and  line  of  the  book.
Unfortunately,  with  this  trick  there  was  a  little  mistake,  as  our  friend  glanced
at  several  books  before  settling  which  he  would  finally  choose,  and  the  quota-
tion consequently  was  not  produced.  Instead  of  the  quotation,  some  advice
was  found  to  be  written.  I  do  not  doubt  that  this  failure  was  caused  by  the
want  of  concentration  of  mind  upon  the  chosen  book.  With  this  trick  I  was
particularly  struck  with  the  fact  that  there  was  a  visible  difference  in  the
size  of  the  chalk  when  placed  upon  the  slate  and  when  it  was  examined
after  the  writing  had  been  produced,  and  also  the  remainder  of  the  chalk
was  discovered  at  the  end  of  the  last  word  written  ;  both  these  facts  seemed
to  me  to  prove  tlmt  tlie  writing  was  produced  by  the  clialk  alone,  and  by  no
other  secret  agency.


SITTING  X.

The  following  report  is  by  a  J apanese  gentleman  whom  I  had  met
once  previously,  and  who  attributed  sundry  phenomena  of  "mediums,"
which  had  been  discussed,  but  which  he  had  not  personally  witnessed,
to  the  action  of  some  new  unrecognised  force.

Report  of  Marquis  Y.  A.  T.

[a]  On  January  24th,  1887,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Mr.  Davey's  slate-
writing  performances  in  his  private  room.  He  first  removed  a  table,  which
was  in  the  corner,  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  brought  two  common
slates,  one  double-slate  which  can  be  locked,  a  sponge,  a  box  of  chalks,  and
a  glass  of  ordinary  water.  Then  he  told  me  to  examine  and  sponge  and  wipe
tiaem  thoroughly  ;  so  I  did,  and  put  first  the  common  slate,  a  piece  of  chalk
being  under  it,  and  put  our  hands  on  it ;  a  faint  sound  of  scratching  was
heard.  When  the  sound  had  ceased,  Mr.  Davey  turned  it  out  as  follows :
(No.  1)  was  written  on  it.

No.  1.

"Japanese  is  very  difficult  language  to  write,  but  we  will  do  our  best.  We

are  sorry  not  to  see  Baron this  evening,  please  give  him  our  kind

regards. — Joey."

[6]  Next  I  locked  the  double-slate  (small  piece  of  chalk  was  put  in  it),
and  laid  before  him,  and  we  put  our  hands  on  it  while  I  was  holding


Experimental  Investigation.


465


the  key  in  my  hand.  As  soon  as  the  scratching  sound  had  ceased
I  unlocked  it  and  found  such  words  as  follow  :


No.  2.


'^A  student  like  yourself  will  easily  understand  the  importance  of  this
writing,  which,  as  far  as  the  senses  are  able  to  judge,  would  appear  to  be  of
a  supernatural  character.  This, however,  is  not  the  case.  In  order  to  prove  to
you  that  we  are  above  ordinary  conditions  of  conjurers,  and  also  demonstrate
the  absurdity  of  writing  being  produced  by  chemical  action  we  are  willing  to
carry  out  any  test  you  may  suggest  which  would  serve  to  dispel  such  a  theory
from  those  who  have  not  witnessed  these  performances. "

[c]  Again  I  put  another  common  slate  on  the  table  and  we  put  our  hands
on  it.  In  turning  it  we  found  a  Japanese  but  really  Chinese  character
was  written.

■ No.  3.

A  Chinese  letter  ^ This  letter  is  also  used  in  Japan  because  the

Japanese  are  using  the  Chinese  characters.  In  Japan  this  letter  is  used  as  a
verb,  and  means  "  to  be  scattered  "  or  "  to  be  dispersed."  It  is  pronounced
"  Chinu  "  in  Japan.

[cZ]  Once  more  I  locked  the  double-slate  (this  time  I  put  white  and  blue
pieces  of  chalk  in  it),  and  put  the  key  in  my  pocket  and  even  sealed  it
myself.  In  opening  it  I  found  a  letter  in  Japanese  character  was  written
and  also  an  English  as  follows  : —


2  H


468


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


A.

Hai  tei  shikareba  taikei  go-seiko  no  dan  haruka  ni  gasi  tateniatsuri  soro
sate  wa  *  *  *  ko  ni  wa  ikaga  wafcaraserare  soro  ya  usei  mo  kanete  shibo  no
ki-koku  ye  tokai  tsukaraatsuri  soro  kokoro-gumi  ni  goza  soro  aida  tokaraz
haibi  banru  kaishin  tsukamatsuru  beku  madzu  wa  yoken  made  soso  fugu  (in
Japanese  character,  with  white  chalk).

Japanese,  when  translated,  relates  to  my  friend  Prince  *  *  *  in  Japan,
and  it  also  means  it  is  pleased  to  give  me  writing  in  Japanese.

B.

We  don't  like  this  coloured  chalk  to  write  it  as  it  is  not  short  enough.  Try
smaller  piece  nest  time.  —Joey.

This  performance  was  more  than  wonderful,  and  I  could  not  see  how  any-
thing could  have  been  written.  But  I  hoj^e  I  will  have  an  opportunity  to
learn  about  this  by  reading  Mr.  Davey's  excellent  work  on  this  subject.  I
had  asked  for  writing  to  come  in  blue  colour,  and  writing  in  blue  English
colour  is  an  excuse  for  not  doing  so,  I  suppose.  Y.  A.  T.


SITTING  XL

Mr.  H.  W.  S.,  the  writer  of  the  following  record,  was  a  comparative
stranger  to  me,  as  I  had  met  him  on  only  one  previous  occasion.  He
requested  me  to  give  him  a  seance,  as  he  had  heard  of  my  performances
from  some  of  his  friends  who  are  well-known  to  me.  Previous  to  the
sitting  I  informed  him,  as  I  have  also  informed  many  others,  that  my
phenomena  were  not  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  "  Spiritualistic "
theory.

BejMrt  of  Mr.  H.  W.  S.

Ftbruaru  llth,  1887.

After  the  very  interesting  scientific  phenomena  to  which  I  was  an  eye-
witness last  night,  it  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  detail  the  various  astonishing
feats  displayed  by  Mr.  Davey  [«.  Clifford.]

The  apartment  in  which  I  was  received  was  a  well-stocked  library,  and
the  furniture,  including  tlie  table  at  which  we  sat,  was  of  the  ordinary  make
and  style,  with  none  of  the  intricacies  so  necessary  to  the  every-day  conjurer;
and  I  am  convinced  that  the  furniture  of  the  room  and  its  general  surround-
ings played  no  part  whatever  in  the  accomiilishment  of  the  facts  which  I  am
going  to  narrate.

Having  produced  a  small  book-slate,  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  examine  it,
and  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  its  simplicity  of  construction,  &c.  I  did  so  ;  the
slate  was  composed  of  two  ordinary  pieces  of  slate,  about  six  by  four  inches,
mounted  in  ebony  covers  hinged  on  one  side  with  two  strong  plated  hinges,
and  closed  in  front,  beyond  the  question  of  a  doubt,  with  a  Chatwood's
patent  lock.


Experimental  Investigation.


469


With  the  exception  of  a  small  escutcheon,  bearing  the  initials  of  the
donor,  the  slate  was  plain  and  substantial,  and  bore  the  strictest  inspection,
so  as  to  entirely  preclude  the  idea  of  chemicals  or  any  other  similar  agent
being  used  to  it.

[a]  After  I  had  finished  examining  the  slate,  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  write
in  the  slate  any  question  I  liked  while  he  was  absent  from  the  room.  Picking
up  a  piece  of  grey  crayon,  I  wrote  the  following  question  :  "  What  is  the
specific  gravity  of  platinum  1 "  and  then  having  locked  the  slate  and
retained  the  key,  I  placed  the  former  on  the  table  and  the  latter  in  my
pocket.

After  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  I  heard  a  distinct  sound  as  of  writing,
and  on  being  requested  to  unlock  the  slate  I  there  discovered  to  my  great
surprise  the  answer  of  my  question  :  ' '  We  don't  know  the  specific  gravity,
Joey."  The  pencil  with  which  it  was  written  was  a  little  piece  which
we  had  enclosed,  and  which  would  just  rattle  between  the  sides  of  the  folded
slate.

Having  had  my  hands  on  the  slate  above  the  table,  I  can  certify  that  the
slate  was  not  touched  or  tampered  with  during  the  time  the  writing  was
going  on.

[6]  Next  ;  having  taken  an  ordinary  scholar's  slate  and  placed  a  fragment  .
of  red  crayon  upon  it,Mr.  Davey  placed  it  under  the  flap  of  the  table.  I  held
one  side  with  my  hand  as  before.  I  then  heard  the  same  sound  as  previously,
and  when  the  slate  was  placed  on  the  table  I  found  the  following  short

address  distinctly  written  :  "  Dear  Mr.  S  , — The  substitution  dodge  is

good  ;  the  chemical  is  better,  but  you  see  by  the  writing  the  spirits  know  a
trick  worth  two  of  that.  This  medium  is  honest,  and  I  am  the  only  true
Joey.  "  The  writing  was  in  red  crayon,  and  was  in  regular  parallel  straight
lines.

[c]  Then,  again,  Mr.  Davey  requested  me  to  place  a  small  fragment  of
slate-pencil  in  the  lock  slate,  which  latter  had  been  previously  cleansed
with  sponge  by  me.  Respecting  the  method  of  closing  the  slate,  &c.,  every-
thing was  done  as  in  the  first  instance  ;  the  slate  was  locked,  and  I  retained
the  key.

As  soon  as  the  sound  of  writing  was  over,  I  picked  the  slate  from  oif  the
table,  where  it  had  been  lying  right  under  my  eyes,  unlocked  it,  and  read  as
follows  :  ' '  We  are  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  you  this  writing  under
these  conditions,  because  with  your  special  knowledge  upon  the  subject  you
can  negative  the  theory  of  antecedent  preparation  of  this  slate  as  advanced
by  certain  wiseacres  to  explain  the  mystery. — '  Joey.'  "  The  fact  that  the
pencil  when  removed  from  the  interior  of  the  slate  had  diminished  in  size
and  show  ed  distinct  traces  of  friction,  convinces  nie  that  it  was  the  pencil
and  nothing  else  which  produced  the  caligraphy.  If  the  particles  taken  from
the  pencil  by  friction  did  not  go  on  the  surface  of  the  slate,  where  could
they  go  ?

[d]  Lastly,  as  requested  by  Mr.  Davey,  I  took  a  coin  from  my  pocket  with-
out looking  at  it,  placed  it  in  an  envelope  and  sealed  it  up.  1  am  certain  that
neither  Mr.  Davey  nor  myself  knew  anything  about  the  coin.  I  then  placed
it  in  the  book-slate  together  with  a  piece  of  pencil, closed  it  as  previously  and
deposited  it  on  the  table  ;  and  having  placed  my  hands  with  those  of  Mr.  ,

2  I

i


470


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &g.


Davey  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  slate,  waited  a  short  time.  I  then  unlocked
the  slate  as  requested,  and  to  my  intense  amazement  I  found  the  date  of  the
coin  written,  by  the  side  of  the  envelope  containing  it.

The  seal  and  envelope  ( which  I  have  now)  remained  intact.

This  last  feat  astonished  me  more  than  the  others,  so  utterly  impossible
and  abnormal  did  it  appear  to  me.  I  may  also  mention  that  everything
which  was  used,  including  the  cloth  and  sponge  with  which  the  slates  were
cleansed,  were  eagerly  and  thoroughly  scrutinised  by  me,  and  I  failed
to  detect  anything  in  the  shape  of  mechanism  of  any  kind.  Were  I
sceptically  inclined  towards  Spiritualism,  I  should  have  attributed  the
feats  I  witnessed  to  it,  but  I  am  convinced  from  the  bond  fide  manner
in  which  Mr.  Davey  proceeded  to  perform  his  mysterious  writing.
Spiritualism  plays  no  part  in  it  whatever.  Were  T  asked  to  account
for  the  method  by  which  the  writing  was  done,  or  rather  to  advance
any  theory  based  upon  which  it  would  be  possible  to  2)roduce  such
phenomena,  I  should  suggest  a  powerful  magnetic  force  used  in  a  double
manner,  i.e., 1st.  the  force  of  attraction,  and  2nd.  that  of  repulsion.*

But  Mr.  Davey  has  by  great  perseverance  and  study  cultivated  his
scientific  secret  to  such  an  extent  that  were  it  magnetism,  electricity,
pneumatics, or  anything  else,  it  would  baffle  the  most  accomplished  in  any  of
those  branches  of  science  to  form  even  an  approximate  idea  of  his  modus
operandi.


SITTING  XII.

Mr.  Henry  Hayman  was  introduced  to  me  by  Mr.  H.  W.  S.,  the
writer  of  the  preceding  report.  In  connection  with  this  sitting  I  may
observe  that  not  only  is  it  commonly  the  case  that  witnesses  believe
themselves  to  have  taken  precautions  which  they  did  not  take,  but  that
they  also  frequently  omit  to  record  precautions  which  they  did  take.

In  the  present  instance,  for  example,  Mr.  Hayman  suggested  during
one  experiment  that  it  might  be  said  that  I  produced  the  writing  by
means  of  mechanism  connected  with  my  knees  ;  I  thereupon  desired
one  of  the  sitters  to  look  under  the  table  during  the  continuance  of  the
experiment ;  Mr.  H.  W.  S.  proceeded  to  do  so,  but  was  unable  to
discover  anything  suspicious.

Report  of  Mr.  Henry  Hayman.

Febrxoary  16th,  1887.
[o] Mr.  H.  W.  S.  and  myself  visited  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey  last  evening,  and
he  gave  us  a  seance  of  his  slate-writing.  He  first  got  a  plain  table,  without
any  secret  contrivances,  let  me  examine  it,  which  I  did  thoroughly,  then


*  Compare  the  theory  framed  by  Dr.  E.  von  Hartmann  to  account  for
slate-writing  phenomena,  in  Der  Spiritismus.  See  C.  C.  M.'s  translation,
Spiritism,  pp.  45-48. — S.J.D.


Experimental  Investigation.


471


brought  two  ordinary  school  slates,  and  asked  me  to  wash  them  with  a  sponge
and  water,  so  that  if  there  was  any  writing  on,  it  might  be  washed  off.  He
next  placed  one  flat  on  the  table,  asked  me  to  take  two  small  pieces  of  chalk,
and  put  them  on  the  slate,  which  I  did,  a  blue  and  a  red  piece  ;  then  he  put
the  other  slate  on  the  top,  and  we  joined  hands  and  pressed  them  on  the
top  of  the  slates.  After  a  minute  or  two  I  distinctly  heard  writing  ;  when  it
had  ceased  he  asked  me  to  lift  it  up.  When  I  did  so  the  bottom  one  was
covered  with  writing  in  the  following  words  (half  in  blue  and  half  in  red
chalk)  :  "  You  will  please  pardon  us  friends  if  we  do  not  enter  with  you  to-
night into  experiments  of  a  very  minute  nature,  the  grand  fact  of  this
writing  should  be  sufiicient,  and  we  do  not  care  to  cloak  the  wonderment
thereof  by  descending  to  underhand  coin  tricks,  and  such  like  phenomena,
which  however  startling  to  some  would  fail  upon  those  who  like  yourself
are  acquainted  with  conjuring  possibilities.  Good-bye."

[6]  The  next  thing  he  showed  me  was  a  slate  which  locked  up  with  a  patent
lever  lock.  After  I  had  washed  the  slate,  he  asked  me  to  write  down  on  the
inside  any  question  I  liked,  then  put  a  piece  of  chalk  ia,  lock  it  up,  and  put
the  key  in  my  pocket.  The  question  I  asked  was,  "What  kind  of  weather
shall  we  have  to-morrow  ?"  He  was  out  of  the  room  while  I  wrote  it  down,
and  it  was  locked  up  by  the  time  he  came  back  ;  he  then  jjlaced  it  on
the  table,  the  gas  being  alight  at  the  time,  we  joined  hands  and  put  them
on  the  top  of  the  slate.  After  a  little  I  again  heard  writing,  and  when  I  opened
it  there  was  the  answer,  in  red  chalk,  each  side  of  the  slate  :  "  Ask  the
clerk  of  the  weather. "  It  had  been  written  with  the  piece  of  chalk  I  had
put  in.  I  am  quite  certain  the  slate  had  not  been  opened  after  I  had  locked
it  up.  Henry  Hayman.

P.S. — I  may  add  that  I  watched  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey  very  closely,  but  I  could
see  no  possible  means  by  which  any  of  his  slate-writing  could  be  done  by
ordinary  known  means.  H.  H.

Statement  of  Mr.  H.  W.  S.

February  l&tli.

It  is  with  still  greater  astonishment  that  I,  in  company  with  my  friend,
Mr.  H. ,  witnessed  last  night  a  seance  of,  if  possible,  greater  anomalies  than
the  previous  one.  Whilst  confirming  all  the  details  given  by  my  friend,
Mr.  H.,  I  should  like  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  were  two
witnesses  in  the  matter,  whose  evidence  is  undoubtedly  more  reliable  than
that  of  one  person.  Moreover,  it  is  far  more  difficult  to  perform  in  their
presence,  as  the  observation  is  more  intense.

[H.  W.  S.]


SITTING  XIII.

Mr.  Stanley  W.  Jones,  the  writer  of  the  following  report,  was
inclined  to  account  for  the  phenomena  which  he  witnessed,  and  for
analogous  "  mediumistic  "  phenomena,  by  some  theory  involving  the
action  of  magnetism.


472


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


Report  of  Mr.  Stanley  W.  Jones.

I  called  on  Mr.  S.  J.  Uavey,  by  appointment,  on  the  evening  of  Friday,
March  25th,  1887,  bringing  with  me  two  perfectly  new  slates,  which  I  had
purchased  that  day  and  privately  marked.  I  was  shown  into  a  well-furnished
study,  but  without  any  of  the  usual  paraphernalia  of  the  conjurer  about  it.
An  ordinary  dark  wooden  table  with  two  flaps  was  brought  forward,  which  1
carefully  examined.  I  pulled  out  the  single  drawer,  finding  it  full  of  j^apers,
and  nothing  suspicious  or  mysterious  about  it  in  any  way.

[a]  In  answer  to  my  request,  Mr.  Davey  took  an  ordinary  slate  of  his
own,  which  I  carefully  sponged  and  wiped.  He  placed  the  same  under  the
leaf  of  the  table,  I  putting  between  the  surface  of  the  slate  and  the  wood  of
table  a  piece  of  crayon.  I  supported  one  side  with  my  left  hand,  he  the  other
with  his  right.  His  left  hand  and  my  right  were  clasped.  He  asked  me  to
propound  some  question.  I  accordingly  submitted  the  following  interroga-
tory :  "On  what  day  of  the  week  does  the  1st  April  fall  ?  "  After  a  certain
interval  he  said,  "Let  us  examine  the  slate."  It  was  raised,  but  apparently
presented  an  unchanged  appearance.  After  replacing  it  as  before,  in  a
minute  or  two  I  heard  a  very  faint  scratching,  and  on  looking  at  the  surface
the  following  fairly  legible  scrawl  aj^peared  :  "I  don't  know."'

[6]  Mr.  Davey  now  placed  in  my  hands  a  small  ebony-backed  slate,
with  Chatwood's  lock ;  bidding  me,  while  he  retired  from  the  room,  write  any
question  therein.  I  inscribed,  "What  was  the  exact  date  of  my  birth  ?  "
placing  the  key  in  my  pocket.  I  put,  however,  a  new  piece  of  crayon
inside.  The  slate  was  now  laid  on  the  table  and  we  placed  our  hands  upon
it.  After  a  short  time  the  scratching  was  again  heard,  and  on  unlocking
the  slate  the  following  perfectly  legible  answer  aj^peared  :  "  I  do  not  know
your  birthday. "  The  facets  of  the  crayon,  which  were  perfectly  unbroken
on  being  put  in,  I  found  worn  away,  and  resting  on  the  last  y.

[c]  I  now  took  the  two  new  slates  which  I  had  purchased,  and  which  had
never  for  a  moment  passed  out  of  my  possession,  I  even  taking  the  pre-
caution of  sitting  on  them  during  tlie  foregoing  proceedings.  I  placed  a
piece  of  red  crayon  therein,  and  screwed  them  down  top  and  bottom  so
tightly  that  by  no  possibility  could  even  the  thin  edge  of  a  penknife  be
introduced.  I  then  corded  the  slates  twice  across  and  across,  sealing  them  in
two  places  with  red  and  blue  wax  (for  of  course  any  attempt  to  remove  the
seals  by  heat  would  cause  the  colours  to  fuse,  and  thus  immediately  detect
the  artifice),  stamping  them  with  my  own  private  signet.  Mr.  Davey  placed
the  slates  under  the  table,  and  requested  me  to  name  some  word  I  would
like  written.  I  stipulated  for  "  April."  After  a  few  minutes,  duiing  which  I
most  carefully  watched  him,  he  returned  them,  and  after  10  minutes'  work,
so  tightly  were  they  closed,  I  found  exactly  what  I  had  desired.

[d]  He  next  took  his  own  slate  again,  laying  it  upon  tlie  table,  I  having
previously  placed  a  piece  of  crayon  therein,  and  pocketing  the  key  after
locking  it.  After  a  sliglit  interval,  a  distinct  and  continuous  scratching  as
of  regular  writing  was  heard,  which  lasted  exactly  25  seconds.  On  unlock-
ing the  slate,  the  following  message  in  a  clear  running  hand  ajipeared:
"  Dear  Sir, — We  regret  to  think  that  in  this  enlightened  age  there  are  still
to  be und  investigators  in  the  realm  of  Trixography  whose  minds  do  not


Experimental  Investigation.  473

aspire  beyond  the  pencil  thimble,  and  '  half-a-crown  '  trick  slate.  We  are
therefore  pleased  you  should  impose  tests  upon  our  powers,  as  we  are
anxious  to  thoroughly  satisfy  you  of  our  medium's  honesty.  Good-bye."

This  concluded  a  most  interesting,  successful,  and  perfectly  satisfactory
psychographic  seance.

The  precautions!  took  entirely  preclude  any  idea  of  trickery  or  conjuring.
It  is  also  a  noticeable  point  that  whereas  the  last  "  message  "  was  concluded
in  25  seconds,  it  takes  at  least yiye  miiMiies  to  transcribe.  I  was  extremely
careful  in  doing  my  utmost  to  detect  any  artitices  of  Mr.  Davey,  but  must
own  that  not  only  was  I  most  completely  bafHed,  but  everything  seemed
perfectly  open  and  above  board,  the  entire  proceedings  being  transacted  in
the  full  glare  of  two  powerful  gas  jets.  I  left  very  much  impressed  with  Mr.
Davey's  marvellous  powers  and  the  phenomena  I  had  witnessed.

Staijley  W.  Jones.

[c]  P.S.-  NotaBene. — After  perusal  of  above,  considering  that  the  expres-
sion, "I  found  exactly  what  I  desired,"  might  be  liable  to  a  possible  miscon-
struction, I  think  it  better  to  add  that  I  state  in  the  most  unequivocal,  explicit,
and  emphatic  manner,  that  after  Mr.  Davey  had  returned  me  my  two  slates,
secured  as  above  described,  and  which  I  most  carefully  and  minutely
examined  to  detect  any  signs  of  tampering,  finding  however  my  seals  intact
and  the  cording  and  screws  in  exactly  the  same  condition  as  when  they  left
my  possession  a  few  moments  before,  and  that  the  word  "April,"  which  I
had  asked  for,  was  legibly  written  with  the  crayon,  on  one  of  the  inside
surfaces.  Whether  the  top  or  bottom  I  did  not  observe.  The  apparently
impossible  having  thus  been  solved  as  I  hereby  testify.

Stanley  W.  Jones.


SITTING  XIV.

The  following  account  is  by  a  gentleman  who  has  had  considerable
opportunities  of  observing  and  taking  part  in  experimental  inquiry.  I
shall  speak  of  him  as  Dr.  Q.  He  was  aware  that  my  performances
were  conjuring,  and  had  read  my  paper  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.
for  January,  1887.  He  had  had  sittings  with  "slate-writing"
mediums,  and  knew  precisely  the  object  of  my  investigation,  although
he  did  not  know  the  methods  which  I  employed.  His  account  is
remarkably  good,  and  I  quote  it  chiefly  to  show  the  rapidity  with
which  slates  fastened  together  as  described  can  be  manipulated.

Report  of  Dr.  Q.

[a]  I  have  witnessed  this  afternoon,  about  three  hours  ago,  some  remark-
able phenomena,  when  sitting  with  Mr.  Davey,  which  I  think  worthy  of  a
brief  record  without  comment.  The  seance  was  in  a  friend's  room,  in  the
early  afternoon,  in  thoroughly  good  daylight.  An  adjoining  room,  entirely
separate  from  the  experimenting  room,  gave  me  the  opportunity  of  making
my  preparations  out  of  Mr.  Davey's  sight. I  took  three  common  school-


474  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  £c.


room  slates  and  examined  them  carefully  by  myself,  testing  the  security  of
the  joints  of  the  wood  frames,  the  solidity  of  the  piece  of  slate  enclosed,  and
its  freedom  from  marks  of  chalk.  I  had  brought  a  strong  lens  and  was
thereby  able  to  mark  for  identification  each  slate,  A,  B,  and  C,  with  marks
not  visible  to  my  own  eyes  without  a  lens.  I  then  laid  B  on  C  and  tied  them
tif^htly  round  with  strong  string  whose  elasticity  was  very  slight.  The  knots
I  sealed  and  marked  the  seals.  I  had  left  a  small  piece  of  whitish  chalk
between  the  slates.  I  brought  them  in  this  condition  back  to  the  experi-
mentin<:'  room  where  Mr.  Davey  was,  and  we  seated  ourselves  at  the  corner
of  a  wooden  table  without  tablecloth.  The  only  drawer  in  the  table  which  I
could  find  had  been  removed.  I  gave  the  slates  to  Mr.  Davey,  who  was
sitting  on  my  left.  He  took  them  and  held  them  in  his  two  hands  under  the
tablefor  a  minute  or  more,i  then  gave  me  his  left  hand  above  the  table,  and
I  held  it  in  my  left  hand.  My  knees  under  the  table  were  separated  by  a  leg
of  the  table  from  free  movement  towards  Mr.  Davey.  After  two  or  three
minutes,  during  which  there  had  been  some  conversation,  he  asked  me  to
suggest  some  word  which  should  be  written  between  the  slates.  I  said  at
first°  Vladivostok,  but  as  he  thought  this  inappropriate  I  changed  it  for
Hong  Kong.  I  heard  scratching  sounds,  but  observed  less  movement  of  Mr.
Davey's  right  elbow  than  there  had  been  before.  After  a  minute  or  two  he
reproduced  the  slates  and  asked  me  to  examine  them  and  see  what  had  been
written  inside.  I  found  no  appreciable  displacement  of  the  string,  no  change
in  the  seals,  and  the  marks  of  identification  were  clear.  I  cut  the  string,
therefore,  and  opened  the  slates.  On  one  I  found  rather  indistinct  scratches
in  an  apparently  continuous  line,  of  which  one-half  bore  a  considerable
resemblance  to  a  badly-written  Hong  ;  the  other  half  was  of  about  equal
length,  but  not  decipherable.

[b]  I  retired  to  the  preparing-room  to  make  ready  for  another  experiment.
I  drew  on  the  internal  surface  of  B  five  vertical  lines,  and  on  the  internal
surface  of  C  five  vertical  and  five  horizontal  lines  with  the  fragment  of
whitish  chalk  and  tied  and  sealed  them  as  before.  This  time  I  thought  that
the  apposition  of  the  edges  was  niore  complete  and  secure  than  before.  I
brought  them  to  Mr.  Davey,  and  after  they  had  been  handled  as  before,  I
asked  that  the  word  Irishman  should  be  written,  but  there  was  no  success  ;  I
did  not  find  any  appreciable  alteration  on  the  inside  or  outside  of  the  slates.
My  left  knee  had  been  under  the  apparent  position  of  Mr.  Davey's  right
hand.

[c]  In  the  third  experiment  the  same  slates  were  used ;  they  were  prepared
in  Mr.  Davey's  presence.  They  were  tied  and  the  knots  sealed  and  also  two
screw  nails  were  driven  through  the  wooden  frames  of  both  slates,  one  at
what  I  may  call  the  south-east  corner  and  the  other  at  the  middle  of  the
north  end.  This  made  firm  and  satisfactory  apposition  of  the  frames  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  screws.  The  screws  were  not  sealed,  but  the  position
of  the  fine  broken  woody  fibres  round  them  was  noted.  I  did  not  succeed  in
making  the  tied  string  quite  as  tight  as  in  the  previous  experiment.  I  noticed
no  dillerence  in  the  manipulation  of  the  slates  from  the  first  two  experi-
ments. I  made  no  attempt  to  touch  Mr.  Davey's  hand  with  my  left  knee.  I
asked  that  77  should  be  written,  and  after  a  few  seconds  explained
myself  by  saying  that  they  should  be  written  out  in  full,  not  in  numbers.


Experimental  Investigation.


475


The  slates  were  brought  above  the  table  m  less  than  a  minute  after  this.  I
could  find  no  change  externally,  and  written  inside  I  found  the  figures  77,
and  also  a  fairly  well-formed  "  Sev,"  followed  after  an  indistinct  interval  by
signs  resembling  "  ty,"  and  these  also  by  some  almost  indecipherable  scratches.

[d]  For  a  fourth  experiment  I  prepared  the  same  slates  in  the  adjoining
room.  A  fresh  screw  was  fixed  in  the  previous  hole  near  the  south-east  corner,
and  another  was  passed  through  both  frames  a  little  below  the  north-west
corner.  The  exact  position  of  the  heads  of  the  screws  was  noticed,  but
they  were  not  sealed.  I  carefully  examined  the  piece  of  chalk  left  between
the  slates  with  my  lens,  and  found  two  smooth  rubbed  facets  on  it.  These
and  the  other  rough  surfaces  of  the  irregular  polygonal  mass  I  marked  with
very  finely  cut  lines.  The  slates  were  tied  with  thinner  and  more  yielding
string,  and  the  knots  sealed.  A  rather  fragile  drop  of  sealing  wax  was  placed
on  the  junction  of  the  crossed  strings  over  the  middle  of  the  slate.  The
chief  object  of  the  experiment  was  to  test  the  rapidity  with  which  the
phenomena  occurred  when  Mr.  Davey  was  not  under  my  observation.  I  was
to  stand  with  my  back  to  Mr.  Davey,  to  hold  out  the  slates  to  him  behind
my  back,  and  to  order  some  word  which  was  to  be  written  between  them
behind  me  out  of  my  sight,  and  the  slates  returned  to  my  hand  behind  my
back  as  soon  as  possible.  I  was  to  note  the  time  spent  on  this.  On  a  first
attempt  I  held  out  the  slates  behind  my  back  saying,  "  commandment."  Mr.
Davey  took  them,  asking  at  the  same  time  what  was  the  word  required.  1  saw
that  I  had  not  made  myself  plain,  turned  round  and  took  back  the
slates  within  one  or  two  seconds,  and  found  no  change  externally  except  that
the  fragile  drop  of  sealing  wax  on  the  crossed  strings  was  broken.  I  took  the
slates  back  again  to  the  preparing-room,  and  put  on  another  similar  drop.
On  a  second  trial  I  again  said,  "  commandment,"  putting  the  slates  behind
me  with  my  left  hand,  holding  my  watch  in  my  right,  and  keeping  my  back
to  Mr.  Davey.  They  were  returned  to  my  hand  in  30  or  31  seconds.  Some
sounds  which  might  be  described  as  shuffling  and  scratching  had  been  heard
by  me.  I  laid  them  on  the  table,  and  on  examination  found  no
change  externally ;  then  cut  the  strings  and  found  on  the  inner
surface  "  commandment  "  written  more  distinctly  than  the  previous
words  had  been  and  near  the  edge  ^  of  the  slate.  Whilst  I  was
looking  at  the  word  Mr.  Davey  touched  and  to  some  extent  broke  the  piece
of  chalk.  In  examining  it  afterwards  with  a  lens  I  found  only  two  smooth
rubbed  facets,  each  of  which  was  still  marked  with  the  finely  cut  line  I  had
made  on  it  :  over  some  only  of  the  remaining  rough  surfaces  could  I  find  the
fine  lines  that  I  had  previously  made  over  all.  I  made  no  accurate  compari-
son between  the  marks  I  could  produce  on  the  slate  by  the  whitish  chalk
and  those  forming  the  words  or  parts  of  words.  In  no  case  was  the  f)iece  of
chalk  large  enough  to  touch  both  internal  surfaces  at  the  same  time.

MoA-ch  2oth,  1887.


SITTINGS  XV.  AISID  XVI.

Miss  Symons  was  introduced  to  me  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  the  day  of
our  first  sitting.  I  gave  to  her  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  three  sittings  in  all,  of


476  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  <&c.


the  second  of  which,  a  dark  seance,  she  wrote  no  account.  As  I  have
already  stated  (p.  415,  note),  I  shall  not  quote  the  accounts  written  by-
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  as  I  had  told  her  a  good  deal  about  my  tricks  beforehand,
and  she  knew  that  my  performances  were  conjuring.  Notwitlistanding
this,  however,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  unable  to  explain  some  of  my
phenomena.  At  my  request,  she  has  furnished  some  notes  concerning
the  reports  of  Miss  Symons,  and  she  also  makes  the  following  statement  :

"  I  did  not  communicate  what  I  knew  about  Mr.  Davey  to  Miss
Symons  till  after  the  second  seance  here  recorded,  as  my  object  in  taking
her  to  the  seances  was  to  obtain  an  account  of  what  she  witnessed,
written  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  same  state  of  mind  as  when  she
wrote  certain  accounts  (printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  June,
1886)  of  Mr.  Eglinton.  I  therefore  merely  represented  Mr.  Davey  as  a
person  through  whom  remarkable  phenomena  occurred,  which  I  wanted
to  have  investigated.  Mr.  Davey  himself  seemed  to  me  (as  I  have
recorded  in  my  note-book)  to  talk  very  openly  to  Miss  Symons.  He
seemed  to  tell  her  almost  as  much  as  he  had  told  me  about  his  tricks  and
those  of  other  'mediums,'  but  it  was  doubtless  mixed  up  in  a  mystifying
way.  Unfortunately,  Miss  Symons  had  great  confidence  in  my  care  as
an  investigator,  and,  without  revealing  the  actual  situation,  I  could  not
succeed  in  making  her  feel  herself  dependent  entirely  on  her  own
observation.  It  is  due  to  her  to  state  this,  as,  had  she  left  me  out  of
account  she  believes  she  would  have  used  more  precautions  than  she
did,  and  she  considers  that  she  was  more  careful  in  her  investigation  of
Mr.  Eglinton  than  in  that  of  Mr.  Davey."

These  sittings  were  the  earliest  I  gave  which  were  recorded  in
detail ;  my  experience  then  was  comparatively  limited,  and  I  have
since  become  much  more  practised  in  certain  methods,  and  have
also  acquired  the  knowledge  of  new  ones.

SITTING  XV.

Report  of  Miss  Symons.

Slate-writing  seance,  November  ICth,  1885,  at  14,  Dean's-yard,  with  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  and  a  medium  whom  I  will  designate  as  Mr.  A.  [changed  through-
out to  D. ,  see  p.  410].  Our  sitting  commenced  at  7.45  p.m.  We  took  our
places  round  a  deal  table  in  the  following  order  : — The  medium  Mr.  D.  at
one  corner,  next  him  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  I  oj^posite.

Neither  Mrs.  Sidgwick  nor  I  had  brought  any  slates,  and  we  were,
therefore,  obliged  to  use  those  brought  by  Mr.  D.  We  sat  in  a  good  light,  a
lamp  and  several  candles  were  burning  in  dilferent  parts  of  the  room.  We
first  washed  the  slates  ourselves  with  water  brought  us  by  Mr.  Podmore,  so
that  there  was  no  question  of  its  containing  any  admixture  of  chemicals,  by
which  means  writing  might  be  produced,  as  has  sometimes  been  suggested
to  me  ;  the  table,  too,  was  above  suspicion,  having  just  been  bought  by  Mr.


Experimental  Investigation.


477


Podniore  for  this  particular  seance.  After  each  one  of  us  had  separately-
washed  and  dried  the  slates,  one  was  marked  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  a  piece  of
pencil  was  placed  on  it,  and  it  was  held  by  Mr.  D.  under  the  table,  who  warned
us  to  watch  him  very  carefully,  as  he  gave  no  promise  not  to  cheat,  did  we
give  him  the  faintest  opportunity  for  so  doing,  and  who  wished  us  distinctly
to  understand  tliat  he  did  not  claim  to  produce  the  phenomena  he  hoped  to
show  us,  by  spirit  agency.  Prior  to  placing  the  ordinary  slate  under  the  table,
we  had  washed  and  examined  a  small  double  folding  slate,  also  belonging  to
the  medium.  This  slate  was  locked  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  put  the  key  in  her
purse,  and  the  purse  in  her  pocket,  and  who  sat  upon  the  slate.

The  single  marked  slate,  of  which  I  have  pi'eviously  spoken,  was  now
held  by  Mr.  D.  under  the  table.  We  joined  hands,  and  contented  ourselves  by
asking  merely  that  any  word  might  be  written,  or  the  single  word  "  Abbey."
The  medium,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  only,  showed  himself  very
impatient  at  no  writing  having  been  produced.  He  proposed  using  another
slate,  which  had  also  been  washed  and  dried  by  us.  Another  piece  of  pencil
was  tried  ;  these  and  other  movements — for  he  constantly  moved  the  slates  to
ascertain  whether  anything  had  been  written — made  it  much  more  difhcult
to  watch  him  narrowly,  than  had  he  been  content  to  wait  quietly  and
patiently  for  results.  Still  I  was  not  able  to  detect  any  change  of  slates
beyond  the  two  which  had  been  washed  and  cleaned  by  us.  No  writing  had
appeared,  and  Mr.  D.  soon  proposed  that  we  should  try  the  following  test,
suggested  by  him.

[a]  One  of  us  was  to  stand  with  a  newspaper  on  a  table  behind  us,
and  with  one  finger  was  to  point  at  random  at  any  woi'd  ;  the  other  was
to  sit  at  the  deal  table  with  him.  It  was  agreed  that  I  should  be  the  one
to  point  to  a  word  on  the  newspaper  behind  me,  and  I  took  up  my  position
for  this  purpose  at  another  table,  about  a  couple  of  yards  from  the
one  at  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  D.  were  sitting.  We  had  waited  a  few
seconds  only  when  the  medium — who,  as  I  have  said  before,  seemed  restless
and  impatient  throughout  the  evening — suggested  that  I  should  blow  out  the
candles  behind  me,  as  he  thought  darkness  behind  the  paper  might  facilitate
the  accomplishment  of  the  test.  I  complied,  and  returning  to  the  table
again  placed  my  hand  behind  my  back,  and  put  my  finger,  as  before,  at
random  on  any  part  of  the  paper.  I  had  no  sooner  done  as  he  had  asked,
than  Mr.  D.  regretted  that  I  should  ever  have  moved  from  my  place,  as  he
thought  it  possible  that  the  word  written — if  writing  came  at  all — would  be
the  first  and  not  the  second  word  to  which  I  had  pointed.  It  was  not  long
before  writing  was  heard.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  D.  turned  to  the  candle
behind  them,  but  were  unable  to  decipher  the  word  written.  Mr.  D.  asked  thaC
it  might  be  re-written.  Another  slate  was  used,  on  which  they  presently
read  the  word  "Melbourne."  We  then  turned  to  see  the  word  at  which  I
was  pointing.  It  was,  however,  not  "  Melbourne,"  neither  was  that  word
anywhere  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  my  finger,  though  we  did
afterwards  find  it  in  larger  type,  and  two  columns  further  on.  Whether  I
had  at  first  pointed  to  this  word,  could  not  of  course  be  ascertained.  It  is
possible  that  I  did  so,  though  a  test  which  we  tried  later  on,  and  to  which  t
shall  presently  allude,  proves  that  the  "control"  was  not  incapable  of
making  a  mistake. As  to  whether  this  word  was  obtained  under  good


478


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


conditions  I  cannot  give  an  opinion,  as  I  was  not  sufficiently  near  the
medium  to  be  able  to  watch  hiin  closely.

[6]  We  next  reversed  our  positions,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sitting  opposite  Mr.  D.
and  I  next  him  ;  the  double  slate  remained  on  the  chair  on  which  I  sat.^  After
again  washing  two  slates,  and  placing  one  on  the  top  of  the  other,  Mr.  D.  and
1  together  held  them  under  the  table  ;  they  were  once  or  twice  removed  to  see
that  the  pencil  was  still  there,  and  that  no  writing  had  come,  but  always
returned  immediately,  and  they  were  not  reversed  or  changed  by  Mr.  D.,  so
far  as  I  know,  whilst  we  were  together  holding  them,  up  to  the  time  when  we
again  apparently  heard  the  scratching  of  the  pencil.  We  found,  on  carrj'ing
the  slates  to  the  light,  that  there  was  a  message  of  moderate  length  covering
half  the  slate,  and  signed  "J.S."

[c]  Again  we  sat  as  before,  and  under  the  same  conditions  writing  came  on
one  of  the  two  slates  held  by  Mr.  D.  and  me  under  the  table,  half  the  message
being  in  red  chalk  and  half  in  blue — a  bit  of  each  had  been  placed  on  the
slate.  Again  I  could  detect  no  trickery  whatever ;  the  slates  were  clean
when  we  laid  the  bits  of  chalk  between  them,  and  one  was  covered  with
writing  when  they  were  removed  from  the  table.  Unfortunately  the  slates
had  not  been  marked,  and  I  did  not  notice  whether  the  bit  of  chalk  was
resting  at  the  last  stroke  of  the  last  word,  or  whether  the  nib  was  at  all
worn  down.  The  message  was  of  decided  interest,  it  was  as  follows  : — "  My
dear  Friends,  We  have  no  wish  to  deceive  you  as  regards  the  Agency  question.
The  name  of  a  deceased  relative,  especially  a  mother,  is  [far  too  sacred,
although]  most  effective, "&c. — the  ordinary  Spiritualistic  jargon — then,  "Our
friend  made  a  mistake  the  other  night,  dear  Miss  S.  Agradezco  &  V.  su
visita.  Espero  que  le  volviere  a  ver  d  V.  pronto.  Tengo  que  macharme,
A  Dios."  Then  the  message  continued  :  "Yes,  your  haunted  house  was  a
failure."  The  last  part  of  this  sentence  was  too  badly  written  to  be
deciphered  ;  it  appeared  to  be  to  the  effect  that  the  writer  had  not  been  able
to  be  present.  Now  this  message  appears  to  me  to  be  striking,  though  not  of
course  conclusive.  I  must  explain  that  about  a  month  ago  I  had  had  a  sitting
with  Mr.  Eglinton  for  slate-writing,  and  had  asked  a  question  in  Spanish,  to
which  I  had  had  the  reply  that  "there  was  no  French  scholar  present."  Hence
the  reason  of  the  remark  "Our  friend  made  a  mistake  the  other  night,"  &c.
(the  former  seance  had  taken  place  in  the  day-time).  This  message,  which
had  amused  me  at  the  time,  had  by  no  means  been  forgotten  by  me,
although  it  had  not  been  in  my  conscious  thoughts  for  many  days,  and  cer-
tainly not  during  the  seance  of  wliich  I  write  ;  it  was  known  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick
also,  to  whom  I  had  written  an  account  of  the  seance  with  Mr.  Eglinton  soon
after  it  took  place.  But  what  caused  an  allusion  to  this  seance  of  a  month
ago,  and  tlirough  the  agency  of  a  medium  who  it  seems  improbable  could
have  heard  of  this  former  seance  'I  However,  as  1  have  said  before,  interesting
and  striking  though  this'message  appears  to  be,  it  gives  no  proof  of  thought-
transference,  as  Mr.  D.  may  have  heard  of  the  seance  through  some  ordinary
means,  though  from  his  conversation  he  appeared  to  be  on  any  but  intimate
terms  with  Mr.  Eglinton,  and  he  was  quite  unknown  to  me  and  I  believe  to
Mrs.  Sidgwick  (?)  before  we  met  him  on  this  evening  at  Dean's-yard.  He  also
told  us  that  he  did  not  know  a  word  of  Spanish.  Still,  it  would  have  been  no
very  difficult  task  to  have  got  a  few  sentences  written  for  this  particular


Experimental  Investigation.


479


seance,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  message  from  beginning  to  end  which
might  not  have  been  written  previous  to  the  seance.  But  admit-
ting all  this,  I  was  not  conscious  of  any  movement  by  which  he  could  have
changed  a  cleaned  slate,  which  I  was  holding  with  him,  for  one  on
which  the  message  was  written.  The  allusion  to  the  haunted  house  is  less
striking,  for  Mr.  D.  is  known  to  Mr.  Podmore,  and  might  have  heard  of  it
through  him,  or  many  other  sources.

[(i]  We  next  tried  for  writing  on  the  locked  slate.  I  must  remark  here  that
though  we  had  sat  on  this  slate  during  the  greater  part  of  the  seance,  we  had
not  done  so  throughout.  We  had  left  it  on  the  chair  when  we  turned  to  the
candles  behind  us  to  read  the  message.  Mr.  D.  had  quickly  picked  it  up,  and
asked  us  not  to  lose  sight  of  it,  as  he  wished  to  preclude  all  possibility  of
fraud.  He  might,  of  course,  in  this  moment  -  have  changed  the  slate  for  one
on  which  a  message  was  already  written,  but  the  nature  of  the  test  we
obtained,  I  think,  negatives  this  supposition  ;  besides  which,  before  it  was
held  under  the  table,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  gave  me  the  key,  we  unlocked  the
slate,  found  no  writing  there,  and  after  the  slate  was  again  locked,  I  put  the
key  in  my  pocket.  ^

It  was  now  proposed  by  Mr.  D.  that  we  should  try  to  obtain  a  line  from
a  page  of  any  book  to  be  taken  at  random  from  Mr.  Podmore's  shelves.  This
was  done  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  took  care  only — at  Mr.  D.'s  request — to
select  a  book  with  good  type.  This  book  was  shown  to  Mr.  D.,  who  opened
it,  looked  at  the  type,  and  considered  it  sufficiently  clear.  Mrs.  Sidgwick
placed  it  on  the  table,  and  her  and  my  hands  rested  on  it,  whilst  Mr.  D.  and
I  held  the  small  locked  slate  under  the  table.  It  was  at  this  point,  after
choosing  her  book,  that  the  slate  had  been  opened,  found  clean,  and  the  key
given  to  me.  It  was  decided  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  should  think  of  the  page  of
the  book  from  which  the  line  was  to  be  taken,  and  I  of  the  line,  counting  from
the  top  of  the  page,  it  being  agreed — at  Mr.  D.  's  wish — that  to  facilitate  the
test,  we  should  each  think  of  a  number  below  10.

Again,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  we  gave  Mr.  D.  no  opportunity  for  changing
the  slate.  I  am  quite  certain  that  he  did  not  do  so  whilst  we  were  holding  it
together.  And  in  this  case  the  message  must  have  been  written  mi  our
presence,  as  we  did  get  a  line  copied  from  this  veiy  book,  though  not  the  line
of  which  we  were  thinking.  When  the  slate  was  again  unlocked,  we  found
writing  on  each  side  ;  the  message  was  to  the  effect  that  we  were  not
sufficiently  en  rapport  with  one  another  to  get  the  best  results  as  yet,  but
that  they  were  willing  to  give  us  some  proof  of  their  power.  Then  followed  a
few  words  in  inverted  commas,  after  which  an  illegible  word,  with  which  the
message  broke  off  abruptly.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  then  explained  that  she
had  been  thinking  of  page  9,  and  I  had  thought  of  line  4.  Mrs.  Sidgwick
quickly  turned  to  this  page  and  line,  but  no  such  words  as  those  quoted  were
to  be  found.  Mr.  D.  suggested  that  the  9  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  mind  might
have  been  reversed  and  wrongly  read  as  6.  We,  therefore,  tunied  to  page
6,  and  on  the  last  line  of  that  page  and  the  first  line  of  page  7,  we  found  the
words  for  which  we  were  looking.

In  this  case — admitting  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomenon — there  might
again  have  been  thought-transference,  for  the  book  had  been  in  both  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  and  Mr.  D.'s  hand,  and  either  might  have  cauglit  sight  of  these  very


480  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


words.  With  this  the  seance  ended,  as  Mr.  D.  expressed  himself  too  tired
to  sit  any  longer,  and  complained  of  a  very  bad  headache.  He  seemed  to
suffer  much  after  each  message  had  been  produced,  and  complained  of  great
dryness  of  tlie  throat.

Jessie  H.  Symons.

November  19fh,  1885.


SITTING  XVI.

Report  of  Miss  Symons.

Slate-writing  seance  given  by  Mr.  D.,  at  14,  Dean's-yard,  Westminster,
Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself  present  : —

I  took  slates  with  me — two  ordinary  ones,  and  one  a  folding  slate,  framed
in  wood,  with  a  padlock  and  key.

[ft]  We  first  used  the  ordinary  slates ;  they  were  cleaned,  dried,  and  placed
one  on  the  other  upon  the  table,  a  nib  of  pencil  between  them,  and  Mrs.
Sidgwick's,  medium's,  and  my  hands  resting  on  them.  No  writing  being
heard,  Mr.  D.  and  I  held  them  underneath  the  table.  Eventually,  however,
writing  was  produced  whilst  the  slates  were  on  the  table  in  position  I  have
before  described.  The  message  was  a  hmg  one,  covering  completely  one  side
of  slate.  We  examined  them  when  they  were  placed  the  second  time  on  the
table,  and  satisfied  ourselves  that  they  were  clean.  I  am  sure  that  the  slates
were  not  changed,  because  mine  had  rounded  corners  and  Mr.  D.'s,  I
observed,  were  square.

[6]  The  medium  next  asked  me  to  fetch  a  book  from  the  outer  room.  I  took
one  at  random  from  the  shelves  of  the  library.  Mr.  D.  saw  me  take  it  out,
but  did  not  touch  it.  I  brought  it  into  the  inner  room  and  put  it  on  a  chair
between  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself,  whilst  we  prepared  another  slate  and  bit
of  pencil.  Being  again  satisfied  that  the  slates  were  clean,  the  book — into
which  I  had  not  looked,  and  the  name  of  which  I  did  not  know — was  placed
on  the  slate,  all  our  hands  resting  on  it  as  before.  1  mentally  thought  of  a
page  and  line,  from  which  a  quotation  was  to  be  made,  both  numbers,  at
medium's  request,  being  under  10.  After  a  short  time  writing  was  heard.
On  the  slate  was  written,  "  Cantor  lecture  will  be  given  on  Mondays  at  the
Kensington  Museum — this  is  all  we  have  power  to  do."  We  looked  at  p.  2,
line  7,  the  numbers  I  had  thought  of,  but  did  not  find  the  words  quoted.
The  medium,  however,  was  very  sure  that  they  would  be  found  somewhere
near,  and  he  soon  discovered  on  last  line  of  p.  7  "  Cantor  lecture,"  and  on
second  line  of  p.  8  "  will  be  given  on  Mondays,"  and  a  few  lines  further
down,  "  at  the  Kensington  Museum."

[c]  The  test  having  been  only  a  partial  success,  the  medium  proposed  that
we  should  tiy  it  again.  He  asked  me  to  fetch  a  second  book  from  the  outer
room.  1  took  up  a  Journal  of  the  Society  lying  on  the  table.  I  did  not  look
to  see  which  number  I  had  chosen.  Medium  asked  me  to  think  again  of  two
numbers  under  10,  to  determine  page  and  line  from  which  quotation  should
be  made.  I  did  so,  and  very  shortly  after  was  written  in  red  chalk,  "No
such  page."  This  was  true,  for  on  opening  volume  we  found  it  commenced  at
a  hundred  and  something.


Experimental  Investigation.


481


[d]  Mr.  D.  wished  to  try  this  test  again,  so  I  fetched  a  third  book.  This
happened  to  be  Time — both  he  and  I  saw  the  title.  This  time  I  told  him
which  numbers  I  was  thinking  of — p.  8,  line  5.  We  held  one  slate  under
the  table,  and  another  with  the  book  on  it  remained  on  the  table — both
these  slates  were  Mr.  D.  's.  After  a  time  writing  was  heard,  and  it  was  on  the
upper  slate  that  we  found  the  quotation,  correctly  given  this  time,  "The
Imperial  Parliament,"  line  1,  and  then  a  few  words  taken  from  line  5.  The
slate  used  was  a  large  folding  one,  with  a  lock,  belonging  to  medium.  Into
this  he  slipped  a  sheet  of  paper  and  a  bit  of  lead  pencil  ;  it  was  on  the  paper
that  the  quotation  was  written.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  the  key,  and  it  was  she
who  opened  the  slate. ^  The  seance  was  held  by  full  gaslight.  The  writing
came  always  on  underneath  surface  of  slate — that  lying  nearest  the  table.

[e]  Mr.  D.  then  proposed  showing  us  another  trick.  He  took  up  12  squares
of  paper,  asked  me  to  name  any  12  animals  I  liked,  whose  names  he  wrote
on  the  12  squares  of  paper.  These  were  shufBed  together,  and  I  was  asked  to
choose  one,  which  I  was  to  glance  at  and  then  instantly  to  burn.  Mr.  D.  at
the  same  time  threw  the  other  squares  into  the  fire.  I  next  wrote  the  first
and  last  letters  of  the  animal  I  had  chosen  on  another  piece  of  paper,  this
Mr.  D.  burned  in  the  gas,  bared  his  arm  and  showed  us  that  there  was
nothing  written  there,  rubbed  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  paper  over  the  bare
arm,  and  presently  what  looked  like  letters  became  very  faintly  visible.
They  did  not,  however,  become  sufficiently  distinct  to  enable  us  to  read
them,  and  Mr.  D.  said  he  would  presently  get  the  animal's  name  written  on
a  slate.

[/]  ^6  sat  round  the  table  again,  as  before — Mrs.  Sidgwick  opposite
medium  and  I  next  him.  One  slate  was  held  underneath  table  by  Mr.  D.  and
me,  and  the  others  were  left  on  the  table,  with  our  hands  resting  on  it.  I
asked  that  the  names  of  my  sisters  might  be  written  — this  was  not  done.
Neither  did  "  Joey,"  in  answer  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  question,  succeed  in  telling
us  where  we  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  day.  "Joey"  was  also
unable  to  get  any  writing  on  my  little  folding  locked  slate,  though  we  gave
him  two  or  three  times  the  opportunity  of  doing  so.

[g]  Mr.  D.  asked  him  to  tell  us  any  secrets  about  either  of  us,  and  we
heard  the  sound  of  writing  on  the  slate  lying  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  table.
The  sound  continued,  when  Mr.  D.  withdrew  his  hands  a  short  distance  from
the  slate,  but  ceased  when  he  withdrew  them  to  a  greater  distance.  A  long
message  was  written  again,  covering  the  whole  side  of  the  slate,  and  com-
mencing at  a  spot  where  the  medium  had  previously  requested  it  to  commence
by  putting  a  small  cross.

The  "  secrets"  were  such  as  were  more  or  less  known  to  us  all,  referring
to  a  possible  explanation  I  had  given  of  our  last  seance  with  Mr.  D.  to
"Blue  Bricks, "  and  telling  me  that  I  could  get  slate- writing  if  I  sat  sufliciently
often,  and  "  not  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  "  !  !

One  of  our  messages  at  request  was  written  in  different-coloured  chalks,
three  bits  of  which  had  been  placed  on  the  table,  underneath  the  slate.

[/(.]  The  last  experiment  Mr.  D.  showed  us  was  the  visible  moving  of  the
chalk  under  an  inverted  tumbler.

Two  bits  of  chalk  were  placed  on  a  slate,  the  tumbler  covering  them  ;
the  slate  was  isolated  from  the  table. Mr.  D.  held  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  and


482  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


my  hands,  and  there  was  no  contact  by  either  of  us  with  the  slate.
Presently  one  bit  of  chalk  was  observed  to  move  slightly.  Mrs.  Sidgwick
asked  it  to  trace  the  figure  4  (Mr.  D.  having  proposed  that  she  should  choose
a  number  under  10),  and  on  removing  the  tumbler  and  inspecting  the  slate,
we  found  the  figure  4  somewhat  faintly  traced  on  the  slate.  I  do  not  believe
that  this  was  a  genuine  phenomenon,  though  I  have  no  theory  as  to  how  the
trick  was  performed.  I  only  observed  that  though  the  chalk  moved,  it  did
not  appear  to  be  forming  a  4,  although  that  figure  was  plainly  visible  when
Mr.  D.  afterwards  gave  us  the  slate.

[i]  Before  he  left,  Mr.  D.  held  a  slate  with  me  under  the  table,  and  asked
that  the  name  of  the  animal  written  on  the  slip  of  paper  I  had  chosen  should
be  written  on  the  slate.  Writing  was  heard,  the  slate  brought  up,  and  I
found  "  rhinoceros  "—wrongly  spelt— in  red  chalk.  This  was  correct,  though
liow  Mr.  D.  knew,  or  by  what  means  the  word  was  written,  I  have  no  idea,
for  the  slate  appeared  to  me  to  be  clean  *  when  we  put  it  under  the  table.

Jessie  H.  Symons.

February  23rd,  1886.


SITTING  FOR  MATERIALISATION.

The  foregoing  reports  have  all  related  to  "  Slate-writing,"  or  ana-
logous phenomena.  I  have,  however,  also  given  a  few  sittings  for
"Materialisation,"  and  I  may  in  the  future  endeavour  to  exhibit  more
fully  the  possibilities  of  trickery  in  this  direction,  but  this  branch  of  the
subject  has  been  of  less  interest  to  me,  partly  because  the  experiences
which  originally  impressed  me  in  connection  with  Spiritualism  were  not
"  Materialisation  "  but  "  Slate-writing"  phenomena— partly  because  the
testimony  offered  by  Spiritualists  for  the  genuineness  of  the  latter
appears  to  be  so  much  superior  to  that  offered  in  favour  of
"  Materialisations."  Still,  the  following  reports  of  a  seance  which  I
gave  last  year  may  be  instructive  by  way  of  suggesting  what  may
be  done  by  trickery.  Although  only  three  of  the  six  sitters  wrote
reports,  none  of  them  contributed  in  the  smallest  degree  to  the
production  of  the  "  phenomena."

1.  Beport  of  Mrs.  Johnson.

October  1th,  1886.

I  have  just  returned  from  paying  a  quite  unexpected  visit  to  Mr.  Davey.
We  had  invited  him  to  our  house  for  to-morrow  to  give  us  one  of  his
wonderful  manifestations,  but  received  a  bad  account  of  his  health,  which
prevented  him  keeping  his  appointment.  I,  therefore,  with  my  sister,  called  to
inquire  after  him,  and  found  that,  although  unable  to  leave  the  house,  he  was
about  to  hold  a  seance  with  some  friends,  and  invited  us  to  join  them.

On  entering  the  dining-room  we  searched  every  article  of  furniture,  but
could  find  nothing  that  could  in  any  way  assist  in  the  materialisation  which
followed. Mr.  Davey  also  turned  out  his  pockets,  and  we  looked  under  his


Experimental  Investigation.


483


coat  and  waistcoat.  After  the  door  was  locked  and  sealed,  and  the  gas  turned
out,  we,  six  besides  Mr.  Davey,  sat  round  a  table,  all  joining  hands.  I  had
hold  of  Mr.  Davey's  left  hand  and  a  gentleman  opposite  of  his  right,  none
for  a  moment  letting  go  until  the  end  of  the  seance.  A  musical  box  was
playing  on  the  table  ;  by  degrees  it  floated  about  and  knocked  a  gentleman  on
the  head.  Knockings  were  heard  in  different  parts  of  the  room,  and  bright
lights  seen.  A  gong  sounded  several  times,  and  then  appeared  the  head  of
a  woman,  which  came  close  to  us,  and  then  dematerialised.  After  a  few
seconds  another  form  appeared,  the  half  figure  of  a  man  holding  a  book,  with
lambent  edges,  which  it  raised  over  its  head,  moved  close  to  us,  bowed
several  times,  and  by  degrees  seemed  to  disappear  with  a  scraping  noise
through  the  ceiling.  During  the  seance  I  with  the  others  had  various  taps
on  the  head  and  body,  a  gentleman  complained  of  the  coldness  of  a  hand
pressing  on  him,  and  the  seance  was  altogether  a  most  interesting,  remark-
able and  startling  phenomenon,  and  I  can  in  no  way  account  for  it.

Marianne  J ohnson.

2,  Report  of  Miss  Willson.

Thursday  Evening,  October  *]th.

Dear  Mr.  Davey,

We  have  just  returned  from  a  seance  at  your  house,  and  while
all  is  fresh  in  my  memory,  I  hasten  to  send  you  my  account  of  what
happened.  You  had  kindly  promised  to  come  to  my  sister's  house  to-morrow
evening  to  give  us  a  "  materialisation,"  and  perhaps  some  slate-writing,  but
having  received  a  telegram  and  letter  from  you  saying  you  must  disappoint
us,  as  your  doctor  had  forbidden  you  for  the  present  to  exert  yourself  much
or  to  be  out  in  the  night-air,  my  sister  and  I  called  to-day  to  inquire  after
you.

We  found  you  at  home,  and  you  persuaded  us  to  stay  to  a  short  seance.

Seven  of  us,  including  yourself,  entered  the  dining-room,  which  we
immediately  examined,  looking  under  the  tables  and  sofa,  behind  curtains,
inside  the  chetfonier,  &c.  After  convincing  ourselves  that  nothing  was  con-
cealed, and  you  having  turned  out  your  pockets,  we  locked  the  door,  and
placed  a  sealed  paper  across  it.  We  then  sat  round  the  dining-table,  holding
hands  in  a  circle,  a  musical  box  was  placed  on  the  table,  and  the  gas  turned
out.  In  a  short  time  we  heard  raps  in  various  parts  of  the  room,  a  gong
sounded  in  one  corner,  the  musical-box,  playing,  floated  in  the  air,  and  struck
the  head  of  one  of  our  party.  Several  felt  themselves  touched,  and  one  said
he  distinctly  felt  a  cold  hand  placed  on  his  head.

A  female  head  appeared,  in  a  strong  light,  floating  in  the  air,  and  after-
wards a  half-length  figure  of  a  bearded  man,  in  a  turban,  reading  a  book,
appeared  in  the  same  manner,  bowed  to  some  of  the  assembly,  raised
his  book  above  his  head,  and  floated  about  the  room,  finally  disappearing
through  the  ceilLng  with  a  scraping  noise.  This  all  happened  while  two  of
our  number  tightly  held  your  hands,  and  are  convinced  they  never  relaxed
their  clasp.

On  the  gas  being  relit,  we  found  the  door  still  locked  with  the  paper
unbroken.


484


The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


Trusting  our  visit  did  not  fatigue  you,  and  that  your  proposed  trip  will
soon  restore  you  to  health,  when  we  hope  you  will  resume  your  interesting
investigations,  1  remain,  sincerely  yours,

E.  M.  WiLLSON.

3.  Report  of  Mr.  Rait.

On  Thursday  evening,  the  7th  October,  1886,  I  was  present  at  a  seance
held  by  Mr.  Davey,  at  his  house.  There  were  in  all  eight*  persons,  myself
included.  We  took  our  seats  at  7.30  p.m.,  round  an  ordinarj^  dining-room
table  (in  the  dining-room  of  the  house),  which,  at  Mr.  Davey's  request,  we
examined  cai-efully,  as  also  any  other  objects  in  the  room  which  demanded
our  attention.  The  door  of  the  room  was  locked,  and  I  placed  the  key  in
my  pocket,  it  was  also  sealed  with  a  slip  of  gummed  paper  ;  the  gas  was
then  turned  out,  so  that  we  were  left  in  darkness.  A  musical  box  was
wound  up,  and  set  to  play  an  air,  with  the  object,  as  I  suppose,  to  enliven  the
proceedmgs  !  I  held  Mr.  Davey's  right  hand,  his  left  was  held  by  Mrs.  [John-
son] ;  the  rest  joined  hands,  so  that  during  the  seance  a  continual  chain  was
formed  which  was  maintained  the  whole  time.  After  we  had  remained
some  time  thus,  various  noises  as  of  a  shuffling  of  feet,  &c.,  were  heard  in
difi'erent  parts  of  the  room,  and  I  distinctly  felt  something  grasp  my  right  foot;
almost  immediately  I  was  touched  on  the  forehead  by  a  cold  hand,  which,  at
Mr.  Davey's  request,  also  touched  those  that  wished  it.  The  musical  box
was  lifted,  and  although  it  was  dark  I  fancied  I  saw  it,  surrounded  by  a  pale
light,  descend  through  the  air  ;  it  certainly  struck  me  lightly  on  the  side  of
the  head,  then  it  was  again  raised,  and  deposited  on  the  table.

The  hand  which  touched  me  was  cold  and  clammy;  it  evidently  belonged
to  a  most  courteous  and  obliging  sjDirit,  for  it  did  exactly  what  we  desired  !
and  at  my  wishing  to  feel  the  full  palm  on  the  back  of  my  head  (so  as  to
ascertain  its  shajie  and  size)  it  rested  there  for  fully  three  seconds  ;  it  was,
however,  a  somewhat  weird  experience  !  Various  raps  were  now  heard,  a
gong  sounded  behind  my  back,  and  we  were  told  by  Mr.  Davey  to  pay
attention,  as  something  wonderful  was  about  to  take  place.  Faintly,  but
gradually  growing  more  distinct,  a  bluish  white  light  appeared  hovering
about  our  heads  ;  it  gradually  developed  more  and  more  till  at  length  we
beheld  what  we  were  told  was  the  head  of  a  woman.  This  apparition  was
frightful  in  its  ugliness,  but  so  distinct  that  every  one  could  see  it.  The
features  were  distinct,  the  cheek  bones  prominent,  the  nose  aquiline,  a  kind
of  hood  covered  the  head,  and  the  whole  resembled  the  head  of  a  mummy.
After  favouring  those  of  the  company  who  wished  to  see  its  full  face  by  turn-
ing towards  them,  it  gradually  vanished  in  our  presence.  The  next  spirit  form
was  more  wonderful  still  ;  a  thin  streak  of  light  appeared  behind  Mr.  Davey,
vanished,  appeared  again  in  another  part  of  the  room,  and  by  degrees
developed  into  the  figure  of  a  man.  The  extremities  were  hidden  in  a  kind
of  mist,  but  the  arms,  shoulders  and  head  were  visible.  The  figure  was  that  of
an  Oriental,  a  thick  black  beard  covered  his  face,  his  head  was  surrounded  by  a
turban ;  in  his  hands  he  carried  a  book  whichheoccasionallyheldabove  his  head,
glancing  now  and  then  from  underneath  it. The  face  came  once  so  near  to


*  Seven. See  the  other  reports.— S.  J.  D.


Experimental  Investigation.


485


me  that  it  appeared  to  be  only  two  feet  from  mine.  I  thus  could  examine  it
closely.  The  eyes  were  stony  and  fixed  and  never  moved  once.  The  com-
plexion was  not  dusky,  but  very  white  ;  the  expression  was  vacant  and
listless.  After  remaining  in  the  room  for  a  few  seconds,  or  rather  a  minute,
the  apparition  gradually  rose,  and  appeared  to  pass  clean  through  the  ceiling,
brushing  it  audibly  as  it  passed  through.  The  seance  here  terminated  ;  the
gas  was  turned  on  again,  and  everything  appeared  the  same  as  when  we  first
sat  down  ;  the  door  was  unlocked,  the  seal  being  found  intact.  I  will
mention  that  during  the  whole  of  the  seance  I  held  Mr.  Davey's  right  hand,
with  but  one  exception,  when  it  was  found  necessary  for  him  to  light  the  gas
to  see  to  wind  up  the  musical  box,  as  it  had  stopped  playing.  Noihvng  was
'prepared  beforehand ;  the  seance  vxis  quite  casfial ;  we  could  have  sat  in  any
room  we  wished,  and  we  had  full  liberty  to  examine  everything  in  the  room,
even  to  the  contents  of  Mr.  Davey's  pockets,  which  were  emptied  (before
beginning  the  seance)  by  him  on  the  table  before  our  eyes  !

October  8th,  1886.  John  H.  Rait.


Now  I  should  have  no  hesitation  whatever  in  challenging
Spiritualistic  "  mediums,"  or  any  other  persons,  to  reproduce  the
phenomena  described  in  the  various  reports  which  I  have  quoted,
tmder  the  conditions  described  hy  the  witnesses.  I  need  hardly  say  that
not  one  of  these  detailed  reports  is  accurate  throughout,  and  that
scarcely  one  of  them  is  accurate  in  even  all  the  points  of  importance.
I  think  it  undesirable  at  present  to  publish  the  details  of  my
methods,  but  I  have  communicated  them  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.
Hodgson.  I  have  also  communicated  them  to  Mr.  Angelo  3.  Lewis,
known  under  the  name  of  Professor  Hoffmann  as  the  author  of
several  books  on  conjuring  and  magic.  Mr.  Lewis  sends  me  the
following  statement : —

I  have  read  with  much  interest  the  foregoing  reports  of  sittings  with  Mr.
Davey,  testifying,  as  will  be  seen,  to  occurrences  fully  as  striking  and  ap-
parently abnormal  as  anything  recorded  as  having  taken  place  at  sittings  with
Mr.  Eglinton.  I  have  since  had  the  opportunity  of  discussing  the  matter
in  detail  with  Mr!  Davey,  who  has  indicated  how  far  the  descriptions  of  the
sitters  (though  given  in  all  good  faith)  differ  from  the  actual  occurrences,
and  has  explained  the  various  methods  employed  by  him,  some  of  such
methods  being  those  in  actual  use  by  professional  mediums  in  America  and
elsewhei'e,  and  others  the  outcome  of  his  own  ingenuity.  I  have  been
much  struck  with  their  combined  boldness  and  simplicity,  and  in  view  of
the  complete  illusion  they  admittedly  have  produced  in  so  many  cases,  the
"  doubt"  which  I  expressed  in  the  Jov/rnal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  for  August,  1886,  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  whole  of  the  Eglinton
manifestations  being  produced  by  trickery,  has  been  greatly  shaken.  Mr.
Davey's  successes  prove  that  it  is  possible  for  a  conjurer,  devoting  himself
specially  to slate-writing feats, to produce,  under  the same  external

2  K


486  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


conditions,  results  of  precisely  the  same  kind  and  quality  as  those  produced  by
the  professed  medium.  Indeed,  in  so  far  as  the  conditions  vary  at  all,  they  are
greatly  in  favour  of  the  j^rofessional  medium,  first,  by  reason  of  the  prestige
derived  from  his  claim  to  supernatural  powers  ;  and,  secondly,  by  reason  of
his  cherished  privilege  of  producing  no  results  at  all  unless  he  may
consider  it  perfectly  safe  to  do  so.

I  am  not  at  liberty  to  divulge  Mr.  Davey's  methods,  nor  would  any  good
purpose  be  served  by  doing  so  ;  but  I  willingly  certify,  for  the  benefit  of
any  person  who  may  stUl  entertain  a  doubt  upon  the  matter,  that  his
"  manifestations"  are  in  every  case  produced  by  perfectlj'  natural  means,
no  Spiritualistic  or  other  unknown  force  having  any  part  in  them.

Angelo  J.  Lewis.
("  Professor  Hoffmann.")

Enough  has  been  said,  in  the  notes  to  the  reports,  to  suggest  to  the
reader  how  wide  a  margin  must  be  allowed  for  the  possibilities  of
misdescription  in  the  numerous  records  to  be  found  in  Spiritualistic
literature,  of  occurrences  described  in  much  the  same  manner  as  those
which  I  produced  by  trickery.  It  seems  to  me  not  improbable  that
had  I  claimed  the  agency  of  "  spirits,"  the  effect  upon  many  of  my
sitters  would  have  been  yet  more  impressive,  and  their  reports
"would  have  been  still  more  wonderful.  But  my  position  debarred
me  from  more  than  one  advantage  which  has  been  used,  I  believe,  by
many  a  trickster  "  medium."  I  was  unwilling,  for  instance,  to  trade
upon  their  emotions  by  professing  to  give  messages  from  dead  relatives
and  friends,  as  I  might  in  many  instances  have  done — thus  rendering
the  recipients  of  such  messages  less  capable  as  observers  of  the
phenomena,  and  more  prejudiced  in  favour  of  their  genuineness.  I
should  find  it  very  difficult  myself  to  draw  any  line  as  to  the  possi-
bilities of  mal-observation  and  lapse  of  memory  in  hond  fide  witnesses
beyond  saying  that  I  should  allow  for  at  least  as  much  as  may  be
exemplified  in  the  foregoing  reports.

I  may  here  again  remind  my  readers  that  it  was  not  as  a  sceptic,
but  as  a  believer  in  "  psychography,"  that  I  originally  approached
this  investigation  as  to  the  results  that  might  be  produced  by  conjuring.
I  gradually  became  convinced  that  my  belief  in  "  psychography "
was  unjustified,  that  I  could  not  attribute  any  value  to  the  records  of
sittings  which  I  had  with  a  professional  medium  in  1884,  without
claiming  a  superiority  which  undoubtedly  does  not  exist,  to  the
numerous  witnesses  of  my  own  phenomena.

In  some  of  my  earlier  experiments  I  believed  that  there  were
indications  of  thought-transference  between  myself  and  my  sitters.
My  later  sittings  have  offered  no  support  to  this  view,  but,  owing
partly  to  my  inexperience,  I  laboured  sometimes  under  considerable
nervous  excitement  in  my  earlier  sittings,  and  I  have  not  felt  this
latterly. This  may  have  conduced  to  what  occasionally  seemed  to  me


Experimental  Investigation.


487


to  be  a  certain  amount  of  community  of  thought  between  my  sitters
and  myself,  and  I  hope  at  some  time  to  make  a  special  series  of
experiments  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  my  conjecture
is  well  founded  or  not.

In  conclusion,  I  may  say  that  the  results  of  my  investigation  as  to
the  possibilities  of  conjuring  in  relation  to  "  psychography  "  have  been
a  revelation  to  myself  no  less  than  to  others.  I  am  aware  that  in
addition  to  the  methods  which  I  have  employed  for  producing  "  slate-
writing,"  there  are  other  methods,  which  I  know  to  be  conjuring,  but
which  have  not  yet  been  shown  to  me ;  and  I  should  certainly  not  be
convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  Spiritualistic  phenomena  of  this  kind
by  any  testimony  such  as  I  have  seen  recently  published  in  great
abundance,  which  presents  so  many  close  analogies  to  the  reports  of  my
own  conjuring  performances.


APPENDIX.

Notes  to  Sitting  I.
By  S.  J.  Davey.
[From  notes  made  September  19th,  1886.]

1.  Although  Mr.  Rait's  slates  did  not  leave  the  room  during  the  seance,
one  of  them  was  left  unguarded  on  the  table  on  one  occasion  for  about  sixty
seconds.

2.  The  chalks  had  been  taken  out  of  the  box  before  the  seance.

3.  This  was  not  invariably  the  case  ;  Mr.  Rait  examined  the  chalks  on
only  two  or  three  occasions.

4.  I  put  the  slate  below  the  table,  and  after  a  while  I  asked  Mr.  Rait  to
help  me  to  hold  it.

5.  Immediately  should  be  about  four  minutes  after  the  questioii  was  ashed  ;
another  writing  was  produced  in  the  interval.  See  Mr.  Limmer's  report
[c.c.].

6.  It  was  J,  not  Mr.  Rait,  who  suggested  the  change.

7.  There  is  no  mention,  in  either  account,  of  my  manipulations  of  the
slates  after  the  experiment  [g]  was  decided  upon.

8.  Mr.  Rait  omits  to  mention  that  this  question  had  been  asked  early  in
the  sitting. See  Mr.  Limmer's  report  [e],

9.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  message  Mr.  Rait  opened  his  envelope  and  I
saw  "September,"  and  was  therefore  able  to  impart  this  information  on  a
slate  later  on.

10.  I  "  led  up  to  "  this  request  by  Mr.  Rait.


488  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  Sc.


11.  It  is  obvious  tliat  a  few  words  or  sentences,  or,  if  required,  a  long
message,  can  be  produced  on  special  occasions,  from  languages  unfamiliar  to
the  "  medium."

12.  Mr.  Rait  did  not  take  projjer  precautions  for  identifying  the  pencil.

13.  It  was  a  single  slate  that  was  used  in  experiment  [l]  ;  see  Mr.  Halt's,
report.


Notes  to  Sitting  IL.
By  Richaed  Hodgson.
[From  notes  made  September  17th,  1886.]

1.  Mrs.  Y.  does  not  mention  that  the  slate  was  withdrawn  more  than
once  and  placed  on  the  table,  and  slie  apparently  did  not  observe  what  D..
did  with  the  slate  on  these  occasions  in  the  act  of  placing  it  under  the  table
again,  and  before  Miss  Y.,  who  relinquished  hold  when  the  slate  was  on  the
table,  again  took  hold  of  it.

Mrs.  Y  also  does  not  say  what  the  questions  were.  One  of  them,  asked
by  Mr.  Y.,  was,  "  On  what  day  do  we  sail  for  America  ?  "  and  another,  asked
by  herself,  was,  "  Have  I  got  over-shoes  on  ?  "  It  is  noteworthy  that  later  a
reply  was  obtained  to  this  first  question,  which  D.  requested  Mr.  Y.  to
repeat.

2.  It  was,  however,  written  in  an  ordinary  way.  It  was  not  the  case  that
neither  Mr.  D.  's  hand  nor  Miss  Y.  's  moved  in  the  least  the  whole  time.  Part
of  the  conjuring  ojjeration  took  place  while  Miss  Y.  was  holding  the
slate,  and  while  the  thumbs  of  D.  and  Miss  Y.  were  both  visible,  but
another  part  of  the  operation  took  place  in  the  intervals  when  Miss  Y.  was
■nut  holding  the  slate.

3.  Mrs.  Y.  might  have  added  that  three  more  candles  were  burning  on
the  mantel-piece,  and  a  lamp  turned  to  the  full  on  an  adjoining  table.

4.  I  incline  to  think  that  D.  walked  with  Miss  Y.  close  to  the  bookcase,
and  waved  liis  hand,  requesting  Miss  Y.  to  choose  a  book.

[I  did  not  remember  this  incident  clearly  when  I  made  my  note,  my
attention  having  been  drawn  elsewhere  wliile  Miss  Y.  was  making  her
selection.  But  I  learn  from  Mr.  Davey  that  I  saw  correctly.  I  remember
that  after  the  writing  had  been  jiroduced,  Mr.  Y.  asked  Miss  Y.  if  she  had
gone  alone  to  the  bookcase,  and  she  replied  that  she  had,  and  that  Mr.
Davey  had  remained  by  the  table  with  his  back  towards  her.  Hence,
probably,  the  agreement  of  the  reports  in  the  erroneous  statement.  I
conjecture  that  Miss  Y.  transposed  Mr.  Davey's  actions  on  the  two  separate
occasions  of  her  choice  of  a  book.  On  the  occasion  of  her  first  choice  I
believe  Mr.  Davey  did  remain  close  to  the  table  as  she  describes.]

5.  Miss  Y.  had  thouglit  of  page  1,  but  no  quotation  had  been  given
from  this  page.

6.  This  statement  is  erroneous.  Mrs.  Y.  had  not  the  slate  under  her  eye
the  whole  time,  nor  was  it  the  case  that  either  her  daughter's  hand  or  her
own  was  placed  upon  it  continuously.

7.  This  statement  also  is  erroneous. The  slates  used  in  the  experiment


Experimental  Investigation.


489


were,  indeed,  those  which  Mr.  Y.  had  brought  with  him,  but  they  were
taken  and  placed  together  by  Mr.  Davey.

8.  Mrs.  Y.'s  hand  was  removed  from  the  slates  during  the  exj^eriment.

9.  After  the  figure  had  been  drawn  and  the  name  of  the  colour  written
in  the  locked  slate  (away  from  the  table,  and  out  of  the  sight  of  D.)  by  Mr.
and  Miss  Y.,  Mr.  Y.  named  the  colour  (only)  aloud,  at  Mr.  D.'s  request.

10.  Miss  Y.  does  not  mention  the  previous  withdrawals  of  the  slate.  See
note  2,  and  Mr.  Y's.  report  [«].

11.  Miss  Y.  herself  took  the  slate  in  her  own  hand  with  her  to  the
bookcase,  and  brought  it  back  to  the  table,  without  relinquishing  hold.  She
has  thus  here  forgotten  a  precaution  which  she  really  took.

12.  Miss  Y. 's  remembrance  is  here  incorrect.

13.  Miss  Y.  wrote  her  description  of  this  from  her  recollection  of  the
figure  seen  on  the  slate  the  night  before,  and  she  stated,  after  looking  at  the
slate,  that  she  had  in  memory  confused  the  white  and  the  so-called  green
(which  in  daylight  is  at  once  seen  to  be  blue).  The  long  mark  was  blue,  the
short  one  was  white .

14.  I  think  that  two  out  of  the  three  books  originally  chosen  had  been
previously  replaced,  the  one  chosen  by  Miss  Y.  being  one  of  them.

15.  I  chose  mine  by  requesting  Mr.  Y.  to  take  a  number  of  chips  of
pencil  at  random  out  of  the  box,  which  he  did,  the  numbers  giving  7
and  9.

16.  Each  wrote  down  on  a  slate  the  page  and  line  he  or  she  had  chosen,
so  that  D.  could  not  see  it,  and  then  placed  the  slate,  writing  downwards,  on
the  table  under  his  or  her  own  charge.  The  numbers  chosen  were  not
spoken  aloud  till  after  the  final  opening  of  the  slate.

17.  The  slate  was  not  guarded  continuously  during  the  interval  between
the  examination  and  the  final  opening.

18.  I  consider  that  the  figure  was  a  manifest  attempt  at  a  cross,  three  of
the  limbs  being  clear,  the  fourth  being  only  a  scrawl.  The  marks  forming
the  "  cross  "  were  in  blue  and  white  ;  there  was  also  a  red  track  on  the  slate.

19.  I  have  heard  Mr.  Y.  's  explanations,  but  with  the  very  jjartial  excep-
tion of  a  portion  of  one  of  them  they  were  incorrect,  and  I  believe  that
there  was  no  thought-transference.

The  reader  should  remember  that  the  object  of  the  notes  to  the  various
reports  is  not,  of  course,  to  supply  all  their  deficiencies,  or  even  to  point  out
all  the  errors  and  omissions  noticed  therein  by  Mr.  Davey  and  myself.  Some
of  these  errors  and  omissions  the  reader  may  discover  for  himself  by  a  com-
parison of  independent  reports  of  the  same  sitting.  Let  him  compare,  for
example,  the  three  descriptions  of  [e]  in  Sitting  II. ,  bearing  in  mind  that  Mr.
Y.  knew  all  along  that  the  performances  were  conjuring,  that  Miss  Y.  knew
this  only  just  before  writing  her  report,  and  that  Mrs.  Y.  did  not  know  it
until  her  report  had  been  written.  I  agreed  with  Mrs.  Y.  that  some  of  the
other  chalks  moved,  besides  the  red  piece,  and  that  the  figure  produced  on
the  slate  was  clearly  intended  for  a  cross  (and  Mr.  Davey  afterwards  assured
me  that  he  had  intended  to  draw  a  cross),  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Y.'s
description  of  the  incident  unduly  diminishes  the  "marvel"  of  the  phe-
nomenon, just  as  Mrs.  Y.'s  unduly  increases  it.


490  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  &c.


Notes  to  Sitting  III.
By  Richaed  Hodgson.
[From  notes  made  September  13-15 th,  1886.]

1.  This  was  not  the  case.  The  slate  was  sometimes  lying  on  the  table,
with  Mr.  Legge's  hand  upon  it;  and  he  lost  perception  of  it  for  a  short  period,
notwithstanding  his  vigilance.

2.  Mr.  Davey  took  the  slate  and  asked  Mr.  Legge  to  hold  it  under  the
table  with  him.  After  a  short  time  the  slate  was  withdrawn  by  both  of  them
at  Mr.  Davey's  suggestion,  but  no  wi-iting  was  found  upon  it.  When  Mr.
Davey,  alone,  took  hold  of  the  slate  again  to  place  it  under  the  table,  he
used  an  opportunity,  and  Mr.  Legge  did  not  observe  what  was  done.  These
circumstances  are  omitted  from  Mr.  Legge's  report.  The  withdrawal  which
in  his  report  appears  to  have  been  the  first,  was  in  reality  the  second.

3.  Mr.  Legge  did  not  act  precisely  as  before.  On  the  second  and  third
occasions  on  which  the  slate  was  placed  under  the  table,  Mr  Legge  did  not
take  hold  of  it  until  after  it  had  been  placed  there  by  Mr.  Davey.

4.  Mr.  Legge  omits  to  notice  that  Mr.  Davey  had  asked  a  question  as  to
whether  any  manifestations  could  be  obtained.

5.  The  slate  was  neither  selected  nor  placed  by  Mr.  Legge.  Mr.  Davey
first  placed  some  coloured  nibs  of  chalk  on  the  table  just  in  front  of  Mr.
Legge.  He  then  took  one  of  his  own  slates  which  Mr.  Legge  had  not
touched,  and  apparently  sponged  both  sides  thoroughly.  Mr.  Davey  himself
then  placed  the  slate  over  the  pieces  of  chalk,  and  asked  Mr.  Legge  to  place
his  hand  upon  the  slate. Mr.  Legge  then  for  the  first  time  touched  the  slate.

6.  Mr.  Legge  has  omitted  to  mention  more  than  one  important  previous
detail  concerning  the  locked  slate.  After  locking  it,  he  first,  at  Mr.  Davey's
request,  put  it  in  his  pocket,  also  the  key.  Later  on,  he  was  requested  by
Mr.  Davey  to  bring  it  out  and  place  it  on  the  table  and  put  his  hand  upon  it,
first  opening  it  to  see  if  any  writing  was  in  it,  and  locking  it  again,  and
taking  possession  of  the  key.  It  lay  on  the  table  thus  some  time,  and  Mr.
Davey  found  an  opportunity  of  manipulating  it.  (See  Note  1.)  Mr.  Legge's
great  care  over  some  precautions  was  the  very  cause  of  his  neglect  of  others.

7.  In  addition  to  the  lamp,  there  were  four  candles  burning  the  whole
time.  Three  of  them  were  on  the  mantel-piece.  I  do  not  recollect  whether
the  fourth  was  on  the  mantel-piece  or  on  one  of  the  tables.


Notes  to  Sitting  IV.
By  Richard  Hodgson.

[From  notes  made  September  22nd,  1886.]

1.  The  slates  were  both  of  them  Mr.  Padshah's,  but  I  cannot  recollect  that
either  of  them  was  washed  by  any  person,  and  I  find  upon  inspection — as
they  are  still  in  my  possession — that  they  were  certainly  not  washed.


Experimental  Investigation.


491


2.  Mr.  Padshah  has  omitted  to  mention  myself.  I  sat  between  Mr.
Russell  and  Hughes.

3.  I  do  not  myself  remember.  Mr.  Russell  states  that  it  was  washed  by
Mr.  Davey,  and  Mrs.  Russell  states  that  it  was  washed  by  Mr.  Padshah
himself.

4.  I  thought  the  selection  at  that  time  had  reference  to  the  writing  on
the  slate  held  underneath  the  table.

5.  See  note  15.

6.  Mr.  Padshah  does  not  say  that  it  was  Mr.  Davey  who  suggested  that
writing  between  the  two  slates  should  be  asked  for.

7.  The  word  really  written,  as  I  learn  from  Mr.  Davey,  was  "Books,"
and  was  thus  curiously  misread  by  Mr.  Padshah,  who  had,  he  tells  us  near  the
beginning  of  his  report,  suggested  the  importance  of  getting  "  my  own  name
— not  surname — which  no  one  excef)t  myself  in  the  room  knew."  I  believe
that  no  one  in  the  room  except  Mr.  Padshah  knew  that  his  initial  name  was
Boorzu,  in  the  original  Persian.  Mr.  Davey  had  written  "  Books"  in  order
to  suggest  the  experiment  with  a  book,  which  was  afterwards  carried  out.
Mr.  Padshah  had  apparently  been  much  impressed  with  the  idea  of  getting
his  first  name  written,  and  it  is  no  matter  for  surprise  that,  with  such  a
dominant  idea,  he  should  interpret  a  scrawly  Books  into  a  Boorz.  It  was
just  Mr.  Padshah's  devotion  to  his  test  that  produced  the  illusion.

8.  Not  cracks,  but  a  peculiar  chip  in  the  frame  on  one  side,  which  I  had
observed  closely  when  Mr.  Padshah  first  showed  me  his  slates.

9.  Mr.  Padshah  had  not  examined  them.

10.  What  Mr.  Padshah  describes  as  a  "  push  "  was  merely  the  result  of
the  shaking  of  Mr.  Davey 's  hands  in  his  endeavour  to  produce  the  appearance
of  "  convulsive  movements."

11.  None  of  Mr.  Padshah's  colleagues  expressed  any  opinion  as  to  the
manner  of  the  production  of  the  writing,  and  it  was  explained  before  the
seance  that  the  reports  written  should  be  as  indei^endent  as  joossible.

12.  Notwithstanding  Mr.  Padshah's  confidence  on  this  point,  this  ' '  con-
temptible "  theory  is  the  true  one  ;  his  attention  was  actually  diverted
from  the  locked  slate,  and  for  some  time  he  entirely  lost  perception  of  it
although  it  was  then  lying  on  the  table.  His  confidence  on  this  point  is  a
striking  illustration  of  the  influence  of  temporary  forgetfulness,  which  not
improbably  would  have  become  permanent  had  he  not,  after  giving  me  his
report,  made  further  efibrts  of  recollection  after  I  had  told  him  that  the
slate-writing  was  due  to  conjuring.  He  wrote  his  report  on  the  night  of  the
sitting,  beginning  shortly  after  tlie  sitting  was  over.  He  gave  me  his  report
as  soon  as  he  had  finished  it,  and  I  then  assured  him  that  the  slate-writing
in  every  case  was  the  result  of  conjuring,  that  the  writing  on  the  slate  was
not  "  precipitated,"  but  was  ordinary  writing  with  a  slate  pencil,  and  that  he
had  actually  lost  sight  of  the  slate  during  the  sitting.  He  then  endeavoured
again  to  recall  the  events  of  the  sitting,  and  succeeded  eventually  in  recol-
lecting the  particular  occasion  when  an  opportunity  was  given  to  Mr.  Davey
of  dealing  with  the  locked  slate  unobserved.

[I  did  not  then  inform  Mr.  Padshah  whether  he  was  right  or  not  in  this
recollection,  and  his  temporary  forgetfulness  lias  become  permanent.
Apparently  he  afterwards  quite  forgot  the  occasion  when  he  gave  Mr.  Davey


492  The  Possihilities  of  Mal-Ohservation,  &c.


the  opportunity  to  produce  the  message,  and  he  wrote  to  me  on  November
21st  1886:  "  I  now  imagine  Davey  wrote  while  he  studiously  directed  my
attention  to  a  variety  of  books,  and  naturally  absent-minded,  my  attention
was  absorbed  with  a  view  to  make  a  judicious  selection,  thus  withdrawing  my
eye  from  the  slate  itself.  Whether  it  is  so  or  not,  I  think  it  is  more  than
possible  it  might  have  been  done  that  way."  During  this  incident,  however,
—unfortunately  for  Mr.  Davey— Mr.  Padshah  had  taken  the  locked  slate  with
him  and  carefully  guarded  it ;  see  Mr.  Russell's  report  [g].  ]

13  I  learn  from  Mr.  Padshah  that  he  has  had  sittings  with  Eglmton
when  "  phenomena  "  occurred,  that  he  was  not  convinced  by  them  "of  some-
thing abnormal,"  and  that  he  was  much  more  impressed  by  the  sitting  with

Mr.  Davey.  i i  n

14.  Mr.  Russell  took  very  little  share  in  the  talking,  and  can  be  hardly

said  to  have  joined  in  the  conversation  at  all  !

15  Mr.  Russell  here  states  that  the  "Yes  "  and  the  "  6  "  were  found  at
the  same  time  on  the  slate.  My  remembrance  as  to  this  point  is  not  vivid,
but  it  a<^rees  with  Mr.  Russell's.  From  Mr.  Padshah's  report  it  would  appear
that  there  were  two  withdrawals,  the  first  for  the  "6,"  the  second  for  tlie
"Yes  "  Mrs  Russell  also  makes  two  withdrawals,  but  reverses  the  sequence,
taking  the  first  for  the  yes,  and  the  second  for  the  "6."  The  circumstances
occurred,  I  think,  in  the  following  order  :—

Mr.  Padshah  was  in  the  first  place  asked  to  think  of  a  number  ;  later,
Mr.  Davey  put  the  question  as  to  whether  there  would  be  any  manifestations.
When  the  slate  was  withdrawn,  the  yes  was  first  observed,  then  the  6.

16.  Mr.  Russell  makes  this  statement  as  though  he  had  read  and  distin-
guished the  letters  himself,  which  I  believe  was  not  the  case.  [I  have  since
learnt  that  he  did  not  see  the  word  at  all,  as  it  was  so  hastily  wiped  away

by  Mr.  Davey.]  , •  .

17.  I  think  that  Mr.  Davey  turned  the  two  slates  over  together  m  the  act
of  placinc'  them  on  Mr.  Padshah's  shoulder,  not  in  the  act  of  replacing  them
on  the  table.  [Mr.  Davey  tells  me  that  Mr.  Russell  is  right  ;  Mr.  Hughes
agreed  with  me.]

18.  Blue. See  Note  22.

19.  Mr.  Russell  made  a  very  few  brief  notes  during  the  sitting,  but  did
not  use  these  in  writing  his  report.

20  There  is  a  drawer  at  one  end  only  of  the  table.  Mrs.  Russell  probably
inferred  that  there  was  a  drawer  at  the  other  end,  where,  however,  the  table
has  never  been  fitted  for  a  drawer.  The  table  is  perfectly  honest,  and  the
drawer  has  never  been  used  by  Mr.  Davey.

21.  It  was  Mr.  Russell  who  chose  red,  and  Mrs.  Russell  adopted  his

choice.

22.  There  were  chalks  of  five  colours  between  the  slates,  red,  green,  blue,
yeUow,  and  white.  The  "blue"  writing  afterwards  exhibited  appeared  in  the
then  light  to  be  of  a  greenish  tinge,  and  as  attention  was  drawn  to  the  writing's
behig  green,  Mr.  Davey  abstracted  the  blue  piece  of  chalk  that  had  been
betwl^en  the  slates,  probably  so  that  if  investigation  of  the  chalks  were  made,
it  might  be  said  that  as  there  was  no  blue  between  the  slates,  green  had  been
used.  In  daylight  the  writing  was  at  once  seen  to  be  blue.  Mr.  Davey's
manipulation  of  the  chalks  was  not  observed  by  any  of  the  other  sitters,  and


Experimental  Investigation.


493


1  mention  it  as  typical  of  many  incidents  which  occurred  at  the  sittings  where
I  was  present,  and  which  in  some  cases  were  of  the  utmost  importance,  but
"were  entirely  unnoticed  by  even  the  keenest  of  the  uninitiated  witnesses.


Notes  to  Sitting  VIII.
By  R.  Hodgsox  and  J.  M.  Dodds.

1.  I  had  some  conversation  with  Mr.  Dodds  on  the  day  after  he  finished
his  report,  and  notwithstanding  his  close  observation  during  the  sitting,  and
the  great  care  which  he  had  taken  to  record  accurately  the  events  which  he
had  witnessed,  he  agreed  with  me  concerning  particular  lapses  of  observation
and  memory,  which  have  produced  some  errors  in  his  report.  That  he  did  not
discover  Mr.  Davey's  modus  operm^di  in  producing  the  writing  was  due  chiefly
to  mal-observation,  but  mal-observation  of  a  kind  that  perhaps  the  keenest
uninitiated  witness  would  find  it  almost  impossible  to  avoid.  Mr.  Dodds  at
one  time  or  another  had  lost  perception  of  each  slate  upon  which  writing  was
produced.  One  of  the  instances  of  lapse  of  memory  is  worth  specifying
because  it  illustrates  tendencies  to  which  I  have  previously  adverted, — the
tendency  to  minimise  the  marvel  of  a  phenomenon  known  to  be  due  to
conjuring,  and,  possibly,  the  tendency  to  represent  a  subsequent  impression
as  having  been  experienced  during  the  sitting.

The  word  Yes  found  written  upon  the  slate  was  the  word  desired  by  Mr.
Dodds  himself,  his  question  on  the  double-slate  having  been  given  up  for  the
time  for  the  express  purpose  of  obtaining  some  simple  phenomenon  which
was  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  test,  but  merely  as  a  "  start."  Mr.  Davey  had
suggested  that  we  should  try  to  get  some  simple  word  written  such  as  no  or
yes,  that  if  writing  once  began,  we  should  probably  "get  plenty  of  it,"  and
test  questions  could  be  attempted  later.  Mr.  Dodds  assented  to  this.  Hence
neither  Mr.  Davey  nor  myself  expected  Mr.  Dodds  to  be  specially  influenced
by  the  production  of  the  word,  though  he  appeared  to  be  much  more
impressed  in  the  first  instance  than  he  afterwards,  when  writing  his  report,
supposed  himself  to  have  been. — R.  H.

On  talking  over  the  sitting  with  Mr.  Hodgson,  two  days  afterwards,
I  agreed  with  him  that  in  my  account  of  the  production  of  the  word  "  Yes,"
my  memory  played  me  false,  and  I  unconsciously  minimised  the  result ;  and
that  his  account  given  above  is  the  correct  one. — J.  M.  D.

2.  This  happened  accidentally,  and  it  was  Mr.  Davey  who  drew  attention
to  it.  J.  M.  D.

3.  I  chose  this  book  because  I  happened  to  have  been  reading  another  of
Taine's  books  in  my  chambers  on  the  morning  of  the  day  of  my  sitting.

J.  M.  D.

4.  At  this  stage,  had  Mr.  Davey  been  a  professional  medium,  he  would
perhaps  have  expressed  surprise  at  the  prematurely  discovered  writing,  and
passed  it  off  as  an  unexpected  production  of  the  "spirits,"  remarking  that
the  sound  of  the  writing  was  not  always  heard  by  the  sitters,  and  that  oven
the  medium  himself  could  not  always  tell  when  it  was  being  produced.  It


494  The  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation,  <&c.


would  have  been  difficult  for  Mr.  Dodds  to  have  explained  how,  under  the
conditions  as  described  by  him,  the  writing,  covering  a  side  of  one  of  his  own
slates,  could  by  any  possibility  have  been  produced  by  Mr.  Davey  himself.

R.  H.


Notes  to  Sitting  XIV.
By Richard  Hodgson.

[From  notes  made  March  2Gth,  1887.]

1.  According  to  my  recollection,  Mr.  Davey  used  both  hands  in  placing
the  slates  under  the  table,  and  again  in  the  course  of  replacing  them  upon  the
table,  but  his  left  hand  did  not  remain  below  the  table  in  any  instance  for  a
longer  interval  than — I  should  name  as  a  maximum  limit — ten  seconds.

2.  The  word  "  Commandment  "  ends  at  the  edge  of  the  slate,  but  it  begins
very  nearly  at  the  centre  of  the  slate,  and  is  written  almost  parallel  with  the
longer  axis  of  the  slate,  traversing  rather  more  than  half  the  length  of  the
slate  surface.  The  scrawled  words  "  Seventy-seven  "  are  written  diagonally,
very  nearly  across  the  centre  of  the  slate,  and  the  number  77  is  in  a  similar
position  on  the  other  side  of  the  centre.  The  writing  intended  for  Hong-
Kong  is  in  a  position  somewhat  to  the  right  of  the  centre.  The  slates  are
still  in  my  possession.


Notes  to  Sitting  XV.
By  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

1.  According  to  my  independent  notes  (made  Nov.  17th,  1885),  the
locked  slate  was  at  this  period  examined  and  was  blank.

2.  According  to  my  notes  "this  moment"  was  of  sufficient  duration  to
give  plenty  of  time  and  opjjortunity  to  write  the  message.

3.  I  infer  from  my  notes  and  recollection  that  no  examination  of  the  slate
was  made  at  this  period,  for  I  had  in  my  mind  at  the  time  two  possible  ex-
planations of  the  trick,  and  any  such  examination  would  have  been  incom-
patible with  either.  Moreover,  Mr.  Davey  assures  me  that  from  the  way  in
which  the  trick  actually  was  done  he  knows  that  the  slate  cannot  have  been
examined  at  this  point.  Miss  Symons  must  have  transposed  the  examination
which  I  record  as  having  taken  place  earlier  (see  Note  1),  to  this  period.


Notes  to  Sitting  XVI.

By  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

1.  According  to  my  notes  (made  Feb.  23rd,  1886),  Mr.  Davey  had  one
round-cornered  slate  among  his,  tliough  I  noticed,  as  I  thought,  decided
differences  between  it  and  Miss  Symons'. This  is  worth  mentioning,  as


Experimental  Investigation.


495


showing  a  difference  of  opinion  on  a  point  which  we  both  thought  we  observed
particularly.  Besides  omissions,  there  are  at  least  two  important  positive
misdescriptions,  which  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  specify  further,  in  Miss
Symons'  account  of  the  first  incident  of  the  seance.  I  well  remember
the  impression  which  this  incident  made  on  me  at  the  time.  1  could
not  make  it  out  at  all.  I  believe  1  thought  it  more  puzzling  than  any
professed  Spiritualistic  phenomena  I  have  seen,  assuming  these  latter  to
be  conjuring.  There  seemed  less  possibility  of  its  having  been  done  by  con-
juring. The  hypothesis  of  the  change  of  slates,  which  at  first  did  not  seem
to  be  possible — and  which  was,  in  fact,  as  Mr.  Davey  assures  me,  erroneous —
never  seemed  plausible  ;  only  I  was  unable  to  think  of  any  other  explanation
at  aU.  The  reason  it  puzzled  me  so  much  was  that,  I  thought  I  knew  pretty
well  the  possibilities  of  slate-writing,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  loop-hole
here  for  any  of  them.  It  may  interest  the  reader  to  compare  my  own
account  of  the  incident  ; —

"  Miss  Symons'  two  slates  were  held  together  on  the  table  and  under  the
table  by  her  and  Mr.  Davey.  Then  one  of  Mr.  Davey's  square-cornered
slates  was  substituted  for  one  of  them  ;  then  again  removed  and  the  two
round-cornered  ones  again  held,  on  the  ground  that  though  it  might  be  easier
to  get  writing  on  Mr.  Davey's  slate,  it  would  be  more  satisfactory  to  get  it  on
Miss  Sj'mons'.  We  waited  a  considerable  time.  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to
draw  the  curtains  between  the  two  rooms.  Then  we  again  sat  as  before  ;  the
two  slates  on  one  another  on  the  table  and  our  hands  on  them.  The  sound  of
writing  was  heard,  and,  presently,  on  looking  between  the  two  slates,  one  of
them  was  found  to  be  written  on  all  over  one  side.  I  cannot  remember  eveiy
detail  of  what  occurred,  but  the  impression  produced  on  my  mind  most  dis-
tinctly was  that  one  of  M  iss  Symons'  slates  had  been  written  on  all  over  one
side  [the  impression  was  so  far  true],  and  that  there  had  been  no  possible
opportunity  for  Mr.  Davey  to  have  done  this.  The  slate  seemed  to  have
been  on  the  table  with  our  hands  on  it  from  the  moment  we  had  seen  it
clean.  I  do  not  know  what  happened  while  I  drew  the  curtain,  but  cannot
conceive  its  having  been  done  then.  Mr.  Davey  and  Miss  Symons  still  sat
at  the  table,  and  even  if  there  had  been  opportunity  there  was  no  tune."

2.  According  to  my  notes  it  was  for  the  first  of  the  three  book  experi-
ments that  the  paper  and  lead  pencil  were  used,  and  Mr.  Davey  agreed  with
me.  The  paper  was  S.P.R.  paper,  and  Mr.  Davey  tore  off  a  corner  for  further
identification.

3.  "  Another  trick  "  was  Mr.  Davey's  own  expression.

4.  The  word  was,  however,  then  already  on  the  slate.


496


Multiplex  Personality.


VII.

MULTIPLEX  PERSONALITY.  -
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

"Oacrov  y  atCkoioi  fj.€Td(j)vv,  Toarov  ap  (T<^i,aiv  ah\

KoX  TO  djoovelv  aSXoia  TVaplcTTaro.  -r-,

Lmpedocles.

I  purpose  in  this  paper  briefly  to  suggest  certain  topics  for
reflection, — topics  which  will  need  to  be  more  fully  worked  out  else-
where. My  theme  is  the  multiplex  and  mutable  character  of  that
which  we  know  as  the  Personality  of  man,  and  the  practical  advantage
which  we  may  gain  by  discerning  and  working  upon  this  as  yet
unrecognised  modifiability.  I  shall  begin  by  citing  a  few  examples  of
hysterical  transfer,  of  morbid  disintegration  ;  I  shall  then  show  that
these  spontaneous  readjustments  of  man's  being  are  not  all  of  them
pathological  or  retrogressive  ;  nay,  that  the  familiar  changes  of  sleep
and  waking  contain  the  hint  of  further  alternations  which  may  be
beneficially  acquired.  And,  lastly,  I  shall  point  out  that  we  can
already  by  artificial  means  induce  and  regulate  some  central  nervous
changes  which  efiect  physical  and  moral  good  ;  changes  which  may  be
more  restorative  than  s'eep,  more  rapid  than  education.  Here,  I  shall
urge,  is  an  avenue  open  at  once  to  scientific  and  to  philanthropic
endeavour,  a  hope  which  hangs  neither  on  fable  nor  on  fancy,  but  is
based  on  actual  experience  and  consists  with  rational  conceptions  of
the  genesis  and  evolution  of  man.

I  begin,  then,  with  one  or  two  examples  of  the  pitch  to  which  the
dissociation  of  memories,  faculties,  sensibilities  may  be  carried,  without
resulting  in  mere  insane  chaos,  mere  demented  oblivion.  These  cases
as  yet  are  few  in  number.  It  is  only  of  late  years — and  it  is  mainly
in  France — that  savants  have  recorded  with  due  care  those  psychical
lessons,  deeper  than  any  art  of  our  own  can  teach  us,  which  natural
anomalies  and  aberrant  instances  aff'ord.

Pre-eminent  among  the  priceless  living  documents  which  nature
thus  oflfers  to  our  study  stand  the  singular  personages  known  as
Louis  Y.  and  Felida  X.  Felida's  name  at  least  is  probably  familiar  to
most  of  my  readers ;  but  Louis  Y.'s  case  is  little  known,  and  although
some  account  of  it  has  already  been  given  in  English,  ^  it  will  be


1  Journal  of  Metital  Science  for  January,  1886.  Proceedings  of  the
S.  P.  P.,  Part  X.,  1886.


Multiplex  Personality.


497


needful  to  recall  certain  particulars  in  order  to  introduce  the  specula-
tions which  follow.

Louis  V.  began  life  (in  1863)  as  the  neglected  child  of  a
turbulent  mother.  He  was  sent  to  a  reformatory  at  ten  years  old,
and  there  showed  himself,  as  hs  has  always  done  when  his  organisa-
tion has  given  him  a  chance,  quiet,  well-behaved,  and  obedient.
Then  at  fourteen  years  old  he  had  a  great  fright  from  a  viper — a
fright  which  threw  him  off"  his  balance  and  started  the  series  of
psychical  oscillations  on  which  he  has  been  tossed  ever  since.  At
tirst  the  symptoms  were  only  physical,  epilepsy  and  hysterical  paralysis
of  the  legs  ;  and  at  the  asylum  of  Bonneval,  whither  he  was  next
sent,  he  worked  at  tailoring  steadily  for  a  couple  of  months.  Then
suddenly  he  had  a  hystero-epileptic  attack — fifty  hours  of  convulsions
and  ecstasy — and  when  he  awoke  from  it  he  was  no  longer  paralysed,
no  longer  acquainted  with  tailoring,  and  no  longer  virtuous.  His
memory  was  set  back,  so  to  say,  to  the  moment  of  the  viper's  appear-
ance, and  he  could  remember  nothing  since.  His  character  had
become  violent,  greedy,  and  quarrelsome,  and  his  tastes  were  radically
changed.  For  instance,  though  he  had  before  the  attack  been  a
total  abstainer,  he  now  not  only  drank  his  own  wine  but  stole  the
wine  of  the  other  patients.  He  escaped  from  Bonneval,  and  after  a
few  turbulent  years,  tracked  by  his  occasional  relapses  into  hospital
or  madhouse,  he  turned  up  once  more  at  the  Rochefort  asylum  in
the  character  of  a  private  of  marines,  convicted  of  theft  but  con-
sidered to  be  of  unsound  mind.  And  at  Rochefort  and  La  Rochelle,
by  great  good  fortune,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  three  physicians —
Professors  Bourru  and  Buret,  and  Dr.  Mabille — able  and  willing  to
continue  and  extend  the  observations  which  Dr.  Camuset  at  Bonneval
and  Dr.  Jules  "Voisin  at  Bicetre  had  already  made  on  this  most
precious  of  mauvais  sujets  at  earlier  points  in  his  chequered  career.^

He  is  now  no  longer  at  Rochefort,  and  Dr.  Burot  informs  me  that
his  health  has  much  improved,  and  that  his  peculiarities  have  in
great  part  disappeared.  I  must,  however,  for  clearness'  sake,  use  the
present  tense  in  briefly  describing  his  condition  at  the  time  when
the  long  series  of  experiments  were  made.

The  state  into  which  he  has  gravitated  is  a  very  unpleasing  one.
There  is  paralysis  and  insensibility  of  the  right  side,  and  (as  is  often
the  case  in  right  hemiplegia)  the  speech  is  indistinct and  difficult.

1  For  Dr.  Camuset's  account  see  Annales  Medico-Pyschologiques,  1882,  p.  75;
for  Dr.  Voisin's,  Archives  de  Nevrologie,  September,  1885.  The  observations  at
Rochefort  have  been  carefully  recorded  by  Dr.  Berjon,  La  Grande  Hysteric  chez
I'Homme,  Paris,  1886,  and  by  Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot  in  a  treatise,  De  la  sug-
gestion 'metiiale,  &c.  (Bibl.  scientijique  contemporaine),  Paris,  1887.


498


MtiUiplex  Personality.


Nevertheless  he  is  constantly  haranguing  any  one  who  will  listen  to
hira,  abusing  his  physicians,  or  preaching,  with  a  monkey-like  impu-
dence rather  than  with  reasoned  clearness,  radicalism  in  politics  and
atheism  in  religion.  He  makes  bad  jokes,  and  if  any  one  pleases
him  he  endeavours  to  caress  him.  He  remembers  recent  events
during  his  residence  at  the  Rochefort  asylum,  but  only  two  scraps  of
his  life  before  that  date — namely,  his  vicious  period  at  Bonneval  and
a  part  of  his  stay  at  Bicetre.

Except  this  strangely  fragmentary  memory  there  is  nothing  very
unusual  in  this  condition,  and  in  many  asylums  no  experiments  on  it
would  have  been  attempted.  Fortunately  the  phy.sicians  of  Roche-
fort  were  familiar  with  the  efficacy  of  the  contact  of  metals  in
provoking  transfer  of  hysterical  hemiplegia  from  one  side  to  the
other.  They  tried  various  metals  in  turn  on  Louis  V.  Lead,  silver,
and  zinc  had  no  effect.  Copper  produced  a  slight  return  of  sensi-
bility in  the  paralysed  arm.  But  steel,  applied  to  the  right  arm,
transferred  the  whole  insensibility  to  the  left  side  of  the  body.

Inexplicable  as  such  a  phenomenon  certainly  is,  it  is  sufficiently
common  (as  French  physicians  hold)  in  hysterical  cases  to  excite
little  surprise.  What  puzzled  the  doctofs  was  the  change  of
character  which  accompanied  the  change  of  sensibility.  When
Louis  V.  issued  from  the  crisis  of  transfer,  with  its  minute  of
anxious  expression  and  panting  bi'eath,  he  was  what  might  fairly  be
called  a  new  man.  The  restless  insolence,  the  savage  impulsiveness,
have  wholly  disappeared.  The  patient  is  now  gentle,  respectful,  and
modest.  He  can  speak  clearly  now,  but  he  only  speaks  when  he  is
spoken  to.  If  he  is  asked  his  views  on  religion  and  politics,  he
prefers  to  leave  such  matters  to  wiser  heads  than  his  own.  It  might
seem  that  morally  and  intellectually  the  patient's  cure  had  been
complete.

But  now  ask  him  what  he  thinks  of  Rochefort ;  how  he  liked  his
regiment  of  marines.  He  will  blankly  answer  that  he  knows  nothing
of  Rochefort,  and  was  never  a  soldier  in  his  life.  "  Where  are  you,
then,  and  what  is  the  date  of  to-day?"  "  I  am  at  Bicetre  ;  it  is
January  2nd,  1884  ;  and  I  hope  to  see  M.  Voisin  to-day,  as  I  did
yesterday."

It  is  found,  in  fact,  that  he  has  now  the  memory  of  two  short  periods
of  life  (difierent  from  those  which  he  remembers  when  his  right  side
is  paralysed),  periods  during  which,  so  far  as  can  now  be  ascertained,
his  character  was  of  this  same  decorous  type  and  his  paralysis  was  on
the  left  side.

These  two  conditions  are  what  are  now  termed  his  first  and  his
second,  out  of  a  series  of  six  or  more  through  which  he  can  be  made
to  pass. For  brevity's  sake  I  will  further  describe  his  ^/th  state  only.


Multiplex  Personality.  499

If  he  is  placed  in  an  electric  bath,  or  if  a  magnet  be  placed  on
his  head,  it  looks  at  first  sight  as  though  a  complete  physical  cure  had
been  effected.  All  paralysis,  all  defect  of  sensibility,  has  disappeared.
His  movements  are  light  and  active,  his  expression  gentle  and  timid.
But  ask  him  where  he  is,  and  you  find  that  he  has  gone  back  to  a  boy
of  fourteen,  that  he  is  at  St.  Urbain,  his  first  reformatory,  and  that  his
memory  embraces  his  years  of  childhood,  and  stops  short  on  the  very  day
when  he  had  the  fright  with  the  viper.  If  he  is  pressed  to  recollect  the
incident  of  the  viper  a  violent  epileptiform  crisis  puts  a  sudden  end  to
this  phase  of  his  personality.

Is  there,  then,  the  reader  may  ask,  any  assignable  law  which
governs  these  strange  revolutions  any  reason  why  Louis  V.  should  at
one  moment  seem  a  mere  lunatic  or  savage,  at  another  moment  should
rise  into  decorous  manhood,  at  another  should  recover  his  physical
soundness,  but  sink  backward  in  mind  into  the  child'?  Briefly,  and
with  many  reserves  and  technicalities  perforce  omitted,  the  view  of  the
doctors  who  have  watched  him  is  somewhat  as  follows  :  A  sudden
shock,  falling  on  an  unstable  organisation,  has  effected  in  this  boy  a
profounder  severance  between  the  functions  of  the  right  and  left  hemi-
spheres of  the  brain  tha.n  has  perhaps  ever  been  observed  before.  We
are  accustomed,  of  course,  to  see  the  right  side  of  the  body  paralysed
and  insensible  in  consequence  of  injury  to  the  left  hemisphere,  which
governs  it,  and  vice  versa.  And  we  are  accustomed  in  hysterical  cases
— cases  where  there  is  no  actual  traceable  injury  to  either  hemisphere
—to  see  the  defects  in  sensation  and  motility  shift  rapidly — shift,  as  I
may  say,  at  a  touch — from  one  side  of  the  body  to  the  other.  But  we
cannot  usually  trace  any  corresponding  change  in  the  mode  of
functioning  of  what  we  assume  as  the  "highest  centres,"  the  centres
which  determine  those  manifestations  of  intelligence,  character,
memory,  on  which  our  identity  mainly  depends.  Yet  in  some  cases  of
aphasia  and  of  other  forms  of  asemia  (the  loss  of  power  over  signs,
spoken  or  written  words  and  the  like)  phenomena  have  occurred  which
have  somewhat  prepared  us  to  find  that  the  loss  of  power  to  use  the
left — which  certainly  is  in  some  ways  the  more  developed — hemisphere
may  bring  with  it  a  retrogression  in  the  higher  characteristics  of
human  life.  And  the  singular  phenomenon  of  automatic  vjriting  (as  I
have  previously  tried  to  showi)  seems  often  to  depend  on  an  obscure
action  of  the  less-used  hemisphere.  Those  who  have  followed  these
lines  of  observation  may  be  somewhat  prepared  to  think  it  possible
that  in  Louis  V.'s  case  the  alternate  predominance  of  right  or  left
hemisphere  affects  memory  and  character  as  well  as  motor  and  sensory
innervation. Inhibit  his  left  brain  (and  right  side)  and  he  becomes,


1  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.


500


Multiplex  Personality.


as  one  may  say,  not  only  left-handed  but  sinister ;  he  manifests  himself
through  nervous  arrangements  which  have  reached  a  lower  degree  of
evolution.  And  he  can  represent  in  memory  those  periods  only  when
his  personality  had  assumed  the  same  attitude,  when  he  had  crystallised
about  the  same  point.

Inhibit  his  right  brain,  and  the  higher  qualities  of  character
remain,  like  the  power  of  speech,  intact.  There  is  self-control ;  there
is  modesty ;  there  is  tlie  sense  of  duty — the  qualities  which  man  has
developed  as  he  has  risen  from  the  savage  level.  But  nevertheless  he
is  only  half  himself.  Besides  the  hemiplegia,  which  is  a  matter  of
course,  memory  is  truncated  too,  and  he  can  summon  up  only  such
fragments  of  the  past  as  chance  to  have  been  linked  with  this  one
abnormal  state,  leaving  unrecalled  not  only  the  period  of  sinister
inward  ascendency,  but  the  normal  period  of  childhood,  before  his
Wesen  was  thus  cloven  in  twain.  And  now  if  by  some  art  we  can
restore  the  equipoise  of  the  two  hemispheres  again,  if  we  can  throw
him  into  a  state  in  which  no  physical  trace  is  left  of  the  severance
which  has  become  for  him  a  second  nature,  what  may  we  expect  to  find
as  the  psychical  concomitant  of  this  restored  integrity  1  What  we  do
find  is  a  change  in  the  patient  which,  in  the  glimpse  of  psychical
possibilities  which  it  offers  us,  is  among  the  most  interesting  of  all.
He  is,  if  I  may  so  say,  born  again  ;  he  becomes  as  a  little  child  ;  he
is  set  back  in  memory,  character,  knowledge,  powers,  to  the  days
before  this  trouble  came  upon  him  or  his  worse  self  assumed  its
sway.

I  have  begun  with  the  description  of  an  extreme  case,  a  case  which
to  many  of  my  readers  may  seem  incredible  in  its  bizarrerie.  But
though  it  is  extreme  it  is  not  really  isolated ;  it  is  approached  from
different  sides  by  cases  already  known.  The  mere  resumption  of  life
at  an  earlier  moment,  for  instance,  is  of  course  only  an  exaggeration  of
a  phenomenon  which  frequently  appears  after  cerebral  injury.  The
trainer,  stunned  by  the  kick  of  a  horse,  completes  his  order  to  loosen
the  girths  the  moment  that  trepanning  has  been  successfully  performed.
The  old  lady  struck  down  at  a  card  party,  and  restored  to  consciousness
after  long  insensibility,  surprises  her  weeping  family  by  the  inquiry,
"  What  are  trumps  1 "  But  in  these  common  cases  there  is  but  a
morsel  cut  out  of  life  ;  the  personality  reawakens  as  from  sleep  and
is  the  same  as  of  old.  With  Louis  V.  it  is  not  thus  ;  the  memories
of  the  successive  stages  are  not  lost  but  juxtaposed,  as  it  were,
in  separate  compartments ;  nor  can  one  say  what  epochs  are  in  truth
intercalary,  or  in  what  central  channel  the  stream  of  his  being
flows.

Self-severances  profound  as  Louis  V.'s  are  naturally  to  be  sought


Multiplex  Personality.


501


mainly  in  the  lunatic  asylum. ^  There  indeed  we  find  duplicated
individuality  in  its  grotesquer  forms.  We  have  the  man  who  has
always  lost  himself  and  insists  on  looking  for  himself  under  the  bed.
We  have  the  man  who  maintains  that  there  are  two  of  him,  and  sends
his  plate  a  second  time,  remarking,  "  I  have  had  plenty,  but  the  other
fellow  has  not."  We  have  the  man  who  maintains  that  he  is  himself
and  his  brother  too,  and  when  asked  how  he  can  possibly  be  both  at
once,  replies,  "  Oh,  by  a  different  mother."

Or  sometimes  the  personality  oscillates  from  one  focus  to  another,
and  the  rival  impulses,  which  in  us  merely  sway  difi^erent  moods,
objectify  themselves  each  in  a  persona  of  its  own.  An  hysterical
penitent  believes  herself  one  week  to  be  "  Sceur  Marthe  des  Cinq
Plaies,"  and  the  next  week  relapses  into  an  imaginary  "  Madame  Poul-
maire,"  with  tastes  recalling  a  quite  other  than  conventual  model.
Another  patient  seems  usually  sane  enough,  but  at  intervals  he  lets  his
beard  grow,  and  is  transformed  into  a  swaggering  lieutenant  of
artillery.  The  excess  over,  he  shaves  his  beard  and  becomes  once  more
a  lucid  though  melancholy  student  of  the  early  Fathers.  Such  changes
of  character,  indeed,  may  be  rapid  and  varied  to  any  extent  which  the
patient's  experience  of  life  will  allow.  In  one  well-known  case  a  poor
lady  varied  her  history,  her  character,  even  her  sex,  from  day  to  day.
One  day  she  would  be  an  emperor's  bride,  the  next  an  imprisoned
statesman —

Juyenis  quondam,  nunc  femina,  CiBueus,
Rursus  et  in  veterem  fato  revohita  figuram.

Yet  more  instructive,  though  often  sadder  still,  are  the  cases  where
the  disintegration  of  personality  has  not  reached  the  pitch  of  insanity,
but  has  ended  in  a  bewildered  impotence,  in  the  horror  of  a  lifelong
dream.  Speaking  generally,  such  cases  fall  under  two  main  heads —
those  where  the  loss  of  control  is  mainly  over  motor  centres,  and  the
patient  can  feel  but  cannot  act  ;  and  those  where  the  loss  of  control  is
mainly  over  sensory  centres,  and  the  patient  acts  but  cannot  feel.

Inability  to  act  just  as  we  would  wish  to  act  is  a  trouble  in  which
we  most  of  us  share.  We  probably  have  moods  in  which  we  can  even
sympathise  with  that  provoking  patient  of  Esquirol's  who,  after  an
attack  of  monomania,  recovered  all  those  social  gifts  which  made  him
the  delight  of  his  friends,  but  could  no  longer  be  induced  to  give  five
minutes'  attention  to  the  most  urgent  business.  "  Your  advice,"  he  said
cordially  to  Esquirol,  "  is  thoroughly  good.  I  should  ask  nothing  better
than  to  follow  it,  if  you  could  further  oblige  me  with  the  power  to  will

^  The  cases  cited  here  come  mainly  from  Krishaber's  Nevropathie  Cer^bro-
cardiaque.  Several  of  them  will  be  found  cited  in  Ribot's  admirable  monograph
Maladies  de  la  PersonnaliU.


502


Multij)lex  Personality.


what  I  please."  Sometimes  the  whole  life  is  spent  in  the  endeavour  to
perform  trifling  acts — as  when  a  patient  of  M.  Billod's  spent  nearly  an
hour  in  attempting  to  make  the  flourish  under  his  signature  to  a
power  of  attorney  ;  or  tried  in  vain  for  three  hours,  with  hat  and  gloves
on,  to  leave  his  room  and  go  out  to  a  pageant  which  he  much  wished  to
see.  Such  cases  need  heroic  treatment,  and  this  gentleman  had  the
luck  to  be  caught  and  cured  by  the  Revolution  of  1848.

Still  more  mournful  are  the  cases  where  it  is  mainly  the  sensory
centres  which  lie,  as  it  were,  outside  the  personality  ;  where  thought
and  will  remain  intact,  but  the  world  around  no  longer  stirs  the  wonted
feelings,  nor  can  reach  the  solitary  soul.  "  In  all  my  acts  one  thing  is
lacking — tl^e  sense  of  effort  that  should  accompany  them,  the  sense  of
pleasure  that  they  should  yield."  "  All  things,"  said  another  sufferer,
"  are  immeasurably  distant  from  me  ;  they  are  covered  with  a  heavy
air."  "  Men  seem  to  move  round  me,"  said  another,  "  like  moving
shadows."  And  gradually  this  sense  of  ghostly  vacancy  extends  to  the
patient's  own  person.  "  Each  of  my  senses,  each  part  of  me,  is  separate
from  myself."  "  J'existe,  mais  en  dehors  de  la  vie  r^elle."  It  is  as
though  Teiresias,  who  alone  kept  his  true  life  in  unsubstantial  Hades,
should  at  last  feel  himself  dream  into  a  shade.

Sometimes  the  regretful  longing  turns  into  a  bitter  sense  of  exile,
of  banishment,  of  fall  from  high  estate.  There  are  words  that  remind
us  of  the  passionate  protestations  of  Empedocles,  refusing  to  accept
this  earth  as  his  veritable  home.  KXauo-a  t€  Kal  Kainvaa,  said  the  Sicilian
of  Sicily,  l^oDv  dcrvvridea  xo>pov  ("I  wept  and  lamented,  looking  on  a  land
to  me  unwonted  and  unknown  ").  "  Lorsque  je  me  trouvais  seul,"  said
a  patient  of  Kinshaber's,  "  dans  un  endroit  nouveau,  j'^tais  conime  un
enfant  nouveau-ne,  ne  reconnaissant  plus  rien.  J'avais  un  ar-dent  desir
de  revoir  mon  ancien  monde,  de  redevenir  I'ancien  moi  ;  c'est  ce  d^sir
qui  m'a  empech(^  de  me  tuer.  "

These  instances  have  shown  us  the  retrogressive  change  of  per-
sonality, the  dissolution  into  inco-ordinate  elements  of  the  polity  of  our
being.  We  have  seen  the  state  of  man  like  a  city  blockaded,  like  a
great  empire  dying  at  the  core.  And  of  course  a  spontaneous,  unguided
disturbance  in  a  machinery  so  complex  is  likely  to  alter  it  more  often
for  the  worse  than  for  the  better.  Yet  here  we  reach  the  very  point
which  I  most  desire  to  urge  in  tliis  paper.  I  mean  that  even  these
spontaneous,  these  unguided  disturbances,  do  sometimes  effect  a  change
which  is  a  marked  improvement.  Apart  from  all  direct  expei-iment
they  show  us  that  we  are  in  fact  capable  of  being  reconstituted  after  an
improved  pattern,  that  we  may  be  fused  and  recrystallised  into  greater
clarity  ;  or,  let  us  say  more  modestly,  that  the  shifting  sand-heap  of  our
being  will  sometimes  suddenly  settle  itself  into  a  new  attitude  of  more
assured  equilibrium.


Multiiolex  Personality.


503


Among  cases  of  this  kind  which  have  thus  far  been  recorded,  none
is  more  striking  than  that  of  Dr.  Azam's  often  quoted  patient,
F^^lida  X.1

Many  of  my  readers  will  remember  that  in  her  case  the  somnam-
bulic life  has  become  the  normal  life  ;  the  "  second  state,"  which
appeared  at  first  only  in  short,  dream-like  accesses,  has  gradually
replaced  the  "  first  state,"  which  now  recurs  but  for  a  few  hours  at  long
intervals.  But  the  point  on  which  I  wish  to  dwell  is  this  :  that
Felida's  second  state  is  altogether  sitperior  to  the  first — physically
superior,  since  the  nervous  pains  which  had  troubled  her  from  child-
hood have  disappeared  ;  and  morally  superior,  inasmuch  as  her  morose,
self-centred  disposition  is  exchanged  for  a  cheerful  activity  which
enables  her  to  attend  to  her  children  and  her  shop  much  more  eflfec-
tively  than  when  she  was  in  the  "  etat  bete,"  as  she  now  calls  what  was
once  the  only  personality  that  she  knew.  In  this  case,  then,  which  is
now  of  nearly  30  years'  standing,  the  spontaneous  readjustment  of
nervous  activities — the  second  state,  no  memory  of  which  remains  in
the  first  state — has  resulted  in  an  improvement  profounder  than  could
have  been  anticipated  from  any  moral  or  medical  treatment  that  we
know.  The  case  shows  us  how  often  the  word  "  normal  "  means  nothing
more  than  "  what  happens  to  exist."  For  Felida's  normal  state  was  in
fact  her  mm'hid  state ;  and  the  new  condition,  which  seemed  at  first  a
mere  hysteiical  abnormality,  has  brought  her  to  a  life  of  bodily  and
mental  sanity  which  makes  her  fully  the  equal  of  average  women  of  her
class.

Now,  before  we  go  further,  let  us  ask  ourselves  whether  this  result,
which  sounds  so  odd  and  paradoxical,  ought  in  reality  to  surprise  us.
Had  we  any  reason  for  supposing  that  changes  as  profound  as  Felida's
need  always  be  for  the  worse,  that  the  phase  of  personality  in  which
we  happen  to  find  ourselves  is  the  phase  in  which,  given  our  innate
capacities,  it  is  always  best  for  us  to  be  1

To  make  this  question  more  intelligible,  I  must  have  recourse  to
a  metaphor.  Let  us  picture  the  human  brain  as  a  vast  manufactoi'y,
in  which  thousands  of  looms,  of  complex  and  diflfering  patterns,  are
habitually  at  work.  These  looms  are  used  in  varying  combinations ;
but  the  main  driving-bands,  which  connect  them  severally  or  collectively
with  the  motive  power,  remain  for  the  most  part  unaltered.

Now,  how  do  I  come  to  have  my  looms  and  driving-gear  arranged
in  this  particular  way  1  Not,  certainly,  through  any  deliberate  choice
of  my  own.  My  ancestor  the  ascidian,  in  fact,  inherited  the  business
when  it  consisted  of  little  more  than  a  single  spindle. Since  his  day

1  For  the  fullest  account  of  Felida,  see  Hypnotisnie,  Double  Conscience,  &c.,
par  le  Dr.  Azam. Paris,  1887.


504


Multiplex  Personality,


my  nearer  ancestors  have  added  loom  after  loom.  Some  of  their  looms
have  fallen  to  pieces  unheeded  ;  others  have  been  kept  in  repair  because
they  suited  the  style  of  order  which  the  firm  had  at  that  time  to  meet.
But  the  class  of  orders  received  has  changed  very  rapidly  during  the
last  few  hundred  years.  I  have  now  to  try  to  turn  out  altruistic
emotions  and  intelligent  reasoning  with  machinery  adapted  to  self-
preserving  fierceness  or  manual  toil.  And  in  my  efibrts  to  readjust  and
reorganise  I  am  hindered  not  only  by  the  old-fashioned  type  of  the
looms,  but  by  the  inconvenient  disposition  of  the  driving-gear.  I
cannot  start  one  useful  loom  without  starting  a  dozen  others  that  are
merely  in  the  way.  And  I  cannot  shift  the  driving-gear  to  suit  myself,
for  I  cannot  get  at  much  of  it  without  stopping  the  engines,  and  if  I
stopped  my  engines  I  should  not  know  how  to  set  them  going  again.
In  this  perplexity  I  watch  what  happens  in  certain  factories — Felida's,
for  instance — where  the  hidden  part  of  the  machinery  is  subject  to
certain  dangerous  jerks  or  dislocations,  after  which  the  gearings  shift
of  themselves  and  whole  groups  of  looms  are  connected  and  disconnected
in  a  novel  manner.  From  hence  I  get  at  least  a  hint  as  to  the  concealed
attachments ;  and  if  I  see  that  new  arrangement  working  well  I  have
an  object  to  aim  at ;  I  can  try  to  produce  a  similar  change,  though  a
smaller  one,  among  my  own  looms  and  by  my  own  manipulation.

For  even  if  these  profoundest  spontaneous  changes  are  beyond  the
reach  of  imitation,  there  are  smaller  changes,  long  familiar  to  us,  which
we  now  see  in  a  new  light,  as  imitable  in  a  manner  which  shall
reproduce  their  advantages  without  their  drawbacks.  There  is  the
painless  trance  wliich  sometimes  supervenes  in  hysteria ;  there  is  the
action  of  alcohol ;  there  is  especially  the  action  of  opium,  which  from
the  first  commended  itself  by  its  psychical  effect,  by  the  emotional
tranquillity  which  it  induces.  Such  at  least  seems  to  be  the  inference
from  the  well-known  passage  where  the  wifely  Helen  determines  to
give  her  husband  and  his  friends  the  chance  of  talking  comfortably,
without  interrupting  themselves  by  perpetual  tears  and  lamentations.

Then  heaven-born  Helen  in  their  cups  would  throw
Nepenthes,  woeless  banisher  of  woe  :
This  whoso  drank  daylong  no  tear  should  shed —
No,  though  he  gazed  on  sire  and  mother  dead  ;
No,  though  his  own  son  on  that  dreamy  day
Before  his  own  eyes  raging  foes  should  slay.i

The  successive  discoveries  of  intoxicants,  narcotics  proper,  and
anfesthetics  formed  three  important  stages  in  our  growing  control  over
the  nervous  system.  Mesmer's  discovery,  or  rather  his  rediscovery  of  a
process  probably  at  least  as  old  as  Solon,  marked  an  epoch  of  quite


1  Od.  iv.  219.


Multiplex  Personality.


605


equal  significance.  And  the  refinements  on  Mesmer's  process  which
this  century  has  seen,  the  discoveries  linked  with  the  names  of
Puysegur,  Esdaile,  Braid,  Charcot,  &c.,  though  often  set  forth  with  an
air  of  controversy  rather  than  of  co-operation,  will  gradually  be
recognised  as  mutually  concordant  elements  in  a  new  branch  of  moral
as  well  as  physical  therapeutics.  Nay,  it  is  a  nascent  art  of  self-
modification  ;  a  system  of  pulleys  (to  return  to  our  previous  metaphor),
by  which  we  can  disjoin  and  reconnect  portions  of  our  machinery  which
admit  of  no  directer  access.

One  or  two  brief  instances  may  indicate  the  moral  and  the  physical
benefits  which  hypnotisation  is  bringing  within  the  range  of  practical
medicine.  And  first  1  will  cite  one  of  the  cases — rare  as  yet — where
an  insane  person  has  been  hypnotised  with  permanent  benefit.^

In  the  summer  of  1884  there  was  at  the  Salpetriere  a  young

woman  of  a  deplorable  type. J eanne  Sch  was  a  criminal  lunatic,

filthy  in  habits,  violent  in  demeanour,  and  with  a  lifelong  history  of
impurity  and  theft.  M.  Auguste  Voisin,  one  of  the  physicians  on
the  stafi",  undertook  to  hypnotise  her  on  May  31st,  at  a  time  when  she
could  only  be  kept  quiet  by  the  strait  jacket  and  "bonnet  d'irrigation,"
or  perpetual  cold  douche  to  the  head.  She  would  not — indeed,  she
could  not — look  steadily  at  the  operator,  but  raved  and  spat  at  him.
M.  "Voisin  kept  his  face  close  to  hers,  and  followed  her  eyes  wherever
she  moved  them.  In  about  10  minutes  a  stertorous  sleep  ensued  •  and
in  five  minutes  more  she  passed  into  a  sleep- waking  state,  and  began  to
talk  incoherently.  The  process  was  repeated  on  many  days,  and
gradually  she  became  sane  when  in  the  trance,  though  she  still  raved
when  awake.  Gradually,  too,  she  became  able  to  obey  in  waking
hours  commands  impressed  on  her  in  the  trance — first  trivial  orders  (to
sweep  the  room  and  so  forth),  then  orders  involving  a  marked  change
of  behaviour.  Nay  more ;  in  the  hypnotic  state  she  voluntarily
expressed  repentance  for  her  past  life,  made  a  confession  which
involved  more  evil  than  the  police  were  cognisant  of  (though  it  agreed
with  facts  otherwise  known),  and  finally  of  her  own  impulse  made  good
resolves  for  the  future.  Two  years  have  now  elapsed,  and  M.  Yoisin
writes  to  me  (July  31st,  1886)  that  she  is  now  a  nurse  in  a  Paris
hospital,  and  that  her  conduct  is  irreproachable.  In  this  case,  and  in
some  recent  cases  of  M.  Voisin's,  there  may,  of  course,  be  matter  for
controversy  as  to  the  precise  nature  and  the  prognosis,  apart  from
hypnotism,  of  the  insanity  which  was  cured.  But  my  point  is  amply
made  out  by  the  fact  that  this  poor  woman,  whose  history  since  the

''■  Annalcs  Medico-Psi/chologiques,  ISSi,  vol.  ii.,  p.  289  sqq.  The  case  was
rediscussed  at  the  last  meeting  of  che  French  Association  for  the  Advancement
of  Science.


506


Multiiolex  Personality.


age  of  13  had  been  one  of  reckless  folly  and  vice,  is  now  capable  of  the
steady,  self-controlled  work  of  a  nurse  at  a  hospital,  the  reformed
character  having  first  manifested  itself  in  the  hypnotic  state,  partly  in
obedience  to  suggestion,  and  partly  as  the  natural  result  of  the
tranquillisation  of  morbid  passions.

M.  Yoisin  has  followed  up  this  case  with  others  equally  striking,
into  some  of  which  a  committee  of  the  Society  Medico-Psychologique  is
now  inquiring. 1  And  M.  Dufour,  the  medical  head  of  another  asylum, 2
has  adopted  hypnotic  suggestion  as  a  regTilar  element  in  liis  treatment.
"  Des  a  present,"  he  says,  "  notre  opinion  est  faite  :  sans  crainte  de
nous  tromper,  nous  affirmons  que  I'hypnotisme  peut  rendre  service  dans
le  traitement  des  maladies  mentales."  As  was  to  be  expected,  he  finds
that  only  a  small  proportion  of  lunatics  are  hypnotisable ;  but  the
effect  produced  on  these,  whether  by  entrancement  or  suggestion,  is
uniformly  good.  His  best  subject  is  a  depraved  young  man,  who  after
many  convictions  for  crimes  (including  attempted  murder)  has  become
a  violent  lunatic.  "  T.,"  says  Dr.  Dufour,  "  a  et^  un  assez  mauvais
sujet.  Nous  n'avons  plus  a  parler  au  present,  tellement  ses  sentiments
moraux  ont  et6  am^liores  par  I'hypnotisme."  This  change  and
amelioration  of  character  (over  and  above  the  simple  recovery  of
sanity)  has  been  a  marked  feature  in  some  of  Dr.  Voisin's  cases
as  well.

There  is,  indeed,  in  the  sleep-waking  state  even  of  sane  persons,
a  characteristic  change  of  character,  more  easily  recognised  than
described.  Without  generalising  too  confidently,  I  may  say  that  there
seems  usually  to  be  an  absence  of  self-consciousness  and  anxiety,  a
diminution  of  mere  animal  instincts,  and  a  sense  of  expansion  and
freedom  which  shows  itself  either  in  gaiety  or  in  a  sort  of  beatific
calm.  In  Madame  B.  (a  subject  whose  susceptibility  to  hypnotisation
by  Dr.  Gibert  and  Prof.  Janet  from  a  distance  has  recently  attra.cted
much  notice)  there  was  something — as  it  seemed  to  me — indescribably
absurd  in  the  contrast  between  the  peasant  woman's  humble,  stolid,
resigned  cast  of  countenance  and  the  childish  glee  with  which  she
joked  and  babbled  during  the  "  phase  sornnambulique  "  of  her  complex
trance.  On  the  other  hand  M.  Richet  says  of  a  recent  subject  of  his
own,^  "  She  seems  when  in  the  somnambulic  state  to  be  normal
in  all  respects  except  that  her  character  has  changed. When  awake

1 1  have  myself  seen  Dr.  Voisin  successfully  hypnotise  a  melancholic
patient  who  was  in  a  state  of  extreme — it  might  have  seemed  of  liopeless —
restlessness.

"  Dr.  E.  Dufour,  medecin  en  chef  de  l  asile  Saint-Robert  (Isfere).  See
Annales  Medico-Psychologiques,  September,  1886,  p.  238,  and  Contribution
a  I'etude  de  Vhypnotismc,  par  le  Dr.  Dufour. (Grenoble,  1887.)

3  Revue  Philosopfdque,  September,  1886,  p.  327.


Multiplex  Personality.


507


she  is  gay  and  lively  ;  when  entranced,  grave,  serious,  almost  solemn.
Her  intelligence  seems  to  have  increased."

And  I  may  remark  that  this  phase  of  the  somnambulic  character,
this  tendency  to  absorption  and  ecstasy,  is  a  fact  of  encouraging
significance.  It  is  an  indication  that  we  may  get  more  work  out  of
ourselves  in  certain  modified  states  than  we  can  at  present.  "  Ecstacy,'
which  in  former  ages  was  deemed  the  exalted  prerogative  of  saints,
is  now  described  as  a  matter  of  course  among  the  phases  of  a  mere
hysterical  attack.  The  truth  is,  perhaps,  more  complex  than  either
of  these  views  would  admit.  Ecstasy  (we  may  certainly  say  with
the  modern  alienist)  is  for  the  most  part  at  least  a  purely  subjective
affection,  corresponding  to  no  reality  outside  the  patient,  and  appearing
along  with  other  instabilities  in  the  course  of  hysteria.  True  ;  but  on
the  other  hand  ecstasy  is  to  hysteria  somewhat  as  genius  is  to  insanity.
The  ecstasy,  say,  of  Louise  Lateau  assuredly  proves  no  dogma,  and
communicates  to  us  no  revelation.  Yet,  taken  strictly  by  itself,  it  is
not  altogether  a  retrograde  or  dissolutive  nervous  phenomenon.  Rather
it  represents  the  extreme  tension  of  the  poor  girl's  spirit  in  the  highest
direction  which  her  intellect  allows  ;  and  the  real  drawback  is  that
this  degree  of  occasional  concentration  usually  implies  great  habitual
instability.  The  hysterical  patient  has  an  hour  of  ecstasy,  during
which  her  face,  if  we  may  trust  Dr.  Paul  Richer's  drawings,^  often
assumes  a  lofty  purity  of  expression  which  the  ordinary  young  person
might  try  in  vain  to  rival.  But  she  pays  for  the  transitory  exaltation
by  days  of  incoherent  scolding,  of  reckless  caprice.  And  similarly,  as
I  maintain,  the  power  of  exaltation,  of  concentration,  which  constitutes
genius  implies  a  profound  modijiability  of  the  nervous  system,  a
tendency  of  the  stream  of  mentation  to  pour  with  a  rush  into  some
special  channels.  In  a  Newton  or  a  Shelley  this  modifiability  is
adequately  under  control ;  were  it  not  so,  our  Shelleys  would  lapse
into  incoherence,  our  Newtons  into  monomania.

And  I  maintain  that  the  hypnotic  trance,  with  its  liberation  from
petty  preoccupations,  its  concentration  in  favourite  channels,  has
some  analogy  to  genius  as  well  as  to  hysteria.  I  maintain  that  for
some  uneducated  subjects  it  has  been  the  highest  mental  condition
which  they  have  ever  entered  ;  and  that,  when  better  understood  and
applied  to  subjects  of  higher  type,  it  may  dispose  to  flows  of  thought
more  undisturbed  and  steady  than  can  be  maintained  by  the  waking
effort  of  our  tossed  and  fragmentary  days.

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  the  movctl  accompaniments  of
the  hypnotic  trance,  because  they  are  as  yet  much  less  generally
known  than  the  physical. It  would,  indeed, be  a  mere  waste  of

La  Grande  Hxjsterie,  Second  Edition,  Parig,  1885.


508


Multvplex  Personality.


space  to  dwell  on  the  lulling  of  j^ain  which  can  be  procured  by
these  methods,  or  even  on  the  painless  performance  of  surgical  opera-
tions during  the  hypnotic  trance ;  but  I  will  cite  a  case  ^  illustrating
a  point  comparatively  new — namely,  that  the  insusceptibility  to  pain
need  not  be  confined  to  the  entranced  condition,  but  may  be  prolonged
by  hypnotic  suggestion  into  subsequent  waking  hours.

An  hysterical  patient  in  the  hospital  of  Bordeaux  suffered  recently
from  a  malady  which  was  certainly  not  imaginary.  She  had  a
"phlegmon,"  or  inflamed  abscess,  as  big  as  a  hen's  egg,  on  the  thigh,
with  excessive  tenderness  and  lancinating  pain.  It  was  necessary
to  open  the  swelling,  but  the  screaming  patient  would  not  allow  it
to  be  touched.  Judging  this  to  be  a  good  opportunity  for  testing  the
real  validity  of  deferred  hypnotic  suggestion,  Dr.  Pitres  hypnotised
the  woman  by  looking  fixedly  in  her  eyes,  and  then  suggested  to  her
that  after  she  had  been  aivakened  she  would  allow  the  abscess  to
be  opened,  and  would  not  feel  the  slightest  pain.  She  was  then
awakened,  and  apparently  resumed  her  normal  state.  M.  A.  Boursier
proceeded  to  open  and  squeeze  out  the  abscess  in  a  deliberate  way.
The  patient  merely  looked  on  and  smiled.  She  had  no  recollection  of
the  suggestion  which  had  been  made  to  her  during  her  trance,  and  she
was  not  a  little  astonished  to  see  her  formidable  enemy  thus  disposed
of  without  giving  her  the  slightest  pain.

Cases  like  these  are  certainly  striking  enough  to  give  a  considerable
impetus  to  further  experiment.  Hypnotism,  however,  has  in  England
many  prejudices  to  contend  with.  I  shall  touch  on  one  such  prejudice
only — a  very  excusable  one  and  germane  to  the  main  argument  of  this
paper.  "  These  duplications  of  state,"  it  is  said,  "are  not  natural;
and  what  is  unnatural,  even  if  it  is  not  morbid,  can  never  be  more
than  a  mere  curiosity."  I  would  ask  of  such  an  objector  one  single
question:  "Which  state,  then,  do  you  consider,  as  unnatural,  your
own  ordinary  sleep  or  your  own  ordinary  waking  ?  "

This  rejoinder  goes,  I  think,  to  the  root  of  the  matter  ;  for  we  do
indubitably  undergo  every  day  of  our  lives  a  change  of  state,  a  shift-
ing of  our  internal  mechanism,  which  is  closely  parallel  to  the  artificial
changes  whose  induction  I  am  here  recommending.  Our  familiar  sleep,
whether  considered  from  the  psychical  or  the  physiological  side,  has  a
curious  history,  strange  potentialities.  In  its  psychical  aspect — to
take  the  point  which  here  most  concerns  us — it  involves  at  least  the
rudiments  of  a  "  second  state,"  of  an  independent  memory.  I  should
like,  had  I  space,  to  show  how  the  mere  recurrence  of  a  dream-scene —
a  scene  which  has  no  prototype  in  waking  life — is  the  first  stage  on  the

1  First  given  in  the  cTotirnffl^  de  Medecinc  dc  Bordeaux,  and  cited  at  length
in  Dr.  Berillon's  Bevue  de  VHypnotisme  for  September,  1886.  Professor  Pitres'
name,  I  may  add,  carries  great  weight  in  the  French  medical  world.


Multiplex  Personality.


509


way  to  those  recurrent  accesses  of  somnambulism,  linked  by  continuous
memory,  which  have  developed  into  the  actual  ordinary  life  of  Felida
X.  Leaving  this  point  for  future  treatment,  and  passing  to  sleep's
physiological  aspect,  we  recognise  in  it  the  compromise  or  resultant  of
many  tentative  duplications  of  state  which  our  lowly  ancestors  have
known.  Their  earliest  difterentiation  of  condition,  it  may  be,  was
merely  the  change  between  light  and  darkness,  or  between  motion  and
rest.  Then  comes  encystation,  a  fruitful  quiescence,  originally,  per-
haps, a  mere  immobility  of  self-defence,  but  taken  advantage  of  for
reproductive  effort.  And  passing  from  protozoa  to  metazoa,  we  find
numerous  adaptations  of  this  primitive  duplicability  of  condition.
We  find  sleep  utilised  as  a  protection  against  hunger,  as  a  protection
against  cold.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  animals  for  whom  what
we  call  "  true  sleep  "  is  wanting,  whose  circumstances  do  not  demand
any  such  change  or  interruption  in  the  tenor  of  their  lifelong  way.

Yet  why  describe  this  undiiferentiated  life-history  as  a  state  of
waking  rather  than  of  sleep  ?  Why  assume  that  sleep  is  the  acquired,
vigilance  the  "normal"  condition'?  It  would  not  be  hard  to  defend
an  opposite  thesis.  The  new-born  infant  might  urge  -with  cogency  that
his  habitual  state  of  slumber  was  primary  as  regards  the  individual,
ancestral  as  regards  the  race ;  resembling  at  least,  far  more  closely
than  does  our  adult  life,  a  primitive  or  protozoic  habit.  "  Mine,"  he
might  say,  "is  a  centrally  stable  state.  It  would  need  only  some
change  in  external  conditions  (as  my  permanent  immersion  in  a  nutri-
tive fluid)  to  be  safely  and  indefinitely  maintained.  Your  waking  state,
on  the  other  hand,  is  centrally  unstable.  While  you  talk  and  bustle
around  me  you  are  Li\-ing  on  your  physiological  capital,  and  the  mere
prolongation  of  vigilance  is  torture  and  death."

A  paradox  such  as  this  forms  no  part  of  my  argument ;  but  it  may
remind  us  that  physiology  at  any  rate  hardly  warrants  us  in  speaking
of  our  waking  state  as  if  that  alone  represented  our  true  selves,  and
every  deviation  from  it  must  be  at  best  a  mere  interruption.  Vigilance
in  reality  is  but  one  of  two  co-ordinate  phases  of  our  personality,  which
we  have  acquired  or  differentiated  from  each  other  during  the  stages  of
our  long  evolution.  And  just  as  these  two  states  have  come  to  co-exist
for  us  in  advantageous  alternation,  so  also  other  states  may  come  to  co-
exist with  these,  in  response  to  new  needs  of  the  still  evolving
organism.

And  I  will  now  suggest  two  methods  in  which  such  states  as  those
described,  say,  in  Dr.  Voisin's  or  in  Dr.  Pitres'  case,  might  be  turned
to  good  account.  In  the  world  around  us  are  many  physical  invalids
and  many  "moral  invalids,"  and  of  both  these  classes  a  certain  per-
centage are  sure  to  prove  hypnotisable,  with  patience  and  care.  Let
us  try  to  improve  the  moral  invalid's  character  by  hypnotic  suggestions


510


Multiplex  Personality.


of  self-restraint,  which  will  continue  effective  after  he  wakes.  And
let  us  try  to  enable  the  physical  invalid  to  carry  on  his  intellectual  life
without  the  perturbing  accompaniment  of  pain.  I  am  not  bringing  out
a  panacea,  and  I  expect  that  with  the  English  race,  and  in  our  present
state  of  knowledge,  but  few  of  these  experiments  will  succeed.  But
increased  experience  will  bring  the  process  under  fuller  control,  will
enable  us  to  hypnotise  a  larger  proportion  of  persons  and  to  direct  the
resulting  phenomena  with  more  precision.  What  is  needed  is  the  per-
severance in  experiment  which  springs  from  an  adequate  realisation  of
the  ultimate  gain,  from  a  conviction  that  the  tortuous  inlet  which  we
are  navigating  is  one  of  the  mouths  of  a  river  which  runs  up  far  into
the  unexplored  interior  of  our  being.

I  have  dealt  elsewhere  with  some  further  cases  which  go  to  show
the  persistent  efficacy  of  moralising  suggestions — suggestions  mainly
of  abstinence  from  pernicious  indulgences — when  made  to  a  subject  in
the  hypnotic  trance. ^  It  must  suffice  here  to  point  out  that  such
moralisation,  whether  applied  to  a  sane  or  an  insane  subject,  must  by  no
means  be  considered  as  a  mere  trick  or  a  mere  abnormality.  It  is  but  the
systematisation  of  a  process  on  which  religious  and  moral  "  revivals  "
have  always  largely  depended.  When  some  powerful  personage  has
thrown  many  weaker  minds  into  a  state  of  unusual  perturbation,
unusual  plasticity,  there  is  an  element  in  that  psychical  tumult  which
may  be  utilised  for  lasting  good.  A  strong  suggestion  may  be  made,
and  its  effect  on  the  brain  will  be  such  that  it  will  work  itself  out,
almost  automatically,  perhaps  for  years  to  come.  When  Father  Mathew
sjjread  the  temperance  pledge  through  Ireland  he  showed  this  power  at
its  best.  What  it  can  be  at  its  worst  we  see,  for  instance,  in  the  recent
epidemic  of  frenzy  in  the  Bahamas,  where  the  hysterical  symptoms  were
actually  the  main  object  sought,  and  the  dogma  only  served  to  give  to
that  hysteria  a  stimulating  flavour  of  brimstone.  Scenes  not  dissimilar
have  been  witnessed  in  England  too  ;  yet  the  sober  moralist  has  been
forced  to  recognise  that  a  germ  of  better  life  has  often  been
dropped,  and  has  quickened,  amid  the  turbulence  of  what  to  him  might
seem  a  mere  scandalous  orgy.

Just  so  did  the  orthodox  physician  look  on  in  disgusted  contempt  at
the  tumultuous  crises  of  the  patients  around  Mesmer's  baquet.  But
science  has  now  been  able  to  extract  from  that  confused  scene  its  germ
of  progress,  and  to  use  a  part  of  Mesmer's  processes  to  calm  the  very
accesses  which  Mesmer  employed  them  to  generate.  Let  her  attempt,
then,  to  extract  the  health-giving  element  from  that  moral  turbulence
as  well,  and  to  use  the  potency  which  in  ignorant  hands  turns  men  and
women  into  hysterical  monomaniacs,  to  revive  in  the  spirits  which  she
dominates  the  docility  of  the  little  child.

1  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Part  X.


Multiplex  Personality.


511


This  last  phrase  represents  a  true,  an  important  analogy.  The  art
of  education,  as  we  know,  rests  on  the  physiological  fact  that  the  child's
brain  receives  impressions  more  readily,  and  retains  them  more  lastingly,
than  the  adult's.  And  those  of  us  who  have  been  well  drilled  in  child-
hood are  not  apt  to  consider  that  the  advantage  thus  gained  for  us  was
an  unfair  or  tricky  one,  nor  even  that  virtue  has  been  made  unduly
easy  to  us,  so  that  we  deserve  no  credit  for  doing  right.  It  surely  need
not,  then,  be  considered  as  over-reaching  Destiny,  or  outwitting  the
Moral  Law,  if  we  take  persons  whose  early  receptiveness  has  been
abused  by  bad  example  and  try  to  reproduce  that  receptiveness  by  a
physiological  process,  and  to  imprint  hypnotic  suggestions  of  a  salutary
kind.

I  ventured  to  make  a  proposal  of  this  sort  in  a  paper  published  in
1885  ;  but,  although  it  attracted  some  comment  as  a  novelty,  I  cannot
flatter  myself  that  it  was  taken  au  serieux  by  the  pedagogic  world.
But  as  I  write  these  lines  I  see  from  a  report  of  the  Association
Fran9ais  pour  I'Avancement  des  Sciences  (Session  de  Nancy,  1886)  that
the  "  Section  de  Pedagogie  "  has  actually  passed  a  resolution  desiring
"  que  des  experiences  de  suggestion  hypnotique  soient  tentees,  dans  un
but  de  moralisation  et  d'education,  sur  quelques-uns  des  sujets  les  plus
notoirement  mauvais  et  incorrigibles  des  ecoles  primaires."  I  commend
the  idea  then,  with  the  sense  that  I  am  not  alone  in  my  paradox,  to  the
attention  of  practical  philanthropists.

My  second  suggestion — namely,  that  we  may  conceivably  learn  to
carry  on  our  intellectual  life  in  a  state  of  insusceptibility  to  physical
pain,  may  appear  a  quite  equally  bold  one.  "  We  admit,"  the  critics
might  say,  "  that  a  man  in  the  hypnotic  trance  is  insensible  to
pinching  ;  but,  since  he  can  also  notoriously,  when  in  that  state,  be
made  to  believe  that  his  name  is  Titus  Gates,  or  that  a  candle-end
is  a  piece  of  plum-cake,  or  any  other  absurdity,  the  intellectual  work
which  he  performs  in  that  mood  of  mind  is  not  likely  to  be  worth
much."  But  my  point  is,  as  may  have  been  already  gathered,  that
this  clean-cut,  definite  conception  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  now  shown
to  have  been  crude  and  rudimentary.  Dr.  Pitres'  case,  above  cited
(where  the  patient  was  restored  to  ordinary  life  in  all  respects  except
that  she  continued  insensible  to  pain),  is  a  mere  sample  of  cases  daily
becoming  more  numerous,  where  power  is  gained  to  dissociate  the  ele-
ments of  our  being  in  novel  ways,  to  form  from  them,  if  I  may  so  say,
not  only  the  one  strange  new  compound  "  hypnotic  trance,"  but  a  whole
series  of  compounds  marking  the  various  stages  between  that  and  the
life  of  every  day.  Hysterical  phenomena,  now  for  the  first  time  studied
with  something  like  the  attention  which  they  deserve,  point  strongly  in
this  direction.  And  apart  from  hysteria,  apart  from  hypnotism,  we
find  in  active  and  healthy  life  scattered  hints  of  the  possible  absence  of


512


Multiplex  Personality.


pain  during  vigorous  intellectual  effort.  From  the  candidate  in  a  com-
petitive examination  who  forgets  his  toothache  till  he  comes  out  again,
to  the  soldier  in  action  unconscious  of  the  bullet-wound  till  he  faints
from  loss  of  blood,  we  have  instances  enough  of  an  exaltation  or  con-
centration which  has  often  made  the  resolute  spirit  altogether  uncon-
scious of  conditions  which  would  have  been  absorbing  to  the  ordinary
man.  And  here  too,  as  in  the  case  of  moral  suggestibility,  already
dealt  with,  the  function  of  science  is  to  regularise  the  accidental  and  to
elicit  from  the  mingled  phenomenon  its  permanent  boon.  Already  men
attempt  to  do  this  by  a  mere  chemical  agency.  There  have  been  philo-
sophers who  have  sought  in  laudanum  intellectual  lucidity  and  bodily
repose.  There  have  been  soldiers  who  have  supplemented  with  "  Dutch
courage  "  the  ardour  of  martial  fire.  Philosopher  and  soldier  alike  ex-
pose themselves  to  an  unhappy  reaction.  But  by  the  induction  of
hypnotic  anaesthesia  we  are  taking  a  shorter  road  to  our  object ;  we  are
acting  on  the  central  nervous  system  without  damaging  stomach  or  liver
on  the  way.  It  was  an  abridgment  of  this  kind  when  sub-cutaneous
injection  of  morphia  replaced  in  so  many  cases  morphia  taken  by  the
mouth.  Yet  though  the  evil  done  in  transitu  was  subtler  and  slower,
evil  still  was  done.  On  the  other  hand  the  direct  non-chemical  action
on  the  central  nervous  system,  in  which  hypnotism  consists,  is  not
proved  to  be  in  any  way  necessarily  injurious,  and  has  thus  far,  when
under  careful  management,  resulted  almost  uniformly  in  good.  Such
at  least  is  the  view  of  all  physicians,  so  far  as  I  know,  who  have
practised  it  themselves  on  a  large  scale,  though  it  is  7iot  the  general
view  at  present  of  those  men — physicians  or  others — who  are  content
to  judge  from  hearsay  and  to  write  at  second-hand.

Let  us  not  then,  I  would  say,  be  satisfied  if  we  can  merely  give
some  poor  sufferer  a  good  night  by  hypnotism,  or  even  if  we  can  operate
on  him  painlessly  in  a  state  of  trance.  Let  us  approach  the  topic  of
the  banishment  of  pain  in  a  more  thoroughgoing  and  bolder  spirit.
Looking  at  that  growing  class  of  civilised  persons  who  suffer  from
neuralgia,  indigestion,  and  other  annoying  but  not  dangerous  forms  of
malaise,  let  us  consider  whether  we  cannot  induce — in  those  of  them
who  are  fortunate  enough  to  be  readily  hypnotisable — a  third  condition
of  life,  which  shall  be  as  waking  but  without  its  uneasiness  and  as  sleep
without  the  blankness  of  its  repose,  a  state  in  which  the  mind  may  go
serenely  onwards  and  the  body  have  no  power  to  distract  her  energy  or
to  dispute  her  sway.

Is  there  anything  in  nature  to  render  this  ideal  impossible  1  Let
us  consider  the  history  of  pain.  Pain,  it  may  be  plausibly  suggested,
is  an  advantage  acquired  by  our  ancestors  in  the  course  of  their
struirsfle  for  existence.  It  would  be  useless  to  the  fortunate  animal-
cule,  which,  if  you  chop  it  in  two,  is  simply  two  animalcules  instead  of


Multiplex  Personality.


513


one.  But  as  soon  as  the  organism  is  complex  enough  to  suffer  partial
injury,  and  active  enough  to  check  or  avoid  such  injury  before  it  has
gone  far,  the  pain  becomes  a  useful  warning,  and  the  sense  of  pain
is  thus  one  of  the  first  and  most  generalised  of  the  perceptive  faculties
which  place  living  creatures  in  relation  with  the  external  world.  And
to  the  human  infant  it  is  necessary  still.  The  burnt  child  must  have
some  reason  to  dread  the  fire,  or  he  will  go  on  poking  it  with  his  fingers.
But,  serviceable  though  pain  may  still  be  to  the  child  and  the  savage,
civilised  men  and  Avomen  have  now  a  good  deal  more  of  it  than  they  can
find  any  use  for.  Some  kinds  of  pain,  indeed  (like  neuralgia,  which
prevents  the  needed  rest),  are  wholly  detrimental  to  the  organism,  and
have  arisen  by  mere  correlation  with  other  susceptibilities  which  are  in
themselves  beneficial.  Now  if  this  correlation  were  inevitable — if  it
were  impossible  to  have  acute  sense-perceptions,  vivid  emotional  de-
velopment, without  these  concomitant  nervous  pains — we  should  have
to  accept  the  annoyance  without  more  ado.  But  certain  spontaneously
occurring  facts,  and  certain  experimental  facts,  have  shown  us  that  the
correlation  is  not  inevitable  ;  that  the  sense  of  pain  can  be  abolished,
while  other  sensibilities  are  retained,  to  an  extent  far  beyond  what  the
common  experience  of  life  would  have  led  us  to  suppose  possible.

Our  machinery  is  hampered  by  a  system  of  checks,  intended  to  guard
against  dangers  which  we  can  now  meet  in  other  ways,  and  often
operating  as  a  serious  hindrance  to  the  work  of  our  manufactory.  A
workman  here  and  there  has  hit  on  an  artifice  for  detaching  these  checks,
with  signal  advantage,  and  is  beginning  to  report  to  the  managers  his
guess  at  a  wider  application  of  the  seemingly  trivial  contrivance.

Be  it  mentioned  too  that  not  only  pain  itself,  but  anxiety,  ennui,
intellectual  fatigue,  may  be  held  in  abeyance  by  hypnotic  treatment
and  suggestion.  There  is  not,  indeed,  much  evidence  of  any  increase
of  sheer  intellectual  acumen  in  the  hypnotic  state,  but  in  most  kinds
of  ordinary  brain-work  the  difiiculty  is  not  so  much  that  one's  actual
power  of  thinking  is  inadequate  to  the  problems  proposed  as  that  one
cannot  use  that  power  aright,  cannot  focus  one's  object  steadily  or
gaze  on  it  long.  Hypnotism  may  not  supply  one  with  mental  lenses
of  higher  power,  but  in  its  artificial  attention  we  have  at  least  the
rudiment  of  a  machinery  like  that  which  holds  firm  the  astronomer's
telescope  and  sweeps  it  round  with  the  moving  heavens,  as  compared
with  the  rough  and  shifting  adjustments  of  a  spy-glass  held  in  the  hand.

These  speculations,  especially  where  they  point  to  moral  progress
as  attainable  by  physiological  artifice,  will  seem  to  many  of  my  readers
venturesome  and  unreal.  And  in  these  days  of  conflicting  dogmas  and
impracticable  Utopias,  Science,  better  aware  than  either  priest  or
demagogue  of  how  little  man  can  truly  know,  is  tempted  to  confine
herself  to  his  material  benefit,  which  can  be  made  certain,  and  to  let


514


Multiplex  Personality.


his  moral  progress — which  is  a  speculative  hope — alone.  Yet,  now
that  Science  is  herself  becoming  the  substance  of  so  many  creeds,  the
lode-star  of  so  many  aspirations,  it  is  important  that  she  should  not  in
any  direction  even  appear  to  be  either  timid  or  cynical.  Her  humble
missionaries  at  least  need  not  show  themselves  too  solicitous  about
possible  failure,  but  should  rather  esteem  it  as  dereliction  of  duty
were  some  attempt  not  made  to  carry  her  illumination  over  the  whole
realm  and  mystery  of  man.

Especially,  indeed,  is  it  to  oe  desired  that  biology  should  show^ —
not  indeed  a  moralising  bias,  but — a  moral  care.  There  has  been  a
natural  tendency  to  insist  with  a  certain  disillusionising  tenacity  on
tlie  low  beginnings  of  our  I'ace.  When  eminent  but  ill-instructed
personages  in  Church  or  State  have  declared  themselves,  with  many
flourishes,  "  on  the  side  of  the  Angel,"  there  has  been  a  grim  satisfaction
in  proving  that  Science  at  any  rate  is  "  on  the  side  of  the  Ape."  But
the  victory  of  Science  is  won.  She  has  dealt  hard  measure  to  man's
tradition  and  his  self-conceit ;  let  her  now  show  herself  I'eady  to  sym-
pathise with  such  of  his  aspirations  as  are  still  legitimate,  to  offer  such
prospects  as  the  nature  of  things  will  allow.  Nay,  let  her  teach  the
world  that  the  word  evolution  is  the  very  formula  and  symbol  of
liope.

But  here  my  paper  must  close.  I  will  conclude  it  with  a  single
reflection  which  may  somewhat  meet  the  fears  of  those  who  dislike  any
tamperings  with  our  personality,  who  dread  that  this  invading  analysis
may  steal  their  very  self  away.  All  living  things,  it  is  said,  strive
towards  their  maximum  of  pleasure.  In  what  hours,  then,  and  under
what  conditions,  do  we  find  that  human  beings  have  attained  to  their
intensest  joy  ?  Do  not  our  thoughts  in  answer  turn  instinctively  to
scenes  and  moments  when  all  personal  pre-occupation,  all  care  for
individual  interest,  is  lost  in  the  sense  of  spiritual  union,  wliether  with
one  beloved  soul,  or  with  a  mighty  nation,  or  with  "  the  whole
world  and  creatures  of  God  "  1  We  think  of  Dante  with  Beatrice,  of
Nelson  at  Trafalgar,  of  S.  Francis  on  the  Umbrian  hill.  And  surely
here,  as  in  Galahad's  cry  of  "  If  I  lose  myself  I  find  myself,"  we  have
a  hint  that  much,  very  much,  of  wliat  we  are  wont  to  regard  as  an
integral  part  of  us  may  drop  away,  and  yet  leave  us  with  a  con-
sciousness of  our  own  being  which  is  more  vivid  and  purer  than
before.  This  web  of  habits  and  appetencies,  of  lusts  and  fears,  is  not,
perhaps,  the  ultimate  manifestation  of  what  in  truth  we  are.  It  is
the  cloak  which  our  rude  forefathers  have  woven  themselves  against  the
cosmic  storm  ;  but  we  are  already  learning  to  shift  and  refashion  it  as
our  gentler  weather  needs,  and  if  perchance  it  slip  from  us  in  the  sun-
shine then  something  more  ancient  and  more  glorious  is  for  a  moment
guessed  within.


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


515


VIII.

STAGES  OF  HYPNOTIC  MEMORY.
By  Edmund  Gurney.

On  a  former  occasion  {Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  69-70)  I  drew  atten-
tion to  some  remarkable  peculiarities  of  memory  which  may  be  observed
in  hypnotic  "  subjects."  It  has,  of  course,  long  been  recognised  as  one  of
the  most  striking  characteristics  of  hypnotic  trance,  in  any  but  its  very
lightest  stages,  that  the  "  subject  "  is  oblivious,  on  waking,  of  what  he
has  said  and  done,  and  of  all  that  has  passed  in  his  presence,  while  the
trance-condition  lasted  ;  but  that,  when  he  is  re-hypnotised,  these
vanished  memories  recur  to  his  mind.  But  the  trance-condition  had
always,  in  relation  to  memory,  been  treated  as  a  single  state ;  or  at
any  rate  as  double  only  in  the  sense  that  in  its  deeper  stages  conscious-
ness seemed  so  completely  to  lapse  that  no  impression  at  all  could  be
made  on  the  "subject's"  mind,  and  consequently  no  material  for  memory
could  be  stored  there.  Experiment  showed,  however,  the  existence
of  positive  and  distinct  stages  of  memory  within  the  conscious  portion
of  the  hypnotic  trance.  After  being  brought  into  a  light  stage  of  trance
— what  we  may  call  state  A — the  "  subject  "  is  told  something,  with  a
direction  to  remember  it.  He  is  then  carried  into  a  deeper  stage  of
trance — state  B,  and  is  asked  what  it  was  that  he  had  just  been  told  ;
he  proves  quite  unable  to  recall  it,  and  even  to  recall  the  fact  that  any-
thing has  been  told  him.  He  is  now  told  something  fresh,  with  a
direction  to  remember  it,  after  which  he  is  recalled  to  state  A  ;  and
now,  when  asked  what  he  has  been  told,  he  does  not  mention  and  can-
not recall  what  he  heard  a  few  moments  before  in  state  B,  but
repeats  instead  what  had  been  told  him  in  the  prior  state  A,  in
which  he  now  again  finds  himself.  Brought  once  more  to  state  B,
he  similarly  remembers  what  he  had  been  told  in  that  state,  while
again  completely  oblivious  of  what  was  impressed  on  him  in  state  A.
On  waking,  he  retains  no  memory  of  anything  that  has  been  told
him  ;  ^  though  if  ordered,  in  the  trance,  to  remember  and  mention  some
particular  item  on  waking,  he  will  do  so.  I  made  the  trials  with  a
considerable  number  of  "  .subjects,"  in  different  parts  of  England,
employing  three  different  hypnotisers,  to  each  of  whom  the  results  were

^  This  is  nearly,  but  not  quite,  invariaWe  ;  with  one  "subject"  I  have
twice  found  the  thing  told  him  in  state  A  to  be  dimly  remembered  on  waking —
I  presume  because  it  had  been  told  while  the  trance  was  still  in  its  very
lightest  stage.


516


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


as  new  and  surprising  as  they  were  at  first  to  myself ;  there  seems
reason  to  think,  therefore,  that  the  results  are  tolerably  normal, ^  and
not  due  to  any  special  idiosyncrasies  of  operator  or  "  subject  "  ;  as  they
certainly  were  not  due  to  any  guidance,  or  any  interference  with  the
free  play  of  the  "  subject's "  mind,  in  the  remarks  addressed  to  him
during  the  progress  of  the  experiment.  I  always  found  the  two  stages
well  marked,  though  in  one  or  two  cases  we  seemed  to  get  upon  a  sort
of  knife-edge,  when  for  a  short  time  both  the  impressions  seemed  to  be
simultaneously  remembered.  The  mode  of  effecting  the  passage  from  one
stage  to  another  has  usually  consisted  in  gentle  passes  over  the  face,
without  contact ;  but  with  one  operator,  the  same  effect  was  produced
mainly  or  altogether  by  verbal  suggestion — e.g.,  by  the  simple  direction,
"  Go  deeper,"  several  times  reitei-ated.  I  must  not  digress  into  a
discussion  of  the  nature  of  the  influence  which  the  passes  exercise ;  but
I  may  just  say  that  no  experiments  are  better  calculated  to  display  the
wonderful  delicacy  of  that  particular  mode  of  affection,  in  the  case  of
persons  with  whom  it  has  been  tlie  rule  to  employ  it.  To  the  student
of  hypnotism  the  immediate  responsiveness  of  the  subject's  mind  and
organism  to  the  appropriate  stimuli  comes  to  seem  as  much  a  matter  of
course  as  that  the  tones  of  an  organ  should  vary  in  obedience  to  the
hand  which  turns  on  or  shuts  off  the  different  stops  ;  but  among  all
these  notable  instances  of  stop-management  on  the  human  instrument,
none  is  more  impressive  than  to  find  that  a  few  noiseless  movements  of
one  person's  fingers,  at  a  short  distance  from  another  person's  face,  have
completely  obliterated  that  with  which  the  latter's  attention  two  or
three  seconds  ago  was  entirely  engrossed,  and  have  brought  back  within
his  mental  horizon  that  which  no  other  means  in  the  world — no  other
physical  operation,  not  the  clearest  verbal  reminder,  not  the  fear  of
death,  nor  the  offer  of  £1,000  reward — could  have  induced  or  enabled
him  to  recall.

Though  there  is  nothing  which  would  have  prepared  us  for  these
memory -stages — since  the  passage  from  normal  waking  to  deep  hypnotic
sleep  is  apparently  a  perfectly  gradual  one — it  may  be  observed  that
we  occasionally  find  some  sort  of  analogy  to  them  in  dreams;  though
as  these  do  not  admit  of  deliberate  testing,  and  the  test  has  to  be  got

^  I  am  speaking  of  cases  where  the  trance-condition  is  definitely  estab-
lished— in  the  sense  that  the  "  subject,"  if  left  to  himself,  willlapse  into  a  deep
state  of  slumber,  in  which  he  shows  a  high  degree  of  insensibility  to  sound  and  to
pain,  and  from  which  only  the  original  operator  can  rapidly  bring  him  back  to
the  normal  waking  state.  1  sbonlil  not  expect  to  get  similar  results  in  the  very
light  forms  of  hypnotic  affection  which  are  so  common  in  France  ;  where  the
physical  deviation  from  normality  is  far  less  marked,  and  the  "subject  "  comes
to  himself,  after  the  little  course  of  therapeutic  suggestion  has  been  gone
through,  without  any  special  means,  and  often  without  any  break  in  the
continuity  of  consciousness.


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


517


so  to  speak,  out  of  the  dream  itself,  which  naturally  retains  some
sort  of  continuity  of  incident,  the  analogy  is  of  a  very  broken  and
imperfect  sort.  The  following  case  was  lately  sent  to  me  by  my  friend,
Mr.  David  Stewart,  of  Milton  of  Campsie,  a  careful  and  accurate
reporter.

I  don't  know  whether  a  case  of  "alternating  memory"  during  ordinary
dreaming  may  be  of  the  sUghtest  interest  to  you.  This  morning,  in  a  dream
about  as  ridiculous  as  dreams  usually  are,  a  number  of  circumstances  led  me
to  amputate  the  tail  oi  a  pony  belonging  to  tlie  farmer  with  whom  I  live,  and
while  I  was  rainly  endeavouring  to  fix  it  on  again,  the  farmer  came  in.  At
this  point  all  the  previous  circumstances  of  the  dream  were  forgotten,  and  I
racked  my  brains  in  a  hopeless  attempt  to  explain  the  state  of  affairs.

Memory  was  a  blank,  and  still  remains  so.  However,  as  the  pony
seemed  likely  to  die,  we  lifted  it  into  a  large  pot  that  was  heating  over  the
kitchen  fire  to  give  it  a  warm  bath,  and  I  went  off  for  the  veterinary
surgeon.  On  the  way  I  seemed  partially  to  waken  up,  though  still  walking
on  the  road  to  town.  I  felt  that  the  events  at  the  farm  had  been  a  dream,
and  I  turned  and  walked  .back,  feeling  quite  relieved.

Once  home,  however,  the  whole  thing  returned.  Here  was  the  pony,
still  in  the  pot.  Every  idea  that  1  had  been  dreaming  was  gone.  I  only
knew  that  I  had  gone  for  the  vet.  and  come  back  without  him.  After  some
more  fooling  I  awoke.

All  this  seems  very  silly,  but  it  shows  the  existence  of  four  distinct  layers,
as  it  were,  of  consciousness.

1.  That  of  the  first  part  of  the  dream,  cut  off  by  a  sharp  line  of  forgetf  ul-
ness  from  all  the  rest.

2.  The  second  and  last  part  of  the  dream,  which  seem  to  be  on  the  same
level.

3.  The  middle,  when  I  "  dreamt  it  was  a  dream."  This  too  was  cutoff
sharply  from  the  last  part  of  No.  2.

4.  Waking  consciousness  ;  remembering  2,  3,  and  4,  but  not  No.  1.
With  the  assistance  of  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  (whom  I  will  in  future  call

S.),  I  have  lately  made  a  fresh  series  of  experiments  in  hypnotic  memory,
in  which  some  further  points  have  been  observed  ;  and  it  may  make
the  matter  more  intelligible  to  give  the  details  of  a  few  cases.  The
great  point,  of  course,  is  to  use  the  right  means  for  ascertaining
whether  the  thing  told  is  or  is  not  remembered.  It  would  never
do  to  begin  by  asking  the  "  subject  "  point-blank,  "  Do  you  remember
such  and  such  a  thing  1 " — as,  if  he  were  inclined  to  sim.ulate,  he  might
say  "  Yes,"  though,  in  fact,  he  did  not  remember  it ;  while,  apart  from
any  question  of  simulation,  the  mere  mention  of  this  thing  might  recall
it  to  him,  though  it  had  lapsed  beyond  recall  had  his  mind  been  left  to
itself.  A  very  little  skill  will  surmount  this  difficulty.  The  first
question  should  be  asked  in  some  neutral  form  of  words,  which  will  be
understood  as  referring  to  one  particular  thing  if  that  particular  thing
is  truly  remembered,  but  which,  if  it  meets  with  no  response  implying
memory,  will  equally  serve  as  the  introduction  to  some  fresh  topic.

2  M


518


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


The  following  are  epitomised  samples  of  the  sort  of  conversation
which  occurred.

A  young  man  named  S  1,  (often  mentioned  in  my  paper  on

"Peculiarities  of  certain  Post-hypnotic  States ")  after  being  hypnotised,
was  told  in  state  A  that  the  pier-head  had  been  washed  away,  and  in
state  B  that  an  engine-boiler  had  burst  at  Brighton  station,  and  killed
several  people.  He  was  then  roused  to  state  A,  when  he  proved  to
recollect  about  the  accident  to  the  pier  ;  after  which  a  few  passes
brought  him  again  to  state  B.

S.i "  But  I  suppose  they'll  soon  be  able  to  build  a  new  one."

Had  the  pier  been  now  present  in  S  t's mind,  this  remark

would  have  been  naturally  understood  to  refer  to  it,  as  it  had  formed
the  subject  of  conversation  a  few  seconds  before.  But  he  at  once
replied,  "  Oh,  there  are  plenty  on  the  line " — meaning  plenty  of
engines.

S. "  The  pile-driviiig  takes  time,  though."

S  T. "  Pile-driving  ? Well,  I  don't  know  anything  about

engines  myself."

A  few  upward  passes  were  now  made,  and  it  at  once  becomes  clear
that  the  memory  has  shifted.

S. "  If  they  have  plenty  more,  it  doesn't  matter  much."

S  T. "  Oh,  they  can't  put  it  on  in  a  day  ;  it  was  a  splendid

place."

S. "  Why,  I'm  talking  about  the  engine."

S  T. "  Engine  !  What,  on  the  pier  ?  I  never  noticed  one  there."

Again,  the  same  "subject"  was  told  in  state  A  that  a  balloon  had
been  seen  passing  over  the  King's-road.  Some  passes  were  made
which  carried  him  into  state  B,  when  S.  said,  "  But  I  didn't  see  it
myself."

S  T. "  What  was  that  1. "

He  was  now  told  that  two  large  dogs  had  been  having  a  fight  in
the  Western-road  ;  and  a  few  upward  passes  roused  him  to  state  A.
S. "  But  it  was  a  good  long  time  in  sight."

S  T. "  The  balloon  %  "

S. "  No,  the  dog  "

S  T. "  Dog ! Why,  was  there  one  on  it  ? A  dog  on  a

balloon  ! "

The  "  subject "  is  brought  down  again  to  state  B.

1  The  topics  were  in  every  case  selected,  the  changes  of  state  directed,  and
the  substance  and  tone  of  Mr.  Smith's  remarks  suggested,  by  me  ;  tlie  actual
form  of  words  being  sometimes  left  to  him,  in  order  that  the  conversation  might
flow  easDy.  I  am  much  indebted  to  him  for  the  ready  and  complete  way  in
which  he  throughout  met  my  wishes.


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


519


S. "  But  it  didn't  remain  in  sight  long  ;  it  soon  went  up."

S  T. "  What  didn't  1 What  went  up  1"

S. "  Weren't  we  talking  about  balloons  1 "

S  ^T. "  No  ;  but  one  o£  them  dogs  looked  like  a  busted  balloon

when  he  was  down."

A  few  upward  passes,  and  S.  says,  "  Which  one  1" ■ ■  '

S  T. "  Why,  there  was  only  one."

S. "One  what?"

S  T. "  Balloon."

S. "  I  was  talking  about  dogs."

S  T. "  I  don't  knOw  nothing  of  dogs."

Three  days  afterwards,  S — — t  was  again  hypnotised,  and  S.  said,
"  What  was  that  you  said  about  the  pier  1 "

S  T. "  Oh,  about  the  head  being  washed  away."

This,  it  will  be  seen,  was  the  memory  appropriate  to  state  A.  Some
downward  passes  were  made,  and  S.  said,  "  A  good  thing  that  things
don't  often  happen  like  that."

S  T. "  No,  they  don't  at  Brighton  ;  they  do  on  the  Northern

lines."

Here  we  have  the  engine  accident  again — the  memory  appropriate
to  state  B.  The  balloon  over  the  King's-road  was  now  strongly
suggested  by  S.  ;  but  that  idea  belonging  to  state  A,  it  could  not  be
recalled  in  state  B.  S.  then  said :  "  Oh,  no  ;  of  course  it  was  in  the
Western-road."

S  T. "  Yes,  something  happened  there."

S. «  What  was  it  ?  "

S  T. "  A  dog-hght ;  between  two  large  dogs. They  had  a  good

old  tussle."

Here  is  an  instance  with  W  s,  also  often  mentioned  in  my

earlier  paper.

He  was  told  in  state  A  that  the  statue  of  Sir  Cordy  Burrows  had  been
dug  up  and  carried  off  from  the  Pavilion  Gardens,  and  in  state  B  that
a  pipe  had  burst  in  North-street,  and  had  caused  a  waterspout
and  a  commotion.  After  bringing  him  back  to  state  A,  S.  said,  "Yes,
1  heard  that  people  got  very  muddy  over  that  job."

W  s.  "Whatiob?"

S. "  What  I  told  you  about."

W  s. "  Ah,  they  ivould  get  muddy  over  taking  off' that  statue."

S.  "I  was  talking  about  the  pipe  bursting."  But  no  suggestion  or
description  was  able  to  bring  back  this  occurrence — whicli  belonged  to
the  B  class — to  his  mind.

The  next  day  the  same  "  subject  "  was  hypnotised,  and  was  immedi-
ately asked  what  had  happened  in  the  Pavilion  Gardens.

W  s. "Sir  Cordy  Burrows?  when  they  ran  away  with  it?  "


2  M  2


520


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


S. "  Ran  into  North-street,  didn't  tliey  V
W  s.  "No."

S. "  Tliere  was  something  about  a  pipe  in  North-street."

W  s. "Oh,  I  haven't  heard  anything  about  North-street."

He  was  carried  in  a  few  seconds  into  the  further  stage,  when  S.
said,  "  Where  was  it  carried  off  to  ?  "

W  s. "They  couldn't  rarry  it,  could  they? But  it  carried

itself  pretty  high. Carry  a  waterspout !  "

S.  "  What  about  that  statue  ? "  But  nothing  would  revive  this  A
idea  in  the  B  state.

On  March  23rd,  S  1  was  hypnotised,  and  told  that  the  spire  of

St.  Paul's  Church,  in  West-street,  had  fallen,  and  hurt  some  people.
Some  passes  were  made,  and  S.  said  :  "  "Did  you  hear  whether  many
people  were  hurt  ? "

S  T.  "When?"

S. "  In  that  accident."

He  had  no  idea  what  was  meant,  and  S.  now  told  him  that  the
accident  had  been  at  the  Grand  Hotel — that  the  lift  had  gone  up  with
a  run,  and  been  smashed  against  the  top.  He  was  then  brought  back
to  state  A.

S. "  Yes,  that's  an  unusual  sort  of  accident."

S  T. "Yes,  they  don't  generally  fall  like  that,  unless  struck  by

lightning."

S. "  Fall  !  Why,  it  went  up."

S  T. "  Went  up  1 "

S. "Yes,  at  the  hotel."

S  T. "  It  didn't  fall  on  a  hotel,  did  it  ?  "

On  March  27th,  being  asked,  in  state  B, what  it  was  that  had
happened  in  West-street,  he  replied,  "  Tlie  top  of  the  church  fell  oif."
S. "  Wasn't  there  something  that  went  up  ? "

S  T. "  I  don't  think  so."

S. "  Went  up  with  a  run  1 "

S  T. "  No  ;  they  were  frightened  the  other  side  of  the  road,

perhaps."

S.  now  brought  him  down  to  state  B,  and  continued,  "  Oh,  they
were  frightened,  were  they  ? "

S  T. "  Yes,  those  that  saw*it  were."

S. "  Saw  wliat  ? "

S  T. "  Saw  it  go  up."

S. "  What  go  up  ?  "

S  T. "  That  lift  go  up."

S. "  I  thought  you  meant  that  spire."

S  T. "  What,  is  there  a  spire  on  the  top  ? "

S. "  Top  of  what  ?  "  .


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


521


S  T. "  Of  the  hotel." And  so  on.

It  is  equally  easy  to  start  with  state  B. Thus,  on  April  7,  the

eleventh  day  from  the  last  experiment,  S  1  was  carried  down  into

the  deep  speechless  condition,  and  then  recalled  by  one  or  two  calls  to
the  stage  where  he  was  capable  of  answering.  The  above  conversation
was  then  continued.

S. "  Do  you  remember  that  accident  that  there  was  at  Brighton  1 "

S  T. "  What,  at  the  Grand  Hotel,  when  that  lift  went  up  1 "

S.  "  Ah,  we  were  talking  of  several  accidents;  wasn't  there  another
in — in  West-street  ? "

S — — T.  "  No.  The  hotel  is  at  the  bottom  of  West-street."  (It  is
very  near  to  the  junction  of  West-street  with  the  King's-road.)

He  is  now  roused,  and  S.  continues,  "  Oh,  just  at  the  bottom  of
West-street,  is  it  ? "

S  T. "  Not  quite  ;  nearly."

S. "  What  is  1 "

S  T. "  The  church."

S. "  What  church  1"

S  T. "  That  one  the  steeple  fell  off ;  you  were  telling  me  about

it.  It  fell  on  the  roof  of  an  hotel  " — clearly  the  echo  of  his  concluding
remark  on  March  23rd.

Here  is  an  instance  of  an  entirely  fresh  experiment  commencing

with  a  suggestion  in  state  B. W  s,  having  just  been  roused  from

the  condition  when  he  was  incapable  of  answei'ing,  was  told  that
there  was  a  fine  new  specimen  of  a  whale  at  the  Aquarium.

W  s. "  Oh  !  Where  did  they  get  that  from  1 "

S. "It  was  found  floundering  on  the  coast."

The  "subject"  having  been  roused  to  the  lighter  state,  S.  went  on,
"  So  they'll  have  it  in  a  tank."
W  s. "  What  1 "

S.  "  Wasn't  I  telling  you  about  something  1  What  was  I  telling
you  about  1 "

W  s. "  You  told  me  something." He  appears  to  consider.

S. "  What  sort  of  fish  did  I  mention  1  "

W  s. "Fish  ! I  don't  know." He  cannot  recall  this  idea.

S.  "  Well,  I  was  going  to  tell  you  about  Miss  Webb's  display  at
the  pier. They're  going  to  have  that  at  the  Aquarium,  in  a  tank."

State  B  is  now  reproduced,  and  S.  proceeds  :  "  But  I  suppose  she's
used  to  the  water."

W  s. "They  generally  are;  you  don't  often  see  them  out  of  it,

unless  they're  dead."

S. "  I  said  it  was  at  the  pier."

W  s. "You  said  floundering  on  the  coast."

S. "  No,  I  said  something  about  Miss  Webb."


522


Stages  of  Hyimotic  Memory.


W  s. "  Webb  ! Whale  ain't  Webb."

It  would  be  tedious  to  multiply  these  normal  instances.  But  there
were  some  of  a  more  unusual  kind.  As  I  have  said,  the  rule  is  to
obtain  tivo  states  or  stages.  If  the  attempt  is  made  to  carry  the
trance-condition  beyond  state  B,  the  effect  is  either  to  bring  the
"subject"  into  an  apparently  deep  sleep,  in  which  he  is  incapable  of
answering,  and  probably  of  hearing ;  or  to  create  such  a  desire  for
sleep,  and  aversion  to  being  questioned,  that  he  becomes  more  or  less
intractable.  With  one  "  subject  "  I  have  found  that  even  the  second
stage,  on  one  or  two  occasions,  could  not  be  obtained.  In  this  deepen-
ing process  sleep  and  apparent  unconsciousness  supervened  before  any
dividing  line  had  been  established;  so  that,  up  to  the  last  moment  when  he
could  answer  questions,  the  memory  of  the  things  told  him  immediately
after  his  entrancement  remained.  But  there  are  other  cases  which  are
exceptional  in  just  the  opposite  direction — cases  where  the  course  of
the  trance  allows  a  distinct  third  stage  of  memory  to  manifest  itself
before  unconsciousness  sets  in.  The  following  instance  will  make  this
clear.

In  state  A,  S  1  was  hypnotised  ;  and  the  fact  of  his  being  in

state  A  was  ascertained  by  his  remembering  the  balloon  over  the
King's-road,  and  forgetting  the  dog  fight  and  the  engine-accident —
the  ideas  of  state  B.  He  was  now  told  that  a  foreign  flag  had  been
seen  floating  over  the  Pavilion,  and  was  then  carried  on  into  state  B,
when  S.  said,  "People  may  well  complain."

S  T. "  Yes."

S.  "Whyl"

S  T. "  Why,  the  nuisance — those  dogs  fighting  in  the  Western-
road." (The  idea  proper  to  state  B  is  revived.)
S. "  No,  I  meant  about  the  flag."

S  T. "  What  flag  ? There  are  plenty  of  flags  about."  (The

idea  projjer  to  state  A  is  forgotten.)

S.  "  No,  I  meant  that  cart  running  away  in  Montpelier-road  " — a
new  idea,  which  will  belong  henceforth  to  the  B  class.

S  T. "What  cart?"  Then,  scornfully,  "Cart  running  away!

It's  the  horse  that  runs  away."

He  was  then  informed  more  particularly  that  a  horse  with  a  cart
had  bolted  in  Montpelier-road ;  and  the  deepening  passes  were
continued.

S. "  So  they  found  it  bottom  upwards."

There  was  no  answer  ;  the  "  subject  "  had  lapsed  into  sleep.  He
was  called  by  name,  and  a  few  reverse  passes  were  made — when  he
woke  with  an  "  Eh  ?  "

S. "  They  found  it  bottom  upwards."

S  T. "  What  ? When  ? "


'Stages  of  Hyimotic  Memory.


523


S.  "  A  boat,  I  mean."  He  was  then  told  that  a  very  high  tide
had  washed  away  a  boat  on  the  beach ;  but  that  after  a  time  it  had
drifted  ashore.  Tliis  idea  was  suggested  in  what  proved  to  be  a
separate  and  third  stage,  C,  when  he  was  on  the  very  verge  of  lapsing
into  unconsciousness  ;  and  he  did  lapse  immediately  afterwards.  He
was  roused,  and  S.  said,  "  That's  the  effect  of  not  tying  it  securely."

S  t's  answers  now  showed  that  the  rousing  had  carried  him  over

stage  C,  and  that  he  was  once  more  in  stage  B.  He  said,  "  Tied  ?
They  never  tie  them."

S. "  No  wonder  it  was  washed  away  then."

S  T. "  Washed  away  ! Did  it  go  over  the  cliff? "

S. "  No  ;  what  do  you  mean  1 "

S  T. "  That  horse  and  cart  you  were  talking  about."

Here,  then,  was  the  stage  B  idea,  the  boat  of  stage  C  being
forgotten.  It  remained  to  ascertain  that  what  I  have  called  stage  0
was  not  identical  with  stage  A — that  there  had  been  a  real  progression
beyond  stage  B,  and  not  a  mere  oscillation  between  the  A  and  B  states.
Accordingly,  some  reverse  passes  were  made,  with  the  view  of  bringing
the  subject  into  the  A  state ;  and  S.  said,  "  I  dare  say  it  will  get
knocked  about  on  the  beach."

S  T. "  What  knocked  about  ?  "

S.  "What  I  was  telling  you  about."

S  T. "Why,  have  they  taken  it  on  the  beach  now,  then  1 "

S. "  It  was  on  the  beach."

S  T. "  Why,  you  said  it  was  on  the  Pavilion."

S.  "  What  do  you  mean  r'
S  T. "  That  large  flag."

Here  then  was  the  stage  A  idea,  and  the  memory  of  the  boat  of

stage  C  proved  as  unrevivable  as  it  had  been  in  stage  B. S  1  was

now  carried  down  without  pause  into  the  state  of  deep  sleep — the  most
certain  way  of  lighting  on  stage  C  being  to  go  beyond  it  in  this  way,
and  then  to  revive  the  "subject  "  just  enough  to  enable  him  to  under-
stand and  answer.  He  was  called  by  name  several  times,  and  a  few
reverse  passes  were  made,  before  he  answered,  "  Eh  ?  what  1  "  S.
replied  in  words  which  would  apply  equally  to  carts  or  boats ;  but,  as  I
expected,  they  were  understood  as  applying  to  boats — the  stage  C  idea.

S. "  Is  it  customary  to  tie  them  ?  "

S  T. "  Yes."

S.  "  I  thought  you  said  it  wasn't."  (He  had  said  before  that  it
was  not  customary  to  tie  carts.)

S  T. "  Oh,  yes;  sometimes  they  tie  them  to  capstans,  sometimes

to  larger  vessels."

He  was  now  questioned  about  the  cart,  but  had  no  remembrance  of
it ;  also  about  the  dog-fight  (which,  the  reader  will  recall,  was  another


524


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


stage  B  idea),  with  the  same  result.  Some  upward  passes  were  now
made,  and  S.  said,  "Did  you  say  they  tie  them  to  a  capstan  1 "

S  T. "  No;  they  throw  the  reins  loose  over  the  horse's  back."

S. "  A  lot  of  people  saw  it  coming  down."

S  T. "  What,  the  horse  and  cart  ? "

Here  is  evidently  the  reappearance  of  stage  B ;  and  proceeding
again  on  the  upward  or  lightening  course,  we  found  the  A  idea,  the  flag
on  the  Pavilion,  duly  remembered.  This  was  on  February  28th.  On
March  2nd,  the  same  process  was  briefly  repeated.  Thus  after  the
"subject"  had  proved  his  recollection  of  the  flag,  he  was  carried
straight  on  into  the  furthest  state,  and  S.  said,  "  Have  you  heard  of
something  running  away  ? "

S— T.  "  No  ;  not  r^mning  away  ;  it  broke  away  on  the  beach  ;
but  it  washed  in  again."  (Here  is  stage  C,  stage  B  having  been
crossed  without  any  questions.)  The  "  subject "  was  roused  a  little,
and  S.  said,  "  Yes  ;  it  very  nearly  got  lost."

S  T. "  Whati I  don't  think  so."

S. "  If  it  hadn't  been  washed  ashore,  it  would  have  been  lost."
S — - — T. "  It  didn't  go  over  the  rails  into  the  sea,  did  it?"
S. "What  didn't?"

S  T. "  That  horse  and  cart." (Re-ascent  into  stage  B.)

He  was  now  completely  roused,  re-hypnotised,  given  a  new  A
impression — viz.,  that  the  statue  had  been  taken  from  the  Pavilion
Gardens — and  then  a  few  passes  were  made.

S. "So  people  ran  in  all  directions."

S  T. "  When,  where  1 Anything  serious  ? "

S. "  That  statue,  you  know."

S  T. "  Statue  ! Was  it  in  the  way  then  1 "

S. "  In  the  way  ? When  ?  "

S  T. "  When  that  horse  and  cart  ran  away." (Re-descent  into

state  B.)

He  is  now  given  a  new  B  impression — viz.,  that  the  pipe  had  burst
in  North-street — and  is  then  carried  right  on  into  deep  sleep,  and
slightly  roused.

S. "  Yes,  that's  a  novel  idea,  isn't  it  ?  "

S  T.  "What?"

S. "  Why,  turning  that  "

S  T.  "  What,  the  water  turning  that  boat  ashore  ? "  (Re-
descent  into  stage  C.) And  so  on.

I  will  give  one  more  instance  of  these  memory  alternations,  which
includes  the  third  state. Immediately  after  the  last  appearance  of  the

boat,  which  belonged,  it  will  be  remembered,  to  stage  C,  S  1  was

told  that  Brill's  Baths  were  going  to  be  transformed  into  a  circus — •


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


525


which,  he  opined,  would  never  pay.  This  was  the  final  impression  of
March  2nd. On  March  3rd,  we  began  with  stage  A.

S. "  What  were  you  telling  me  about  the  Pavilion  Gardens  ? "

S  T. "Yoit  were  telling  me — about  the  statue  of  Sir  Cordy

Burrows  being  taken  away."  (A.)

He  is  now  told  that  a  new  Grand  Hotel  was  to  be  built  on  the
East  Cliff.  He  expresses  surprise,  and  says  that  "  it  is  a  funny  place  to
choose." He  is  now  carried  deeper.

S. "Yes,  it  is  a  funny  place."

S  T. "  Why,  they  burst  anywhere."

S. "  What  do  you  mean  1 "

S  T.  ''  Why,  you  told  me  a  water-pipe  had  burst  in  North-
street."  (B.)

S. "  I  was  talking  of  the  hotel."

S  T. "What,  did  it  burst  beside  the  Unicorn  f" (This  is  a

hotel  in  North-street.)

He  is  now  told  that  there  was  to  be  a  new  Electric  Railway
along  the  West  Cliff.

S  T. "  Have  they  got  the  sanction  of  the  Council  1  "

S.  "  Have  you  heard  of  anything  to  be  done  on  the  Hast
Cliff  r'

S  T.  "  Nothing  that  I  know  of.  Only  that  lift  for  the  rail-
way." (This  was  a  real  project  in  connection  with  the  East  Cliff
electric  car.)

S.  "  That  improvement  will  make  up  for  the  catastrophe  at  the
Pavilion."

S  T. "  What  was  that  ?  "

S. "The  statue."

S  T. "  Statue  !  " This  A  idea  cannot  be  recalled  in  state  B.

He  is  carried  deeper.

S. "  So  they  are  going  to  do  it  after  all."

S  T. "  Are  they  ? A  very  good  thing  if  it  pays."

S. "What  pays. r'

S  T.  "Why,  that  Circus  at  Brill's  Baths."  (C.)

He  is  now  told  that  a  new  spire  is  to  be  put  on  St.  Paul's  Church,
in  West-street ;  and  then  we  begin  the  reverse  journey.

After  a  few  upwai'd  passes,  S.  says,  "Yes,  St.  Paul's  wants  one
like  that."

S  T. "  Like  what  1 "

S. "  The  spire  for  St.  Paul's."

S  T.  "  I've  never  seen  St.  Paul's  ;  it  looks  very  nice  in  photo-
graphs." (He  referred  the  remark  to  St.  Paul's  in  London.)

S.  "  What  is  that  they  are  going  to  do  on  the  West  Cliff,  or  at
Brill's  Baths?"


526


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


S  T. "  There's  that  new  Electric  Railway." (B.)  The  idea  of

the  circus  (C)  could  not  be  revived.

S. "  That  will  be  an  improvement,  like  that  hotel."

S  T. "  Why,  there's  no  hotel  been  improved."

S. "Not  on  the  East  Cliff?"

S  T. "  What,  are  they  going  to  build  a  new  one  1 "

A  few  more  upward  passes,  and  S.  resumes,  "  They  have  been
painting  it."

S  T. "  You  said  they  were  going  to  build  a  new  one."

S. "  A  new  what  1  "

S  T. "  Hotel  on  the  East  Cliff."  (A.)

He  is  woke,  and  tlien  immediately  re-hypnotised.  For  the  first  few
moments  he  only  remembers  "  something  about  some  hotel,"  and  does
not  recall  on  which  cliff  it  was  to  be.  But  a  few  more  passes
bring  back  state  A  completely.

S.  "  Was  there  to  be  something  on  the  West  Cliff?  "

S  T.  "  You  said  the  hotel  was  to  be  on  the  East  Cliff."  (A.)

He  is  carried  further,  and  S.  says,  "  On  the  East  Cliff,  is  it  to  be  ? "

S  T.  "  Why,  they've  got  one  there  !  "

S.  "One  what?"

S  T.  "An  electric  railway," — which  is  true.  From  his  exclaiming

"  Why  they've  got  one  there,"  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  hotel  (A)  was
now  forgotten,  and  that  the  idea  of  the  new  Electric  Railway  (B)
which  lie  had  been  told  was  to  be  on  the  West  Cliff,  had  reappeared.
The  state  is  now  deepened,  and  S.  says,  "  Oh,  they  have  got
one  1 "

S  T.  "No,  not  yet."

S.  "What?"

S  T.  "  Why,  a  new  spire  to  St.  Paul's."  (C.)

Brought  back  to  state  A,  he  remembers  the  hotel  on  the  East  Cliff,
but  when  the  new  spire  is  suggested,  he  remarks,  "  What,  to  tliat
church  at  Kemp-town  ?  "

These  samples  are  fair  types  of  the  dialogues  that  passed,  and  will
sufficiently  show,  I  think,  that  the  results  were  fairly  observed,  and  not
forced  or  fished  for  in  the  course  of  the  interrogatories.  But  it  may  be
objected  that  I  am  taking  the  honesty  of  the  "  subjects  "  too  much  for
granted,  and  that  they  may  have  acted  their  parts.  Now,  I  should
certainly  not  base  a  conclusion  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  experiments
on  the  fact — wliich  my  expeiience  of  these  "subjects"  put  quite  beyond
doubt — that  they  were  in  a  true  hypnotic  state.  I  am  very  far  indeed
from  holding  that  because  a  person  is  hypnotised  he  is  incapable  of
deceit ;  indeed,  I  think  it  by  no  means  improbable  that  even  honest
persons  may  be  guilty  of  what  looks  like  cliicanery  during  that
temporary  dislocation  of  the  mental  machinery  which  the  turning  of  the


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.  527

hypnotic  screw  involves. ^ But,  putting  morbid  and  exceptional  cases
aside,  I  would  unhesitatingly  assert  that,  with  patience  and  observa-
tion, one  may  learn  to know one's "  subject " in the  abnormal
state,  even  as  one  may  learn  to  know  him  in  the  normal  state.  He  is  a
new  person,  with  decided  eccentricities,  and  he  might  fail  to  recognise
himself ;  but,  for  all  that,  he  has  a  quite  recognisable  character,  the
manifestations  of  which,  in  the  narrow  range  of  circumstances  with
which  he  is  brought  into  contact,  are  specially  constant  and  easy  to
predict. Thus  one  comes  to  trust,  or,  it  may  be,  to  distrust  him,  just
as  one  might  any  other  acquaintance.  Now  the  tone,  demeanour,  and
style  of  conversation  of  the  "subjects"  on  whom  these  observations  were
made  have  always  been  perfectly  open,  candid,  and  consistent ;  there
has  never  been  the  slightest  sign  of  trickiness  or  evasion. I  really
owe  this  expression  of  confidence  to  their  hypnotic  character,  as  I  am
almost  ashamed  to  feel  how  exclusively  the  high  level  of  untruthfulness
which  the  above  dialogues  undoubtedly  maintained  was  due  to  my  own
share  in  them. Not,  of  course,  that  I  should  expect  to  impart  my
gradually -acquired  confidence  to  others,  who  have  to  accept  the  grounds
for  it  at  second  hand  ;  but  such  considerations  may  fairly  be  used
to reinforce  more definite arguments. These  are  at  least  three
in  number. (1)  The  young  men  whom  I  employed  had  no  means  of  dis-
covering what  results  would  be  to  my  liking.  Though  it  was,  of  course,
impossible  for  Mr.  Smith  and  me,  after  the  stages  had  once  manifested
themselves,  not  to  expect  the  results  to  turn  out  in  the  main  as  they
did,  we  were  careful  to  give  the  "  subjects  "  no  opportunity  of  knowing
what  these  expectations  were. The  matter  was  never  discussed  in  their
presence,  either  when  they  were  entranced  or  when  they  were  awake —
except  that  on  waking  they  were  offered  a  sovereign  if  they  could
repeat  anything  that  had  been  told  them  in  the  trance ; and  no
expressions  of  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction,  or  comments  of  any  sort,
accompanied  the  experiments. I  may  mention,  too,  that  in  five  distinct
instances,  through my forgetfulness,  this or that "  subject "  was
interrogated,  when  in  a  particular  state,  on  topics  which  had  been
previously  mentioned  to  one  of  the  others  when  in  that  state,  but  not  to
him.  On  these  occasions  his  mind  appeared  to  be  a  complete  blank  as  to
what  was  referred  to.  I  imagined,  therefore,  that  there  was  some  failure

1  This  seems  to  be  the  case  also  in  other  abnormal  manifestations,  as  little
connected  as  hypnotism  need  be  with  bodily,  mental,  or  moral  disease.  Some
of  my  readers  will  recall  the  Newnham  experiments  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  63-9),  where  some  of  the  answers,  written  with  a  planchette,
showed  a  trickiness  quite  alien  to  the  real  character  of  the  person  who  held  it  ;
and  in  the  same  class  we  may  reckon  the  baseless  predictions  and  ludicrous
claims  with  which  this  little  instrument  so  often  deceives  those  who  have  been
unconsciously  directing  it.


528


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


or  irregularity  in  these  results — until  an  examination  of  my  former  notes
showed  me  what  the  explanation  was.  (2)  Even  supposing  that  one
"  subject  "  might  have  hit,  by  luck  or  cunning,  on  the  hypothesis  of
memory- stages,  and  might  have  divined  that  this  was  what  I  had  in  my
mind,  and  so  tried  to  act  it  out,  what  are  the  chances  that  several
should  have  independently  done  so  ?  It  must  be  remembered  that  the
experiments  were  as  new  to  each  of  them  in  turn  as  at  first  they  were
to  me;  and  with  each  of  them  the  results  were  as  clear  and  unmistakeable
on  the  first  day  as  ever  afterwards.  (3)  Even  if  luck  or  cunning  had
led  them  all  to  the  discovery,  it  is  surely  most  improbable  that  they
should  all  have  had  so  unbroken  a  run  of  success,  in  a  complicated  task
requiring,  one  would  think,  much  natural  aptitude,  and  certainly  much
quick  observation  and  presence  of  mind.  Though  there  are  special
ways  in  which  hypnotic  differs  from  normal  intelligence,  the  difference
has  never  been  observed  to  lie  in  a  superiority  of  nimble  practical  wit.
An  untrained  lad,  when  liypnotised,  might  surpass  his  normal  self  at
learning  a  lesson  by  rote,  but  not  at  a  game  like  whist.

Of  the  fresh  points  of  interest  which  this  series  of  experiments
exhibited,  the  first  relates  to  the  effect  which  persistent  bothering
apparently  had  on  the  memory-conditions.  The  eflect  was  in  some
cases  to  obliterate  the  older  impressions,  but  never  to  confuse  them.
Impressions  made  in  state  A  did  not  reappear  in  state  B,  nor  vice  versa;
but  impressions  made  on  some  previous  day,  in  one  state,  might  fail  to
reappear  when  that  state  reappeared,  if  a  neiver  impression  connected
with  the  state  had  taken  too  strong  a  hold  on  the  mind.  Thus,  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  expei'iments  on  February  28th, S  1  remembered, in  state

A  and  state  B  respectively,  the  impressions  which  had  been  connected
with  those  states  on  February  26th ;  but  after  the  various  ups  and
downs  of  the  journey  to  stage  C  and  back  again,  and  the  giddy  merry-
go-round  of  flags,  carts,  and  boats,  he  was  unable  to  recall  the  balloon,
in  state  A,  and  the  dog-fight,  in  state  B ;  though  (as  we  have  seen)
remaining  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  new  impressions  now  associated  with
these  two  states  respectively.  And  on  March  2nd,  though  the  ideas  of
February  28th  were  each  remembered  in  the  appropriate  state,  no
amount  of  suggestion  could  bring  to  remembrance  the  impressions  of  an
older  date.  Exactly  the  same  thing  occurred  on  March  3rd.  The
impressions  of  March  2nd  were  remembered,  each  in  the  proper  stage,
at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  but  could  not  be  revived  at  its  close,
after  a  course  of  questions  connected  with  a  fresh  series  of  impressions.

A  second  observation  was  that  what  I  have  called  the  "  knife-edge,"
the  middle  line  where  the  ideas  of  both  stages  were  now  and  then
for  a  moment  present  togethei",  can  apparently  be  broadened  out  with
habit ;  the  sharp  angle  becomes  a  gentle  curve,  and  the  stages  at  either
end which  remain  completely  out  of sight of  one  another  shrink


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


529


proportionately  in  extent. Thus  with  W  s,  whose  mind  has  been

carried  over  the  ground  again  and  again,  one  has  now  to  be  careful
to  impress  the  second  or  "  state  B  "  idea  when  he  is  closely  approaching
the  deep  speechless  condition  which  marks  the  limit  of  the  experiment.

Another  fact  which  clearly  came  out  was  that  people  have  good  and
bad  hypnotic  memories,  just  as  they  have  good  and  bad  ordinary
memories.  After  an  interval  of  less  than  three  weeks,  all  the  ideas  that

had  been  impressed  on  S  1  proved  to  be  forgotten  and  unrevivable,

with  one  doubtful  exception ;  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  this,  I
found  that  it  was  impossible  to  get  this  "  subject "  to  execute  an
order  a  longue  echeance.  He  was  told  in  the  trance  on  March  3rd  that
he  was  to  do  a  particular  thing  on  March  28th  ;  but  the  order  had
completely  faded  from  his  remembrance  on  March  23rd.

But  a  more  important  point  was  this — that  even  where  the
memories  remain  clear,  the  distinct  separation  of  states  may
be  temporary  only.  The  case  in  which  this  was  first  shown
greatly surprised  me, as it was the  iirst  irregularity  that  had

presented  itself  in  many  scores  of  trials.  On  March  2nd,W  s,  while

undoubtedly  in  state  B,  recalled  the  story  of  the  balloon,  which
belonged  to  state  A ;  and  a  few  minutes  afterwards,  while  in  state  A,
he  remembered  tlie  engine-accident  which  belonged  to  state  B.  Now
both  the  ideas  which  seemed  thus  to  be  remembered  out  of  their  proper
states  had  been  impressed  on  him  a  week  previously.  In  the  inteiwal
a  good  many  conversations  of  the  type  above  exemplified  had  been
held ;  and  my  first  notion  was  that  by  ourselves  repeatedly  suggesting,
in  one  state  or  the  other,  the  idea  not  proper  to  that  state — in  order  to
show  that  in  the  wrong  state  no  amount  of  suggestion  would  quicken
the  paralysed  memory — we  had  by  degrees  created  an  independent
impression  of  the  A  thing  in  the  B  state,  (or  vice  versa,)  or  had  at  any
rate  given  the  "  subject  "  the  material  from  which  he  could  himself
piece  out  some  knowledge  of  it.  The  answers,  however,  had  been  given
with  a  readiness  and  completeness  which  made  this  supposition  seem
decidedly  strained  ;  and  subsequent  trials  showed  clearly,  I  think,  that
it  was  unnecessary,  and  that  thei'e  had  really  been  no  irregularity.  The
obliteration  of  the  distinction  in  these  cases  was  simply  due  to  the
week's  lapse  of  time  ;  ^  and  after  a  longer  period  of  1 9  days,  during  the
greater  part  of  which  no  experiments  were  made,  I  found  that  the  old

1  The  period  may  probably  vary  greatly  iiTider  different  circumstances  ;  and
I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  the  fusion  itself  is  the  rule

or  the  exception.  _  With  S  1,  we  have  seen  that  the  separation  of  memories

remained  quite  distinct  on  the  11th  day,  while  in  less  tlian  double  that  time

there  remained  no  memories  to  be  separated.  With  W  s,on  the  other  hand,

who  has  been  much  more  exercised,  it  happened  in  one  case  that  impressions
given  on  March  iind  and  revivable  only  in  the  mutually  exclusive  stages  on
March  23rd,  were  fused  on  March  24th.


530


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


ideas,  of  whichever  state,  could  all  be  equally  and  indiscriminately
recalled  in  either  state  A  or  state  B  ;  though  in  respect  of  more  recent
impressions  these  states  proved  as  distinct  and  as  mutually  exclusive  in
their  memories  as  ever.  This  was  a  great  relief  to  my  mind,  not  only
as  doing  away  with  the  uncertainty  which  the  occurrence  of  exceptions
in  a  uniform  series  of  results  must  necessarily  involve,  but  for  a  wider
reason.

Probably  all  who  have  considered  the  phenomena  of  "double
consciousness,"  or  any  cases  where  a  single  life  has  included  parts  of
which  one  knows  nothing  of  another,  have  asked  themselves  how  far  the
individual  really  remained  the  same.  Mr.  Myers  has  recently  pointed
out,  as  I  think  with  perfect  justice,  how  much  less  of  a  single  and  com-
plete thing  personality  is  than  we  are  apt  to  assume,  how  much  the
very  idea  of  personality  depends  on  the  sense  of  continuity  of
memory,  and  how  this  fact  involves  apparent  disruption  and  subor-
dinate multiplications  of  personality,  whenever  by  any  means  the
chain  of  memory  is  abruptly  snapped.  But  however  much  we  may
recognise  as  a  fact  that  the  /  of  to-day  or  of  this  year  may  fail
to  show  any  connection — save  in  the  habitation  of  the  same  bodily
tenement — with  the  /  of  yesterday  or  of  ten  years  ago,  we  most  of  us
clinc,  I  imagine,  to  the  notion  that  there  is  some  sense  in  which  it  is  still
true  that  the  two  I's  which  inhabit  the  same  bodily  teiiement  have,  after
all,  a  sort  of  identity,  and  that  their  relation  is  fundamentally  different
from  that  between  persons  inhabiting  different  bodily  tenements.
And  we  should  certainly  feel  it  to  be  a  justification  of  this  notion,  if
there  came  a  time  when  the  inhabitant  of  the  one  tenement  could  look
back,  and  remember  simultaneously  both  the  dissociated  states — if  he
could  in  tins  way  relate  his  present  consciousness  to  each  of  them.
Just  as  we  should  recognise  a  certain  unity  of  personality  in  the  fact
that  each  of  the  /s,  though  separated  in  all  else,  retained  some  past
memory  in  common,  so  should  we  recognise  a  unity  in  the  fact  that,
though  the  two  had  liad  no  common  element,  the  memories  of  them
co-existed  in  a  single  consciousness.  That  is  to  say,  the  point  of  union
may  be  above  the  point  of  separation  as  well  as  beAmv  it.  Now,
whether  or  not  such  a  final  fusion  in  memory  will  ever  be  manifested
in  those  major  instances  of  broken  identity  which  present  the  personal
problem  in  an  urgent  form,  I  cannot  guess  ;  if  not,  then  I  confess  that
I  see  no  manner  in  which  our  faith  in  the  continued  identity  of  the
persons  concerned,  or,  ultimately,  in  our  own,  can  be  sustained.  For  is
not  their  case  ours  1  ^  Does  the  boy  or  the  man  know  aught  of  the
life  of  the  infant,  who  yet,  we  say,  was  he  1  Is  not  the  physical  change
of  death,  which  we  must  all  undergo,  a  profounder  one  than  any  which


^  See  Mr.  Myers'  remarks  above,  p.  257.


Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory.


531


the  brains  of  Louis  V.  or  liis  like  have  undergone  ?  The  problem  of
continuance  is  the  same  for  all ;  and  though,  in  our  total  ignorance  of
the  nature  of  the  bond  between  mind  and  organism,  it  may  be  rash  to
found  on  present  experiences  presumptions  as  to  untried  modes  of
psychical  life,  I  still  think  it  is  something  if  here  and  now,  on
a  small  scale,  a  union  of  divided  states  in  a  higher  memory
can  be  shown  to  take  place.  I  say  on  a  small  scale ;  for  with  the
hypnotic  "  subject  "  there  is,  of  course,  no  question  of  an  actual
breach  of  personality,  since  the  backward  bonds  remain  unbroken  :
in  each  of  his  states  of  mutually  exclusive  memory  his  normal  waking
life  is  distinctly  realised  and  remembered.  At  the  same  time,  the
experiments  show  that  a  separation  of  impressions  which  appears  as
distinct  and  complete  as  if  they  belonged  to  different  individuals  may
in  time,  and  by  a  spontaneous  process,  be  dissolved  away,  and  the  two
pieces  of  experience  may  merge  into  the  general  store  over  which  the
mind  has  unrestricted  control.  It  would  be  easy  to  increase  the  gravity
of  the  experiences  were  it  worth  while  to  afflict  the  "  subject's  "  mind  ;
he  might  be  told  of  tragic  events  immediately  concerning  himself  ;  he
might  even  be  incited  to  crimes  and  violence  with  real  consequences  of
a  most  serious  kind.  But  after  all,  the  scale  of  the  results  is  of  little
importance.  It  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  hypnotism  that  it  con-
denses into  a  few  minutes  processes  which  it  might  take  years  of
normal  life  to  parallel ;  and  when  we  remember  that  the  ideas  suggested
were  strongly  impressed  on  the  "  subject's "  mind,  that  they  often
surprised  him  and  usually  elicited  a  string  of  comments,  and  that  in
the  other  state  the  memory  of  them  could  not  be  evoked  by  the  most
explicit  and  persevering  reminders,  the  breach  and  oblivion  seem  to  be
as  utter  as  any  which  mere  course  of  time  could  bring  about.  Yet  no
less  utterly  do  they  disappear  in  the  natural  development  of  the  very
condition  out  of  which  they  arose.  I  do  not  wish  to  press  the  analogy
of  these  hypnotic  phenomena  unduly;  but  if  the  superiority  of  man  to
the  brutes  depends  on  personality,  and  if  personality  depends  essentially
on  memory,  then  those  who  desire  that  man's  dignity  should  be  main-
tained, and  that  personality  should  be  continuous,  can  hardly  afford  to
despise  the  smallest  fact  of  memory  which  exhibits  the  possibilities  of
union  and  comprehension  as  triumphing  over  those  of  disruption  and
dispersion.


532


Gases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.


IX.

NOTE  ON  CERTAIN  REPORTED  CASES  OF  HYPNOTIC
HYPERESTHESIA.

In  an  interesting  paper  which  appears  in  the  Revue  Philosophique
for  November  last,  M.  Bergson  of  Clermont-Ferrand  gives  an  account
of  a  case  of  supposed  thought-transference  or  clairvoyance  which  turns
out  to  be  much  moi'e  probably  explicable  by  hypnotic  hyperacuity  of
vision.  The  case,  I  think,  should  be  noted  here,  for  to  those  who  have
satisfied  themselves  that  transmission  of  thought  does  sometimes  occur  it
is  specially  important  to  sift  away  all  the  spurious  cases  which,  while
apparently  supporting,  must  in  the  end  discredit  the  novel  theory.

Briefly,  then,  MM.  Bergson  and  Robinet  found  that  a  boy,  who  was
supposed  to  be  a  clairvoyant,  or  a  telepathic  percipient,  could  read
figures  and  words  under  the  following  conditions.  One  of  the  observers
hypnotised  the  boy,  stood  with  his  back  nearly  against  the  light,  opened
a  book  at  random,  held  it  nearly  vertically  facing  himself,  at  about  four
inches  from  his  own  eyes,  but  below  him,  and  looked  sometimes  at  the
page  and  sometimes  into  the  boy's  eyes.  The  book  had  often  to  be
slightly  shifted  ;  but  ultimately  the  boy  could  generally  read  the  number
of  the  page.  Asked  where  he  saw  it,  he  pointed  to  the  back  of  the
book,  just  opposite  the  number's  true  position.  Asked  where  the  bind-
ing of  the  book  was,  he  put  his  hand  underneath  the  book,  and  indicated
the  place  where  the  binding  would  have  been,  had  the  book  faced  him.

It  occurred  to  M.  Bergson — and  he  deserves  full  credit  for  being  the
first  to  insist  on  this  precaution — that,  small  though  the  figures  were,
the  boy  might  really  be  reading  them  as  reflected  on  the  cornea  of  the
liypnotiser.  Experiments  with  slightly  altered  jjosition  showed  that  in
fact  the  boy  could  not  read  the  letters  unless  adjustment  and  illumination
were  carefully  made  as  favourable  as  possible.  The  letters  were  .3mm.
in  height, — nothing  is  said  of  their  thickness, — and  their  corneal  image
would  be  about  O'lmm.  in  lieight,  as  M.  Bergson  computes,  under  the
conditions  employed.  This  seems  a  very  small  image  to  see  distinctly  ;
but  Mr.  J.  N.  Langley  and  Mr.  H.  E.  Wingfield,  who  have  kindly  tried
some  careful  experiments  to  test  this  point,  inform  me  that  they  can
read  on  each  other's  corner  the  corneal  image  of  printed  letters  of  about
10mm.  in  height.  We  know  from  Binet  and  Fere's  experiments,  &c.,
how  greatly  the  hypnotic  state  does  sometimes  increase  acuity  of  vision;
and  we  may,  I  think,  conclude  that  the  boy  probably  did  read  the  letters
on  his  hypnotiser's  cornea.


Gases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercestliesia.


533


What,  then,  are  we  to  make  of  the  boy's  statement  that  he  saw  the
words  as  though  in  a  book  facing  him  ?  M.  Bergson  feels  sure  that  this
was  the  boy's  real  belief.  There  was  no  suspicion  of  charlatanism,  and
in  fact  the  boy  disliked  the  experiments,  and  now,  as  M.  Bergson  writes
to  me,  refuses  to  renew  them.  M.  Bergson  supposes,  and  I  think  justly,
that  this  was  a  case  of  simulation  inconsciente  ;  the  hypnotised  subject
genuinely  referring  his  sensations  to  the  source  to  which  his  first
hypnotiser  (a  believer  in  thought-transference)  had  suggested  to  him
that  they  were  due.

And,  in  fact,  this  unconscious  simulation  which  leads  the  subject  to
refer  his  unusual  sensations  to  the  special  cause  which  his  hypnotiser,
or  some  caprice  of  his  own  mind,  suggests,  is  a  not  uncommon  and  a
very  interesting  phenomenon.  It  was  observed,  for  instance,  by
EUiotson,  who  pointed  out  a  good  many  hypnotic  peculiarities
which  his  successors  are  now  gradually  rediscovering.  It  is  a
hypnotic  exaggeration  of  a  familiar  phenomenon,  namely,  of  the
large  infusion  of  erroneous  inference  which  we  most  of  us  import
into  the  account  which  we  render  to  ourselves  of  our  ordinary
sensations.

A  particularly  curious  case  is  briefly  described  in  the  Journal  oj
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  June,  1884.  A  man  was  brought  to
us  who,  when  hypnotised,  could  often  name  cards  held  in  front  of  him,
although  his  eyes  had  been  plastered  up  and  bandaged  in  a  most
elaborate  way.  The  man's  friends  took  this  for  clairvoyance,  and  the
man  assented,  being  sure  that  he  could  not  see  the  cards  in  the  usual
way.  They  "flashed  upon  him,"  as  he  said.  Now,  after  a  good  deal
of  puzzling  over  the  case,  Mr.  R.  Hodgson  found  that  he  also  could
sometimes  manage  to  see  over,  similar  bandages,  through  small  chinks
between  the  skin  and  the  paper  gummed  over  the  eyes.  But  he,  too,
found  that  he  saw  fitfully,  the  power  of  vision  seeming  to  come  and
go, — and  he  actually  could  not  tell  with  which  eye  he  was  seeing,
except  by  covering  each  eye  in  turn  with  his  hand.  The  distorted
position  of  the  eyeball,  and  the  minute  and  oddly-placed  channels  of
vision,  produced  so  much  confusion  that  there  seemed  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  hypnotised  subject's  belief  that  he  was  seeing  "  clair-
voyantly  "  was  other  than  genuine.

The  case  of  M.  Bergson's  boy  seems  to  have  been  a  similar  one.
And  his  idea  that  he  was  reading  from  the  book  seems  to  have  been  a
sort  of  compromise  between  the  feeling  that  he  was  reading  somewhere
and  the  hypnotiser's  suggestion  that  the  words  were  being  transferred
supernormally  from  mind  to  mind.

Thus  far,  then,  M.  Bei'gson's  narration  and  explanation  seem
credible  enough,  and  his  argument  as  against  thought-transference  in
this  boy's  case  seems  well  made  out. But  he  proceeded  to  further

2  N


534


Cases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.


experiments  which,  as  recounted,  seem  incredible,  and  which  may  lead
some  readers  to  distrust  the  accuracy  of  the  whole  series.

To  explain  the  difficulty,  I  must  first  point  out  that  the  word
hyperesthesia  is  loosely  used  for  three  different  classes  of  phenomena.
It  is  used  (1)  for  an  exaggeration  of  the  familiar  action  of  specialised
organs,  as  when  the  eye  is  sensible  to  very  small  amounts  of  light.  It
is  used  (2)  for  alleged  perceptions,  which  would  imply  a  specialisation
of  what  I  may  term  our  undiffere^itiated  fund  of  nervous  sensibility  in
novel  directions.  Sensibility  to  the  action  of  magnets,  of  metals  in
contact,  of  medicaments  at  a  distance,  may  or  may  not  exist,  but
should  scarcely  be  called  by  the  same  name  as  (say)  the  eye's  extra
sensitiveness  to  light.  And  again,  the  word  is  used  (3)  for  cases  where
our  non-specialised  organs  are  credited  with  performing  functions
which,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  demand  a  definite  sense-specialisation,  or
our  specialised  organs  are  credited  with  functions  which,  on  measurable
anatomical  grounds,  appear  to  overpass  the  limits  of  their  specialisation.
This  last  class  of  cases  must  be  received  with  extreme  caution.

Well,  M.  Bergson  says  that  he  showed  the  boy  a  microscopic
photograph  of  12  men,  its  longest  diameter  2mm.,  and  that  the  boy
saw  and  imitated  the  attitude  of  each  man.  Also  that  he  showed  the
boy  a  microscopic  preparation,  involving  cells  not  greater  than  "OGmm.
in  diameter,  and  that  the  boy  saw  and  drew  these  cells.

Now  I  might,  in  the  first  place,  object  that  thought-transference
was  not  formally  excluded,  since  M.  Bergson  himself  knew  the
photograph  and  the  look  of  the  cells.  I  do  not  press  this,  for  the  other
experiments  seem  to  me  to  negative  thought-transference  in  this  case.
I  merely  point  out  that  if  we  wish  to  prove  that  a  subject  does  not
receive  an  image  from  our  minds  we  should  present  to  him  an  object
with  which  we  are  ourselves  unacquainted.

But  the  real  difficulty  is  as  regards  the  minimum  visihile.  It  is
usually  (though  not  universally)  supposed  that  in  oi'der  to  produce  a
definite  image  more  than  one  retinal  rod  or  cone  must  be  stimulated ;  and
that  consequently  no  object  can  be  separately  discernible  which  does  not
subtend  (say)  an  angle  of  60  seconds,  or  whose  retinal  image  is  less
than  (say)  -OOimm.  in  diameter.  Floating  particles,  none  of  them
exceeding  •0029mm.  in  diameter,  have,  I  believe,  been  seen  as  a  cloud
in  a  ray  of  electric  light  sent  through  a  tube  of  filtered  air,  but  have
never  been  seen  separately  by  the  naked  eye.

Now,  the  o'etinal  hna,ge  of  an  object  itself  only  -OGmm.  in  diameter,
and  placed  within  the  range  of  distinct  vision,  will  be  much  less  than
•004mm.  in  diameter.  To  bring  it  up  to  this  ininimum  the  retinal
image  must  be  x.,  of  the  size  of  the  object  itself ;  and  this  implies  a
nearness  to  the  eye  involving  mere  darkness  and  blur.  The  microscopic
slide  was  presumably  transparent;  but  nothing  was  said  as  to  the


Cases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.


535


transparency  of  the  photograph,  and  yet  the  points  distinctly  visible  on
the  photograph  must  have  been  even  smaller  than  the  cells  on  the  slide.

A  letter  with  which  M.  Bergson  has  favoured  me  has  done  much  to
remove  these  difficulties.  It  seems  that  the  photograph  was  transparent,
and  that  the  boy  held  it  close  to  his  eye.  Moreover,  after  seeing  the
photograph  the  boy  could  not  read  ordinary  print.  "  C'esttrop  grand,"
he  said ;  and  it  was  some  time  before  the  eye  (which  M.  Bergson
believes  to  have  been  always  myopic)  resumed  its  normal  state.
It  seems,  then,  conceivable  that  hypnotic  suggestion  had  induced
(by  spasm  of  the  ciliary  muscle  ?)  some  change  in  the  shape  of  the
crystalline  lens,  which  made  the  eye  a  microscope  for  the  time
being.  Mr.  George  Wherry  has  kindly  communicated  to  me  two  some-
what analogous  cases,  where  ciliary  spasm  (itself  induced  by  microscopic
or  telescopic  work)  led  to  uniocular  diplopia,  in  one  case  even  triplopia.
In  these  cases  irregxdar  ciliary  spasm  apparently  turned  the  lens  into  a
kind  of  multiplying  glass: — is  it  possible  that  M.  Bergson  induced  a
regular  ciliary  spasm,  which  turned  the  lens  into  a  magnifier  ?

Turning  back  to  the  question  with  which  we  started,  the  possibility
of  a  hypersesthetic  explanation  of  cases  of  supposed  telepathy,  I  must
add  that  I  earnestly  hope  that  the  experiments  recorded  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  may  receive  careful  criticism  from  this  point  of  view.
Few,  if  any  of  them,  will,  I  think,  be  found  explicable  by  the  cornea-
reading  discussed  above,  but  there  may  be  other  sources  of  error  which
have  escaped  our  care.  Yet  in  the  hands  of  some  critics  hyperesthesia
itself  assumes  attributes  almost  magical.  In  the  Revue  Philosophique
for  December,  1886,  Dr.  Ruault  maintains  that  he  and  others  have
frequently  sent  subjects  to  sleep  "by  an  effort  of  will  "  in  an  adjoining
room  ;  but  that  the  real  cause  of  the  sleep  was  the  suggestion  given  by
the  changed  sound  accompanying  the  hypnotiser's  quickened  circulation,
which  the  subject  hears  through  the  wall.  This  is  meant,  it  seems,  to
apply  to  the  Havre  case,  now  well  known,  of  sommeil  a  distance,  where
Dr.  Gibert  or  M.  Pierre  Janet  can  throw  Mme.  B.  into  the  hypnotic
trance,  "  by  an  effort  of  will,"  from  their  houses  to  hers.i  Yet  I
confess  that,  whatever  may  be  the  true  meaning  of  this  curious  history,
I  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  a  peasant  woman  is  sent  to  sleep  by  "  the
sound  of  a  going  "  in  the  arteries  of  an  elderly  physician,  at  a  distance
of  half  a  mile.


Since  the  above  note  was  printed  in  Mind  for  Jan.  1887,  some
further  experiments  have  been  reported  which  may  be  noticed
here  as  bearing  more  or  less  directly  on  the  same  problem — the

■'An  account  of  this  case  will  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.B.,
Part  X.,  Art.  "Telepathic  Hypnotism."


536


Cases  of  Hyjynotic  Hypercesthesia,


sufficiency  or  otherwise  of  the  ordinary  senses  to  explain  certain
results  noted  in  hypnotic  hypersesthesia.  The  hypersesthesia  of
specialised  sense-organs  falls  roughly  into  four  divisions,  as  con-
cerned with  sight,  hearing,  smell  (including  taste),  and  touch — -
■which,  as  here  used,  is  the  vaguest  of  the  four  categoi'ies.  As  regards
smell,  there  seems  no  assignable  limit  which  we  can  pronounce  a  priori
that  hypertesthesia  can  never  transcend.  We  have,  that  is  to  say,  no
distinct  knowledge  either  as  to  the  difiusibility  of  odorous  particles,  or
as  to  the  existence  of  odorous  differences  between  objects  not  normally
thus  distinguishable  by  man.  As  regards  hearing,  our  limit  is  more
nearly  calculable,  for  it  depends  on  sound-waves,  of  which  more  is
known  ;  but  nevertheless  it  is  hard  to  say  at  what  distance,  for  instance,
a  hypersesthetic  patient  may  disentangle  her  physician's  step  from  the
confused  noises  of  the  street.  As  regards  sight,  we  may  have  difficulties
arising  from  minuteness,  from  darkness,  or  from  interposition  of  opaque
objects.  The  difficulty  of  distance  may  be  said  to  be  compounded  of
minuteness  and  defect  in  light.  The  question  of  minuteness  has  already
been  touched  on  in  Dr.  Bergson's  case.  As  to  darkness,  we  may  be  pre-
pared for  an  almost  indefinite  increase  in  retinal  excitability,  and  for
a  considerable  increase  in  the  pupil's  dilatation.  The  interposition  oj
opaque  objects  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  a  very  definite  obstacle.  I
will  now,  however,  cite  a  case  as  to  which  it  is  not  easy  to  form  a
decided  opinion ; — unless,  indeed,  we  ascribe  the  coincidence  to  chance
alone.

The  case  was  published  by  Dr.  Sauvaire  in  the  Revue  Philosophique
for  March,  1887.  Mile.  S.,  a  healthy  girl,  was  hypnotised  for  the  first
time.  It  was  suggested  to  her  that  there  was  a  portrait  on  the  back  of
a  certain  card  (apparently  the  king  of  clubs),  and  that  she  would  still
see  the  portrait  when  awakened.  She  was  awakened  and  recognised  the
portrait  on  the  back  of  the  same  card,  jumbled  in  the  pack.  This,  of
course,  was  not^  specially  remarkable,  on  the  theory  that  some  trifling
speck  or  crease  afibrds  a  jwint  de  repere  which  enables  the  eyesight,
stimulated  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  to  recognise  a  card  on  which  for
other  persons  no  mark  is  visible.  But  there  was  more  than  this.  Another
pack  of  cards,  which  the  young  lady  had  never  touched,  was  placed  before
her,  face  downwards.  She  passed  them  through  her  hands,  apparently,
without  turning  any  of  them  up,  and  as  she  did  so  she  recognised
another  copy  of  the  imaginary  portrait,  on  the  back  of  one  of  the  new
cards.  The  card  was  turned  up,  and  proved  to  be  the  king  of  clubs — to
correspond,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  card  in  the  first  pack  on  whose
back  the  hallucinatory  portrait  had  originally  been  suggested.

Dr.  Sauvaire  suggests  that  she  saw  through  the  card,  as  it  lay  on
the  table,  as  we  should  see  through  it  if  we  held  it  up  to  the  light.
Such  an  hypothesis  would  zieed  strong  confirmation. If  the  recognition


Cases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.  537


■was  really  due  to  hyperffisthesia,  and  was  not  merely  a  chance
coincidence,  it  may  be  suggested  that  the  face  of  one  card
adheres  to  the  back  of  the  next  in  differing  degrees  according  to
the  amount  of  paint  on  the  card,  and  that  a  delicate  sense  of  friction
may  have  been  called  into  play.  It  has,  indeed,  often  been  suggested
that  hypersesthetic  subjects  can  see  through  the  imperfectly  opaque
eyelids,  and  through  the  imperfectly  opaque  bandages  applied  thereto  ;
but  in  such  cases  there  has  usually  been  strong  light  shining  through
the  bandages,  while  in  Dr.  Sauvaire's  case  it  would  seem  that  the
card's  face  was  recognised  zvhile  lying  on  the  table,  a  feat  more  difficult
to  imagine.  Efforts  should,  of  course,  be  made  to  repeat  the  experiment.

Somewhat  different  is  an  experiment  recorded  by  M.  de  Rochas,^
on  his  familiar  subject  Benoit,  an  office-clerk,  whose  extraordinary
suggestibility  I  have  myself  witnessed  at  Blois.

"  I  give  to  Benoit,"  he  says,  "  a  piece  of  cardboard,  with  the  sug-
gestion that  it  is  a  mirror.  He  looks  at  himself,  arranges  his  hair,  and
his  cravat."  (This,  of  course,  is  mere  acceptance  of  the  suggestion.)  "I
place  a  real  mirror  behind  him  in  such  a  position  that  the  reflection
from  it  falls  on  the  card  ;  he  sees  the  back  of  his  head  ;  I  put  my  finger
against  the  mirror  behind  his  head;  he  recognises  my  finger  ;  I  place  my
watch  in  the  same  place  and  turn  it  several  times  ;  he  sees  sometimes
gold,  sometimes  something  white  (the  watch-face),  but  without  being
able  to  say  exactly  what  the  object  is."

It  is  difficult,  I  think,  to  suppose  that  reflections  from  the  cardboard
surface,  imperceptible  to  the  normal  observer,  really  existed,  and  were
really  discerned  by  the  subject.  And  it  seems  possible  that  in  this
experiment  a  shadow  of  M.  de  Rochas'  finger  may  have  been  thrown
by  the  real  mirror  on  to  the  card,  and  the  yellow  and  white  light  may
have  been  alternately  reflected  on  to  it  from  the  shining  surface  of
the  watch  ;  while  Benoit  may  have  seen  the  back  of  his  head,  as
well  as  his  face,  owing  to  suggestion.  But  if  the  experiments  could
be  successfully  repeated  in  such  a  way  as  absolutely  to  exclude  such
explanations  as  these,  the  results  might  be  very  interesting.

Dr.  Taguet,  of  Bordeaux,  had  a  few  years  ago  a  patient  who  was
said  to  read  words  held  up  behind  her  back,  and  reflected  on  a  card  in
front  of  her.  Dr.  Myers  went  to  see  this  patient  in  the  Asile  des
Alienees  at  Bordeaux,  in  February,  1885,  but  at  the  time  when  he  saw
her  she  did  not  possess  the  power,  and  I  have  noticed  no  further
account  of  her  since  that  date.

M.  de  Rochas  gives  another  case  which,  so  far  as  it  goes,  recalls
some  old  experiments  of  Townshend's.  He  believes  (p.  283)  that  he
rendered  certain  subjects  by  suggestion  so  sensitive  to  small  degrees  of

^  Lcs  Foi'ces  no)i  Dcjiyiics,  i>.  213. (Paris,  Masson,  1887.)


538


Gases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.


light  that  they  recognised  one  another,  when  near  at  hand,  in  a  room
thoroughly  darkened  for  Reichenbach's  experiments  on  the  alleged
magnetic  ilames.  The  experiment  is  insufficiently  described  ;  but  here,
too,  is  a  line  for  further  trial  ;  and  in  this  case  the  sensitiveness  of  the
dry  plate  might  perhaps  be  utilised  to  give  a  precise  measure  of  the
degree  of  hyperajsthesia  attained.

Another  experiment  of  M.  de  Rochas',  on  auditory  hyperi^sthesia,
though  plainly  inconclusive  as  it  stands,  presents  matter  for  reflection.
He  rendered  Benoit  completely  deaf  by  suggestion,  contractured  one  of
the  boy's  arms,  and  then  found  that  when  he  spoke  at  the  end  of  this
arm,  or  indeed  when  touching  any  part  of  the  boy's  body,  the  voice
was  heard.  It  is  obvious  that  this  may  probably  have  been  the  mere
result  of  a  suggestion  unconsciously  given  to  the  subject  that  he  was
to  hear  under  these  conditions.

The  question,  however,  is  not  so  simple  as  it  looks.  It  is  possible,
that  is  to  say,  that  the  suggestion  to  hear  may  have  acted  in  a  some-
what roundabout  manner,  may  in  some  way  have  changed  the  condition
of  arm  or  body  as  well  as  of  ear.  Compare  an  experiment  already
given  in  these  Proceedings,  where  Mr.  Gurney  shouted  continuously
into  the  ear  of  the  subject,  who  was  entranced;  while  the  subject,  on
his  part,  did  not  apparently  hear  Mr.  Gurney  at  all,  but  was  aware  of
the  lightest  whisper  uttered  by  his  mesmeriser,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  who
stood  at  a  distance.  Such  a  case  may  be  explicable  either  by
thought-transference  or  by  what  I  liave  elsewhere  termed  selective
hypercesthesia.  It  may  have  been  analogous  to  "  silent  willing,"
the  utterance  of  the  whisper  forming  no  essential  element  in  the  trans-
ference of  the  idea,  or  there  may  have  been  suggested  hyperaesthesia  to
sounds  made  by  Mr.  Smith,  combined  with  suggested  anjesthesia  to
sounds  made  by  all  other  persons.

This  possibility  of  combining  hypertesthesia  and  antesthesia —
localised  nervous  stimulus  with  localised  nervous  inhibition — offers  one
of  the  most  hopeful  avenues  of  hypnotic  experiment.  It  enables  us  to
isolate  certain  forms  of  sensibility  and  to  observe  them  with  much  less
than  usual  of  the  disturbing  interruption  of  sensibilities  on  which
we  are  not  experimenting.  Suggestions,  moreover,  directed  to  the
internal  viscera  (which  have,  thus  far,  been  inspired  almost  exclusively
by  a  therapeutic  aim),  may  be  so  arranged  as  to  throw  light  on  the
working  of  special  drugs.  It  would  be  interesting  to  see  how  far  the
viscera  could  take  up,  so  to  say,  a  suggestion  to  feel  the  action  of  a  drug
of  whose  nature  the  subject  himself  was  not  aware.  It  is  possible  that  the
action  of  minute  doses  might  be  thus  discerned  hyperjesthetically,  and
that  such  action  miglit  present  instructive  points  of  difference  from  the
effect  of  the  same  drug  in  ordinary  doses.

Such,  then,  are  some  of  the  problems  which  may  be  worked  at,  as


Gases  of  Hypnotic  Hypercesthesia.


539


it  seems  to  me,  on  a  suitable  subject  with  good  prospect  of  gaining  real
instruction.  I  bring  them  forward  here  because  it  would  seem  that
suitable  subjects  are  now  being  found  in  France,  and  because  the
experiments  on  hypersesthesia  thus  far  reported  have  been  for  the  most
part  so  unsystematic  as  to  be  nearly  useless.

It  is  a  strange  and  disappointing  fact  that  for  many  years  past,  and
notably  since  1883,  when  the  subject  of  mesmerism  or  hypnotism  was
first  broached  in  these  Proceedings,  so  little  work  should  have  been
done  in  England  in  this  direction.  Beyond  the  experiments,  scantier
than  could  be  wished,  which  the  writers  in  these  Proceedings  have
themselves  been  able  to  watch  or  to  perform,  there  has  been  scarcely
anything  published  in  English  since  that  date  which  has  demanded
notice.  In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  so  much  has  been  done  that
the  mere  report  and  discussion  of  French  experiments  has  formed  a  great
part  of  our  own  task.  This  difference  is  largely  due  to  the  marked
superiority  of  the  French  over  the  English  as  hypnotic  subjects  ;
apparently  a  racial  difl'erence  which  no  effort  of  ours  can  nullify,  Yet
I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  more  of  enterprise,  more  of  familiarity
with  foreign  work,  on  the  part  of  the  staffs  of  our  own  hospitals,  might
lead  to  the  discovery  of  some  of  those  fortunate  subjects,  "the  frogs  of
the  psycho-physiologist,"  whose  special  sensitiveness  might  teach  us
lessons  all  the  more  valuable  because  attainable  without  injury — or  with
positive  benefit — to  the  subjects  themselves.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


540


Critical  Notices.


X.

CRITICAL  NOTICES.

Le  Magnetisme  Animal,  par  Alfred  Binet  et Cii.  F^;r^,  Mddecin-
adjoint  a  la  Salpetriere. Paris  :  Felix  Alcan,  1887.

This  workman-like  and  brightly-written  book  forms  a  really  valuable
addition  to  the  literature  of  its  subject ;  and  few  whose  fate  it  has  been
to  make  any  prolonged  excursions  into  that  literature  will  fail  to  realise
what  high  praise  such  a  statement  involves.  For  one  who  wishes  to
gain  a  rapid,  and  at  the  same  time  a  tolerably  complete,  view  of  the
position  of  hypnotism  in  France,  MM.  Binet  and  Fere's  treatise
would  form  the  complement  to  the  two  recent  and  equally  excellent
productions  of  the  Nancy  school,  Dr.  Bernheim's  De  la  Suggestion,  and
Professor  Beaunis'  Le  Somnambulisme  Provoque.  The  Parisian  book
has  naturally  a  strong  Parisian  flavour.  For  scientific  purposes  Paris
is  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  for  hypnotic  purposes  the  Hospice  de  la
Salpetriere  is  the  centre  of  Paris  ;  consequently  any  form  of  hypnotism
specially  connected  with  that  Hospice  is  necessarily  "  Le  Grand
Hypnotisme  " — broken  reflections  of  which  may  be  found,  as  "  formes
fnistes,"  in  Nancy,  Germany,  England,  and  other  places.  But  after  all,
this  is  mainly  a  question  of  name  and  classification.  The  great  thing
is  to  get  all  the  phenomena  competently  observed,  wherever  they  occur.
Our  authors  expressly  state  in  their  preface  that  their  work  is  the
product  of  a  school — or  of  the  school,  as  disciples  of  Dr.  Charcot  very
naturally  hold  ;  and  they  have  done  their  work  of  observation  and  ex-
position so  well  that  we  may  all  be  glad  to  be  enrolled  as  their  and  his
scholars.

Yet  a  word  of  warning  seems  needed,  with  respect  to  the  unique
importance  claimed  by  them  for  the  pronounced  physical  phenomena
of  hypnotism ;  since  to  grant  that  claim  in  its  full  extent  would  not
only  cast  doubt  on  scientific  results  which  I  do  not  gather  that  they
themselves  really  question,  ^  but  would  involve  a  most  serious
circumscription  of  the  most  promising  of  all  fields  of  psychological
inquiry.  They  contend — and  with  justice — that  the  more  remarkable
physical  features  of  hypnotic  trance  are  objective  and  unmistakeable  ;
that  these  afford  a  test  of  the  genuineness  of  the  condition  which  the
rawest  sceptic  cannot  call  in  question.  Now  in  the  infancy  of  the  subject
such  a  test  is,  of  course,  of  great  importance.  It  was  a  physical  feature
— the  inability  to  open  the  eyes — which  led  Braid  to  his  first  epoch-

1  See  especially  their  remarks  on  the  work  of  Dr.  Liebeault,  p.  57.


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


641


making  studies  ;  and  the  serene  immobility  which  Esdaile's  patients  and
others  exhibited  a  generation  ago,  when  their  limbs  were  being  amputated
or  large  tumours  excised  during  hypnotic  trance,  marked  another  epoch
of  scarcely  less  importance.  Since,  however,  it  is  possible  to  simulate
inability  to  open  the  eyes,  and  since  influential  medical  critics  opined
that  serene  immobility  under  the  amputating  knife  was  simply  the  mark
of  the  "  hardened  impostor,"  it  is  satisfactory  to  have  a  number  of  more
objective  proofs  accumulated.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  see  this,  and  to
admit,  besides,  the  high  interest  for  the  physiologist  of  the  specialities
observed  at  the  Salpetriere  ;  and  another  thing  to  identify  the  whole
scientific  character  of  hypnotism,  as  matter  of  precise  and  verifiable
observation,  with  the  cases  where  those  specialities  are  found.  The
startling  objective  tests  still  have  their  use  ;  they  overbear  otherwise
invincible  prejudice;  and  if  there  were  only  a  dozen  hypnotic  "subjects"
in  the  world,  they  might  be  indispensable.  But  experimental  research
has  now  advanced  far  beyond  the  point  where  the  theory  of  simulation
could  be  sweepingly  applied  by  any  intelligent  critic — it  would  be
nearly  as  rational  to  suppose  that  everyone  who  complained  of  stomach-
ache or  neuralgia  was  shamming,  on  the  ground  that  these  complaints
are  capable  of  being  shammed.  Hypnotic  science  would  be  a  reality,
and  its  palmary  interest  would  remain,  if  there  were  not  a  single
hystero-epileptic  patient  in  the  world.  We  find  plenty  of  healthy
persons  who  exhibit  even  the  bodily  signs  in  a  quite  unmistakeable
form.  The  muscular  condition  which  enables  an  ordinary  "subject"
to  hold  his  arm  extended  for  many  minutes  without  the  usual
physiological  signs  of  fatigue,  or,  supported  on  two  chairs  by  head  and
feet  alone,  to  support  a  heavy  weight  for  a  prolonged  period,  are
sufficiently  beyond  simulation ;  and  the  same  may  be  said,  taking  the
phenomena  en  masse,  of  the  smiling  endurance  of  severe  bodily
inflictions,  of  the  failure  of  boys  without  pocket-money  to  pick  up
sovereigns  which  they  might  have  for  the  stooping,  and  many  other
similar  eccentricities.  Even  the  characteristic  up-rolling  of  the  eye-
balls, if  simulated,  would  imply  nothing  less  than  a  world-wide
conspiracy.  But  we  might  exclude  bodily  symptoms  altogether,  and  the
cumulative  proof,  arising  from  the  ever-growing  improbability  that
hundreds  of  persons  in  hundreds  of  places,  guiltless  of  theories  and
unacquainted  with  one  another,  could  build  up  by  their  several
acts  of  conscious  or  unconscious  deceit  a  large  and  consistent  body  of
psychological  results,  would  still  remain  as  complete  as  that  afforded
by  the  most  inimitable  phenomena  of  plastic,  rigid,  or  irritable
muscles.

Even  so,  our  authoi-s  might  urge — and  in  fact  they  have  urged — that
the  best  material  for  scientific  study  is  the  perfect  type,  and  that  then
deviations  and  rudimentary  forms  can  be  readily  understood.  But  this


542


Critical  Notices.


plea  has  not  really  more  force  than  the  other.  It  is  significant  that  the
accepted  French  name  for  a  hypnotic  "  subject "  is  la  malade.  But
hypnotism  is  not  a  disease,  though  it  is  often  a  remedy  ;  and  a  picked
■malade  of  the  Salpetriere  presents  a  no  more  perfect  type — may  indeed
present  a  much  less  perfect  type — of  the  psychological  peculiarities
connected  with  the  state,  than  many  a  healthy  man  or  woman,  who  on
physical  grounds  might  fall  short  of  the  dignity  even  of  a  forme  fruste.
Nor  have  the  physical  peculiarities,  so  far,  in  either  their  developed  or
their  rudimentary  forms,  thrown  any  light  whatever  on  the  psychical ;
so  that  the  view  whicli  our  autliors  put  forward,  that  to  pass  from  the
former  to  the  latter  is  to  follow  the  rule  of  Descartes  and  pass  from
the  simple  to  the  complex,  specious  as  it  looks,  lias  in  reality  little
meaning.  They  do  not  themselves  attempt  to  make  any  such
transition.

The  substantial  value  of  the  work  is,  however,  quite  independent
of  these  considerations.  If  the  Paris  specialities  are  somewhat  of  a
luxury,  we  none  the  less  want  to  know  all  about  them  ;  and  this  book
supplies  tlie  want  without  being  by  any  means  a  mere  monograph.

It  opens  with  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  hundi'ed  years'  liistory  of
"  animal  magnetism,"  from  the  haquet  of  Mesmer  to  the  establishment
of  the  trois  ctats  by  Charcot.  One  is  surprised  to  find  no  mention  of
Esdaile,  certainly  the  most  important  figure  in  mesmeric  history
between  Braid  and  Liebeault ;  but  on  the  whole  this  rapid  epitome  is
excellent.  The  tentative  advance  of  skilled  observation  and  methodical
thought  into  the  domain  of  marvels  so  strangely  opened  up  by
charlatans  and  amateur  healers  is  graphically  presented ;  and  the
writers  show  their  superiority  to  ordinary  scientific  prejudice  by
admitting  that  in  this  domain,  as  in  others,  scientific  methods  may
sometimes  reveal  marvels  as  well  as  explode  them.  It  is  significant  to
find  the  subject  of  thought-transference  (which,  by  the  way,  was
brought  to  the  front  in  England  some  years  earlier  than  our  authors
represent)  treated  with  reserve  and  respect — for  the  first  time,
perhaps,  in  any  book  of  scientific  pretensions,  written  without  professed
belief  in  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon.  Here,  however,  I  must
again  venture  some  brief  comment  in  respect  of  two  of  the
criticisms  made.

Refening  to  the  results  and  arguments  in  M.  Richet's  well-known
paper  of  December,  1884,  which  introduced  the  subject  to  French
science,  our  authors  object  that  "the  calculus  of  probabilities  is  not
adapted  to  decide  a  question  of  tliis  nature."  This  is  true  in  a  sense —
in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  would  be  ti'ue  to  say  that  an  examination
of  a  man's  heart  is  not  adapted  to  decide  the  question  whether  or  not
he  is  in  sound  health.  The  man's  heart  may  be  all  right,  but  his  lungs
or  liver  may  be  out  of  order : so  results  of  soi-disant  "  psychical "


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


543


experiments  may  far  surpass  anything  that  the  calculus  would  allow
us  to  attribute  to  chance,  but  may  still  be  due  to  something  other  than
thought-transference — namely,  to  deliberate  fraud,  or  to  unconscious
interpretation  of  pliysical  signs.  But  if  the  physician  discovers  that
all  the  other  organs  of  his  patient's  body  are  sound,  then  an
examination  of  the  heart  is  eminently  adapted  to  decide  the  question
of  health — we  can  guess  what  a  Life-Assurance  Company  would  say  of  a
physician  who  gave  his  certificate  without  it.  And  in  the  same  way,
when  the  hypotheses  of  fraud  and  of  unconscious  physical  signs  are
excluded — the  first  by  the  character  of  the  experimenters,  the  second
by  the  conditions  of  the  experiment — the  examination  of  probabilities,
and  in  cases  which  admit  of  numerical  measurement  the  application  of
the  calculus  of  probabilities,  is  not  only  adapted  to  decide  the  question
of  thought-transference,  but  is  the  one  indispensable  means  of  deciding
it.  The  issue  being  left  clear  between  thought-transference  and  chance,
the  experimenter  who  should  neglect  to  take  account  of  chance  would
be  on  a  par  with  the  physician  who  forgot  that  his  patient  had
a  heart.

The  other  item  of  criticism  on  this  subject  is  amiably  meant,  but
none  the  less  must  be  strongly  demurred  to.  A  sort  of  excuse  is  made
for  thought-transference  and  its  advocates,  in  the  last  resort,  on  the
ground  that,  however  wrong  the  hypothesis  may  be,  the  facts  which  have
led  to  it  are  likely  to  pi'ove  interesting  physiological  curiosities,
showing  the  degree  to  which  thought  can  betray  itself  by  physical
signs — as  by  rudimentary  movements  of  the  muscles  of  articulation,
and  by  changes  in  the  vascular  and  secretive  systems.  General
suggestions  of  this  sort  are  misleading,  inasmuch  as  they  have  no
relation  to  the  evidence  on  which  the  hypothesis  really  rests.  How-
ever "  externally  visible  "  people's  thoughts  may  habitually  be  through
unconscious  movements  of  their  lips  or  larynx,  they  cannot  be  thus
visible  to  those  who  do  not  use  their  eyes  to  see  them  ;  and  however
much  aware  "  subjects  notoriously  endowed  with  sensorial  hyper-
excitability  "  may  be  of  "  thermic  or  secretory  modifications  "  in  tlieir
own  bodies,  it  remains  to  be  explained  how  the  thermic  or  secretory
modifications  of  some  one  else's  body  should  reveal  to  them  whether
he  is  thinking  of  the  two  of  clubs  or  of  the  five  of  diamonds.

The  historical  chapter  is  followed  by  an  account  of  the  various
means  by  which  hypnotic  trance  may  be  produced.  On  this  there  is
not  much  to  remark.  The  authors  point  out,  as  I  think  with  justice,
that  the  analogy  of  hypnotic  to  ordinary  physiological  sleep  must  not
be  pressed ;  though  they  somewhat  detract  from  the  strength  of  their
own  position  by  a  theory  that  all  hypnogenetic  processes  act  by  nervous
fatigue.  The  ultimate  nervous  events  involved  are  really  as  unknown
to  us  now  as  they  were  in  the  time  of  Braid  ;  and  the  key,  e.g.,  to


544  Critical  Notices.


many  cases  of  hypnotisation  by  suggestion,  or  to  Dr.  Pitres'  rapid
entrancements  by  pressure  of  special  areas  of  the  body,  seems  no  more
likely  to  be  found  in  "  fatigue  "  than  in  "  instability,"  or  "  hypertrophy,"
or  "  congestion,"  or  other  supposable  conditions.  Even  in  cases
where  the  means  of  entrancement  is  suggestive  of  fatigue,  a  diificulty
would  often  remain  in  connecting  the  means  with  the  result — which,
as  I  have  pointed  out  before  {Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  272-4),  is  often
not  a  dulling,  but  a  special  alertness  and  mobility,  of  mental  life.  On
the  whole,  however,  our  authors  keep  commendably  free  from  premature
or  fanciful  theories  ;  and  the  emphasis  which  they  have  given  to  the
physical  aspects  and  forms  of  hypnogeny  is,  I  think,  the  right
corrective  to  the  tendency  of  the  Nancy  school  to  recognise  no  other
agency  than  suggestion.  ^

The  exposition  now  proceeds  to  the  actual  phenomena  of  trance  ;
and  here  we  have  naturally  a  predominance  of  physiological  detail.  The
peculiarities  of  muscle,  tendon  and  nerve,  observed  in  hysterical
"  subjects,"  and  the  "  three  states "  of  lethargy,  catalepsy,  and
somnambulism,  are  clearly  described  and  illustrated.  I  find  here  little
matter  for  special  comment,  but  three  remarks  suggest  themselves.  (1)
Speaking  of  muscular  contractures  due  to  "  lethargic  "  hyper-excita-
bility, the  authors  state  that  even  when  the  excitation  is  applied  to  the
body  of  a  muscle,  the  contracture  is  reflex — i.e.,  is  produced  by  the
ascent  of  a  nervous  current  to  the  bi-ain  and  a  re-descent  by  the  motor
nerves  ;  and  they  regard  this  as  proved  by  the  fact  that  contracture  of
one  sterno-mastoid  muscle,  which  turns  the  head  to  one  side,  can  be
corrected  by  excitation  of  the  other — this  being  "  a  sort  of  interference
which  has  no  seat  except  in  the  nervous  centres."  Surely  the  proof  is
rather  a  lame  one.  If  I  can  turn  a  person's  head  to  the  right  by
pulling  the  right  ear,  and  bring  it  back  to  its  normal  position  by  pulling
the  left  ear,  without  setting  up  any  interference  in  his  nervous  centres,
why  should  not  his  own  mechanically  stimulated  muscles  do  the  like  ?
(2)  In  the  account  of  these  lethargic  contractures  (p.  83),  it  is  stated
that  "  under  the  influence  of  continuous  traction,  the  contractured  limb
yields  by  degrees,  like  one  which  has  been  made  I'igid  by  an  act  of  will."
It  is  puzzling,  therefore,  to  find  (p.  98)  this  effect  of  continuous  traction
included  among  the  physical  signs  which  are  "  guarantees  against  simula-
tion." (3)  "We  are  told  (p.  92)  that  when  a  hallucination  is  imposed  on
a  "  subject "  in  catalepsy,  the  fixed  attitude  of  the  limbs  "  gives  place
to  complex co-ordinated movements, harmonising with the  idea

1  See,  for  instance,  the  remarks  (pp.  128-9)  on  the  production  of  paralysis
of  the  arm  (1)  by  suggestion  of  the  idea,  (2)  by  the  application  of  a  vibrating
diapason  to  certain  points  on  the  head.  An  identical  result  is  produced  in  one
case  hy  2}S]/cJdcal  (wliich  of  course  means  psycho-physical),  in  the  other  by  purely
physical,  means.


Binet  ef  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


545


suggested."  This  is  very  interesting  ;  and  if  I  lived  at  Nancy,  I  should
certainly  fasten  on  the  fact,  as  a  strong  support  to  the  view  that  the
cataleptic  fixity  itself  is  really,  in  a  way,  the  result  of  suggestion — that
there  is  a  true  psychical  obedience,  and  not  merely  an  idiopathic  physical
symptom,  in  the  retention  of  the  impressed  attitudes.

Passing  now  to  admitted  psychical  features,  we  have  the  main
peculiarities — sensory  anaesthesia  and  hypersesthesia,  extreme  retentive-
ness  of  memory,  extending  to  remote  facts  of  normal  life,  general
oblivion  on  waking,  rapfort  with  the  hypnotiser,  &c.,  &c. — presented
with  judicious  comments.  Some  of  the  statements  border  on  the
marvellous.  A  hypnotised  girl  recognises  and  names  a  doctor  with
whom  her  only  connection  was  that  at  the  age  of  two  she  had  been  an
inmate  of  an  institution  where  he  visited.  "  Selective  sensibility  "  some-
times reaches  such  a  pitch  that  the  patient  can  identify  "each  one  of
a  thousand  operators,"  and  sometimes  "can  recognise  their  touch  through
his  clothes."  Very  curious,  too,  are  the  accounts  of  divided  rapport,
the  "  subject  "  welcoming  A's  touch  on  the  right  side  and  B's  on  the
left,  while  resenting  and  resisting  A's  touch  on  the  left  and  B's  on
the  right ;  ^  and  actually  reserving  her  right  eye  for  hallucinations
imposed  by  A  and  her  left  for  those  imposed  by  B.  In  hypnotism
stranger  things  than  this  may  yet  be  true.  But  as  regards  hypnotic
rapport 'wl  general,  I  cannot  think  that  it  is  rightly  represented  (pp.  110
and  133)  as  a  mere  exaggerated  form  of  the  normal  attraction  which  one
person  often  exercises  on  another.  As  a  rule,  of  course,  a  person  would
not  submit  to  be  hypnotised,  least  of  all  frequently,  by  any  one  wliose
manner  or  person  they  objected  to  \  but  there  are  quite  enough  cases  to
prove  that  personal  dread  and  aversion  form  no  barrier  to  the  establish-
ment of  a  peculiar  influence  which  the  "  subject  "  in  vain  tries  to  throw
off.  On  the  subject  of  memory,  I  need  only  remark  that  our  authors
seem  to  have  too  readily  admitted  the  view  that  the  events  and  ideas
of  the  trance  can  always  be  recalled,  on  waking,  by  appropriate
suggestions.  I  have  explained  above  (p.  281)  my  dissent  from  M
Delboeuf  on  this  head.  As  far  as  a  study  of  the  literature  and  my  own
humble  dealings  with  formes  frustes  enable  me  to  judge,  the  revivable
memory  is  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule,  if  any  but  the  lightest
stage  of  trance  has  been  induced.

The  next  chapter  consists  chiefly  of  a  rescript  of  Dr.  Charcot's
classical  essay  {Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  1882)  de-

1  Through  the  kindness  of  M.  F^re,  Mr.  Myers  and  I  witnessed  tins
phenomenon  as  exhibited  by  "  la  nomniee  Wit  .  .  ."  in  August,  1885.  In  that
case,  however,  the  result  was  clearly  due  to  siiggestion,  not  to  the  mere  contact,
by  which  (according  to  our  authors)  anyone  can  "  d^velopper  a  son  profit  les
phenomenes  d'electivit^,  quand  un  malade  est  en  etat  de  somnambulisme
indiiferent."


546


Critical  Notices,


scribing  the  three  hypnotic  stages  of  "  les  grandes  hysteriques."  The
authors  candidly  admit  that  different  results  might  be  obtained  by
giving  the  subjects  "a  different  hypnotic  education";  but  I  do  not
gather  that  they  have  any  doubt  that  Dr.  Cliarcot's  modes  of  procedure
Avould  produce  the  three  stages,  at  any  rate  to  some  appreciable  extent,
in  a  quite  fresh  hystero-epileptic  patient,  who  had  never  seen  any
other,  and  in  whose  presence  the  experimenters  preserved  absolute
silence.  1  They  may  very  likely  be  right ;  but  it  cannot  be  too  com-
pletely realised — and  for  the  best  obsei'ver  in  the  world  it  may  require
some  time  to  realise — how  subtle  a  thing  "  hypnotic  education  "  is,  and
how  slight  are  tlie  signs  by  which  a  hypnotic  "subject"  will  sometimes
divine  the  operator's  wishes  and  expectations.  Nor  is  it  easy  (may  I
suggest  ?)  even  for  a  taciturn  Northerner  to  preserve  absolute  silence
for  several  minutes  together,  when  keenly  interested  in  what  he  is
observing.  These  remarks  are  not  made  in  any  cavilling  spirit ;  it  is
very  far  from  my  wish  to  question  the  care  and  sagacity  of  Dr.  Charcot
and  his  pupils.  But  it  would  be  a  legitimate  satisfaction  to  those  who
live  in  a  country  where  hystero-epilepsy  is  comparatively  infrequent,
and  who  have  no  opportunity  for  direct  observation,  if  the  full  details
of  a  few  crucial  expei'iments — carried  out  with  quite  new  patients
and  if  possible  outside  the  walls  of  the  Salpetrifere — could  be  given  to
the  Avorld.  A  similar  remark  applies  to  a  topic  which  occurs  inci-
dentally in  the  chapter  under  review,  and  becomes  much  more
prominent  later  in  the  book — the  influence  of  a  magnet  on  patients
who  are  unaware  of  its  proximity.  That  a  magnet  should  produce
distinct  physical  effects  on  the  human  organism  is,  if  true,  one  of  the
most  remarkable  facts  of  modern  science.  It  is  a  fact  which  French
savants  of  repute  assert  as  a  matter  of  quite  ordinary  experience  ;  yet
probably  not  half-a-dozen  physicians  or  physiologists  out  of  France
have  either  witnessed  it  or  believe  in  its  reality.  Some  years  ago  a  com-
mittee of  our  own  Society  published  some  results  which  pointed  strongly
in  this  direction  {Proceedings^  Vol.  I.,  p.  230,  and  Vol.  II.,  p.  56) ;
but  they  were  too  few  and  uncertain  in  their  occurrence  to  admit  of
positive  conclusions.  With  the  French  results  it  is  otherwise ;  they
seem  indefinitely  repeatable ;  and  that  being  so,  the  present  state  of
things — confident  assertion  on  one  side  of  the  Channel,  ignorant  indif-
ference or  incredulity  on  the  other — seems  nothing  short  of  a  scientific
scandal.  I  am  quite  disposed  to  lay  the  blame  to  the  account  of
English  torpor  rather  than  of  French  precipitancy ;  but  I  cannot  but
think  that  our  foreign  confreres  would  sooner  win  the  insular  ear  if
they  more  explicitly  recognised  the  staggering  unexpectedness  of  the
facts  which  they  smoothly  recite, as  well  as  the  magnitude  of  the

^  It  is  only  fair  to  state  that  our  authors  themselves,  in  dealing  directly
with  the  subject  of  suggestion,  emphasise  these  very  points  (pp.  142-3).


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


547


issues  raised  ;  and  if  they  would  make  a  point,  as  each  new  form  of
magnetic  effect  presents  itself,  of  placing  on  record  crucial  experiments,
in  which  every  condition  and  every  guarantee  should  be  carefully
detailed.  It  is  surely  too  unceremonious  to  say,  for  instance,  as  our
authors  do  (p.  118),  "  We  have  ascertained  that,  by  bringing  a  magnet
near  the  arm  of  a  patient  in  natural  sleep,  or  near  the  vertex  of  one
Avho  is  in  lethargy,  one  produces  a  new  state,  ...  in  which  the
respiration  is  imperceptible,  the  insensibility  is  complete,  and  the
appearance  that  of  actual  death."  Writers  who  are  so  enamoured
of  "  objective  "  experiments,  and  so  hard  on  results  which  have
to  be  accepted  in  part  on  the  strength  of  the  observer's  experience  and
judgment  (p.  125),  may  surely  be  expected  in  their  own  records  to
leave  as  little  as  possible  to  be  taken  on  trust.

The  chapter  on  Suggestion,  which  contains  much  good  sense,
presents  also  some  matter  for  criticism.  I  am  glad  to  find  the  authors,
though  they  have  previously  seemed  doubtful  whether  any  formula  can
be  found  for  the  psychical  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  coming  more  than
once  to  the  very  verge  of  one  which  I  have  myself  suggested —
"psychical  reflex  action."  I  must  own,  however,  to  sheer  bewilderment
at  their  attempted  explanation  of  the  "  subject's  "  aflfection  by  the  idea
of  something  as  in  reality  an  afiection  by  peripheral  excitation,  because
forsooth  an  idea  is  built  up  out  of  remembered  sensations,  and  "  Nihil
est  in  intellectu,  &c."  This  is  surely  carrying  championship  of  the
periphery,  and  the  war  with  Nancy,  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason.  I
presume  that  Messrs.  Binet  and  Fere,  like  everyone  else,  would  speak
of  a  murderer  as  conceiving  a  crime,  or  a  hero  an  exploit,  with  his  mind
or  with  his  brain,  not  with  his  skin  or  retina  ;  and  in  this  respect
hypnotically-suggested  ideas  stand  on  precisely  the  same  ground  as  any
others.  The  fact  adduced,  that  certain  bodily  effects  which  can  be
originated  by  suggestion  can  also  be  ori,ginated  by  direct  physical
stimuli  (see  above,  p.  544,  note),  is  wholly  irrelevant ;  for  the  suggested
idea  which  produces  the  effect  is  of  the  effect,  not  of  the  peculiar
physical  stimulus  which  may  produce  a  similar  eff'ect  on  anotlier
occasion  or  with  another  "  subject."  The  idea  of  a  paralysed  arm
which  paralyses  an  arm  is  not  built  up  out  of  remembered
sensations  of  a  vibrating  diapason.  After  this  brief  lapse,  the  account
flows  smoothly  on.  The  various  classes  of  suggestion  are  clearly
indicated  ;  and  it  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  a  special  difficulty
connected  with  "  negative  hallucinations  "  is  recognised.  The  point  of
the  difficulty,  however,  seems  in  this  passage  to  have  been  missed  ;  for
the  effect  is  represented  as  a  sort  of  sensory  paralysis,  strictly  parallel
to  motor-paralysis  produced  by  suggestion.  The  two  things  are,  of
course,  alike  in  being  both  effects  of  inhibition — "un  mot  qui
n'explique  rien,"  as  our  authors  trenchantly  observe;  but  they  are


548


Critical  Notices.


surely  much  more  markedly  unlike  in  fundamental  character.  Iia  the
first  place,  the  arm  which  cannot  move  simply  fails  to  do  something
which  an  act  of  will  is  normally  required  to  bring  about,  whereas  the
eye  that  cannot  see  fails  to  do  something  which  it  normally  caniiot
help  doing ;  so  that  the  inhibition  is  in  the  one  case  of  an  occasional
action,  in  the  other  of  a  continuous  function.  But  this  is  not  all.
That  the  idea  of  inability  to  move  an  arm  should  produce  the  inability
is  really  one  of  the  most  comprehensible  efiects  of  suggestion,  so  far
as  anything  can  be  called  comprehensible  of  which  the  physical  details
are  unknown  to  us ;  for  all  that  happens  is  that  the  connection
between  a  motor  centre  and  the  higher  ideational  centres  is  shut  oS.  But
that  the  idea  of  inability  to  see  a  particular  person  or  object  should
produce  the  inability,  introduces  a  new  and  complex  psychological
puzzle.  For  here  there  is  no  disconnection  of  the  optic  nerve,  or  of
any  particular  fibres  of  the  optic  nerve,  from  the  higher  centres.  The
whole  optical  apparatus  retains  normal  activity  ;  the  invisible  person
may  occupy  every  portion  of  the  field  of  vision  in  turn,  and  will
everywhere  remain  invisible,  while  every  other  object  in  the  room
is  clearly  seen.  Clearly,  then,  the  efiect  is  very  much  more
than  a  mere  sensory  inhibition,  parallel  to  the  motor  inhibition
in  the  other  case.  As  M.  Ft^re  himself  and  Professor  "William  James^
had  rightly  pointed  out,  the  invisible  thing  must  in  a  sense  be  seen  in
order  to  be  not  seen ;  it  must  be  recognised  as  the  subject  of  the  sugges-
tion. That  is  to  say,  perception  includes  it,  but  ignores  or  "  cuts  "  it.
Thus  the  principle  of  association  of  ideas,  which  our  authors  represent
as  here  completely  breaking  down,  is  truly  maintained  ;  the  idea  of  the
person  who  it  was  suggested  would  be  invisible  must,  in  some  obscure
way,  be  represented  in  the  mind  which  averts  itself  from  regarding
him.

In  the  account  of  hypnotic  hallucinations,  the  chief  feature  is
naturally  that  modification  of  imaginary  visual  objects  by  optical
instruments — prism,  spy-glass,  or  mirror — on  which  both  our  authors
have  written  separately.  The  investigation  is  of  great  interest,  if  only
as  showing  the  remarkable  hyperajsthesia  and  retentiveness  which  are
involved  in  the  observation  of  the  real  points  de  repere  with  which  the
imaginary  object  links,  so  to  speak,  its  visible  existence  ;  but  having
discussed  it  elsewhere,  ^  I  need  say  no  more  of  it  here  than  that  these
special  optical  delusions  seem  as  peculiar  to  "  the  atmosphere  of
the  Salpetriere  "  as  mirage  to  that  of  the  desert.  Neither  normal  nor
ordinary  hysterical  "subjects"  are  affected  by  them.  I  remark,by  theway,

^  Proceedingsof  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Part  II.,  p.  97.
2  Proceedings, Vol. III., pp. 163-7, and  Phantasms of  the  Living,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  469-70.


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


549


a  repetition  of  an  old  mistake  as  to  Brewster,  who  is  represented  as  having
proved  that  a  hallucinatory  image  could  be  doubled  by  pressure  on  the  side
of  one  eye-ball.  "What  he  really  did  was  to  state  the  exact  opposite —
viz.,  that  a  hallucinatory  image  was  to  be  distinguished  from  a  real
object  by  the  fact  of  7iot  being  so  doubled.  He,  of  course,  could  not
have  said  this  had  he  known  of  a  single  case  where  the  hallucinatory
image  was  doubled  by  pressure  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  I  am  not
aware  that  he  ever  supported  his  own  statement  by  adducing  a  single
case  of  its  failing  to  be  doubled.  Instances  of  the  doubling  have
been  credibly  reported.  Of  further  points  discussed,  special  mention  is
due  to  a  very  interesting  series  of  experiments  carried  out  by  MM.
Marie  and  Azoulay  (p.  176),  proving  the  distinctly  longer  time  which  it
requires  to  perceive  a  hallucinatory  object,  when  presented  afresh,  than
to  recognise  a  real  one.  This  fact  seems  to  show,  what  would  naturally
be  expected,  that  the  recognition  of  the  -point  de  re-pere,  and  the  imposi-
tion on  it  of  the  imaginary  figure,  is  a  double  operation.  Very  interest-
ing also  are  the  observations  as  to  the  colourlessness  of  hallucinations
suggested  to  an  achromatopic  eye  ;  the  production  of  complementary
colours  by  hallucinatory  images ;  the  mixture  of  imaginary  colours  ;  and
the  close  relation  between  visual  activity  and  the  general  sensibility  of
the  external  tissues  of  the  eye,  exhibited  when  the  visual  activity  is
induced  by  hallucination  no  less  than  by  normal  excitation.

The  topic  of  esthesiogenes  brings  us  into  that  region  of  marvels  to
which  I  have  already  referred — the  various  effects  of  a  magnet  on  the
human  organism.  "  This  agent  has  nothing  mysterious  about  it,"  say
our  authors  ;  "  it  acts  on  the  nervous  system  like  a  weak  electric
current."  This,  of  course,  explains  nothing  ;  weak  electric  currents
have  never  been  supposed  able  to  affect  a  human  body  across  space.
However,  we  need  not  chop  straws  as  to  how  far  the  existence  of  a
quite  unguessed  relation  of  living  tissues  to  physical  agencies  is
"  mysterious  "  ;  it  is  at  any  rate  a  fact  of  surpassing  interest  ;  and
our  authors'  list  of  precautions  (p.  195)  certainly  conveys  the  impres-
sion that  they  have  justified  their  own  conviction  of  its  reality.  They  do
not  perhaps  exceed  their  rights  in  claiming  that  it  would  weigh  nothing
against  the  genuineness  of  their  results  if  these  could  not  be  repeated
with  other  "  subjects  " ;  since  the  peculiar  sensibility  in  question  is,  for
aught  they  know,  a  peculiarity  of  "  les  grandes  hysteriques."  But  in
view  of  the  extraordinary  susceptibility  of  some  neurotic  persons  to
suggestion,  one  cannot  but  wish  that  the  list  of  precautions  included
the  invariable  employment  of  an  electro-magnet,  of  which  the  current
could  be  turned  on  and  off  without  the  "subject's  "  knowledge.

The  phenomena  first  described  belong  to  the  class  of  transfers.  A
unilateral  hallucination  of  the  eye  or  ear  is  transferred,  by  the  applica-
tion of  a  magnet,  to  the  other  side  of  the  body  ;  not  symmetrically,  how-


550


Critical  Notices.


ever,  in  the  visual  cases — the  imaginary  profile  which  the  right  eye  saw
as  turned  to  the  right  is  similarly  seen  by  the  left  eye.^  The  transfer
is  accompanied  by  a  pain,  localised,  according  to  our  authors,  in  a
special  area  which  may  probably  be  the  visual  or  the  auditory.  Exter-
nal stimulation  of  the  skull  at  the  parts  thus  indicated,  at  a  time  when
the  "  subject  "  is  in  catalepsy,  is  said  to  restore  movement  to  the  fixed
eyes,  and  hearing  to  the  deaf  ears.  But  the  more  remarkable  cases  are
those  where  the  hallucination  is  bi-lateral.  Here,  we  are  told,  the
proximity  of  the  magnet  annuls  the  hallucination.  The  imaginary
object  disappears  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  a  real  object  similarly  dis-
appears ;  the  gong  whose  noise  had  just  before  struck  a  patient  into
catalepsy  ceases  to  be  visible  to  her  eyes  when  the  magnet  is  held  near
her  head,  and  may  then  be  struck  again  and  again  with  violence  with-
out producing  any  effect  on  her.  Similarly  (p.  240)  an  object  rendered
invisible  by  suggestion  becomes  visible  again  under  the  influence  of  the
magnet.  The  same  means  will  suppress  memory  in  the  same  way,  and
cause  a  "  subject "  to  forget  the  nature  of  an  object  which  she  has  just
before  been  correctly  desciibing.  Our  authors  apply  to  this  influence
of  the  magnet  the  term  jyolarisation.  But  besides  merely  replacing  an
activity  by  a  paralysis,  polarisation  may  apparently  produce  positive
complementary  results.  The  "  subject "  who  has  been  gazing  at  an
imaginary  red  cross,  at  the  approach  of  the  magnet  begins  to  see  green
rays  radiating  from  it ;  and  gradually  the  green  becomes  all  the  colour
visible,  and  the  red  cross  in  the  middle  is  replaced  by  a  white  one.

A  similar  relation  of  polarisation  to  simple  transfer  is  described  in
the  next  chapter,  in  the  department  of  movements  and  acts.  A  patient
is  told  to  make  a  jned  de  iiez  at  a  bust  of  Gall  with  her  left  hand ;  a
magnet  is  placed  near  her  right  hand,and  she  is  woke.  She  makesfourteen
pieds  de  nez  with  her  left  hand  ;  then  the  movement  gradually  ceases,
and  is  taken  up  by  the  right  hand.  On  the  withdrawal  of  the  magnet
the  transfer  is  again  produced,  and  the  left  hand  recommences.  Similarly
the  magnet  will  cause  a  series  of  numbers  which  the  "subject"  is
writing  with  the  right  hand  to  be  continued  with  the  left ;  and  while
the  left  hand  is  thus  employed,  the  right  has  lost  all  its  writing  faculty.
And  again,  an  order  to  carry  out  a  series  of  actions  with  the  one  hand
is  executed  throughout  with  the  other  hand,  though  the  magnet  has
only  been  in  the  "subject's"  proximity  at  the  very  beginning  of  the
experiment.  Polarisation  paralyses  the  power  of  carrying  out  move-
ments with  either  hand.  The  "  subject "  is  rolling  up  a  pellet,  when  a
magnet  is  brought  near  the  back  of  her  neck ;  her  hands  begin  to

1  It  is  impossible,  without  great  cumbrousness,  to  avoid  speaking  of  hallu-
cinations as  seen  by  the  ei/e  or  heard  by  the  car.  Such,  of  course,  is  the  "sub-
ject's "  own  impression,  but  the  actual  physical  event  corresponding  with  the
impression  takes  place  in  central  nervous  centres,  not  in  the  external  organ.


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisms  Animal.


551


tremble,  she  endeavours  to  proceed,  but  has  to  give  it  up.  But  if  the
suggested  movement  is  associated  with  an  emotion,  the  alleged  effect  is
to  produce  the  opposite  emotion.  A  "  subject "  to  whom  it  has  been
suggested  to  strike  the  experimenter,  and  who  has  actually  aimed  a  blow
at  him,  is  incited  by  a  hidden  magnet  at  her  feet  to  exclaim,  "  I  want
to  kiss  him,"  and  can  only  be  prevented  from  doing  so  by  force  !
Confirmatory  examples  of  this  "  psychic  polarisation,"  or  reversal  of
ideas  and  emotional  impulses,  have  since  been  described  by  MM.
Bianchi  and  Sommer,  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  February,  1887.^

Further  topics  of  interest  in  this  10th  chapter  are  the  effects  of
suggestion  in  producing  the  "  attitudes  passionelles  "  ;  the  confinement
of  suggested  acts  to  one  side  of  the  body  ;  the  "echo-speaking,"  which
Berger  discovered  to  be  producible  in  some  hypnotic  "  subjects  "  by  the
application  of  the  hand  to  their  head  or  the  nape  of  the  neck  ;  the
diminished  reaction-time  in  this  echo-speaking — the  results  here  con-
firming the  experiments  of  Professor  Stanley  Hall  (Mind,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.l70)in  hypnotic  reaction-time  in  general  and  contrasting  in  an  interest-
ing way  with  the  increased  time  necessary  for  distinct  psychic  reactions,
such  as  the  re-establishment  of  a  hallucinatory  image  in  its  former
place  (see  p.  549  above)  ;  the  independent  reasoning,  and  often  the  in-
genuity, which  "  subjects "  will  often  bring  to  bear,  in  or  after  the
execution  of  suggested  acts  ;  and  the  obstinacy  with  which  suggestions
bearing  on  some  particular  act,  or  class  of  acts,  are  often  resisted.
(Compare  a  case  which  I  described  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  287.)
And  specially  I  would  draw  attention  to  a  certain  difference  between
cataleptic  and  suggested  somnambulic  attitudes  (p.  220),  which  certainly
tends  to  suggest,  as  against  the  Nancy  view,  that  hypnotic
catalepsy  is  not  a  mere  effect  of  suggestion.  But  many  more  experiments
of  a  precise  kind  are  wanted.  I  have  certainly  seen  a  "  subject's  "
extended  arm,  stiffened  by  suggestion,  tremble  and  drop  in  the  way  that
our  authors  describe  ;  but  then  the  stage  of  trance  produced  was  of
the  very  lightest ;  and  there  is  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  in  some  "  sug-
gestion" cases  fatigue  and  its  physical  symptoms  do  not  supervene
nearly  so  soon  as  they  would  in  normal  conditions.

The  next  chapter,  which  takes  up  again  the  subject  of  sensory
paralyses  produced  by  suggestion,  is  rich  in  interesting  facts.  For
instance,  a  "subject"  to  whom  a  purse  had  been  rendered  invisible,
will  equally  fail  to  see  the  money  which  comes  out  of  it ;  one  to  whom
a  particular  person  had  been  rendered  invisible  could  not  see  him  for
some  days,  and  then,  on  regaining  the  power  to  see  him,  took  him  for
a  stranger  visiting  the  hospital ;  one,  in  whom  pressure  of  a  particular

^  See  also  "Nuove  Ricerclie  nelF  Ipnotismo,"  pel  Dott.  Guiseppe  d'Abundo,
in  La  Psichiatria  for  1886,  Fase.  I.,  p.  68.

2  0  2


552


Critical  Notices.


spot  would  always  produce  a  hysterical  attack,  remained  perfectly
indifferent  when  the  pressure  was  exercised  by  a  person  rendered
invisible  by  suggestion.  Colours  rendered  invisible  by  suggestion
are  said  to  have  been  revived  in  memory  by  the  proximity  of  a  magnet,
and  they  also  give  rise  to  subsequent  complementary  images — showing
that  the  invisible  colour  has  affected  the  sensory  centi'e  in  the  same
way  as  if  it  had  been  visible.  This  is  a  strong  proof  that  the  physical
process  in  "  negative  hallucination  "  has  its  seat  in  some  higher  part
of  the  brain  than  the  sensory  centre,  and  is  thus  in  complete  accordance
with  what  was  said  above  (p.  548)  as  to  the  complexity  of  the  accom-
panying psychical  condition.  On  that  point,  by  the  way,  I  iind  myself
no  less  at  variance  with  our  authors  than  before ;  for  they  now
describe  the  special  peculiarity  of  the  condition  in  much  the  same
words  as  I  have  myself  employed,  yet  attempt  to  give  it  a  sort  of  ex-
planation by  denying  it  any  psychical  side.  Not  only  do  they  illustrate
the  fact  that  there  must  be,  in  a  sense,  recognition,  and  so  sight,  of  the
invisible  object,  but  they  admit  that  in  some  cases  this  demands  "  a
very  delicate  and  a  very  complex  operation,  and  a  sustained  effort  of
attention."  The  assumption  that  such  an  act  is  a  piece  of  mere  un-
conscious cerebration  seems  to  me  no  very  plausible  substitute  for  the
hypothesis,  puzzling  though  it  be,  that  on  the  mental  stage  recognition
is  compatible  with  aversion  of  attention.

We  pass  on  in  the  next  chapter  to  the  effect  of  suggestion
in  producing  motor  paralyses.  Here  the  chief  points  to  note  are
the  general  accompaniment  of  the  paralysis  by  anaesthesia  ;  the  exact
correspondence  of  anajsthetic  area  with  the  area  of  the  paralysis  ;  the
exaggeration  of  the  tendon-reflexes,  as  in  some  paralyses  of  organic
origin ;  the  increase  of  force  in  the  left  arm  during  the  paralysis  of  the
right,  and  even  of  skill  in  the  left  hand  when  some  particular  process,
such  as  writing,  is  forbidden  to  the  right  (p.  256) — facts  which  recall
the  alleged  effects  of  the  magnet,  and  are  regaixled  by  our  authors  as
due  to  suppleance  between  the  two  cerebral  hemispheres ;  the
production  of  aphasia  in  conjunction  with  suggested  paralysis  of  the
right  arm,  due  (tliey  hold)  to  the  proximity  of  the  speech-centre  to  the
motor-centre  involved  ;  paralysis  with  contracture  caused  by  the  idea
of  excitation  at  the  spot  where  actual  pressure  would  produce  it — e.g.,
the  griffe  lethargique  following  suggestion  of  pressure  at  a  particular
spot  on  the  fore-arm.  In  their  account  of  jjartial  paralyses,  which
merely  inhibit  a  particular  action,  our  authors  describe  an  effort  made
by  the  patient  to  perform  the  action — flexion  of  the  thumb — as  having
resulted  in  a  violent  extension.  This  is  confirmatory  of  a  less  extreme
case  which  I  described  some  years  ago  (^Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  288-9) —
the  instant  contraction  of  the  biceps  muscle  in  opposition  to  slight
hardenings  of  the  triceps  which  the  "  subject"  produced,  with  great  effort,


Binet  et  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal.


553


when  offered  a  sovereign  if  he  would  extend  his  arm.  But  the  attempted
comparison  between  such  opposition-effects,  and  the  pi'oduction  of  com-
plementary images  by  colours  the  sight  of  which  has  been  suppressed
by  suggestion,  seems  an  unfortunate  piece  of  ingenuity.  For  in  the
motor-cases  we  have  simply  nervous  energy  directed  to  a  particular
spot  in  the  body,  and  taking  the  only  alternative  channel  when  it
finds  the  desired  one  closed.  In  the  colour-cases  there  is  no  question  of
any  alternative  channel,  and  the  physical  process  at  the  sensory  centre —
fatigue  of  certain  nervous  elements,  or  whatever  it  may  be — is  precisely
the  same  as  if  the  colour  had  produced  its  normal  effect  in  consciousness.
The  true  sensory  parallel  to  the  motor-cases  would  be  if  the  suppression
of  a  real  colour  produced  an  impression  of  the  complementary  colour
which  was  not  produced  where  there  had  been  no  suppression ;  for
then  it  might  be  conjectured  that  the  central  elements  responded  with
increased  foi-ce  to  stimulation  from  the  one  colour  through  their
enforced  blindness  to  the  other  ;  but  our  authors  have  not  recorded
any  example  of  such  an  effect.  ^  Of  special  interest  are  the
"  systematic  paralyses,"  where  some  complicated  set  of  movements,
such  as  those  of  writing,  or  of  playing  the  piano,  are  rendered
impossible.  The  selection  may  be  of  the  most  arbitrary  sort ;  for
instance,  a  "  subject "  is  rendered  unable  to  write  the  word  non,
though  he  can  write  any  number  of  other  woitls  containing  the  letters
n  and  o  (p.  254).  Our  authors  represent  this  as  an  inhibition,  not  of
movements,  but  of  co-ordination  of  movements.  It  may  be  suspected,
however,  that  the  cause  lies  further  back — that  the  motor  energy  is,  so
to  speak,  prevented  at  the  very  outset  from  directing  itself  to  that  par-
ticular word.  The  test,  which  does  not  seem  to  have  been  tried,  would
be  to  set  the  unsuspecting  "  subject "  to  write  a  number  of  words
in  one  of  which  the  syllable  non  occurred.  If  this  word  were
written,  the  inability  certainly  could  not  be  that  of  grouping
these  three  letters.  And,  in  general,  it  seems  to  me  that
the  facts  of  systematic  paralysis  indicate  something  distinctly
beyond  mere  failure  in  co-ordination,  and  a  fortiori  beyond  the  mere
"  paralysis  of  the  motor-centre,"  which  a  few  pages  later  (p.  258)  we
find  represented  as  the  "fundamental  fact"  in  all  these  effects  of
suggestion.  It  is  just  here,  in  my  view,  that  the  parallel  between  the  sensory
and  the  motor  paralyses  might  fairly  be  pressed — the  physical  cause  in
either  case  lying  in  a  cerebral  tract  higher  than  the  specific  centres  of
sense  or  movement. Our  authors,  "  averting  their  regard  "  from  these

1  Their  language  at  this  place  (p.  249)  would  imply  that  they  had  giveu
such  an  example,  the  "subject"  seeing  a  green  square  while  actually
gazing  at  a  red  one,  whose  colour  had  been  suppressed  ;  but  in  the  experiment
to  which  they  must  be  referring  (p.  235)  the  complementary  image  is  described
as  consecutive,  and  is  just  what  would  be  produced  in  normal  conditions.


554)


Critical  Notices.


higher  tracts  (without  the  excuse  of  hypnotic  suggestion  !)  are  led  to
treat  any  psychical  facts  connected  with  them  as  secondary  and
insignificant.  Thus  they  end  the  discussion  on  "  paralyses  of  will,"  in
the  chapter  now  under  review,  by  saying  that  it  matters  little  whether
a  person's  own  account  of  an  inability  is  that  he  cannot  do  the
thing,  or  tliat  he  does  not  ivish  to  do  it,  or  that  he  does  not
know  how  to  do  it  ;  because  all  three  cases  involve  some
functional  disturbance  of  the  motor-centres.  So  may  excess  alike
of  pleasure  and  of  pain  involve  some  functional  disturbance  of  the
heart.  Such  treatment  of  fundamental  psychological  distinctions  is
hardly  of  a  piece  with  the  immediately  succeeding  paragraphs  (p.  262),
in  which  the  long  neglect  of  hypnotism  by  psychologists  is  deplored,
and  its  claim  to  a  foremost  place  in  the  study  of  mind  is  strongly
enforced.

The  following  chapter,  on  the  therapeutical  applications  of  hypnotism
and  the  "  medicine  of  the  imagination,"  though  eminently  sensible  as  far
as  it  goes,  is  short,  and  calls  for  little  comment.  I  must  remark,  how-
ever, that  the  dogmatic  assertion  that  "  suggestion  only  cures  affections
which  are  capable  of  being  modified  spontaneously,  or  by  the  influence
of  various  external  agents,"  seems  decidedly  premature.  The  agency
which  can  produce  a  blister  in  a  few  hours — a  result  which  our  authors
accept  (p.  146),  but  which  a  few  years  ago  scarcely  any  instructed
physiologist  would  have  believed — is  not  one  whose  physiological  limits
can  be  laid  down  in  a  single  trenchant  phrase.

The  final  chapter,  "  Hypnotism  and  Responsibility,"  gives  a  sketch
of  the  various  ways  in  which  hypnotism  might  come  into  contact  with
the  criminal  law.  These  may  be  epitomised  as  follows.  (1)  Someone
may  profess  to  have  been  subjected  to  injury  while  in  the  hypnotic
trance — -a  profession  which  may  be  true,  or  deliberately  false,  or  due
to  a  deluded  imagination,  or  the  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  which
has  either  caused  him  to  see  something  which  was  not  fact,  or  to  fail  to
see  something  which  was  fact.  (2)  Someone  may  have  been  subjected  to
injury  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  but,  owitigto  post-hypnotic  oblivion,  may
be  unable,  in  a  normal  state,  to  bear  witness  to  the  fact.  (3)  Someone  may
have  been  instigated  to  commit  a  crime,  either  during  the  hypnotic
trance  or  afterwards,  by  a  command  impressed  during  trance.  (4)
Someone  may  make  a  false  confession  of  a  crime,  under  the  influence  of
a  previous  hypnotic  command.  The  difiiculties  and  pitfalls  which  would
await  the  "expert"  witness  in  such  cases  are  set  forth  with  due
caution  ;  and  here  the  stress  laid  on  the  value  of  objective  physical
signs,  when  it  is  a  question  of  whether  a  person  is  hypnotisable  or  not,
seems  quite  in  place.  The  treatise  concludes  with  two  very
sound  principles  ; — -that  attempts  to  extort  truth  by  hypnotising
suspected  or  accused  persons  against  their  will  are  illegitimate  ;  and


Dr.  Oilles  de  la  Tourette,  L' Hypnotisme,  &c.  555


that  experimentation  on  human  material  must  be  pursued  ^vith  the
utmost  caution,  and  must  never  be  prostituted  to  the  gratification  of
vulgar  curiosity.

I  am  sorry  to  part  with  so  interesting  a  book.  If  I  have  seemed
to  dwell  principally  on  disputable  points,  this  has  been  in  some
measure  forced  on  me  by  the  nature  of  my  task.  The  authors
themselves  expressly  state  that  they  consider  the  subject  not  ripe  for
general  conclusions ;  consequently  their  work  contains  no  broad  views
or  sweeping  hypotheses  of  which  a  popular  outline  might  have  been
presented  at  second-hand.  The  book  is  eminently  one  of  special  facts
and  special  discussions ;  and  in  such  a  case  the  reviewer's  most
instructive  course  seems  to  be  to  deal  with  points  of  difference —
to  criticise,  in  fact,  rather  than  to  seek  to  reproduce,  and  to  alight
where  the  path  is  tangled,  rather  than  to  retrace  it  where  it  is  clear.
The  reader  who  desires  to  master  the  facts  in  detail  will  naturally  go  to
the  original;  of  many  of  them  the  account  hardly  admits  of  being
shortened  ;  but  even  a  brief  critical  survey  of  the  manner  in  which
they  have  been  presented  and  interpreted  may  suggest  the  nature  of
the  problems  involved  to  some  who  can  forego  the  minutiae  of
muscular  contractions  or  complementary  images.  My  only  regret
would  be  if  this  treatment  seemed  to  any  one  incompatible  with  a
genuine  sense  of  the  high  qualities — the  care,  the  candour,  and  the
ingenuity — -which  the  work  displays.  Though  modest  alike  in  its  form
and  in  its  claims,  it  worthily  sustains  the  high  scientific  reputation  of
its  authors  and  their  school.

Edmund  Gurnet.


L'Hypnotisme  et  les  Etats  Analogues  cm  Point  de  Vue  Medico-legal,
par  le  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  Preparateur  du  Cours  de
Medecine  Legale  a  la  Faculte.  Preface  de  M.  le  Dr.  P.
Brouardel. Paris  :  Librairie  Plon,  1887.

That  a  treatise  more  than  500  pages  long  should  discuss,  and  treat
as  a  pressing  need,  the  recognition  of  hypnotism  by  the  French  code,
certainly  shows  that  the  subject  is  in  a  very  advanced  stage,  inasmuch
as  the  law  of  the  land  is  usually  the  very  last  stronghold  into  which  a
new  conclusion  of  science  forces  a  passage.  As  in  all  the  English
annals  of  mesmerism  there  seems  to  be  no  case  betokening  any  necessity
for  legislation,  and  as,  if  any  danger  existed,  legislation  in  this  country
could  only  be  got  either  by  a  popular  agitation,  which  is  unlikely,  or


556


Critical  Notices.


by  an  agitation  of  medical  experts  in  the  subject,  who  hardly  here  exist
at  all,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  question  to  which  Dr.  Gilles  de  la
Tourette  voluminously  devotes  himself  is  not  yet  a  British  interest.
Of  such  a  question  it  is  natural  that  a  Frenchman  should  woi'k  out  the
theoretical  possibilities  before  the  mass  of  English  people  are  alive  to
the  bare  facts.  Bare,  indeed,  the  facts  themselves  are  so  far  from
being,  that  I  shall  have  to  criticise  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  closely
upon  his  version  of  them.  His  book  is  in  effect,  if  not  in  purpose,  a
counterstroke  of  optimism  from  Paris  against  the  warnings  of  danger
published  from  time  to  time  by  Dr.  Liegeois,  of  Nancy,  referred  to  in
Mr.  F.  Myers'  first  article  in  Pi-oceedings  X.,  and  best  summarised  in
the  Revue  de  T Hypnotisme,  No.  3,  p.  82,  September,  1886.  Another
treatment  of  the  question  on  the  same  side  is  to  be  found  in  the  first
number  of  the  same  journal,  by  Dr.  Ladame,  of  Geneva.  A  main
purpose  of  Dr.  de  la  Tourette  is  to  reassure  the  world  against  the  fear
of  crimes,  committed  in  real  life  and  out  of  the  human  laboratories  of
the  hospitals,  under  the  influence  of  hypnotic  or  post-hypnotic
suggestion.  The  force  of  his  reassurance  depends  almost  entirely  on  a
proposition  which  he  shares  with  the  rest  of  the  Paris  school,  and
which  vitiates,  if  false,  nearly  the  whole  of  his  optimism.  Briefly
stated,  it  is  that  all  these  artificially  produced  mental  and  bodily  states
are  "  nevroses,"  or  as  we  should  say,  pathological :  that  a  hypnotic
subject  is  a  "  malade,"  and  generally  has  either  hysteria  or  its  germs,
which  renewed  hypnotising  tends  to  bring  out ;  and  that  the  phenomena
of  natural  somnambulism,  of  hypnotism  provoked  on  persons  apparently
robust,  and  of  the  confessed  "  n^vropathes  "  of  the  Salpetriere,  are  all
branches  of  the  same  fatal  tree,  hysteria.  It  would  follow  that  the
symj^toms  and  stages  of  hypnotism  in  the  hysterical  patients  of  MM.
Charcot,  Richer,  Dumontpallier,  and  Magnin,  so  far  as  they — imperfect
as  the  agreement  on  them  is  ^ — are  to  be  expected  and  similarly  tested
for  in  the  case  of  persons  apparently  robust.  Now  the  doctor's  true
and  secondary  proposition,  that  all  the  cases  which  have  yet  come  before
the  French  Courts  have  involved  hysteria,  is  not  to  be  confounded  with
his  untrue  fundamental  proposition,  which  sometimes  appears  in  the
form  that  "  sujets  sains  "  do  really  exist,  but  are  to  be  judged  by  rules
based  on  the  observation  of  "  hysteriques,"  and  sometimes  apparently
in  the  form  tliat  hypnotism  appears  "  chez  les  seuls  nevropathes."  The
evidence  he  adduces  in  proof  of  this  is  worth  examining  as  a  bad  case
of  scientific  prejudice.  On  p.  57  lie  quotes  from  Dr.  Liebeault's  first
work  (p.  344),  in  order  to  confute  the  Nancy  scliool  out  of  its  master's
mouth. Dr.  Liebeault  says  first  that  the bilious-nervous  tempera-

^  See  SocicU  de  Biologie,  7  Jan.,  1882,  p.  5  ;  and  id.  Memoires  o/1885,  p.  50.
Also  Revue  de  V  Hyjmotisme,  No.  6,  p.  77.


Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  L'Hypnotisme,  &c.


557


ments,  then  the  nervous,  tlien  the  nervous-lymphatic  temperaments
furnish  his  best  sleepers  ;  that  the  disposition  to  put  oneself  in  the
requisite  "passivity  of  mind"  is  hereditary.  Then  he  admits  that
"people  affected  with  strabismus,  quivering  of  eyeballs,  or  '  tics  con-
vulsifs',  and  vapourish  women,  hysterical  and  some  epileptic  people,
nervous  sufferers,  and  sufferers  from  anfemia,  are  usually  disposed  to
become  somnambules."  He  adds  to  this  list  persons  who  dream  and  move
about  in  sleep.  But  the  last  part  of  the  quotation  from  Dr.  Liebeault
runs  : — "  Si  Ton  rencontre  surtout  des  sujets  a  endormir  parmi  des
malades,  ce  n'est  pas  une  raison  pour  croire  que  les  ^tats  de  charme  et
de  somnambulisme  sont  morbides,  comme  on  est  porte  a  le  penser  :  nous
avons  endormi  des  femmes  et  des  hommes  d'une  constitution  robuste  et
qui  n'avaient  jamais  ete  souffrants,  pour  ainsi  dire,  des  paysans
vigoureux  ayant  servi  dans  des  corps  d'elite  et  fait  des  campagnes
pdnibles  sans  qu'ils  soient  jamais  entres  dans  un  hopital."  Dr.  de  la
Tourette  makes  the  astonishing  comment  :  "  On  nous  accordera  sans
con  teste  que  I'opinion  de  M.  de  Liebeault  n'a  rien  de  defavorable  a  la
these  de  la  production  de  I'hypnotisme  chez  les  seuls  nevropathes,  qui
est  celle  que  nous  soutenons."  If  we  pass  over  the  calculation  of  M.
Bottey  that  30  per  cent,  of  absolutely  healthy  persons  can  be  hypnotised,
which  is  quoted  as  also  favourable  to  "  la  these,"  we  come  to  a  more
serious  argument,  quoted  from  M.  Paul  Janet  (de  1'  Institut),  who
urges  tliat  tliough  healtliy  persons  can  be  hypnotised,  yet  hysteria  is  the
stem  on  which  it  is  best  to  graft  hypnotism,  and  presents  it  in  its
fullest,  purest,  most  classic  form.  M.  Janet  also  criticises  the  paucity
of  detail  upon  the  pathological  liistory  of  the  Nancy  patients,  and  M.
Paul  Magnin  i  asks  in  wonder  how  the  feature  so  well-known  in  the
Salpetriere,  and  the  most  important  symptom  in  detecting  fraud,  namely,
the  excitability  of  nerves  and  muscles  othertvise  than  by  suggestion,  can
have  escaped  M.  Bernheim's  notice.  Possibly  the  answer  to  this
question  is  :  "  Just  because  there  are  so  many  non-hysterical  patients
at  Nancy.  It  may  be  true  that  M.  Magnin  has  shown  the  presence  of
surface  and  deep  contractions  in  all  three  states  of  hysterical  hypnotism;
but  if  we  cannot  really  argue  from  that  to  non-hysterical  hypnotism,  it
will  be  necessary  definitely  to  prove  hysteria  before  the  medical  expert,
re-hypnotising,  can  point  to  the  absence  of  muscular  contraction  as  an
e\ddence  of  feigned  hypnotism."

One  more  specimen  of  Dr.  de  la  Tourette's  incompleteness  on  this
point.  On  p.  442,  he  speaks  of  the  public  mesmerisers  who  fix  on
ansemic  "nevropathes"  in  their  audience  to  begin  upon.  It  is  a  pity
that  he  has  never  been  a  witness  of  Mme. Card's  exhibitions  at

1  Revue  de  V  Hypnotisme,  No.  6,  p.  177,  in  review  of  Dr.  de  la  Tourette's
book.


558


Critical  Notices.


Oxford  or  Cambridge.  It  is  well  known  that  Hansen  preferred  robust
young  students,  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  nerves/  and  that  flighty
persons  of  weak  concentrative  power  are  bad  subjects.

But  many  English  readers  will  be  asking,  "  Who  would  ever  feign
hypnotism  at  all  1  How  does  the  question  come  before  the  law,  and
how  do  the  scientific  issues  affect  the  law  ?  "  It  will  be  most  con-
venient to  take  the  divisions  of  Dr.  Ladame  in  the  article  mentioned
above.  The  first  deals  with  the  danger  of  the  methods  of  hypnotising,
especially  the  violent  ones  practised  in  public  shows.  Dr.  de  la  Tourette's
most  valuable  chapters  deal  with  the  "exploitation"  of  magnetism.
The  prohibition  of  Donate  in  Italy,  of  Hansen  in  Germany,  and  of  per-
formers at  the  English  Universities,  shows  how  practical  the  po  int  is.
Nothing  could  better  play  into  the  hands  of  the  believers  in  the
"  nevrose  "  than  the  deranging  effect  of  public  exhibitions  undertaken
for  commercial  motives,  and  of  private  and  blundering  attempts  by  the
inexpert.  The  more  practised  and  more  gentle  the  manipulation  is,
the  less  of  a  "  nevrose  "  is  hypnotism,  and  the  world  can  read  the  con-
fessions of  Dr.  Lidbeault  (Heime,  Nos.  4  and  5),  who  has  hypnotised
thousands,  and  learn  how  slight  have  been  his  errors,  and  how  largely
they  vanished  the  more  he  employed  gentle  suggestion.

The  next  division  of  Ladame  deals  with  unlawful  acts  committed
spontaneously  by  natural  somnambulists,  and  the  sensible  conclusion
of  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  is  that  they  should  be  acquitted,  but  also
watched,  as  irresponsible,  since  they  recollect  their  act,  if  at  all,  only
as  a  dream.  A  more  complicated  difficulty  arises  with  persons  afflicted
witli  an  "  etat  second."  Are  they  accountable  in  one  state  for  what
they  do  in  another  1  Hysteria  must  not  be  reckoned  to  destroy
responsibility,  or  its  slightest  symptom  would  be  an  excuse ;  but  it
would  be  hard  to  punish  a  person  during  one  etat  for  the  misdoings  of
his  other  personality,  and  the  utmost  that  can  be  laid  at  the  door  of
the  patient  is  a  limited  responsibility  during  the  same  section  of
his  life.  The  case  of  Dr.  Dufay,  who  by  inducing  artificial  somnam-
bulism found  where  an  article  had  been  hid  in  natural  somnambulism,
suggests  the  grave  question  of  what  may  be  termed  judicial  re-
hypnotising.  By  this  is  meant  an  eff'ort  to  reproduce  by  new  hypnotism
the  memories  of  old  hypnotism,  in  order  to  examine  the  chances  of
the  subject  having  been  an  irresponsible  instrument  of  crime.  But  before
discussing  this  a  word  is  due  on  Dr.  Ladame's  third  division,  which  deals
with  crimes  committed  on  hypnotised  persons.  Dr.  de  la  Tourette  has
many  hints  of  value  on  this  head,  but  they  are  too  frequently  based
on  the assumption  of  a  hysterical  constitution in  every  possible

^  Fischer,  Dcr  Sogcnannte  Lehetis-Magnetismus  (Mainz,  1883),  p.  82  ;  and
see  Mr.  E.  (iurney's  letter  to  the  Medical  Times  of  Oct.  27,  1883.


Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  L'ffypnotisme,  &c.  559


victim.  The  two  questions  then  to  be  settled  ai'e  first,  how  far  was  will
abolished ;  and,  secondly,  how  far  was  consciousness  abolished  ?  As
to  the  first  question,  the  doctor  thinks  that  in  lethargy  there  is
certainly  no  power  of  resistance,  the  ^dctirn  being  a  mere  'pdte  molle"
and  that  in  somnambulism  there  is  more,  as  certain  subjects  are
incapable  of  suggestion  in  that  state.  Consequently  if  a  subject  be
re-hypnotised  by  the  medico-legal  expert,  and  found  incapable  both
of  lethargy  and  of  suggestion  in  somnambulism,  the  case  will  not
come  under  this  class.  As  to  the  question  of  consciousness,  on  which
the  power  of  giving  eAddence  depends,  he  thinks  that  if  the  crime
was  committed  in  lethargy,  there  is  no  memory  at  all ;  if  in  "  letliargie
lucide,"  that  there  is  memory  on  waking ;  and  if  in  somnam-
bulism, that  there  is  memory  in  the  corresponding  state  of  re-hypno-
tisation.  But  while  he  recognises  the  fickleness  of  such  evidence,
I  do  not  find  him  laying  down  the  obvious  canon  that  it  never
ought  to  tell  against  anybody  without  independent  corroboration.
Now  the  doctor's  restricted  and  pathological  view  of  hypnotism
matters  in  this  connection  the  less,  that  probably  in  most  liealthy
subjects  there  would  be  a  very  large  power  of  resistance,  at  any
rate  during  the  "  alert "  stage,  and  probably  well  on  into  the  deep
stage,  to  any  improper  suggestion  or  attempt  :  while  in  a  hysterical
person  there  would  be  a  smaller  fund  of  instinctive  moral  resistance
both  in  hypnotism  and  out  of  it.  Therefore  we  may  accept  the  Doctor's
rules  on  this  head  provisionally, — always  bearing  in  mind  his  radical
assumption, — and  cheerfully  subscribe  to  his  proposal  to  protect
"I'inconscient"  from  outrage  by  the  code  of  France,  just  as  it  is  protected
by  the  codes  of  Belgium,  Germany,  and  Spain.  Before  gratefully  leaving
this  section,  I  may  remark  how  irresistibly  the  "  Castellan  case,"  quoted
by  so  many  authors,  strikes  one  as  having  a  fine  incrustation  of  myth.
Too  long  to  cite,  it  is  so  much  in  danger  of  becoming  classic  that  I
may  notice  the  unjudicial,  the  professionally  literary  style,  in  which
it  is  always  presented,  and  the  strange  trust  accorded  to  the
detailed  evidence  of  all  the  witnesses,  who  refrained  without  apparent
motive  from  interfering  with  what  they  make  out  as  a  weird  and
dreadful  outrage.

On  the  next  head  Dr.  de  la  Tourette  is  decidedly  too  roseate  in  his
assurances,  and  Mr.  Myers  is  perhaps  too  easily  comforted.  Dr.  Liegeois
took  pains  to  show  that  persons  can  be  made,  under  the  influence  of  sug-
gestion, to  commit,  both  during  or  after  hypnotism,  crimes,  to  forget  both
who  the  suggester  was  and  their  own  act,  and  even  sincerely  to  throw
suspicion  on  some  third  person.  Dr.  de  la  Tourette  dismisses  all  these
experiments  as  "purely  of  the  laboratory,"  and  points  to  the  manifold
chances  of  frustration  in  real  life  through  some  slip  in  the  programme
enjoined  by  the  hypnotiser,  or  through  the  subject  managing  to  resist.


560


Critical  Notices.


evade,  or  disclose  the  injunction. In  Jean  Mornas, M.  Claretie's
inadequate  and  crudely  wrought  story  (said  to  have  been  transcribed
from  a  laboratory  experiment),  the  subject  commits  theft  and  murder
at  the  suggestion  of  her  guilty  lover,  and  will  not  reveal  his  name
to  justice  until  re-hypnotised  and  made  to  re-live  the  experience,
somewhat  like  the  somnambulist  in  The  Moonstone. It  is  not  clear
whether  the  suggestion  is  executed  in  or  after  the  hypnotic  state,  and
(as  far  as  my  memory  goes)  the  process  of  extracting  the  name  is  not
described. Again  the  comment  occurs,  that  no  man  should  be  con-
sidered guilty  when  tlius  denounced  without  almost  as  strong  inde-
pendent evidence  as  would  be  needed  if  he  had  not  been  thus  denounced
at  all.  It  would  be  quite  easy  for  the  guilty  hypnotiser  to  have  foreseen
this  procedure,  and  to  have  instilled  a  suggestion  to  denounce  an
innocent  person  in  case  of  justice  adopting  it. Theoretically,  indeed,
there  is  no  limit  to  the  duel  fought  between  justice  and  the  criminal  in
the  soul  of  the  unwitting  accomplice,  but  practically  justice  having  the
last  word  would  imperil  the  criminal  considerably. One  point  to  settle
would  be  tlie  extent  to  which  subsequent  counter-suggestion  by  justice
could  annul  a  forgetfulness  suggested  by  the  criminal. How  little  the
rules  for  hysterical  hypnotism  might  hold  in  such  a  case,  may  be  seen
from  the  account  of  Professor  Liegeois'  demonstrations  at  the  Congress
of  the  "  Association  rran9aise  "  at  Nancy,  on  August  18th,  1886.  "  M.
Liegeois  propose,  poui'  donner  une  confirmation  de  ce  qu'il  a  avance  sur
la  possibilite  de  faire,  pendant  le  somnambulisme,  des  suggestions  qui  se
realiseront  fatalement  au  reveil,  d'hypnotiser  en  presence  des  membres
de  la  section  plusieurs  hommes,  non  liysteriques,  qu'il  a  amenes.  A  I'unde
ses  sujets  plonge  dans  I'c^tat  de  somnambulisme,  il  suggere  I'accom-
plissement  de  divers  actes  que  celui-gi  doit  exdcuter  en  certain  laps  de
temps  apres  son  reveil. L'injoncfAon  est  irresistihlement  accomjdie."  ^
Therefore,  at  least  with  some  French  temperaments,  even  if  hysteria
is  absent,  the  I'isk  of  suggested  crime  is  quite  serious. One  point
important  to  clear  up  and  not  named  by  the  doctor  is  the  limits  of
moral  resistance  in  the  person  for  whom  "  suggestion "  is  pleaded.
Most  healthy  subjects  draw  the  line  fairly  on  the  right  side  of  impro-
priety or  misdoing,  but  we  do  not  know  how  far  this  resistance  could
be  ordered  down  by  the  hypnotiser  insisting. Probably  it  would
require  much  less  force  to  make  such  a  subject  sign  a  receijDt  than
commit  a  misdemeanour. But  in  the  hysterical  subject  it  might  be
hard  to  distinguish  between  suggestion  commonly  called  hypnotic  and
the  ordinary  suggestion  of  the  real  principal  and  stronger  spirit  in  a
ci'ime  to  his  loyal  tool. And  if  any  person,  hysterical  or  not,  after
re-hypnotisation,  should  be  pronounced  to  have  irresponsibly  committed


^  Revue,  No.  3,  p.  82  (italics  mine  throughout).


Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  L'Rypnotisme,  &c.  561


a  crime,  they  should  of  course  suifer  all  the  restrictions  of  the
irresponsible.

As  precautions  against  risking  such  a  fate,  Professor  Liegeois  recom-
mends everyone  to  refuse  to  be  hypnotised  except  by  a  trustwortliy
friend.  Mr.  Myers  quotes  the  further  precaution  of  the  friend  suggesting
to  the  subject — "  You  will  not  be  able  to  be  hypnotised  by  anyone  else."
Of  course,  the  criminal  on  his  side  might  suggest  this  too  :  but  the
experiments  I  have  read  do  not  decisively  show  that  this  injunction
cannot  be  ordered  down  in  both  cases.  Professor  Beaunis  i  goes  so  far  as
to  say  that  no  suggestion  should  be  offered  without  the  previous  waking
consent  of  the  patient.

Another  question  justice  might  have  to  face  is,  "  Could  this  person
have  been  hypnotised  for  the  first  time  against  his  will  1  "  The  doctor
suggests  that  by  a  ruse  he  might.  Now  the  methods  for  turning  common
into  hypnotic  sleep  bear  on  the  point,  and  are  discussed  by  the  German
writers,  with  whose  researches  (with  the  exception  of  Heidenhain's)
Dr.  de  la  Tourette  betrays  no  acquaintance.  Rumpf,-  Malten  ^  (quoting
Gscheidlen),  and  Borner,  *  agree  that  this  is  feasible,  and  Gsclieidlen,
by  putting  his  hand  on  tlie  heads  of  five  workmen  sleeping  normally,
developed  hypnotic  symptoms.  Borner  says,  curiously,  that  if
consciousness  persists  after  the  passage  into  abnormal  sleep,  the  sleeper
wakes,  when  let  alone,  fi'om  normal  into  hypnotic  sleep;  but  if  conscious-
ness has  not  persisted,  wakes  into  normal  life.  It  is  right  to  add  that
at  the  Breslau  debate,  cited  by  Malten,  it  was  suggested  that  putting  the
hand  on  the  head  merely  produced  insensibility  by  deepening  the
common  sleep.  The  point  is  not  settled,  but  it  is  evident  how  it  might
arise  in  the  judicial  inquiry  whether  a  person  could  have  unwittingly
been  made  irresponsible.

Lastly,  it  should  be  remembered  that  throughout  Dr.  de  la  Tourette
refuses  to  admit  any  evidence  either  for  a  special  mesmeric  influence,  or
for  mental  suggestion,  or  for  any  form  of  experimental  thought-trans-
ference. He  never  faces — yet  can  hardly  not  have  heard  of — tlie
evidence  to  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  especially  that  of  the  Havre  case,  which  also  appears  in  La
Suggestion  Mentale,  by  Dr.  Ochorowicz.  Yet,  if  true,  that  evidence
transforms  the  whole  medico-legal  theory  of  hypnotism.  Till  it  is
more  definitely  established,  it  would  not  be  much  use  to  try  to  work
out  the  practical  consequences  before  the  law.  Nevertheless,  Dr.
Gilles  de  la  Tourette  owes  more  respect  to  the  evidence  than  he
gi^es.  O.  Elton.

^  Le  Somnamhulisme  Provoque,  p.  39.
2  DmUche  Med.  Wochenschrift,  1880,  p.  280.
^  Der  Magnetische  Schlaf  (BerUn,  1880),  p.  19.
4  Deutsche  Med.  Wochenschrift,  1880,  p.  94.


562


Critical  Notices.


De  la  Suggestion  Mentale,  par  le  Dr.  J.  Ochoeovvicz,  ex-Professeur
Agrege  de  Psychologie  et  de  la  Philosopliie  de  la  Nature  a
rUniversite  de  Lemberg.  Preface  de  M.  Charles  Richet.
Paris:  Octave  Doin,  1887.

We  welcome  this  book  as  the  first  serious  attempt  made,  out  o£
England,  to  present  and  arrange  a  considerable  mass  of  evidence  for
the  phenomena  of  thought-transference.  It  is  disappointing,  however,
to  find  that  M.  Ochorowicz  has  so  few  experiments  of  his  own  to
record.  Of  the  540  pages  of  which  this  book  consists,  nearly  300  are
occupied  with  excerpts  from  the  already  published  experiments  of  other
investigators,  from  Puysegur  and  Deleuze  down  to  M.  Liebeault  and
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  And  of  the  remainder  of  the  book
the  greater  part  is  devoted  to  a  discussion  of  rival  hypotheses,  and  to
the  dissection  of  inconclusive  experiments.  But  his  industry  and
perseverance  appear  to  be  in  no  way  to  blame  for  this  somewhat  meagre
result.  He  has  been  investigating  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  and
its  allied  states  for  many  years,  and  has  always  had  in  view  the
possibility  of  the  super  sensory  communication  alleged  to  have  been
observed  by  other  workers  in  the  same  field.  Under  the  headings
"  De  la  Suggestion  Mentale  Apparente "  and  "  De  la  Suggestion
Mentale  Probable,"  he  gives  the  results  of  his  earlier  researches
in  this  direction.  These  two  chapters  are  perhaps  the  most  interesting
in  the  book.  They  prove  not  merely  that  M.  Ochorowicz  is  a
painstaking  and  indefatigable  experimenter,  but  that  he  is  ingenious
and  subtle  to  a  high  degree  in  analysing  the  causes  of  miraculous-
seeming  manifestations.  Too  subtle,  perhaps,  on  occasion.  It  is
difficult,  for  instance,  to  believe,  if  the  experiment  is  accurately
recorded,  that  his  explanation  is  entirely  adequate  in  the  following
case.  M.  Ochorowicz  took  up  a  novel  by  Kraszewski,  Le  Monde  et  le
Poete,  opened  it  at  random  out  of  sight  of  the  subject,  and  requested
him  to  read  it.  He  could,  at  first,  see  nothing.  M.  Ochorowicz  then
prompted  him  with  the  first  two  or  three  words  of  tlie  page,  and  the
young  man  at  once  named  correctly  the  chapter  and  volume,  and
recited  the  entire  page,  almost  without  a  mistake.  When  M.
Ochorowicz  put  down  the  book,  the  subject  stopped  his  recitation  ;  but
he  would  go  on,  on  a  fresh  page,  if  prompted,  so  long  as  M.  Ochorowicz
kept  his  eyes  on  the  text.

Voici  r  explication  du  mystfere  :

Le  jeune  homme  en  question  a  lu  derniferement,  "  deux  fois  de  suite, "le
roman  mentionne  de  Kraszewski  ;  il  I'avait  lu,  comme  on  le  lisait  dans  le
temps  en  Pologne,  surtout  a  I'age  de  six-sept  ans.  II  le  savait  presque  par
coeur. Evidemnient  il  ne  saurait  pas  reciter,  a  I'etat  de  veille,  des  pages


Dr.  J.  Ochorowi'cz,  De  la  Suggestion  Mentale.  563


entiferes  textuellement,  mais,  en  somme,  notre  experience  n'a  prouve  qu'une
seule  chose  :  une  "  vivacite  etonnante  des  souvenirs  en  sonnambulisme. "  Et
quant  a  I'influence  de  ma  pens6e,  la  cause  en  etait  bien  simple  :  il  voyait
mieux  quand  je  regardais  dans  le  livre,  parce  que  niachinalement  jecorrigeais
ses  petites  erreurs.  Ce  sont  meme  ces  erreurs-la  qui  m'ont  suggere  I'explica-
tion  vraie  de  1' experience  ;  car,  au  lieu  de  lire  mal  un  mot  ecrit,  il  le
rempla9ait  par  un  autre,  analogue  comnie  sens,  mais  tout-a-fait  different
comme  forme.  Ayant  ete  entraine  en  dehors  des  associations  exactes,  par
une  erreur  semblable,  il  s'arretait  si  je  fermais  le  livre,  parce  que  je  ne
pouvais  plus  lui  venir  en  aide.

Moreover,  it  appeared  subsequently  that  the  young  man  could
"  read,"  though  less  correctly,  even  when  the  book  was  closed.  No
doubt  M.  Ochorowicz  is  right  in  refusing  to  regard  this  as  even  a  proof
presumptive  of  thought-transference :  though,  to  those  who  admit
thought-transference  as  a  fact  in  nature,  it  might  not  appear  out  of  the
question  that  the  memory  of  the  subject  to  some  extent  should  be
reviviiied  and  supplemented  by  that  agency.  But  the  simpler  and  more
probable  explanation  of  the  "  subject's  "  failure  to  read  when  the  book
was  closed  appears  to  me  to  be  that  his  capacity  for  "  reading "
depended  upon  his  belief  that  he  was  reading  tlirough  the  eyes  of  the
operator.  To  accept  liis  own  explanation  would  argue  a  want  of  care
on  the  part  of  M.  Ochorowicz  of  which,  on  the  evidence  supplied  by
this  book,  he  may  reasonably  be  acquitted.

Elsewhere,  however,  his  comments  are  eminently  just.  Here,  for
instance,  is  an  account  of  an  experiment  conducted  by  himself  in
waking  a  hypnotised  subject  by  mental  suggestion.  The  experiment
succeeded  perfectly  on  the  first  trial ;  the  subject  awoke  as  soon  as  the
mental  command  was  formulated.  An  equal  measure  of  success
attended  his  subsequent  experiments  of  the  same  kind  ;  but  he  found
himself  unable  to  compel  the  subject  to  execute  his  commands  when  he
willed  that  she  should  perform  certain  movements.  Why,  then,  he
asks,  did  she  obey  my  commands  in  the  one  case  and  remain  insensitive
in  the  other  1

En  voici  la  raison  ;  il  y  avait  la  deux  habitudes,  qui  avaient  passe
inaperques.  Continuant  le  traitement  depuis  plusieurs  semaines,  j 'avals  pris
I'habitude  de  la  reveiller  juste  une  demi-heure  apres  la  declaration  du
sommeil ;  je  ne  regardais  pas  la  montre,  mais  je  venais  toujours  a  i'heure
fixe,  et,  comme  c'etait  une  heure  avant  le  diner,  mon  estomac  remplagait
parfaitement  ma  montre.

Quant  a  la  malade,  elle  a  pris  egalement  I'habitude  de  se  reveiller  presque
exactement  a  la  minute — phenomene  bien  connu  des  hypnotiseurs.  Cela
n'arrive  pas  toujours,  mais  cela  arrive  tres  souvent.

He  then  verifies  this  hypothesis  by  ascertaining  that  he  could  not
awaken  the  subject  by  mental  command,  10,  15,  or  20  minutes  after  the
commencement  of  the  sleep,  and  that she  invariably  awoke  of  her


564


Critical  Notices.


own  accord  after  a  sleep  of  30  to  35  minutes'  duration.  After
considering  this  and  otlier  similar  experiences,  he  makes  the  suggestive
remark  :  "  II  y  a  toujours  deux  questions  a  elucider.  La  question,
Comment  le  sujet  a-t-il  pu  deviner  la  pensee  1  n'est  que  la  seconde  ;
tandis  que  la  premiere  consiste  a  savoir  :  Comment  I'experimentarteur
est  arrive  a  choisir  une  pensee  plutot  qu'une  autre?"  (p.  17.)  He
applies  this  canon  to  the  noteworthy  series  of  experiments  with
Madame  D.  The  subject  was  in  a  normal  state,  with  her  back  turned
towards  the  two  experimenters,  who  were  in  contact  (the  exact  nature
of  the  contact  is  not  stated)  with  her  throughout  the  experiment,
although  out  of  her  sight.  Under  these  conditions  the  names  of  cards,
imaginary  colours  and  tastes,  objects  in  the  room,  <fec.,  were  correctly
named  in  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  trials.  (A  full  record  of
these  experiments  was  sent  to  us  by  M.  Ochorowicz  in  the  spring  of
last  year,  and  will  be  found  quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  661-4.)  M.  Ochorowicz  hesitates  to  regard  these  experiments
as  conclusive.  He  thinks  them  to  a  certain  extent  invalidated  by  the
circumstances  of  what  he  calls  "  le  milieu  psychique."  All  the  objects
thought  of  (except  the  cards,  which  were  drawn  at  random  from  a  full
pack)  were  chosen  at  the  time  by  one  or  other  of  the  experimenters.
The  laws  of  the  association  of  ideas,  he  explains,  are  very  obscure  :
the  links  of  connection  are  frequently  automatic  and  unconscious,  and
spring  from  the  sensation  of  the  moment.  A  conjurer  takes  advantage
of  this  fact  to  force  upon  his  audience  the  choice  which  he  wishes  them
to  make,  by  creating,  so  to  speak,  the  appropriate  psychical  environ-
ment. But  in  the  experiments  described,  the  psychical  environment
was  ready  made ;  the  mental  furniture  of  the  three  persons  present
must  have  been  to  a  great  extent  common  ;  and  it  is  probable,  there-
fore, unless  special  precautions  were  taken  to  prevent  it  (e.g.,  by
selecting  the  tests  before  the  commencement  of  the  experiments),  that
the  trains  of  association  leading  them  to  think  of  one  object  rather
than  another  would  also  be  common  in  many  cases  to  both  operators
and  subject.  The  experimenters  themselves,  who  can  alone  know  the
principles,  if  any,  which  guided  their  selection  of  the  objects  thought
of,  can  best  judge  how  far  the  force  of  this  series  of  experiments  is
really  impaired  by  these  considerations.  A  more  serious  evidential
defect — as  Mr.  Gurney  has  already  pointed  out — is  that  in  many
cases  the  object  chosen  was  actually  in  the  room,  and  that  it  is  not
stated  what  precautions  were  taken  to  prevent  the  attention  of  the
"  subject  "  from  being  directed  to  it  by  normal  means.

It  is  only  within  the  last  15  months  that  M.  Ochorowicz  has
succeeded  in  obtaining  conclusive  proof  of  the  possibility  of  super-
sensuous  communication.  M.  Richet's  results — an  account  of  which  was
published  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  in  December,  1884 — appear  to


Dr.  J.  Ochorowicz,  De  la  Suggestion  Mentale.  565


have  given  him  the  first  impetus  towards  definite  experiment.  As,
however,  immediately  after  describing  M.  Richet's  experiments,  he
goes  on  to  preface  a  recital  of  his  own  preliminary  attempts  with
the  words,  "  J'entrepris  une  sdrie  d'experiences  dans  le  but  de  verifier
celles  qui  ont  et(5  faites  par  la  Society  for  Psychical  Researches"
we  may  infer  that  he  became  acquainted  with  the  work  of  the  preceding
few  years  in  England  at  about  the  same  period.  The  experiments
of  Messrs.  Gibert  and  Pierre  Janet,  in  inducing  sleep  by  mental
suggestion  at  a  distance,  were  the  first  undoubted  proofs  which  he
received.  These  experiments  have  been  fully  described  by  Mr.  F.  W.
H.  Myers  (who  was  present  with  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  throughout  M.
Ochorowicz's  visit  to  Havre)  in  the  Proceedings,  PartX.,  pp.  127  et  seq.,
and  need  not  be  further  dwelt  on  liere.

M.  Ochorowicz  returned  from  Havre  eager  to  follow  up  the  clue
which  had  been  given  him  ;  and  he  did,  in  fact,  succeed  in  impressing
commands  upon  certain  hypnotised  subjects  by  mental  suggestion.
The  actions  prescribed  were,  however,  as  a  rule  of  a  comparatively
simple  kind  ;  and  the  operator  was,  in  many  cases,  in  actual  contact
with  the  subject,  or  at  least  was  in  her  immediate  vicinity.  It  is
difiicult,  therefore,  without  a  much  fuller  description  of  the  precautions
taken,  to  feel  confident  that  no  hint  of  the  act  to  be  performed  could
have  been  derived  from  gestures  or  other  indications  of  a  normal  kind.
The  following  spontaneous  experience  seems  to  be  free  from  any
objection  on  this  score,  though  standing  alone  it  cannot  have  much
weight,  as  lucky  guessing  would  be  a  quite  possible  explanation.
After  describing  two  or  three  observations  on  a  subject  whom  he  was
hypnotising  therapeutically,  and  who  seemed  to  be  occasionally  aware
in  the  hypnotic  sleep  of  the  operator's  mental  state,  M.  Ochorowicz
proceeds  to  relate  the  following  experience  : —

J'arrive  chez  Mile.  S. . .  .

"  Qu'avez-vous  fait  hier  soir  a  11  heures  ? "  me  demande-t-elle
ex  abrupto.

Devinant  une  excentricite  somnambulique  quelconque,  je  lui  dis  : —

"Ah,  non  !  vous  me  raconterez  d'abord  ce  que  vous  savez,  et  puis  moi
je  vous  dirai  si  c'est  exact."

"  Soit.  Vous  avez  ecrit  toute  la  soiree  ;  ce  n'etait  pas  des  lettres,  car  j'ai
vu  de  grandes  feuilles  ;  vous  n'avez  lu  aucun  livre,  mais  vous  ecriviez  tout  le
temps  ;  puis  a  11  heures  vous  vous  etes  couche,  mais  vous  n'avez  pas  pu
dormir  et  vous  etes  leve  encore  une  fois,  et  vous  vous  promeniez  dans  la
chambre,  en  fumant  une  cigarette  "

lei  une  personne  qui  etait  a  cote  de  Mile.  S.  hier  soir,  affirme  qu'aprfes
s'etre  couchee  elle  ne  faisait  que  repefcer  tout  le  temps  ; — ■

"Ah!  mon  Dieu,  quand  est-ce  qu'il  va  dormir  enfin  .  .  .  .  il
m'empeche  de  me  reposer. . .  ."

Je  ne  dis  rien,  et  Mile.  S.  continue  son  recit : —

2  p


566


Critical  Notices.


"Puis  enfin,  vers  une  heme,  vous  vous  etes  endormi  et  vous  vous  etes
reveille  juste  a  7  heures  du  matin. Est-ce  vrai  ? "

Tout  cela  etait  exact,  sauf  "  un  retard  constant "  de  plusieurs  minutes
dans  les  heures.  Cest-a-dire  qu'elle  me  voyait  ecrire  encore  a  11  heures,
tandis  que  je  me  suis  leve  d  lOh.  45  a  peu  prfes,  etc.

The  scantiness  of  our  author's  positive  results  is  probably  to  be
explained,  in  part,  by  the  fact  of  his  having  hitherto  almost
exclusively  confined  his  experiments  to  persons  actually  in  the
hypnotic  trance.  As  he  himself  points  out,  the  precise  stage  at  which
the  hypnotised  subject  is  most  amenable  to  mental  suggestion  is  in  the
brief  period  of  transition  between  two  well-marked  phases  of  the  trance
— the  deep  lethargic  sleep  (etat  aid^ique),  in  which  the  subject  is
incapable  of  originating  speech  or  motion  of  any  kind,  and  the  lucid
somnambulic  state  (^tat  polyideique),  in  which  the  activity  of  his  own
mind  overpowers  the  comparatively  feeble  suggestions  received  from
without.  In  our  own  experiments  in  thought-transference  with
hypnotised  subjects,  we  found  great  difficulty  in  preventing  the
percipient  from  relapsing  in  the  middle  of  the  experiment  into  a  deep
speechless  slumber,  from  which  no  hint  of  mental  suggestion  could  be
extracted.  If  the  waking  state  is  not  always  so  favourable  to  the
reception  of  telepathic  suggestions,  the  conditions  are,  at  any  rate,
more  stable  and  of  longer  duration.  Now,  not  only  does  M.
Ochorowicz  seem  rarely  to  have  experimented  with  persons  in  the
normal  state,  but  it  has  not  even  occurred  to  him  to  try  with  persons
who  have  not  beeen  proved  to  be  readily  susceptible  of  hypnotisation.
If  the  truth  must  be  told,  his  parental  partiality  for  that  rather
dubious  little  toy,  the  hypnoscope,  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  of  a
snare  to  him  ;  for  indirectly  it  has  led  on  to  a  partiality,  which  the
results  in  no  way  justify,  for  the  particular  class  of  sensitives  that  his
talisman  reveals  to  him.  And  whilst  he  has  thus  neglected  a  wide
field  of  experiment,  Tie  has  been  led  into  what  seems  to  be  an  over
hasty  generalisation.  For  he  lays  it  down  more  than  once  as  an
undoubted  canon  that,  for  mental  suggestion  to  be  effective,  a  special
rap2)ort  is  necessary  between  the  operator  and  subject.  We  know  so
little  of  the  conditions  under  which  such  transference  of  ideas  takes
place  that  we  cannot  deny  that  there  may  be  a  sense  in  which  this  is
true ;  but  apparently  M.  Ochorowicz  connotes  by  the  word  rapport
some  previously  established  and  cognisable  bond  between  the  two
parties  ;  and  in  that  case  his  assertion  is  certainly  misleading,  as  he
would  have  been  willing  to  admit  if  he  had  been  present  at  some  of  the
experiments  conducted  at  Dean's-yard,  or  with  Mr.  Guthrie's  percipients
at  Liverpool  and  elsewhere.  It  has  happened  on  more  than  one  occasion
that  a  complete  stranger  to  the  percipient  has  met  with  startling  and
immediate  success,  where  failure  has  rewarded  the  efforts  of  the  rest


Dr.  J.  Oehoroioicz,  De  la  Suggestion  Mentale.


567


of  the  investigators.  Nor  do  the  records  of  spontaneous  telepathy
support  so  sweeping  a  generalisation.  Out  of  830  cases  recorded  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living  we  find  that  in  36  the  action  took  place  between
strangers ;  the  only  traceable  rapport  being  the  fact  of  the  two
persons  having  a  common  friend,  or  such  common  associations  as  may
be  presumed  to  exist  between  inhabitants  of  the  same  town.

Of  the  second  section  of  the  work  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  much.  It
consists  of  copious  citations  from  the  works  of  the  earlier  French  investi-
gators, and  of  such  later  writers  as  Professor  Beaunis  and  Dr.  Liebeault,
designed  to  illustrate  various  phases  of  the  subject.

The  last  100  pages  of  the  book  are  devoted  to  a  discussion  of  the
various  hypotheses  which  have  been  put  forward  from  time  to  time  to
account  for  the  phenomena.  "When  M.  Cousin  asked  Hegel  for  a
succinct  statement  of  his  views,  the  German  philosopher  is  said  to  have
replied,  "  Ces  choses-ci  ne  se  disent  ni  succinctement,  ni  en  fran9ais."
We  may  doubt,  in  turn,  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  compress
within  a  few  pages  of  intelligible  English  the  gist  of  these  rival
theories,  and  whether  the  result,  if  attained,  would  be  commensurate
■with  the  labour.  One  comment,  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  universal
fluid  which  serves  as  the  intermediary  of  the  brain-waves,  is,  perhaps,
worth  quoting ; —

M.  Despine  attribue  a  I'ether  la  chaleur,  la  lumifere,  relectricite,  le
magnetisme  terrestre,  la  gravitation,  rattraction  moleculaire,  les  affinites
chemiques,  les  fonctions  de  la  vie  organique,  celles  de  I'automatisme,  et  enfin
celle  du  cerveau.  Je  crois  qu'il  ne  reste  plus  grand  chose  a  distribuer.  Si,
reste  la  Providence  ! (p.  483.)

Our  author's  own  theory  depends  upon  the  supposition  that  electrical
and  nervous  energy  are  to  a  certain  extent  reciprocally  convertible.
He  illustrates  his  view  by  the  analogy  of  the  photophone — an
instrument  in  which  a  mirror  is  made  to  vibrate  to  the  human  voice.
The  mirror  reflects  a  ray  of  light,  which,  vibrating  in  its  turn,  falls
upon  a  plate  of  selenium,  modifying  its  electric  conductivity.  The
intermittent  current  so  produced  is  transmitted  through  a  telephone
— and  the  original  articulate  sound  is  reproduced.  Now  in  hypnotised
subjects — and  M.  Ochorowicz  never  treats  of  thought-transference
between  persons  in  the  normal  state — the  equilibrium  of  the  nervous
system,  he  sees  reason  to  believe,  is  profoundly  affected.  He  supposes
then  that  the  electric  currents  of  the  atmosphere  are  modified  by  the
nervous  energy  of  the  agent;  that  the  disturbance  so  produced  is
transmitted  to  the  nervous  system  of  the  percipient,  already  in  a  state
of  tension,  and  there  reproduces  a  corresponding  modification  of  the
nerve-elements.

In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  it  would  be  premature  to
discuss  the  theory  here  very  briefly  and  inadequately  summarised.


568


Critical  Notices.


But  it  may  be  worth  while  to  point  out  that  our  own  conception  of
telepathy  involves,  strictly  speaking,  no  theory  at  all.  It  involves  as
little  of  pure  theory  as  Newton's  conception  of  the  law  of  gravitation.
What  Newton  did  was  to  find  the  simplest  general  expression  for  the
observed  facts  by  saying  that  the  heavenly  bodies  acted  upon  each
other  with  a  certain  measurable  force.  He  did  not  attempt  to  explain
the  mode  of  the  action ;  he  contented  himself  with  asserting  its
existence,  and  defining  its  limits,  And  whilst  succeeding  astronomers  '
have  for  the  most  part  been  content  to  follow  his  example,  the  Science
has  nevertheless  advanced  in  a  steady  and  continuous  progression.
So  the  conception  of  telepathy  simply  colligates  the  observed  facts
of  spontaneous  and  experimental  thought-transference,  as  instances
of  the  action  of  one  mind  upon  another.  The  nature  of  that  action  the
theory  does  not  discuss :  it  merely  defines  it  negatively,  as  being
outside  the  normal  sensory  channels.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to
suppose  that  the  further  advancement  of  the  subject  at  the  present
time  is  dependent  on  the  discovery  of  physical  correlates  for  the  alleged
psychical  action.

In  conclusion,  it  must  be  said  that  the  zeal  and  industry  shown  by
M.  Ochorowicz  are  deserving  of  a  fuller  measure  of  success  :  and  I  have
little  doubt  that  he  will  meet  vsdth  it.  In  some  departments  of
psychical  research,  at  any  rate,  he  would  appear  to  have  no  lack  of
material,  if  his  estimate  is  correct,  that  30  per  cent,  of  his  fellow-
countrymen  are  easily  susceptible  of  hypnotisation.

Frank  Podmore.


\


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


569


LIBRARY  CATALOGUE  (Abridged).i
1887.

A  COMPLETE  CATALOGUE  CAN  BE  CONSULTED  IN  THE  ROOMS  OF  THE  SOCIETY.

[R]  indicates  that  the  hook  is  fur  reference  only.


ENGLISH.

Abekcrombie  (John,  M.D.),  Inquiries  concerning  the  Intellectual

Powers,  and  the  Investigation  of  Truth  London,  1841

[R]  Account  op  a  Strange  and  Dreadful  Apparition  at  Sea  ...London,  1627

Alderson  (John,  M.D.),  An  Essay  on  Apparitions London,  1823

(Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  I.)

Animal  Magnetism,  A  short  sketch  of,  by  a  Physician London,  1838

(Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vols.  VIII.  and  IX.)

 The  Art,  Practice  and  Progress  of  that  Useful  Science... ionc^on,  1791

AsHBURNER  (John, M.D.),  Philosophy  of  Animal  Magnetism  and

Spiritualism  (2  copies)  London,  1867

Aubrey  (John,  F.R.S.),  Miscellanies London,  1784

Badely,  Narrative  of  Cure  by  Prince  Hohenlohe London,  1823

{Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

Bastian  (H.  Charlton,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of

Mind. 3rd  edit  London,  1882

Baumann  (Madame),  Curative  Results  of  Modern  Somnambulism

London,  1849
{Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

Baxter  (Robert),  Supernatural  Manifestations  in  Mr.  Irving's  Con-


gregation  London,  1833

Beard  (George  M.,  M.A.,  M.D.),  The  Psychology  of  the  Salem

Witchcraft  Excitement  of  1692 New  York,  1882

 Trance  and  Muscle  Reading New  York,  1882


1  In  Proceedings,  Part  VII.  (December,  1884),  a  complete  Catalogue  of  the
Library  as  it  then  stood  was  printed,  and  separate  copies  of  this  Catalogue  are
still  to  be  had  from  the  Assistant-Secretary.  In  October,  1885,  an  Abridged
Library  Catalogue  (containing  the  more  important  books)  was  printed  in
Part  IX. ,  but  not  published  separately.  The  growth  of  the  Library  during  the
last  18  months  has  been  considerable,  and  it  has  been  judged  advisable  to  reprint
a  second  Abridged  Catalogue  (m  Proceedings,  Part  XL,  and  also  separately),
which  contains  both  the  Abridged  Catalogue  of  October,  1885,  and  most  of  the
additions  since  made,  which  amount  to  about  200  volumes.  The  Library  now
(May,  1887)  contains  1,132  volumes.  It  will  of  course  be  understood  that  in
making  this  selection,  the  Library  Committee  by  no  means  intend  to  imply  that
all  the  books  in  the  following  list  possess  scientific  or  evidential  value.


570


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


[R]  Beaumont  (John),  A  Treatise  of  Spirits,  Apparitions,  Witchcrafts,  &c.

London,  1705

Beckett  (William,  Surgeon  and  F.R.S.),  Inquiry  into  Touching  for

the  Cure  of  the  King's  Evil London,  1722

(Of.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

Belden  (L.  W.,  M.D.),  An  Account  of  Jane  C.  Rider,  the  Springfield
Somnambulist. Lecture  to  Springfield  Lyceum  (2  copies)

Springfield.  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  1834

Bennett  (John  Hughes,  M.D.),  The  Mesmeric  Mania  of  1851

Edinburgh,  1857
(Of.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

[R]  Berrow  (Rev.  Capel,  A.M.),  A  Lapse  of  Human  Souls  in  a  State  of

Pre-existence,  the  only  original  Sin London,  1766

BiRT  (William  Radcliif),  Table  Turning  popularly  Explained  London,  1853

(Cy.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.)

Blundell  (Walter),  Painless  Tooth  Extraction  without  Chloroform

London,  1854

BoiSMONT  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.),  A  History  of  Dreams,  Visions,
Apparitions, Ecstasy, Magnetism and Somnambulism.  1st

American,  from  the  2'n,d  Paris  edition  Philadelphia,  1855

 On  Hallucinations.  From  the  French,  by  Robert  T.  Hulme,  F.L.S.

(2  copies) London,  1859

Braid  (James,  M.R.C.S.,  &c.),  Neurypnology  ;  or,  the  Rationale  of

Nervous  Sleep  (3  copies) London,  1843

 Observations  on  Trance  ;  or,  Human  Hybernation  London,  1850

Brewster  (Sir  David),  Letters  on  Natural  Magic, hth  edit 1842

Brown  (J.  P.),  The  Dervishes,  or  Oriental  Spiritualism London,  1868

[R]  BuRTHOGGE  (Richard,  M.D.),  An  Essay  upon  Reason  and  the  Nature

of  Spirits  (2  copies)  London,  1694

Carpenter  (William  B.,  M.D.,  F.R.S. ,  &c.),  Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,

&c..  Historically  and  Scientifically  considered  London,  1877

 Principles  of  Mental  Physiology. &th  edit  London,  1881

Clark  (W.  W.),  A  Forecast  of  the  Religion  of  the  Future  ...London,  1879

Cobbe  (Frances  Power),  Darwinism  in  Morals and  other  Essays.

London,  1872

 The  Peak  in  Darien  ,  London,  1882

CoLLYER  (Robert  H.,  M.D.),  Psychography Philadelphia,  1843

  Exalted  States  of  the  Nervous  System  (2  copies)  Loiulon,  1873

Colquhoun  (J.C.),  Report  (1831)  on  Animal  Magnetism  of  the  French

Academy  of  Sciences. From  the  French  (2  copies)... Edinburgh,  1833

Colton  (Rev.  C,  M.A.),  The  Sampford  Ghost  and  other  Pamphlets

Tiverton,  N.D.

Confessions  of  a  Medium Lorulon,  1882

CouES  (Professor  Elliott),  Biogen  :  A  Speculation  on  the  Origin  and

Nature  of  Life Boston,  U.S.A.,  1884

Cox  (Edward  W.),  A  Monograph  on  Sleep  and  Dreams London,  1878


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.  571

Cox  (Edward  W.)  The Mechanism  of  Man  :  An Answer  to  the
Question — What  am  I  ?

Vol. I.  The  Mechanism  (2  copies)  London,  1876

Vol.  II.  The  Mechanism  in  Action  London,  1879

Crookes  (William,  F.R.S.),  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritu-
alism  London,  1874


[R]  Dee  (Dr.  John),  On  Spirits. With  a  Preface  by  M.  Casaubon,  D.D.

London,  1659

Delaage (Henri), Pamphlets,  &c., including Biography  of  the
Somnambule  Alexis

Deleuze  (J.  P. F.),  Practical  Instructions  in  Animal  Magnetism.

From  the  French,  by  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn Netv  York,  1879

Delitzsch  (Franz,  D.D.),  A  System  of  Biblical  Psychology.  From  the
German,  by  the  Rev.  R.  E.  Willis,  Ph.  D.  2nd  English  edit.

Edinburgh,  1879

[R]  De  Loire  (Peter),  A  Treatise  of  Specters  or  Strange  Sights.  From  the

French London,  1605

Dialectical  Society,  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Spiritualism

London,  1873

DoDS  (Rev.  John  Bovee),  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  Mesmerism

New  York,  N.D.
(C/.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.)

Edmonds  (Judge),  An  Appeal  to  the  Public  on  Spiritualism  (2  copies)

New  York,  1858


 Letters  and  Tracts  on  Spiritualism  London,N .D.

Electrobiology  and  Mesmerism  (from  QwarterZi/ iiemew) ...London,  1853

[R]  Elliotson  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  Surgical  OiJerations  in  the  Mesmeric

State  London,  1843

 Mesmerism  in  India  ;  reprinted  from  The  Zoist London,  1850


(Of.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)


Ennemoser  (Joseph),  The  History  of  Magic. From  the  German,  by

WiUiam  Howitt. With  an  Appendix  by  Mary  Howitt. 2  vol.

London,  1854

EsDAiLE  (James,  M.D.),  Mesmerism  in  India London,  1846

 The  Introduction  of  Mesmerism  with  Sanction  of  Government

into  the  Public  Hospitals  of  India.  2nd  edit  London,  1856

  Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  (2  copies) London,  1852

Evans  (W.  F.),  The  Primitive  Mind-Cure  Boston,  1885

Pahnestock  (Wm.  Baker,  M.D.),  Statuvolism  ;or.  Artificial  Somnam-
bulism. 1st  and  3rd  edits  Chicago,  1871

Farmer  (John  S.),  'Twixt  Two  Worlds  :  a  Narrative  of  the  Life  and

Worls  of  William  Eglinton London,  1886


Ferriar  (John,  M.D.),  An  Essay  towards  a  Theory  of  Apparitions

London,  1813

Ferrier  (David,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Functions  of  the  Brain.  2nd  edit.

London,  1886


572


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


Forbes  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  Illustrations  of  Modern  Mesmerism

London,  1845

Galton  (Francis,  F.R.S.),  Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty  London,  1883

[R]  Glanvil  (Joseph),  Saducismus  Triumphatus  ;  or,  Evidence  Concerning

Witches  and  Apparitions.  3rd  edit  London,  1689

{Alw  continiwusly  paged  with  the  above.)

AContinuation  of  the  Collection,  by  Henry  More,D.D.  London,  1688

A  Whip  for  the  Droll,  &c.,  in  a  Letter  to  Dr.  Henry  More.D.D.  1688

An  Account  of  What  Happened  in  the  Kingdom  of  Sweden,

by  A.  Hornech,  D.D 1688

[R]  The  Mh  edit,  of  the  above  with  additions  London,,  1726

[R]  Greatbak  (Valentine),  Account  of  Strange  Cures  ;  written  by  himself

in  a  Letter  to  Robert  Boyle  {And  other  Pamphlets)  London,  1666

Gregory  (Wm.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.),  Animal  Magnetism,  or  Mes-
merism and  its  Phenomena. 3rd  edit. (2  copies) London,  1884

Haddock  (Joseph  W.),  Somnolism  and  Pschyeism  London,  1849

[R]  Hale  (Lord  Chief  Justice),  Matter  of  Fact  Concerning  Witches  and

Witchcraft. Parti  ,  London,  1693

Hall  (Spencer  T.),  Mesmeric  Experiences Lojidon,  1845

Hammond  (William  A.,  M.D.),  Spiritualism  and  Nervous  Derangement

London,  1876

Hare  (Robert,  M.D.),  Experimental  Investigation of  the  Spirit

Manifestations New  York,  1855

Hartmann  (Eduard  von),  Spiritism. Translated  from  the  German

London,  1885

Heidenhain  (Professor  Rudolf,M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism.  From  the
German,  by  J.  C.  Wooldridge,  B.  Sc.  With  a  preface  by  G.  J.
Romanes,  M.A.,  F.R.S  London,  1880

Hellenbach  (Baron),  Birth  and  Death  as  a  Change  of  Form  of
Perception  ;  or.  The  Dual  Nature  of  Man.  From  the  German,
by  V  London,  1886

HiBBERT  (Samuel,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.),  Sketches  of  the  Philosophy  of

Apparitions. 2nd  edit  Edinburgh,  1825

Houdin  (Robert),  The  Sharpers  Detected  and  Exposed 1863

[R]  Hutchinson  (Francis,  D.D.),  An  Historical  Essay  Concerning  Witch-
craft  London,  1718

JouBNAL  of  Science. Vols,  for  1875,  1879,  and  1880  London

Jung-Stilling  (Dr.  J.  H.),  Theory  of  Pneumatology.  From  the  Ger-
man, by  Samuel  Jackson  (2  copies)  London,  1834

Kernbr  (Justinus),  The  Seeress  of  Prevorst. From  the  German,  by

Mrs.  Crowe  (2  copies)  London,  1845

Leb  (Edwin  Lee,  M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism  London,  1866

Lenormant  (Francois),  Chaldean  Magic.  From  the  French  N.D.

Light. Vols.  L-VI  London,  1881-6


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.  573

M.A.  (Oxon.),  Psychography.  2nd  edit  London,  1882

Macnish  (Robert),  The  Philosophy  of  Sleep.  3rd  edit  Glasgow,  1833

Maitland  (Rev.  S.  R.,  D.D.,  F.R.S.),  Illustrations  and  Inquiries

relating  to  Mesmerism. Parti  London,  1849

{Gf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

Maetin  (John),  Animal  Magnetism  Examined  London,  1790

(C/.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.)

Maudsley  (Henry,  M.D.),  Natural  Causes  and  Supernatural  Seemings

^  London,  1886

 The  Pathology  of  Mind London,  1879

 Body  and  Will  London,  1883

Mayo  (Herbert,  M.D.),  On  the  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Supersti-

tions. With  an  account  of  Mesmerism.  2nd  edit  Edinburgh,  1851

Medecina  Diastatica. From  the  works  of  Theophr.  Paracelsus,  by

Andrea  Teutzellius. From  the  Latin,  by  Ferdinand  Parkhurst  ^

London,  16o3

Mesmekism:  Its  History,  Phenomena,  and  Practice.  With  Reports  of

Cases  developed  in  Scotland Edinburgh,  1843

 (The Edinburgh  Review, Mr. Cornewall Lewis  and  the

Rev.  D.  Maitland  on) London,  1851

{Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

Mind  in  Nature. Vols.  I.  and  II  Chicago,  1885-6

Miraculous  Events  in  Rome  in  1796-7  (Examination  into  authenticity

of). From  the  French,  by  Rev.  B.  Rayment  London,  1801

MONCTON  (Stephen,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.),  The  Metaphysical  Aspect  of

Natural  History  London,  1885

[R]  MooB  (Major  Edward,  F.R.S.),  Bealings  Bells  (2  copies)  Woodhridge,  1841
Myers  (A.  T.,  M.D.),  The  Life  History  of  a  Case  of  Double  or  Multiple

Personality  (Reprinted  from  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  Jan.,

1886).

Newnham(H.),  Human  Magnetism London,  1845

Owen  (R.  Dale),  FootfaUs  on  the  Boundary  of  another  World  (2  copies)

^  London,  1861

[Rl  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.  Cf.  Animal  Magnetism, Badely,  Baumaan,

Bennett, Boerhaave, Davis, EUiotson, Evans,  Maitland,

Mesmerism,  Stubbe,  Wood.
[R]  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.  Gf. Animal  Magnetism,  Beckett,  Birt,  Dods,

Gillard,  Godfrey,  Martin.
Phantasmatological  Society  (Selections  from  Papers  of),  Frinted

for  private  circulation  Oxford,  1885

Phantasms  of  the  Living. By  Edmund  Gurney,  Frederic  W  H.

Myers,  and  Frank  Podmore. 2  vol  London,  1886

Pierce  (C.  J.),  and  J.  Jastrow  on  Small  Differences  of  Sensation.

Read  before  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  U.S. A 1884


PrLKiNGTON  (George),  The  Unknown  Tongues Lo7idon,


1837


574  Abridged  Library  Catalogue.

Prater  (Horatio),  Lectures  on  True  and  False  Hyimotism  ...London,  1851

Pmncetown  Review  (The) New  York,  1885

Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  Vol  I.  1885

— ■ —  of  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Glasgow. Vols.  XV.  and  XVI.

Glasgow,  1884-5

Psychical  Research  (Proceedings  of  Society  for). Vols.  I. -IV.

London,  1883-7

 (Journal  of  Society  for). Vols.  I.  and  II  London,  1884-6

Psychological  Rkview. Vol.  I  London,  1879

Ptolemy,  Tetrabiblos. From  the  Greek  Paraphrase  of  Proclus,  by

J.  M.  Ashmand London,  1822

Reichenbach  (Baron  Charles  von),  Researches  on  Magnetism,
Electricity,  &c.,  in  their  Relations  to  Vital  Force.  From  the
German,  with  Preface  and  Notes,  by  John  Ashburner,  M.D.
(3  copies) London,  1850

Sandby  (Rev.  George,  jun.,  M.A.),  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents

(2  copies] London,  1844

Savile  (Rev.  Bourchier  Wray,  M.A.),  Apparitions  :  A  Narrative  of

Facts  London,  1874

Scoresby  (Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  F.R.S.),  Zoistic  Magnetism  London,  1849

Scott  (Sir  Walter),  Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft... iyoncZo?i,  1830

SiNNETT  (A.  P.),  The  Occ'idt  World  Phenomena,  and  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research, with  a  Protest  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky

London,  1886

Skey  (F.  C. ,  F.R.S.),  Hysteria:  Six  Lectures  at  St.  Bartholomew's

Hospital London,  1866

Spiritualist  (The). By  D.  F.  G  London,  1857

Squirrell  (Elizabeth),  Autobiography  of. By  One  of  her  Watchers

London,  1853

Stewart  (Professor  Balfour,  F.R.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  F.R.S.),  The

Unseen  Universe  London,  1875

Stock  (St.  George),  Attempts  at  Truth  London,  1882

Sully  (James),  Illusions  :  A  Psychological  Study.  2nd  edit.  London,  1882

Symonds  (John  Addington,  M.  D. ),  Sleep  and  Dreams  :  Two  Lectures

delivered  at  Bristol  London,  1851

Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.),  A  Practical  Manual  of  Animal  Magnetism.

From  the  French,  by  D.  Spillan,  M.D.,  M.A  London,  1843

Tolstoi  (Leon),  What  I  believe. From  the  Russian,  by  Constantino

Popoif London,  1885

ToPHAM  (W.  and W.  Squire  Ward),  Case  of  Amputation  of  Thigh

during  Mesmeric  State  London,  1842

Townshend  (Rev.  C. H., M.A.),  Facts  in  Mesmerism.  2nd  edit.

London,  1844

 Mesmerism  Proved  True London,  1854

Truesdell  (John  W. ),  The  Bottom  Facts  Concerning  the  Science  of

Spiritualism  New  York,  1883


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.  575

TuKE  (Daniel  Hack,  M.D.),  The  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body.

2  vol  London,  1884

 Sleep  Walking  and  Hypnotism London,  1884

Unseen  World  (The).  2nd  edit  London,  1853

Upham  (Rev.  Charles  W.), Lectures  on  Witchcraft. Comprising  a

History  of  the  Delusion  in  Salem,  1692  Boston,  U.S.A.,  1831

Wallace  (Alfred  Russel),  On  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism.  2nd

edit  London,  1881

WiENHOLT  (Dr.  Arnold),  Somnambulism.  From  the  German,  by  J.  C.

Colquhoun  Edinburgh,  1845

Wilson  (John  M.D.),  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism London,  183&

Winter  (George,  M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism,  Dissertations  on  [various

diseases]  with  cases London,  1801

Year  Book  of  the  Scientific  and  Learned  Societies  of  Great  Britain

and  Ireland. 2nd  annual  issue London,  1885

Zerfei  (Professor  G.  G.,  Ph.D.),  Spiritualism  and  Animal  Magnetism

London,  1871

ZoiST  (The). A  Journal  of  Cerebral  Physiology  and  Mesmerism,  13

vol.  (2  copies)  London,  1844-1856

Zollner  (Johann  Carl  Friedrich),  Transcendental  Physics.  From  the

German,  by  C.  C.  Massey  London,  1882


CURRENT  PERIODICALS.

Journal  of  Mental  Science 1884

Light London,  1881

Science Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  1884


FRENCH.

Alliot  (Dr.  Eugene),  La  Suggestion  Mentale  Paris,  1886

Annales  du  Magnetisme  Anuvlal, 8  vol.  (bound  in  four)  Paris,

1814-1816

AzAM,  Hypnotisme. Double  Conscience  et  Alterations  de  la  Per-

sonnalite 1887

Baillarger  (M.  J.),  De  I'lnfluence  des  Hallucinations  Paris,  1846

Baillif  (Dr.  Louis  Ernest),  Du  Sommeil  Magnetique  dans  I'Hysterie

Strasburg,  1868

Baissac  (Jules),  La  Vie  apres  la  Mort  :  Eternite  et  Immortalite

Paris,  1886

Bakagnon(P.  Petrus),  Etude  du  Magnetisme  Animal.  2nd  edit.  Paris,  1853


576


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


Bar^ty  (Dr.),  Force  Neurique  Rayonnante  Paris,  1882

  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1887

Earth  (Henri),  Du  Sommeil  non  naturel  Paris,  1886

Beaunis  (H.),  Le  Somnambulisme  Provoque Paris,  1886

  Recherches Expdrimcntales  sur  les  Conditions  de  I'activite

cdrebrale  Paris,  1886

Beauvallon  (G-aultier  de),  Bssai  sur  les  Hallucinations  Paris,  1883

Bergasse  (M.),  Considerations  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal... ia  Haye,  1784

B^RILLON  (Edgar),  Hypnotisme  Experimental  Paris,  1884

Berjon  (Dr.  A. ),  La  Grande  Hysterie  chez  I'Homme 1886

Bernheim  (Professor  H.),  De  la  Suggestion  dans  I'Etat  Hypnotique

Paris,  1884

 Contribution  a  I'Etude  de  I'Aphasie  :  de  la  Cecite  Psychique

des  Clioses Paris,  1885

 De la  Suggestion  et  de  ses  Applications  a  la  Therapeutique

Paris,  1886

 De  la  Suggestion  dans  I'Etat  Hypnotique  :  Reponse  a  M.  Paul

Janet Paris,  1884

Bertrand  (Alexandre),  Traits  du  Somnambulisme  Paris,  1823

 Du  Magnetisme  Animal  en  France Paris,  1826

 (Prof.  Alexis),  L'Aperception  du  Corps  Humain  par  la  Conscience

Paris,  1884

BiBLiOGRAPHiE  des  Ouvrages  relatifs  aux  Pfelerinages,  aux  Miracles,

au  Spiritisme,  et  a  la  Prestidigitation  Turin,  1886

BiBLioTHiiQcrE  DU  Magn^xisme  Animal.  8  vol.  (bound  in  four)  Paris,

1817-1819

Binet  (Alfred),  La  Psychologie  du  Raisonnement Paris,  1886

 et  F£r]£,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1887

BoiSMONT  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.),  Des  Hallucinations.  2nd  edit.,  Paris,  1852

Bottey  (Dr.  Fernand),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1884

BouRRU  ET  Burot,  Action  a  Distance  des  Substances  Toxiques  et
Medicamenteuses;  suivie  d'une  Connnunication  par  M.  Ch.  Richet

Paris,  1886

Brullard  (Dr.  Joseph),  Considerations  generales  sur  I'Etat  Hypnotique

Nanc^J,  1886

Burden  (C.  et  Dubois  Fred.),  Histoire  Academique  du  Magnetisme

Animal  Paris,  1841

Cahagnet  (L.  a.),  Magnetisme.  2  vol.  (2  copies)  Paris,  1848-9

 (Alphonse),  Therapeutique du  Magnetisme  et  du  Somnam-
bulisme Paris,  1883

Chambard  (Dr.  Ernest),  Du  Somnambulisme  en  general Paris,  1881

Chardel  (C),  Essai  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  Paris,  1844

Charpignon (J.), Physiologie, MiJdecine et Metaphysique  du

Magnetisme  Paris,  1848

Chazarain  (Dr.),  Decouverte  de  la  Polarite  Humaine Paris,  1886


Ahridged  Library  Catalogue.  577

Chevillard  (A.),  Etudes  Experimentales  sur  certains  Phenomenes  et

Solution  Rationnelle  du  Probleme  Spirite.  2nd  edit  Paris,  1871

CoLSENBT  (Dr.  Edmond),  La  Vie  Inconsciente  de  I'Esprit  Paris,  1880

Comet  (Dr.),  La  Verite  aux  Medecins  et  aux  Gens  du  Monde... Pam,  1841

Crouigneau  (Dr.  Georges),  Etude  Clinique  et  Experimentale  sur  la

Vision  Mentale Paris,  1884

CuLLEREE,  Magnetisme  et  Hypnotisme  Paris,  1886

[R]  De  L'Ancre  (P. ),  Incredulite  et  Mescreance  du  Sortilfege  plainemenfc

convaincue  Paris,  1622

Deleuze  (J.  P.  P.),  Defense  du  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris.  1819

 Histoire  Critique  du  Magnetisme  Animal.  2  vol.  (bound  in  one).

2nd  edit  Paris,  1819

Demarquay  et  Giraud-Teulon,  Recherches  sur  I'Hypnotisme  Paris,  1800

De Puysegur, Recherches Physiologiques sur  I'Homme  dans

I'Etat  de  Somnambulisme Paris,  1811

 Appel  de  la  Decision  portee  contre  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1813

 Memoires  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire et a  I'Etablissement  du

Magnetisme  Animal.  3rd  edit.  4  vol  Paris,  1811-1820

 Du  Magnetisme  Animal  considere  dans  ses  rapports  avec  diverses

branches  de  la  Physique  Generals,  2nd  edit  Paris,  1820

 Du  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1807

Descourtis  (Gabriel),  Du  Fonctionnement  des  Operations  Cerebrales

Paris,  1882

Dbspine,  Etude  Scientifique  sur  le  Somnambulisme  Paris,  1880

D'Olivet  (Fabre),  Notions  sur  le  Sens  de  I'Ouie,  &c  Paris,  1811

DuFOUR  (Dr.  E.),  Contribution  a  I'Etude  de  I'Hypnotisme  ...Grenoble,  1886

Dumontpallier,  De  I'Action  Vaso-motrice  de  la  Suggestion  chez  les

Hysteriques hypnotisables (Gazette  des  pLopitaux,  1885,  p.  619).

Du  PoTET  (Le  Baron),  Manuel  de  I'Etudiant  Magnetiseur  ...Paris,  1851

DuREAU  (A. ),  Notes  Bibliographiques  pour  servir  a  THistoire  du  Mag-
netisme Animal 1869


EspiNAS  (Dr. A.), Du Sommeil  Provoque  chez les  Hysteriques

Bordeaux,  1885

Exposi  DES  Cures  Operees  en  France  par  le  Magnetisme  Animal.  2  vol.

Paris,  1826


F^R^  (Dr.  Ch.),  Sensation  et  Mouvement  (2  copies) Paris,  1887

 et  Binet,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1886

FoissAC  (P.,  M.D.),  Rapport  et  Discussions  de  I'Academie  Royale  de

Medecine  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1833

GARCiN(Dr. ),  Le  Magnetisme  Explique  par  Lui-meme  Paris,  1855

Gauthier  (Aubin),  Histoire  du  Somnambulisme.  2  vol  Paris,  1842

GiBiER  (Paul),  Le  Spiritisme Paris,  1887

Hi^RicouRT (J.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  en  dehors  de  I'Hysterie
(Eemie  Scientijiqiie,  1884,  i. ,  812).


578


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


Herzen,  Les  Conditions  de  Conscience 1886

[R]  HiSTOiEE  DES  DiABLES  DE  LouDUN Amsterdam,  1716

JoLY  (Prof.  Henri), L'Imagination  :  Etude  Physiologique  Paris,  1883

Lafontaine, Memoires  d'un  Magnetiseur.  2  vol 1886

Lasserre  (Henri),  Notre  Dame  de  Lourdes  Paris,  1882

LeguiS  (Gabriel),  Urbain  Grandier.  2nd  edit  Paris,  1880

Lelut  (L.F.),  Du  Demon  de  Socrate  Paris,  1856

Lemoine  (Albert),  Du  Sommeil Paris,  1855

Leuret  (Francois),  Fragmens  Psychologiques  sur  la  Folie Paris,  1834

Leveqtje  (Ch.),  La  Science  de  I'lnvisible Paris,  1865

Li^BEAULT  (Dr.  A. A.),  Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues  Paris,  1866

 Ebauche  de  Psychologie Paris,  1873

 Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnetisme Paris,  1883

LiEGEOiH  (Jules),  De  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  ses  Rapports

avec  le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel Paris,  1884

Lucas, Traite philosophique et physiologique de  I'Heredite

Naturelle.  2  vol  Paris,  1850

LuYS  (Dr.  J.),  Le  Cerveau.  3rd  edit  Paris,  1878

Magnin  (Paul),  iltude  clinique  et  experimentale  sur  I'Hypnotisme  ...

 De  quelques EfFets  des Excitations Peripheriques  chez  les

Hystero-epileptiques  a  I'etat  de  Veille  et  d'Hypnotisme ...Paris,  1884

Maury  (L.  F.  Alfred),  La  Magie  et  I'Astrologie  Paris,  1860

 Le  Sommeil  et  les  Reves Paris,  1878

MEMOIRES  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  et  h  I'Etablissement  du  Magnetisme

Animal.  2  vol.  (bound  in  one)  2nd  edit  Paris,  1809

Mesmbr,  Memoires  et  Aphorismes  de  Paris,  1846

 Precis historique  des Faits  relatifs  au  Magnetisme  Animal

jusque  en  avril,  1781. Traduit  de  I'allemand London,  1781

Mesnet  (Dr.  Ernest),  De  I'Automatisme Paris,  1874

Mich:6a  (C.  F.),  Du  Deliredes  Sensations.  2nd  edit  Paris,  1851

NoiZET  (General),  Memoire  sur  le  Somnambulisme  et  le  Magnetisme

Animal  Paris,  1852


OcHOROWicz  (Dr.  J.),  Essai  sur  le  Sens  de  Toucher  et  le  Sens  du
Magnetisme (Revue  Scientifique,  1884,  i.  553).

 De  la  Suggestion  Mentale Paris,  1887

P£t£tin(D.  M.),  Electricite  Animale Paris,  1808

Philips,  Cours  theorique  et  pratique  de  Braidisme  ou  I'Hypnotisme

nerveux Paris,  1860


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


579


Philips,  Influence  Reciproque  de  la  Pensee,  de  la  Sensation,  et  des

Mouvements  Vegetatifs Paris,  1862

PEOcfcs  Verbal  fait  pour  delivrer  une  Fille  possedee  par  le  Malin
Esprit  a  Lovviers  ;  publie  d'apres  le  MS.  original  par  Armand
Benet Paris,  1883

PuEL  (T.),  De  la  Catalepsie  (2  copies)  Paris,  1856


[R]  Rapport  de  I'un  des  Commissaires  (M.  de  Jussieu)  charge  par  le  Roi


de  I'Examen  du  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1784

RiBOT  (Th.),  Les  Maladies  de  la  Personnalite Paris,  1885

Richer  (Paul),  Etudes  Cliniques  sur  la  Grande  Hysteria Paris,  1885

RiCHET  (Charles),  L'Homme  et  I'lntelligence Paris,  1884

RocHAS  (A.  de).  La  Levitation  ou  I'Enlfevement  du  Corps  (Eemie

ScientifiqiK,  1885,  ii.,  336)  Paris,  1885

— —  Les  Forces  non  definies  Paris,  1887

RouLLiER  (Auguste),  Exposition  Physiologique  des  Phenomenes  du

Magnetisme  Animal  et  du  Somnambulisme Paris,  1817


Schmidt  (Oscar),  Les Sciences Naturelles  et  la Philosophie  de

rinconscient Paris,  1879

ScoBARDi  (R.  P.),  Rapport  Confidentiel  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal.

2nd  edit  Paris,  1839

Senso  (Marc),  La  Verite  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal Lausanne,  1881

S^R]^  (G. Louis  de).  Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magnetique

(2  copies) Paris,  1855

SiciLiANi  (Pierre),  Prolegomenes  a  la  Psychogenie  Moderne... Paris,  1880

SzAFKOWSKi  (Louis-Rufin),  Recherches  sur  les  Hallucinations  Paris,  1849

Taine  (H.),  De  I'lntelligence.  2  vol.,  Uh  edit  Paris,  1883

Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Expliqu^  Paris,  1845

 Manuel  Pratique  de  Magnetisme  Animal.  2nd  edit  Paris,  1845

TissoT  (Prof.  J.),  L'Imagination  :  ses  Bienfaits  et  ses  Egarements,

surtout  dans  la  Domaine  du Merveilleux Paris,  1868

Toiirette  (Dr.  Gilles  de  la),  L'Hypnotisme  et  les  Etats  Analogues  au

point  de  vue  Medico-legal  Paris,  1887

[Rr]  Vallemont  (L.L.  de),  La  Physique  Occulte Paris,  1709

VoisiN  (A.),  De  la  Therapeutique  suggestive  chez  les  Alienes... Paris,  1887

Yung  (Dr.  Emile),  Le  Sommeil  Normal  et  le  Sommeil  Pathologique,

Paris,  1883


Revue  de  l'Hypnotisme. Nos.  1-10
Revue  Philosophique  (Ed.  Th.  Ribot)


  1886-7

Paris,  1884  —


580


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


GERMAN.

ApELLA(Dr.),  Zur  medicinischer  Statistik Berlin,  1886

Archiv  fur  den  Thierischen  Magnetismus.  6  vol  Leipzig,  1817-1820

Brendal  (Franz),  Kritik  der  Commissarischen  Berichte  und  Protokolle

iiber  die  Somnambiile  C.  Hohne Freiberg,  1840


Bruckshucke  aus  dem  Leben  eines  siiddeutschen  Theologen. 2  vol.

Leipzig,  1872,  1875

BuRDACH  (Karl  Friedrich),  Blicke  ins  Leben,  Vols.  I. -IV.  Leipzig,  1842-8
Daumer (Prof. G. W.), Das Reich des Wundersamen  und


Geheimnissvollen  Regensburg,  1872

Doppelleben,  Das  geistige Leipzig,  1856

Du  Prel  (Dr.  Carl),  Die  Philosophie  der  Mystik  Leipzig,  1885

 Ein  Problem  fiir  Paschenspieler

— —  Das  Gedankenlesen  Berlin,  N.D.

EcKHARTSHAUSEN  (Hofrath  von),  Verschiedenes  zum  Unterricht  und

der  Unterhaltung  fiir  Liebhaber  des  Magnetismus Munich,  1791

Ehrmann,  Onirus  als  Schutz-Patron  der  Traiimer 1805

Ennemoser  (Dr.  Joseph), Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Ursprung  der

Menschlichen  Seele.  2nd  edit  Tubingen,  1851


Erk  (Dr.  Vincenz  von),  Ueber  den  Unterschied  von  Traum  undWachen

Prague,  1874

Eschenmayer  (Prof.  C.  A.  v.),  Versuch  die  Scheinbare  Magie  des
Thierischen  Magnetismus  aus  Physiologischen  und  Psychischen
Gesetzen  zu  erkliiren Stuttgart,  1816

 Mysterien  des  innern  Lebens Tubingen,  1830

Fischer  (Prof.  Fr. ),  Der  Somnambulismus.  3  vol  Basle,  1839


Geister  und  Gespenster  in  eine  Reihe  von  Erzahlungen  dargestellt


(2  vol.  bound  in  one)  '  Basle,  1810

Geistesleben,  Das  Unbewusste 1859

[R]  Geschichte  eines  Geistersehers  :  aus  den  Papieren  des  Mannes  m.d.

Eisemen  Larve. 2  vol 1797

Gessmann  (Gustav),  Magnetismus  und  Hypnotismus  Vienna,  1886

Gmelin  (Eberhard),  Ueber  thierischen  Magnetismus Tubingen,  1757

GoRW^iTZ  (Dr.  Hermann),  Idio-Somnambulismus  Leipzig,  1851


Gravell,  Ueber  die  Fortdauer  unsererGefiihle  nach  dem  Tode,  Leipzig,  1821

[R]  Hanak  (Dr.  Michael),  Geschichte  eines  natiirlichen  Somnambulismus

Leipzig,  1833

Hartmann  (Eduard  von),  Der  Spiritismus  Leipzig  and  Berlin,  1885

Hellenbach  (L.  B.),  Die  Magie  der  Zahlen Wien,  1882

 Geburt  und  Tod Wien,  1885


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


581


Hennings  (Justus  Christian),  Von  den  Ahnungen  und  Visionen  Leipzig,  1777

 Von  den  Traumen  und  Nachtwandlern  Weimar,  1784

Hensel  (Louis),  Neueste  offerbarungen  iiber  das  Fortleben  und  das

Jenseits  Steglitz,  1885

 Aiihang  ziir  Philosophie  des  Geistes  Steglitz,  1885

Hensler  (Dr.  P.  J.),  Der  Menschen  Magnetismus  in  seiner  Wirkun-

gen  auf  Gesundheit  und  Leben Wurzhirg,  1837

HoHNiN  (T.  C), Berichte und  ProtokoUe liber  die  sogennante

Somnambiile Dresden,  1840

Hufeland  (Dr.  Wiedrich),  Ueber  Sympathie  Weimar,  1822

jAJfKOWSKi(Eduard),Phanomenologie  und  Metaphysik  der  Anormalen

Sinnesbilder  Leipzig,  1882

JoLLER  (M.),  Darstellung  selbsterlebter  mystischer  Erscheinungen

Zwrich,  1863

Kaa^te  (Dr.  Hans),  Ueber  Beziehungen  zwischen  Hypnotismus  und

cerebraler  Blutfiillung Wiesbaden,  1885

Kernbr  (Justinus),  Geschichte  zweyer  Somnambiilen Karlsruhe,  1824

 Die Seherin  von  Prevorst. 2  vol. (bound  in  one)  2nd  edit.

Stuttgart,  1832

 Geschichten  Besessener  Neuerer  Zeit  Stiittgart,  1834

 Blatter  aus  Prevorst.  12  vol.  (bound  in  three) Karlsruhe  and

Stuttgart,  1831-9

KiESER (Dr. D. G.), System  des Tellurismus oder  Thierischen

Magne  tismus.  2  vol  Leipzig,  1826

Kluge  (Carl  A.  G.),  Versuch  einer  Darstellung  des  Animalischen

Magnetismus  als  Heilmittel.  2nd  edit  Berli^i,  1815

Krausz (Friedrich), Nothschrei eines Magnetisch  -  Vergifteten

Stuttgart,  1852

 Nothgedrungene  Fortsetzung  meines  Nothschrei Stuttgart,  1867

Kbitische  Analyse  der  anti-spiritistischen  Erklarungsweise  soge-
nannter  spiritisticher  Phanomene  von  einem  nicht  Spiritististen

Leipzig,  1884

Lambl,  Geschichte  eines  Hellseherin  als  Beitrage  ziir  Lehre  der
Porencephalie  (Arch.  f.  Psych.,  1884).

Leeser,  (J.),  Herr  Prof.  Wimdt  und  der  Spiritismus Leipzig,  1879

Marcabd  (Dr.  and  Baron  von  Strombeck),  Geschichte  euies  animalis-
chen Magnetismus Brunswick,  1815

Meier  (Dr. ),  Geschichte  der  hellsehenden  Auguste  Miiller Stiittgart,  1818

Mittheiltjngen  aus  dem  magnetischen  Schlafleben  der  Somnambiile
Auguste  K.  in  Dresden.  [The  preface  is  signed  by  Johann  Karl
Bahr  and  Rudolph  Kohlscliiitter  as  editors.] Dresden,  1843

 seliger  Geister  im Jahre 1855 durch  die Hand  der  Maria

Kahlammer,  etc. Herausgegeben  von  J.  Friederich

Munich,  1856
2  Q


582


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


[R]  NicoLAi  (Friedrich),  Beispiel  einer  Erscheinung  mehrerer  Phantasmen

Berlin,  1799

[R]  Pamphlets,  German,  Vol.  I.

Ennemoser  (Dr.  Jo.seph),  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Ursprung  und

das  Wesen  der  Menschlichen  Seele Stuttgart,  1851

Leubuscher  (Rud.), Ueber  die Entstehung dsr  Sinnestauschung

Berlin,  1852

Siebeck  (Prof.  H.),  Das  Traumleben  der  Seele Berlin,  1877

Schubert  (Dr.  G.  H.  von),  Ueber  Ahnen  und  Wissen Munich,  1847

Wundt  (Prof.  W.),  Der  Spiritismus  Leipzig,  1879

[R]  Pamphlets,  German,  Vol.  II.

Baader  (Franz),  Eine  Geisterscheinung  Miinster,  1833

Clemens  (Dr.  A.),  Das  Ferngefuhl Frankfort,  1857

Hoffmann  (Dr. H.), Die  Physiologie der  Sinnes-Hallucinationen

Frinkfort,  1851

Leben  (das),  und  der  Tod  Leipzig,  1850

Scherer  (Friedrich),  Das  Walten  von  Wahrheit  und  Wahn

(Im  Selbstverlage  des  Verfassers)  N.D.

Wegners  (Georg  Wilhelm),  Abhandlung  von  Gespenstern  Berlin,  1747

Wellmer  (Meta),  Geistergeschichten Nordhausen,  1875

[R]  Pamphlets,  German,  Vol.  III.

Blicke  in  die  Traum  und  Geisterwelt Leipzig,  1854

E  (H. von),  Geschichten  von  Lebendig  begrabenen  Personen

Frankfort,  1798

Horst  (Georg  Conrad),  Theurgie  Mainz,  1820

Meier  (Dr.),  Geschichte  der  Magnetisch  hellsehenden  Augusta  Miiller

in  Karlsruhe Stuttgart,  1818

\ Passavant  (Dr.  Johann Carl),  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Lebens-

magnetismus  und  das  Hellsehen.  2nd  edit  Frankfort,  1837

Perty  (Prof.  Dr.  Maximilian),  Die  Realitat  magischer  Krafte  und
Wirkungen  des  Menschen  gegen  die  Widersacher  vertheidigb
(2  copies) Leipzig,  1863

 Blicke  in  das  verborgene  Leben  des  Menschengeistes  (2  copies)

Leipzig,  1869

 Die  Mystischen  Erscheinungen  der  Menschlichen  Natur  (2  copies)

2nd  edit  Leipzig,  1872

 Die  Sichtbare  und  die  Unsichtbare  Welt  Leipzig,  1882

Pick  (Arnold),  Von  Bewusstein  in  Zustiinden  sogenannter  Bewusst-
losigkeit  (Arch  f.  Psych.,  1882).

PoviNSKi  (Adolf,  Graf),  Ueber  den  Verkehr  der  Geister  des  Jenseits

mit  den  Menschen Leipzig,  1870

Preybr  (Professor  W.),  Die  Entdeckung  der  Hypnotismus  ...Berlin,  1881

Psyche. Deutsche  Zeitschrift  fiir  Odenwissenschaft  und  Geister-
kunde,  9  Nos  Grossenhain,  1865-66

PxJSCH  (Lucian),  Spiritualistische  Philosophie  ist  erweiterte  Realismus

Leipzig,  N.D.


REiCH  der  Geister. Ath  edit.


Stuttgart,  1867


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


583


Eeichenbach  (Dr.  K.  Freiherr  von),  Aphorismen  liber  Sensitivitiit

undOd 1866

 Odische  Begebenheiten,  &c  Berlin,  1862

 Die  Odische  Lohe,  &c  Vienna,  1867

RiEGEE  (Dr.  Conrad),  Der  Hypnotismus Jena,  1884

 und M. TiPPEL, Experimen telle  Untersuchungen  liber  die

Willensthiitigkeit Jena,  1885

RoHLiNG  (Prof.  Dr.  Aug.),  Louise  Lateau  :  Die  Stigmatisirte  von  Bois

d'Haine Paderborn,  1874

RoEMER (C),  Ausfiihrliche historische Darstellung eine  hochst

merkwiirdigen  Somnambiile Stuttgart,  1821

ScHAtiENBERG  (Dr.  Carl  H.),  Tischriicken  und  Tischkloppen  eine

Thatsache Diisseldorf,  1853

ScHiNDLER,  Das  Magische  Geisterleben  Breslau,  1857

Schopenhauer  (A.),  Parerga und  Paralipomena.  ith edit.  2vol.  Leipzig,  1878

ScHWARTZCHiLD  (Heinricli,  M.D.),  Magnetismus,  Somnambulismus,

Clairvoyance. 2nd  vol  Gassel,  1854

Seelbach  (Rev.  C),  Fingerzeige  der  gottlichen  Weltriegerung  (2  vols.

in  one)  Stuttgart,  1864

Splittgerber  (Franz),  Tod,  Fortleben  und  Auferstehung Halle,  1879

Spitta  (Dr.  Heinrieh),  Die  Schlaf-  und  Traumzusfcande  der  Mensch-

lichen  Seele. Id  and  2nd  edit  Tiihingen,  1878-83

Sterne  (Carus),  Die  Wahrsagung  aus  der  Bewegungen  lebloser  Korper

unter  dem  Einliuss  der  menschlichen  Hand Weimar,  1862

 Die  Naturgeschichte  der  Gespenster Weimar,  1863

Stockhausen  (Rev.  J.  F.),  Mira  Presagia  Mortis;  das  ist,  Wunder-

liche  Todes  verboten  Frankfort,  1698

[R]  Tenzel  (Andreas),  Medicina  Diastatica.  Herausgegeben  von  P.C.

Leipzig,  1753

WiLLMANN  (Carl),  Modeme  Wunder Leipzig,  1886

WiRTH  (J.  U.),  Theorie  des  Somnambulismus  oder  des  Thierischen

Magnetismus Leipzig,  1832

 (Moritz),  Professor  Zcillner's  Experimente  mit  den  Amerikani-

schen  Medium  Herrn  Slade  und  seine  Hypothese  intelligenter
vierdimensionaler  Wesen Leipzig,  1882

 Die  Mediumistische  Frage,  ilire  Lage  und  Losung Leipzig,  1885

WoLFORT  (Dr.  Karl  C),  Mesmerismus Berlin,  1814

 Erlaiiterungen  zum  Mesmerismus Berlin,  1815

WuNDT  (Prof.W.),  Der  Spiritismus  eine  sogenannte  wissenschalftliche

Frage  Leipzig,  1879

Zeitschrift  fur  Psychische  Aebzte,  Herausgegeben  von  Friedrich

Nasse. Vols.  l.-V  Leipzig,  1818-1822

2  Q  2


584  Abridged  Library  Catalogue.

[R]  Zeitung  (Neue),  Griindlicher  und  eigentlicher  Bericht  einen  wahr-
haftigen  wunderbaren  Historien  von  einem  Jungling  der  gestorben
und  wiederlebendig  worden,  und  was  er  gesehen  und  geredt  hat

Dresden,  1567

ZoLLNER  (F. ),  Zur  Aufklarung  des  Deutschen  Volkes  iiber  Inhalt  und

Aufgabe  der  Wissenscliaftlichen  Abhandlungen Leipzig,  1880


PsYCHiscHE  Studien  (Ed.  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakow),  Vols.  I.  —

Leipzig,  1874  —

Sphinx. Vol.  I.  (Ed.  Dr.  Hiibbe-Sclileiden) Munich,  1887


ITALIAN.

Fkanzolini  (Fernando),  Del  Somnambulismo  :  Studio  Medico  forense

letto  all  'Academia  di  Udine,  nel  19  Nov.  1880 1882

Maggiorani  (Carlo),  Influenza  del  Magnetismo  sulla  Vifca  Animale

Eome,  1880

PiLASTRO  (Mario  del),  I  Fenomeni  Spiritici  Leghorn,  1883

Sekgi  (Prof.  G.),  L'Origine  dei  Fenomeni  Psichici Milan,  1885


LATIN.

[R]  BiOLYCHNiTiM  seu  Lucema 1611

[R]  Compendium  Maleficarum Milan,  1626

[R]  De-Thardingius  (Dn.  Georgius),  Dissertatio 1724

[R]  Fabius  (Everardus),  Specimen  de  Somniis Amsterdam,  1836

[R]  GocLENius  (Rod.  M.D.),  Tractatus  novus  de  Magnetica  Vulnerum

Curatione  Frankfort,  1613

[R]  Kabbala  denudata  Frankfort,  1677

[R]  Magica  Seu  mirabilium  Historiarum  de  Spectris  at  Apparitionibus

Spirituum Fisleben,  1597


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.  585

[R]  Pamphlets,  Latin,  for  Vol.  I.

Wedelius  (Ernestus  Henricus)  Dissertatio  Medica  de  Spectris  „.,„Jcna,  1693

[R]  Porta  (Io  Baptista),  Magise  Naturalis  Antwerp,  1560

[R]  PsELLUS  (Michael),  De  Operatione  DEemonum  Dialogus  (Greek  and

Latin) Paris,  1615

[R]  Semler  (Salomonis  Joannis),  Commentatio  de  Dsemoniacis  quorum  in

N.  T.  fit  mentio  Halle,  1797

[R]  SoNNTAG  (Joh.  Mich.),  De  Spectris  et  ominibus  morientium  Altdorf,  1716

[R]  Sprenger,  Malleus  Maleficarum. 2  vol  London,  1620

[R]  Thyrsi  Petri  Opera Cologne,  1600

[R]  Trithemios  (Joannes),  Steganographia  Frankfort,  1606


[R]  WiEKi  (Joannis),  Opera  Omnia


Amsterdam,  1660


586


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


THE  LIBRARY.


The  Society's  Library  of  books  and  periodicals  is  open  to  Members
and  Associates  alike,  for  consultation  at  the  Society's  Rooms.
Members  have  the  additional  privilege  of  taking  out  books,  except  those
marked  [R],  which  are  for  reference  only,  according  to  the  following
Rules : —

1.  Members  may  obtain  books  either  by  writing  to  the  Assistant-

Secretary,  or  by  taking  them  from  the  shelves,  in  which  latter
case  they  must  leave  a  written  acknowledgment  on  the  form
provided  for  the  purpose,  entering  also  any  books  which  they
may  at  the  same  time  return.  Members  must  pay  for  the
carriage  of  books  sent  to  them  or  returned  by  them.

2.  No  Member  may  have  more  than  two  volumes  out  at  once,  or

retain  any  volume  more  than  three  weeks,  without  special
permission  from  the  Assistant-Secretary.  In  the  case  of
Members  engaged  on  work  for  the  Society  in  which  the  books
are  needed,  this  Rule  will  be  relaxed.

3.  Associates  temporarily  in  London,  or  who  may  otherwise  wish

to  borrow  books  from  the  Library  during  a  short  period,  can
do  so  on  the  following  terras  : —

For  One  Month  ...  5s. | For  Three  Months  ...  10s.

Should  persons  who  are  neither  Members  nor  Associates  of  the
Society  desii'e  to  make  use  of  the  Library,  special  facilities  will  be
granted,  in  cases  where  there  seems  to  be  sufficient  reason  for  doing  so.

It  is  hoped  that  Members  will  co-operate  in  taking  care  of  the
books,  and  returning  them  promptly  for  the  use  of  others.  Many  of
the  books  are  rare,  and  would  be  hard  to  replace  if  lost.

A  suggestion  book  is  kept  in  the  Society's  Rooms,  where  names  of
books  recommended  for  purchase  may  be  entered  by  Members  and
Associates ;  or  suggestions  may  be  sent  in  writing  to  the  Assistant-
Secretary.  Any  such  recommendations  will  be  carefully  considered  by
the  Library  Committee.

A  large  proportion  of  the  existing  books  have  been  acquired  by  gift.
The  books  purchased  with  the  Society's  funds  have  been,  for  the  most
part,  of  a  distinctly  scientific  character.

The  Council  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  their  thanks  to
the  numerous  donors  of  books  to  the  Library  for  their  acceptable
presents.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  587


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{May,  1887.)


PRESIDENT.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon. Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,
London,  S.W.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  Rose  Castle,  Carlisle.
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  Stanmore  Hall,  Stanmore,  Middlesex.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Englefield  Green,  Staines.
Hon.  Roden  Noel,  57,  Anerley  Park,  London,  S.E.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Hensleigh Wedgwood,  Esq.,  31,  Queen  Anne-street,  London,  W.

COUNCIL FOR  1887.
Prop.  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  President.


Prof.  J.  C.  Adams,  F.R.S.

Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

Walter  H.  Coffin.

Edmund  Gurney.

Richard  Hodgson.

Prof.  0.  J.  Lodge,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.

Prof.  Macalister,  M.D.,  F.R.S.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,


Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  LocKHART  Robertson,  M.D.

Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick.

Henry  A.  Smith.

J.  Herbert  Stack.

Prof.  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.

Hensleigh  Wedgwood.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.

HON.  SECRETARY.
Edmund  Gurney,  26,  Montpelier-square,  London,  S.W.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.


Professor  J.  C.  Adams,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.


588


List  of  Memhei's  and  Associates.


The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Hawarden,  North  Wales.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Lord  Tennyson,  Farringford,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wight.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.Gt.S.,  Nutwood  Cottage,  Frith  Hill,
Godalming.

Gc.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  29,  Rue  des  Ecuries  d'Artois,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
U.S.A.

Professor Nicholas Murray Butlek, Columbia  College,  New
York,  U.S.A.

Professor DobroslIvin, M.D.,  Imperial Medical Academy,  St.

Petersburg.
Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  G.  S.  Fullerton,  Pennsylvania  University,  Philadelphia,
U.S.A.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Johns  Hopkins University,  Baltimore,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.
Professor  W.  James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  U.S.A.
Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Le  Havre,  France.

MIhadeva  Vishnu  KAne,  B.A.,  Government  High  School,  Dharwar,
Bombay.

Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Russia.
Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy.
Professor  Liegeois,  Nancy.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  U.S.A.
Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  PMlosophique,  Paris.
Dr.  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.
H.  Taine,  Menthon  St.  Bernard,  Haute  Savoie,  France.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.
Rev.  R.  Whittingham,  Pikesville,  Maryland,  U.S.A.

MEMBERS.

Aksakof,  Hon.  Alexander  D.,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.,  M.P.,  4,  Carlton-gardens

London,  S.W.
Balfour,  G.  W.,  M.P.,  32,  Addison-road,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


589


Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gai'dens,  London,  S.W.
Balliston,  W.  H.  T.,  5,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida  Hill,  London,  W.
Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.P.S.E.,  &c.,  6,  De  Vesci-terrace,  Kings-
town, Co.  Dublin.

Barrett,  Mrs.,  30,  Courtfield-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Batnes,  Robert  Edward,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Beatty,  Octavius,  14,  Beaumont-street,  Oxford.

Benham,  Robert  Fitzroy,  M.R.C.S.,  Abercorn  House,  Baron's  Court,
London,  S.W.

Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.

Bentall,  F.  W.,  HoUoway-road,  Heybridge,  Maldon,  Essex.

Beveridge,  Eeskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Bidder,  Mrs.  C,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

BiDDELL,  Sidney,  32,  The  Grove,  Boltons,  London,  S.W.

Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.

Bridson,  Joseph  Ridgway,  Belle  Isle,  Windermere.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

BuDDEN,  Edward Russell, Camelot, Netherhall-terrace,  South

Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
BuGBY,  William,  Hillsboro,  South  Beddington,  Carshalton,  Surrey.
Bundy,  Colonel  John  C,  Chicago,  U.S.A.

Bushby,  Henry  North  Grant,  Wormley  Bury,  Hoddesden,  Herts.

BusHELL,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  near  London.

Caithness,  The  Countess  of,  Duchesse  de  Pomar,  51,  Rue  de
rUniversite,  Paris.

Carpenter,  Major  Geo.  W.  Wallace,  28,  Ashley-place,  Victoria-
street,  London,  S.W.

Carpenter,  William  Lant,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  36,  Craven  Park,  Harlesden,
London,  N.W.

Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.

Chambers,  Miss,  St.  Baldred's  Tower,  North  Berwick,  N.B.

Chiltoff,  a.,  M.D.,  University  of  Kharkof,  Russia.

Close,  Charles  Arthur,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  30,  St.  James's-square,  London,
S.W.

Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Cooper,  Edward  V.,  West  End  Cottage,  Great  Haseley,  Tetsworth,
Oxon.

Coventon,  Charles  H.,  Morwenstow,  Enfield,  Middlesex.

Ceaavshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

Cuffe,  Hon.  O.  Frederick  Seymour,  2,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.


590


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Kingstanley,  Stonehouse,  Gloucestershire.
Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.A.,  3,  Upper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton,
Bristol.

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Delmar,  F.,  17,  St.  Petersburgh-place,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

DoDGSON,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Downing,  Charles,  Trevethan,  Brentwood,  Essex.

Drayson,  Major-General,  R.A.,  Royal  Albert  Yacht  Club,  Southsea.

Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Elder,  Miss  M.  C,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London,  E.G.

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Florence, Ernest B., 33, RedclifFe-square, South  Kensington^

London,  S.W.
Flower,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.

FoRSTER,  Anthony,  Clovelly,  Silverhill  Park,  St.  Leonard s-on-Sea.
Fountain,  Alfred,  Highfield,  Hillingdon,  Uxbridge,  Middlesex.
Fry,  Lewis  George,  Goldney  House,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Gardner,  Herbert,  M.P.,  46,  Dover-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  Rue  d'Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris.
Geiler,  Mrs.  Hermann,  Warton-street,  Lytham.
Gell,  Philip  Lyttelton,  M.A.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
Glinka,  Mademoiselle  de.

GooDHART,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  Sheffield.
Graham,  Alexander,  3,  Barnard's  Inn,  London,  E.G.
Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.
Grant,  Thomas,  Shirley  House,  Maidstone.
Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Addington  Rectory,  Winslow.
Griffin,  Francis  Charles,  1,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  London,  W.
Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  29,  Holland-park,  London,  W.
GuRNEY,  Edmund,  M.A.,  26,  Montpelier-square,  London,  S.W.
Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.  A.,  St.  Barnabas  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  London,
S.W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Guthrie,  Malcolm,  J. P.,  2,  Parkheld-road,  Liverpool.

Haddington,  The  Countess  of,  Tyninghame,  Prestonkirk,  N.B.

Hargreaves,  T.  Sidney,  2 1 8,  Golborne-road,  NorthKensington,  London,  W.

Harrison,  William,  The  Horsehills,  Wolverhampton.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Col.  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,  near

Fawkham,  vid  Dartford.
Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  6,  Grafton-street,  London,  W.
Heron-Allen,  Edward,  Constitutional  Club,  London,  S.W.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


591


Hewitt, Frederic W.,  M.B.,  23,  Somerset-street,  Portman-square,

London,  W.
Hodgson,  Richard,  B.A.

Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixham.
Hogg,  Henry  E..,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hollond,  John  R.,  Stanmore  Hall,  Stanniore,  Middlesex.
Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Ogbeare  Hall,  Holsworthy,  Devon.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
HoPKiNSON,  Professor  Alfred, M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

HoRSFALL,  Charles  Edward,  Grassendale  Priory,  Liverpool.
Hughes,  Frank  Septimus,  1,  Furnival's  Inn,  Holborn,  London,  E.C.
Hughes,  Captain Henry  Morgan, F.R.G.S., 6,  Victoria-terrace,

West  Brighton.
Hume,  A.  O.,  Simla,  India.

I'Anson,  W.  a.,  M.R.C.S,,  L.R.C.P.,  Westgate  Hill  House,  Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

Irving,  Dr.  Lewis  A.,  Government  House,  Ganesh  Khind,  Bombay.
James,  Arthur  Gwynne,  LL.B.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  London,  E.C.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westboume  Park-villas,  London,  W.
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jebb,  Major  J.  de  Witt,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,  W.
Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.
Jeune,  Mrs.,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.

Joyce,  Samuel,  Junr., European  Telegraph  Works,  Pownall-road

Dalston,  London,  E.
Kay,  H.  a.,  13,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Keightley,  Bertram,  B.A.,  30,  Linden-gardens,  London,  W.
Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  96,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.
KiMBER,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.
KiRWAN,  J.  J.,  Reform  Club,  London,  W.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Lafone,  Alfred  William,  M.P.,  Hatton,  Bedfont,  Middlesex.
Lafone,  Harold,  B.A.,  Hanworth  Park,  Feltham,  Middlesex.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.
Laurie,  Reginald  Northall,  Palace  Chambers,  Westminster,  S.W.
Leaf,  Walter,  M.A.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.
Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.
Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  op.  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.
LoNGSTAFF,  George  Blundell,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Southtield  Grange,

Woodhill-road,  Wandsworth,  S.W.
MacAlister,  John  Y.  W.,  Leeds  Library  Leeds


592  TAst  of  Members  and  Associates.


MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  1,  New  Burlington-street,
London,  W.

Malcolm,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  Achnamara,  Bellanoch,  Lochgilphead,
Argyleshire,  IST.B.

Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough
Station,  Hants.

Marshall,  Mrs.  Edgar,  18,  St.  John's-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Marshall,  John  William,  M.  A.,  The  Holt,  Godalming.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  30,  Woodland- villas,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Massey,  Charles  C,  1,  Albert  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Matthews,  Frank  Herbert,  B.A.,  Ivy  Villa,  Beulah  Hill,  Upper
Norwood,  London,  S.E.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,F.R.G.S.,  Vigo  House, Weybridge.

Money-Ooutts,  Francis  Burdett,  Ancote,  Weybridge.

MoNTEFlORE,  F.,  4,  Great  Stanhope-street,  London,  W.

MoRELL,  J.  D.,  LL.D.,  Clevelands,  Fitzjohn's-avenue,  London,  N.W.

MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.  (of  New  York),  care  of  Messrs.  Monroe  and  Co.,
7,  Rue  Scribe,  Paris.

Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Broadlands,  Romsey,  Hants.

Muirhead,  Henry,  M.D.,  M.A„  Bushy  Hill,  Oambuslang,  Glas-
gow, N.B.

Murray- Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.
Myers, A. T., M.D.,  9, liower  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,
London,  W.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Naidu,  C.  V,,  Downing  College,  Cambridge.
Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H.,  The  Chaplaincy,  Magdalen-street,  Exeter.
Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.
Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow-on-the  Hill,  near  London.
Page,  A.  C,  M.D.,  Truro,  Nova  Scotia.

Paice,  Wm.,  M.A.,  20,  Blandford-road,  Bedford  Park,  Chiswick.
Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.
Paschkoff,  a.,  5,  Cavendish-square,  London,  W.
Payntbr,  William,  Bute  Chambers,  Cardilf.

Pease,  Edward  R.,  29,  Claremont-road,  Moor  Edge,  Newcastle-on-
Tyne.

Percival,  Francis  W.,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  36,  Bryanston-street,  Lon-
don, W.

Pilcher,  Giles  Theodore,  33,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.

Pilcher,  R.  H.,  Post  Office,  Rangoon,  Burmah.

PoDMORE,  Frank,  M.A.,  14,  Dean's-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.

Portal,  Spencer,  Malshanger,  Basingstoke.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Porter,  Miss  A.,  47,Brompton-square,  South  Kensington,  London,S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


593


PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  19,  Oldford-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.
Pratt,  Thomas,  Camden  House,  Lower  Merton,  Surrey.
Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Prim,  Jose,  188,  Gresham  House,  Old  Broad-street,  London,  E.G.
PuRDON,  John  E.,  M.B., Surgeon-Major,  Valley  Head,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Pye,  William  A.,  24,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N."W.
Rayleigh,  Clara,  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Rensselaer,  Mrs.  P.  L.  Van,  9,  Bolton-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Ridley,  Henry,  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  20,  Portsea-place,  Connaught-square,
London,  W.

Robertson,  C.  Lockhart, M.D.,  Grand Avenue Mansions,  West
Brighton.

Robinson,  Arthur,  Jesus  College,  Cambridge.
Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  Edward  H.,  M.A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-
on-Thames.

Rogers,  George  Frederick,  24,  St.  Andrew's-street,  Cambridge.
Ross,  A.  Galt,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Ferishtah,  Hampton,  Middlesex.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  16,  Samsfield-road,  Finsbury  Park,  London,  N.
Rylands,  Thomas  Glazebrook,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfields,  ThelwaU,

near  Warrington.
Salt,  Titus,  J.P.,  Milner  Field,  Bingley,  Yorkshire.
Sandilands,  Harry,  90,  New  Bond-street,  London,  W.
Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  25,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone,  Padstow.

Schuster,  Professor  Arthur,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hil],London,S.E.
Sennett,  Alfred  R.,  M.S.T.E,  62,  Hatton-garden,  London,  E.C.
SiDGwiCK,  Professor  Henry,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  H.,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
SiDGwiCK,  Arthur,  M.A.,  77,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Singleton,  Mrs.,  8,  Prince's- gate,  London,  S.W.
SiSLEY,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Smith,  Martin  Ridley,  1.3,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  Loudon,  S.W.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  410,  Race-street,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.
Smith,  Mrs.  Sidney,  7,  The  Terrace,  Barnes,  S.W.

SOLOVIOFF,  WsEVOLOD.

Stack,  J.  Herbert,  30,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
Stanhope,  The  Right  Hon.E.,  M.P.,  23,  Eccleston-square,Londou,S.W.
Stapelton,  Josiah  G.,  47,  Lee-terrace,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Steaen,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.


594


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Stewart,  Professor  Balfour,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,

Manchester.
Stock,  St.  George,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford.
Stogdon,  John  Cole,  M.A.,  18,  Clement's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Stopford,  Francis  James,  Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,  St.  James's-

street,  London,  S.W.
Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  London, W.
SuRTEES,  William  Edward,  Tainfield,  near  Taunton.
Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  Toppesfield  Rectory,  Halstead,  Essex.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Endsleigh-gardens,  London,  N.W.
Taylor,  Major  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Farnborough

Station,  Hants.

Tebb,  Mrs.,  7,  Albert-road,  Gloucester-gate,  Regent'sPark,  London.N.W.
Thomson,  Professor  Joseph  John,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.

Thornton,  Rev.  R.,  D.D.,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Notting  Hill,  London,  W.
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
TiDMAN,  Paul  Frederick,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Tod,  Alexander,  St.  Mary's  Mount,  Peebles,  N.B.
Travers,  John  Amory,  Dorney  House,  Weybridge.
Tulloch,  Conrad,  Linwood,  Erith,  Kent.

Yane,  Francis  P.  F.,  Isthmian  Club,  12,  Grafton-street,  London,  W.
Vicars,  George  Rayleigh,  B.A.,  Woodville  House,  Rugby.
Wallace,  Shepherd,  B.A.,  Friars  School,  Bangor,  North  Wales.
Walrond,  E.  D.,  B.A.,  Hillingdon,  Uxbridge,  Middlesex.
Warrender,  Miss,  Bruntisfield  House,  Edinburgh,
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wedgwood,  Hensleigii,  M.A.,  31,  Queen  Anne-street,  London,  W.
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Berniiard,  The  Mill  House,  Felstead,  Essex.
White,  Harold  Holden,  96,  Queen's-gate,  London,  S.W.
Whitear, Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  4,  The  Bank,  Crouch  Hill,  Hornsey,

London,  N.
Wild,  Charles,  Jesus  College,  Cambridge.
WiLLMOTT,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Charles  M.,  Rose  Villa,  North  Strand,  Limerick.
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Rosemont,  Hyeres,  France.
Winch,  William  Richard,  4,  Fenchurch-street,  London,  E.C.
WooDHOusE,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Woosnam,  W.  Burgoss,  M.A.,  Petitor  House,  St. Mary  Church,
Torquay.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


595


Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-aquare,  London,  S.W.
YoEKE,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.

Beard,  Sidney  H.,  The  Chestnuts,  Torrington  Park,  North  Finchley,  IST.
Beilby,  J.  Wood,  Beechworth,  Victoria,  Australia.
Birchall,  James,  Kirkdale,  Liverpool.

Creery,  Rev. A.  M.,  B.A.,  Victoria-terrace,  Murray-street,  Higher

Broughton,  Manchester.
Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.
Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  20,  Holford-square,  London,  W.C.
Grubb,  Edward,  Rye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarborough.
James,  Captain,  68,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Ferndale,  Revington-road,  Oxford.
Keulemans,  J.  Gr.,  8,  Primrose  Hill  Studios,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  25,  Clifton-road,  Birkenhead.
NiSBET,  E.  T.,  51,  Eldon-street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.
Scudamore,  Mrs.,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Ashford,  Kent.
SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Prospect  House,  Great  Horton,

Bradford,  Yorkshire.

ASSOCIATES.

Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.

Anderson,  James  Arbuthnot, 46, Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Archdale,  Audley  S.,  XJnderdown,  Ledbury,  Herefordshire.
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
AsHCROFT,  Rev.  Thomas,  185,  Lansdowne-terrace,  Chorley,  Lancashire.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  Sherbourne  Villa,  Leamington.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.
Baikie,  Robert,  M.D.,  55,  Melville-street,  Edinburgh.
Bailey,  Walter,  13,  Albemarle-crescent,  Scarborough.
Ball,  W.  W.  R.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Barker,  Miss  Alice  R.,  Albrighton  Hall,  Wolverhampton.
Barnett,  Mrs.  S.  A.,  St.  Jude's  Vicarage,  Whitechapel,  London,  E.
Beazley, Lieutenant- Colonel George G., 74,  Redclilie-square,
London,  S.W.

Becket,  Miss  Maria,  Hotel  Vendome,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Benson,  Mrs.,  The  Palace,  Lambeth,  London,  S.W.
Beresford,  Edward  A.,  21,  Hereford-square,  London,  S.W.
Berrey,  Walter  F.  M.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Bevan,  Rev.,  C.B.,  M.A.,  Kirton  Vicarage,  Boston.


596


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  Is^elmes,  near  Romford.

Bickford-Smith,  R.  A.  H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,
London,  S.W.

BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rosa,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Junr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

BiRRELL,  Miss,  37,  Addison-gardens  North,  London,  W.

Blackwood,  Miss  Cecilia  Grace,  Shortlands,  near  Bromley,  Kent.

BoLDERO,  Mrs.  A.,  28,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

Bolland,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.

Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  care  of  King,  King  and  Co.,  Bombay,  India.

BosTOCK,  Miss  E.  A.,  Penmaen  Gower,  Swansea.

BosviLLE,  Mrs.,  Thorpe  Hall,  Bridlington.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  44,  Elanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  Chiswick.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Weston  Patrick,  Odiham,  Hants.

BowNESS,  William  Wilson,  20,Campden-grove,Kensington,London,W.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Brewster,  Mrs.  E.,  10,  Park-terrace,  Nottingham.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  E.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.

Brock-Arnold,  Rev.  George  M.,  M.A.,  St.  Giles'  Vicarage,  Well-
street,  Cripplegate,  London,  E.C.

Brown,  Mrs.,  Oxenford  Hall,  Magdalen-street,  Oxford.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  Edgbaston  House,  Pittville,  Cheltenham.

Browne,  Edward  G.,  B.A.,  24,  Bernard-street,  Russell-square,  London,
W.C.

Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidston,  Alleyn-road,  East  Dulwich,
London,  S.E.

Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.,
Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  35,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Buck,  Sir  E.  C,  Civil  Service,  Simla,  India.
Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.C.
Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Caird,  Mrs., 29,  Broadhurst-gardens, Finchley New-road,  South

Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  The  College,  Barbadoes.
Campbell,  Miss  E.,  South  Hall,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.
Campbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.
Campbell,  Robert  Allen,  C.E.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Capper,  Miss,  Francis-grove,  Wimbledon,  S.W.
Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Pigott,  Greyhill,  Winchfield.
Caudee,  Miss  Emmeline,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


597


Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  C.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.
Chase,  Lieutenant  "W.  S.  L.,  V.C,  D.A.Q.M.  General,  Quetta  District,
Beluchistan.

Chowne,  Colonel  William  C,  Lexham-gardens,  Kensington,

London,  W.

Christopher,  H.  Carmichael,  50,  Romola-road,  Herne  Hill,  London,
S.E.

Clarke,  Frederick,  W.  A.,  5,  Pyrland-road,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.
Clay,  A.  Keatinge,  Anglesea,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin.
Clejiens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Clissold,  Edward  Mortimer,  M.A.,  United  University  Club,  Pall

Mall  East,  London,  S.W.
Coit,  Stainton,  P1i.D.,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Bayton  Lodge,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Cooke,  Rev.  John  Hunt,  Cape  House,  Coolhurst-road,  Crouch  End,

London,  N.

CooKSON,  Mrs.  Montague,  29,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
CooMBE,  Charles  Frederick,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  General  Infirmary,
Sheffield.

Oostelloe,  Mrs.  B.  F.  C,  40,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.
CouES, Professor Elliott,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,
U.S.A.

Cox,  John,  M.A.,  Cavendish  College,  Cambridge.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crossley,  Mrs.  Herbert,  Ferney  Green,  Windermere.
Crowther,  William  F.,  Watton  Vicarage,  Hull,
Cumin,  Mrs.,  16,  Chester-square,  London,  S.W.

Cunningham,  George,  D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's  Parade,
Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  M.A.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.
Darbishire,  Samuel  D.,  M.D.,  60,  High-street,  Oxford.
Darley,  Mrs.,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Davey,  S.  John,  Alfriston,  Hayne-road,  Beckenham,  London,  S.E.
Davies,  William,  Bellfield,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  The  Western  and  Brazilian  Telegraph  Company,

Caixa,  453,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.
Debenham,  Ernest  Ridley,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  108,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Doubleday,  Mrs.  Frances  G.,  Washington,  D.O.,  U.S.A.

2  B


598  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


DovETON,  F.  B.,  10,  Grange-gardens,  Eastbourne.

Eaden,  Mrs.,  Little  Shelf ord,  Cambridge.

Eady,  Mrs.,  Combe  Royal,  Kingsbridge,  Soutli  Devon.

Edelsten,  John  A.,  Quernfield,  Latchford,  Warrington.

Edge,  H.  T.,'  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.

Elliot,  William  Scott,  Junr.,  29,  Hyde  Park-place,  London,  W.

Elliot,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  The  Deanery,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Elliott,  Charles  Alfred,  Lismore,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.

Elton,  Oliver,  Sprowston  Hall,  Norwich.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,  West  Brompton,  London,
S.W.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Evens,  John,  R.E.,  Oldbank,  Enniskillen,  Ireland.
Faber,  Knud  Helge,  M.D.,  25,  Livjagergade,  Copenhagen.
Fagan,  Mrs.  Louisa  M.,  26,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.
Fair,  Frederick  Kendall,  Lieutenant  R.E.,  Brompton  Barracks,
Chatham.

FitzGerald,  Desmond  G.,  M.S.T.E.,  6,  Akerman-road,  Brixton,  S.W.
Fleming,  A.,  Broxbourne,  Herts.

Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Adelaide,  Australia.
Folkestone,  The  Viscountess,  8,  Ennismore-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  Adel  Grange,  Leeds.

Eraser,  Lt.-Col.  Alexander  Thomas,  R.E.,  Department  of  Public

Works,  Madras  Presidency.
Garrett,  Miss  Agnes,  2,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Gaynor,  Henry  F.,  Lieutenant  R.E.,  50, Westmorland-road,  Newcastle-

on-Tyne.

Gessmann,  Gustav,  Junr.,  11,  Burg-gasse,  Vienna  VII.
Gibson,  Thomas,  Castle  Park,  Lancaster.
Gibson,  Mrs.  Sumner,  Old  Church,  Penrith,  Cumberland.
Gladstone,  Miss  Catherine  Annie,  Shedfield  Cottage,  Botley,  Hants.
Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.
Glyn,  The  Hon.  and  Rev.  E.  Carr,  The  Vicarage,  Kensington,  S.W.
Gonemys,  Le  Comte  Dr.  Nicolo,  Corfu,  Ionian  Islands.
Goodman,  Roger  N.,  B.A.,  B.  Sc.,  50,  New-street,  Bedford-square,
London,  E.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  The  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Grant,  Arthur  J.,  B.A.,  Carentan  House,  Underhill-road,  Forest

Hill,  London,  S.E.
Greaves,  R.  H.,  Bengal  Civil  Service,  care  of  Messrs.  Grindlay  and  Co.,

55,  Parliament-street,  London,  S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


599


Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.
Griffith,  Robert  W.,  M.A.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.
Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Kent.
Grosvenor,  George  Fox,  M.D.,  121,  Ladbroke-grove,  Notting  Hill,

London,  W.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta,  23,  Lower  Leeson-street,  Dublin.
GuNTON,  Rev.  Charles  Forster,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.
GuNTON,  Rev.  F.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Hall,  T.  P.,  B.A.,  F.C.S.  (Eng.),  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Canada.
Hameed-Ullah,  M.,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.
Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.
Harland,  Henry,  Authors'  Club,  19,  West  24th-street,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.
Harris,  J.  Chantrey,  JVew  Zealand  Times  Office,  Wellington,  New
Zealand.

Harris,  Miss,  40,  Lothrop-street,  Queen's  Park,  Harrow-road,  Lon-
don, W.

Harris,  Miss  Isabel,  9,  Chelsea-embankment,  London,  S.W.
Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  45  (D),  Colville-gardens,  London,  W.
Hart,  S.  Lavington,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Hastie,  Miss,  Luscar,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Hastings,  Miss,  3,  Ridgway-place,  Wimbledon.
Hayes,  Joseph  Walton,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy.
Heartley,  Rev.  C.  T.,  M.A.,  Cheveley  Rectory,  Newmarket.
Hennings,  Rev.  J ames,  Duncombe  House,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.
Henty,  Walter,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  London,  S.W.
Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.
HiBBS,  Reginald  R., 13, St.  Lawrence-road, North  Kensington,
London,  W.

Hill,  Arthur  G.,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  47,  Belsize-avenue,  London,  N.W.

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth.

Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.

Hodgkin,  John  Eliot,  Childwall,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Hoffmann,  Oskar  von,  7,  Augustus  Platz,  Leipzig.

Hogg,  Jonathan,  Stratford,  Rathgar,  Co.  Dublin.

Hogg,  Robert  W.,  B.A.,  1,  Furnival's  Inn,  Holborn,  London,  E.C.

Holland,  Mrs.,  7,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.

Holt,  Mrs.,  The  Cottage,  East  Sheen,  Mortlake,  Surrey.

Hooke,  Richard,  Kersall  Dale,  Higher  Broughton,  Manchester.

Hopkinson,  Miss,  37,  Woburn-place,  London,  W.C.

Hopps,  Rev.  J.  Page,  Lea  Hurst,  Leicester.

2  R  2


600


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


HoENE,  Aldeeson,  46,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.
Howe,  Edwaed  R.  J.  Gambiee,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.

HowoRTH,  Henry  H.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
Hubbe-Schleiden,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Neuhausen,  near  Munich.
Humphreys,  Edward  H.  P.,  Denmark  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Ionides, Constantine a., 80, Holland Villas-road,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Jackson,  William  Hatchett,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Penwartha,  Weston-
super-Mare.

James,  Mrs.,  10,  Pelham-place,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M.A.,  115,  Clifton- hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  The  University,  Glasgow.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.

Johnson,  G.  I.,  24,  Cross-street,  Manchester.

Johnson,  William  Ernest,  B. A.,  LlandafF  House,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Joyce,  T.  Heath,  Freshford,  South  Hill,  Bromley,  Kent.

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Kay,  Walmsley  P.,  Bank-terrace,  Darwen.

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  122,  Blackheath-hill,  London,  S.E.

Kelso,  C.  E.,  22nd  and  Gratiot-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Ker,  Dr.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

Kimball,  Benjamin,  8,  Congress-street,  Boston,  U.S.A.

KiNCAiD,  Mrs.  S.  M.,  43,  St.  Stephen's  Green,  Dublin.

Knightley,  Lady,  Fawsley,  Daventry.

Knox,  Nathaniel  Alexandee,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Aus-
tralia.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,  Christ  Church  House,  4,

Canterbury-street,  Liverpool.
Lambert,  Rev.  Beooke,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Vicarage,  Greenwich.
Lane-Poole,  Stanley,  M.R.A.S.,  6,  Park-villas  East,  Richmond,  near

London.

Larken,  Rev.  E.  P.,  Gatton  Tower,  Reigate.
La  Toue,  Miss  Juliet,  Broadlands,  Romsey,  Hants.
Laycock,  Rev.  James  A.,  2,  Eton-terrace,  Harrogate.
Leaf,  Arthue  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London, W.
Leonaed,  Arthue  G.,  M.A.,  44,  Highbury  Hill,  London,  N.
Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.
Lewis,  Mes.  W.  B.,  Weybridge  Heath,  Surrey.
Leymaeie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.
Limond,  Miss  Catheeine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


601


Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Greenfield  House,  Onchan,  Isle  of  Man.
Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  University  College,  Liverpool.
Loewenthal,  Leopold,  78,  Elgin-avenue,  St.  Peter's  Park,  London,  W.
LoMAx,  Benjamin,  C.E.,  Free  Library  and  Museum,  Brighton.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  Selwyn  College,  Cambridge.
Macalistek,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Strathmore  House,  5,  Harvey-
road,  Cambridge.
Mackenzie,  Miss  Minna,  Pool  House,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross-shire,  N.B.
Maitland,  Edward,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  London,  S.W.
Malleson,  Edmund  T.,  Duppas  Hill,  Croydon.

Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill  on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-avenue,  London,  N.W.

Marshall,  George  W.,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.,  Holmbush,  Upper  Richmond-
road,  Putney,  S.W.

Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  1,  Torrington-street,  London,  W.C.

Marson,  Gervase,  Birk  Crag,  Great  Clowes-street,  Higher  Broughton,
Manchester.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),
France.

Martin,  W.  R.,  Pine  Craig,  South  Queensferry,  Scotland.

Mathews,  George  B.,  B.A.,  9,  Menai  View-terrace,  Upper  Bangor,

North  Wales.
Max,  Professor  Gabriel,  17,  Heustrasse,  Munich.
McChesney,  Mrs.  Joseph  Henry,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Mellor,  W.  p..  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Miles,  Frank,  26,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
MiLEY,  M.,  B.A.,  21,  Belsize-avenue,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Millar, Alexander, Airdrie House, 19, Orlando-road,  Clapham,

London,  S.W.
Miller,  Robert,  6,  Chester-street,  Edinburgh.

Miller,  Mrs.  William  Pitt,  Marlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Milnes, George Hutchinson, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., St.  George's

Hospital,  London,  S.W.
MiNOT,  Dr.  Charles  Sedgwick,  25, MountVernon-street, Boston, U.S.A.
MoLESWORTH,  GuiLFORD  L.,  Simla,  India.

Moore,  Major-General  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Gipsy  Hill,  Upper

Norwood,  London,  S.E.
Moule,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.
Mullan,  Rev.  David,  B.A.,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.
MuNRO,  Henry  Acland,  New  College,  Oxford.


602


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Murray,  John  Henry,  (late  Captain  39th  Regiment)  Ashfield,  Beau
Park,  Co.  Meath.

Murray,  R.  Milne,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.P.  (Edin.),  10,  Hope-street,
Edinburgh.

Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Mylne,  Mrs.,  22,  Gloucester-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.

Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney Sussex  College,  Cambridge.

Newton,  Richard  Heber,  Garden  City,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Nichols,  Miss  Irene,  Lawford  Hall,  Manningtree.

Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nixon,  Brinsley,  8,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  57,  Anerley  Park,  London,  S.E.
NoRRis,  S.  J.,  Riverton,  South  Australia.

Norway,  Arthur  H.,  Secretary's  Office,  General  Post  Office,London,  E.G.
Owen,  Rev.  Samuel  Hubert,  Bucknall  Rectory,  Stoke-upon-Trent.
Parker,  Hon.  Mrs.,  60,  Elm  Park-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Partridge,  Mrs.,  118,  Queen's-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Passingham,  Mrs.,  Milton,  Cambridge.

Patterson,  Mrs.  Jane,  23,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.W.
Perry, Edwin C, M.A., The London Hospital,  Whitechapel,
London,  E.

Phear,  Rev.  Dr.,  Emmanuel  College  Lodge,  Cambridge.
Phillipps,  Alfred  March,  Hitcham  Hall,  Ipswich.
PiLciiER,  Arthur  J.,  Lieutenant  R.E.,  Brompton  Barracks,  Chatham.
Plummer,  J.  W.,  Cockermouth.

Podmore,  Austin,  14,  Dean's-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.

Podmore,  Rev.  Thompson, M.A., Aston-le- Walls  Rectoiy,  Byfield,

R.  S.  O.,  Northamptonshire.
PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Ratlifarnham,  Co.  Dublin.
Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  14,  The  Avenue,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
Power,  Miss  Helen,  19,  Spring-street,  Paddington,  London,  W.
Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Pribitkof,  v.,  23,  Troitzky  P^reoulok,  St.  Petersburg.
Railton,  Charles  W.,  Woodlands,  Alderley  Edge,  Cheshire.
Rathdonnell,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Drumcar,  Dunleer,  Co.  Louth.
Rawson,  Henry  G.,  68,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Reichel,  Principal  Henry  Rudolph,  M.A.,  University  College,

Bangor,  North  Wales.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


603


RiGG,  Thomas  S.  G.,  B.A.  (Sydney  University),  General  Post  Office,
Sydney.

Richardson,  P.,  Wingrove  House,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Ridley,  Miss,  19,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robins,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  8,  Marlborougli-road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.

Robinson,  Mrs.  Lionel,  19,  Kensington-square,  London,  W.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
Rosenbach, Dr. Paul, Kaiserliche Medicinische Akademie,  St.

Petersburg.
Ross,  Joseph  Carnb,  M.D.,  Shian,  Penzance.

Roxburgh,  Robert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-buildings,  Weston-
super-Mare.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath,
Sussex.

Sawyer,  Miss  Eliza  A.,  25,  Lansdowne-crescent,  Cheltenham.
Sawyer,  R.  D.,  7,  Avenue  Gourgand,  Paris.
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  9,  Longwall-street,  Oxford.
ScHOLEPiELD,  Rev.  C.  C,  M.A.,  Eton  College,  Windsor.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  .59,  Borgfelde,  Mittelweg,  Hamburg.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.

Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.  ■

Shoobridge,  Leonard  K.  H.,  Albury  House,  Ware,  Herts.

SiBLY,  F.  A.,  B.A.,  St.  Jolm's  College,  Cambridge.

Sidebotham,  Edward  J.,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  London,  E.C.

SiDGwicK,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.

Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.

Sladen,  Douglas  B.  W.,  20,  Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Grange-over-Sands,  Carnforth.

Smith,  H.  B.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.
Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
Snape,  Mrs.,  Chorley  New-road,  Bolton.

SoLLAs,  Professor  W.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.E.,  F.G.S.,  Trinity  College,
Dublin.

Southward,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.A.,  St.  Catherine's  College,  Cambridge.
Spencer, Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25, York-street,  Portman-square,

London,  W.
Stackhouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.

Stanley,  Miss  Sara,  2,  Stirling  Mansions,  Compayne-gardens,  South
Hampstead,  London,  N.W.


604  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Stapley,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Steel,  Miss,  33,  Argyll-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Stephen,  O.  Leslie,  4,  OoUingham-place,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.
Stewart,  David,  Kincaid  House,  Milton  of  Campsie,  N.B.
Stillman,  W.  J.,  3-,  Challoner-street,  Baron's  Court,  West  Kensington,
London,  W.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.
Stout,  George  F.,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Stuart,  Morton  G.,  East  Harptree,  near  Bristol.
Sturge,  Miss  Emily,  Tyndall's  Park,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland.
Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  8,  Harewood-square,  London,  N.W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.
Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor,  I.  O.  Howard,  Pine  Banks  Tower,  Thorpe,  Norwich.
Templeton,  J.  Murray,  39,  Rue  Gabriel,  Montmartre,  Paris.
Tennant,  Mrs.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
Tennant,  Miss  Dorothy,  2,  Richmond-terrace, Whitehall,  London,
S.W.

Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville  Park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Stanley,  80,  South  Audley-street,  Grosvenor-square,
London,  W.

Thurstan,  Frederick  W.,  M.A.,  Crescent  Cottage,  Hale,  Farnham.
Thurtell,  William  Ellis,  M.A.,  25,  Gordon-place,  Campden  Hill,
London,  W.

Trench,  Rev.  F,  Chenevix,  M.A.,  St.  John  Baptist,  Tuebrook,  Liver-
pool.

Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris,
North  Wales.

Tucker,  Miss  Mildred  A.  R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,
London,  N.W.

TuRNBULL,  Mrs.  Peveril  A.,  Sandybrook  Hall,  Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.
Turner,  H.  H.,  M.  A.,  Shurland  House,  9,  Humber-road,  Westcombe

Park,  London,  S.E.
Turner,  Miss  Lucy,  4,  Brigstock-road,  Thornton  Heath,  Croydon.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.
Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.
Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  Petersfield  House,  Cambridge.
Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  8,  Ebury-street,  London,  S.W.
Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


605


Waltek,  Rev.  Henry  M.,  M.A.,  2,  Mandeville-place,  Manchester-
square,  London,  W.

Walwtn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion-hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  London,
S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B.

Wassell,  Henry  A.,  Addenbrook  Villa,  Love-lane,  Stourbridge.
Waterhouse,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  36,  Carl  Ludwig  Strasse,  Wahring,
Vienna.

Wethered,  F.  J".,  M.R.C.S.,  Heatherfield  House,  The  Avenue,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
White,  William,  Morden  House,  55,  Highbury-hill,  London,  IST.
White,  Mrs.  Henry,  9,  Grosvenor-crescent,  London,  S.W.
Whitley,  Edward  Forbes,  Penarth  House,  Truro,  Cornwall.
Whiton,  James  M.,  Ph.D.,  Tremont,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Whitridge,  Frederick  W.,  University  Club,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Willett,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
WiLLSON,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  11,  Canterbury-villas,  Thornton  Heath,
Croydon.

Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  Elm  House,  Todmorden.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.

Withers,  John  James,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.

Woodhead,  John  E.,  171,  West  Washington-street,  Chicago,  U.S.A.

Woodhouse,  Otway  E.,  A.I.C.E., 20, Upper  Phillimore-gardens,

Kensington,  London,  W.
Woods,  Miss  Alice,  Queen  Anne's-grove,  Bedford  Park,  Chiswick.
Woodward,  Lionel  M.,  Tintern  House,  Great  Malvern.
WoRSLEY,  Mrs.,  Bromley  College,  Kent.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London,  W.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  41,  Courtheld-road,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Young,  Mrs.  Les  Combournaises,  Dinan,  Cotes  du  Nord,  France.
Young,  Professor  William  H.,  76,  Lange  Strasse,  Baden  Baden.

N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  14,  Dean's-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.


PEINTEn  BY  THE  N.iTIONAL  PRESS  AGENCY,  LIMITED,  WHITEFEIAKS  STREET,  E.G.


PROCEEDINGS OF  THE


INDEX  TO  VOL.  IV.


A.

A.  ,  Mr. See  under  TJareij,  S.  J.

Automatic  Writing,  F.  W.  H.  Myers on 209

,,  Instances  of ...  210,  216,  2;W,  2?,G,  239,  240,  246,  292

,,  by  Hypnotised  Subjects 236,  2.S9,  240,  246

Post-Hypnotic 29.3-323

Azani,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by 496,  503

B.

B.  ,  Madame,  Case  of  ...  128,  143,  149,  174,  175,  177,  182-84,  246,  506,  535
Babinski,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Kesearches  and  Experiments  of ... ... ...  209

Barety,  Dr.,  Theory  of  Neuric  Rays 173,  178

Barrett,  Mrs. ,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  SLate-writing  Plienomena '"  ...  417
Barrett,  Professor,  Case  contributed  by ... ...  230

,,  On  some  Physical Phenomena commonly  called

Spiritualistic 25

Beaunis,  Professor,  Hypnotic  Kesearclies  and  Experiments  of 5,6,  7,  12,

14,  15,  1.59,  167,  169,  175,  180,  277,  288,  540
Bergson,  M.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  in  Hypnotic  Hypera'sthesia  ...  532

Berjon,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of...  21,  151,  152,  154,  166
Bcrnheim,  Professor,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of,  6,  7,  9,

158,  540,  557

Biltz,  H.,  Thouglit-transferencc  Experiments  with  112,  113,  114,  115,  124

Binet,  A.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  ExperiuK-nts  of  ... 236,320,  540

,, Review  of  Lc  Blagnctismc  Animal,  par  A.  Binot  et  Ch.  Fere  ...  540

Block,  A.  J.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-writing" 445

Bourru  and  Bourot,  Drs.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of  21,

128,  151,  166,  167,  169,  176,  181,  497

Braid's  Hypnotic  Experiments 145-147

Brown-Sequard,  Researches  and  Exi)eriments  of 148,  149

Briiggenkate,  B.  J.  Ten.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Shite-writing  "  ...  448
Bullock,  E.,  Alleged  Mediumsliip  of 54

C.


C,  Mi.s.s,  Case  of


29


ii


Index  to  Vol  IV.


Cataleptic  Hallucination,  Case  of 230

Chambaitl,  Dr. ,  Table  of  Hypnogenous  Piocesses ... ... 185

Cliarcot,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Kesearche.?  and  Experiments  of 6,  147,  180,  183,

540,  545-546

Clittbrd,  David. (S'fc  under  Daccij,  S.  J.

Council  of  the  Society,  List  of  Members 587

^■

Davey,  S.  .).,  Experimental  Investigation  of,  as  to  tlie  Possibilities  of
Mal-observation  and  Lapse  of  Memory  from  a  Practical

Point  of  View 405-495

,,  Slate-writing  and  other  alleged  Spiritualistic  Phenomena

obtained  by  Normal  Means  67,  384,  389,  390,  401,  408,  419,  487
Delbonif, Professor, Hypnotic Researches  and Experiments  of  274,

277,  278-282,  286,  287-89

Despine,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of 6,  18,  144,  101,  171

De.ssoir,  Max,  Experiments  in  Thought-transference  ... Ill

Dodds,  J.  M.,  Evidence  on Mr.  Davev's  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena

398,  457,  493

Dreams 226,  241,  517

Dufay,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... 228

Du  Prel,  Raron,  on  "Slate-writing"  Pliencjmena 375

Dusart,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of 12S,  137

E.

E.,  Mdllk.  a.  E.,  Case  of  9,  14,  15,  17,  167,  175

Edgworth,  F.  Y.,  The  Calculus  of  Probabilities  as  applied  to  Psychical

Research  ... ... 189

Eglinton,  W.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 36,  38,  GO,  71,  72,  82,  83,  338,  382,

383,  391-396,  399,  406,  411

Elliotson,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  Researches  of  ... ... ... ...  ...17,139,161

Ellis,  S.,  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing  "  Phenomena 417

Elton,  0., Review  of  L'Hypnoiimic  ct  Ics  Etais  Analogues,  par  Dr.

Gilles  de  la  Tourette 555

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 173

E.

Fay,  Mk.s.,  Alleged  ^lediumship  of 48

Fairlamb,  Miss,  Alleged  Mediumship  of ... ... ...  48

Fere,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of... 6,  128,  236,  320,  540

,, Review  oi  Lc  M<(gnHis)nc  Aniinrd,  \)a.i- A.  Binet  et  Ch.  Fere  540

Firman,  E.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of ... 62,  389

Fox  Family,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 40

G.

(iiRERT,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researclies  ami  Experiments  of  127,  175,  177,  500,  535
Cillis,  Herr,  Evidence  on  "  Slate-writing  "  Phenomena .. 372


Index  to  Vul.  IV.


Ill


Gurney,  Edmund,  Eglinton's  Professed  Mediumsliii") .338,  3i9,  379

,, Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States 268

,,  ,, Preview  of  Lc  Magnetismc  Animal,  par  A.  Binet  et

Cli.  Fere  540

„  ,, Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory 515

H.

Havre,  Case,  The  ...  128,  143,  149,  174,  175,  177,  182,  183,  184,  246,  506,  535
Hayman,  H.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing"  Phenomena ...  470

Haxby,  W.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 60

Hericourt,  M.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  E.\periments  of ... 128,  137,  236

Herschell,  Dr.,  Evidence  on  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena 97

Hodgson,  R.,  Evidence  on  "  Slate-writing  "  Phenomena 372,  379

,,  On  Possibilities  of  Mal-ohservation  and  Lapse  of  Memory

from  a  Practical  Point  of  View 381

,,  Notes  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena  488,  490,

493,  494

Hyperresthesia,  Hypnotic,  Note  on  Certain  Reported  Cases 532

Hypnotism  —

Experimental  Evidence 6,  20,  127,  228,  236,  268,  496,  503,  505,  506

515,  544-555,  561,  563-566


Automntic  Writing  hy  Hypnotised  Subjects  ...  236,  239,  240,  246,  292
Commands,  Execution  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  269

Hypnotic  Hypera^sthesia,  Cases  of 532

,, Memory,  Stages  of 515

,, Stigmata  and  Ha?morrhage ... ... 166

,, Suggestion,  Human  Personality  in  the  Light  of ... ...  1

Modes  of  Induction  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena,  Tabulated  ...  181,  185
Personality  in  the  Light  of  Hypnotic  Research  1 ,  20,  237-252,  292,  314,  496

Post-Hypnotic  States,  Peculiarities  of  Certain 268

Telepathic  Hypnotism 127


L

L  Miss.,  Case  of ... ...  33

J.

Janet,  De.  H. ,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of  127,  174,  177,

182,  183,  184,  236.  237,  246,  285,  289,  506,  535,  .557
Johnson,  ilrs., on  jNIr.  Davey's  "  Materialisation  and  Slate-writing"


Phenomena ... 416,  482

Jones,  Stanley,  Evidence  on  i\Ir.  Davey's  "Slate-writing'' 471

K.

Kellar,  H.,  Evidence  on  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena 411

Keulenians,  .J.  G. ,  Cases  contributed  by 22ii,  228


L.

Legge,  J.  G.,  Evidence  on  jNIr.  Da\'cy's  "  Slate- writing  '  Phenomena  435,  490


IV


Indez  to  Vol.  IV.


Lewis,  Angelo,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writini;-  "  Phenomena  400,  485
Lewis,  Professor  H.  Carvill,  Accounts  of  some  so-called  ".Spiritualistic"

Seances ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 338,  352

Library  Catalogue ... ... ... ... ...  569

Kules 586

Liebeault,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  E.xperinients  of 6,  7,  f>,  14,  15,

18,  148,  167,  170,  172,  556,  557,  558
Liegeois,  Professor,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  E.vperiments  of  2,  6,  9,  556,

560,  561

Linnuer,  H.  J.,  Evidence  on  ^Ir.  Davey's  "Slate-writing"  ... 419,  423

Louise,  Case  of ... ... ... ...  ... ... ... ...  237

Loudun,  Psychical  Phenomena  connecte  I  with  tin  Ursuline  Convent  of  232


M.

M.,  Albkrtine,  Case  of 142,  170

"  M.A.,  Oxon,"  Evidence  on  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena 339

Mabille,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  E.xperiinents  of  151,  153,

166,  167,  181,  497

Mabire,  E.,  Thouglit-transference  Experiments  with ... 324

Mal-Observation,  the  Possibilities  of,  in  connection  with  Spiritualistic
Phenomena —

Davey,  S.  J.,  on 405

Hodgson,  R.,  on ... ... ... ...  381

Ma.ssey,  C.  C.  M.,  on 75,  408

Al an ville,  E.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Siate-writing" ... ...  449,454

Massey,  C.  C,  Evidence  on  Slate-writing  Phenomena ... 80,  87,  382,  391
,, ,, ( )n  the  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation  in  Relation  to  the

Evidence  for  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism 75,  408
,, ,,  ,, Discussion  on,  with  Professor  Sidg wick  ...99,101,107

Meetings  of  the  Society V24,  25,  45,  75,  209,  262

Mesmerism, Sec  Hypnotism

Mesnet,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... 234

Monck,  "  Dr.,"  Alleged  Mediumship  of 84

Multiplex  Personality,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 496

Muscle  Reading,  Experiments  in  Ill

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  vVutomatic  Writing  209

,, HumanPersonality  in  the  lightof  HypnoticSuggestion  . . .  1

,,  ,, Multiplex  Personality 496

,,  Note  on  certoin  alleged  casesof  Hypnotic Hypera'sthesia  532
,, Telepathic  Hypnotism 127

N.

Netheeclift,  F.  G.,  Report  on  Handwriting  in  certain  "  Slate-wiiting  "

Phenomena ... ... ... ... ... 370,  373,  376

0.

OcHunoWKJZ,  Dl!.  J.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  ... ...  562-566

,, \i(z\\Q,\\!  oi  Dcla  StigrjustioH  Mcnialc  par  ... ...  562


Index  to  Vol.  IV.
Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society ...  .:.


V

oS7


V.

Padshah,  B.  J.,  Evidence  on  "  SLate-writing"  Phenomena... 377,  398,  402
,,  ,,  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-writing"  Phenomena

398,  402,  437,  490

Percival,  F.  W.,  Evidence  on  "  Slate-writing  "  Phenomena 344

Perronet,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Kesearches  and  Ex]ieriment.s  of 17,  18,  178

Physical  Phenomena  Some,  commonly  called  Spiritualistic —

Professor  Barrett  on 25

,, Balfour  Stewart  on 42

Pitres,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  liesearclies  and  E.xperiments  of  7,  142,  147,  149,  157,

170,  508,  509

Podmore,  Austin,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing" ... 09,  410
Podmore,  I'rank,  Review of  Dc  la  .'Suggestion  BIcntalc,  par  Dr.  J.

Ochorowicz ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  562

Post-Hypnotic  States,  Edmund  Gurney  on  the  Peculiarities  of  certain ...  268
,,  ,, Automatic  Execution  of  slight  Physical  Mo\-ements  282

,,  ,, Execution  of  Hypnotic  Commands 269

,,  ,, Reckoning  of  Time  and  Counting  of  Signals  ... ...  286

,,  ,, Secondarjr  Intelligence,  Exhibitions  of ...  292,314

Presidential  Address  262

Probabilities,  F.  V.  Edgworth  on  the  Calculus  of,  as  applied  to  Psychical

Research  ... ... ... ... ...  189

(J.,  Dr,.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate- writing"  Phenomena ... 473,  494


R.

Rait,  J.  H.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Materialisation,"  and  "SLate-
writing" 419,  423,  484,  487

Raven.3bu)g,  Baroness,  Thouglit-tran.sference  i^xperiments  with 124

Reviews 5-10.  562

Richer,  Dr. P., Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of  6,  7,  143,144-49,  244,  507
Richet,  M.  Ch.,  Hypnotic  Researches  a:ul  Experiments  of 6,  7,  18,  151,  181,

236,  506,  542

Rochas,  Commandant  de.  Case  recorded  by 251,  537

Russell,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing"

398,  437,  490


S.,  H.  W.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing" 468

Saclise,  W.,  Thought-transference  Experiments  with 115,  124

Sauvaire,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by 536

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Case  contributed  by 216

Schmoll,  Anton,  Thought-transference  Experiments  of 324

Scobell,  R.  AY.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing  " 417

Secondary  Intelligence,  Post-Hypnotic  Exhibitions  of 292,  314


vi


Index  to VoL  IV.


Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Evidence  on^Mr.  Davey's  "Hlate-wiiting" 07,  413,  47.5,  494

,,  Notes  on  two  accounts  of  Seances ... ... 494

,,  ■  Results  of  a  Personal  Investigation  into  the  "  Physical

Plienoiuena  of  Spiritualism " ... ... ... ...  4.3

Sidgwick,  Professor,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  Slate-writing  Phenomena  413
,,  ,, Note  and  Discussion  with  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  on  the

Pos.sibilities  of  Mal-Ubservation ...  99,103,109

Sladc,  Dr.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of .50,  65,  79,  85,  410,  411

"Slate-writing,"  Mr.  Davey's 07,  384,  389,  390,  401,  408,  419,  487

,,  Eacsiniile  of 460

"  Spiritualistic"  56,65,  79,  85,338,387,  388,391-90,  406,407,  408
,,  ,,  Expert's  report  on  handwriting  in  certain

cases  of 370,  373,  376

„  Facsimiles  of ...  .358,359,363,300,374

Smith,  G.  A.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 174,  271,  517,  538

Society  for  Psychical  Research —

(Jcneral  Meetings  (ordinary) 1,  24,  25,  45,  75,  209,  202

Library  Catalogue ... ... ... ...  509

,, Rules  ... 586-

Members,  A.ssoeiates,  and  Honorary  ileiubers,  List  of 587

Officers  and  Council  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  587

Spiritualistic  Seances,  Account  of  some  so-called,  by  Prof.  Carvill  Lewis

and  others ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 338

Spiritualism, Physical  Phenomena  of  so-called ... 25,  42,  45,  75,  338,  381
Mal-Obscrvation  possibilities  of  in  connection  with  25,  45,

75,  338,  381

,,  Sec  aim  "  Slatc-iuritiii/j"  rhcnomcna

Stewart,  D.,  Case  contiibuted  by  ... ... ... ... ... ...  517

Stewart,  Prof.  Balfour, Note  on  "  Some  Physical  Phenomena  commonly

called  Spiritualistic  " 42

,,  I'rcsidential  Address  ... ... 202

Stidolph,  Miss,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey'is  "  Slatc-M  riting  "  I'honomena  418
Symons,  Miss, Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey'.s  "  Slate-'w  riting "  Phenomena

402,  475,  480,  494

T.


•  T.,  ]Mr.  and  Mlss  a.  B.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing  " ...  461

T.,  Marquis,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-writing" 464

Taylor,  Major,  Evidence  on  '  Slate-writing "  Phenomena ... .. ...  82

Telepathic  Hypnotism,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 127

Thought-transference —

Experimental  Evidence —

With  Colours  564

,, Numbers .. ' 113

,, Objects 32(),  334,  .335,  504

,, Playing-cards 114,  115,  504

,, Pictures 115,  .327

,, Reproductions  (plates  of)  made  by  Sensitives  110,  120,328-335

,, Tastes  ... ... ... ... ... ...  564

,, Words  and  Sentences 114,562

Spontaneous,  possible  case  of ... ... 412


Index  to  Vol.  IV.


vii


Time,  Reckoning  of,  in  Post-Hypnotic  States 286

Tourette, Dr. Gilles  de  la,  Review  of  V Hiipnottsine ct Ics  Etats

Analog  lies  par 555

Truesdell,  J.  W.,  on  "  Slate-writin,;;- "  Phenomena ... 414

V.

v.,  Louis,  Case  of 18,  21,  148,  151,  152,  153,  160,  166,  176,  496,  5.31

Venner,  R.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate-writing  "  Plienomena  ...  441)
Voisin,  Dr.  A.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 505,  506,  509

W.

Wallace,  A.  R.,  Evidence  on  "  Slate  writing  "'  Phenomena 84

,,  on  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  84,  o81,  504

Webb,  G.,  Evidence  on  "  Slate-writing  "  Plienomena ... 352

Wedgwood,  Hensleigli,  Evidence  on  "  Slate-writing  "  Plienomena  ...  71
Wei.ss,  E.,  Thought- transfei'ence  Experiments  with  ...  111-115,  124

Wheeler,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  154

Willson,  Mrs.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Materialisation  "  Phenomena  483

Wilson,  D.  H.,  Evidence  on  "  Slate- writing  "  Phenomena 82

Wingfield,  H.,  Case  contributed  by 236

Wood,  Miss,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 48

X.

X.,  Felida,  Caseof 496,503

Y.

Y.,  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Miss,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate- writing  "

Phenomena 426,  488

Z.
