Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XX (1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1906 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Part LIII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc20soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XX
(CONTAINING  PART  LIII)

1906


The  responsibility  for  both  the  faets  and  ilie  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


GLASGOW

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  CO.  LTD.

1 906

\_7 he  Rights  of  Translation  and  I\eproructio7i  are  reservea]


CONTENTS


PART  LIII.
October,  1906.

PAGE

On  a  Series  of  Automatic  Writin-gs. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  -  1

Table  of  Contents.

Part  I. General  Description  of  the  Script.

Chapter I. Introdnetory  ------- -  g

Chapter II. Form  and  Style  of  the  Script - - . .  is

Chapter III. Other  General  Characteristics - - - -  47

Chapter IV. Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form  Assumed - - -  67

Chapter V. Comments  in  the  Script  on  the  Phenomena - -  84

Chapter VI. Unverifiable  Statements  and  Allusions  - - -  105

Part  II. Verifiable  Matter  Contained  in  the  Script.

Chapter VII. Reminiscences  and  Connexion  with  Dreams,  etc. -  133
Chapter  VIII. Experiments  in  Conveying  Information  Telepathi-

cally  to  the  Script  - - - - - -  156

Chapter IX. Spontaneous  References  to  Living  Acquaintances  -  177
Chapter X. R'^ferences to other "Sensitives";  Cross-corre-
spondences 205
Chapter XI. Cross-correspondences,  Continued  - - - -  219

Chapter XII. Misaellaneous  References  to  Past  Events - -  276

Chapter  XIII. Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events - -  319

Illtjstr.\tive  Appendix  349,


89708


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LI  1 1.

October,  1906.  '  '  ■


ON  A  SERIES  or  AUTOMATIC  WEITINGS.
By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


Prefatory  Note.

I  WISH  to  preface  this  record  of  automatic  phenomena  with
thanks  to  those  friends  without  whose  encouragement,  sugges-
tions, and  criticism  it  could  not  have  been  made.  In
particular,  grateful  acknowledgment  is  due  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
Mr.  Piddington,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  Miss  Johnson  for  constant
help,  not  only  in  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  them-
selves, but  also  in  the  actual  preparation  of  this  report.

Many  other  persons  named  or  indicated  in  the  following
pages  have  been  so  kind  as  to  check  the  accuracy  of  the
statements  made  respecting  them,  and  I  beg  them  to  accept
my  cordial  thanks.

A


2


Table  of  ContenU.


[part


Note. — Part  I.  of  this  paper  is  occupied  almost  entirely  with  details
which  are  necessary  and  preliininary  to  a  complete  comp'ehension  of  Part
II.,  but  which  are  not  likely  to  interest  a  reader  who  is  not  first  satisfied
that  the  writings  under  discussion  contain  matter  worth  notice.  The  author
would  suggest  that,  in  order  to  fmm  a  judgment  on  this  point,  the  reader
should  take  first  Part  I.,  chapter  I.,  and  should  then  proceed  directly  to
Part  II.

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.
FART  I.

PAGE

General  Description  of  the  Script, ------  g

Chapter  I. — Introductory,  6

Introductory  ;  history  :  early  attempts  ;  renewed  attempts  ;
successful  attempts  ;  script  obtained  in  Latin  ;  appearance  of
English  ;  number  of  writings  ;  record  and  preservation  ;
sensations  while  writing  ;  influence  of  contents  on  the  writer  ;
experiments  on  conditions  of  writing.

Chapter  II. — Form  and  Style  of  the  Script, - - - -  18

Length  of  separate  communications  ;  drawings ;  hand-
writing, generally  representing  the  writer's  own  normal
type  ;  use  of  paragraphs  and  capital  letters  ;  size  and  variety
of  writing  ;  four  classes  of  writing  different  from  the  writer's
ordinary  hand  ;  inaccuracies  ;  meaningless  introductory  phrases  ;
terminal  phrases  ;  languages  used  :  English,  Latin,  and  Greek  ;
antecedent  knowledge  of  Latin  and  Greek  ;  proportion  and
intention  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  the  script  ;  philological
peculiarities  ;  words  non-existent  and  unintelligible ;  words  non-
existent but  intelligible  ;  words  used  in  special  senses  ;  unusual
constructions ;  crabbed  style  ;  allusions  to  fables  ;  poetical
phraseology  ;  original  nou-classical  phrases.

Chapter  III. — Other  General  Characteristics, - - - -  47
Aphorisms  and  proverbs  ;  quotations  ;  condensed  expressions  ;
assonances  ;  puns  ;  verse  :  Greek,  Latin,  English.

Chapter  IV. — Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form  Assumed,  -  -  -  67
Conversations  represented  in  the  script ;  apparent  inter-
polations, interruptions,  and  dialogues  ;  signatures  ;  classification
of  signatures  ;  unfinished  attempts  ;  unidentified  signatures  ;
proper  names  ;  signs  ;  crosses  :  Latin,  St.  Andrew's,  and  Greek  ;
other  signs  ;  unintelligible  signatures  ;  identified  signatures.


LIII.]


Table  of  Contents.


3


PAQE

Chapter  V. — Comments  in  the  Script  on  the  Phenomena,  - -  84

Statements  as  to  success,  failure,  capacity,  frustrated  desire  :
complaints  of  diiBculty  ;  general  exhortations  ;  exhortations  to
credit  the  script  ;  directions  given  for  writing,  negative  and
positive,  vague  and  definite ;  directions  as  to  communication
of  matter  to  other  persons  ;  directions  for  the  production  and
improvement  of  the  phenomena  ;  reference  to  personal  matters.

Chapter  VI. — Unverifiable  Statements  or  Allusions, - -  105

Unknown  names  ;  unidentifiable  descriptions  :  scenes,  persons,
objects,  anecdotes  ;  descriptions  of  supposed  "  isles  of  the  blest  " ;
allusions  to  Christian  ritual  or  symbolism  ;  quasi-philosophical
utterances  ;  prayers ;  enigmatic  or  oracular  sayings  ;  mystic
sayings  ;  quasi-mathematical  allusions.


PART  II.

Verifiable  Matter  Contained  in  the  Script, - - - -  133

Chapter  VII. — Reminiscences  and  Connexion  with  Dreams,  Etc.,  133
Precautions  for  the  preservation  of  the  script ;  classification
of  verifiable  topics  ;  allusions  to  things  known  to  the  writer  ;
allusions  to  subjects  recently  in  the  writer's  mind ;  revived
memories ;  emergence  in  the  script  of  knowledge  not  voluntarily
recoverable ;  connexion  with  dreams.

Chapter  VIII. — Experiments  in  Conveying  Information  Tele-

pathicallt  to  the  Script,  156

Experiments  without  the  writer's  knowledge:  by  Dr.  Verrall
and  others  ;  experiments  with  the  writer's  knowledge  :  by
Mr.  F.  C.  Constable,  by  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,  and  others.

Chapter  IX. — Spontaneous  References  to  Living  Acquaintances,
Classification  of  references  to  persons  living  at  the  time  ;
miscellaneous,  unintelligible  or  incomplete  references  ;  references
to  persons  known  to  be  interested  in  the  phenomena  :  Mr.
Constable  ;  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  ;  Dr.  Verrall ;  Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall ;
Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  her  brothers;  other  members  of  the  S.P.R. :
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Mr.  Piddington,  Dr.  Hodgson;  other  friends;
general  comment  on  such  references.


177


4


Table  of  Contents.


[part


Chapter  X. — References  to  Other  "Sensitives";  Cross-Corre-
spondences  205

Cross-correapondences  with  other  sensitives ;  references  to
Mrs.  Archdale,  Mrs.  Thompson,  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
personalities.  ■  ■ ■  '

Chapter  XI. — Cross-Correspondences  Continued,  -  -  -  -  219
References  to  Mrs.  Forbes  in  chronological  sequence  ;  account
■  of  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Forbes  ;  first  reference  to  writer  in
Mrs.  Forbes'  planchette-writing ;  first  reference  in  script  to
Mrs.  Forbes  ;  first  allusion  to  Mrs.  Forbes'  circumstances
unknown  to  the  writer ;  reflexion  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of
impressions  of  writer  ;  incorrect  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  ;
definite  allusion  by  Mrs.  Forbes  to  incident  unknown  to  her  ;
visit  of  writer  to  Mrs.  Forbes  and  verification  of  earlier  state-
ment in  script ;  experiment  with  Mrs.  Forbes  ;  cross-corre-
spondences between  scripts  of  Mrs.  Forbes  and  writer ;  reflexion
in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  mental  impression  of  writer ;  references
in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  to  a  book  recently  read  by  writer  ;  refer-
ences in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  to  Dr.  Verrall ;  experiment  in
simultaneous  writing  ;  verified  statement  in  planchette-writing
from  Mi's.  Forbes  ;  references  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  to  writer's
daughter  ;  experiment  by  Mrs.  Forbes ;  further  references  to
Mrs.  Forbes  ;  cross-correspondences  between  scripts  of  Mrs.
Forbes  and  writer ;  experiment  by  Mrs.  Forbes  in  simultaneous
writing  ;  failure  to  convey  impression  of  writer  to  Mrs.  Forbes  ;
general  comment  on  the  above  cross-correspondences.

Chapter  XII. — Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events, -  276

Account  of  various  verified  references  in  the  script  to  past
events  known  and  unknown  to  writer  :  lost  hat ;  dormitory
notice ;  cloisters  of  Trinity  College  ;  basket  with  fruit ;  river
"Dovinans" ;  manuscript  play ;  garden ;  inscription  by  Dr.  Verrall ;
phrase  to  be  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  ;  veridical  case  ;  destruction
of  pictures  by  fire  ;  waters  of  Omar  ;  references  to  neo-Platonists ;
hills  in  Rome ;  Columella  ;  three  letters  kept  together  ;  descrip-
tion of  small  book  ;  allusions  to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity  ;  box:
containing  papers  ;  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope  ;  bishop's
ring  and  cross  ;  form  assumed  by  a  signature  ;  Philadelphus
Coronarius  ;  Plato's  Symposium.

Chapter  XIII. — Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events,  -  319
Unfulfilled  prophecy  ;  Millbank ;  vague  prophecy  ;  Logion  ;
eagle;  Maidment;  Didascalia ;  Veni  Creator;  unfulfilled  pro-
phecies; breach  in  family;  September  19th;  Daily  Mail  ghost;
visit  to  America  ;  Marmontel's  Memoirs  ;  cross  on  five  steps.


LIII.]


Table  of  Contents.


5


PAGE


Appendix  of  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Script  and  Corro-


Script  of  March,  1901,  1902,  1903,  to  illustrate  development  ;
list  of  dates  of  script ;  extracts  from  script,  to  illustrate  diffi-
culty in  recalling  what  has  been  produced,  use  of  paragraphs  ;
lists  of  aphorisms,  quotations,  assonances,  puns  ;  specimens  of
automatic  verse  in  Greek,  Latin,  English  ;  supposed  conversa-
tions; statements  by  the  script  as  to  its  own  success;  extracts
illustrating  statements  in  script  urging  confidence ;  extracts
containing  directions  as  to  writing,  noting  dates  ;  extracts  refer-
ring to  possibility  of  conveying  information  in  dream  ;  list  of
unidentified  names ;  anecdotes ;  extracts  describing  supposed
isles  of  the  blest ;  extracts  recalling  Christian  associations ;
oracular  or  enigmatic  sayings  ;  mystic  sayings  ;  quasi-mathema-
tical allusions  ;  extracts  from  diary  and  script  illustrating  types
of  dreams  ;  extracts  from  script  containing  attempts  to  guess
words  suggested  by  Dr.  Verrall,  and  contemporary  comments  ;
classification  of  above  attempts  ;  extracts  referring  to  experi-
ments with  Mr.  Constable,  and  contemporary  notes  ;  extracts
referring  to  experiments  with  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  and  others ;
complete  list  of  references  in  script  to  Dr.  Verrall  ;  list  of
references  illustrating  "  cross-correspondences with  Mrs.
Archdale,  Mrs.  Forbes ;  list  of  documents  corroborative  of
cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes ;  extracts  illustrating
miscellaneous  references  in  the  script  to  past  events  ;  list  of
documents  corroborating  references  in  the  scrijDt  to  future
events  ;  note  on  "  Wheel  of  the  Master."


borative  Documents,


340


Index,


433


6


Chapter  1.


[part


PART  I.

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  SCRIPT.


CHAPTER  1.
Introductory.

The  present  paper  is  an  attempt  to  give  as  complete  an
account  as  possible  of  the  phenomena  of  automatic  writing
which  have  occurred  since  I  first  found  myself  able  to
produce  such  writing,  in  March,  1901.  The  mass  of  detail  is
so  considerable,  and  the  confusion  and  obscurity  in  the  writing
itself  so  great,  that  if  I  were  to  reproduce  the  whole  script  as
it  stands,  even  a  very  full  commentary  would  fail  to  make  it
intelligible ;  many  of  the  episodes  would  need  elaborate  comment
as  well  as  frequent  notes ;  there  is  much  apparent  rubbish ;
much  of  the  information,  which  I  believe  to  be  contained  in
the  script,  is  only  to  be  obtained  by  piecing  together  sentences
occurring  in  different  bits  of  writing  often  separated  from  one
another  by  considerable  intervals  of  time ;  and  at  least  half
the  original  writing,  being  in  Latin  or  Greek,  would  require
translation.  It  has  therefore  seemed  best  to  give  first  a  general
account  of  the  writing,  of  its  origin,  development,  and  nature,
and  then  to  treat  in  detail  of  various  episodes,  selected  and,
where  possible,  isolated  from  the  surrounding  mass.

I  have  not  been  able,  as  I  should  have  wished,  to  make  a
complete  classification  of  the  contents  of  the  automatic  script,
as  much  of  the  matter  still  remains  too  obscure  for  such  a
process,  and  moreover  there  is  a  danger  that,  in  the  desire  for
complete  classification,  meanings  which  they  do  not  legitimately
bear  may  be  put  upon  some  parts  of  the  writings,  or  episodes


LIII.]


Introductory.


may  be  pressed  prematurely  into  the  service  of  some  explana-
tory hypothesis.  At  the  same  time  it  seemed  to  me  that  the
only  hope  of  making  the  subject  intelligible  lay  in  some  sort
of  provisional  classification,  but  I  have  not  attempted  to  make
this  classification  exhaustive  or  exclusive,  so  that,  at  the  risk  of
VFearying  the  reader  by  repetition,  some  topics  are  treated
under  more  than  one  head.

Another  and  a  much  greater  difficulty  than  any  of  the  pre-
ceding lies  in  the  personal  nature  of  many  of  the  writings.
With  this  I  have  dealt  as  best  I  could.  Certain  parts  of  the
script  have  been  omitted.  In  some  cases  pseudonyms  have
been  substituted  for  the  names  of  real  persons,  or  identity
otherwise  disguised.  No  other  alterations  have  been  made.
It  would  be  useless  to  give  any  positive  estimate  of  what  has
been  omitted ;  but  I  think  it  right  to  say  that  the  script  has
certainly  not  gained,  but  lost,  by  the  omissions.  Matter  pre-
judicial to  its  value  and  interest  is  more  than  proportionally
represented  in  the  parts  actually  now  published.

Before  proceeding  to  a  general  account  of  the  appearance
and  contents  of  the  script  itself,  it  seems  necessary  to  say
something  of  its  origin  and  development.


History.

Early  attem'pts.

For  some  considerable  number  of  years  I  have  been  in-
terested in  automatic  phenomena,  and  have  tried  to  obtain
them  in  various  ways.  My  experiences  in  Crystal  Gazing
during  the  years  1889-1892  were  recorded  and  published  in
the  Froceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  473,  et  seq.  With  a  few
doubtful  exceptions  the  pictures  so  seen  were  purely  fantastic.
With  Planchette  or  a  table,  if  I  have  sat  with  a  second  person,
I  have  usually  obtained  movements,  though  the  results  were
seldom  of  any  interest ;  but  till  recently  I  was  quite  unable
to  get  any  movement  with  Planchette  when  sitting  alone,  or
any  writing  with  a  free  pencil,  except  a  few  letters  repeated
in  meaningless  combinations,  e,  v,  r,  appearing  and  reappearing
as  "  every,  very,  ever,"  and  so  on.  It  is  probable  that  the
letters of my surname,  the  word most frequently  written


8


Chapter  I.


[part


in ordinary life without conscious effort, were  responsible
for  the  words  produced.

I  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  automatic  writiuo'  was
not  possible  to  me;  but  in  January,  1901,  I  resolved  to  make
a  fresh  attempt,  and  on  this  occasion  the  attempt  was  more
persistent  than  had  been  the  case  with  the  earlier  efforts.

Renewed  attempts.

On  Jan.  19,  1901,  I  spent  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  more
in  sitting  perfectly  still  in  a  very  dim  light,  with  a  view  to
giving  myself  the  opportunity  of  recognising  any  impression
that  I  might  have.  I  continued  this  daily,  and  after  two  or
three  days  I  put  my  hand  on  a  Planch ette  or  held  a  pencil.
But  I  obtained  no  satisfactory  results.  Unless  my  attention
were  actively  engaged  in  some  other  direction  the  pencil  did
not  move ;  if  I  tried  to  occupy  my  attention  with  reading,
the  pencil  merely  reproduced  some  of  the  words  of  the  book,
or  occasionally  traced  characters  resembling  those  on  a  brass
table  on  which  the  pencil  and  paper  lay ;  Planchette  was
altogether  useless.  After  Feb.  2  I  left  off  the  attempts  for
some  days,  and  two  later  attempts  on  Feb.  12  and  13  pro-
duced no  better  results.  I  made  no  further  effort  till  March
3  and  again  on  March  5  ;  it  was  on  this  latter  date  that
what  I  regard  as  the  first  successful  result  was  obtained.

Successful  attemiJts ;  script  ohtainecl  in  Latin.

When  I  resumed  the  attempt  in  March,  I  decided  not  to
endeavour  to  distract  my  attention  by  reading  but  to  let  my
mind  passively  follow  any  suggestions  which  might  come  from
movements  of  the  pencil  or  otherwise.  On  March  3  much
the  same  sort  of  thing  was  written  as  in  the  earlier  attempts,
words  not  making  any  intelligible  sense  but  not  wholly  dis-
connected ;  these  words  were  followed  by  Greek  letters,  Greek
words,  and  odd  signs.  On  the  second  occasion,  March  5,  at
first  the  words  presented  themselves  to  me  as  wholes,  but  the
sequence  was  unintelligible ;  then  I  suddenly  felt  a  strong
impulse  to  change  the  position  of  the  pencil  and  to  hold  it
between  the  thumb  and  first  finger.  Ever  since  an  attack  of
writer's  cramp,  some  sixteen  years  ago,  I  have  held  the  pen
or pencil between the first and  second  finger,  and I  had


LIII.]


Introductory.


9


naturally  held  the  pencil  in  the  same  way  when  trying  to
get  automatic  writing.  Now,  however,  in  obedience  to  the
impulse,  I  took  the  pencil  between  my  thumb  and  first  finger,
and  after  a  few  nonsense-words  it  wrote  rapidly  in  Latin.
I  was  writing  in  the  dark  and  could  not  see  what  I  wrote ;
the  words  came  to  me  as  single  things,  and  I  was  so  much
occupied  in  recording  each  as  it  came  that  I  had  not  any
general  notion  of  what  the  meaning  was.  I  could  never
remember  the  last  word ;  it  seemed  to  vanish  completely  as
soon  as  I  had  written  it.  Sometimes  I  had  great  difficulty
in  recognising  what  was  the  word  I  wanted  to  write,  while  at
other  times  I  could  only  get  part  of  it.  When  I  had  filled
one  sheet  of  paper,  I  turned  up  the  electric  light  and  read
what  had  been  written  before  going  on  to  the  next  sheet.
On  this  first  occasion,  March  5,  1901,  my  hand  wrote  about
80  words  almost  entirely  in  Latin,  but  though  the  words  are
consecutive  and  seem  to  make  phrases,  and  though  some  of
the  phrases  seem  intelligible,  there  is  no  general  sense  in  the
passage.^

Till  the  end  of  the  month,  with  a  very  few  exceptions,  I  con-
tinued daily  to  write  fluently  in  Latin,  with  occasional  Greek
words.  The  writing  was  not  intelligible  throughout,  but  it
improved  and  was  very  different  from  the  mere  rubbish  with
which  it  began.  Whole  phrases  were  intelligible,  and  in  spite
of  blunders  of  every  description  the  general  drift  was  often
easily  apparent.  The  actual  writing  was  my  own  normal
handwriting  and  the  amount  produced  at  each  sitting  remained
about  what  it  had  been  on  the  first  occasion.  I  continued  to
use  paper  of  the  same  size  and  the  script  usually  filled  one  page,
that  is,  it  consisted  of  from  70  to  90  words,  but  occasionally  the
impulse  to  write  continued  after  the  page  was  full  and  I  then
took  a  second  piece  of  paper.  The  end  of  the  impulse  to  write
was  often  signalised  by  the  drawing  of  a  long  line.  After  the
first  two  or  three  times  of  writing  I  never  read  what  had  been
written  till  the  end,  and  though  I  continued  to  be  aware  of  the

1  See  App.,  p.  340,  for  copy  of  early  script.  I  have  printed  the
whole  of  the  script  of  March  1901  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  some
idea  of  the  development  of  the  script,  and  for  the  same  reason  I
have  also  printed  without  selection  the  script  of  March  1902  and
1903. There  was  no  script  in  March  1904.


10


Chapter  I.


[part


particular  word,  or  perhaps  two  words,  that  I  was  writing,  I
still  retained  no  recollection  of  what  I  had  just  written  and
no  general  notion  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  whole.

Appearance  of  English.

On  March  31  occurred  the  first  intelligent  use  of  English,
namely  the  word  "  Eemember  "  in  peculiar  and  separated  letters,
followed  by  "  A.  V.  E.  vale,"  at  the  termination  of  the  script ;
on  April  3  the  script  ended  ;  "  God  a  Dieu  Good  be  'ye
Tuus " ;  and  on  April  16  a  remark  in  English  was  interpolated
in  the  midst  of  the  Latin.  From  that  time  onward  English  -has
appeared  and  continues  to  appear  quite  as  frequently  as  Latin  :
while  there  has  been  a  good  deal  of  Greek  also  from  time  to
time.  Speaking  generally,  these  three  languages  are  the  only
languages  used,  though  occasional  words  from  others  are  to  be
found.  Attempts  to  give  facts  are  in  the  later  script  usually  made
in  English,  Latin  being  used  for  the  frequent  exhortations  or  con-
solatory and  encouraging  remarks  that  seem  to  be  addressed
personally  to  me.  But  this  is  not  invariably  the  case ;  state-
ments of  fact  apparently  intended  for  verification  being  some-
times made  in  Latin,  or  in  Greek.

Nximher  of  toritings.

The  automatic  script  has  continued  to  be  produced  from
March  1901  till  the  present  time,  with  occasional  intervals,
mainly  due  to  lack  of  opportunity  or  inclination  on  my  part.
In  this  paper  I  discuss  and  classify  the  script  obtained  in  the
course  of  the  years  1901-1904.  1  began  an  examination  and
analysis  of  the  script  for  the  purpose  of  this  paper  in  the
year  1904,  and  the  last  day  of  that  year  seemed  conveniently
to  terminate  the  period  covered  by  what  is  here  discussed.
Between  March  5,  1901,  and  Dec.  31,  1904,  I  have  had
306  pieces  of  automatic  script  written  under  the  conditions
above  described,  besides  16  pieces  obtained  under  somewhat
different  conditions.  These  16  were  written  at  hours  appointed
beforehand,  and  by  arrangement  with  other  persons  who
agreed  to  try  at  the  same  time  for  automatic  writing.  They
are  not  included  in  the  306,  though  it  may  be  convenient
to refer to them in  the course  of  the paper. The  306


LIII.]


Introductory.


11


pieces,^  extending  over  a  period  of  3  years  and  10  months,  were
not  produced  at  regular  intervals.  Generally  speaking,  my  inten-
tion has  been  to  try  for  writing  about  twice  a  week,  but  some-
times I  have  been  too  much  occupied  with  other  matters  to
make  the  necessary  effort ;  sometimes  the  writing  itself  has
suggested  that  I  should  leave  off  for  a  time ;  or  I  have  felt
disposed  to  wait  without  quite  knowing  why.  On  the  other
hand,  I  have  occasionally  felt  desirous  of  writing  more  frequently
than  twice  a  week,  or  I  have  deliberately  resolved  beforehand  to
try  the  experiment  of  writing  on  several  consecutive  days.  The
highest  number  of  writings  in  any  one  month  was  16  in  March
1901;  10,  11,  or  12  pieces  per  month  were  obtained  nine  times;
2  or  3  pieces  per  month  six  times,  while  in  one  month,  March
1904,  no  attempt  was  made.  In  December  1901  I  wrote  on
four  consecutive  days  and  then,  after  an  interval  of  three  days,
on  six  consecutive  days.  The  longest  intermission  was  from
February  15  to  April  9,  1904.  Sometimes,  but  rarely,  I  have
written  twice  in  one  day.  I  have  not  been  able  to  distinguish
any  difference  in  results  whatever  methods  were  employed.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  writing  I  have  never  failed  to  pro-
duce something  when  I  have  sat  down  to  write,  but  occasionally
it  has  only  been  half-a-dozen  words.

Record  ami  Preservation.

The  method  of  record  and  preservation  has  been  as  follows :
Up  to  the  middle  of  December  1902  I  myself  kept  the  original
writings,  in  pencil  and  for  the  most  part  on  large  sheets  of
paper.  But  on  and  after  Dec.  14,  1902,  the  originals,  after
being  copied,  have  been  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  one  by  one,
as  they  have  been  obtained,  in  envelopes  which  he  has  filed
and  kept  unopened  unless  specially  requested.  The  earlier
originals  were  also  sent  to  him  in  December,  1902.  From
the  beginning,  each  original  writing  has  been  copied  by  me
into  a  note-book  kept  for  the  purpose  in  which  the  date  of
the  copy  as  well  as  of  the  original  is  entered." During  the  first

1  See  App.,  p.  354,  for  dates  of  writings.

-  In  this  book  are  also  entered  dated  notes  of  all  information  bearing
on  the  script,  such  as  verifications,  refutations,  possible  explanations,
and  so  on.


12


Chapter  I.


[part


few  months  each  piece  of  writing  was  seen  by  my  husband
always  within  a  few  hours  of  its  production,  and  often
immediately  on  its  termination,  but  since  the  sending  of  the
originals  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  the  script  has  not  been  regularly
shown  to  my  husband.^

Sensations  while  loriting.

I  have  already  described  the  conditions  and  the  sensations
which  accompanied  the  earlier  writings,  and  need  only  add  that
for  the  most  part  the  same  conditions  and  sensations  continue
to  prevail.  Whether  I  write  in  light  or  dark,  I  do  not  look
at  the  paper.  I  perceive  a  word  or  two,  but  never  under-
stand whether  it  makes  sense  with  what  goes  before.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  will  be  seen  that  though  I  am
aware  at  the  moment  of  writing  what  language  my  hand  is
using,  when  the  script  is  finished  I  often  cannot  say,  till  I  read
it,  what  language  has  been  used,  as  the  recollection  of  the  words
passes  away  with  extreme  rapidity.

I  have  tried  more  than  once  to  reproduce  from  memory
what  has  just  been  written,  but  I  have  never  been  able  to
give  more  than  a  word  or  two  and  1  have  no  impression
as  to  the  general  sense,  if  there  has  been  any.  The  only
successful  attempt  at  reproduction  was  obtained  under  the
following  circumstances :  I  had  written  automatically  imme-
diately before  sleeping,  and  I  did  not  read  it  over.  The
next  morning  I  tried  to  remember  it,  and  wrote  down  all
I  could.  The  script  (Aug.  25,  1902)  consisted  of  27  Latin
words  followed  by  83  English  words,  and  a  signature.-  My
eye  had  fallen  on  the  first  three  words  before  it  occurred  to
me  to  make  the  experiment,  and  my  reproduction  was  as
follows :  "  quantula  pars  rogationis — Latin  first  about  3  or  4
lines,  then  children  and  a  mossy-something  in  a  forest,  write
to-morrow."  I  was  quite  unable  to  remember  whether  there
was  a  signature.  What  I  did  remember  was  correct  as  far
as  it  went,  but  the  reader  will  see  that  it  did  not  go  far.  This

1  In  May  1906,  the  originals  were  taken  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  to  the
Rooms  of  the  S.P.R.,  where,  under  my  directions,  they  were  compared
with  the  copies  for  the  purposes  of  this  pajier.

2  See  App.,  p.  355.


liil]


Introdivctory.


13


piece  of  script  was  more  intelligible  and  connected  than  many
of  the  productions,  so  that  it  might  have  been  expected  that
I  should  have  had  a  better  recollection  of  it.  On  other  occasions,
when  I  have  written  down  at  once  what  I  could  remember,
only  the  last  word  or  two  has  ever  been  recalled.

I  usually  write  when  I  am  alone,  and  I  prefer  not  to  have
a  bright  light ;  it  is  desirable  also  to  write  at  a  time  of  day
or  under  circumstances  when  I  am  not  likely  to  be  interrupted.
But  none  of  these  conditions  is  essential.  I  write  freely  with
my  husband  in  the  room ;  I  have  also  written  with  my  daughter
watching  me,  and  with  a  servant  moving  about  in  the  room  ;
on  five  occasions  (July  30,  1901,  Dec.  9,  1902,  April  26,  190:3,
May  11  and  13,  1904)  I  have  tried  to  obtain  writing  in
presence  of  other  friends,  each  time  with  success,  though  the
amount  has  been  less  than  usual ;  it  is  quite  common  for  me
to  write  in  a  railway  carriage  with  other  travellers  present ;
and  it  has  happened  to  me  several  times  to  be  momentarily
interrupted,  to  answer  a  question  briefly,  and  to  continue  writing.
On  21  occasions  out  of  the  whole  306,  I  have  had  a  sudden
impulse  to  write,  and  twice  after  finishing,  as  I  thought,  the
particular  bit  of  writing,  I  have  had  a  strong  impulse  to  con-
tinue (Nov.  25,  1901,  July  31,  1903).  On  some  of  these
occasions  the  writing  obtained  in  obedience  to  such  an  impulse
has  seemed  specially  interesting,  but  that  is  by  no  means
invariably  the  case.-^  Sometimes  the  impulse  to  write  takes
the  form  of  discomfort  in  the  right  arm  or  hand,  but  this  is
rare;  I  have  only  noted  three  occasions  (March  8,  1901,  Jan.
8,  1902,  April  14,  1902),  and  on  one  of  these  I  was  prevented
by  circumstances  from  writing  at  once.  My  left  hand  writes
automatically  as  well  as  my  right ;  I  should  say  that  I  normally
can  write  with  both  hands,  and  use  the  left  when  the  right  is
incapacitated  by  writer's  cramp.

On  one  occasion  (April  19,  1901)  I  had  a  feeling  some
little  time  before  the  actual  writing  came  -  that  I  miQ;ht  want
to  write,  and  this  induced  me  to  buy  a  paper  that  I  might
have  a  support  to  write  on,  as  I  was  just  going  by  train;  but
it  was  not  until  some  50  minutes  after  the  train  started  that

^  Of  these  21  pieces  of  script  written  under  sudden  impulse,  6
appear  to  contain  matter  of  interest.

2  See  p.  149.


14


Cha])ter  I.


[part


I  had  any  desire  to  write,  in  spite  of  the  expectation  aroused
by  the  previous  feeling.  Another  time  (May  27,  1901)  I  had
a  curious  sense  of  "  expectancy  and  subdued  excitement  as  if
something  were  going  to  happen,"  and  I  noted  the  sensation
at  the  time,  10.15  a.m.  I  also  noted  that  I  had  no  desire
to  write  automatically.  But  at  12.40  p.m.  on  the  same  day,
I  had  a  sudden  impulse  to  write  when  I  was  otherwise
engaged.  The  writing  described  the  burning  of  a  house  and
the  arrival  on  tlie  scene  of  a  fire  engine.  It  is  possible,  I
suppose,  that  the  same  cause — whatever  it  may  have  been —
that  produced  the  script  had  produced  the  earlier  feeling  of
excitement.^

One  other  sensation  occasionally  accompanies  the  script,  and
has  perhaps  tended  to  increase.  I  am  sometimes  exceedingly
sleepy  during  the  production  of  the  writing,  and  more  than
once  I  have  momentarily  lost  consciousness  of  my  surroundings.
The  first  time  that  this  happened  I  was  writing  by  firelight
with  my  eyes  shut,  as  I  often  do,  and  got  very  sleepy,  so
sleepy  that  when  the  pencil  ceased  to  write  and  I  turned  up
the  light  I  could  not  understand  a  word  of  what  I  saw,  and
lying  down  on  the  sofa  actually  went  to  sleep  till  a  noise
roused  me.  The  writing  (Feb.  13,  1902)  presented  no  points
of  interest,  but  perhaps  suggests  that  more  than  one  influence  ^
or  set  of  associations  is  discernible  in  the  writing.

The  next  occasion  on  which  this  feeling  of  sleepiness  occurred
was  on  November  24,  1902,  and  it  was  then  more  marked.  I
copy  the  contemporary  note :  "  I  got  very  sleepy  and  lost  con-
sciousness, I  think,  in  the  middle :  the  writing  was  very  violent
when  I  again  realised  what  I  was  doing  and  more  '  automatic '
than  usual."  Here,  too,  as  in  the  earlier  case,  there  purport
to  be  more  communicators  than  one,  and  there  are  certainly
differences  of  handwriting. When  this  writing  was  over,  I  was

1  Possibly  the  account  of  the  fire  was  an  attempt,  not  very  successful,
to  relate  an  incident  capable  of  verification ;  see  p.  284.

-  It  is  not  easy  to  describe  the  writing  without  seeming  to  assume  a
personality  on  the  part  of  the  supposed  writer,  of  which  I  am  very
far  from  being  convinced.  But  it  is  convenient  to  use  such  expres-
sions as  "  the  supposed  writer,"  "  the  control,"  or  "  the  scribe  "  to
represent  the  motive  power  which  seems  to  the  owner  of  the  writing
hand  something  quite  separate  from  his  normal  personality.


LIII.]  fi:  jA?rd)^icfd7*i/,V7\iNU  A  15

left  with  a  feeling  of  fatiaue,  and  soma  discomfcrt  in  the  right
arm ;  I  mention  this  '  as  '  it  'is  the '  pnlj  cccasioii  on  which
anything  like  a  disagreeable  feeling  was  associated  with  the
production  of  the  script.

The  next  time  that  I  went  to  sleep  was  in  the  middle  of
writing  on  Feb.  23,  1903,  at  6.15.  p.m.,  when  I  had  arranged
with  two  friends  that  they  should  sit  with  a  Planchette  at
the  same  hour.  I  slept  only  for  a  moment,  and  when  I  woke
went  on  with  the  automatic  writing  just  as  before.  The  words
then  written  were :  "  It  has  helped  them  and  you  will  get  a
message  now  plain  to  read."  This  latter  statement  was  correct ;
a  message  written  by  their  Planchette  was  perfectly  intelligible
to  me,  and  introduced  names  quite  unknown  to  the  Planchette
writers.^

Two  occasions  (March  11,  1903,  and  March  26,  1903)  on
which  I  was  writing  automatically  the  last  thing  at  night  and,
falling  asleep,  ceased  to  write,  demand  no  comment.  Three
times  I  have  gone  to  sleep  towards  the  end  of  the  writing
(July  21,  1903,  Sept.  27,  1903,  and  Nov.  23,  1903),  but
whether  the  last  part  of  the  writing  was  written  before  or
after  I  went  to  sleep  I  am  unable  to  say,  as  I  was  alone  in
the  room.  Once,  however,  on  May  11,  1904,  I  certainly
continued  writing  during  my  sleep ;  I  was  interrupted  by  an
unexpected  visitor  who  found  me  writing.  The  hand-writing
of  the  script  thus  produced  is  not  my  own,  but  bears  a  likeness
to  that  of  Dr.  Sidgwick.-

Influence  of  contents  on  the  vjriter.  '  ■•

It  has  occasionally  seemed  as  if  I  were  affected  by  the
contents  of  the  script,  although  I  was  not  conscious  of those
contents.  Thus  once  (June  10,  1904)  I  found  the  tears
running  down  my  face  when  the  writing  was  over ;  the
contents  apparently  alluded  to  two  friends  of  mine  who  had
died  under  tragic  circumstances.  On  another  occasion  (April
24,  1903),  when  the  script  was  suddenly  stopped  by  an
interruption  from  outside,  my  left  hand,  which  was  not  writing,
was  very  cold  and  I  had  a  recollection  of  feeling  a  wind  on  my
left  side ;  just  before  the  interruption  there  occurred  in  the  script

iSee  p.  250.  2  gee  p.  26.


16


[part


the  words  '^a'CGld,hreez,e'^;blovYS."' •  •  I-  hf^verfiftid  that  only  once  has
any  disagreeable seusyiiiw  ,  a'ttacfted;  tv^ ^  production  of  the
script,  but  I  may  add  that  if  I  am  suddenly  interrupted  while
writing  the  sensation  is  not  pleasant.  Although  I  am  appar-
ently in  a  perfectly  normal  condition  when  writing — for  the
number  of  times  above  noted  when  I  have  felt  sleepy  is
insignificant  compared  with  the  total  number  of  times  when
I  have  written  without  feeling  sleepy — if  I  am  unexpectedly
interrupted,  I  have  a  sensation  of  discomfort  and  a  little
difficulty  in  adjusting  myself  to  my  surroundings,  but  perhaps
no  more  than  I  always  have  if  interrupted  in  something
that  has  absorbed  my  attention.

Experiments  on  conditions  of  writing.  '  ■

1  have  made  a  small  number  of  experiments  in  connexion
with  the  script  which,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  may  be
mentioned  here,  though  it  will  be  convenient  to  deal  with
them  under  other  heads  later  on.  On  five  occasions — besides
those  mentioned  on  p.  10  and  not  included  in  this  paper — I
have  tried  to  obtain  writing  at  a  time  when  some  one  else  ^
was  also  "  sitting "  ;  viz.  twice  with  Mrs.  Forbes  and  a  friend
using  Planchette  (Feb.  22  and  23,  1903),  twice  with  another
friend,  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,  who  was  sitting  for  tilts  or  writing
(April  10  and  27,  1903),  and  once  at  the  suggestion  of  Mrs.
Thompson  (April  22,  1903).  On  four  out  of  these  five  occasions
it  seemed  that  there  was  some  interest  in  the  results.^  Twice,  in
the  early  days  (March  14  and  15,  1901),  in  accordance  with
the  suggestion  of  a  professional  medium,'^  I  held  in  the  hand
that  was  not  writing, a  letter  from  a  dead  friend,  but  no

1 1  have  purposely  not  stated  whether  names  used  in  this  paper  are
actual  or  invented  by  me ;  but  wherever  pseudonyms  have  been  em-
ployed, the  real  names  have  been  communicated  to  the  Editor  of  the
Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch.

2  See  pp.  173,  209,  250.

^  The  medium  in  question,  who  did  not  know  my  name,  had  on
March  8,  1901,  said  that  I  was  an  automatic  writer,  and  later  in
the  sitting,  on  being  given  a  letter  from  a  dead  friend  of  mine
in  an  envelope,  she  said  that  to  hold  this  letter  would  help  the
automatic  writing ;  she  was  completely  wrong  in  her  description  of
the  writer  of  the  letter,  but  I  thought  the  experiment  suggested
might  be  worth  trying.


LIII.]


Introductory.


17


effect  whatever  was  produced.  Again,  at  the  suggestion  of
a  stranger,  Mr.  Constable,  who  had  read  the  account  of  my
experiences  in  the  S.  P.  E.  Journal,  I  tried  to  obtain  an
answer  to  a  question  contained  in  a  sealed  envelope  which
he  sent  to  me  through  Miss  Johnson.  It  is  possible  that  some
of  the  references  in  the  script  written  under  these  circumstances
(Nov,  4,  5,  7,  11,  18  and  24,  1902)  had  some  bearing  on
the  thoughts  of  Mr.  Constable,  but  no  answer  to  the  question
in  the  envelope  was  obtained. ^

One  other  series  of  experiments  concludes  the  list.  On  ten
occasions  I  purposely  concentrated  my  thoughts  upon  a  par-
ticular subject,  recorded  at  the  time,  during  the  last  fifteen
or  twenty  minutes  before  trying  to  write.  Four  times  (Oct.
27  and  31,  J^ov.  3,  1902,  and  Jan.  18,  1903)  while  sitting  in
the  dark  and  alone,  I  concentrated  my  attention  on  a  particular
person;  once  (Nov.  11,  1902)  I  sat  alone  and  in  the  dark  think-
ing of  the  letter  which  I  held  in  my  hand  (Mr.  Constable's;
see  above);  five  times  (Nov.  28,  1902;  Jan.  25,  Feb.  2,
Feb.  9,  Feb.  12,  1903)  I  spent  the  last  ten  minutes  or  more
in  reading  or  thinking  over  a  passage  from  a  particular  book
which  had  appeared  to  be  referred  to  by  another  automatic
writer.  The  results  are  dealt  with  in  detail  elsewhere:  as  far
as  I  can  judge  the  resulting  script  presented  points  of  interest
in  three  or  perhaps  more  of  the  ten  experiments.  They  were
anyhow  worth  trying,  as  in  my  opinion  results  of  considerable
interest  and  value  were  produced  upon  the  writing  of  the  other
automatist  in  at  least  two  instances.^

iSee  p.  168.  2  See  pp.  239,  243.


B


18


Chapter  II.


[part


CHAPTER  II.
Form  and  Style  of  .the  Script.

I  NOW  come  to  the  main  subject  of  this  paper,  the  account
of  the  writing  itself — its  appearance  and  contents.  It  is
not  easy  to  present  this  in  a  compact  and  clear  way  to  the
reader,  and,  as  stated  above,  no  exact  system  of  classification
seems  possible.  But  I  have  grouped  the  miscellaneous  mass
of  details  under  heads  as  far  as  possible  and  a  rough  order
may  be  observed  in  the  treatment.  Thus,  a  line  may  be
drawn  separating  such  incidents  as  are  capable  of  verification,
or  at  least  of  explanation,  from  the  more  general  topics,  and
among  these  last  there  are  some  which  refer  more  especially
to  the  form,  and  others  to  the  contents  of  the  writings.  I
propose  to  deal  first  with  the  general  topics,  leaving  the  dis-
cussion of  particular  incidents  till  the  reader  has  gained  some
idea  of  the  nature  of  the  script,  and  in  the  general  account  I
shall  begin  with  such  subjects  as  concern  rather  the  form
than  the  matter,  though  the  distinction  is  not  always  easy  to
draw,  and  in  some  cases  a  diflerent  classification  might  be
made.  But  such  things  as  drawings  in  the  script,  its  language
and  phraseology,  its  tricks  of  style  and  so  on,  seem  to  belong
to  the  former  category ;  while  the  sentiments  of  the  supposed
writer,  the  philosophical  disquisitions  and  allusions,  and  the
descriptions  of  scenes  may  be  classified  as  contents.

I  begin,  then,  with  the  form  and  style  of  the  writing.

(1)  Length  of  separate  communications.

I  have  already  said  that  the  number  of  words  written
at  a  sitting  varies  from  70  to  90,  but  this  statement  is
not  universally  true.  Once  265  words  were  written,  in  a
detailed  description  of  a  scene  which  has  not  been  identified,
and  once  only  20  words  were  produced  although  there  was  no
interruption. But, normally,  the writing  tends  to  stop  when


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


19


one  page  has  been  filled,  though  the  spacing  of  the  words
varies  considerably,  as  does  the  size  of  the  writing.  The
time  occupied  in  each  communication^  is  about  twenty  minutes.

(2)  Deawings.

There  is  nothing  in  the  script  which  deserves  the  name  of
drawing ;  I  am  no  draughtswoman,  and  the  script  shares  my
incapacity.  But  there  are  a  considerable  number  of  scrawls,^
which  are  not  letters,  and  for  which  I  can  find  no  other  name
but  drawings.  Sometimes  they  are  used  to  illustrate  the  text,
as  when  after  a  description  of  a  jewelled  cross  a  representation
of  the  cross  is  given  (June  24,  1902).^  Sometimes  the  scribe
expresses  a  desire  to  draw,  as  "  the  stone  like  this"  followed  by  a
rough  sketch  (June  24,  1902, «);  or  "now  for  the  ring — draw  it"
and  then  follows  a  rough  sketch  of  the  stone  set  in  the  ring
(June  24,  1902,&).  Sometimes  the  drawing  appears  first,  and
a  description  follows:  on  Nov.  1,  1901,  there  is  a  drawing  of
a  diamond  or  lozenge,  followed  by  the  words  "  the  lozenge
is  important."*  ISTot  infrequently  the  object  drawn  seems  to
have  no  connexion  with  the  words  of  the  script.  Thus,  on
March  14,  1902,  three  shamrock-like  objects  were  interpolated
in  the  middle  of  some  writing  entirely  disconnected  with  them,
and  on  another  occasion,  September  18,  1901,  an  animal,
probably  intended  for  a  cat,  appeared  at  the  base  of  a  writing
which  contains  nothing  to  explain  its  appearance.  The  cat
made  a  more  effective  entry  on  March  11,  1902,^  though  it
contributed  nothing  of  value ;  three  drawings  followed  one
another,  representing  (1)  a  confused  oval,  (2)  a  sleeping  cat —
obviously  a  development  of  No.  1 — and  (3)  a  seated  cat ;  then
came  the  word  "  watching,"  followed  by  the  drawing  of  a
mouse. Then  was  written :  "  Nothing  to  day,  wait  for  Hodgson's

1 1  use  the  word  "  communication "  for  convenience,  without
desiring  to  express  any  opinion  as  to  the  source  or  sources  of  the
writing.  The  script  constantly  assumes  the  form  of  a  communication
or  message,  and  I  shall  use  both  these  expressions  freely,  sans
prejudice.

2  These  scrawls  occur  in  about  one  out  of  every  three  pieces.

3  For  facsimiles  see  App.  pp.  426,  7.

*  Nothing  has  been  made  of  the  lozenge.
^  For  facsimile  see  App.  p.  346.


20


Chapter  II.


[part


next  letter  that  will  make  things  clearer."  Apparently  here
the  notion  of  waiting  emerged  first  in  the  form  of  a  cat
waiting  to  catch  a  mouse.

What  I  have  called  drawings  appear  in  108^  out  of  the  306
pieces  of  writing.  A  common  place  for  their  occurrence  is
at  the  end  of  the  communication  as  a  sort  of  signature ;
26  times  a  drawing  appears  in  this  place,  and  on  8  of
these  occasions  there  is  also  a  drawing  in  the  text.  Some  of
these  signatory  drawings  are  of  interest,  and  are  discussed
under  other  heads.-

Four  times  a  rough  drawing  with  no  meaning  replaces  the
few  words  of  nonsense — sheer  and  absolute  nonsense — which
often  seem  required  before  the  script  can  get  under  way.^

On  the  whole  I  have  not  found  that  any  value  attaches
to  the  drawings,  and,  except  where  they  are  introduced  to
explain  the  writing,  they  usually  occur  in  the  more  worthless
pieces.  They  are  perhaps  slightly  more  "  automatic "  than  the
words,  but  unless  they  are  simply  an  alternative  rendering,  so
to  speak,  of  an  idea  also  expressed  in  words,  I  have  no  reason
to  suppose  that  they  stand  for  anything  more  than  the  sort  of
fantastic  picture  or  image  which  it  is  common  for  me  to  see
in  a  crystal,  and  which  has  no  interest  or  value  of  any  kind.

The  most  elaborate  piece  of  drawing  occurred  in  the  script  of
Aug.  26,  1903,  and,  though  elaborate,  is  apparently  wholly
valueless.  It  suggests  nothing  to  me,  and  I  can  in  no  way
account  for  the  production  of  the  greater  part  of  it.  The
day  before  writing  it  I  had  been  reading  the  H.  Wedgwood
case  quoted  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  162  and  foil.,
and  had  noticed  the  crest  of  Colonel  Gurwood,  a  reproduction
of  which  is  the  first  of  the  drawings  in  the  script.  The  case
was  not  new  to  me.

(3).  Handwriting.
Normal  type.

By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  script  is  written  in  my  own
handwriting,  altered  slightly  in  character  according  to  the  speed

1  Of  this  number,  108,  not  more  than  78  pieces  contain  anything
that  can  be  supposed  to  represent  a  definite  object.

-See  pp.  75-81.  ^geg  p.  28.


LIII.]  Form  and  Style  of  Scrrpt.  21

or  size  of  the  writing.  I  am  not  able  to  say  whether  the
pace  of  the  writing  is  usually  the  same  as  that  of  my  normal
hand,  as  during  the  production  of  the  script  I  am  not  sufficiently
aware  of  the  manual  act  of  writing,  as  distinguished  from  the
mental  effort  to  fix  a  more  or  less  fleeting  impression  of  the
words,  to  be  able  to  express  an  opinion  as  to  the  actual  time
spent  in  putting  things  on  paper.  Sometimes  I  am  aware  that
the  words  are  coming  very  fast,  and  the  appearance  of  the
writing  confirms  the  impression  that  the  speed  was  consider-
able :  but  much  more  often  the  whole  process  is  slow,  and  I
am  unable  to  distinguish  between  slowness  of  apprehension  and
slowness  of  reproduction.  At  first  it  was  usual  for  the  whole
of  each  contribution  to  be  written  consecutively  in  my  own
normal  hand,  varied  only  at  the  conclusion  by  attempts  at
signatures,  or  farewell  words  in  a  somewhat  different  character.
Before  long  a  larger  hand  was  used  occasionally,  apparently
to  draw  attention  to  a  word  or  to  a  change  in  the  nature  of
the  matter  conveyed :  sometimes  this  purpose  is  effected  by
spacing — the  distances  between  words  not  always  being  uniform.
Stops  are  sometimes  but  not  always  inserted ;  it  is  not  un-
common to  find  a  full  stop  marked  only  by  the  use  of  a  capital
letter  for  the  beginning  of  the  next  sentence.  But  occasionally
the  punctuation  is  extremely  careful, — commas,  notes  of  interro-
gation, and  even  inverted  commas  being  used.  In  the  Greek
writing  more  often  than  not  the  accents  are  inserted,  and  the
breathings  almost  invariably ;  but  some  of  the  Greek  writing
is  very  rough,  and  entirely  without  marks,  or  in  uncials,  or
even  in  ordinary  English  letters  for  a  word  or  two.  It  is
not  uncommon  for  the  transition  from  Latin  into  Greek  to  be
effected  through  the  medium  of  a  word  or  two  in  Eoman
character  but  Greek  in  form.  Thus  on  June  27,  1901,
the  script  began :  "  Quid  coerces  nenymon  yo\)]vo)v  pufjuijv"
with  a  little  space  between  the  last  Latin  and  the  first  Greek
word,  and  the  accent  only  on  the  last  Greek  word.  The
rest  of  the  script  was  in  Latin  till  just  at  the  end  when
English  appeared.

Use  of  paragraphs.

After  a  time  the  use  of  spacing  was  extended,  and  para-
graphs occurred,  noticeably  on  Sept. 20, 1901, when  after


22


Chapter  II.


[part


some  attempts  to  give  a  word,  the  script  began  a  fresh
paragraph  with  the  words  "  The  bird  is  nothing  put  it
away."  and  then  returned  to  its  attempts  to  give  a  word.^
Then  a  third  paragraph  began,  "  Non  possum  phxrima  hodie-  "
and  continued  with  remarks  on  the  difficulty  of  writing
in  Latin.  The  use  of  the  paragraph  has  gradually  increased,
and  now  it  is  more  common  than  not  to  have  the  contribution
divided  into  two  or  more  parts  by  means  of  paragraphs.

Capital  letters.  .  ■  '  '■

Capital  letters  first  appeared  on  March  15,  1901,  in  a
supposed  signature,  viz.  "  Pollux  Cappa  docus "  ponet  tigillum."
Capitals  are  also  used  in  efforts  to  give  a  particular
word.  In  the  persistent  effort  made  during  August  and  Sep-
tember 1901  to  write  a  sentence  that  my  husband,  unknown
to  me,  wished  to  have  produced,^  the  word  "  Cock "  constantly
appeared  with  a  capital  and  other  attempts  to  give  the
words  were  often  made  entirely  in  capitals.  The  first  verse
that  appeared  in  the  script  was  in  Greek  capitals ;  it  was
part  of  a  hexameter,  the  last  word  being  spelled  backwards.*
This  is  almost  the  only  occasion  on  which  any  reversal  either
of  the  letters  or  of  their  order  has  been  attempted.  The
absence  of  "  looking-glass  writing "  is  marked.

Size  and  variety  of  loritiag.

The  writing  is  not  always  uniform  in  size,  but  varies  a
little  as  my  normal  writing  does ;  occasionally,  however,  a  large
character  seems  to  be  introduced  for  some  special  object.  This
large  character  is  in  some  cases  just  like  what  my  normal
hand  would  produce  if  I  tried  to  write  a  large  round  hand,
but  sometimes  it  presents  slight  differences.  Sometimes  how-
ever the  handwriting  is  wholly  unlike  my  normal  hand.

The  18  cases  of  this  large  character  may  be  thus  summarised  :
{A)  The  script  occasionally  makes  more  or  less  persistent
efforts  to  give  some  word  or  phrase,  often  quite  unconnected

^  See  App.  p.  356.

2  Where  a  space  occurs  between  two  words  in  the  script  it  is
here  reproduced.

2  See  below,  p.  156.  *  See  p.  64.


LIU.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


23


with  the  context,  and  on  five  occasions  uses  the  larger  handwriting
in  such  a  case.  Thus,  tlie  first  appearance  of  this  kind  was
on  Jan.  29,  1902,  when  without  any  connexion  with  what
had  preceded,  it  wrote  in  a  larger  hand,^  "gentile  no
gentes gens togata  vocat,"  and  went

on  with  further  attempts  to  give  some  Latin  phrase  in  the
ordinary  hand.

(B)  Once  certainly  and  perhaps  twice"  the  larger  hand  marked
an  apparently  meaningless  interpolation;  thus  on  Feb.  12,  1903,
came  in  large  type  the  words,  "And  on  earth
praise"  between  a  remark  about  "  Hodgson "  and  a  de-
scription of  a  locked  box.

(C)  Twice  the  large  type  is  used  in  what  I  have  called  a
"conversation"  reported  by  the  script  (April  3,  1901,  May  31,
1902).3

(D)  Seven  times  a  considerable  portion  of  the  communication
is  written  in  this  larger  hand.  Thus,  on  October  29,  1901,
an  unverifiable  message  was  so  written,  and  on  May  18,  1902,
a  verifiable  and  partly  correct  message  was  so  written.'*

{U)  Twice  a  personal  direction  to  me,  in  the  midst  of  an
attempt  to  convey  a  verifiable  message,  was  conveyed  in  the
large  hand.  Thus,  on  Nov.  25,  1901,  after  an  attempt  to
produce  a  verifiable  handwriting,  unknown  to  me,^  came  the
words  "Leave your hand to m  e."

Four  classes  of  different  writing.

Where  the  handwriting  seems  to  differ  in  type  from  my
normal  hand  the  following  classification  may  be  made :

(a)  3  cases  where  the  writing  is  larger  but  also  different  in
type.  These  closely  resemble  the  cases  mentioned  under  (C)
above.^

(6)  7  cases  where  the  writing  differs  completely  from  my
own,  but  does  not  challenge  identification.

(c)  10  cases  where  attention  is  called  in  the  script  to  differ-
ence of  writing.

1  The  spaced  words  represent  the  larger  hand.

2  On  Jan.  25,  1903,  the  interpolation  may  not  have  been  meaningless.
3 See  below,  p.  68.  *See  \^.  iul.  sgee  p.  126.

6  For  one  of  these,  March  19th,  1902,  see  App.  p.  348.


24


Chapter  II.


[part


{cl)  5  cases  where  a  handwriting  known  to  me  is  imitated,
or  where  the  writing  is  said  to  resemble  that  of  a  person
indicated.

Some  only  of  these  cases  deserve  comment.  Thus,  of  the
cases  classed  under  (/>),  once  (March  31,  1902)  the  unknown
and  evidently  fantastic  handwriting  seems  to  comment  on  what
has  appeared  in  the  earlier  communication,  and  to  show  a
recollection  of  my  dreams  not  usual  in  the  script.^

One  of  the  longest  communications  not  in  my  own  hand
came  on  Feb.  18,  1902,  and  I  have  tried  in  vain  to  verify  the
statements  made  in  it  or  to  discover  its  intention.  After  a
remark  in  Latin  to  the  effect  that  if  only  I  would  listen  all
would  be  plain,  suddenly  in  a  distinctive  handwriting,  not
the  least  like  my  own,  it  went  on :  "  in  this  long  narrow  hand
written  two  centuries  ago  or  more.  Can  you  not  see  who
is  meant  ?  Nevile  is  one  name  Ealph  Nevile,  not  of  Warwick
a  scholar,  not  a  soldier ;  four  square  and  pillars  no  other  at
all  like  it."  Then  in  curious  Latin,  which  I  here  translate :  ^
"  Dining  at  the  king's  table  he  there  fell  asleep.  An  unin-
scribed  slab  covers  his  bonea,  from  his  ashes  broke  forth  a
great  flame  that  created  knowledge.  This  could  certainly
be  ascertained. The  signatory  set  his  name  E.  Nevile."

The  Latin  is  odd  and  not  classical ;  the  word  commensal,
"  sharing  the  table,"  occurs  in  no  Latin  known  to  me ;  erupit,
"  broke  forth,"  is  a  correction  for  the  word  first  written  criint,
"seized";  the  verb  "to  be  known,"  a  very  familiar  one,  is
misspelt,  scieri  for  sciri.  The  suggestion  of  the  story  is  plain,
but  recalls  nothing  to  me.  Some  one,  apparently  Ealph  Nevile,
seems  to  have  died  suddenly  after  supping  with  his  king,  and
to  have  received  scant  honour  in  his  burying.  I  have  failed
to  identify  the  Ealph  Nevile  described.

Another  of  these  cases  is  described  in  detail  below.^  The
handwriting  of  some  words  in  the  script  of  May  8,  1901^
as  noted  at  the  time,  is  not  mine ;  it  is  not  known  to  me
and  does  not  recall  any  writing  that  I  know.  I  subsequently
found  that  very  similar  words  had  been  spoken  in  trance  by
a  sensitive  at  a  distant  place  and  at  approximately  the  same

iFor  script  see  App.  p.  349,  and  for  comment  see  below,  p.  1-53.
-The  script  is  given  iu  the  Appendix  p.  376.  ^See  p.  207.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


25


hour.  It  is  possible  tliat  the  difference  of  handwriting  is
intended  to  separate  these  words  from  the  rest  of  the  script,  to
serve,  in  fact,  the  purpose  of  quotation  marks.

In  one  case,  May  25,  1902,  classified  under  (c),  there  seems
to  be  an  attempt  in  the  script  to  reproduce  not  a  handwriting
but  a  type  of  print  in  a  book  which  it  is  trying  to  describe.
The  paragraph  is  as  follows : "  Maupertuis  and  Sarrasiu

not  the  crop,  these  are  names  in  a  book  together,  a
yellow  book  with  clear  good  print  early  printed — some  one
has  just  read  it  in  a  library  with  slanting  sunlight  over
level  lawns  outside  the  windows.  a  visitor  to  the  house
the  book  is  nearly  square  with  a  wide  margin  and  black
quaint  print  It  lies  open  on  a  table  M  a  u  p  e  r  t  u  y  s
and  again  in  sainte  amour  et  charite
but  the  letters  are  narrower  than  yours."

I  have  not  been  able  to  make  anything  of  this,  and  can
find  no  connexion  between  Maupertuis  and  Sarrasin.  It  is
not  likely  that  any  book  about  either  of  these  persons
should  use  the  type  or  the  language  which  the  script  tries  to
reproduce.

In  seven  other  cases  the  script  claims  that  the  handwriting-
ought  to  be  recognised,  but  so  far  this  has  not  been  done.  In
three  of  these  cases  it  only  remarks  that  the  writing  "  should
help,"  or  uses  some  such  vague  phrase,  and  does  not  say  to  whom
it  should  be  shown.  In  the  other  instances  it  specifies  persons
who  ought  to  recognise  the  hand,  but  these  persons  have  not  been
able  to  throw  any  light  on  the  subject.

In  one  case  (April  27, 1903)^  the  script  produced  a  very  marked
handwriting  quite  unknown  to  me ;  a  writing  which  claimed  to
be  both  described  and  imitated.  As  I  was  writing  by  arrange-
ment at  the  same  time  as  another  friend,  I  sent  her  a  copy  of  the
script  and  found  not  only  that  the  contents  of  the  message  were
in  part  intelligible  to  her,  but  that  the  handwriting  resembled
that  of  a  lady  unknown  to  me,  of  whom  she  had  been  thinking
in  connexion  with  the  subject  of  my  message.  I  noted  at  the
time  that  my  hand  was  cramped  and  uncomfortable  at  first  and
the  pencil  slipped  constantly  till  it  seemed  at  last  right.  When
the  unusual  handwriting  ceased,  the  pencil  went  back  to  its
usual  position.

1  See  p.  174,  for  further  account  of  the  incident.


26


Chapter  II.


[part


The  cases  where  definite  imitations  were  produced  of  hand-
writings known  to  me,  are  as  follows :

(a)  On  Sept.  6,  1902,  after  the  words,  "Wait  for  the  clue
on  the  17th  it  will  come.  Sept.  17th  write  then.  Let  him
have  it  to  see  and  countersign,"  followed  a  passable  imitation
of  Mr.  Piddington's  initials.  To  Mr.  Piddington,  whose  signa-
ture was  familiar  to  me,  accordingly  I  sent  the  script  to
"  countersign."  ^

{/3)  Mr.  Myers.

On  three  occasions  only  has  there  been  any  attempt  to
reproduce  the  writing  of  Mr.  Myers,  a  handwriting  known  to
me  and  exceedingly  characteristic.  On  Feb.  3,  1902,  an  attempt
was  made  to  give  words  described  as  "  the  test,"  but  there  was
no  indication  of  what  was  meant  by  the  test;  on  Jan.  22,  1903,
a  statement — subsequently  shown  to  be  true — about  what  would
be  found  in  the  forthcoming  book  Human  Fcrsonality"  was  made
in  a  handwriting  resembling  that  of  Mr.  Myers :  and  on  July
13,  1904,  a  statement  in  the  same  hand  about  the  contents  of
a  sealed  envelope  said  to  have  been  left  by  Mr.  Myers  with  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  was  subsequently  ascertained  to  be  incorrect.

(7)  Dr.  Sidgwick.

There  has  only  been  one  attempt  to  reproduce  the  writing  of
Dr.  Sidgwick,  on  May  11,  1904,  when  I  was  writing  auto-
matically at  the  rooms  of  the  Society,  20  Hanover  Square.  I
had  begun  to  write,  by  arrangement,  with  several  other  persons
in  the  room,  but  feeling  sleepy  and  not  very  comfortable  in  the
room  with  the  others  I  went  alone  into  the  Library.  There
the  feeling  of  sleepiness  increased  and  I  knew  nothing  further
until  I  was  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of  a  visitor.  The  last
words  written  under  these  circumstances  are  in  a  hand  re-
sembling that  of  Dr.  Sidgwick,  which  was  well  known  to  me,  as
are  also,  thougli  less  so,  some  later  words  produced  after  the
interruption.  The  contents  of  the  script,  which  claim  to  be
verifiable,  have  not  been  found  to  have  any  meaning  or  appro-
priateness.

((5)  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour.

On  Nov.  22  and  25,  1901,  there  was  an  attempt  to  imitate
the  handwriting  and the  signature  of  the  late  Mr.  Francis

iSeep.  81.  2  gee  below,  p.  315.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


27


Maitlaud  Balfour.  I  was  not  acquainted  with  him  and  never
saw  any  writing  of  his  except  a  message  of  three  or  four  words
with  his  signature,  and  that  I  had  not  seen  since  July,  1882.
On  referring  to  the  scrap  of  writing  it  seemed  to  me  that  there
was  some  resemblance  between  the  last  part  of  the  surname
and  the  last  of  the  three  attempts  at  the  signature  in  the
script  of  Nov.  25.  Only  the  initials  of  the  Christian  names
are  on  the  paper  written  by  Mr.  Balfour,  while  the  whole
name  is  given  in  the  script.  I  then  sent  the  original  of
my  script  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that  she  might  compare  it  with
letters  in  her  possession.  She  wrote  to  me  that  though  there
seemed  to  her  to  be  a  superficial  likeness  to  Mr.  Balfour's
writing,  on  comparison  with  his  letters  she  found  none  in
■detail.  The  contents  of  the  script  have  not  been  found
appropriate.

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  imitated  handwritings,  I  should
perhaps  say  that  I  have  normally  no  faculty  whatever  of
reproducing  handwritings.  I  cannot  draw  and  I  am  a  very
clumsy  copyist.  Like  all  visualisers  I  have  a  very  clear  per-
ception of  handwritings  that  I  have  seen,  and  in  thinking  of
things  written  to  me  by  friends  I  "  see  "  them  in  the  character-
istic writing.  I  should  recomise  a  writing  that  I  had  once
known  if  I  had  not  seen  it  for  years.  But  my  attempts  to
copy  and  to  reproduce  from  memory  handwritings  familiar  to
me  have  met  with  no  success.  I  have  no  accurate  or
reproducible  knowledge  of  the  details  of  writings  even  very
familiar,  though  by  visualising  a  word  I  can  often  recall  what
kind  of  letter,  e  or  r  for  instance,  is  made  by  a  person  whose
writing  is  well  known  to  me.

<4)  Inaccuracies.

Throughout  the  script  is  full  of  inaccuracies,  sometimes  of
a  sort  that  might  be  made  by  any  one  writing  rapidly,  or
not  looking  at  the  paper,  but  often  of  a  kind  not  paralleled
in  my  normal  writing.  Of  the  mistakes  in  grammar  and  the
various  linguistic  blunders  in  Latin  and  Greek,  I  shall  later
have  occasion  to  speak ;  I  am  here  referring  to  slight  errors,
slips,  omissions  of  letters,  and  so  on.  These  occur  in  all  the
three  languages,  perhaps  rather  less  frequently  in  the  English


28


Chapter  II.


[part


than  in  the  ancient  languages,  and  are  constantly  of  a  type  that
I  should  not  have  expected  to  find  in  any  normal  writing  of
my  own,  however  hasty.  Dr.  Leaf  and  Mr.  Piddington  appear
as  "  leaf  and  Pitherington " ;  Plato's  Dialogue  is  called  the
"simposium."  "  Lith  hill"  for  "  Leith  Hill,"  "  changs "  for
"  hangs,"  perhaps  belong  to  the  class  of  printer's  errors,  as
do  sprcrare,  eqiUum,  solsituo,  dcii,  pliana,  for  "sperare,  equitum,
solstitio,  dei,  plana,"  but  the  form  diffidlissimum  for  "  difticil-
limum  "  is  not  one  that  I  should  expect  under  any  circumstances
to  write  in  my  own  person.  The  same  sort  of  error  occurs
in  the  Greek  :  thus  ava^eyeiTui,  evidently  meant  as  the  future
tense  of  ava^e^ofxai,  "  he  will  receive  "  ;  6  cro^cppoi',  the  masculine
article  with  the  neuter  form  of  the  adjective ;  and  aoiSai  for
"  poets."  Such  mistakes  occur  throughout,  towards  the  end
where  on  the  whole  the  script  is  much  more  intelligible  than
it  was  at  first,  as  well  as  at  the  beginning.

I  have  looked  through  other  normal  writings  of  my  own
to  see  whether  the  type  of  error  is  the  same  as  in  the  script,
and  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  two  chief  errors  to  which  I
am  normally  liable  seldom  occur  in  the  script.  I  am  apt,
as  I  suppose  is  the  case  with  most  people,  to  omit  a  letter
occasionally,  and  a  word  often,  but  I  can  find  few  traces
of  this  in  the  script ;  it  should,  however,  be  remembered  that
when  the  general  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  obscure,  it  is
not  easy  to  detect  the  unintentional  omission  of  a  word.  But
the  commonest  source  of  error  in  my  normal  writing, — one
to  which  I  have  always  been  disposed,  and  which  occurs  in
type-written  as  well  as  in  hand-written  work, — is  the  omission
of  the  initial  letter  of  a  word ;  this  trick,  which  is  charac-
teristic of  my  normal  self,  under  conditions  of  fatigue  or  haste,
seems  to  be  wholly  wanting  in  the  automatic  writer.

(5)  Meaningless  Intkoductoey  Pheases.

It  is  quite  common  for  the  first  two  or  three  words
written  on  each  occasion  to  have  no  connexion  with  the  rest
of  the  script ;  they  seem  to  serve  as  a  sort  of  start,  while
the  thing,  whatever  it  is,  is  getting  under  way.  It  is  seldom
that  two  or  three  unintelligible  and  disconnected  words  are
found,  except  at  the  beginnings.  I  illustrate  these  disconnected
beginnings  by  random  selections  from  the  script : "  Wensday


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


29


Cover  dale  and  Derwent,"  followed  by  an  intelligible  and
connected  message  (April  24,  1903);  "  Polycept/'  followed  by  a
message  otherwise  consecutive  (March  17,  1903).  A  particularly
clear  piece  of  writing  on  Oct.  7,  1903,  some  of  which  was
evidential,  began  with  the  words  "  the  Burnt  Njal."  I  do
not  mean  to  say  that  this  introductory  nonsense  is  usual,  but
it  is  common ;  the  number  of  times  when  nonsense  of  the  kind
described  prefaces  a  piece  of  script  is  out  of  all  proportion
to  the  total  number  of  disconnected  phrases  in  the  script  as
a  whole.  I  have  not,  in  fact,  found  any  instances  in  the
middle  of  the  script  of  nonsense  parallel  to  those  just  quoted.
When  a  strange  name  or  phrase  occurs  elsewhere  than  at  the
opening,  an  attempt  is  made  to  give  some  explanation  of  it ;
as,  for  instance,  on  Sept.  28,  1901,  the  script  had:

A  s  h  a  r  b  a  1  why  cant  you  get  it  right?  it  sounds  Indian,
it  is  not —  you  can't  hear  it.  Assliarb  all  asher  bell  azure  bell  that's
more  like.

Several  other  cases  of  this  kind  are  to  be  found,  and
some  of  them  occur  at  the  beginning  of  a  piece,  e.g.  on  Feb.
18,  1902,  "  Cucurbito  or  Curculio  neither  is  right
Cur  non  comprehendis  ? ",  but  the  meaningless  introductory
phrases  to  which  I  am  here  referring  seem  to  have  no  context.
A  parallel  is  to  be  found  in  some  experiments  made  by  my
daughter  and  Mr.  Bayfield  in  table  tilting  ^  when  it  was
common  for  the  first  few  words  to  have  no  connexion  with
what  followed,  and  often  to  be  in  a  different  language.  In
the  table  tilting  experiments  this  introductory  rubbish  often
served  to  prevent  the  sitters  from  following  what  was  being
produced  by  the  table,  and  we  usually  found  the  results
better  when  the  attention  of  the  sitters  had  been  distracted.
Possibly  some  similar  object  is  attained  in  the  case  of  the
automatic  writing  by  the  production  of  a  few  words  of  sheer
nonsense  which  serve  to  occupy  the  attention  of  the  conscious
self,  and  so  leave  the  subliminal  self  more  free  to  act.

(6)  Terminal  Phrases.

Certain  formulas  have  a  tendency  to  come  at  the  conclusion
of  a  bit  of  writing,  though in many  other  cases  there  is

1  See  Journal  S.P.R.,  June,  1904.


30


ChajJter  II.


[part


nothing  to  indicate  that  a  conclusion  has  been  reached  except
the  cessation  of  the  impulse  to  write.  Sometimes  a  long  line
is  drawn,  and  then  nothing  further  is  produced,  even  when  I
have  placed  the  pencil  afresh  on  the  paper  and  waited  for
some  time.  Occasionally  the  concluding  remark  will  be  of
the  nature  of  a  farewell,  as  "  vale,"  "  no  more  now,"  and  so
on.  Often  the  communication  terminates  in  the  form  of  a
letter :  "  yours,"  "  tuus,"  followed  by  an  attempt  at  a  signa-
ture ;  sometimes  the  signature  is  lacking  and  the  script  ends
with  "  Tuus  idem,"  or  some  similar  formula.  The  question  of
the  signing  of  the  communications  seems  to  concern  the  nature
of  the  contents  of  the  script  quite  as  much  as  its  form
and  it  is  discussed  below  in  connexion  with  the  different
forms  (letters,  reported  conversations,  etc.)  assumed  by  the
communications.^  Nothing  at  all  parallel  to  the  initiatory
nonsense  is  to  be  found  in  the  termination  of  the  script.  It
is  possible  that  the  occurrence  of  a  short  formula,  such  as
"  satis,"  "  iam  satis,"  "  finis."  serves,  just  as  does  the  drawing
of  a  line,  or  the  affixing  of  quasi-signatures,  to  indicate  to  me
that  the  particular  communication  is  complete,  for,  as  I  have
said,  I  am  almost  always  sufficiently  conscious  of  what  is
being  written  to  follow  a  word  or  two  at  a  time.

(7)  Languages.
Languages  used.

As  already  stated,  English,  Latin,  and  Greek  are  freely
and  apparently  indifferently  employed for  the  communica-
tions, though  possibly  a  careful  analysis  of  the  script  might
show  some  connexion  between  the  language  used  and  the
information  conveyed.  Of  modern  foreign  languages  there  is
hardly  a  trace.  In  the  very  first  piece  of  writing,  quite  unin-
telligible (March  5,  1901),  occurred,  between  two  L?tin  words,
a  German  word,  "  morgenstern,"  in  ordinary  character ;  on
April  3,  1901,  at  the  end  of  a  Latin  communication  came
the  phrase, "  God  a  Dieu," followed  by "  Good  be 'ye "

1  See  p.  73.

-But  see  below  for  possible  distinctions  in  usage  of  these  languages.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Scri^yt.


Bl


and  the  signature  "  tuus " ;  not  another  word  of  either
German  or  French  ^  is  to  be  found  in  the  whole  of  the  306
pieces.  Italian  occurs  in  two  cases;  on  June  30,  1901,  in
the  midst  of  English  comes :  "  The  bird  will  come  I'uccel  di
Dio ; "  and  on  Nov.  5,  1902,  there  is  an  attempt,  recognised
by  the  script,  to  write  Italian :  "  Something  says  Italian  words
to-night,  sempre  cosi  bene  sta  .  it  confuses.  In  tanto
diletto  d'amor."  This  is,  I  think,  easily  accounted  for.  My
husband  was  giving  a  lecture  to  the  Dante  Society  on  the
eveniu"  of  Nov.  5,  1902,  and  we  had  been  talking  about
the  subject  of  his  lecture  for  some  days,  especially  since
Nov.  3,  when  I  had  bought  him  the  small  copy  of  Dante
which  he  was  to  take  to  the  lecture.  I  was  writing  auto-
matically at  6.30  p.m.,  and  no  doubt  my  mind  was  occupied
with  the  lecture  which  was  to  be  delivered  that  evening.
There  are  other  instances  of  the  appearance  in  the  script  of
subjects  which  had  recently  interested  me.'

Setting  aside  then  this  last  case  which  may  be  thus
accounted  for,  there  remain  only  the  three  instances  just
cited  where  modern  foreign  lan^uaoes  are  found,  and  in  no
case  is  any  information  given  or  statement  made  in  them.
As  regards  my  own  acquaintance  in  this  department,  I  should
say  that  without  any  accurate  knowledge  of  Italian  I  read  it
easily,  and  have  read  modern  Italian  novels  as  well  as  Dante
and  Ariosto.  I  have  at  various  times  learnt  a  good  deal  of
Dante  by  heart,  and  many  of  his  phrases  come  easily  into
my  mind  at  a  very  slight  suggestion ;  "  I'uccel  di  Dio "  is
one  which  would  be  likely  to  occur  to  my  normal  mind  at
the  suggestion  of  a  bird  messenger.  German  I  have  known
since  my  childhood,  though  here  again  I  am  no  scholar,  but
I  have  read  it  and  spoken  it  from  time  to  time  for  35
years,  and  when  I  was  first  learning  Greek  I  was  constantly
annoyed  by  the  cropping  up  of  German  words  while  I  was
seeking  for  the  Greek  equivalents  for  English.  French  I
know  well  and  read  as  easily  as  English ; I  speak  it  also,

^The  only  references  to  French  phrases  are  on  Aug.  26,  1903,  when
there  occurs  a  French  motto  in  connexion  with  a  description  of  a  coat
of  arms:  and  on  May  13,  1902,  when  the  words  "  fleur  de  luce"  are
written  in  an  English  description  of  a  coat  of  arms.

-See  p.  139.


32


Chapter  II.


[part


and  indeed  constantly  dream  in  it,  and  speak  it  occasionally
in  sleep.^  In  the  imaginary  conversations  which  I  suppose
most  of  us  hold  with  ourselves  from  time  to  time,  I  am
quite  as  likely  to  use  French  as  English.

It  has  always  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  most  unaccount-
able features  of  this  automatic  writinff  that  French,  which
has  for  me  long  and  deep  associations  of  familiarity  and
sentiment,  should  altogether  fail  to  appear.  I  should  cer-
tainly have  expected  to  find  traces  of  French  in  any  expres-
sion of  my  profounder  feelings.  The  complete  absence  of
such  traces  is  one  of  several  indications  that  the  subliminal
strata  tapped,  so  to  speak,  in  the  automatic  writings  are
not  those  reached  by  the  usual  ways  of  dreaming  or  semi-
conscious thouo'ht.

So  far  as  I  am  aware  there  is  no  trace  of  any  other  modern
language  in  the  script.  I  know  enough  of  Spanish  to  detect
any  attempts  at  it,  but  with  the  exceptions  above  named,
and  a  very  few  unintelligible  collections  of  letters,  which
seem  rather  to  represent  efforts  to  reproduce  a  sound  than
attempts  at  an  unfamiliar  language,  the  whole  of  the  script
is  in  English,  Latin,  or  Greek.  The  English  is  perfectly
normal,  as  far  as  the  vocabulary  and  phraseology  is  con-
cerned, and  calls  for  no  comment.  But  this  is  not  the  case
with  the  classical  languages  employed.  The  Latin  and  Greek
of  the  script  are  at  once  more  fiuent  and  more  faulty  than  my
own ;  the  vocabulary  is  larger,  embracing  words  unknown  to
me  though  often  tolerably  obvious  in  meaning  and  correctly
formed ;  the  grammatical  construction  is  less  strict  than  in
classical  writers,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Latin,  the  whole  turn  of
the  phraseology  is  often  medieval  or  at  least  very  "  late " ;
the  mistakes  are  frequent,  and  often  of  a  type  quite  unlikely
to  be  made  by  myself  ;  in  fact,  the  suggestion,  especially  of
the  Latin,  is  that  the  language  used  is  one  in  which  the
writer  habitually  expresses  himself,  and  is  certainly  not  the
language  of  the  classical  writers  known  to  me.  As  this  ques-
tion of  language  seems  to  be  of  interest,  I  shall  deal  with  it

^  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  speaking  in  my  sleep,  but  when
suddenly  roused  from  a  dream  I  have  found  myself  saying  a
word  or  two,  and  these  are  quite  as  likely  to  be  in  French  as  in
English.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


33


at  some  length,  and  will  preface  my  remarks  by  a  statement
of  my  own  acquaintance  with  both  classical  languages.

Antecedent  hiowleclge  of  Latin  and  Greek.

For  something  more  than  three  years  before  February  1880,
I  worked  steadily  at  both  Latin  and  Greek,  reading  the  usual
classical  authors,  and  learning  to  "  compose "  in  Greek  and
Latin  prose  and  Greek  iambic  verse ;  Latin  verse  I  did  not
attempt.  Since  then  I  have  been  constantly  occupied  in
reading  and  in  teaching  both  languages,  but  up  to  the  time
when  the  automatic  writing  began,  I  had  read  very  little
outside  the  somewhat  restricted  range  of  "  classical "  authors.
The  only  exceptions  were,  in  Greek,  besides  the  Gospels,  the
Meditations  of  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus,  which  I  knew
well,  and  the  Latin  version  of  the  Dc  Imitatione,  which
came  into  my  hands  long  after  I  was  intimately  acquainted
with  the  English  version,  and  which  I  read  but  discarded  in
favour  of  the  more  familiar  book.  I  have  never  read  the
Vulgate,  or  any  Latin  prayers  or  hymns,  nor  till  quite
recently  ^  had  I  read  any  Christian,  medieval,  or  Eenaissance
Latin  writers,  except  a  few  pages  of  the  Colloquies  of  Erasmus,
when  I  was  first  learning  Latin.

I  did  not  continue  to  practise  writing  either  language  for  more
than  a  short  time  after  the  Tripos  Examination  in  1880,  though
I  have  had  considerable  experience  in  looking  over  elementary
Greek  and  Latin  prose,  and  some  seven  years  ago  worked
through  an  elementary  Latin  verse  composition-book  with  a
view  to  teaching  the  rudiments.  I  have  never  been  familiar
enough  with  the  art  of  composition  in  Greek  to  practise  it  for
pleasure,  but  there  were  a  few  weeks,  twenty  or  more  years
ago,  when  I  was  in  the  habit  of  writing  little  notes  to  a  friend
in  Latin  for  the  amusement  of  describing  in  classical  epistolary
style  the  common  events  of  daily  life.

Proportion  and  Intention  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  script.

The  first  21  pieces  of  script  are  wholly  in  Latin,  though  an
occasional  word  or  phrase  in  Greek  occurs ;  in  the  next  seven

1  The  dates  of  my  reading  of  the  Neo-Platonists  and  other  late
classical  writers  are  given  when  that  subject  is  discussed.  Allusions
to  Neo-PIatonic  phraseology  in  the  script  occurred  before  I  read
those  writers.

C


34


Chapter  II.


[part


there  are  sentences  in  English,  but  the  greater  part  is
still  in  Latin ;  after  that  English  begins  to  be  freely  used,
but  Latin  is  by  no  means  abandoned,  being  used  in  186  of
the  306  bits  of  script.  It  has  been  less  used  in  the  later
than  in  the  early  writings;  it  is  found  in  88  out  of  the
first  100  pieces  of  writing,  but  the  later  percentage  is  not
so  high,  and  in  the  more  recent  writings  the  main  portion
is  apt  to  be  in  English  with  only  short  remarks  in  Latin,
thus  reversing  the  earlier  proportions.  But,  though  it  is  now
not  common  for  a  whole  communication  to  be  in  Latin,  that
language  still  seems  to  be  used  as  a  relief,  after  a  difficulty
has  been  experienced  in  saying  something  in  English,  as  if
the  Latin  came  more  easily^  than  any  other  language.  This
I  suppose  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  first  communications
came  in  Latin,  so  suggesting  to  my  subliminal  self  that  Latin
is  the  best  medium  of  communication.  But  this  does  not
explain  why  Latin  was  used  for  those  first  writings.

From  the  time  of  its  first  appearance,  on  March  11,  1901,
Greek  has  continued  to  appear  in  the  script,  but  it  does  not
occupy  anything  like  so  large  a  space  as  Latin.  The  pieces
which  contain  it  are  fewer,  and  the  remarks  in  Greek  are
shorter.  Greek,  in  fact,  does  not  appear  to  be  regularly  used
like  the  other  two  lan!:fuaQ;es  as  a  means  of  communication,
but  rather  in  a  special  way.  Out  of  the  306  pieces  113
contain  Greek,  and  there  seems  no  tendency  to  increase  or
diminish  "its  use;  for  it  is  found  in  40  of  the  first  100  bits
of  writing,  in  39  of  the  next  hundred,  and  in  34  in  the  last
106,  thus  showing  only  a  small  diminution,  which  may  be
accidental.  There  is  no  communication  wholly  in  Greek.  In
many  cases  Greek  is  used  to  convey  philosophical  or  quasi-
philosophical  sentiments  ;"  it  is  also  frequently  used  in  messages
referring  to  symbolism  connected  with  the  Greek  letter  Sigma.
Another  group  of  contributions  in  which  Greek  appears  is  that
in  which  an  effort  was  beino;  made  to  give  a  sentence  which
was  the  subject  of  an  experiment  of  my  husband's  unknown  to
me  ;  as  the  words  which  he  wished  to  convey  were  Greek,  the
appearance  of  Greek  in  the  attempts  to  guess  these  words  is

1  On  more  than  one  occasion  it  is  stated  in  the  script  that  Latin
is  easier.

2  See  below,  p.  12.5.


liil]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


35


probably  not  accidental.^  In  poetic  or  highly-coloured  descrip-
tions in  Latin,  the  script  is  very  apt  to  break  into  Greek
for  a  word  or  two,  and  there  are  three  or  four  attempts  at
Greek  verse.^  On  two  occasions  at  least  a  statement  which
seems  to  have  evidential  value  is  given  in  Greek,  once,  on
Jan.  ol,  1902,  in  that  language  combined  with  Latin.  Speak-
ing generally,  then,  it  seems  as  if  a  reason  could  be  given
in  many  cases  for  the  use  of  Greek,  or  at  least  as  if  the
instances  where  Greek  was  used  could  be  classified  without
much  difficulty.

This  is  by  no  means  the  case  with  the  Latin.  I  am  not
able  to  make  any  distinction  between  the  use  of  Latin  and
English ;  both  are  used  for  the  personal  remarks  apparently
addressed  by  way  of  encouragement  or  reproach  to  rae,^  and
also  for  the  communication  of  what  are  claimed  as  facts,
whether  verifiable  and  verified  or  not.  In  the  beginning
English  seemed  to  be  more  often  used  for  such  statements.
Thus  several  attempts  at  a  message  about  a  pamphlet
which  was  to  be  given  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  came  in
English  in  the  midst  of  the  Latin,  which  was  at  that  time
the  normal  language  of  the  script.  On  the  other  hand,
the  first  description  of  an  incident  capable  of  verification,
and  subsequently  ascertained  to  be  correct*  (May  11,  1901),
was  in  Latin.  On  the  whole  it  may  be  said  that  for
some  considerable  time  it  was  the  habit  of  the  script  to
begin  in  Latin,  and  after  some  statements  in  English  to  con-
clude in  Latin,  but  this  habit  was  constantly  broken,  and  in  the
later  writings  it  is  quite  common  for  the  process  to  be  reversed.
The  more  poetical  passages,  including  pieces  resembling  descrip-
tions of  classical  "  Isles  of  the  Blest,"  are  apt  to  be  in  Latin
when  they  are  not  in  Greek,  though  even  here  the  rule  is  not  of
universal  application,  one  of  the  most  definite  attempts  to  describe
some  such  place  ^  (Aug.  8,  1903),  being  in  English,  after  a  pre-
liminary start  in  Greek  followed  by  three  words  in  Latin,
while  another  highly  coloured  description  (May  29,  1903)
which  began  in  Latin  went  on  to  Greek,  and  after  returning
to  Latin  concluded  in  English.*^  In  fact  it  is  difticult  at
present  to  make  any  generalisation.

iSee  p.  156.  2  gee  p.  63.  3  gee  p.  88.

4  See  p.  328.  5  See  p.  117.  6  gee  p.  116.


36


Chapter  II


[part


Philological  Peculiarities  in  Latin  and  Greek.

As  I  have  already  said,  the  vocabulary  and  phraseology
as  well  as  the  grammatical  construction  of  the  ancient  languages
used  in  the  script  are  not  such  as  I  should  myself  employ  if  I
were  deliberately  writing  those  languages.  The  following  illus-
trations are  taken  chiefly  from  Latin,  as  some  of  the  peculiarities
of  the  Grreek  seem  to  be  due  to  the  nature  of  the  communica-
tions themselves ;  where,  for  instance,  the  ideas  conveyed  are
those  of  the  later  Greek  philosophers,  it  is  natural  that  the
language  used  should  be  unfamiliar  to  the  classical  vocabulary.

Words  non-existent  and  unintelligihle.

A  considerable  number  of  words  occur  which  are  not  extant,
and  the  meaning  of  which  is  not  obvious  either  from  the
context  or  the  form.  Many  of  these  are  probably  pure  inven-
tions, but  some  of  them  are  used  with  a  curious  persistence
even  after  investigation  has  shown  that  they  have  no
existence.  To  the  class  of  pure  rubbish  belong  no  doubt
capricornatam^  Arturocampus,  texiculae,  spargedulis,  clargedula,
eledryosunen.  Roscidulo  rare  has  a  sort  of  meaning,  but  I  can
see  no  reason  for  the  pretty  constant  use  of  saepedido  for
saepc  (often),  other  than  a  preference  for  diminutive  forms,
which  is  elsewhere  manifested  by  the  script.  A  certain  mean-
ing can  be  seen  in  the  words  ccdigraphus  calligraphiam  posuit,
though  the  "  good  writer "  seems  doubtful  of  his  spelling,  and
the  signature  which  he  appended  after  saying  that  it  was  for
me  to  interpret,  tu  interpretare  [sic]  dehes,  and  which  consisted
of  a  capital  S  and  a  spiral,  was  described  in  the  odd  words
helix  vcl  helicemorphistikos — LahyrinthiTcos  vel  involute,  which
seem  to  be  various  quaint  and  non-classical  ways  of  saying
"  curly."

Words  non-existent  hnt  intelligihlc.

The  curious  words  produced  by  the  script  in  its  attempts
to  give  three  Greek  words  chosen  by  my  husband  for  the
purpose of experiment are discussed later.- Other  words

1  This  occurs  near  the  beginning  of  a  piece  of  script  and  may  be
a  meaningless  introductory  phrase,  see  above  p.  28.

2  See  p.  156.


LIII.]


Foi^m  and  Style  of  Script.


37


unknown  to  any  classical  dictionary  and  inexplicable  where
they  stand,  though  not  without  suggestions  of  meaning,  are
dcropliil,  monoecist,  monoicus,  lUmjo-iKaKo? ;  magicliorclvs  seems  to
be  equivalent  to  magus ;  hagiologus,  a  "  speaker  of  holy  things,"
or  more  probably  "  writer  of  histories  of  saints,"  is  twice  used,
the  second  passage  showing  an  unmistakeable  reminiscence  of
the  iirst. Thus  on  May  23,  1901,  the  script  had:

Accomplishment  is  better  than  success.  Do  you  see  ?  Note  all
you  get.  The  hour  is  important,  agnus  dei  cum  cruce  eburneo.  put
it  down.  Manifold  uses  are  there  for  us  all.  Dominans  in  vipa,
stetit  hagiologus. Crede  experto.*

On  Dec.  4,  1902,  the  script  began  "Manifold  uses  are  there
for  us  all,  look  back  at  that  hagiologus  is  an
important  word."  But  I  can  find  no  connexion  between  the
two  passages,  and  no  sense  in  either.  Another  word  pro-
duced after  considerable  effort  is  fxeyepyda-TuXov  (Feb.  2,
1904),  which  I  suppose  might  mean  a  "large  Labour  prison,"
and  seems  from  the  context  to  have  some  such  sense.
e(pe\KV(TTiK6v  is  used  apparently  in  the  sense  of  "  dragged
after,"  a  non-classical  and  I  should  think  impossible  sense.
-TrpoaeWrjvi'CeLv  is  another  odd  word,  which  may  be  variously
divided  and  interpreted.^  ecnrepaXeiv,  an  impossible  Greek
word,  which  seems  to  be  formed  on  a  false  analogy  with
the  Latin  ves2Kmsco,  "  to  grow  evening,"  appears  to  be  used
in  the  sense  "  to  stay  out  in  the  evening."  (jL'yfj.aToeL^e^,^
which  first  appeared  as  o-cpiy/uaToeiSeg,  is  perfectly  intelligible
and  regularly  formed  though  it  does  not  as  a  fact  exist.

Words  iised  in  specicd  senses.

In  some  cases  words  of  a  vague  or  even  an  inappropriate
meaning  appear  to  be  used  in  some  special  sense.  Such  is  the
use  of  mansitetudinem,  "gentleness,"  which  on  May  11,  1901,
seems  to  be  applied  to  some  material  object ;  a  paper  is  said
to  have  been  placed  in  a  box  and  over  it  a  mansuetudo
which  is  to  be  lifted  off. The  word  sxipellex,  "  furniture,"  is

*  Trans.  "Lamb  of  God  with  cross  of  ivory.  .  .  .  Ruling  on  the
shore  stood  the  hagiologus. Believe  one  who  knows."

t  Trans. "  Sigma  shaped."

7rpo9  and  "EXXijv  or  rrpo  and  "EeXipn].


38


Chapter  II.


[part


constantly  used  in  a  sense  evidently  thought  by  the  script  to
be  quite  definite ;  it  appears  to  be  some  piece  of  furniture
capable  of  containing  an  object,  possibly  a  paper  of  importance.
Thus  on  May  31,  1901,  after  a  reference  to  the  passage
in  the  Symposium}  Diotima  gave  the  chic,  it  goes  on,  Fascines
vcl  fasces  in  supellcctili,  apparently  meaning  "  a  bundle  in  a
piece  of  furniture,"  adding  that  a  happy  thought  is  concealed  in
the  Latin  tongue.  On  another  occasion,  March  2,  1902,  the
mysterious  remark  occurs  Snpclleetilem  ero  eedo,  "  I  give  the
supellex  to  its  master  (?),"  i.e.  "  abandon  it  (?),"  and  as  the  next
remark  tells  me  not  to  take  useless  things  for  useful,  the  sug-
gestion here  may  be  that  sujkUcx,  as  occasionally  in  Latin,  is
used  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  "  superfluities."  But  on  October
9,  1902,  Purpur  regale  in  samite  odorijicatum,  "scented  purple
in  fine  linen "  (or  some  such  thing),  is  said  to  be  in  a  supellex,
and  immediately  afterwards  follows  what  seems  to  be  a  trans-
lation, purple  hut  not  fine  rcdment  lying  in  a  chest,  it  gleams
and  a  scent  is  there.  But  the  word  "  chest "  does  not  seem
always  to  fit  supellex,  and  moreover  there  is  an  obvious  word
for  chest  (cista),  apparently  not  unknown  to  the  script,  as  the
diminutive  cistela  (sic)  is  used.  On  Jan.  18,  1903,  I  am
directed  (apparently)  to  lift  up  a  supellex  "  in  the  middle  and
find  what  is  underneath,"  Swpcllcctilcm  in  medio  leves  quod
suhter  est  invenies,  and  a  few  days  later,  Jan.  25,  just  before  a
passage  unmistakeably  referring  to  the  quotation  from  the
Symp)osiicm  and  also  to  a  locked  box,  come  the  words,  supellex
is  the  nearest  word,  interpret  that.  Finally  on  March  17,  1903,
after  speaking  of  a  writing-table  with  a  key  in  its  drawer,  the
script  with  some  anger  says  that  constant  repetition  is  annoying,
that  I  am  to  take  the  key,  and  break  the  "  supellex  "  if  I  can-
not otherwise  manage,  Exaeerhat  repetitio  prineipni — cape  clavem.
Supellectilcm  /range  si  aliter  non  posses.

So  much  for  the  use  of  the  word  s^ipellex,  which  remains
entirely  unexplained.  Another  curious  word  which  seems  to
be  connected  with  a  missing  or  important  paper  is  the  word
jaltela,  to  which  I  can  attach  no  meaning  at  all.  In  form  it
seems  to  suggest  a  badly  Latinised  '  fauteuil,'  but  I  can  find
no  such  word,  and  as  '  fauteuil '  is  apparently  of  German  origin,
'  faldstuhl,'  there  is  not  likely  to  be  any  Latin  word,  such  as

iSee  pp.  .310-318.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


39


faltela,  even  in  medieval  Latin.  The  word  occurs  three  times
in  the  script.  On  April  14,  1901,  something  is  said  to  have
been  placed  in  a  faltela  at  Pratio's — posuit  ([uod  ootid  in  faltela
apiid  Fratio^mn— and  as  several  attempts  to  give  a  '  test  word '
follow  this  remark  it  seems  as  though  a  faltela  were  some-
thing that  could  contain  a  paper.  On  the  next  occasion  it  is
connected  with  the  placing  of  a  paper  in  a  chest ;  ^  after
saying  that  the  removal  of  the  mcmsuetvclo  will  reveal  the
paper,  it  adds  Faltela  inest,  "  the  faltela  is  inside."  On
May  26,  1901,  in  a  most  unintelligible  passage  come  the
words  in  faltela  stat.  rccludcre,  "  it  is  in  the  faltela,  open  it."
These  three  passages  of  the  script  suggest  that  the  word  may
be  intended  to  mean  '  envelope,'  but  there  seems  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  word  actually  exists,  and  the  language  of
the  script  in  these  early  days  is  so  obscure  that  it  is  useless
to  attempt  to  interpret  a  word  for  which  it  is  the  sole
authority.  On  the  other  hand  some  of  the  early  writings
have  proved  less  irrelevant  than  seemed  at  first,  so  that  I
have  thought  it  worth  while  to  collect  together  the  passages
where  these  unknown  words  are  used,  in  the  hope  that  some
light  may  appear  where  now  all  is  darkness.

There  are  further  a  few  cases  of  words  apparently  used  in  a
special  sense,  though  they  have  so  many  possible  meanings
that  it  cannot  be  decided  with  certainty  what  is  intended  by
their  use  in  the  script.  For  instance,  repeated  injunctions  are
to  be  found  for  the  application  of  processes  described  as
destringere, — nexerc, — superponere,  to  the  words  of  the  script ;
in  particular  it  is  constantly  urged  that  if  some  words  were
taken,  sume,  and  some  process  of  superposition  were  then
applied,  siqoeopone,  sense  would  be  seen  where  now  there  is
apparent  nonsense.  But  no  definite  directions  have  ever  been
given  as  to  this  process  of  superposition,  and  the  later  writ-
ings contain  few  references  to  it.

Unusual  Constructions.

Besides  the  above  described  use  of  odd  words  the  gram-
matical construction  presents  peculiarities.  The  most  noticeable
of  these  is  a  frequent  use  of  the  infinitive  instead  of  the
imperative,  a  usage  not  unknown  in  classical  Greek  but  rare,

^  See  preceding  page.


40


Chapter  II.


[part


and  not  known  as  far  as  I  am  aware  in  classical  Latin.  Tu
modo  iMticntiare  is  an  odd  way  of  saying  in  Latin,  "  only  be
patient "  ;  tempus  adnotare  appears  the  next  day  for  "  note  the
hour."  Nor  should  I  have  written  ^(^pria-dac  ixovov  pw  avfj.-
TrXaa-aeip  aei  tu  wcravTW?  eyovTa,  whatever  I  had  meant  to
express.  The  imperative  is  also  used  by  the  script  in
both  languages,  in  Greek  more  often  than  the  other  construc-
tion, but  in  Latin  it  seems  a  matter  of  indifference  which  is
employed.  Thus  on  June  23,  1901,  roga  in  ipistulis  is  followed
almost  immediately  by  notare  dievi,  and  on  Nov.  22,  1901,
the  order  is  reversed :  Hodic  committere  aliquid  chartae  time —
resjjice  p>ostero  die  tunc  interpretationcm  bene  invcnies.  Here
the  obvious  intention  is  to  give  directions  that  (1)  something
is  to  be  set  on  paper,  and  (2)  that  something  on  the  paper  is
to  be  looked  at,  though  whether  the  examination  is  to  be  noio
of  something  already  written  (look  back  at  yesterday's)  or  is
to  be  subscqtccntly  of  what  is  now  written  (write  to-day,  look
back  next  day)  is  uncertain.  In  any  case  there  seems  no
reason  for  distinguishing  between  the  two  injunctions,  and
throughout  the  script  a  careful  study  of  both  constructions
has  not  enabled  me  to  discover  any  distinction  in  their  use.
Nor  has  the  irregular  construction  ceased  to  appear  with  the
.  development  of  the  writing;  on  June  8,  1904,  it  is  used  in
what  seems  to  be  a  prayer,  0  tu  qui  speni  nostram  informasti,
patie7itiam  insupcr  praebcre  tuis  tibi  eonjitcntibus,  "  0  thou  who
didst  give  us  hope,  give  patience  also  to  those  who  trust  in
thee.''

Crabbed.  Style.

Another  characteristic  of  the  Latin  is  perhaps  rather  a
question  of  style  than  syntax,  and  consists  in  a  condensation
and  brevity  which  make  interpretation  difficult.  This  is  more
marked  in  the  earlier  writings.  In  many  of  these  cases  I  often
failed  to  see  any  sense  at  all,  though  other  persons  subsequently
discovered  a  meaning  which  was  then  apparent  to  me.  It  is,  I
suppose,  possible  that  the  crabbed  style  and  obscurity  may  be
useful  in  disguising  the  intention  from  me  during  the  act  of
writing,  and  so  giving  a  more  free  hand  to  the  subliminal  self.
Instances  of  this  crabbedness  of  construction  are,  on  March
14, 1901, consolator dux  fidci nee unqnam  caret  quotiens


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


41


cliscerpitur  placet  ne  ?  There  was  no  punctuation  till  the  ?,
but  the  words  were  spaced  as  above  represented.  It  may  be
interpreted :  "  The  consoler  is  the  guide  to  faith,  and  faith  is  not
wanting,  if  the  words  are  taken  to  pieces ;  are  you  satisfied  ? "
Had  I  wished  to  express  such  a  sentiment  I  should  have  been
incapable  of  putting  it  in  such  a  form.  Again,  the  following
sentence,  at  first  sight  quite  unintelligible,  appears  to  have
a  meaning,  but  is  certainly  not  the  way  in  which  I  can
conceive  myself  expressing  the  idea :  Communicatio  ptrosit
neculiae  necopinato  ubi  valetudo  desit.  This  may  mean,
"  Communication  may  be  of  use  unexpectedly  in  a  sleepless
night  when  you  axe  not  well."

■  Allusions  to  fctbles.

Such  crabbed  sentences  occur  much  more  frequently  in  the
earlier  writings,  where  also  are  to  be  found  several  curious
phrases  which  seem  to  be  allusions  to  fables  or  stories
altogether  unknown  to  me.  For  instance,  on  March  30,  1901,
grassidator  petivit  carnificern  auribus  istis  non  comprcnsus  fcd)idam.
I  do  not  know  what  a  grassidator  is,  and  can  only  suppose
carnifex  to  be  butcher.  ^Vho  sought  or  hit  the  butcher  I  am
unable  to  say,  and  so  am  in  the  same  position  as  that  of  the
person,  whoever  it  was,  who  with  "those  ears  of  his(?)"  did
"  not  understand  (?)  the  story."  The  next  day  there  is  again  a
perfectly  unintelligible  allusion  to  some  "  smiling  sisters,"
followed  by  the  word  Aesojn,  which  suggests  that  an  acquaint-
ance with  Esop's  fables  might  be  of  service,  but  I  have
not  been  able  to  trace  these  ladies.  On  April  7,  1901,  again,
Favx  cecinit  griphoni  gryllus  manco  (a  phrase  capable  of  trans-
lation if  the  third  word  is  read  as  two,  gripho  ni,)  seems
hardly  likely  to  have  been  produced  by  a  fortuitous  juxta-
position of  letters  or  sounds,  but  can  only  be  interpreted  by
the  recognition  of  some  allusion  which  escapes  me — "  The
voice  speaks  in  a  riddle  if  the  cricket  (or  possibly  '  little
pig ') did not speak to the maimed." Animals  ^ play  a

1  For  the  bird  which  occurs  frequently  at  first  see  below  (p.  328),
but  some  of  the  allusions  to  animals  preceded  the  successful  hit
with  the  bird,  which  probably  accounts  for  the  later  appearances
of  the  avis.


42


Chapter  II.


[part


considerable  part  in  the  early  writings:  on  April  20,  1901,  we
have  aloiJcx  non  sine  vulture  in  Monte  Citorio,  pes  manco,  "  a
fox  and  a  vulture  upon  Monte  Citorio  a  foot  to  the  lame,"
another  allusion  to  the  maimed  of  April  7  (above).  This  may
mean  that  interpretation  would  be  helped  by  the  recognition
of  the  fox  and  vulture  on  Monte  Citorio.  But  I  can  make
nothing  of  these  animals.  Bomhux  in  vacuo,  "  a  silkworm  in  an
empty  space,"  on  April  24,  1901,  may  be  a  description  of  the
script  itself  and  its  misplaced  ingenuity,  and  is  a  modification,  I
take  it,  of  the  phrase  honibinans  in,  vacuo,  "  buzzing  in  a  vacuum."

Poetical  Phraseology.

A  considerable  list  might  be  made  of  words  or  phrases  in
Latin  or  Greek  which  suggest  poetical  or  literary  associations
though  they  are  not  reproductions  of  classical  expressions.
Some  of  these  occur  in  descriptions  of  glorified  and  unfamiliar
scenery,  which  are  discussed  later,  but  it  will  be  convenient  to
comment  on  the  actual  oddities  of  phrase  here.  In  some  cases
these  poetical  or  high-flown  phrases  occur  in  no  connexion  which
accounts  for  them,  and  where  they  are  of  a  type  quite  unlikely
to  be  used  by  my  normal  self,  I  have  noted  them  among  philo-
logical peculiarities.  The  first  complete  poetical  phrase  of  this
type  occurred  on  March  21,  1901  :  mox  adveniet  lux  chalcidica
inviolabilis.  It  is  not  easy  to  translate  this  phrase,  as  the
meaning  is  conveyed  by  allusion  rather  than  statement.  The
"  inviolate  light  of  the  Sibyl "  that  will  "  shortly  come "  sug-
gests rather  than  says  that  I  may  look  before  long  for  a
meaning  in  the  obscure  utterances  of  the  script.  The  reader
must  take  my  word  for  it,  that  the  rolling  phrase  with  its
far-fetched  allusion  to  Virgil's  Sibyl, ^  whose  home  was  by  the
'  Chalcidian  height '  of  Cumae,  is  not  one  that  would  occur  to
me  naturally.  So  too  on  June  27,  1901,  I  was  surprised  to
find  that  my  pencil  had  written  "  Quid  coerces  nenymon  'ya\}]vu)v
pixiluLi]v ; "  *  and  a  little  later  in  the  same  script  "  velociter
currit  alatus  pes,  vehementior  rota, ocissime autem  nuntius

*  Trans.  "  Why  dost  thou  hold  back  the  might  of  the  windless
calms  1  "

1  See  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  17,  "  Chalcidicaque  levis  tandem  super  adstitit
arce."


LIU.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


43


dei  alipes  super  maria  volitans."  The  phrase  vtjvejuwv  yaXi'jpcov
recurs  in  the  script,  and  seems  to  form  part  of  an  attempt
to  recall  a  passage  in  the  Symposmm}  but  there  is  nothing
in  that  dialogue,  or  in  any  of  the  other  classical  passages
where  the  phrase  "  windless  calm "  is  found,  to  suggest  the
rest  of  the  sentence  as  given  in  the  script;.  Nor  have  I
found  any  parallel  for  this  use  of  coercco,  "  to  hold  back,"
equivalent  to  the  Greek  icareyeLv,  nor  does  the  Greek  phrase
KUTeyeLv  pwfx}-iv  occur  in  classical  writers.  The  word  cdipcs,
though  intelligible,  is  not  extant,  and  I  know  of  no  passage
where  a  wheel  is  used  as  an  emblem  of  speed ;  a  hoof  or
a  wing  would  be  the  more  likely  symbol  before  the  days
of  railway  trains,  bicycles  and  motor  cars.

More  than  one  linguistic  curiosity  occurs  at  the  conclusion
of  the  script  of  May  16,  1902,  this  time  all  in  Greek:

Aloi'cratos  jj-ovdiK-i-j  y^pq-o.i.  err—epa^eis,  (1)  Kopq  ;  Kai  OapOovcriv
vaKivdoi  yXav^  Kal  avTi]  cf^povSos  ''jS'/-  o.p,f3poa-n]  re  vv^  irri  apfiari
(jjoirar  no  a  word  wrong' — somewhere.  Put  it  right  ask  him
which.

The  translation  would  seem  to  be :  "  Musaeus  uses  music ;
dost  loiter  in  the  evening,  0  maid  ?  even  the  hyacinths  sleep ;
and  the  owl  herself  has  now  vanished.  Ambrosial  night  is
wandering  on  her  car."  There  is  more  than  a  word  wrong ;
SapdovQ-i  seems  to  be  a  false  present  for  SapOdpovcri,  and  there  is
no  authority  for  ea-Trepa'i^eip,^  but  the  general  sense  would  seem
to  be  as  above.  It  is  possible  that  Sapdoucri  ^  is  a  form  of
SpaOova-i,  the  dative  of  the  aorist  participle,!  but  no  form
except  eSpaOoi/  seems  to  have  been  in  classical  use.  Both
words  are  poetical.  The  whole  passage  in  fact  suggests
poetry  rather  than  prose,  but  contains  no  reminiscence  that
I  can  trace  of  any  particular  Greek  original.

*  Trans.  "  Swiftly  runs  the  winged  foot,  more  violently  the  wheel,
but  fastest  of  all  the  wing-footed  messenger  of  the  god  flitting  over
the  seas."

j  Trails. "There  are  hyacinths  for  the  sleepers."
iSee  p.  313.

-  It  is  uncertain  whether  the  original  has  <^wTa  or  (^otra.

3 See  above,  p.  37.  ''Note  that  the  word  has  no  accent.


44


Chapter  IT.


[part


On  Jan.  18,  1903,  in  the  description  of  a  supposed  "Isle  of
the  Blest  "  occurs  the  phrase  tto)/  re  evavOe/uLw  "  with  fair  flowered
grass."  The  phrase  though  intelh'gible  is  unfamiliar  to  me ;
TToa  is  the  regular  word  for  grass  or  a  meadow,  other  forms
of  the  word  being  ttoo/  and  iroia,  but  the  form  in  the  script,
TTot],  does  not  seem  to  be  used.  eudpOe/no^  appears  to  be
twice  used  in  classical  writers  ;  by  both  Pindar  and  Meleager
it  is  applied  to  the  bloom  of  young  manhood.

A  very  curious  expression  occurs  on  Feb.  20,  1903,  a/xa-
puvOiuov  SeiXap,  "  the  bait  of  immortality."  The  common  word
for  bait  is  SeXeap,  but  Callimachus,  I  find,  uses  the  form  SelXap
in  fragment  475.  aiuLdpav9o<;  means  "unfading,"  "undying,"  and
the  form  used  in  the  script  is  a  perfectly  possible  one,  though
it  does  not  as  a  fact  exist.  The  combination  of  the  two
words  is  entirely  unknown  to  me.

In  another  passage  occurs  the  phrase  Kpua-TaWoTnjKToi  irayai,
which  apparently  means  "  frozen  founts  " ;  I  have  not  found  the
phrase  elsewhere,  nor  do  the  words  for  "  dark  shore,"  clkti]
Kvaperj,  used  in  the  same  script,  occur  in  any  Greek  poetry
known  to  me,  though  they  very  well  might.

In  another  place,  Aug.  8,  1903,  the  original  word  avro-n-i]^
occurs,  apparently  meaning  "  self-frozen  "  or  "  self-fixed."  It  is
formed  no  doubt  on  the  analogy  of  KpuarraXKoTrri^,  an
Aeschylean  word.  The  word  KpuardWivov  is  used  in  the
same  script,  which  represents  an  attempt  at  Greek  iambic
verse.

On  July  3,  1903,  a  word  is  invented,  SeSd^erai,  evidently
intended  to  have  the  same  meaning  as  SapSaTrreiv.  It  appar-
ently forms  part  of  a  verse  which  is  not  given  completely.^

Original  Mon- Classical  Phrases.

Another  class  of  unusual  expressions  might  be  made  con-
sisting of  phrases  intelligible  as  they  stand,  though  not  classical,
and  either  invented  or  adapted  for  the  purpose  in  hand.
Among  these  may  be  noticed  the  following :

(1)  On  May  27,  1901,  in  an  account  of  a  fire  given  in
more  fluent  Latin  than  I  should  have  had  at  command  had
I  wished  to  describe  such  a  scene,  the  arrival  of  the  fire
engine  was  described. This  would  have  presented  great  diffi-

1  See  below,  p.  63.


LIII.]


Form  and  Style  of  Script.


45


culties  to  me,  and  I  suppose  I  should  have  said  something
about  a  macJmia,  or  tried  to  find  some  sort  of  halista  that
could  throw  water.  But  the  script  was  bolder  and  wrote :
tandem  advenit  ficscator  magno  equtum  [sic]  sonitu,  "  at  last
came  the  Darkener  with  a  great  sound  of  horsemen."  The
words  are  plain  enough,  but  not  such,  I  think,  as  would
have  occurred  to  any  writer  of  normal  Latin  prose.  The
word  fiLscator  is  used  in  poetry,  and  once  only ;  it  is
applied  by  Lucan,  Pharsalia,  4.  66,  to  the  storm  wind  which
brings  up  the  black  clouds  and  darkens  the  blue  sky.  It
would  certainly  never  have  occurred  to  me  to  describe  the
arrival  of  the  galloping  horses  with  the  fire-engine  in  any
such  way  as  this.^

(2)  On  Feb.  2,  1903,  the  script  began  with  the  words:
"  Cunabula  cum  narthece  ceromatico  possidet  infantem  deum,"
and  continued  with  phrases  suggesting  a  liturgical  fragment  and
ceremonies  appropriate  to  a  non-Protestant  ritual,  or  at  least
reminiscent  of  such  a  ritual.  The  general  intention  of  the
passage  is  elsewhere  discussed  ^  ;  here  we  are  concerned  only
with  the  unusual  words  in  the  opening  phrase.  Cimabula
evidently  means  a  cradle,  though  there  is  no  authority  for  the
use  of  the  plural  in  this  sense ;  the  script  apparently  thinks
cunahula  a  feminine  singular,  but  that  may  be  simply  a
blunder.  The  words  cum  narthece  ceromatico  were  completely
unfamiliar  to  me,  and  suggested  nothing  till  after  consultation
of  dictionaries.  Ccromciticus,  an  adjective  formed  from  the
noun  Ceroma,  an  unguent  of  which  wax  constitutes  a  part,
is  used,  as  I  knew,  by  Juvenal  {Sat.  3.  68),  "ceromatico
fert  niceteria  collo,"  of  the  Greek  wrestler  who  wears  the
crown  of  victory  on  his  anointed  neck.  Narthcx  I  knew
as  the  name  of  the  hollow  stalks  in  which  Prometheus  hid
the  stolen  sacred  fire.  Investigation  showed  that  the  word
ccromciticus  is  not  used  except  by  Juvenal,  as  quoted,  and  that
the  word  narthex  is  used  of  a  case  to  contain  something,  and
the  diminutive  nartliccium  is  regularly  used  in  late  writers
for  a  doctor's  phial.  It  is  perfectly  clear  then  that  narthcx
ceroviaticus  means  a  phial  of  unguent,  but  the  exact  phrase
is  not  extant,  and  it  is  certain  that  had  I  wished  to  write

^  See  p,  284  for  detailed  account.
2  See  p.  120.


46


Chapter  II.


[part


of  a  phial  of  unguent  I  should  not  have  used  either  of  the
words  employed  in  the  script.

(3)  Another  example  of  the  use  of  abnormal  but  intel-
ligible Latin  or  Greek  is  to  be  found  in  a  passage  which
seems  to  have  an  evidential  value  as  showing  a  connexion
between  the  communications  of  my  script  and  those  given  in
Dr.  Hodgson's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  On  Jan.  31,  1902,
the  opening  words  were :

Panopticon  o-<^atpas  ctTtTaAAet  crui'Sey/xa  jiviTTLKor.  ■

The  words  may  be  rendered  :  "  The  all-seeing  (?)  ot  a  sphere
fosters  the  mystic  co-reception."  Panopticon  does  not  exist,
but  its  derivation  is  clear :  it  conveys  the  ideas  of  "  all-
seeing  " ;  ciTirdWeiv  is  a  not  very  common  word  used  by
Homer,  Pindar,  and  Theocritus,  in  the  sense  of  "  cherish,
foster " ;  awSeyjua  certainly  does  not  exist,  though  it  is  quite
regularly  formed,  and  its  meaning  is  unmistakeable.  Neither
the  noun  Seyfxa  nor  the  compound  verb  avv^eyoixaL  occur  in
classical  writers,  but  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  meaning
"joint  reception."

The  incident  is  related  in  detail  below.^


iSee  p.  213.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


47


CHAPTEE  III.

Other  General  Characteristics  of  the  Script.

I  GOME  now  to  a  class  of  topics  which  seem  to  concern  both
tlie  form  and  the  matter  of  the  script,  and  which  may  be
described  as  "borderland  cases";  they  fall  imder  six  heads —
aphorisms,  quotations,  condensed  expressions,  assonances,  puns,
■  and  verse.  They  appear  to  make  a  transition  from  illus-
trations of  the  form  of  the  script  to  illustrations  of  its
contents.  There  is  a  certain  sense  of  appropriateness  in  some
of  the  quotations  and  plays  upon  words,  but  on  the  other
hand  many  of  them  seem  to  be  used  to  fill  in  blanks  between
intentional  statements,  or  to  be  due  to  some  association  of
ideas  that  has  no  connexion  with  the  ostensible  subject  of
the  communication.  They  are  perhaps  of  the  same  type  as
the  "  automatisms "  ^  which  Professor  Hyslop  has  described  in
his  comments  on  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper.  In  some  cases  the
meaning  seems  to  be  the  more  important  part,  in  others  the
form  of  expression  appears  to  be  the  determining  cause  of
their  introduction.  The  reader  will  best  judge  of  their
characteristics  when  the  facts  are  before  him.

(I.)  Aphorisms,  Proverbs,  &c.

Throughout  the  writings,  but  more  especially  at  the  beginning,
are  to  be  found  what  I  have  called  aphorisms.  In  many
cases  these  seem  to  be  perverted  proverbs,  the  sort  of  sentence
that  one  might  make  up  in  dreams,  epigrammatic  in  form  but
with  little  or  no  meanino-  on  a  closer  examination.  To  this
class  belong  (May  23,  1901)  "Accomplishment  is  better
than  success.  Do  you  see?";  (Sept.  7,  1901)  "Too  many
swallows  and the  summer  is spoilt,"  which seems to be  a

1  See  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  238.


4S  Chapter  III.  [part

hybrid  recollection  of  two  common  proverbs  with  yet  a  kind
of  meaning  behind  it.  On  Jan.  8,  1902,  a  higher  flight  was
tried :  "  Never  try  with  spun  thread  of  your  own  fashioning
to  interpret  the  divine — spindle.  Lachesis  will  clip."  This
loftier  vein  still  showed  itself  in  the  next  piece  of  writing  on
January  11,  1902,  when  I  was  told:  "  Faith  than  Hope  greater
removes  mountains."  This  is  analogous  to  the  '  quotations '
of  the  next  section.^  The  sententiousness  of  dreams, — verbose
enunciation  of  the  commonplace — appears  on  March  26,  1902,
in  the  words,  "  Not  yet  is  the  fulness  of  time — reaping  follows
the  full  sheaves,"  as  also  in  the  remark  on  the  same  subject
on  March  19,  1902:  "Many  harvests  go  to  the  fulfilment  of
the  crop  of  promise."  The  application  of  the  proverb  about
"  pearls  to  the  swine "  has  a  certain  appropriateness  where
it  occurs  in  an  early  writing,  April  14,  1901,  and  perhaps
is  deliberately  intended.  It  runs  thus :  margaritae  veaiv  tibi
meae  forsitan  sine  pratio.  Eeading  prdio  for  pratio  the  whole
sentence  may  be  rendered  "  Pearls  before  swine,  perhaps  my
pearls  seem  valueless  to  you."  The  other  proverbial  phrases
above  quoted  seem  however  to  have  no  applicability  to  their
context  and  occur  apparently  as  spontaneous  observations.  Nor
is  it  easy  to  see  what  is  the  point  of  the  words^  dubium  omne
cluhmm  -pro  ignoto  which  precede  a  confused  communication
on  Sept.  6,  1902.

The  opening  words  of  Oct.  9,  1902,  though  cast  in  this
mould,  may  yet  be  meant  to  convey  a  practical  hint,  "  Dreamers
see  most  of  the  truth — in  golden  visions  of  the  dawn."  The
script  is  fond  of  insisting  on  the  usefulness  of  sleep :  "  Sleep
is  better,"  on  May  13,  1903,  gives  the  same  idea,  and  it  is
often  suggested  that  I  should  "  listen  in  sleep "  or  leave  off
writing  now  and  sleep.*

Tlie  occurrence  of  these  aphorisms  is  almost  entirely  confined
to  the  earlier  writings ;  there  has  been  only  one  in  the  last

iSee  p.  49.

2  As  my  own  name  is  Margaret,  it  is  possible  that  some  notion
of  a  punning  reference  to  that  name  has  suggested  the  phrase.

"The  phrase  recurs  in  an  inverted  form  on  Jan.  14,  1903,  "omne
ignotum  pro  dubio — in  his  atque  in  omnibus  rebus,"  adds  the
script.

^For  connexion  between  script  and  dreams  see  below,  p.  148.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics,


49


two  years.  On  August  21,  1904,  the  script  began:  "  Econ
Economics  Haste  dictates  what  Wisdom  shuns."  The  appli-
cation of  the  proverbial  condemnation  of  haste  to  the  subject
of  economics  may  be  a  reflexion  of  the  general  interest  felt
at  the  time  in  the  Fiscal  question.  The  rest  of  the  writing
deals  with  wholly  different  subjects.-^

(II.)  Quotations.

These  are  very  much  more  frequent  than  the  aphorisms.  In
the  whole  number  of  writings,  306,  I  have  found  75  phrases
which  are  obvious  reminiscences  of  passages  in  familiar  authors.
I  have  not  included  in  this  list  one  or  two  cases  where  a
definite  reference  is  made  to  a  passage  in  some  author  as
being  contained,  for  instance,  in  a  sealed  envelope,  or  referred
to  in  a  book  not  read  by  me ;  these  are  regarded  as
intentional  remarks  on  the  part  of  the  scribe.  What  I  now
discuss  is  the  appearance  of  familiar  phrases,  such  as  "  come
unto  these  yellow  sands "  or  "  niultum  in  parvo "  in  the
body  of  the  script,  without  apparent  connexion  with  the
context.

A  complete  list  of  such  quotations  as  I  have  recognised  is
given  in  the  Appendix,  with  references  in  most  cases  to  the
original  authors.'  It  will  be  seen  that  the  three  languages
have  been  placed  under  contribution,  but  Latin  furnishes  far
the  largest  number,  48  being  in  Latin,  24  in  English  and
3  in  Greek.  A  point  bearing  on  the  question  of  language  is
that  the  quotations  occur  with  much  greater  frequency  in  the
earlier  than  in  the  later  writings,  35  coming  in  the  first
100  pieces,  26  in  the  second  100,  and  14  in  the  last  106.
If  the  22  quotations  occurring  in  the  first  two  months  of  the
writing  (27  pieces  of  writing)  are  excluded,  it  will  be  seen  that
of  the  53  quotations  left,  26  are  in  Latin  to  24  in  English  and
3  in  Greek,  so  that  the  predominance  of  Latin  quotations  seems
due  to  the  disproportionate  frequency  of  quotations  in  the
early  days  of  the  script.

^  See  App.,  p.  3.56,  for  complete  list  of  aphorisms,  which  is  not
large.

2  See  App.,  pp.  357-360.

D


50


Chapter  III.


[part


It  will  be  remembered  that  the  script  became  much  more
intelligible  than  it  was  at  first,  and  similarly  the  early  quota-
tions seem  to  have  had  little  or  no  connexion  with  the
context  in  which  they  appear,  while  in  the  later  writings
the  quotations  are  more  intelligently  applied.  At  the  begin-
ning they  seem  to  be  thrown  out  as  if  they  were  lumber  of
the  mind,  bits  of  floating  rubbish  carried  out  with  the  stream
at  the  opening  of  the  sluices ;  later  on  they  are  apparently
intentional,  and  serve  to  illustrate  a  point  or  to  suggest  a
definite  image  or  line  of  thought.

Comment  on  Quotations.

The  first  few  quotations  have  no  meaning  where  they  occur,
but  are  mainly  very  familiar  phrases.  They  are  certainly  not
what  I  should  have  consciously  introduced,  but  there  is
nothing  remarkable  in  finding,  for  instance,  a  reference  to
Constantine's  motto, — though  the  words  would  normally  occur
to  me  in  Greek  as  they  are  said  to  have  appeared  to  him,
6P  rovTw  vIkq, — or  to  the  familiar  phrase  "  o  si  sic  omnes  ! "
or  again  to  the  transitoriness  of  worldly  fame,  "  ubi  nunc  est
gloria  mundi."  Horace's  non  omnis  moriar,  "  I  shall  not  wholly
die,"  is  almost  inevitable  under  the  circumstances,  and  so  is
Aeneas'  account  of  the  change  in  the  dead  Hector  who  came
to  him  in  a  dream,  quant'mn  mutatus  ah  illo.

On  March  14,  1901,  in  a  piece  of  writing  rather  more
intelligible  than  its  predecessors,  and  containing  the  first  of
many  puns,^  came  the  words  tandem,  hahcs  tola  quod  mente
2)ctisti,^  "  At  last,  thou  hast  what  thy  whole  heart  desired."
The  quotation  appears  in  Mr.  Myers'  Presidential  Address  to
the  S.P.E.,  delivered  in  May,  1900.^  The  word  tandem  is
not  in  the  original  Virgil,  but  translates  the  words  '  at  last '
immediately  preceding  the  quotation  from  A^irgil  in  the  Presi-
dential Address.  It  would  therefore  seem  that  the  source  for
the  phrase  in  my  script  is  a  reminiscence  not  of  Virgil  but
of  Mr.  Myers'  Address.

One  of  two  quotations  on March 15,  is  optimo  dierum,


iSee  pp.  60,  280.  2  virgil,  Aen.  iv.  100.

3  See  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  114.


Liii.]  Other  General  Characteristics.  51


"  best  of  days,"  an  expression  applied  by  Catullus  to  the
chief  day  of  the  festival  of  the  Saturnalia.  The  same  phrase
recurs  on  April  3,  1901,  where  it  is  clearly  intended  to  mean
some  particular  day.  It  is  probable  that  the  day  intended
is  Sunday ;  it  is  at  least  certain  that  on  the  Sunday
following  the  first  reference  to  opti^no  dieruin,  I  had  a
very  strong  desire  ^  to  write,  though  the  circumstances  were
not  such  as  had  up  to  that  point  invariably  accompanied  the
production  of  the  script.^  Again,  if  ojjtimo  diencvi  be  taken
to  mean  Sunday,  the  phrase  of  April  3,  1903,  becomes  intellig-
ible. But,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
the  Latin  words  optimus  diermn  were  ever  used  to  represent
Sunday,  nor  when  they  first  occurred  in  the  script  did  they
suggest  any  meaning  to  me  but  the  Saturnalia.

The  quotation,  "  Dianae  sumus  in  fide,"  written  on  the  above
described  Sunday,  March  17,  immediately  after  the  statement
that  "  to-day  I  can  probably  do  something,"  is  also  from
Catullus,  and  perhaps  confirms  the  notion  that  the  vague  sug-
gestion of  a  date  on  March  1 5  was  meant  to  be  Sunday.  Here
too  something  more  intelligent  than  the  mere  citation  of  a
stray  tag  of  verse  may  have  been  intended ;  for  Mrs.  Eorbes'
Christian  name  is  Diana,  and  a  few  days  later  ^  there  appears
in  my  script  the  first  recognised  attempt  to  set  up  a  con-
nexion between  her  writing  and  mine.

There  follow  several  quotations  of  no  interest,  and  seeming
to  represent  merely  reminiscences  of  familiar  formulas.  In  a
reference  to  Tennyson,  on  June  23,  1901,  for  the  first  time  the
script  seems  to  be  aware  that  an  attempt  is  being  made  to
quote,  and  apparently  supposes  that  the  quotation  is  appropriate.
But  the  allusion,  if  there  is  one,  remains  unidentified.  On
August  7,  1901,  the  quotation  vile  j^otahis  seems  to  be  an
attempt,  recognised  as  a  failure,  to  say  something,  for  it  is
followed  by  the  words  "  that's  not  right,"  and  further  unsuc-
cessful attempts.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Keats'  phrase
"palely  loitering"  on  September  14,  1901.

1  See  below,  p.  286,  for  a  suggestion  about  the  Saturnalia.

2 1  was  not  alone,  and  the  hour  was  an  unusual  one ;  see  below,
p.  221.

3  See  p.  222.


52


Chapter  III.


[part


Twice  quotations  are  introduced  with  some  apparent  intelli-
gence, though  they  convey  no  meaning  to  me ;  the  script
recognises  in  one  case  (Dec.  5,  1901)  that  it  is  referring  to
a  Scotch  Ballad,  and  in  the  other  (March  26,  1902)  that  the
quotation  is  or  should  be  a  help  to  interpretation,  and  on
other  occasions  something  similar  seems  to  have  occurred.

A  quotation  from  Browning  on  October  8,  1902,  may  have
been  an  effort  to  produce  something  verifiable,^  for  on  the
day  when,  on  my  way  back  from  London,  I  wrote  automati-
cally "  to  the  dark  tower  came  who  ? "  my  husband  had,  during
my  absence,  and  unknown  to  me,  been  reading  Browning's
poem  "  Childe  Koland  to  the  dark  tower  came."

Some  of  the  later  quotations  are  perfectly  intelligible  in  their
context,  and  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  wholly  inappropriate
tags  which  occurred  at  first.  On  May  14,  1904,  the  opening
words  of  the  myth  in  the  Phacdms  are  given  and  recognised
as  such  by  the  script.^  Two  other  quotations  are  introduced
appropriately;  thus,  on  June  24,  1904,  a  disquisition  on  the
attitude  of  mind  towards  an  offender  is  preceded  by  the  remark
that  sometimes  "  Saeva  indignatio  is  just."  On  October  21,
1904,  a  reference  to  the  death  of  two  sisters  ends  with  an
allusion  to  Horace's  ode  on  the  death  of  Quintilius.

Of  two  quotations,  which  occurred  on  the  same  day,  Oct.  23,
1903,  one  seems  to  be  of  some  interest  in  connexion  with
its  context,  and  I  here  relate  what  I  have  been  able  to
make  out  about  its  meaning.

On  Oct.  21  there  had  been  written  a  fragmentary  verse
about  faith  and  hope,  followed  by  a  plain  allusion  to  a  pas-
sage in  the  Thcactetus  of  Plato,  where  Socrates  says  that  there
is  no  other  beginning  of  wisdom  but  wonder,  and  that  it  is
rightly  said  that  Iris  (the  rainbow  messenger  of  the  gods)
is  the  child  of  Thaumas  (Wonder).  On  Oct.  23  another  allu-
sion was  made  to  the  verse  about  faith  and  hope,  and  then
after  the  words  "  let  her  write,"  the  script  went  on  :

These  three  are  great,  but  greater  than  they  is  Wonder's  daugh-
ter. The  stern  Lawgiver  is  not  so  fair, Seek  and  ye  shall,
Wisdom  comes  not  unsought,  and  one  comes  to  call  who  is  not
there  for  the  wishing. The  child  of  wonder  is  a  fairer  figure  and


iSee  p.  189.


2  See  p.  145.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


53


a  mightier  than  the  rainbow  of  Hope, — no  messenger  but  the  divine.
Better  than  Faith  Hope  and  Charity  is  Wonder's  child.

It  was  obvious  at  once  that  the  w^riting  of  the  23rd
alluded  to  the  writing  of  two  days  before.  The  transition
from  "  faith  and  hope  "  to  "  Iris,"  not  explained  in  the  earlier
script,  is  made  clear  on  the  second  occasion  by  the  words
"  rainbow  of  Hope "  which  supply  the  connecting  link.  The
intention  of  the  second  script  is  perfectly  plain ;  two  points
are  made  :  (1)  Great  are  Taith  Hope  and  Charity,  but  greater
still  is  Wisdom;  (2)  Wisdom  must  be  sought.

The  second  of  these  points  is  made  by  the  uncompleted
reference  to  S.  Matt.  7.  7  (or  S.  Luke  11.  9),  and  the  words
next  following.  What  at  the  time  struck  me  as  curious  was
the  sudden  appearance  in  this  context  of  the  phrase  from  the
Gospels.  The  other  phrases,  "  child  of  wonder,"  "  daughter  of
wonder,"  "  rainbow  of  Hope,"  "  messenger,"  are  Platonic,
definite  reminiscences  of  the  Theaetetus,  as  was  recognised  by
the  script  of  Oct.  21,  and  I  knew  no  reason  for  their  asso-
ciation with  the  Gospel  phrase.

But  some  little  time  later  I  found  that  the  Gospel  saying
and  the  Platonic  view  that  the  beginning  of  Wisdom  (or
Philosophy)  is  Wonder,  have  been  closely  associated  by  other
minds,  though  this  was  entirely  unknown  to  me  when  the
script  was  produced.  I  discovered  it  accidentally  in  the
following  way :

In  the  Times  of  Nov.  14,  1903,  I  found  an  account  of
one  of  the  recently  discovered  Sayings  of  Jesus,  now  published
in  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Oxyrhynms  Papyri.  Dr.  Gren-
fell  had  been  lecturing  in  London  on  Nov.  13  (as  also  in
Cambridge  on  Nov.  10),  and  his  translation  of  this  "  logion "
was  thus  given  in  the  Times :  "  Let  not  him  that  seeketh
cease  from  his  search  until  he  find,  and  when  he  finds  he
shall  wonder ;  wondering  he  shall  reach  the  kingdom  {i.e.  of
heaven),  and  when  he  reaches  the  kingdom  he  shall  have
rest."

I  had  not  heard  the  lecture  at  Cambridge,  but  when  I  read
this  report  it  struck  me  that  there  was  a  certain  resemblance
between  its  phrases  and  my  recent  script,  and  when  the
fourth  volume  of  the  Oxyrhyncus  Papyri  appeared,  in  May  or


54


Chapter  III.


[part


June,  1904,  I  found  that  Clement  of  Alexandria  had  certainly
connected  the  Gospel  saying  with  the  Platonic  phrase.  In
the  comment  on  the  Saying  {Ox.  Pap.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  5),  it  is
stated  that  the  logion  in  question  is  twice  quoted  by  Clement
of  Alexandria  as  from  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,
on  the  first  occasion  to  "show  that  the  beginning  of  philosophy
is  wonder " ;  and  the  logion  itself  is  said  to  be  parallel  to
Matt.  7.  7,  "  Seek  and  ye  shall  find."

It  may  be  that  all  this  is  irrelevant,  and  that  my  own
knowledge  was  sufficient  to  account  for  the  juxtaposition  of
the  Platonic  and  the  Gospel  passages,  though  I  had  never
consciously  thought  of  any  such  connexion.  But  it  is  perhaps
noteworthy  that  the  juxtaposition  should  have  been  made  in
the  script  just  before  the  occurrence  of  an  opportunity  of
finding  an  explanation  of  that  combination  of  phrases  which
had  surprised  me.  I  never  had  any  knowledge  of  the
matter  contained  in  the  Logia  till  I  read  the  report  in  the
Times  of  Dr.  Grenfell's  lecture,  so  that  the  words  of  the  script
cannot  have  been  a  reminiscence.^

To  sum  up  then,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  quotations  are
of  two  kinds:  (1)  mere  tags  introduced  with  no  appropriate-
ness, and  (2)  reminiscences  apparently  used  deliberately,  though
the  purpose  is  not  always  ascertainable.  The  former  class  occur
mainly  in  the  earlier  writings,  and  seem  to  approximate  to  the
"  aphorisms "  of  the  script,  and  perhaps  to  the  automatisms  of
Professor  Hyslop,  while  the  latter  are  to  be  found  in  the  later
script,  which  is  on  the  whole  fairly  intelligible.  The  sources
of  the  quotations  call  for  no  special  comment ;  the  authors
from  whom  they  are  derived  are  accessible  and  familiar;  but
with  a  few  exceptions  they  are  not  the  quotations  most  familiar
to  me,  or  such  as  would  first  occur  to  me  were  I  asked  for
a  list  of  familiar  quotations.  The  absence  of  French,  prose
or  verse,  is  noticeable  here  as  above ;  were  I  to  draw  up  a
list  of  the  phrases  constantly  occurring  to  me  in  daily  life,
French  literature  would  furnish  a  large  portion  of  the
whole.^

1  See  also  p.  321,  ■  '

2  It  was  at  some  period  in  the  early  part  of  1904,  when  analysing
the  contents  of  the  script,  that  I  first  noticed  the  absence  of  French
phrases  and  allusions  in  the  script.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


55


(III.)  Condensed  Expressions.

Tt  has  happened  occasionally  that  an  unintelligible  expression
has  subsequently  been  expanded  into  words  with  a  meaning,  thus
suggesting  that  at  the  first  attempt  the  idea  has  emerged  in  the
condensed  form  called  by  '  Lewis  Carroll '  a  "  portmanteau."  I
have  found  two  instances  of  this,  both  in  the  early  script,  and
there  may  be  others  unrecognised.  On  March  8,  1901,  the  word
obsolevisti  appeared  in  a  context  which  throws  no  light  upon  its
meaning :  "  fac  quaeras  querimonium  obsolevisti  solacium  dona-
visti  etsi  tu  nescias."  The  sense  is  not  determinable  though,
with  the  exception  of  obsolevisti,  the  words  have  meaning :  fac
qiiaeras  "  see  that  you  ask  (or  seek),"  and  querimonium,  false  form
for  querimonia,  "  complaint,"  precede  the  unknown  word,  and  the
succeeding  phrase  means  "  you  have  given  consolation  though  you
did  not  know  it."  On  March  11,  1901,  occurred,  without  any
explanatory  context,  the  words  obsolevit  iavi  ista  oratio  "  that
kind  of  speaking  is  now  obsolete,"  and  it  certainly  seems  as  if
obsolevit  ista  might  be  an  expansion  of  the  unintelligible  word
obsolevisti.  In  that  case  there  would  be  a  general  sense  in
the  first  extract.  "  See  that  you  search  ;  lamentation  is  out  of
date  ;  you  have  unwittingly  given  consolation."

The  next  instance  is  clearer;  on  April  8,  1901,  occurred  the
Greek  phrase  iuf.eya\oX\vT6<;  6  koicti?.  The  last  words  mean  "  the
brother " ;  the  first  word  is  apparently  a  "  portmanteau "  of
P-eya^,  "  great "  and  oXXvrai,  "  is  destroyed."  Not  till  nearly  a
year  afterwards,  Feb.  10,  1902,  was  this  portmanteau  unpacked,
and  its  contents  were  certainly  not  what  I  expected.  I  had
taken  the  first  phrase  to  be  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  describe
complete  destruction,  but  the  words  of  Feb.  10,  1902,  were
fieydXwmiuog  o  Kaai^  6v8e  airoWvTaL  to.  epya  avTOv,  "  of  great
renown  is  the  brother,  neither  do  his  works  perish,"  and  there
followed  a  description  of  some  one  whom  I  have  not  been  able
to  identify.  It  looks  as  if  the  two  words  lULeyaXwvvfxo?  and
aTToWvTai  had  first  emerged  in  the  impossible  word  /uLeya-

It  does  not  seem  possible  to  determine  whether  in  these  cases
the  first  appearance  is  a  confused  emergence,  or  the  second  an
expansion,  of  the  underlying  idea.  If  it  is  the  latter,  the
incident is perhaps analogous to the development of  the


56


Chajyter  III.


[part


narration  of  an  incident  in  the  script,  of  which  there  have  been
frequent  examples.^  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  unintelligible
words  are  in  fact  unsuccessful  attempts  to  write  what  sub-
sequently appears  in  a  correct  form  and  has  always  been
intended,  the  error  is  not  one  of  a  type  confined  to  my
subliminal  self.  It  has  happened  to  me  more  than  once  to
run  two  words  together  in  conversation,  though  not  I  think  in
writing,  and  to  become  aware  only  from  a  certain  impression  that
my  hearers  are  amused  that  I  have  been  using  a  '  portmanteau.'
Thus  I  have  spoken  of  "  Jaesar "  where  I  intended  to  say
"  Julius  Caesar."

(IV.)  Assonances.

In  several  cases  there  have  occurred  in  the  script  juxtapositions
of  words  for  which  there  seems  no  reason  but  a  similarity  of
sound.  In  some  cases  a  pun  is  evidently  intended,  but  in  others
there  is  no  apparent  intention  or  meaning :  one  combination  of
sounds  seems  to  suggest  another  similar  effect,  which  thereupon  is
written.  The  actual  puns  are  discussed  in  the  next  section ;
here  I  describe  the  assonances.

These  sometimes  occur  in  the  midst  of  unintelligible  words,
sometimes  again  when  the  meaning,  though  not  perfectly  clear,  is
yet  perceptible.  I  have  found  nine  cases  of  such  assonances,
some  of  them  being  very  nearly  actual  puns.  I  have  excluded
cases  where  in  the  effort  to  give  a  particular  word  several  similar
sounds  appear  in  succession,  as  those  do  not  seem  analogous  to
the  tricks  of  style  with  which  I  am  now  dealing.

The  first  of  these  assonances"  appeared  on  March  25,  1901,
and  has  already  been  quoted.^  The  sentence  in  which  it  occurs
is  perhaps  intelligible,  but  the  juxtaposition  of  two  words  so
similar  in  sound  as  necuhiae  and  necopinato  can  hardly  be
accidental ;  Latin  however  lends  itself  to  such  assonances.  On
the  next  occasion,  March  31,  1901,  the  sound  amb  seems  to
have  been  reproduced,  but  while  the  first  word  is  appropriate
in  its  context  the  two  next  phrases  have  no  meaning.  After
a  remark  that  superposition  would  make  all  clear,*  the  words

1  See,  for  instance,  the  gradual  development  of  the  suggestion  of  a
book  or  paper  to  be  found  in  a  specified  place,  described  on  p.  195.

^For  complete  list  see  App.,  p.  360. ^See  p.  41. ■'See  p.  39.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


57


are  written :  ambages  desunt  ava^alveiv  necesse  nec  sine  avihitu.
"  There  is  no  trick ;  it  is  necessary  to  climb  ;  not  without
ambition  (?) "  It  is  easier  to  suppose  that  the  similarity  of
sound  has  introduced  the  last  two  phrases  than  to  find  any
connexion  between  them,  or  with  the  first.  On  April  10,
1901,  a  similar  attempt  to  combine  Greek  and  Latin  words  of
like  sound  resulted  in  absolute  nonsense.-^

The  words  on  April  22,  1901,  ^yrei  Z»;Ta  prodest,  "  Seek,  Z
is  useful "  may  have  a  glimmer  of  sense ;  they  come  just  after
my  husband's  initials,  and  at  this  time,  unknown  to  me,  he
wanted  my  script  to  reproduce  some  words.

On  June  30,  1901,  in  a  piece  of  writing  far  more  intelligible
than  those  just  described  the  syllable  del  seems  responsible  for
the  words  Si]X>]T)ipiov  ScXtov  aSeXcpog  SeXcpiKt]  which  followed
one  another,  but  when  the  fourth  word  was  reached  it  was  made
the  beginning  of  an  intelligible  sentence,  though  whether  this
was  the  original  intention  of  the  writer  we  may  take  leave  to
doubt.  The  sentence  SeXcpiK}]  ofxcpu  y^pi'jaeTai  means  "  he  will
use  the  voice  of  the  oracle  "  and  is  appropriately  followed  by  the
injunction  to  "  apply  intelligence "  ingenium  ctdhibe?

A  reminiscence  of  the  preceding  sound  again  probably  accounts
for  the  words  "  has  long  ago  agone,"  which  are  found  on  Sept.  4,
1901.  There  is  perhaps  more  intelligence  shown  on  Sept.  12,
when,  the  intention  being,  as  I  believe,  to  add  the  Greek  letter
TT,  2),  (pronounced  in)  to  guesses  already  made,^  what  was  actually
written  was  as  follows:  "Thibet  looks  like  a  word,  a  tie  between
Pye  gives  one  clue,  but  there  is  another."  There  is,  I
think,  little  doubt  that  Thibet  and  tie  between  are  connected,
and  they  may  be  unsuccessful  shots  at  the  sound  Fi.

The  next  case,  which  should  perhaps  be  classified  as  a
deliberate  pun,  also  came  when  an  attempt  was  being  made
to  give  a  word. On  Jan.  4,  1902,  the  script  has:

Tell  Hodgson  the  words  in  gen.  that  is  nearly  right  yei/vrjo-ti  is
important  not  Genesis — and  not  Exodus  but  e^wSos — Perhaps  he
will  understand  that  you  will  not.

The  last  remark  if  addressed  to  me  was  certainly  justified ;  I  did
not  understand. Nor  do  I  think  that  there  is  any  explanation

i"Belua  (3a\o<;  ebanuit."  2  See  also  below,  p.  288.

^See  p.  156  for  the  full  account  of  this  incident.


58


Chapter  HI.


[part


of  the  extract  except  that  the  Greek  yewrjuL's,  "  engendering,"
suggested  the  mach  commoner  word  for  "creation,"  ■yeVeo-i?,
Genesis,  which  in  its  turn  led  on  to  the  second  book  of  the  Old
Testament.  By  a  reversal  of  the  previous  performance  this  is
made  into  e^wSo?,  an  unknown  word — an  impossibility  which
may  have  been  perceived,  and  so  saved  us  from  the  rest  of  the
books  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  conceivable  that  there  was  a
point  in  the  "  words  in  gen,"  that  the  idea  to  be  conveyed  by
them  was,  for  example,  the  idea  of  "  generation  "  or  birth.  Dr.
Hodgson,  on  hearing  of  the  attempt,  wrote  that  they  had  a
possible  relevance  ^  to  him.  But  whether  that  be  so  or  not,
the  incident  illustrates  the  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  script
to  produce  assonances,  without  any  further  intention,  as  far
as  can  be  seen,  than  that  of  reproducing  a  sound  that  has
occurred  already.

That  the  association  of  ideas  in  the  region  reached  by  the
script  is  not  that  of  the  normal  personality  is  further  illus-
trated by  the  last  of  this  group  of  assonances.  The  incident
needs  some  preliminary  explanation.  In  April  1902  I  had  a
letter  from  Dr.  Hodgson,  in  which  he  suggested  an  experiment
for  me  to  try  in  connexion  with  his  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,
There  had  been  some  reason  to  think  that  there  was  a  con-
nexion between  her  trance-writings  and  my  automatic  script,^
and  with  a  view  to  testing  this  Dr.  Hodgson  proposed  that  I
should  look  some  morning  at  a  noticeable  group  of  flowers
and  try  to  get  them  mentioned  to  him  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.
There  was  a  noticeable  group  in  the  room  where  I  read  his
letter,  daffodils  and  bay  leaves,  a  combination  never  seen  by
me  before,  and  I  selected  these.  While  I  was  looking  at
them  and  thinking  over  the  experiment,  the  phrase  spissa
comam  came  into  my  head,  "  close-leaved,"  probably  suggested
by  the  two  Horatian  phrases,  sjnssct  o^amis  laurca  {Odes,  ii.
15.  9),  and  spissa  te  nitidum  coma'^  {Odes,  ill.  19.  25).  That
was  on  April  11,  and  on  April  24  my  script,  after  referring
to  Dr.  Hodgson's  experiment,  wrote :

It  is  hard  to  do. Try  again  next  week. Wordsworth's  daffodils

1  See  p.  282.  2  gee  p.  21.3.

^  The  phrase  spissa  comam  though  recalling  these  two  Horatian
phrases  conveys  a  new  idea ;  Horace  speaks  of  "  thick  houghed
laurel"  and  of  a  person  whose  "thick  hair  shines."


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


59


he  can  get  but  not  the  Sjiissa  comam — perhaps  Daphne  may  help —
the  likeness  of  the  words — think  of  that.

Clearly  this  refers  to  the  subject  of  this  experiment,  and  is
an  attempt  to  make  a  word  which  will  suggest  the  two
flowers, — a  '  portmanteau '  in  fact.  Daphne,  as  the  classical
reader  will  remember,  will  well  stand  for  the  bay,  and  the
sound  of  the  first  syllable  is  the  same  as  in  daffodils.  The
suggestion  is  extremely  fanciful,  and  not  in  the  least  likely  to
occur  to  my  conscious  mind,  but  apparently  the  methods  of  the
subliminal  self  are  not  those  of  the  supraliminal.  '  Wordsworth's
daffodils '  would  have  seemed  to  me  a  complicated  way  of
thinking  of  the  flower  which  was  the  subject  of  the  experi-
ment, but  I  suppose  that  it  is  after  all  arrived  at  by  a
process  similar  to  that  which  brought  Horace's  lines  to  my
conscious  mind  when  I  looked  at  the  leaves  of  the  bay.  It
would  however  certainly  never  have  occurred  to  me  to  seek
a  single  word  to  represent  the  two  flowers,  nor  to  combine
them  by  symbolism  and  assonance  in  "  Daphne."  The  incident
is  perhaps  of  some  interest  as  showing  the  extremely  far-fetched
nature  of  associations  in  the  region  of  my  subliminal  self,  the
part  played  by  assonance,  and  the  suggestion  that  a  fanciful
representation  is  easier  to  transfer  to  another  subliminal
intelligence  than  is  a  simple  concrete  notion.

(V.)  Puns.

Here  is  another  point  in  which  my  subliminal  and  supra-
liminal selves  differ.  I  have  hardly  ever  made  a  pun  in  my
life ;  I  do  not  easily  see  analogies  between  words,  and  I  am
seldom  amused  by  comic  puns  or  interested  by  the  -ancient
oracular  play  upon  words.  But  it  is  otherwise  with  the
automatic  script.  It  is  fond  of  punning  and  especially  of
punning  upon  names ;  it  is  indeed  quite  like  an  ancient
oracle  in  its  desire  to  find  a  meaning  in  a  name,  as  well  as
in  its  complete  disregard  for  the  laws  of  philology.  Puns
are  scattered  throughout  the  writings  and  are  by  no  means
more  common  in  the  earlier  than  in  the  later  script,  though
the  less  serious  examples  are  perhaps  in  the  first  productions.
The  first  pun  ^  appeared  very  soon  after  the  writing  began.

complete  list  is  given  in  the  App.,  p.  361.


60


Chapter  III.


[part


On  March  14,  1901,  in  an  unintelligible  passage  apparently
concerned  with  an  inscription,  occur  the  words :  "  hiero-
glyphema  sane  marmario  glyptato  non  sine  caelato  quid  dicani
stellato  cultellario."  Little  can  be  said  of  this  incompre-
hensible medley  except  that  it  clearly  contains  a  pun  on  the
two  meanings  of  the  Latin  word  caelum,  "  chisel "  and
"  heaven ;  the  first  meaning  was  apparently  intended,  then
the  second  meaning  seems  to  occur  to  the  scribe  ^  and  produces
the  allusion  to  the  "  starry  "  knife,  or  whatever  he  may  please
to  mean  by  mltellario.  The  play  upon  the  word  is  marked
by  the  regular  classical  phrase,  qtcid  dicam  ?  "  may  I  say  ? ".
The  same  word  caelare  furnishes  another  shocking  pun  on
April  22,  1901,  when  the  proverbial  remark  about  the  art
required  to  conceal  art,  Ars  est  celare  artem,  is  at  once  followed
by  the  quasi-correction  "  better  to  carve,"  ceielare  melius.  The
scribe  adds  the  comment  "  you  write  nicely,  though  there  is
a  lack  of  sense  owing  to  your  want  of  faith,"  and  it  is
difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  this  commendation,
qualified  though  it  be,  is  due  to  satisfaction  at  having  worked
off  another  pun.

On  June  3,  1901,  the  mention  of  scrijJtura  in  the  sense  of
writing  at  once  brings  in  vcctigcd^  though  taxation  has  no
place  in  the  context.  A  few  days  later  comes  the  first  pim
on  a  name;  on  July  23,  1901,  describing  the  arrival  of  some
visitor  to  England,^  the  script  said :  "  To  Lodge  he  goes  first
to  lodge."  The  next  attempt,  on  Aug.  10,  1901,  was  more
ingenious ;  to  see  the  pun  requires  a  knowledge  of  the  Greek
name  (electron)  of  amber,  mentioned  only  in  English  in  the
script,  but  lest  the  casual  reader  should  miss  the  point  the
important  word  is  written  in  a  larger  hand  :

Amber  and  verdigris  and  the  result  electrifies  the  world.
Try  another  amalgam  quite  as  hard  to  mix — and  you  will  find  the
truth.

Needless  to  say  no  other  amalgam  has  been  tried,  nor  has
any  amalgam  of  amber  and  verdigris  been  discovered  !

1  Here  and  elsewhere  I  use  the  word  "  scribe "  to  denote  that
which  produces  the  automatic  script  as  distinguished  from  my
normal  personality.

2  Scri/ptura  and  vedigal  are  two  kinds  of  taxes.

3 The  incident  is  possibly  veridical;  see  below,  p.  199,


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


61


The  later  plays  upon  words  seem  more  serious.  On  Feb.
10,  1902,  in  a  description^  of  a  person  hitherto  unidentified,
the  script  has :  Magister  sui  generis  ambulanclo  dicta — non  sane
obiter  dicta — -proviidgat.  "A  Master  in  his  own  line(?)  he
pronounces  maxims  as  he  walks,  but  not  obiter  dicta ; " — the  pun
is  not  translateable.  The  description  suggests  a  Peripatetic
philosopher.

Two  of  the  puns  occur  in  passages  that  seem  to  recall  Neo-
Platonic  or  late  Greek  philosophical  writings  and  are  elsewhere
discussed ;  ^  the  second  of  these  passages  appears  to  be  mystic
in  character,  and  that  being  so,  the  explanation  of  a  technical
word  by  a  fanciful  derivation  is  not  out  of  place.

On  Feb.  13,  1903,  occurred  a  pun  on  the  two  meanings
of  the  Latin  clavis,  a  "  key "  and  a  "  club,"  with  an  un-
mistakeable  allusion  to  the  Hercules  Furens  of  Euripides.

A  very  elaborate  pun  on  the  name  Christopher  occurred  on
Jan.  29,  1904.  Two  meanings  are  suggested,  neither  of  them
philologically  possible,  but  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  common
derivation,  or  to  the  legend  which  makes  St.  Christopher  the
"  Christ-bearer."  The  name  Christopher  is  that  of  a  nephew
and  god-son  whose  birthday  is  on  Feb.  5,  seven  days  after
the  introduction  of  the  name  in  the  script.  The  name
Christopher  appears  towards  the  end  of  the  writing  in  quasi-
archaic  Greek  capitals,  thus  :

XPei,  XPICTO0OPOC,  x/5"^™v  </>w/3  no  xm™^'  'pop°'-  Can't
you  see  the  double  sense  1 Do  understand.

The  light  of  the  Sanctuary  and  the  Bearer  of  Good.

Then  comes  the  Greek  ^  (Chi)  as  signature.

The  explanations  or  translations  given  by  the  script  are  not
correct  renderings  of  the  two  Greek  phrases,  but  involve  blun-
ders which  it  needs  little  acquaintance  with  Greek  to  detect.
If  the  first  is  to  mean  "  Light  of  the  Sanctuary,"  the  word
(pcop  (thief)  must  be  supposed  equivalent  to  (poo?,  "  light,"  and
it  is  a  considerable  strain  upon  the  meaning  of  y^pia-TO<;,
"  anointed,"  to  make  it  mean  Sanctuary.  In  the  second  phrase,
(popa  could  not  mean  "  bearer "  though  it  does  mean  "  burden."
All  these  facts  were  perfectly  well  known  to  me ;  I  have  no


1  See  above,  p.  55.


2  See  p.  288.


62


Chapter  III.


[PAKT


turn  for  punning,  no  interest  in  derivations,  no  sympathy  with
fanciful  symbolism  of  any  sort ;  nor  am  I  likely  to  confuse
either  (pu>p  and  cpco?,  or  (popd  and  (p6po9.  This  is  one  of
many  cases  where  there  seems  no  point  of  contact  between
my  normal  self  and  the  productions  of  the  scribe.  I  have
entered  at  some  length  into  this  incident,  as  it  seemed  possible
to  put  down  in  black  and  white  the  differences  between  the
scribe  and  myself,  differences  which  are  constantly  obvious
to  me,  though  not  easy  to  explain  to  a  reader.

Plays  on  the  names  of  two  sisters,  whose  death  was  due  to
the  same  accident,  occur  in  one  of  several  writings  referring  to
them.  The  names  are  Monica  and  Dorothy,  and  on  Oct.  12,
1904,  etymological  allusions  were  made:  "God's  gift  resumed;
Monica  who  lived  alone."  Dorothy,  of  course,  does  mean  the
gift  of  God,  but,  whatever  may  be  the  derivation  of  Monica,
it  is  not  likely  to  be  fAomiKos  or  jmovoiKtjTos,  "  who  lives  alone."

(VI.)  Verse.

Another  characteristic  of  the  script  not  shared  by  my
normal  self  is  a  tendency  to  break  out  into  verse.  I  am  no
poet,  and  have  great  difficulty  in  producing  even  a  very  short
set  of  verses  in  English.  I  wrote  Greek  iambics  years  ago,
but  have  hardly  ever  made  up  a  line  of  Latin  verse.-"-  That
I  am  capable,  however,  of  producing  some  kind  of  verse,  when
in  a  condition  between  sleeping  and  waking,  I  discovered  some
years  ago,  when,  being  convalescent  and  resting  a  good  deal
in  the  day,  I  used  occasionally  to  find  myself  making  up  verse
half  unconsciously.  The  verse  was  always  in  the  nature  of  a
parody,  and  was  usually,  if  not  always,  unrhymed.^  Several
fragments  of  verse  have  occurred  spontaneously  in  the  auto-
matic script  in  each  of  the  three  languages  used,  and  on  two
or  three  occasions,  when  I  have  been  experimenting  with
another  writer  at  a  distance,  verses  of  some  length  have  been
produced.^ There  seems  an  increasing  tendency  to  produce

1  See  above,  p.  33. -I  have  given  specimens  in  App.,  pp.  361-2.

3  The  -writing  which  resulted  when  direct  experiments  were  made
to  obtain  results  simultaneously  with  another  automatic  writer  falls
outside  the  scope  of  this  paper,  but  the  "  poetry "  produced  under


LIII.]  Other  General  Characteristics.  63

English  verse.  The  first  long  passage  was  obtained  in  July,
1904,  and  a  considerable  quantity  has  been  written  since  the
close  of  the  period  discussed  in  this  paper.

Ghxck  Verse.

The  first  piece  of  verse  which  occuiTed  in  the  script  was
in  Greek,  after  some  writing  in  Latin  (April  14,  1901);
it  was  written  in  uncials  and  is  reproduced  in  the  Appendix.^
The  reader  will  note  the  full  stop  after  the  12th  letter  and
will,  perhaps,  be  as  puzzled  by  it  as  I  was ;  he  may  also  be
surprised  to  find  this  obscure  fragment  classed  as  verse — or  as
anything  else  !— if,  as  I  did,  he  reads  it  as  "  EUUSINEMATAE.
OPHMA."  .  But  if  he  will  reverse  the  order  of  the  four  (Greek)
letters  after  the  full  stop,  and  so  make  the  last  word  Ampho
instead  of  the  unintelligible  Oplima,  he  will  see,  as  my  hus-
band did,  that  the  apparently  meaningless  collection  of  letters
can  be  divided  into  Greek  words,  and  that  these  words  form
the  end  of  a  hexameter  line :  ev  vcri  nj/j-ar'  ap  a.iU(pox'^  There
is  no  meaning,  but  that  the  words  are  real  Greek  words  and
form  part  of  a  hexameter  is  obvious.

In  the  Greek  words  quoted  and  commented  on  above
(May  16,  1902),^  there  also  appears  to  be  a  rough  hexameter,
contained  in  the  words a/uL(3poa-l>]  re  e-rr} ap/xari  (pona.

The  last  four  of  these  make  the  end  of  a  hexameter.  If,  for
the  word  re,  a  long  monosyllable  vpere  substituted,  we  should
have  nearly  a  complete  verse.  Perhaps  that  was  recognised  by
the  scribe,  for  to  the  words  is  appended  the  criticism :  "  no  a
word  wrong — somewhere.  Put  it  right.  ask  him
which."

On  July  3,  1903,  more  attempts  were  made  to  produce
Greek  hexameters.  I  quote  the  whole  passage,  which,  as  will
be  seen,  becomes  more  and  more  like  verse  as  it  goes  on,
winding  up  with  a  complete  line.  We  were  staying  at  the
time  of  its  production  at  a  hotel  high  up  on  the  Piigi  in

these  circumstances  is  given  in  the  Appendix  to  this  section  (p.  362)
to  illustrate  the  kind  of  thing  obtained.

^  See  App.,  p.  365.  ~  Or  ev  valv  rnxar ap'  a/x</)w.

3  See  p.  43.


64


Chapter  III.


[part


Switzerland,  and  the  surroundings  are  apparently  reflected  in
the  script.-^

For  her  a  message  of  peace  — contemplation  on  high  summits
— stillness  in  the  air.

Trpos  oSSas  Oedv  noctivaga  ilia  G  Eelene^  apfxarl  apyvpoevrl  TreAet
(TV  8'  ovK  eTTivoia  )(^p(jjjikvrj  you  have  not  all  the  words — ivoXXa  r'
deAAa  is  part  /cat  AaiAaTrt  KapTepouiVTL  SeSai^erat  ovpavo^  aAAos.  No
you  confuse — the  storm  &  whirlwind  consume  the  blue  clear  space
between  the  worlds,  but  the  supernal  peace  is  undisturbed.*

The  other  foui-  specimens  ^  of  Greek  verse  are  attempts  at
iambics,  a  metre  which  I  used  to  write  freely  some  years
back.  They  present  few,  if  any,  points  of  interest.  In  two
cases  where  more  than  one  line  is  given  the  scribe  appears
to  be  aware  that  he  has  not  been  very  successful,  as  the
verses  are  followed  by  the  comments,  "  it  is  not  quite  right.
But  you  have  the  idea,  it  is  hard  to  catch"  (Aug.  8,  1903),
and  again  (May  26,  1904)  7W7i  bene  ovinia — etsi  qitaedmn.  "It
is  not  all  right  though  some  of  it  is."  Three  times  a
Greek  iambic  line  seems  to  have  been  employed,  not  for  its
own  sake,  but  to  convey  to  me  a  remark.  These  are  among
the  rare  occasions  on  which  Greek  has  been  used  as  the
medium  of  communication  between  the  scribe  and  myself.

Latin  Verse.

The  Latin  verse  is  much  more  fragmentary ;  scattered  about
among  phrases  entirely  irrelevant  are  a  few  scraps  with
hexameter  rhythm,  such  as  eras  mcliora  siopersunt  (Jan.  13,
1902),  which  for  excellent  reasons  I  do  not  translate;  monet
ne  dixeris  omni  quod  tihi  confitear  soli,  "  He  warns  you  not  to

*  Trans.  "  To  the  thresholds  of  the  gods  the  night-wandering
moon  on  her  silvered  car  goes  (?).  But  you  not  using  intelligence
.  .  .  and  often  a  storm  .  .  .  and  by  the  whirlwind  in  its  might  (?)
the  rest  of  the  heaven  will  be  devoured."

1  See  above,  p.  44.

-  For  Eelene  read  Selene,  the  E  (6)  being  sometimes  used  in  the
script  for  2;  the  breathings  on  the  next  two  words  should  be
transposed,  appLarl  upyvpoerTi ;  the  form  KapTepoojvTi  seems  to  have
been  invented  for  "metrical  purposes";  the  next  word  ^Saxperau
is  not  classical.


3  See  App.,  p.  365.


LIII.]


Other  General  Characteristics.


65


tell  every  one  what  I  am  admitting  to  yon  only "  (Oct.  6,
1901).  The  first  few  words  of  this  last  sentiment  are  in
a  larger  hand,  intended,  I  suppose,  to  prevent  my  overlooking
the  poetical  outburst.  Magno  contcndis  corpore  contra  looks  like
a  fragment  of  genuine  Latin  poetry,  but  I  have  not  been  able
to  trace  it  (Nov.  3,  1902).  The  first  part  of  the  writing  of
March  1,  1903,  consisted  of  scraps  of  hexameter  lines,  the
sort  of  rubbish  that  one  might  produce  when  half  asleep ;  no
line  is  complete,  there  is  no  consecutive  sense,  and  no  general
meaning.  On  July  15,  1904,  the  script  tried  its  hand
with  extremely  poor  success  at  Latin  Sapphics ;  there  is  a
discernible  meaning  in  these,  but  no  other  interest.  The
curious  reader  will  find  all  these  efforts  reproduced  in  the
Appendix.^

English  Verse.

English  verse  was  not  introduced  so  early  as  Latin  or
Greek.  The  first  appeared  on  Feb.  23,  1903,  when  I  was
sitting  at  the  same  time  as  two  other  friends  in  another  place
who  were  working  Planchette.^  My  script,  after  dealing  with
other  matters,  concluded  with  the  following  lines :

Lover  who  lives  to  learn —
Giver  the  gift  to  earn,
Wisdom  the  love  to  feel,
Friendship  the  bond  to  seal.

On  April  9,  1903,  again  at  the  end  of  writing  on  a  quite
irrelevant  topic,  the  script  wound  up  with  a  verse  :

and  daisies  pied  upon  the  green
and  the  cuckoo's  foot  between

Merrify  Merrily
Call  it  early  call  it  often
Woods  to  bloom  and  buds  to  soften

Happily  happily.

Another  attempt  at  verse  (Jan.  17,  1904)  was  of  a
different  type ;  it  is  less  complete  and  more  conscious,
recognising  its  intention  and  its  want  of  success.  After
saying  something  about  Hope,  the  script  goes  on :


iSee  App.,  p.  366.

E


2  See  p.  250.


66


Chapter  III.


[part


Hope — youngest  daughter  of  to-day,  and  oldest  mother  of the  race

To  see  the  Godhead  face  to  face,  no
Beholds  the  Godhead's  very  face  . Shine  at  the  on  the

Wanderer  on  the  Way — That  is  not  quite  right,  but  it  is  about
Hope's  vision  which  is  the  true  one  and  leads  on  the  Passion-

ate Pilgrim.

None  of  this  recalls  anything  to  me,  or  has  any  meaning ;
I  do  not  see  what  the  "  Passionate  Pilgrim  "  is  doing  here,  nor
whether  he  is  to  be  identified  with  the  "  Wanderer."  ^

Some  stumbling  blank  verse,  again  on  the  subject  of  hope,  was
produced  on  May  26,  1904.  On  September  18th,  1904,  a
more  serious  attempt  was  made  to  produce  verse,  but,  as  the
script  itself  recognised,  it  was  "  poor  stuff."  I  quote  the  whole
passage  as  it  illustrates  the  methods  of  the  scribe.  It  will  be
seen  that  the  first  two  stanzas  are  written  consecutively  as  if
they  were  prose.  The  third  stanza  is  recognised  to  be  verse,
but  it  is  incomplete,  a  dissyllable  being  wanted  to  complete
the  rhythm  in  the  first  line.  The  meaning  of  the  lacking  word
is  suggested  by  the  script  itself  and  after  a  further  effort  a
criticism  on  the  whole  production  is  pronounced.

for  many  a  month  the  hand  of  time  has  shewn  to  all

that  pass  this  sign  and  this  alone  yet  have  the  careless

generations  failed  to  read  so  blindly  lurks  the  flower  with-

in the  seed

The  riotous  colours  of  the  autumn  flames  have  touched  the

bracken,  turning  green  to  gold,  the  wandering  songsters  going  as
they  came  by  the  long  journey  flee  the  winters  cold.

So  each  successive

there  is  a  word  that  means  a  group
in  its  turn
fills  with  its  dust  the  cinerary  urn

urn  behind  urn  in  numberless  array

the  records  of  past  glories  still  decay
But  none  of  this  says  what  I  want  to  say — write  this  week  more
often  and  especially  on  Wednesday  morning  next — not  such  poor
stuff"  as  this.

Plain  Prose  is  best.

1  But  see  below,  p.  297,  for  a  possible  explanation  of  the  association
of  ideas  in  the  above.


LIU.]


Va7'ieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


67


CHAPTEE  IV.
Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form  Assumed  by  the  Script.

So  far  the  topics  discussed  have  concerned  the  form  adopted
by  the  script  rather  than  the  nature  of  its  contents,  though
in  the  last  few  groups  there  is  reason  to  suppose  intention  in
the  selection  of  the  particular  form,  or  at  least  recognition
on  the  part  of  the  scribe  of  the  form  adopted.  I  pass  to
the  contents,  taking  first  the  cases  where  these  are,  so  to
say,  expressed  by  the  form,  and  afterwards  other  cases  where
the  form  appears  to  be  of  no  importance.

There  are  two  main  groups  where  the  form  seems  intended
to  convey  some  meaning.  The  mass  of  the  writing  consists
of  unsigned  observations,  not  to  be  attributed  to  any  identifiable
person,  though  often  expressed  in  the  first  person  "  I,"  and
addressed  to  some  one  in  the  second  person  "  you,"  presumably
myself.^  But  two  other  types  occur — one  where  the  script  seems
to  represent  a  conversation  between  two  or  more  persons,
and  another  where  a  directly  personal  note  is  introduced
by  the  appending  of  a  signature  to  the  supposed  communi-
cation. It  is  not  easy  always  to  distinguish  these  classes,
as  the  reader  who  has  followed  me  so  far  will  understand,
seeing  how  dream-like  and  confused  are  the  utterances  of  the
script.  In  many  cases,  although  there  is  no  signature  to  the
communication,  the  writing  bears  witness  in  its  contents  to
its  being  ostensibly  addressed  to  me  by  various  identifiable
persons.  Again,  it  is  clearly  not  possible  to  determine  with
certainty,  in  the  absence  of  change  of  language  or  writing,
whether  the  observations  of  the  script  are  supposed to  be

1  This  person  "  I "  is  what  I  have  called  "  the  scribe,"  and  I  wish
here  to  emphasise  the  statement  that  the  scribe  is  not  an  indirect
way  of  alluding  to  a  particular  supposed  communicator,  but  a  general
name  for  the  writing  hand,  which — for  whatever  reason — assumes  a
dramatic  personality.


68


Chapter  IV.


[part


made  by  more  than  one  communicator,  though  there  are
several  cases  where  the  contents  clearly  show  that  a  message
purports  to  come  from  more  than  one  source.  But  in  spite
of  the  difficulties  of  classification  it  has  seemed  helpful  in
judging  the  whole  question  of  the  automatic  phenomena,  to
discuss  here  the  above  mentioned  two  classes — namely,  what
I  may  call  "  conversations,''  and  the  type  where  an  actual
signature  is  appended  to  the  communication.

(I.)  Conversations.

The  first  hint  that  more  than  one  person  must  be  sup-
posed to  be  having  a  say  is  found  on  March  30,  1901,
though  I  did  not  interpret  it  till  long  afterwards,  when  the
conversational  form  had  unmistakeably  appeared.^  The  writ-
ing on  that  date  ^  begins  with  the  remark  that  there  are
as  many  opinions  as  there  are  speakers.  A  few  days  later,
April  3,  1901,  the  first  unmistakeable  conversation  appears,  the
remarks  of  the  second  speaker  being  written  in  a  large  round
hand  sharply  distinguished  from  the  particularly  small  hand-
writing of  the  body  of  this  piece  of  script.  The  contents
are  of  no  interest ;  their  meaning  is  perhaps  clearer  or  rather
less  obscure  than  was  usually  the  case  at  this  early  period,
but  nothing  of  any  value  was  said.  The  person  addressed  as
"  you "  would  seem,  at  least  in  one  instance  here,  not  to  be
myself,  but  some  one  else  who  answers  in  the  first  person.
When  reproached  with  not  doing  something,  this  person  replies
that  he  has  done  it.  Feci,  whereas  I  ^  had  not  done  anything.

^The  reader  must  understand  that  most  of  the  opinions  about
the  script  expressed  in  this  paper  are  the  result  of  long  observa-
tion and  familiarit}' ;  in  many  cases  later  writings  have  thrown
light  upon  the  earher  productions ;  at  the  beginning  the  phenomena
seemed  unanalysable,  and  I  avoided  as  far  as  possible  forming  any
theor}'  about  them.

2  See  Appendix,  p.  366,  for  list  of  all  these  supposed  conversations.

2  Perhaps  the  reproaches  for  stupidity  and  inattention  described
below  (p.  89)  may  in  some  cases  not  be  addressed  to  me,  but  to
some  other  would-be  communicator  or  intermediary ;  it  is  probable
in  any  case,  however,  that  they  reflect  my  own  feeling  of  impatience
at  the  extreme  difficulty  of  seeing  any  sense  in  the  farrago  freely
produced  with  an  exasperating  air  of  superior  knowledge.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


69


I  do  not  class  as  conversations  the  considerable  number  of
cases  where  communications  are  ostensibly  made  by  more  than
one  "  control,"  in  order  to  give  a  new  message  or  to  complete
or  correct  what  was  said  by  the  first.  Here  I  refer  only
to  cases  of  apparent  confusion,  where — to  use  a  familiar  illus-
tration— the  telephone-wires  seem  to  have  got  into  contact,
so  that  the  operator  hears  remarks  not  addressed  directly  to
him. Thus  on  Jan.  13,  1902,  the  script  has:

Patience  for  you  both.  it  will  come  Three  Latin  words
can  she  not  write  them  1  would  give  the  clue.  quid  fremuerunt
gentes  1  gentes  seems  right — gens  togata  rapit —  Non

possum plurima hodie  eras  meri  meliora  supersunt. C  r  a  s
meliora  supersunt.

I  do  not  profess  to  explain  this,  but  I  think  that  it  is  a
case  such  as  I  have  described.  The  words  "  can  she  not
write  them  ? "  break  into  the  midst  of  the  phrase,  "  Three
Latin  words  would  give  the  clue,"  and  suggest  that  they  were
unintentionally  recorded — ^just  as  the  telephone  occasionally
records  the  impatient  observations  of  the  young  woman  at
the  Central  Office.  Who  is  meant  by  "  you "  and  "  she "  I
cannot  say,  but  the  words  "  gentes  seems  right "  appear  to  be
a  criticism  on  the  three  preceding  words,  which,  if  they  are
intended  for  a  quotation,  should  read  "  Quccrc  fremuerunt
gentes."  Again,  the  repetition  of  the  three  final  words  sug-
gest that  when  they  first  appeared  they  were  not  said  to
me,  but  addressed  by  one  communicator  to  another,  who  then
transmitted  to  me  what  seemed  important,  unaware  that  the
whole  had  already  been  caught  and  recorded.

Similarly  on  Aug.  7,  1901,  after  a  long  message  meant
apparently  to  be  verifiable,  came  the  words :

This  is  something  new — perhaps  a  test — I  dont  understand
quite. Who  is  it  1

Then  follows  abruptly  an  allusion  to  a  wholly  different
incident.  In  this  case  it  seems  to  be  recognised  that  there
is  confusion,  and  the  words  "  I  don't  understand "  are  perhaps
unintentionally  recorded.  The  confusion  is  greater  on  Feb.
13,  1902,  and  there  partly  marked  by  a  change  in  the
writing. On  Oct. 23,  1903,  after  confusion,  some  attempt


70


Chapter  IV.


[part


is  made  to  remedy  it,  with  success  as  far  as  the  fluency  of  the
writing  is  concerned,  though  the  meaning  of  the  message  thus
produced  is  not  obvious.  The  early  part  of  this  script  was
produced,  as  noted  at  the  time,  with  great  difficulty ;  the
words  "  faith  fled,  Hope  stayed "  refer  to  an  earlier  piece  of
writing ;  then  the  script  has :  "  when  did  that  happen  ? — no
this  is  not  right.  Stop  it  is  too  difficult — let  her  write."
Then  with  the  new  paragraph  the  writing  came  quite  easily.

In  the  above  case  again  it  cannot  be  determined  whether
the  "  she  "  refers  to  myself  or  to  some  supposed  communicator
temporarily  displaced,^  but  on  Jan.  15,  1903,  I  was  undoubtedly
referred  to  in  the  third  person ;

Wait  for  the  word.  He  said  "  I  ^  will  send  the  half  message  to
Mrs.  Verrall  and  you  have  the  other  half.  Tell  Hodgson  this,  but
you  have  not  got  the  word  yet.

Then  came  further  unsuccessful  attempts  to  produce  a  recog-
nisable word.

On  November  25th,  1904,  there  appears  to  be  another
instance  where  a  sentence  in  the  script  represents  a  remark
ahotd  me  in  the  midst  of  other  remarks  addressed  to  me.  Thus
after  saying,  apparently  to  me,  "  Why  will  you  not  look  for
it."  the  script  goes  on :

Tell  them  that.

Long  have  they  waited  we  do  not  know  why — but  can  do  no
more.  Don't  touch  her — let  her  work  alone, the  touch

confuses.

It  is  probable  that  the  "  you  "  who  will  not  look  refers  to
me,  and  almost  certain  that  I  am  intended  also  by  the  "  her "
who  is  not  to  be  touched.

There  are  two  or  three  other  cases  where  reference  is  made
in  the  third  person  to  some  one,  probably  another  supposed
communicator,  but  it  is  not  certain  whether  such  reference  is
intentional,  nor  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  Thus  on  Aug.  16,
1901,  after  a  long  message  relating  entirely  to  the  attempts

1  There  is  the  same  difficulty  in  the  script  of  March  20,  1903.  See
App.  pp.  352,  3.

2 The  inverted  commas  before  "I"  appear  in  the  script,  but  there
is  no  mark  for  the  end  of  the  quotation.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


71


to  guess  my  husband's  Greek  sentence,^  addressed  throughout
by  "  me "  to  "  you,"  there  comes  a  statement  of  what  some
one  else,  a  third  person,  says ;  here  the  change  of  language  may
indicate  chanoe  in  the  communication. It  runs :

A.W.V.  will  understand  this — I  think  of  him  when  I  say  it.  you  do
not  know.  Mone  inquit  alteram,  ne  titubet — non  semper  recte

fit  quod  manu  incipit.*

It  continues  in  Greek  and  Latin  and  concludes  with  a  curiously
confused  signature.

Again,  on  Oct.  6,  1901,  after  describing  an  incident  in
English,  the  script  suddenly  breaks  into  Latin,  and  in  a
slightly  larger  handwriting  says-  "  He  warns  you  not  to  tell
everyone  what  I  am  admitting  to  you  only."  Then  after
confused  attempts  to  put  things  for  A.W.V.  with  greater  clear-
ness, and  complaints  that  "  neither  you  nor  I  know  it,  so  it
is  hard  to  get.  It  all  belongs  to  him  but  not  to  me  his
friends  but  not  mine.  No  one  here  knows  but  one  and  her
I  have  not  met,"  it  goes  on  "  I  will  ask  Arthur "  and  returns
to  the  incident  with  which  it  started.

On  March  15,  1903,  we  have  what  looks  like  an  uninten-
tional report  of  a  discussion  between  two  would-be  com-
municators :

S  is  the  first  to  be  recognised  but  there  are  others.  write
yourself  mow  Otranto  pice  cur non  cetera  1  quia

non  comprehendit  ilia  nostr a  fac  quiescat. Signum  illud

pro  bono,  sed  non  omue.

The  last  sentence  "  that  sign  is  to  the  good  but  it  is  not  the
whole,"  clearly  refers  back  to  the  first  remark ;  but  between
the  two  come  words  that  are  only  intelligible  if  we  suppose
them  to  be  addressed  by  the  communicators  to  one  another,
and  assign  them  to  different  speakers,  thus :

A.  "  Write  yourself  now."

B.  makes  futile  eftbrts.

C.  "Why  not  (give?)  the  rest?"

*  Trans.  "  Tell  the  other  (feminine),  he  says,  not  to  stumble ;  what
her  hand  begins  is  not  always  right."

1  See  p.  156.  -See  above,  p.  64.


72


Chcqyter  IV.


[part


D.  "Because  she  does  not  understand  our  (words?)"

E.  "  Get  (some  one)  to  be  quiet. That  sign  &c."

In  this  division  of  the  remarks  between  various  speakers
I  am  guided  partly  by  the  gaps  between  the  words — to  which
experience  has  led  me  to  attach  considerable  importance^ —
and  partly  by  the  sense.  I  make  no  attempt  to  assign  the
parts,  only  to  mark  the  breaks.

Once,  on  Feb.  1,  1904,  the  earlier  part  of  the  script
appears  to  represent  a  reported  conversation  between  two
persons,  one  of  whom  is  trying  to  catch  what  the  other  says,
but  without  much  success.  Then  with  a  new  paragraph  one
seems  to  assume  "  control "  and  gives  a  connected  message  ;
the  next  paragraph  represents  another  person  commenting  on
what  has  preceded.-  A  somewhat  similar  case  of  supplementary
statements  by  a  second  communicator  is  found  on  Dec.  4,
1902,  but  in  that  case  there  is  no  reported  conversation
between  the  supposed  communicators ;  both  seem  to  address
me  directly.^

The  best  illustration  of  a  conversation  occurs  in  a  piece
of  writing  not  included  in  the  306  pieces  which  make  the
subject  of  analysis  in  this  paper.  It  was  produced  on  December
5th,  1904,  not  spontaneously,  but  as  the  result  of  an  experiment
in  simultaneous  writing  in  the  presence  of  others.  The  con-
versational form  may  have  been  due  to  suggestion  from  the
circumstances  of  its  production.  But  it  is  of  the  same  type  as
other  conversations  spontaneously  produced,  though  the  differ-
entiation of  the  speakers  is  emphasised  by  a  change  of  hand-
writing as  well  as  by  the  use  of  paragraphs.  The  first  few
sentences  cannot  be  definitely  distributed  among  the  supposed
speakers,  but  in  the  fourth  paragraph  a  sloping  handwriting  is
introduced,  and  thenceforth  to  the  end  of  the  communication

^  Amid  the  general  confusion  and  difficulty  of  interpretation,  some
things  seem  to  stand  out  as  important ;  e.g.  gaps  between  words  and
new  paragraphs, — not  that  such  a  break  invariably  has  an  ascertain-
able meaning,  but  it  seems  best  to  assume,  in  the  absence  of  strong
evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  it  indicates  some  sort  of  change  in
whatever  it  is  that  produces  the  script.

2  See  below,  p.  211,  for  comment  on  the  script  of  Feb.  1,  1904.

^  This  script  possesses  no  interest,  and,  not  being  counted  as  a
conversation,  is  not  quoted  in  the  Appendix.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


73


the  sloped  writing  alternates  with  my  ordinary  hand  and
represents  one  speaker  in  a  dialogue,  the  parts  of  which  are
plainly  distinguishable.  Thus,  beginning  with  the  paragraph
where  the  hand  changes,  and  representing  the  sloping  writing
by  italics,  we  have  the  following :

Then  there  is  a  line  of  verse  to  be  remembered  Heaven  lies  about
us  in  our  infancij — that  has  a  special  quite  a  special  association.
repeat  the  line  again

It  has  been  icritten  doivn. go  on  to  the  next  trial
Cecilia  was  a  name  wanted

/  cannot  make  this  clear.

The  instructions  have  come  elsewhere, they  should  be  followed,
then  wait  for  the  results.

/  cannot  work  this  easily

You  do  not  attend  to  the  instructions

/  cannot  hear  what  they  say  or  understand  what  they  do

Say  it  was  Thursday  that  was  meant.

It  was  Thursday  meant.

(II.)  Signatures.

There  are  altogether  148  cases  of  signatures  or  attempts  at
signature,  in  the  306  pieces  of  script  here  discussed;  thus,  less
than  half  the  pieces  are  signed,  for  it  sometimes  happens  that
a  single  piece  of  writing  has  two  signatures,  a  second  signed
paragraph  being  occasionally  added  after  the  first  signature.
The  signatures  are  not  always  the  last  word  in  the  writing
where  they  occur,  as  occasionally  after  a  signature  a  fresh
start  is  made  and  further  remarks  added,  not  signed.  Nor
must  the  signature  be  taken  in  all  cases  as  attached  to  the
whole  of  what  precedes ;  sometimes  a  change  of  handwriting
or  a  break  of  some  kind  indicates  what  words  are  supposed
to  be  written  by  the  person  signing.  Often  it  is  impossible
to  assign  with  certainty  a  definite  portion  of  the  script  to
the  ostensible  writer.

In  these  148  signatures  I  have  counted  all  cases  where  a
name,  or  initial,  or  sign,-^  has  been  appended  to  a  statement

^  A  considerable  number  of  signs  appear  as  signatures ;  some
of  these  have  been  identified,  but  not  all.  They  are  described
below.


74  Chapter  IV.  [part

so  as  to  give  the  whole  the  air,  generally  speaking,  of  a  letter
and  not  a  memorandum. They  may  be  thus  classified  :

Classification  of  Signatures.

{A)  Unfinished  attempts  12
(5)  Unidentified  :

(1)  names,  proper,  - - - -  5

(2)  fancy  names, - - - -  5

(3)  initials, -----  5

(4)  signs, -----  29

Total,  44

(C)  Unintelligible, 9

{D)  Identified:

(1)  name  of  living,  - - -  1

(2)  names  of  dead,^ - - -  48

(3)  signs  for  dead,  - - - -  34

Total,  83

Total,  therefore,  in  all, - -  148

{A)  Unfinished  attempts.

Some  of  these  have  been  discussed  above  - ;  they  are  included
here  among  signatures,  as  they  distinctly  give  the  vpriting  a
personal  note. They  are  of  the  following  type  :

1.  Vale  ....  signifer  signum  ponit.

2.  Usque  ad  illud  vale.

Tuus.

3.  Tuus iam  ante  signator.  *

4.  Yours  as  you  know.

5.  not  your  friend  but  another.

This  indefinite  form  of  signature  was  commoner  in  the  earlier
than  in  the  later  writings.  Thus  of  the  twelve  instances  ten
occur  in  the  first  two  years  of  the  writing. It  would  appear

*  1.  Trans.  "Good-bye — the  seal-bearer  sets  his  seal."  2.  "Till
then  good-bye — Yours." 3.  "  Yours — who  has  signed  before  this."

'  Initials  and  suggestions  of  name  are  included  under  names.

2  See  above,  p.  29.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


that  on  the  whole,  this  signature  is  used  when  the  contents
of  the  script  are  of  some  interest  or  evidential  value.

Thus,  in  eight  out  of  ten  cases,  decided  success  attended  the
efforts  to  produce  evidential  matter  made  by  this  supposed
writer  who,  it  should  be  noted,  though  he  does  not  append  his
name,  seems — to  judge  from  the  manner  of  his  writing — to
have  assumed  that  he  would  be  recognised.  But  in  the  absence
of  a  direct  statement  as  to  who  was  intended  by  the  person
signing  "  yours,"  etc.,  it  has  seemed  better  to  regard  these
signatures  as  unfinished  attempts  and  not  as  identified
signatures.

(B)  Unidentified  signatures,  . ■  . .  ■  .

(1)  Proper  names:

Of  5  unidentified  names  used  as  signatures  three  are  in
handwritings  not  my  own  ;  E.  Nevile  and  his  story  have  been
described.^  "Mortimer  Gothard,  1703  "  or  some  such  person
appears  as  a  signature  only  on  Feb.  9,  1904;  and  on  Oct.
29,  1901,  Alec-K  signed  some  remarks  apparently  intended
to  be  evidential,  but  so  far  unverified.  This  communicator
re-appeared  twice;  thus  on  Nov.  1,  1901,  "Alec  can  try  again
later,"  and  on  Nov.  4,  1901,  "  Frodsham  and  a  river  in  the
winter  it  was  frozen  Alec  Keith  to  the  friend  of  another."
K.  has  developed  into  Keith,  and  the  place  originally  described
as  "  Frendsham  or  Frettisham  perhaps  Frodsham  "  has  remained
Frodsham,  but  no  enquiries  have  thrown  any  light  on  this
episode.  One  unidentified  name,  Eloise,  appears  only  as  a
signature,  and  conveys  nothing  to  me  (Oct.  31,  1902);  another,
in  an  early  script,  also  has  no  meaning,  but  is  here  described  in
detail  as  possibly  illustrating  the  gradual  emergence  of  an  idea
not  at  first  recognisable.-  The  script  of  June  27,  1901,  was
signed  as  follows :

Two  drawings  of  curved  objects ;  then  the  words,  "  or  a
gourd."  Then  three  drawings  representing  apparently  (1)  a
gourd,  (2)  a  cross,^  (3)  the  horns  or  ears  of  an  animal;  then  the
words  "  moses  not  the  prophet." ;  then  a  line  between  two
brackets  and  the  name  "  Johann."

i.See  p.  24.

"  See  also  above,  p.  55,  on  "  portmanteau "  phrases.
^This  cross  is  counted  as  a  drawing,  not  as  a  signature.


76


Chapter  IV.


[part


It  seems  as  if  there  were  a  definite  aim  behind  all  these
eftbrts ;  possibly  even  the  final  effort  is  not  completely  correct,
and  what  underlies  it  all  is  "  Jonah "  not  "  John,"  three
attempts  being  made  to  suggest  the  name  Jonah;  (1)  the
gourd,  (2)  the  prophet,  (3)  the  name  Johann.  If  this  is  so,  it
will  be  seen  that  the  second  of  these  two  notions,  the  prophet,
does  not  itself  emerge  at  once,  but  is  preceded  by  "  horns "
and  then  "  Moses."  This  suggested  explanation  fails  to  account
for  the  cross,  but  as  it  possibly  throws  light  on  the  methods
of  the  script,  or  on  what  appear  to  me  to  be  its  methods,  I
have  thought  this  digression  justified.  Another  suggestion  has
been  made  to  me  that  in  the  Latin  cross,^  taken  in  conjunction
with  "  horns "  and  "  Moses  not  the  prophet,"  are  to  be  found
allusions  to  W.  Stainton  Moses  and  his  well-known  "  control "
Imperator.  In  that  case  there  seems  no  explanation  for  the
gourd,  or  the  name  John.

{B  2)  Eancy  names.
{B  3)  Initials.

The  unidentified  fancy  names  and  initials  present  no  points
of  interest.

(i?4)  Signs.

Eighteen"'  of  the  twenty-nine  unidentified  signs  represent  some
form  of  cross ;  I  had  proposed  to  class  these  all  together,  but
as  on  a  closer  examination  there  seems  to  be  some  distinction
between  the  value  of  the  writing  signed  by  different  kinds
of  crosses,^  I  have  subdivided  the  class.  The  types  of  cross
used  are  three,  ~|~  x  -|-  ;  of  these  -|~  is  used  twice,  x  five
times,  -f-  eight  times,  while  once  x  and  -\-  are  combined,
and  once  all  three  forms  appear  together.

Latin  Cross.

This  cross  appears  on  two  consecutive  days,  Aug.  25  and  26,
1902,  the  first  time  alone  with  the  word  cross  written  beside

1  See  below,  p.  79.

-Or  possibly  17,  if  an  ill-executed  drawing,  resembling  a  Latin
cross  upside  down,  or  a  Greek  cross  with  too  long  an  upper  arm,
is  not  interpreted  as  a  cross.  It  occurred  on  Oct.  26,  1901,  shortly
after  the  word  X"V"5  >  classified  in  the  text.

3  For  remarks  on  the  possible  significance  of  these  cases,  see  below,
p.  79.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


77


it  •/  on  the  next  day  the  word  cross  is  in  the  body  of  the
script,  and  the  script  is  signed  by  three  characters,  a  capital
I  within  a  circle,  a  Latin  cross,  and  a  fish.  Neither  piece  of
writing  contains  anything  of  interest;  the  second  is  particularly
scrappy.

St.  Anclrcivs  Cross,

This  appears  as  a  signature  five  times  on  May  27,  1901,
on  October  21  and  25,  1902;  on  January  21,  1903;  and
on  Jan.  29,  1904,  but  on  none  of  these  days  was  anything
written  which  seems  to  show  supernormal  knowledge.  On  the
first  four  occasions,  matter  was  produced  which  purported  to
be  verifiable,  but  there  is  little  or  no  reason  to  attach  value
to  the  statements.-  The  last  occasion  on  which  the  transverse
cross  is  used  is  immediately  below  the  unwarranted  philological
statements  about  the  name  Christopher  described  above.^

Greek  Cross.

The  Greek  cross  +  is  used  eight  *  times  as  a  signature,
five  times  plain,  twice  enclosed  in  a  circle,  and  once  with
a  decoration  at  the  intersection  of  the  arms.  Once  also  it
is  used  in  combination  with  the  transverse  cross,  and  as  the
combination  occui's  on  Jan.  31,  1902,  after  three  preceding
scripts  signed  with  the  Greek  cross  I  shall  consider  that  case
together  with  these,  so  making  altogether  9  occasions  where
the  Greek  cross  is  used.

On  six  of  these  nine  occasions  reference  is  made  in  the
accompanying  script  either  to  Dr.  Hodgson  or  to  Mrs.  Piper,
and  on  the  other  three  matter  of  interest  is  given — twice  (Oct.
12,  1901,  Dec.  7,  1903)  instances  of  apparent  thought-trans-
ference from  friends,^  and  on  May  31,  1901,  the  first  reference

^  See  App.  p.  355,  where  the  script  is  given.

2  See  p.  284  for  detailed  account  of  statements  by  the  script  on
May  27,  1901.

3  See  p.  61.

*0r  nine  times,  if  the  ill-executed  drawing  of  Oct.  26,  1901,  is
counted  as  a  Greek  cross.

5  See  pp.  283,  285.


78


Chapter  IV.


[part


to  the  passage  from  Plato's  Syviposium  which  plays  so  large
a  part  in  the  script.^  On  four  consecutive  occasions  reference
was  made  to  Dr.  Hodgson  or  Mrs.  Piper  in  writing  signed
with  the  Greek  cross,  one  of  these  being  apparently  a
successful  attempt  to  establish  a  connexion  between  my  writing
and  Mrs.  Piper's  trance."  I  had  been  interrupted  in  this
writing,  and,  after  a  persistent  desire  to  write,  which  circum-
stances prevented  me  from  obeying,  produced  at  the  first
opportunity  a  few  hours  later  on  the  same  day  the  words :
Crux  ct  praetcrca  nihil  "  only  a  cross,"  and,  after  some
general  remarks  in  Latin,  the  following  signature  consisting  of
a  Greek  and  a  transverse  cross  each  enclosed  in  a  circle  and
joined  together  by  two  lines :


On  April  27,  1903,  the  script  produced  evidential  matter
for  "  Hodgson,"  subsequently  verified  by  him,  and  the  signature
was  a  Greek  cross.  Finally,  the  script  of  July  21,  1903,
produced  further  evidential  matter,  and  after  a  first  signature
"  E.G,"  followed  the  words :  "  Eector  fecit  per
interpretationem  posuit  signum  suum  ipse "  ;
then  a  decorated  equilateral  cross ;  then  the
words  "  again  better  " ;  then  a  better  drawing  of
the  same  crcis,^  reproduced  here  in  facsimile.
I think it will be acknowledoed that  the

o

"  signator  "  who  represents  himself  by  means  of  the  Greek  cross
is  one  of  the  most  efficient  of  the  so-called  "  communicators."

The  three  crosses  appear  together  as  a  signature  to  a  writing
on  July  18,  1904.  The  earlier  part  of  this  script  refers  to
the supposed contents  of a sealed envelope left by  Mr.

iSee  p.  310.  p.  213.

3 The  meaning  of  the  Latin  is  not  clear:  "Rector  {or  The  director)
has  done  it  by  explanation  (?) ;  he  himself  has  set  his  seal."  Mr.
Piddington  suggests  as  a  possible  meaning  for  '  per  interpretationem,'
'by  using  some  one  to  act  as  interpreter  for  him.'


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


79


Myers,  but  the  words  referring  to  the  envelope,  though
appearing  to  confirm  those  of  July  13,  1904,  do  not,  as  those
do,  say  that  the  envelope  in  question  belongs  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge ;  they  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  a  correction  of  what
was  clearly — but,  as  it  turned  out,  erroneously — stated  earlier
in  the  month.^  But  however  that  may  be,  there  is  no  doubt
that  the  latter  part  of  the  script,  in  a  larger  and  rounder
hand  than  my  own,  and  signed  as  above  stated  with  the  three
crosses  reproduced  below,  refers  plainly  to  an  attempt  of
July  3,  1904,  to  work  off  the  verification  of  a  prophecy
"  after  mid  September  next," "  and  then  concludes :  "  do
you  know  who  says  this  ?  not  Myers,  not  any  you  know —
it  is  not  his  function  but  ours."  It  would  thus  appear  that  the
crosses  stand  for  some  supposed  communicators  unknown  to  me,
but  there  is  no  further  indication  of  the  persons  whom  they
represent,  and  the  mysterious  decorations  which  accompany
them  on  this  occasion  throw  no  light  on  the  problem.


It  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  Miss  Johnson,  when  she  read
the  above  account  of  the  crosses  appearing  in  the  script  as
signatures,  that  the  Latin  and  Greek  crosses  are  used  respec-
tively by  two  "  controls  "  of  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  whom  he

^The  words  of  July  18,  1904,  are:  "let  the  trial  be  made  as  they
desire — this  is  clear  that  the  passage  from  the  Symp.  wh.  you  have
found  as  I  told  you  in  the  book  is  in  an  envelope  sealed  by  me.
I  shld  like  Hodgson  to  know  this  but  it  is  not  in  his  envelope.
I  wrote  the  words  some  time  before  the  book  was  ready — pps  the
test  is  not  very  good,  but  it  shld  help."  The  passage  from  the
Symposium  was  not  contained,  as  the  script  of  July  13,  1904,  had
positively  affirmed,  in  the  envelope  left  by  Mr.  Myers  for  experimental
purposes  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  opened  in  December,  1904.  The
incident  is  described  below  on  pp.  299-301,  318.


2  See  p.  327.


80


Chapter  IV.


[part


calls  Imperator  and  Eeetor.  Facsimiles  of  the  signatures  of
Imperator  and  Eeetor  are  given  in  Proc.  S.P.E.  Vols.  IX.  pp.
283,  294;  XL  41.  I  am  familiar  with  the  report  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  phenomena  of  Stainton  Moses,  and  was
aware  that  a  cross  was  used  in  the  signature  of  several  of  his
"  controls."  But  I  had  certainly  never  consciously  distinguished
between  the  use  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  cross,  though  the
distinction  is  plainly  observed,  as  any  one  may  see  who  looks
at  the  facsimiles  in  the  Proceedings.

When  my  script  on  July  21,  1903,  stated  plainly  that  a
certain  cross — here  described  as  a  decorative  Greek  cross — was
the  mark  of  Eeetor,  I  sent  a  copy  to  Dr,  Hodgson  and  asked
whether  such  a  drawing  had  appeared  in  any  writing  during
Mrs.  Piper's  sittings,  where  much  of  the  automatic  script  is
ostensibly  the  work  of  Eeetor.  But  Dr.  Hodgson  had  no
recollection  of  any  such  drawing.  I  therefore  supposed  the
conjunction  of  Eector's  name  and  a  cross  to  be  a  reminiscence
of  my  knowledge  of  the  Stainton  Moses  phenomena.  So  I
still  take  it  to  be,  but  the  reminiscence  is  at  once  more
accurate  and  less  mechanical  than  I  had  supposed  it.  The
cross  of  Eeetor  in  my  script  is  no  exact  reproduction  of
Eector's  cross  as  shown  in  the  Proceedings,  but  while  putting
on  a  decoration  it  retains  the  characteristic  of  the  Greek  cross
with  equal  branches,  always  associated  with  the  Eeetor  of
Mr.  Stainton  Moses.

That  the  distinction  between  the  Latin  cross  of  Imperator
and  the  Greek  cross  of  Eeetor — not  consciously  observed  by
me — was  recognised  by  my  subliminal  self  is  clear,  not  only
from  the  statement  that  the  decorative  Greek  cross  is  the  sign
of  Eeetor  (July  21,  1903,  posuit  signum  suum  ipse),  but  also
from  the  conjunction  in  the  script  of  August  26,  1902,  of  the
Latin  cross  with  the  capital  I,  which  obviously  stands  for
Imperator.  I  had  noticed  the  Christian  symbolism  in  the  cross
and  fish,  but  was  puzzled  to  account  for  the  capital  I.

The  published  accounts  of  the  Stainton  Moses  phenomena
thus  explain  the  appearance  in  my  script  of  the  Latin  and
Greek  crosses.  But  I  have  so  far  found  no  explanation  of
the  St.  Andrew's  or  transverse  cross.  This  does  not  appear
to  have  been  used  by  the  "  controls "  of  Mr.  W.  Stainton
Moses.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


81


Other  Signs.

Of  other  signs  used  nine  occur  singly  and  call  for  no  com-
ment ;  they  are  of  various  sorts,  geometrical  patterns,  mere
scribbles,  a  flower,  three  anchors ;  a  palm  appears  three  times,
in  each  case  with  a  sword.  The  sword  appears  to  have  been
identified.^  But  no  identification  has  been  attempted  for  the
palm,  which  is  so  ill  drawn  that  I  might  have  hesitated  what
name  to  give  it  but  for  the  kind  suggestion  of  the  script,
which  wrote  beneath  the  first  appearance  of  these  two  objects,
on  Aug.  6,  1901,  "the  sword  and  the  palm."

I  have  classed  as  a  signature  a  star,  which  terminated  one
piece  of  writing,  as  it  appears  in  the  usual  place  for  a  sig-
nature, but  I  am  disposed  to  believe  that  it  forms  part  of
the  body  of  the  script.  On  Sept.  7,  1901,  when  the  script
was  trying  to  reproduce  three  Greek  words  wanted  by  my
husband  it  ended  "  Banipal  and  Assur,"  then,  as  another  shot,
"  Asta  aster,"  and  a  rough  drawing  of  a  star.  If  this  star  is
not  counted  as  a  signature,  eight  cases  remain  of  miscellaneous
signatures,  only  two  of  which  follow  script  containing  any-
thing of  possible  interest ;  the  other  six  are  appended  to  some
of  the  most  worthless  of  the  writings.

■(  6')  Unintelligible  signatures.

Of  these  there  are  in  all  nine ;  two  of  them  belong  to  the
first  two  months  of  the  script,  when  the  greater  part  of  what
was  written  was  unintelligible,  and  the  third  is  appended  to  a
wholly  unintelligible  writing,  also  quite  early.  The  writing
preceding  five  others  contains  nothing  of  interest,  and  in  three
cases  is  hardly  intelligible ;  there  may  be  a  point  in  the
script  of  Dec.  22,  1901,  but  not  enough  to  make  it  worth
■quoting.

{D)  Identified  Signatures.

(1)  Signature  of  the  living.

The  initials  of  Mr,  Piddington,  which  appeared  at  the  end
of  a  communication  on  Sept.  6,  1902,  have  been  counted
among  signatures,  though  an  inspection  of  the  script  suggests
that  a  message  for  him  and  not  from  him  was  intended.  The

1  See  pp.  222-4.

F


82


Chapter  IV.


[part


concluding  words  are :  "  Let  him  have  it  to  see.  and  counter-
sign ;  J.  G.  P."  ^  This  was  written  before  I  had  arranged  to
send  each  original  at  once  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  as  the
script  contained  a  statement  that  a  clue  might  be  expected  on
Sept.  17 — a  statement  hitherto  unfulfilled — it  seems  likely
that  the  production  of  Mr.  Piddington's  initials  is  due  to  an
unexpressed  desire  of  my  own  that,  if  anything  came  of  the
remark  about  the  clue  that  was  to  follow,  its  effect  should
not  be  spoilt  for  want  of  due  attestation  of  the  date  of  the
remark.

This  is  the  only  instance  of  an  imitation  of  the  known
signature  of  a  living  person.  An  attempt  to  imitate  the  hand-
writing of  a  living  person  unknown  to  me  has  been  already
noted.^

(2)  and  (3)  Signatures  purporting  to  reprcseiit  the  dead.

The  nature  of  these  signatures  varies  greatly ;  in  some
cases  the  whole  name  is  given,  in  others  the  initials,  or  a
single  initial ;  sometimes  there  is  a  special  arrangement  of
letters,  a  device  suggesting  the  name,  or  an  allusion  to  it.
Counting  all  these  types,  eight  persons  in  all  have  been  repre-
sented by  the  script  as  signatories  on  fifty-four  occasions.

A  few  instances  in  which  evidential  value  may  be  claimed
for  these  signatures  are  discussed  later.^  For  the  most  part,
the  supposed  signatories  being  well  known  to  me,  no  value
whatever  can  be  attached  to  the  mere  appearance  of  their
names  or  initials.  As  regards  the  nature  of  the  communi-
cations definitely  attributed  in  the  script  to  specified  persons,
there  is  not  sufficient  material  upon  which  to  base  a
judgment.  All  that  can  be  said  at  present  is  that  it  appears
from  an  analysis  of  the  statements  made  and  signed  by  various
names  or  symbols,  that  the  so-called  signatories  have  a  certain
individuality,  in  that  some  of  them  have  a  special  faculty  for
making  remarks  of  interest  or  remarks  of  a  particular  type.
Thus  the  owner  of  the  Greek  cross,  whether  we  call  him
Eector  or  not,  is  a  specially  successful  communicator  and  seems
to  have  a  particular  interest  in  Mrs.  Piper  and  Dr.  Hodgson  ;
the  owner  of  the  transverse  cross,  on  the  other  hand,  makes
efforts  to  produce  evidential  matter,  but  with  very  little
iSee  p.  126.  ^  ,See  p.  25. ^See  pp.  222-4,  305-7.


LIII.]


Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form.


83


success.  This  individualism  was  not  the  least  realised  by  me
at  the  time ;  it  was  only  when  I  tabulated  the  statements
under  various  signatures  for  the  purpose  of  this  paper  (in
March  and  April,  1905)  that  I  discovered  that  the  signatories
appeared,  at  least  in  some  instances,  to  possess  distinguishing
characteristics.  How  far  this  may  be  due  to  dramatisation  on
the  part  of  my  subliminal  self  I  cannot  say.


84


Chapter  V.


[part


CHAPTER  V.

Comments  in  the  Script  on  the  Phenomena  and  the
Method  of  Production.

A  LARGE  part  of  the  contents  of  the  writings  consist  of  what
may  be  described  as  personal  matters, — communications,  that  is,
addressed  by  the  scribe  to  myself,  concerning  the  value  of  the
statements  made,  the  difficulty  of  communication,  the  efforts
necessary  to  produce  the  writing,  the  success  or  failure  of
particular  attempts,  the  best  conditions  for  improvement,  and
other  similar  topics.  These  may  be  classified  under  two  main
heads  :  (I.)  statements,  (II.)  exhortations;  and  the  latter  fall  con-
veniently into  two  divisions,  (a)  general  exhortations,  encourage-
ment or  reproach  ;  and  (h)  specific  directions  for  the  conduct
of  the  business  of  communicating.  For  the  purposes  of  this
section  no  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  various  writers  or
listeners,  such  as  has  been  attempted  above ;  ^  it  is  here
presumed  that  the  first  person  '  I '  represents  what  I  call  the
scribe,  and  that  the  second  person  '  you '  stands  for  my  own
normal  personality.

(I.)  Statements  as to success, failure, capacity,  diffi-
culty, ETC.

Success.

The  statements  as  to  success  in  transmission  vary ;  some-
times they  are  perfectly  general :  "  keep  this ;  it  will  be
wanted " ;  sometimes  the  writer  congratulates  himself  on  his
fluency  or  felicity  of  phrase,  or  remarks  that  there  is  "  some-
thing in  this  if  you  could  only  see  it " ;  on  other  occasions
he  states  definitely  that  he  has  produced  this  time  what  may
be verified. There  is, I fear,  little  connexion  between  the

iSee  p.  68.


LIII.]


Comments  by  Scrvpt  on  Phenomena.


85


satisfaction  of  the  writer  and  the  clearness  or  correctness  of
the  script.  Thus,  on  March  13,  1901,  in  a  hopelessly  obscure
passage,  occur  the  words :  moclo  cecini  carmen  indudahile
auribus  has,  "  I  have  just  sung  a  song  that  cannot  escape
your  hearing,"  and  the  next  day  the  unintelligible  words :
dulcissime  sonat  imago  clara  imlsanti  pecletemptin,  "  most  sweetly
sounds  the  clear  echo  to  one  who  dances  a-foot,"  are  followed
by  the  remark :  quam  bene  feci  illncl  I  "  how  well  I  did
that."  The  expressions  (jSTov.  7,  1901,  and  Jan.  8,
1902),  0  quam  bene  currit  plumida  sacpc  rcdit  scnsus,
"  how  well  the  pen  runs,  the  sense  is  repeated,"  and  o  quam
bene  currit  ccdamus  ixderna  lingua,  "  how  well  runs  the  pen  in
its  native  tongue,"  may  refer  to  the  greater  fluency  in
Latin  which  was  certainly  shown  at  first,  rather  than  to
any  specific  success.  But  when  the  hand  remarks  that  "  this
is  a  clue,"  or  that  "  this  is  verifiable,"  after  producing  some-
thing quite  vague  or  hopelessly  confused,  we  can  only  express
a  pious  hope  that  the  future  may  justify  the  writer's  claim.
Only  on  three  of  the  eleven  occasions  when  success  was
claimed  in  this  way  was  the  claim  justified  (June  23,  1901,
Sept.  18,  1901,  and  Oct.  9,  1902),  though  on  three  others
there  may  have  been  a  measure  of  success.''  I  do  not  wish
to  give  the  impression  that  the  script  is  never  to  be  trusted
when  it  makes  a  statement  about  itself;  on  the  contrary,  in
some  cases  considerable  value  attaches  to  its  own  impres-
sions. But  a  general  remark  of  the  kind  here  described  seems
valueless.

Faihire.

The  statements  as  to  failure  are,  generally  speaking,  of  two
types:  (1)  a  general  expression  of  inability,  or  (2)  a  specific
complaint  that  a  particular  fact  or  word  has  not  been  cor-
rectly written  down :  probably  more  value  attaches  to  the
second  than  to  the  first  of  these  two  classes.  It  seems  natural
enough  that  my  own  constantly  present  sense  of  the  futility
of  much  of  the  writing  should  find  expression  in  the  script,
and perhaps  the desire  for success occasionally  represented

^  See  App.,  p.  368,  where  are  given  all  statements,  correct  or
incorrect,  as  to  success,  with  references  to  the  parts  of  this  paper
where  such  statements  are  discussed.


86


Chapter  V.


[part


side  by  side  with  the  knowledge  of  failure  also  represents
a  normal  feeling.  The  three  strongest  expressions  of  this
frustrated  wish  are  in  Latin,  and  iu  each  case  the  failure  is
recognised  as  being  on  the  part  of  the  scribe  (March  6,
1901,  July  8,  1901,  and  Feb.  2,  1904).  Many  of  the
failures  are  attributed  to  the  stupidity  of  the  recipient,  and
are  classified  under  the  head  of  '  reproaches.'  In  the  greater
number  of  the  statements  of  failure,  whether  general  or  par-
ticular, no  definite  cause  is  assigned.  Once  "  the  light  is  dim,"
two  or  three  times  "  it  is  not  clear,"  more  often  the  script
says  simply,  "  I  cannot  do  it,"  sometimes  adding  "  to-day "
with  a  word  of  encouragement  for  "  to-morrow."  Once  in  the
middle  of  some  hopeless  stuff,  it  seemed  to  recognise  its  own
folly  and  exclaimed  in  Latin,  that  being  then  its  normal
language,  o  stxdtiloquor  !  "  what  folly  I  talk  ! "

In  some  cases  where  an  effort  is  made  to  give  a  name
or  a  word  for  identification,  the  statement  is  more  definite ;
thus  on  April  20,  1901,  after  a  signature,  comes  a  remark
that  some  one  has  not  put  what  he  wanted,  and  that  a  certain
alteration  is  to  be  made ;  once  it  is  said  that  there  is  "  a
word  wrong " ;  ^  two  or  three  times  something  is  said  to  be
"  more  like,"  though  not  yet  right.

But  in  general  there  is  little  value  in  these  statements
of  failure ;  when  the  script  is  definitely  correcting  an  earlier
antecedent  error,  it  goes  straight  to  the  problem  before  it
and  omits  all  introductory  observations ;  the  greater  number
of  these  admissions  of  failure  occur  in  pieces  of  writing  which
are  obviously  confused  or  incomplete.  They  are  scattered
throughout  the  writing,  but  are  rather  more  frequent  at  the
beginning ;  they  are  not  very  numerous,  amounting  to  some-
thing like  a  total  of  25.

Capacity.

The  expression  of  capacity  or  effort  to  communicate,  unac-
companied by  a  claim  to  success,  is  almost  confined  to  the
writings  of  the  first  nine  months,  but  is  there  fairly  frequent,
occurring  some  14  times  in  90  pieces.  Three  of  the  occa-
sions when  a  sense  of  greater  ease  was  expressed  were  during
the attempts to reproduce a sentence  thought of by  my

1  See  p.  63.


LIII.]


Comments  by  Script  oyi  Phenomena.


87


husband  without  my  knowledge.  I  had  no  idea  that  he
was  performing  any  experiment,  and  it  was  only  a  year  or
more  afterwards  when  he  told  me  the  circumstances  that  I
found  that  there  was  a  connected  endeavour  on  the  part  of
the  script,  and  that  the  three  pieces  now  in  question  belonged
to  that  series.  They  were  written  on  June  3,  July  31,
and  August  16,  1901  ;  and  each  of  the  three  purported  to
come  from  the  same  signatory.  On  another  occasion,  July  23,
1901,  two  messages  were  sent,  one  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the
other  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  both  seem  to  have  shown  some
intelligence  on  the  part  of  the  scribe,^  who  was  therefore
perhaps  justified  in  saying  "it  is  easier  to-night";  he  adds
that  the  sign,  which  he  then  tried  to  give,  was  "  hard  to
make "  to  me,  and  he  certainly  did  not  succeed  in  producing
anything  intelligible.  On  Nov.  13,  1901,  after  Mrs.  Forbes
and  I  had  tried  Planchette  together  for  the  first  time  with  no
results  of  interest,  my  script,  which  was  particularly  fluent  and
encouraging,  though  it  contained  nothing  evidential,  concluded :
"  How  much  easier  it  is  to-night,"  and  once,  on  Dec.  1 9,
1901,  though  at  the  beginning  impressed  with  the  difficulty,
apparently  on  its  own  side,  it  ended  by  assuring  me  that  I
""  understood  better "  that  night.  But  the  effort  remains
unintelligible.

Desire  frustrated.

Three  times  the  script  asserted  that  it  had  made  an  effort
to  which  I  had  not  responded,  and  twice  it  complained  in
more  general  terms  that  it  had  wanted  to  say  something,
hut  had  been  prevented  by  me.  On  the  last  of  these  occa-
sions— all  belong  to  the  earlier  days — Sept.  4,  1901,  I  had
written,  in  obedience  to  a  strong  impulse,  and  the  contents
■concerned  my  husband's  sentence.'  On  the  first  occasion,
March  8,  1901,  my  arm  ached  before  I  sat  for  writing,  as
it  had  done  earlier  in  the  day,^  and  it  is  likely  that  with
more  experience  I  should  have  recognised  this  aching  as  a
•desire  on  the  part  of  my  hand  to  write ;  that  is  probably
the  explanation  of  the  opening  words  of  the  script :  veni  hodi-
srno  nondum  parata  eras,  "  I  came  to-day  but  you  were  not
jet  ready."

iSee  pp.  194-199.  2  gee  p.  162.  s  gee  p.  13.


88


GJia'pter  V.


[part


On  another  occasion,  when  I  wrote  in  obedience  to  an
impulse,  May  3,  1901,  the  first  words  were  a  question  as
to  why  I  had  not  written  the  day  before  when  the  hand
wanted  to  write,  and  a  warning  that  it  was  difficult  if  I
refused.  I  had  felt  a  strong  desire  to  write  the  day  before
while  I  was  at  a  Committee  meeting,  but  naturally  had  not
been  able  to  yield  to  it.  On  two  of  the  five  occasions
when  I  apparently  failed  to  respond  I  was  entirely  unaware
of  any  special  sensation.

Coviplaint  of  difficulty.

From  time  to  time  the  script  contains  complaints  of  the
difficulties  of  writing,  some  of  them  apparently  inevitable,
others  due  to  itself,  others  again — and  these  more  frequently —
due  to  me.  These  last  complaints  seem  addressed  to  me  per-
sonally, but  on  some  dozen  occasions  there  are  to  be  found
observations  to  the  effect  that  "  it  is  dark  "  and  therefore  use-
less to  go  on  at  that  moment,  or  that  "  it  is  hard "  and
"  there  is  confusion,"  or  again  that  the  difficulty  is  due  to  want
of  experience ;  "  it  will  come  with  patience,  it  is  not  usual
hence  the  difficulty."  Twice  the  scribe  wrote,  Tu  aiitcm
nescis  ego  non  2>ossum,  "  you  don't  know  and  I  can't,"  and
sometimes  it  says  that  a  date  or  a  word  is  hard,  or  that  it
is  hard  "  to-day."  Besides  once  saying  that  the  light  was
dim,  it  has  on  four  or  five  occasions  spoken  of  hindering
darkness,  but  on  the  whole  there  is  a  marked  absence  of
the  references  to  "  the  light "  which  are  common  in  other
automatic  writings  known  to  me.  The  complaints  about
difficulty,  like  the  statements  of  failure,  are  found  in  the
more  scrappy  and  less  successful  of  the  writings,  but  occa-
sionally in  the  midst  of  what  proves  to  be  of  some  interest
a  complaint  is  made  of  the  difficulty  of  giving  a  particular
thing.

(II.)  General  Exhortations.

There  are  a  very  considerable  number  of  remarks  through-
out the  script  addressed  to  me  and  urging  me  to  "  go  on,"
or  to  "  wait  for  a  result,"  or  to  "  try  again,"  or  to  "  leave
off  now,"  and  of  these  I  do  not  propose  to  say  anything,  as
they  have  no  interest  and  throw  no  light  upon  the  problem


LIII.]


Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.


89


of  the  writing.  Bi;t  possibly  something  may  be  learnt  from
a  consideration  of  the  longer  and  more  deliberate  utterances.
To  judge  from  the  reproaches  of  the  scribe,  a  great  deal  of
the  difficulty  and  confusion  is  directly  attributed  to  me ;  T
seem  not  only  unable,  but  unwilling  to  understand — indeed,
the  unwillingness  seems  more  obvious  to  the  scribe  than  the
inability.  At  first  the  script  expressed  a  good  deal  of  impa-
tience with  my  stupidity,  wilful  or  otherwise :  "  I  should  like
to  speak,  but  you  will  not  let  me " ;  or  o  mora,  ingrata  tihi
canam  "  0  the  delay,  I  should  waste  my  words  on  you " ;
or  again,  "  how  can  I  ?  help,  can't  you,  combination  is  the
best."  ^  Once  after  reproaching  me  with  not  writing  earlier,
as  it  had  long  wanted  to  tell  me  something,  it  went  on :
"  you  cant  hear  tonight.  Your  head  is  full."'  Yet  the  next
day  it  began  :  "  Why  did  you  stop  yesterday  ?  It  was  interest-
ing. But  you  did  not  understand."  In  time,  however,  the
scribe  seems  to  have  realised  that  the  difficulties  were  not
created  wilfully  by  me,  for  its  impatience  unmistakeably
lessens  with  experience,  and  though  it  still  tells  me  some-
times that  the  fault  is  mine,  it  seems  to  recognise  that  the
fault  is  not  intentional.  "  This  is  not  right.  but  you  can
do  no  more,"  is  the  latest  expression  of  reproach,  a  very  con-
siderable modification  of  the  incisive  remarks  of  earlier  days.

But  even  in  the  earlier  days  the  script  was  encouraging
on  occasion ;  after  saying  that  it  would  be  plain  some  day,
that  it  would  be  easier  when  I  had  gone  to  the  mountains,
and  so  on,  it  began  to  commend  me.  It  is  true  that  the
first  commendation  came  only  after  a  reprimand.  On  Oct.
29,  1901,  it  wrote  (I  translate  the  Latin):

I  have  often  been  present ;  you  do  not  always  recognise  your
friend ;  lay  aside  your  folly  ;  do  not  prefer  your  own  interpretation
to  that  of  others.  You  do  not  know— you,  I  mean,  you  are  mistaken  ;.
you  do  not  know.  But  you  will  be  able  some  day.  .  .  Listen  and
look  at  night.  no  one  but  you  can  help  you.  But  you  know
more  now  and  I  can  do  it  better.

^  It  is  of  course  possible  that  these  observations  are  of  the  nature
of  reported  conversations  (see  above)  and  not  intended  for  me  per-
sonally ;  but  at  the  time  that  they  were  made  I  took  them  as
addressed  to  myself.

^  English  began  here.


90


Chapter  V.


[part


Six  weeks  later  the  script  began  with  one  of  its  rolling
mysterious  sentences  that,  like  the  poetry  of  dreams,  appear
impressive  till  you  take  a  nearer  view,  though  here,  judged
with  the  context,  it  may  not  be  wholly  meaningless :  "  Unused
of  old  forewarned  but  not  exempt — none  is.  But  we  learn
like  you.  It  is  hard."  Then  it  goes  on  in  Latin :  mo7istro
tibi  quod  vix  possim ;  iiicrcdibilc  sane  verurii  quidem.  quod  si
crcdas  maiora  sequuntur*  and  concludes :  "  That  is  all  I  can
do.  You  understand  better  tonight.  Go  on."  And  hence-
forth, though  the  encouragement  is  still  sparingly  bestowed,
the  reproaches  almost  entirely  cease.

Exhortations  to  believe.

An  attitude  of  belief  on  the  part  of  the  person  addressed
is  constantly  recommended  by  the  script.  Patience  is  desired,
perseverance  is  advised,  careful  recording  of  all  that  is  written,
even  if  not  intelligible,  is  often  urged ;  but  the  most  frequently
recurring  injunction  is  to  "  believe " — not  to  attach  credence
to  a  particular  statement,  but  to  have  confidence,  generally
speaking,  in  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena,  and  to  allow
the  mind  to  assume  a  receptive  attitude. Thus  on  April  19,

1901,  a  very  urgent  piece  of  writing,  trying  to  describe
something  that  is  to  be  looked  for,^  winds  up  with  an  appeal
apparently  addressed  to  me,  as  my  initials  appear  followed
by  a  signature :  "  Cant  you  see  ?  cant  you  believe  ?  M.  de
G.  V."  On  three  later  occasions  (April  22,  July  4,  and
August  IG,  1901)  it  is  said  that  belief  will  make  things  clear.
On  Sept.  9,  1901,  the  converse  is  stated,  that  the  disbelief
of  some  one  (specified)  makes  it  hard.  On  Nov.  13,  1901,
after  Mrs.  Forbes  and  I  had  for  the  first  time  met  and  talked
over  our  automatic  writing,  my  script  wrote :  "  Your  belief
helps  most — that  is  why  I  wanted  her  to  come  to  you."
Three  times  more  in  the  next  three  months  does  the  script
speak  of  the  importance  of  belief  on  my  part,  and  on  Feb.  27,

1902,  after  the  expression  of  a  strong  wish  that  I  should
l)elieve  what  the  writer  points  out  to  me,  it  is  stated  that
the  thing  so  pointed  out  is  intended  for  me  personally,  and

*  Trans. "I  point  out  to  you  what  I  hardly  can;  it  is  certainly
incredible  though  true. If  you  believe  this  greater  things  follow."
1  See  p.  195  for  the  incident,  which  seems  to  be  evidential.


Li[i.]  Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.  91


it  is,  I  think,  indicated  that  matter  of  general  evidential  value
shall  follow  later  on.  The  words  are :  si  modo  credere  velis
quod  tihi  monstro,  tibi  ncc  caeteris — postmodo  gentihtis.  "  If  only
you  will  believe  what  I  show  you — to  you  not  to  others,
afterwards  to  the  world."

The  injunctions  to  believe  continue  at  intervals.  On  June
24,  1902,  the  script  says  it  has  done  its  part  and  it  is  now
for  me  to  do  mine ;  to  understand — and,  what  is  hardest  of
all,  to  believe ;  hard  is  that,  but  necessary.  Some  distinction
is  apparently  made  between  belief  and  faith,  for  it  continues :
"  Eeason  demands  belief— and  reason  will  give  it.  Faith  is
another  thing — that  eomes."  On  March  1,  1903,  it  is  thought
impossible  that  I  should  withhold  my  assent  any  longer,  and
on  March  7  the  script  enquires  whether  "  this  is  easier  to
believe,  0  you  who  who  never  give  me  your  faith  ! "  ^  This
remark  occurs  in  a  particularly  obscure  communication  appa-
rently referring  to  Neo-Platonic  philosophy.  On  August  22,
1903,  I  am  told  to  carry  out  a  certain  action,"  "and  then
write  for  the  certainty — you  do  not  believe  that  makes
it  hard.  But  Hodgson's  letter  will  encourage  you  when  it
comes  this  week."  No  letter  from  Dr.  Hodgson  was  received
within  a  week  of  August  22,  1903,  but  a  letter  was  written
by  him  on  August  28,  1903,  which  when  it  was  received
by  me  on  Sept.  7  was  found  to  be  distinctly  encouraging,
though  it  contained  no  proof  of  the  trustworthiness  of  my
automatic  writing.  However,  although  I  was  not  aware  of  any
particular  change  in  my  attitude  between  the  end  of  August
and  the  end  of  September  of  that  year,  the  script  seems  to
have  been  satisfied,  for  on  Sept.  22,  1903,  after  referring  to
certain  events  which  would — and  did — occur,  it  went  on :
"  Then  this  writing  of  mine  to  you  will  bring  conviction.
Not  to  you — you  have  it."  Since  that  time  no  further  refer-
ence to  my  scepticism  was  made  till  on  August  14,  1904,  it
reproached  me  for  not  opening  the  '  sealed  envelope '  in  the
words  :  "  And  you  will  not  look — Faith  is  not  yours."

So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  these  remarks  of
the  script  do  not  correspond  with  any  subjective  feeling  on

^The  Latin  runs:  "Num  credibilius  illud,  o  nunquam  mihi
iidem  praebens."

2  See  p.  101.


92


CJiapter  V.


[part


my  own  part.  From  the  beginning  of  1901  I  have  kept  a
diary  in  which  it  has  been  my  habit  to  note  any  change  or
development  of  opinion  on  the  subject  of  the  value  of  the
automatic  writing  or  other  kindred  topics.  Looking  through
this  diary  I  find  that  there  is  recorded  in  it  a  distinctly
increasing  tendency  towards  what  I  suppose  the  script  would
call  "belief,"  that  is,  to  a  disposition  to  attach  value  to  the  com-
munications of  the  script  and  to  attribute  them  to  some  external
cause  rather  than  to  my  own  subliminal  self.  But  I  can  trace
no  connexion  between  the  recorded  dates  of  such  progressive
opinion  and  the  dates  on  whicli  the  script  advises  the  adop-
tion of  a  receptive  attitude,  though  I  think  that  the  tone
adopted  in  the  successive  utterances  of  the  script  shows  a
certain  recognition  that  my  attitude  was  less  sceptical  latterly
than  it  had  been  at  first.  May  16  and  17,  1901,  were  the
dates  when  first  it  seemed  to  me  that  there  was  something
like  evidence  for  an  external  cause  for  the  writing,  and
on  June  1  of  the  same  year  a  distinct  step  in  the  progressive
opinion  of  which  I  have  spoken  was  made.  Other  dates
there  are  in  this  mental  progress,  especially  Nov.  3  and  Dec.
19,  1902,  Feb.  10,  1903,  and  above  all  Oct.  20,  1903.i
But  the  script,  though  perhaps  admitting  a  less  resolute
incredulity  on  my  part  in  June,  1902,  continues  to  reproach
me  with  scepticism,  and  apparently  only  recognises  a  distinct
change  of  attitude  between  Aug.  22  and  Sept.  22,  1903.
This  I  certainly  did  not  recognise  or  record,  but  on  Aug.
26  I  carried  out  an  injunction  of  the  script  given  on  Aug.
22,"  and  the  script  of  Sept.  17  said  that  my  so  doing  had
helped,  so  that  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the  congratula-
tions of  Sept.  22  on  my  change  of  attitude  are  due  to  that
action  on  my  part  ratlier  than  to  any  actual  change  of
opinion  as  to  the  value  of  the  script.  After  all,  to  carry  out
an  injunction  does  show  a  certain  confidence,  so  that  the
script  may  have  had  reason  for  its  satisfaction.  But  it  was
not  happy  in  returning  in  August,  1904,  to  its  old  reproach
of  want  of  faith  in  the  case  of  the  experiment  with  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  sealed  envelope. The  "  faith  "  that  was  shown

^  For  extracts  from  diary  and  statements  about  what  occurred  on
these  dates,  see  App.,  p.  369.
-  See  preceding  page.


LIU.]  Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.  93

in  opening  that  envelope,  at  the  urging  of  the  script,  was
not  in  the  issue  justified.^

(III.)  Directions  Given.

No  comment  is  needed  on  the  frequently  expressed  desire
that  I  should  be  patient,  should  persevere,  should  note  every-
thing, should  interpret  later,  and  so  on,  sometimes  follov?ed
by  promises  of  success  if  I  would  do  these  things.  I  pass  on
to  what  may  be  called  the  directions  given  by  the  script  for
the  conduct  of  the  whole  affair,  directions  which  fall  under
three  main  heads,  according  as  they  concern  (1)  the  writing
itself,  (2)  the  publication  of  the  writing,  in  the  widest  sense
of  the  word,  making  known  to  others  the  contents  of  the
script;  and  (3)  action  other  than  writing  or  publication.

1.  Directions  as  to  writing.

(a)  Negative  directions ; to  ahstain.

The  directions  as  to  writing  ^  are  positive  and  negative ;
I  am  told  not  to  write  for  a  certain  time  or  to  write
regularly,  or  to  write  on  some  special  day.  On  three  of  the
seven  occasions  when  the  script  told  me  to  wait  the  writing
was  particularly  scrappy ;  on  the  other  four,  I  had  been
writing  rather  more  frequently  than  usual  before  the  desire
for  an  interval  was  expressed.  In  all  cases  I  attended  to  the
directions,  but  I  have  no  reason  to  see  in  them  anything
more  than  a  reflexion  of  the  impression  which  I  may  very
well  have  had  that  the  writing  was  poor,  or  that  I  had  been
doing  a  good  deal  of  it  lately.

(&)  Positive  directions ; to  vmte.

The  positive  directions  for  writing  are  very  much  more
numerous  and  deserve  more  attention ;  counting  one  or  two
doubtful  cases  there  are  in  all  34.  They  are  of  two  types,
(a)  vague :  where  I  am  told  to  write  during  a  period  of
varying  length,  and  (/3)  definite : where  a  fixed  day  is  named

1  For  an  arrangement  of  the  dates  given  in  script  and  diary  in
parallel  columns,  see  App.,  p.  369.

2  For  complete  list,  see  App.  pp.  371-3.


94


Gha2iter  V.


[part


for  writing.  It  should  however  be  said  that  where  the  fixed
day  is  "  to-morrow "  I  am  not  sure  that  the  actual  next
day  is  intended,  as  the  script  uses  "to-morrow"  in  some  other
instances  as  equivalent  to  the  near  future.  But  in  deter-
mining the  value  of  its  instructions  I  have  naturally  not
given  it  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  and  have  reckoned  "to-
morrow "  as  meaning  the  day  subsequent  to  that  on  which
the  direction  was  given.

(a)  VcKjuc  ;  during  a  2)criod.

Instructions  to  write  during  a  period  were  given  seven
times ;  once  the  remark  is  unintelligible  and  may  not  refer
to  a  date  for  me  to  write  at  all  (March  19,  1903);  another
time  the  writing  (Oct.  19,  1903)  tells  me  not  to  look  for
evidence  in  the  script  which  I  am  to  produce  "  this  week,"
and  the  script  so  produced,  though  all  on  the  same  subject
and  perhaps  presenting  points  of  interest,  is  not  evidential.^
On  a  third  occasion  I  was  prevented  from  carrying  out  the
instructions  (Oct.  30,  1903).

Four  cases  remain  ;  of  these  the  promise  that  "  it  is  better
in  June"  (May  29,  1903)  was  quite  unfulfilled,  if  the
reference  is  to  ascertainable  value  in  the  writing.  The  script
during  June,  1903  was  particularly  scrappy  and  unconvincing;
it  was  obtained  with  difficulty  in  very  uncongenial  circum-
stances :  we  were  abroad  in  the  worst  weather  I  ever
experienced  anywhere,  and  I  was  anxious  about  my  husband's
health.  On  June  30,  1903,  however,  nothing  daunted,  it
again  told  me  to  write  much  the  next  month  "  here  and  at
home."  I  did  what  I  could  but  was  much  interrupted,  as
we  were  still  travelling  till  the  middle  of  the  month ;  5  pieces
of  script  thus  obtained  in  July  contained  nothing  of  interest,
but  a  fluent  and  long  piece  of  writing  on  July  21  and
another  on  July  3 1  produced  perhaps  the  best  evidence  of
knowledge  of  facts  wholly  unknown  to  me  that  has  occurred.

Of  three  bits  of  script  produced  "  this  week,"  according  to
orders  on  March  15,  1903,  one  was  good  and  two  useless.
The  directions  of  Oct.  27,  1902,  that  I  was  to  write  more
often  and  should  be  helped  "  by  Talbot  all  through  Novem-
ber "  tallied  with  a  statement  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  Oct.

1  See  pp.  52-4,  297.


Liii.]  Comments  hy  Scri^ot  on  Phenomena.  95


30.^  My  own  writing  in  that  month  of  November  was  more
intelligent  and  interesting  than  usual,  very  little  actual  rubbish
being  produced  ;  it  was  in  that  month  also  that  I  received
from  Mrs.  Forbes  the  "  message "  which  drew  my  attention
to  the  passage  in  Plato's  Si/inposinm}  Twice  then  out  of
four  times  the  direction  to  write  during  a  certain  period
proved  fruitful.

Definite :  on  a  fixed  day.
"  To-night."

It  is  very  unusual  for  me  to  write  more  than  once  on
the  same  day ;  it  has  only  happened  six  times  in  four  years,
twice  by  deliberate  intention  on  my  own  part,  because  the
conditions  of  the  first  attempt  had  been  such  that  I  was  not
sure  that  the  impulse  to  write  had  been  exhausted,  and  four
times  in  obedience  to  supposed  directions  in  the  script.  One
of  these  directions  was  quite  indefinite.^  On  another  occasion,
March  14,  1902,  when  the  script  directed  me  to  "write
each  day  again  to-night,"  the  writing  was  obscure  and  ap-
parently recognised  its  failure.

But  on  the  other  two  occasions  when  the  script  urged  me
to  write  again  on  the  same  day  (June  24  and  Dec.  19,
1902),  the  matter  produced  was  of  some  interest.

"  To-morrow."

Five  of  the  instructions  to  write  on  a  fixed  date  appointed
"to-morrow."  Of  these  one  (Oct.  22,  1903)  is  in  the  middle
of  the  series  described  above  *  when  on  several  consecutive
occasions  the  script  dealt  with  the  same  set  of  ideas ;  it
was  on  the  "  morrow  "  that  there  was  made  that  combination
of  the  Gospel  phrase  and  the  Platonic  allegory  which  I  sub-
sequently found  to  have  been previously  made  by  a  Father

^  For  the  "  telepathic "  connexion  between  me  and  Mrs.  Forbes,
see  p.  238.  Mrs.  Forbes  did  not  know  of  my  script  of  Oct.  27
when  she  wrote  on  Oct.  30.

2  See  p.  241.

^  This  does  not  appear  in  the  list  given  in  the  Appendix  as  it
seems  to  mean  "no  more  now,"  rather  than  a  positive  direction
"  write  to-night."

*  See  p.  52.


96


Chcqjter  V.


[part


of  the  Church  aud  a  modern  commentator.  Another  belongs
to  the  series  of  experiments  with  Mr.  Constable,  described
below,-^  and  on  the  "  morrow "  a  veridical  statement  seems
to  have  been  obtained.  The  third  (Dec.  7,  1903)  suggested  an
e.xperiment  which  could  not  be  made.

On  Feb.  1,  1904  I  had  fixed  my  mind  before  writing
on  a  particular  point  upon  which  I  wanted  more  information
from  the  script,  but  though  there  was  a  reference  to  that
point  at  the  beginning,  almost  at  once  other  irrelevant  and
apparently  new  matter  was  introduced  and  the  script  then
said :  "  We  had  another  message  but  this  was  urgent,  write
to-morrow  for  ours."  The  writing  of  the  morrow  was,  how-
ever, extremely  obscure  and  if  it  had  any  meaning  I  have
failed  to  gather  it  from  the  extraordinary  Greek  of  which  it
is  composed.  Again  on  Feb.  5,  1904,  the  script  apparently
tried  to  be  evidential,  but  recognising  its  failure  said,  "  write
to  morrow  but  expect  no  word."  I  wrote  on  the  next  day,
and  there  was  an  attempt,  only  partially  successful,  to  give
evidential  matter  on  a  wholly  new  subject.

"  On  a  fixed  day."

The  directions  to  write  on  a  fixed  day,  numbered  9  to  27
in  the  Appendix,  really  represent  21  orders,  as  two  of  them
are  double  (Nos.  17,  20),  and  fall  into  three  classes,  according
as  the  results "  on  the  days  in  question  were  good,  bad,  or
untested.  Only  a  rough  classification  has  been  attempted ;
when  any  matter  of  apparent  interest — of  whatever  kind —
has  been  produced,  I  have  classified  the  result  as  '  good.'

Untested  Besults.

The  failure  to  carry  out  instructions  was  sometimes  due
to  defective  directions,  sometimes  to  neglect  on  my  part,  some-
times to  a  combination  of  the  two.  Thus,  when  on  June  30,
1901,  the  script  told  me  to  count  15  days  and  "listen  that
night,"  I  did  not  then  understand,  as  I  should  have  done
with more  experience, that  the listening was to be  done

iSee  p.  168.

2  The  number  of  results  is  19,  as  twice  two  directions  for  the
same  day  were  given.  They  may  be  thus  classed  :  results  good,  8 ;
bad,  4  ;  untested,  7.


Liii.]  Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.  97


pencil  in  hand. But  on  July  17,  1901,  the  script  said  that
I  ought  to  have  written  on  July  15  in  these  words  :
roga  quid  eveniat  in  diem  ante  hunc  biduum — quid  evenerit  dicere
volui — cur  non  scripsisti  1  *

On  the  other  occasions,  through  forgetfulness,  I  failed  to  carry
out  a  plain  direction.  Two  of  the  orders  referred  to  the  same
day,  but  the  first  time  I  was  told  to  write  on  that  day  was
some  fifteen  weeks  in  advance  (Dec.  7,  1903)  and  so  I  suppose
the  script  thought  it  desirable  to  remind  me,  for  on  April  10,
1904,  it  wrote:  "and  write  on  the  23rd."  But  in  spite  of  this
I  regret  to  say  that  I  forgot  all  about  writing  on  April  23  till,
on  April  27,  1904,  I  was  reminded  of  it  by  the  script  writing:
"  Why  did  you  forget  the  23rd  ?  "

•  Good  Results.

On  March  29,  1901,  the  script  was  written  in  the  morning
at  11  a.m.,  and  therefore  the  hour  then  appointed,  ten  days
and  ten  hours  from  that  time,  would  bring  us  to  9  p.m.  in
the  evening  of  April  8.  Accordingly  at  that  hour  I  tried
for  writing  and  the  result,  though  at  the  time  unintelligible
to  me,  was  subsequently  found  to  have  a  good  deal  more
meaning  than  had  up  to  then  been  discoverable  in  the  pre-
ceding script.  The  script  of  May  26,  1901,  was  at  10.20  p.m.,
and  the  40  hours  which  I  was  to  count  brings  us  to  2.30
p.m.  on  May  28 ;  the  script  so  produced  contained  traces  of
a  telepathic  connexion  with  a  friend.  The  other  four  successful
appointments  were  made  on  August  7,  1901,  when,  on  the
date  arranged,  some  success  was  obtained  in  cjettins;  the  Greek
sentence  wanted  by  my  husband;  June  14,  1903,  when,  on
one  of  the  two  dates  arranged,  there  was  shown  probable
telepathic  knowledge  of  the  intentions  of  a  friend  named ;
July  13,  1902,  and  Dec.  27,  1903,  when,  on  the  dates
named  in  the  script,  undoubted  connexion  was  shown  between
my  script  and  Mrs.  Forbes^;  Dec.  25,  1903,  and  Jan.  9,  1904,
when  on  the  day  named  for  writing  the  script  produced  an
unintelligible  association  of  ideas  subsequently  found  to  have
some  interest.^

*  Trans. "  Ask  what  is  happening  two  days  before  this — what  has
happened  I  meant  to  say ;  why  did  you  not  write  ? "
1  See  pp.  235,  264.  2  gee  p.  297.

G


98


Chapter  V.


[part


Bad  BesvMs.

There  remain  four  cases  where  the  writings  on  the  appointed
dates  contained  nothing  of  interest.  One  of  them  is  ambiguous
in  more  than  one  point;  the  direction  on  March  11,  1903,
to  "  watch,  not  alone "  and  "  when  the  vision  comes  note  the
day "  may  not  indicate  automatic  writing  at  all ;  and  it  is
possible  that  by  "  the  fifteenth  day "  the  script  meant  March
15,  though  the  later  words  "count  from  now"  seem  to  show
that  it  meant  15  days  after  the  date  of  writing,  namely,
March  26.  I  wrote  on  both  days;  March  15  brought  a
partial  success  in  obtaining  a  password  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  in
trance,  but  March  26  gave  nothing  so  far  found  valuable.

Another  case  probably  represents  a  revived  memory  and  is
in  any  case  ambiguously  expressed.  On  Dec.  28,  1904,  the
script  wrote :

6  days  you  must  wait  from  now  and  other  3.  then  the  message
will  make  things  clear. Let  it  come  then.

It  was  not  certain  whether  I  was  to  write  on  the  date  given
or  to  expect  a  message  from  some  one  else.  No  message
came.  My  own  writing  on  January  6,  1905,  referred  to
Mrs.  Forbes,  but  was  not  evidential.  As  the  next  paragraph
in  the  script  of  December  28,  1904  after  this  mention  of  a
date,  also  referred  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  as  on  consideration  I
remembered  that  January  6  was  a  day  of  associations  for
Mrs.  Forbes  and  marked  a  coincidental  cross-correspondence
between  her  and  me  in  the  preceding  year  1904,^  there  is
little  doubt  that  the  recollection  of  this  fact  produced  the
instructions  of  the  script  of  December  28,  1904,  to  wait  six
days,  and  then  three.  The  elaborate  allusion  to  a  date
already  marked  in  my  mind  is  paralleled  in  the  script  of
Sept.  28,  1901,  where  a  second  reference  to  "October  19"
appears  in  a  similar  form,  not  intelligible  without  some
consideration.-

It  is  not  easy  to  draw  any  conclusion  from  an  examination
of  these  results ;  in  many  cases  it  seems  as  if  the  remarks
of  the  script  were  reflexions  of  feelings  more  or  less  dimly
present  in  my  own  normal  consciousness,  and  this  probably
occurs  more  often  than  has  been  recognised. The  number  of

iSee  p.  264.  2 p.  330,


Liii.]  Comments  by  Scrijjt  on  Phenomena.  99


successes  is  not  sufficiently  great  in  comparison  with  the
number  of  failures  to  justify  much  confidence  in  the  directions
of  the  script ;  but  it  may  perhaps  be  said  that  more  value
attaches  to  its  positive  than  to  its  negative  statements,  and
experience  shows  that  it  is  desirable  to  carry  out  the  injunc-
tions whenever  they  are  intelligible,  and  to  give  some  attention
to  discovering  their  meaning.

The  direction  to  "  write  regularly "  is  not  infrequent,  and
it  is  not  certain  whether  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  general
remark,  such  as  those  above  mentioned,  to  "  go  on,"  etc.,  or
whether  it  is  meant  for  a  specific  order,  to  apply  under  the
immediate  circumstances.  In  either  case  there  seems  nothing
to  learn  from  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  occasions  when
the  advice  is  given  ;  I  have  carried  it  out  whenever  I  could.

2.  Directions  as  to  "Publication."

When  the  script  makes  a  definite  statement,  it  usually
gives  no  indication  of  the  persons  to  whom  this  is  to  be  com-
municated, but  occasionally  it  expresses  a  desire  that  certain
information  should  be  conveyed  or  withheld,  or  corroborated
by  enquiry.  Where  names  of  persons  are  thus  introduced  the
writings  will  be  discussed  in  detail  when  I  deal  with  "  verifiable
incidents."  The  names  are  often,  I  think,  introduced  as  part
of  the  information  which  the  script  seeks  to  give,  and  the
form  "  Ask  (So  and  So) "  is  not  meant  to  convey  an  instruction,
but  to  say  for  whom  the  incident  will  have  a  meaning.  Some-
times the  relation  of  an  incident  or  the  introduction  of  a
name  is  followed  by  such  remarks  as  "  Tell  (some  one)  this,"  or
"  Ask,  ask  till  you  know,"  "  surely  you  can  find  out  from
some  one,"  but  it  is  not  common  for  the  script  to  do  this.  On
the  other  hand  there  have  been  some  dozen  occasions  on  which
it  has  enjoined  temporary  or  permanent  silence.  Twice  the
script  implies  that  information  given  is  for  me  personally  and
not  for  general  use.  One  of  these  injunctions  is  intelligible  to
me,  but  on  the  other  occasion  the  direction  apparently  means
that  the  information  is  still  incomplete.  Twice  I  am  told  not
to  tell  a  special  person,  but  the  description  of  the  person  is
too  indefinite  for  identification.  Four  times  the  script  tells  me
not  to  ask  but  to  wait  for  information,  twice  with  complete
justification,  but twice  for  no  discoverable  reason. Once  I


100


Chapter  V,


[part


am  told  not  to  tell  my  husband  something  and  once  not  to
tell  Dr.  Hodgson  ;  on  neither  occasion  have  I  found  any  mean-
ing in  the  injunction.  On  Sept.  22,  1903,  I  was  told  not
to  say  anything  about  the  Symposmm  passage  yet,  but  the
information  subsequently  given  in  the  script  about  this  passage
vsras  incorrect,  and  all  that  my  script  stated  correctly  about  it  ^
had  already  been  given  before  the  recommendation  to  wait
before  talking  of  it.  Again  the  script  told  me  on  Oct.  12,
1903,  not  to  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  something  yet,  but  when  it
removed  the  prohibition,  no  information  was  obtainable  to  justify
its  previous  advice.

On  the  whole  then  no  special  value  seems  to  attach  to  the
directions  of  the  script  on  this  point.

3.  Other  Directions.
(a)  Negative.

From  time  to  time  also  the  script  has  given  me  negative
and  positive  instructions  of  a  more  general  nature ;  the
negative  are  not  many,  only  some  three  or  four,  and  do  not
seem  important ;  ne  tentaveris  novas  vias,  for  instance,  "  do
not  try  new  methods,"  is  too  vague  to  have  any  interest.

{h)  Positive.

The  positive  instructions  vary  considerably.  Sometimes  they
deal  with  particular  points,  as  when  the  script  attempts  to
obtain  verification  of  something  previously  described :  "  look
in  the  paper  for  three  days"  (March  19,  1902)  or
"Look  in  paper"  (October  21,  1902).  On  neither  occasion
could  I  find  anything  in  the  paper  which  bore  on  the  con-
tents of  the  script.  On  the  other  hand  the  repeated  direction
(from  Jan.  14  to  Jan.  31,  1903)  to  look  in  Human  Per-
sonality for  a  reference  to  a  passage  from  the  Symposi'imi
was  justified."

Once  I  was  told  to  look  back  in  the  script  for  the  explana-
tion of  a  statement  made,  but  my  researches  were  not
successful.  Two  or  three  times  the  script  has  referred  to
earlier  allusions  to  the  subject  with  which  it  was  then  dealing.
Several orders  have been given  which are  not  intelligible ;

iSee  pp.  310-8.  2  See  p.  315.


Liir.]


Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.


101


these  occur  chiefly  in  the  earlier  writings,  though  one  at  least
came  fairly  late.  A  few  suggestions  concerning  specified
persons  ^  have  been  made,  and  once,  as  above  mentioned,"  the
script  urged  me  to  perform  a  specified  action  (Aug.  22,  1903).
Whether  any  useful  purpose  was  served  by  my  carrying  out
that  order,  I  am  unable  to  determine ;  the  facts  are  given
below  in  sequence :

Aug.  22,  1903.  Order  given,  followed  by  statement  that  I
did  not  believe  and  that  made  it  hard.

Aug.  26. Action  performed.^

Sept.  9.  Script  gave  information,  subsequently  verified,  also
referred  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  made  its  first  effort  to  send  him
the  "  Syringa  "  message.*

Sept.  17.  Script  said  that  the  action  done  had  helped  me
to  the  thought  and  that  the  knowledge  would  come.

It  thus  appears  that  not  long  after  I  had  carried  out  the
order  of  the  script  I  did  obtain  an  evidential  statement  in
my  script  (Sept.  9)  and  though  at  the  time  of  writing  I
had  no  idea  that  the  script  of  Sept.  9  was  of  special  interest,
the  next  script,  Sept.  17,  claimed  that  I  had  been  helped  by
carrying  out  its  order.  But  in  the  absence  of  other  similar
instances  it  would  be  unwise  to  conclude  that  post  hoc  is  here
propter  hoc.

On  the  other  hand  there  seems  good  reason  to  attach  value
to  the  directions  of  the  script  to  "  note  the  hour "  of  writing ;
the  remark  struck  me  as  superfluous,  for  the  date  and  hour
of  sitting  down  to  write  is  always  the  first  thing  I  note  on
the  paper.  But  of  the  ten  occasions  when  the  script  has  drawn
attention  to  the  importance  of  noting  the  hour  or  date,  only
thrice — once,  April  16,  1901,  the  day  is  insufficiently  indi-
cated— has  the  exact  date  failed  to  be  of  importance ;  twice

^  These  are  discu.ssed  later  under  verifiable  incidents.
2  See  p.  92.

^  On  Aug.  26  immediately  after  carrying  out  the  order  I  tried
for  automatic  writing,  but  the  script  had  no  bearing  on  anything
known  to  me  and  has  not  proved  evidential,  though  obviously
intended  so  to  be  ;  the  script  of  Aug.  31  contained  evidential  matter
relating  to  other  subjects ;  no  other  writing  was  obtained  between
Aug.  22  and  Sept.  22  except  as  here  described.

*See  p.  307.


102


Chapter  V.


[part


(May  27,  1901,  and  Feb.  6,  1904)  it  is  doubtful  whether  the
matter  given  is  distinctive  enough  to  be  evidential,  though
in  both  cases  the  exact  date  would  be  essential  for  evidence ;
but  in  the  other  five  cases  evidential  matter  depending  on  the
exact  time  of  writing  was  given.  Details  will  be  found  later
as  these  cases  are  discussed  among  "  verifiable  incidents."  ^

Instructions  for  improvement,  etc.

The  general  instructions  for  the  improvement  of  the  writing
or  the  production  of  evidential  matter  are  of  three  main  types ;
according  as  they  are  concerned  with  (1)  Dr.  Hodgson,  (2)
sitting  with  other  sensitives,  (3)  watching  for  information  con-
veyed during  sleep.

(1)  Dr.  Hodgson.

Dr.  Hodgson's  ^  name  was  the  first  to  be  given  in  the  script
(April  3,  1901),  the  first  English  sentence  (April  16,  1901)
contained  his  name,  "ask  Hodgson  he  knows";  and  his  name
has  been  frequently  mentioned  throughout.  Owing  to  his
absence  from  England,  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  see  more
than  extracts  from  the  writing  and  that  may  perhaps  be  the
reason  why  the  script  constantly  suggested  that  I  "  should  show
him  all "  as  "  he  more  than  any  would  understand."  It  has
also  expressed  not  only  the  wish  that  he  should  come  to
England  but  the  assurance  that  he  would.  Therein  it  has
shown  itself  in  error.

(2)  Other  sensitives.

Another  thing  that  the  script  seems  disposed  to  urge  is
that  I  should  "  sit "  with  other  persons,  not  apparently  so
much  for  special  evidential  purposes  as  to  facilitate  the  pro-
duction of  writing.  Thus,  on  Dec.  14,  1902,  it  writes:  "You
and  another — try  together,"  and  again  on  July  21,  1903,
as  a  definite  message  to  me  from  Mr.  Gurney,  "  Sit  with
some  one  else — so  that  you  may  be  free  for  the  impression,
you  would  help — and  you  would  learn." On  Sept.  17,  1903,

^  See  App.,  p.  373,  for  list  of  passages,  and  references  to  pages
where  the  various  incidents  are  discussed.

-  See  p.  202  for  references  to  Dr.  Hodgson.


Liil.]  Comments  by  Script  on  Phenomena.  103

it  writes :  "  I  cant  do  much  more  through  you  alone  but  sit
with  others  and  learn  to  help.  In  the  winter  I  will  tell  you
more."  On  July  17,  1903,  it  suggested  that  I  should  sit  with
a  lady  of  my  acquaintance;  and  this  it  repeated  on  Sept.  17,

1903,  Meanwhile  this  lady's  own  automatic  writing  had
made  the  same  suggestion  to  her  on  July  11,  1903.  In
August  she  entered  into  communication  with  me  and  we  sat
together  in  October,  1903,  and  have  done  so  from  time  to
time  since.  After  the  temporary  interruption  of  our  oppor-
tunities for meeting during my  absence from Europe  in

1904,  the  script  resumed  the  suggestion  on  April  27,  1904.
In  these  remarks  the  script  seems  to  show a  knowledge

of  the  possibilities  of  the  situation,  as  before  it  began  to
suggest  that  I  should  sit  with  this  lady  I  had  made  her
acquaintance  and  knew  that  she  was  interested  in  these
and  similar  phenomena,  though  I  was  very  far  from  antici-
pating that  she  would  let  me  join  her  group.  But  in  other
respects  it  showed  a  complete  ignorance  of  what  was  feasible.
It  was,  for  instance,  suggested  in  the  script  that  I  should  sit
■with  another  lady,  though  I  knew  perfectly  well  that  such  a
suggestion  was  impracticable.

(3)  Sleep.

The  third  class  of  general  directions  concerns  impressions
■conveyed  in  sleep.  The  actual  cases  of  possible  connexion
between  my  dreams  and  my  automatic  writing  are  discussed
later.^  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  script  expects  that
information  may  be  conveyed  during  my  sleep  to  supplement
what  comes  by  automatic  writing.  On  none  of  the  occasions
when  the  script  told  me  to  listen  on  any  particular  night
•did  I  remember  any  impression  the  next  morning  on  waking,
so  that  though  it  is  possibly  true  that  impressions  similar
to  those  conveyed  by  automatic  writing  may  also  be  con-
veyed in  dreams — and  some  experiences  of  my  own  seem  to
confirm  this — there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  scribe  has
any  knowledge  as  to  when  such  impressions  are  likely  to
be  distinct  enough  to  be  remembered  on  waking,  nor  that

'  A  list  of  passages  in  the  script  referring  to  the  possibility  of  con-
veying information  in  dreams  is  given  in  Appendix,  p.  374.  See  also
below,  Chapter  VII.


104


Gha^oter  V.


[PAKT


in  my  case  the  expectation  aroused  by  the  writing  produces
any  effect  on  my  dreams.

(4)  Reference,  to  personal  matters.

Throughout  the  script  there  has  been  exceedingly  little  of
a  personal  nature ;  no  advice  whatever  has  been  given  as  to
my  own  health,  for  instance,  or  that  of  any  one  else,  there
has  been  no  general  moral  advice,  and  such  "  philosophical "  talk
as  occurs  seems  to  refer  to  particular  philosophical  views  and
to  be  meant  for  evidential  matter  rather  than  to  have  any
ethical  or  didactic  intention.  The  number  of  references  in
the  script  to  feelings  or  preoccupations  of  my  own,  real  or
supposed,  is  less  than  a  dozen ;  twice  the  script  suggested
that  I  had  been  of  more  service  to  a  friend  in  distress  than
I  had  thought ;  once  it  referred  sympathetically  to  an  incident
which  had  caused  me  considerable  distress.  As  above  described
it  has  constantly  urged  upon  me  the  necessity  of  belief,  but
this  rather  with  a  view  to  obtain  better  phenomena  than  for
any  personal  reason.  For  the  rest  its  personal  advice  is
entirely  confined  to  the  four  months  between  Oct.  6,  1903,^
and  Feb.  9,  1904,  when  on  four  occasions  (Oct.  6,  Dec.  26
and  27,  1903,  and  Feb.  9,  1904)  it  told  me  "not  to  worry,"
and  once  (Jan.  1,  1904)  to  "clear  my  thoughts  of  public
affairs."  It  was  in  the  month  of  October,  1903,  that  the
question  of  applying  for  leave  of  absence  and  going  to  Algeria
for  the  sake  of  my  husband's  health  was  first  seriously  con-
sidered. We  left  home  on  Dec.  11,  1903,  and  remained
away  till  March  11,  1904.  During  that  time  I  had  a
great  deal  more  anxiety  than  usual  and  this  feeling  was
probably  reflected  in  the  writing.  It  is  noticeable  that  the
writing,  with  very  few  exceptions,  was  meaningless  and  scanty
during  this  absence  from  home  and  that  not  on  account  of
any  lack  of  opportunity ;  we  were  stationary  during  more
than  ten  weeks  and  I  had  plenty  of  leisure  for  writing.  The
contents  of  the  script  were  for  the  most  part  worthless,  full
of  promises  as  to  letters  that  would  come  and  news  that
was  not  to  disturb  me,  no  doubt  attributable  to  the  vague
disquiet  and  preoccupation  of  my  normal  self


LIII.]


Unverifiable  Statements  or  Allusions.


105


CHAPTEK  VI.
Unveeifiable  Statements  or  Allusions.

Before  passing  to  the  consideration  of  verifiable  incidents,
there  remain  to  be  described  a  considerable  number  of  writings
dealing  with  various  subjects,  some  of  which  purport  to  be
verifiable,  but  have  not,  for  various  reasons,  been  verified,  some
of  which  make  no  such  claim.  In  some  of  these  cases,  a
partial  explanation  may  be  found  in  reminiscences,  more  or
less  conscious,  or  in  the  emergence  of  a  wholly  forgotten
knowledge.  In  some  cases  no  explanation  has  suggested  itself.
Some  of  the  incidents  described  in  this  chapter  have  the
appearance  of  mere  failures,  unsuccessful  attempts  to  produce
what  if  true  would  be  of  evidential  value.  In  some  instances
the  details  are  defective,  in  others  the  whole  account  hope-
lessly vague  ;  while  parts  resemble  records  of  a  dream.  It
seems  best  to  attempt  no  classification  of  these  incidents
according  to  their  purpose  or  intention ;  I  have  grouped
together  such  as  resembled  one  another  in  external  character,
described  them,  and  appended  such  comment  as  seemed
necessary.

(I.)  Unknown  Names.

There  have  been  from  time  to  time  in  the  script  names
unknown  to  me,  sometimes  occurring  in  connexion  with  incidents
related  or  suggested,  sometimes  found  without  any  context.
The  whole  number  is  not  large,  and  the  mere  names  are  chiefly
found  in  the  opening  sentences  of  the  script,  where  as  I
have  said  before,  nonsensical  words  and  phrases  are  apt  to
occur  before  the  communication  proper  begins.  Excluding
ten  or  twelve  such  cases,  there  remain  twenty-five  instances
where  names,  so  far  without  any  meaning,  appear  in  conjunction
with  some  bit  of  description  or  other  indication  suggesting
that  they  are  part  of  a  latent  reminiscence  or  of  an  attempt


106


Chapter  VI,


[part


to  produce  verifiable  matter.  In  twenty-one  of  these  cases,  the
attempt,  whatever  may  have  been  intended,  is  unsuccessful.
Two  may  be  reminiscences ;  one  is  perhaps  a  prediction,  and
one  seems  veridical.  These  are  discussed  under  their  several
heads.^  Nine  of  .  the  groups  of  unidentified  names  were
published  in  a  note  in  the  S.P.E.  Journal  for  November,  1903,
in  the  hopes  that  they  might  have  some  meaning  for  readers
of  the  Journal,  but  no  light  has  been  thrown  upon  them,  and
there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  they  represent  anything  more
than  subliminal  reminiscences  of  names  heard  or  seen, — woven
together  by  some  dream-like  process  into  the  semblance  of  a
story.

(II.)  Unidentifiable  Descpjptions.

(a)  Scenes.

Closely  analogous  to  the  introduction  of  unknown  names  is
the  appearance  of  other  unidentifiable  matter,  descriptions  of
persons,  scenes,  or  objects,  unnamed  and  not  recalling  anything
to  me.  These  are  apparently  of  the  same  type  as  crystal-
visions  ^  and  might  certainly  be  expected  in  any  automatic
phenomena  produced  by  a  strong  visualiser,  such  as  I  am.
The  point  that  seems  to  call  for  notice  is  not  that  they  occur,
but  that  they  occur  less  frequently  than  I  should  have  been
•disposed  to  anticipate.  There  are  fourteen  descriptions  of
scenes  in  which  persons  take  part,  three  descriptions  of  some
person  unknown,  and  eight  descriptions  of  objects,  the  objects
being  however  only  four,  as  two  of  them  are  described  more
than  once.  -  It  is  of  course  possible  that  some  of  these  scenes
or  objects  may  be  eventually  identified,  but  until  that  has
taken  place  they  scarcely  seem  to  require  comment.

They  are  in  some  cases  evidently  affected  by  my  surroundings
at  the  time  of  writing ;  thus,  during  a  stay  in  the  Alps,  the
script  described  persons  talking  "  in  the  Alps  not  here "  while
the  moon  shone  on  a  lake,  walking  "  up  a  long  gray  valley "
with  a  "  sound  of  falling  water,"  or  walking  on  a  hillside
"  with  patches  of  snow."  In  one  case  an  incident  described
in  the  script  was  undoubtedly  connected  with  an  impression

^  See  App.,  p.  374,  for  list  of  unknown  names  and  references  to
pages  where  further  comment  on  the  incidents  has  been  made.

2  For  an  account  of  my  experiments  in  crystal-gazing  see
Proceedings  S.P.K.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  473-478.


Lill.]  Unverijiable  Statements  or  Allusions.  107


about  a  stranger,  probably  due  to  unconscious  observation ;
this  is  described  in  detail  later/  In  other  cases  there  seems
no  more  explanation  of  the  scene  described  than  can  be  given
for  the  imagery  of  a  dream.'

(6)  Persons.

The  three  descriptions  of  unknown  persons  are  all  in  Latin,
and  purport  to  be  evidential.  These  are  not  the  least  like
anything  that  ever  occurs  in  my  own  dreams  or  in  crystal-
gazing,  and  are  therefore  here  noticed  in  detail.

(1)  On  Jan.  8,  1902,  the  script  wrote:

One  comes  to  you — -magis  tibi  quam  ceteris  o  quam  bene  currit
•calamus  paterna  lingua  nec  alius  facile  interpretatur.  prodest
autem  scientiae.*

Then  followed  an  apparent  attempt  to  relate  an  incident
known  to  my  husband  as  a  boy  at  school.^  Then  Latin  began
again :

Latine  loquitur  Latium  incolens  multos  ante  annos  nona  decies
admodum  non  Eomae  indigena  sed  alienus  perfervido  ingenio  plus
■quam  matrem  filius  urbem  illam  coronatam  amavit.  Hoc  debes
■cognoscere  et  tu.f

The  words  perfervido  ingenio  recall  the  familiar  phrase,
^'  Perfervidum  illud  Scotorum  ingenium,"  which,  as  I  remem-
bered at  once,  is  introduced  into  the  inscription  on  the
memorial  tablet  in  Trinity  College  Chapel  to  Dr.  H.  A.  J.
Munro,  Professor  of  Latin  at  Cambridge.  He  died  and  was
Juried  at  Kome  in  1885,  but  though  perhaps  a  fanciful
imagination  might  thus  say  that  he  dwelt  in  Latium,  no
ingenuity  can  apply  to  him  the  number  nona  decies,  "  90  th."
I  have  not  been  able  to  find  that  the  epithet  "  crowned "  is

*  Trans.  "Rather  to  you  than  others.  Oh  how  easily  runs  the  pen
in  its  (or  his)  native  tongue !  nor  does  another  easily  interpret.
But  it  benefits  knowledge."

t  Trans.  "  He  speaks  in  Latin :  he  dwells  in  Latium,  many  years
ago  about  the  ninetieth,  not  a  native  of  Rome  but  a  foreigner,  his
impetuous  genius  loved  that  crowned  city  more  than  a  son  his
mother. This  even  you  ought  to  know  well."

^See  below,  p.  141.

2  Six  of  the  fourteen  scenes  were  described  while  I  was  abroad,
when  I  was  constantly  seeing  new  places.

3  See  p.  277.


108  Chapter  VI\  [part

used  of  Eome  by  Dr.  Munro,  nor  by  Lucretius,  the  author
whom  he  edited  and  with  whom  he  is  specially  associated.
The  epithet  is,  however,  obviously  appropriate  to  any  city
surrounded  with  a  wall.  The  same  idea  occurs  in  another
passage  of  the  script.  May  13,  1902:

Date  lilia  Romae  coronatae  illi  urbi  super  montibus  sedenti— imma
positae — aspice  deam  !  velata  comam  insuper  sedit — corona  gemmata
fulgebit.*

Here  the  first  words  are  a  direct  allusion  to  Virgil,  Aen.
VI.  883,  "  manibus  date  lilia  plenis,"  t  and  it  is  probable  that  the
rest  of  the  description  is  influenced  by  the  preceding  passage  in
that  poem,  where  in  the  vision  of  the  Rome  that  shall  be,  seen
by  Aeneas,  the  City  is  titrrita,  "  towered  like  the  Berecynthian
Mother,"  the  account  of  whose  progress  in  Lucretius'  second
Book  is  clearly  in  the  mind  of  the  later  poet.^  The  Great
Mother  is  described  by  Lucretius  as  wearing  the  coi'ona  murcdis,
the  "  mural  crown,"  familiar  in  the  representations  of  Cybele,
so  that  the  words  "  urbem  illam  coronatam "  thouqh  not
actually  used  by  either  Lucretius  or  Virgil  are  easily  explicable
as  an  allusion  to  both  passages,  and  in  conjunction  with  the
phrase  "  perfervido  ingenio "  suggest  that  the  person  indicated
is  Dr.  Munro.'

*  Trans.  "  G-ive  lilies  to  Rome,  to  that  crowned  city  seated — or
rather  set — upon  the  mountaius.  Behold  the  goddess  !  with  veiled
hair  she  sits  aloft;  the  jewelled  crown  will  gleam."

^  Trans. "Give  lilies  with  full  hands."

1  See  Conington's  note  on  Virgil,  Aen.  VI.  785.

-  It  further  appears  that  the  goddess  Roma,  a  late  conception
and  the  visible  type  of  the  Fortune  of  the  City,  wore  the  mural
crown,  in  imitation  of  Cybele,  on  the  coins  of  certain  cities  of  Asia
Minor,  but  not  in  her  representations  at  Rome  (see  Preller,  Rom.
Myth.  p.  705  to  709) ;  it  would  seem  therefore  that  there  is  an
appropriateness  in  the  application  of  the  epithet  "  crowned "  to
Rome  in  the  mouth  of  certain  foreigners,  as  contrasted  with  natives
of  Rome ;  this  was,  as  far  as  I  know,  entirely  unknown  to  me  at
the  time  of  writing  the  script ;  it  was  only  in  investigating  the
subject  for  the  purposes  of  this  paper  that  I  became  acquainted  with
the  above  facts  about  the  Goddess  Roma.  But  even  granted  that
the  use  of  the  epithet  "crowned  "in  conjunction  with  what  precedes
suggests  that  the  person  intended  is  a  native  of  Asia  Minor  who
loves  Rome  as  his  own  country,  we  are  no  nearer  discovering  who
that  person  is.


mil]  Unverifiable  Statements  or  Allusions.  109


(2)  A  month  later,  Feb.  10,  1902,  came,  again  in  Latin,
a  description  of  some  one,  but  again  there  is  no  means  of
identification.  After  saying  in  Greek  that  the  brother  is
renowned  and  that  his  works  do  not  perish,^  the  script
continues  :

Magister  sui  generis  ambulando  dicta — non  sane  obiter  dicta —
promulgat.  Quem  si  bene  legis  multa  de  veritate  invenies.  leges
volui  tu  autem  insciens  legis  posuisti.  Magus  erat  in  popuhs  non
bene  eruditis,  scientiae  vero  magistrum  mehus  vocabis  eum.*

The  allusions  to  the  peripatetic  teaching,  to  the  magical
reputation,"  and  to  his  mastership,  suggest  that  the  person
here  described  is  Aiistotle,  "  il  maestro  di  lor  che  sanno,"  the
master  of  those  that  know,  as  Dante  calls  him,  but  the
identification  is  not  certain,  and  there  was  no  traceable  reason
why  Aristotle  should  be  in  my  thoughts  at  the  time  this  was
written.  The  rest  of  the  script  contained  statements  about
Dr.  Hodgson,  and  some  proposed  arrangements  for  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper,  but  was  not  evidential.

(3)  On  Sept.  27,  1902,  the  script  made  another  attempt,
■also  mainly  in  Latin,  to  describe  some  one,  and  again  here,  as
in  the  two  preceding  efforts,  there  is  a  certain  flavour  of
literary  allusion. The  words  are :

nec  domitus  indomita  cervice  post  multas  victorias  sese  erigit
•quem  si  impigre  comprehendis,  ecce  clavis  in  manu  tua  iam  est —
utinam  facundior  esset  eloquentia  tua !  non  ego  desum.  tu  autem
moraris. — That  old  man  eloquent.  C.f

*  Trans.  "  A  master  unexampled  he  utters  his  sayings— not  how-
ever obite7'  dicta — as  he  walks.  If  you  read  him,  you  will  find  much
that  concerns  truth  ;  I  meant  '  if  you  will  read  '  but  in  your  ignor-
ance you  set  down  'if  you  read.'  He  was  a  wizard  among  illiterate
peoples,  but  you  might  better  call  him  a  master  of  knowledge."

t  Trans.  "  Untamed  with  neck  untamed  after  many  victories  he
uprears  (?)  himself ;  if  with  zeal  you  understand  him,  lo,  you  have
the  key  in  your  hand.  I  wish  your  speech  were  more  fluent  !  It
is  not  my  fault ;  it  is  you  that  hinder."

1  See  p.  55  for  an  account  of  the  possible  earlier  emergence  of
this  remark.

"  This  may  refer  to  his  reputation  among  the  unlearned  of  the
Middle  Ages,  or  more  probably  to  the  curious  fact  that  the  most
learned  of  Greeks  came  from  among  the  half  barbarous  peoples  of
the  borders  of  Greece.


110


Clia'pter  VI.


[part


The  "  old  man  eloquent "  is  of  course  Isocrates,  killed,  as
Milton  says/  by  the  news  of  the  defeat  at  Chaeroneia ;  it  is^
I  suppose,  possible  that  the  whole  description  is  intended  to
apply  to  Isocrates,  but  the  unmistakeable  allusion  does  not
occur  till  quite  the  end,  after  the  mention  of  the  word
eloqucntia,  and  it  seems  equally  likely  that  the  juxtaposition
of  eloquence  and  some  one  untamed  by  defeat  has  brought
with  it  a  reminiscence  of  Isocrates.  In  either  case  there  is
no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  name  of  the  person  described^
whether  or  not  he  were  Isocrates,  would  explain  any  of  the
problems  connected  with  the  automatic  writing.

(c)  Objects,

No  particular  interest  attaches  to  the  first  of  the  objects
apparently  intended  for  identification.  On  Oct.  9  and  31,
1902,  is  a  description  of  the  contents  of  a  chest  with  a  scent
like  cedar  wood,  and  on  Nov.  11,  1902,  I  am  told  to  make
enquiries,  but  no  further  clue  is  given,  and  no  identification
has  been  made.  Twice,  on  March  3  and  May  13,  1903,  there
has  been  a  description  of  a  book  bound  in  leather,  inside
which  there  seems  to  be  a  paper  of  importance.  It  should
perhaps  be  noted  that  twice  in  the  course  of  some  experiments-
in  simultaneous  writing  with  a  lady  in  the  spring  of  1904
her  script  contained  a  reference  to  a  mislaid  paper  of  impor-
tance to  me,  which  was  in  a  book,  a  book  further  described,
as  "  an  old  history  book."  But  I  should  suppose  that  the
mislaying  of  papers,  and  the  possibility  of  their  having  been
placed  inside  a  book  and  forgotten,  would  be  a  fairly  general
"  topic "  among  automatic  writers  and  valueless  unless  the  twO'
communications  showed  greater  evidence  of  similarity  than  these
do.  The  third  object  sought  for  is  a  small  pearl  cross,  but  no
clue  is  given  to  the  owner,^  though  it  is  twice  referred  to.  The-

1  Milton,  Sonnet  x.

2  In  February,  1905,  I  noticed  that  a  friend  was  wearing  a  pearl
cross  closely  resembling  the  cross  described  in  the  script  in  the
summer  of  1903.  It  is  possible  that  some  years  ago  I  had  seen
this  cross  worn,  and  that  the  description  in  the  script  is  due  to  a
recollection  of  it.  No  supernormal  knowledge  is  shown  by  the
script ;  the  cross  has,  it  is  true,  as  stated  by  the  script,  an  inscrip-
tion on  the  back,  but  the  inscription  is  not  given  by  the  script,.


LIII.]  Unverijiable  Statements  or  Allusions.  Ill

last  attempt  to  describe  an  object  differs  from  the  others
in  being  extremely  detailed,  but  so  far  nothing  remotely  re-
sembling either  the  object  or  the  place  where  it  is  said  to
be  has  been  recognised  by  me.

{d)  Anecdotes.

Besides  the  scenes,  persons,  and  objects  above  described,
there  have  on  three  occasions  ^  been  related  in  Latin  anecdotes
claiming  to  have  their  source  in  some  authority  insufficiently
indicated.  These  also  I  take  to  be  something  after  the
manner  of  dreams  and  not  susceptible  of  explanation.  One  of
the  three,  a  story  about  E.  Nevile,  has  already  been  discussed ;  ^
it  was  written  in  a  strange  handwriting  and  presented  some
peculiarities  of  language.  The  other  two  simulate  the  sort
of  story  that  might  be  found  in  a  Hagiology,  or  some  similar
compilation.  One,  on  Oct.  26,  1901,  relates  how  a  jailer
asked  his  prisoner  to  restore  the  health  of  his  son,  and
obtained  his  wish.  It  appears  to  centre  in  some  way  round
a  word  like  "  Caristia,"  for  this  group  of  sounds  enters  more
than  once  into  the  story.  After  an  allusion  to  the  Saints
Crispin  and  Crispianus,^  follows  an  attempt  to  make  the
same  sounds  into  a  geographical  name,  "Caristia  insula  Ehodani."
Lastly,  the  script  suggests  that  the  story  which  it  has  narrated
will  be  found  in  the  "  Caristian  legend  of  St.  Josepha,"  and
then  proceeds  to  correct  the  word,  "  not  quite  Caristia,"  by
giving  "  Charis,"  and  then  the  same  in  Greek,  X"/"^-  These
last  observations  suggest  attempts  at  the  word  Christian,  but
unfortunately  there  is  no  more  reason  to  suppose  that  there
is  a  Christian  legend  of  Saint  Josepha,  whoever  she  may  be,
containing  a  story  of  a  jailer's  sick  sou  than  that  the
incident  took  place  on  an  island  in  the  Khone  called  Caristia —
or  by  any  other  name.

The  other  story  was  related  on  June  5,  1904,  and  contains
no  clue  as  to  its  origin ;  it  tells  of  the  coming  to  a  foreign
coast  of  a  Macedonian  ship  with  a  Chalcedonian  steersman.
The  chief  of  the  local  tribe  seems  to  have  come  down  to  the

and  the  only  definite  statement — a  date  said  to  be  connected  with
the  cross — is  incorrect.

1  See  App.,  p.  376.  2  gee  p.  24.

'See  p.  143  for  further  comment  on  this  revived  memory.


112  Chapter  VI.  [part

shore  in  some  trepidation,  accompanied  by  his  soldiers,  when
the  sudden  disappearance  of  the  ship  and  a  clap  of  thunder
terrified  the  natives,  who  saw  in  it  an  omen  of  disaster  to
themselves — an  omen  which,  however,  is  discredited  by  the
intelligent  narrator.  This  strange  tale  is  said  to  have  been
told  by  an  unnamed  bishop  in  whose  book  it  is  to  be  found.
But  without  further  information  I  fear  that  the  bishop  will
remain  unnamed,  and  his  book  unknown.

The  giving  of  unidentifiable  names,  spurious  messages,  and
so  on,  is  of  common  occurrence  in  automatic  phenomena,  as
will  be  admitted  by  all  who  have  experimented  with  table-
tilting,  planchette,  and  such  instruments.  The  ratio  of  these
unidentified  names,  etc.,  to  the  mass  of  the  script  is  however
considerably  less  than  has  been  the  case  in  most  of  the
automatic  phenomena  of  the  common  type,  produced  by  two
persons,  with  which  I  am  acquainted.

(III.)  "  Isles  of  the  Blest."

Besides  the  descriptions  above  referred  to,  which  may  be
intended  for  accounts  of  actual  places,  there  occur  from  time
to  time  in  the  script  descriptions  of  a  less  definite  character,
which  seem  to  relate  to  a  visionary  dwelling  place,  a  kind  of
Elysian  Fields  or  Isles  of  the  Blest.  In  some  cases  it  is  possible
that  literary  reminiscence  colours  the  description ;  while  in  other
cases  the  imagery  bears  a  certain  resemblance  to  sensations
which  I  have  experienced  in  dreams.  The  series  forms  so
characteristic  a  group  in  the  automatic  writings  that  I  have
thoi;ght  it  worth  while  to  describe  and  comment  in  detail.

Though  the  first  unmistakeable  description  ^  of  an  "  Isle  of
the  Blest "  did  not  appear  till  nearly  two  years  after  the
inception  of  the  script,  there  are  among  the  quite  early  writings
fragments  which  suggest  that  some  such  idea  had  been  seeking
expression  earlier  in  the  sublitninal  consciousness  Thus  on
March  11,  1901,  a  fragmentary  pjassage  refers  to  a  place  of
which  the  notes  are :  growing  fiowers,  sweet  odours,  dewy
drops,  and  divine  inhabitants.  These  same  ideas  occur  again
on  March  29,  1901,  where,  however,  the  phraseology  is  more

1  See  App.,  p.  .377,  for  complete  text  of  passages  describing  "Isles
of  the  Blest."


LIU.]  Unverifiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.  113

mystic ;  the  "  scented  flower  of  light,"  for  instance,  can  scarcely
describe  a  natural  object.  On  this  occasion  a  Greek  word  oV/x)/
is  introduced,  and  the  writer  seems  dimly  aware  of  the  esoteric
nature  of  his  sayings,  as  he  concludes  with  the  suggestion  that
though  what  he  says  may  be  of  use  to  the  wise,  enough  has
been  said  "for  a  stranger."  On  April  27,  1901,  some  one,
probably  myself,  is  reproached  with  having  a  mind  too  much
fixed  on  this  earth,  and  urged  in  language  reminiscent  of
Horace's  Ode  to  Archytas,  and  of  Lucretius'  address  to
Epicurus,^  to  let  the  soul  soar  to  the  regions  of  the  sky,
"  where  all  is  clear,  all  bathed  in  rosy  light,  plain  even  for
the  blind  to  see :  but  darkness  surrounds  your  eyes."

Discouraged  apparently  by  my  insensibility,  the  script  makes
no  further  reference  to  any  visionary  scene  till  January,  1903,
when  a  deliberate  attempt  seems  to  have  been  made  to
describe  an  'Abode  of  the  Blest.'  The  script  of  Jan.  18,
1903,  was  produced  under  somewhat  special  circumstances,
related  here  as  possibly  accounting  for  the  writing.  Before
trying  for  writing  I  had  sat  alone,  as  noted  at  the
time,  for  about  twenty  minutes  thinking  of  talks  I  had
had  on  three  particular  occasions,  when  the  question  of
survival  after  death  had  for  special  reasons  been  prominent
in  my  thoughts.  The  writing  is  confused,  and  in  places  un-
intelligible ;  it  contains  two  or  three  inaccuracies,  such  as
diciliora  for  difficiliora,  cliscre  for  discere,  but  it  plainly  begins
with  an  allusion  to  the  dead,  and  ends  with  a  description
of  an  abode  of  departed  friends.  The  opening  phrases  are  full
of  reminiscences.  Christian  and  classical ;  in  the  second  there
is  a  curious  mistake,  or  perhaps  a  deliberate  correction,  which
my  normal  self  could  never  have  made.  The  script  has  vivida
vis  cmimai.  The  phrase  in  Lucretius'  address  to  Epicurus  at
the  opening  of  his  poem  (I.  72)  runs:  vivida  vis  animi  'pcrvicit
("  the  living  force  of  his  soul  gained  the  day,"  as  Munro
translates  it),  the  word  used  by  Lucretius  being  naturally
animus,  the  intellectual  part  of  man,  not  anima,  the  breath  of

'^Script:  ascripta  es  glebae  mente  vel  ingenio.  Lucr.,  I.  74,  on  the
contrary,  of  Epicurus:  "  omne  immensum  peragravit  mente  animoque.
Script :  "  libera  animam  .  .  .  per  polum  transcurre."  Hor.  Od.  I.  28.  5.
"animoque  .  .  .  percurrisse  polum."  Perhaps  the  "  modo  cantoris"
of  the  script  is  intended  to  mean  "as  the  poet  says."

H


114


Chapter  VI.


[part


life.  It  is  impossible  that  any  one  who  knows  Lucretius  or
the  Epicurean  system  should  confuse  the  two  words.  But
the  modification  of  the  language  of  the  great  materialistic
poet  in  an  attempt  to  prove  survival  of  the  spirit  after
bodily  death  is  perhaps  intentional.

What  follows  is  quite  unintelligible.  The  scribe  claims  to
have  deposited  "  some  such  thing "  with  a  friend,  and  bids  me
announce  this  to  the  friend  in  question ;  something  is  to  be
done  with  the  puzzling  piece  of  furniture  a  "  supellex " ;  ^
something  is  to  be  sent  away  to  a  foreign  land.  Then  comes
the  suggestion  of  an  "  Isle  of  the  Blest,"  where  "  gentle
unspoiled  flowers  on  the  turf  "  are  apparently "  "  drenched  with
liquid  dew,"  where  there  is  a  scented  breeze,  a  cross  which
reaches  to  the  pole  of  the  heavens,  and  "  happiness  in  the
shade  with  many  a  little  stream,  and  a  fair  flowered  lawn."
There  dwell  the  "  Blest  whom  you  knew  well."  The  inter-
mingling of  flowers  and  grass,  and  the  Christian  symbolism,
suggest  that  there  may  here  be  a  recollection  of  the  valley
in  Purgatory  where  Sordello  led  Dante  to  see  the  souls  of
Paidolph  and  other  kings ;  but  the  distinctive  touches  in
Dante's  picture  are  absent.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  epithet
hlandus,  "  kindly "  or  "  gentle,"  applied  to  the  flowers,  and
perhaps  in  integer,  "  whole,"  "  unspoiled,"  are  traces  of  that
'  nice  derangement  of  epitaphs '  which  would  appropriately
describe  sensations  belonging  to  certain  of  my  dreams,^  where
quasi-intellectual  or  ethical  impressions  are  conveyed  by  physi-
cal means.

Two  days  later,  Jan.  20,  1903,  the  script  again  attempted
to  describe  an  "  Abode  of  the  Blest,"  saying  this  time  that
I  had  seen  or  read  it,  and  ought  to  recognise.  The  last
words,  in  English,  "  bliss  under  the  shadow  of  a  great  tree,"
recall  the  umhrosa  felicitas  of  the  script  of  Jan.  18,  and  suggest
that  the  same  sort  of  place  is  being  described.  But  a  different
suggestion  is  made  by  the  introductory  paragraph.  The  words
are  not  very  clear,  but  it  seems  evident  that  the  scene
described  has  some  association  with  water. "  The  daughters

1  See  p.  37.

2  For  language,  see  above,  p.  44.

3  See  below,  p.  149.


Liir.]  Unverifiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.  115


of  Nestor  come  round  with  every  kind  of  many -sounding
chord,"  they  "  swim  round  about  upon  the  waves " ;  there  is
"  a  string  of  dolphins "  and  an  "  echoing  plash."  The  band
of  "  Nereids  grows  faint,"  a  "  vast  chink "  gapes  open ;  ^  into
this  the  spectator  is  apparently  invited  to  go,  to  find  "  no
movement,  a  feeling  of  terror  and  empty  void."

This  recalled  nothing  whatever  to  my  mind.  Homer  has
described  a  cave  of  nymphs  in  Ithaca  {Od.  XIII.,  96),  and
Porphyry  has  made  it  into  an  elaborate  allegory,  though  of
the  latter  fact  I  was  not  aware  at  the  time  of  writing  the
script ;  ^  I  knew  the  passage  in  Homer.  Homei%  however,
calls  the  Nymphs  Naiads ;  that  or  Nereids  would  be  the
natural  word  for  me  to  use.  How  the  word  Nestoridae
"  daughters  of  Nestor,"  comes  in  I  am  unable  to  say ;  it  is
not  so  far  as  I  know  used  in  classical  poetry,^  and  the
two  or  three  daughters  assigned  by  mythology  to  Nestor  were
not  Nymphs.  The  Nereids  with  the  dolphins  are  common
enough  in  classical  poetry,  but  I  can  make  nothing  of  the
"  chink,"  and  all  my  associations  with  habitations  of  the  Blest
would  place  them  in  "  Islands  "  or  "  Meadows,"  not  in  caves.
Not  until  two  months  later,  when  I  read  Porphyry's  allegorical
interpretation  of  the  passage  in  Homer,  had  I  any  idea  that
the  Abode  of  the  Blest  had  been  placed  by  any  one  in  a
sea  cave.

In  the  next  reference  to  this  subject,  March  27,  1903,
the  chink  re-appears,  and  this  time  there  is  no  doubt  of  its
object ;  "  the  winds  drop,"  says  the  scribe,  "  and  there  gapes
a  huge  chink  through  which  you  may  see  inside  if  you  stoop
your  head."  Then  follows  a  description  of  the  usual  type :
a  silvery  light  prevails,  accompanied  by  varied  colours  and
varied  scents ; saffron  and yellow  flowers,  purple and  rose

1  It  is  possible  that  the  first  piece  of  writing  on  this  subject
(March  11,  1901),  contains  an  attempt  to  describe  the  ingens  rima
in  the  words  " infra  ingens  .  .  .  nec  sine  stupore"  " below  a  huge  .  .  .
and  a  feeling  of  stupor."

2  See  below,  p.  290.

2  The  masculine  Nestorides  is  common  enough  in  the  Odyssey
as  applied  to  Telemachus'  companion,  the  young  son  of  Nestor,
Antilochus.  The  only  possible  connexion  between  Nestoridae  and
Nereides,  which  seem  to  be  used  by  the  script  as  equivalents,  is
that  Nestor  and  Nereus  were  both  typical  old  wise  men.


116


Chapter  VI.


[part


colour,  wave  after  wave  rolls  on ;  all  glows  with  light ;  in  the
midst  may  be  seen  those  who  were  before  "  descrilied  as  seated."
The  English  words  that  follow,  describing  a  "  flame  that  flickers
not,"  have  no  literary  associations  for  me,  but  the  next  phrase
lucida  tela  did,  the  "  glittering  shafts  of  day,"  recalls  a  well-
known  passage  in  Lucretius.  But  the  next  allusions  convey
nothing  to  me,  as  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  prototype
for  the  "  crystal  frozen  founts,"  nor  can  I  identify  the  "  dark
shore the  actual  phrase  uktvi  Kvavaj  does  not  seem  to  occur
in  any  classical  author.^

The  next  account,  May  29,  1903,  is  still  more  highly
coloured.  The  same  general  type  of  ideas  occurs :  clear  (?) "
water  is  sprinkled  from  a  holy  fount ;  close  beside  are  "  many
coloured  flowers,  their  crowns  already  opened  to  the  western
wind."  In  the  next  words  appears  a  touch  of  synaesthesia :
"  there  is  a  crimson  scent  in  that  garden  plot."  The  leafy
woods  sing  with  the  varied  harmonies  of  birds.  Over  all
goes  twining  the  ivy  "  that  holds  the  gods,"  ^  an  ivy  not  like
ours,  but  "  gold-coloured  in  its  leafed  and  berried  spirals ;
like  to  the  supple  yellow  l;)looming  helichrys  with  which  the
god  himself  wreaths  his  hyacinthine  locks.  From  every
separate  leaf  is  distilled  a  dewy  drop,  like  the  jewel  on
the  topmost  blades  of  grass  in  the  first  light  of  the  sun
after  that  night  before  which  Nothing  was."  Then  with
the  closing  words  in  English,  the  script  returns  to  its
synaesthesia :

golden  birds  on  a  golden  bough,  and  golden  sougs  in  a  real
Hesperid  garden —  Sound  and  sight  and  sense  are  one  and  all  of  it
golden  in  the  golden  days.

Part  of  this  writing  is  probably  reminiscent  of  a  phrase  in
the  first  Idyll  of  Theocritus  (Theo.  Id.  I.,  29,  30)  where  the
yellow  berried  ivy  mixed  with  helichrys  makes  the  decoration
of  the  rim  of  a  cup  given  as  a  prize.  The  German  editor,
whose  book  I  read  25  years  ago — and  had  not  looked  at
since — says  that  the  ivy  in  this  passage  is  "  not  our  common

1  See  pp.  286-93  for  further  comment  on  Neo-Platonic  allusion.s.

2  No  word  remotely  resembling  clargedula  exists  in  Latin.

3  The  phrase  capax  deorum  is  curious,  but  there  seems  no  doubt
of  its  meaning.


LIII.]  Unvevifiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.  117

ivy,  heclera  helix,  but  the  yellow-berried  ivy,  heclera  poetica,
or  chrysocarpa,"  and  his  note  may  be  represented  in  the  script ;
the  ivy  of  the  poet's  wreath  is  of  course  the  ivy  specially  sacred
to  "  the  god "  Bacchus.  But  I  can  find  no  prototype  for  the
latter  part  of  the  description,  for  the  dewdrops  on  the  grass
in  the  sunlight  of  the  first  morning  of  Creation,  nor  has  the
passage  in  Theocritus  any  association  with  "  Isles  of  the  Blest,"
or  "  Gardens  of  the  Hesperides."

The  introduction  of  the  "  Hesperid  Garden  "  is  perhaps  due
to  another  literary  reminiscence  not  recognised  till  much  later.
Immediately  before  the  description  just  quoted  was  an  allu-
sion to  the  word  "  Orotava,"  which  had  been  given  in  the  script
of  AprU  17,  1903,  "as  a  pass  word."  The  word  had  no  meaning
to  me,  and  I  did  not  know  whether  it  was  a  real  or  fancy  name.
On  this  occasion,  May  29,  1903,  it  was  not  given  correctly:
"  You  have  given  the  name  though  you  do  not  believe  it,"
says  the  script. "  Let  some  one  ask  in  sounding  phrase,"

ore  rotundo, —  no —  orotando  Orotara  is  more  like
O  r  0  t  a  n  a through  Tara's  halls ;

then  after  a  direction  to  write  next  month  came  the  descrip-
tion above  quoted.  In  October,  1904,  on  reading  the  recently
published  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  by  Mr.  Myers,  I
found  the  word  Orotava  in  a  poem  called  "  Garden  of  the
Hesperides,"  and  after  ascertaining  that  it  was  a  local  name
in  Teneriffe,  I  found  that  the  same  name  appears  also  in  a
poem  on  Teneriffe  in  an  earlier  volume,  the  Renewal  of  Youth,
which  I  had  read  some  years  before  the  above  script  was
produced.  In  that  poem  the  Canary  Islands  are  called
"  Haunts  of  Hesperides,"  so  that  the  association  between
Orotava  and  Hesperid  Garden  may  be  due  to  the  emergence
of  a  memory.  But  I  must  ask  the  reader  to  take  my  word
for  it,  that  the  resources  of  my  normal  knowledge  and  memory
were  quite  unequal  to  producing  the  odd  combination  of
allusions  in  three  languages  written  by  the  script  on  May  29,
1903.

The  last  of  the  descriptions  of  Abodes  of  the  Blest  came  on
Aug.  8,  1903,  and  differs  from  the  others  in  several  respects
— indeed,  if  it  were  not  for  the  definite  statement  towards
the  end,  that  it  was  describing  where  were  "  the  happy  blest,"


118


Chapter  VI.


[part


I  should  hardly  have  classed  it  with  the  others  of  this  type.
It  is  mainly  in  English,  with  a  few  fragmentary  Greek  phrases
near  the  beginning  and  near  the  end.  It  is  chiefly  occupied
with  an  attempt  to  describe  what  seems  indescribable,  an
effect  of  radiant  blue  light  which  casts  no  shadow,  and  of
a  pillar  which,  standing  with  no  reflexion  on  a  crystal  floor,
is  yet  not  transparent,  thovigh  it  does  not  conceal  what  is
behind.  There  is  a  strong  resemblance  to  certain  effects  which
I  have  imagined  myself  to  see  in  dreams,  a  characteristic  of
those  dreams  being  a  sort  of  "  tender  blue  radiance,"  ^  as  I
have  described  it  in  a  contemporary  note.  The  words,  "  Find
the  pillar  in  sleep,"  suggest  that  the  script  is  aware  of  this
likeness  to  my  dreams.^  Towards  the  end  there  is  an  un-
successful effort  to  give  in  Greek  verse  some  further  description
of  crystal  water  or  self-frozen  clear  water,  flowing  from
natural  springs,  and  finally  there  is  a  drawing  of  leaves,  and
a  lotos  flower  with  the  name  "  Lotos."  But  all  this  symbolism
conveys  nothing  whatever  to  my  mind,  and  there  is  no  trace
in  this  writing  of  any  literary  allusion.  Since  that  date,
August,  1903,  to  the  present  time,  there  has  been  no  re-
appearance of  the  "  Isles  of  the  Blest."  With  the  exception
of  the  three  early  bits  of  writing  which  may  represent  the
inception  of  the  idea  of  the  "  Isles,"  the  five  or  six  pieces
which  unmistakeably  deal  with  the  subject  were  all  pro-
duced between  the  middle  of  January  and  the  middle  of
August,  in  the  year  1903.  I  have  no  explanation  to  offer
for  their  occurrence  at  that  particular  time,  or  indeed
at  all,

1  Some  years  ago,  on  Feb.  2,  1894,  I  recorded  a  dream  of  the
preceding  night,  in  which  I  had  a  specially  vivid  and  lasting  sen-
sation of  colour,  unlike  anything  ever  actually  seen  by  me  awake.
A  landscape  appeared  to  be  "  illuminated  with  the  most  dehcate
and  lovely  and  divine  blue  light, — not  cold  like  moonlight,  but  a
sort  of  tender  radiance  that  casts  no  shadows.  .  .  . —  the  whole  place
was  lighted  • — ■  by  this  diffused  blueness — but  with  none  of  the  cold-
ness of  blue, — nor  the  haze  of  the  sea, — nor  the  purple  of  an  Italian
landscape."

2  For  the  connexion  between  the  script  and  my  dreams,  see
pp.  148-155.


Liii.]  Unverijiable  Statements  or  Allusions.


119


(IV.)  Allusions  to  Christian  Eitual  or  Symbolism.

Of  definite  allusions  to  distinctive  Christian  phrases,
symbolism,  or  ritual,  there  are  very  few  in  the  script,^  a  fact
not  at  all  surprising,  as  I  have  never  been  interested  in  such
symbolism,  or  had  any  but  the  most  superficial  acquaintance
with  Christian  Art  or  Liturgy.  The  few  eases  described  above
where  the  cross  is  used  as  a  signature  ^  are  not  included  under
this  head,  as  no  religious  symbol  seems  there  intended.  The
word  "cross"  only  appears  three  or  four  times  in  the  306
pieces  under  consideration;^  once  (March  29,  1901)  in  an
unintelligible  context  occurs  the  phrase  graece  loquitur  emptor
redemptor  cruciferens,  "  in  Greek  speaks  the  purchaser,  redeemer,
bearing  the  cross";  once  (Jan.  31,  1902)  after  the  words
■  Crux,  *  et  praeterea  nihil — an  obvious  variant  on  Vox  et  praeterea
nihil — the  script  continues.  Post  sempiternam.  mansttetudincm  omnia
superrvactLa — in  terris,  "  after  the  eternal  compassion  all  is  mere
emptiness  upon  the  earth " — words  which  suggest  Christian
associations,  though  conveying  no  particular  meaning  as  they
stand.  The  introduction  of  the  cross  in  an  "  Isle  of  the  Blest "
has  just  been  mentioned.  These  cases  complete  the  appearances
of  the  word  cross.

An  unintelligible  combination  of  what  seem  to  be  Christian
symbols  appears  on  October  25,  1902,  in  a  particularly
scrappy  bit  of  writing :

Went  worth  made  the  device  for  him.  a  fish  and  anchor.
Give  them  both. Dont  forget and Saint  Peters  keys.

This  communication  is  signed  with  the  S.  Andrew's  Cross.^
Again,  the  word  hagiologus  is  twice  used,  once  in  near  conjunc-
tion with  agnus  Dei,  and  two  of  the  little  anecdotes  related  ^
suggest  a  possible  origin  in  some  collection  of  Christian  stories.

1  See  App.,  p.  379,  for  quotations  from  script. -See  p.  76.

3  1  do  not  include  attempts  made  to  describe  a  cross  for  purposes
of  identification,  see  above,  p.  110,  note;  below,  p.  335.

*  It  is  possible  that  the  "  cross'/'  here  is  connected  with  the
"ring"  of  the  earlier  (and  interrupted)  script  of  the  same  day,  and
is  therefore  not  symbolic  but  intended  to  describe  a  verifiable
object;  see  p.  302.

^See  p.  77.  ^See  above,  p.  111.


120


Chapter  VI.


[part


Once  (June  27,  1901)  occurs  the  phrase  Veoii  Creator,^  and  once
(July  23,  1902)  the  odd  combination  occurs,  Monsignor  catholicus^
presbyter  iri  terra  non  lontana  ah  ista  rem  prohahit.  Lontana  is
subsequently  corrected  to  longinc[ua.  On  both  these  last  occa-
sions the  script  was  produced  while  I  was  on  the  Continent.
So  also  was  a  long  and  detailed  but  wholly  unidentifiable
account  (July  18,  1902)  of  a  scene  supposed  to  be  viewed
from  above,  and  to  take  place  in  a  church  "  low  with  windows
small  and  richly  jewelled,  not  as  in  our  Gothic."  The  general
description  and  the  words  '•  malekite  malechite,"  and  again,
"  ico  "  and  "  Moscowa"  suggest  a  Eussiaii  church ;  fragments  in
Latin  further  suggest  that  some  memorial  or  funeral  service
is  supposed  to  be  going  on,  but  there  is  nothing  sufficiently
distinctive  for  identification,  and  there  is  obvious  confusion
recognised  by  the  script  itself.  The  extract  concludes  with
a  reference  to  a  "  tiara  with  floating  strings  not  worn,"  ^  then
adds,  "  You  cannot  complete.,  leave  it,"  and  signs  "  Leona  .  .  .

Pontifex  Maximus."

There  is  one  curious  passage  which the  date  of  writing

1  But  see  p.  324  for  a  possible  explanation  of  the  words.

2  Catholicus  appears  to  be  the  title  of  an  ecclesiastical  dignitary  in
the  Orthodox  Greek  Church ;  Monsignor  is  a  title  in  the  Eoman
Catholic  Church,  but  I  can  find  no  authority  for  combining  them,
still  less  for  adding  the  title  "presbyter."

3 1  find  among  the  Oriental  rites  in  use  at  Rome  {Christian  and
Ecclesiastical  Rome,  Vol.  II.,  p.  88)  one  called  Greco-Melkite  (Greco-
Melchita),  in  which  the  celebrant  wears  the  "high  stiff  biretta  with
a  veil  pendent."  The  words  in  the  script  "  Malekite  Malechite  "  bear
at  least  as  much  resemblance  to  this  name  as  to  the  green  stone
Malachite,  though  the  next  sentence  of  the  script  shows  that  the-
stone  was  at  least  present  in  memory.  I  knew  nothing  of  the
Greco-Melkite  rite  till  February,  1905.

There  appears  to  be  no  such  thing  as  a  tiara  with  strings,  but  I
suppose  that  a  "high  stiff  biretta  with  a  veil  pendent"  is  not  very
unhke  what  is  described  and  drawn  in  the  script.  I  can  find
nothing  else  in  the  way  of  ecclesiastical  head-dress  at  all  resembling,
a  "  tiara  with  floating  strings — not  worn,"  except  this  high  biretta,
which  appears  to  be  removed,  replaced,  and  removed  again  in  the
course  of  the  service.  It  is  perhaps  only  an  odd  coincidence  that
in  the  same  piece  of  writing  should  occur  the  words  "  Malekite
Malechite."  I  have  not  been  able  to  identify  the  building  described
with  any  church  where  this  rite  is  observed,  nor  the  service^
described  with  any  special  function.


Liii.]  Unverifiable  Statements  or  Allusions.


121


and  certain  associations  of  ideas  may  help  to  account  for,
though  I  have  found  no  sort  of  explanation  for  the  language
used. I  give  the  script  in  question  :

Feb.  2,  1903,  6.15  p.?n.  [from  6.3]  iill  6.15  /  read  [Plaiu's]  Symposium.
I  had  arranged  with  Mrs.  Forbes  to  sit  siraultaneoushj  ivith  her  at  6.15.^
Cunabula  cum  narthece  ceromatico  possidet  infantem  deum.  Hodie
sanctus  Sanctorum  in  fideles  lumen  impetrat.  Quis  in  concilio  dei
gloriam  spectat  ?  tintinnabulis  ridet  omne  concinant  circum-

stantes.*

The  peculiarities  of  language  in  the  above  extract  have
been  discussed  above  ^  and  need  not  detain  us  here :  the  cpiestion
is  as  to  the  general  meaning  or  intention  of  the  writing.

The  points  referred  to  in  the  script  appear  to  be  :

( 1 )  a  cradle  with  an  infant  god ;

(2)  a  phial  of  unguent;

(3)  the  day  of  writing;

, :  ■ (4)  the  Holy  of  Holies  (masculine)  ;

(5)  light  procured  for  the  faitliful ;

(6)  ringing  or  tinkling  of  bells ;

(7)  general  festivity ;

(8)  songs  from  the  onlookers;

(9)  something (undetermined)  about a Council  and

beholding  the  glory  of  God.

The  most  definite  of  all  these  points  is  the  third,  the  date,
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  script  was  written  on  Feb.  2,
that  is,  on  the  Festival  of  the  Purification,  or  Presentation
of  Christ  in  the  Temple,  "  Candlemas  Day."  Some  of  the
associations  with  this  day  are  certainly  represented  in  the
script,  though  the  opening  phrases,  at  least  at  first  sight,  are

*  Trans.  "A  cradle  with  a  phial  of  unguent  holds  the  infant  god.
To  day  the  Holy  One  of  Holies  asks  and  obtains  light  for  the
faithful.  Who  in  the  Council  of  God  beholds  the  glory  1  or  Who  in
the  Council  beholds  the  glory  of  God  ? — with  tinklings  all  is  joyous  ;
let  the  bystanders  too  sing."

1  The  words  in  italics  were  noted  on  the  paper  before  the  script
was  obtained.  The  rest  of  the  script  was  quite  unlike  the  above,
and  partly  concerned  with  Mrs.  Forbes ;  it  is  considered  later,
p.  294.

2  See  p.  45.


122


Chapter  VI.


[part


more  suggestive  of  a  Nativity^  than  of  the  Purification.  On
Candlemas  Day,  as  its  name  impHes,  the  chief  ceremony  in
the  Roman  Church  is  the  Benediction  and  distribution  of
wax  hghts.  The  cradle  and  phial  of  ointment  would  be  appro-
priate to  a  baptismal  ceremony  where  there  was  anointing/
but  they  have  no  place  in  the  ceremonies  of  February  2  ;  the
obtaining  of  light  for  the  faithful,  however,  belongs  rather  to
Candlemas  than  to  any  other  festival ;  the  ringing  of  bells,
the  joyousness,  and  the  singing  are  not  sufficiently  distinctive
to  determine  what  ritual,  if  any,  is  aimed  at.  The  phrase,
"  with  tinklings  all  is  joyous,"  is  not  appropriately  applied  to
the  ringing  of  the  "  Sanctus  l^ell "  in  a  Eoman  church,  as
that  is  not  part  of  the  ceremonial,  but  a  mere  note  of  adver-
tisement ;  on  the  other  hand  a  friend  whom  I  have  consulted
writes  that  these  words  "  bring  to  my  mind  the  flabelli
(fans),  with  little  tinkling  bells  carried  and  shaken  at  certain
points  of  Armenian  and  other  Eastern  liturgies — a  very  joyous
sound."  The  same  friend  adds  that  the  words  in  the  script
from  "  Hodie  sanctus  "  to  "  spectat "  read  "  just  like  a  liturgical
fragment,"  but  they  have  not  been  identified  as  such.

On  the  whole  I  am  disposed  to  attribute  the  whole  per-
formance to  vague  recollections  suggested  by  the  date  at  the
head  of  the  paper.  It  is  true  that  the  Festival  of  the  Puri-
fication is  not  a  Nativity,  but  it  is  also  true  that  I  am
completely  unlearned  in  matters  of  ritual  and  had  certainly
never  thought  of  distinguishing  between  their  appropriate
ceremonial.  It  must  be  remembered  that  if  the  script
represents  any  impression  of  my  subliminal,  however  uncon-
scious, derived  from  my  normal  experience  or  knowledge,  the
important  thing  to  ascertain  is  not  what  are  the  facts  as  to
the  ritual  observed  anywhere  on  February  2,  but  what  my

1  Or  possibly  of  the  Epiphany,  but  the  "  light "  given  in  answer
to  prayer  is  to  the  "  faithful "  and  hardly  represents  the  manifesta-
tion to  the  Gentiles.  Besides  the  distinctive  characteriptics  of  the
Epiphany  are  absent;  there  is  no  "star,"  no  "manger,"  no  "wise
men."

-Note,  however,  that  the  curious  word  ceromatico  used  for  "oint-
ment" means  a  mixture  containing  wax,  and  does  not  suggest  the
oil,  or  chrism  of  oil  and  balsam,  used  for  anointing.  The  lights
blessed  on  February  2  are  wax  lights,  and  the  word  cereus,  wax,
occurs  in  the  prayers  at  the  blessing  of  candles  in  Eoman  churches.


LIII.]


Unverijiable  Statements  or  Allusions.


123


subliminal  impressions  would  be ;  they  might,  no  doubt,  be
more  accurate  than  my  supraliminal  impressions,  but  would
not  be  infallible.  I  would  not  undertake  to  say  that  I  might
not  have  confused  the  ceremonies  of  baptism  with  those  of
purification  and  presentation  in  the  temple.^  But  to  admit
that  throws  no  light  on  the  general  question  why  the  script
should  produce  such  vague  recollections  with  all  the  appearances
of  describing  a  piece  of  ritual  observance,  and  in  language
entirely  unlike  any  that  I  have  ever  known  or  seen.  I  had
not  to  my  knowledge  at  the  time  of  writing  ever  looked  into
any  book  containing  an  account  of  the  ceremonies  or  prayers
in  use  by  any  Church,  except  those  in  the  Book  of  Common
Prayer.'

The  next  piece  of  writing  after  the  above,  on  February  9,
1903,  showed  an  attempt  to  refer  to  some  ceremony  of
baptism,  but  is  wholly  unintelligible.  I  quote  it  only  to
complete  the  list  of  possible  allusions  to  this  subject,  but
there  is  nothing  distinctively  Christian  in  it.

Sponsor  cum  matertera  aquam  in  putidillo  praebet. lintello  tersunt
no tergunt — fiaprvpet  6  —apiiv. ne(Trifif3pL0<i  6  Stos.  €V(f)7]{jiflTf.
XayOts  KaXXicrrr].

So  far  as  it  can  be  translated,  it  runs  thus :  "  The  godfather
with  the  aunt  offers  water  in  a  little  well  (?) ;  with  a  little

1  A  brother  of  my  mother's  was  born  on  February  2,  and  I  have
all  my  life  been  familiar  with  a  miniature  painted  by  his  mother,
representing  him  as  a  child  with  two  doves.  It  is  possible  that
this  early  association  of  a  birthday  with  the  Feast  of  tlie  Purifica-
tion may  be  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  the  child  and  cradle
into  the  script.  It  is  possible  also  that  the  notion  of  a  birthday  was
introduced  by  telepathic  association  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  I  was  writing
simultaneously  with  her,  and  I  found  subsequently  that  February  2
was  her  husband's  birthday  ;  so  that  the  date  February  2  undoubtedly
was  associated  in  her  mind  with  birthday  ceremonies. See  p.  249.

-  There  is  a  resemblance  between  the  words  of  the  script  and
(e.g.)  the  phrases  used  in  an  account  of  the  Festival  of  the  Purifi-
cation given  "ex  m.  s.  Pontificalis  Ecclesiae  Bisuntinae "  (Martene,
De  Ant.  Erd.  Bit.).  After  the  words  "  has  candelas  tua  benedic-
tione  perfunde,  quatenus  fidelis  populus  eas  in  manibus  portans  non
solum  exteriori  lumine  gaudeat,"  comes  the  Praefafio,  ending  with
the  Sanctus,  then  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  distribution  of  candles,  the
hymn  of  Simeon,  and  a  procession  :  "  omnis  plebs  Ecclesiarum  loca
cum  cereis  et  diversis  hymnis  lustrantibus  circumeunt."


124


Chapter  VI.


[part


linen  cloth  (?)  they  rub  it.^  He  who  is  present  bears
witness."

Then  follows  an  obscure  allusion  in  G-reek  to  the  middle  of
the  day,  and  the  script  ends :  "  Farewell ;  fairest  grace."

This  completes  the  list  of  allusions  to  things  apparently
appertaining  to  Christian  ritual.


(V.)  Quasi-philosophical,  Mystic,  or  Didactic  Utterances.

Besides  the  exhortations  above  described,"  there  have  from
time  to  time  occurred  in  the  script  longer  passages  of  a  more
or  less  philosophical  or  didactic  nature,  apparently  addressed
to  me  and  intended  to  convey  instruction.  The  intention  is
not  very  well  marked  nor  do  the  teachings,  such  as  they  are,
seem  to  be  those  of  any  recognised  system.  For  the  most
part  they  are  vague  and  general  in  character,  though  there
are  here  and  there  touches  of  mysticism,  possibly  allusions  to
Orphism,  or  to  the  doctrines  of  later  Platonism.  The  iden-
tifiable references  to  dogma  are  discussed  elsewhere,^  but  most
of  the  writings  on  this  topic  are  indefinite  and  contain  but
few  allusions  to  ascertainable  doctrines.

(1)  Prayers.

On  three  occasions,  all  comparatively  recent,  there  have
been  what  seem  to  be  prayers  or  addresses,  but  it  does  not
appear  to  whom  they  are  addressed.  On  June  8,  1904,
among  some  remarks  intended  to  be  evidential,  come  a  few
words,  asking  him  who  shaped  our  hope  to  bestow  patience
too  upon  those  who  trust  in  him,  o  tu  qui  spevi  nostram
inforraasti,  paticntiam  insicper  praehere  tuis  tihi  confitcntihiis.
Three  months  later  some  one,  who  though  by  nature  impatient
had  shown  great  care,  is  begged  to  remember  other  persons'

1  The  language  is  obscure,  the  words  being  unknown  and  not
regularly  formed ;  putidillo  and  lintello  are  obviously  diminutives,  but
it  is  not  clear  from  what  they  come.  Puteus  is  a  well ;  linteum,
a  linen  cloth ;  linter,  a  boat.  Tersunt  is  an  impossible  form,  cor-
rected to  tergunt ;  it  means  "they  rub  or  cleanse."

2  See  p.  88.  3  See  p.  286.


LIII.]


Unverifiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.


125


difficulties,  and  reminded  that  only  in  the  long  lapse  of  time
is  there  hope  of  success :

0  tu  qui  diligentiam  adhibuisti  ipse  etsi  natura  impatiens,  aliorum
angustias  comprehendere  debes ;  aevo  in  longinquo  sola  sahis.

Later  again,  December  6,  1904,  a  long  prayer  occurs  in
Latin,^  not  apparently  quite  successfully  brought  off,  as  after
a  certain  confusion  the  script  remarks  in  English :  "  But  the
words  are  not  all  arranged.  It  is  not  as  it  should  lie " ;
and  proceeds  to  give  the  gist  of  the  passage.  The  person
addressed  is  not  sufficiently  indicated  for  identification,  and
the  statements  and  sentiments  are  not  distinctive  or  appro-
priate to  any  particular  school.  The  language  in  one  point
recalls  Horace's  description  of  the  "  wise  man "  of  Stoicism,
.in  another  perhaps  Hadrian's  Address  to  his  Soul.  The  intro-
duction "  Ave "  and  the  conclusion  on  the  word  "  imperat "
suggest  that  there  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  famous  and
unidentified  "  Imperator  "  known  to  readers  of  the  records  of
the  phenomena  of  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses  and  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance.

(2)  Philosophy.

Besides  the  passages  referring  to  Neo-Platonist  theories,
which  are  dealt  with  later,  there  are  24  pieces  of  writing
of  the  nature  of  philosophical  disquisition,  chiefly  in  Greek,
though  both  Latin  and  English  are  used.  In  seven  of  these
the  language  and  thought  are  distinctly  mystic,  with  sugges-
tions of  Orphism ;  in  five  the  subjects  discussed  take  a  quasi-
mathematical  form,  dealing  with  unification,  likeness  of  parts,
and  so  on ;  the  remaining  twelve  are  vague,  enigmatic,  and
often  riddling  in  character.-

{a)  Enigmatic  or  Oracular  Sayings.

Three  of  these  talk  about  rhythm,  in  the  first  case  (Sept.
28,  1901)  with  a  possibly  conscious  connexion  between  pu6/jLo^
rhythm,  and  apiQixo^  mmiber.  In  the  next  (Jan.  4,  1902)  it  is
said  that  "  Mousike  endoxis,"  ^  whatever  that  may  be,  makes  all

iSee  App.,  p.  381.  2  ggg  App.,  p.  381.

2  eV8o|is  is  an  impossible  Greek  form ;  the  word  is  written  in
Roman  character,  as  sometimes  happens  when  the  Greek  is  not
correct.


126


Chapter  VI.


[part


rhythmic,  and  I  am  advised  to  call  in  others,  as  alone  I  am
not  much  use.  On  March  19,  1902,  the  script  says  that
without  "  something  composite  "  the  whole  is  not  "  in  good
rhythm,"  makes  a  statement  about  what  can  be  "  harmonised,"
and  advises  me  not  to  guess  but  to  receive  what  "  thought  ^
(to  voovfievov)  casts  out."  Later  (May  31,  1902),  "none  of
all  this  perpetual  chatter "  is  said  "  to  fit  together,"  and  some
one  "  versed  in  music  or  the  Muses "  (or  perhaps  Musaeus ')
is  mentioned.  The  remarks  on  July  13,  1902,  and  June  21,
1903,  contain  allusions  to  a  paper  of  my  husband's  on  the'
Greek  habit  of  etymological  punning,  and  both  seem  to  imply
that  some  kind  of  "  combination "  is  required.  The  same
idea  occurs  also  on  Jan.  30,  1903,  when  the  script  says  that
what  "  you  have  chattered  about "  and  "  she  has  thought "
fit  together,  "  that  joint  action "  is  better,  and  that  "  those
who  would  separate "  ^  are  not  the  best  in  this  matter,  though
there  are  occasions  when  separation  must  be  made.  This
piece  of  writing  ends  with  a  perfectly  unmistakeable  allusion
to  a  recognised  theory  about  the  Platonic  ideas,  that  they
are  numbers,  apiO/uLol, — and  that  therefore  arithmetic  is  of
advantage.

On  Oct,  6,  1903,  the  script  opens  with  the  curious  words:

Autaggeltos  i)  Smi'om — Koi  5t'  avTy]v  Travra  ^l(.k€k6(t ixi^r ai*

This  recalls  the  saying  of  Anaxagoras,'*  very  familiar  to  me,
that  all  was  chaos  till  mind  came  and  brought  it  into  order,
but  the  word  used  by  Anaxagoras  is  nc'j  Siavola  but  povg,  and
the  word  avTayyeXToii  is  not  used  in  classical  Greek  as  far
as  I  can  ascertain  ;  the  dictionary  quotes  it  from  Basil.

*  Trans.  "  Intelligence  is  self-announced,  and  through  intelligence
are  all  things  brought  into  order."

1  i.e.  Thought,  regarded  as  the  thing  thought,  not  the  active
principle,  voi«s.

"  Musaeus  is  a  traditional  poet  or  mystic  of  the  same  type  as
Orpheus.

2  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  phrase  ol  x^P^CovTes  "  the  separatists  "
appeared  to  me  to  be  possibly  an  allusion  to  the  Homeric  question.
But  I  have  since  (Februar}^  1906)  found  that  the  j^hrase  is  applied
by  commentators  on  Pythagorean  theories  to  those  who  distinguish
vovs  and  ^vx']  instead  of  identifying  them.

Trdi'Ta  )(p"iJ/>iaTa  rjv  ojwv. eira  I'ovs  kXdoiv  avra  SieKOcr/xiycrei'.


LIII.]


Unverifiohle  Statements  or  Allusions.


127


Unintelligible  riddling  occurs  on  two  successive  occasions,  in
Latin  and  Greek  on  Nov.  30,  1904,  and  in  Greek  only  on
Dec.  4;  English  is  used  twice:  on  Jan.  25,  1903,  to  express
in  sounding  language  the  sort  of  stuff  that  one  knows  in
dreams,  and  again  on  June  24,  1904,^  where  there  appears  to
be  a  paradoxically  expressed  interpretation  and  criticism  of
the  precept  "  Forgive  your  enemies."

With  the  words  "  not  without  holiness  and  temperance "  a
touch  of  mysticism  apparently  enters  into  the  very  frag-
'mentary  and  unintelligible  remarks  of  Jan.  29,  1904,  the
word  "  holy,"  oVjo?,  being  specially  used  of  the  initiated  in
Orphic  writings ;  this  script  again  attempts  to  explain  how
understanding  of  "  the  doctrine  which  brings  rhythm  and
harmony  into  everything "  is  to  be  attained.

(&)  M^jstic.

A  mystic  allusion  seems  to  be  found  on  March  7,  1903,
in  the  wheel  of  the  master  which  divides  time  into  equal
parts.  And  in  the  middle  of  1904  there  was  apparently
an  outburst  of  mysticism,  beginning  on  May  26  with  some
incomplete  Greek  verses  on  the  subject  of  the  forgetfulness
of  the  dead  and  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  knowledge
without  the  "  speaking  of  the  gods,"  and  continuing  on
June  10  with  some  dark  remarks  about  the  baptising  of
certain  disciples  called,  seemingly,  "  obscure,"  because  what  is
plain  to  others  is  obscure  to  them !  A  mysterious  "  Etymo-
logicum  Symbolisticum,"  formed  on  the  analogy,  I  suppose,  of
the  Etymologicum  Magnum,  but  unfortunately  non-existent,
is  suggested  as  the  authority  for  this  strange  derivation,  and
the  script  proceeds  in  almost  wholly  unintelligible  language  to
discourse  about  the  opening  of  the  gates  of  death,  where  "  if
you  can  behold  the  pure  ^  with  your  eyes  you  will  find  the
mystics  or  initiated "  "  stretching  tight  what  has  been  left
behind," — whatever  that  may  mean  !  For  "  things  there  and
things  on  this  side  are  ever  bound  together  with  a  golden
thread " :  then  follows  something  more  about  bindino;  and
making  one.

^  See  below,  p.  128.

-The  original  puns  on  KoiOapos,  pure,  and  Kadopav,  to  behold.


128


Chapter  VI.


[part


The  next  piece  of  writing,  June  24,  is  again  on  the  same
subject.  After  a  fanciful  interpretation  of  the  words  "  Forgive
your  enemies,"  the  script  passes  into  Greek,  obscure  enough
indeed,  but  not  so  hopelessly  corrupt  and  fragmentary  as
in  some  other  instances.  It  is  not  easy  to  translate,  and  no
translation  can  convey  to  those  who  do  not  read  Greek  the
eccentricities  of  phrase  and  form ;  nor  can  any  comment  of
mine,  I  fear,  convey  to  strangers  the  extreme  dissimilarity
between  this  passage  and  anything  that  I  have  consciously
thought  or  written.  I  can  only  repeat  that  I  cannot  con-
ceive myself  under  any  normal  circumstances  using  the  words
or  entertaining  the  ideas  of  this  curious  fragment.  Till  my
attention  was  attracted  to  the  subject  by  the  script,  I  had
no  knowledge  of  Orphism  beyond  what  must  be  acquired  in
the  course  of  classical  reading  by  one  who  has  always  been
interested  in  Platonism,  the  Platonism  of  Plato,  that  is  to
say,  and  not  Neo-Platonism  ^  or  any  other  imitation  or  modi-
fication, ancient  or  modern,  of  Plato.  At  the  time  when  this
script  was  produced  I  had  not  read  the  chapter  on  Orphism
in  Miss  Harrison's  Prolcrjomcna  to  Greek  Religion,  though  I  saw
so  much  of  her  during  the  writing  of  that  book  that  I  knew
that  the  subject  was  one  of  great  interest  to  her  and  must
have  heard  something  of  her  views.  It  is  always  difficult  to
say  what  one  knew  at  any  particular  moment,  and  it  is
possible  that  my  lack  of  interest  in  these  subjects  induces
me  to  imderestimate  the  actual  information  which  I  possessed
and  could  have  produced  if  it  had  l^een  called  for,  but  even
making  due  allowance  for  this  I  still  find  it  impossible  to
account  for  the  phrases  or  the  ideas  in  the  following  passage :
xusia  dele  Crousia  \xovo<^i.\r\Th'i  1}  SvyaTYjp'  Trai'SeKTOjp  epwros
dyyeAta  crepdcfiecriv  a-£Lpd<f>opo<;'  dXX.'  ev  uy[(TpaTL  tlvI  tujv  paOq-Qiv
■7rai'8eKT(x>p  Kal  TravSojpos  to  avTo  ^vvajxu  el  Kal  ovk  epyoj'  roiyap  a-6(j)0t,
iini'OL  ol  fxepvripivoi'  ovtoc  yap  jj^vijixocrvvy  •^piDVTf.'i  X'l'jdrjii  tfiTrXno  to
TrapdSeLyfia  to  ipyucmKov  fv  i'cracrti'.

which  may  be  thus  translated :

"  xusia,  efface  that ;  Crousia,  the  daughter  is  the  only  love.

1  In  1901,  when  the  script  began,  I  had  read  none  of  the  Neo-
Phitonists — not  Plotinus,  nor  Porphyry,  nor  Plutarch  (except  the
Lives),  nor  Macrobius,  nor  lamblichus.  My  acquaintance  with  these
various  writers  began  after  the  middle  of  March,  1903,  see  p.  286.


LIIT.]


Unverifiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.


129


The  all -receiving  ^  message  of  love  is  a  yoke  fellow  of  seraphs  :  -
but  in  a  certain  consecration  of  disciples  the  all  receiving
and  the  all  giving  are  the  same,  at  least  in  function  if  not
in  fact.  Therefore  only  the  initiated  are  wise ; for  they,
iising  (?)  memory,  and  filled  with  forgetfulness,  know  well  the
efficient  example."

What  this  means,  or  whether  it  means  anything,  I  must
leave  the  reader  to  determine,  but  it  seems  to  me  to  say
that  under  some  circumstances  (probably  initiation)  there  is
an  identification  of  opposites  (i.e.  receiving  and  giving)  and
that  in  the  case  of  the  initiated  a  combination  of  opposites
(i.e.  memory  and  forgetfulness)  produces  a  condition  of  efficiency.
What  is  the  object  of  this  condition  of  efficiency  the  script
•does  not  here  say,  but  taking  this  passage  in  connexion  with
others  of  the  same  type  it  appears  to  me  to  suggest  that
one  object  of  initiation  was  to  enable  the  dead  to  communicate
with  the  living.  I  am  not  aware  whether  any  such  explanation
has  ever  been  suggested  by  writers  on  the  subject  of  Orphism,
That  the  waters  of  Mnemosyne,  or  Memory,  play  a  part  in  Orphic
rites  was  certainly  known  to  me  at  the  time  that  this  script
was  produced,  and  a  speculative  fancy  might  conceive  that
the  dead  who  remembered  were  more  likely  to  communicate
with  the  living  than  the  dead  who  forgot,  but  I  have  never
to  my  knowledge  entertained  any  such  speculation,  nor  indeed
any  other  speculation,  on  the  effect  of  initiation  in  Orphic
or  other  mysteries.

1  urai'SeKTwp  though  perfectly  intelligible  is  not  extant ;  SeKTOjp  for
the  comtnon  form  oeK-r,/^  is  used  by  Aeschylus,  Eum.  204,  and
TravSeKTrys  exists.

2  Note  the  pun  in  the  original;  (Teipd<j)opos  literally  "a  trace-
horse,"  i.e.  fastened  beside  the  yoked  pair  by  a  rope.  o-epdcjjta-Lv  is
apparently  meant  for  a  dat.  pi.  of  the  Hebrew  word  "seraph."

^  The  phrase  o-oc^ot  fxovoc  ot  fxefivynxivoL  is  appropriate  enough  if  Dr.
Adam's  suggestion  (Ed.  of  Plato's  Bejmblic,  Vol.  II.,  p.  379)  is  accepted
that  a-ocfioi  was  a  "recognised  way  of  describing  the  representa-
tives of  the  Orphic  brotherhood."  But  I  was  not  accpiainted  at  the
time  when  the  script  was  produced  with  this  view,  which  I  found
only  in  March,  1905,  when  study  of  this  feature  of  the  script
led  me,  for  the_  first  time,  to  consult  some  authorities  on  Orphism.
Dr.  Adam's  Edition  of  the  Republic  was,  however,  in  our  house  in
November,  1902,  and  as  I  cut  the  leaves  of  the  book  on  its  arrival
I  may  have  seen,  without  noticing,  the  passage  in  question.

I


130


Chapter  VI.


[part


Again,  on  August  21,  1904,  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to
produce  evidential  matter  relating  to  my  husband  was  pre-
ceded and  followed  by  mystical  allusions.  The  script  began
by  saying  in  Greek  that  "  our  Terpsichore "  rejoices  without
the  lyre,  and  the  listeners,  themselves  songsters,^  strike  the
lyre,  not  with  hands  but  with  the  spirit.  These  remarks
are  to  be  "  grasped  and  when  grasped  handed  back ;  thereby
shall  the  disciples  receive  them  though  they  know  not  their
master."  After  the  evidential  attempt  in  English  the  script
returns  in  Latin  to  the  same  idea  of  lyreless  music  and
song :

Now  there  returns  the  voice  of  that  choir  singing  without  a
lyre,  celebrating  in  a  fashion  unintelligible  to  you  but  delightful  to
themselves  the  glory  of  all  and  the  whole.  When  we  hear  this
we  must  leave  meetings  with  mortal  men  and  seek  the  eternal
communion.

The  idea  of  songs  unaccompanied  by  the  lyre,  which
apparently  underlies  both  parts  of  the  script,  has  no  associa-
tions for  me  and,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  revived  reminiscence
is  traceable  in  this  writing.  Nor  have  I  found  any  parallel
to  it  in  such  mystical  writings  as  I  am  acquainted  with.

The  next  piece  of  mysticism  occurred  on  Oct.  12,  1904,
when  after  a  reference  to  "  Orotava  "  ^  and  a  statement  that
I  once  knew  what  that  meant,  there  followed  a  description
in  Latin  of  the  coming  to  Charon's  ferry  of  some  one  who
returned  again  to  his  comrades  in  the  realms  above.  The
personage  is  not  named  nor  sufficiently  described ;  he  is  a
singer  whose  "  more  than  mortal  voice "  pleases  the  living
and  the  dead,  and  whose  songs  form  "  as  it  were  a  bridge
from  l^ank  to  bank."  ^  Then  follows  a  curious  little  hit  of
mysticism  telling  how,  while the  river  flows,  the  banks  are

1  The  script  has  doLOaf,  songs,  but  no  doubt  doiSol,  bards,  is  intended.
The  Greek  is  not  altogether  classical  but  there  seems  no  doubt  about
its  meaning.

2  See  p.  117.

3  Two  persons  at  once  suggest  themselves  as  the  originals  for  the
singer,  Orpheus  and  Virgil,  the  Orpheus  of  classical  story  and  the
Virgil  of  the  Sixth  Aeneid  and  the  Divina  Commcdia.  But
the  expressions  in  the  script  do  not  exactly  correspond  with  any
of  the  famous  "  Descents  into  Hell."


LIJI.]


Unverijiahle  Statements  or  Allusions.


131


apart,  but  when  the  river  plunges  into  the  deep  sea,  the
banks,  though  at  first  they  separate  in  opposite  directions,  at
last  come  curving  round  the  water  they  confine,  and  so  are
no  longer  opposite  but  the  same.-'  The  idea  seems  again  to
be  the  ultimate  identity  of  opposites,  as  in  the  script  of
June  24,  1904,  just  quoted.

But  whether  the  writing  on  June  24,  1904  intended  or  not
to  imply  that  initiation  made  communication  possible  between
the  dead  and  the  living,  by  Jan.  24,  1905,-  the  scribe  was
quite  clear  on  this  point :

Only  the  initiated  are  present  with  their  friends  ;  the  uninitiated
ever  wander  around  tombs  and  places  of  burial,  terrifying  those  who
are  there  and  not  benefitting  themselves.

Then,  apparently  conscious  that  some  of  the  phrases  used  are
reminiscent  of  the  Phaedo,^  it  adds  :
\ All  such  things  as  this  have  long  ago  been  written  about  in  books  ;
but  whether  the  tales  are  told  with  understanding  or  in  foolishness
it  is  for  wise  men  to  determine.

(c)  Quasi-Mathematical  disquisitions.

On  five  occasions  when  the  phraseology  of  the  script  is
more  arithmetical  than  philosophic,  the  language  used  is
Greek,  and  it  is  possible  that  some  Platonic  x'eminiscence
lies  behind  the  writing,  though  the  strange  expressions  in
it  are  undoubtedly  original  and  not  even  in  form  like  the
words  of  Plato.  The  writings  are  of  no  interest  except  perhaps
linguistically.  Once,  on  Nov.  26,  1902,  there  is  possibly
a  revived  memory  of  Plato's  Philebus  and  at  the  same  time
an  attempt  at  a  cross-correspondence  between  my  script  and

'  There  is  perhaps  another  touch  of  mysticism  in  the  introduction
of  the  number  7 ;  "  seven-foot  boots "  are  to  be  put  on  and  the
way  must  be  sought  and  sought  again  "  three  and  four  times,  ter
et  quater.  Macrobius,  Soran.  I.  6.  44  (see  below,  p.  287)  sees  in
Virgil's  ter  quaierque  beati  a  reference  to  the  Pythagorean  "  universal
Seven."

-The  script  of  January  1905  falls  outside  the  period  dealt  with
in  this  paper,  but  the  passage  in  question  is  quoted  as  belonging
to  the  series  here  described.

^  See  Plato,  Phaedo,  81  D,  ?}  TOLavT-q  i/zv^r]  .  .  .  Trepl  to.  fxvq/j.aTa.  Tf
Kal  Tovs  Toicfiovs  KvXivSovfievr],  irepl  a  8i]  Kal  uxpdrj  arra  t^v)(uji/  CTKioeiSrJ


132


Chapter  VI.


[part


that  of  Mrs.  Forbes/  but  no  evidential  or  verifiable  matter
appears  in  the  other  quasi-mathematical  disquisitions  concerning
"  one  and  two "  or  the  "  properties  of  triangles "  or  "  parts
of  likes."

The  touches  of  Neo-Platonism  in  the  script,  being  a  veri-
fiable and  not  general  topic,  are  dealt  with  later.^  Here
ends  the  description  of  the  general  characteristics  of  the
script ;  the  second  part  of  this  paper  treats  of  such  points
as  lend  themselves  to  corroboration,  refutation,  or  at  least
explanation.  •  ,  _

iSee  pp.  144,  24.3.  '^See  p.  286.


liil]


Reminiscences,  etc.


133


PART  II.

VEEIFIABLE  MATTEE  CONTAINED  IN  THE  SCRIPT.


CHAPTEE  VII.

Eeminiscences  and  Connexion  with  Dreams,  etc.

We  now  leave  the  description  of  the  nature  of  the  script  and
of  the  general  topics  introduced  and  come  to  the  considera-
tion of  the  "  evidential "  value  of  the  information  contained  in
the  script,  without  considering  for  the  present  to  what  source
or  agency  the  evidence  points.  This  second  part  of  the  paper
deals  with  such  portions  of  the  script  as  are  by  their  very  nature
able  to  be  verified,  refuted,  or  at  the  very  least  connected  with
definite  occurrences.  Where,  for  instance,  statements  are  made
in  the  script  about  persons  named  or  otherwise  identified,
or  when  information  as  to  past  or  forthcoming  events  of  a
definite  nature  is  contained  in  it,  it  is  at  least  possible  to
ascertain  whether  or  not  the  statements  are  correct,  and  if
correct,  how  far  information  previously  and  consciously  in  my
possession  can  account  for  them.

On  this  latter  point,  I  can  only  say  that  I  have  endeavoured
to  ascertain  and  to  make  clear  to  my  reader  the  extent  of
my  conscious  knowledge  on  all  topics  dealt  with  in  this  script,
but  it  is  of  course  possible  that  in  many  cases  my  subliminal
extended  beyond  my  supraliminal  knowledge  and  that  this  may
account  for  some  of  the  apparently  evidential  statements.  It
will  be  seen,  however,  that  there  are  other  instances  where
the  evidence  for  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  does  not
rest  on  my  own  impressions  alone,  but  is  corroborated  by
other  persons.


134


Chapter  VII.


[part


Against  error  arising  from  misdating  of  the  script  or  mis-
recollection  of  its  contents  precautions  have  been  taken  by
the  method  pursued  for  its  preservation.  This  method  has
been  described  above.  But  I  repeat  some  particulars  here
before  discussing  any  of  the  topics  where  verification  becomes
possible,  in  order  that  the  conditions  and  external  corroboration
may  be  perfectly  clear.

Precautions  ohscrved.

The  first  piece  of  fluent  writing  was  obtained,  as  stated
above,  on  March  5,  1901.  On  March  11  I  copied  that
piece  as  well  as  pieces  obtained  on  March  6,  8,  and  9,
into  a  book,  prefacing  them  with  a  short  statement  about
previous  unsuccessful  efforts  earlier  in  the  year.  From  that
time  onwards  I  have  always  copied  each  piece  of  writing
into  a  book,  generally  within  twenty-four  hours  after  it  had
been  obtained,  though  occasionally,  when  I  have  been  away
from  home  and  not  had  the  book  with  me,  there  has  been  a
longer  interval.  The  date  of  the  copying  has  always  been  entered
at  the  time  of  copying.  The  script  is  copied  on  to  the  right-
hand  pages  in  these  MS.  l;)Ooks,  and  on  the  left-hand
pages  it  has  been  my  practice  to  add  any  comments  or  infor-
mation subsequently  obtained  which  seemed  likely  to  bear  on
the  contents  of  the  script. Such  comments  are  always  dated.

At  the  beginning  it  was  my  practice  to  show  the
original  writings — in  pencil  on  large  sheets  of  paper — to  my
husband  as  soon  after  they  were  written  as  was  possible :
they  were  then  locked  in  my  writing-table.  Some  of  the
originals  and  the  book  of  copies  were  shown  to  certain  other
persons;  for  instance,  Mrs.  Forbes,  on  November  14,  1901,
saw  a  few  originals  ;  both  originals  and  copies  were  seen  by
Mr.  Piddington  in  ISTovember,  1901,  and  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  in  December,  1901.  From  time  to  time  extracts
have  been  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  other
persons  whom  they  were  thought  to  concern,  notes  beiug
made  by  me  as  to  what  was  sent.  In  the  summer  of  1902,
while  I  was  abroad  and  therefore  not  copying  regularly  into
the  book,  I  showed  some  of  the  originals  to  Miss  Jane  Harrison,
who  was  with  us,  as  well  as  to  my  husband,  and  she  has
dated  and  initialed  them.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


135


In  some  other  cases,  where  it  seemed  that  the  date  of  pro-
duction might  be  of  importance,  I  obtained  the  attestation
of  others,  chiefly  of  Mr.  Piddington.  Finally,  in  December,
1902,  as  it  appeared  that  there  might  be  some  premonitory
value  in  the  script,  it  was  arranged,  to  obviate  the  possibility
of  tampering  on  my  part  with  originals  or  copies,  that  all
existing  originals  should  be  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and
that  thenceforth  I  should  send  to  him,  after  taking  a  copy
for  my  own  use,  each  original  in  an  envelope  dated  and  posted
by  me,  and  filed  by  him,  usually  unopened,  for  future  reference.^
Accordingly,  on  December  15,  1902,  I  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
all  originals  down  to  and  including  the  script  of  Oct.  25,  1902,
the  originals  from  Oct.  25  to  Dec.  9,  1902  being  at  that  time
in  the  charge  of  Miss  Johnson.  The  next  piece  of  writing,  pro-
duced on  Dec.  14,  was  sent  on  the  day  of  its  production  to
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  since  then  I  have  regularly  sent  to
him,  very  shortly  after  production,  all  the  original  writings,
except  in  one  or  two  cases  where  in  pursuance  of  an  experi-
ment it  has  been  arranged  for  the  originals  to  go  to  some
one  else."

Classification  of  topics.

The  verifiable  topics  may  be  variously  classified.  The
greater  part  refer  to  specified  persons,  living  and  dead,
and  in  many  cases  claim  to  give  information  about  the
doings  or  thoughts  of  the  living,  or  about  incidents  connected
with  the  dead,  and  not  known  to  myself.  But  I  should
1)6  giving  a  thoroughly  false  idea  of  the  contents  of  the  script

1  The  envelopes  have  in  some  instances  been  opened,  at  my  request,
■when  I  wished  the  contents  to  be  communicated  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

"In  all  cases  before  Dec.  14,  1902,  where  the  date  of  the  script
is  of  importance  in  estimating  the  value  of  its  contents,  any  cor-
roboration of  its  authenticity  that  can  be  given  will  be  noted;  in
the  case  of  the  later  script  this  will  not  be  done,  as  the  postmarks
and  the  corroboration  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  show  the  latest  date
at  which  access  to  the  originals  could  have  been  had  by  me.  In
the  absence  of  statements  to  the  contrary  it  may  be  assumed  that
all  originals  since  Dec.  14,  1902,  were  beyond  my  control  within
48  hours  after  the  date  at  which  they  were  produced.  In  the
Appendix  will  be  found  lists  of  corroborative  documents  where  the
■exact  chronological  sequence  is  of  special  importance.


136


Chapter  VII.


[part


if  I  allowed  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  greater  part,  even
of  this  verifiable  matter,  appears  in  the  form  of  communications
from  supposed  discarnate  spirits.  The  information  is  for  the
most  part  stated  without  any  colour  other  than  is  made
inevitable  by  the  personal  form  of  the  phraseology.  "  Tell  So
and  So,"  or  more  frequently,  "  Some  one  ought  to  remember
this " :  such  are  the  phrases  in  common  use.  Often  the
incident  is  related  without  any  suggestion  of  its  connexion
with  other  portions  of  the  script  or  any  clue  to  its  meaning ;
in  more  than  one  instance  of  the  apparent  knowledge  by  the
scribe  of  facts  unknown  to  me,  and  subsequently  ascertained
to  be  correct,  the  clue  to  the  verification  has  been  obtained
only  by  what  seems  the  merest  accident.  It  is  of  course
possible  that  in  some  cases  a  clue  has  been  missed.

As  I  have  said  above,  attempts  at  rigid  and  exclusive
classification  seem  premature,  but  it  will  be  convenient  to  treat
of  the  verifiable  incidents  in  classes,  grouping  together  those
that  are  of  the  same  general  type.  After  describing  in  this
chapter  those  that  seem  to  concern  my  own  personality,  and  are
connected  with  my  own  thoughts,  memories,  or  dreams,  and  after
saying  something  of  a  series  of  experiments  carried  out,  with  or
without  my  knowledge,  by  various  specified  persons,^  I  shall  go
on  to  the  cases  where  "  messages "  to  or  about  living  people  ^
occur,  taking  for  separate  discussion  those  referring  to  other
automatic  writers  ^  or  "  sensitives "  of  any  kind.  In  some
cases  the  object  aimed  at  seems  to  have  been  not  a  "  message,"'
evidential  or  otherwise,  to  a  particular  person  or  group,  but
the  production  of  statements  normally  unknown  or  unknow-
able at  the  date  of  writing  but  subsequently  verifiable.  These
form  a  class  apart  and  will  be  considered  *  when  the  com-
munications grouped  round  persons  have  been  described.

That  an  intimate  connexion  exists  between  the  contents  of
tlie  automatic  writing  and  my  own  mind  has  been  profusely
illustrated  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  paper ;  it  is  shown  in
the  languages  used,  in  quotations  from  authors  known  to
me,  in  allusions  to  literary  and  other  subjects  familiar  to  me,
and  in  many  other  ways. Efforts  to  trace  some  of  the  con-


iSee  Chapter  VIII.
2  Chapters  X.  and  XL


2  Chapter  IX.

4  Chapters  XII.  and  XIII.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


137


nexions  in  detail  have  been  made  in  discussing  those  "  general
topics "  which  deal  with  imaginary  descriptions  or  philosophical
disquisitions.^  But  besides  these  there  are  a  few  cases  where
the  allusions  are  definite,  and  the  manner  of  expression
seems  to  show  that  the  script  is  referring  to  my  own  actual
knowledge,  exactly  as  a  third  person  might  do ;  there  are
also  some  cases  where  the  script  shows  revived  memories
beyond  the  range  of  my  conscious  recollection ;  there  are  a
few  traces  of  reference  to  things  thought  of  by  me  just
before  writing ;  and  there  are  some  traceable  connexions
between  my  dreams  and  the  automatic  writing.  It  seems
desirable  to  deal  with  these  four  types  before  going  on  to
other  kinds  of  verifiable  matter.

(1)  Allusions  to  things  known  to  the  write?:

The  greater  number  of  these  have  already  been  mentioned
in  describing  the  quotations  and  other  literary  allusions,
but  a  few  remain  to  be  noted.  The  script  seems  specially
familiar  with  a  paper  written  by  my  husband  and  read  by
me  before  our  marriage ;  it  was  published  in  the  Journal  of
Philology  in  1880,  and  dealt  with  the  question  of  "divination"
in  names  and  their  magical  interpretation  among  the  Greeks.
The  paper  suggested  that  in  some  cases  the  old  verb  ro-Trav
"  to  conjecture "  or  "  divine,"  had  been  in  our  manuscripts
replaced  by  the  common  phrase  to  irav,  "  the  whole."  The
paper  was  well  known  to  me  some  twenty-five  years  ago,  but
has  not  been  specially  recalled  to  my  mind  recently,  and  I  did
not  understand  the  first  reference  to  it  until  it  was  pointed
out  to  me.  On  April  8,  1901,  in  the  midst  of  almost
unintelligible  phrases  in  Latin  and  Greek,  came  the  following :

sume  superponenti  ideam  -n-avTl  rpoTroj  kol  Tro.vra  tottw  Hellen-
istice  Helenen  cur  non  omnia,  rides  1  et  ego.  sed  necte  semper.
Finis  coronat  opus.  *

One  of  the  names  discussed  in  the  paper  was  that  of  Helen
and  it  was  also  suggested  that  confusion  between  toVo?  and
the  common  word  rpoiro? might in part account for  the

*  Trans.  "  Take — for  me  superposing  (?) — a  shape  in  every  mode  and
I  divine  all  things.  Hellenistically  Helen ;  why  not  all  things  1  Yoa
smile  1 So  do  I,  but  go  on  weaving. The  end  crowns  the  work."

1  See  Chapter  VI,


]38


Chapter  VII.


[part


disappearance  in  our  MSS.  of  the  word  roVo?  in  the  sense
required.  The  allusion  to  my  husband's  paper  is  therefore
clear,  and  it  seems  probable  that  sume  superponenti  ideam  is
meant  to  suggest  an  interpretation  by  re-arrangement.

On  two  subsequent  occasions  reference  was  made  to  the
same  subject,  each  time  in  the  course  of  some  quasi-
philosophical  but  not  very  intelligible  observations.  The  only
clear  point  is  that  in  each  case  the  collaboration  of  some
other  person  is  required.  Thus  on  July  13,  1902,  it  is
suggested  that  "  he  himself "  is  also  guessing  with  you,  auvaTo-
X'^'C,^'-  "^ci!  aJrof,  and  on  June  21,  1903,  after  a  reference  to
a  phrase  in  the  tottj/  paper,  it  is  said  "  alone  you  are  not
able  but  with  another,  even  if  he  does  not  act  with  you."
The  only  other  resemblance  between  these  two  pieces  is  that
both  were  written  abroad,  the  first  in  the  Swiss  Alps,  the
second  on  the  Lake  of  Lucerne,  and  on  each  occasion  there
seems  reason  to  attribute  to  the  script  telepathic  connexion
with  friends  of  mine,  very  slight  in  one  case,  l^ut  distinct
in  the  other."  On  neither  of  these  occasions  does  there
appear  to  be  any  appropriateness  in  the  allusion  to  my
husband  or  to  his  paper.

On  one  other  occasion  reference  was  made  to  a  phrase
used  in  a  technical  sense  by  the  members  of  a  society  to
which  my  husband  belongs,  but  conveying  no  meaning  to  the
general  reader.  The  phrase  had  no  meaning  to  me,  till  my
husband  mentioned  the  associations  that  it  had  for  him,  and
I  cannot  at  this  day  recall  ever  having  heard  it.  But  as
I  have  known  many  members  of  the  society,  it  is  impossible
to  claim  this  as  showing  supernormal  knowledge  on  the  part
of  the  script.  The  script  apparently  so  intended  it ;  it  gives
the  phrase,  then  adds :

ask  your  husband  what  that  means.  Henry  Sidgwick  would
have  known — Write  it  large.  (The  phrase  is  repeated.)  That  will
convince  him  that  it  is  not  you  who  write — -no  other  words.
"  (the  phrase) "  suffices.  It  is  known  to  Gurney  too — and  they
will  recognise.

Then  follows  the  name  of  another  member  of  the  society.

^  fiovi]  OVK  Svvdcrat,  aAAct  crvv  erepm  Katrrep  ov  (TVfXTrpdcrcrovTi.

2  See  pp.  183,  233.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


139


But  in  the  impossibility  of  proving  that  I  had  not  heard
the  phrase,  none  of  this  is  likely  to  '  convince '  any  one  that
the  allusion  was  not  due  to  a  reminiscence  of  my  own.  The
three  names  mentioned  are  those  of  persons  who  would  have
known  the  phrase,  and  whom  I  should  associate  with  the
phrase,  granted  that  I  knew  it,  as  they  were  all  members
of  the  society  in  question.

(2)  Allusions  to  things  recently  thought  of  hy  the  writer.

I  have  throughout  these  four  years  watched  carefully  to
see  if  in  the  automatic  writing,  as  often  in  dreams,  I  could
trace  reminiscences  of  recent  events  or  impressions.  But  to
my  surprise  the  number  of  such  cases  is  exceedingly  rare.
In  the  whole  306  pieces  of  writing  I  can  find  only  five
occasions  where  the  writing  distinctly  refers  to  something  that
had  occurred  shortly  before  its  production.  The  first  occasion
was  on  May  29,  1901,  when  the  name  of  a  friend,  about
whom  we  had  felt  some  anxiety,  occurred  in  the  script,  with
statements  that  grossly  exaggerated  a  fleeting  impression  of
my  own. It  concluded  with  the  words :

It  is  not  fraud,  not  you,  you  do  not  do  it.  It  is  I.  That's
all  to-day.

The  writing  was  obtained  in  the  train  on  my  way  down
from  town,  soon  after  eight  p.m. ;  I  noted  at  the  time  that
at  six  o'clock  something  had  occurred  which  suggested  the  name
with  which  the  script  began,  and  that  the  whole  thing  was
"  an  exaggerated  reproduction  of  what  has  lately  occasionally
been  in  my  mind,  especially  on  Sunday  last,"  the  26th  May.
I  further  noted  that,  contrary  to  the  usual  custom,  "  I  was
quite  aware  of  what  I  was  writing,  it  came  in  phrases,"
whereas,  as  T  have  said,  the  automatic  script  usually  presents
itself  to  me  in  words  and  I  have  no  general  impression
whatever  of  its  meaning,  as  each  word  vanishes  while  I  am
endeavouring  to  catch  the  next.  In  fact  on  this  occasion,  my
own  "  impression  throughout  was  that  I  myself — not  my  hand —
was  writing,  hence  perhaps  the  remarks  at  the  end."  This  is
the  only  occasion  on  which  anything  of  this  kind  has  occurred,
or  when  I  have  had  an  impression  of  the  absolute  lack  of
genuineness  of  the  writing ;  the  impression  of  its  '  genuineness '


140


Chcqoter  VII.


[part


varies  from  less  to  more,  but  this  is  tlie  only  piece  for  which,
in  spite  of  the  protest  of  the  scribe,^  I  still  seem  to  myself
to  be  responsible.

On  another  occasion  Italian  words  were  obtained  in  the
script  at  6.30  on  the  afternoon  of  a  day  on  which  my
husband  had  gone  to  town  to  give  a  lecture  to  the  Dante
Society.  The  scribe  seems  to  have  been  aware  of  my  pre-
occupation with  Italian  and  to  have  resented  it.  I  was
writing  in  pursuance  of  an  experiment  and  holding  in  the
left  hand  a  sealed  envelope  of  which  I  was  to  endeavour  to
read  the  contents.^  The  day  before  it  had  suggested  "  Con-
stantia,"  "  Clementia,"  and  this  evening  it  began  with  "  Olivia,"
then  wrote :

This  is  not  the  thing  you  want — wait  for  that.  Something
says  Italian  words  to-night,  sempre  cosi  bene  sta.  it  confuses. — -
In  tanto  diletto  d'amor.  you  dont  know  the  words.

On  Aug.  31,  1903,  two  days  after  I  had  heard  of  the
death  of  a  friend,  her  initials  appeared  at  the  beginning  of
the  next  automatic  writing,  the  first  obtained  since  her
death ;  nothing  further  referring  to  her  has  occurred  in  the
script,  and  these  initials,  which  wei'e  written  in  a  hand
somewhat  recalling  hers,  though  not  a  close  imitation,  were  no
doubt  due  to  the  thoughts  that  had  filled  my  mind  during
the  preceding  days.

On  June  21,  1902,  the  script  made  an  allusion  to  something
on  which  my  husband  was  engaged  at  the  time.  On  June  20
or  2 1  he  began  to  write  an  Essay  *  on  a  play  of  Euripides,  of
which  I  saw  the  title,  namely,  "  A  Soul's  Tragedy."  I  was
familiar  with  the  line  which  he  was  taking  in  the  Essay,  but
the  title  was  new  to  me  and  interested  me.  An  important
personage  in  his  view  of  the  play  is  Lyssa  (Madness),  and  the
script  produced  the  following  unmistakeable  reference  to  the
Essay  :

Not  Luria  but  Lyssa  gives  the  keynote  he  must  complete.

It  is  better  than  the  Editing.

1  For  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  scribe '  as  used  in  this  paper  see
above,  notes  to  pages  14  and  67.

-See  p.  31.  3 The  word  was  'Fuchsia,'  see  p.  168.

*  Since  published.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


141


The  script  is  signed  ^  with  what  are  probably  intended  for
the  initials  of  my  husband's  former  Head  Master,  the  late
Archbishop  Benson,  but  the  phrase  used,  with  its  allusion  to
Browning's  poems,  Luria,  and  A  Soul's  Tragedy,  is  clearly
derived  from  my  own  recently  acquired  knowledge  of  the
proposed  title  of  my  husband's  Essay.

The  last  of  these  instances  is  a  little  more  complex.  I
seem  to  have  had  an  "  impression "  about  a  stranger,  probably
derived  from  subconscious  observation  and  inference,  then  to
have  elaborated  the  impression,  and  finally  to  have  repre-
sented it  in  the  script,  but  so  far  as  the  statements  in  the
script  could  be  checked,  they  were  incorrect.  I  relate  the
incident  in  detail,  as  it  throws  light  on  the  way  in  which
some  at  least  of  the  writing  is  produced.  But  it  is  the
only  case  of  its  kind  that  I  have  observed,  though  possibly
a  parallel  to  it  may  be  found  in  one  of  the  cases  related
below,''^  where  the  script  recalled  a  dream  impression.

In  the  summer  of  1902  I  was  staying  at  the  Eiffel  Alp,
near  Zermatt,  and  on  July  1  at  breakfast  I  had  a  sudden
impression  about  a  girl  in  the  hotel,  who  had  arrived  a  day
or  two  before,  and  whom  I  had  seen  three  or  four  times.  I
had  not  spoken  to  her.  As  I  sat  at  the  table,  not  looking  at
her,  or  thinking  of  her,  it  suddenly  flashed  across  me  that
she  was  engaged,  and  that  there  was  some  tragedy  about  the
engagement.  The  impression  was  so  vivid  that  I  wondered
how  I  could  ascertain  whether  or  not  it  were  correct.  I
did  not  know  the  girl's  name.  It  then  occurred  to  me  that
I  could  at  least  check  the  impression  as  to  her  engagement
by  seeing  whether  she  wore  a  ring.  I  looked  and  found  that
on  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand  she  was  wearing  two  rings :
one  was  a  gold  ring  with  something  circular,  not  (I  think)  a
jewel,  in  the  centre,  and  over  that  one  she  wore  a  broad
chain  ring  in  gold,  such  as  a  man  might  wear  on  his  little
finger.  I  therefore  thought  it  probable  that  I  had  sub-
consciously observed  the  '  rings  and  inferred  that  she  was
engaged,  but  that  she  had  lost  her  lover  and  was  wearing
a  ring  of  his  as  well  as  her  own.

On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  as  I  sat  after  dinner  on
the  terrace  of  the  hotel,  I  had  the  sudden  impression  that
1  See  p.  302.  -See  p.  153.


142


Chapter  VII.


[part


the  man  had  been  killed  in  the  South  African  war,  and,  as
she  came  on  to  the  terrace,  I  had  the  further  impression  of
seeing  over  her  shoulder  the  face  of  a  man  with  melancholy
dark  eyes.  That  night  when  I  wrote  automatically  the  script
began  as  follows :

Ricochet  shot  from  a  shell — and  died  in  hospital.  He  was  on
horseback,  it  was  two  years  or  more  ago.  Frank  was  the  name.  Large
dark  eyes  and  a  pale  face  with  a  moustache  but  no  other  hair  on  his
face.  The  moustache  not  a  dark  brown.  A  tall  man  with  a  droop
about  the  shoulders.

There  was  considerable  difficulty  in  checking  these  state-
ments, as  we  knew  nothing  of  the  girl  in  question  or  her
friends.  However,  a  friend  of  mine  asked  another  lady  staying
at  the  hotel  whether  she  knew  or  could  find  out  anything
about  the  girl.  In  this  way  we  learnt  that  the  girl  was
at  the  time  engaged  to  a  man  then  in  the  Mounted  Consta-
bulary at  the  Cape,  and  expected  home  in  about  three
weeks.  jSTothino-  could  be  ascertained  as  to  his  name  or  his
personal  appearance.  But  it  was  quite  clear  that  the  script
was  incorrect  in  saying  that  he  had  died  two  years  ago,  and
there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any  real  knowledge
of  the  circumstances  was  contributed  by  the  script,  or  that
any  part  of  the  impression  was  correct,  except  such  as  might
have  been  derived  from  observation  of  the  ring.^

(3)  Revived  memories ; emergence in the script of  knovjledge
not  vohmtarily  recoverahlc.

Perhaps  the  first  instance  of  a  revived  memory  appears  in
the  curious  signature  of  a  very  early  piece  of  writing,  March
15th,  1901.  The  knowledge  of  which  this  may  be  a  remi-
niscence was  certainly  not  consciously  possessed  by  me,  and
it  was  only  three  or  four  years  after  the  production  of  the
writing  that  I  found  any  meaning  for  the  odd  phrase.

The  script,  which  is  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  842,  ended
with  the  words  Pollux  Ccqrpadocus  ponet  tigillum.  The  intention
is  probably  to  re}tresent  the  signatory.  Sigilhi.m  occurs  else-
where in  the  early  script  in  the  sense  of  a  seal,"  but  who

1 1  have  never  heard  anything  further  of  the  lady  concerned.
2  See  April  20th,  1901,  "cerata  sigilla";  Aug.  28, 1901,  "signa
sigillo."


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


143


was  intended  by  the  Cappadoeian  Pollux  ?  The  juxtaposition
of  Pollux  and  Cappadocia  conveyed  nothing  to  me  and  recalled
no  associations.

But  in  October,  1904,  on  re-reading  Ibsen's  play  about
JiUian,  Kaiser  unci  Galilacr}  which  I  had  read  somewhere
about  1895,  I  found  that  he  makes  Julian  call  Gregory
Nazianzen  and  Basil  of  Ctesarea  the  Castor  and  Pollux  of
Cappadocia.  Whether  he  has  any  authority  for  so  doing  I
have  not  discovered ;  the  writer  of  Gregory's  biography  in
Migne's  Patrologion  compares  the  friends  with  Orestes  and
Pylades,  and  Gregory  himself,  in  his  commendation  of  Basil,^
says  that  there  seemed  one  soul  for  both,  but  two  bodies.  But
the  allusion  in  Ibsen  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  conjunction
of  the  two  words  and  tlie  emergence  of  the  Cappadoeian
Pollux  in  my  script.

Perhaps  the  first  certain  emergence  of  knowledge  possessed
but  not  at  the  moment  rememljered  by  me  was  on  Oct.  26,
1901.  The  day  before,  Mr.  Piddington,  whom  I  had  seen
at  a  meeting  of  the  S.P.E.  Council  in  town,  had  suggested
that  I  should  try  an  experiment  in  connexion  with  an  automatic
writer  known  to  him  but  not  to  me.  I  was  to  suggest  to
the  "  scribe "  a  word,  with  the  view  of  getting  it  reproduced
by  the  other  lady.  I  have  no  means  of  communicating  with
the  "  scribe "  other  than  fixing  my  mind  in  the  course  of
the  day  on  any  subject  in  which  I  am  interested,  and
accordingly  I  did  this  on  the  25th  and  again  on  the  26th.
In  the  evening  of  Oct.  20  the  script  apparently  made  an
effort  to  give  the  name  of  the  saint  whose  festival  was  on
Oct.  25,  the  day  when  the  experiment  had  been  suggested.
Such  at  least  seems  the  best  available  explanation  of  what
was  written  :

Grasp  it  now  Graspian — and  another  like  the  first.  It  is  not
you — placement  or  pleasement  is  a  word  that  belongs  to  him,  cited
extraordinary.  s.  Crispin's  day  recently  that  is  a  date — not
for  you.

Then  followed  the  "  Caristian  story  "  described  above.^


1 1  read  the  play  in  the  German  translation.

Un  Laud.  Bas.  M.  Chap.  XX.  s^ee  p.  111.


144


Gha'pteT  VII.


[part


The  remarks  are  not  very  intelligible,  but  whatever  the
intention  may  have  been,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  a  reference
to  the  Saints  Crispin  and  Crispian  and  their  recent  festival.
I  have  a  very  scant  knowledge  of  Saints'  days,  but  I  knew
that  these  saints  were  the  saints  of  Agincourt,  and  that
Agincourt  was  fought  in  October.  I  found  on  investigation
that  their  festival  is  Oct.  25,  the  day  preceding  their  appear-
ance in  the  script,  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  this  appearance
represents  a  piece  of  knowledge  on  my  part  irrecoverable  by
ordinary  methods :  I  may  be  presumed  to  have  known  at  some
time  the  date  of  the  battle  of  Agincourt,  though  I  could  not
recall  it  by  conscious  effort.

Another  case  in  which  there  may  be  traces  of  a  revived
memory,  in  this  case  of  a  passage  in  Virgil,  occurred  on
Feb.  27,  1902.  But  the  script  is  so  confused  that  tlie
combination  of  elements  may  easily  be  wholly  fortuitous.
The  incident  is  not  related  in  detail  and  is  only  mentioned
here  for  the  sake  of  completeness.

On  Nov.  26,  1902,  there  seems  to  emerge  in  the  script
a  reminiscence  of  a  passage  in  Plato's  Dialogue,  PMlchus,  very
familiar  to  me  in  1879  and  1880,  but  not  looked  at  since.
The  passage  of  the  script  is  as  follows :

Tt  TTOT  di'ojxd(eL<; ;  ovTii'a — (TvvapidfjLi'jTU)  to  Aoyetoi' — a.AAos  xts
;rei'creTut  to  oAof, crt'  Se  ovk  ei'a  jxovii  kvX  —potTireXa^tLV  Svvmto.l.

The  Greek  is  full  of  errors.  auvapidfxi'jro)  is  a  false  form,
but  the  word  intended  (a-umpi6iui.elrw)  seems  fairly  obvious.
Xoyeioi'  is  more  difficult.  The  accent  is  not  right  if  the  word
is  to  mean  \oyetov,  a  stage :  moreover  the  context  seems  in-
appropriate to  that  meaning  and  rather  suggests  some  connexion
with  Xoyo?,  "  reason,"  e.g.  Xoyiop  the  noun  "  oracle,"  or  Xoyiov
the  adjective  neuter  "  possessing  Xoyof."  eW  and  ew  pro-
bably mean  "  one,"  i.e.  one  in  number.  It  may  perhaps  l^e  thus
translated  :  "  What  do  you  name  ?  No  one.  Let  him  include
the  logcion  (?)  some  one  else  will  learn  the  whole.  But  you
unaided  are  not  able  to  bring  one  and  one  together."

It  is  not  very  clear,  but  neither  in  my  recollection
is  the  dialogue  which  I  believe  it  to  reproduce.  Some
points  stand  out  in  the  script :  there  is  a  question  of  learn-
ing about a whole,  and of  not leaving  something  out,  and


liil]


Reminiscences,  etc.


145


some  one  is  reproached  with  failure  in  the  elementary
process  of  putting  one  to  one.  The  script  recalled  nothing
whatever  to  my  mind,  but  I  was  interested  in  the  unusual
compound  verl)  avpapiO/ueiv,  and  looked  it  up  in  Liddell  and
Scott's  Lexicon.  I  there  found  a  reference  to  Plato's  Pkilchus,
the  only  one  of  the  four  or  five  passages  mentioned  in
the  Lexicon  which  I  was  certain  that  I  had  read.  I  turned
to  the  passage  in  the  Philebus  (23  D).  Socrates  is  proceeding
to  make  a  complete  classification  of  "  things  that  are,"  and
says  that  they  fall  under  three  heads,  (1)  the  unlimited
(Platonic  matter),^  aTreipoi^ ;  (2)  the  principle  of  limit  (ideas),
■Trepan;  and  (3)  combination  of  the  two  (phenomenal  world),
TO  ^ujUjuiia-'yoiuLevov ;  at '  this  point  the  speaker  interrupts  him-
self with  the  remark  that  he  is  a  ridiculously  incompetent
■classifier  and  reckoner,  since  he  has  forgotten  that  a  fourth
•class  is  necessary,  namely,  the  cause  of  the  combination,
(probably  to  be  identified  with  mind),  ama  Tijg  jui^ew^.
Here  then  is  something  very  like  what  was  suggested  in
the  script, — an  attempt  to  make  a  classification  of  a  whole ;
a  reminder  not  to  leave  out  something,  viz.,  intelligence,  as
a  cause ;  a  reproach  to  some  one  for  failing  in  the  first
principles  of  his  art.  Taken  together  with  the  use  of  the
rare  word  "  to  reckon  along  with,"  a-vvapiOfxeip,  I  think  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  this  script  represents  the  emergence
■of  a  piece  of  knowledge  once  undoubtedly  possessed  by  me,
but  quite  irrecoverable  by  any  ordinary  conscious  process.

On  May  14,  1904,  another  piece  of  information  about  a
passage  of  Plato  seems  to  have  emerged.  On  May  13  it  had
been  suggested  as  an  experiment  that  I  should  try  to  find
what  were  certain  Greek  words  written  on  a  sheet  of  paper
containing  '  tips '  for  the  Classical  Tripos  and  known  only  to
the  friend  who  proposed  the  test.^  The  script  of  May  13  pro-
fessed its  intention  of  getting  the  words  on  the  next  day,  and
on  May  14,  wrote  as  follows :

O"0(^t(JTtKTJ

Tracra  xfv)(i]  aOdvaro?,  ovk  ecrd'  ottojs  fxi]  Tavra  Tij  pvi'ip.!)  fievei.

^Such,  at  least,  is  the  interpretation  noted  by  me  in  1S79.
-  See  p.  175.

K


146


Chapter  VII.


[part


They  begin  the  dialogue  —  the  story  —  Look  at  that.  Adyos

8tai'ota  I'ous

Siarota

^^^ts?  rh  akoyov*

The  words  "  Universal  soul  is  immortal "  are,  as  the  script
says  and  as  I  knew  at  once,  the  opening  words  of  the  famous
myth  in  the  Phaedrus  in  which  the  soul  is  compared  with  a
charioteer  driving  a  pair  of  horses.  This  myth  I  know  well ;
I  read  it  for  the  first  time  about  1878,  But  neither  my
recollections  nor  a  reference  to  the  dialogue  threw  any  light
on  the  curious  arrangement  of  words  following  the  allusion,
the  "  lists,"  in  fact,  which  seem  to  have  puzzled  the  scribe  as
much  as  they  puzzled  me.  I  looked  up  the  notes  in
Thompson's  Edition  in  which  I  read  the  dialogue  first,  but
which  T  have  not  used  since.  But  still  I  found  nothing.
The  note  however  on  the  words  -waa-a  ^v)(}i  aOavuTog  referred
me  to  an  excursus  by  Thompson  at  the  end  of  his  book,  and
there  on  p.  165,  in  a  note  on  the  explanation  of  the  Allegory
of  the  Phaedrus  I  found  the  following :

"  This  is  one  of  the  dichotomies  which  Plato  so  greatly
affected. We  have —


TO  Adyov  ixov  TO  aA.oyov


vous  Stavota?  Ovjj.o'i  kiriOviiia."

Any  one  who  will  compare  Thompson's  dichotomy  and  the
script,  will  I  think  at  once  admit  the  resemblance ;  the  sug-
gestion that  something  should  be  written  which  was  in  Greek
and  associated  with  the  Classical  Tripos  seems  to  have  caused
this  emergence  from  my  mind  of  something  which  it  is  almost
certain  I  had  read  in  the  course  of  my  own  preparation  for  the

*  Trans. "The  temperate  is  very  wisely  drunk  (?)
Sophistic.

Universal  soul  is  immortal ;  it  is  impossible  that  this  does  not
abide  in  your  memory."


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


147


Classical  Tripos,  but  which  it  is  equally  certain  that  I  could
not  consciously  have  reproduced.

The  last  of  these  cases  occurred  on  May  26,  1904.  The
words  of  the  script  are :

The  Ring  and  the  Book.  Pompilia's  grave  is  described,  read
that — and  find  the  words  there,  five  words  together,  the  child
mother.

The  script  was  apparently  still  engaged  in  the  quest  for
the  words  at  the  top  of  the  sheet  of  '  tips,'  which  on  May
13,  1904,  it  had  said  were  five  in  number.  I  had  no
recollection  of  there  being  any  description  in  the  Ring  and  the
Book  of  Pompilia's  grave,  but  on  referring  to  the  poem  I
found  that  she  expresses  the  hope  {Pompilia,  1.  27)  that
she  will  be  buried  in  the  church  of  San  Lorenzo  in  Lucina,
— her  "  own  particular  place,"  as  all  readers  of  the  poem  will
remember — and  certainly  her  body  was  exposed  there  {Guido,
second  narrative,  1.  1295).  Just  before  the  description  of  the
church  her  names  are  given ;  they  are  five  in  number,
Francesca  Camilla  Vittoria  Angela  Pompilia,  and  their  number
is  emphasised  by  the  speaker  in  another  place,  "  my  own  five
saints"  (Pomp.,  I.  107).

I  had  no  conscious  recollection  at  the  moment  of  reading
the  script  that  Pompilia  had  any  other  name  or  that  anything
was  said  in  the  poem  about  her  burying,  but  it  is  likely
that  the  desire  of  my  subliminal  self  to  find  five  unknown
words  revived  a  recollection  of  Pompilia's  five  names  mentioned
in  connexion  with  the  church  where  she  had  been  baptised
and  hoped  to  be  buried.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
the  allusion  to  Pompilia  has  any  connexion  with  the  problem
set  before  the  script,  and  I  subsequently  ascertained  that
the  required  words  were  not  five  in  number.  Perhaps,  how-
ever, the  source  of  the  allusion  in  the  script  of  this  day  to
Browning's  poem  is  to  be  found  in  another  association  of  ideas.
On  reference  to  the  Pioman  Calendar^  I  find  that  May  26th
is  the  date  of  the  annual  feast  commemorating  the  consecration
of  the  church  of  San  Lorenzo  in  Lucina,  and  it  seems  most
unlikely  that  the  allusion  in  the  script  on  that  very  day  to
"  Pompilia's  grave "  is  purely  accidental  coincidence. I  visited

1  See  Handbook  to  Christ,  and  Eccl.  Rome,  vol.  ii.  p.  330.


148  Chapter  VII.  [part

the  church  of  San  Lorenzo  in  Lucma  when  I  was  in  Eome
in  1891,  and  may  have  seen  there  or  elsewhere  a  notice  of
the  date  of  the  commemorative  festival.  But  no  such  knowledge
was  consciously  possessed  by  me.  Nor  in  fact  do  I  associate
with  churches  any  special  days  other  than  the  days  connected
with  their  patron  saints.  Investigation  of  the  Koman  Calendar
was  suggested  to  me,  when  revising  this  paper  for  press,  as
it  appeared  that  on  several  occasions  ^  the  contents  of  the
script  were  determined  by  associations  with  the  dates  on  which
they  were  obtained.

(4)  Connexion  with  dreams.

An  obvious  point  for  consideration  is  whether  any  con-
nexion can  be  traced  between  the  automatic  writing  and  my
dreams,  and  if  so  what  is  the  nature  of  that  connexion  and
the  frequency  of  its  occurrence.  I  am  not  a  constant
dreamer,  that  is  to  say,  the  dreams  which  I  remember  on
waking  are  not  many.  Every  one  is  familiar  with  the
experience  of  having  a  dream  recalled  by  some  event  in  the
succeeding  day,  and  this  doubtless  implies  that  other  dream-
impressions  not  recalled  by  events  of  the  day  remain  sub-
merged. But  such  an  experience  is  not  common  with  me
and  the  whole  number  of  my  remembered  dreams  is  small.
I  have,  however,  all  my  life  had  occasional  vivid  impressions
in  sleep,*  differing  altogether  from  the  ordinary  dream  into
which  familiar  persons  or  objects  enter  in  a  more  or  less
confused  way.  It  has  been  my  habit  for  the  past  fifteen
or  sixteen  years-  to  record  these  vivid  dream -impressions
immediately  after  their  occurrence,  distinguishing  in  particular
a  certain  class  of  them  as  "  what  I  call  my  real  dreams."  The
chief  characteristic  wliich  marks  these  "  real "  dreams  is  the
sensation  of  reality  which  accompanies  them,  and  the  durability
of  the  impression  left  on  waking  ;  the  effect  on  waking  is  as
though  I  had  come  from  a  world  of  reality  into  a  world  of
appearances,  and  this  eff"ect  often  lasts  through  the  whole  of
the  following  day,  so  that  I  have  a  curious  sense  through  all
my  ordinary  occupations  of  playing  a  "  pretence  game,"  while

iSee  pp.  120,  143,  314.

2  See  App.,  p.  385,  for  dates  of  dreams  so  recorded.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


149


my  real  self  is  occupied  somewhere  else.  Another  character-
istic of  these  "  real "  dreams  is  the  intensity  of  the  sensations
experienced  in  them.  I  have  had  more  vivid  sensations  of
colour  and  sound  in  dream  than  I  have  ever  had  in  waking
hours,  and  I  have  had  occasionally  other  sensations  difficult
to  describe :  they  are  not  synaesthetic,  that  is,  they  do  not
seem  to  involve  confusions  or  combinations  of  two  senses
ordinarily  distinct,  but  they  seem  to  present  a  sensation  by
some  unusual  channel.  An  illustration  will  perhaps  explain
more  clearly  what  I  mean.

I  do  not  in  sleep,  any  more  than  in  waking,  possess  the
faculty  of  "  coloured  audition "  ;  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  my
physical  sensations  in  sleep,  though  sometimes  intensified,
remain  of  the  same  type  as  they  are  in  waking  hours ;  I
hear  sounds,  I  see  forms  and  colours,  once  at  least  I  smelt
a  strong  odour,  and  the  sense  of  touch  is  constantly  exercised
in  dreams  in  the  usual  manner.  But  more  than  once  in  a
dream  I  have  seemed  to  obtain  a  mental  impression  by  means
of  a  physical  sensation  not  directly  suggesting  it,  to  learn  for
instance  by  touching  a  person  what  are  his  thoughts  or  what
is  his  nature.  The  physical  sensation  which  accompanies  the
acquisition  of  that  knowledge  is  very  marked  and  often
vividly  present  some  hours  after  waking.

Between  February,  1894,  and  the  beginning  of  the
automatic  writing  I  find  recorded  in  my  notes  six  of
these  "  real "  dreams,  and  a  note  in  the  record  of  the  first
shows  that  though  this  is  the  first  recorded  it  is  not  the
first  experienced.  Four  other  dreams  in  that  period  are
recorded  as  very  vivid  but  not  "  real."  The  habit,  there-
fore, of  "  real "  dreaming  was  established,  and  noted  by  me,
before  the  inception  of  the  automatic  script.  With  this  pre-
liminary note  as  to  the  nature  of  my  dreams,  I  pass  to  the
question  of  the  connexion  between  them  and  the  automatic
writing.  There  seem  to  be  in  all  eight  cases  in  which
some  connexion  can  be  traced  and  I  propose  to  relate  these
in  detail.^

{a)  On  April  19,  1901,  I  had  been  up  to  town  for  a
meeting  of  the  S.P.E.,  and just  before  leaving  London  by

^  See  App.,  p.  386,  for  further  account  of  "  real "  dreams  and
corresponding  script.


150


Chapter  VII.


[part


the  evening  train  I  felt  that  it  was  so  likely  that  I  should
want  to  write  automatically  on  my  way  home  that  I  bought
a  suljstantial  weekly  paper  to  serve  as  writing-desk.  But
when  the  compartment  in  which  I  was  travelling  filled  with
people  I  gave  up  the  idea  and  read.  Suddenly  I  felt  my
right  arm  numb,  the  fourth  and  fifth  fingers  tingled,  and  I
took  paper  and  pencil,  in  spite  of  the  audience.  The  numb-
ness passed  from  the  fourth  finger  after  I  had  written  two
or  three  words  but  remained  in  the  little  finger  till  after
I  had  reached  home.  The  contents  of  the  script  thus  pro-
duced are  described  later ;  ^  it  is  the  physical  sensation  that
is  emphasised  here,  in  view  of  the  sequel.

On  the  succeeding  night,  April  19,  I  had  one  of  the  "real"
dreams  above  described,  and  noted  it  at  8.30  a.m.  on  April  20.
In  this  dream,  as  once  some  years  before,"^  the  sense  of  reality
was  apparently  produced  by  a  very  marked  sensation  of  touch.
A  previous  feeling  of  uncertainty  was  removed  by  the  con-
tact between  my  right  arm  from  wrist  to  elbow  and  the
left  arm  of  a  person  in  my  di'eam.  I  also  had  in  this  dream,
as  I  have  had  on  other  occasions,  the  impression  of  com-
municating with  my  companion  without  words,  though  words
were  passing  at  the  time  between  us  on  other  sul:)jects.  So
strong  was  the  feeling  in  my  arm  produced  by  this  dream-
touch  that  I  woke  "  almost  thinking  I  still  felt  it,"  and  was
sufficiently  awake  to  investigate  whether  there  was  any
physical  sensation  in  my  arm  to  account  for  this  impression.
But  there  was  none.  I  slept  again  and  through  that  later
sleep  as  throughout  the  next  day,  I  continued  conscious
of  the  persistency  of  the  impression  of  reality  attained  in
the  dream,  which  is  the  never  failing  mark  of  this  type  of
dream.

It  is  possible  that  there  was  some  connexion  between
the  sensation  of  numbness  in  the  forearm  and  fingers  preceding
the  impulse  to  write  automatically  on  the  evening  of  April
19,  and  the  vivid  sensation  of  information  conveyed  by  means
of  contact  with  almost  precisely  the  same  part  of  the  arm
and  hand  in  the  dream  on  the  following  night.  But  it  must
be  noted  that  a  similar  vivid  sensation  of  touch  in  the  same
arm  has  twice  before  in  dreams  seemed  to  me  to  convey
iSee  p.  195.  ^  See  App.,  p.  386.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


151


the  knowledge  of  something  nncommimicated  and  perhaps
incommunicable  in  any  other  way,  and  that  these  two  earlier
dreams  occim-ed  respectively  in  1894  and  1898,  long  before
I  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  aiitomatic  writing.

(b)  On  May  8,  1901,  I  wrote  automatically,  beginning  at
10  p.m.,  and  the  script  terminated  with  a  suggestion  that
other  automatic  phenomena  were  being  produced  elsewhere
at  the  same  hour.

In  my  note-book  I  recorded  on  May  10,  1901,  9  a.m.,
that  on  the  preceding  night  I  had  dreamt  that  Mrs.  Thompson
was  obtaining  automatic  phenomena :  I  had  woke  and  dreamt
again  to  the  same  effect,  and  this  though  at  the  time  I
knew  that  she  was  not  giving  sittings.  I  had  therefore  no
reason  whatever  to  attach  any  value  to  the  suggestion  in  the
dream  :  it  was  recorded  because  I  was  keej^ing  a  careful
record  of  all  impressions  in  any  way  likely  to  throw  light  on
the  production  of  automatic  phenomena.  The  dream  may  have
been  due  to  a  development  of  the  idea  expressed  in  the  script
of  May  8,  that  communications  were  being  elsewhere  produced
at  the  same  time  that  my  script  was  being  written.

However  this  may  be,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  further
■development  in  my  next  piece  of  script  on  May  11,  which
definitely  stated  that  Mrs.  Thompson  would  have  news  to
give  in  the  next  few  days.

There  seems  no  doubt  as  to  the  connexion  here  between  my
automatic  writing  and  my  dreams,  as  the  dream  impression
seems  to  furnish  the  link  between  the  two  statements  in  the
script.

The  most  interesting  point  in  this  case  is  that  the  infor-
mation thus  obtained  was  correct.^

(c)  In  the  third  of  these  cases  there  seems  to  have  been
a  direct  influence  by  the  script  upon  my  dreams.  On  June  3rd,
1901,  the  script  concluded  its  remarks  thus:

Pone stilum  per  aliquot  dies — signa  dabo  cum  rescribere

debes. In  somniis  Veritas — expecta.*

This  was  followed  by  an  attempt  at  signature.

*  Trans.  "  Put  down  your  pen  for  a  few  days ;  I  will  give  a  sign
when  you  are  to  write  again  (?). In  dreams  is  truth — wait."

iSee  p.  207.


152


ChaiJter  VII.


[part


I  took  this  to  mean  that  I  was  not  to  write  again  till  I
received  some  indication,  and  I  expected  that  indication  to-
take  the  form  of  some  physical  impulse  to  the  hand  such  as
I  had  had  on  April  19,  1901,  or  at  least  a  very  strong  desire
to  write,  such  as  I  had  had  on  more  than  one  occasion  pre-
viously (May  11,  May  27).  I  thought  the  remark  about
truth  in  dreams  referred  to  my  sensations  of  reality  in  certain
dreams,  and  might  mean  that  instead  of  getting  automatic
writing  I  was  to  look  out  for  an  impression  in  a  dream.  I
mention  this  to  show  what  were  niy  expectations  at  the
time.

For  some  days  after  June  3  I  made  no  attempt  to  write,,
but  on  the  night  of  June  13  I  had  a  ridiculous  dream,  to-
the  effect  that  I  received  an  "  automatic  telegram " — whatever
that  may  be ! — telling  me  that  I  might  begin  writing  again.
I  then  saw  that  the  words  of  June  3  were  quite  capable  of
being  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  signal  for  the  resumption  of
writing  would  come  in  a  dream  and  I  have  little  doubt  that
such  an  unconscious  interpretation  helped  to  produce  the
dream.

{(1)  In  another  case,  it  seems  as  if  a  state  of  mind
produced  in  me  by  the  script  were  distinctly  reflected  in
a  dream  which  occurred  on  the  succeeding  night.  On  ISTovember
22,  1901,  and  again  on  Nov.  25,  the  automatic  script  pur-
ported to  come  from  Mr.  Francis  Maitland  Balfour  of  Trinity
College.^  I  was  disturbed  at  the  occurrence  in  my  script  of
supposed  messages  requiring  verification  from  my  friends,  as
I  believed  that  the  greater  part  of  the  writing  was  produced!
by  some  part  of  my  own  mind  over  which  I  had  little  or
no  control.

On  the  evening  of  November  25,  my  mind  was  constantly
occupied  with  the  thought  of  how,  without  stopping  the  phe-
nomena, I  could  be  sure  of  preventing  myself  from  manufactur-
ing messages,  and  how  I  could  hope  to  obtain  any  sort  of
guarantee  that  they  were  genuine.  That  night  I  had  a  dream
directly  bearing  on  this  question,  and  in  the  dream  I  recognised
the  impression  given  as  being  an  answer  to  my  difficulty  as  to
determining  the  source  of  the  statements  in  the  script.  The-
details  are  not  very  clear  and  certainly  not  interesting ;  what  is

^  See  also  pp.  26,  225.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


153


certain  is  that  on  the  night  after  the  recurrence  of  the  un-
comfortable condition  of  mind  produced  by  the  contents  of
the  script,  I  had  a  dream  which  endeavoured  to  persuade  me
of  the  genuineness  of  my  automatic  phenomena,  and  so  to-
remove  that  condition  of  mind.

(e)  In  the  next  case  the  memory  of  an  otherwise  forgotten
dream  seems  to  have  been  recalled  by  the  script.  The  case-
has  no  other  interest,  but  is  the  only  instance  of  the  kind,
and  is  therefore  related  here.

On  March  31,  1902,  the  script,  produced  at  11.15  a.m.,
contained  the  following  words  :

The  red  postbox  was  in  a  bird's  eye  view — last  night.
36  was  the  number  6x6  and  the  VI.  Aeneid — look  at  the  line
No.  XXXVI 1

On  reading  this  over  I  remembered  that  the  preceding  night-
I  had  dreamt  that  I  was  trying  experiments  in  the  thought-
transference  of  diagrams  and  saw  something  round  with  a  tail
below,  and  red ;  I  was  told  in  the  dream  that  I  was  not
unsuccessful,  as  the  object  was  a  red  pillar-box.  I  thought
my  object  very  unlike  a  pillar-box,  and  asked  to  see  the
pillar-box  in  question.  I  then  found  that  it  was  looked  at
from  above,  and  that  the  door  in  the  side  was  open,  so  that
the  only lines represented were  a circle and  a  semicircle


to  me,  were  mixed  up  the  numbers  36  and  6,  and  Aeneid  VI,
It  is  of  course  possible  that  no  such  dream  occurred,  but
that  the  remarks  in  the  script  produced  a  pseudo-memory.
But  that  is  not  my  impression,  and  in  view  of  the  differences
between  the  script  and  the  dream  I  am  disposed  to  think
that  I  did  actually  dream  something  of  the  sort  described,
and  that  my  subliminal  self  continued  on  the  same  lines-
when  it  got  the  chance  of  writing  automatically,

Neither  the  script  nor  the  dream  seem  to  have  been  of
any  value  and  the  line  in  the  SLdlt  Aeneid  {Aen.  VI.  36)^  is-
meaningless  without  its  context.

1  See  App.,  p.  349,  for  complete  script.

-Aen.  VI.  36.  "Deiphobe  Glauci,  fatur  quae  talia  regi."  (Dei-
phobe  daughter  of  Glaucus,  who  thus  spoke  to  the  king.)


attached  below,  thus


In  the  dream  also,  so  it  seemed


154


Chapter  VII.


[part


(/)  The  next  case  of  connexion  between  the  script  and
dreams  occurred  in  the  early  summer  of  1902,  at  the  time
that  I  was  going  abroad.  The  circumstances  are  somewhat
similar  to  those  in  case  c,  and  may  quite  possibly  have  been
produced  by  an  association  of  ideas,  as  we  were  going  again
at  the  same  time  of  year  to  the  same  place  in  Switzerland.
On  May  31,  1902,  the  script  said  "Later  not  here  in  the
mountains  shall  come  the  news  that  helps,"  and  at  the  end
of  the  communication  it  told  nie  to  "  dream  and  remember —
the  blue  colour  that  you  saw — see  again  to-night,  alone  in
sleep."  I  had  no  impression  of  colour  in  sleep  that  night,
and  for  some  time  after  this  I  made  no  attempt  to  obtain
writing  since  I  felt,  as  I  have  occasionally  done  at  other  times,
as  if  the  faculty  had  left  me.  On  June  17,  1902,  at
Lausanne,  I  had  a  feeling  that  the  power  to  write  was
returning,  and  on  June  20  "in  the  mountains  "  some  suggestion
was  made  in  dream  about  obtaining  automatic  phenomena  on
Tuesday  or  Wednesday.

Script  was  obtained  on  the  day  suggested,-'  after  an  impulse
to  write,  so  that  a  remark  in  the  script  of  May  31  apparently
produced  impressions  in  sleep  on  June  17  and  June  20,  and
in  its  turn  the  impression  in  sleep  of  June  20  produced  an
impulse  to  write  on  June  24:.

{g)  The  next  attempt  at  a  connexion  between  the  script
and  my  dreams  was  in  the  summer  of  1903  when  I  was
again  in  Switzerland.  It  was  a  complete  failure.  On  June
2 1  the  script  wrote :  "  Listen  to  night  in  the  silence  it  will
come  to  you."  I  had  a  dream  on  the  evening  of  June  21,
but  it  was  of  a  perfectly  tiivial  and  ordinary  character  and
had  no  connexion  with  anything  in  the  script.

(A)  The  last  case  is  quite  unlike  any  of  those  that  have
been  described ;  there  seems  to  have  been  an  attempt  in  a
dream  to  interpret  what  had  been  written  long  before  in
the  script  and  not  understood.  The  incident  is  complicated,
and  not  easily  comprehensible  without  elaborate  explanations.
It  is  therefore  not  related  here,  and  I  need  only  say  that  my
dreaming  mind  showed  a  familiarity  with  details  in  the  auto-
matic script  of  some  three  years  before,  and  an  ingenuity  of
interpretation far  exceeding  that  of  my  conscious  self.  For

1  See  p.  302.


LIII.]


Reminiscences,  etc.


155


that  conscious  self  had  altogether  failed  to  see  what,  after  the
dream,  seemed  likely  enough  to  have  been  the  meaning  of
the  script.

This  completes  the  account  of  all  cases  where  there  seems
to  have  been  any  connexion  between  the  script  and  my
dreams :  the  total  number  is  not  large,  but  neither  is  the
total  number  of  dreams  remembered  in  the  morning  or  thought
worth  recording.  Still,  with  all  allowance  made  for  that,  it
does  not  seem  as  if  any  definite  or  regular  connexion  between
my  dreaming  mind  and  my  writing  hand  could  be  established,
though  on  some  occasions  they  do  appear  to  have  been  in
communication.


156


Chaiyter  VIII.


[part


CHAPTEE  VIII.

Experiments  in  conveying  Information  telbpathically

TO  THE  Script.

In  the  course  of  the  period  during  which  I  have  obtained
automatic  writing  a  certain  number  of  experiments  have  been
tried,  with  the  object  of  seeing  whether  information  unknown
to  me  could  be  conveyed  to  me  by  means  of  telepathy,
clairvoyance,  or  other  unrecognised  channel.  Two  of  these
experiments  were  performed  withoiat  my  knowledge,  one  by
my  husband,  one  by  a  friend  who  had  heard  of  the  experi-
ment carried  out  by  my  husband.  The  latter  was  completely
unsuccessful ;  the  former,  though  not  successful  in  all  points,,
shows  I  think  beyond  dispute  that  the  script  was  influenced
by  the  desire  of  my  husband,  unknown  to  me,  that  it  should
produce  a  certain  phrase  consisting  of  three  Greek  words,
for  it  seems  to  have  made  a  large  number  of  attempts — with
varying  success — to  reproduce  those  words.  The  circumstances
are  described  below.

{A)  Experiments  without  my  knowledge.

(1)  A.  W.  Vcrrall.  In  April,  1901,  soon  after  the  inception
of  my  automatic  writing,  my  husband  decided,  without  giving
me  any  hint  of  his  intention,  to  try  an  experiment  in
thought-transference.  He  wrote  down  the  three  Greek  words
IxovoiTwXov  e?  aw}  "  to  the  one-horse  dawn,"  a  phrase  con-
nected with  an  incident  of  his  undergraduate  days  about
thirty  years  before.  The  incident  was  never  known,  as  far
as  we  are  aware,  to  me,  and  was  only  known  at  the  time
of  its  occurrence  to  the  two  or  three  friends  immediately
concerned  and  liimself.  When  he  related  the  incident  to  me
in  October,  1902,  his  recollections  were  as  follows:  that  during

lEur.  Or.  1004.


liil]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


157


an  examination  he  and  some  other  men  met  on  the  Senate
House  steps  after  a  translation  paper  in  which  had  been  set
a  passage  from  the  Orestes  of  Euripides  containing  the  above  words;
that  some  one  asked  "  What  on  earth  is  the  meaning  of  /uovo-
TTcoXoi'  e?  au)  ?  that  some  one  else  answered  "  a  one-horse  dawn,"
and  "  one-horse  "  being  a  current  slang  expression  at  the  time
there  was  a  laugh  and  the  subject  dropped  ;  that  Dr.  A.  T.
Myers  and  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney^  were  members  of  the  group
of  friends.  I  have  since  ascertained  that  the  passage  was  set
for  translation  in  the  Classical  Tripos  of  1873,  the  year  of
my  husband's  degree.  Dr.  Myers  was  a  fellow-candidate  with
my  husband,  but  Mr.  Gurney  was  not.  The  examination  took
place  in  the  Senate  House.

The  words  occur  in  a  passage  describing  a  disturbance  of
natural  phenomena,  the  reversal  of  the  movement  of  the  sun,
and  the  epithet  /uo^oVwXo?  is  usually  taken  to  refer  to  the
one-horse  car  of  Dawn  as  distinguished  from  the  four-horse
chariot  of  the  Sun ;  in  my  husband's  opinion,  however,  the
word  may  mean  no  more  than  /ixopog,  alone  or  solitary,  the
latter  part  of  the  word,  -ttwAo?,  being  possibly  connected  with
TTwXeoiuai,  "  to  wander."

This  experiment  was  devised  by  my  husband  in  April,
1901,  and  the  three  words  were  then  written  down,  with
the  intention  of  seeing  whether  my  hand  would  make  any
attempt  to  reproduce  his  thought.  The  paper  on  which  the
words  were  written  was  put  into  an  envelope,  placed  by  him,
to  the  best  of  his  belief,  in  the  drawer  of  his  writing-table,
where  he  is  in  the  habit  of  keeping  papers.  The  drawer  is
not  used  by  any  one  but  liimself.'  He  had  not  made,  he
tells  me,  any  experiment  before ;  and  he  said  nothing  about
any  experiment  either  at  the  time  of  its  beginning,  or  at
any  time  during  the  continuance  of  what  are  hereafter
noted  as  allusions  to  it  in  the  script.

The  first  apparent  allusion  ^  to  such  an  experiment  occurred

^Mr.  Gurney  died  in  1888,  and  Dr.  Myers  in  1894.

-  The  note  of  this  experiment  was  mislaid  or  lost ;  it  could  not
be  found  when  the  experiment  was  ended  and  the  words  told  to  me.

^ '  Apparent,'  that  is,  in  the  light  of  those  which  followed  ;  at  the
time,  as  will  immediately  be  seen,  my  husband  did  not  recognize
it  as  an  allusion.


158


Chapter  VIII.


[part


on  June  16,  1901,  when  these  words  appeared,  "Five  stars
in  the  east  that  is  not  right.  Cant  you  understand — "  followed
later  by  the  observation :  "  There  is  no  hurry,  show  it  all
to  your  husband."  I  attached  no  special  importance  to  this
injunction.  Since  March  5,  when  the  writing  began,  there
had  been  four  references  in  all  to  my  husband  by  his  initials
A.  W.  v.,  and  on  June  3  the  script  had  expressed  a  feeling
that  it  was  difficult  to  convince  a  sceptic,  but  that  it  could
"  soon  give  a  plain  message  for  him  who  runs  not  ^  to  read —
A.  W.  V.  knows  better  than  you."  I  was  in  the  habit  of
showing  my  script  to  my  husband  and  he  saw  this  writing
of  June  16  but  did  not  recognise  in  it  any  allusion  to  his
three  words.  We  were  temporarily  separated  towards  the  end
of  July,  1901.  On  August  1,  I  showed  him  the  writing  of
July  31,  and  he  told  me  that  "it  interested  him."  This  I
noted  at  the  time,  as  I  did  all  such  observations,  but  neither
then  nor  at  any  subsequent  date  up  to  October,  1902,  did
I  have  the  least  idea  that  he  was  looking  for  any  particular
words  in  my  script,  or  that  he  had  himself  set  my  hand  a
task  ;  the  extracts  which  were  subsequently  seen  to  refer
to  this  incident  were  parts  of  larger  wholes,  and  though  he
told  me  from  time  to  time  by  way  of  encouragement  that
there  was  "  a  point  of  interest "  to  him  in  that  day's  writing,
or  that  he  "  understood  what  the  script  meant,"  I  never  had
the  least  idea  to  what  he  was  referring.  I  was  aware  that
there  was  something  in  my  writing  which  he  was  observing
with  interest,  and  I  noted  all  his  observations  at  the  time.
But  it  was  not  till  more  than  a  year  later,  Oct.  17,  1902,
when  it  seemed  clear  that  no  further  attempts  to  produce
the  words  would  be  made,  that  I  heard  from  him  what  he
had  been  looking  for  and  that  he  had  made  an  experiment.

What  first  made  my  husband  think  that  the  script  might
lie  on  the  track  of  his  three  words  was  the  appearance  in
the  script  of  July  31,  1901,  of  the  following  phrases:

longaevus  senex  barba  alba  /xoi'oxtTcoi'os  sine  apparatu  ,  .  .  albi-
pannosus  est.  signifer  ille.

The  words  purport  to  describe  an  "  aged  man  with  a  white
beard,  one-garmented  without  ornament  .  .  .  white-garmented

1  My  husband  was  lame  from  rheumatism  in  the  knees.


LIII.]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


159


is  he :  the  standard-bearer."  But  in  the  curious  word,  not
extant,  //oi'o^^/tcoi'o?,  he  saw  a  possible  attempt  at  iulovottcoXov.
In  connexion  with  tliis,  the  repetition  of  the  Latin  word  for
white,  alia,  which  is  also  a  late  Latin  word  for  "  dawn "
(French  aube),  seemed  also  possibly  suggestive.  The  sequel,
as  will  be  seen,  confirmed  this.  The  writing  of  July  31
concluded  with  the  remark :  "  In  August  you  will  know  more-
wait. Don't  ask. write  often."

I  wrote  on  Aug.  6,  7,  and  10,  but  on  none  of  these  days
was  there  any  reference  to  the  three  words.  On  Aug.  13,
however,  the  script  made  another  twofold  attempt  at  the
idea  of  "  dawn "  by  the  juxtaposition  of  a  crowing  cock  and
a  motto  about  dawn.  After  this  it  made  persistent  efforts,
some  attempt  at  either  sense  or  sound  of  the  three  words
appearing  in  each  of  the  next  fourteen  writings  of  the  script,
that  is,  on  all  the  days  when  writing  was  obtained  between
Aug.  13  and  Sept  20,  fifteen  in  all.  At  the  time,  and  until
I  was  told  of  the  experiment  in  October,  1902,  I  had  no
notion  of  their  significance.  It  will  be  easily  realised  by  any
one  who  will  consider  the  fragmentary  nature  of  those  allusions
and  the  multiplicity  of  ways  in  which  now  the  sense,  now
the  sound,  and  now  the  appearance  of  the  words  was  indicated,
that  it  was  not  possible  for  a  person  ignorant  of  the  nature
of  the  problem  that  had  been  set,  not  even  knowing  that
there  was  a  problem,  to  interpret  the  allusions  or  even  to
connect  them.  I  had  no  idea  that  there  was  anything  in
question  so  definite  as  a  sentence,  and  was  astonished  on
looking  back  through  the  writing  to  see  how  near  the  script
had  come  to  the  truth.

From  the  detailed  comment^  that  follows,  it  will  be  seen
that  the  script  attempts  to  reproduce  both  the  word  and  the
sense  ;  it  tries  for  the  notions  of  "  dawn  "  and  of  "  one-horse  "
or  "  solitary " ;  it  also  attempts  to  reproduce  the  sound  and
the  appearance  both  of  the  individual  words  and  of  the
whole sentence of three words. There are  perhaps  also

^In  the  Appendix  (p.  387)  will  be  found  all  passages  in  the  script
which  appear  to  relate  to  this  incident,  and  also  a  summary  under
heads  of  the  various  attempts  according  as  they  seem  to  aim  at
representing  the  sense,  the  sound,  or  the  appearance  of  the  three
words  that  made  the  subject  of  the  experiment.


160


Ghcqyter  VIII.


[part


references  to  the  incident  which  suggested  the  phrase  to  my
husband  ;  ^  and  there  are  many  appeals  to  him.

The  first  attempt  seems  to  have  been  directed  at  the
sense ;  on  June  1 6  appears  the  first  suggestion  of  "  dawn  "
in  the  words  "  five  stars  in  the  east,"  said  immediately  not
to  be  right,  and  followed  by  the  remark  that  the  incredible
bird  would  return  within  six  months.  Another  allusion  was
made  to  dawn  on  July  -4,  and  on  July  31,  as  we  have  seen
al:)Ove,  appeared,  in  iJ.ovoyj.TO}vo^,  an  approach  to  the  words.

The  script  of  July  31  pi'omised  further  information  in
August,  but  thi'ee  writings  intervened  before  it  returned  to  the
subject.  Then,  on  August  13,  it  again  recurred  to  the  subject
of  dawn  by  writing  of  a  "  cock,  a  crested  cock  that  crows,"
which  it  recognised  as  "  an  emblem — not  a  real  bird "  and
actually  interpreted  as  a  symbol  of  morning,  for  it  added :
"  heraldic — with  a  motto — cano  canam  albam."

On  Aug.  16,  after  saying  that  there  was  something  to
expound  for  me  and  another  (e^jy-yj/o-t?  irapa  cro\  kui  aXXw  tiv'i)
it  went  on  :

easier  and  easier  though  you  do  not  know.  The  cock  is  inside
a  circle  perhaps  a  coin. Try  for  the  words  again.

Then  came  further  efforts  at  words  including  "  albicapillus  and
albipannosus,"  and  a  description  of  some  one  in  long  trailing
draperies  of  white  carrying  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,  a  small
hox  in  the  other,  and  "  going  towards  the  east " :

AWV  will  understand  this — I  think  of  him  when  I  say  it— you
do  not  know.

My  husband  naturally  did  understand  very  well,  as  he  was
actually  looking  for  reference  to  words  of  which  '  going  towards
the  east '  is  a  fair  translation.

On  Aug.  20  a  reference  to  a  wearer  of  white  drapery,  with
the  words  "  a  strong  sweet  scent  trails  behind "  suggests  an
emergence — in  the  form  of  a  priest  approaching  an  altar —
of  another  way  of  suggesting  the  east. Then,  after  confused

*  Trans.  "  I  sing  the  white  dawn." Here  it  seems  certain  that

■albam  represents  aulic.

^  The  script  seems  to  sliow  knowledge  of  something  not  remembered
by  him  at  the  time  of  the  experiment,  though  known  to  him  in
the  past ;  see  p.  163.


LIII.]


Expenments  in  Telepathy.


16:1


references  to  my  husband's  old  school,  Wellington  College,  it
€nds  with  what  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  circumstances  of
the  incident :

The  long  room  with  the  many  windows  is  near  this  hot  room
— he  was  outside — how  plain  it  seems  to  me  !  hut  you  dont  know.
Arthur  can  tell  you.i

The  strangely  involved  and  embarrassed  process  of  the  thought
is  well  illustrated  in  the  script  of  Aug.  23,  for  frantic  efforts  are
made  to  get  at  another  word  which  eventually  turns  out  to  be
Chanticlere,"  merely  another  way  of  saying  "  cock  "  which  has
already  been  quite  plainly  said.

On  August  2  8  the  notion  of  the  "  altar "  seems  clearly
to  emerge ;  the  cock  reappears  again  as  an  emblem ;  it  is
seen  that  words  or  writing  is  required ;  reference  is  made
to  my  husband,  not  by  his  full  initials  but  by  the  first  two,
which  have  always  been  used  to  designate  him  by  some  of  liis
undergraduate  friends :  "  Ask  A.W.  he  will  recognise  this."
Thei'e  seems  some  confusion  here  as  to  what  writing  is  wanted.
Some  time  before,  we  had  been  reminded  by  a  phrase  in  the
script  of  a  Latin  inscription-  which  my  husband  had  made  for  a
friend,  and  the  eff'ort  to  get  at  words  interesting  my  husband
seems  to  have  produced  some  recollection  of  this  other  incident.
The  drawing  of  a  sundial  in  the  script  is  at  once  followed  by
the  words  "  in  the  east  to  the  daylight,"  again  reproducing
the  sense  of  the  three  words.

The  next  day,  Aug.  29,  efl^orts  seem  to  have  been  directed
rather  to  the  letters,  and  appearance  and  sound  of  the
words,  than  to  the  sense,  though  the  notion  of  the  dawn  is
not  forgotten.  But  the  middle  word  is  plainly  produced.
After  saying  that  the  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic,  and
drawing  three  archaic  forms  of  Greek  letters,  in  illustration,
it  produces  the  word  "  es,"  with  the  archaic  s,  in  connexion  with

'Arthur  is  my  husband's  name,  but  as  the  name  here  is  not
written  in  my  ordinary  hand,  and  he  is  elsewhere — and  in  this
very  script — referred  to  by  his  initials,  I  do  not  believe  that  the
allusion  is  to  him.  See  also  script  of  Oct.  6,  1901,  where  'Arthur'
is  clearly  distinguished  from  A.  W.  V.,  and  there  clearly  refers  to
some  one  dead  ;  in  that  passage  probably,  and  in  this  possibly,  the
allusion  is  to  Dr.  Arthur  Myers.

-  See  below,  p.  280,  for  an  account  of  allusions  to  an  inscription.

L


162


Ghai^ter  VIII.


[part


the  emblematic  bird,  thus  endeavouring  to  represent  e?  aw
(es  Ao)  "  to  the  dawn."

On  Sept.  2  the  sound  again  appears :  "  waly,  perhaps  vale^
two  syllables,  to  .  .  .  ,"  where  it  seems  to  aim  at  e?  aw.
On  Sept.  4  it  gets  the  a  as  well  as  the  cs  by  writing  as  '  the

letters':  "<jC  agunto  CArU(\/~0  esagito."  Then  it
returns  to  the  attempt  at  the  first  word  (iuovottwXop)  and
at  the  meaning  which  was  given  to  it  by  my  husband  "  wander-
ing alone,"  and  gets  as  near  it  as

/jioi'OCTToAos — /xovo'^iTiDVOS  /j.oi'O?  fxeTo.  0601'  ovSk  aAAoii  Ttl'O?  *

But  still  it  is  aware  that  it  has  not  got  the  last  word :
but  I  want  the  final  word.

At  this  point  I  was  interrupted  and  the  script  produced
later  in  the  day  only  repeated  what  had  already  Ijeen  given,

with  a  slight  modification : 6  C  OC  P  I 5  um/tc

More  attempts  were  made  on  Sept.  7,  first  at  tlie  words,
then  at  their  sound  :

Mol  es  to  but  the  £c  is  the  end  of  a  word. es

there  are  o  and  1  before  the  es.  oA  .  .  es  Tender  es  fusa

a long word like that, — foreign, Indian I think— Banipal
and  Assur.

In  spite  of  the  vagueness  and  groping,  it  is  clear  here,  (1)  that
the  script  is  seeking  to  produce  certain  definite  words  in  a
foreign  language;  (2)  that  these  words  were  felt  to  be  three;
(3)  that,  notwithstanding  the  remark  about  "  Indian,"  the
language  is  suspected  to  be  Greek,  since  Greek  characters  are
used  in  writing  it ;  (4)  that  the  sound  or  word  cs  is  an
ascertained  part.

On  September  9  it  took  two  further  steps  in  advance.
After  repeating  the  letters  suggested  last  time,  and  stating
correctly  that  the  "  m  comes  before  the  es  agiles,"  it  goes  on
to  introduce  the  '  p,'  a  conspicuous  omission  in  its  previous
attempts  to  repi'esent  juoi'OTrwXov  {moncqwlon.)  This  it  did  in
a  very  (juaint  fashion.  My  husband  of  C(jurse  noticed  (though,
as  usual,  without  saying  anything  to  me)  that  the  attempt
monostolos  was  defective  cliiefiy  in  wanting  the  p  of  monojjdlo-n ;

*  Trans.  "Single-vested,  single-robed,  alone  with  God  and  none  other."


Liir.]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


163


on  this  day,  without  betraying  any  notion  that  what  was  wanted
was  the  Greek  letter  p,  (tt)  '  Pi,'  it  suddenly  remarked :

Pye  is  a  bird  too  but  not  ours.

At  its  next  opportunity,  Sept.  ll^,  it  emphasised  this  addition,
saying,

Pye  gives  one  clue  but  there  is  another.

The  second  point  made  on  September  9  is  an  odd  one.  In
the  midst  of  the  attempts  it  wrote :

Find  the  h  e  r  1)  m  o  1  y  ^  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide.  i'lr^i-
Ko.l  TeAos  X-ijif/£i,<;  [sic].  *

We  could  attach  no  meaning  to  the  allusion  to  Milton's  phrase ;
the  passage  in  Cornvs  (11.  636-7)  seemed  to  have  no
bearing  on  the  context,  and  recalled  nothing  to  my  husband
either  at  the  time  or  later  when  he  revealed  his  experiment
to  me,  and  we  examined  in  detail  together  all  the  writing  of
these  weeks.  But  in  the  spring  of  1905,  when  I  was  writing
this  paper  and  had  ascertained  that  the  passage  of  the  Orestes
was  set  in  the  last  paper  of  the  Classical  Tripos  of  1873,  it
occurred  to  me  to  look  at  the  otiier  papers  set  in  that  year,
and  I  found  that  the  subject  for  Latin  Hexameters  in  the
Tripos  of  1873  was  the  passage  from  Comus,  ending,

"And  yet  more  med'cinal  is  it  than  that  moly
Which  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave."

It  appears  that  the  combination  of  the  letters  m  o  I,  pro-
duced in  the  effort  to  give  the  word  jj-ovo-n-wKov,  had,  by
some  association  of  ideas,  suggested  a  reminiscence  of  another
paper  in  the  same  Tripos  examination.  The  curious  point
about  this  is  that  the  recollection  had  entii^ely  gone  from  my
husband's  mind ;  when  I  asked  him  if  he  had  any  recollection
of  other  papers  in  the  Tripos,  and  in  particular  of  the  Latin
Verse,  he  could  recall  nothing,  and  e^'en  the  siglit  of  the
passage  in  Comics  did  not  revive  any  memory  of  having  trans-
lated it.  That  all  the  pieces  set  for  translation  or  composition
in  an  important  examination  make  a  profound  impression  at
the  time  does  not  need  proving  to  those  who  have  been  examined.

*  Trans. "Seek  and  you  will  find  at  last."
1  In  larger  writing.


164


Chapter  VIII.


[part


But  it  is  strange  to  Hnd  that  my  script  seems  to  have
registered  here  not  only  an  existing  mental  impression  of  my
husband's,  but  also  a  forgotten  past  impression,  once  closely
associated  with  the  first.

On  Sept.  1 2  the  script  recurred  to  "  Pye,"  and  apparently
tried  to  give  "  another  clue,"  but  without  much  success.

On  Sept.  14  it  played  round  the  sounds  and  the  notions
of  "  planet "  and  "  solitary,"  and  came  exceedingly  near  to
p.ov6iTw\ov  in  sense,  when  it  wrote  :  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine
coinitc,  "  bright  it  wanders  in  the  sky  uncompanioned " — a
sentence  which  is  in  fact  a  precise  and  correct  exposition  in
Latin  of  /xovottoAov  (aw),  lonely-wandering  (dcaon),  according  to
the  interpretation  preferred  by  my  husband.

On  Sept.  18  it  got  vaguely  hold  of  the  only  idea  not
hitherto  reproduced,  namely,  that  of  "  horse "  in  the  ordinary
view  of  the  meaning  of  fxopoiroAo'i,  "  having  one  horse."  The


graved  on  something  is  suggestive  of  eunriro^,  "of  goodly  horses."^
On  this  occasion,  while  I  was  writing  in  one  room,  my  husband,
sitting  in  another,  definitely  fixed  his  mind  on  the  notion
of  '  horse,'  which  had  so  far  been  conspicuously  absent.  Tliis
was  unknown  to  me  at  the  time  and  wholly  unsuspected :  I
was  somewhat  startled  to  find  when  he  told  me,  on  seeing
the  script  of  Sept.  18,  that  he  had  been  fixing  his  mind  on
something,  as  I  had  had  no  idea  that  my  writing  had  in  any
sense  been  the  subject  of  experiment.

After  this  no  further  light  was  obtained ;  I  now  knew  tliut
there  was  a  thing  wanted  by  my  husband  and  that  he  had
been  trying  experimentally  to  obtain  it ;  whether  this  know-
ledge on  my  part  had  any  effect  I  cannot  tell,  but  the  next
script  had  very  little  to  say  on  the  subject  l:»eyond  a  suggestion
that  the  words  were  not  those  of  the  ostensible  writer,  but
of  some  doctor,  apparently  not  a  doctor  of  letters ;  I  was  to
ask  A.W.V.

1  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  letters  in  the  script  represent  not
tvtTTTTo?,  but  eh  iTTTTos,  '  GHe  horse.'  The  second  symbol  in  the  script
looks  like  a  y,  but  is  plainly  made  of  two  strokes,  and  might  be  a
Greek  i,  followed  by  a  badly  made  Greek  s.  In  that  case,  the  script  in
€?s  (Vttos  '  one  horse '  has  come  very  near  the  common  meaning  of

/XOI'OTTwAoS.


word


^  T~/  */~p  Q  f ,  which  it  described  as  being  en-


Liii.]  Experiments  in  Telepathy.  165


On  Sept.  28  I  had  automatic  writing  with  no  reference
whatever  to  these  words  or  to  my  husband, — a  thing  that
had  not  occurred  since  August  10,  and  the  next  writing  on
Oct.  6  contained  the  words  "  But  A.W.V.  must  be  satisfied."
Since  then  nothing  further  has  been  contributed.  On  three
subsequent  occasions,  ISTov.  1,  1901,  July  1,  and  July  7,
1902,  in  some  unintelligible  fragments,  there  appear  to  be
reminiscences  of  the  attempts  at  words  in  the  autumn  of
1901,  but  these  have  no  meaning,  no  connexion  with  the
context  or  with  one  another,  and  no  reference  to  my  husband.
They  appear  in  fact  to  be  reminiscences  of  what  has  been
earlier  written  in  the  script,  not  fresh  contributions  in  any
sense.  There  are  other  instances  in  the  script  of  similar
echoes.

In  October,  1902,  finding  that  no  further  development  had
occurred  for  a  year,  my  husband  related  the  whole  experiment
to  me  and  we  then  looked  through  the  script  and  selected  the
relevant  passages.  The  abruptness  with  which  the  search
for  the  three  words  terminated  is  perhaps  no  less  remark-
able than  the  persistence  with  which  during  six  weeks  it
was  pursued.  It  is  also  noticeable  that  the  cessation  of  the
attempts  followed  instantly  upon  my  becoming  aware  that
my  husband  was  trying  an  experiment.

No  one  who  reads  the  detailed  account  of  the  writing
of  August  and  September,  1901,  can,  I  think,  have  any
doubt  that  there  is  a  connexion  between  the  persistent
efforts  of  the  script  and  the  test  that  had  been  devised
by  my  husband.  There  is  nothing  else  at  all  like  this  in
the  history  of  the  automatic  writing.  Efforts  have  been  made
by  the  script  on  other  occasions  to  convey  information,  and
the  information  so  conveyed  has  often  required  piecing  together
and  has  extended  over  long  periods  of  time.  But  in  no
other  case  have  the  efforts  been  consecutive  and  concentrated,
hardly  wandering  from  the  subject  at  all,  for  it  is  evident,
I  think,  on  reading  what  was  produced  between  Aug.  1 3  and
Sept.  20  that  though  a  great  deal  is  said  which  does  not
advance  the  enquiry,  little  else  but  this  enquiry  forms  the
matter  communicated ;  that  is  to  say,  the  references  to  places
and  people,  etc.,  seem  to  be  brought  in  during  the  efforts  made


166


Chapter  VIII.


[part


to  trace  the  various  possible  clues,  not  to  have  an  interest
or  an  object  of  their  own.  In  other  cases,  where  repeated
efforts  have  been  made  to  convey  the  same  information,
the  remarks  were  scattered  over  a  long  period  of  time  and
amid  much  matter  bearing  on  quite  disconnected  topics.
Here,  on  the  contrary,  after  a  few  tentative  references  to
the  subject  (on  June  3,  June  16,  and  July  3)  a  definite
approach  is  made  on  July  31  ;  interest  was  aroused  in
me  by  my  husband's  evident  interest  in  the  writing  of
that  day,  though  I  had  no  idea  what  it  was  that  had  a
meaning  for  him,  and  then,  after  another  ten  days,  on  August
13  the  script  began  to  approach  the  subject  of  the  three
Greek  words  and  to  that  subject  it  stuck  for  six  weeks ;
then  it  abruptly  dismissed  the  sulyect,  with  an  expression
intimating  the  dismissal,  and  never  recurred  to  it  again.

As  regards  success,  it  will  not  I  think  be  denied  that  the
script  made  an  attempt  at  the  problem — a  thing  itself
remarkable  in  the  circumstances.  Also  it  came  near  to  what
was  set  both  in  sound  and  sense.  The  script  is  full,  for  the
time,  of  the  ideas  mornin(j  and  east,  named  or  suggested  in
various  ways ;  more  than  once  occurs  a  translation,  or  some-
thing very  near  it,  of  the  original  words — "  going  towards  the
east,"  "  in  the  east  to  the  daylight,"  and  so  on.  The  language
and  words  too  are  approached,  the  middle  word  h  is  correctly
and  repeatedly  given  ;  it  is  indicated  clearly  that  the  k  is  pre-
ceded by  a  compound  of  ixovo-,  and  it  is  suggested  that  the
final  word  begins  with  a  and  ends  with  o.  When  it  is  considered
that  all  this  while  I  had  no  notion  that  any  experiment
whatever  was  on  foot,  and  had  no  reason  to  suppose  so,  the
facts,  I  think,  are  certainly  noteworthy.

I  have  dealt  with  this  incident  at  great  length  because  it
seems  to  me  to  possess  a  special  value  for  those  who  are
interested  in  the  questions  raised  by  the  study  of  my  auto-
matic script ;  the  problem  here  is  much  more  dehnite  than
in  most  of  the  other  cases.  It  is  possible  to  place  side  by
side  the  thing  aimed  at  and  the  thing  attained,  and  judge
the  results.  Again,  the  general  difficulty  of  estimating  the
value  of  the  script  is  brought  out  very  clearly  by  this
incident ;  given  the  words  selected  by  my  husband  it  can,  in
my  view,  be  shown  that  the  script  from  Aug.  13  to  Sept.  20,


LIII.]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


1G7


1901,  bears  unmistakeable  evidence  of  a  knowledge  of  their
appearance  and  their  meaning.  But  had  we  not  known  the
words,  they  would  have  been  irrecoverable  from  the  script,
although  a  careful  examination  would  have  shown  an  effort  to
communicate  something  definite,  and  something  intelligible  to
my  husband.  Under  these  circunistances  it  is  rash  to  count
as  rubbish  all  that  is  not  easily  understood.  We  should
rather  apply  in  other  cases  the  patience  and  scrutiny  which
were  in  this  case  justified.

(2)  The  second  experiment  tried  without  my  knowledge
was  a  complete  failure.  Mr.  Gilbert  Murray,  who  stayed
with  us  in  November,  1902,  and  heard  of  the  experiment
above  described,  tried  a  similar  one  on  his  departure,  with-
out telling  me  anything  of  his  intentions.  But  when  he
told  me  of  this  experiment  on  Sept.  9,  190.3,  I  found  no
trace  of  any  allusion  to  it  in  the  script  produced  in  the
last  ten  months.

It  should  be  said  that  though  Mr.  Murray  has  been  suc-
cessful in  experiments  involving  telepathy  with  other  persons,
there  has  been  no  evidence  for  thought-transference  between
him  and  me ;  on  the  other  hand,  there  have  been  recorded
some  instances,  though  not  many,  of  successful  telepathy,  both
spontaneous  and  experimental,  between  myself  and  my  husband,
and  some  further  traces  of  knowledge  of  what  was  in  his
juind  appear  in  the  script.^

{B) EXPKRIMENTS  WITH MY  KNOWLEDGE.

It  does  not  form  part  of  the  scheme  of  this  paper  to
discuss  the  series  of  experiments  in  simultaneous  automatic
writing  with  other  writers "  unknown,  or  but  slightly  known
to  me,  which  I  have  from  time  to  time  carried  out.  But
though  the  mass  of  the  writing  here  dealt  with  has  been
produced  spontaneously,  there  are  a  few  cases  where  experi-
ments have  been  tried  which  are  of  the  same  general  type

iSee  p.  184. See  also  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  481-2.

^  A  paper  on  experiments  in  simultaneous  writing  by  Mrs.
Bradgate  and  myself  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  and
reported  in  the  Journal  for  November,  1904.


168


Chapter  VIII.


[part


as  the  other  matter  here  discussed  and  are  therefore  included.
On  three  or  four  occasions  I  have  arranged  to  sit  for  writing-
at  the  same  hour  as  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  the  results  are  described
in  that  part  of  this  paper  which  deals  with  the  relations
between  our  automatic  writings.  The  other  experiments  are
as  follows :

(1)  Six  attempts  to  read  the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope
sent  to  me  by  Mr.  F.  C.  Constable,  then  unknown  to  me ;

(2)  Three  similar  attempts  two  years  later;

(3)  Two  scripts  produced  when  sitting  at  the  same  time
as  a  friend,  Mrs.  Dew  Smith :

(4)  Attempts  to  obtain  some  Greek  words  known  only  to
the  friend  who  suggested  the  experiment.

(1)  First  experiment  with  Mr.  Constable,  November,  1902.

On  Nov.  4,  1902,  I  received  from  Miss  Johnson  a  letter
and  a  sealed  envelope  sent  to  her  by  Mr.  F.  C.  Constable  of
Wick  Court  near  Bristol,  with  a  request  that  I  would  try
an  experiment,  and  see  whether  by  sitting  with  the  sealed
envelope  in  my  hand  I  could  obtain  in  the  script  any
reference  to  its  contents.  Mr.  Constable,  wlio  is  a  member
of  the  S.P.E.,  and  had  heard  a  paper  read  at  a  meeting
l»y  me  about  my  script,  was  an  absolute  stranger  to  me.
I  sat  with  the  sealed  envelope  in  my  left  hand  on  Nov.  4,
5,  7,  11,  18,  and  24;  after  this  I  returned  the  envelope
unopened  to  Miss  Johnson  and  was  made  acquainted  with  its-
contents  and  other  circumstances  by  Mr.  Constable  whom  I
met  in  town  on  Dec.  9.  The  conditions  were  excellent :
Mr.  Constable  and  I  were  strangers ;  I  had  no  means  of
anticipating  what  was  likely  to  interest  him ;  I  received  from
him  one  letter  only,  written  on  Nov.  7,  until  after  the
conclusion  of  the  experiment.  The  question  is  whether  any
connexion  is  established  between  the  proljlem  set  by  him  and.
the  results  shown  in  my  writing.

Briefly  the  facts  are  these :  The  sealed  envelope  contained
a  letter  from  Mr.  Constable  addressed  to  Mr.  Gurney ;
Mr.  Gurney  had  known  of  a  "  psychic "  experience  of  Mr.
Constable's  following  upon  his  mother's  death  on  Aug.  7,
1867,  in  which  the  word  "fuchsia"'  was  the  important  point.


Liii.]  Experiments  in  TeleiKdhy.  169'


Mr.  Constable's  idea  was  to  send  in  closed  envelopes  to  me
and  to  Mrs.  Piper  letters  addressed  to  Mr.  Gurney  suggesting
that  some  knowledge  of  the  "  fuchsia "  incident  should  appear
in  our  automatic  writings.  None  of  these  facts  were  known
to  me  at  the  time  of  the  experiment.  I  learnt  them  from
Mr.  Constable  when  I  met  him  for  the  first  time  on  Dec.
9,  1902.

The  whole  of  the  script  produced  on  the  six  sittings  is
given  in  the  Appendix.^  On  Nov.  4,  5,  11,  and  18,  I  held  the
envelope  the  whole  time  that  the  writing  was  being  produced ;
on  Nov.  7  I  put  it  down  after  nine  words  had  been  written,
and  the  last  part  of  the  script,  which  obviously  refers  to
other  matters,  is  excluded  from  this  experiment.  On  Nov.  24
I  fell  asleep  in  the  course  of  the  writing  and  have  no  note
on  the  subject  of  how  long  I  held  the  envelope.  I  regarded
the  first  words,  "  I  can't  do  more,"  as  expressing  a  desire  ta
discontinue  the  experiment,  and  thereupon  returned  the  un-
opened envelope  to  Miss  Johnson.

It  is  not  easy  to  summarise  the  results :  in  the  first  three
trials  there  seems  to  recur  an  effort  after  something  represented
by  "  Constantia  "  and  "  Clementia  "  on  Nov.  4,  "  Olivia  "  and
"a  long  woman's  name  ending  ia  "  on  Nov.  5,  and  "Constantia"
again  on  Nov.  7  ;  this  may  possibly  be  aimed  at  the  word
"  fuchsia " — a  word,  it  may  be  noted,  made  by  adding  "  ia "
to  the  name  "  Fuchs " — which  is  what  Mr.  Constal:>le  hoped
to  have  produced,  and  if  so  the  script  of  Nov.  7  was  justified
in  saying  "  one  only  word."  But  the  general  description  of  the
letter  on  Nov.  5  is  too  indefinite  to  be  of  value,  and  a  state-
ment about  the  "  short  name  like  Jack  "  is  incorrect.  The  script
of  Nov.  11  gives  no  information;  the  only  point  on  Nov.  18
that  bears  on  the  matter  is  the  introduction  of  the  name  Gurney.
The  name  is  not  however  connected  by  the  script  with  the
letter,  and  the  quotation  introduced  has  no  applicability.  The
last  piece  of  writing  is  very  confused ;  the  only  point  of  contact
with  the  experiment  seems  to  be  in  the  introduction  of
Dr.  Hodgson's  name  and  the  statement  that  "  he  had  tried
the  flowers  but  without  success."  The  same  experiment  had
been  suggested  by  Mr.  Constable  to  Dr.  Hodgson  to  try
with  Mrs.  Piper,  so  in  that  case  too  the  word  wanted  was

iSee  App.,  p.  394.


170


Chapter  VIII.


[part


the  name  of  a  llower.  But  the  sentence  in  my  script  may
refer  to  an  experiment  that  Dr.  Hodgson  had  suggested  my
trying  in  the  spring  of  1902,  to  which,  however,  no  reference
had  been  made  in  the  script  since  the  allusion  on  April
2-1:,  1902,  described  above.*  It  is  perhaps  moi-e  than  a
coincidence  that  an  allusion  should  be  made  to  "  Hodgson "
and  an  experiment  with  flowers  while  I  was  trying  to  get
at  what  Mr.  Constable  wanted.  But  it  is  not  distinctive
enough  to  be  of  evidential  value.

But  if  we  turn  from  the  question  of  the  contents  of  the
sealed  envelope  to  the  general  intention  of  Mr.  Constable,
I  think  there  is  a  sus'Siestion  of  connexion  between  his
thoughts  and  my  script.  On  Nov.  3,  the  day  on  which
he  wrote  the  letter  which  he  sealed  and  the  two  letters
explaining  the  experiment  to  Miss  Johnson  and  to  me,  my
script  produced  the  following :  '

None  the  less  through  others  not  known  speaks  the  fate, —
fatum  ineffabile  ineluctabile,  etsi  tu  magno  contendis  corpora
contra.

I  will  give  the  words  between  you  neither  alone  can  read,  but
together  they  will  give  the  clue  he  wants.

Comperire  .  .  .  redintegratio  amoris  ^  nec  nou  secessus  (desunt
hi  alia  et  alioquin)  Redit  iara  verbutn  ipsum — Caritatis  voca-
bulura,  but  hers  are  in  English  and  will  fill  the  gaps — Wait
some  time  for  hers — it  is  hard  to  give  her  words.

Tuus — iam  nomen  habes  in  mente  etsi  non  in  calamo.  *

This  was  absolutely  unintelligible  to  me  at  the  time,  and
I  do  not  profess  to  understand  it  now.  But  it  seems  to
have  a  possible  bearing  on  the  experiment  that  Mr.  Constable

*  Trans.  "  The  fate  unspeakable  unavoidable,  although  you  with  all
your  strength  fight  against  it  ...  to  discover  .  .  .  the  restoration
of  love  and  not  separation  (here  (■?)  and  elsewhere  C)  words  are
missing).  Now  the  word  itself  returns — the  term  Charity.  .  .  .
Yours — you  have  the  name  in  your  mind  now  though  not  on  your
pen."

1  See  p.  58.

2  The  script  thus  written  was  out  of  my  control  before  I  received
Mr.  Constable's  letter,  as  I  had  sent  the  original  on  Nov.  3  to
Mr.  Piddington.


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


Ill


was  proposing  on  the  day  when  this  was  written.  The  script
suggests

(1)  an  utterance  from  a  stranger,

(2)  a  division  of  a  task  between  two  persons,

(3)  the  obtaining  of  a  clue  for  some  one  (masculine),

(4)  an  effort  of  some  one  other  than  myself  (feminine)  to
give  words.

The  above  four  points  are  not  out  of  keeping  with  the
conditions  of  the  experiment,  and  the  receipt  of  Mr.  Con-
stable's letter  and  enclosure  on  Nov.  4  suggested  to  me  at  the
time  a  possible  meaning  for  the  otherwise  unintelligible  words
about  "  the  clue  he  wants."

The  script  of  ISTov.  7  also  suggests  a  telepathic  connexion
with  Mr.  Constable ;  after  returning  to  "  Constantia "  it  adds
"  one  only  word,"  and  refuses  absolutely  to  say  more.  In  a
letter  written  on  Nov.  7  and  received  on  Nov.  8,  thanking  me
for  undertaking  the  experiment,  Mr.  Constable,  who  had  been
very  careful  in  the  letter  proposing  the  experiment  to  give
me  no  clue  as  to  what  he  had  put  in  the  sealed  envelope,
wrote :  "  I  thank  you  heartily  for  trying  my  experiment —
perhaps  one  icord  meaningless  to  you."  This,  I  think,  shows
that  on  Nov.  7  his  thoughts  were  occupied  with  the  word
'  fuchsia '  which  he  hoped  to  obtain,  rather  than  with  the
general  contents  of  the  sealed  letter,  and  on  the  same  day
my  script  distinctly  committed  itself  to  the  statement  about
"  one  only  word."  ^

(2)  Second  experiment  with  Mr.  Constable,  November,  1904.

On  Nov.  10,  1904,  I  heard  from  Mr.  Constable,  enclosing
a  sealed  envelope  for  experiment.  In  answer  I  told  him  that
I  would  try  as  before,  but  that  I  would  take  three  or  four
weeks  over  the  experiment,  as  I  was  not  at  that  time  writing
automatically  often.  I  sat  with  the  envelope  in  my  hand
three  times,  on  Nov.  18,  23,  and  25.  Contrary  to  the  usual
habit,  after  the  first  attempt  at  automatic  writing  I  had  a
strong  impression  about  the  experiment  which  I  recorded  in
my  diary  on  Nov.  19. On  Nov.  25,  immediately  after  writing,

1  For  subsequent  possible  connexion  between  Mr.  Constable  and
my  script,  of  a  spontaneous  kind,  see  p.  181.


172


Cha^Jter  VIII.


[part


I  had  another  distinct  feeling  that  I  "  was  to  write  my
impressions  to  him  at  once."  This  I  did,  so  that  on  this
occasion  the  results  on  my  side  are  represented  not  only  by
three  pieces  of  automatic  writing,  but  by  my  letter  of  Nov.  25
to  Mr.  Constable.

The  details  appear  in  the  Appendix ;  I  summarise  the
incident  here :

Mr.  Constable  had  Jieard  at  the  Council  dinner  of  the  S.P.R.
on  Oct.  21  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of  opening  a  sealed
letter  left  by  Mr.  Myers,  in  consequence  of  statements  made
by  my  script.  He  felt  doubt  as  to  the  value  of  such  a  test,
regarded  as  evidence  for  the  continuing  of  personal  identity  after
death,  thinking  that  the  contents  of  the  letter  might  become
known  to  a  medium  by  clairvoyance.  He  therefore  tried  to  devise
a  test  to  distinguish  if  possible  between  the  effect  on  a  medium
of  («)  the  actual  words  written  in  the  letter  itself — to  be  read
by  clairvoyance — and  {h)  the  thoughts  impressed  on  the  letter,
or  elsewhere,  by  the  writer — to  be  learnt  by  telepathy  in  the
widest  sense,  by  connexion,  that  is,  between  the  minds  of  the
medium  and  the  agent.  Accordingly,  on  Nov.  9  he  wrote  two
letters,  which  he  placed  in  envelopes  and  sealed  ;  one  of  these
contained  the  word  "  fuchsia,"  and  this  he  sent  to  me ;  the
other  contained  a  record  of  the  writer's  thoughts  (as  dis-
tinguished from  the  actual  w'ord),  namely  that,  from  8.30  to
9.30,  he  was  thinking  of  his  mother.  This  letter  was  retained
in  the  custody  of  Mrs.  Constable.

The  impressions,  recorded  in  my  diary,  and  sent  to  Mr.
Constable  after  the  three  attempts  had  been  made,  were  as
follows :

(1)  that  the  contents  of the  letter  were  less  important

than  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment ;

(2)  that  the  experiment  was  suggested  to  Mr.  Constable  by

some  one  else ;

(3)  that the experiment  was  connected  with the  sealed

envelope  {i.e.  the  Myers  envelope  which  there  was  a
: ■ question  of  opening),  and  meant  as  a  preliminary  trial ;

(4)  that  the  sealed  envelope  sent  me  was  one  of  two  and

the  less  important.

iSee  App.,  p.  395.  ' •  "


LIII.]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


173


I  further  noted  that  the  script  had  made  curly  drawings
and  an  attempt  at  a  word.

The  above  four  impressions  may  on  the  whole  be  said  to
be  correct ;  the  experiment,  though  not  suggested  to  Mr.
Constable  by  some  one  else,  was  devised  by  him  as  the
result  of  conversation  with  other  persons :  the  sealed  envelope
sent  to  me  was  one  of  two,  the  shorter  and  the  less  important,
inasmuch  as  it  represented  the  written  word  («),  and  not  the
writer's  thought  (b).  These  impressions  are  definitely  enough
recorded  in  the  script,  which  distinctly  states,^  on  Nov.  23,
after  attempts  at  a  word,  that  there  is  a  second  envelope  held
by  another  person,  and  that  one  of  the  envelopes  contains  a
single  word,  and,  on  Nov.  23  and  25,  that  the  experiment  is
devised  as  a  preliminary  trial  before  opening  the  Myers
envelope.

The  experiment  then  seems  to  have  failed  so  far  as  concerns
the  actual  words  contained  in  both  letters,  the  letter  I  held
and  the  second,  of  the  existence  of  which  I  did  not  know ;
but  the  script  indicates  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  there
were  two  letters,  and  of  the  object  of  the  experiment.  Tliat
is  to  say,  there  is  no  evidence  of  clairvoyance  or  of  direct
transference  from  Mr.  Constable's  mind  of  what  he  intended
to  convey.  But  it  appears  that  the  script  showed  acquaintance
with  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment  and  of  facts  within
Mr.  Constable's  knowledge  beyond  what  might  be  expected
from  mere  guessing.

(3)  Experiment  with  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,  April,  1903.

On  April  2,  1903,  I  saw  my  friend  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,
and  found  that  she  had  been  trying  experiments  in  the
production  of  automatic  phenomena  by  table  tilting.  We
arranged  to  have  two  simultaneous  but  separate  sittings
on  April  10  and  13,  but  I  was  prevented  from  sitting
on  the  13th.  On  the  10th  the  script  produced  a  message
in  English  and  Greek,  referring  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  by
her  Christian  name  and  signed  with  a  monogram."  The
contents  are  too  confused  and  enigmatic  for  verification ;
the  word  juovdSeXcpo^  (with  one  brother)  occurs  twice,  and
the  signature  consisted  of  two  letters  of  my  friend's  initials
1  See  App.,  p.  397.  2 App.,  p.  400.


174


Chajyter  VIII.


[part


"  A.D. "  in  a  monogram.  She  has  never  to  my  knowledge
used  a  monogram.  I  sent  the  writing  to  her  and  heard  that
though  enigmatic  the  message  was  suggestive  to  her ;  lier
thoughts  had  been  much  occupied  lately  with  her  husband's
only  brother,  and  the  monogram  reminded  her  of  one  used  by
her  husband  who  had  died  early  in  1903.  His  first  initial
was  A,  as  I  must  have  known  though  I  had  no  recollection
of  it,  and  he  used  Albert  Durer's  signature  as  a  mark  on
some  of  his  belongings.  I  must  have  seen  Albert  Durer's
signatui'e  on  engravings,  but  certainly  never  knew  that  it  was
used  by  Mr.  Dew  Smith ;  there  is  a  certain  resemblance
between  the  Durer  signature  and  the  signature  of  my  script,
which  is  the  only  distinct  monogram  so  occurring  in  the
writing.  I  knew  of  no  brother  of  Mr.  Dew  Smith's,  and  had
always  supposed  him  to  be  an  only  son.

On  April  22  I  heard  the  above  facts  from  Mrs.  Dew
Smith,  and  she  said  that  she  would  sit  on  Mondays  and  Fri-
days after  tea.  On  Friday,  April  24,  my  script  contained  a
short  message  aljout  something  quite  different  and  added  "  I
cannot  do  it  to-day."  On  Monday,  April  27,  the  early  part
of  the  script  was  supposed  by  me  to  refer  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,
and  therefore  was  sent  to  her  in  London ;  the  latter  half,  in
a  totally  different  handwriting,  referred  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  and
when  sent  to  him  proved  intelligible.

The  part  sent  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  contained  the  words
"  not  the  ring  "  followed  by  an  attempt  to  describe  and  imitate
a  handwritini!;.  Then  after  vvritino;  "  ask  about  the  round
mirror  where  that  is,"  it  proceeded  to  draw  and  describe  an
instrument  like  a  pair  of  tweezers.

The  writing  was  in  a  small  sloping  hand  quite  unlike  my
own,  and  not  recalling  anything  whatever  to  me.

Mrs.  Dew  Smith  wrote  on  May  1  from  Haslemere  that
on  Friday,  April  24,  she  had  sent  a  message  mentally  to  me,
when  sitting  as  we  had  arranged,  asking  for  answers  to  two
questions  :

(«)  where  was  an  ivory  footrule  belonging  to  her  husband
which  she  had  lost :

(b)  what  she  should  give  to  a  friend  of  his  as  a  memento.

(ft)  Near  the  spot  where  she  last  used  the  footrule  (in
her  London  house,  not  in  the  country  where  she  was  staying


LIII.]


Experiments  in  Telepathy.


175


when  she  wrote)  was  a  small  round  mirror  lying  on  a  table
as  it  had  not  yet  been  hung  up.^

ih)  She  had  thought  of  giving  to  the  friend  a  ring  wliich  her
husband  used  to  wear,  but  hesitated  as  she  did  not  herself
wish  to  part  with  it  :  the  writing  described  and  imitated  in
my  script  reminded  her  of  that  of  the  friend  in  question.
A  letter  from  the  friend  was  enclosed.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  a  sense  the  script  of  April  27
answered  the  two  questions  put  to  me  mentally  by  Mrs.  Dew
Smith  on  April  24  ;  («)  "  ask  about  the  round  mirror  where
that  is "  had  an  applicability  to  the  disappearance  of  the
footrule  which  had  last  been  used  in  proximity  to  a  round
mirror ;  {h)  the  words  "  not  the  ring "  were  a  direct  answer
to  the  second  question.  The  likeness  between  the  writing  of
the  script  and  that  of  Mrs.  Dew  Smith's  friend  is  not
marked,  though  there  appears  to  be  some  ;  the  final  d  is  like ;
so  is  the  r ;  so  is  the  general  appearance  of  the  document ;
but  a  stroke  before  the  initial  vowel,  emphasised  in  the
script,  does  not  occur  in  the  letter.  The  other  article
described  has  not  been  identified.

On  the  whole  then,  there  seems  some  reason  to  think  that
facts  known  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  were  represented  in  the
script.  I  had  no  knowledge  of  a  round  mirror  as  a  possession
of  hers,  though,  as  I  had  lieen  in  her  London  house,  I  may
have  seen  it.  I  had  no  reason  to  suppose  that  she  was
thinking  about  a  ring.  The  writer  of  the  letter  was  and  is
wholly  unknown  to  me  and  I  had  certainly  never  seen  any
specimen  of  the  handwriting.

There  have  been  no  further  attempts  to  obtain  simul-
taneous phenomena  between  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  and  myself ;
we  had,  many  years  ago,  some  success  in  experimental
telepathy,  and  a  few  cases  of  apparently  veridical  reference
to  her  in  the  script  are  related  below."

(4)  Ex2)criment  tuith  Mr. W.  C.  Marshall,  May,  1904.

This  last  experiment  was  a  failure.  On  May  13,  1904,
it  was  suggested  that  I  should  try  to  get  in  my  script  certain

^  She  had  recently  moved  into  the  London  house.
■-See  p.  18.3.


176


Chapter  VIII.


[part


■Greek  words  in  a  sheet  of  '  tips '  for  an  examination  shown
to  Mr.  Marshall  many  years  ago  by  a  friend  since  dead,  and
now  known  to  no  one  else  but  Mr.  Marshall.  The  script  at
once  wrote  that  the  words  were  five  and  should  be  got  the
next  day.  The  next  day,  May  14,  it  produced  five  Greek
words  incorrectly  written  and  hardly  construable,  and  on
June  5,  1904,  without  any  context  or  reference  to  Mr.
Marshall,  the  script  wrote:  "  Two  foreign  words  maranthinon
telesphoron. Two  long  words  not  in  English."

No  further  attempts  were  made  for  some  months.  I  then
learned  from  Mr.  Marsliall  that  the  words  wanted  were  two
in  number,  but  that  the  attempts  in  the  script  did  not
resemble  them.

An  attempted  correction  on  Dec.  30,  after  I  had  heard
as  above  from  Mr.  Marshall,  took  us  no  further,  and  the
script  has  made  no  other  reference  to  the  subject.-^


^  See  App.,  p.  401,  for  the  script  referring  to  this  subject.


LIII.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


177


CHAPTER  IX.

Spontaneous  References  in  the  Script  to  Living
Acquaintances.

As  has  been  said  above,  the  greater  part  of  the  script  is
concerned  with  remarks  about  identifiable  persons,  living  or
dead.  Often  the  remarks  are  perfectly  vague  :  "  Ask  So-and-
■  so,"  "  Such-and-such  would  know."  Sometimes  they  are  of
no  evidential  value,  as  they  deal  with  matters  well  within
my  own  knowledge  at  the  time.  But  in  other  cases  information
is  thus  conveyed  which  was  not  in  my  possession.  I  have
made  a  complete  collection  of  all  these  "  messages,"  as  the  pro-
portion of  grain  to  chaff  is  an  important  element  in  forming
conclusions  as  to  the  value  of  the  script,  bi;t  I  do  not  propose
to  describe  them  in  detail.

Before  discussing  them  here  some  words  should  be  said  on
the  selection  of  the  persons  written  about  in  the  script.
Names  of  living  persons  occur  some  280  times ;  in  more
than  60  cases  the  references  are  to  other  persons  known
by  me  as  themselves  obtaining  or  able  to  obtain  automatic
phenomena.^  The  remaining  214  occasions  may  be  classified  as
follows :

(I.)  Miscellaneous, - - - - - -  28

(II.)  Personal  friends  known  to  be  specially  interested

in  the  script,  - - - - -  186

viz.  (A)  Persons  already  connected  with

the  script  - - -  6

(B)  A.  W.  Verrall  (husband) -  .34

(C)  Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall  (daughter) 1 9

(D)  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  her  brothers  17

1  These  are  separately  discussed,  see  Chapters  X.  and  XI.

M


178


Chapter  IX.


[part


(E)  Prominent  members  of  the


s.r.E.

40
11
13


67


viz.  Dr.  Hodgson

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  -
Mr.  Piddington
Others


(F)  Other  friends


43


The  bias  of  the  selection  is  evident,  whatever  may  be  its
explanation.  Under  the  circumstances,  and  considering  my  own
strong  interest  in  the  work  of  the  S.P.E.,  it  is  not  surprising
that  the  greater  number  of  names  occurring  in  the  script  should
be  those  of  persons  intimately  associated  with  that  work ;
nor  is  it  surprising  to  find  a  considerable  number  of  references
to  my  husband  and  my  daughter, — both  of  them  interested  in
the  production  of  these  automatic  phenomena.  But  I  should
not  have  expected  to  find  so  complete  an  omission  of  other
friends  of  mine,  living  or  dead,  very  intimately  associated
with  me  and  constantly  represented  in  other  uncontrolled
conditions  of  my  mind,  for  instance  in  dreams.  Thus,
there  is  no  reference  whatever  to  my  mother,  who  died
some  twelve  years  ago,  nor  to  my  sister,  and  only  one  very
doubtful  allusion  to  my  father,  both  living.  These  three
relatives  figure  fairly  often  in  my  dreams,  and  I  have  had
some  experiences  suggestive  of  a  telepathic  connexion  between
my  sister  and  myself.^  Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the
selection  of  languages,"  it  is  clear  that  the  selecting  agency
is  not  my  normal  self,  nor  even  what  a  deliberate  dramatisation
on  my  own  part  would  suggest.

I  take  the  cases  in  detail,^  beginning  with  the  small  group
of  "  miscellaneous "  persons  whose  names  appear  in  the  script.

(I.)  Miscellaneous  Names.  28.

The  miscellaneous  names  may  be  classified  under  five
heads.

iSee  S.P.R.  Journal,  IX.,  p.  134.  2  ggg  p.  .32.

^  I  here  discuss  only  cases  where  the  actual  name  is  found  in  the
script;  there  are  some  cases  where  subsequent  information  suggested
that  allusions  to  particular  persons  were  intended,  but  those  are  not
included  in  this  classification.


LIIT.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


179


(1)  Unintelligible  Introductory  Phrases.  2.

Twice  where  names  occur  at  the  l^eginning  of  a  communi-
cation they  seem  to  be  mere  rubbish,  used  while  getting  under
way.

(2)  Preliminary  attempts  at  things  later  completely  expressed.  5.

There  are  five  possible  instances  of  this.  It  seems  occasion-
ally as  if  in  the  effort  to  produce  a  particular  word  some
other  word,  quite  incorrect  Init  associated  in  idea,  were  first
produced,  shaken  out  as  it  were  from  a  bag  of  counters  by
mistake.  Thus  I  have  little  doubt  that  in  the  writing  of
Dec.  10,  1901,  "Mrs.  Pattrick.  Note  the  name — Hill  Side
that's  why  I  know,"  "  Mrs.  Pattrick "  represents  the  first
emergence  of  tlie  idea  subsequently  produced  in  "  Hill  Side."
Mrs.  Pattrick  is  the  name  of  a  lady,  an  acquaintance  of  mine,
who  lives  in  Hill  Side,  the  house  in  Cambridge  where  Dr.
and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  lived  before  they  came  to  Newnham  College.

Again  on  July  19,  1903,  the  name  Horatio  Brwwn  (sic)
was  followed  by  mere  scribbles ;  the  name  is  naturally  associated
with  Venice,  and  the  next  writings,  on  July  21  and  July  31,
1903,  conveyed  messages  about  Venice  of  possible  evidential
value.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  name  Horatio  Brown
emerged  in  approaching  the  idea  of  Venice.

(3)  My  oivn  initials.  1.

These  occurred  once  on  April  19,  1901,  in  a  passage  written
with  some  urgency  during  a  journey ;  they  may  represent  a
personal  remonstrance  or  appeal.  The  script  wrote :  "  Cant
you  see  ?  cant  you  believe  ? M.  de  V."

(4)  Ambiguous.  3.

Three  times  the  name  "  Arthur "  occurs  in  a  hand  quite
unlike  my  own,  and  quite  unlike  the  rest  of  the  writing  in
the  context.  It  is  possible  that  the  intention  is  to  refer  to
my  husband,  but  as  he  is  usually '  referred  to  by  his  initials,
A.W.V.,  or  by  description,  as  "  your  husband,"  I  have  not
counted  these  as  allusions  to  him.

1  There  is  one  exception ;  on  Oct.  6,  after  a  reference  to  the
Christian  name  of  a  brother,  his  own  name  Arthur  is  used.


180


Chapter  IX.


[part


(5)  Attcmj^ts  to  produce  evidential  matter.  17.

The  remaining  17  instances  (14  names,  3  being  double)  are
apparently  attempts  to  produce  verifiable  matter,  but  some  are
complete  failures,  some  too  vague  to  be  tested,  some  not  beyond
tlie  range  of  my  own  guessing,  and  only  five  or  six  perhajDS
correct.

Two  of  the  latter  refer  to  the  same  friend,  Miss  Jane
Harrison,  and  are  the  only  references  to  her  in  the  whole  of
the  script. On  Jan.  29,  1902,  the  script  wrote:

The  little  book  was  lost  and  is  found  with  the  pages  faintly
numbered  in  ink  at  the  top.  written  in  on  the  right  hand  pages —
and  a  few  words  opposite.  It  opens  badly — some  is  in  pencil,  it
is  hard  to  read. There  was  a  monocjram  two  letters  intertwined  ^


like  that.  Perhaps  Miss  Harrison  knows.  It  is  not  clear
yet.


I  learnt  on  encpury  from  Miss  Harrison  that  she  had  mis-
laid a  small  book  containing  notes  about  the  subject  of  a  lecture
which  she  was  to  give  on  Jan.  31.  She  had  been  looking  for
the  book  "  all  the  week,"  that  is,  between  Jan.  24  and
Jan.  30,  when  I  spoke  to  her.  The  book  was  an  interleaved
text,  so  that,  on  opening  it,  there  would  appear  on  one  side
the  Greek  text,  on  the  other  Miss  Harrison's  own  notes  in
ink  and  in  pencil,  undouljtedly  "  hard  to  read."  ]>ut  the
text  was  alternately  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  hand
page,  and  there  was  no  monogram  on  the  cover.  The  l)Ook
was  found  in  time  for  the  lecture,  but  its  disappearance  had
caused  a  good  deal  of  annoyance  to  its  owner  during  the  four
or  five  days  preceding  my  script.

The  second  reference  to  Miss  Harrison  was  on  Feb.  6,
1904,  when  she  was  with  us  in  Algeria.  It  merely  stated,
in  a  writing  not  mine,  that  the  date  ought  to  help  Miss
Harrison  to  identify  the  supposed  communicator :

It  is  for  Jane  show  it  to  her,  she  will  know  what  it  means  &
the  date  ought  to  heljj  her  February  6th  long  ago  now,

Feb.  6  was  in  fact  the  birthday  of  a  young  sister  of  Miss
Harrison's  who  had  died  nearly  thirty  years  before,  and  whom

^  E.G.  appear  to  be  the  letters,  the  E  being  reversed


LIU.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


181


I  had  never  known.  But  neither  the  writing  nor  the  attempt
at  a  signature  recalled  anything  to  Miss  Harrison.

(11.)  Persons  known  to  be  interested  in  the  script.  186.

We  now  come  to  references  in  the  script  to  persons  whose
known  interest  in  the  script  or  in  its  usual  topics  would  make
the  occurrence  of  their  names  likely.

(A) Persons  already  mentioned  in  scriiot.  6.

I  begin  with  some  cases  where  the  person  referred  to  had
already  been  connected  with  the  script  before  the  actual
occurrence  in  the  script  of  the  name.

Mr.  Marsh.  1.

On  Sept.  19,  1903,  Mr.  Marsh,  the  subject  of  an  apparently
successful  prediction  ^  in  which,  however,  his  name  had  not
been  mentioned,  was  expected  to  stay  with  us.  On  Sept.  17
the  scribe  wrote :  "  Mr.  Marsh  has  something  to  tell  you
this  week,"  but  the  statement  proved  incorrect.

Mr.  F.  G.  Constable..  1.

The  experiments  with  Mr.  Constable  have  been  described
above.^  After  the  conclusion  of  the  first,  Mr.  Constable  and
I  met,  for  the  first  time,  in  London  on  Dec.  9,  1902,  and
some  automatic  writing  produced  by  me  in  his  presence,
contained  a  drawing  of  a  chain  and  a  reference  to  a  cornelian
heart,  which  induced  me  to  refer  to  Mr.  Constable  the  remarks
which  were  made  by  the  script,  a  few  days  later,  on  Dec.  14.

The  links  should  help — a  little  golden  chain — and  a  heart  sus-
pended— P atris  eius  in  memoriam  a  little  old  fashioned  por-
trait, three  curls  on  either  side  the  face — no  cajD — in  a  gilt  frame,
a  miniature  oval  shaped — the  neck  is  bare — the  dress  gray  the
heart  belongs  to  her  but  is  not  in  the  portrait — it  was  given  after.

The  experiment,  as  will  be  remembered,  had  concerned  an
incident  connected  with  Mr.  Constable's  mother  and  in  the
course  of  our  conversation  he  had  mentioned  that  he  had  a


iSee  below,  p.  331.


2  See  pp.  168-173.


182


Chapter  IX.


[part


portrait  of  his  mother  hanging  up  in  his  room.  In  answer  to
my  enquiries,  Mr.  Constable  told  me,  in  three  letters  written
on  Jan.  1,  3  and  7,  1903,  that  there  hangs  in  his  study
a  photograph  of  his  mother  which  is  an  enlarged  copy  taken
from  a  small  oval  daguerreotype  in  a  gilt  frame.  The  hair
is  shown  in  three  curls  ^  on  each  side,  and  there  is  no  cap.
The  lady  is  wearing  a  brown  velvet  cloak  and  the  neck  is
somewhat  conspicuously  bare.  She  had  and  habitually  wore
a  long  gold  chain  made  of  links,  and  on  this  chain  a  locket —
but  not  a  heart,  cornelian  or  otherwise ;  the  locket  was  given
to  her  in  1863,  some  years  later  than  the  date  of  the  daguerreo-
type portrait,  which  was  probably  taken  in  1856  or  1857  for
a  son  who  was  going  to  India.  The  daguerreotype  is  now  in
the  possession  of  that  son's  daughter.  It  further  appeared  (1)
that  till  quite  recently  Mr.  Constable  had  been  under  the
impression  that  the  original  from  which  his  photograph  had
been  enlarged  was  not  a  daguerreotype  but  a  miniature,  and
(2)  that  to  wear  the  neck  bare  was  characteristic  of  the
lady.

It  would  thus  seem  as  if  there  were  some  information
conveyed  by  the  script  definite  enough  to  be  evidential,
though  not  all  the  statements  are  correct.  "  The  dress  is
gray "  is  not  correct ;  no  dress  is  visible  in  the  picture,  and
it  has  not  been  found  possible  to  ascertain  the  colour  of  the
dress  which  was  worn  at  the  time ;  the  cloak  is  known  to  have
been  brown,  though  naturally  the  photograph  does  not  show
any  colour.  It  is,  however,  possible  to  interpret  the  words
'  the  dress  gray  '  as  suggesting  that  the  general  appearance  of
the  costume  is  gray  (as  in  the  photograph),  not  coloured  (as  in
a  painting).  "  A  heart "  again  is  not  a  correct  description
of  the  locket;  a  locket  however,  was  (1)  worn  on  a  gold
chain,  (2)  is  not  shown  in  the  picture,  and  (3)  was  given
to  the  lady  after  the  picture  had  been  taken.  The  details
of  the  description  of  the  portrait  are  correct  and  the  script
seems  to  have  hit  upon  a  characteristic  touch  in  the  "  bare
neck."

1  The  lady  wore  more  than  three  curls  on  each  side,  but  only  three
are  shown  in  the  portrait,  so  that  in  this  respect  the  script  appears  to
reproduce  the  actual  picture  rather  than  a  general  inapression  of  the
lady  herself.


LIII.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  183

Mrs.  Dew  Smith.  4.

Besides  the  references  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  aboved  described  ^
when  I  was  definitely  thinking  of  her  before  obtaining  auto-
matic scripts,  there  have  been  four  others,  on  June  21,  1903,
Aug.  31,  1903,  Dec.  7,  1903,  and  Dec.  23,  1904.  The
third,  Dec.  7,  1903,  is  a  mere  allusion  to  a  visit  that
she  was  to  pay  me  and  lays  no  claim  to  evidential  or
other  value ;  the  other  three  purport  to  convey  information
unknown  to  me. They  are  as  follows  :

(a)  June  21,  1903  (Switzerland).

What  is  Alice  doing  1  she  has  found  a  house  now — ask.  a  little
house near  a  wood,  with  a  sunny  garden  on  one  side.

I  had  not  seen  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  since  April  and  knew  nothing
of  her  intentions :  at  the  end  of  July,  on  returning  from
Switzerland,  I  heard  from  her  that  she  had  been  wanting  to
find  a  small  house  in  the  New  Forest  with  a  garden,  but
had  no  particular  house  in  view.

(b)  Aug.  31,  1903.

Tell  Alice  from  me  the  pen  [or  pin]  will  be  found  and  can
then  be  given  back — But  she  is  too  anxious.

I  was  uncertain  whether  the  word  was  pen  or  pin,  and
asked  Mrs.  Dew  Smith,  when  I  saw  her  on  Sept.  1,  whether
she  had  lost  either  a  pen  or  a  pin.  She  said  that  she  had
not.  But  the  next  day  she  remembered  and  told  me  that
on  Aug.  31  she  missed  a  little  parcel  of  pens  which  she
valued  and  about  which  she  had  written  to  make  enquiries.
The  pens  were  eventually  found,  but  not  till  some  months  later.

<c)  Dec.  23,  1904.

Now  give  this  message  to  Alice  Dew.  Her  plan  is  a  good
one  &  she  should  carry  it  out  at  once  :  I  know  there  is  some  dis-
approval but  that  will  pass.  She  is  quite  right  in  her  view.  Tell
her  that.  tell  her  with  emphasis.  She  is  to  do  it  &  not  be
■deterred  by  their  criticism.

She  sat  alone  last  night  late  but  I  could  not  make  her  hear.  She
will  remember  the  little  tinkling  bell. That  will  prove  my  truth.

^See  above,  p.  173.


184


Ghajyter  IX.


[PAKT


In  a  letter  of  December  27,  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  told  me  in
answer  to  enquiries  that  for  the  last  six  months  her  mind
had  been  full  of  a  plan  for  building  a  cottage  to  live  in
at  the  end  of  the  next  year ;  that  there  were  difficulties  in
the  way,  and  that  all  her  friends  opposed  her  plans  and
criticised  the  scheme.  She  had  no  site  in  view,  but  the
plans  for  the  cottage  were  actually  made  and  the  main  point
of  adverse  criticism  was  a  very  large  room  which  she  wished
to  build.

She  wrote  from  the  country  where  she  was  staying  with
a  sister,  and  said  that  not  being  alone  she  had  only  once
since  leaving  town  made  automatic  experiments.  She  had
unusual  difficulty  and  obtained  nothing.  That  was  on  Dec.  22
or  23.  She  also  said  that  she  had  a  strong  impression  of
hearing  a  little  bell  outside  the  house  one  evening  and  wondered
if  it  were  a  bicycle  bell,  but  was  not  sure  that  it  was  on  the
evening  mentioned.

ISTo  one  of  these  cases  taken  alone  is  of  much  evidential
value,  but  the  three  taken  together  perhaps  show  some  reflexion
in  the  script  of  thoughts  and  actions  telepathically  or  otherwise
not  normally  conveyed.  The  last  in  particular  presents  a
message  which,  though  unfortunately  vague,  is  distinctly  ap-
propriate, and  the  attempts  to  give  corroborative  evidence  are
good  as  far  as  they  go, — l)etter  certainly  than  I  thought
likely  at  the  time,  for,  believing  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  to  be  at
her  own  house  in  town,  I  thought  it  very  improbable  that
any  tinkling  bell  would  have  been  noticed.

(B)  A.  W.  Vcrrall  34.

Allusions  by  name,  initials  or  description  were  made  to
my  husband  on  thirty- two  occasions  (twice  referring  to  two
separate  incidents)  counted  as  thirty-four  times.  Many  of  these
allusions  are  clearly  intended  to  he  evidential,  but  some  contain
only  references  to  what  has  been  said  earlier  in  the  script
or  must  otherwise  be  supposed  known  to  me ;  others  again
are  too  vague  to  contribute  anything  verifiable.  Those  that
purport  to  be  evidential  may  l:)e  classed  under  three  heads,
which  I  here  call  Successes,  Failures,  and  False  Statements.
Under  "  Successes "  I  have  counted  cases  where  some  correct
information  seems  to  have  been  conveyed,  even  where  there


LIII.]


References  to  Livmg  Acquaintances.


185


are  also  mistakes.  "  False  statement "  is  used  when  the
statement  is  ascertainably  wrong ;  "  Failure,"  when  for  one
reason  or  another  no  test  has  been  possible.  The  classification
has  been  made  mainly  with  a  view  to  clearness  of  treatment
and  not  for  statistical  purposes. It  is  as  follows :  ^


(a)  Non-evidential - - -  -  -  -  13

(5)  Would-be  evidential - -  -  -  -  21

viz. Successes -  -  -  10

False  statements  -  -  3

Failures -  -  -  8

Total ------  34


False  Statements.

Three  attempts  to  give  something  "  wanted "  or  "  thought
of "  by  my  husband  are  certainly  wrong.  The  only  experiment
made  by  him  in  connexion  with  the  script  has  been  above
described  ;  it  required  no  "  woman's  name,"  as  suggested  by
the  script  on  Nov.  4,  1901.  I  learnt  early  in  October,  1902,
of  that  experiment,  and  that  knowledge  of  mine  is  probably
responsible  for  the  incorrect  suggestion  (Oct.  27  and  31,
1902),  that  he  had  thought  of  something  else  for  me  to
produce.

Failures.

On  July  8,  1901,  the  script  produced  what  I  took  to
be  a  message  to  my  husband  from  an  unnamed  person  who
had  known  him  at  Trinity  College.  The  vague  reminiscences
recalled  nothing  to  him.  On  Nov.  25,  1901,  the  College
friend  of  July  8  was  certainly  associated  and  perhaps  identified
with  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour.  But  my  husband  has  not  been  able
to  recall  any  special  conversation  such  as  is  described,  though
naturally,  after  25  years,  his  memory  is  not  very  clear."

1 A  complete  list  is  given  in  App.,  pp.  401-3.  To  enable  the  reader
to  form  some  idea  of  the  nature  and  value  of  references  in  the  script
to  specified  persons  I  have  dealt  in  detail  with  these  references  to
my  husband,  which  are  typical  of  the  rest.  In  regard  to  other
persons  so  mentioned,  I  confine  myself  to  classification  and  descrip-
tion of  selected  instances.


2  See  also  p.  277.


186


Chapter  IX.


[part


Two  statements  (Nov.  1,  1901,  and  Aug.  21,  190-1)  are
wholly  unintelligible;  another  (Oct.  12,  1901)  seems  to  lie
partly  a  reminiscence  of  the  attempts  to  guess  ixovottwKov
e?  aw,  and  partly  a  confused  attempt  to  say  something  about
Dr.  Benson,  the  late  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  was
Head  Master  of  Wellington  College,  when  my  husband  was
at  school  there.

In  October,  1902,  the  script  described  on  two  occasions
some  purple  garment  laid  aside  in  a  chest  with  a  lock  of
gray  hair  and  a  toy  or  child's  letter.  In  each  case  the
incident  is  connected  by  the  script  with  my  husband ;  on
Oct.  9  ^  he  is  definitely  stated  to  have  seen  it  worn,  and
on  Oct.  31  the  subject  recurs  immediately  after  a  reference
to  him.  But  in  the  absence  of  clear  indication  to  whom  to
apply,  we  have  not  been  able  to  test  this  assertion.

An  expression  familiar  to  my  husband  was  given  on  Jan.
30,  1903,  but  in  the  impossibility  of  proving  that  it  was
unknown  to  me,  the  incident  is  not  evidential.

Successes.

Six  of  the  ten  cases  where  my  husband's  name  occurs  in
attempts,  at  least  partially  successful,  to  produce  verifiable
unknown  facts,  deal  with  his  thought-transference  experiment,
and  have  been  discussed  above.^

Of  the  others,  two  apparently  show  telepathic  knowledge
of  things  in  his  mind,  unknown  to  me ;  one  perhaps  shows  a
confused  impression  of  his  future  action,  not  at  the  time
within  his  knowledge ;  the  last  is  difficult  to  classify,  and
may  be  a  merely  accidental  coincidence.

I  discuss  these  four  in  chronological  sequence.

Script  of  April  14,  1902.  This  script  was  produced  under
the  following  circumstances  :

From  April  9  to  12,  1902,  my  husband  and  I  stayed  together
at  Wellington  College,  and  I  twice  visited  the  cliapel  there
to  see  the  new  aisle  *  which  had  been  built  in  memory  of  Arch-

1  The  next  paragraph  of  the  script  on  Oct.  9,  which  seems  to
show  telepathic  knowledge  of  my  husband's  thought,  though  there
is  no  explicit  reference  to  him,  is  described  below  on  p.  189.

2  See  above,  p.  138.  ^See  p.  156.

■*  The  original  chapel,  known  well  to  my  husband  but  not  to  me,


LIIT.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  187

bishop  Benson.  On  the  first  occasion,  April  10,  I  had  gone  with
the  Head  Master  and  some  other  visitors,  and  I  then  particularly
noticed  the  Credence  table,^  for  which  my  husband  had  written
an  inscription.  On  the  second  occasion,  April  11,  my  husband
and  I  were  alone  for  some  little  time  in  the  chapel,  and  after
noticing  the  general  effect  of  the  new  aisle,  looked  in  detail
at  its  glass.  I  read  to  him  the  inscriptions  on  the  windows,
and  we  also  looked  at  the  commemorative  tablets  in  the
corridor  leading  to  the  chapel.  I  have  no  recollection  of  looking
specially  at  the  east  end  of  the  chapel.

On  April  12  my  husband  and  I  separated,  and  on  April  14
I  went  to  visit  a  friend.  While  on  my  way,  in  the  train,  I
felt  discomfort  in  my  right  hand,  and,  taking  off  my  glove  to
relieve  it,  suddenly  experienced  a  desire  to  write  automatically.
The  script  so  produced  began  with  two  statements,  afterwards
verified,'  and  then,  after  an  unintelligible  remark  and  a  long
line  ,  came  the  following :

The  chapel  is  too  light— something  has  been  taken  away  was  it
a  cross  in  the  east  ask  if  he  noticed — I  tried  to  show  it  you  don't
understand — let  me  write  Cant  uar  is  sedile  ubi  nunc  gentium  1
non  tuum  respondere.  defer  ahi.  The  angular  writing,  crabbed,
comes  again,  but  you  will  not  like  this  turn  the  last  letter  so  no —
not  that  way  m  s  t  Verrall  Verrall  Verrall. V.  Verrall.

The  writing  throughout  was  in  a  more  angular  hand  than
mine. The  difference  becomes  more  marked  at  the  end.

The  first  words  of  the  script  suggested  to  me  the  chapel
at  Wellington  College,  and  the  words  '  Cant  uar  is  sedile,'
an  allusion  to  the  Archbishop,  seemed  to  confirm  this  view.
I  could  make  nothing  of  the  next  three  words  ^  '  ubi  nunc
gentium,'  but  the  following  words,  '  It  is  not  for  you  to
answer,  ask  some  one  else,'  suggested  that  I  should  ask  my
husband. I  had  not  seen  him  since  April  12th;  he  returned

had  no  aisles.  In  1882,  before  I  ever  saw  the  chapel,  a  north  aisle
had  been  added,  but  the  south  aisle  was  not  added  till  1902.

^  The  table  had  belonged  to  Dr.  Benson,  and  had  been  given  to
Wellington  College  Chapel  after  his  death  by  Mrs.  Benson.

-See  p.  305  for  one  of  these.

2  Uhi  gentium  means  "  Where  in  the  world  1 "  but  uU  nmic  genliura
can  only  be  rendered  "  Where  is  now  '  of  the  nations '  {gentium)."


188


Chapter  IX.


[part


home  on  the  afternoon  of  April  18  th,  after  I  had  copied  the
script,  and  I  showed  it  to  him  at  once.

The  opening  words,  "  the  chapel  is  too  light,"  carried  back
his  thoughts  at  once  to  the  early  days  of  the  original
aisleless  chapel,  and  recalled  his  own  view  that  the  effect
of  the  original  design  had  been  injured  by  the  addition  of
the  north  aisle,  which  destroyed  the  proportions  and,  by  its
new  window  at  the  west  end,  increased  the  light  within  the
building.  The  later  words  reminded  him  of  an  incident
associated  with  the  eastern  end  of  the  chapel.  This  is
decorated  below  the  lancet  windows  with  heads  in  mosaic,
surrounded  by  inscriptions,  and  on  one  occasion,  while  he  was
at  school,  he  was  present  in  the  apse  when  Dr.  Benson,
then  Head  Master,  was  showing  these  decorations  to  a  visitor.
The  visitor,  looking  at  the  crabbed  characters  round  the  head
of  S.  Paul,  read  the  inscription  out  as  '  Ductor  Dubitantium,'
'  Leader  of  the  Doubting,'  a  mistake  instantly  corrected  by  the
Head  Master  to  '  Doctor  Gentium,'  '  Teacher  of  the  Nations.'

My  husband  has  no  recollection  of  having  noticed  the
mosaics  on  the  occasion  of  this  last  visit  on  April  11th,
1902,  and  was  certainly  not  aware  of  having  missed  anything
in  the  apse,  nor  has  he  any  recollection  of  having  thought
of  this  incident  either  in  the  chapel,  or  on  any  other  occasion,
till  he  read  the  script,  since  its  occurrence  some  thirty-five  years
ago.  At  the  same  time  it  seems  to  be  very  likely  that  the
difficulty  which  I  had  in  deciphering  the  words  in  the  windows
when  we  were  together  in  the  chapel  on  April  11th  revived
vaguely  in  his  memory  the  earlier  incident,  when,  owing  to
a  difficulty  of  deciphering,  the  two  words  doctor  gentium  were
misread.

I  had  no  recollection  of  inscriptions  in  the  mosaics ;  when
my  husband  first  spoke  of  an  inscription  I  supposed  him  to
refer  to  lettering  in  the  windows  of  the  east  end.  It  is,
however,  certain  that  I  have  at  some  time  seen  the  mosaic
inscriptions,  as  I  have  several  times  been  into  the  chapel.
The  head  of  S.  Paul  is  on  the  right  hand  side,  not  far  from
the  Credence  table,  to  which  my  attention  had  been  specially
drawn  on  the  preceding  day,  April  10  th.

I  have  since  ascertained,  indirectly  in  1903  and  by  per-
sonal observation  and  inquiry  in  July,  1905,  that  no  alteration


LIII.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


189


has  been  made  at  the  east  end  of  Wellington  College  Chapel.
Nothing  has  been  removed,  and  the  inscription  doctor  gentium
in  "  angular  and  crabbed "  letters,  not  easy  to  read,  still
surrounds  the  head  of  S.  Paul.  It  thus  appears  that  there
is  no  truth  in  the  suggestion — tentative,  it  is  true,  and
followed  by  the  phrase  which  commonly  shows  recognition  of
an  error,  "  you  do  not  understand " — that  something  had
been  removed.

The  reader  who  sees  in  this  allusion  in  the  script  an
■emergence  of  a  submerged  memory  of  my  husband's  may  find  a
parallel  in  the  "  herb  moly "  of  the  preceding  autumn,  which
was  connected  by  the  script,  as  it  had  once  been  in  my
husband's  mind,  with  the  "  solitary  dawn,"  though  at  the  time
of  his  attempt  to  get  a  reference  to  the  solitary  dawn  in  my
writing  he  had  no  associations  of  it  with  the  herb  moly.^

Script  of  Oct.  9,  1902.

On  Oct.  9,  1902,  I  spent  the  day  in  town,  leaving  home

at 9.50 a.m. and returning  at  9.10  p.m. In  the  train  on

my  way  back,  just  before  8.55  p.m.  I  wi'ote  automatically,
after  a  reference  to  my  husband.

to the  dark  tower  came  who  ?  ask  him  who  ? and  where  \  The

tower  was  dark  &  cold,  but  we  all  loved  it.  he  will  remember
write  regularly — there  is  truth  in  this.

The  answer  to  the  first  question  "  Who  ? "  is  clearly
■"  Childe  Eoland."  The  line  "  Childe  Eoland  to  the  dark
tower  came "  is  the  opening  of  Edgar's  song  in  Kincj  Lear
(Act  III.  Sc.  4)  and  the  subject  and  title  of  a  poem  by
Browning.  There  is  no  context  in  the  Shakespearean
passage,  but  Browning's  poem  describes  the  surroundings  of
the  tower,  so  that  if  the  suggestion  in  the  second  question
"  where  ?  "  was  to  be  pressed  it  seemed  to  me  that  Browning's
poem "  and not Shakespeare's  song was  indicated. But  I

1  See  above,  p.  163.

2 1  can  see  no  special  meaning  in  the  words  "  The  tower  was
dark  and  cold  but  we  all  loved  it."  There  is  no  hint  of  cold  in
Browning's  poem,  though  much  talk  of  darkness ;  and  the  "  we "
who  "  all  loved  it "  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  predecessors  of
Browning's  hero,  who  perished  by  the  way  in  their  attempt  to
reach  the  tower.


190


Chapter  IX.


[part


could  find  no  reason  for  a  reference  to  this  poem  in  anything
I  had  done  or  thought  about.

The  "  him "  whom  I  was  to  ask  seemed  to  point  to  my
husband,  whose  name  had  occurred  just  before.  Accordingly,
the  next  morning  I  showed  the  script  to  him,  and  he  at
once  said  that  during  my  absence  on  the  day  before  he
had  been  reading  Browning  and  had  especially  read,  more
than  once,  "  Childe  Eoland."  I  had  no  reason  whatever  to
expect  him  to  be  reading  Browning  in  general,  or  that  par-
ticular poem.  The  allusion  to  it  in  my  script  seems  therefore
remarkable.

Script  of  Aug.  31,  1903.

The  statements  of  the  script  of  Aug.  31  ^  may  be  thus
divided :

(1)  Hugh  will  not  go  abroad  next  month  he  rests.

(2)  then  comes  a  hurried  journey  to  the  south  and  the  long

break.

(3)  Do  not  tell  this  to  Arthur.

(4)  It  may  not  be  quite  right  perhaps  you  do  not  understand
but  there  is  sense  &  truth  in  it.

(5)  You  will  know  before  Christmas.

In  these  statements  it  is  possible  to  see  a  confused  expres-
sion of  knowledge  concerning  the  future  certainly  not  possessed
by  me  at  the  time  of  writing.  But  the  statements  are  not
definite,  and  at  best  the  script  seems  to  have  confused  two
incidents. The  facts  are  as  follows :

My  brother  in  law,  Hugh  Verrall,  who  had  been  ill,  was  to
go  abroad  for  a  rest  and  change  in  September,  1903,  and
the  Italian  Lakes  was  the  suggested  locality.  This  I  heard
of  about  Aug.  22.  He  started  in  fact  on  Oct.  9,  by  Paris,
and  reached  the  Italian  Lakes  after  a  slow  journey  and  many
stoppings ;  he  returned  to  England  early  in  December.

Early  in  November,  1903,  my  husband  and  I  began  to  con-
sider the  suggestion  of  his  doctor  that  we  should  go  to  Algeria
for  the  Christmas  vacation,  taking  the  journey  out  and  back
as  fast  as  possible  so  as  to  secure  the  utmost  possible  time
in  Algeria. On  Dec.  1,  however, he  decided to apply  for

1  See  App.,  p.  403.


Lill.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  191


leave  of  absence  for  the  Lent  Term  of  1904,  and  go  away
for  three  or  toux  months,  so  as  to  avoid  undue  haste  on  the
journeys. This  we  did,  reaching  our  destination  on  Dec.  16.

There  were  thus  two  journeys  taken  abroad  for  health
by  two  members  of  the  Verrall  family  in  the  autumn  of
1903,  one  expected  and  one  unexpected  in  August,  1903.

Of  these  five  statements  in  the  script :

(1)  states  the  facts  about  Hugh  correctly.

(2)  goes  on  to  speak  of  a  "hurried"  journey — a  phrase  not
the  least  applicable  to  the  very  slow  journey  to  the  Lakes
which  was  contemplated,  as  I  knew,  for  Hugh — and,  in
connexion  with  this  journey,  of  a  "  long  break."  The  long
break  and  the  journey  to  the  south  are  strictly  applicable  to
Arthur's  actual  journey,  while  the  hurried  journey  to  the
south  is  appropriate  to  what  was  first  recommended  by  our
doctor,  and  was  contemplated  by  us  during  the  month  of
November.

(3)  seems  superfluous  if  it  means  that  Arthur  was  not  to  be
told  of  Hugh's  movements,  but  has  a  certain  appropriateness  if
applied  to  Arthur's  journey.  My  husband  was  unwilling  to  go
away  at  all,  and  the  whole  question  was  as  little  discussed
as  possible,  our  ultimate  decision  being  taken  only  ten  days
before  we  left  home.

(4)  indicates  error,  though  not  complete  error,  in  what
had  been  said  before.

(5)  unintelligible  if  referred  to  Hugh,  is  quite  correct  if
applied  to  Arthur's  journey.

If  this  interpretation  is  correct,  the  script  shows  knowledge,
confused  though  it  be,  of  what  it  was  wholly  impossible  that
at  the  time  of  writing  I  should  consciously  know.  At  the
time,  however,  I  took  it  to  refer  to  the  journey  of  my  brother-
in-law,  the  only  journey  then  in  contemplation  for  any  member
of  the  family.

Script  of  Oct.  3,  1904.

I  find it  impossible to classify  this  incident ; the  reader

must  judge  whether  or  not there  was  any  justification  for

the  evident  belief  of  the  script  that  it  had  this  time  made
a  hit.


192


Chapter  IX.


[part


On  October  3,  1904,  I  went  to  town  for  the  day.  On  the
way,  in  the  train  (10  a.m.  from  Cambridge),  just  after  passing
Hatfield,  my  hand  wrote :

Disappointments  many  but  the  end  is  sure.  Now  this  is  an
omen  an  omen  in  the  proper  sense.  Note  the  name  of  the  first
acquaintance  you  meet  to-day  and  tell  your  husband ;  he  will
understand.

Omen  occasionis.*
That  will  come  off — keep  open  wits.

In  the  train  on  the  way  home  (5  p.m.  from  King's  Cross)  I
noted  that  the  first,  and  indeed  the  only  acquaintance  whom  I
met  was  Mr.  White,  a  Cambridge  don.  I  asked  my  husband
on  my  return  if  "  White "  answered  to  anything  which  had
been  in  his  thoughts,  but  he  said  it  did  not.  I  then  told
him  what  had  occurred,  and  heard  that  on  that  afternoon,
between  3.30  and  4  p.m.,  when  he  was  on  his  tricycle,  he
had  seen,  from  behind,  some  one  whom  he  believed  to  be
the  Mr.  White  in  question.  He  was  much  surprised  to
hear  that  I  had  seen  him  in  London  at  11.20  a.m.,  but
on  consideration  said  that  he  could  not  assert  that  the  man
he  saw  in  Cambridge  was  Mr.  White,  though  he  should  certainly
have  asserted  it  but  for  my  seeing  him  in  town.  For  Mr.
White  to  have  been  where  my  liusband  thought  he  saw  him
before  4  p.m.  he  must  have  left  London  at  latest  by  the
12.40  p.m.,  which  as  he  only  reached  it  at  11.20  seems
unlikely.  It  is  probable,  tlierefore,  that  my  husband  was
mistaken  in  his  impression,  and  the  remarks  of  the  script  in
that  case  served  to  show  his  error.  But  wliat  purpose  was
so  served  it  seems  impossible  to  discover,  and  in  any  case
there  was  no  sort  of  omen.^

(C)  Hdcti  dc  G.  Verrall. 19. .  .

The  allusions  in  the  script  to  my  daughter  are  fewer
than  those  to  my  husband,  and  with  two  possible  exceptions
valueless. Her  name,  Helen,  occurs 19 times,  but  on  two

*  Trans. "  Omen  of  opportunity."

1  It  should  however  be  noted  that  the  script  appears  to  use  the
word  omen  in  the  sense  of  "  evidence  of  supernormal  faculty,"  or
"successful  hit,"  without  implying  anything  premonitory.  See
below,  pp.  223,  309.


Liii.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances,


193


occasions  the  reference  is  stated  by  the  script  not  to  be  to  her,
and  on  two  others  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  she  is
the  Helen  intended.  But  in  the  absence  of  any  indication
of  any  other  Helen,  I  have  grouped  together  all  references
to  the  name.  Following  the  same  classification  as  in  the
case  of  A.  W.  Verrall,  we  have  as  follows :


((x)  Non-evidential - -  -  -  - 1 1

(h)  Would-be  evidential -  -  -  -  8

viz.  Successes  (?) -  -  -  2

False  statements  -  -  3

Failures -  -  -  3

Total, ------  19


(D)  Mrs.  Sidgwick  ami  her  hrothers.  17.

For  purposes  of  comparison  I  have  again  classified  these
cases,  as  far  as  possible,  under  the  same  heads  as  before,
but  in  commenting  on  them  it  will  be  more  convenient  to
group  them  according  to  the  various  episodes  to  which  they
refer. The  classification  is  as  follows  :

(«)  Non-evidential
(b)  Would-be  evidential
viz.  Successes

False  statements

Failures  -

Four  of  the  allusions  contain  the  incorrect  suggestion  ^  that
Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  was  concerned  in  the  incident  connected
with  the  words  juopo-ooXou  e?  aco.  Another  is  an  attempt  to
refer  to  somethins;  of  evidential  value.  The  statement  is  not
very  definite  and  the  script  seems  uncertain  whether  Mrs.
Sidgwick  or  Miss  Johnson  is  the  person  who  could  corroliorate
the  story,  but  neither  Mrs.  Sidgwick  nor  Miss  Johnson  can
throw  any  light  on  the  subject.

The  script  of  November  22nd  and  25th,  1901,  attempted
to  reproduce  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour's  handwriting.  Comment  on
this  has  been  made  above."


3
14

2
8
4

i  7


See  above,  p.  156.

N


-See  p.  26.


194  / •  " Chapter  IX.


[part


On  July  17  th,  1901,  an  attempt  was  made  to  say  some-
thing of  evidential  value  for  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  but  it  was  a
complete  failure  and  recalled  nothing  to  her.^ ' .  ;  '  '

On  July  23rd,  1901,  the  script  seems  to  have  been  more
successful. It  wrote  .  .

Sidgwick  wants  to  say  something  about  a  message — a  missing
book.  It  ought  to  be  found.  It  had  dates  in  it — a  little  book
kept  by  accident — there  was  something  else  in  it.  It  fastens  with
a  strap — most  of  the  leaves  are  torn  out  but  March  and  May  are
there,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  must  look.

I  sent  the  above  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  at  the  end  of  July,
1901,  and  on  August  1st  she  told  me  that  she  had  many
little  note  books  fastened  with  straps,  containing  occasional
notes,  and  that  in  some  cases  some  of  the  leaves  had  been
torn  out.  On  August  3rd  she  told  me  that  she  had  found
one  with  leaves  torn  out,  containing  on  its  remaining  leaves
dated  notes  referring  to  a  certain  incident.  Other  papers
referring  to  this  incident  were  destroyed  before  Dr.  Sidgwick's
death,  but  the  notes  in  this  book  were  apparently  left
undestroyed  by  accident.

Six  of  the  statements,  two  non-evidential,  two  false  state-
ments, and  two  failures "  seem  to  refer  to  a  proposed
"test"  of  some  kind.  On  October  10th,  1903,  the  script
suggested  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  should  be  asked  for  a  question
concerning  Dr.  Sidgwick  to  which  only  she  knew  the  answer.
The  script  had  for  some  time  been  writing  about  letters
apparently  from  or  to  Dr.  Sidgwick  and  kept  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
but  the  connexion  between  these  letters  and  the  proposed
test-question  was  obscure.  On  October  12th  more  was  said
about  the  letters,  and  in  the  next  paragraph  the  script
said  "  Don't  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  yet."  Early  in  December,
1903,  I  left  England  for  Algeria.  The  script  wrote  on
December  25th:  "Mrs.  Sidgwick  would  know  about  the  three
letters  in  the  cabinet";  and  on  December  26th:  "Mrs.
Sidgwick  knows  the  letters  in  the  cabinet,  ask  her."

On  January  l7th,  1904,  it  made  further  remarks  about

1  See  below,  p.  278.

"  The  statements  have  not  yet  been  tested.


LIII.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


195


"Mrs.  Sidgwick's  letter"  and  its  contents,  and  on  July  13th,
1904,  came  a  statement  that  an  envelope  containing  a  short
sentence  written  by  Dr.  Sidgwick  was  kept  with  two  other
letters  in  "  the  Florentine  cabinet."  ^

The  above  allusions  are  too  obscure  for  verification ;  the  last
two  seem  to  refer  to  a  sealed  envelope  to  be  opened  post-
humously, but  the  two  in  December,  1903,  may  refer  to  something
quite  different.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  knows  nothing  of  three  letters
kept  together,  so  that  the  two  statements  in  December,
1903,  are  classified  as  false.  The  remarks  of  October  10th
and 12th,''  1903,  they  stand,  unevidential,  but  may

be  connected  with  matter  purporting,  though  so  far  unsuccess-
fully, to  be  evidential.  The  script  of  October  lOtli  apparently
•supposes  a  connexion  between  the  test-question  and  the  letters
that  have  been  preserved.

One  of  these  allusions  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  (April  27,  1901)
is  more  interesting  and  may  perhaps  justify  its  claim  to
evidential  value.  I  relate  it  in  detail,  beginning  with  the  list
of  appropriate  extracts  ^  from  the  script.

1.  April  19th,  1901.  -

Deposui  cum  amico  apud  hortanos.*  roga  multipliciter  volumen
rolled  and  tied  up  pumice  omnia  aequata.^  haec  cum  legas  tu
saepe  aiyis  under  the  sofa  in  a  blue  cover  Ask  on  Monday
don't  hesitate — one  at  a  time, only  one. then  you  will  know  what

iFor  "the  Florentine  cabinet"  see  p.  197.

2  There  is  some  interest  attaching  to  the  statement  of  October  10th,
and  also  to  some  words  connected  with  it  on  January  17th,  1904.
This  incident  is  further  described  below,  p.  297.

2  In  only  one  case  did  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  name  appear  in  the  script,  on
April  27,  but,  as  the  reader  will  see,  other  passages  in  the  script  plainly
refer  to  the  same  subject.

*The  word  hortani  appears  to  be  an  adjective  from  a  noun  Horta.
Horta  is  the  name  (1)  of  a  place  in  Etruria,  probably  called  after
(2)  an  Etruscan  goddess  of  Inspiring  or  Exhortation  {■n-apopjj.av,
hmiari,  see  Plut.  Qiiaest.  Rom.  46).  It  is  perhaps  possible  to  read
the  letters  as  hortarios,  a  non-existent  and  unintelligible  word.

5  Referring  to  Catullus,  XXII.,  11.  8-9,  where  he  describes  a  volume
of  poems.  The  meaningless  at-yt?  evidently  represents  Catullus'
caprimulgus.


196  > . Glm'pter  IX.


[part


I  mean — stop —  tu  tu  non  alia  fac  mihi  quod  rogem.  nunc  nunc
in  praesenti. instare — ne  dubitaveris.*

2.  April  27th,  1901.

The  book  is  there,  look  for  it  well — j'ou  will  find  it.  No  hurry,
tell  Mrs.  Sidgwick.i  .  .  .  Why  can't  I  go  on.  It  seems  so  clear —
put  it  down — wrapped  up.  Look  both  of  you  non  alii  solaet —
under  something  blue — loose — low — you  must  stoop — to  see  it.  Try
again. Go  on,  go  on.

3.  May  1st,  1901.

a  jar — sweet  scented  and  full.  an  arm-chair  stood  beside.
Can't  you  see  now  where  it  was  [drawing  of  handle]  handles  like  this
Dovinantis  in  ripa. non  possum  plurimum  tibi

dicere.  quare  non  capisl  alia  iam  cepisti  nuilto  difficiliora.:]:  Look
look,  it  will  be  opened  for  you.

4.  May  3rd,  1901.

Describe  nunc  quod  dictito,  modo  leges.  Depositum  in  loco
bene  descripto  iam  ante — sub  pedibus  §  There  is  something  blue
there  but  I  can't  say  quite  what.  It  moves  like  a  drapery — not
a  light  blue  not  much  of  it.  The  jar  belongs — it  is  higher —
in  the  same  room — go  in  and  look.  There  are  books  all  about —
and  a  picture — a  portrait  perhaps  in  a  frame.  On  the  left  hand
side. other  things  first. It  is  below. It  is  a  test.

5.  May  Sth,  1901.

Wooden  cases  Florentine  pattern. She  will  know.

It  was  obvious  on  reading  the  above  extracts  that  an  attempt
was  being  made  to  describe  a  particular  room,  a  particular

^  Trans.  "I  have  placed  it  with  a  friend  at  the  '  hortani '  (?),
ask  very  often  a  volume  .  .  .  the  whole  thing  smoothed  otT  with
pumice.  This — since  you  read  often — goatskin —  .  .  .  you  you  not
another  do  for  me  what  I  ask  now  now  at  once,  do  it  at  once —
do  not  hesitate."

J  Trans. "Not  others  you  alone"  (fern.  plur.).

I  Trans.  "On  the  bank  of  the  Dovinans  (?)  I  cannot  tell  you
more,  why  do  you  not  understand  1  You  have  understood  other
things  before  now  much  more  difficult."

§  Trans.  "  Write  down  now  what  I  dictate,  presently  you  will  read
it. Laid  aside  in  a  place  well  described  before  this — under  one's  feet."

lA  vague  remark  on  June  16th,  1901,  "Mrs.  Sidgwick  will
know. There  is  no  hurry  "  is  perhaps  a  recurrence  to  this  subject.


LIII.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  197

place  in  that  room,  and  something  of  the  nature  of  a  book
kept  in  that  place.  But  at  the  time  I  did  not  identify  the  room.
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  to  whom  I  referred  the  first  sentences  of  April
27  th,  could  make  nothing  of  them.  On  May  18  th  I  spoke
of  the  matter  to  Miss  Johnson,  in  consequence  of  the  veri-
fication that  day  of  another  statement  in  the  script  of
May  8th,^  and  she  suggested  that  the  description  applied
to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  room  at  ISTewnham  College  with  which  I
was,  of  course,  familiar.  The  window- seat,  which  is  on  the  left-
hand  side  of  the  room  to  a  person  going  from  the  door  to  the
fireplace,  is  fitted  with  cushions  and  had  at  the  time  a
valance  made  of  a  stuff  of  which  the  ground  was  blue.  This  I
did  not  remember,  my  impression  being  that  the  covering  was
.yellow,  a  colour  which  I  find  it  originally  had,  but  some  time
before  1901  the  coverings  had  been  renewed  with  a  stuff
of  which  blue  was  an  important  part.  By  the  window
stands  a  table  on  which  there  are  generally  one  or  more
jars  with  flowers;  on  May  18th  when  I  looked  at  the  room
there  was  a  jar  filled  with  wallflowers.  Near  the  table  is
an  arm-chair.  On  the  opposite  wall  are  book-cases,  and
over  one  of  these  is  a  framed  portrait  of  Dr.  Sidgwick.  There
is  in  the  room  a  chest  of  drawers  with  a  pattern  inlaid  in
wood,  and  metal  handles,  but  the  handles  are  not  of  the
shape  drawn  in  the  script.  This  chest  is  Florentine,  having
been  obtained  at  Florence  and  given  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  as
a  wedding  present  by  two  of  her  brothers.  These  facts  about
the  chest  were  quite  unknown  to  me  till  I  made  enquiries
on  May  18th,  1901.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  told  me,  on  May  18th,  that  under  the
drapery  of  the  window-seat  she  kept  a  box  containing  im-
portant papers,  but  she  could  think  of  nothing  in  the  box  cor-
responding to  the  description  in  the  script.  It  was  not  till
January  1st,  1905,  that  I  ascertained  on  further  enquiry
from  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that  among  the  papers  in  that  box  was
a  privately  printed  pamphlet  in  a  sealed  envelope,  given  to  Dr.
Sidgwick  some  years  before.  This  sealed  packet  was  taken
charge  of  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  1893,  but  she  did  not  know
what  it  contained,  and  had  so  completely  forgotten  all  about
it,  that,  as  she  wrote  to  me,  "  I  was  not  aware  of  having

1  See  pp.  207-209.


1^  ••• ■  •  •  "■ Chapter  IX.  [part

lost  it  uutil  I  found  it,"  that  is,  in  December,  1903.  When
in  the  spring  of  1901  (April  or  May),  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was
asked  if  among  Dr.  Sidgwick's  papers  there  was  such  a  sealed
packet,  she  replied  that  there  was  not,  having  forgotten  the
packet  in  the  box.

It  thus  appears  that  at  the  time  when  enquiries  were  made
of  Mrs.  Sidgwick  about  a  sealed  packet  the  script  was  writing
a  description  of  a  place  containing  some  sort  of  book, — a
place  corresponding  closely  enough  for  identification  with  the
place  where  the  missing  pamphlet  was.

(E)  Mcmhers  of  the  S.P.R  67.

The  members  of  the  S.P.R.  mentioned  are:  "  .


Professor  Eichet

1

Sir  Lawrence  Jones  -

1

Miss  Alice  Johnson  -

1

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  -

-  11

Mr.  Piddington

-  13

Dr.  Hodgson

-  40

They  may  be  classified  as  follows :

Single  Instances,
(a)  Non-evidential

(Jj) Would-be  evidential
viz.  Success

False  statement
Failures  -

Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

(«)  Non-evidential
{b) Would-be  evidential

viz.  Successes  -

False  statement
Failures

11


6
5

1


LIU.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  '199


Mr.  Piddington.

(a)  ISTon-evidential

(&)  AVould-be  evidential

viz.  Successes  -

False  statement  -
-  Failure


1
1


9


9
4


13


Dr.  Hodgson.

(a)  ISTon-evidential

{b) "Would-be  evidential

viz.  Successes  -

False  statements
Failures  -


12


9


17

23


40


Single  Instances. 3  cases.

The  reference  to  Professor  Richet  is  unintelligible ;  the
reference  to  Miss  Johnson,  which  has  been  already  noted/
is  incorrect,  and  the  reference  to  Sir  Lawrence  Jones  is  too
vague  to  be  tested.

Bir  Oliver  Lodge. 11  cases.

Most  of  the  references  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  are  of  a  general
nature  and  fail,  even  when  so  intended,  to  be  evidential.
Four  of  them  connect  his  name  with  that  of  Mrs.  Thompson,
.and  of  these  one"  is  evidential  and  one  other  claims  with-
out success  to  be  so.  Three  refer  in  general  terms  to  the
importance  of  obtaining  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  opinion  of  the
script. Two  others  lack  precision  and  one  is  definitely  false.^

One  case  remains  for  comment  here.

On  July  23rd,  1901,  when  I  was  in  Switzerland  and
■Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  England,  the  script  wrote :

magno  tumultu  super  maria  in  praesenti  iam  navi  longa — non
Homano  sensu — volitat.  Pulsat  machina  vibrat  navis  in  quinques
<iies eras  attinget — notare.* To  Lodge  he  goes  first  to  lodge —

*  Trans.  "In  rough  weather  (1)  over  the  seas  now  this  moment
in  a  long  ship — not  in  the  Roman  sense — he  flies.  The  engine
throbs,  the  ship  quivers  in  five  days  he  will  reach  the  shores
— note  it."


iSee  p.  193.


2  See  page  208.


'See  below,  p.  301.


200


Chapter  IX.


[part


tell  him  what  I  say  show  him  what  you  write  It  will  help.  Some-
thing of  importance  has  happened  since  you  have  been  away — write
to  Lodge  and  tell  him  I  have  said  so. It  has  to  do  with  Hodgson.

On  July  28th,  1901,  I  wrote  from  France  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  inclosing  him  the  above  extract,  which  was  unintelli-
gible to  me.  The  description  of  the  large  steamer — not  a
man-of-war — coming  to  England  had  suggested  to  me  Dr.
Hodgson,  who,  as  I  knew,  was  expected  in  England  about  the
middle  or  end  of  July.  But  I  expected  him  to  come  straight
to  Cambridge,  and  in  fact  he  did.

On  July  30  th  the  script,  after  my  return  to  England,
made  what  appeared  to  be  an  addition  to  the  above  or  a  correc-
tion of  it ;  for  though  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  name  does  not  occur,
the  word  "  notare "  is  repeated  and  is  followed  by  the  words,
obviously  alluding  to  the  "five  days"  of  the  script  of  July  23:

You  have  it  not  quite  right.  Try  again.  .  .  .  Ask  if  on  the
28th  that  makes  5  days.

The  name  is  wrong.  Thaumas  is  more  like  but  I  can't
get  it.

The  first  sentence,  written  before  I  had  heard  from  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  or  knew  anything  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  movements,  I  took
to  be  a  correction  of  the  name  Hodgson  in  the  earlier  script.
The  remark  about  "  Thaumas,"  beginning  as  it  did  a  new
paragraph,  I  took  to  be  a  new  incident,  as  I  had  learnt  by
this  time  that  a  new  paragraph  invariably  indicated  a  change
of  subject.  But  as  the  only  person  indicated  for  reference
was  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  plainly  referred  to  in  the  first  paragraph,
I  wrote  to  him  to  ask  "  if  the  name  Thaumas  had  any  meaning
for  him."

There  were  thus  two  points  referred  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  r
(a)  the  statement  of  July  23rd,  which  I  took  to  be  substantially
but  not  wholly  correct,  and  (5)  the  reference  to  "  Thaumas  "  on
July  30th. The  facts  were  as  follows:

(a)  On  July  31st  I  heard  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  that  the
remark  about  "  something  of  importance "  having  happened
seemed  intelligible  to  him,  and  that  in  connexion  with  it  some
one  had  come  to  him  from  America,  reaching  Birmingham  on
July  28th,  i.e.  five  days  after  the  23rd,  though  the  ship  must
have  "  reached  the  shores"  of  England  on  the  27  th. The  only


Llll.]  References  to  Living  Acquaintances.  201


sense  in  which  the  words  "  it  has  to  do  with  Hodgson "  can  be
interpreted  is  that  later  in  the  year,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  visitor
and  Dr.  Hodgson  returned  to  America  in  the  same  ship.  But
it  is  much  more  likely  that  the  mention  of  a  ship  and  of  an
arrival  reminded  me  of  Dr.  Hodo'son's  coming,  and  so  intro-
duced  his  name.

(&)  On  July  29th,  1901,  Mr.  K  W.  Thomas  applied  to
Mr.  Piddington  for  the  post  of  Organising  Secretary  to  the
S.P.E.,  and  gave  my  husband's  name  as  a  reference.  Mr.
Piddington  sent  the  letter  on  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  received
it  on  July  31st.  I  knew  nothing  about  applications  for  the
post  in  question  till,  on  August  3rd,  I  heard  at  the  Council
meeting  that  the  selected  candidate  was  called  Thomas,  and
Mr.  Thomas  was  in  fact  appointed.  Mr.  Thomas  had  been
well  known  to  us  when  he  was  in  Cambridge,  but  we  had
no  knowledge  of  his  occupation  or  intentions.  At  the  time,
then,  when  the  script  wrote  of  "  Thaumas  "  in  such  a  way  as
to  make  me  connect  the  reference  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
there  was  a  reason  for  connecting  the  two.

Mr.  Piddington. 13  cases.

Far  the  greater  number  of  the  references  to  Mr.  Piddington
are  of  a  perfectly  general  character ;  "  tell  Piddington  this,"  or
"  tell  Piddington,  he  will  know  why,"  and  so  on.  There  are
eight  of  these  vague  statements.  The  remaining  five  all  concern
Mrs.  Thompson,  one  being,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  mean-
ingless and  another  at  least  partially  incorrect.

The  remaining  three  are  these :

1.  On  May  18th,  1902,  the  script  wrote  in  a  larger  hand
than  my  own,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  Mrs.  Thompson,-'
as  follows :

Rosie  Thompson  not  the  mother,  tell  Mr.  Piddington  this — some-
thing has  happened  to  her  just  lately  but  they  need  not  be
alarmed.  at  the  school.  Mrs.  Thompson  was  there  I  saw  it
through  her. Do  not  forget.

^See  below,  p.  211,  for  a  case  where  another  apparent  reference  to
Mrs.  Thompson's  daughter  is  also  made  in  a  larger  handwriting
than  my  own.  In  that  case  it  directly  purjjorts  to  represent  one
of  Mrs.  Thompson's  controls,  Mrs.  Cartwright.


202


Chapter  IX.


[part


I  sent  the  above  script  to  Mr.  Piddington  as  directed,  and
learnt  from  him  that  Mrs.  Thompson  took  her  daughter  Eosie
to  school  at  Bournemouth^  on  May  7th,  1902,  and  saw  her  there
again  on  May  9th.  On  Friday  and  Saturday,  May  16  th  and
17  th,  Eosie  Thompson  was  in  bed  with  a  bad  cold  and  neuralgia.
A  letter  from  her  on  May  20  th  to  her  mother  says  that  she
came  down  to  dinner  on  Sunday  18th,  and  went  back  to  bed
at  4.30.  But  as  she  is  rather  subject  to  bad  colds,  her  mother
was  not  anxious.  The  script  then  was  apparently  justified
in  saying  that  to  Eosie  Thompson  something  had  happened
just  lately  at  the  school  which  was  not  cause  for  alarm.
But  the  incident  is  not  distinctive  enough  for  evidential
purposes.

2.  On  October  7th,  1903,  after  writing  about  some  letters
of  Dr.  Sidgwick's,  the  scribe  added  in  a  new  paragraph  the
words :  "  Tell  Piddington  to  ask  Mrs.  Thompson  about
Sidgwick's  three  envelopes."  I  sent  this  message  to  Mr.
Piddington  by  the  evening  post  of  October  7th.  At  the
time  I  knew  nothing  of  his  plans  nor  of  Mrs.  Thompson's.
I  heard  from  Mr.  Piddington  on  October  8th  that  he  had  an
appointment  to  see  Mrs.  Thompson  on  that  afternoon,  and  so
an  opportunity  to  ask  the  question.  That  evening,  after  I
had  heard  from  Mr.  Piddington,  the  scribe  wrote :  "  Mrs.
Thompson  does  not  know  those  letters,  but  what  Piddington
hears  from  her  will  help  you  to  understand."  It  was  true
that  Mrs.  Thompson  did  not  know  of  the  letters,  but  nothing
that  she  said  to  Mr.  Piddington  has  thrown  any  light  on  the
letters.

i

Br.  Hodgson. 40  cases.  -

Eather  more  than  half  of  the  large  number  of  references
to  Dr.  Hodgson  are  of  a  vague  and  non-evidential  character,
■even  when  an  attempt  at  evidential  matter  may  be  detected.
On  the  other  hand  the  proportion  of  successes  among  the
would-be  evidential  cases  is  high,  and  some  of  the  successes
are  striking.  Twenty-three  of  the  references  are  of  the  following
type :  "  Hodgson  will  be  a  help,"  "  Hodgson  is  pleased,"  "  you
should  see  Hodgson,"  "  Hodgson  will  understand,"  "  I  should
like  Hodgson  to  know  this."  In  four  cases  there  is  a  sug-
1 1  knew  that  Eosie  Thompson  was  going  to  school  after  Easter.


LIII.]


References  to  Living  Acquaintances.


203


gestion,  sometimes  amounting  to  a  statement,  that  Dr.  Hodgson
would  be  in  England  and  able  to  see  the  script.  This  has
not  been  the  case,  so  that  the  whole  script  has  never  been
shown  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  though  he  was  informed  of  all  actual
references  to  himself.

A  definite  message  was  apparently  intended  for  Dr.  Hodgson
on  December  12th,  1901,  and  I  sent  him  the  following  words:

In  hoc  signo  vincit  amor.*
Tell  Hodgson  the  last.

They  had  no  significance  for  him. They  were  however  preceded

by  the  words  :  "  Crosses  three  +  +  +  and  a  dividing  line  ,"

and  it  is  possible  that  it  was  intended  to  refer  to  the  use  of
Eector's  Greek  cross.^  But  as  I  had  attached  no  significance
at  that  time  to  the  cross,  Greek  or  otherwise,  I  did  not  send
the  words  about  the  crosses  to  Dr.  Hodgson.

It  is  probable  that  the  same  thing  happened  in  other
instances,  and  that  things  remain  unintelligible  to  me  which
would  have  been  found  to  have  a  meaning  had  they  been
shown  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  successful
references  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  though  I  have  letters  from  him
confirming  the  statements  of  the  script,  the  letters  do  not
contain  the  details  necessary  for  the  reader's  comprehension  of
the  incidents.  I  had  hoped  to  obtain  these  from  Dr.  Hodgson,
when  he  had  read  the  proofs  of  this  paper,  but  his  death  in
December,  1905,  has  deprived  me  of  his  help.  Under  these
circumstances  I  confine  myself  here  to  the  above  classification
of  the  references  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  Such  matters  as  I  have
been  able  to  make  intelligible  are  related  in  Chapters  XII.
and  XIII.,  as  isolated  incidents.

(F) Other  friends. 43.  '  - • ' ' "  .

The  43  allusions  to  other  friends  may  be  thus  classified :
(a)  Non-evidential - - - - -  20
(&) Would-be  evidential - - - -  23


viz.  Successes  -

False  statements
Failures


6
5
12


Total,


-  43


*  Trans. "  In  this  sign  love  conquers."


1  See  above,  p.  79.


204


Chapter  IX.


[PAKT


General  Comment  on  above.

In  the  above  chaos  it  is  difficult  to  see  any  order,  and
any  attempt  to  draw  general  conclusions  would  be  mislead-
ing. But  two  points  may  be  emphasised, — the  comparative
narrowness  of  the  field  of  selection,  and  the  want  of  uni-
formity as  to  results.  The  narrowness  of  the  field  has  been
noticed  above,  and  may  no  doubt  be  explained  by  some
process  of  unconscious  selection.

No  less  noteworthy  is  the  variation  in  the  type  of  remark
made  about  the  selected  persons,  and  for  this  it  is  difficult
to  account  by  any  process  of  selection,  conscious  or  imconscious.
Why,  for  instance,  should  the  remarks  concerning  Mrs.  Dew
Smith  be  almost  without  exception  interesting  while  those
about  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Leaf  ^  are  wholly  valueless  ?  Again,  why
is  there  so  marked  a  difference  in  the  evidential  value  of
the  references  respectively  to  my  husband  and  my  daughter  ?
It  is  not  likely  that  my  own  impression  or  expectation
would  account  for  the  marked  difference.  I  should  have
prima  facie  anticipated  greater  success  in  obtaining  tele-
pathic connexion  with  my  daughter  than  with  my  husband,
for  whereas  my  husband  has  no  automatic  faculty  whatever,
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  such  faculty  is  possessed  by
my  daughter,  and  it  is  certain  that  success  has  attended
experiments  in  thought-transference  between  her  and  me.^
And  yet  out  of  the  thirty-four  references  to  my  husband,
ten  (or,  excluding  the  special  experiment  tried  by  him,  out
of  twenty-three,  four)  are  at  least  partially  correct,  whereas
only  one  of  the  eighteen  similar  references  to  my  daughter
is  of  any  interest  at  all.  Among  the  other  persons  mentioned.
Dr.  Hodgson's  name  is  connected  with  a  greater  number  of
successes  than  any  other.  These  are  points  for  consideration ;
I  have  no  explanation  to  suggest.

1  References  by  name  to  these  intimate  friends  of  mine  are  four,
counted  above  under  (F)  as  two  non-evidential  and  two  false  state-
ments. One  possibly  evidential  incident  is  related  below,  p.  285,
but  there  the  script  mentioned  no  name.

2  See  Proc.  S.P.K.,  Vol.  XL,  p.  174.


Liii.] Cross-Correspondences  with  other  Sensitives.


205


CHAPTER  X.

References  to  other  "  Sensitives  "  ;  Cross-
Correspondences.

It  is  not  without  intention  that  in  the  above  discussion  of
"  messages "  to  or  about  identifiable  persons  I  have  omitted  all
references  to  "  sensitives,"  to  persons,  that  is,  who  are  in  the
habit  of  obtaining  automatic  phenomena.  I  use  this  phrase  in
a  perfectly  general  sense,  to  include  cr3'stal-gazing,  planchette
or  pen-writing,  trance  utterances,  etc. ;  in  fact  all  the  forms  of
sensory  and  motor  automatism,  without  any  pre-judgment  as
to  the  cause  of  those  phenomena.  In  a  paper,  of  which  the
main  purpose  is  the  classification  of  observed  facts,  it  seems
wiser  to  unite  in  a  separate  group  references  to  persons
distinguished  from  the  majority  by  the  habitual  production
of  automatic  phenomena.^

The  next  two  chapters  deal  with  I'eferences  in  the  script  to
four  sensitives.

As  I  have  stated  above,  I  am  not  here  dealing  with
experimental  cases,  and  shall  therefore  say  nothing  of  the
writing  obtained  when  definite  experiments  were  made  with
two  other  automatists.  Nor  shall  I  discuss  some  apparently
spontaneous  connexions  between  my  script  and  the  automatic
writing  of  a  lady  with  whom  at  the  suggestion  of  Miss  Johnson
I  subsequently  attempted  some  experiments  in  the  summer  of
1905,  but  of  whose  name  I  was  then  ignorant  and  whose
acquaintance  I  made  only  in  November,  1905.  There  seems
no  doubt  that  "  cross-correspondences "  exist  between  her
automatic  writing  and  mine,  but  the  examination  and  discussion

^I  say  "habitual,"  as  I  believe  the  possession  of  the  faculfcj^  to
be  much  commoner  than  is  generally  supposed.  But  for  my  purposes
a  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  those  who  habitually  obtain
automatic  phenomena  and  those  who  do  not.


206


Chapter  X.


[part


of  such  correspondences  fall  outside  the  period  dealt  with  in
this  paper.

The  four  sensitives  referred  to  in  my  script  are  (1)  Mrs.
Archdale,  (2)  Mrs.  Thompson,  (3)  Mrs.  Piper,  (4)  Mrs.  Forbes.
To  the  discussion  of  these  references  I  shall  not  apply  any
statistical  method.  Where  all  is  tentative  and  undetermined,
it  might  be  misleading  to  classify.  Even  in  the  preceding-
chapter  classification  presented  difficulties.  It  was  not  always
easy  to  distinguish  between  evidential  and  non-evidential
matter  ;  where  I  have  seen  partial  success,  some  critics
might  see  only  failure.  On  the  other  hand  it  should  be
remembered  that  I  have  classed  as  failures  incidents  in  which
a  closer  examination,  or  a  more  complete  knowledge,  might
see  some  success.  But  the  difficulty  of  clear  division  into
'  good '  and  '  bad '  is  increased  in  the  case  of  sensitives  where
the  record  is,  so  to  speak,  double,  being  registered  at  both
ends  of  the  line.  Any  attempt  therefore  at  classification  in  our
present  state  of  knowledge  would,  I  conceive,  be  mischievous,
and  I  shall  relate  these  incidents  in  chronological  order.  i

(1)  Mrs.  Archdale.

On  October  25th,  1901,  Mr.  Piddington  told  me  about  a
lady,  Mrs,  Archdale,  who  was  obtaining  automatic  writing.
He  suggested  that  I  should  try  to  obtain  in  my  script  a  word
to  be  reproduced  in  Mrs.  Archdale's  writing.  As  I  had  never
heard  of  the  lady  before  this,  the  experiment,  if  successful,
would  be  interesting.  A  day  or  two  later  Mr.  Piddington
wrote  to  me  giving  me  some  details  to  help  in  the  experi-
ment, and  mentioned  that  the  name  of  the  supposed  control
of  Mrs.  Archdale,  her  son,  was  Stewart.  T  remembered  that
the  name  had  occurred  in  my  script  in  a  passage  conveying
no  meaning  to  me,  and  I  accordingly  looked  it  up  and  sent
it  to  Mr.  Piddington. It  was  as  follows  :  September  18th,  1901.

Women  are  bound  or  abound.  Stewart  and  Haslemere — what
do  they  here  ? Hazelrigg  is  better.

On  November  4th  I  heard  from  him :  "  There  is  a  clear
connection  between  Stewart  Archdale  and  Haslemere.  Hazelrigg
seems  to  be  an  attempt  to  mention  another  name  connected


Liii.] GroHS-Correspondencea  %vith  other  Sensitives.  207


with  the  boy's  life,  but  the  association  is  quite  distinct
from  Haslemere. Hazelrigg  is  nearly,  but  not  quite,  right."

This  seemed  promising;  the  three  names  had  occurred  in
the  script  five  weeks  before  I  heard  of  Mrs.  Archdale,  but  after
Mr.  Piddington  had  made  her  acquaintance,  although  he  knew
nothing  of  any  connexion  between  Stewart  and  Haslemere,  or
of  the  other  name  suggested  by  Hazelrigg.  But  no  further
development  occurred.^

(2)  Mrs.  Thompson.

The  name  of  Mrs.  Thompson  occurs  with  some  frequency
in  the  script  throughout  the  years  1901,  1902,  and  1903.  In
that  there  is  nothing  remarkable.  I  sat  with  Mrs.  Thompson"^
frequently  in  the  two  years  preceding  the  inception  of  my
script,  and  was  much  impressed  with  the  value  and  interest
of  her  trance  utterances.  Like  all  her  friends  I  was  sorry  to
learn,  as  I  did  from  her  in  the  middle  of  March,  1901,  that
she  was  croing;  to  o-ive  no  more  sittings.

The  first  four  references  to  Mrs.  Thompson  make  parts  of
a  single  episode. Thej'  are  as  follows  :

(1)  May  1st,  1901.

Before  17th  it  is  easier  now  to  write.

(2)  May  3rd,  1901.

EOSA  THOMPson  could  perhaps  but  I  don't  know.

(3)  May  8th,  1901.

Nescio  quid  ^  interponit  se  tuae  menti  mihi  que.  In  a  glass  is
truth — reversed — read and  then search. Falsehood is  never  far

away. Quid  mihi  vis  1  non  possum, desine. C^^O^  u/r-t^  die  finito,*

avSa  *  clock  and  time  H.  No  power — doing  something  else
to-night. Note  hour.*

*  Trans.  "  Something  or  other  interposes  between  your  mind  and
me  .  .  .  What  do  you  want  of  me  1  I  cannot,  leave  off  .  .  .
when  the  day  is  finished  (?)  listen  (?)."

^  See  App.,  p.  403,  for  list  of  all  references  to  the  subject.

-See  my  paper  on  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance  Phenomena  in  Proc.
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVII.,  p.  164.

^  After  a  remark  on  the  difficulty  of  communicating.

*  Here  were  some  attempts  at  drawing.


208


Chapter  X.


[part


(4)  May  11th,  1901.

Before  the  17th  wait. Rosa  Thompson  will  speak — Lodge  will
tell  you. Wait. Do  not  hurry  date  this.

The  script  on  May  Stli  was  written  between  10  and
lO.'JO  p.m.  The  following  note  was  made  on  May  9th,  9.45  a.m.,
when  I  copied  the  script  into  the  book  :  "  I  thought  that,
after  the  Greek,  I  was  looking  at  the  face  of  a  clock,  the
time  being  10.25 ;  I  fancied  that  I  was  drawing  this,  but  had
no  idea  that  I  had  written  the  words,  '  clock  and  time.'  The
words  '  falsehood  .  .  .  away '  are  in  quite  a  different  [and
unknown]  hand."

It  is  clear,  and  I  recognised  it  at  the  time,  that  two  asser-
tions are  made  in  the  above  four  extracts,  viz.  (1)  that  before
the  17th  ^  Mrs.  Thompson  would  say  something  of  which  I
should  hear  through  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  (2)  further,  that
on  May  8th  at  10.25  p.m.  a  "  control,"  claiming  to  be  H.,  a
friend  of  mine,  was  "communicating"  elsewhere."^

As  noted  above,  I  knew  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  not  giving
sittings,  and  I  in  no  way  associated  her  with  the  remarks  of
my  script  on  May  8th,  where,  as  will  be  observed,  there  is  no
mention  of  names  either  of  persons  or  places.  The  expectation
that  I  formed,  so  far  as  I  formed  any,  from  the  remarks  of
the  script  on  May  1,  3,  8,  and  11,  1901,  was  that  I  was  to  be
informed  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  the  Council  meeting  on  Ma,y
17th  of  something  learnt  by  him  from  the  normal  Mrs.  Thompson
— not  her  trance-personality — and  that  some  medium  had
received  an  ostensible  communication  from  H.  just  before
10.30  p.m.  on  May  8th.

The  facts  are  these :  Mrs.  Thompson,  of  whose  movements
I  knew  nothing,  went  to  stay  in  Birmingham  in  May,  and

1  May  17th  was  the  date  of  the  next  Council  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.

"For  first  assertion  see  script  of  May  1,  May  11,  and  perhaps
May  3  ;  for  second  assertion  see  May  8.  The  suggestions  on  May  1
that  something  is  to  happen  'before  I7th,'  and  on  May  3  that
"  Mrs.  Thompson  would  perhaps "  do  something,  are  combined  and
defined  on  May  11,  and  reinforced  by  the  statement  that  I  shall
hear  of  Mrs.  Thompson's  speaking  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  This  is
a  characteristic  instance  of  the  development  of  an  incident  in  the
script,  of  which  I  have  spoken  above,  p.  56.


LIII.]


Gross-Correspondences  with  other  Sensitives.


209


dined  with  Sir  Oliver  and  Lady  Lodge  on  May  8th,  1901.
Unexpectedly  and  spontaneously  she  went  into  trance  between
9  and  10.30  p.m.,  and  was  "  controlled,"  not  only  by  the  usual
Nelly,  but  also  by  H.  In  the  course  of  the  sitting  this
latter  '  control '  used  the  words  "  falsehood  creeping  in,"  and
said  that  some  one  was  "  calling  him "  elsewhere.  Quite  at
the  end  of  the  sitting,  which  concluded  at  10.30,  Nelly  repeated
that  some  one  was  at  that  moment  ("  now  ")  calUng  H.

I  learnt  of  this  sitting  in  the  following  manner :  On  May
14th  I  had  a  letter  from  Mr.  Piddington  in  which  occurred
a  phrase  suggesting  that  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  lately  seen
Mrs.  Thompson.  On  May  17th,  at  the  S.P.R.  Council  Meeting,
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  not  present,  but  Mr.  Piddington  then
■gave  me  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  notes  of  the  sitting  with  Mrs.
Thompson  on  Ma}^  8th,  which  he  thought  it  would  interest
me  to  read.^

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  two  assertions  of  the  script
were  justified;  (1)  before  the  l7th  Mrs.  Thompson  did  speak,
as  I  learnt  from  the  notes  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge;  (2)  on
May  8th,  at  10.25  p.m.,  the  H.  'control '  was  ostensibly  occupied
in  communicating  elsewhere,  as  recorded  in  those  notes.  A  few
more  instances  of  such  "  cross-correspondences "  as  these  would
greatly  strengthen  the  evidence  for  telepathy.

The  next  two  references  to  Mrs.  Thompson  on  May  28th
and  June  23rd,  1901,  are  unintelligible.  On  May  28th,  in  the
midst  of  a  confused  statement,  came  the  words  "  the  date  is
important — get  it  right.  Through  Mrs.  Thompson."  But  nothing
has  been  discovered  to  throw  light  on  this  script.  On  June  23rd
the  words,  "  Mrs.  Thompson :  Lodge  will  understand,"  were  inter-
jected without  reference  to  the  context.

Some  vague  allusions  to  the  probability  of  Mrs.  Thompson's
resuming  sittings  before  long  followed  in  the  next  few  months.
But  it  was  not  till  after  I  had  seen  Mrs.  Thompson,  at  a
meeting  of  the  S.P.R.,  when  I  read  a  paper  about  my  script,
that  the  script  contained  a  definite  reference  to  her.  After
the  meeting  on  April  20th,  1903,  as  we  were  parting,  Mrs.
Thompson  asked  me  to  try  for  automatic  writing  between
9  and  10  in  the  evening  of  April  22ud. I  understood  that

^  Mr.  Piddington  knew  nothing  about  my  script  of  May  8th.

o


210


Chapter  X.


[part


she  would  try  something  similar  at  the  same  hour.  On  that
evening  I  obtained  automatic  writing  and  also  Planchette-
writing  with  my  daughter.  The  script  produced  soon  after
9  was  as  follows  :

There  is  some  one  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  another  woman,  taller
and  slighter — she  helps  her  to  write — the  message  is  not  clear  to
you. I  do  not  know  the  house. I  cannot  take  you  there.

Later,  on  Apiil  30th,  1903,  before  I  had  heard  anything
from  Mr.  Piddingtou,  who  was  to  act  as  intermediary  between
Mrs.  Thompson  and  me,  my  script  produced  another  obvious
allusion  to  the  same  incident  in  the  words  :

Mrs.  Thompson  named  a  name,  but  not  yours — Nelly  could  help
if  she  could  come — she  finds  it  hard  to  write,  and  would  easily
speak.

On  May  1st  I  heard  from  Mr.  Piddington  that  on  the  eveiung
of  Wednesday,  April  22nd,  Mrs.  Thompson  and  a  friend,  unknown
to  me,  a  taller  and  slighter  woman  than  Mrs.  Thompson,  had
taken  part  in  experiments  in  the  rooms  of  the  S.P.R.  During
those  experiments  the  name  of  my  daughter  was  mentioned  by
Mrs.  Thompson,  but  my  own  name  was  not.  Mrs.  Thompson
knew  nothing  of  my  daughter's  experiments  in  automatic  writ-
ing, and  no  one  but  ourselves  knew  that  on  the  evening  in
question,  April  22nd,  my  daughter  tried  Planchette  with  me,  and
also  obtained  script  alone.  It  appears  then  that  the  statements
of  the  script  of  April  22nd  and  30th,  1903,  were  true  as  far
as  they  went,  and  they  were  certainly  quite  contrary  to  my
own  impression.  I  had  no  idea  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was
taking  part  in  any  experiment,  and  fully  expected  that
at  the  hour  arranged  she  would  be  alone  and  at  her  own
house.

It  is  possible  to  see  in  a  piece  of  script  written  on  Friday,
April  24th,  1903,  an  attempt  to  describe  the  rooms  at  Hanover
Squai'e  as  the  localitj'  indicated  in  the  preceding  script  of  April
22. After  the  word  "  Wensday  "  (so  spelt)  it  went  on  :

the  case  has  been  identified — but  they  wait  for  more  about  the
room.  There  is  a  portrait  hanging  near  the  fire.  Edmund  Gurney
books  in  cases  in  the  room — no  coloured  picture.


Liii.] Gross-Correspondences  tvith  other  Sensitives.  211


Those  who  know  the  rooms  in  Hanover  Square  will  recognise
the  intention  in  the  above,  and  April  22nd,  the  day  of  the
experiment  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  was  a  Wednesday.

Two  references  in  October,  1903,  to  an  incident  already
described,^  two  unevidential  allusions,  and  one  vague  and
unverifiable  statement  complete  the  list  of  references  to  Mrs.
Thompson.

There  are  two  allusions  in  the  script  to  one  of  Mrs.  Thomp-
son's trance-personalities,  a  certain  Mrs.  Cartwright.^  The
first,  on  November  25th,  1901,  comes  after  an  apparent  attempt
to  produce  something  evidential.

A  solicitor  known  to  a  friend  of  yours.  Hugh  Chesson  at  some
place  that  ends  in  Chester — Godmanchester  perhaps.  It  is  Mrs.
Cartwright  writing — -I  have  found  her.

But  nothing  has  been  made  of  these  names.  The  other  refer-
ence to  Mrs.  Cartwright  is  perhaps  more  intelligible,  though
here,  too,  it  is  at  best  doubtful  whether  there  is  any  real
intention  in  the  confused  phrases  of  the  script.  As,  however,
this  paper  is  a  record,  not  of  successes  but  of  incidents,  I  will
describe  this  tangled  story.

On  February  1st,  1904,  after  other  matter  the  script  wrote
two  separate  paragraphs  as  follows  :

Write  the  sound.  Fin  is  ill  ^ — Fin  do  you  not  hear  ?  li  get  the
next  word  for  me.  Fin-sway  that  is  the  sound — listen  again  Jin
sway  out  in  on  say  that  write  that  sound  in  sense.  Oidinon.  Fin  is
way  out  Inn  no — not  right It  is  a  message  about  Fin — it  is  urgent.

let  ■*  me  say  it.  It  is  a  sudden  illness  xoMch  she  sees  will  come  to
her  sister — this  is  Mrs.  Cartiuright  speaking — she  wants  you  to  know.
Not  in  her  oivn  house  in  london,  somewhere  else. Tell  someone  this.

This  was  followed  by  the  remark  :

We  had  another  message  but  this  was  urgent — write  to-morrow
for  ours.

It  is  possible  that  the  two  paragraphs  of  the  script  are
unconnected  ;  the  second  paragraph  does  not  contain  the  word

iSee  p.  202.  -See  S.P.R.  Proc,  Vol.  XVIL,  p.  184.

.  3  Words  in  italics  are  in  a  larger  character.
*  Before  "let"  are  some  illegible  strokes.


212


Chapter  X.


[part


"  Fin,"  which  is  appai'ently  the  leading  word  in  the  first.  On
the  other  hand,  the  larger  handwriting  is  of  the  same  type
throughout  both  paragraphs,  and  the  notion  of  illness  occurs
in  both.  The  second  paragraph,  with  its  mention  of  Mrs.
Cartwright,  plainly  alludes  to  Mrs.  Thompson,  but  it  is  not
clear  whose  sister  is  to  have  an  illness.  My  impression,
recorded  before  any  attempt  at  verification,  was  that  the
intention  of  this  second  paragraph  is  to  suggest  that  "Nelly"
is  announcing  the  approaching  sudden  illness  of  her  sister,  an
illness  which  is  to  occur  not  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  London  house.

The  R,  the  initial  of  Mrs.  Thompson's  Christian  name  as  well
as  of  that  of  her  eldest  daughter,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
similarity  of  the  lai'ger  handwriting,  suggests  a  closer  connexion
between  the  two  paragraphs  than  is  otherwise  apparent.  But
the  first  par  agraph  seemed  wholly  inapplicable  to  Mrs.  Thomp-
son until  I  heard  from  her  on  August  2nd,  1904,  after  a  long
gap  in  our  correspondence,  "  you  will  be  surprised  to  hear  we
are  leaving  London  and  going  into  the  country  (Finchley)."
It  then  occurred  to  me  as  possible  that  in  the  earlier  paragraph
there  was  an  attempt — confused  and  fragmentary  at  best — to
allude  to  the  removal  of  Mrs.  Thompson  out  of  London  to
Finchley,  represented  by  the  words  "  Fin  is  way  out."  But
this  is  very  uncertain,  and  even  if  this  suggestion  were  accepted,
an  explanation  is  still  to  seek  of  the  supposed  prophecy  of
sudden  illness  to  Miss  Rosie  Thompson  not  in  her  own  house
in  London.

I  have  recently  (May,  1906)  ascertained  from  Mrs.  Thompson
that  the  idea  of  moving  to  Finchley  was  not  entertained  till
early  in  the  summer  of  1904,  and  that  the  actual  move  was
made  in  December,  1904.  Mrs.  Thompson  also  informs  me
that  Miss  Rosie  Thompson  has  had  only  one  sudden  illness
in  her  life  ;  that  was  in  June,  1905,  when  she  was  staying  in
her  uncle's  house  in  Birmingham.  The  illness  was  very  sudden,
and  Miss  Thompson's  father  was  sent  for.  As  soon  as  she
could  be  moved,  Mr.  Thompson  brought  her  home  to  Finchley.

(3)  Mrs.  Piper.

I  have  separated,  so  far  as  I  could,  the  allusions  to  Mrs.
Piper  and  to  her  trance-personalities  from  the  allusions  to


Liii.] Gross-Correspondences  tvith  other  Sensitives.  213


Dr.  Hodgson.  The  first  occasion  on  which  there  appears  in
the  script  anything  possibly  bearing  on  statements  in  Mrs
Piper's  trance^  is  December  10th,  1901.

Betwixt  dark  and  hght  a  grey  figure  in  the  bedroom  not  [to
be  feared]  -  you  will  see  on  an  anniversary — note  the  date — this
year.  Put  the  [conversation],'-  on  [paper]  ^  that  is  all  I  can
see. Try  other  nights.

No  grey  figure  was  seen  by  me,  or  as  far  as  I  can  ascer-
tain, by  any  member  of  my  household  on  any  date,  anniversary
or  otherwise,  in  1901.  On  January  28th,  1902,  in  Mrs.  Piper's
sitting^  a  reference  was  made  by  the  control  to  a  "vision"
of  a  figure  which  it  was  said  had  been  seen  by  my  daughter
when  she  was  not  asleep,  but  in  a  bedroom.  The  date  of  the
supposed  "  vision  "  was  not  definitely  stated,  but  referred  to  as
recent.

No  trace  of  such  appearance  to  my  daughter*  or  myself  has
been  found.  The  script  of  December  10th,  1901,  warning  me  of
the  possibility  of  some  such  appearance  makes  it  probable  that
I  should  have  noted  any  impression,  however  slight,  of  the
sort.  There  is  however  possibly  a  "  cross-correspondence "
between  the  reference  of  my  script  on  December  10th  to  an
apparition  that  was  to  be — an  apparition  "  betwixt  dark  and
light  in  a  bedroom" — and  the  statement  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
personality  on  January  28th,  1902,  that  part  of  a  figui'e  had
been  visible  to  my  daughter  in  a  bedroom  when  she  was  not
asleep. My  script  contains  no  other  references  to  apparitions.

The  next  incident  is  of  a  very  different  type,  being  one  of
the  most  striking  instances  of  a  cross-correspondence  that  has
occurred  in  my  experience.  On  January  31st,  1902,  I  had
been  lunching  with  Mr.  Piddington  in  town,  and  after  the
arrival  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  from  Birmingham,  was  about  to
walk  with  them  to  the  S.P.R. Council Meeting  at  3  p.m.,

^  I  vshould  say  that  I  have  seen  very  few  records  of  Mrs.  Piper's
unpublished  sittings.

'  Words  in  brackets  almost  undecipherable.

quote  from  the  report  of  a  sitting  on  January  ■28th,  1902,
sent  by  Dr.  Hodgson.

*  For  possible  confusion  between  me  and  my  daughter,  see  follow-
ing incident.


214


Chapter  X.


[part


when  I  felt  suddenly  so  strong  a  desire  to  write  that  I  came
down  and  made  an  excuse  ^  for  not  accompanying  the  gentle-
men, saying  1  would  drive  later.  As  soon  as  they  had  started
I  wrote  automatically  in  the  dining-room  the  following  words:
Panopticon  o-c^aipas  uTtraAAei  cnn'Sey/xa  /xdo-tikov.  ti  oi'k  eStSoJS ;
volatile  ferrum— pro  telo  impinget.

A  few  more  words  were  added,  when  I  was  interrupted
by  Mr.  Piddington,  who  had  returned,  in  order  to  drive  with
me  to  the  meeting.  All  the  rest  of  the  day  I  felt  a  wish
to  write,  and  finally  in  the  train  on  the  way  home  to  Cam-
bridge more  script  was  produced.  That  script'-  contained  no
verifiable  statement  but  was  signed  with  two  crosses,  one  of
them  being  the  Greek  cross  definitely  stated  elsewhere  in  the
script  to  be  the  sign  of  Rector.^

The  curious  opening  words  interested  my  husband,  who  saw
them  on  February  1st,  1902,  as  well  as  myself,  but  we  could
not  find  any  application  for  the  Greek  (or  quasi-Greek)
though  the  meaning  is  pretty  clear.  Panoi^ticon  is  not  a
Greek  word,  and  it  is  difficult  to  make  out  what  it  is  sup-
posed to  mean,  beyond  saying  that  it  contains  the  ideas  of
"  universal "  (Trai^)  and  "  seeing "  {oittikov).  It  is  noticeable
that  this  word,  apparently  but  not  really  Greek,  is  written  in
lloman  letters,  the  genuine  words  next  after  it  being  written
in  Greek  characters.  The  word  ariToXkei,  "tends,  cherishes,
fosters,"  is  not  a  common  one,  though  it  occurs  in  Homer,
Theocritus,  and  Pindar;*  awStyixa  is  not  an  existing  Greek
word,  but  is  legitimately  formed  as  a  noun  from  the  verb
<5t'xoMai,  "I  receive,"  compounded  with  the  preposition  aw,
"with,"  and  means  "joint-reception"  or  "common  reception."
The  whole  sentence  therefore  seems  to  mean  that  some  sort
of  universal  seeing  "of  a  sphere  fosters  the  mystic  joint-
reception."

iThe  original  account  of  this  incident,  written  in  1902,  bears
on  the  margin  corroborative  notes  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  Mr.
Piddington.

'-iThe  whole  script  will  be  found  in  App.,  p.  404.

3  See  above,  p.  78.  •  •■  i

4  Pindar,  Nem.  3.  99. Fennell  there  translates  it  "developes."


I.III.] Gross-Correspondences  ivith  other  Sensitives.  215

The  next  words  mean  "Why  did  you  not  give^  it?"  The
Latin  words  may  be  translated :  "  the  flying  iron — ferrum
(iron)  for  telum  (weapon) — will  hit."

The  Latin  words  suggested  the  hurling  of  a  spear,  and  on
February  7th,  1902,  after  looking  up  some  passages,  I  noted
that  volatile  ferrum  is  used  by  Virgil  for  a  spear.  The  more
common  phrase,  volatile  telum,  which  is  used  by  Lucretius
and  Ovid  for  a  spear,  is  also  applied  by  Ovid  to  an  arrow.-
I  therefore  took  this  passage  to  refer  to  a  "  spear,"  described
as  "  the  winged  iron," — to  use  Virgil's  variant  on  the  common
phrase,  volatile  telum — and  recorded  this  interpretation.

So  far  for  what  happened  in  England.  In  Boston,  as  I
subsequently  learned,  the  following  took  place.  At  Mrs.  Piper's
sitting^  on  January  28th,  1902,  after  the  reference  to  my
daughter's  supposed  vision,*  Dr.  Hodgson  suggested  that  the
same  "control"  should  try  to  impress  my  daughter  in  the
•course  of  the  next  week  with  a  scene  or  object.  The  control
assented.  Dr.  Hodgson  said  :  "  Can  you  try  and  make  Helen
see  you  holding  a  spear  in  your  hand?"  The  control  asked:
^' Why  a  sphere?"  Dr.  Hodgson  repeated  "spear,"  and  the
■control  accepted  the  suggestion,  and  said  the  experiment  should
be  tried  for  a  week.  On  February  4th,  1902,  at  the  next
sitting,  and  therefore  at  the  very  first  opportunity,  the  con-
trol claimed  to  have  been  successful  in  making  himself  visible
to  Helen  Verrall  with  a  "  sphear "  (so  spelt  in  the  trance
writing).  The  confusion  between  the  "sphere"  and  "spear"
of  January  28th  seems  to  have  been  persistent,  at  least  in  the

^  The  script  is  not  perfectly  clear ;  the  word  may  be  eSiSm  or
■iSlSovi,  but  the  two  forms  are  equivalent  in  meaning.

-  There  is  some  difference  of  opinion  among  commentators  as  to
the  exact  weapon  described  in  the  various  passages  referred  to.
The  above  comment  represents  the  conclusion  to  which  I  came  on
February  7th,  1902,  as  noted  on  that  day.

^Communications  at  these  sittings  were  made  by  means  of  Mrs.
Piper's  right  hand,  writing  automatically,  the  usual  "  control "  being
"  Rector "  acting  as  intermediary  for  other  specified  communicators.
The  reader  will  find  a  full  account  of  the  methods  of  the  recent
phenomena  in  Prof.  Hyslop's  account  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper
in  S.P.R.  Proc,  Vol.  XVI.

*See  immediately  above.


216


Chapter  X.


[part


mind  of  the  medium,  and  to  have  produced  the  combination
"  sphear."

To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  my  name  had  never  been
mentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper  since  her  return  to  America  in  1889,
till  during  the  sittings  that  began  in  January,  1902.  The  first
intimation  that  my  name  or  my  daughter's  had  been  men-
tioned by  her  reached  me  on  February  8th,  1902,  from  Sir
Oliver  Lodge.  On  February  13th  I  received  a  letter  from
Dr.  Hodgson,  enclosing  the  report  of  the  sitting  of  January
28th.  The  report  of  the  sitting  on  February  4th  reached
me  on  February  18th.  Thus  no  news  at  all  of  Mrs.  Piper's
sittings  came  to  me  till  after  February  7th,^  the  day  on  which
I  recorded  my  impression  that  the  Latin  allusion  in  my  script
was  to  a  spear ;  the  Greek  allusion  to  a  sphere  is  beyond
question.  In  no  previous  writing  of  mine  had  there  been  any
allusion  to  a  spear ;  the  word  "  sphere "  occurred  once  before
in  a  very  unintelligible  early  writing  on  March  14th,  1901,
there  too  in  conjunction  with  the  word  "panopticon."  In
view  of  this  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  suggestion
of  a  sphere  as  the  object  to  be  shown  came  not  from  Dr.
Hodgson,  but  from  the  "  control."

To  sum  up  then:  on  January  28th,  1902,  during  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  a  suggestion  was  made  that  a  spear  or  sphere  should
be  shown  to  my  daughter,  and  on  February  4th  the  experi-
ment with  the  "  sphear "  was  said  to  have  been  made  with
success.  On  January  31st,  between  those  dates,  my  script  (as
interpreted  by  me  at  the  time)  said  that  the  seeing  of  a
sphere  effected  a  mysterious  "  co-reception,"  and  associated  this
statement  with  a  reference  to  a  spear.  It  seems  to  me  that,,
though  the  proposed  experiment  did  not  succeed  in  the  way
intended,  there  is  strong  reason  for  thinking  that  my  script
was  in  some  way  affected  by  it.  The  reader  will  note  that
the  connexion  between  my  script  of  Jan.  31  and  the  Piper

^At  this  time  I  had  not  begun  the  practice  of  sending  the
original  script  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  The  evidence,  therefore,  for
its  production  at  the  date  stated  is  not  corroborated  by  the  post-
mark. My  husband  saw  the  script  on  February  1st;  on  February
1st  I  copied  it  into  my  notebook,  and  on  February  7th  I  noted  on
the  opposite  page  the  Virgihan  use  of  volatile  ferrum.  I  always
note  dates  of  any  entry  in  the  book  containing  copies  of  the  scripts


Liii.] Cross-Correspondences  luith  other  Sensitives.  217

sittings  is  made  perfectly  clear  by  the  signature  of  my  script,
which  introduces  Rector's  Greek  cross.^

The  following  arrangement  perhaps  helps  to  mark  the
sequence  of  dates :


Statement  in  Parallel  Columns.


Mrs.  P.,  Boston,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  v.,  England.

Jan.  28.  "  Spem-  &  Sphere  suggested."

Jan.  3L  "  <T<paLpS.!,  volatile  fei~rum."

Feb.  4. "  Sphear  "  claimed.

The  next  three  allusions  to  Mrs.  Piper  (March  to  July,
1902)  are  not  evidential.

There  was  no  further  reference,  direct  or  indirect,  to  Mrs.
Piper  till  the  spring  of  1903.  On  March  15th,  1903,  and  again
on  March  17,  attempts  were  made  to  produce  a  word,  and
as  these  were  followed  by  the  remark,  "  but  Hodgson  would
understand  much  that  you  write  he  must  see  it,"  though  there
was  no  direct  reference  to  Mrs.  Piper,  I  took  the  script  as  alluding
to  her.  On  April  17th  further  attempts  were  made  at  what  was
said  to  be  "the  pass-word,"  and  from  later  allusions  it  appeared
that  "  the  pass-word "  was  intended  for  Dr.  Hodgson.  It  was
not  till  some  months  later,  September,  1903,  that  I  learnt  from
Dr.  Hodgson,  that  on  March  10th,  1903,  a  new  pass-word  had
been  given  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  for  reproduction  by  other
automatists,  as  closely  related  to  the  suggestion  in  my  script
of  March  15th,  1903,  as,  "say,  ella  to  welda."

The  last  allusion  to  Mrs.  Piper,  on  February  1st,  1904,  is
correct,  but  unimportant.

I  take  separately  the  allusions  to  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-
personalities.  On  July  21st,  1903,  to  a  long  evidential  message
signed  E.G.,  the  following  words  were  added :

Rector  fecit  per  interpretationem. posuit  signum  suum  ipse.*

* "  Rector  has  done  it  by  explanation  (or  perhaps  by  means  of
interpretation,  i.e.  using  an  interpreter) ;  he  himself  has  set  his  seal."
1  See  above,  pp.  78-80.


218


Chapter  X.


[part


The  appended  seal  is  a  decorated  Greek  cross,  which,  as
alread}'  stated,^  is  appropriately  associated  with  "Rector" — at
least  with  the  Rector  of  the  Stainton  Moses  group  of  controls
with  whom  the  Rector  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  claims  identity.

There  are  three  certain  allusions  and  another  possible  one  to
"  Imperator."  In  the  first,  on  October  29th,  1901,  the  name
Imperator  appears  to  be  used  as  equivalent  to  Mrs.  Piper  in
trance.  On  November  22nd,  1901,  after  a  reference  to  Mrs.
Piper's  sittings,  comes  what  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  give
the  name  of  the  mysterious  Imperator,  but  it  is  too  vague  for
identification.  On  January  11th,  1902,  there  is  pei'haps  another
attempt,  but  again  a  failure,  to  identify  Imperator  in  the  words  :
"  Imperat  Imperator  alii  non  tibi — uec  Latine  loquitur."  *  On
December  6th,  1904,  came  a  long  address  to  some  one,  possibly
intended  for  Imperator,  though  his  name  does  not  occur.  It
begins  "  Ave,"  as  do  the  invocations  quoted  by  Professor
Hyslop,'-  and  the  allusions  in  it  to  the  ideal  wise  man  of
the  Stoics  and  to  the  Emperor  Hadrian's  dying  prayer  seem
appropriate  to  the  personality  and  name  of  Imperator.^

*  Trans.  "  The  Ruler  rules  some  one  else,  not  you — nor  does  he
speak  Latin."

iSee  above,  p.  78.  -  S.P.R.  Proc,  Vol.  XVL,  pp.  477,  487.
3  See  p.  1-25.  .  •.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  wiUi  Mrs.  Forbes.  219


CHAPTER  XI.

Cross-Correspondences  Continued.

(4)  Mrs.  Forbes.

The  cross-correspondences  between  Mrs.  Forbes  and  myself
are  numerous,  and,  at  the  risk  of  wearying  the  reader,  must
be  related  in  detail  and  at  length.  Most  of  them  are  recorded
in  her  script  or  in  mine ;  but  there  are  some  which,  though
not  so  recorded,  seem  so  important  an  element  in  determining
the  nature  of  our  interconnexion  that  they  must  be  here
included.  The  evidence  for  the  dates  of  the  various  incidents
in  these  cross-correspondences,  though  fairly  complete,  is  not
all  equally  good.  Every  note  that  I  have  on  the  subject  is
dated,  so  that  I  am  always  able  to  say  whether  an  impression
of  my  own  was  recorded  before  or  after  its  justification.  I
have  also  kept  every  letter  that  I  have  received  from  Mrs.
Forbes  since  the  beginning  of  our  acquaintance,  and  she
has  sent  me  copies  of  all  writing  of  hers  which  concerned  or
seemed  to  concern  me.  In  some  cases  we  have  been  able  to
obtain  external  corroboration  ;  the  dates  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  script
are  attested  by  the  postmarks  on  the  envelopes  in  which
they  were  sent  to  me;  and  since  November,  1002,  the  dates
of  my  script  are  attested  by  the  postmarks  and  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  corroboration.  It  seems  most  convenient  to  relate  the
history  of  our  cross-correspondences  in  chronological  sequence
without  any  attempt  at  classification.

The  first  time  that  I  heard  the  name  of  Mrs.  Forbes  was  on
June  23rd,  1900,  when  I  received  a  letter  mentioning  that  she
had  had  a  successful  sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson.^ Later  that

iThe  Mrs.  Forbes  of  this  paper  is  the  Mrs.  Scott  of  Mr.  Pid-
dington's  article  on  Types  of  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  trance
in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  104.  I  knew  no  details
of  Mrs. Forbes'  sittings  until I  stayed  with  her  in  April,  1902,


220


Chapter  XI.


[part


autumn  I  heard  from  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  automatic  script,
and  I  met  her  one  evening  in  December,  1900.  She  then
told  me  under  what  circumstances  her  automatic  writinof
had  begun,  and  what  evidence  she  had  for  its  genuine
character.  The  supposed  writer,  in  her  case,  was  her  only-
son  Talbot,  who  had  been  killed  in  the  South  African  War.
The  next  time  that  I  saw  Mrs.  Forbes  was  on  February  5th,
1901,  when  she  came  to  Cambridge  to  see  Miss  Johnson
and  me  on  business  connected  with  the  S.P.R.  On  that
occasion  I  did  not  see  her  alone.

It  will  make  the  incidents  in  this  complicated  series
clearer  if  I  state  first,  in  each  case,  what  occurred,  and  then
relate  the  necessary  facts  concerning  my  knowledge  of  those
occun^ences.  A  list  of  corroborative  documents  is  given  in
the  Appendix.^  For  convenience  of  reference  I  have  here  num-
bered the  successive  incidents  in  Roman  notation ;  the  Arabic
numerals  in  brackets  refer  to  the  numbered  list  of  exti'acts
from  my  own  script.  In  this  chapter  quotations  from  my  script
are  in  small  type  as  elsewhere,  and  messages  automatically
])roduced  by  Mrs.  Forbes  are  in  italics.  It  must  be  remembered
that  no  selection  has  been  made  but  that  I  give  all  the  cases
in  which  my  script  seemed  to  refer  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  not  only
those  which  appear  to  have  '  evidential '  value.

(I.)  On  Sunday,  February  24th,  1901,  between  11  and  12
a.m.,  Mrs.  Forbes,  at  her  house  in  the  North  of  England,  was
engaged  with  a  friend,  Mrs.  Baltimore,  then  unknown  to  me,  in
planchette-writing.  The  first  words  were  :  "  Edmund  Gurney'^
writes  for  H. " ;  then,  after  answering  intelligently  several
questions  put  to  it,  the  instrument  wrote:  "let  us  see  our  friends
in  Cambridge. Mrs.  Verrall  is  so  strongly  my  friend  that  I

At  the  time  when  my  writing  began  I  only  knew  in  a  general
way  that  the  results  of  her  sittings  had  been  good,  and  that  there
had  been  an  appearance  at  them  of  what  purported  to  be  the
"  Talbot  Forbes  control."

1  See  p.  404,  for  complete  list  of  extracts  from  my  script  con-
cerning Mrs.  Forbes,  and  p.  409,  for  a  list  of  the  documents  upon
which  this  account  is  based.

2  Three  ostensible  "  controls "  appear  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  automatic
writing :  her  son  Talbot,  unknown  to  me,  Mr.  E.  Gurney,  who  was
known  to  her  and  to  me,  and  H.,  also  known  to  her  and  to  me.


LIII.]


Gross-Gorrespondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


221


can  be  tuith  her."  Plauchette  then  said  that  I  was  sitting  in
a  chaii-  near  the  fire,  very  comfortable,  "  but  don't  ask  me
to  look  over  her  shoulder,  for  I  can't  see  that  she  has  got  a
book."

On  this  Sunday,  February  24th,  at  11.10  a.m.,  for  half  an
hour^  I  was  sitting  in  a  low  chair  near  the  fire,  close  to  my
husband's  chair  ;  we  were  looking  over  together  a  type-written
MS.  of  an  article  which  I  had  written  and  which  my  husband
was  criticising  before  sending  to  press.  Before  beginning  to
read  the  article  he  had  used  the  expression  to  me :  "  Make
yourself  comfortable,"  and,  after  so  doing  I  sat  beside  him,
looking  over  the  MS.  as  he  read  it.  The  description  of
Planchette  seemed  to  us  correct ;  my  attitude  and  occupation
were  suggestive  of  reading,  though  I  held  no  book.

Such  are  the  facts.  My  knowledge  of  them  came  about  as
follows :  On  February  25th  late,  on  returning  from  town,  I
found  a  note  from  Miss  Johnson,  enclosing  a  letter  from  Mrs.
Forbes,  asking  what  I  had  been  doing  from  11  to  12  on  the
24th,  and  describing  the  statement  of  Planchette.  I  sent  our
recollections  to  Miss  Johnson  on  February  25th  and  to  Mrs.
Forbes  on  February  26th.  On  March  4th  I  heard  from  Mrs.
Forbes  the  full  account  of  the  incident.-

(11.)  March  17th,  1901.

On  Sunday,  March  17th,  about  11.45  a.m.,  while  I  was
reading  in  my  husband's  study,  I  felt  a  sudden  impulse  to
write  automatically.  I  had  never  before  written  except  when
alone  and  in  the  dark,  and  at  first  resisted  the  impulse.  It
was,  however,  so  marked  that  I  wrote,  finishing  at  11.58  a.m.
The  script  (No.  1)  said  :

1  This  was  not  noted  at  the  time,  but  remembered  on  the  evening
of  February  25th,  after  enquiry  concerning  the  matter  had  come
from  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  it  was  confirmed  by  my  husband's  recollec-
tion.

-There  is  possibly  a  connexion  between  the  receipt  on  March  4th
of  Mrs.  Forbes'  letter,  giving  the  names  of  her  supposed  communi-
cators, and  the  marked  improvement  in  my  automatic  script  of
March  5th.  It  is  at  least  certain  that  her  letter  was  a  great
encouragement  to  me.


222


Cha'pter  XI.


[part


Quid  magis  difficile  ne  dum  impossible  nisi  tu  etiam  velis.  hodie
possum  nec  sine  dubio.  fac  scribas.  Dianae  sumus  in  fide ;  iterum
notare.*

The  reference  to  Catullus  XXXIV.:  "  Dianae  sumus  in  fide,"
suggested  Mrs.  Forbes  to  me,  as  her  name  is  Diana,  and  on
March  18th  I  wrote  to  her,  telling  her  that  I  had  had  an
impression  on  Sunday  17th  vaguely  connected  with  her.  To
this  she  answered  that  on  Sunday,  from  about  12  to  1,  she
was  automatically  writing  a  not  very  successful  message.  As
this  appears  to  be  the  first  introduction  into  the  script  of  any
allusion  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  it  is  here  related  not  for  its  own  sake,
but  to  make  the  series  complete.

(III.)  March  21st,  1901.

The  script  (No.  2)  of  the  above  date,  in  the  midst  of  a
good  deal  that  was  unintelligible,  contained  the  words:

Ne  falls  rogatricem.f

On  March  24th,  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Baltimore  writing
with  Planchette  had  the  words  :  "  Tell  Mrs.  Verrall  to  send  you
her  last  zvriting."  Accordingly  on  March  25th  Mrs.  Forbes
posted  to  me  a  letter  asking  for  my  last  writing.  There  is
possibly  a  correspondence  between  the  statements  of  my  script
that  I  was  "  not  to  disappoint  her  who  asks,"  and  her  script
asking  to  see  this  piece  of  writing,  which  was  "the  last"  pro-
duced by  me.

(IV.)  August  28th,  1901.

After  a  letter  on  April  16th  from  Mrs.  Forbes  I  had  no
further  communication  with  her  till  October ;  but  in  the  script
produced  in  the  interval  there  was  at  least  one  definite  allusion
to  her  affairs,  unrecognised  by  me  till  some  time  later.  On
August  28th,  1901,  the  script  began  as  follows  :  .  .

*  Trans.  "What  is  more  difficult,  not  to  say  impossible,  unless
you  also  wish  it  1.  To-day  I  can,  not  without  doubt.  Write  '  we
are  in  Diana's  allegiance.'  Note  it  again."  The  whole  script  is
given  in  Appendix,  p.  343.

yirans. "Do  not  fail  (1)  her  who  asks."  ■  y-  •


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  223

Signa  sigillo.  Conifera  arbos  in  horto  iam  insita  omina  sibimefc
ostendit.*

The  script  was  signed  with  a  scrawl  and  three  drawings
representing  a  sword,  a  suspended  bugle  and  a  pair  of
scissors ;  thus  :


A  suspended  bugle  surmounted  by  a  crown  is  the  badge  of  the
legiment  to  which  Talbot  Eorbes  belonged.  Mrs.  Forbes  has  in
her  garden  four  or  live  small  Hr-trees  grown  from  seed  sent  to
her  from  abroad  by  her  son  ;  these  are  called  by  her  Talbot's
trees.  This  fact  was  entirely  unknown  to  me.  On  August  28th
Mrs.  Forbes'  script  contained  the  statement,  purporting  to  come
from  her  son,  that  he  was  looking  for  a  "sensitive"  who
wrote  automatically,  in  order  that  he  might  obtain  corroboration
for  her  own  writing,  and  it  concluded  with  the  remark  that
he  must  now  leave  her  in  order  to  join  E.G.  in  controlling
the  sensitive.  The  hour  of  her  writing  on  August  28th  does
not  appear,  but  as  she  usually  writes  early  in  the  day  and
as  mine  of  the  same  date  was  at  10.30  p.m.,  it  is  probable
that  hers  preceded  mine.

It  thus  appears  that  on  a  certain  day  "Talbot  Forbes"  in
Mrs.  Forbes'  script  declared  that  he  was  seeking  and  implied
that  he  had  found  another  automatic  writer  through  whom
to  communicate  with  her.^  On  the  same  day  a  statement  was
made  in  my  script  about  fir-trees  planted  in  a  garden  which

*  Trans.  "  Sign  with  the  seal.  The  fir-tree  that  has  already  been
planted  in  the  garden  gives  its  own  portent."

^  The  actual  words  are  1  am  looking  for  a  sensitive  who  tvriks  to  tell
Father  to  believe  I  can  write  through  you  .  .  .  I  have  to  sit  with  our
friend  Edmund  to  control  the  sensitive. — (signed  with  Talbot  Forbes'
initials).


224


Chapter  XI.


[part


had  a  meaning  for  Mrs.  Forbes  and  a  special  connexion  with
her  automatic  experiments,  and  the  signature  of  this  script,  to
which  attention  had  been  directed,  represented  partially  the
badge  of  Talbot  Forbes'  reo-iment,  together  with  a  sword.^  As
bearing  on  the  question  whether  such  a  combination  is  likely
to  have  been  accidental,  I  may  say  that  on  no  other  occasion
has  a  bugle  appeared  in  the  script,  nor  has  there  been  any
other  reference  to  a  planted  fii'-tree.-

I  learned  the  above  facts  as  follows:  On  November  1.3th,  1901,
Mi's.  Forbes  stayed  with  me  for  one  night,  and  I  showed
her  some  of  the  English  parts  of  my  writing.  There  were
some  things  in  it  which  suggested  to  her  ti'aces  of  an  influence
similar  to  her  son's,  and  in  discussing  these  questions  she  had
occasion  to  mention  a  memorial  to  him  which  was  surmounted
by  the  regimental  badge,  a  suspended  bugle  below  a  crown.
I  then  remembered  that  in  my  script  there  had  been  a  di'aw-
ing  which  had  puzzled  me  at  the  time,  of  which  this  badge
reminded  me.  Subsequent  examination  verified  the  representa-
tion, so  far  as  concerns  the  bugle.  The  nail  on  which  the  bugle
is  suspended  is  plainly  indicated.  It  struck  me  as  remarkable
that  the  opening  sentence  of  the  script  so  signed  should  contain
an  allusion  full  of  meaning  for  Mrs.  Forbes.  I  asked  her  to
look  through  her  script  and  let  me  have  a  copy  of  any  remarks
that  might  concern  me,  and  in  that  way  became  acquainted
with  the  fact  that  on  the  same  day,  August  28th,  her  script
as  above  quoted  had  suggested  connexion  with  another  auto-
matic writer.^

(V.)  September  20th,  1901.

The  first  actual  mention  in  my  script  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  name
is  on  September  20th,  1901  (No.  3),  when  it  is  suggested  that
I  should  ask  her  if  she  has  a  message  for  me  about  "  g  i  m  a "

1  No  explanation  of  the  open  scissors  has  been  suggested.

-Except  once  subsequently,  on  November  27th,  1901,  after  veri-
fication of  the  incident,  when  it  was  quoted  as  an  encouragement.

3 1  knew  nothing  at  the  time  when  my  script  was  produced  of
the  surroundings  or  tastes  of  Mrs.  Forbes.  It  was  only  in  April,
1902,  that  I  found  that  her  garden  was  full  of  associations  with  her
son,  and  that  allusions  to  certain  flowers  there  growing  had  been
made  in  her  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  225


or  some  such  word.  Nothing  has  been  made  of  this  suggestion.
In  the  afternoon  before  writing  I  had  seen  a  letter  to  a  friend
in  which  Mrs.  Forbes'  name  occurred  frequently.  This  I  noted
at  the  time,  thinking  it  a  possible  explanation  of  the  occurrence
of  her  name.  She  was  abroad  at  the  time  and  not  trying
for  automatic  writing.

(VI.)  November  13th,  1901.

The  next  incident  in  this  story  was  a  meeting  between  Mrs.
Forbes  and  myself  at  my  house,  where  she  stayed  for  one  night,
as  related  above.  Letters  from  her  on  28th  and  30th  October,
1901,  had  seemed  to  indicate  a  similai'ity  in  the  topics
mentioned  in  her  script  and  mine  about  the  middle  of  October.
But  the  topic  was  one  not  unlikely  to  occur  to  us  both.  Her
name  did  not  appear  in  ray  writing,  but  my  name  did
appear  in  hers.  When  she  stayed  with  me  on  Nov.  13  we
obtained  some  writing  with  Planchette,  but  all  of  a  vague
description.  My  own  script,  written  after  the  Planchette-
attempts,  encouraged  me  to  persevere,  but  was  non-evidential

(VII.)  November  22nd,  1901.

Soon  after  Mrs.  Forbes'  visit  my  script  (No.  4),  associated
her  name  with  that  of  Mrs.  Thompson.  The  association  of
names  was  likely  enough  to  occur,  for  Mrs.  Forbes  and  I,
having  both  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  had,  on  the
occasion  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  visit  to  me,  compared  our  experiences
and  impi'essions.

(VIII.)  November  25th,  1901.

On  November  22nd,  1901,  immediately  after  the  above
reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  the  script  produced  an  attempt  to
represent  a  communication  from  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour,  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  brother.  The  introduction  of  this  first  definite
attempt  at  impersonation  of  some  one  hardly  known  to  me
disturbed  me  at  the  time  as  I  was  unwillinof  to  show  the
script  or  apply  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  for  confirmation  of  statements
which  could  be  fully  accounted  for  as  the  product  of  my  own
imagination. On November 25th,  after  resistins;  an  earlier

p


226  . ' . Cha2)tev  XI.  '  [part

desire  I  wrote  at  6.50  p.m.,  and  further  matter  was  produced
on  the  same  subject.^

On  November  2-5 th,  between  2  and  3  p.m.  Mrs.  Forbes'  script
produced  first  a  confused  message  fi'om  "  E.G."  to  me  about
my  writing,  followed  by  a  clear  message  from  "  Talbot "  that
I  was  to  be  told  at  once  by  tliat  day's  post  that  the  friends
ivere  ivith  lier  [Mrs.  Verrall]  when  she  was  xoith  Mrs.  Sidgetvick
[sic].  In  the  language  of  Mr.s.  Forbes'  script  to  be  tuith  usually
means  to  sympathise  with  or  think  about,  so  that  the  phrase
when  she  luas  tvith  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  a  not  inappropriate  repre-
sentation of  my  attitude  of  mind  between  the  22nd  and  25th.
The  message  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  seemed  to  me  at  the  time
to  show  a  knowledge  on  her  part  of  a  feeling  of  my  own
normally  impossible  for  her  to  divine.  It  preceded  my  own
writing  of  November  25th,  which  contained  much  more  definite
allusions  to  Mr.  Balfour  than  were  in  the  first  attempt  on
November  22ad.  Whether  or  not  it  ])receded  the  impulse  to
write  on  the  25th,  I  am  unable  to  say ;  "  all  the  afternoon "
are  the  words  in  my  diary,  so  that  it  is  probable  that  Mrs.
Forbes'  writing  closely  corresponded  with  the  beginning  of
the  impulse  to  write  which  culminated  in  my  writing  at
6.50  p.m.

It  is  interesting  to  note  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  the  confusion
of  the  first  message  to  me  from  "  E.G."  and  the  clearness  of
the  message  from  "  Talbot."  It  has  frequently  happened  that
a  long  and  confused  communication  from  "  E.G."  or  others
has  been  foll(_iwed  by  a  clear  and  much  shorter  message  from
"Talbot."  2

(IX.)  December  5th,  1901.

On  December  5th,  1901  (No.  5),  my  script  introduced  the
name  "Talbot"  for  the  first  time  in  the  words:

Note  the  hour,  I  will  tell  some  one  else  I  was  here— talbot
helping.

The  writing  was  produced  between  5.20  and  6.0  p.m.

On  December  5th,  from  12  to  12.30  p.m.,  Mrs.  Forbes  was
writing  automatically  what  seems  to  be  an  attempt  to  explain

i.See  pp.  26,  152.  2  gee  below,  pp.  230,  244-5.


Lili.]  Cross-Correspondences  ivith  Mrs.  Forhes.


227


the  difficulty  of  simultaneous  writing  or  connexion  between
two  automatic  writers.  The  words  are :  For  earth-friend  to
see  with  earth-friend  the  light  is  feeble.  When  the  friends  see
together  the  same  light  is  the  force  that  ive  use  for  this  letter.
This  writing  of  hers  preceded  mine,  and  so  if  there  is  any
connexion  other  than  accidental  between  them  the  tense  in
mine  is  not  appropriate.

Mrs.  Foi'bes  and  I  had  agreed  to  communicate  at  once  with
one  another  if  either  of  us  found  allusions  to  the  other  in  her
writings.  Although  in  her  script  of  December  5th  there  was
no  allusion  to  me,  she  sent  it  at  once  to  me,  so  that  I  received
it  on  December  6th  by  the  second  post.  Mrs.  Forbes  not
infrequently  acts  on  some  impulse  not  completely  represented  in
her  writing ;  in  fact  her  interpretation  of  what  she  writes
•seems  often  to  go  beyond  what  is  stated  in  the  actual  words.
This  is  perhaps  natural,  as  she  is  largely  conscious  of  what  she
produces,  more  so,  I  think,  than  is  the  case  with  me.  Thus,
though  there  was  no  mention  of  my  name  in  her  script,  she
supposed  it  to  concern  me,  and  acted  on  her  impression.

(X.)  December  16th,  1901.

On  December  10th,  1901,  Sir  Oliver  Lodg-e  sunjo-ested  to
me  that  I  should  try  the  experiment  of  writing  every  day
at  a  fixed  hour.  I  accordingly  wrote  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  whose
automatic  writing  had  previously  made  to  her  a  similar  sugges-
tion, to  tell  her  that  I  proposed  to  do  this,  and  that  henceforth
we  should  try  for  coincidence  not  of  date  but  of  subject.  I
wrote  automatically  on  December  10th,  11th,  12th,  and  1.3th,  on
the  last  occasion  at  a  friend's  house.  But  on  the  l-lth  I  found
it  impossible  to  get  any  time  to  myself,  and  the  same  thing-
happened  again  on  the  loth.  I  was  very  much  annoyed  at
having  to  break  what  I  regarded  as  a  compact,  and  throughout
these  two  days  my  thoughts  were  constantly  occupied  with
the  failure  on  my  part.  I  decided  to  abandon  any  attempt  to
write  during  my  absence  from  home,  and  on  December  16th  I
wrote  to  that  ettect  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

On  December  16th  Mrs.  Forbes  obtained  a  message  for  me
which  she  sent  on  at  once,  though  owing  to  my  absence  from
home,  of  which  1  had  not  told  her,  I  did  not  receive  it  till


228  Chapter  XI.  [part

Dee.  18th.  The  note  enclosing  it  said:  "It  seems  to  me  rather
fussy — as  if  it  were  to  be  sent  at  once,  but  it  also  looks  as  if
you  were  to  make  time  somehoiv  to  try  for  some  writing
yourself."  She  added  her  impression  that  there  was  some
mistake  about  this,  as  she  knew  that  I  was  making  time
every  day.  The  script  enclosed  said :  Mrs.  VerralL  to  try  to
see  for  ^  H.  H.  says — to  say  friends  can  wait  is  far  from
courteous ;  then  further  broken  remarks :  would  it  seem  fair
for  the  spirits  to  sit  for  work  for  hours  .  .  .  she  sat  xuith
foolish  ..."  and  so  on,  with  other  remarks  about  the  im-
portance of  regular  attention  on  the  part  of  automatic  writers
if  any  results  were  to  be  obtained.

It  thus  appears  that  on  the  same  day  on  which  I  wrote
to  Mrs.  Forbes  to  express  my  regret  at  my  failure  to  write
as  arranged  during  the  two  preceding  days,  her  automatic
script  produced  a  reproach  to  me  for  having  failed  to  keep
my  appointment.  The  reproach  was  unintelligible  to  Mrs.
Forbes,  who  believed  me  to  be  writing  regularl3\  To  me  the
message  seemed  appropriate  enough ;  the  opening  words  are
not  uncharacteristic  of  the  supposed  communicator,  and  the
later  remark,  she  sat  with  foolish,  very  closely  represented  my
own  feeling  of  annoyance  that  I  had  been  occupied  in  irrelevant
conversation  with  persons  not  interested  in  our  experiment,
when  I  ouo[ht  to  have  been  writing.

(XI.)  December  17th,  1901.

1  had  intended,  as  above  stated,  to  attempt  no  writing  during
my  absence  from  home,  but  on  December  17th  (No.  6),  before
receiving  the  reproaches  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  on  Dec.  18th,
I  was  so  worried  all  day  with  a  wish  to  write  that  I  contrived
to  get  a  clear  time  to  myself  at  6.50  p.m.  The  script  thus
produced,  after  a  second  allusion  to  the  Marmontel  incident,^
concluded  as  follows  :

get  in  communication  with. It  is  the  usual  expression  in
Mrs.  Forbes'  script.

2  Dots  here,  as  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  copies  sent  to  me,  represent,  not
omissions,  but  what  is  illegible  in  the  original  automatic  writing.

3  See  below,  p.  332.


LHi.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


229


Ask  Mrs.  Forbes  what  she  wrote  to-day  your  name  is  not  in  it
but  you  would  understand— it  tried  to  be  Stewart  and  Hasleraere  ^
and  about  a  brook — water  running  and  a  flight  of  birds.

This  was  signed  with  a  badly  drawn  sword  and  palm.

The  remarks  seem  quite  incorrect.  My  name  was  contained
in  Mrs.  Forbes'  writing  of  17th,  and  there  was  nothing  in  that
writing  which  could  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  the  suggested
topics.

(XII.)  December  ISth,  1901.

On  December  18th  (No.  7),  after  I  had  received  the  above-
mentioned  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes  with  reproaches  for  not
writing,  the  script  produced,  as  might  be  expected,  an  allusion
to  Talbot  in  the  words :

Talbot  wrote  yesterday  or  before.  There  was  never  any  need
for  explanation.

The  statement  is  obviously  unevidential.

(XIII.)  January  10th,  1902.

After  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes  written  on  December  19th,  I
heard  nothing  further  for  some  weeks,  nor  was  there  any
reference  to  her  in  my  script.  On  January  11th,  1902,  at  9.45
a.m.,  I  noted  in  my  diary  that  I  had  felt  on  the  day
before  that  "  after  an  interval  I  had  again  come  into  touch "
with  whatever  it  was  that  produced  my  automatic  script.
The  impression  was  especially  vivid  at  7.0  p.m.  and  again  at
11.30-12  p.m.,  on  January  10th.

On  January  10th,  at  an  hour  not  mentioned,  but  after  1  p.m.,
Mrs.  Forbes  automatically  wrote  a  long  message  for  me  from
"Edmund,"  which  I  received  by  the  second  post  of  January
11th,  after  I  had  made  the  above-mentioned  entry  in  my
diary.  Neither  the  subjective  impression  nor  the  contents  of
the  script  are  definite  enough  to  be  evidential.  But  the
coincidence  between  the  reference  to  me  after  three  weeks'
silence  and  my  own  sensation  of  having  "  come  into  touch "
is  worth  noting,  especially  as  the  record  of  my  own  feeUng
was  made  before  I  heai'd  from  Mrs.  Forbes.

^  See  p.  206.  This  seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  an  earlier  "cross-
correspondence.


230


Chapter  XI.


[part


(XIV.)  February  and  March,  1902.

On  February  23rd  and  March  Sfcb,  1902,  my  daughter,  who
was  table-tilting  with  a  friend,  obtained  some  statements
concerning  Mrs.  Forbes,  who  was  known  to  both  the  agents.
On  both  occasions  the  information  was  partly  but  not  wholly
correct.  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Forbes  on  the  subject  on  March
9,  1902.

(XV.)  March  10th,  1902.

The  next  entry  in  my  script  (No.  8),  March  10th,  1902,
6.45  p.m.,  is  incorrect  so  far  as  it  is  detinite.

Mrs.  Forbes  has  heard,  must  have  heard  by  now.  There  is  a
letter  for  you  gone  astray — it  will  arrive — remember  this  date.

As  I  had  written  to  Mrs.  Forbes  on  March  9th  it  was  obvious
that  she  ought  to  have  heard  by  the  evening  of  March  lOtii  ;
her  reply  reached  me  in  due  course  on  March  11th.

(XVI)  March  22nd,  1902.

On  March  23rd,  1902,  I  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  a  note
asking  whether  a  certain  word  had  any  significance  for  me.
I  replied  that  if  the  word  came  in  a  certain  connexion,  it
might  have  a  profound  significance.  When  I  received  from
her,  as  I  did  on  March  26th,  the  automatic  message  which
had  induced  her  to  write,  I  found  that  it  did  purport  to
represent  what  the  single  word  had  suggested  to  me.  In
Mrs.  Forbes'  automatic  writing,  there  first  appeared  the  name
of  the  '  control '  with  whom  the  word  was  associated  in  my
mind  and  then  the  single  word  without  context,  and  without
my  name.  Immediately  following  it,  however,  was  a  much
clearer  message  from  Talbot,  distinctly  stating  that  the  control
named  wanted  you  to  try  for  a  test  luith  our  friend  at
Cambridge.  Write  to  Mrs.  Verrall  to-day.  One  word  will  be
enough. Then  in  large  letters  the  word  in  question  was  written.

The  significance  of  the  word  for  me  could  not  have  been
known  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  accordingly  the  incident  made  a
great  impression  on  me.

(XVII.)  March  31st,  1902.

On  March  81st,  1902,  it  was  arranged  that  Mrs.  Forbes
should  try  for  automatic  writing,  while  I  fixed  my  mind  on


LIII.]


Gross-Correspondences  ivith  Mrs.  Forbes.


231


the  above  incident,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  something  further
about  it  in  her  script.  This  experiment  proved  a  complete
failure. Mrs.  Forbes'  writing  was  completely  unintelligible.

(XVIII.)  April  14th,  1902.

On  April  Uth,  1902  (No.  9),  I  went  to  stay  with  Mrs.  Forbes.
In  the  tiain  on  the  way  I  had  a  very  strong  desire  to  write.
The  first  words  of  the  script  were  :

Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  it — for  you  in  the  house. ^

On  my  arrival  at  Mrs.  Forbes'  house  I  Ibund  that  there  were
no  letters  waiting  for  me,  and  therefore  supposed  the  statement
in  the  script  to  be  mistaken.  But  an  incident  on  April  1.5th,
when  she  and  I  wrote  togetlier  with  Plauchette,  led  to  her
producing  a  letter  which  enabled  me  to  verify  a  peculiar  form
of  Mr.  Gurney's  signature  that  had  occurred  in  my  script  of
nine  months  before,"-^  so  that  there  certainly  was  something  for
me  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  house — something  which  I  should  probably
not  have  seen  had  I  not  visited  her.

(XIX.)  May  4th,  1902.

After  two  unsuccessful  attempts  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  to  convey
intelligible  messages  to  me  on  April  24th  and  27th,  my  daughter
and  I  on  May  4th,  1902,  obtained  a  message  with  Planchette.
It  purported  to  come  from  Talbot  Forbes,  and  said  :  "  My
mother  has  had  a  wounded  man  to  stay  with  her.  Will  not
tell  you  his  name.  Want  you  to  tell  my  mother  my
message."

I  found  on  enquiring  that  a  man  who  had  been  "  vei'y  bad
with  sciatica,"  and  was  still  suffering  a  good  deal  of  pain  and
limping,  had  stayed  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  from  Saturday  to  Monday,
May  3rd  to  5th.  During  his  visit  there  had  been  much  talk
of  his  ailments  and  his  remedies.

(XX.)  May  7th,  1902.

In  a  letter,  received  on  May  7th,  Mrs.  Forbes  suggested
that  my  daughter  and  I  at  our  next  sitting  should  ask  "  who

1  This  was  followed  by  a  statement  (subsequently  verified)  about
Dr.  Hodgson,  and  the  Wellington  College  Chapel  incident  (see  p.  186).

2  See  p.  305.


232


Chapter  XI.


[part


sat  with  Mrs.  Forbes  on  Sunday  evening,"  i.e.  May  4th.  On
Wednesday,  May  7th,  Planchette,  with  many  repetitions,  gave
"  masterman  hastings."  This  was  followed  by  attempts  culmin-
ating in  Walter,  and  remarks  about  "  Mrs.  Walter  James."
We  sent  as  a  guess  the  name,  Masterman  Hastings.

Mrs.  Forbes  answered  that  the  first  two  letters  were  right,
that  the  total  length  was  about  right  and  that  the  H  of
Hastings  would  correspond  with  two  long  letters  that  should
be  in  that  place.

On  May  10th  we  tried  again,  after  receiving  the  above
information,  and  the  result  sent  to  Mrs.  Forbes  was  :

(1)  Manners  Walters.

(2)  Mr.  W^alterer.

The  first  of  these  was  given  after  some  eff'orts ;  the  second,
"  Mr.  Walterer,"  appeared  in  answer  to  a  different  question,
viz.  as  to  the  whei'eabouts  of  my  husband.  The  answer  was :
"  He  is  sitting  with  Mr.  Walterer,  Walterer  Walters  is  the
name  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  friend."

On  May  12th,  before  we  heard  anything  more  from  Mrs.
Forbes,  my  script  (No.  9a)  wrote:

Look  and  you  will  see  surely  it  must  be  plain.  Why  hesitate  ?
Mary  buds  no  Mary  Baltimore  was  the  name.  It  is  Helen  who
writes  not  you. better  than  you.^

This  clearly  referred  to  our  Planchette  experiment.  The  name
of  Mrs.  Baltimore^  was  known  to  me  as  that  of  a  friend  of
Mrs.  Forbes,  and  I  thought  that  I  had  heard  her  spoken  of
as  Mary.  The  likeness  in  Walterer  to  Baltimore  made  me  feel
almost  sure  that  from  the  first  I  had  unconsciously  guessed  at
Mary  Baltimore,  but  in  the  Planchette-writing  was  unable
to  prevail  over  my  daughter's  ignorance  of  the  name,  which
therefore  only  emerged  in  my  own  script.  A  letter  from  Mrs.
Forbes  received  on  May  13,  showed  that  the  name  was  correct.

The  guess  was  not  unlikely  on  my  part,  but  the  incident
seems  to  throw  some  light  on  the  sub-conscious  processes.

^At  the  conclusion  of  this  writing  came  the  words,  apparently
without  context,  "  Marian  Baltimore."

2  See  above,  No.  I.,  p.  220.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


233


(XXI.)  May  16th,  1902.

The  next  reference  in  the  script,  May  16th,  1902  (No.  10),
is  partly  a  reminiscence  of  the  above.

There  is  no  letter  about  Marian  Baltimore  on  the  way  to  you.
But  Mrs.  Forbes  will  have  a  message  for  you  next  week.

The  name  Marian  Baltimore  has  no  applicability,  the  name
of  Mrs.  Baltimore  being,  as  I  now  knew,  Mary,  and  no  message
came  to  me  from  Mrs.  Forbes  till  June  1st.

(XXII.)  May  18th,  1902.

Another  suggestion,  in  the  script  of  May  18th,  1902  (No.  11),
was  also  incorrect.  "  She "  was  said  to  want  me  to  look  for
something  in  a  dark  wood  drawer,  to  ask,  and  send  her  word
when  I  heard  from  her.  The  directions  were  confusing,  and
I  said  nothing  to  Mrs.  Forbes.  Later  on,^  after  what  seemed
a  further  reference  to  this  drawer,  I  made  enquiries,  but  could
obtain  no  clue  to  any  possible  meaning.

(XXIII.)  May  28th,  1902.

My  daughter  and  I  made  another  attempt  on  i\Iay  28th  with
Planchette  to  get  information  about  Mrs.  Forbes,  but  the  infor-
mation was  extremely  vague,  and,  where  it  could  be  tested,
incorrect.

(XXIV.)  June  9th,  1902.

The  next  incident  in  this  series  was  a  meeting  between
myself  and  Mrs.  Forbes  at  Cambridge,  where  she  was  staying
with  other  friends.  After  this  we  had  no  further  communication
of  any  kind  till  the  interchange  of  letters  I'elated  below.

(XXV.)  July  13th,  1902.

On  June  IGth  my  husband  and  I  went  to  Switzerland  for
some  weeks,  and  I  had  no  allusions  to  Mrs.  Forbes  in  my  script
till  July  13th,  1902  (No.  12).2  Then  the  script  written  at  9.15
p.m.  in  the  hotel  at  the  top  of  the  Simplon  Pass,  after  a  few
words  of  somewhat  enigmatic  Greek,  began  a  new  paragraph  :

On  such  an  eve  of  storm  the  message  came  across  the  water  far
away — she  will  not  write  nor

1  See  below,  No.  XXX.,  p.  241.

2 1  obtained  seven  pieces  of  automatic  script  between  my  seeing
Mrs.  Forbes  and  this  first  allusion  to  her  on  July  loth.


234


Ghcqjter  XI.


[part


(at  this  point  I  was  temporaril}^  interrupted,  but  went  on  again
almost  at  once)  :

no  letter  for  you — she  has  not  understood — but  you  will  hear
later — this  is  for  you — to  help.  Count  three  and  five  and  write  then
— and  on  the  23rd  of  the  month.  The  words  are  for  you  and  none
other  but  they  went  to  Mrs.  Forbes — ask  her.  The  message  is  for
you — about  the  water  ^ — she  will  know  that.  You  have  not  seen
the  lilies  my  lilies. Tell  her  I  said  that.

Talbot.

No  other  message  tonight,  write  later  as  I  said

H. Do  the  signature  better  H.

On  July  11th,  as  subsequently  appeared,  Mrs.  Forbes  had  a
reference — the  first  since  our  meeting — in  her  script  to  me.  It
was  not  very  definite,  but  suggested  that  a  te.st  was  to  be
attempted  with  the  hand  of  friends;  a  test  will  he  given
through,  the  friends  .  .  .  Here  followed  an  attempt  at  my  name,
which  is  what  induced  Mrs.  Forbes  to  send  the  messacre  to  me.

It  further  appeared  that  Mrs.  Forbes  had  been  watching
and  watering  with  much  interest  some  lilies  which  had
lately  bloomed,  and  which  were  in  full  flower  about  July
11th.  Earlier  in  the  summer  some  red  lilies  had  bloomed,  of
which  the  bulbs  had  been  sent  to  her  by  her  son.  There  had
been  a  good  deal  of  rain  in  England  in  early  July,  and  more
than  one  thunderstorm,  but  the  exact  dates  of  the  storms  were
not  known.  In  a  letter  of  July  11th  she  writes  that  she  hopes
there  has  been  better  weather  in  Switzerland  than  in  England,
and  that  my  husband  and  I  have  not  been  "  rained  upon  as
we  have  been  this  week."

I  have  separated  the  facts  as  far  as  possible  from  our  com-
munications concerning  them,  but  the  interchange  of  letters  is
an  important  part  of  this  incident.  On  July  14th  I  wrote  to
Mrs.  Forbes  quoting  the  words  of  my  script  of  July  13th  from
"  the  words  are  for  you  "  to  the  signature  "  Talbot,"  and  telling
her  that  a  future  date  (which  I  did  not  give)  "-^  had  been
mentioned  for  me  to  write  on.  This  I  posted  by  the  early
(mid-day)  post  on  July  14th,  and  by  the  same  post  I  sent  a

1  The  word  is  indistinctly  written.

-  The  whole  correspondence  between  Mrs.  Forbes  and  me  in  relation
to  this  incident  was  seen  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  August,  1902.


LIII.]


Cross-Correspondences  luitli  Mrs.  Forbes.


235


letter  to  Mr.  Piddingtou  containing  a  copy  of  the  whole  script,
as  I  thought  the  message  might  be  evidential.  I  wrote  to
him  "  the  whole  thing  .  .  .  may  mean  that  Mrs.  Forbes  has
had  a  messao-e  for  me  which  she  has  not  recognized  as  belonging-
to  me.  The  message  may  be  going  to  come  on  21st^  or  23rd
of  this  mouth."

By  the  evening  delivery,  G  p.m.,  on  the  same  day,  July  14th,
I  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  a  letter  forwarded  from  Cambridge,
and  written  b}'  her  on  July  11th,  telling  me  that  she  had  had
a  message  (automatic)  that  day,  but  would  not  send  it,  as  she
wanted  to  know  first  if  I  had  obtained  anything  similar.  By  the
same  evening  post  of  July  14th  I  sent  a  card  to  Mr.  Piddingtou
telling  him  of  the  crossing  of  letters  of  enquiry  about  script
from  Mrs.  Forbes  and  myself,  the  first  letters  that  had  passed
since  our  meeting  on  June  9th.  On  July  17th  Mrs.  Forbes
wrote  in  answer  to  my  enquiries  about  the  lilies,  etc.,  and  this
letter,  enclosing  her  script  of  11th,  I  received  on  July  19th.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  statement  in  my  script  of
July  13th  that  a  message  meant  for  me  had  gone  to  Mrs.
Forbes  was  true  in  the  sense  that  on  July  11th  she  had
received  a  message  which  she  took  to  be  connected  with  me,
and  of  which  she  at  once  Avrote  to  inform  me.  There  seems
to  have  been  some  truth,  though  also  some  confusion,  in  the
would-be  evidential  allusions  in  my  script;  there  had  been  a
week  of  storms  in  England,  some  lilies  blooming  in  her  garden
had  been  specially  watched  by  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  there  were  in
her  garden  flowers  which  she  could  recognise  as  "  Talbot's  lilies."

(XXVI.)  July  23rd,  1902.

The  incident  did  not  end  here.  Two  dates  had  been  men-
tioned on  which  I  was  to  write,  and  I  wrote  on  both.  On
July  21st  nothing  was  obtained  which  could  possibly  be
connected  with  Mrs  Forbes.  On  July  23rd  at  12.10  p.m.  (No.
12a),  at  Ouchy  on  the  Lake  of  Geneva  the  script  began  :

Double  discharge — but  do  not  ask.

Then,  after  reference  in  Latin  to  quite  a  different  subject :
Hodie  mane  aliquid  in  Britanniarum  pusilla  insula  evenit  quod

1"  Count  three  and  five"  =  8,  and  this,  added  to  the  date  of  writing
the  script  (13th)  gives  21st  as  a  possible  date.


236


Chapter  XI.


[part


amicis  tuis  magnum  refert.  Fac  scribas — iam  tibi  diem  pronotavi
— antehac,  sed  non  possum  angustiora  describere.  Eventum  non
reipublicae  amico  autem — It  is  interesting  to  a  friend.  Note  the
date.  H.*

Naturally,  under  the  circumstances,  I  connected  the  reference
to  my  friends  in  England  with  Mrs.  Forbes.

On  July  23rd  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  to  me  (enclosing  automatic
writing)  as  follows  :  "  Last  night  in  bed  I  felt  a  strong  impulse
to  write,  this  morning  when  I  awoke  I  felt  it  again,  and  now,
at  10  a.m.,  I  have  again  felt  it.  I  send  you  the  result.  I  feel
more  sure  than  I  have  ever  felt  that  whatever  mess  I  may
have  made  of  it,  there  was  a  genuine  effort  on  'the  other
side,'  and  I  can't  help  hoping  you  have  also  had  some  experience."
The  enclosed  automatic  writing  was  as  follows:

(a)  On  July  22nd,  11.30  p.m.,  from  Talbot  to  say  that  she
was  to  see  'with  ^  Mrs.  VerralVs  letter,'^  and  that  if  possible  he
would  be  with  her  to  write  automatically  the  next  day.

(b)  July  23rd,  at  7.45  a.m.,  from  Talbot  to  tell  her  to  wait
till  she  was  downstairs.

(c)  July  23rd,  at  10.0  a.m.,  from  Talbot,  Will  you  see  for
H.  for  writing  to  prove  identity  ?-  .  .  .  Will  you  write
to  Mrs.  Verrall?  And  again,  he  only  wants  to  write — you  to
write  for  him  to  Mrs.  Verrall."

It  will  be  seen  that,  though  two  dates  were  suggested  in
my  script  of  July  13th,  and  though  I  wrote  automatically  on
both  of  them,  on  the  21st  there  was  nothing  referring  to  Mrs.
Forbes.  On  the  23rd  I  wrote  at  12.10  p.m.  that  on  that
morning  in  England  something  had  occurred  which  much
interested  my  fi'iends,  that  the  day  had  been  announced  to  me
beforehand  but  not  the  details,  and  that  the  event  was  not  of
public  but  of  private  interest. All  these  statements  are  strictly

*  Trans.  "To-day  this  morning  .something  has  occurred  in  Britain's
Httle  island,  which  to  your  friends  is  of  much  interest.  See  that
you  write — -already  I  have  foretold  the  day  to  you  before  this,  but
I  cannot  write  down  the  details.  The  event  not  to  the  country
but  to  a  friend  (is  of  interest)."  [The  phrase  in  brackets  is  obviously
to  be  supplied  from  the  context.

1  i.e.,  be  in  telepathic  or  spiritual — non-material — communication.

^  i.e.,  automatic  script.  "Letter"  is  commonly  used  in  this  sense
in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script.


liil]  Gross-Correspondences  luith  Mrs.  Forbes.  237


true,  Mrs.  Forbes'  writing  having  occurred  about  an  hour  ^  before
mine.  The  "  double  discharge  "  of  my  script  of  July  23rd  may
easily  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  the  coincidence  of  our  both
writing  on  the  same  day,^  and  in  that  case  it  may  be  regarded
as  suggesting  the  natm'e  of  the  event  in  England.^

To  sum  up  the  last  two  incidents,  which  make  part  of  a
single  episode  :  in  the  course  of  some  six  weeks,  during  which
I  obtained  eleven  separate  pieces  of  script,  there  were  two  only
which  could  refer  to  Mrs.  Forbes.  On  both  these  occasions
the  statements  of  the  script  were  correct.  In  the  same  period,
during  which  Mrs.  Forbes  was  constantly  writing  automatically,
she  twice,  and  twice  only,*  spontaneously  communicated  to
me,  as  above  described,  messages  automatically  obtained,  and
these  corresponded  with  my  writing  about  her.  To  make  clear
the  sequence  of  dates,  I  have  drawn  up  a  statement  in
parallel  columns.

Statement  in  Parallel  Columns.


Mrs.  F.,  England.

Mrs.  v.,  Switzerland.

July  11.  "message  about  Mrs.  V."

July  13.

"  message  for  you  went  to  Mrs.  F. "

July  21.

no  reference  in  sc.  to  Mrs.  F.

July  23.  "message  to  Mrs.  V."

July' 23.

"double  discharge."

1  This  allows  for  the  difference  between  English  and  Middle-Euro-
pean time.

2  As  I  had  told  Mrs.  Forbes  on  the  13th  that  I  was  to  write  again
on  a  future  day  and  hoped  that  she  would  do  the  same,  it  may  lie
supposed  that  I  expected  her  to  write  on  the  21st  or  the  23rd.  But
though  I  had  script  on  both  days,  it  was  only  on  the  day  on  which
she  also  wrote  that  I  had  any  reference  applicable  to  her.

2  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  Mrs.  Forbes'  name  does  not  appear  in
the  script. For  similar  omissions  see  No.  LXII.  and  also  p.  334.

*I  have  counted  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  11.30  p.m.  on  July  22nd
as  part  of  the  communication  of  July  23rd.  It  was  so  regarded
by  her  and  reached  me  at  the  same  time.


23S


Chapter  XI.


[part


(XXVII.)  October  27th,  1902.  ■ •  .

No  further  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  occurs  in  the  script
till  October  27th,  1902  (No.  13),  when,  after  a  remark  in
Greek  that  I  too  was  to  write  my  share  and  some  one  else
would  read,^  came  the  words :

it  is  not  wholly  right.  Try  to  understand.  Mrs.  Forbes  has
the  other  words — piece  together.  Add  hers  to  yours.  It  is
important.

After  another  paragraph  on  a  different  subject  came  a  third
paragraph ;  -

Write  more  often. Talbot  will  help — all  through  November.

On  October  31st  (No.  13a)  appeared  what  might  be  another
reference  to  the  above  first  paragraph :

She  has  had  some  words  incomplete,  to  be  added  to  and  pieced
and  make  the  clue.

But  T  have  not  been  able  to  discover  to  what,  if  anything,  this
refers.  Mrs.  Forbes  had  had  no  wi'itino'  referrino-  to  me  since
July  26th  when  her  script  referred  to  the  success  previously
narrated.

The  second  statement,  however,  on  October  ■27th,  "Talbot
will  help — all  through  November,"  seems  evidential.  On
October  30th,  1902,  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  said:  We  [i.e.  "  H.
with  Talbot "]  will  send  more  work  to  you  when  we  have
been  with  Mrs.  Verndl,  and  again  :  We  are  going  to  Gam-
bridge.

The  first  part  of  this  message  was  sent  to  me  by  Mrs.
Forbes  on  October  30th,  11  a.m.,  when  she  did  not  know  that
there  had  been  any  reference  to  her  in  my  script  of  October
27th.  The  second  sentence  from  her  script,  "  We  are  going  to
Cambridge,"  readied  me  in  a  letter  of  November  17th,  with
a  note  that  it  had  been  omitted  before  ;  it  had  been  written
automatically  just  after  her  letter  to  me  of  October  30th.
Thus  a  similar  statement  appears  independently  in  her  script
and  in  mine  ;  mine  on  October  27th  states  that  Talbot  will
hel])  me  all  through  November,  and  hers  on  October  30th
states  that  Talbot  is  going  to  Cambridge  to  be  with  me.

^  (Tvyypo.(pe  /cat  cru — aXXos  uvayvojpileLV.


liil]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


239


(XXVIII.)  November  2nd,  1902.

The  next  episode  is  unfortunately  spoiled  for  evidential
purposes  by  my  having  made  no  note  of  my  part  in  the  affair
till  after  hearing  from  Mrs.  Forbes.  The  reader  must  judge
what  value  to  attach  to  my  recollection  after  the  event.

On  October  27th,  1902,  I  decided  to  try  an  experiment
with  my  automatic  writing.  At  a  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  on
October  17th,  when  I  read  a  paper  on  my  automatic
script,  several  speakers  urged  me  to  "  tallv  to  my  control."
This  I  felt  to  be  impossible,  as  I  have  no  sense  of  the
presence  of  a  "  control,"  and  to  address  my  hand  would  be
absurd.  But  I  was  struck  with  the  (general  agreement  of
automatic  writers  as  to  the  importance  of  this  point,  and  I
decided  to  try  the  following  experiment.  On  October  27th,
1902,  and  again  on  October  31st,  before  writing,  I  sat  for  some
iifteen  minutes  in  the  dark,  concentrating  my  thoughts  on  one
of  the  supposed  communicators,  H.  Being  a  strong  visualiser
I  soon  began,  as  alwaj^s  when  recalling  any  one,  to  picture  him
to  myself;  I  imagined  liim  sitting  on  the  corner  of  the  seat  in
the  drawing-room,  where  he  always  sat  when  he  called.  There
was  a  moment  on  the  27th  when  I  had  so  clear  a  mental  image
of  him  that  I  found  mj^self  looking  towards  the  seat  as  if
he  were  actually  sitting  there,  and  I  distinctly  remember
realising  how  vivid  my  power  of  visualisation  is.  On
the  31st  I  thought  of  him  from  the  beoinnino-  as  sitting
on  that  seat.  I  made  no  note  of  this  experiment  at  the  time.
I  have  no  habit  of  recording  impressions,  and  I  was  writing
as  little  as  possible  in  my  diary  at  the  time,  because  I  was
unable  to  use  my  right  hand,  and  left-hand  writing  I  then
found  extremely  laborious.

On  November  2nd  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  to  me,  enclosino-  a
passage  in  her  script  of  the  same  day.  After  a  message  from
Talbot  to  say  that  H.  had  a  message  for  me,  that  Mrs.
Forbes  was  to  come  with  him  to  Cambridge,  and  that  the  difii-
cult}^  of  definite  statement  was  very  great,  there  was  an
interval  of  ten  minutes  in  which  she  had  no  writing;  then
came  the  following  :  H.  sees  the  ivorcls — not  so  strong  as
your  sons  luriting,  hut  clearer.  Will  you  he  sure —
you — tell Mrs. Verrall to he sure 1 a/m the vjriter — the


240


Chapter  XI.


[PAKT


friend  was  with  her  when  she  sat  .  .  .  ivhen  she  sat  0  n  ^  the

0  I  seat  (?)  ivhen  she  felt  for  (?)  .  .  .  in  the  dark — whe7i
she  was  looking  for  the  light  (?)  -  in  the  dark  she  tried  to  find
the  Old  ^ — with  symjKithy,  H.

On  receiving  her  letter  on  November  3rd  I  was  much
struck  at  the  reference  in  it  to  the  old  seat,  and  found  it
difficult  to  attribute  to  chance  the  appearance  of  this  "  mes-
sage"  to  me  in  her  script  of  November  2nd,  immediately  after
the  two  days,  October  27th  and  31st,  when  I  had  been  sitting
"  in  the  dark "  imagining  H.  "  on  the  old "  seat  and  wonder-
ing  whether  my  so  doing  would  have  any  effect  on  my
writing.

As  I  have  said,  I  had  made  no  note  of  m}'  experiment.  I
related  it  to  Mr.  Piddington  on  November  3rd,  and  sent  him
Mrs.  Forbes'  letters  of  October  30th  and  November  2nd,  as
well  as  copies  of  my  own  script.  I  did  not  tell  Mrs.  Forbes
more  than  that  her  message  was  intelligible  and  interesting,
till  December  12th  or  13th,  when  I  sent  her  the  written
account.  In  writing  back  to  me  on  December  18th  she
emphasised  the  vividness  of  her  impression,  saying:  "My
message  [i.e.  the  message  to  me  about  H.'s  presence  on
the  old  seat]  .  .  .  was  told  me — as  I  might  tell  you — I  had
been  with  a  mutual  friend  sitting  in  a  certain  place."  When

1  wrote  to  Mi's.  Forbes  on  November  4th  I  asked  her  to  send
to  me  at  once  any  references  she  obtained  in  her  script,  and
to  allow  me  to  leave  her  entirely  uninformed  as  to  their
intelligibility  or  appropriateness.  This  she  most  kindly  con-
sented to  do  in  a  letter  written  on  November  5th.

(XXIX.)  November  7th,  1902.

Two  or  three  days  later  my  script  (No.  14)  wrote :

Your  message  comes  through  Mrs.  Forbes — I  am  doing  that  now

— she  is  easier — tell  her  that.

This  obviously  may  be  an  echo  of  the  last  episode ;  it  may,
1  These  words  are  in  larger  writing.

2 Mrs.  Forbes  notes  to  these  words  that  they  were  "guesses,"  but,
as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  Mrs.  Forbes'  impressions  seem  quite  as
adequate  a  representation  of  her  subliminal  knowledge  as  do  the
mechanical  actions  of  her  hand.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


241


however,  possibly  refer  to  a  message  which  she  sent  me  at
the  end  of  the  month.^

(XXX.)  November  11th,  1902.  .  •

On  November  7th,  1902,  Mrs.  Forbes  sent  me  a  long  and
obscure  piece  of  script  about  working  with  wood  of  cedar  and
X-rays,  which  operate  through  wood.  I  could  make  nothing
of  it,^  but  it  doubtless  suggested  the  next  reference  to  Mrs.
Forbes  in  my  own  script  of  November  11th,  1902  (No.  15):

Mrs.  Forbes  writes  of  the  cedar-wood — You  cannot  find  that —
ask  about  the  chest — with  the  faint  smell — upstairs — in  a  room —
with  a  window  on  a  garden  all  a  maze — ask  someone  this.

The  chest  reminded  me  of  the  earlier  allusion  (No.  XXII.)
to  a  dark  wood  drawer,  but  neither  message  had  any  meaning
for  Mrs.  Forbes,  as  she  told  me  later.

(XXXI.)  November  26th  and  27th,  1902.

A  short  message  from  Mrs.  Forbes  on  November  14th,  to
say  that  a  test  was  being  prepared  in  connexion  with  me,
was  followed  by  two  messages  written  on  successive  days  and
received  by  me  together.

On  November  26th  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote :  H.  opens  a  hook
long  closed ;  and  on  November  27th  she  wrote :  Will
it  he  worth  while  to  try  to  follow  the  clue  of  yesterday  ?
H.  wishes  Mrs.  Verrall  to  open  the  last  hook  she  read  for
him  in  which  is  the  true  ivord  of  the  test.  If  she  will  try
to  hegin  the  sentence  tvith  this  word  he  tvill  he  sure  to  prove
his  heing  the  writer — let  the  letter  be  sent  to-night.  She  added
that  there  was  also  an  effort  to  write  a  word  which  seemed
to  begin  ESO.

1  was  completely  puzzled  by  this  message,  which  I  received
by  the  first  post  of  November  28th,  1902.  It  was  so  clearly
expressed  and  definite  that  I  was  disposed  to  attach  gTeat
value  to  it,  but  I  could  not  understand  what  I  was  meant

iSee  below,  No.  XXXI.

2  It  is  suggested  that  the  meaning  might  be  that  I  was  to  be
content  with  my  ordinary  habit  of  automatic  writing,  and  not  try
talking  to  the  control.

Q


242


Chapter  XI.


[part


to  do.  I  could  attach  no  meaning  to  the  phrase  "  the  last
book  read  for  H.,"  nor  could  I  see  how  even  if  1  could  think
of  such  a  book  I  was  to  know  in  which  part  of  it  was  to  be
found  the  word  with  which  I  was  to  beo-in  a  sentence.  I
noted  my  bewilderment  at  10  a.m.  on  November  28th,  and
puzzled  over  the  question  all  day.  In  the  evening  I  thought
of  a  possibility.  During  the  two  days,  November  26th  and
27th,  my  thoughts  had  been  much  occupied  with  Plato's
Dialogue  of  the  Symposium.  A  passage  from  it  (202b — 203a)
had  been  set  for  translation  for  November  21st,  1902,  by  a
lecturer  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,^  and  I  am  in  the  habit
of  using  the  Trinity  College  translation  papers  for  my  class  at
Newnham  College.  My  own  lecture  on  the  subject  was  to  be
on  Saturday,  November  29th.  On  November  26th  I  read  in
the  Dialogue  the  context  of  the  passage  selected,  and  on
November  27th  I  looked  over  some  ten  or  twelve  translations
of  the  passage.  During  those  two  days  my  mind  was  full  of
the  passage,  of  the  reference  to  it  earlier  in  my  script,  and
of  the  appropriateness  of  its  selection.  If  the  book  intended
was  the  Symposium,  the  word  intended  might  very  well  be
one  of  the  phrases  in  the  selected  extract  about  the  inter-
mediation of  spirits  between  God  and  man.  On  the  chance
that  the  Symposium  might  be  the  book  I  was  to  open,  I
decided  to  fix  my  mind  upon  it  before  trying  for  automatic
script  that  evening. This  I  noted  at  the  time.

When  once  my  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  Sym-
posium I  saw  reasons  for  its  suitability  to  the  conditions
demanded  by  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  though  I  had  not  punctuated
her  message  ^  so  as  to  refer  it  to  the  last  book  read  by  me.
Mrs.  Forbes'  script  however  contained  the  word  "clue,"  which
was  the  word  used  in  my  own  early  reference  to  the  Sym-

1  See  App.,  p.  414,  for  the  passage.

2  1  read  the  words  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  as  the  last  hook  she  read
for  him,  and  it  was  not  till  Mr.  Piddington  took  them  otherwise
that  I  saw  that  they  need  not  have  this  meaning.  The  simplest
interpretation  certainly  is,  that  I  was  to  open  for  H.  the  last  book
I  had  read.  The  last  book  read  by  me  before  November  28th
was  Plato's  Sjjmposium.  I  read  no  other  book  on  November  26th
or  27th,  having  visitors  in  the  house  and  my  translation  papers  to
look  over.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  243


posiuvi,  May  31st,  1901.  My  own  script  also  of  November
26th,  written,  in  spite  of  great  difficulties,  in  obedience
to  a  strong  impulse,  and  unfortunately  interrupted,  had  con-
tained in  Greek  ^  a  suggestion  that  there  was  something
which  I  could  not  accomplish  alone.  I  was  therefore  dis-
posed to  attach  special  value  to  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  and
anxious  to  carry  out  its  instructions.  On  the  chance  then
that  I  might  be  doing  so,  I  fixed  my  mind  before  writing
on  the  passage  in  question  and  made  the  following  notes  before
and  after  obtaining  my  script-:

"Nov.  28tb,  ld02,  .5.40  p.m.  [i.e  before  writing.]  My  mind
fixed  on  Diotima  and  her  clue,  that  the  Saiixoviov  yeVo9
avfjLTrXtjpol  between  God  and  man  and  that  of  these  [i.e.  of
the  race  of  intermediary  spirits]  one  is  Eros."

"  Nov.  28th.  6.45  p.m.  [i.e.  after  writing]  I  tried  the  experi-
ment above  recorded  before  writing,  as  I  thought  that  Mrs.
Forbes'  message  [i.e.  of  Nov.  26th,  27th]  might  be  an  attempt
to  represent  my  interest  in  the  Symposium  passage  which
had  been  set  and  which  I  had  been  readino-  and  correctino-
on  26th  and  27th."

I  made  this  experiment^  in  the  hopes  that  if  the  Sym-
posium were  the  book  intended  by  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  she
would  get  a  clearer  reference  to  it  at  her  next  attempt.
Naturally,  I  said  nothing  of  this  to  her.

(XXXII.)  December  18th,  l'J02.

I  heard  nothing  further  from  Mrs.  Forbes  till  on  December
19th  I  received  from  her  her  automatic  writing  of  the  18th.

1  aAA,os  Tts  Trevcrerat  to  oAoi'.  (tv  Se  oi))(_  eva  [xovi^  kvi  TrpocnreXd^eLV
Svvaacu.  Trans.  "  Some  one  else  will  learn  the  whole  but  you
alone  are  not  able  to  put  one  to  one." See  above,  p.  144.

-  My  own  script  of  this  day  had  no  direct  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes
but  ended  with  the  words  :  "  It  must  come  elsewhere — keep  your
record."

2  My  own  script  on  which  the  note  of  this  experiment  was  made
was  sent  to  Miss  Johnson  before  Dec.  15th,  and  therefore  the  evidence
is  complete  for  its  having  been  annotated  before  I  received  Mrs.
Forbes'  script  of  Dec.  18th.  From  this  time  onwards  all  my  writing
was  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  as  it  was  obtained,  so  that  there  is
external  evidence  for  the  dates  of  each  piece  of  script.


244


Chapter  XI.


[part


This  was  her  next  attempt,  and  it  seemed  to  me  an  unmis-
takeable  reference  to  the  Dialogue  such  as  I  had  hoped  to  obtain.
Her  writing  was  as  follows  (for  purposes  of  reference  I  have
divided  it  into  the  three  parts  of  which  it  obviously  consists,
according  to  the  supposed  communicators,  i.e.  H.,  E.G.,  and
Talbot) :

(a)  ...  tvord  .  .  .  H.  make  it —  .  .  .  loitlc  the —
Dionysus  ^  Dio  n —

(b)  .  .  .  Edmund  writes  to  tell  the  friend — who  ivvites
with  Talbot — word  of  the  Test  will  be  Dy  .  .  .  Will  you
give  the  sense  of  the  message,  ivrite  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  say
the  word  tvill  be  found  in  Myers'  own  .  .  .  will  you  send
a  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall  to  say  H.  tvill  see^  with  her
on  Friday — ^vill  you  be  so  kind  OjS  to  send  this  to-day  ?

(c)  ...  Talbot  writes  to  say  you  can  be  sure  .  .  .  it  is
one  of  the  most  Hymeneal  Songs — Love's  oldest  melody.

It  appears  to  me  indisputable  that  there  is  here  an  attempt
to  refer  to  the  passage  in  the  Symposium  which  I  had  fixed
upon  and  noted  before  writing  automatically  on  November
28th.  The  first  part  of  the  message  purporting  to  come  from
H.  tries  to  give  a  "  word,"  and  the  attempt  represents
the  initial  capital  and  the  two  following  letters  of  the  name
Diotima — a  name,  I  need  hardly  say,  entirely  unknown
to  Mrs.  Forbes.^  In  the  second  message,  attributed  to  Mr.
Gurney,  is  a  further  attempt  at  the  word  which  is  described
as  the  "word  of  the  test,"  and  which  is  to  be  sent  to  me;
it  is  also  added  that  this  word  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Myers'
own — something  not  named.  Finall}^  "Talbot"  communicates
a  description,  not  inappropriate,  of  the  Dialogue,  in  language

1  Mrs.  Forbes  marks  '  Dionysus  '  as  a  guess.
"  Or  sit ;  word  not  clear.

3  Mrs.  Forbes  is  unacquainted  with  Latin  and  Greek  and  has
read  no  translation  of  the  Platonic  dialogue  in  which  the  name
Diotima  occui's,  nor  any  commentary  on  Greek  philosophy  or  literature.
Mr.  Myers'  book  on  Human  Personality,  contained  (Vol.  I.  p.  113)
a  reference  to  this  passage  of  the  Symposium  and  mentioned  specifically
the  name  of  Diotima,  but  the  book  was  not  published  till  February,
1903,  and  Mrs.  Forbes  had  not  seen  any  of  the  proof-sheets.  No  other
classical  name  or  allusion  has,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  occurred  in
Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  certainly  not  in  any  script  of  hers  seen  by  me.


LIII.]


Cross-Corres2}ondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


245


not  natural  to  my  own  phraseology  nor,  I  should  think,  to
that  of  Mrs.  Forbes;  she  in  fact  completely  misunderstood  the
allusion,  for  in  the  letter  enclosing  her  script  she  wrote:  "if
it  turns  out  that  you  have  anything  to  do  with  weddings
to-morrow,  or  are  reading  any  special  book  with  a  Hymeneal
song  in  it,  I  shall  be  very  much  delighted."

Not  the  least  interesting  point  in  this  script  is  the  drama-
tisation. The  first  communicator,  with  great  difficulty,
produces  only  an  attempt  at  a  word.  The  second  describes
that  word  as  part  of  a  test,  says  that  it  concerns  me  and
attempts  to  add  a  further  point  for  its  identification.  The
third,  in  a  few  words  written  with  comparative  ease,  gives
a  description  of  the  book  such  as  suits  very  well  the  supposed
situation,  viz.,  that  of  an  intermediary  not  himself  acquainted
with  the  passage  in  question  but  endeavouring  to  help  in  the
transmission  under  difficulties  of  a  somewhat  technical  allusion.
My  own  script  of  December  19th — the  Finday  suggested  for
writing  by  Mi's.  Forbes — contained  some  fresh  points  about
the  Symposium  passage^  but  no  direct  reference  to  Mrs.
Forbes.  Before  writing  on  Dec.  19th  I  had  turned  my  thoughts,
as  noted  at  the  time,  to  Diotima  and  the  Symposium,  hoping
that  Mrs.  Forbes  would  get  the  words  Plato  or  Eros  to  com-
plete the  proof

(XXXIII.)  December  19th,  1902.

Mrs.  Forbes'  next  script  on  December  19th,  1902,  contained
an  attempt  to  produce  verifiable  matter  concerning  my  hus-
band. It  was  not  successful,  being  vague,  but  contained  the
phrase  Br.  Verrall  on  Mrs.  VerraU's  sofa.

In  my  husband's  study  there  is  a  sofa  of  mine  which  he
has  occasionally  used  and  began  to  use  pretty  regularly  in
the  year  1902.  So  far  as  we  know  Mrs.  Forbes  knew  nothing
of  this  sofa  or  its  being  called  my  sofa.  But  the  point  is  a
small  one.^

1  For  a  complete  account  of  the  part  played  by  this  passage  in
my  automatic  writing,  see  below,  p.  310.  The  connexion  with
Mrs.  Forbes  is  only  a  part  of  the  whole  episode.

2  See  below  No.  XXXIX.  for  possible  further  development  of  this
incident.


246


Chapter  XL


[part


(XXXIV.)  December  26th,  1902.

My  next  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  was  on  December  26t'h,
1902  (No.  16):

Mrs.  Forbes  will  get  the  words  I  want,  but  wait,  happy  is  the
hour,  let  your  thoughts  follow  her,  do  not  write.

Some  of  the  words  wanted  to  complete  the  reference  to  the
Symposium  were  at  least  partially  obtained  in  Mrs.  Forbes'
writing.  This  is  the  most  convenient  place  to  describe  those
attempts.

On  January  6th,  1903,  her  script  had  combinations  of
letters  suggestive  of  the  Greek  name  "  sumposion " ;  thus :
"  .  .  .  son  .  .  .  son  suspuro  suspiro  sryseo  sym  on  H.  eros."
Faint  scribbles  contain  a  possible  suggestion  of  Greek  letters,
but  there  is  no  identifiable  Greek  character.

On  January  11th  unmistakeable  isolated  Greek ^  characters
were  produced :  to,  e,  p,  cr,  (p,  ?,  a ;  and  described  as  part  of
an  uncompleted  test.

On  February  20th  there  appeared  all  we  write  is  really
SYMP  (here  the  line  ended  and  the  next  began) — a  the  tic  (JY
This  suggests  that  what  Mrs.  Forbes  calls  a  guess  had  com-
pleted  the  word.  The  first  four  letters  Symp  are  larger  and
separated  from  the  following  three  groups  of  letters.

On  March  2nd  her  script  had :  Write  to  Mrs.  Verrall  to  say
the  word  we  ivant  to  send  her  to-day  is  sympathy  come  y,
and  in  the  same  script  was  a  scrawl  which  Mr.  Piddington,  to
whom  I  sent  it,  interpreted  as  an  attempt  to  produce  "  E/jw?
love,"  and  a  second  scrawl  which  he  read  as  "  o  e  r  o  ?  "  \sic\

On  April  1st,  after  something  about  a  seal  in  a  drawer,
with  written  words,  came  "symp  athy,"  again  suggesting
that  to  symp  had  been  added  an  obvious  termination.  The
like  came  again  in  the  same  script:  "Seal  s  ym  p  athy  write
this."  Here  followed  an  archaic  Greek  capital  S — -  the  initial
letter  of  the  dialogue.^

1  Mrs.  Forbes  does  not  know  the  Greek  alphabet  and  has  never
consciously  written  Greek  characters.

2  The  question-mark  was  written  by  Mrs.  Forbes  in  her  script  as
sent  to  me.

3  Mrs.  Forbes  attached  so  little  meaning  to  this  sign  that  she  omitted
it  in  the  copy  sent  me,  though  it  is  plain  in  the  original.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  247


(XXXV.)  January  3rd  and  4th,  1903.

The  next  incident  concerns  a  communication  obtained
through  Planchette  by  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Baltimore.

On  January  3rd  they  obtained  :  Short  are  the  tuorcls  to  the
writer  but  long  to  the  reader — write  this  with  date  and  hour
to  Mrs.  Verrall.

On  January  4th  they  obtained  another  message  to  me,  con-
fused, but  indicating  that  I  was  to  look  in  my  own  room
for  a  lost  something  hid  in  some  article  of  furniture.

The  only  fact  with  which  we  could  in  any  way  connect  this
was  the  loss  of  a  note  of  my  husband's  referring  to  his  thought-
transference  experiment.^  The  loss  had  been  finally  announced
by  him  to  me  on  January  4th.  But  it  seems  very  doubtful
whether  this  is  within  the  meaning  of  the  Planchette  message.
A  further  reference  to  this  incident  possibly  appears  in  my
script  of  January  21st  (see  below,  No.  XXXIX.).

(XXXVI.)  January  6th,  1903.

Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  this  date  contained  attempts  (see  above)
at  the  word  Symposium.  It  was  not  posted,  but  given  to  me
by  her  when  we  met  in  London  on  January  7th.  On  January
9th  I  met  Mrs.  Baltimore  for  the  first  time  at  Mrs  Forbes'
invitation.

(XXXVII.)  January  14th,  1903.

On  January  14th  (No.  17)  my  own  script,  written  in  Lon-
don, when  I  had  been  there  nearly  a  month,  and  was  about  to
leave,  said  :

Mrs.  Forbes  has  sent  it  to  you — or  should  have  by  now ;  she
has  got  nearer  and  will  get  the  word.  Write  more  often  this  month
— we  can  do  more  now  for  you.  Your  husband's  test  goes  forward,
Mrs.  Forbes  gets  that  better  than  you  do — write  regularly — there
will  be  news  for  you  to  write  next  week — good  news  before  the
month  is  out.

The  last  sentences  are  too  vague  to  be  valuable.  The  first
remark  seemed  to  me  at  the  time  incorrect.  I  had  received
nothing  from  Mrs.  Forbes  since  our  meeting  in  London,  and
found  nothing  from  her when  I  reached  home  on  January

1  See  above,  p.  157.


248


Chapter  XI.


[part


16th.  But  I  subsequently  ascertained  that  she  had  had  a
message  for  me  on  January  11th,  containing  unmistakeable
Greek  characters,^  so  that  she  might  be  said  to  have  "  got
nearer  to  the  word  I  wanted.'  Contrary  to  her  custom,  she
had  not  sent  me  the  script  at  once.  Nor  did  she  send  me
a  fragmentary  message  about  opening  a  book  which  she
obtained  on  January  13th.  On  January  14th,  at  5.30  p.m.,
she  was  reminded  by  her  script  of  these  omissions  :  H.  wants
you  to  write  to  friends.  This  reminder  in  her  script  preceded
by  one  hour  and  a  half  the  statement  in  my  script  that  a
more  successful  attempt  had  l)een  made  by  her,  and  had  been,
or  should  have  been,  sent  to  me.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was
only  on  January  20th  that  Mrs.  Forbes  sent  me  her  scripts  of
January  11th,  13th,  and  14th  together  with  another,  and  owing
to  my  having  left  London,  they  did  not  reach  me  till  the
evening  of  January  23rd.

(XXXVIII.)  January  18th,  1903.

On  Sunday,  Januai-y  18th,  1903,  before  writing,  I  made  an
experiment  of  the  same  type  as  those  of  October  27th  and
31st,  1902.-  I  fixed  my  attention  on  talks  with  H.  on  certain,
days  in  1900,  and  noted  this  before  obtaining  script.

On  January  20th  Mrs.  Forbes,  who  knew  nothing  of  this,
wrote  automatically  that  there  had  been  some  connexion
between  H.  and  me  on  Sunday  during  a  sitting :  H.  writes  to
say  Verrall  .  .  .  Verrall  saw  with  H.  on  Sunday.  And
again :  Mrs.  Verrall  tuas  with  H.  on  Sunday  %ohen  he  {or
she)  sat  with  Mr.  .  .  .  This  letter  I  received  as  above
described  on  January  23rd.  It  is  interesting  to  find  the
experiment  made  by  me  before  writing  on  January  18th  again
reflected  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  a  few  days  later.  This  time
the  evidence  is  complete,  as  my  script  with  the  note  upon,
it  was  out  of  my  hands  before  I  received  her  letter.

(XXXIX.)  January  21st,  1903.

On  Januaiy  21st,  1903  (No.  18),  my  script,  after  a  refer-
ence to  the  Symposium,  went  on :

Wait  for  the  word  from  Mrs.  Forbes.  The  paper  is  hid  in  your
house  and  should  be found. It  was  in  a  book,  not  loose,  not  a.

iSee  above,  p.  246.  2  gee  above,  No.  XXVIIL,  p.  239.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  ivith  Mrs.  Forbes.  249'


paper,  but  part  of  something.  It  is  on  a  table,  why  don't  yoa
look — The  paper  is  blue  or  grey,  blue  I  think — a  ragged  bit  of  torn
paper — It  is  inside  something.

Try  your  sofa — that  is  partly  right — he  could  remember.

There  is  little  or  nothing  in  this.  It  obviously  refers  to  my
husband's  lost  note.  The  description  of  the  paper  (according
to  his  recollection)  is  right  but  not  distinctive.

(XL.)  January  25th,  1903.

On  January  25th,  1903,  Mrs.  Forbes  and  I  sat  simultaneously
to  try  for  automatic  writing  in  accordance  with  a  suggestion
of  her  script  on  January  22nd.  My  writing  contained  no
reference  to  her.  Her  writing  contained  an  attempt  to  give
verifiable  matter  concerning  my  husband,  as  follows :  "  But
you  can  tell  her  that  U.  sat  with  her — -luhen  she  sat  still
in  the  .  .  .  3Ir.  Verrall's  room — luitlt  .  .  .  on  her  .  .  .  Mr.
Verrall  Br.  Verrall  %uas  ivith  own  work — -say  tuork  work  of
.  .  .  Let  us  see  first  the  Cambridge  writer — on  the  chair  lies
the  Paper — the  work  is  done  .  .  .  no  word  H.  will  ever
see  .  .  .  it  is  too  far  for  you  to  travel."

My  husband  finished  a  particular  bit  of  work  (a  paper  on  a
classical  subject)  on  the  afternoon  of  this  day,  and  put  it
when  finished  on  a  chair  beside  him.  The  words,  "  Let  us  see
.  .  .  work  is  done,"  may  refer  to  this.  Mrs.  Forbes'  script
was  written  at  6.30  p.m.

(XLI.)  February  2nd,  1903.

On  February  2nd,  1903,  Mrs.  Forbes  and  I  again  sat  simul-
taneously by  arrangement.  This  time  her  writing  contained
nothing  evidential,  but  my  script  (No.  19)  seems  to  have
produced  something  intelligible  to  her.  After  curious  Latin
allusions  to  the  Feast  of  the  Purification,  confused,  as  I  have
described,^  with  a  Nativity,  and  a  remark  about  a  friend  whom
I  was  to  meet  the  next  day,  it  wrote :

Harriet  de  Vane  with  another.

The  name  Harriet  was  in  a  hand  resembling  that  of  Mrs.
Forbes,  and  the  words  quoted  were  followed  by  nonsense  words

. iSee  p.  12L


250


Chapter  XI.


[part


in  a  hand  distinctly  resembling  the  less  legible  parts  of  her  writ-
ing. I  took  the  name  Harriet  de  Vane  as  intended  for  sending
to  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  sent  it  accordingly.  I  then  heard  from
her  that  she  has  a  pastel  drawing  of  her  great-grandmother
by  Harriet  de  Vim.  The  drawing  is  in  the  room  where  she
was  writing  automatically  on  February  2nd.  I  had  been  in
the  room  and  must  have  seen  the  portrait,  but  on  a  subsequent
visit  I  ascertained  that  the  name  of  the  artist  is  not  visible.
Mrs.  Forbes  also  told  me  that  her  husband's  birthday  is  Feb-
ruary 2nd,  so  that  if  any  connexion  is  admitted  between  her
script  and  mine,  it  is  conceivable  that  her  thought  of  Feb-
ruary 2nd  as  a  birthday  ma}^  have  contiibuted  to  the  intro-
duction into  my  script  of  incidents  more  appropriate  to  a
Nativity  than  to  a  Purification.

(XLII.)  February  22nd  and  23rd,  190.3.

On  these  days  by  arrangement  I  sat  for  automatic  writing
simultaneously  with  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Baltimore.  On  Feb-
ruary 22nd  nothing  evidential  occurred.

On  February  23rd  the  experiment  seems  to  have  been  more
successful. My  own  script  dated  6.1-5  p.m.  (No.  20)  said:

Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  a  message  but  not  about  the  word,^  you  must
wait  for  that.

After  a  few  more  vafjue  encourafjements  in  Latin  there  is  a
blank  in  the  script  and  I  am  aware  that  at  some  point
during  the  writing,  probably  at  this  point,  I  went  to  sleep.
I  was  roused  by  the  slamming  of  a  door  and  wrote  rapidly
on  waking. The  next  words  after  the  gap  were :

It  has  helped  them  and  you  will  get  a  message  now  plain  to
read. Send  this  to  her.

I  noted  that  my  writing  was  over  at  6.30. I  have  no  doubt
that  the  momentary  sleep  came  immediately  before  the  remark
that  it  had  helped,  and  I  took  the  "it"  to  refer  to  this  sleep.^
At  6  i).m.  Mrs. Forbes and Mrs.  Baltimore began  their

1  Obviously  the  test  word  which  Mrs.  Forbes  knew  me  to  be
expecting. See  Nos.  XXXI.,  XXXII.

2  The  incident  of  my  sleepiness  was  noted  on  the  original  document
as  soon  as  the  automatic  writing  was  completed.


LIII.]


Gross-Gorrespondences  tvith  Mrs.  Forbes.


251


experiment  and  at  Planchette's  suggestion  used  a  glass  and
letters,  so  that  their  words  were  not  written  but  spelt  out :
Tell  Mrs.  Verrall  to  take  care — to  go — Hove  when  she
is  visiting  Brighton  ALFRED.  At  this  point  they  resumed
Planchette,  which  wrote :  Tell  Mrs.  Verrall  H.  sees  tvith
a  trouble  of  which  he  cannot  speak — you  will  know — tvhen
he  writes — Hove.

This  message  was  only  too  appropriate.  For  some  days  my
mind  had  been  much  occupied  with  a  trouble  connected  with
the  illness  of  the  daughter  of  a  friend  of  mine,  Alfred,  who
was  living  at  Hove,  near  Brighton.  On  February  16th  or
17th  I  had  received  from  his  wife  a  letter  which  had  dis-
tressed me.  I  answered  this  on  February  17th ;  on  February
18th  I  saw  in  London  some  members  of  his  family;  on
February  19th  I  received  another  seriously  disturbing  letter
and  discussed  its  contents  with  my  husband  on  that  evening,
and  the  next  morning,  on  February  20th,  I  wrote  to  Alfred's
wife  saying  that  I  hoped  no  decision  would  have  to  be
arrived  at  before  we  went  to  Brighton  at  Easter.  This  subject
then  had  been  occupying  me  greatly  for  some  days  and  the
form  that  my  thoughts  constantly  took  was  regret  for  the
trouble  of  Alfred  and  his  wife.

The  sucfgestion  that  I  should  go  to  Hove  when  visitingr
Brighton  and  the  connexion  of  this  suggestion  with  the  word
"trouble"  and  the  name  Alfred  closely  corresponded  with
feelings  of  mine  which  it  seemed  impossible  for  the  writers
to  know.  I  enquired  of  them  whether  the  combination  of
names  {i.e.  Hove,  Brighton,  Alfred)  suggested  to  them  any
associations  and  if  so,  what  ?  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  that  they
had  none  for  her;  that  she  hardly  knew  Brighton  and  had
no  friends  living  there.  Mrs.  Baltimore  replied  that  she  had  no
associations  except  that  she  knew  Hove  to  be  near  Brighton.
Alfred  knew  nothing  of  either  lady.  It  seems  therefore  clear
that  the  Planchette  writers  had  no  knowledge  which  could
have  led  to  the  pi'oduction  of  the  message  sent  to  me.  It
seems  equally  clear  that  my  script  was  correct  in  stating  that
Mrs.  Forbes  had  a  message,  not  about  my  test,  and  that
it  would  be  plain  to  read.  It  is  probable  that  at  least  part
of their writing must have been subsequent to  mine.


252


Chapter  XI.


[part


The  process  of  spelling  words  is  very  slow  and  as  they  had
had  some  writing  with  Planchette  before  the  spelling  process
began  it  is  unlikely  that  their  sitting  should  have  been  over
at  6.30,  when  my  own  was  completed.

(XLIII.)  March  11th  and  1.3th,  1903.

On  March  11th,  1903,  my  script  wrote  as  follows  (No.  21):

Trenrrnj  Kal  0€i<aTy  rjjj.epa  W5  ai'-'os  yap  Kal  crir  Kal  aAAos  etg-
a-vvea-w  iXOolre  av.  op^/xart  xPW^"-'-*  th&t  day  watch,  not  alone,
when  the  vision  comes  note  the  day  and  count  fi'om  now.

Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  the  other  word  and  will  send  it — not  Sym-
posium but  it  helps  and  is  clear.  I  don't  think  she  knows  it  is
for  you  but  you  will  understand.

The  first  paragraph  is  obscure  and  was  quite  unintelligible
at  the  time.  The  second  paragraph  states  plainly  that  Mrs.
Forbes  has  got  another  word  for  me  not  the  word  of  the
SymposiuTii.  On  March  15 — possibly  in  consequence  of  the
numerical  suggestion  in  the  opening  words  of  the  above  script —
my  script  recurjed  to  the  topic  and  after  attempts  at  a  word
and  a  reference  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  wrote  :

Mrs.  Forbes  is  slow  but  she  has  something  which  you  have  not
seen,

and  finally  told  me  to  "  Ask  Mrs.  Forbes  for  hers."

As  I  have  said  above,^  on  March  10  one  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-
personalities  made  attempts — obviously  incomplete — to  give  a
password  for  reproduction  by  other  automatists.  So  that  the
suggestion  in  the  words  of  the  first  paragraph  on  March  11
("  You  and  another,"  "  not  alone,")  of  an  attempt  at  a  cross-
correspondence  is  not  inappropriate  if  applied  to  me  and  Mrs.
Piper's  trance-personality.  But  the  statement  in  the  second
paragraph  of  March  11  about  Mrs.  Forbes  is  incorrect.  Early
in  March  Mrs.  Forbes  had  been  called  away  by  sudden  illness
and  had  had  no  time  for  automatic  writing.

*  Trans.  "  On  the  fifteenth  day  (reading  irkn-Trj  for  Tre/xTrr/;),  for
in  the  same  way  will  both  you  and  another  come  to  understanding.
Use  sight."

1  See  p.  217.  The  supposed  word,  as  I  later  learnt  from  Dr.
Hodgson,  was  an  unintelligible  collection  of  letters,  s  t  a  b  d  e  1  t  a.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


253


(XLIV.)  April  2nd,  190:j.

On  April  2nd,  1903,  in  the  train  between  London  and
Brighton  my  script  wrote  (No.  23) :

Mrs.  Forbes  has  gone  home  ask  her  to  write  next  week  on
Wednesday — she  will  know  whj'.

On  reachino-  Brighton  I  found  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes  from
her  own  home,  where  I  did  not  know  her  to  be,  enclosing
the  automatic  writing  mentioned  in  No.  XXXIV.,  written  on
Wednesday,  April  1st.  In  a  subsequent  letter,  April  6th,  Mrs.
Forbes  told  me  that  on  Wednesday,  April  1st,  after  she
finished  her  letter  to  me  her  hand  wrote  automatically  some-
thing about  writing  on  Wednesday.  She  was  uncertain
whether  this  i-eferred  to  the  past  or  future,  but  finding  on
examination  that  she  had  not  written  on  Wednesday,  March
25th,  she  took  it  to  refer  to  Wednesday,  April  8th.  In  that
case  her  script  of  April  1st  and  mine  of  April  2nd  agreed
in  recommending  that  iVIrs.  Forbes  should  write  on  Wednesday,
April  Sth.i

(XLV.)  April  8th  and  10th.

Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  the  Sth  contained  further  allusions  to
the  attempt  to  reproduce  a  word  wanted  by  me.

A  new  point,  however,  was  introduced  into  her  script  by
the  word  "  daughter "  in  connexion  with  me,  apparently
suggesting  that  my  daughter  should  take  some  part  in  this
interconnexion."^  This  suggestion,  so  vague  on  April  Sth  that
I  might  have  overlooked  it  altogether,  was  emphasised  in  Mrs.
Forbes'  script  of  April  10th.  This  began  with  a  statement
that  something  was  to  be  corrected  in  the  script  of  April  Sth;
it  went  on  with  a  message,  absolutely  unintelligible  to  Mrs.
Forbes  and  me  but  with  a  meaning  for  my  daughter;  it
then  said  that  the  automatic  writing  would  be  far  less
difficult  to  understand  if  "  the  younger  Verrall "  wrote  with

1  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  about  writing  on  Wednesday  has  not  been
preserved.  It  was  produced  wlien  she  was  laid  up  in  bed  and  had
no  proper  paper  or  pencil  at  hand.  "So  as  evidence  it  is  value-
less," as  she  wrote  on  April  6th.

2  The  actual  words  were  :  "  Tell  Mrs.  Verrall's  .  .  .  you  .  .  .  one  of
 daughter  more."


254


Chapter  XI.


[part


Planchette ;  and  finally  suggested  that  my  daughter  and  I
should  sit  simultaneously  with  Mrs.  Forbes  on  Sunday,  i.e.
April  12th.  The  meaning  was  made  perfectly  clear  by  the
addition  on  April  11th  that  by  "  Verrall "  "Helen  Verrall"  was
intended.

The  actual  words  were  as  follows;  April  10th:

Will  you  he  so  good  as  to  write — to  arrive  to-morrotu —
to  tell  Mrs.  Verrall  our  letter  must  he  read  with  one  word
corrected  which  means  more.  E.G.  .  .  .  A  grower  of  flowers
one  year  will  he  sower  of  seed — Send  this  message.  Edmund
writes  for  H.  to  a,sk  you  to  say  it  ivill  he  far  less
dijficult  to  read  the  sense  if  the  younger  Verrall  ivrites  with
Planchette.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Verrcdl  can  he  sure  of  this — sit  on
Sunday- — Mother  daughter  yourself.

On  April  11th:  Our  word  was  not  Verrcdl — Helen  Verrall
she  would  see  with — would  she  sit.

I  read  the  above  script  to  my  daughter  and  she  at  once
said  that  the  message  could  be  explained  by  a  fact  in  her  recent
experience.  She  had  been  staying  from  March  25th  to  April
2nd,  with  a  friend  who  is  a  professional  gardener,  and  during  her
visit  there  was  much  discussion  over  a  suggestion  of  her  friend's
new  head-man  that  certain  plants  should  be  grown  from  seed
which  hitherto  had  been  raised  from  cuttings.  The  new  man
was  particularly  skilled  in  raising  plants  from  seed.  My
daughter  who  is  very  familiar  with  the  methods  of  her  gardener-
friend,  was  much  interested  in  the  discussion ;  and  she  at  once
recognised  a  reference  to  this  subject  in  the  phrase  "  a  grower
of  flowers  one  year  will  be  sower  of  seed."

The  above  facts  were  entirely  unknown  to  me,  and  Mrs.
Forbes  had  no  knowledge  of  my  daughter's  movements  or
that  she  had  any  horticultural  friend.

(XLVI.)  April  14th-18th,  1903.

From  April  14th-lSth  my  daughter  and  I  stayed  with
Mrs.  Forbes,  but  no  allusions  to  Mrs.  Forbes  appear  in  my
script  of  April  17th,  the  only  one  obtained  during  the  visit.

(XLVII.)  May  1st  and  2nd,  1903.

On  May  1st  and  2nd Mrs.  Forbes' script  seems  to  have


LIU.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  255

made  further  efforts  to  trace  my  husband's  lost  paper  (see  Nos.
XXXIII.,  XXXV.,  XXXIX.).  On  May  1st  she  wrote :  Dr.  Verrall
will  he  the  finder — say  nothing  hut  this — Mrs.  Verrall  must
he  careful  to  look  soon — some  of  the  test  ^^ctper  ivill  he  found —
wallC?)  of  study  on  left  side — left  of — Mrs.  Verrall.  And
on  May  2nd:  Send  the  written  message  to  Mrs.  VerialL
Say  a  drawer  open  with  no  way  of  fastening  the  opening — ■
Mrs.  Verrall  will  see  in  .  .  .  inside  a  ...  a  simple  .  .  .
open  letter  .  .  .  a  word  which  will  shew — H.  will  send
this  .  .  .  let  Mrs. Verrall  see  with  care  it  is  soon  found —

open  drawer  no  means  fastening  look  for  your .  The

script  then  went  on  to  say  that  I  should  be  in  telepathic
communication  with  a  friend,  "Mrs.  S,  Alice."

Not  much  can  be  made  of  the  first  paragraph.  My  husband
thought  that  he  had  placed  the  missing  paper  in  the  left-
hand  drawer  of  his  study  table  which  has  a  key,  though  for
some  reason  the  lock  does  not  work.  But  he  thinks  that
the  words,  written  on  paper,  were  placed  inside  an  envelope,
so  that  the  description,  "a  simple  open  letter,"  are  hardly
suitable.  Mrs.  Forbes,  it  should  be  remembered,  had  received
no  information  about  our  loss.

The  second  suggestion  about  my  friend  is  interesting.  On.
May  2nd,  the  date  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  I  had  received  a
letter  from  my  friend,  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  (Alice)  about  a  correct
reference  to  her  in  my  script  of  April  27th.^  Mrs.  Forbes  and
Mrs.  Dew  Smith  are  not  acquainted,  nor  had  I  spoken  of  Mrs.
Dew  Smith  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

(XL VIII.)  May  10th  and  12th,  1903.

Another  attempt,  this  time  by  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Baltimore
together  to  pursue  the  lost  paper,  seems  to  have  failed :  "  W7'ite
to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  tell  her  to  seek  still  farther  for  the
paper— Mr.  Verrall's.  Mr.  {or  Mrs.)  Verrall  left  it  on  the
shelf  tvhere  she  was  looking.

This  was  wholly  unintelligible,  and  no  light  was  thrown  by
another  reference  to  the  subject  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  May
12th.  No  further  reference  to  this  subject  has  been  made
either  by  Mrs.  Forbes  or  me.

^See  account  of  references  to  Mrs.  Dew  Smith  above,  p.  174.


256


Chapter  XI.


[part


(XLTX.)  June  29th,  1903.

On  June  4th,  1903,  I  went  abroad,  and,  as  I  have  said  above,
the  automatic  writing  was  for  the  most  part  very  poor  and
incorrect  durins^  that  absence.  On  June  29th  it  contained  a
reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  (No.  24).

Mrs.  Forbes  has  lost  your  chie — she  cannot  get  it  now.

<L.)  June  30th,  1903.

Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  June  30th,  1903,  possibly  showed
knowledo-e  of  what  I  was  thinkincj  about  at  the  time,  but  the
reference  is  very  vague.  At  the  end  of  June,  or  quite  early
in  July,  certainly  before  July  3rd,  we  received  in  Switzerland
news  of  the  very  serious  illness  of  a  relative,  and  anxiously
waited  further  news  from  Brighton.  On  June  30th  Mrs.
Forbes'  scri[)t  wrote  :  Mrs.  Verrall  is  trying  to  see  with
Brighton  friends  who  send  the  letter  to  he  read.  H.  writes
with  sympathy.  This  message  she  was  told  to  send  to  me,
and  it  reached  me  on  July  6th.

(LI.)  July  10th,  190.3.

Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  July  10th,  1903,  contained  for  the
first  time  the  name  of  a  person  known  only  by  name  and
reputation  to  her  and  to  me.  The  incident  is  only  mentioned
on  account  of  its  possible  effect  on  my  own  subsequent
writing,  for  shortly  afterwards,  on  July  21,  1903,  my  script
produced  allusions  to  the  same  person.

(LII.)  July  17th,  1903.

My  script  on  this  day  wrote  (No.  25) :

Mrs.  Forbes  has  something  which  should  settle  the  date — it
fills  your  gap.

This  was  and  is  wholly  unintelligible.

<LIIL)  July  26th,  1903.

On  July  26th,  1903,  Mrs.  Forbes  tried  an  experiment  noted
by  her  as  follows  :  "  Ask  E.G.  to  try  to  impress  Mrs.  Verrall
with  the  idea  of  our  lilies  D.M.T.F."  This  she  sent  to  me
in  a  closed  envelope  on  July  26th  asking  me  to  keep  it  unopened.
On  July  30th  she  wrote  that  she  had  tried  to  impress  me
with  the  word  or  idea  "  lilies,"  but  that  the  experiment  had


LIII.]


Cross-Correspondences  ivith  Mrs.  Forhes.


257


evidently  failed.  She  asked  me  to  tell  her  whether  it  had
had  any  effect  at  all,  but  told  me  that  her  script  of  July  29th
had  written  :  Worth  while  to  try  the  experiment  but  the  lilies
vjould  grow  by  our  own  garden,  from  which  she  concluded
that  I  had  had  no  reference  to  them.

I  had  no  automatic  script  after  July  21st  and  before
hearing  from  Mrs.  Forbes  of  her  experiment,  so  that  as  regards
my  script  there  had  been  no  chance  of  testing  the  experiment.
I  had  no  impression  of  Mrs.  Forbes  or  of  lilies  in  the  required
period.  My  daughter  was  occasionally  obtaining  automatic
writing  at  this  time,  and  on  July  26th,  about  9.10  p.m.,  some
six  hours  after  Mrs.  Forbes'  recorded  desire  that  Edmund
Gurney  should  impress  an  idea  upon  me,  she  had,  I  found,
obtained  writing,  signed  for  the  first  and  only  time  with  the
signature  "  E.  Gurney,"  resembling,  as  I  noted  at  the  time,
the  same  signature  as  it  appears  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script.  My
daughter  had  never  seen  any  signature  of  Mr.  Gurney'.s,  but
as  she  had  tried  Planchette  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  it  may  be  taken
that  she  knew  how  that  signature  appeared  in  Mrs.  Forbes'
script.  The  style,  then,  of  the  signature  is  not  evidential,  but
it  struck  me  as  interesting  that  such  a  signature  should  appear
at  all  in  my  daughter's  writing,  and  es])ecially  at  this  time,
and  for  this  reason  I  expected  some  further  development  of  the
incident.

I  said  nothing  to  my  daughter  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  experiment.
On  August  23rd  my  daughter  had  a  reference  in  her  script
to  lilies,  and  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  so  that  it  seemed  as  though  the
experiment  might  be  producing  an  effect.  There  were  other
points  in  the  script,  and  I  wrote  on  August  24th  to  enquire
if  they  applied  to  Mrs.  Forbes.  My  letter  was  as  follows  :
"  The  exact  message  is  this  '  if  you  had  seen  her  picking  the
lilies  you  would  have  understood,'  then  she  goes  on  about  'a
red  light,'  which  she  first  wrote  about  in  your  house,  shewino-
that  you  are  somewhere  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  and  finally
comes  this,  '  the  house  is  large  and  there  is  a  belt  of  rhodo-
dendrons. In  the  north  you  have  seen  it.  Go  and  look.
Renoldson  is  a  clue.  What  about  those  daisies?  Did  you
pick  them  after  all  ?  Not  you  I  mean  but  Mrs.  Forbes.'  Then
comes  a  Latin  sentence  saying  that the memory  of  these


258


Chapter  XI.


[part


things  will  not  be  incorrect  as  of  all  things  they  were  what
pleased  (him  or  her)^  most."  I  asked  whether  any  of  this
meant  anything  to  Mrs.  Forbes  and  said  that  we  knew  of  no
house  with  a  belt  of  rhododendrons,  though  the  next  sentence
of  the  script  might  mean  that  Mrs.  Forbes'  house  is  in  the
north,  and  that  my  daughter  had  seen  it.

To  these  questions  Mrs.  Forbes  answered  as  follows  :  "  There
was  no  effort  [on  my  part]  to  '  iinpress '  it  [i.e.  the  message].
I  looked  at  the  lilies,  cut  some  and  mentally  asked  if  it  would
be  possible  to  tell  '  our  friends  at  Cambridge '  {i.e.  the  Verralls]
about  them.  We  have  been  i)lanting  a  belt  of  rhododendrons
in  the  little  wood  to  the  north  of  the  garden  and  I  have  often
looked  to  see  if  they  were  growing.  The  lilies  were  distinctly
the  things  that  pleased  me  most  in  the  garden  this  summer."

It  thus  appears  that  my  daughter's  script  of  August  28th
was  correct  in  stating  that  the  lilies  were  picked  by  Mrs.  Forbes.
It  is  correct  also  in  connecting  with  the  lilies  a  belt  of  rhodo-
dendrons, of  which  neither  my  daughter  nor  I  had  any  normal
knowledge,'-  as  the  planting  of  these  rhododendi-ons  was  subse-
quent to  our  visit.  The  obscure  Latin  sentence  with  which
the  script  concludes,  if  interpreted  as  I  did  interpret  it  at  the
time,  is  appropriate,  as  Mrs.  Forbes  points  out,  the  lilies  having
been  chosen  as  the  subject  of  experiment  at  a  moment  when
the  pleasure  derived  from  them  was  felt.

We  cannot  see  that  "  Renoldson  is  a  clue,"  nor  do  the
"  daisies "  seem  to  have  any  meaning  in  this  incident.  But
there  can,  I  think,  be  little  doubt  that  the  allusions  in  my
daughter's  script  of  August  23rd,  following  on  the  signature
in  her  script  of  July  26th,  are  the  direct  result  of  Mrs.
Forbes'  experiment,  wholly  unknown  to  her,  of  July  26th.^

^  Latin  ei.  The  sentence  runs  thus  :  "  scilicet  memoria  harum  rerum
non  fallet  quod  ex  omnibus  maximum  ei  jsraefuere."

"  This  is  shown  plainly  in  my  letter  of  August  24th  to  Mrs.
Forbes.

3  This  incident  finds  a  parallel  in  the  incident  described  on  p.  213.
There  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-personality  to
make  an  impression  upon  my  daughter  seems  to  have  missed  its
aim,  and  to  have  been  recorded  in  my  script.  Here,  on  the  contrary,
an  attempt  on  Mrs.  Forbes'  part  to  impress  me  failed,  but  was
recorded  in  my  daughter's  script. . , .,  ,, .  ...


LIII.]


Gross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


259


(LIV.)  July  31st,  1903.

On  July  31st  I  heard  from  Mrs.  Forbes  that  .she  was  going
to  Italy  next  month.  In  my  script  of  July  21st  something
had  been  written  about  a  picture  at  Venice/  and  on  July  31st
(No.  26)  the  scribe  wrote  as  follows  :

The  picture  in  the  picture-frame — upon  the  wall — &  no  name
upon  it — in  her  room,  ask  Mrs.  Forbes.  She  has  thought  lately
of  the  picture,  and  will  remember.

And  again,  after  an  interval :

ask  Mrs.  Forbes  whether  she  knows  the  likeness  in  the  picture —
she  may  know.  Go  into  the  gallery  at  Venice,  the  lady  with  the
pearls.

And  again :

More  another  time,  but  ask  Mrs.  Forbes  if  she  knows.  More
through  Helen  later. Do  not  tire  her.

On  August  10th,  in  answer  to  enquiry,  I  learned  from
Mrs.  Forbes  that  she  had  latelj^  put  a  tiny  sketch  of  Venice
into  a  frame.  There  was  no  name  on  the  sketch.  The  picture
was  not  hung,  but  was  resting  against  the  wall  in  the  drawing-
room.  It  had  been  framed  before  July  31st.  The  words,  then,
of  the  script  about  the  "  picture  in  the  picture-frame,"  which
seemed  unmeaning  to  me,  are  intelligible  if  referred  to  a  recently
framed  picture,  and  the  other  statements  in  the  same  paragraph
are  in  that  case  correct.  The  later  paragraphs  conveyed  no
meaning-  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

The  reference  in  my  script  of  July  21st  to  a  picture  at
Venice  and  the  subsequently  received  information  that  Mrs.
Forbes  was  likely  to  go  to  Italy,  may  well  account  for  the
suggestion  in  the  script  of  .1  uly  31st  that  Mrs.  Forbes  should
be  asked  to  look  for  a  picture  there,  but  does  not  account  for  the
production  of  the  statement  concerning  the  picture  in  a  frame
in  Mrs.  Forbes'  room  lately  thought  of  by  her.
(LV.)  August  11th,  1903.

On  August  11th,  1903,  in  speaking  to  a  friend,  Mr.  M.  A.
Bayfield,  of  S.P.R.  investigations  and  the  difficulty  of  coming

^  I  have  never  been  to  Venice.  The  picture  described  was  apparently
a  portrait  resembling  some  one  unknown  to  me.


260


Chapter  XI.


[part


to  any  conclusions,  I  used  the  phrase,  "  Anyhow  they  teach
one  patience,  which  is  perhaps  the  hardest  thing  to  learn."
On  August  12th  I  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  a  copy  of
Planchette  writing  obtained  by  herself  and  Mrs.  Baltimore.
The  last  lesson  to  he  learn  ed  is  Paiience ;  Mrs.  Verrall  is
our  friend  who  has  so  much — she  vAll  he  rewarded  by  making
plain  the  tangle.  The  expression  struck  me  as  closely  recalling
my  words  of  the  same  date.^  The  script  was  received  by
the  first  post  with  no  explanation  ;  by  the  second  post  followed
a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes  explaining  that  there  had  been  an
"insistent  command"  to  send  the  message  to  me  by  a  "mes-
senger we  could  trust,"  and  that  they  had  hastily  written  it
out  for  Mrs.  Baltimore  to  post  herself.  This  seems  to  show
an  impression  on  the  side  of  the  Planchette  writers  that  the
date  of  the  Planchette  message  was  important,  that  is  to  say
that  the  message  i-eferi-ed  to  something  specific  and  was  not
merely  general.

(LVI.)  August  18th,  1903.

On  August  18th,  1903,  Mrs.  Forbes  had  two  messages  for
me  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  morning:  10  a.m.  Great
sympathy  for  our  friends  .  .  .  Death  .  .  .  Talbot  writes  to
say  it  will  he  better — Mrs.  Verrall  writes  first.  1.45  p.m.,
after  general  directions  to  write  automatically,  Mother  of
Helen  writes — Mrs.  Verrall  .  .  .  your  son's  name  gives  the
clue.

This  is  too  vague  to  be  useful.  A  friend  of  mine,  unknown
to  Mrs.  Forbes,  was  very  seriously  ill  at  the  time  and  died
ten  days  later.  The  name  Talbot  has  no  connexion  with
this  friend.

(LVII.)  October  6th  and  7th,  1903.

Soon  after  the  last  mentioned  writing  Mrs.  Forbes  went
abroad,  and  no  further  intercourse  took  place  till  after  her
return. On  October  6th  my  script  (No.  27)  wrote :

1 1  have  no  note  as  to  which  came  first,  the  Planchette-writing
or  our  conversation.  I  mentioned  the  Plancbette-writing  to  Mr.
Bayfield  as  soon  as  I  received  the  letter,  and  he,  like  me,  was
struck  with  the  connexion  indicated  between  the  Planchette  message
and  the  sentiment  expressed  by  me  on  the  preceding  day.


Liii.]  Gr OSS-Correspondences  tvith  Mrs.  Forhes.  261


Mrs.  Forbes  comes  home  this  week  and  will  have  a  message  for
you.  But  she  found  no  picture  at  Venice.  She  has  had  a  success
while  she  was  away — ask  about  it.  Her  mother  will  want  her  much
this  winter — she  will  be  in  the  south.

And  ou  October  7th  (No.  28)  it  added:

Write  to  Mrs.  Forbes — tell  her  not  to  look  for  the  chain — any

other  trinket  will  do  as  well.  That  is  not  quite  right,  but  I  think
she  will  understand.

In  my  suggestion  to  Mrs.  Forbes  to  look  for  a  portrait  at
Venice  described  in  my  script  I  had  included  the  phrase,  "  the
lady  with  the  pearls."  On  August  23rd,  in  the  same  writing
of  my  daughter's  which  alluded  to  Mrs.  Forbes'  experiment
with  the  lilies  (No.  LIII.)  came  the  phrase,  "why  did  Mrs.
Verrall  not  understand  about  those  pearls.  We  said  it  plainly,
It  is  a  clue."  ^  This  correction  about  the  pearls  may  possibly
Tiave  been  the  further  help  "  through  Helen "  promised  in  my
script  of  July  Slst.  In  any  case  the  script  of  October  7th
seems  to  have  intended  to  correct  an  impression  of  Mrs.  Forbes
about  the  pearls.  On  October  8th  Mrs.  Forbes,  after  receiving
my  script  of  October  7th,  wrote  to  me  that  the  message  about
not  looking  for  the  chain  was  appropriate,  for  she  had  looked
with  much  care  for  a  chain  of  pearls,  and  did  not  believe  there
was  any  portrait  of  a  lady  wearing  one  in  Venice.  The  writing,
therefore,  of  October  7th  was  at  least  intelligible  to  Mrs.  Forbes^
and  it  claimed  perhaps  no  more.

The  script  of  October  6th  made  three  statements.  The  first
that  Mrs.  Forbes  was  coming  home  that  week  and  that  she
found  no  such  picture  at  Venice  as  described,  was  correct,  but
not  beyond  a  guess.  The  second,  that  she  had  a  success  while
she  was  away,  corresponded  to  her  own  feeling ;  at  Venice
there  came  to  her  an  impression  which  explained  some  things
unintelligible  hitherto.-

The  third  statement  is  much  more  definite  and  proved  to
be correct,  though I  had no  normal  ground  for  any  such

^  My  daughter  knew  nothing  of  the  allusions  in  my  script  to  the
lady  with  the  pearls.

-  This  impression  was  told  by  her  to  me,  and  my  estimate  of  it
-confirms  her  own.


262


Ghaj)tev  XI.


[part


coDjecture.  On  November  30th,  when  Mrs.  Forbes  spent  one
night  with  me,  she  told  me  of  her  mother's  illness.  Naturally
I  said  nothing  of  the  above  script.  On  December  2nd  she
was  telegraphed  for  to  go  to  her  mother's  house  in  the  south,
whence  she  wrote  to  me  on  December  5th  saying  that  she
would  have  to  stay  a  long  time  away  from  home,  and  noting
the  difficulty  caused  by  the  distance  between  her  own  and
her  mother's  home.

(LVIII.)  October  27th,  1903.

Between  October  9th  and  12th  it  was  arranged  that  I
should  sit  for  the  first  time  with  a  friend  in  town  on  the  last
Tuesday  of  October  (27th)  and  the  first  Tuesday  in  November
(3rd).  Of  this  Mrs.  Forbes  knew  nothing  beyond  the  fact  that
I  was  going  to  town  some  time  before  November  18th,  and
hoped  to  do  some  experiments  there.  In  her  automatic  script
of  October  22ud  or  23rd  she  had  a  confused  message  about
me  which  her  script  instructed  her  to  send  to  Mr.  Piddington.
In  this  it  was  said  that  the  last — day  of  October'^  would  be  the
first  sitting.  I  heard  of  this  from  her  in  a  letter  written  on
October  27th,  asking  whether  I  had  had  any  writing  on  the
22nd  and  23rd  which  might  account  for  her  message ;  the
message  itself  had  been  sent  to  Mr.  Piddington  according  to
the  script's  instructions  instead  of  to  me.

(LIX.)  October  30th,  1903.

My  script  of  October  30th,  1903  (No.  29),  wrote :

Send  this  Blue  forget-me-uots  tied  with  short  lengths  of  ribbon
— ask  Mrs.  Forbes  to  send  you  a  flower.  I  have  given  her  one
message  about  you.

I  took  no  notice  of  this  and  nothing  came  of  it.

(LX.)  November  23rd,  1903.

On  November  23rd,  1903,  my  script  wrote  as  follows  (No.
30):

1  There  was  a  .space  before  'da}^,'  so  that  it  was  not  clear  what
was  intended,  whether  '  day,'  or  some  named  day,  such  e.g.  aa
'Monday,'  'Tuesday.'


Llii.]  Gross-Correspondences  tvith  Mrs.  Forbes.  263


Mrs.  Forbes  has  a  special  message  for  you  which  you  will
understand.

aA,Ao  Tt  oi'Se  (Toi  fJ.ovy  *

Cres  cent  saecla
Crenent  crest  [then  a  drawing  of  the  Garwood  crest]  ^
look  up  that  for  help.

Gurney  wrote  the  word ask  Mrs.  Forbes,
[drawing  of  four-petalled  flower]

The  broken  words  in  the  middle  of  this  writing  I  took  to
be  gradual  emergences  of  the  name  Gurney  passing  through
Crest  and  Gurtvood.  So  that,  omitting  the  final  drawing,  all
it  came  to  was  a  statement  that  Gurney  wrote  a  word  for  me,
and  apparently  alluded  to  this  in  a  message  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

1  heard  nothing  from  Mrs.  Forbes,  so  on  November  25th  I
wrote  telling  her  of  the  opening  words  only  :  "  Mrs.  Forbes  has
a  special  message  for  you  which  you  will  understand."  On
November  27th  her  script  had  as  follows :  H.  must
send  the  .  .  .  word  (?  ward)  to  be  luith  Edmund  Gurney,
and  again :  Would  you  send  Mrs.  Verrall  a  message  f
be  sure  it  is  sent.  Edmund  Gurney,  Talbot  and  H.
write  Mrs.  VerralVs  script.  If  her  reading  "  word "  is  correct,
there  is  perhaps  a  connexion  between  her  script  of
November  27th  and  that  part  of  mine  of  the  23rd,  which
she  had  not  seen.  The  reference  to  "  Gurney "  in  both  scripts
does  not  count,  as  the  name  often  comes  in  her  writing,  thouah
rarely  in  mine."  No  script  of  hers,  however,  was  forthcoming
till  I  asked  whether  she  had  a  message,  and  the  distinctive
features  of  my  script,  the  drawings  and  the  word  "  crest,"
were  lacking  in  hers.

On  November  29th  my  daughter,  who  knew  nothing  of
the  above,^  wrote  automatically : "  Mrs.  Forbes  will  have  a

*  Trans.  ''  Something  else  and  not  for  you  alone."

^  For  the  Gurwood  crest  see  S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  IV.  p.  174.

2  On  no  other  occasion  in  conjunction  with  the  name  of  Mrs.
Forbes.

2  My  daughter  knew  that  Mrs.  Forbes  was  shortly  coming  to  stay
with  me,  and  that  another  automatist  had,  on  November  3rd,  implied
that  simultaneous  messages  to  two  sensitives  from  E.  G.  might  be
expected.


264


Chapter  XI.


[part


message  about  Guiniey,"  and  these  words  were  followed  by  two
quadruple  drawings,  distinctly  resembling  the  four-petalled
tlower  in  my  script  of  the  2;3rd.  The  second  of  these  draw-
ings was  described  as  "shamrock  four-leaved."

Whether  then  there  be  a  connexion  or  not  between  my
script  of  November  23rd  and  Mrs.  Forbes'  of  November  27th,
there  seems  to  have  been  a  reflexion  of  mine  in  my  daughter's
writing  of  November  29th,  inasmuch  as  her  script,  like  mine,
combined  the  names  of  Gurney  and  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  contained
a  sketch  of  a  four-petalled  flower.

(LXI.)  November  30th,  1903.

M-rs.  Forbes  stayed  with  me  on  November  30th  for  one
night.

(LXII.)  January  9th,  1904.

The  next  incident  seems  to  be  of  the  same  type  as  above
(XXV.),  where  a  message  intended  for  me  apparently  went
to  Mrs.  Forbes.  But  here  the  process  was  reversed.  It  was
only  when  she  applied  to  me  for  her  message  that  I  recognised
any  meaning  in  my  script.  The  incident  is  somewhat  com-
plicated.

On  December  11th,  1903,  we  left  home  for  a  long  absence
in  Algeria.  No  communication  passed  between  Mrs.  Forbes
and  me,  and  I  had  no  references  to  her  for  some  time.  On
December  27th  my  script  made  one  of  the  appointments  for
writing  above  described  :  ^

"  Count  days  five,  six  and  two,  then  listen  and  remember."

1  The  last  paragraph  of  the  script  was  as  follows  :

"  I  have  told  you  that  the  letter  will  come,  I  cannot  say  when,
but  I  see  it  open  in  your  hands  and  your  surprise ; it  is

nearer  now  than  when  I  wrote  before,  but  not  immediate.  count
days  five  six  and  two,  then  listen  and  remember."

It  is  possible  that  this  was  intended  to  say  that  on  the  day
indicated  a  letter  would  arrive.  But  the  words  "  then  listen "  sug-
gested that  I  was  to  write  automatically,  and  that  was  the
interpretation  I  placed  upon  them.

On  the  day  before,  December  26th,  there  had  been  a  remark
abuut  a  letter  coming  to  me  "  from  her  "  that  "  gives  the  news —


Lin.]  Cross-Correspondences  ivith  Mrs.  Forbes.  265

Accordingly,  after  thirteen  days,  on  January  9th  (No.  31)  I
tried  for  writing,  and  after  statements  in  English,  came  the
following  paragraph  in  Latin :

Solacia  attamen  eiusdem  doloris  nec  mihi  nec  tibi  attinget —
ab  aliis  accipere  debes :  post  septimam  diem  omnia  comprehendere
potes. Fac  scribas  die  septimo  decimo.*

I  could  make  nothing  of  this,  though  some  points  were
clear.  An  interpretation  was  to  be  expected  on  the  seventh
day,  i.e.  on  January  16th.  Nothing  else  was  evident  except
that  there  was  a  reference  to  consolation  for  some  grief.

On  Saturday,  January  16th,  by  the  English  mail  at  one
o'clock  p.m.,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes,  saying :  "  I
have  been  told  to  ask  you  to  send  me  your  last  week's  script;
my  message  is  as  follows :  H.  wrote  the  last  week's  message
to  be  sent  to  you — ask  Mrs.  Verrall  to  send  it  H.  wrote  the

message  on  ^  for  the  friend  at  Cambridge  see  if  it  is  true

write  to  ask  her  for  the  last  week's  script."

There  was  only  one  piece  of  script  that  could  be  described
as  the  last  week's  script,  viz.,  that  of  Saturday,  January  9th.
There  had  been  script  on  December  25th,  26th,  27th,  29th,  and
January  1st ;  then  only  on  January  9th.  There  was  thus  only
one  piece  of  writing  produced  in  the  course  of  the  week
preceding  the  date  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  letter,  which  was  January
12th,  and  that  was  the  piece containing an  unintelligible

wait  and  be  patient  I  cannot  say  what  you  will  think  but  I  see
your  surprise

nec  urna  deest,  cineribus  impleta  tuorum."
It  is  not  what  you  think,  don't  try  to  understand  wait."

The  two  allusions  to  a  coming  letter  are  no  doubt  connected,  but
whether  they  have  any  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  and  myself  I
cannot  say.

["Trans.  "Nor  is  there  lacking  the  urn  filled  with  the  ashes  of
your  dead."]

*  Trans.  "  Nevertheless  consolation  for  the  same  grief  will  concern  (?)
neither  me  nor  you — you  ought  to  receive  it  from  others  :  after  the
seventh  day  you  will  be  able  to  understand  everything.  Write  on
the  seventeenth  day."

1  The  word  in  this  gap  Mrs.  Forbes  marked  as  not  very  clear ;  it
might,  she  wrote,  be  "yesterday"  or  "Wednesday."


266


Chapter  XI.


[part


message,  for  the  explanation  of  which  I  was  told  to  wait
seven  days.  The  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes,  received  on  the  7th
day,  furnished  the  prospect  of  an  explanation,  and  I  sent  to
her  a  copy  of  the  script,  asking  if  the  contents  were  intelli-
gible to  her.

On  January  27th  I  I'eceived  her  reply,  enclosing  copies  of
her  writing  in  early  January,  and  telling  me,  what  I  did  not
know,  that  January  6th  was  the  anniversary  of  her  son's
death.  The  script  obtained  by  her  was  as  follows :  (a)  On
Januaiy  4th  a  confused  message  that  Mr.  Gurney  wanted  to
send  a  message  to  me ;  {h)  on  January  5th  a  statement  sug-
gesting some  connexion  between  her  and  me,  followed  by  an
allusion  to  the  loss  of  her  son  in  the  words  :  Will  he  with  your
loss  of  your  only  son  one  of  worthy  2^cb'>'entage  one  who  well
deserves  .  .  .  tvell  reivarcled.  Follow  this  .  .  .  it  is  Mrs.
.  .  .  roll  sends  tlte  anstver  tvho  cares  for  it  .  .  .  this  evi-
dence is  wor  .  .  .  Edmundj  writes  tell  this  message  Write
to  the  friends  of  Cambridge  they  a.re  the  .  .  .  Talbot's  friends

Send  this  letter  do  be  care  fid  it  will  he  lost  if  you ;

(c)  On  January  12th  the  above  quoted  statement  that  the  last
week's  message  was  written  for  Mrs.  Fobres,  ash  Mrs.  Verra.ll  to
send,  it,  and  again,  ivrite  to  ask  her  for  the  last  week's  script.

It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  of  January  5th
began  a  message  of  consolation  to  her,  which  was  left  incom-
plete ;  it  suggested  that  I  had  some  answer  to  send,  and  that
unless  I  were  communicated  with  somethinor  would  be  lost.  Mrs.
Forbes  did  not  communicate  with  me  at  once,  and  on  January
12th  her  script  plainly  told  her  to  ask  for  a  particular  piece  of
my  script.  The  piece  of  my  script  so  asked  for  contained  a
remark  about  consolation  for  sorrow,  unintelligible  to  me,  but
explained,  as  promised  in  my  script,  seven  days  after  its
reception.^

The  above  incident  made  a  considerable  impi'ession  on  Mrs.
Forbes  and  me  at  the  time,  one  of  the  best  points  being  the
absence  of  unexplained  or  superfluous remarks  in  the  script

1  The  Latin  nec  mihi  ncc  tibi  attingct  is  difficult  to  interpret.  I
have  translated  it:  "will  concern  neither  me  nor  you,"  i.e.  "the
grief  is  not  ours."  This  interpretation  is  made  more  likely  by  the
next  words  plainly  referring  to  others  from  whom  I  am  to  hear.


Liii.]  Gross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  267


concerned.  It  is  true  that  Mrs.  Forbes'  name  does  not  occur
in  my  script  but  the  script,  by  giving  precisely  the  day  on
which  I  was  to  receive  explanation,  definitely  connects  itself
with  Mrs.  Forbes,  from  whom  I  received  the  explanation  on
that  day.  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  was  also  quite  clear ;  an  inter-
rupted message  of  consolation  to  her  was  confirmed  by  some-
thing in  a  piece  of  my  writing  which  she  obtained  in  answer
to  instructions  in  her  own  script,  and  which,  without  those
instructions,  she  would  certainly  not  have  obtained.^

(LXIII.)  January  25th,  1904.

On  January  25th,  1904,  after  the  receipt  of  the  letter  asking
for  my  script  but  before  the  completion  of  the  explanation,
my  script  referred  to  Mrs.  Forbes  (No.  32)  as  follows  :

Mrs.  Forbes  message  was  wrong  listen  to  this :  A  letter  from
Mr.  Forbes  to  her  at  Cranford  will  go  this  month.

The  fii'st  words  are  an  obvious  reflexion  of  my  own  know-
ledge, about  the  mis-sent  message.  The  last  sentence  is  too
vague  for  verification.  It  was  very  probable  that  some  time
in  the  course  of  January  Mrs.  Forbes,  if  Mrs.  Forbes  is  intended,
would  receive  a  letter  from  her  husband  at  Cranford,  the
name  of  her  mother's  house.

(LXIV.)  April  ISth,  1904.

On  April  13th,  1904,  my  daughter  and  I,  trying  Planchette,
obtained  some  references  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  vague  and  of  no  value.

(LXV.)  July  13th-16th,  1904.

On  July  13th,  1904,  after  a  long  interval-  Mrs.  Forbes'
sci-ipt  wrote  an  expression  of  desire  to  send  a  message  cor-
rectly to  me. Mrs.  Forbes  was  told  in  the  script  to  send

1  It  may  be  noted  that,  as  I  had  no  notion  for  whom  the  message
of  consolation  was  intended,  I  could  not  convey  it  to  any  one,  and
Mrs.  Forbes  would  therefore  have  known  nothing  about  it  had  she
not,  at  the  suggestion  of  her  script,  written  to  ask  me  to  send  her  a
particular  bit  of  my  writing.

2  There  was  no  communication  between  January  9tli-27th  (LXII.
LXIII.)  and  July  13th,  except  (1)  the  Planchette  writing  of  April
13th  (LXIV),  (2)  a  vague  message  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  writing  on  May
24:th  to  tell  me  to  persevere,  and  (3)  a  letter  from  her  about  other
matters  on  June  1st.


268


Chapter  XI.


[part


this  message  to  me  and  to  tell  me  to  begin  to  ivrite  from
to-morrow  (i.e.  July  14th,  1904).  The  message  reached  me  on
July  14th.  On  July  13th,  my  own  script  definitely  stated  that
"  the  sentence  from  the  Symposium "  was  in  a  sealed  envelope
belonging  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  This  statement  was  incorrect.^
If  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  produced,  after  long  silence,  was  in-
tended as  a  correction  of  mine,  it  failed  of  its  purpose,  being
too  indefinite.  At  the  time  it  appeared  more  like  a  corroboration
than  a  correction.  But  its  contents  are  too  undefined  to  be
classified.

I  was  prevented from  writing  on  July  14th. My  script
(No.  33),  on  July  loth  contained  the  words:
I  cannot  get  the  Greek  words  to  Mrs.  Forbes,

a  mere  reminiscence,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  of  the  long  efforts  of
her  sci'ipt  to  give  tlie  words  of  the  Symposium.

On  July  16th  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  suggested  that  some
episode  was  now  closed  and  that  some  distinct  success  had
been  accomplished;  this  information  was  to  be  sent  to  me.
The  words  are :  Our  dream  of  our  own  home  will  soon  be
realized.  All  is  written  to  the  end  of  the  first  chapter.  I  was
overjoyed — our  friends  were  here ;  all  I  felt  was  great  joy  ;
all  I  knew  was  the  end  of  the  first  chapter  seemed  come,
with  the  next  page  began  the  real  story.  And  again,
Send  Mrs.  Verrall  this  message.  The  end  of  the  first  chapter
has  come — all  ivill  be  ready  for  the  next  which  begins — over
the  page  .  .  .  great  joy  sympathy.

This  writing  remains  quite  unexplained.

(LXVI.)  October  3rd,  1904.

The  next  reference  in  my  script  to  Mrs.  Forbes  was  on
October  3rd,  1904  (No.  34),  when,  in  the  train  on  my  way
to  London,  about  11  a.m.,  it  wrote:

Ella  Forbes  my  cousin  Send  the  letter  to  her.  It  is  long-
since  you  wrote.

In  answer  to  enquiries,  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  on  October  15th
that  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  October  3rd,  she  was  visiting
.a  cousin  of  Talbot  Forbes,  a  man,  A.  W.  Forbes. The  initials

1  See  below,  p.  301.


Llii.]  Gross-Gorres'pondences  xvith  Mrs.  Forbes.  269


A.  W.  in  MS.  are  perhaps  not  unlike  the  name  Ella,  but  the
feminine  pronoun  in  the  script  is  wrong  unless  it  be  taken
to  refer  to  Mrs.  Forbes  (to  whom  obviously  I  was  to  write),
and  not  to  its  grammatical  subject  Ella  Forbes.  But  nothing
can  be  made  of  the  incident.

(LXVII.)  October  14th  and  1.5th,  1904.

In  a  letter  of  October  1.5th  Mrs.  Forbes  told  me  of  a
suggestion  made  in  her  script  of  October  14th,  that  I
should  sit  on  Sunday,  October  16th,  to  obtain  some  story
scene  or  episode.  Tell  Mrs.  Verrall  tve  tvill  send  the  scene  to
her  .  .  .  write  this  message  I  ^vill  send  the  scene  to  Mrs-
Verrall  to  be  read  by  you.  E.G.

I  received  this  letter  on  the  morning  of  October  16th.  I
had  no  time  to  write  till  quite  late  in  the  evening.  At  10.30
p.m.  (No.  35),  after  other  writing  not  bearing  on  the  suggested
experiment,  my  script  wrote  the  following  :

Tell  this.

in  the  fire-lighted  room  she  &  the  dog  alone,  and  the
thought  came  to  her  as  she  held  up  the  screen  before  the  fire —
and  the  dog  stirred  in  his  sleep — he  felt  that  I  was  there.

It  was  only  for  a  moment — but  the  scene  was  plain.  Will
this  meet  your  point?  It  is  all  that  I  can  do
t  0  n  i  g  h  t  .1

In  addition  to  the  writing,  quite  contrary  to  my  usual
habit,  I  had  a  mental  impression  as  I  finished  the  script
of  Mrs.  Forbes  sitting  in  her  drawing-room,  with  the  door  into
the  greenhouse  open  ;  through  that  door  a  shadowy  figure,  which
I  knew  to  be  Talbot,  came  and  stood  in  the  window  looking
at  Mrs.  Forbes.^

1  In  a  different  hand.

^  Mrs.  Forbes'  drawing-room  is  known  to  me.  It  has  two  doors
at  opposite  ends  of  the  room.  The  fireplace  is  opposite  the  entrance
door,  and  beside  the  fireplace  is  the  door  into  the  greenhouse.  Close
to  this  door  is  a  large  window.  The  figure  of  which  I  had  an
impression  came  through  the  open  greenhouse  door  and  stood  in
the  window.  Mrs.  Forbes  was  sitting  on  the  further  side  of  the
fireplace,  in  her  usual  place.  This  impression  was  not  noted  at
the  time  of  writing  the  script.  It  was  noted  on  October  ■21st  after
hearing  from  Mrs.  Forbes  that  the  general  description  in  my  script
was  correct,  and  before  sending  her  the  questions  to  which  I  received
definite  answers  on  October  2.5th.


270


Cha'pter  XI.


[part


1  was  expecting  the  script  to  produce  "  a  story,  scene  or
episode,"  but  from  my  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  habits  I
thought  it  so  unlikely  that  she  would  have  been  writing  at
any  hour  when  the  room  could  be  described  as  "fire-lighted" —
which  I  took  to  mean  at  dusk  before  the  lights  wei-e  brought
in — that  I  did  not  send  the  script  to  her.  She  usually  writes
automatically  in  the  morning  and  has  once  or  twice  on  a
Sunday  written  at  2  p.m.

On  October  18th  I  heard  from  her  enclosing  her  script
produced  on  October  16th  at  5.45  p.m.  The  hour  was  not
inconsistent  with  the  statement  in  my  script,  and  the  contents
of  her  script  seemed  also  to  show  some  coincidence.  She
wrote :  Gurney  .  .  .  write  to  you  .  .  .  from  Cambridge
G  .  .  .  yoto  tvill  be  tvritten  to  for  a  test  is  being  given —
a  very  strong  evidence  .  .  .  message  will  be  given  .  .  .  go  on
sitting  after  tea  it  is  «  good  time  I  am  free  to  sit  here  then
I  wish  you  could  be  tvith  me  to  see  me — /  will  try  to  send
the  evidence  ive  want.  Gurney  will  be  sure  to  give  Mrs.
Verrall  a  .  .  .  .

■  The  supposed  writer  is  not  named  in  this  script,  but
familiarity  with  the  style  of  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  indicates  that
it  is  Talbot  Forbes.^  The  writer  expresses  the  wish  that  Mrs.
Forbes  "could  be  with"  him  "to  see"  him,  says  that  he  is  "free
to  sit "  where  she  is  at  the  time  of  writing,  which  is  described
as  "after  tea."''  I  had  not  expected  that  she  would  write  on
October  16th,  there  being  no  hint  of  any  attempt  at  simul-
taneous sitting  in  her  letter  proposing  that  I  should  write
on  that  day,  but  when  I  received  her  script  I  sent  her  the
account  in  my  script  of  October  16th  but  said  nothing  of  the
accompanying  impression.

On  October  19th  she  answered  in  general  terms  that  mine
was  a  true  description  of  her  at  the  time  of  writing  her  script
on  Sunday. In  answer  to detailed questions  subsequently

^  It  is  common  for  the  supposed  Talbot  to  give  no  name,  and
the  comparative  fluency  of  the  sentences  points  to  him  as  communi-
cator. It  is  clear  that  "  Gurney "  is  spoken  of  in  the  third  person.

2  The  suggestion  of  connexion  with  me  cannot  be  reckoned  among
coincidences,  as  Mrs.  Forbes  had  proposed  I  should  sit  some  time
on  Oct.  16th.


Liii.]  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  271


sent  she  replied,  in  a  letter  received  ou  October  25th,  as
follows:^  She  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  there  was  a
small  lamp  behind  her  but  little  light.  There  was  one  dog
and  one  dog  only  in  the  room.  She  was  not  able  to  say
whether  the  dog  stirred  at  any  special  moment.  She  was
holding  a  piece  of  paper  as  a  screen  in  her  hand.  The  door
to  the  greenhouse  was  open.  I  had  not  mentioned  my
impression  to  her  but  had  asked  the  question,  "  Had  you  any
thought  of  the  door  to  the  greenhouse  ? "  and  to  this  she
replied,  "The  door  to  the  greenhouse  was  open.  /  aliuays
think  of  it  before  I  settle  down  to  read  or  widte,  as  I  see
myself  that  it  is  open."

The  script  was  therefore  fairly  correct  in  its  statements.  The
word  "  fire-lighted,"  if  taken  strictly  to  mean  unlighted  other-
wise, is  not  coiTect,  but  it  perhaps  can  be  interpreted  less
strictly.  Mrs.  Forbes  and  the  dog  were  alone ;  there  had  been
two  dogs  constantly  with  her  when  I  last  stayed  at  the  house,
but  only  one  was  in  the  room  on  this  occasion.  She  was  holding
a  piece  of  paper  as  a  screen.  The  impression  which  I  had  that
the  greenhouse  door  was  open  was  correct.  There  was  no
reason  as  far  as  I  know  why  I  should  thinic  of  the  greenhouse
door  at  all.  My  so  doing  clearly  established  that  the  room
in  question  was  the  drawing-room.  This  at  the  time  struck
me,  as  I  associate  Mrs.  Forbes'  automatic  writing  with  her  own
sitting-room  and  a  particular  desk  at  which  she  usually  sits.
Apparently  there  was  some  appropriateness  in  the  allusion
to  the  open  greenhouse  door,  as  her  answer  to  my  question
shows  that  she  habitually  sits  with  the  greenhouse  door  open,
— a  habit  of  hers  not  consciously  observed  by  me.

(LXVIII.)  December  21st,  28th,  1904,  and  January  6th,  1905.

The  nest  three  references  concern  the  same  subject,  an
endeavour  by  my  script  to  obtain  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  an
allusion  to  an  event  deeply  interesting  to  me.  The  attempt
seems  to  have  failed  completely.

The  sealed  envelope  entrusted  by  Mr.  Myers  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  was  opened  in  London  on  December  13th,  1904,  and

1  The  actual  questions  and  answers  are  given  verbatim  in  Appendix,
p.  413.


272


Cha'pter  XI.


[part


proved  to  contain  a  sentence  bearing  no  resemblance  to  the
phrase  from  the  Symposhim  which  my  script  had  led  me  to
expect.  Mrs.  Forbes  knew  nothing  of  the  failure  nor  of  the
proposal  to  open  the  envelope.  On  December  21st,  the  first
script  obtained  by  me  after  the  failui'e  had  the  words
(No.  36):

Wait  now  and  write  regularly — I  will  send  a  message  about  this
through  Mrs.  Forbes — do  not  ask  for  it  it  may  take  time.

On  December  •28th  the  scribe  wrote  (No.  37) :

Six  days  you  must  wait  from  now  &  other  three — then  the
message  will  make  things  clear. Let  it  come  then.

I  want  to  confirm  it  through  Mrs.  Forbes  but  she  has  not  under-
stood. I  want  her  to  write  and  sympathize  with  the  failure  and  not
to  know  what  it  is.  I  shall  try  all  this  week — -wait  for  her  letter
and  help.  Think  of  her  often,  send  a  message  to  her  in  mind  to
write  &  say  she  is  sure  you  are  disappointed.

If  not  by  Monday  next  it  is  too  late  for  evidence — she  will  hear
the  facts  on  Monday  next.

I  took  no  steps  to  communicate  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  but  tried
for  script  on  the  date  indicated,  viz.  January  Gth.^  The  script
then  wrote :

Mrs.  Forbes  has  been  anxious  this  week  but  the  anxiety  is  less
now.  I  could  not  make  her  hear  what  I  wanted  her  to  write  to
you — but  ask  to  see  what  she  wrote  on  Monday.

After  this  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Forbes  as  the  experiment  had
obviously  failed.  She  i-eplied  that  she  had  written  no  script
on  the  preceding  Monday  (January  2nd),  having  hardly  had
any  opportunity  of  writing  for  a  long  time.  She  had  had
very  little  script  for  some  weeks,  and  neither  in  the  script
nor  otherwise  any  special  impression  about  me  or  the  opening
of  a  sealed  envelope.  The  attempt  therefore  to  impress  her
with  a  sense  of  ni}^  disappointment  was  a  complete  failure.

The  foregoing  account  of  what  I  have  called  the  cross-corre-
spondences between  Mrs.  Forbes  and  me  is  as  complete  as  I

1  Six  -t-  three,  i.e.  nine  days  after  December  28th.  Note  that  Jan.
6  was  the  anniversary  of  Talbot  Forbes'  death,  as  I  had  learnt  the
year  before,  though  this  allusion  in  my  script  did  not  at  the  time
suggest  to  me  any  associations  of  the  date  with  Mrs.  Forbes.


Liir.]  Gross-Correspondences  ivitli  Mrs.  Forbes.  273

can  make  it.^  It  seemed  best  to  relate  the  incidents  in  chrono-
logical sequence  with  no  attempt  at  classification  or  selection
and  only  brief  comment.  Premature  classification  is  apt  to
confuse,  and  the  selection  of  isolated  incidents — itself  a  species
of  classification — is  open  to  the  further  objection  that,  even
when  the  principle  of  selection  is  clearly  laid  down,  no  oppor-
tunity is  given  to  the  reader  of  checking  its  application
Moreover,  the  exclusion  from  consideration  of  certain  cases  in
a  series  may  be  positively  misleading  unless  accompanied  by
a  clear  statement  of  the  relative  fi'equency  of  success  compared
with  failure  in  the  excluded  as  well  as  in  the  included  instances,
and  such  an  application  of  the  statistical  method  is  impossible
where  the  cases  do  not  admit  of  unmistakeable  division  into
two  classes  and  two  only.  There  are  few  incidents  in  the  long
preceding  narrative  which  could,  without  further  qualification,
be  indisputably  labelled  as  successes  or  failures.

Under  these  circumstances  a  complete  and  chronological
account  of  the  coincidences  seems  necessary  if  any  judgment  is  to
be  formed.  The  historical  arrangement  has  the  further  advantage
that  it  enables  the  reader  to  understand  the  conditions  under
which  the  phenomena  were  produced,  to  ascertain,  namely,
what  knowledge  and  what  expectation  was  present  in  the
mind  of  the  writers  on  each  particular  occasion.  Here,  in
some  respects,  the  present  case  offers  special  facilities.  Where
the  persons  concerned  are  in  constant  and  familiar  communica-
tion it  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  what  at  any  given  point
was  the  information  possessed  by  either  party.  Here,  how-
ever, the  acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Forbes  and  myself  preceded  but
by  a  month  or  two  the  first  incident  in  the  series  of  cross-
correspondences,  and  even  during  the  four  succeeding  years,
1901-1904,  our  opportunities  for  meeting  were  few.

We  both were sufficiently  familiar with the methods  of

1  Every  identifiable  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  whether  by  name
or  allusion,  in  my  script  appears  verbatim  in  the  above.  In  the  case
of  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  I  have  occasionally  paraphrased  instead  of
transcribing,  but  wherever  the  phraseology  seemed  of  importance  I
have  given  the  actual  words.  I  have  not  included  certain  pieces  of
her  writing  which  were  amplifications,  confirmations,  or  reminiscences
of  preceding  script.  Everything,  however,  of  the  nature  of  a  state-
ment, correction,  or  addition,  has  been  included.

S


274


Chapter  XI.


[part


investigation  requii'ed  in  such  cases  to  realise  not  only  the
importance  of  preserving  documents  and  obtaining  external
corroboration,  but  also  the  value  of  noting  before  and  after
verification  any  information  that  could  throw  light  upon  the
production  of  the  sci-ipt.  Every  letter  that  passed  between
us  has  been  kept.  Many  notes  as  to  antecedent  knowledge  or
impression  were  made  for  our  own  or  the  other's  use.  We
were  also  aware  of  the  confusion  often  introduced  into  the
script  by  involuntary  efforts  at  guessing  on  the  part  of  the
writer.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  neither  Mrs.  Forbes  nor
I  are  in  any  way  unconscious  during  the  production  of  the
script,  and  so  a  natural  tendency  to  complete  a  word  of  which
the  first  letters  or  syllables  are  given  is  often  exhibited,  when
some  part  of  the  automatic  writing  emerges  more  definitely
into  consciousness  than  the  rest,  and  this  guessing  m&y  tend  to
spoil  or  inhibit  the  phenomena.

It  was  to  diminish  this  source  of  error  and  to  make  easier  the
record  of  antecedent  normal  knowledge  that  Mrs.  Forbes  consented
for  months  to  send  me  all  writing  referring  to  myself  without
receiving  from  me  any  indication  as  to  the  value  of  her  pro-
ductions or  any  but  the  vaguest  encouragement.^  Without
some  such  general  encoui-agement  the  experiment  could  hardly
have  been  carried  through.  The  continued  production  of  what
is  unintelligible  to  oneself  and  not  enthusiastically  received  by
its  only  other  reader  is  at  best  a  laborious  and  thankless
task,  and  I  wish  here  to  express  my  great  gratitude  to  Mrs.
Forbes  for  the  patience  and  care  which  she  exhibited  throughout
and  not  least  in  this  particular  respect.

As  to  the  value  of  the  whole  narrative,  or  the  interest  of
particular  incidents,  the  reader  must  form  his  own  opinion ;
there  are  two  points  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script  to  which  I  will
call  attention.

(1)  Difficulty  of  verbal  expression.

This,  a  characteristic  to  some  extent  of  all  automatic  writing,
is  specially  marked  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,  much  more  so,  for

1  It  was  not  till  after  the  opening  of  the  sealed  envelope  in  December,
1904,  that  Mrs.  Forbes  knew  that  there  had  been  in  her  script
allusions  which  I  could  not  mistake  to  an  identified  passage  in  a  book.


LIII.]  Gross-Correspondences  xoith  Mrs.  Forhes.


275


instance,  than  in  my  own.  It  often  appears  as  though,  at  the
moment  of  approaching  a  particular  word  or  phrase,  the  power,
whatever  it  is,  fails,  and  it  is  not  uncommon  to  obtain  from  a
general  reading  of  the  script  a  clear  impression  of  its  inten-
tion, hardly  justified  by  the  actual  phraseology.  It  is,  in  fact,
possible  to  see  what  it  is  driving  at  but  does  not  precisely
express  in  words.  A  similar  experience  is  common  to  all  who
have  listened  to  a  foreigner  whose  acquaintance  with  English  is
more  extensive  than  his  command  of  its  vocabulary.  This
is  not  the  case  with  my  own  script,  where,  as  the  reader  will
recall,  the  actual  sentences  are  usually  complete,  though  their
wording  is  often  harsh  or  obscure.

(2)  Dramatisation.

The  dramatisation  of  the  supposed  communicators,  and  the
distribution  among  them  of  the  various  statements  of  the
script  is  conspicuous  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  curiously
well  sustained.  Would-be  evidential  matter,  of  a  more  or
less  fragmentary  description,  is  attributed  to  H.,  and  the
general  direction  of  the  phenomena  to  Edmund  Gurney.
The  clearest,  most  fluent,  and  most  definite  statements  come
from  Talbot  Forbes,  who  seems  to  intervene  occasionally  with
the  object  of  stating  clearly  what  has  been  left  in  confusion
by  previous  efforts.  There  are  many  instances  of  this,  but
perhaps  the  most  striking  is  the  communication  about  the
Symposium  on  December  18th,  1902.^  My  own  script,  here
as  elsewhere,  is  less  markedly  dramatic  in  form.  There  is
perhaps  a  more  personal  touch  in  its  references  to  Mrs.  Forbes
than  in  other  parts,  but  that  may  be  due  to  the  influence
of  the  suggestive  dramatisations  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script.


iSee  XXXII.


276


Chapter  XII.


[part


CHAPTER  XII.

Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.

In  the  next  two  chapters  I  have  collected  together  all  such
references  in  the  script  to  identifiable  matter  as  have  not  already
been  discussed  in  connexion  with  specified  persons.  For  con-
venience I  have  divided  them  according  as  they  appear  to  relate
to  what  had  already  occurred  at  the  time  of  writing  or  to  what
was  still  to  come.  Beyond  this  broad  division  into  Past  and
Future,  I  have  attempted  no  classification.  The  incidents  show
considerable  difi^erences,  both  in  character  and  value.  If  they
were  classified  by  results  they  would  range  from  complete
failure  through  many  intermediate  classes  to  complete  success,
and  much  difference  of  opinion  would  be  found  as  to  the  class
in  which  a  particular  incident  should  fall.  What  they  all
possess  is  sufficient  precision  of  statement  to  be  connected,
whether  correctly  or  not,  with  definite  events.  They  are  in
fact,  or  claim  to  be,  identifiable,  and  many  have  been
identified.  In  this  respect  they  differ  from  the  "  unidentifiable
statements  or  allusions "  described  in  Chapter  VI.,  though  this
difference  may  be  one  of  degree  rather  than  of  kind,  and
so  the  same  type  of  phenomenon  may  be  represented  in  both.
But  for  critical  purposes  there  is  an  important  distinction
between  detailed  description  so  far  unidentified  and  state-
ments which,  even  if  lacking  in  precision,  yet  present  a  point
of  contact  with  an  actual  occurrence.

Where  more  than  one  reference  in  the  script  is  made  to
what  is  apparently  the  same  incident,  I  have  grouped  these
references  together.^  Occasionally  two  or  three  topics  are  so
constantly  intermingled  in  the  script  that  it  has  been  impos-
sible to  disconnect  them.  But  I  have  treated  the  incidents
as  isolated  units  wherever  that  could  be  done.

1  In  all  cases  where  no  quotation  from  the  script  is  given  in
this  narrative,  extracts  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  415-29.


LIII.]


Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


277


(1)  In  the  first  of  the  series  of  attempts  to  guess  jULOPOiroAov
eV  ciM,  August  13th,  1901,  at  a  time  when,  as  the  reader  will
remember,  I'  had  no  idea  that  my  husband  was  trying  any
experiment,  the  script  produced  an  unmistakeable  allusion  to  an
incident  connected  with  him — the  loss  of  a  hat — some  years
before.  At  the  time  the  emergence  of  this  memory  seemed
wholly  arbitrary,  but,  on  reviewing  the  matter  after  I  was
acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  his  experiment,  I  am
disposed  to  think  that  some  vague  association  of  ideas  may
account  for  the  mention  of  the  lost  hat.  The  unrecognised
intention  to  find  something  wanted  by  my  husband  may  have
revived  in  my  memory  the  recollection  of  a  lost  object
belonging  to  him.  The  words  of  the  script  show  a  conscious-
ness that  the  loss  of  the  hat  was  known  to  me :

Hat — a  black  hat  in  a  box  belonging  to  him  was  lost  something
blue  near  it. Ask — you  know  this — a  blue  tie  in  the  hat.

The  hatbox  was  lost  with  the  hat  in  it ;  but  we  have  no
recollection  of  a  tie  or  anything  else  lost  with  the  hat.  This
statement  therefore  has  no  evidential  value,  but  it  marks  a
connexion  with  my  husband  in  a  piece  of  writing  unmistakeably
aiming  at  the  word  "dawn."^

(2)  A  description  in  the  script  (Jan.  8th,  1902)  of  some
incident  occurring  to  a  boy  at  school  contains  the  word
"  Angelus,"  following  upon  the  phrase,  "dormitory  notice."  This
looks  like  a  reminiscence  of  the  "  Anglesea "  which  was  my
husband's  dormitoiy  at  Wellington  College.  But  he  has  no
recollection  of  any  incident  at  Wellington  such  as  it  suggested,
and  the  name  Everitt  introduced  in  the  script  has  no  association
for  him.

(3)  I  have  grouped  together  two  references  in  the  script
(on  July  8th  and  Nov.  25th,  1901),  though  lam  not  sure  that
they  are  intended  to  describe  the  same  incident.  Remarks
about  a  talk  "  in  the  cloisters  "  ^  in  the  script  of  July  8,  1901
seem  to  be  definitelv  attributed  to  Dr.  Sidg-wiek,  and  to  be
addressed  to  some  one,  almost  certainly  my  husband.  The

^See  above,  p.  160.

2  From  the  context  evidently  the  cloisters  at  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.


278


Chapter  XII.


[part


second  script  (Nov.  25,  1901)  is  confused.  After  allusions  to
Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour,  and  to  a  basket  associated  elsewhere  with
T)v.  Sidgwick/  it  refers  to  a  talk  between  some  one  and
my  husband  in  the  College  Court,  as  described  on  July  8th,
1.901,  but  there  is  no  means  of  determining  with  precision  who
is  supposed  to  be  the  speaker  on  this  occasion.

My  husband  has  no  special  recollection  of  such  talks  as  are
described,  and  in  the  absence  of  further  information  the  allusion
in  the  script  must  be  looked  upon  as  unverified.^

(4)  Four  attempts  were  made  to  produce  identifiable  matter
in  connexion  with  a  basket  containing  fruit.  The  incident
was  first  introduced  on  July  17th,  1901,  when,  after  reproaching
me  for  not  writing  on  July  1.5th,  as,  on  June  30tb,  I  had
been  instructed  to  do,  the  scribe  produced  remarks  about  a
basket  with  fruit  in  it,  and  attempted  to  describe  a  room  by
the  seaside  at  a  place  which  was  either  Margate  or  Ramsgate.
The  whole  story  was  unmistakeably  connected  with  Dr.
Sidgwick,  the  script  terminating  with  various  attempts  at
names,  among  which  his  occurred.  Later  (Dec.  10th,  1901)
Margate  was  given  as  the  name,  and  the  incident  was  connected
with  Mr.  Myers,  and  a  visit  of  his  to  Margate.

It  was  a  fact  within  my  knowledge  that  Mr.  Myers  had
visited  Dr.  Sidgwick  at  Margate  on  July  7th-9th,  1900.  The
description  of  the  room  is  not  applicable  to  the  rooms  at  Margate.
Fruit  had  been  sent,  but  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  no  special  re-
collection of  a  basket  of  grapes.

There  is  no  evidential  value,  therefore,  in  this  incident.

(5)  Another  group  of  allusions  remains  completely  un-
identified. On  three  occasions  in  the  early  days  of  the  script
attempts  were  made  to  describe  a  place,  apparently  a  river,
represented  in  Latin,  the  ordinary  language  of  the  script  at
that  date,  by  "  Dovinans." The  banks  of  the  "  Dovinans "  are

1  See  next  incident,  No.  4.

2  See,  however,  a  letter,  in  May,  1900,  from  Dr.  Sidgwick  to  Sir  G.  0.
Trevelyan,  quoted  in  the  recently  pubhshed  Memoir  of  Henry  Sidgwick,
p.  589,  where  the  language  closely  resembles  that  of  the  script  of
July  8,  1901.  The  Memoir  was  not  published  till  after  I  had  written
the  present  chapter.


LIII.]


Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


279


mentioned  on  March  31st,  April  8th,  and  May  1st,  1901.
On  two  subsequent  occasions  allusions  appear  to  some  word
beginning  Dover  (May  8th,  1901,  March  19th,  1902),  and
once  (April  2nd,  1903)  is  a  reference  to  the  banks  of  some-
thing called  Douern  ;  on  this  -last  occasion  there  is  said  to
be  a  cross  on  steps,  with  a  wreath  upon  it,  on  the  banks
of  the  Douern,  and  somewhat  illegible  initials  are  given,  the
iirst  being  A,  the  second  probably  J,  and  the  third  C.^  On
May  23rd,  1901,  occurs  the  phrase,  "Dominans  in  ripa  stetit
hagiologus  " ;  -  but  it  is  quite  likely  that  "  dominans  in  ripa "
is  a  reminiscence  of  "Dovinantis  in  ripa,"  especially  as  this
passage  purports  to  be  signed  by  the  same  signatory.

Nothing  has  been  discovered  that  throws  any  light  upon  the
name  Dovinans ;  it  occurs  only  in  the  earliest  script,  which  is
usually  fragmentary  and  unintelligible.

(6)  On  three  successive  occasions  in  the  summer  of  1901  there
were  references  to  a  play  which  I  was  to  identify  if  possible.
The  description  was  not  very  definite,^  but  clearly  the  reference
was  to  a  MS.  play  connected  with  children  and  dating  from  a
long  time  back.  The  supposed  communicator  wa,s  not  named,
but  was  plainly  indicated  as  Dr.  Sidgwick.

As  the  script  had  said  that  "  she "  would  know,  I  asked
Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  my  return  to  England  whether  she  knew
anything  about  such  a  play  and  she  then  told  me  that  recently
in  sorting  some  papers,  she  had  come  across  a  MS.  play*  written
and  performed  by  children.  I  have  now  seen  the  play ;  in
one  or  two  points  it  corresponds  to  the  description ;  the
sheets  for  instance,  are  square  and  the  paper  white ;  the  writing-
is  crabbed  and  there  are  other  childish  papers  with  it.  But
there  are  not  twenty  or  thirty  sheets,^  the  writing  is  not  very

1  See,  however,  later,  p.  335,  for  a  discussion  of  this  incident,
which  seems  to  have  been  verified  since  this  chapter  was  written.

-Trans.  "Dominant  on  the  bank  stood  the  legend-writer."

^The  three  passages  are  given  in  App.,  p.  416.

*The  play  was  written  in  1856  by  some  children  among  whom
was  the  sister  of  Mr.  Jermyn  Cowell,  a  friend  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's,
to  whom  the  MS.  doubtless  came  among  other  papers  on  Mr.
Cowell's  death  in  1867.

°  There  are  18  sheets,  i.e.  36  pages.


280


Chapter  XII.


[part


close  and  in  some  pages  there  is  a  margin  on  the  right.  The
play,  moreover,  is  quite  complete  and  contains  nothing  repre-
senting the  attempts  at  names  in  the  script.  The  only  note-
worthy point  is  that  about  the  time  when  Mrs.  Sidgwick
came  across  a  childish  play  in  MS.  there  was  in  my  script  a
reference  to  such  a  play  sufficiently  connected  in  the  script
with  Dr.  Sidgwick  to  induce  me  to  apply  to  her  for
information.

(7)  There  have  been  throughout  the  script  constant  refer-
ences to  a  garden,  but  they  are  not  definite  enough  for  veri-
fication. The  earlier  allusions,  mostly  in  the  fragmentary  and
unintelligible  Latin  of  the  first  few  months  of  the  script,
suggest  that  something  is  contained  in  the  writer's  garden,
"the  dewy  gai'den  where  I  used  to  set  my  feet,"  but  the
"  treasures  hidden  in  the  garden  "  remain  undiscovered.

(8)  In  three  passages  of  the  script  and  in  three  only  occur
three  small  letters  xx  x  in  juxtaposition  and  these  same  extracts
contain  the  word  glyptatus.  It  is  probable  that  the  three
passages  are  somehovi^  connected.  The  first  two,  on  March  14th
and  April  8th,  1901,  are  untranslatable  though  not  altogether
meaningless,  at  least  in  suggestion.  Both  refer  to  a  hiero-
glyphema,  whatever  that  may  be,  probably  an  inscription,  as
in  the  first  case^  there  are  allusions  to  carved  marble  and  a
knife,  and  in  the  second  case  the  word  inscription  is  actually
used,  though  there  the  Meroglyyhema  seems  to  be  a  puzzle
as  well  as  an  inscription.

On  the  third  occasion  (Aug.  28,  1901)  there  is  no  doubt
at  all  that  the  script  refers  to  a  circular  inscription,  cut  on
stone.  The  script  speaks  of  a  dial  or  font  and  there  is  a
rough  drawing  which  might  represent  either  of  these  objects.
A  phrase  earlier  in  the  same  script :  "  I  speak  with  the
toncue  of  brass — hard  to  move "  seems  to  indicate  a  sun-
dial.  Reference  was  made  to  my  husband  on  this  occasion'^
and  also  on  April  8th,  but  not  on  March  14th.  Both  March
14th  and  April  8th  contained  allusions  to  the  same  personal
friend  of  ours,  H.

iSee  App.,  p.  417.

2  This  was  one  of  the  attempts  to  guess  fxovo-n-tJikov  k  dw.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


281


When  my  husband  saw  the  writing  of  August  28th  he
pointed  out  the  references  to  a  sundial,  which  I  had  not
observed,  and  suggested  that  the  three  x  x  x  were  intended
as  some  sort  of  clue.  We  then  looked  through  the  preced-
ing script  and  found  that  this  same  sign  had  occurred,  as
above  noted,  on  two  other  occasions,  in  both  of  which  there
were  references  to  some  sort  of  cut  inscription.  It  seemed
therefore  that  these  three  bits  of  writing  represented  successive
attempts  to  say  something  about  a  sundial  with  an  inscrip-
tion upon  it.  This  aroused  no  recollection  in  my  mind,  but
my  husband  had  vague  reminiscences  connected  with  an  in-
scribed sundial. They  may  be  summed  up  as  follows :

(1)  It  is  certain  that  H.  once  asked  my  husband  to  com-
pose a  Latin  inscription  for  a  friend  of  his.

(2)  My  husband's  first  recollection  was  that  the  object  to  be
inscribed  was  a  sundial,  but  on  second  thoughts  he  thought
it  was  a  mantelpiece.

(3)  At  a  later  date  he  believes  that  Mr.  G.  Monkton,  an
acquaintance  of  ours,  consulted  him  about  an  inscription  and  in
so  doing  referred  to  his  having  already  had  some  similar
service  from  my  husband  through  H.

I  distinctly  remember  a  correspondence  between  my  husband
and  Mr.  G.  Monkton  about  an  inscription,  but  I  had  no
idea  that  H.  had  any  connexion  with  the  episode,  nor  do
I  recollect  what  was  the  object  to  be  inscribed,  though
my  impression  is  that  it  was  a  mantelpiece.  The  general
outcome  of  these  recollections  is  that  there  were  two  occasions
on  which  my  husband  composed  or  criticised  a  Latin  inscrip-
tion :

(a)  For  a  friend  of  H.,  unnamed  at  the  time,  and  subsequently
found  to  be  Mr.  G.  Monkton.

(6)  For  Mr.  G.  Monkton  at  his  own  request.

I  certainly  knew  of  the  second  and  may,  I  suppose,  have
known  of  the  first. But  I  can  recall  nothing  of  it.

The  description  in  the  script  is  not  very  detailed  nor  par-
ticularly clear,  but  it  seems  to  have  recalled  something  to  my
husband.  Some  six  weeks  later  the  script  accepted  our
interpretation  of  these passages  in  the words : "  You  have


282


Chapter  XII.


[part


understood  the  sundial  at  last"  (October  6th,  1901),  and  since
then  there  has  been  no  further  reference  to  the  subject.

^^^(9)  In  the  winter  of  1901-2  great  efforts  were  made  to
convey  to  Dr.  Hodgson  a  word  or  words.  The  incident  has  no
special  value,  but  as  it  is  a  characteristic  illustration  of  the
style  of  the  script  I  relate  it  in  detail.  The  passages  bearing
on  this  subject  are  as  follows :

(ft)  December  loth,  1901 (I  give the  whole  of  what  was
written).

Non  crepitat  niiltitidinis  vox  in  auribus  meis.*  Hodgson  knows
the  words  you  will  get  them  before  long.  Gignifer  or  gengane
yevvi^iDv  or  yevvia^ovTes  Gesneration.  But  there  are  two  words,  eu
yei'i'j^Tot  ol  yei'i'ia^'oi'Tes  some  such  phrase — a  paradox,  a  denial,
a  statement,  all  those  at  once— ei'yei/ets  ol  dyeveZs  No  it  was  better
before  but  that  is  the  idea — a  pair  of  contradictory  words  and  g
is  an  important  sound.

ay>/pws  y-qpa^ — no  not  that, you  can't  do  it. Goodnight  Tuus.

{h)  December  19th,  1901  (at  the  end  of  a  piece  of  writing).

Gennesarion
Gennsaret
Genos — agenes

Faithless  generation
Is  it  German — genossen — no  it  has  more  form.
ytvta,

yei'i'a  70  yiyi'o/xei'oi'

That  is  all  I  can  do.

You  understand  better  tonight. Go  on.

(c)  December  21st,  1901.

Do  not  forget  the  word  it  is  gens  togata  and  another  short
word, gens  togata  dedit  f  like  dedit  but  not  that  sense.

(d)  January  4th,  1902.

Late  but  not  last.  Tell  Hodgson  the  words  in  gen — that  is
nearly  right  yewT^o-ts  is  important  not  Genesis — and  not  Exodus
but  €^a)8os — perhaps  he  will  understand  that  you  will  not.

*  Trans. "  The  voice  of  the  crowd  (V)  does  not  sound  in  my  ears."
t  Trans.  "  The  toga-clad  race  gave."


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


283


(e)  January  13th,  1902.

Three  Latin  words  can  she  not  write  them  1  would  give  the
clue — Quid  fremuerunt  gentes'?  gentes  seems  right — gens  togata
rapit. Non  possum  plurima  hodie  eras  meri  meliora  supersunt.*

(/)  January  29th,  1902.

gentile  no  gentes  gens  togata  vocat.  Romam — Romanam  condere
gentem.t

(g)  February  10th,  1902.

You  will  hear  from  Dr.  Hodgson  but  he  does  not  understand
those  words — I  wanted  him  to  have  them.

In  January,  1902,  I  sent  the  first  five  extracts  to  Dr.
Hodgson ;  they  conveyed  absolutely  nothing  to  me.  I  did  not
receive  his  answer  till  February  13th,  three  days  after  the
last  of  the  above  quoted  writings.  He  wrote  that  the  "  words
in  gen "  recalled  to  him  a  dim  reminiscence  of  a  quotation,
containing  the  word  yeveaOai,  in  which  he  had  once  been
interested.  But  he  could  not  recall  the  sentence  and  no
further  information  on  the  subject  has  been  received.

(10)  On  October  12th,  1901,  after  a  long  and  confused  piece
of  writing,  signed  and  so  apparently  terminated,  came  the
addition  :

Give  it  to  her — yarn  a  tangled  skein.  Veridical  is  the  case —
see  what  you  have  said.

On  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  October  13th,  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick  brought  to  me  a  letter  from  Mr.  Piddington  enclosing  an
account  from  a  Cambridge  correspondent  of  an  apparently
veridical  dream.  Mr.  Piddington  had  written  on  October  11th
to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  suggesting  that  she  or  I  should  investigate
the  case,  so  that  before  the  remark  of  my  script  both  Mr.
Piddington  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  thought  of  me  as  a  pos-
sible investigator.

The  case  was  investigated  by  me,  and  appeared  to  be  veri-
dical. It  was  printed  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal,  July,  1902.

'''Trans.  "Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage'?  (Ps.  II.)  .  .  .
the  toga-clad  race  carries  oft'.  I  cannot  do  more  to-day  better
things  are  left  (?)  for  to-morrow."

J  Trans.  "To  found  the  Roman  race." Virgil,  Aen.  VI.  133.


284.


Gliajiter  XII.


[part


(11)  On  May  27th,  1901,  I  had  a  curious  sensation  early
in  the  naorning,  which  I  noted  at  the  time  as  follows :  "  Maj'
27th,  10.15  a.m.,  I  am  impelled  to  note  that  for  the  last
quarter  of  an  hour  or  so  I  have  been  filled  with  a  growing
sense  of  expectancy  and  subdued  excitement,  as  if  something
were  '  going  to  happen.'  It  has  reached  such  a  point  that  I
must  make  a  note.  I  don't  connect  it  with  anything  or  any-
body, but  I  am  actually  a  little  breathless, — though  I  have
been  sitting  still  for  half  an  hour,  reading  proofs.  It  is  Bank
holiday,  and  the  paper  has  come  long  ago,  so  there  is  no
post  or  ring  at  the  bell  to  be  expected.  I  have  no  desire  to
write  automatically."

Later  in  the  morning  I  went  out,  and  on  my  return  had  a
sudden  impulse  to  write.  I  began  at  12.40  p.m.  but  was  in-
terrupted for  a  moment,  and  resumed  at  12.50,  ending  at  1.
After  a  word  or  two  of  nonsense,  and,  in  Latin,^  a  statement
about  the  difficulty  of  writing,  even  when  great  care  was  used,
the  frequency  of  mistake,  and  the  greater  facility,  when  I
was  taken  unawares,  the  script  went  on,  after  telling  me  to
note  the  time,  to  describe  a  fire.  The  points  mentioned  were
the  burning  and  destruction  of  a  house — the  absence  of  the
master — the  destruction  of  pictures — the  black  smoke,  strong
smell,  and  crackling  of  flames — the  considei'able  and  noteworthy
damage — the  presence  of  excited  inhabitants — the  hindrance
caused  by  the  wind — the  arrival  at  last  of  a  fire  engine
drawn  by  horses  amid  the  shouts  of  a  crowd — the  licking
and  flickering  of  the  flames  and  their  extinction  in  smoke
— the  subsequent  lamentation  "  not  accompanied  by  groans
and  tears."  It  was  then  stated  that  the  occurrence  was
I'ecent,  and  that  if  I  noted  .it  at  once  its  truth  would  be
manifest.

In  the  Times  of  the  next  morning.  May  28th,  I  found  a
short  paragraph  as  follows :  "  A  fire  occurred  yesterday  at  the
Lady  Artists'  Club,  Blythswood  Square,  Glasgow.  Before  the
flames  were  extinguished  over  60  oil  and  water  colour  pic-
tures on  exhibition  in  the  salon  were  destroyed."  Subsequent

1  The  original  Latin  is  given  in  App.,  p.  418.  It  presents  some
points  of  linguistic  interest  which  have  been  commented  on  above,
p.  44.


LIU.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  285


enquiries  ^  showed  that  the  fire  occuri'ed  in  the  early  morning
of  May  27th,  the  summons  to  the  fire-brigade  being  at  1.20  a.m.
Considerable  damage  was  done  by  fire  to  the  premises,
and  the  pictures  were  almost  wholly  destroyed  by  the  heat.
The  loss  was  estimated  at  about  £1500.

It  would  appear  that,  at  least  towards  the  end,  the  account
in  the  script  shows  a  certain  picturesque  exaggeration  of
detail.  There  was  no  lamentation,  no  shouting  crowd,  no
disturbing  wind.  A  more  serious  inaccuracy  is  contained  in
the  words  clominus  ahsens,  "the  master  was  not  there."  As
will  be  .seen,  the  premises  being  a  Club,  there  was  no  master
at  all,  and  no  responsible  person  was,  as  a  fact,  absent  at  the
time.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fire  was  extinguished  by  a  fire
engine  drawn  by  horses,  and  the  destruction  of  pictures  is  a,n
important  point  in  common  between  the  description  and  the
fact.  To  ascertain  whether  it  is  common  to  read  of  destruc-
tion of  pictures  by  fire,  I  looked  carefully  at  the  notices  of
fires  in  the  Times  during  the  rest  of  the  year,  and  only  found
one  other  case,  in  December,  where  mention  was  made  of  the
destruction  by  fire  of  pictures.

Whether  or  not  there  is  a  connexion  between  the  fire  at
Glasgow  at  1.20  a.m.  and  the  I'ecord  of  a  recent  fire  in  my
script  eleven  hours  later,  there  is,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  a
connexion  between  my  script  and  the  unusual  sensation  of
subdued  excitement  which  preceded  it  by  about  three  hours.
It  is  probable  that  the  first  impression — however  produced —
of  a  fire  reached  my  consciousness  about  10  a.m.,  but  was  not
definite  enough  to  emeroe  till  later  in  the  morning;.

(12)  On  December  7th,  1903,  in  the  train  on  my  wa}^  back
from  London,  where  I  had  spent  the  day,  about  11  p.m.  the
script  wrote :

The  letter  is  at  your  house  that  explains.  good g  u  i  d-

a  n  c  6.2  and  the  waters  of  Omar.

There  was  no  letter  for  me  at  home,  but  the  first  post  next
morning brought me a letter  from my friend Mrs.  Leaf

1  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  with  whom  I  communicated,  wrote to  the
secretary  of  the  Club  for  information  about  details  not  contained
in  a  paragraph  from  the  Glasgoio  Herald  of  May  28th.
The  spacing  represents  larger  writing  in  the  original.


286


Chapter  XII.


[part


wishing  me  a  good  journey,  and  enclosing  me  a  pocket  edition
of  Omar  Khayyam,  the  first  copy  of  that  work  which  I  have
ever  possessed.  We  were  to  start  for  Algeria  on  December
11th,  and  letters  of  good  wishes  for  the  journey  might  be
expected.  But  the  introduction  of  the  word  "Omar"  in  con-
nexion with  a  letter  of  good  wishes  seems  remarkable.  What
is  meant  by  "the  waters"  of  Omar  I  do  not  know;  the  object
of  our  journey  was  for  my  husband  to  take  the  waters  of
Hammam  R'Hira,  and  it  is  possible  that  this  has  introduced
confusion.

(13)  About  a  year  after  the  script  began — in  January,
1902 — I  read  a  book  that  had  recently  appeared,  Life
and  Letters  in  the  Fourtlt  Century,  and  in  the  chapter  on
Macrobius  were  some  points  which  reminded  me  of  parts  of
my  script.  1  noted  these  at  the  time,  but  I  made  no  further
acquaintance  with  Macrobius  till  the  spring  of  1903,  when  the
appearance  in  the  script  of  allusions,  as  it  seemed,  to  Neo-
Platonic  theories,  induced  me  to  read  for  the  first  time  several
of  the  later  Platonists,  amono-  others  Macrobius.  On  reading
Macrobius  I  found  some  further  traces  of  apparent  connexion
with  my  script,  and  I  here  group  together  all  the  indications
of  such  connexion.  In  some  cases  the  phrases  in  the  script
may  easily  be  traced  to  other  sources,  but  as  bearing  on  the
general  question  of  connexion  between  Macrobius  or  other
Neo-Platonists  and  the  script,  it  seems  better  to  place  them
together  for  comment.

{a)  Macrobius'  longest  work  is  called  the  Saturnalia^,  and
represents  a  supposed  conversation  on  things  in  general
between  friends  assembled  during  that  festival.  Catullus'
phrase  for  the  Saiurnalia,  '  opthno  dierum,'  is  naturally  enough
quoted  by  Macrobius.^  The  same  phrase  occurs  twice  in  my
script."  The  question  of  what  is  there  intended  has  been  dis-
cussed above.  The  phrase,  in  any  case,  probably  has  its  origin
in  the  familiar  passage  of  Catullus.

(6)  On  May  3rd,  1901,  the  script  uses  the  phrase  crastino
die,  and  on  May  31st,  1901,  it  speaks  of  deferring  in  cras-
tinum  diem. On  October  17th,  1901,  it  shows  some  uncertainty

^Sat.  II.  1.  8.  2  March  15th,  April  3rd,  1901,  see  p.  50,


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  287


as  to  the  phraseology  used,  and  speaks  of  telling  more  cr<xs
vel  crastino  die.  The  doubt  as  to  the  best  phrase  to  use  for
"  to-morrow "  amused  me  when  I  saw  it,  but  recalled  nothing.
Macrobius  discusses  at  some  length  ^  the  question  whether  the
phrase  die  crastini  is  justifiable,  or  whether  the  more  regular
die  crastino  is  not  preferable.  Though  the  disputed  linguistic
point  is  not  quite  the  same  in  the  script  and  in  Macrobius,
there  is  a  close  analogy  between  them.  I  know  no  other
place  where  the  phrase  is  discussed,  and,  as  such  discussions
do  not  interest  my  normal  self,  I  have  no  explanation  to  give
for  their  occurrence  in  the  script.

(c)  Several  of  the  quotations  from  Virgil  in  the  script  are
also  quoted  by  Macrobius.  But  his  quotations  from  Virgil
are  so  numerous  that  the  coincidence  goes  for  little  or
nothing,  especially  as  the  quotations  common  to  both  are  very
familiar.

(cZl)  On  October  12th,  1904,  in  an  imaginary  journey  to
the  Abode  of  the  Blest,  the  script  says  that  the  "  way  must
be  sought  for  thrice  and  four  times,"  ter  et  quarter  renovare
viam.  Seven  is  of  course  a  mystic  number,  but  I  had  no
associations  with  the  division  of  it  into  three  and  four.  Virg-il
{jEneid  I.  94)  has  the  phrase  terque  quaierque  beati,  "  thrice
and  four  times  blest,"  applied  to  those  who  have  not  lived  to
see  the  destruction  of  Troy,  and  the  words  in  the  script  may
be  due  to  a  reminiscence  of  that  passage  or  some  other  similar
use  of  the  words.  But  Macrobius  quotes  the  Virgilian  phrase
to  illustrate  his  contention  that  Virgil  was  deeply  learned
in  ritual  and  mystic  lore,-  and  supposes  it  to  describe  the
happiness  of  the  Blest.  The  numbers  three  and  four  and
their  resulting  conjunction  into  seven  have  a  special  signiticance
in  the  Pythagorean  system — a  system  intimately  connected
with  later  Neo-Platonic  symbolism.  The  importance  of  the
Pythagorean  SiaTea-a-apwv  is  insisted  upon  in  the  same  passage
of  Macrobius.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  Pythagorean  Diatessaron,
and  could  see  no  possible  meaning  for  a  phrase  in  my  script  of
December  19th,  1902,  "the  new  and  old  Diatessaron/'  till  I  read

^Sat.  I.  4.

2"Nullius  disciplinae  expers  plane  et  per  omnia  beatos  exprimere
volens." Macr.  Comm.  in  Samn.  Scij).  I.  6.  ii. See  also  above,  p.  1.31.


288


Chapter  XII.


[PAET


the  passage  in  Macrobius  early  in  1905.^  Tlie  only  application
that  I  could  find  for  the  word  Diatessaron  was  to  the  com-
bined narrative  of  the  four  Gospels,  but  that  did  not  explain
the  double  reference  ("new  and  old"),  which  became  intelligible
only  when  I  learnt  that  there  was  a  Pythagorean  as  well
as  a  Christian  Diatessaron.

(e)  The  script's  habit  of  punning  described  above  finds  its
analogy  in  Macrobius,  but  is  common  enough  in  other  classical
writers,  and  especially  among  the  Neo-Platonists.  Once,  how-
ever, the  same  unscientific  and  fanciful  connexion  between  two
unconnected  words  appears  both  in  Macrobius  and  the  script.
Macrobius^  connects  Apollo's  epithet,  Delphian,  with  a  supposed
old  Greek  word  SeX(po<;  meaning  "  one,"  and  goes  on  to  say  that
hence  too  comes  the  word  aSeXtpo?  "  brother,"  as  meaning  "  not
one."  The  script  connects  together  the  words  aSeXcpog  "  bi'other,"
and  SeXcpiKo^  "  Delphian "  in  the  phrase  aSeXcpo?  SeXcpiKfj  o/iKpr]
Xpyorerai,  and  makes  quite  clear  that  the  reference  is  to  the
Delphian  Apollo  by  going  on  to  suggest  that  by  attention  and
the  dismissal  of  one's  own  imagination  one  may  arrive  at  an
interpretation  of  the  truth  of  God.^

(/)  Another  allusion  to  Macrobius  perhaps  occurs  on  April
27th,  1901,  when  the  script  wrote  as  follows:  "Commensal  in
nitidillo  cecinit  carmen  irrefrasrabile  scientiae.  nonne  audis  ?
ausculta  aures  adhibeto  iam  jiooemium  incipit.  Fac,  Die,  faceto
(licto.  nomen  nescis— sed  non  semper  sic  erit."  The  actual
words  are  obscure  and  not  easily  translatable,  but  the  general
sense  is  plain.  Some  one  somewhere  has  repeated  "  an  irre-
futable formula  of  wisdom " ;  if  I  do  not  hear  I  am  to  listen
and  attend,  for  the  prelude  (?)  begins  at  once.  Then  follow  the
words  Fac  Die  faceto  dicto,  intended  apparently  for  a  pun  on
the  word  faceto.

The  same  combination  of  words  is  found  in  Macrobius.  He
is  explaining  that  the  ancients  called  seemly  jests  "dicta"

1  The  text  of  Macrobius  was  in  my  possession,  and  had  been
referred  to,  though  not  read,  before  the  script  of  October  12th,  1904,
so  that  I  may  have  seen,  without  remembering,  his  comment  on  the
Virgilian  phrase  ferquc  quaterque.  But  the  allusion  in  the  script  to
the  "Diatessaron"  occurred  some  months  before  I  had  any  oppor-
tunity of  acquaintance  with  Macrobius.

-Sat.  I.  17.  G5.  3  See  above,  p.  57.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


289


(sayings),  and  quotes  as  his  authority  Cicero,^  who  writes
that  whereas  everything  that  we  say  is  a  '  saying,'  the  word
is  especially  used  for  things  which  are  said  with  humour,  brevity,
and  wit,  quae  facete  et  hreviter  et  acute  locuti  essemus,  ea
propria  nomine  aiypellari  dicta  voluerunt.

Here  then  the  script  and  Macrobius  seemed  to  have  hit
upon  the  same  combination.  The  script  was  obtained  on
April  27th,  1901,^  when  I  knew  nothing  of  Macrobius.  It
was  only  in  February,  1905,  that,  in  the  course  of  a  careful
reading  of  the  whole  of  Macrobius,  I  came  across  the  passage
in  question.

(g)  On  April  20th,  1901,  the  script  attaches  some  importance
to  the  solstice,^  which,  it  says,  is  to  be  awaited.  There  is
a  more  definite  reference  on  June  23rd,  1901.  I  note  the
allusions,  as  they  may  be  a  reflexion  on  the  general  interest
in  the  solstice  felt  by  the  Neo-Platonists.  In  that  case  they
may  be  closely  connected  with  the  incident  next  to  be  narrated.

(h)  The  explanation  of  a  phrase  in  the  script  of  April  22nd,
1901,  is  perhaps  to  be  found  rather  in  Neo-Platonic  philosophy
in  general  than  in  Macrobius  in  particular.  The  phrase  is
"  Cardo  KupKLvov"  and  after  these  mysterious  words  the  script
goes  on  to  say  that  if  this  is  not  possible,  another*  is  to  be
tried  and  hope  not  abandoned.  The  two  words  had  no
meaning  or  connexion  as  far  as  I  could  see.  Cardo  means  a
hinge,  and  is  also  used  of  the  four  cardinal  points ;  KupKivos
means  a  crab.  But  I  learn  to  my  surprise  from  Macrobius  and
other  writers  that  the  phrase  has  a  traditional  meaning,  so
that  the  combination  is  intelligible  and  probably  not  accidental.
Basing  his  views  on  the  Platonic  mj^th  at  the  end  of  the
Repuhlic,  Porphyry,^  in  his  allegorical  interpretation  of  Homer,

1  Cic.  24  fragm.  Ed.  Orelli,  p.  968.  I  have  never  read  or  looked
at  any  collection  of  Cicero's  fragments. Macr.  Sat.  II.  1.  14.

-  It  was  sent  with  other  script  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  December,
1902.

^  On  April  20th  the  phrase  used  is  Tpoira^  rjeXioco ;  on  June  23rd
the  phrase  is  solsituo  (sic)  die.

*  Possibly  "  another  way  " — the  Latin  leaves  the  meaning  uncertain.
See  App.,  p.  418.

^De  Antr.  N.  21.

T


290


Chapter  XII.


[part


says  that  the  cave  which  is  the  abode  of  souls  has  two  entrances,
north  and  south,  at  the  cardinal  points  in  Cancer  and  Capricorn,
the  extreme  points,  that  is,  of  the  ecliptic.  The  northern  gate
is  the  one  by  which  the  souls  enter  in  their  descent  to  earth.^
The  words  used  for  the  gates  by  Porphyry  are  aicpa  and  xJXai,
and  the  northern  gate  is  called  6  KupKipo?  and  kutu  KupKivov.
Gardo  is  not  used  in  the  singular  for  a  door,  but  it  is  used  for
one  of  the  cardinal  points  (a/cpov),  so  that  the  phrase  Gardo
canceris  would  naturally  represent  the  north  point  on  the
ecliptic,  in  the  sign  of  Cancer  the  Crab,  which  served  for  the
entrance  gate  of  the  descending  souls.  KapKiPog  is  precisely
equivalent  to  cancer,  so  that  the  phrase  "  Cardo  KupKivou"
though  combining  two  languages  and  not  occurring  anywhere
in  the  classics,  is  perfectly  intelligible.  But  it  was  not
intelligible  to  me  at  the  time  of  writing  nor  for  some  years
later.

(*)  It  is  possible  to  see  in  the  description-  on  January  20th,
1903,  some  connexion  with  the  Cave  of  the  Nymphs,  as
allegorically  interpreted  by  Porphyry  from  Homer's  account  in
Odyssey,  XIII.  97.

The  scribe  appeared  to  think  the  description  veridical,  but  it
recalled  nothing  to  me.  Some  six  weeks  later,  however,  having
occasion  to  consult  a  Biographical  Dictionary  for  the  life  of
Porphj'ry,  who  was  little  more  than  a  name  to  me,  I  found
there  an  account  of  his  allegory  of  the  Cave  of  the  Nymphs
which  seemed  to  have  some  points  in  common  with  my  script,
and  I  then  read  Porphyry's  work  for  the  first  time.  Porphyry's
Cave  is  inhabited  by  Naiads — water-nymphs — representing  the
souls  that  are  to  be  born.  In  the  script,  Nereids,  also  water-
nymphs,  inhabit  what  is  obviously  intended  for  an  Abode  of
the  Blest.  In  Porphyry's  narrative  mystical  importance  is
attached  to  an  olive-tree,  and  a  similar  suggestion  seems  to  be

^  The  same  ideas  appear  in  Macrobius  {Comm.  I.  V2.  1-.3),  Apuleius,
and  elsewhere,  and  seem  to  have  been  common  among  the  Neo-
Platonists.

2  See  above,  p.  112,  for  comment  on  the  series  of  which  this  script
forms  part.  The  point  here  raised  is  whether  any  connexion  is  to
be  traced  between  this  description  on  Jan.  20,  1903,  and  Porphyry's
Allegory,  then  unknown  to  me.


LIU.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  291


made  in  the  script,  tliough  the  "  great  tree "  mentioned  there
is  not  defined.

The  Homeric  description  on  which  Porphyry's  allegory  is
based  contains  the  olive-tree  and  the  water-nymphs,  but  is
wholly  without  mystical  suggestion,  and  presents  no  analogy
with  the  script.  The  connexion  between  Porphyry's  Allegory
and  the  script  cannot  be  regarded  as  established,  but  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  account  in  the  script  suggests  certain
analogies  with  Neo-Platonic  or  Orphic  descriptions  of  Abodes
of  the  Blest.  On  March  7th,  1903,  immediately  after  my
finding  in  the  Biographical  Dictionary  a  short  account  of
Poi'phyry's  allegory,  and  before  I  read  the  original,  the  script
wrote  as  follows :

IHaco  carmine  responsum  dedi  illi  quod  semper  postulas —
mentionem  iam  ante  feci  huius  loci — cur  non  invenire  potes  ?
(XKTi)  Kvavk'i] — mare  glaucum  spumantibus  equis  insuper  deiis  vehitur —
nihilo  magis  rota  magistri  tempus  in  partes  aequas  dividit.

prime  splendidior,  postremo  multisonans  voce  angelica,  postea  autem
voi]TM  re  Ktti  voepM  magis  uteris.  Num  credibilius  illud,  o
numquam  mihi  fidem  praebens  !  Temptanti  difficilia,  manum  atten-
dere  debeas — manum  amicam  usque  ad  cram  illam.  wKrepos  rjSij
oSos.  *

Obviously,  and  naturally  enough,  the  script  alludes  to  the
discovery  which  I  had  made  that  day,  but  the  allusions  are
certainly  not  such  as  would  have  been  produced  by  my
normal  self  Homer's  Cave  of  the  Nymphs  is  described  not
in  the  Iliad  but  in  the  Odyssey.  This  was  known  to  me,  and
had  been  recalled  by  the  statement  in  the  book  of  reference.
In  this  point  then  the  script  showed  ignorance  of  what
was  familiar  to  me. But  two  other  points  appear  to  show

*  Trans.  "In  the  Ilian  (1)  poem  I  have  given  the  answer  to  that
which  you  constantly  ask.  I  have  already  before  this  made  mention
of  this  place  {or  passage?) — why  can  you  not  find  iti  Sea-blue  coast —
over  the  blue  sea  on  his  foaming  horses  the  god  is  drawn.  None
the  more  the  wheel  of  the  master  divides  time  into  equal  parts.  At
first  he  is  more  glorious,  at  last  many  sounding  with  angel  voice,  but
finally  you  will  make  more  use  of  the  intellectual  and  mental.  Is  this
more  easy  of  belief,  O  you  who  never  give  me  trust  1  To  one
attempting  difficulties  you  ought  to  extend  (?)  a  hand,  a  friendly
hand  up  to  tliat  distant  shore. The  way  is  now  darkened."


292


Chapter  XII.


[part


knowledge  beyond  what  I  possessed.  The  word  voepoq  (mental)
was  quite  unfamiliar  to  me,  but  when  later  I  rea.d  Porphyry  I
found  that  the  word  was  common  in  his  vocabulary.  Further,
the  introduction  of  the  mysterious  "  wheel  of  the  master "
dividing  time,  conve3'ed  no  association  or  suggestion  to  me
till,  a  year  or  two  later,  I  read  an  account  of  a  series  of
inscribed  Orphic  tablets  found  in  Lower  Italy.^  I  then  found,
what  I  certainl}'  did  not  know  before,  that  the  wheel  is  of
great  importance  in  Orphic  ritual.  In  the  allusions  to  the
Abode  of  the  Blest  in  these  Orphic  tablets  there  appear
water-nymphs  and  springs,  a  tall  cypress  tree,  and  a  wheel.
I  have  found  no  parallel  to  the  phrase  "  wheel  of  the  master,"
the  Orphic  prayers  being  addressed  to  the  Mistress  of  the
Underworld.^  The  allusion  in  the  script,  it  is  true,  lacks
precision,  but  the  correspondence  in  phraseology  and  idea
between  these  Orphic  descriptions  and  my  script  surprises
and  puzzles.  At  the  time  they  were  produced  I  was  com-
pletely unacquainted  with  the  later  Greek  philosophers  and
mystics.  My  knowledge  was  confined  to  the  allusions  in
Mr.  Myers'  Essay  on  the  Greek  Oracles,^  but  there  is
nothing  whatever  in  that  suggestive  of  these  fanciful  accounts
of  abodes  of  the  Blest.  I  have  never  investigated  this
or  any  kindred  subject,  or  taken  an}'  interest  in  Greek
mysticism.  There  was  no  text  of  Plotinus,  Porphyry,  lambli-
chus,  or  any  writer  on  similar  subjects  in  our  house,  till  T
was  induced  to  read  such  authors  by  the  allusions  in  ray
script.  Miss  Harrison  was  in  Italy  examining  the  Orphic
tablets  in  March  and  April,  1903,  and  after  her  return  to
Cambridge  I  probably  heard  something  of  their  contents,
though  my  conscious  knowledge  of  them  dates  only  from  the
publication  of  her  book  in  the  autumn  of  1903.  Nor  have
I  been  able  to  find  in  such  classical  authors  as  I  have  read
anything  about  the  underworld  which  would  have  suggested  the
sort  of  symbolism  which  appears  in  the  script.

1  Prolegomena  to  tJie  Sfud//  of  Greek  Religion,  by  Miss  J.  E.
Harrison,  p.  573  and  foil.,  especially  pp.  589-593.

2  Aeo-TTotva,  ^dovLa  /S'acrtAeta.  See  App.  p.  431,  for  further  account
of  allusions  in  the  script  to  a  wheel.

'^Essays:  Classical  and  Modern,  Vol.  I.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


293


(j)  On  March  20th,  1903,  the  sci-ipt  gave  what  looks  like
a  direction  for  writing,  viz.  that  success  was  not  to  be
expected  with  an  East  wind  but  with  a  Westerly  breeze.

Never  when  the  wind  blows  from  out  of  the  East  but
on  the  Western  breeze  it  comes  with  sound  of  bells  and  music
heard  afar. Ask  about  this.

The  last  phrase  suggested  that  the  statement  was  verifiable,
but  it  was  not  obvious  where  the  corroboration  was  to  be
found.  It  was  not  till  later  that  my  reading  of  Neo-Platonic
writers  showed  me  that  it  was  a  i-egular  instruction  of  the
thaumaturgists  to  persons  wishing  to  attain  mystical  communion
to  make  their  efforts  only  when  the  wind  was  from  the  West.
I  cannot  conceive  why  my  script  should  agree  with  them.

(14)  Two  hills  in  Rome  have  been  mentioned  by  name  in
the  script.  On  July  30th,  1901,  I  was  told  that  the  Caelian
hill  had  already  appeared  in  the  script  before  this  date,  and
that  this  was  to  be  noted.  Apparently  I  had  "  it  not  quite
rioht."  I  could  find  no  earlier  reference  to  the  Caelian  hill,
but  in  January,  1906,  when  writing  this  paper,  I  found  that
a  part  of  the  Caelian  hill  was  ditlerently  named,  as  Caeliolus,
by  Varro,  Gaeliculus,  by  Cicero.^  In  the  script  of  April  2-1-th,
1901,  in  the  midst  of  an  unintelligible  ^  passage  came  the
words,  Caeliculosiis  vel  alium  non  dissimile,  and  then  a
reproach  for  sticking  over  the  words.  The  sentence  quoted
is  not  translatable  as  it  stands,  and  contains  a  false  concord,
alium  being  masculine  and  dissimile  neuter.  It  however
suggests  that  a  word  not  unlike  Gaeliculosus  is  intended,  and
this  might  well  be  Gaeliculus.  I  find  no  other  word  with
which  it  is  possible  to  connect  it.  It  seems  therefore  as  if
this  script  of  April  24th,  1901,  might  contain  the  earlier  re-
ference to  the  Caelian  hill  spoken  of  on  July  30th,  1901.

The  other  Koman  hill  mentioned  is  not  one  of  the  famous
seven  hills,  but  a  small  eminence  known  as  Monte  Citorio.
On  April  20th  and  again  on  June  3rd,  1901,  the  script
mentions  this  hill,  each  time  in  connexion  with  a  vulture.
On  both  occasions  there  are  other  mysterious  allusions,  and

1  Varro,  L.  L.,  IV. Cicero  ;  De  Ear.  Eesp.  XV.

2  See  App.,  p.  419,  where  all  references  to  'hills'  are  printed.


0-


294


Chapter  XII.


[part


on  June  3rd  it  is  boldly  asserted  that  the  hill  is  holy  and  a
great  help  to  me.  The  name  suggested  nothing  whatever  to
me,  but  I  found — and  I  knew  this  before  the  second  reference —
that  Monte  Citorio^  is  an  artificial  modern  hill  in  Rome
believed  to  be  made  from  the  debris  of  the  Temple  of  Marcus
Aurelius.  So  far  as  I  know  the  name  was  new  to  me  when
it  occurred  in  the  script  of  April  20th,  1901,  and  it  certainly
conveyed  no  association  of  any  sort.

In  January,  1906,  I  found  that  the  only  two  hills  in  Rome
mentioned  in  the  script  had  a  link  of  association  in  the  same
Roman  Emperor,  for  Marcus  Aurelius-  was,  it  appears,  born  in
a  house  on  the  Caelian^  hill.

(15)  An  allusion  to  Columella  was  contained  in  the  script
of  July  3rd,  1904,  which  attempted  to  produce  a  prophecy
for  subsequent  fulfilment.  The  prophecy  is  subsequently  dis-
cussed ;  *  here  I  deal  only  with  the  reference  to  Columella.
The  whole  passage  is  quoted  in  the  Appendix.^  The  relevant
parts  are  these  :

In  September  remember  the  19th  Columella.  It  is  then  the
fulfilment  will  be,  the  event  has  already  been  foretold.  Then
Astraea  Redux  and  the  rest  of  it —

Columella  was  a  name  to  me  and  only  a  name.  I  found
that  he  was  a  writer  on  agriculture,  and  in  his  eleventh  book
he  cives  a  calendar  containiusj  astronomical  as  well  as  other
information. Not  every  day  is mentioned ; the entries  are

iFor  Monte  Citorio  see  Middleton,  Remains  of  Ancient  Rome,
Vol.  II.,  pp.  78  and  209.  In  describing  the  Temple  and  column  of
M.  Aurelius — which  I  did  not  see  when  1  was  in  Rome  for  a  fortnight
in  1891 — Middleton  writes:  "Near  these  remains  in  the  Dogana  is
a  slight  elevation  called  Monte  Citorio,"  etc.  The  word  Dogana
without  any  context  occurs  in  my  script  of  July  4th,  1901,  and
perhaps  suggests  that  I  had  read  the  passage  in  Prof.  Middleton's
book.

2 1  am  familiar  with  the  writings  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  but  my  Greek
text  contains  no  biographical  notes.  I  only  ascertained  the  place  of
his  birth  in  looking  up  references  to  the  Caelian  lull  for  the  purpose
of  this  paper.

^See  Burn's  Rome  and  the  Com,pagna,  p.  224,  where  the  original
authorities  are  quoted.

4  See  p.  327.  ^See  App.,  p.  419.


LIU.]


Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


295


about  one  in  thi'ee  or  four  days.  On  September  19th  he  states
that  the  sun  leaves  Virgo  for  Libra.  An  alternative  name
for  Virgo  is  Astraea.  I  do  not  understand  how  my  script  came
to  make  this  combination  of  Astraea  and  September  19th,  and
to  refer  to  Columella,  who  explains  it.  There  is  no  other
I'eference  to  Astraea  nor  to  Columella  in  the  script.

(16)  In  the  last  few  months  of  1903^  there  were  repeated
■efforts  in  the  sciipt  to  give  something  described  as  a  message
from  Dr.  Sidgwick.  After  alluding  to  a  sealed  envelope,
apparently  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's,  the  scribe  wrote  on  September
22nd,  1903,  that  before  this  envelope  was  opened  another  mes-
sage ought  to  be  given  correctly.  This  other  message  was  stated
to  be  from  "  Henry  Sidgwick  " ;  it  is  not  so  certain  to  whom
the  envelope  was  said  to  have  belonged.  On  October  7th
it  was  stated  that  "  Henry  Sidgwick's  message  "  was  about  three
letters  kept  together,  and  further  descriptions,  not  very  definite,
■of  the  letters  were  given.  Mr.  Piddington  was  to  be  told  to  ask
Mrs.  Thompson  about  these  envelopes.^  On  October  8th,  before
I  had  heard  the  result  of  these  enquiries,  some  further  points
were  added  to  the  description  of  the  letters,  in  particular  the
date  June,  1872  (perhaps  June  9th),  but  it  was  said  that  Mrs.
Thompson  knew  nothing  of  them.

On  October  10th  further  attempts  were  made  to  give  the
contents  of  a  letter  of  June  9th,  1872,^  and  it  was  also  suggested
that  T  should  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  give  me  a  question  about
Dr.  Sidgwick  to  which  she  knew  the  answer  and  I  did  not.
This  question  I  was  to  put  "at  the  first  chance."  It  was
stated  that  the  message  was  not  yet  correctly  understood.
Another  reference  to  the  letters  on  October  12th  was  followed
by  the  words  in  large  writing:

It  was  arranged  that  he  should  refer  to  these
threeletters

but  it  does  not  appear  who  was  to  refer  to  them.

iSee  App.,  p.  419.  2, See  p.  202.

^On  October  4th,  1903,  there  had  been  a  description  of  a  pocket
book  containing  a  photograph  and  a  paper  on  which  was  the  date
June,  1872,  and  some  words  of  which  the  general  drift  was
given.  Whether  this  is  supposed  to  belong  to  the  three  letters  I
cannot  say.


296


Chapter  XII.


[part


On  December  25th,  after  saying  that  Sidgwick's  message
was  not  clear,  the  script  went  on  to  state  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick
would  know  about  the  three  letters,  and  on  the  next  day,
December  2Gth,  it  repeated  this  remark.  On  January  Lst,
1904,  it  suggested  that  a  diary  was  connected  with  the  letters,
and  on  January  29th  it  apparentl}'  corrected  earlier  statements
in  the  words :

The  letters  are  kept  by  someone — those  we  told  of — you  heave
not  asked  the  right  person.

On  February  7th,  1904, 1  heard  from  Mrs  Sidgwick,  to  whom  I
had  written,  that  she  could  make  nothing  of  the  remarks
about  the  supposed  three  letters.  The  only  correct  statements
in  the  above  attempts  seem  to  be  negative  and  valueless,  viz. :
that  Mrs.  Thompson  did  not  know  the  letters,  and  again,  that  I
had  not  asked  the  right  person.  The  other  statements  if  not
incorrect  are  at  least  unverified  and  un verifiable.

(17)  In  the  spring  of  1904  two  attempts  ^  were  made  to  describe
a  small  book.  On  the  first  occasion,  April  27th,  1904,  it
was  not  clear  to  whom  the  book  was  supposed  to  belong  ;
an  allusion  to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,-  suggested  that  Dr.
Sidgwick  was  supposed  to  be  concerned.  On  May  11th  the
reference  to  Dr.  Sidgwick  is  plain,  as  several  sentences  in  the
script  referring  to  the  book  are  in  a  handwriting  resembling
his.^  This  book,  if  opened  at  a  particular  place,  is  said  to
contain  the  words  wanted  in  answer, — obviously,  that  is,  in
answer  to  the  question  suggested  by  Mi-s.  Sidgwick,  which  I
was  to  put  and  did  put  as  a  preliminary  test.  The  question
was  one  to  which  the  answer  might  veiy  well  be  contained
in  a  quotation  from  a  book.  It  was  to  find  "  the  last  of  Dr.
Sidgwick's  texts."  The  script  suggests  that  the  text  required
is  or  is  closely  connected  with  the  text  in  1  Corinthians  xiii.
13.  It  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  De  Imitatione  coucerning
Love,  and  concludes  with  the  statement,  clearly  intended  as  an
answer  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  question,  that  the  text  alluded  to
was  the  last,  that  there  were  three  in  all,  and  that  one  was  a,
verse  from  Coriolanus.

iSee  App.,  p.  421.  2  gee  below,  No.  18.

^For  the  circumstances  under  which  this  writing  was  produced
see  above,  p.  26.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


297


So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  there  is  no  truth
in  any  of  these  statements.  The  text  in  question  is  not
1  Corinthians  xiii.  13,  and  the  book  has  not  been  identified.^

(18)  Closely  connected  with  the  last  two  episodes,  and  cer-
tainly associated  with  Dr.  Sidgwick,  are  a  series  of  references'
to  Faith,  Hope  and  Charity,  ^  in  which  special  value  is  attached
to  the  virtue  of  Hope.  It  is  not  clear  from  the  script  what  is
the  intention  of  these  passages,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  aim
at  describing  the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope  left  by  Dr.  Sidg-
wick. Again,  it  is  possible  that  their  origin  is  to  be  found  in
the  guessing  of  the  subliminal  self,  started  by  the  suggestion  *
that  a  text  was  wanted.  This  I  heard  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on
October  18th,  1903,  and  on  October  19th  the  script  had  the  first
of  a  long  series  of  allusions  to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  and
their  comparative  merits.

Three  of  the  nine  references  to  Hope  are  in  fragmentary
English  verse,  and  of  these  the  second  deserves  notice  among-
comments  on  possibly  verifiable  matter  contained  in  the  script.

On  December  25th,  1903,  the  scribe  stated  that  "on  the  17th
of  next  month  "  I  was  to  "  ask  the  question,"  and  a  reference,
closely  following,  to  "  Sidgwick's  message "  made  it  clear  that
the  question  meant  was  the  one  about  "  the  last  of  Dr.  Sidg-
wick's texts "  suggested  to  me  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  two  months
before.  On  January  17th,  1904,  remarks  about  S,  a  letter,  an
envelope,  a  seal,  and  the  words  "  not  without  hope,"  were
followed  by  the  statement  "  The  question  is  now  answered,"
and  later,  by  the  following :

The  text  [w  test]  and  the  answer  are  one  and  are  given — Hope —
youngest  daughter  of  to-day,  and  oldest  mother  of  the  race.

To  see  the  Godhead  face  to  face,  no  Beholds  the  Godhead's  very
face. Shine  at  the  on  the  Wanderer  on  the  Way — That  is  not  quite-

1  Five  texts  representing  the  keynote  at  difierent  periods  of  Dr.
Sidgwick's  thoughts  about  his  own  life  are  given  in  the  Memoir,  hy
A.  S.  and  E.  M.  S.,  published  in  March,  1906,  p.  125.

2  See  App.,  p.  421.

^For  the  combination  of  Wonder's  daughter,  Wisdom,  with  Faith,
Hope,  and  Charity  and  the  allusions,  certainly  to  the  Theaetetus.
and  apparently  to  the  Logia,  see  above,  p.  52.

*  See  preceding  incident.  No.  17.


298


Chapter  XII.


[part


Tight  but  it  is  about  Hope's  vision  which  is  the  true  one,  &

leads  on  the  Passionate  Pilgrim.

As  noted  above,^  the  allusions  to  the  Wanderer  on  the  Way,
"the  Passionate  Pilgrim,  and  Hope's  vision  wei-e  unintelligible  to
me,  and  it  was  not  till  some  two  years  afterwards  that  I  found
a  possible  connexion  between  them  in  Browning's  poem  of  La
■Saisiaz.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  I  had  not  read  this
poem  till  my  attention  was  attracted  to  it  by  a  reference  in  a
letter  of  Dr.  Sidcfwick's  which  I  read  in  the  Memoir,  immedi-
ately  after  its  ])ublication  in  March,  1906.  In  that  letter  -  Dr.
Sidgwick,  writing  of  "  the  great  question  of  Immortality,"
expresses  his  agreement  with  the  line  of  thought  "in  which
Browning's  poem  on  the  subject  (La  Saisiaz)  concludes.  It  is
that  on  moral  grounds  hope  ratlier  [than]  certainty  is  fit  for
us  in  this  earthlv  existence."

Readers  of  the  poem  will  remember  the  circumstances  of  its
production :  after  the  sudden  death  of  a  friend,  the  poet  takes
alone  the  walk  which  they  had  planned  to  take  together,  and
debating  with  himself  the  question  of  Immortality,  concludes
as  above  described.  Some  expressions  in  the  poem  bear  a
certain  resemblance  to  phrases  in  the  script — '  my  pilgrim-foot,'
'  the  ways  we  walked  together,'  '  wander  at  will  .  .  .  wandering
still' — and  the  whole  poem  may  not  unfairly  be  described  as
an  account  of  the  vision  of  hope  which  comes  to  the  wanderer
on  a  pilgrimage  of  affection.

The  combination  of  a  pilgrimage  or  wandering  and  a  vision
of  Hope  in  the  script  and  in  the  poem  may,  in  spite  of  my
impression  to  the  contrary,  be  due  to  a  latent  knowledge  of  the
poem  or  of  some  notice  of  it.  But  the  association  of  those  ideas
with  Dr.  Sidgwick's  name  in  what  purports  to  be  an  attempt
to  produce  a  verifiable  "message"  cannot  be  so  explained.  It
was  impossible  that  I  should  have  any  normal  knowledge  of
the  contents  of  a  letter  written  in  1878  by  Dr.  Sidgwick  to  a
friend  with  whom  I  was  not  acquainted,  and  I  certainly  did  not
see  the  proofs  of  the  Memoir.

1  See  above,  p.  66,  where  I  have  left  unaltered  the  note  written  in
1905,  before  any  possible  explanation  had  occurred  to  me.

^  Hewiij  Sidgwick:  a  Memoir,  p.  338.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  299


(19)  It  was  on  February  10th,  1903,  that  the  appearance
of  Mr.  Myers'  book  on  Human  Personality  justified  the  state-
ments in  the  script  that  a  certain  passage  from  the  Syrii-
jposium  would  be  quoted  in  that  book.^  Two  days  later,  on
February  12th,  the  script  began  a  series  of  allusions  to  a
locked  box,  to  the  position  of  the  key  of  that  box,  and  to
something  sealed  contained  by  the  box.  Between  February
12th  and  April  17th  thei'e  were  seven  references  to  this  sub-
ject.- The}'  were  fairly  consistent,  and  represented  that  a
letter  or  envelope,  sealed  with  a  four-lettered  inscription  on
the  seal,  was  kept  in  a  locked  box.  The  key  of  this  box
was  said  to  be  in  the  locked  di'awer  of  a  writing  table.  On
the  fii'st  occasion,  February  12th,  Dr.  Hodgson's  name  was
mentioned  as  likely  to  help ;  and  he  was  indirectly  referred  to
■on  the  last  occasion,  April  l7th.

After  some  months'  interval,  on  August  18th,  1903,  another
reference  was  made  to  the  box,  and  this  time  it  was  plainly
stated  that  before  opening  the  box  Dr.  Hodgson  must  receive
a  message  about  it,  and  that  part  of  a  word  required,  but  nut  all,
had  been  sent  to  him.  Attempts  were  made  at  the  required
word.  The  script  also  stated  plainly  what  had  been  suggested
•on  March  26th,  that  the  '-message  inside"^  was  from  the
Symposium,  the  passage  known  to  me.

Putting  together  the  results  of  these  eight  references,  I
supposed  the  script  to  be  attempting  to  describe  the  contents
of  a  sealed  envelope,  that  is,  of  an  envelope  left  sealed  for
posthumous  reading.  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson  on  August  24th,
telling  him  of  the  description  of  the  box,  and  in  his  reply
(dated  September  17th,  1903),  he  told  me  that  he  knew
nothing  of  any  box  like  that  described,  and  had  no  sealed
envelope  left  with  him  for  posthumous  reading.

A  year  later,  however,  two  more  references  were  made  by
the  script  to  a  box  said  to  contain  a  sealed  envelope  enclosed
in  another  envelope.  On  July  13th,  190+,  it  was  stated  clearly
that  a  sealed  envelope  left  by  Mr.  Myers  with Sir  Oliver

1  See  below,  No.  24.  See  App.,  p.  423.

^  i.e.  inside  the  box.  There  being  no  reference  on  this  occasion  to
a  seal  or  a  double  enclosure,  the  only  possible  meaning  for  "  inside  "
is  inside  the  box  described.


300


Chapter  XII.


[PAKT


Lodge,  and  containing  a  particular  passage  from  the  Symposium,
was  kept  in  a  box  as  described.  Tliis  proved  completely
untrue.^

On  July  loth,  1904,"  the  script  distinctly  implied,  if  it  did
not  actually  state,  that  Dr.  Hodgson  had  a  sealed  envelope
for  posthumous  use.  Referring  to  the  opening  of  such  an
envelope  belonging  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the  scribe  wrote  that
it  was  important  for  Dr.  Hodgson  to  see  the  box  opened,  but
that  "his  own  envelope"  might  wait.  It  is  to  be  remem-
bered that  at  this  time  I  myself  knew  that  Dr.  Hodgson  had
no  sealed  envelope  for  posthumous  use.  This  is  a  noticeable  but
not  a  solitary  case  in  which  the  statements  of  the  script  are  not
guided  by  my  conscious  knowledge,  but  actually  opposed  to  it.

(20)  At  the  risk  of  repetition,  I  treat  separately  the  attempts
to  read  the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope.  There  is  some  con-
fusion, as  the  script  appears  to  refer  to  more  than  one  sealed
envelope.  Thus  on  September  22nd,  1903,^  after  speaking  of  a
message  from  Dr.  Sidgwick,  the  script  referred  to  an  envelope
containing  a  drawing  on  one  side  of  the  paper  and  a  word  or
two  on  the  other*.  Attempts  made  to  represent  the  words  were
recognised  as  unsuccessful ;  the  drawing,  called  a  curved  line,
resembled  a  2,  and  it  was  stated

2fy/xa  stands  for  Sidgwick  elsewhere,*  why  not  there  too?

It  was  not  said  whose  envelope  was  described,  but  the  im-
plication is  plainly  that  it  was  Dr.  Sidgwick's.  No  further
reference  was  made  to  the  subject  till  on  July  3rd,  1904,  the
script  wrote  as  follows,  about  the  contents  of  an  envelope,  plainly
not  the  one  referred  to  on  September  22nd,  1 903  :

What  is  now  wanted  is  a  fulfilled  prophecy  to  induce  you  to
open  the  envelope  which  contains  the  allusion  to  Plato,  and  the  place
of  Love  in  the  scheme.

It  then  proceeded  to  try  to  make  such  a  prophecy.''

1  See  below,  No.  20. ^pgrj^^ps  also  on  July  18. See  p.  301.

2  See  above,  No.  16. Complete  extracts  are  given  in  App.,  p.  425.

"4  2  has  been  used  as  a  signature  by  other  members  of  the  Sidgwick
family.

The  question  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  is  discussed
below,  p.  327.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  301


On  July  13th,  1904,  as  above  stated,^  it  said  plainly  that  the
envelope  containing  the  passage  from  the  Symjmsium  had  been
left  by  Ml-.  Myers  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  The  description  which
it  proceeded  to  give  of  the  appearance  of  the  envelope  was
too  indefinite  to  be  valuable.  The  envelope  was  said  to
have  been  placed  in  another  envelope,  which  was  initialed
and  dated,  not  by  the  writer,  and  the  containing  envelo]ie
had  been  placed  with  other  papers  in  a  box.  I  knew  that  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  had  sent  his  sealed  envelope  for  custody  to
a  bank,  so  that  there  was  nothing  of  evidential  value  in
this  description.  The  same  script  referred  also  to  the  contents
of  an  envelope  left  by  Dr.  Sidgwick  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and
said  to  be  kept  with  two  other  letters.-  On  July  18th,  1904,
the  script  pressed  that  its  statements  should  be  tested,  and
repeated  that  the  passage  from  the  Symposium  was  in  a
sealed  envelope,  but  not  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  envelope.^  On
August  14th  the  script  repeated  its  view  of  the  contents  of
this  envelope,  and — much  less  definitely  * — of  those  of  Di'.
Sidgwick's  envelope  mentioned  on  July  13th,  and  again  ex-
pressed a  wish  for  the  experiment  to  be  made.  On  November
25th,  1904,  during  the  experiment  suggested  by  Mr.  Constable,^
it  again  expressed  a  wish  to  have  the  envelope  opened.

The  experiment  was  tried,  as  described  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal
for  January,  1905,  and  proved  a  complete  failure.  There  was
no  reference  in  the  envelope  to  the  passage  in  the  Symposium,
nor  was  there  any  S  either  in  or  on  the  envelope.

(21)  The  next  incident  concerns  an  attempt  to  describe  a
ring  and  cross  belonging  to  the  late  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
Dr.  Benson. The  articles  were  certainly  not  known  to  me.  The

1  See  above,  No.  19.

-  Here  there  is  possibly  a  connexion  indicated  with  the  supposed
message  of  Dr.  Sidgwick  about  three  letters;  see  above,  No.  16.

3  For  my  own  knowledge  that  Dr.  Hodgson  had  no  such  envelope,
see  above,  No.  19.

*  The  envelopes  were  said  to  contain,  one  a  reference  to  Love,  the
other  to  Hope.  The  reference  to  Love  was  plainly  an  allusion  to  the
passage  from  the  Symposium,  but  the  reference  to  Hope  was  too  in-
definite for  identification.

^  See  above,  p.  171.


302


Ghaptev  XII.


[PAET


question  whether  the  description  is  definite  enough  to  be
of  evidential  value  is  for  the  reader  to  answer.  The  incident
is  complicated,  and  cannot  be  briefly  stated.

On  January  Slst,  1902,  appeared  a  first  reference  to  a  bishop's
ring,  in  the  words :

afjLuyoomj — os*  crcfievSovrj  Wvov<i Socrts  yavu/xei/w  Krjpl  no  that  is

not  right. He  was  glad  to  get  the  ring — a  bishop's  ring.

On  May  31st,  1902,  just  before  I  went  abroad,  the  script
had:  "Later  not  here  in  the  mountains  shall  come  the  news
that  helps."  Then,  after  some  illegible  and  unintelligible  words,
it  suggested  that  I  should  dream  and  remember,  and  concluded  i
"  amerysthine  ameranth  amethystine — one  of  those  words,  for
you  for  you  only."

For  some  days,  T  made  no  further  attempts  at  writing,  as
I  felt  as  if  the  faculty  had  left  me.^  A  sensation  of  returning
faculty  on  the  night  of  June  20th  was  followed  by  an  impulse
to  write  on  June  21st,  at  the  Ritiel  Alp,  "in  the  mountains."
After  a  reference  to  an  Essay  which  my  husband  was  writing
at  the  time,  the  script  concluded  with  a  signature  as  follows  :

etc  Etc

^  "f^ no—  not  quite  right. ^  |^

I  showed  this  to  my  husband  on  June  23rd,  and  to  him  the
initials  which  we  read  as  ETC,  or  EVC  (meaningless  to  me),
suggested  incorrect  combinations  of  those  of  Dr.  Benson,  EWT
(as  Bishop  of  Truro),  EWC  (as  Archbishop  of  Canterbury).  He
said  he  had  been  thinking  much  of  the  Archbishop  since  we
had  been  at  the  Riftel  Alp.

On  June  24th,  quite  unexpectedly,  at  9.45  a.m.,  when  I  was
dressing  to  go  out,  I  had  a  strong  impulse  to  write,  and  the
script  produced  attempts  at  the  letter  E,  followed  by  an
account  of  an  amethyst  ring  of  a  shape  described.-  A  cross
was  also  described  and  drawn :  the  arms  and  head  terminated
in  trefoils,  and  in  the  centre  of  each  trefoil  there  was  a  jewel.

*  Trans.  afxvySovi]  is  meaningless  ;  the  next  words  mean  "  the  ring,
the  gift  of  a  nation  {or  tribe),  with  joyful  heart."

1  See  above,  p.  154.

"For  reproduction  of  drawings  and  complete  script,  see  App.,  p.  425


liil]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


303


There  was  no  jewel,  though  there  was  some  decoration  indicated,
at  the  intersection  of  the  arms.  It  was  said  that  my  husband
would  know,  and  I  was  told  to  write  again  that  evening.

On  the  same  day,  at  9.40  p.m.,  a  further  description  was  given
of  the  ring.  The  carved  stone  was  held  by  a  gold  rim,  ogive-
shaped,  and  the  circlet  of  the  ring  was  said  to  bifurcate  to
hold  the  stone.  The  rino-  was  further  said  to  have  something
inscribed  upon  it,  three  letters  that  looked  like  Hebrew,  in
the  length  of  the  ring.  It  was  again  repeated  that  these  state-
ments could  be  verified,  and  that  the  incident  was  evidential.

On  June  27th,  1902,  a  little  gold  chain  was  described,  but
on  July  1st  it  was  said  that  this  chain  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  cross,  "  the  cross  stands  is  not  worn" ;  this  statement  was
signed  E.T.C.  On  July  7th,  1902,  it  was  said  that  the  ring-
was  quite  right,  though  the  letters  might  not  be  correct,  and
a  further  attempt  at  those  letters  was  made.  Then  came  a
drawing  of  the  upper  part  of  a  cross,  uudecorated,  but  suri'ounded
at  the  intersection  with  a  circle,  and  the  script  added :

This  is  on  the  tomb  but  the  other  cross  is  lighter  in  design — and
has  something  glistening  about  it  besides  the  gems  in  the  trefoils,.
Trifoliata  gemmata  stellata  *  I  have  tried  to  give  those  three  points
before  this  but  you  have  not  understood.

I  showed  botli  writings  of  June  24th  to  my  husband  on  the
25th,  and  he  said  that  he  remembered  an  amethyst  ring
belonging  to  the  Archbishop  of  the  shape  drawn — a  double
ogive — but  he  knew  nothing  of  any  carving  or  inscription,
nor  of  any  cross  belonging  to  the  Archbishop.  I  had  no
recollection  of  any  such  ring  or  cross.  I  wrote  to  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  asking  her  to  obtain  information  if  she  could  about
a  ring  and  cross  belonging  to  Dr.  Benson,  and  on  my  return
to  England  I  received  from  her  drawings  of  two  rings  and  a
cross  which  had  belonged  to  him,  and  are  now  at  Truro.

(1)  The  cross  terminates  in  trefoils,  in  the  centre  of  which
is  an  amethyst  surrounded  by  three  pearls,  and  the  intersection
of  the  arms  is  surrounded  by  a  circle,  in  the  centre  of  which
is  an  amethyst.  This  cross  was  very  sehJom  worn  b}'  the
Archbishop.

*  Trans. "  Three  leaved,  jewelled,  starred."


:304


Chapter  XII.


[part


(2)  There  is  a  sapphire  ring  engraved  with  the  arms
of  the  see  of  Canterbury  ;  the  stone  is  oval  or  nearly  round,
held  in  a  solid  gold  setting,  wider  than  the  stone,  and  in  no
way  resembles  the  drawing  or  description  in  the  script.  This
ring  Dr.  Benson  had  as  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

(3)  There  is  an  amethj^st  ring  of  double  ogive  shape  ;  the
•amethyst  is  held  by  a  solid  gold  setting,  not  so  deep  as  the  stone.^
The  amethyst  is  cut,  and  there  is  an  inscription  on  the  ring,
as  follows:  +EWB  1877  fratrum  nn  pietas  et  desiderium.
This  ring  Dr.  Benson  had  as  Bishop  of  Truro,  and  this  ring  was
the  one  which  my  husband  remembered.  He  had,  and  has,  no
recollection  of  the  other  ring-  though  he  must  have  seen  it.
He  had  no  knowledge  of  any  inscription  on  the  amethyst
ring.  I  never  met  Dr.  Benson  till  he  was  Archbishop  of
'Canterbury,  and  I  have  never  been  to  Truro,  so  that  it  may
be  taken  as  certain  that  I  never  saw  the  amethyst  ring.-

The  description  in  the  script  is  hardly  definite  enough  for
identification  with  the  rino;  and  cross  beloncfing  to  Dr.  Benson,
and,  moreover,  is  not  correct  in  all  points.  The  cross  does,
it  is  true,  terminate  in  trefoils,  in  the  centre  of  each  of  which
is  a  jewel ;  the  intersection  of  the  arms  is  suiTounded  by  a
circle;  and  there  are  other  jewels  on  the  cross  besides  the  gems
in  the  trefoils  ;  but  there  is  a  jewel  in  the  centre,  where  the
script  stated  that  there  was  none.  The  cross  may  be  described
as  trifoliata  and  gemriiata,  but  the  third  word,  stellata,  seems
to  have  no  application.

With  regard  to  the  ring,  it  is  true  that  Dr.  Benson  had
an  amethyst  ring,  that  the  stone  was  of  the  shape  described,
that  the  stone  was  cut  (if  that  is  what  is  meant  by  "carved"
in  the  script  of  June  24),  and  that  there  was  an  inscription
upon  the  ring.  The  final  drawing  of  the  ring  (June  24th)  is
not  unlike  the  actual  ring ;  but  if  the  statement  that  the
"  circlet  of  the  ring  bifurcates  to  hold  the  stone "  means  that

1  In  this  ring  the  stone  projects  above  and  below  the  gold  set-
ting ;  in  the  sapphire  ring,  the  stone  is  completely  within  the  setting.

2 1  noted  that  "  I  seem  to  recollect  Dr.  Benson's  wearing  a  massive
ring  with  arms  upon  it,  but  I  cannot  be  sure."  This  was  probably
the  sapphire  ring.  No  memorj^  whatever  was  recalled  by  the
descriptions  of  the  script,  nor  by  the  drawings  of  the  amethyst  ring.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


305


the  sold  settino-  is  divided  on  each  side  of  the  stone  into
two  branches,  the  description  is  incorrect.  The  letters  in  the
inscription  are  not  three  nor  do  they  look  like  Hebrew.

I  have  no  explanation  for  the  first  word  in  the  phrase  of
January  31st,  eOuov?  Soa-ig,  "  gift  of  a  nation,"  but  the  actual
inscription  on  the  amethyst  ring  suggests  that  the  words  "he
was  glad  to  get  the  ring,  a  Bishop's  ring,"  are  appropriately
applied  to  that  ring,  received  from  friends  on  his  appointment
to  a  Bishopric.i  The  script  of  January  31st  seems  to  show —
supposing  that  the  whole  thing  is  not  accidental — that  the
appearance  of  the  riug  and  cross  is  not  solely  due  to  the
direction  of  my  husband's  thoughts  or  mine  during  our  stay
at  the  Riffel  Alp.  Whatever  explanation  is  given  of  the  script
of  June  and  Jul}',  1902,  must  extend  to  that  of  January  31st,
1902.

(22)  On  March  27th,  1901,  quite  in  the  early  days  of
the  script,  a  piece  of  unintelligible  writing  was  signed  as
follows  :

Tuus  denique  nomen  adposui. interpretatio  tua  nunc.

I  could  make  nothing  of  this  signature,  but  when  my
husband  saw  it  on  the  same  day  he  suggested  that  it  was
a  reversed  and  double  monogram  of  E.G.,  Mr.  Gurney's  initials,
but  neither  he  nor  I  could  make  anything  of  the  three  marks
round  the  G.,  which  we  took  to  be  decorative.

1  With  a  view  to  ascertaining  whether  the  description  in  the  script
might  fit  the  ring  and  cross  worn  by  any  Bishop,  and  so  have  no
cunnexion  with  Dr.  Benson,  I  looked  carefully  on  August  10th  and
14th,  1902,  at  a  portrait  of  Dr.  Creighton  which  is  at  Newnham
College.  In  that  portrait  he  wears  a  cross  and  two  rings,  but  none
of  these  objects  bears  any  resemblance  to  those  described  in  the
script.  Neither  of  the  rings  is  ogive-shaped,  one  of  them  having
two  large  stones  visible,  and  probably  a  third,  while  the  stone  of
the  other  ring  is  oval  or  circular.  The  cross  does  not  terminate  in
trefoils.

TJ


306


ClMpter  XII.


[part


On  June  30th,  1901,  tlie  communication  about  a  lost  MS.
play,f;described  above,^  was  preceded  and  followed  by  reinarks
intended  |to  suggest  that  the  communicator  had  been  introduced
and  succeeded  by  Mr.  Gurney,  thus  :  "  G  ly  r  i/  ey.  He  cannot
speak — will^_^; write  a  word — wait,"  then:  "He  has  done  what
he  can. this  is  another  thing  EGy."

There  was  no  doubt  as  to  the  person  intended  ;  the  interest
lies  in  ^the  curious  abbreviation  of  the  surname,  Gy.  Neither
my  husljand  nor  I  had  any  reason  to  attribute  such  an
abbreviation  to  Mr.  Gurney,  and  we  regarded  it  as  a  pure
piece  of  fancy.

In  April,  1902,  on  my  way  to  stay  with  Mrs.  Forbes  for
the  first^time,  I  had  a  sudden  desire  to  write  automatically.  The
first  words  written  (April  14th)  were  :  "  Mrs.  Forbes  has  got
it — for  you  in  the  house."  -  There  were  no  letters ,  waiting
for  me,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  message.  On  April  15th
Mrs.  Forbes  land  I  tried  Planchette  together,  and  in  the  early
afternoon,  after  a  .remark  in  looking-glass  writing  about  my
desire  for  more  evidence,  followed  in  ordinary  writing  by  the
words,  "  Edmund  only  wants  to  prove  the  reality  of  life,"  we
took  a  fresh  stai't  and  Planchette  wrote:


We  read  the  first  scribble  as  a  carelessly  written  "  Guy,"
and  wondered  if  this  had  been  suggested  by  the  name  of  a
dog  in  the  house;  of  the  second  we  could  make  nothing;
the  third  was  written  while  we  were  discussing  the  meaning
of  the  first  two.  Mrs.  Forbes  connnented  on  the  occurrence
of  the  surname  Gurney,  as  the  Christian  name  Edmund  was
commonly  used  in  her  automatic  writing.  At  the  conclusion
of  the  Planchette,  writing,  in  answer  to  a  request  of  Mrs.  Forbes,
three  signatures  were  given.  It  appeared  that  there  was  a
slisfht  general  resemblance  between  the  Planchette-signature
and  the  genuine  signatures  of  Talbot  Forbes  (writing  not
known  to  me  but  familiar  to  Mrs.  Forbes),  and  H.  (writing

1  See  p.  279.  -^ov  rest  of  writing,  see  above,  p.  186.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  307


known  to  us  both).  Mrs.  Forbes  thought  it  would  be
interesting  to  see  if  there  were  any  likeness  in  the  third
signature,  purporting  to  be  Mr.  Gurney's,  and  fetched  a  letter  of
Mr.  Gurney's  for  the  purpose  of  comparison.  This  letter  had
been  given  to  her  "  for  test  purposes  "  by  H.,  to  whom  it  was
originally  addressed.  Mrs.  Forbes  had  known  Mr.  Gurney,  but
had  preserved  no  letters  from  him.  No  use  had  been  made
by  her  of  this  letter  since  she  received  it.

The  letter  was  signed  EGy.  On  seeing  this  we  looked  back
at  the  earlier  Planchette  signature  and  read  the  first  mark  as
EGy,  with  a  superfluous  stroke  between  the  G  and  y,  while
the  second,  on  turning  the  sheet  half  round,  was  plainly  seen
to  be  EGy.  I  then  remembered  that  the  same  abbreviation
had  occurred  in  my  script,  and  verified  this  recollection  on  my
return  to  Cambridge.^  I  also  found  the  earlier  monogram  of
March  27th,  1901,  and  recognised  that  the  three  marks,  then
unexplained,  have  the  form  of  y.

I  have  made  enquiries  among  Mr.  Gurney's  friends,  but  have
not  heard  of  any  other  occasion  on  which  this  abbreviated  foi'm
of  signature  was  used.  The  Planchette-signature  may  obviously
represent  the  emergence  of  Mrs.  Foi'bes'  forgotten  knowledge,  for
she  had  read  the  letter  which  she  used  for  compaidson,  though
she  had  no  recollection  of  anything  peculiar  in  the  signature,
and  commented  on  it  with  surprise  when  I  drew  her  attention
to  it.  But  the  occurrence  of  the  abbreviation  in  my  script  in
June,  1901,  and  possibly  in  March,  1901,  cannot  be  thus  explained.
I  certainly  had  no  conscious  knowledge,  and  do  not  see  how
I  could  have  had  any  knowledge,  or  any  reason  for  supposing
that  Mr.  Gurney  had  ever  used  this  abbreviation  ;  nor  can  I
explain  why  my  script  attributed  it  to  him.  It  is  proper  in
this  connexion  to  note  (1)  that  the  letter  had  been  given  to
Mrs.  Forbes  for  test-purposes,  and  (2)  that  the  discovery  of
the  signature  certainly  justified  (to  me)  the  statement  of  my
script  that  Mrs.  Forbes  had  "  got  it  for "  me  "  in  the  house."

(23)  On  August  18th,  1903,  the  scribe  told  me  to  send  Dr.
Hodgson  a  name  represented  by  Orinaria  or  Orellaria,  anyhow

1  Before  doing  so  I  wrote  from  Mrs.  Forbes'  house  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  relating  the  incident.


308


Chapter  XII.


[part


endiDg  in  ia,  and  later  appearing  as  Oriana,  Oronia,  Auronia,
Ororia  (or  Orona).  On  September  9th,  1903,  after  the  production
of  a  statement  unknown  to  me,  but  subsequently  found  to  be
true,  the  script  made  several  attempts  at  a  word  or  words.  The
leading  ideas  in  its  first  ])aragTaph  are  a  long  word  beginning
with  C,  a  crown,  and  a  star ;  in  the  second,  Camilla,  yellow  hair,
the  constellation  of  Ariadne's  crown,  and  the  two  words  Oritella
Coronata.  In  this  script  thei'e  was  indirect  but  unmistakeable
reference  to  Dr.  Hodgson.

On  September  17th,  1903,  the  script  connected  the  statement
that  I  had  now  got  the  key-word  with  Dr.  Hodgson's  name,
and  on  October  5th  it  recurred  to  attempts  at  a  word.  An
allusion  to  Catullus'  poem  of  Ariadne  introduced  the  statement
that  there  was  an  omen  and  a  name  in  the  words  Ariadne  stella
coronaria,  and  that  this  was  to  be  sent.^  Then  came  an  allusion
to  another  constellation,  Berenice's  hair.^  After  rejecting  another
allusion  to  hair,  the  script  recurred  to  a  crown  and  combined
it  with  the  mention  of  flowers.  Further  allusions  to  Ariadne
and  the  statement  that  the  interpretation  was  easy  concluded
this  involved  passage.

T  sent  these  attempts  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  representing  an
effort  to  produce  something  of  significance  to  him.  On
January  2()th,  1904?,  I  heard  from  Dr.  Hodgson  in  I'eply.  He
wrote  that  he  had  had  the  name  SAa-inga  in  his  mind  in
connexion  with  the  phrase  in  my  script  about  "  lilia  olympiaca
non  Romana "  (October  5th),  but  could  trace  no  connexion.
Syringa  blossoms,  he  then  added,  had  a  special  significance  to
him,  having  been  given  some  time  between  1893  and  1897
inclusive,  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  as  a  test  message  to  be
sent  to  a  former  sitter,  now  dead.  The  recipient  of  the
messao-e  had  more  than  once  referred  to  this  message  as  an
excellent  test.  The  production  of  the  word  Syringa  as  a
message  for  Dr.  Hodgson  in  my  script  would  therefore  be
another  good  '  test,'  since  I  was  wholly  unaware  of  Dr.
Hodo'son's  associations  with  the  word.

1  i.e.  to  Dr.  Hodgson ;  so  I  understood,  and  so  I  did.

2  For  detailed  comment  see  Appendix,  p.  427.  The  reader  can
judge  thence  whether  I  have  unduly  emphasised  any  points.  To  give
reasons  here  would  compUcate  the  narrative.


Liii.] MiscelloMeous  References  to  Past  Events.  309


It  occurred  to  Dr.  Hodgson  to  look  up  syringa  in  his
dictionary  (the  Century),  where  he  found :  "  a  plant  of  the
genus  Philadelphus ;  the  mock  orange  .  .  .  the  original
plant  was  P.  eoronarius,  a  native  of  Southern  Europe,  etc."
He  added  that  he  had  no  conscious  knowledge  of  the  name
Philadelphus  cor  on  arius.

On  reading  this  I  looked  back  at  the  two  passages  in  my
script.  That  of  September  9th,  1903,^  appears  to  contain
attempts  to  produce  the  word  eoronarius,  both  in  sound  and
in  sense,  of  much  the  same  type  as  the  attempts,  in  the
autumn  of  1901,  to  give  the  three  words,  luopoTrwXov  eg  aw?
The  word  coronaria  actually  occurs  in  the  scri])t,  the  crown
is  unmistakeable,  and  the  two  words  in  rather  larger  writing,
Oritella  coronata,  perhaps  represent  attempts  at  the  words
Philadelphus  eoronarius.  The  reference  to  Ariadne's  crown
seems  superfluous,  since  the  idea  of  crown  is  already  con-
veyed, but  an  explanation  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the
script  of  October  5th.

There  the  words,  containing  "an  omen^  and  a  name"  which
I  am  told  to  "  send "  are  Ariadne  stella  coronaria.,  and  these
words  are  immediately  followed  by  a  reference  to  another
well-known  constellation  closely  associated  with  Ariadne's
crown,  namely  Berenice's  hair.  I  do  not  think  that  Dr.
Hodgson  had  seen — what  occurred  at  once  to  me  after  hearinof
from  him — that  the  introduction  of  Berenice  was  accounted
for,  if  what  was  wanted  was  not  only  eoronarius  but  Phila-
delphus.'^

Combining  the  scripts  of  Sept.  9,  and  Oct.  5,  1903,  and
remembering  the  attempts  in  1901  to  represent  both  the
sound  and  the  meaning  of  jULovoTrwXov  e?  aw,  I  am  therefore
disposed  to  see  (1)  in  Oritella  coronata  and  the  other
suggestions,  an  attempt  at  the  words  Philadelphus  eoro-
narius, and  (2)  in  the  references  to  Ariadne,  Berenice  and
the  constellations,  an  attempt  to  convey  the  ideas.  Moreover,
in the  script of  Oct. 5th, the crown is associated  with

iSee  App.,  p.  427.  -See  above,  p.  156.

3  For  the  use  of  this  word  in  the  script  see  above,  note  on  p,  192.

*The  exact  relationship  of  Berenice  to  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  is
a  matter  of  dispute,  but  the  names  are  closely  associated.


310


Chapter  XII.


[part


flowers — flowers  unidentified,  it  is  true,  and  described  in  the
singular  phrase  "  lilia  Olympiaca  non  romana."

Why  the  botanical  name  Philadelphus  coronarius  was
attempted  rather  than  the  word  "  syringa,"  it  is  impossible  to
say  without  more  knowledge  than  we  possess  of  the  conditions
governing  these  phenomena.  It  is,  however,  hardly  remarkable,
where  Latin  is  the  language  used,  that  the  Latin  rather  than
the  English  name  of  the  plant  should  appear  in  the  script.
The  Greek  word  avpiy^  (a  shepherd's  pipe)  from  which
the  Syringa  has  its  name,  does  occur  once  in  the  script,  on
Feb.  2Sth,  1903,  where  it  is  associated  with  asphodel,  in  the
woi'ds :

a-vpL-yyi  acr^oSeAw  not  quite  right  a  asphodel  stalked reed  pipe
I  wanted  to  say. o-w  t'  a  cr<^oSeXw  re  a-vpiyyi  re  (Kel  KaOucrav  a'Sas  *
asphodel  stalks  made  their  tuneless  unsounding  pipes.

Dr.  Hodgson's  letter  suggested  a  search  for  other  references
to  the  syringa,  with  the  following  results :

May  16th,  1902:

florum  corona  mox  tibi  plana  erit.f  Ask  Dr.  Hodgson  for  the
news.

Two  days  later,  May  18th,  1902:

in  the  woods  it  will  be  found  the  sweetest  flower  that  blows —
then  you  will  know  that  I  sent  you  this  message,  all  in  a  month
of  May.

On  November  24th,  1902  :

You  will  hear  from  Hodgson — important  he  has  tried  the  flowers
but  without  success.  Try  other  flowers  yourself  to  send — white
with  a  scent — that  helps.

Here  the  first  words  probably  refer  to  an  experiment  pro-
posed by  Dr.  Hodgson,^  but  the  last  words  may  be  intended
to  suggest  syringa  blossoms.

(24)  Part  of  the  history  of  the  allusions  in  the  script  to

*  Trans.  "  With  asphodel  and  syrinx  they  there  sent  down  (1)  their
songs."

\  Trans.  "The  crown  of  flowers  will  soon  be  plain  to  you."
1  See  above,  p.  58.


Lin.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  311


a  passage  in  Plato's  Symposium  has  been  already  related,^  but
it  will  be  convenient  to  collect  here  all  the  references.

The  passage  in  question  is  Symp.  202b — 2()3a  ;-  there  appear
also  to  be  indications  of  allusions  to  an  earlier  passage  in
the  same  dialogue,  197  C.  For  readers  unacquainted  with  the
dialogue  I  give  the  gist  of  the  main  passage  and  its  context.

When  three  or  four  of  the  guests,  at  the  banquet  which
gives  its  name  to  the  dialogue,  have  discoursed  upon  Love,  it
is  the  tui'n  of  Socrates.  After  declaring  that  he  will  not  emulate
the  impassioned  encomium  of  Agathon,  Socrates  says  that  he
will  repeat  what  he  learnt  from  Diotima,  a  prophetess  of
Mantinea,  and  begins  by  denying  that  Love  is  a  god  at  all.
Love  is,  says  Diotima,  one  of  the  race  of  spirits  whose  function
it  is  to  act  as  interpreters  and  mediators  between  gods  and
men.  Then  follows  a  description  of  the  parentage  and  function
of  Love  and  its  place  in  the  Platonic  scheme  of  philosophy.

In  March,  1901,  when  the  script  began,  I  had  not  read  this
dialogue.  I  had  read  several  of  the  dialogues  of  Plato  when  I
was  at  Newnham  College  in  the  years  1878-1881,  but  chiefly  the
metaphysical  works.  I  read  general  commentaries  and  criticisms,
and  must  have  come  across  allusions  to  the  Symposium,  but  I
certainly  never  read  the  dialogue,  and  had  very  little  conscious
knowledge  of  its  contents.  When  in  May,  1901,  there  was  an
allusion  in  my  script  to  Diotima,  I  knew  that  she  was  the
one  woman  in  the  Platonic  dialogues,  and  that  she  was  intro-
duced  in  the  Symposium.  I  knew  that  the  subject  of  the
speeches  in  that  dialogue  was  Love,  but  I  had  no  idea— at  least
no  conscious  recollection — that  there  was  any  mention  of  spirits
in  the  Symposium,  or  any  I'oom  for  them  in  the  Platonic  scheme
of  things.  On  June  1st,  1901,  in  consequence  of  the  appear-
ance of  Diotima's  name  in  the  script  on  May  31st,  I  looked
up  the  passage  where  she  is  introduced.  On  Nov.  26th,  1902,
I  read  the  immediate  context  in  the  dialogue,  and  between
Jan.  25th  and  Feb.  10th,  1903,  I  read  the  whole  dialogue.

It  was  on  May  31st,  1901,  that  the  script  made  a  first
recognisable  and  direct  reference  to  the  dialogue  in  the  words
"  Diotima  gave  the  clue."  I  looked  the  passage  up  to  see
what  Diotima  said,  and  how  far  it  could  be  described  as  a

iSee  above,  pp.  241-6,  301.  "^^ee  App.,  p.  414.


312


Chapter  XII.


[part


"  cine."  I  noted  at  the  time  ^  what  I  conceived  to  be  intended
for  the  clue,  namely  that  she  told  Socrates  that  Love  was
neither  a  god  nor  a  man,  but  a  great  spirit,  and  that  the
spiritual,  being  between  God  and  man,  had  the  power  of  inter-
preting and  conveying  messages  from  God  to  man  and  man  to
God  ;  that  all  the  intercourse  and  talk  of  God  to  men,  whether
sleeping  or  waking,  is  through  spirits,  and  one  of  these  is
Love.

I  was  struck  with  the  appropriateness  of  the  message  in  itself,
and  with  the  form  in  which  it  Avas  conveyed — not  directly  in
words,  but  by  an  allusion  to  Plato.  I  was  certain  that  I
had  never  seen  the  passage,  and  therefore  that  no  emergence
of  forgotten  knowledge  could  account  for  its  appearance^  so
that  the  effect  upon  me  was  considerable  and  lasting.  I
recognised,  of  course,  that  to  persons  who  did  not  know  me
there  was  no  evidential  value  in  the  occurrence,  as  they
would  think  naturally  that  I  had  read  and  forgotten  the
Symposium,  and  unconsciously  made  up  the  message.

In  spite  of  my  interest  no  further  allusion  was  made  in  the
script  to  this  passage,  and  I  had  no  fui'ther  occasion  to  think
of  the  dialogue  till  a  year  and  a  half  later,  when  it  happened
that  the  passage  of  the  Symiyosium  containing  Diotima's  view
was  set  for  translation  in  Trinity  College,  as  above  described,^
and  read  by  me  in  the  natural  course  of  my  work.

But  before  that  occurred  there  had  been  in  the  script
references,  as  I  now  think,  to  an  earlier  passage  in  the  dialogue.
It  was  only  when  I  read  the  whole  work  in  January,  1903,
that  I  noticed  a  likeness  between  the  two  hexameter  lines
introduced  at  the  end  of  Agathon's  panegyric  of  Love,  and
some  fragments  that  had  occurred  in  my  script.  Those  frag-
ments had  occurred  between  June  27th,  1901,  and  June  27th,
1902.

The  lines  of  Agathon  {Symjy.,  197  C)  are  as  follows:

elprfvriv  jxev  ev  ai/OpwTroi?,  TreXdyei  Se  yaXy'jvrjv,

vrjveixlav  avefxwp  koItijv  vttvov  t evi  Kr'jSei*

*  Trans.  "  Peace  among  men,  calm  on  the  sea,  stillness  of  winds,
a  resting-place  and  sleep  in  trouble."

1  Script  book,  June  1st,  1901. Note  in  diary,  June  3rd,  1901,

2  See  p.  242.


LIU.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  313


1.  On  June  27th,  1901,  the  script  wrote:
Quid  coerces  nenymon  -ya/\7;i'aji'  pw/xr^r.  *

No  literary  reminiscence  was  suggested  to  me  by  these  words.
The  phrase  v>]V€/j.cov  yaXrivwv  pu)/j.r]v  does  not  occur,  as  far  as  I
can  ascertain,  in  any  classical  author,  and  indeed  would  not
be  expected.  The  words,  (f>p6vt]ixa  iniveiJ.ov  yaXyptjg  are  used
by  Aeschylus,^  but  were  it  not  for  later  allusions  in  the  script
to  this  phrase  there  would  be  no  reason  to  connect  it  with  the
Symposhom.

2.  On  Sept.  2Sth,  1901,  the  script  wrote  :
Noenymus  I'lpe/xos  ecm  yaX-qvrj.

The  inti'oduction  of  earL  between  the  two  words  turns  the  line
into  half  an  hexameter,  and  so  suggests  a  quotation.

3.  On  December  12th,  1901,  the  script  wrote:

Nenymos  yaX-qv-q — is  the  word  but  there  is  more.  It  is  like  the
dv  a  pi.  6  fj.yjT  01'  ylAacr/xa  f  but  another  meaning.  It  is  Greek  but  written
in  English  letters — two  words  are  plain.  I  think  there  is  something
more.  This  is  not  your  husband's  word — he  wants  a  word  but  more
than  a  name.

It  is  probably  a  vague  recognition  of  the  Aeschylean  phrase
in  the  Agamemnon  that  introduces  the  words,  avapiOfxtjTou
yiXaa-fAa,  clearl}'  referring  to  another  famous  phrase  of  Aeschylus
in  the  Prometheus,  though  the  quotation  is  inaccurate  and
unmetrical.^  The  next  remark,  "  It  is  Greek,  but  written  in
English  letters.  Two  words  are  plain,"  appears  to  be  a  com-
ment on  what  has  already  been  written,  rather  than  a  fresh
contribution,  for  two  words  had  been  plainly  given,  one  of
them  being-  a  Greek  word  written  in  English  letters.  The
next  remark  about  "your  husband's  word"  clearly  refers  to
the  experiment  with  /j.ovoTrcoXoi'.  In  December,  1901,  when
this  script  was  written,  I  knew  that  there  had  been  great
efforts to  satisfy  my husband  about something, and  that

*  Trans.  "Why  dost  thou  stay  the  might  of  the  windless  calms?"
t  Trans. "  Unnumbered  smiling."

^Aesch.  Ag.  740,  "what  seemed  a  spirit  of  windless  calm."

^  Aesch.  P. 89.  ttovtluv  re  kvixcItcdv  dvi^pLOfJ-ov  yeAacr/ia.  "The
unnumbered  smiling  of  the  waves  of  the  sea."


314


Chapter  XII.


[part


Greek  words  had  appeared  in  those  attempts,  but  I  did  not
yet  know  that  what  he  actually  wanted  was  three  Greek
words. It  is  true  that  he  did  not  want  a  name.

4.  On  June  27th,  1902,  the  script  wrote:

Peace  on  earth  tranquillitas  super  omnia  maria  terrasque  omnes.*
Then  listen  for  the  fiery  news — an  arch  of  light  bridges  the  chasm
between  earth  and  sky.

Here  the  first  nine  woi'ds  appear  to  be  a  pai-aphrase  of
Agathon's  first  line,  while  the  last  clause  of  the  second  sentence,
"  bridges  the  chasm  between  earth  and  sky,"  seems  directly
to  allude  to  the  later  passage  in  the  Symposium  where  the
function  of  Love  is  described  by  Diotima,  and  Love  is  said
to  "  brido'e  over  the  intervenins;  sulf."

The  four  extracts  above  quoted  were  produced  under  dif-
ferent conditions.  The  first  and  last  were  written  at  the
RifTel  Alp  above  Zermatt,  on  the  same  day  in  two  succeeding
years.  I  liad  not  with  me  any  copy  of  my  script,  and  the
coincidence  of  date,  if  not  accidental,  must  be  attributed  to
unconscious  and  not  conscious  memory.  The  second  extract
was  written  at  Winchester,  and  the  third  at  home.  On  none
of  these  occasions  was  there  any  apparent  reason  for  my
thinking  of  storms  or  calms.^

The  resemblance  betAveen  these  extracts  and  Agathon's  lines,
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  reference  to  the  later  passage
of  the  same  Dialogue,  suggests  that  an  allusion  to  the  Sym-
posiumi  is  intended  in  the  script.  Direct  allusion  to  the  later
passage  had  been  made  unlikely,  and  in  any  case  evidentially
useless,  by  my  recognition  of  the  appropriateness  of  the  Diotima
incident.  If,  therefore,  a  further  attempt  was  to  be  made  in
the  script  to  suggest  the  Symposium,  some  new  direction  must
be  sought.  But  the  possibility  must  not  be  forgotten  that,
when  I  looked  out  the  reference  to  Diotima  on  June  1st,
1901,  my  eye  may  have  been  caught  by  the  lines  of  Agathon,
though  I  had  no  recollection  of  having  seen  them  till  I  read
them  in  their  context  in  January,  1903.

*  Trans. "  Calm  over  all  the  seas  and  all  the  lands."

1  The  absence  of  corresponding  weather  conditions  was  noted  at
the  time.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.  315


The  account  of  the  next  stao;e  in  these  allusions  to  the
Symposium  has  been  related  in  the  narrative  of  the  connexion
between  me  and  Mrs.  Forbes.^  Though  I  had  fixed  my  mind
on  the  Symposuim  before  writing  on  November  2Sth,  1902,
there  was  no  I'eference  to  it  in  that  or  the  next  five  following
scripts.  On  December  19th,  however,  after  receiving  from  Mrs.
Forbes  what  I  took  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  dialogue  in  her
script,  my  script,  after  saying  that  Socrates  was  in  her-
writing,  had  :

In  the  sealed  book  is  the  word,  the  message  to  men.
the  new  and  old  Diatessaron ;

followed  bj^  the  drawing  of  a  book.  Between  December  19th
and  January  14th  I  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  several  attempts
to  give  the  words  Symposium,  etc.  The  one  piece  of  script
produced  by  me  in  this  period  contained  no  reference  to  the
Symposium  except  to  express  the  belief  that  Mrs.  Forbes  would
get  the  words  wanted.  In  the  last  half  of  January  there  came
closely  following  upon  one  another  live  statements,  which  I
interpreted  to  mean  that  the  passage  in  question  was  alluded
to  and  emphasised  in  Mr.  Myers'  forthcoming  book.  Human
Personality. The  extracts  are  as  follows  :

January  14th,  1903.

Write  regularly — there  will  be  news  for  you  to  write  next  week

— good  news  before  the  month  is  out.^  The  book  will  help — our
word  is  there  contained.

January  22nd,  1903.

In  Myers'  book  is  a  word  that  ought  to  make  things  plain —
read  it  to  see — not  at  the  head  of  a  chapter,  but  quoted  in  the
text — it  should  have  been — and  surely  is.

January  23rd,  1903.

Eead  the  book  for  me. Look  there  for  the  helping  word.

iSee  p.  241.

2  No  definite  person  is  named ;  if  the  "  her,"  as  is  probable,  refers
to  Mrs.  Forbes,  the  statement  is  incorrect,  as  far  as  is  known.  Mrs.
Forbes  has  found  no  word  that  can  be  identified  as  "  Socrates "  in
her  writing.

^See  above,  p.  247.


316  Chapter  XII.  [part

January  2oth,  1903.

Between  God  and  Man  is  the  Sat^ovtov  rt — you  will  see  that
quoted  in  the  book — Love  is  the  bond.

January  31st,  1903.

Look  for  what  I  have  told  you  in  the  book — Myers'  book.
The  passage  is  important  'To  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  That  is
the  counter-sign.

On  February  9th/  1903,  I  noted^  that  the  above  extracts
seemed  to  point  to  Human  Personality.  I  had  corrected  for
press  a  slip  consisting  of  a  list  of  quotations  for  the  headings
of  the  Chapters,^  and  had  seen*  in  slip-proof  Chapter  VL  with
its  Appendix.  I  had  seen  nothing  else,  and  had  no  knowledge
in  detail  of  the  scheme  of  the  book.  Mi\  Myers  had  never
talked  it  over  with  me  ;  on  one  occasion,  late  in  the  autumn
of  1900,  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  view  of  sleep,  and  then  said
that  it  would  be  found  in  his  book.  This,  to  the  best  of  my
recollection,  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  he  ever  spoke
to  me  of  what  was  to  be  in  his  book.

1  therefore  had  no  means  of  knowing  whether  there  was
any  likelihood  that  my  script  would  be  justified  in  its
assertions,  and  I  was  very  anxious  to  test  this.

On  Feb.  10,  as  soon  as  I  received  the  book,  I  turned  to
the  Index,  and,  failing  to  find  "  Diotima,"  went  on  to  look
up  the  references  under  "  Love."  The  pages  given  are  II.,
282,  for  the  "Definition,"  and  I,  112-115,  for  "Platonic."  It
will  be  seen  that  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  112  to  113,  after  expressing
his  own  view  that  "Love  is  the  energy  of  integration,  which
makes  a  Cosmos  of  the  Sum  of  Things,"  Mr.  Myers  goes  on
to  describe  two  views  of  love,  which  he  calls  respectively
physiological  and  Platonic,  and  quotes  Plato's  words,  ep/uLtjvevov
Kot  Sia-TropOfxeuou,  "  the  Interpreter  and  Mediator  between  God

^I  knew  that  the  book  was  expected  to  appear  on  February  10th.

2  On  Feb.  7,  1903,  when  I  saw  Mr.  Piddingtou  in  Cambridge,
I  told  him  that  my  script  had  made  statements  about  what  was
contained  in  Human  Personality,  and  that  I  hoped  to  find  them
confirmed.

3  Hence  no  doubt  the  allusion  in  the  script  of  January  22nd,  1903.
*  I  obtained  these  proofs  in  slip  from  Miss  Johnson  in  the  spring

of  1901.


Liii.]  Miscellaneous  References  to  Past  Events.


317


and  Man."  These  words  begin  the  sentence  which  I  regarded
as  the  'clue'  referred  to  in  my  script  of  May  31st,  1901,  as
noted  before  endeavouring  to  carry  out  the  instructions
received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  on  Nov.  28th,  1902.  On  pp.  113
to  115  Mr.  flyers  gives  an  abstract  of  the  "cosmical"  aspect
of  Love,  as  de.scribed  by  Plato  in  the  Symposium,  calling-
special  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  utterance  is  placed  by
Plato  in  the  mouth  of  Diotima,  the  prophetess.  In  Yol.  II.,
p.  282,  when  Mr.  Myers  is  summing  up  his  views  and  detiuing
Love  as  "a  kind  of  exalted,  but  unspecialised,  telepathy,"  he
refers  indirectlj^  indeed,  but  none  the  less  unmistakeably,  to
this  passage  in  the  Sym2)ositim  when  he  uses  the  phrase,  "  it
(Love)  bridged  the  interval  between  spirits  incarnate  and
discarnate."

It  is,  I  think,  beyond  dispute  that  my  script  was  justified
in  saying  that  in  Mr.  Myers'  book  was  a  word  that  would
"  make  things  plain,"  and  that  this  view  of  Plato's  expressed
in  the  Symposium  was  "quoted  in  the  text."^  The  question
remains  whether  this  information  was  more  than  a  happy
guess.

That  question  will  no  doubt  be  difFerentl}^  answered  by
different  persons.  For  myself,  I  believe  that  I  had  no  such
antecedent  knowledcre  as  would  have  sugo-ested  such  a  statement.
I  took  some  pains  at  the  time  to  investigate  the  question  :  I
have  here  stated  all  that  I  believe  myself  to  have  known
from  Mr.  Myers  or  otherwise  about  the  actual  contents  of
the  forthcoming  book.-  No  reference  to  this  passage  or  to
Diotima  is  made  in  papers  published  by  Mr.  Myers  in  the
S.P.E.  Proceedings.  In  his  essay  on  Rossetti  (Essays,  Modern,
p.  334),  which  I  must  have  read  before  March,  1901,  there  is
a  reference  to  the  phrase,  epijirjvevov  koi  SLairopOjULevov,  but  there
is  nothing  to  indicate  the  dialogue  from  which  the  phrase  is

1  Xo  explanation  has  been  suggested  for  the  words,  "  To  the  ends
of  the  earth  that  is  the  countersign." (Jan.  31,  1903.)

-The  proofs  of  Human  Personality  were  in  Mrs.  Myers'  house  at
Cambridge,  where  I  was  a  frequent  visitor  during  the  spring  and
summer  of  1901.  It  is  therefore  not  impossible  that  I  should  have
seen,  without  consciously  noticing,  the  direct  reference  to  Diotima
in  the  first  volume  or  the  indirect  allusion  to  the  Dialogue  in  the
second  volume.


318


Clia2Jter  XII.


[part


taken,  so  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  unacquainted  with
the  Symposium  to  locate  the  allusion.  Moreover,  the  quota-
tion is  used  in  a  passage  dealing  with  a  different  aspect  of
the  subject,  and  contains  no  suggestion  of  what  seems  to  me
the  kej'note  of  the  references  in  my  script,  viz.,  that  com-
munication between  God  and  Man  is  effected  by  means  of
spirits,  and  that  Love  is  a  Spirit.  In  the  essay  on  Rossetti,
Mr.  Myers  writes:  "Love,  as  Plato  .said,  is  the  kpiJ.)]vevov  km
SiaTTopO/ijLevov,  the  '  interpreter  and  mediator '  between  things
human  and  things  divine ;  and  it  may  be  to  Love  that  we
must  look  to  teach  the  worshipper  of  Beauty  that  the  highest
things  are  also  the  loveliest,  and  that  the  strongest  of  moral
agencies  is  also  the  most  pervading  and  keenest  joy."  This  is
quite  different  from  the  application  made  in  Human  Per-
sonality, and  suggested  in  my  script.^

The  next  group  of  allusions  to  the  Symposiiim  has  been
described  above,  and  may  be  thus  summed  up:'^  On  August
18th,  1903,  the  script  stated  that  the  passage  from  the  Sym-
posium was  inside  something  contained  in  a  box  about  which
I  was  to  ask  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  on  July  13th,  1904,  and
August  14th,  1904,  this  passage  was  said  to  be  contained  in
an  envelope  which  it  was  desirable  to  open.  These  statements
were  not  correct.

Readers  of  this  paper  will  be  accustomed  to  failures  of  the
script,  and  many  reasons  can  be  found  for  this  particular
failure.  Possibly  one  such  reason  should  be  sought  in  the
difficulty  of  excluding  the  tendency  to  guess,  of  which  I  have
spoken  above.  A  })hrase  on  December  19th,  1902,  "  in  the
sealed  book  is  the  word,"  possibly  intended  to  refer  to  Human
Personality,  may  have  suggested  to  whatever  faculty  it  is
that  guesses  that  a  sealed  envelope  was  in  question.  But  it
is  unnecessary  to  look  very  far  for  the  source  of  such  a  guess.
The  numerous  allusions  in  the  script  to  the  opening  of  envelopes
and  similar  thing.s,  show  how  anxious  the  scribe  was  to  work
off  a  success  in  this  direction.

1  The  opinion  formed  at  the  time  was  expressed  in  my  diary  of
February  12th,  1903,  and  I  have  seen  no  reason  to  alter  it.

2  See  p.  299-301.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  319


CHAPTER  XIII.
Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.

I  NOW  come  to  a  group  of  incidents  which  appear  to  relate,
not  to  past  events,  but  to  the  future — an  actual  future,  not  a
present  impression  of  what  will  be.  In  some  cases  it  is  stated
in  the  script  that  these  incidents  are  prophetic  ;  in  other  cases
there  is  nothing  to  show  the  date  of  the  supposed  incident,
but  subsequently  occurring  events  seem  to  correspond  with  the
statements  of  the  script.  In  these  last  cases,  unless  the  cor-
respondence of  detail  is  pretty  close,  the  evidence  is  valueless.
But  that  the  reader  may  judge  whether  prophecy,  even  when
fulfilled,  is  due  to  anything  more  than  casual  coincidence,  I
have  collected  together  all  instances  in  which  it  is  possible  to
see  an  attempt  at  prophecy.  Some  of  the  cases  are  absolute
failures ;  some  are  probably  due  to  the  emergence  of  a  forgotten
memory,  recalled  by  a  subsequent  event ;  others  again  need  a
less  impressive  name  than  prophecies,  and  would  be  better
described  as  anticipations.

(1)  I  begin  with  an  instance  of  unmistakeable  intended  pro-
phecy which  was  not  completed  and  had  no  success.

On  December  29tb,  1903,^  after  a  fluent  exordium  in  Latin
urging  patience  and  promising  unique  results,  the  scribe  told
me  to  write  that  some  man  was  coming  in  a  ship  upon  the
sea,  but  not  to  me.  I  was  told  to  note  the  day  of  writing
and  watch. The  script  concluded  with  the  words :

This  is  a  prophecy.  I  will  tell  you  more  presently,  note  now
the  unexpected  journey  on  the  sea.

I  was  in  Algeria  at  the  time,  a  fact  which  may  account  for
allusions  to  journeys  upon  the  sea.  But  no  one  known  to  me
arrived  either  there  or  elsewhere,  as  far  as  I  could  ascertain,

1  For  complete  extract,  see  App.,  p.  429.


320


Chapter  XIII.


PART


on  or  just  after  December  29th.  The  script  did  not  fulfil  its
own  promise  of  telling  me  more  presently,  and  the  incident
must  be  registered  as  a  complete  failure.

The  next  five  incidents  (2  to  6)  are  very  slight,  and  it  is
more  than  probable  that  there  is  no  real  connexion  between
the  sayings  of  the  script  and  the  subsequent  occurrences  which
reminded  me  of  those  statements.  Probably  these  incidents
are  of  the  same  type  as  the  common  experience  where  some
event  in  the  day  revives  the  recollection  of  something  similar
in  a  dream.  The  difference  is  that  in  this  case  the  dream,  so
to  speak,  had  been  previously  noted,  and  therefore  the  corre-
spondence, if  any,  is  certainly  genuine,  and  cannot  be
attributed  to  false  memory.

{'!)  On  December  9th,  1902,  I  went  up  to  town  for  the  day,
intending  to  lunch  at  a  house  where  I  had  never  been  before,
and  of  which  I  knew  nothing  but  the  address,  Grosvenor  lioad,
Westminster  Embankment.  My  associations  with  the  neigh-
bourhood being  entirely  with  Victoria  Station,  I  started  to
find  the  house  at  the  Pimlico  end.

In  some  script  produced  at  20  Hanover  Square  before  12
noon  on  that  day  ^  occurred,  apparently  without  any  context,
the  words  :

Why  say  Milbranke  what  is  that  here  1

The  words  before  and  after  this  appeared  to  belong  together,
so  that  this  sentence  was  quite  disconnected  and  had  neither
meaning  nor  context.  On  reading  it  over  I  supposed  the  name
intended  to  be  Milbanke,  as  Milbranke  seemed  an  unknown
combination.  I  subsequently  found  that  the  house  I  visited,
which  we  occupied  later  on  for  a  month,  was  close  to  the
site  of  Milbank  Penitentiary,  and  very  near  Milbank  Street.

The  connexion  between  the  fact  and  the  name  in  the  script
is  of  the  loosest,  and  even  if  connexion  be  recognised  it  is
likely  that  the  script  represents  some  vague  knowledge  on
my  own  part  that  the  house  which  I  was  to  visit  was
near  Milbank  Street.  If  so,  such  knowledge  was  completely
latent,  but  in  any  case,  I  attach  no  value  to  the  incident,  and
have  included  it  here  merely  foi-  the  sake  of  completeness.

1  The  script  in  question  was  out  of  my  control  before  12  m.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.


321


(3)  On  April  20th,  1901,  the  script,  which  was  still  apt  to
be  very  unintelligible,  wrote :

Stella  caelo  decernitur  cur  nou  animo'?  genea  yei'v;  computa.
nonas  pone  horas ;  post  aliquot  dies — vis  scire  qnot  dies  1
1  +  1  +  1  +  1  +  1  et  adde  insuper  tres  Scribere  sine  remissione
semper  in  provinciam.  Aquilifer  poscit  aquilae  nigri  alas.  ni
liihim  donare.  vetui.  nugis  tempus  consumis  1  nuntium  deii
iam  accipe  pedibus  alitibus  super  maria  volitantem.  In  caelo
omen  in  terra  pax.*

This  was  not  promising,  and  nothing  ascertainable  came  of  it.

(4)  I  have  above  ^  described  the  apparent  resemblance
between  the  statements  of  the  script  on  October  21st  and
October  23rd,  1903,  and  the  first  of  the  new  Logia  discussed
in  Dr.  Grenfell's  paper  on  November  10th,  as  well  as  the
juxtaposition  in  both  of  the  Platonic  and  Gospel  passages.
In  this  case  reminiscence  ma5^  I  think,  be  eliminated  as  an
explanation  of  the  coincidence.

(5)  On  September  18th,  1901,  at  10.30  p.m.,  the  script
described  a  bird,  partly  in  words,  partly  by  a  rough  drawing :

The  bird  is  perched  on  something,  with  wings  out  and  head
forward.  It  is  crj'ing  at  something,  angry  or  terrified.  It  has
talons  and  a  strong  beak.

The  drawing  represented,  very  roughly,  a  bird  with  out-
spread wings  and  lowered  head  facing  the  spectator  and
looking  to  the  spectator's  right.  The  legs  and  talons  were
conspicuous  and  outstretched,  and  the  bird  appeared  to  be
standing,  not  in  flight.  The  description  made  it  clear  that  a
bird  of  prey,  eagle  or  vulture,  was  intended.

On  September  19th  I  went  to  a  furniture  shop  in  Cambridge
to get  a  wardrobe,  and  inside the  shop  saw  a  very  close

*  Trans.  "A  star  is  seen  in  the  sky  why  not  in  the  mind?
Classes  (1)  count.  Set  nine  hours,  after  a  few  days — do  you  want
to  know  how  many  days  1  five  and  then  add  three.  Write  with-
out relaxing  always  into  the  country.  The  eagle-bearer  demands
the  wings  of  the  black  eagle  give  nothing  I  have  forbidden  it.
Do  you  waste  your  time  on  trifles  1  Receive  now  the  messenger  of
the  god  flying  with  winged  feet  over  the  seas.  An  omen  in  the
Heaven,  peace  upon  the  earth."

iSee  p.  52.


322


Chapter  XIII.


[part


representation  of  the  bird  described  in  the  script  of  the  night
before.  The  bird  was  supporting  a  slab  which  served  as  a
pedestal  table ;  the  wings  were  outstretched  and  the  head  held
forward,  the  beak  was  open,  and  the  bii'd  had  an  angry  look.
But  the  head  was  turned  to  the  spectator's  left,  not,  as  in  the
drawino;,  to  the  rio;ht.

I  have  no  external  corroboration  for  this  incident,  which  was
not  noted  in  writing  till  October  14th.  But  at  the  time  I
was  certain  that  the  script  immediately  preceded  the  visit  to
the  shop.

(6)  On  September  4th,  1901,  at  the  end  of  a  long  piece  of
writing,  the  script,  in  quite  a  different  hand,  wrote :

Madment

Maidment

Evan

awnsley  November  1857.

And  on  September  7th  it  wrote :

M  A  I  M  E  N  T  I  S  W  I  T  H  I  N.  on  the  right-hand

side  as  you  look — the  window  is  behind,  so  it  is  not  very  plain  to
read. But  he  knows  it.

From  September  26th,  1901,  till  October  2nd,  my  husband
and  I  stayed  with  friends  at  Winchester.  During  our  visit
our  host  read  to  us  at  breakfast  one  morning,  I  think  on
September  28th,  parts  of  a  letter  from  a  friend  called  Bawnsley.^
On  September  30th,  or  possibly  on  September  28th,-  I  went
with  my  hostess  to  a  shop  in  Winchester,  and  noticed  the  name
"  Maidment,"  not  outside  the  shop,  but  on  a  paper  bag  hang-
ing up  inside  the  shop  on  the  right-hand  wall.  The  shop-
window  was  behind  me,  when  I  was  within  the  shop,  but  the
name  was  quite  plain  to  read.  At  the  time  I  did  not  connect  it
with  anything ;  it  was  only  after  my  return  from  Winchester
that,  on  reading  through  the  copies  of  the  script  and  finding  the
words  "  Maiment  is  within,"  I  remembered  having  noticed
the  name  Maidment  within  a  shop  at  Winchester.  I  then
remembered  the  reading  of  a letter  from  some  one  called

^  I  do  not  know  the  Christian  name  of  the  letter  writer.

-I  am  not  able  to  fix  the  date  with  absolute  certainty,  but  have
little  doubt  that  it  was  on  September  .30th.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  323


Rawnsley,  but  the  date  "  November  1 857 "  has  no  discover-
able connexion  with  this  or  any  other  incident  known  to  me.

(7)  In  the  early  part  of  March,  1903,  I  was  engaged  in  an
investigation  ot"  the  possible  significance  of  the  Greek  letter
2  which  had  appeared  in  the  script  frequently.  On  March  2nd
I  spoke  to  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison  of  my  impression  that  the
letter  might  have  a  symbolic  meaning  for  Neo-Platonists  or
other  later  Greek  writers.  On  March  3rd  she  brought  rae  a
book  bearing  on  the  subject.  On  that  evening  the  script  pro-
duced the  following :

elSpwv  o  Ti av crol dvojcptXe^  (/jai')^Tai  rjiii-eXevTOV to  y^prjfia

OTjSe  fx^SiOiS  SiareAetTat  aAAd  crin'  (tkotti]  ^  cis  crwecrti/  ekdois.
Soy/xara  eviji' — Si5acr/<aAta  Kat  avTOfiara Trapd.  ^V[j.<fio)V  Trapai'otas.

This  was  followed  by  two  rough  drawings  of  reversed
Sigmas  and  a  description  of  a  bound  volume  lying  on  a  table
in  an  upstairs  room.

The  first  word  is  unintelligible ;  the  rest  can  be  more  or
less  represented  in  English :  "  whatever  seems  useless  to  you
— the  thing  is  half  done — nor  will  it  easily  be  accomplished,  but
with  investigation  you  may  come  (?)  to  understanding.  There
were  doctrines  in  it,  didaskalia  and  automata."  The  last
words  are  again  unintelligible ;  they  mean  something  about
'  madness  from  the  nymphs.'

The  general  drift  of  this  script  may  be  accounted  for  by
my  occupation  about  the  time  it  was  produced ;  in  any  case
the  observations  were  justified,  for  on  the  next  day,  March
4th,  in  the  course  of  my  classical  work,  I  came  across  an
explanation  of  one  aspect  at  least  of  the  Z  in  my  script.  But
the  explanation  was  only  partial — 'the  thing'  only  'half
done ' — and  the  full  '  understandino- '  was  not  reached  till  some
months  later  after  considerable  '  investigation.'  The  phrases
about  doctrines,  didaskalia,  and  automata,  were  still  per-
fectly unintelligible.

On  March  4th  I  wrote  to  a  friend  to  make  enquiries  about
the  use  of  symbolic  letters  in  late  Greek  and  early  Christian

1  (TKOTTi]  is,  as  I  subsequently  found,  commonly  used  by  Plotinus
in  the  sense  required  by  the  script  'consideration,  care.'  Its  mean-
ing in  classical  Greek  is  '  watch-tower.'


324


Chapter  XIII.


[PAKT


writers,  and  on  March  6th  I  heard  from  him  that  he  had
consulted  another  friend  who,  as  it  happened,  was  to  dine  with
us  on  March  7th  and  would  then  bring  me  a  book  which
would  probably  answer  my  question,  viz.,  the  Didascalia.
This  name  was  unknown  to  me,  as  I  was  absolutely  un-
acquainted with  the  literature  and  history  of  eai-ly  Chris-
tianity. The  book  contained  just  such  information  as  I
wanted  about  the  use  of  symbolic  initial  letters  in  o-enei-al,
and  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the  juxtaposition  in
my  script  on  March  3rd  of  the  words  didaskalia  and  automata
is  unconnected  with  the  confirmation  on  March  7th  in  the
Didascalia  of  what  had  been  suggested  to  me  by  the  auto-
matic phenomena.

(8)  The  next  incident  is  rather  a  curious  one ;  the  script
seems  to  show  connexion  with  a  newspaper  paragraph  that
appeared  shortly  after  its  production.  But  the  paragraph,  on
investigation,  was  found  to  be  wholly  untrue,  so  that  the  script
anticipated,  if  anything,  not  I'acts,  but  the  fiction  of  a
journalist.  The  story  is  related  in  detail,  as  it  illustrates,
among  other  things,  the  difficulties  of  investio-ation.

On  June  27th,  1902,  when  I  was  at  the  Riffel  Alp,  the
script  began  as  follows :

Veni  Creator  were  the  words  exultans  cantavit  apud  spiritus
sanctos  inter  filios  Dei.*

The  context  suggested  to  me  that  this  paragraph  (in  contrast
with  the  rest  of  the  script)  was  of  general,  not  personal  applica-
tion.

I  showed  the  script  of  June  27th  to  my  husband  in  the
afternoon  of  June  29th.^  I  also,  about  the  same  time,  mentioned
the  script  to  Miss  Harrison.-

*  Trans.  "  triumphantly  (he  or  she)  sang  at  the  place  of  the  holy
spirits  among  the  sons  of  God."

I I  have  a  note  that  two  pieces  of  June  27th  and  June  29th  were
shown  to  him  together.

2 1  have  a  statement  from  Miss  Harrison  that  the  Vcmi  Creator
was  mentioned  to  her  before  July  4th.  On  that  day  she  left  the
hotel  before  seeing  me,  and  on  her  return  about  12.0,  I  asked
her  whether  she  remembered  my  speaking  of  the  Feni  Creator.
She  replied  that  she  did,  and  noted  her  recollection  before  hear-
ing of  my  discovery  in  the  newspaper  on  July  4th.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.


325


•  On  July  4th  I  saw,  by  chance,  among  the  papers  in  the  hotel
reading-room  the  Giornale  d'ltalict  of  July  2nd.  The  regular
supply  of  papers  to  the  hotel  began  on  July  1st,  and  this
was  the  first  Italian  paper  which  T  had  an  opportunity  of
seeing.  I  found  in  it  the  following  statement,  telegraphed  from
Paris  on  July  1st:  "A  Coursegontes  [sic]  nelle  Alpi  Marittime
I'espulzione  delle  suore  dello  Spirito  Santo  avenne  manu
militari.  Le  suore  abbandonarono  il  convento  cantando  il
Veni  Creator."

I  thought  that  the  above  script  might  refer  to  the  expulsion
of  the  Sisters  named,  as  it  described  some  one  sino-ino-  in
exultation  the  Veni  Creator,  'apud  spiritus  sanctos.'

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Piddington  on  July  4th,  and  on  July  6th
he  answered  that  he  would  make  enquiries  about  the  incident
described  in  the  Giornale  cV Italia.  These  enquiries  were
subsequently  made,  and  showed  :

(a)  That  there  is  no  community  of  any  kind  at  Coursegoules,
in  the  department  of  Alpes-Maritimes.

(6)  That  in  that  Department,  at  Juan  les  Pins,  on  the
coast,  there  was  a  convent  of  the  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
'  filles  du  Saint  Esprit.'

(c)  That  the  only  convent  in  the  Department  of  the  Alpes-
Maritimes  which  did  not  conform  to  the  law,  '  loi  du  1"''  juillet,
1901,'  was  this  convent  at  Juan  les  Pins.^

id)  That  on  June  29,  1902,  the  Sous  Prefet  of  Grasse,  in
conformity  with  the  edict  of  June  27th,  1902,  at  8  o'clock  in
the  morning,  gave  notice  at  the  Orphelinat  that  the  Sisters
were  to  leave,  and  that  at  12  o'clock  precisely  the  sisters
and  orphans  left  the  Orphelinat  for  the  Oratory  of  Juan  les
Pins,  accompanied  by  the  Superior  of  the  Oratory,  M.  J.
B''^  Etcheborne.^

(e)  That  at  no  moment  did  the  Sisters  sing  the  Veni
Creator.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  if  the  script  of  June  27th  refers
to  this  incident  at  all,  it  refers  not  to  the  actual  occurrence
but  to  the  incorrect  version  of  it  which  appeared  in  the  Giornale

^  See  Courier  de  Cannes,  July  1,  1902.

-I  have  his  letter  from  Biarritz  of  Aug.  10,  1902.


326


Chapter  XIII.


[part


<V Italia^  of  July  2nd.  The  script  was  written  on  June  27th,
the  date,  as  I  subsequently  found,^  of  the  decree  concerning
the  unrecognised  orders.  It  makes  no  mention  of  the  locality
where  this  occurred,  or  was  to  occur,  and  neither  the  actual
incident  nor  the  newspaper  account  offers  any  explanation  of  the
words  inter  filios  Dei.^  The  use  of  the  past  tense,  when  the
event  referred  to  in  the  script  has  not  yet  occurred,  is  paralleled
in  other  cases.**

On  no  other  occasion  has  there  been  any  reference  in  the
script  to  the  singing  of  any  hymn,  English  or  Latin.

(9)  In  the  summer  of  1903,  whilst  I  was  abroad,  the  script
committed  itself  to  a  series  of  prophecies,  unmistakeable  pro-
phecies, expressed  in  the  future  tense  with  definite  dates,
within  which  the  fulfilment  was  to  occur.  The  statements
made  may  be  summarized  as  follows  :

(a)  that  three  public  men  would  die  before  my  return  to
England  ;

(6)  that  one  death  would  be  within  the  week  in  which  Tues-
day, June  9th,  was  contained  ;

(c)  that  the  third  death  would  be  sudden ;

{d)  that  on  June  24th  there  were  two  more  deaths  to  come,
one  of  them  unexpected  ;

(e)  that  on  July  3rd  the  third  death  had  not  occurred ;

(/)  that  I  should  see  something  relevant  in  the  papers  at
Bale  ;

{g)  that  in  one  case  there  would  be  a  public  funeral.
The  vagueness  of  the  definition  '  public men '  precluded
effectual  test,  but  statement  /  (at  all  events)  was  not  satisfied.

1  A  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  Giornale,  asking  for  further  information
about  the  incident  described  in  the  paper  of  July  2nd,  received  no
answer.

"  In  the  Gaulois  of  July  .5th,  wliich  I  read  on  July  7th,  I  found
the  decree  spoken  of  as  '  decret  du  27  juin';  this  was  my  first
conscious  knowledge  of  the  date  of  the  decree,  but  probably  I  had
seen  earlier  references  to  it  under  that  title.

^  The  words  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  Job  ;  "  when  tlie  morning
stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy,"  but
that  does  not  explain  their  occurrence  in  this  context.

■^See  specially  below,  p.  331,  in  the  Marmontel  incident.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.


327


(10)  On  October  6th,  1903,  after  a  remark^  about  a  member
of  my  husband's  family,  the  script  went  on :

Great  changes  all  will  see  in  the  next  year,  more  than  one
breach  in  the  close  family.

The  allusion  to  the  "  close  family "  was  appropriate  to  my
husband's  family.  Three  households,  those  of  his  father  and
two  married  brothers,  at  Brighton,  and  an  unmarried  aunt  at
Steyning,  eleven  miles  off,  constituted  his  whole  family.  There
had  been  no  breach  in  the  family  circle  since  the  death  of
his  mother  in  1893,  more  than  ten  years  before  this  writing.

It  is  a  fairly  safe  prophecy  to  suggest  breaches  in  a  family
•containino-  some  old  members,  and  the  use  of  the  term  '  breach '
is  vague.  But  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  statement  of  the
script  was  verbally  correct.  On  June  2nd,  1904*,  my  husband's
aunt  died,  and  in  September,  1904,  the  son  of  his  youngest
brother  left  home  to  establish  himself  in  New  Zealand.  So
that  "  in  the  next  year "  thei'e  was  "  more  than  one  breach "
in  what  till  then  had  been  a  singularly  "  close  family."

(11)  On  July  3rd,  1904,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  further
attempt  to  foretell  one  of  the  two  incidents  just  referred  to,
viz.,  the  departure  of  my  husband's  nephew  for  New  Zealand.
The  incident  is  complicated.  The  script  of  July  3rd  purported
to  give  a  prophecy,  the  fulfilment  of  which  was  to  induce  us
to  open  the  sealed  envelope  containing  the  allusion  to  the
Symposium.^  The  script  stated  that  some  one  would  see  all
the  constellations,  and  that  some  event  already  foretold  would
take  place  on  September  19th.  Later,  on  July  18th,  the  script
stated  the  date  less  definitely  in  the  words,  obviously  referring
to  this  same  prophecy :

Prophecy  is  hard  to  work  but  it  shall  be  done  this  time — read
all  with  care  after  mid-September  next  and  you  will  find  all  you
want  for  proof.

On  July  3rd  I  looked  through  the  script  and  found  only
two  propliecies  unfulfilled  at  that  date,  one  being  that  there
would  be  "  more  than  one  breach "  in  my  husband's  family.^

^  Too  vague  to  be  evidential.

-The  script  is  quoted  in  App.,  p.  419.

3  For  the  other  (on  Feb.  1,  1904)  see  above,  p.  211.  That,  too,
may  be  considered  to  have  been  eventually  fulfilled.


328


Chapter  XIII.


[part


Very  soon  after  the  middle  of  September  there  was  another
breach.^  As  above  stated  my  husband's  nephew  left  for  New
Zealand  in  September,  and,  I  suppose,  saw  "  the  rest "  of  the
constellations,  as  any  one  must  in  a  journey  to  the  Antipodes.
His  vessel  sailed  on  September  22nd  and  September  19th  had  no-
special  association  with  his  journey.  We  heard  of  his  intention
to  go  on  July  21st,  so  that  both  the  above  statements  in
the  script  were  antecedent  to  any  knowledge  of  mine,  as  his.
plans  had  not  been  long  discussed  and  were  wholly  unknown
to  us  till  July  21st.

(12)  On  May  11th,  1901,  I  had  had  a  small  party  of  ladies
to  dinner — my  husband  was  dining  out — and  after  the  depar-
ture of  the  guests  I  had  gone  upstairs,  when  I  felt  a  sudden
strong  desire  to  write  automatically,  and  came  down  again  to
find  materials.  I  wrote  in  the  dark,  at  11.10  p.m.  Some
earlier  statements "  in  the  script  were  veridical ;  the  conclusion
was  as  follows :

Do  not  hurry. date  this hoc  est  quod  volui — tandem.
SiKaiocrvvi] /cat X'^P'^ crvfxtpm'el  (TvveTOicrLV. A.W.V. Kal  cIXXm
TLvl  i'o-ws. calx  pedibns  inhaerens  difficultatein  superavit.  magno-
pere  adiuvas  persectando  semper. Nomeu  inscribere  iam  possum —
sic,  eu  tibi !

Zjyra — oOaAwjKaKo?  ^aX/xaTLKOS  /-ioi'os  jj.ovcnj  TrMrros.

^(DTTjp  /xeytcTTOS.*


T\  ■ —  ^

I  showed  the  script  to  my  husband  next  day.  We  could
make  nothing  of  it,  and  were  much  amused  at  the  drawing

*  Trans.  "This  is  what  I  have  wanted,  at  last.  Justice  and  joy
speak  a  word  to  the  -wise.  A.W.V.  and  perhaps  some  one  else.
Chalk  sticking  to  the  feet  has  got  over  the  difficulty.  You  help
greatly  by  always  persevering.  Now  I  can  write  a  name — thus^
here  it  is  ! " The  rest  is  unintelhgible.

1  The  first  breach  had  occurred  on  June  2.  -  See  p.  208.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  329


of  what  we  often  referred  to  in  the  next  few  days  as  the
"cockyoly  bird."

On  the  evening  of  May  IGth  I  saw  in  the  Westminster
Gazette  an  account  (abridged)  from  the  Daily  Mail  of  an
incident  occurring  on  the  niglit  between  Saturday,  May  lltli,
and  Sunday,  May  12th,  which  recalled  to  me  the  script  above
quoted.  The  writer  of  the  account  in  the  Daily  Mail  stated
that  a  friend  of  his  had  been  compelled  to  leave  his  rooms  "  in
one  of  the  Inns  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  Law  Courts  "  on
account  of  "  uncanny  happenings."  The  writer  and  a  friend
of  his  arranged  to  sit  through  the  night  of  May  11th  in  the
empty  rooms  and  watch  events.  Precautions  were  taken  to
prevent  intrusion,  and  powdered  chalk  was  spread  on  the  floor
of  the  two  smaller  rooms ^  "to  trace  anybody  or  anything  that
might  come  or  go."  The  watchers  saw  a  door  unlatched  and
opened  slowly,  and  heard  the  click  of  the  handle.  This  was
at  12.43  a.m.  At  12. .56  the  same  thing  occurred  to  another
door.  Both  doors  were  closed,  and  no  mark  Avas  visible  on
the  powdered  chalk.  At  1.32  a.m.  the  right-hand  door  opened
again  as  before,  and  at  1.37  the  left-hand  door  opened.  At
1.40  both  doors  closed  simultaneously  "  of  their  own  accord."
Between  1.45  and  1.55  this  happened  twice  again,  so  that  there
were  in  all  four  openings  and  three  closings  unaccounted  for.^
The  last  openings  took  place  at  2.7  and  2.9,  and  both  watchers
noticed  marks  on  the  chalk  in  the  two  little  rooms.  On
examination  it  was  seen  that  the  marks  were  "  clearly  defined
bird's  footprints  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  three  in  the  left-
hand  room  and  five  in  the  right-hand  room."  The  marks  were
identical,  and  exactly  2f  inches  in  size ;  they  might  be  com-
pared to  the  footprints  of  a  bird  about  the  size  of  a  turkej'.
There  were  three  toes  and  a  short  spur  behind.  Nothing
further  occurred.  The  footprints  were  seen  at  2.30  ;  they
waited  till  3.30,  and  then  went  home.  No  attempt  is  made
to  explain  the  occurrence,  and  the  correspondent  says  that  he
has  "  simply  recorded  facts."

The  statement  in  the  script,  that  the  sticking  of  chalk  to
the  feet  got  over  the  difiiculty,  followed  by  a  drawing  of  a

1  There  were  four  room.s  in  all.

2  The  first  time  the  doors  had  been  closed  by  the  watchers.


330


Chapter  XIII.


[part


Hrd  with  a  leer  is  a  singularly  appropriate  comment  on  the
story  in  the  Daily  Mail.  But  the  remarkable  point  is  that
the  script  was  written  at  11.10  p.m.,  whereas  the  first  opening
■of  the  door  did  not  occur  till  12.43  a.m.  and  the  footprints
were  not  observed  till  2.30  a.m.  The  statement  therefore  of
the  script  anticipated  the  reported  event  by  some  three  hours,
and  its  publication  by  a  still  longer  period.  It  is  true  that
the  sprinkling  of  the  chalk  probably  preceded  the  writing,
but  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  writer  of  the  tale  had
any  expectation  as  to  the  sort  of  marks  he  might  find  in  the
chalk.  Nothing  that  had  previously  occurred  suggested  that
the  supposed  disturber  of  the  rooms  was  a  bird.^

At  the  time  when  this  script  was  obtained  I  had  no  reason
to  attach  any  particular  value  to  my  automatic  writing,  and
no  steps  were  taken  to  obtain  external  corroboration  of  the
dates  of  the  script  except  entries  in  my  Diary  and  script-
book  and  communication  of  the  writing  at  the  first  opportu-
nity to  my  husband.  In  this  case  the  absurd  element  in  the
script  and  the  quaintness  of  the  phrase  about  the  chalk  stick-
ing to  the  feet  drew  special  attention  to  the  writing,  and  it
was  discussed  by  us  more  than  once.  The  word  calx  is
ambiguous ;  it  might  mean  "  heel "  as  well  as  "  chalk,"  and
it  was  not  till  we  saw  the  story  in  the  Westminster  Gazette
of  May  16th  that  w^e  found  an  interpretation  for  the  Latin
words.  The  question  of  a  connexion  between  the  story  and
the  script  is  not  affected  by  the  value  of  the  story.  The
script  was  obtained  on  May  11th,  and  whether  or  not  a  bird
made  marks  in  the  chalk  in  the  early  hours  of  May  12th,  it
is  certain  that  a  story  to  that  effect  was  printed  on  May  13th
and  brought  to  my  knowledge  on  May  16th.

(13)  On  August  29th,  1901,  at  the  end  of  an  attempt  to
gue,ss  /uLovuTTioXoi/  e?  aw  the  script  wrote  :

Don't  try — let  it  come.  When  you  don't  expect  it  will  be  plain.
October  will  help — the  19th.  Remember.

On  September  2Sth,  when  I  was  staying  at  Winchester,  the
script  contained  the  following :

1  The  writer  of  the  article  in  the  Daily  Mail  was  seen  by  Mr.
Piddington,  and  stated  that  he  and  his  friend  had  no  anticipations
£LS  to  what  they  might  discover.


Liii.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  331


The  old  world  &  the  new — note  the  date — and  the  sequence — and
count  the  days — ten  more  &  other  nine  then  two.

Counting  the  days — twenty-one — and  adding  them  to  Septem-
ber 28th  brought  the  date  to  October  19th,  which  I  remem-
bered to  have  been  already  mentioned  in  the  script.  My
husband  saw  both  passages  of  writing,  but  I  mentioned  to
no  one  else  the  suggestion  that  any  event  was  to  be  expected
on  October  19th.

On  October  16th  I  heard  accidentally,  and  to  my  great  sur-
prise, that  some  friends  of  mine  were  going  to  America  shortly.
I  asked  how  soon  they  were  to  start,  and  the  reply  was  '  Next
Saturday.'  It  was  only  after  a  few  minutes  that  I  considered
what  day  of  the  month  '  Saturday'  would  be,  and  on  finding  that
it  was  the  19th,  remembered  that  somethino-  had  been  said  in
my  script  about  October  19th.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  remarks  in  the  script,  though  they
might  easily  be  more  definite,  unmistakeably  refer  to  some
•connexion  on  the  19th  October  between  England  and  America.

From  enquiries  subsequently  made,  it  appeared  that  the
■decision  of  my  friends  was  recent,  and  that  on  Aug.  29th
and  Sept.  28th  there  was  no  one  who  knew,  or  could  suppose,  that
any  event  connecting  England  and  America  likely  to  interest  me
would  occur  on  Oct.  19th.  The  information  then  could  not  have
been  conveyed  to  me  by  telepathy,  and  the  only  question  for
consideration  is  whether  it  was  sufficiently  definite  and  dis-
tinctive to  be  beyond  the  range  of  conjecture  or  chance.

(14)  On  December  11th,  1901,  the  script  wrote  as  follows:

Nothing  too  mean  the  trivial  helps,  gives  confidence.  Hence
this.  Frost  and  a  candle  in  the  dim  light  Marmontel  he
was  reading  on  a  sofa  or  in  bed — there  was  only  a  candle's  light.
She  will  surely  remember  this.  The  book  was  lent  not  his  own —
he  talked  about  it.

Then,  after  a  I'eference  to  a  separate  incident,  recognised  as
such,  there  appeared  a  fanciful  but  unmistakeable  attempt  at
the  name  Sidgwick.

No  meaning  was  conveyed  to  me  by  the  above.  The  allusion
to  "she"  and  the  name  given  suggested  that  I  should  apply  to
Mrs.  Sidgwick.


332


Chapter  XIII.


[part


I  accordingly  wrote  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  ask  if  the  allusion
to  Marmontel  had  any  meaning  for  her.  I  heard  from  her  on
December  17th  that  she  could  make  nothing  of  it,  but  that  if
the  name  turned  up  in  some  MSS.  which  she  was  then  reading,
she  would  let  me  know.  I  was  away  from  home  at  this  time,
and  had  not  had  the  opportunity  of  writing  for  some  days.^  I
had,  in  fact,  decided  to  abandon  any  attempt  at  writing  till
my  return  home,  but  I  was  so  disturbed  all  the  17  th  by  a
desire  to  write  that  I  made  time,  and  at  6.50  that  evening
obtained  the  followino-;

I  wanted  to  write  Marmontel  is  right.  It  was  a  French  book,
a "  Memoir  I  think.  Passy  may  help  Souvenirs  dc  Passy  or  Fleury.
Marmontel  was  not  on  the  cover — the  book  was  bound  and  was  lent —
two  volumes  in  old-fashioned  binding  and  print.  It  is  not  in  any
papers — it  is  an  attempt  to  make  someone  remember — an  incident.

Soon  after  my  return  to  Cambridge,  about  Dec.  25th,  1901,
I  was  looking  throuo-h  a  list  of  books — which  I  had  glanced
at  before  Dec.  11th — and  found  an  advertisement  of  'Mar-
montel, Moral  Tales,  Selected  and  Translated  by  G.  Saintsbury.'
This,  strange  though  such  an  admission  may  seem,  was,  as  far
I  could  remember,  my  first  conscious  knowledge  of  Marmontel
as  a  French  writer.

In  January,  1902,  I  wi'ote  to  our  friend  Mi-.  Marsh,  asking  him
to  come  for  a  week-end  visit,  and  he  replied,  fixing  March  1st.
I  had  had  no  communication  with  him  since  June,  1901,  till
this  letter  in  January.  I  sent  him  a  postcard  about  Feb.  23rd,
reminding  him  of  the  date  of  his  expected  visit,  and  he  replied
in  a  letter  on  Feb.  24th.

On  March  1st  Mr.  Marsh  arrived,  and  that  evening  at  dinner
he  mentioned  that  he  had  been  reading  Marmontel.  I  asked  if
he  had  read  the  Moral  Tales,  and  he  replied  that  it  was  the
Memoir's.  I  was  interested  in  this  reference  to  Marmontel,  and
asked  Mr.  Marsh  for  particulars  about  his  reading,  at  the
same  time  explaining  the  reasons  for  my  curiosity. He  then

1  See  above,  pp.  227,  8.  "  Possibly  "  or."

^I  must  have  seen  his  name  in  French  Histories  or  Literature  Manuals.
But  I  have  little  first  hand  acquaintance  with  the  period  to  which  he
belongs,  and  was  certainly  not  aware,  till  March,  1902,  that  he  wrote
Memoirs.


LIII.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  SSB

told  me  that  he  got  the  book  from  the  London  Library,  and  took
the  first  volume  only  to  Paris  with  him,  where  he  read  it  on  the
evening  of  February  20th,  and  again  on  February  21st.  On
each  occasion  he  read  b}'  the  light  of  a  candle,  on  the  20th
he  was  in  bed,  on  the  21st  lying  on  two  chairs.  He  talked  about
the  book  to  the  friends  with  whom  he  was  staying  in  Paris.
The  weather  was  cold,  but  there  was,  he  said,  no  frost.  The
London  Library  copy  is  bound,  as  most  of  their  books  are,
not  in  modern  binding,  but  the  name  '  Marmontel '  is  on  the
back  of  the  volume.  The  edition  has  three  volumes ;  in  Paris
Mr.  Marsh  had  only  one  volume,  but  at  the  time  of  his  visit
to  us  he  had  read  the  second  also.

I  asked  him  whether  '  Passy  '  or  '  Fleury '  would  '  help,'  and
he  replied  that  Fleury's  name  certainly  occurred  in  the  book,
in  a  note  ;  he  was  not  sure  about  Passy,  but  undertook  to
look  it  up  on  his  return  to  town,  and  to  ascertain,  as  he
could  by  reference  to  the  book,  what  part  of  the  first  volume
he  had  been  reading-  in  Paris.  He  is  in  the  habit  of  readinsf
in  bed,  but  has  electric  licrht  in  his  bedroom  at  home,  so  that
he  had  not  read  '  in  bed  or  on  a  sofa  by  candle  light '  for
months,  till  he  read  Marmontel  in  Paris.

On  his  return  to  town  Mr.  Marsh  wrote  to  me  (March  4
1902),  that  on  Feb.  2Lst,  while  lying  on  two  chairs  he  read
a  chapter  in  the  fii'st  volume  of  Marmontel's  Memoirs  describing
the  finding  at  Passy  of  a  panel,  etc.,  connected  with  a  story
in  which  Fleury  plays  an  important  part.

It  will  thus  be  noted  that  the  script  in  December,  1901,
describes  (as  past)  an  incident  which  actually  occurred  two
and  a  half  months  later,  in  February,  1902, — an  incident  which
at  the  time  of  writing  was  not  likely  to  have  been  foreseen  by
any  one.  I  ascertained  from  Mr.  Marsh  tliat  the  idea  of  reading
Marmontel  occurred  to  him  not  long  before  his  visit  to  Paris.
It  is  probable  that  had  he  not  seen  me  almost  immediately
upon  his  return,  when  his  mind  was  full  of  the  book,  I  should
never  have  heard  of  his  reading  it,  and  therefore  not  have
discovered  the  application  of  the  script  of  Dec.  16th  and  17th.

The  description  is  definite  and  in  the  main  accurate.  There
are  however  errors :  though  the  weather  was  cold,  it  does
not  seem  to  have  been  actually  freezing  on  either  of  the  two


334


Chapter  XIII.


[part


nights  in  question ;  the  book  was  not  in  two  volumes  only,
as  seems  implied,  though  only  two  volumes  had  been  read
when  the  incident  was  related  to  me ;  the  name  Marmontel
was  oil  the  back  of  the  book,  though  not  on  the  face  of
the  cover ;  the  binding,  though  not  modern,  can  hardly  be
described  as  old-fashioned.  But  the  reference  to  Passy  and
Fleury — names  which,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  •  are  not-
together  in  any  passage  of  Marmontel's  Memoirs  except  that
read  by  Mr.  Marsh  on  Feb.  21st — is  a  precise  and,  I  think,,
remarkable  coincidence.

Two  other  points  may  be  noted  :  (1)  the  refusal  of  the
script  on  Dec.  17th  to  accept  the  suggestion  that  the  name
Marmontel  may  refer  to  something  in  MSS.  then  being  read
(in  December)  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick ;  and  (2)  the  omission  of  any
reference  to  the  name  of  the  reader  of  Marmontel.  The
omission  of  this,  the  most  conclusive  piece  of  evidence  of  all,
had  it  been  given,  is  paralleled  by  other  incidents  in  the
script.  In  particular  it  may  be  noted  that  in  the  last  two
incidents  narrated,  where  the  allusion  seems  to  be  prophetic,
there  is  a  marked  omission  of  definite  statements.  Thus,  in
No.  12,  no  reference  is  given  to  the  place  where  the  'chalk-
footed  bird'  appeared,  nor,  in  No.  13,  to  the  person  who  was
to  go  from  '  the  old  world '  to  the  new.

The  sentence,  '  She  will  surely  remember  this,'  in  the  writing*
of  Dec.  11th  is  unintelligible  at  least,  if  not  misleading;  the
idea  is  apparently  repeated  on  Dec.  17th  in  the  words,  "  it  is
an  attempt  to  make  some  one  remember."  A  possible
explanation  of  this  is  suggested  by  the  occasional  appearance
in  the  script  of  what  I  have  called  conversations,^  where  the
third  person  "  she "  plainly  refers  to  myself,  the  writer,  who
is  more  frequently  addressed  as  "you."  Thus  on  March  10th,.
19U2,  there  was  written:  "There  is  a  letter  for  you  gone  astray
— it  will  arrive — remember  this  date  (here  a  gap,  then)  I  have
told  her  of  the  letter,  the  strayed  letter — (another  gap,  then)
your  husband  etc.  etc."  Here  you,  Iter  and  your  all  seem  to
refer  to  the  writer,  myself,  part  of  the  remarks  being
apparently  addressed  to  me  and  part  spoken  of  me.  In  the
present  case  it  is  possible  that  what  the  writing  intended  to

1  See  p.  68.


Lili.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  335


convey  was  that  when  the  actual  incident  was  spoken  of  in
the  presence  of  the  writer — as  it  was  on  March  1st,  1902,  by
Mr.  Marsh — "  she  would  surely  remember "  that  this  incident
had  been  described  in  the  script.

Although  at  this  time  the  original  writing  was  not  posted
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodoe  I  am  able  to  offer  external  corroboration
of  the  date  of  the  first  reference  to  Marmontel,  as  I  have
preserved  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  letter  received  by  me  on  December
I7th,  1901,  which  .shows  that  the  name  had  been  mentioned
to  her  by  me  before  that  day  as  occurring  in  my  script.

(15)  On  April  2nd,  1903,  the  script  described  a  cross  on
stone  steps  in  the  following  words :

Now  draw  on  five  stone  steps  a  cross  [drawing]  and  on  the
cross  hangs  a  wreath,  a  fresh  green  wreath.  Tliey  have  come  to  see
it  there — out  in  the  open  on  the  hill  side  in  the  sound  of  the  sea.
It  is  not  a  personal  thing — but  know(?)).  This  is  for  evidence.
There  is  an  inscription  fastened  to  the  wreath.  In  honour  A.  J.  C.^
In  ripis  Douern  I  think  it  is  for  an  old  heroic  deed.  Grey  sky
and  sea  and  the  grey  gulls  cry  in  the  wind. Kyrie  eleeison.

A  few  days  later,  April  10th,  1903,  it  added:

Crosik  or  Croisic  ought  to  help  you  to  the  cross  and  wreath.

In  the  Journal  for  November,  1903,  among  other  unidentified
allusions,  I  advertised  the  names  Douern  and  Croisic  in  con-
nexion with  a  cross,  but  I  received  no  information  leading  to
any  identification.  Croisic  is,  as  I  knew,  in  Brittany,  and  the
allusion  to  it  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  word  Douern
and  the  talk  of  a  stone  cross  on  a  hill  side.

The  cross  remained  completely  unaccounted  for,  and  nO'
further  help  towards  identiffcation  was  given  by  the  following
allusion  on  Feb.  24th,  1905:2

Wait  now  for  this  news.  There  is  a  grey  stone  cross  on  the
hill  side  close  by  the  spot — a  cross  on  stone  steps.  V  o  1 1  i  g  e  r  n
no  Volte  rnius  ager  is  more  like.  Y  o  1 1  e  r  n '  s  Field.
Someone  could  tell  you  of  the  cross.

^  The  second  initial  is  not  as  clearly  marked  as  the  others.  See
facsimile  on  next  page.

2  The  script  of  Feb.,  1905,  and  March,  1906,  falls  outside  the
period  dealt  with  in  this  paper,  but  is  here  included  as  it  refers  to
the  same  subject  as  the  earlier  script  of  April,  1903.


336


Chapter  XIII.


[part


On  March  17th,  1906,  a  river  in  Yorkshire  was  mentioned
in  my  presence  as  the  Derwent.  The  name  "  Derwent "  had
always  been  vaguely  suggested  to  me  by  the  "  Dovinans "  of
the  early  script,^  and  the  "  Douevn "  of  April  3rd,  1903,  had
seemed  a  possible  variant.  The  mention,  then,  of  the  York-
shire Derwent  probably  revived  recollections  of  earlier  script,
and  at  11.30  p.m.  that  evening  was  produced  another  reference
to  the  cross,  this  time  apparently  suggesting  that  I  should
have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and  recognising  the  cross  on  its
five  steps,  and  the  green  wreath  :

Stone  I  want  to  say.  Stone  a  white  stone  and  no  inscription
but  you  would  recognise  if  you  saw.  Can  you  not  find  the  cross
on  its  five  steps  and  the  green  wreath  1

Domus  resonantis  Albuneae  *  where  flows  the  stream  o'er  Dufa's
cliff,  the  Derwent's  wandering  course.  On  the  banks  of  the  stream — •
the  Derwent  water,  not  a  lake — wait  and  see  yourself  what  I  mean.

This  revived  my  interest  in  the  original  unidentified  cross
on  five  stone  steps,  and  led  me  to  look  out  for  any  possible
means  of  verifying  the  statements  of  the  script.  The  descrip-
tion had  always  puzzled  me  as  it  seemed  to  imply  two  incon-
sistent things,  (a)  an  old  heroic  deed  and  (6)  a  modern
memorial,  suggested  by  the  fresh  green  wreath  and  the  initials
A.  J.  C.  The  second  of  these  initials,  as  I  noted  at  the  time,
was  by  no  means  as  distinct  as  the  first  and  third.  Fac-
similes are  given  below  of  the  cross  drawn  in  the  script  and
the  initials  :


*  Trans,  "home  of  the  echoing  Sibyl."  Horace  {Od.  I.  7.  12)  so
describes  Tibur.

^  See  above,  p.  278.


[To  face  p.  336.


LIII.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  o37

On  April  4th,  1906,  I  went  by  arrangement  to  sit  with  a
little  group  of  experimenters  who  were  meeting  at  the  rooms
of  Miss  Curtois  in  Westminster.  I  had  made  Miss  Curtois'
acquaintance  in  the  autumn  of  1905,  and  visited  her  for  the
first  time  on  December  11th,  1905.  I  had  tea  with  her  on
that  day,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  looking  at  anything
in  her  room  and  certainly  made  no  examination  of  her  books
or  pictures.  It  was  a  very  foggy  day  and  we  were  busy
talking.

On  my  second  visit,  however,  on  April  4th,  before  the
arrival  of  the  other  sitters.  Miss  Curtois  and  I  had  some
talk  about  books,  and  in  so  doing  I  looked  over  her  book-
shelves. I  then  saw  hanging  on  the  wall  a  photograph  of
a  cross  on  stone  steps  which  reminded  me  at  once  of  the
cross  described  in  the  script.  I  asked  her  what  it  was  and
she  told  me  that  it  was  a  cross  set  up  by  herself  in  memory
of  her  mother.  I  then  asked  Mrs.  Curtois'  initials  and  found
that  they  were  A.  H.  C.  The  cross  had  been  erected  from  the
design  of  Mr.  Jessopp.  I  next  asked  Miss  Curtois  whether
there  had  not  at  some  time  been  a  green  wreath  on  the
cross — there  was  none  in  the  photograph  at  which  I  was
looking — and  .she,  with  some  surprise,  replied  in  the  afiirma-
tive  and  added  that  there  had  been  some  discussion  about  a
green  wreath  which  was  at  one  time  placed  on  the  cross.  I
subsequently  obtained  from  her  the  following  information  and
a  photograph  (here  reproduced)  of  the  cross  with  the  green
wreath  attached.

In  the  churchyard  of  Washingborough,  a  village  near  Lincoln,
on  the  river  Witham,  was  an  old  pedestal  of  five  stone  steps.
On  this  pedestal  a  modern  cross  was  erected  from  the  designs
of  Mr.  Jessopp  in  memory  of  Mrs.  Curtois,  and  dedicated  on
July  5th,  1903.  There  is  no  inscription  on  cross  or  pedestal.
There  is  a  tablet  in  the  villaoe  church  commemoratino-  the
erection  as  follows :  "  In  loving  memory  of  Ann  Henrietta,
widow  of  the  Kev.  Atwill  Curtois.  .  .  .  this  tablet  has  been
erected  and  the  village  cross  replaced  by  her  daughter,
Marg'aret  Anne  Curtois,  1903  "  A  green  wreath  was  once
placed  on  the  cross,  most  probably  at  Christmas,  1903.  Miss
Curtois  writes  in  April,  1906  :  "  There  was  a  great  deal  of

Y


338


Chapter  XIII.


[part


discussion  about  the  wi'eath  as  it  was  feared  that  it  might
injure  the  cross,  and  the  experiment  was  not  repeated."

The  village  of  Washingborough  lies  on  a  little  hill  near  the
top  of  which  stands  the  cx'oss.  Miss  Curtois  writes  that  she
has  seen  the  country  beneath  it  flooded  and  dotted  with  sea-
gulls, but  the  sea  is  some  thirty  miles  away.

It  thus  appears  that  a  few  days  after  the  reference  in  my
script  (March  l7th,  1906)  suggesting  that  I  should  have  an
opportunity  of  seeing  and  recognising  the  cross  which  had
been  described  first  on  April  2nd,  1903,  I  did  see  and  recog-
nise such  a  cross  and  the  initials  of  the  person  in  whose
honour  it  was  erected  were  very  like  those  given  in  the
script.  The  suggestion  in  the  script  of  ancient  and  modern
associations  also  corresponds  with  the  facts.  It  is  correct  to
say — or  rather  there  was  one  occasion  at  least  when  it  might
have  been  said  with  truth :  "  on  the  cross  hangs  a  fresh
green  wx'eath,"  and  "  they  have  come  to  see  it  there  out  in
the  open  on  the  hill  side,"  but  not  "  in  the  sound  of  the  sea."
It  is  also  true  that  there  is  "  no  inscription."  In  the  first
script  it  was  said  that  there  was  an  itiscription  fastened  to
the  wreath  ;  in  the  last  script,  "  a  white  stone  and  no
inscription."  Miss  Curtois  does  not  know  whether  any  inscrip-
tion was  attached  to  the  wreath  but,  as  stated  above,  there
is  no  inscription  on  cross  or  pedestal.

No  explanation  has  been  found  to  account  for  the  names
associated  in  the  script  with  the  cross :  Douern,  Croisic,
Volternius  or  Voltigern.  There  seems  no  connexion  between
them  and  Washingborough  or  the  Witham.  But  the  general
resemblance  between  the  description  in  the  script  and  the
cross  erected  by  Miss  Curtois,  and  the  near  approach  to
correctness  in  the  initials  given  in  the  script,  seem  to  make
the  incident  worth  relating.  It  should  be  said  that  a  photo-
graph of  the  cross  with  the  wreath  on  it  hangs  in  another
part  of  Miss  Curtois'  room,  so  that  it  is  possible  that  I  saw
this  picture  in  December,  1905,  and  that  a  recollection  of  it
produced  the  script  of  March  17th,  1906.  But  when  that
script  was  produced,  I  had  no  expectation  of  visiting  Miss
Curtois'  house.  Her  letter  asking  me  to  do  so  was  written  on
March  23rd  and  was  received  by  me  on  March  24th.


Liri.] Miscellaneous  References  to  Future  Events.  339


In  any  case  the  original  description  of  the  cross  and  wreath
preceded  the  dedication  of  the  cross  by  three  months  and  the
hanging  of  the  wreath  by  a  still  longer  period,  pi'obably  nine
months.

This  concludes  the  account  of  what  I  prefer  to  call  '  anticipa-
tions '  rather  than  '  prophecies.'  Upon  their  value  the  reader
must  form  his  own  judgment.

I  have  now  accomplished,  as  well  as  I  can,  the  task  which
I  proposed  to  myself  at  the  beginning  of  this  paper.  I  have
given  an  account,  as  complete  as  I  could  make  it,  of  the
automatic  phenomena  obtained  by  me  in  the  course  of  the
four  years  ending  December  31,  1904.  Similar  phenomena
have  continued  to  occur,  and  are  still  occurring,  but  I  have
not  found  the  analytic  attitude  of  mind  necessary  for  the
examination  of  the  phenomena  conducive  to  the  receptive  and
unpreoccupied  condition  which  seems,  generally  speaking,
required  for  their  production.  There  have,  therefore,  been
several  intervals  in  the  \'ears  1905  and  190G  during  which  I
have  not  attempted  to  oljtain  any  automatic  writing,  but
whenever  I  have  tried  the  product  has  been  similar  and  the
results  are,  as  far  as  a  cursory  examination  enables  me  to
judge,  of  the  same  general  type  as  those  here  described.


340


Appendix.


[part


APPENDIX.

General  Note.  In  extracts  from  the  script,  the  actual  words  of
the  script  are  placed  within  inverted  commas,  and  all  spaces  between
words  represent  similar  spacing  in  the  original.  Comments,  etc.
are  printed  in  italics,  those  made  on  the  original  documents  being
within  round  brackets  (  ),  and  those  subsequently  added  within
square  brackets  [  ].  Spacing  between  the  letters  of  a  word  repre-
sents similar  spacing  in  the  originals,  except  in  a  few  cases  where
it  is  used,  as  indicated  by  a  note,  to  represent  a  larger  or  otherwise
altered  handwriting.  In  some  places  names  or  initials  have  been
changed. Omissions  are  marked  by  dots.  ...

Script  of  March,  1901,  1902,  1903,  to  illustrate  Development,

See  Ch.  I.,  P.  9.

March  5  [1901],  6.15  p.m.  no  light  bid  fire.  The  words  came  as
wholes.

"... counsel  gear  nen £) save  trouble  cant  keep "  (here  I

changed  the  pencil  and  held  it  heticeen  my  thumb  and  first  finger  in
the  usual  loay,  not  my  way)  "vely  ten  yet  come  nomen  et  ego  cum
multis  et  omnibus  ne  tristia  munera  fiunt  nec  ipse  postridie  mor-
genstern  opus  rosea  angelica  notabilis  semper  vivo  paullatim  et
spice  — ter  ad  mundum  qiod  ubi  que  c."

{here  the  paper  was  exhausted  and  I  turned,  the  light  up,  read  the
above,  and  turned  over  the  paper.)

6.30  p.m.  "  et  ego  et  ego  ne  tentaveris  aerias  cunctiter  gradu
pone  sequens  vestigia  deum  multipliciter  tuus  est  sumptus  mihi  et
ridens  imaginem  tui  crucis  alteram  mosse."

(liere  again.  I  turned  up  light  and  read,  then  went  on.)

6.S5  p.m.  "noli  vitare  quod  ego  tibi  dicam  et  semper  et  ubique
ne  semel  propositum  meum  fregeris — mane  domi  dominio — videas
quem  tibi  mittam  addio —  dio  deo."

March  6  [1901]. 6.40  p.m. Pencil,  same  conditions  as  last.
"  caret  ipse  nec  unquam  vigebit  ur  illis  monet  ne  vincam  paullo
videndum  nodice  sed  plurimum  nescit. a  mi  messapia  in  hoc  vincite


LIII.]


Ajypendix.


341


signo  cur  plurima?  inquis  modeste  incipi — (end  of  sheet) — incipiam
nisi  fatigaris  vel  tuo  dicere  scribo  putasne  elicere  quod  sensu  careat
delibando  invide  tu  moneam  si  fortasse  videbis  permulta  docebo  tu,
inquit,  sapis,  per  doctum  "

(Here  I  twrmd  up  light  and  read).

^Af)  p.m.  "cur  talis  modis  agendum  tale?  nescio.  ubi  videris
quod  sapiens  sciat,  lucet.  de  mane  nihil  existima  eras  et  fortasse
videbitur.  o  si  sic  omnes !  quid  tu  ?  ego  nequeo  velim  autem
0  quam  velim  ! deus  te  -  -  bonus  -  -  -  a."

March  8  [1901]. 11  p.m. firelight, etjes  shut.

"  veni  hodierno  nondum  parata  eras  multum  perdocebo  si
modo  patientiare  vento  et  undis  sequitur  ,  ne  pone  meum
stilum  et  alter  alterum  ubi  nunc  est  gloria  mundi  obiit  a  sine  te  fac
quaeras  querimonium  obsolevisti  solacium  donavisti  etsi  tu  nescias
quid  ille  meminisceris  et  consolaris  quid  dicam  consolationem  spera-
visti  et  exegisti  monumentum  mei  novas  res  et  insolitas  mihi
iucundissimas  horresco  referens  quid  multa — nec  tibi — sed  ceteris
species  et  imago  venerabiles  -  -  satis  speranti  nec  opinor  admodum
vale  quondam  ulterior  veniet  pars  tua  et  praevalebit  ultima
ratio  tibi  —  cum  silentio  finis."

March  9  [1901]. 10.45  p>.m.  quite  in  the  dark.

"  dimtrium  malle  quam  sibimet  ipse  potissimum  non  omnis
moriar  superne  quicquam  etsi  amavisti  nullius  spei  captus  rescindas
nullas  res  mortalium  aegras  neglegendum  est  vel  inferas  vel
superas  melius  non  nihil  per  me  attinet  color  est  iustus  vere  similis
etiam  Veritas.  o  die  mihi  quid  velis  nunciam  et  credo  condisci-

plinam  patefecisti  quam  mallem  tibi  etsi  necopinanti  surrepere
olim  quando  incipiat  laus  magna  cum  dominatione.  nunc  servitorem
domino  servare  tempus  fac  valeas  quantum  mutatus  ab
illo  0  tempora  mihi  manicipium  debuisti  vale  etiamnunc  opto
signifer  signum  ponit."

March  11  [1901], 6.30  p.m.  in  dark.

"  velim  magnopere  quamvis  multum  desit  sapientiae  afferam  digni-
tationem  nisi  desipientis  in  loco  manu  capio  quod  voluisti  obsolevit
iam  ista  oratio  muu  dum  sprevisti  inane  errabundus  aspernans
declina  fata  aspera  iam  desinite,  precor,  ne  adsis  TpaTre^y  illae  quam
scimus  multiplex  flora  carpitur  iliac  o  quam  iuventibus  suave
olens  roscidus  humor  super  genas  caelicolis  et  infra  ingens  —  — •
nec  sine stupore  —  comter  adscistando  tu  quoque  carpe  non  iter


342


Appendix.


[part


nec  flores  verba  autem  ipsa  tenti  texiculae  tegiculae  o  stultiloquor
—  verb.  sap. ."

March  12  [1901]. 11.15  p.m.  in  dark.

"  attendite  nunc  quid  asperiam  tibi  omine  magno  nec  mihi  venienti
adsonat  glebis  adscripta  per  dulcia  resonantis*  chorea  .  mox  et  tu
audies  videndum  et  parandum  nec  sine  officina  paupertas
egestate  confirmata  raansit  quis  adest  o  loquere  vocabub's  con-
cinnatis  dehiscens  quod  modulor  magica  salutatio  abundat  grave-
virens  cum  maiestate  splendidior  vitro  o  fons  possumne  ante
omnes  lag  lacuna  de  stilo  nihil  quod  attinet  niodo  cecini  carmen
ineluctabile  auribus  tuis  satis  vocanti  plurimum  in  dies  eras
ingens  iterabimus  aequor — vale  ter  vale."

*  [Note  to  ahom.  Resouantia  was  written,  but  below  the  last  two
letters  '  is '  is  written,  suggesting  the  correction  '  resonantis '  for
'  resonantia.']

March  14  [1901]  ended  6.45  [p.m.]  firelirjht.

"  consolator  dux  fidei  nec  unquam  caret  quotiens  discerpitur
placetne  ?  simillime  necdum  violentior  undis  quam  tibi  quam  mihi
desine  querela  mecum  cur  properastu  o  fortunate  mens  et  opifex
carmentalis  invocat  quid  enim  1  insula  tegit  infulam  vittas
0  memor  sis — fxw  (qra ;  hieroglyphema  sane  marmario  glyptato  non
sine  caelato  quid  dicam  stellato  cultellario.  videsne  ?  tandem,  babes
tota  quod  mente  petisti — invidia  caret — spoliaris  omnino  reddere  si
non  tibi  possim  aspetta !  dulcissime  sonat  imago  clara  pulsanti
pedetemptin — quam  bene  feci  illud. — tu  respondeas  testudine  eburneo
plectas  chordas  quid  multa  1  hactenus.  moramur  nisi  quem  infitias.
magichordus  ita plane — xxx  ."

{Here  the  sheet  ended.  I  turned  up  light  and  read.  Then  put  out
light  and  [held^  letter  in  left  hand.)

6.45  p.)n.  "  detegi  panopticon  sphaerae  identidem  magniloquens
inquit,  componere  ausus.  num  deus  adest  musara  taciito  calet
adhuc  calorem  semper."

{here  interrupted)

March  15  [1901]  ends  6.20  [p.m.]

"commendatio  unica  moderatione  neninem  laedit.  quare
resignas  speciosa  reciuet  lex  talionis  nlsciscendi  protervam  nodulo
invicem  noris  sed  mirabilis  sequitur  occupatio.  biblion  tibi  opse-
quor  dei  gratia  impigre  confutaris  massica  nec  sine  venustate  sperne
elegos  quos  audax  composui nescio  qua  dulcedine  captus.  alter


LIII.]


Appendix.


343


alterum  ego  te  si  modo  cont  coasenseris  optimo  dierum  procedas
elusione  nexis  spargedulis  etsi  infinitis. nunc  tibi  redditae  partes
quoad  eliciet  mens  tua  sensus. velle  posse  si  mihi  tibi  etiam.
capisco  auribus  puris Pollux  Cappa  docus  ponet  tigillum."

March  15  [1901]  ends  6.45  [p.m.  holding']  letter.

"  gravis  dolor  adopertus  micat  prolusione  magna  nec  capax  ere
tibi  multa  provicendo  docere  ubi  quando  salva  ratio  ibi  et  pro-
positum  exequere.  ne  fallar  avenam  sume  gratulatione  compellans
omnes  illos  Terpsichoreae  greges  animosas  scribendo  consequere  vel
ponere  stilum  aequom  nihil  ad  rem  exspectas  modo — si  nunc,
semper  .  spes  ultima  caritate  maior  per  modum  grandinis
attrectans  suavitatem  mente  non  nulli  percalescat  -  -  ego  tibi
—  postea  cetera

  Janu  Janitor

Janifer

nexi-t-i  dem — "

March  17  [1901]  11.58  a.m.  finished.

"  quid  magis  difficile  nedum  impossible  nisi  tu  etiam  velis.  hodie
possum  nec  sine  dubio.  fac  scribas.  Dianae  sumus  in  fide  ;  iterum
notare  manu  mittere  quod  diu  desidero  alioquin  negas  disce  disce
modo  tibi  perperam  invideo  ausus  sum  commendare  res  prospere
eveniet  post  incommoda  stupefacta  saepen — multimodis  rerum  ima-
ginibus.  nondum  infiteor  .  a.d.  Xli — vig.  quarta — horam  bene
notavi ;  recordamini. littera  scripta  manet."

March  19  [1901]  6.45  p.m.  ends.

"sine  marte  capitolium  manumittas  exemplum  magnum

terebinthiaco  pulsu  circumspice  ne  titubes  coccidere  perfacile —
quid  {pps.  quia)  attendes  tecum  sum  in  praesenti  et  semper — audisne
quem  tibi  dictito  commentionem  tegulas  volui  olim.  helenaptolis.
modo  sapies  de  hibisco  pertinens  quarta  spicula  sicine  ambo  ?  quid
magis — inter  cesseris  non  nunquam  caedendo  non  ultra  vires — o
utinam  sigillas  posue — {here  end  of  line) — uerim  ante  hoc — pedibus
tuis  non  sine  dolore — Carcerino  apte  Xll — insuper quis  ?  nescio."

March  21  [1901]  11  p.m.

"num  plurimis  manifesta  es  nucibus  molinarios  subsidia  quidem
sine  invito  te  velim  dicere  tu  autem negas.  o nexere  si

nequis  pertinax  scribas  omne  scitum  perpende  mox  adveniet  lux
chalcidica  inviolabilis alteruter  adsciscans  optabit  ne  falle

rogatri  cem admoneto  ne  precaris  sine  fiat  sine  te  magister


344


Ajypendix.


[part


optimus  nam  ipse  dixit  si  quid  velis  non  impedio  caelitibus
interest  gemmas  accumulare  magno  sumptu  sempervirenti  imagine
roris. urceola apta potenti  capax medeolae (or  mediolae)

vesania  m  imputat  roga,  roga,  inquit  ne  sperne  chordas  tibicinis
puri.  mosse  aliunde  alioquin  iuvare.  sapisne  o  mora  ingrata  tibi
canam — . — /jncrTtKO?  at'ros. "

March  25  [1901]  11.5  a.m.

"  Comraunicatio prosit necubiae necopinato ubi  valetudo  desit
modulatione grammatica. Bilingua concursatio urbina  nexit
fratres sabinos. matertera fidelis commensis mihi corripuit  "
{interrupted)  "  difficile  et  disputabile. ne  feceris. exspecta  "

March  27  [1901]  10.55  a.m.

"  moneta  ne  adiuveris  commentatorem  sequipedalem  .  o  utinam
semper  tali  mode  sumpseris  melos  chardon  ^opSwv  quem  [2)2:>s.
quum]  tibi  vocaverim  electryosuuen  nempe  bene  sensisti  1  nam
Optimo  semper  opifici  convolutavi  illud.  adsurgam  inquit,  rectis
dirigens  monitis  " — [i)derrujjted] — "  saepe  toto  corpore  adiutans
mollivit  difficultatem  nodulis  Hexidulis  inhaerens  lectulo  quid
morar  ?  [or  morer]  cur  istaec  ?  excipe  modo  interpretatio  postea
sesquipedalia  verba  sic  semper  sic  ubic[ue  num  postmodo  aliter  ?
fac  roges.  petorrita  pro  carroni.  saepe  currus  deorum.  non  sine
Pallados  alite.  J  Tuus  denique  nomen  adposui.  interpretatio  tua
nunc.

March  29  [1901]  10.55  a.7n.

"ne  communicaveris  ditenti  sciolae  sciolistae  quod  tibi  commenda-
verim  dissociabile  semper  quod  fecisti  emendare  rugis  negandis
nexere  nexere  semper  aurea  roscidula  sempervirenti  *  imagine
poscitur  num  credibile  1  fac  sodes  optimum  illud  o  si  audisti !
graece  loquitur  emptor  redemptor  cruciferens  scarsidulo  dolore
reputans  cosmia  erga  peremptio  optima  ne  dubitaris  modulatione
canifero  poetae  arguti  notare  lioram  semper,  sine  dubio.  horas  pone
sex  postea  quattuor  et  idles  identidem  computa. ibi  vigila  ne  dicam


LIII.]


A'ppendix.


345


ora  pro  nobis,  n — ni  facito  non  omnes  possumus  omnia  spes
permanet  koo-ixov  tenuis  pervolatibilis  unica  aptat  f  multi-
ponens  odoratam  luminis  florem  caelestis  nec  abest  otr/x);  sapienti
prosit  advenae  satis. in  proximum."

[Notes  to  above  :

*  Under  the  last  two  letters  of  '■  sempervirenti'  is  written  ' — te.'

t  The  lines  are  irregular  and  the  exact  order  of  the  words  uncertain.']

March  30  [1901]  10.30  o..m.

"  quot  rhetores tot  sententiae. velle  ubere  ipse  potius  odi
potentis fxavrei^  nuncupare  iam  alii  mirabili  consuetudine
molina  farris trutinam speculor  constanter  tibi  provocatione
si luxerit  bene,  post  modo  vacatio  argumentum  nullius  pro-

positum nec  utile  cuivis detergere  omnino  fortuis qui  possim  ?
adiuta  modo coniunctio  optima cogere  fallit  opinor  in  herba
cur  non  attendis  ? meam  defungor  partem  tibi  tibi  nunc  vias
grassulator  petivit  carnificem  auribus  istis  non  compreusus  fabulam.
interpretatio  nulla  iam  satis."

[Illegible  single  letters.]

March  31  [1901]  4.10  j/^.m.

"  movissem  nisi  et  tu  jurasses  olim  vivax  semper  et  fortasse

alius  praecox olea baccis Sabinis ponetur dis  adiuvantibus

strati  de  odorato  flore  lectuli  Cantorem  movere  dulci-
sonanti  plektro  resonantis  cantus  sume  sume  auream  Ij'ram  fasciculi.
Dovinantis  sub  imagine  ripae  aAts  fia'wovTi  Dominus  praevalebit
sine  risu plectant  sapores  nisu  maiore  cur  rident  sorores  ?

Aesopi  Trapa  KaAa/^ovs. superponenti  nva  na-lv  omnia  plana,
ambages desunt avafiaivnv necesse nec  sine  ambitu. Koc  si  tu
comprenseris  bene Fidelis  esto  .  — '  finis  coronat  opus

[Attempts  at  signature]

experto  crede  requiescat. Remember  A-V-E  .  vale."

March  2  [1902].

"  Fortunati  ambo  ! quos  si  adtrectes  non  utique

dubitare  possis  quin  post  ttvAu^  davaTOM  mliora  attingere
{interrupted)  cur  etiam  haesitas  1  pone  dubium,  tunc  necopinans
veritatem  manu  comprehendere  poteris.  Supellectilem  ero  cedo.  nec
inutiles  res  pro  bonis  aestima.  Leniter  eundo  semper  in  finem.
Cursitor  haeret.

[Attempts  at  signatures.]


346  Appendix.  [part

1 2 3 4 and then again — four  and  four  and  pause — and  then


repeat ^ do  you  see  it  now  1


I  have  tried  to  tell  you  this  before,
acquiret  vires  eundo.
It  seems  so  plain  to  me  but  you  do
not  see. Try  again  later."


March  10,  1902.

"  Pen  nsylvania


not  on  this  account


Not


to-day  for  you,  but  for  others  great  success — and  proof  triumphant.
Mrs.  Forbes  has  heard,  must  have  heard  by  now.  There  is  a
letter  for  you  gone  astray — it  will  arrive — remember  this  date.  I
have  told  her  of  the  letter,  the  strayed  letter.  Your  husband's
cocks  have  gone  away,  but  I  will  tell  more  later.  It  is  not
AUcock  nor  all  cocks,  but  analogous,  the  cock  is  a  symbol,  and
suggests  the  right  name.  But  I  do  not  know  all  and  you  see
even  less  than  I  tell  you.  It  all  belongs  to  old  days,  and  his
father  would  have  understood  before  you.  Try  some  one  else —
there  is  a  woman  alive  who  understands,  besides  the  dead.  What
has  the  sea  shore  to  do  here  ?  pebbles  on  the  beach. Ask  him  that."

[Signatures.]

March  11,  1902.
"  Panis  et  circenses


3


Nothing  to-day.  wait  for  Hodgson's  next  letter  that  will  make
things  clearer.  ..."


UII.]


Ajjpendix.


347


March  12,  1902.

[d7'awings] moulding round the panel It is of  painted
wood — the  left  hand  side  is  what  I  see. it  is  indistinct  on  the

right I  fr^^"^~^ Then  there  is  also  a  round  looking  glass  with


mi


a  black  frame  and  artificial  light,  yellower  tlian  day  and  reflected
in  the  glass.  But  I  cannot  see  the  room  there  is  some  one
in  the  room,  two  people,  a  man  and  a  woman  standing  up —
yellow  letters,  old,  from  a  cabinet  belong — not  his  to  her  but
they  talk  of  them.  I  cannot  see  this,  but  I  hear  it.  The  message
is  important  but  you  have  not  read  it  right.  It  has  to  do  with
the  cabinet  and  the  old  letters, — a  square  folded  one,  held  in  the
hand,  not  a  separate  envelope,  but  all  folded  together.  I  cant  tell
you  more. Go  on  again  later."

[sword  and  palm.]

March  14,  1902.

"Heri  non  voluisti  cur?  et  ego,  vide  quam  difficile  inter
haesitationes  praelucet  Veritas.  Omnia  post  pone  cum  ego  tibi  signum
dedero.  Nunc  incumbe  bacillo.  Hodgson  wrote  the  word  to  you —
it  will  arrive  before  a  week  is  out.  You  are  to  tell  her  and  she
will  do  it.  Draw  the  frame — and  I  will  put  the  picture  in  it.
roses  or  pinks — and  a  white  veil  over  the  head,  can  j'ou  not  see  ?
quid  refringas  ? lenta  saepe

[three  drawings  of  three-petcdled  flower  on  sialic.']

keep  this  though  it  is  not  quite  what  I  meant,
but  it  will  give  the  hint  when  your  letter  comes — next  week.  Two
events  next  week.  Hodgson's  letter  before  the  other — the  other  is
Helen's  not  yours. Write  each  day  again  to-night, be  sure."

March  15,  1902.

"  Moercure  festinatio  sine  cura  multum  impedit  alia  manus  iara
litteras  descripsit.  sinite  manu  tua  uti  dum  modo  veripertinentia
nuntiet.  fac,  audito  si  cpiis  iutellegere  haec  vult.  To  night  it  is
over  nothing  further  for  some  days,  post  multas  refutationes  et
ambages  nonnullas  e  profundis  emergit  Veritas  ipsa  quam  si  surripere
potes,  omnia  plana  fiunt.  But  tonight — the  hand  shakes  not  yours
but  anothers."

[Sifjnatures,  illegible.]


348


Appendix.


[part


March  19,  1902.

"  Many  harvests  go  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  crop  of  promise
2i)va/3/xo^€t  liovov  TO  avi'apfjLoaTov  Kaiirtp  ov  arvj-ifiaXov.  oiiSe  yap
aviv  (TvvO^TOV  TWO'S  (.vpvOfxov  TO  TTttV.  Tt  0?)  (TTOi^d^ii's  \  Seyov  jxaXXov  o
Ti  av  pt'i/');  TO  I'ooi'/xsroi'.  2ot  yap  ovv  Kal  aXXois  AeAcKTat  oyTa —
Now.  listen.  Dover  has  been  given  you  long  ago.  Dover  court
I  think.  There  is  a  woman  there  who  belongs  to  an  earlier  story, —
a  story  not  yours.  Emmie  is  the  name.  She  has  a  boy  and  some-
one knows  them  both.  There  are  just  those  two.  the  boy  is  young
— she  is  sad — I  want  a  message  given  to  Emmie  and  the  boy
Frank.  It  is  from  Harry — on  the  sea  tonight  To  morrow  or  next
day  you  can  find  out  my  ship — tossing  on  the  sea  to-night.  Emmie
has  not  forgotten — that  makes  it  easier  for  me  to  night.  K  a  r  r  y.
Tell  her  from  me  Harry  thinks  of  her  wait  for  the
other  name  F  1  a  m  m  a  u  t  i  a  m  oe  n  i  a  m  u  u  d  i  gives  you  the
clue.  The  flame  goes  up  to  the  night  and  the
stars  are  veiled  in  the  smoke  of  it.  Look  in
the  paper  for  three  days. Then  you  will  believe."

[Attempts  at  signatures.]

[Note  to  above :  The  spaced  letters  represent  a  handwiting  differing
from  my  normal  Imnd.]

March  2-5,  1902.

"  Quam  multa  invenies  non  sine  odorificato  splendore  In
locked  cupboards  within  are  the  treasures  not  to  be  lightly  won.
The  message  has  been  sent  to  you — it  is  not  as  clear  as  you  thought.
But  it  is  true  and  you  will  understand.  .  .  .  The  interpretation
was  surely  clear  though  not  pleasing —  but  it  is  hard  to  believe.
Three  golden  apples — no  more  upon  the  tree.

The  stick  was  not  hers  but  she  carries  it.  let
us  keep  it. Dreams  are  not  true  but  you  have  glimjjses  in  sleep."

[Signature  illegible.]

March  26,  1902.

"  Hence  all  you  vain  delights — live  laborious  days.  Not  yet  is
the  fulness  of  time — I'eaping  follows  the  full  sheaves.  Nesta  and
Trenery  this  is  a  new  point — not  known  to  you.  The  message  will
be  understood  by  others — ivy  leaf  pattern  and  stone  walls,
on  a  summer  evening  long  ago.  The  sun  is  setting  long  beams
aslant,  across  the  golden  corn.  Then  the  poem  was  written— he
will  remember —  There  is  none  like  her,  none,  among  the  garnered
sheaves that  caught  the  light  of  the  flooded  heavens. But  you


LIII.]


Appendix.


349


do  not  understand — some  of  this  is  right  but  not  all — Great
Crosby  is  a  name  that  was  wanted — and  Marston.  Everard  Marston
I  think.  Someone  will  help  you  with  that  name,  note  it  down.
Write  again  soon it  gets  easier  . . . Yours  as  you  know."

March  27,  1902.

"  Helen's  Wedding  March  will  be  played  before  the  year  is
out — you  do  not  understand,  but  write  it  all  the  same.  Ever-
lasting snows  and  birds  of  prey  gathered  together
do  you  not  see  whose  hand  this  is?  Crispin
C  r  i  s  [I  i  a  n  was  right  you  will  see  some  day  Your
husband's  thought  was  good  but  not  complete.
The  old  man  in  white  was  the  best  part  of  it  but  I  have  not
been  able  to  finish  that  and  now  it  has  all  gone  away.  Put  it
aside it will return some  day.

  a  long  grey  wall  M'ith  ivy  tumbling over  —  and  grass

growing  to  the  foot  of  it.  there  are  trees — a  clump  to  the
left  and  the  air  is  cold,  the  people  are  all  this  side  of  the  wall,
on  a  road  outside.  there  has  been  an  accident,  bicycle  I  think,
there  are  wheels  in  the  road,  and  a  little  group  round  someone —
a  girl — on  the  ground.  It  is  in  the  north — three  people  I  think — •
and  they  pick  up  the  girl — she  is  hurt.  I  see  a  horse  now — a  little
brown  pony's  head. That  is  all."

[Nuie  to  above :  The  spaced  words  are  in  a  different  ami  somewhat  larger
hand.]

March  31,  1902.

"  Tetigisti  heri  epistolam  expecta  modo  necnon  breviter
inclinatam — declinatam  potius — consuetudinem  postpone  Mains  in
dies  opus  non  tuum  Non  possum  plurima  tecum  iam  exponere.  But
others  can — go  on  writing.  Later  days  will  help — in  May  and  again
after  seven  weeks  and  days  on  an  evening  suddenly  you  will  see —

a  column  of  light  and  the  writing  runs  spirally  round  it.

The  red  postbox  was  in  a  birds  eye  view — last  night.  36  was

the  number  6x6  and  the  YI  ^neid — look  at  the  line  No.  xxxvi —


now  he  takes  the  letters  out


350  Appendix.  [part

and  he  gets  on  a  bicycle  there  will  be  3  by  one  delivery — so  you
will  know  that  this  is  true. j | p^^j  ] — | one  longer  the

others  square.  and  one  of  them  is  white  the  others  coloured.
Read  the  book  and  find  the  line  I  tell  you  about
I  told  you  last  night  in  sleep  someone  else  helped
you to know what I  meant."

[iVo/c  to  above  ■  The  spaced  words  are  in  a  different  and  somewhat  larger
hand.'j

March  1,  1903.

"Sister  t  anna  cuspide  fracta.

Anna  soror  dictis  tum  talibus  infert.

non  sic  semper  olim. non  tam  bene  talia  dicta
saepe  pernumero  non  sic  tua  postea  verba
omnibus  usc^ue  patent  nee  non  memorabilie  visum
Ante  oculos  .  largas  ad  luminis  oras

ment'  animamque  capit. quae  nunquam  tale  videret
Accipe  tu  gremio  post  congrediens  cave  sensum.

Satis  pio  hodierno  die  feci — tua  nunc  pars  interpretare  exponere,
capere  in  meduUis — non  usque  ail  hoc  facta.  Desine  in  praesenti —
resume  silum  pau  cis  abhinc  horis.  non  est  possibilei  quominus
mentem  vel  potius  assensionem  dutius  adhibeas.  Ex  tenebris  fiet
lux."

Murrh  3,  1903.

"  Battye  and  Cleeve  sant

liSpojv  o  Ti  a.]'  crot  ai'Ojc^eAes  (ji(un]T(u  'ijjjLLT(.X.€VT0V  Tu  y^prffM  orSe
pa8iu)<;  SiareAetrat  aAXd  (tvv  (TKoirrj  els  (Tvve(riv  eXOoi^ —  Ooyfxo.Ta
h''?]\' —  otSao"Ka/\ia Kal  avTOfJ-ara  —apa  Nu/x<^aji'  Trapavoiw;

[draumri'\  is  the  shape  [drairing]  stamped  on

brown  leather  the  volume  is  thick

lies  on  a  table  {page  turned.)

a  glass  with  flowers  is  near — &  the  window  is  open.  They  are  on
a  table — I  can  see  them  quite  plainly  now.  a  watch  ticks  near,  the
room  is  upstairs — the  branches  of  a  tree  are  near — a  portrait  hangs
on  the  wall — a  slim  neck  and  something  yellow  in  the  dress — ear-
rings— and  a  band  in  the  hair — a  very  long  neck."


LIII.]


Appendix.


351


March  7,  1903.

"Iliaco  carmine  responsum  dedi  illi  quod  semper  postulas — Men-
tionem  iam  ante  feci  huius  loci — cur  non  invenire  potes  1  aKTif
Kvaver] — -mare  glaucum  spumantibus  equis  insuper  deus  vehitur —
nihilomagis  rota  magistri  tempus  in  partes  aequas  dividit.  primo
splendidior,  postremo  multi  sonans  voce  angelica,  postea

autem  vorjTM  re  Kal  vokpu)  magis  uteris.  Num  credibilius  illid,
o  numquam  mihi  fidem  praebens !  Temptanti  difficilia,  manum
attendere  debeas — manum  amicam  usque  ad  oram  illam.  vuK-epos
Tj^rj  oSos."

March  11,  1903.

"  —ifxTTTi]  Kal  SeKO.-ij  'qjJLipo.  oj^aurcus  yap  koX  (tv  koI  aAAos  ets

crvvea-LV  eXOolTe  av  o/j./xaTt  >(_prj(TdaL. on that day watch,  not

alone,  when  the  vision  comes  note  the  day  and  count  from  now.

Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  the  other  word — and  will  send  it — not
Symposium,  but  it  helps  and  is  clear.  I  don't  think  she  knows
it  is  for  you — but  you  will  understand.

[unintelligible  scribbles.]

(I  fell  fast  asleep.)

March  15,  1903.

[scribbles]  "  Th  he  i  end  i  is  not  yet  all  must  go  over.  2  is  the  first
to  be  recognised  but  there  are  others.  Write  yourself  mow  Otranto
pice  cur  non  cetera  ?  quia  non  comprehendit  ilia  nostr  a  fac
quiescat.  Signum  illud  pro  bono,  sed  non  omne.  Camilla  inest.
Camilla  in  volumine — directione  plagae  Umbrosa — iam  tibi  hactenus
dixi — C  a  m  e  1  0  t  or  Cameleon — Camus  no  there  is  an  ilia  or  ella
somewhere  go  on  {end  of  pug  e)  Cameu  fortes  Cam  en  if  er
does  that  look  right  1

But  Hodgson  would  understand  much  that  y  o  u  w  r  i  t  e —
he  must  see  i  t — r  e  m  e  m  b  e  r  t  h  a  t — a  sk  Lodge  what  he
thinks.  This  is  important.  Mrs.  Forbes  is  slow  but
she  has  something  which  you  have  not  seen.  There
is  much  in  yours  which  you  do  not  understand.

Hodgson  should see i  t — a  sk  about thi  s —
write  this  week  and  then  ask  Mrs.

Forbes  for  her  s."

[Note  to  above  :  JVorcls  spaced  are  in  a  larger  hand.]


352  Appendix.  [part

March  17,  1903.

"  Polycept — Two  high windows, with  dark  curtains — looking  on
a  street — and  a  table  with  a  red  cloth. The  writing  table  is  in
that  roo(m)  &  the  key  in  its  drawer  would  fit.  Exacerbat
repetitio  principii — cape  clavem — Supellectilem  frange si  aliter  non
posses.

The  word  is  C  a  1  d  i  o  n  a  more  like  that. Capella  Aurigae
seems  much  nearer.

Find  what  constellation  is  marked  with  y  a  little  italic  letter  y
Ask  Hodgson  too — "

\ Signature  illegible.]

March  19,  1903.

"  Nundinae — computa — tunc expecta lucem. caminife  deus  iam
exegit  mandatum ab  alio  impositum. Miraculo  censere
qui  non  sapientia  utuntur — deh  ! semiermis  iacet. arripe  !
arreptum  super  et  insuper  manu  prendere — sic  in  melius  attinges.

spoliare  drjKa'i  illas.  quas  cognovisti  spolia  opima  illaec — quibus
amor illis  Soyfia — in  fine  Car  it  as —

I

sendentesibus  (page


March  20,  1903.

"  Never  when  the  wind  blows  from  out  of  the  East  but  on
the  AVestern  breeze  it  comes,  with  sound  of  bells  and  music  heard
afar. Ask  about  this.


creX/xa  (reiivov  Sat/iorwi' — seditibus  insuper
turned)

iam  talia  antehac  in  libro  habuisti.
de  minimis  non  curat  lex.


LIII.]


Appendix.


353


Listen  now She  tells  the  rest. they  listen.
Ask  at  Smithfiekl  for  the  name. You  do  not  know — Portals
or  Portalis —

Now  something  else.  You  must  find  that  drawer  &  get  the  key.
then  things  will  be  plain.  There  are  papers  inside  and  you
will  not  find  mine  at  once,  you  must  look  for  it  The  seal  is
quite  irregular — ragged  in  outline

Fastiduca  and  another Reckon  the  days

and  wait. "

March  26,  1903.

"  Problemata  nuncupare  aTro^ao-Keiv.  concrepat  exercent  *  in-
cinenter suflficit. /xera 9€0V Dia ^rjTetv ravra TrotoGcra dcfjeXels  koI

o-avTi-jv  Koi  aXXovi — What  is  the  message  1  Write.

The  device  on  the  seal  is  distinctive — get  that  first  [drawing  of

oval  seal'] four  letters  AS  "3^  like  that, pairs  \_scrawls]  No  you

don't  understand.  It  is  on  the  seal,  an  oval  shaped  seal,  with
four  letters  on  it — Roma  or  amor  perhaps — not  a  figure  but  a
word  with  a  meaning.  Inside  is  the  sentence  you  know — but
it  is  not  in  Greek — it  is  in  English  letters —  It  is  the  word
of  the  simposium — and  the  greatest  of  these  is  Charity  is  like
it — but  the  word  is  Love — Crosst  amor."

[*  Note :  This  word  is  almost  illegible.']
March  27,  1903.

"  Espahan  cannot  wait  for  tomorrow's  effort  say  now  she

must  do  it.

The  name  is  not  right.  Wilbrahan — no  Westbathen
cessere  venti  inhiat  ingens  rima  per  illam  introrsum  videre  poteris  si
caput  declinas  En  !  lux  argenteus  omnia  pervadit  vario  colore
variisque  odoribus.  safrano  croceoque  flore — purpureo  roseoque
colore,  unda  super  undam  defluat — omnia  splendent — in  medio  illos
cernere  debeas  quos  tibi  antehac  sedentes  descripsi.  The  heart  of  them
is  ruddy  gold  and  a  flame  goes  up  from  the  midst — but  a  flame  that
flickers  not,  but  shines  radiant  lucid  tela  diei  are  not  so  bright.
This  is  clear  clearer  than  Kpva-TaX\oiri]KToi  iryj-yat.  That  ought  to
help. It  belongs  to  the  okt^  Kvaverj  that  I  gave  you  before."


Z


354 Appendix.  [part

Dates  of  Writings.

1901.  Days.

March:  5,  6,  8,  9,  11,  12,  14,  15,  17,  19,  21,  25,

27,  29,  30,  31  =  16

April:  3,  7,  8,  10,  14,  16,  19,  20,  22,  24,  27  =  11

May:  1,  3,  8,  11,  18,  23,  26,  27,  28,  30,  31  =  11

June:  3,  16,  23,  27,  30 .  =5

July  :  4,  8,  17,  23,  30,  31  =  6

August:  6,  7,  10,  13,  16,  20,  23,  28,  29  =9

September:  2,  4,  4,  7,  9,  12,  14,  18,  20,  28  =  10

October:  6,  12,  17,  26,  29  =5

November:  1,  4,  7,  13,  22,  25,  27  =7
December:  5,  10,  11,  12,  13,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22=  11

1902.  '  '  —
January:  4,  8,  11,  13,  17,  29,  31,  31  =  8
February:  3,  10,  13,  18,  21,  27  =  6
March:  2,  10,  11,  12,  14,  14,  19,  25,  26,  27,  31  =  11
April  :  2,  14,  24  =3
May:  12,  13,  16,  18,  2-5,  31  =6
June  :  7,  21,  24,  24,  27,  29  =  6
July  1,  7,  13,  18,  21,  23  =6
August:  1,  25,  26,  26  =  4  ■
September:  6,  17,  24,  27,  28  =  5  .
October:  9,  14,  15,  21,  25,  27,  31  =7
November:  3,  4,  5,  7,  11,  17,  18,  24,  26,  28  =  10
December:  3,  4,  9,  9,  14,  19,  19,  26  =  8

80

1903.  —
January:  14,  15,  18,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  30,  31  =  11
February:  2,  9,  12,  13,  16,  20,  22,  23  =  8
March:  1,  3,  7,  11,  15,  17,  19,  20,  26,  27  =  10
April:  2,  9,  10,  17,  22,  24,  26,  27,  30  '  =9
May:  13,  27,  29  -  =  3
June:  9,  14,  19,  21,  24,  29,  30  =7
July:  3,  5,  6,  17,  19,  21,  31  =7
August:  2,  8,  13,  18,  22,  26,  31  =7
September:  9,  17,  22,  27  =4
October:  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  12,  19,  21,  22,  23,  30  =  12
November:  17,  18,  23  =3
December:  5,  7,  25,  26,  27,  29  =6

87


Lin.]


A'ppendix.


355


1904.

Days.

January  :  1,  9,  17,  21,  25,  29

6

February  :  1,  2,  5,  6,  9,  14

6

March  :

0

April  :  10,  27

2

May:  5,  11,  13,  14,  2.5,  26

6

June:  5,  8,  10,  24

4

July  :  3,  13,  15,  18

4

_  Q
—  O

September:  18,  21

_  2

October:  3,  12,  16,  21,  22

5

November:  18,  23,  25,  30

4

December  :  4,  6,  21,  23,  28,  30

6

48

Total  306.  —
Extract  from  Script  to  illustrate  difficulty  in  recollecting

WHAT  HAS  BEEN  PRODUCED;  SEE  Ch.  L,  P.  12.

Aug.  25,  1902. 11  p.m.  {in  bed).

"  quantula  pars  rogationis  meae  in  mianu  tua  manet !  tu  mode
resilicas  nempe  sen  sensisti  illud?  ne  spreveris  contemplationem
illam. non  enim  nisi  contemplatione  in  regnum  veritatis  venies.

Forest  and  firs — and  a  mossgrown  tree  trunk,  she  sits  upon  it
and  the  children  play — two  of  them,  a  girl  and  a  younger  boy.  It
is  a  German  speaking  country — hill  beyond  hill.  Clementine — -that
came  to  you  before — Romanzero  and  Nicholas  is  the  boy's  name.
It  is  the  youngest  who  has  died.  The  blue  beads  will  help  to
find  them — ask  for  those,  nothing  else.  Hodgetts  is  another  name —
wait  till  someone  tells  you  what  that  is —


Write  for  me  to  morrow.


[^Note.  When  I  read  this  over  I  saw  at  once  that  it  purported  to  be  an
attempt  to  tell  the  story  of  some  lost  children  of  whom  I  had  heard
shortly  before  this  date.  There  icere  three  children  supposed  to  be  tvith
their  father  and  grandmother,  but  a  sensitive  icho  had  been  consulted
had  said  that  one  child  had  died.  But  not  the  faintest  trace  of  any
allusion  to  this  story  remained  in  my  conscious  mind,  when  I  tried
to  remember  what  the  script  had  written.]


356


Appendix.


[part


Extracts  prom  Script  to  illustrate  Ch.  II.,  P.  22.
Script  of  September  20,  1901.

"Designare  iam  dudum  volui  actorem  illius  non  meorum  verborum,
illius,  dicere  velim  qui  de  ordine  loquatur.  Doctor  est  indoctus
tamen  litteris  humanioribus— fac  roges  A.W.V.  si  hoc  non  verum
sit.  Pybus  inest  vocabulo — ra  Se  aAAa  non  bene  sapis  etsi  multa
recte  interpretare  potes — de  horto  aliquid  et  tamen  deest  quoddam — ■
de  cultello  bene  imbuisti  mentem.  Sed  impigre  conseqni  vestigia
prodest.  Mary  does  not  know  about  the  knife — nor  the  inscription.
The  Balfours  or  Mrs.  Sidgwick  perhaps  would — but  your  husband
could  tell  you  all — Ask  Mrs.  Forbes  if  she  has  a  message  for  you
— something  about  G  i  m  a  or  some  such  word.  Gima  dion  looks
the  length, ye/^a  Atbs

The  bird  is  nothing  put  it  away.  I  want  to  say  the  word.
Gem  astrion — or  Gennadzeron — one  single  long  word.  Ask
Lodge  if  he  knows  what  I  mean.  G  e  n  n  i  s  a  -  h  e  d  r  o  n — I  cant
get  it — Genny  is  sad  — he  drown

Non  possum  plurima  hodie — sed  in  dies  facilius —  ars  scribendi
de  integro  adipiscenda  est.  redintegratio  optima.  Num  totwriKoi'  ti
posui  1 Scit  ille  et  cognoscet.  Vale."


List  of  Aphorisms  contained  in  Script,  see  Ch.  Ill,  P.  49.

margaritae vtalv tibi meae forsitan  sii
pratio."


'  Throw  the  stone  further — the  water  is  too
shallow  here."


1.  April

14,

1901.

2.

May

23,

1901.

3.

May

23,

1901.

4.

Aug.

10,

1901.

5.

Sept.

7.

1901.

6.

Nov.

4,

1901.

7.

Jan.

8,

1902.

spoilt."


fashioning  to  interpret  the  divine — spindle.
Lachesis  will  clip."

8.  Jan. 11,  1902.  "Faith  than Hope greater  removes  moun-

tains."

9.  Feb. 27,  1902.  "To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice." (See  also

quotations.)

10.  March  19,  1902.  "Many  harvests  go  to  the  fulfilment  of  the

crop  of  promise."


LIII.]


Ajypendix.


357


11.  March  25,  1902.  "  In  locked  cupboards  within  are  the  treasures

not  to  be  lightly  won."

12.  March  26,  1902.  "Not  yet  is  the  fullness  of  time — reaping

follows  the  full  sheaves."

13.  Sept. 6,  1902.  "Dubium  omne  dubium  pro  ignoto."

14.  Oct. 9,  1902.  "Dreamers  see  most  of  the  truth — in  golden

visions  of  the  dawn."

15.  Dec. 4,  1902.  "Manifold  uses  are  there  for  us  all.  look

back  at  that." (See  above,  No.  3.)

16.  Jan. 14,  1903.  "omne  ignotum  pro  dubio — in  his  atque  in

omnibus  rebus."

List  of  Quotations  in  Script  to  illustrate  Ch.  III.,  P.  49.

WTiere  the  quotation  is  inexact,  the  original  is  given.

1.  March  6,  1901.  "in  hoc  vincite  signo." Constantine's  dream.

2.  March  6,  1901.  "o  si  sic  omnes ! "

3.  March  8,  1901.  "  ubi  nunc  est  gloria  mundi."

4.  March  9,  1901.  "non omnis moriar." Horace, Odes,  III.

30.  6.

5.  March 9,  1901.  "quantum mutatus  ab  illo." Virgil,  Aen.

II.  274.

6.  March  11,  1901.  "  tu  quoque  carpe  non  iter  nec  flores  verba

autem  ipsa."

Hor.  Sat.  I.  5.  95  :  "carpentes  .  .  .  iter."
Ovid,  Met.  10.  85:  "  carpere  flores."

7.  March  13,  1901.  "  splendidior  vitro  o  fons."  Hor.  Of/.  III.  13.  1.

8.  March  14,  1901.  "tandem habes tota quod mente  petisti."

Virgil,  Aen.  IV.  100.

9.  March  14,  1901.  "  violentior  undis." Hor,  Od.  I.  2.  14.  "  vio-

lenter  undis."

10.  March  15,  1901.  "lex  talionis."

11.  March  15,  1901.  "optimo  dierum." Cat.  14.  15.  (See  below.

No.  16.)

12.  March  17,  1901.  "  Dianae  sumus  in  fide." Cat.  34.  1.

13.  March  17,  1901.  "littera  scripta  manet."

14.  March  29,  1901.  "ora  pro  nobis."

15.  March  31,  1901.  "  experto  crede."

16.  April 3,  1901.  "optimo  dierum." Cat.  14.  15. (See  above,

No.  11.)

17.  April 8,  1901.  "Finis  coronat  opus."


358


Appendix.


[part


18.  April 14,  1901.  "semper  eadem."

19.  April 20,  1901.  "noa  sine  vulture" (See  below.  No.  26).

20.  April 22,  1901.  "multum  in  parvo."

21.  April 22,  1901.  "  Ars  est  celare  artem."

22.  April 24,  1901.  "nox  humida  caelo." Virgil,  Aen.  II.  8.

23.  May 28,  19i)l.  "Tu  quoque  in  parvo  fidelis." See  S.  Luke,

19.  17.

24.  May 28,  1901.  "Peace  not  a  sword." See  S.  Matt.  10.  34.

25.  May 31,  1901.  "trivias  et  comisita  viarum." Cic.  Agr.  I.  3:

"  in  triviis  aut  in  compitis."

26.  June 3,  1901.  "nullum  sine  vulture  in  Apulo." Hor.  Od.

III.  4.  9. (See  above,  No.  19.)

27.  June 23,  1901.  "Tennyson's  line  in  threes  Life,  Life,  and  life

or  something  like  it, — the  one  about  the
foolish  virgins  Late  late  too  late,  ye  cannot
enter  in."  Tennyson,  Guinevere :  "  Late
late  so  late  but  we  can  enter  still. — Too
late  too  late  ye  cannot  enter  now."

28.  Aug. 7,  1901.  "vile  potabis." Hor.  Od.  1.  20.  1.

29.  Sept. 14,  1901.  "palely  loitering." Keats,  Belle  dame  sans

merci.

30.  Oct. 29,  1901.  "  cur  ridenda  poemata  mavis?" Juv.  Sat.  X.

124:  "r.  p.  malo."

31.  Nov. 22,  1901.  "de  re  rustica." Name  of  books  by  Cato,

Varro,  and  Columella.

32.  Dec. 5,  1901.  "  Kirkward  .shall  carry  me. go  ou. not  Helen

but  another  and  not  Scotch."  Ballad :
Helen  of  Kirkconnell.

33.  Dec. 12,  1901.  "  It  is  like  the  ampt^/xT^roi' yeAacr^a  but  another

meaning."  Aesch.  Pr.  V.  90.  "  dvypLd/iov  y."

34.  Dec. 18,  1901.  "Come unto these yellow  sands."  Shake-

speare, Tempest,  I.  2.

35.  Jan. 13,  1902.  "Quid fremuerunt gentes  ? gentes  seems

right." Psalm  2  :  "quare  f.g."

36.  Jan. 29,  1902.  "Komanam  condere  gentem," Virgil,  Aen.

VL  133.

37.  Feb. 21,  1902.  "sic  itur  ad  astra." Virgil,  Aen.  IX.  641.

38.  Feb. 27,  1902.  "To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice." L  Sam.

XV.  22.

39.  March 2,  1902.  "Fortunati  ambo  !  " Virgil,  Aen.  IX.  446.

40.  March 2,  1902.  "  acquiret  vires  eundo."  Y'lvgW,  Aen.  lY .  175.


LIU.]


Appendix.


359


41.  March  11,  1902.  "Panis et circenses." Juv. Sat. X.  81:

"  Panem  et  c."

42.  March  19,  1902.  "  Flammantia  moenia  mundi gives  you  the

clue." Lucr.  I.  73.

43.  March  26,  1902.  "Hence  all  you  vain  delights! — live  laborious

days."

1.  Fletcher,  Nice  Valour.

2.  Milton,  Lycidas,  72:  "to  scorn  delights

and  live  laborious  days."


44.

March

26,

1902.

"There  is  none  hke  her  none."  Tennyson,

Maud,  18.  1.  2.

45.  May

13,

1902.

"  Date  lilia  Romae." Virgil,  Aen.  VI.  883.

46.  May

18,

1902.

"The  sweetest  flower  that  blows."  Shelley,

Sensitive  Plant, s.  f.  for  scent  t.  b.

Wordsworth,  Ode  on  Immortality,  "meanest

f.  t.  b."

47.

June

27,

1902.

"Veni  creator  were  the  words." Latin  hymn.

48.

Aug.

1,

1902.

"Par  nobile  fratrum." Hor.  Sat.  II.  3.  243.

49.  Sept.

27,

1902.

"That  old  man  eloquent." Milton,  Sonnet  X.

50.

Oct.

9,

1902.

"  To  the  dark  tower  came  who  ?  ask  him  who  ?

and  where  ?  " (1)  Shakespeare,  Z^j'rif/  Lear,

III.  4.

(2)  Browning,  Childe  Roland.

51.

Oct.

15,

1902.

"xav  fiol  (Tvvapjxo^n.." Marcus  Aurelius,  Med.

IV.  23.

52.

Nov.

11,

1902.

"Lux  in  tenebris  et  in  terra  pax."

53.

Jan.

18,

1903.

"  Come  unto  me  and  I  will  give  you  rest."

S.  Matt.  11.  28.

54.

Jan.

18,

1903.

"  Vivida vis animai." Lucr.  I.  72: "v.  v.

animi."

55.

Jan.

18,

1903.

"  lampada  tradunt." Lucr.  II.  79.

56.

Jan.

23,

1903.

"  The music of  the  spheres." See  Milton,

Arcades,  63  to  67  and  elsewhere.

57.

Feb.

2,

1903.

"Vex  not  thou  the  poet's  soul."  Tennyson;

"poet's  mind."

58.

Feb.

9,

1903.

"Rustica  Phydyle. Hor. Odes,  III.  23.  2.

"  Phidyle."

59.

March

19,

1903.

"  spolia  opima  illaec."

60.

March

19,

1903.

"  de  minimis  non  curat  lex."

61.

March

26,

1903.

"And  the  greatest  of  these  is  Charity  is  like

it." 1.  Cor.  13.  13.


360


Appendix.


[part


62.  April 2,  1903.  "Otium  cum  dignitate— who  said  that?"  See

Cicero  pro  Sesiio,  45;  de  Orat.  1.  1.  14;  ad
fam.  1,  9,  21.

63.  April 17,  1903.  "Come  unto  these  yellow  sands, where  the

bee  sucks."  Shakespeare,  Temp.  I.  2 ;  V.
1. (See  above.  No.  34.)

64.  Aug. 22,  1903.  "Love  is  enough,  do  you  remember?"  W.

Morris.

65.  Aug. 26,  1903.  "Exprome  Caecubam." Hor.  Od.  I.  37.  5:

"depromere  Caecubum  " ;
Hor. Od. III. 28. 2, 3:  "prome  .  .  .
Caecubum."

66.  Sept. 17,  1903.  "  Love  is  enough do  you  not  understand  ?  "

(See  above.  No.  64.)

67.  Oct. 19,  1903.  "And the greatest of these is  Charity."

1.  Cor.  13.  13. (See  above,  No.  61.)

68.  Oct. 23,  1903.  "The  stern  Lawgiver  is  not  so  fair."  Words-

worth, Ode  to  Duty.

69.  Oct. 23,  1903.  "Seek  and  ye  shall." S.  Luke,  11,  9;  S.

Matt.  7.  7.

70.  Dec. 25,  1903.  "For  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  may

work." S.  John,  9.  4.

71.  Dec. 27,  1903.  "0  that  'twere  possible  after  long  grief  and

pain." Tennyson,  Maud,  2.  4.

72.  May 11,  1904.  "  And  the  greatest  of  these  three." (See  above,

Nos.  61  and  67.)

73.  May 14,  1904.  "Tracra  ipux^i  dddvaTo<;. They  begin  the  dia-

logue." See  Plato,  Phaedrus,  245  C.

74.  June 24,  1904.  "  saeva  indignatio." Swift's  Epitaph.

75.  Oct. 21,  1904.  "Quis  modus  .  .  .  Melpomene." Hor.  Od.  1.

24.  1-3.

In  addition  to  the  above  there  are  a  few  cases  where  the  phraseology
is  reminiscent  of  some  well-known  passage,  as,  e.g.,  on  Oct.  9,  1902,
"  purple  but  not  fair  raiment  " ;  but  where  such  phrases  form  part  of  a
statement,  and  do  not  seem  to  be  either  recognised  as  quotations
or  reproduced  as  isolated  "  tags,"  they  are  not  included  in  this  list.

List  of  Assonances  in  Script  to  illustrate  Ch.  III.,  P.  56.

1.  March  25,  1901.  necubiae  necopinato.

2.  March  31,  1901.  ambages  desunt  dvafiaivnv  necesse  nec

sine  ambitu.


Lin.]


A'ppendix.


361


3.  April  10,  1901.  Belua  /SeAos  ebanuit.

4.  April  22,  1901.  (^jrei (rjTa  prodest.

5.  April  27,  1901.  Fac,  Die,  faceto  dicto.

6.  June  30,  1901.  8rj\rjTi]piov  Sekrov  aS£A<^os  SeXffjuci].

7.  Sept. 4,  1901.  long  ago  agone.

8.  Sept.  12,  1901.  Thibet  looks  like  a  word, a  tie  between

9.  Jan. 4,  1902.  yevvija-is  is  important  not  Genesis — and  not

Exodus  but  e^wSos.

10.  April  24,  1902.  daffodils  .  .  .  Daphne.

List  of  Puns  in  Script  to  illustrate  Ch.  III.,  P.  59.

1.  March  14,  1901.  caelato  "carved"  and  "heavenly."

2.  April  22,  1901.  celare  "to  conceal"  and  caelare  "to  carve."

3.  June  3,  1901.  scriptura  "writing"  and  "tax  on  pasturage."

4.  July  23,  1901.  Lodge,  i.e.  Sir  Oliver,  and  lodge  "to  stay  at."

5.  Aug.  10,  1901.  electron  "amber"  and  "electrify."

6.  Feb.  10,  1902.  obiter  "on  the  way"  and  "by  the  way,  i.e.

trifling."

7.  May 18,  1902.  ayaOo^aljxw  in  its  etymological  sense.

8.  Feb. 13,  1903.  clavis  "club"  and  "key."

9.  Jan. 29,  1904.  Christopher,  xp^'^'^°^'  4"^P,  the  "light  of  the

Sanctuary  "  (?),  and  xPW'^^v  (j>opd  the
"  Bearer  0)  of  Good."

10.  June 10,  1904.  dSrjXoTrjs  and  aSr^Aos. perhaps  assonance  only.

11.  Oct. 1  2, 1904.  Dorothy  "  God's  gift";  Mo7iica  "who  lived  alone."

Verse  to  illustrate  Ch.  III.,  P.  62.

Specimens  of  verse  composed  between  sleeping  and  waking,  and  written
down  on  waking,  on  two  or  three  successive  days,  about  1888 —
1890.

1.  So,  facing  both  ways  through  his  life's  whole  span
He  served  both  God  and  Mammon, — yet  the  one
Grudged  not  his  service  truly  yielded  there
Nor  that  his  toil  spent  at  the  other's  call, —
And,  of  both  lords  regretted,  wept  by  all
The  tribesmen,  full  of  years  and  honours,  passed
To  the  great  gulf,  beyond  Time's  tideless  sea
And  all  his  jerry-builded  houses  knew
Their  lord  no  more.


362


Appendix.


[part


2.  And  didst  thou  hide  thee,  like  an  honest  man,
Or  face  the  accuser  boldly,  like  a  rogue  ?

3.  Tell  me  not  now,  as  in  the  ancient  story,
"  The  path  of  duty  is  the  way  to  glory,"
But  tell  him  once  for  all,  in  accents  strong,

"  Not  even  three  rights  can  ever  make  a  wrong."

Specimens  of  automatic  verse.

I.  Produced  alone  but  while  experimenting  at  the  same
time  as  other  automatists :

a.  (with  Miss  A.)  2  pieces.

b.  {with  Mrs.  B.)  2  „

II.  With  my  daughter,  using  dial  machine :  3  ,,
I.  a.  With  Miss  A.

1.  Wednesday,  July  20,  1904,  2  p.m.

"The  Kings  and  Princes  of  the  Earth  The  troup  of  them

went  out  from  the  North  and  the  thunder  of  their  following  rolled
over  the  land.

A  long  low  window  and  a  seat  in  it,  blue  curtains,  and  the
light  of  the  sun  on  the  lawn  outside.  The  window  is  in  an  angle
and  I  cannot  see  the  room —

only  a  plash  and  plangor  of  the  sea,

and  whirr  of  wings  in  the  deep  caves  I  see

Then  flies  a  white  winged  bird  in  the  blue  sky

or  a  swift  sailing  ship  goes  scudding  by,

so  flash  successive  visions  in  a  glass

the  while  we  dreaming  scarce  behold  them  pass.

Yet  all  the  while  on  the  awakened  soul
each  flitting  image  helps  imprint  the  whole
and  superposed  on  what  was  first  impressed
fills  so  the  outline,  colour,  and  the  rest,
and  while  we  only  watch  the  master's  hand,
no  glimpse  vouchsafed  us  of  the  building  planned,
stone  upon  stone,  the  battlements  arise,
till  the  fair  fabric  flashes  in  the  skies

half  unseeing
and,  roused  from  the  mechanic  gaze

heedless  stare,
we  see  it  in  the  midmost  realms  of  air,
and  know  the  cloud  capped  towers,  the  glittering  dome
te— be— ths  habitation
the  very  habitation  of  our  Home ! "


LIII.]


Apjoendix.


363


2.  Wed.,  Aug.  3,  1904,  2  p.m.
"  Faquir Faquesan some  name  like  that Let  us  show  it
to  her  and  then  she  will  write  it — Stay  the  pencil  and  shut  your
eyes.

{Here  I  think  I  must  have  slept  a  minute.)
"To  open  eyes

The  light  is  dim
In  sunny  skies

Light  of  the  sun  obscures  his  rays  and  him

At  deepest  night

When  all  is  still
Clear  on  the  sight

The  sheen  of  stars  faint  glimmer  over  vale  and  hill

So  with  the  soul

Let  mists  enclose
Lose  self  control

The  grasp  of  self  and  will  resolved  are  the  true  visions  foes

Go  to  sleep  again  and  wait

The  words  are  lost

Gone  from  my  lips
When  longed  for  most

The  heart's  most  brilliant  hopes  do  suffer  worst  eclipse."

L  b.  With  Mrs.  B.

1.  Nov.  20,  1904.
"  The  clock  has  struck  the  hour  an  hour  ago
No  sound  was  uttered  in  the  silent  room
The  stars  shone  brightly  and  the  wind  did  blow
They  all  unwitting  vi^aited  for  their  doom

Yet  louder  than  the  wind  that  blew  that  night
And  brighter  than  the  stars  far  piercing  ray
The  tramp  of  armies  rolling  in  their  might.
The  gleam  of  weapons  on  the  homeward  way

So  unregarded  and  unrecognised

The  Past  tramps  by  with  sullen  tread

So  unregarded  and  unrecognised

The  unseen  future  glimmers  overhead.

This  is  not  what  was  intended  but  it  will  do  if  we  can  get  her
to  say  that  it  is  verse.


364  Appendix.  [part

But  can  we  ?  ■
That  is  the  object  of  the  experiment  to-night

And  success  t
There  has  been  some

Now  write  this  :
Eva  Moore."

[Note.  1  had  heen  reiuliiig  H.  S.  Merriman's  novel  "  Barlasch  of  the
Guard" — the  account  of  the  retreat  from  Moscow.']

2.  Sunday,  Dec.  11,  1904.

(/  had  read  an  article  on  the  Chasm  at  Delphi  in  the  Hellenic  Journal,
and  then  the  Essay  on  Oracles  in  "  Classical  Essays "  hy  F.  IF.
H.  Myers.)

"  And  so  the  answer  all  unwitting  came,
That  on  the  altar  they  should  kindle  flame,
And  as  the  flame  should  flicker  or  grow  faint,
So  live  or  die  the  entranced  seeming  saint.

The  purpose  artful,  and  the  method  cheap.
And  one  more  falsehood  on  the  quickening  heap."

[Note.  Notice  the  repetition  of  the  phrase  '  all  unwitting '  used  in  the
verse  produced  in  the  preceding  experiment  three  weeks  before.]

II.  Verse  produced  automatically  by  M,  de  G.  V.  and  H.  de  G.  V.  on

a  revolving  dial  machine.

1.  Aug.  27,  1904.

{after  describing  some  persons  living  at  Porlock.)
"  multa  fuit  rerum  et  jam  multa  ibi  copia  larvae,"

2.  Sept.  11,  1904.

"  Fond  were  his  hopes,  no  friend  was  there  to  aid,
No  brave  companion  of  his  youthful  days.
But  underneath  the  proud  usurper's  blade.
He  fell  a  victim  to  mistaken  praise.

To  him  the  glory  and  to  us  the  tears;

What  other  recompense  for  service  done

Can  live  theroughout  [sic]  the  long  expanse  of  years,

And  a — show  to  future  ages  what  he  won  1  "


[Note. After  the  vowel  'a'  there  was  a  longish  pause.]


LIII.]


Appendix.


365


3.  Sept.  18,  1904.

"  Some  love  the  sunny  paths  of  life


And  some  prefer  the  shade
Not  softer  is  the  troubled  strife
For  those  whose  choice  is  made.

New  faces  may  replace  the  old,
New  friends  may  claim  our  love,

But  still,  if  all  the  truth  were  told,
The  first  would  be  above."


Specimens  of  Verse  in  Script  to  illustrate  Ch.  III.,  P.  63.

Facsimile  of  verse  produced  in  script  of  April  14,  1901.


O  CD


4  .


Greek  Verse.


May  16,  1902.


anfiporrlii  re  vv^  kirl  dpjiarl  <^ona..


.My  3,  1903.


dpixa-l  dpyvpoevrl  TreAei  .  .  .  TroAAa  t'

deXXa  .  .  .  Kal  AaiAaTTt  KapTepouvrl  SeSdiperai

oi'pai/os  aAAos."


Aug.  8,  1903.


"  |Oer/xa  KpvaTaXXivov  d—o  avfii^VTUJV
pet,6p(j)v  no


(TVfJ.<f)VT(t)V  pe.t6ptJ)V  dl70


May  13,


1904.


"  Koi  Tavr  dp.elxj/as  ovS'  SKetva  Av^cro/xat."


May  14,


1904.


May  26,


1904.


"  dAA'  ot  [jLh>  ecrpLev  olSe  Se  Ko.l  redvijKores
Twv  —plv  Xe  Xqdov

TLov  TTplv  XeXfjOov  ovhev  Is  to  SecrTrocrat
Toiyap  TO  TreijOeiv  ei  Tts  otSe  eTTjTvpus
dSvvaTOV  OTTtv  p.r]  deOiv  XaXovjjLevo


366


Appendix.


[part


Latin  Verse.

Oct.  6,  1901.

"Monet  ne  dixeris  omni  quod

tibi  confitear  soli."
Nm.  3,  1902.

"magno  contendis  corpore  contra."
March  1,  1903. See  above,  p.  350.

May  29,  1903.

"cantant  comatae  Silviae  concentibus
multimodis  avium."
Script  of  July  15,  1904.

"  Audax  perpeti  sic  ad  finem  ventum  est
Semper  litora  si  premis  iniqua

Non  altum  petis*  Illius  vox  clara
Vespera  clamat."

\*  Note  on  above:  The  word  '■'lam"  seems  to  have  been  interpolated  at
this  point  and  there  is  an  illegible  word  immediately  above  the  word
"clara"]

List  of  Supposed  Conversations  in  the  Script  as  described

IN  Ch.  IV.,  P.  68.

Note :  W ords  spaced  are  written  hi  a  larger  hand.

(1)  March  30,  1901. "Quot  rlietores  tot  sententiae."

(2)  April  3,  1901.  "  velle  aut  posse  si  idem  bene  tu  autem
nescis  ego  non  possum  in  tanta  spe  omnium  0  p  i  n  o  r
opinio  =  Soga  semper  post  ponis  quod  dicere  velim  tuo  fronti  o
nimis  rogans !  Cur  non  fasciculo  omnia  superponens  veritatem
deceruis  ? Fee  i."

(3)  August  7,  1901.  "This  is  something  new — perhaps  a  test
— I  don't  understand quite. Who  is  it  ?"

(4)  August  16,  1901.  "A.W.V.  will  understand  this— I  think
of  him  when  I  say  it — you  do  not  know.  Mone  inquit  alteram,
ne  titubet — non  semper  recte  fit  quod  manu  incipit.  Set  xpo'^'C^"'
Kttt  (TVjjL-aOdi'. prosit  credenti."

(5)  October  6,  1901.  "They  are  walking  down  a  garden
path — in  a  level  sunlight — to  a  white  house,  yews  the  garden,
years  ago.  Monet  ne  dixeris  omni  quod  tibi  confitear
sob. But  A.W.V.  must  be  satisfied  etc."


Liir.]  Appendix.  367

(6)  Januanj  13,  1902.  "Patience  for  j'ou  both —  it  will
come  Three  Latin  words  can  she  not  write  them  ?  would  give
the  clue.  Quid  fremuerunt  gentes  ?  gentes  seems  right — gens
togata  rapit.  Non  possum  plurima  hodie  eras  meri  meliora  super-
sunt. Cras meliora supers  un  t."

(7)  February  13,  1902.  "But  who  stands  above?  watching,
invisible?  The  leader  &  palm-bearer  nihil  perfecisti.  omnia
saepe  de  integro  reficienda  sunt.

It  is  not  known  to  me.  There  was  a  secret  signal,  made  with
the  lips — it  betrayed  not,  but  many  left  it  undone.  voices  in
the  air.  why  not?  strangers  not  admitted  Can  you
take  the  message  ? They  call  me  too  much

There  is  truth  in  this, o  "

(8)  January  15,  1903.  "Corvinus  or  cornix  but  that
is  not  the  sense — wait  for  the  word.  He  said  '  I  will  send  the
half  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  you  have  the  other  half.  Tell
Hodgson  this, — but  you  have  not  got  the  word  yet.  Corbel
perhaps  is  more  like  Corb  Corvel  it  was  some  time  ago
through  Mrs.  Piper  but  they  were  not  to  tell  you  etc."

(9)  March 15, 1903. "Write yourself  now  Otranto  pice
cur  non  cetera  1 quia  non  comprehendit  ilia  nostr  a  fac  quiescat.

Signum  illud  pro  bono  etc."

(10)  March  20,  1903.  "Never  when  the  wind  blows  from  out
of  the  East.  But  on  the  Western  breeze  it  comes — with  sound  of
bells  and  music  heard  afar. Ask  about  this.

Listen  now she  tells  the  rest — they  listen
Ask  at  Smithfield  etc."

(11)  Odoler  23,  1903.  "faith  fled,  Hope  stayed  when  did
that  happen  ? — no  this  is  not  right  Stop  it  is  too  difficult — let  her
write.

These  three  etc."

(12)  Fclruary  1,  1904.  "Fin  is  ill  do  you  not  hear?  R  get
the  next  word  for  me.  Fin  —  sway  that  is  the  sound — listen
again  fin  sway  out  in  on  say  that  write  that  sound  in  sense,
outinon  Finiswayout  Inn  no — not  right.  It  is  a
message  about  Fin — it  is  urgent.

\_scrihhles\

let  me  say  it.  It  is  a  sudden  illness  which  she
sees  will  come  to  her  siste  r — t  his  is  Mrs
Cart  Wright speaking  —  she wants you to  know


368


Appendix.


[PABT


—  Not  in  her  own  house  in  Ion  don,  somewhere
else. Tell someone  this.

We  had  another  message  but  this  was  urgent — write  to-morrow
for  ours."

(13)  Nov.  25,  1904. See  below,  p.  .398.

Besides  the  above,  there  are  possibly  indications  of  "  conversations  "
in  the  scripts  of :

April  7,  1901,  where  some  one  addressed  in  the  second  person  is
spoken  of  as  masculine  {dcprehensus  .  .  .  devagavisti),  and  cannot
therefore  be  myself,  unless  the  masculine  form  of  the  participle  is
a  mere  blunder.

Aug.  26,  1902,  where  there  is  a  suggestion  that  one  person  is
explaining  something  to  another  who  is  not  able  to  see, — a  suggestion
borne  out  by  the  multiplicity  of  signatures.

June  14,  1903,  where  a  blunder  is  accounted  for  by  the  difficulties
of  transcribing  what  some  one  else  dictates.  This  may  be  a  general
remark,  but  it  is  possible  here  to  understand  that  two  persons  are
supposed  to  be  actually  engaged  in  the  process  of  conveying  informa-
tion to  me.

Statements  by  the  Script  as  to  its  own  Success.

Incorrect  :

(1)  Jan.  1.3,  1902.

(2)  Feb.  13,  1902.

(3)  Mail  13,  1903.

(4)  July 3,  1903.

(5)  Feb. 9,  1904.

Doubtf  ul  :

(1)  May  27,  1901.

(2)  Jium  24,  1902.

(.3)  Feb. 16,  1903.
Correct  :

(1)  June  23,  1901.

(2)  Sept.  18,  1901.

(3)  Oct. 9,  1902.


"  gentes  seems  right."  {See  p.  283.)

"There  is  truth  in  this."

"  There  is  something  in  this  if  you  could  only
see  it."

"  Some  of  this  is  important."  (See  p.  63.)
"You  do  not  understand  .  .  .  but  it  is  true."

"  talia  si describas sine  remissione  patefiat

Veritas."  (See  p.  284.)
"  This  is  evidential  I  think  at  last — but  it  has

been  hard  to  get."  (Seep.  301.)
"  this  means  something."

"  hodie  aliquid  feci  quod  ad  gloriam  veritatis

abundet."
"  This  last  is  important."

"there  is  truth  in  this."  (Seep.  189.)


LIII.]


Appendix.


3G9


Chronological  List  of  Events  Conducing  to  Confidence
IN  Script. See  Chap.  V.,  P.  92.

3Imj  16,  1901,  saw  in  JVestminster  Gazette  account  of  "Daily  Mail
Ghost";  which  seemed  to  establish  something  genuine  in  the  script
of  May  11.  {See  p.  328.)

May  17,  1901,  heard  what  seemed  to  establish  truth  of  statement
in  the  script  of  May  8.  (See  p.  207.)

June  1,  1901,  looked  up  the  Symposium  to  see  what  "clue"
Diotima  gave,  with  a  result  which  impressed  me  as  suggesting  an
external  cause  for  the  script.  I  noted  in  my  diary  on  June  3,
1901  :  "The  certainty  that  I  have  never  read  the  Symposium  gives
the  thing  an  evidential  value — to  me  .  .  .  The  evidential  value
to  outsiders  is  nothing, — they  would  think  that  I  had  read  and
forgotten  the  Sym^posium, — but  to  me  it  is  almost  convincing."

{Seep.  311.)

Nov.  3,  1902,  heard  from  Mrs.  Forbes,  enclosing  writing  of  hers
which  appeared  to  reflect  a  vivid  impression  of  my  own.

{See  p.  239.)

Dec.  19,  1902,  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes  what  I  regarded  as  an
unmistakeable  reference  to  the  Symposium  passage,  which  I  had
desired  to  convey  to  her. .  {See  p.  243.)

Feb.  10,  1903,  received  my  copy  of  Human  Personality,  and  found
there  confirmation  of  the  statements  in  the  script  that  in  it  would
be  a  reference  to  the  Symposium  passage.  {See  p.  316.)

Oct.  20,  1903,  heard  from  Dr.  Hodgson,  in  verification  of  a  message
sent  to  him  in  my  script,  what  I  noted  at  the  time  as  very  strong
evidence  for  attributing  the  script  to  an  external  cause.


Comparison  in  Parallel  Columns  of  Statements  in  Script
AND  Records  in  Diary.

Dates  of  progressive  confi- Dates  when  Script  referred  to  my  belief,
dence  in  Script.


May  16,  1901. ~|
May  17,  1901.]

June  1,  1901.

  July  i,  1901


fAp.  19,  1901.  desire  that  I  should  believe.
lAp.  22,  1901.  „


370


A'ppendix.


[part


Dates  of  progressive  confi- Dates  when  Script  referred  to  my  belief,
dence  in  Script.

 Aug.  16,  1901.  desire  that  I  should  believe.

 Sept.  9,  1901.


.Nov.  13,  1901.
-Feb.  27,  1902.


June  24,  1902.  recognises  less  incredulity.


Nov.  3,  1902.


Dec.  19,  1902.-


Feb.  10,  1903.

 /Mar.  1,  1903. "must  believe  now."

\Mar.  7,  1903.  „


Oct.  20,  1903.


-Aug.  22,  1903.  "you  do  not  believe."
-Sept.  22,  1903. "you  have  conviction."


Aug.  U,  1904. "Faith  is  not  yours."


LIIl.]


•Ajypendix.


371


Abstention  from  Writing  advised  by  the  Script.
See  Chap.  V.,  P.  93.

(1)  Dec. 22,  1901.  "Wait  before  writing. Count  seven  days

then  try  again — unless  you  hear."  {See
also  helinv,  No.  14.)

(2)  Feb. 21,  1902.  "wait  till  after  Wednesday— then  write."

(3)  March 15,  1902.  "To  night  it  is  over  nothing  further  for

some  days."

(4)  July 1,  1902.  "leave it till it is clearer,  till  after

Friday  next."

(5)  Aug. 26,  1902.  "No  you  dont  see. Leave  it  for  a  while."

(6)  Ajjril 30,  1903.  "  Wait  now — do  not  write  so  often  it  is

not  clear."

(7)  May 5,  1904.  "No  there  is  nothing  wait  some  days."

Instructions  as  to  Writing  given  by  the  Script.
See  Chap.  V.,  P.  93.

a.  Vague  ;  during  a  period.

(1)  Oct. 27,  1902.  "write  more often. Talbot will  help-

all  through  November."

(2)  March  15,  1903.  "Write this week and then ask  Mrs.

Forbes  for  hers."

(3)  March 20,  1903.  "Reckon  the  days  and  wait."

(4)  May 29,  1903.  "It  is  better  in  June  write  that  month."

(5)  Jwie 30,  1903.  "write  much next month, here and  at

home."

(6)  Oct. 19,  1903.  "write  this  week,  but  not  for  evidence."

(7)  Oct. 30,  1903.  "write  next  week."

/3.  Definite;  on  a  fixed  day.
"  to-night."

(1)  March 14,  1902.  "Write  each  day  again  to-night."

(2)  June 24,  1902.  "To-night  again."

(3)  Dec. 19,  1902.  "write  to-night."
"to-morrow."  ■ ■  '  .

(4)  .  Nov. 4,  1902.  "Defer in crastinum  —  medianum  diem

ilium."

(5)  Oct. 22,  1903.  "you will  understand more later — write

to-morrow."


372


Appendix.


[part


(6)  Dec. 7,  1903.  "Sit regularly alone or with others  &

that  will  bring  results — you  will  see.
Try  to-morrow  with  Mrs.  Dew  Smith
and  let  yourself  go."

(7)  Feb. 1,  1904.  "write  to-morrow  for  ours  [i.e.  message]."

(8)  Feb. 5,  1904.  "write  to-morrow  but  expect  no  word."
"  o?i  a  date  assigned."

(9)  March  29,  1901.  "notare  horam  .  .  .  horas  pone  sex  postea

quattuor  et  idies  identidera  computa.
ibi  vigila  ne  dicam ora  pro  nobis."

(10)  April 20,  1901.  "computa. nonas  pone  horas;  post  aliquot

dies — vis  scire  quot  dies  1  l-l-l-fl-l-l-i-l
et  adde  insuper  tres.  scribere  sine  re-
missione  semper  in  provinciam."

(11)  May 26,  1901.  "Count  40  hours  then  write, it  will  be

clear."

(12)  June 30,  1901.  "1 1 1 and  then 3 more, put  nine

and  count  the  days  listen  that  night."

(13)  Aug. 7,  1901,  "August  23rd  is  the  date  you  will  see —

write  that  night."

(14)  Dec. 22,  1901.  "Wait  before  writing. Count  seven  days

then  try  again — unless  you  hear."  [See,
also  No.  1  above.']

(15)  March 31,  1902.  "Later  days  will  help — in  May  and  again

after  seven  weeks  and  days  on  an  even-
ing suddenly  you  will  see."

(16)  June 27,  1902.  "Write  on  Sunday."

(17)  July 13,  1902.  "Count  three  and  five  and  write  then —

(a)  and  on  the  23rd  of  the  month  (b)."

(18)  Sept. 6,  1902.  "Wait  for  the  clue  on  the  17th  it  will

come. Sept.  17th  write  then."

(19)  March 11,  1903.  "  irefiiny^  Kal  SeKarrj  t)fJ-epa  ...  on  that  day

watch  not  alone,  when  the  vision  comes
note  the  day,  and  count  from  now."

(20)  June 14,  1903.  "write  again  on  the  longest  day  (a)  and

June  23  (b)."

(21)  Dec. 7,  1903.  "note  the  date  in late April  and  write

on  the  evening  of  the  23rd  do  not  tell
anyone  this  till  after  the  event.  Write
then  in  Cambridge — at  9  o'clock.  Re-
member." [See  also  No.  25.]


(22)

Dec.

25,

1903.

(23)

Dec.

27,

1903.

(24)

Jan.

9,

1904.

(25)

April

10,

1904.

(26)

Sept.

18,

1904.

(27)

Dec.

28,

1904.

Liii.]  Ajjpendix.  373

iVrite  this  for  me. on  the  17th  of  next
month ask  the  question."

[See  also  No.  24.]
;ount  days  five  six  and  two,  then  listen
and  remember."

^'ac  scribas  die  septimo  decimo."

[See  also  No.  22.]
^nd  write  on  the  23rd  but  before  that
too."  [See  also  No.  21.]

lYrite  this  week  more  often  and  especially
on  Wednesday  morning  next."
i  days  you  must  wait from now  and
other  3 — then  the  messasre  will  make
•  .'  things  clear. Let  it  come  then."

List  of  Passages  when  the  Script  ordered  that  the  Date  or
Hour  should  be  noted. See  Chap.  V.,  P.  102.

t(l)  Mai/ 8,  1901. "no  power, doing  something  else  to-night.

note  hour."  [See  p.  207.]

■?  (2)  May  27,  1901. "  tempus  adnotare. .  . .  Talia  vidi  recenti

tempore — talia  si  describas  sine  remissione

patefiat  Veritas."  [See  p.  284.]

1(3)  May  11,  1901. "Do  not  hurry, date  this hoc  est  quod

volui— &c.,  &c."  [See  p.  328.]

t  (4)  June  23,  1901. "  hodie  aliquid  feci  quod  ad  gloriam  veritatis

abundet.  .  .  .  notare  diem  hora  non  multum

interest."  &c.,  &c.
t  (5)  Dec. 5,  1901. "note  the  hour  I  will  tell  someone  else  I

was  here."  [See  p.  226.]

(G)  Jioly  18,  1902. "Last  night  it could  not be told.  But

note  this  hour."  [See  p.  120.]

t  (7)  July  23,  1902. "Hodie  mane  aliquid  .  .  .  evenit  .  .  .  Note

the  date."  [See  p.  235.]

1(8)  Feb. 6,  1904. "To-night  is  a  marked  date — note  it."

[See  p.  180.]

(9)  July  13,  1904. "It  is  something  contemporary  that  you  are

to  record, note  the  hour."

Note  to  above.  On  the  occasions  marked  f  evidential  matter  appears
to  have  been  given  in  the  script ;  on  those  marked  1  the  matter
referred  to  lacks  distinctness.  Where  the  cases  are  discussed  among
"  verifiable  incidents,"  references  are  given.


374


Appendix.


[part


List  of  Passages  in  Script  referring  to  Possibility  of  con-
veying Information  in  Dream. See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  103.

(1)  June  16,  1901. "There  is  no  hurry. show  it  all  to  your

husband.  Try  at  night — dont  press —
wait."

(2)  Jimc  .30,  1901. "listen  that  night — the  bird  will  come  I'uccel

di  Dio.  in  the  everlasting  snows* —
you  cannot  fail  to  note."

(3)  Dec. 21,  19(^)1. "  You  cannot  write  to  night  —dream  instead."

(4)  May 31,  1902. "dream and  remember — the  blue  colour*

that  you  saw — see  again  to-night,  alone
in  sleep. Do  not  forget."

(5)  Oct. 9,  1902. "Dreamers  see  most  of  the  truth — in  golden

visions  of  the  dawn —  They  can  tell
you  that  this  is  true."

(6)  Dec. U,  1902. "Dream  tonight."

(7)  May 13,  1903. "no  you  wont  understand  what  I  tell  you.

Sleep  is  bette  r."

(8)  June  21,  1903. "It  is  hard  for  us  when  you  have  no  hope —

Listen  to  night  in  the  silence  it  will
come  to  you."

(9)  Au(j. 8,  1903. "Find  the  pillar  in  sleej)."

(10)  Dec. 7,  1903. "a  word  was  said  on  Saturday  night  but

you  did  not  hear. listen  again  to-night
I  will say  it more plainly. write  it
down  the  moment  you  wake — no  matter
■  when."

"*■  [Notes  to  tJie  above. (2)  I  was  in  the  Alps  when  this  was  written.
(4)  See  p.  118,  note  1  ; there  is  a  special  blue  colour  familiar
to  me  in  dreams.]

List  of  Unidentified  Names. See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  106.

a.  Unaccounted  for  :

(1)  Oct. 29,  1901. "Frendsham  or  Frettisham  Park,  perhaps

Frodsham. [signecl]  Alec  K."
Nov. 1,  1901. "Alec  can  try  again  later." "at  Frodsham

there  is  an  old  house."
Nov. 4,  1901. "Frodsham  and  a  river.  .  .  . Alec  Keith

— to  the  friend  of  another."


LIII.]


Appendix.


375


10,

J:  1  UUdXldLu. . . • Xiic lUcobcl^c  CaUlc

through  Alec."

jS  ov.

lyui.

■'  High Chester  .  . .  Hugh Chesson  at

sonie  place  that  ends  in  Chester,  Grod-

manchester  perhaps."

(3)

JJec.

1 ' ,

1901.

"  Robershaw  a  historian."

JJ6C.

1  ft

1  y  u  I.

xiouney,  jxoiana,  xtonaia  .  .  .  \v  uniington,

.  .  .  name  of  the  church  spire."

Jr.--,
J  (III.

A

^,

1902.

"  Heseltine.  .  .  . Francis  Hezeltine.  De-

vornik  .  .  .  Devoniac  is better.  .  .  .

Llangovery  is  the  present  address.  '

(o)

reo.

lo,

Kalpli  iNeviie,  not  oi  WarwicK.

III  at  Cll

ly,

i  yu-..

"  Dover,  .  .  .  Dover  court.  .  .  .  Emmie

and  Frank.  .  .  . from  Harr\'.  '

.^MUjI  Lit'

1  o\J  -1.

' ' a]  Oc1"0 OTiri IptJTT  O'PTT l-i-T^Oof" I  T^AOr^TT

xiobud,  £iiiu iicuciy.  *  .  . vjTicau  v.-'iobuy

lVTarc;t"on Fvprarfl ATar^tAn  "

, . . iTXO/i  i3  Ul.f  11, Jji  V  CI  dl  lA i.TJ.tll  S  bull .

(9)

Mail

25,

1902.

"  Maupertuis  and  Sarrasin  ...  in  a  book

together."

(10)

July

23,

1902.

"  Romenzana  .  .  .  Clemens."

Aug.

25,

1902.

•'Clementine  .  .  .  Romanzero  and  Xicholas."

(11)

Sept.

1",

1902.

"  Clan  George  .  .  .  Clancard  no  Clan  Cahart

Clancy.  .  .  . Clancarty  and  Ormond."

(12)

Od.

21,

1902.

"  Groschen.  .  .  . Denj  s  Haliburton."

(13)

Dec.

9,

1902.

"  Caro  Carnforth."

Dec.

26,

1903.

"  Carnforth."

Jan.

24,

1903.

"  Cornford  is more like  than  Carnforth.

Carn.  Calne.  .  .  .  Violet.  .  .  .  Newman."

J  av .

•TO

1  J  u  0 .

x  encidrvo-ii  ,  .  .  ijreorge  .  .

Jan.

-1,

1903.

'  [above  compiefiu  as\  b-eorge loung  .  .  .

Wilson  .  .  .  Knyvett.  *

(15)

Jlarc/i

20,

1  n  A  o

1903.

bmithheld  .  .  .  rortals  or  rortalis.

/I  A\
(ib)

April

9
^)

1  yuo.

0  yj  .  .  .  JJouern  [«  1  ivei  \.

Apnl

1  n
iU,

lyuo.

"  Crosik or  Croisic."

/I  T\

June

1  yuo.

"  Finlayson  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  Mary."

(18)

June

30,

1903.

"  Alfred."

(19)

Sept.

27,

1903.

"  Henry  Lambert  or  Lampson."

(20)

Feb.

9,

1904.

"Mortimer  Gothard,  1703."  [Signature.]

(21)

July

3,

1904.

"  Ockenden  Manor."

[*  Note  to  the  above.  No.  14.  Knyvett  AVilsou  is  a  combination
of  names  known  to  me.]


376


Appendix.


[part


(b)  Fossibhj  accounted  f(»\-

(22)  Sept.  4,  1901.  "  Maidment  Evan  awnsley." Seep.  322.

(23)  Jan.  8,  1902.  "  Everitt  ;  angelus." See  p.  277.

(24)  Dec.  9,  1902.  "  Milbranke." See  p.  320.

(25)  Feb.  2,  1903.  "Harriet  de  Vane." Seep.  249.

Anecdotes  in  the  Script. See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  111.

October  26,  1901. "Caristia  insula  Rhodani  multum  interest

Iko, efieve Sokixov^ I'yxepas.  SaKpucrt Trewpay/xevo^ — ad  eum

venit ianitor cum spe aliqua emendandi omnia — quid mihi — ■

rogas, inquit Georgios ille — benevolentiam, respondit,  tuam

filius  enim  meus  nunc in discrimine rerum — imprecatio rei  fata

deterrere  valet. Fac  die  carmina  canta — pro  parte  virili,  nomine

filii  mei. Valetudo  redit. This  is  a  tale  not  mine — you  will  find

it  told — look  in  the  lives  of  saints — for  the  Caustian  legend  of  St.

Josepha. But  the  word  is  not  quite  Caristia — Charis  X'^P'-'^

J  '  J)

f<TlT<X>.

Feb.  18,  1902.  "merit  in  this  long  narrow  hand  written  two  cen-
turies ago  or  more.  Can  you  not  see  who  is  meant  1  Nevile  is  one
name  Ralph  Nevile,  not  of  Warwick,  a  scholar  not  a  soldier  :  four
square  and  pillars  no  other  at  all  like  it.  Commensal  regi  ibidem
dormivit.  Tabula  rasa  ossa  sua  operit  e  cineribus  magna  flamma  eripit
erupit  scientiae  opifex. Hoc  valde  scieri  potest.

Signator  nomen  posuit.

R.  Nevile."

[Note. The  hand-writing  is  not  my  own  normal  writing.]

Jwie  5,  1904.  "Neve  usquam  linter  macedonicus  vento
adpulsus  in  portam  illam  adveniet.  Chalcedonicus  magister  ratem
impulit  phoeniken  punicam ;  alio  modo  gubernando  non  nostro.
Historian!  bene  notatam  manu  tua  describas.  In  ripa  barbari
stupefiunt — indigenarum  rex  cum  galeatis  adversum  trepidat — ecce
in  mare  supervacuum  cachinnus  et  praeter  nihil.  Fragor  caeli
omen  iis  etsi  non  oniina  accipientibus — '  Deus,  Deus  quidem  nefastum
decrevit  illud.'

vanitate  humani  iugeni  universum  in  se  vertentes.

Respice  in  librum,  talia  invenies,  nota — Episcopus  historiam  rettulit,
ego  tibi  pro  miraculo  quod  saepe  flagitasti."


LIII.]


A^ypenclix.


317


List  of  Passages  describing  supposed  "Isles  of  the  Blest."

See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  112.

(1)  March  11,  1901.  "multiplex  flora  carpitur  iliac  o  quam
inventibus  [or  iuventibus]  suave  olens  roscidus  humor  super  genas
caelicolis  et  infra  ingens —  — nec  sine  stupore."

(2)  March  29,  1901.  "spes  permanet  koct/mv  tenuis  pervo-
latibilis  unica  aptat  multiponens  odoratam  luminis  florem
caelestis  nec  abest  00-/^7;  sapienti  prosit  advenae  satis."

(3)  A2rril  27,  1901.  "Latine  loquere,  sed  tu  non  potes  interpre-
tare.  ascripta  es  glebae  mente  vel  ingenio — 0  libera  animam  per
maria  per  polum  transcurre  mode  cantoris,  omnia  ibi  plana,  omnia
rosea  suflfusa  luce  vel  caecis  bene  videntia.  oculi  autem  tui
caligine  circumfusi."

(4)  Jan.  18,  1903.  "  Come  unto  me  and  I  will  give  j'ou  rest.
Vivida  vis  animai  lampada  tradere  qui  singula  pro  parte  virili
perficiunt.  lampada  tradunt.  Talia  posui  apud  amicum  hoc  debes
illi  amico  meo  nuntiare — tum  forsitan  alia  diciliora  credere  potest.
Discre  potuerunt  qui  velint— tu  omnino  sola  sola  munere  fungi
potes — mentem  adhibe.

Supellectilem  in  medio  leves  quod  subter  est  iuvenies — tunc
in  alienos  mittas  \jjage  turned]  in  alienam  terram  mittas,  responsum
bene  legendum  est.  item  itemque — insuper  fac  mentem  adhibeas.
Flores  in  caespite  blandi  et  integri  roscidulo  rore  superfundati — 0
cur  non  in  amices  mittes  1

quod  in  animo  habeas,  tale  manu  perficere.  Inest  odorata  aura.
Crux  in  caelum  usque  ad  polum  attinget — umbrosa  felicitas  multis
cum  rivulis  ttov}  tc  (.vavOkjiM.  ibi  habit  ant  beati  illi  quos  bene
cognovisti.

Tuus."

(5)  Jan.  20,  1903.  "Umbrifer  in  aquis  nestoridae  circumveniunt
cum omnimodis  et  multisonantibus  chordis — undas circum  natant

in  delphinum  processu  plangore  resonantium.  Talia  vidi,  talia
audii,  talia  tibi  dictito — Tu  modo  aures  praebe.  Nereidum  chorus
pro  h  !  languescit.  dehiscit  ingens  rima — ibi  intremus — nec  motus,
horror  superest — inane  omne  patet.

Do  j-ou  not  recognise  1  you  have  seen  or  read  it.  In  those  realms
is bliss,  under  the  shadow  of  a  great  tree — and  peaceful  rest."

(6)  March  7,  1903.  "Iliaco  carmine  responsum  dedi  illi  quod
semper postulas — Mentionem iam ante feci huius loci — cur  non


378


Appendix.


[part


invenire  potes  1  o.kt-i]  Kvaviq — mare  glaucum  spumantibus  equis
insuper  deus  vehitur — nihilomagis  rota  magistri  tempus  in  partes
aequas  dividit.  primo  splendidior,  postremo  multi  sonans  voce
angelica,  postea  autem  i'oj/tw  re  koI  voepu)  magis  uteris.  Num
credibilius  illid,  o  nuncjuam  mihi  Mem  praebens !  Temptanti
difficilia,  manum  attendere  debeas — manum  amicam  usque  ad  oram
illam. vvKTepo^  i]oy]  uSijs."

(7)  March  27,  1903.  "  cessere  venti  inhiat  ingens  rima  per  illam
introrsum  videre  poteris  si  caput  declinas.  En!  lux  argenteus  omnia
pervadit  vario  colore  variisque  odoribus — safrano  croceoque  flore,
purpureo  roseoque  colore,  unda  super  undam  defluat. — omnia  splen-
dent, in  medio  illos  cernere  debeas  quos  tibi  antehac  sedentes
descripsi.  The  heart  of  them  is  ruddy  gold  and  a  flame  goes  up
from  the  midst — but  a  flame  that  flickers  not,  but  shines  radiant
lucid  tela  diei  are  not  so  bright.  This  is  clear  clearer  than  KpvuTaX-
AoTD/KTot  -ijjai.  That  ought  to  help.  It  belongs  to  the  aK-i)  Kvave-q
that  I  gave  you  before."

(8)  May  29,  1903.  "Omine  magno  Dedisti  iam  nomen  etsi  non
credas.  Fac  rogat  aliquis.  ore  rotundo, — no — orotando  o  r  o  t  a  r  a
is  more  like  — Orotana through  Tara's  halls.

It  is  better  in  June  write  that  month.  A  sacro  fonte  spargitur
aqua  clargedula  proximus  est  flos  multicolor,  iam  coronis  Zephyro
patentibus — Odor  purpurata  inest  in  hortulo  illo.  cantant  comatae
Silviae  concentibus  multimodis  avium.

Super  omnia  sese  iuvolutat  hedera  deorum  capax — hedera  non
tuae  similis  sed  y^ptiyfxaTL  ^i^pva-'uo  ekiKiDdels  (j>vXX.d  re  koL  f3oiTr/3orpva.
tali  cinget  deus  ipse  caput  vypm  re  Kal  ^dvOtp  dvOojSei  eXt\p-6a-(ji
vaKivdiA'aii  iirl  ko/ml^.  Ex  foliis  singulis  distillat  roscidus  umor,
non  aliter  ac  gemma  in  summis  herbis  primo  candente  sole  post
noctem  illam  quam  antibat  nihil.  Golden  birds  on  a  golden  bough,
and  golden  songs  in  a  real  Hesperid  garden.  Sound  and  sight  and
sense  are  one  and  all  of  it  golden  in  the  golden  days."

(9)  Aug.  8,  1903.  "Early  or  late  it  is  the  same.  Constantia
nemo  phile  angiosperma  blue  on  the  ground  such  is  the  colour-
angio  begins  but  you  have  not  the  right  word  A  n  g  i  o  1  a  no
a  n  g  i  0  1  I  dont  know  it.  Blue  barberry  hagios  ecr-l  to  p-qrov
TO  prjdev — Tt  o'  ovK  ;  crvi'  KAaSats  dyiov  (jp-epivOov  KeXaSovvTi  y^piMjiarX
irdvra  o-vjj.Tr/\y]pol.  color  caelicolarum  aura — a  vapour  of  blue
surrounds,  a  luminous  mist,  so  you  may  know  them.  Still  it
stands,  and  no  shadows — and  the  pillars  stretch  to  the  upper
air— & thence falls the soft  radiance transcending  sense.  There


LIII.]


Appendix.


379


is  no  shadow,  nor  break  in  the  light,  but  the  things  are  not  trans-
parent— you  cannot  see  through  that  pillar,  but  you  can  see  what
is  behind  it.  And  there  is  no  reflexion  on  the  crystal  floor — not
the  least  rijjple.  You  only  see  the  bottom  of  the  pillars  and  the
floor,  one  central  column


no  not  so  numerous — Your  group  is  round  the  central  pillar — that
is  the  meeting  place  though  you  see  no  one  there. But  the  colour
should  make  you  know  that  there  are  the  happy  blest. Not  all  can
see  the  colour — but  some  see  the  movement, wh. is  not  to  you
Find  the  pillar  in  sleep.

pev/jia  KpvcTTdXXn'OV  (xtto  (rvjX(f>VT(uv
pitOpwv  no

(rviJL<f)VTU)v  peiOpwv  drro
CTTiA/Jet  KeAati'us  avTO—i]^  vSiop  del

8v<T—i]pa  7ra— Tau'oi'cra  Ttui^  elXijcjioruiv

It  is  not  quite  right.  But  you  have  the  idea,  it  is  hard  to  catch
— &  only  those  get  who  have.

[drawing  of  leaves]
Lotos.

I  tried  before  for  this.

[draidiuj  of  lotus  flower.']  "

■  List  of  Passages  recalling  Christian  Associations.
See  Chap.  VL,  P.  119.

(1)  March  5,  1901.  "rosea  angelica."

(2)  March  29,  1901.  "graece  loquitur  emptor  redemptor  cruci-
ferens."

(3)  May  23,  1901.  "agnus  dei  cum  cruce  eburneo.  put  it  down.
Manifold  uses  are  there  for  us  all.  Dominans  in  ripa  stetit
hagiologus."

(4)  Jan.  31,  1902.  "Crux  et  praeterea  nihil.  Post  sempiternam
mansuetudinem  omnia  supervacua— in  terris.  pone  superbiam  sume
togaculum  caritatis  impigre  "


380


Appendix.


[part


(5)  June  27,  1902.  "Veni  creator  were  the  words  exultans
cantavit  apud  spiritus  sanctos  inter  filios  Dei.  Peace  on  earth —
tranquillitas  super  omnia  maria  terrasque  omnes.  Then  listen  for
the  fiery  news,  an  arch  of  light  bridges  the  chassm  between
earth  and  sky^ — Profundum  caelum  vel  mare  unum  videtur —
Consentiant  omnes etsi  pro  tempore  nesciunt."

(6)  July  IS, 1902. "Now listen  tiles  that  shape and  a

tesselated  pavement,  with  a  pattern,  made  l)y  the  particoloured
tiles,  black  white  &  yellow — I  look  down  on  it  from  far  above.

2  KL"V  3 written  in  black  letters. There  are  twinkling  points

of  light.  —  and  movement  over  the  pavement.  It  is  a  service,  not
in  English,  why  write  malekite  malechite — that  is  the
word,  something  large  &  flat  of  that  stone  lies  on  one  side
the  windows  are  small  &  richly  jewelled, — not  as  in  our  Gothic — the
whole  church  low  and  the  light  rich  but  not  clear.  Ludovicus
what  is  that — Ludovicus  noster  pro  pietate,  ausculta  in  miseri-
cordiam  tuam  accipe  eum.  No  not  quite  right — accipe  Ludovicum,
regem  ilium,  in  misericordiam  et  gremium  tuum,  domine,  proh
gratia. That  is  what  they  sing — men,  in  black — many  of  them —

Kaiser i H  i  n  d  ^^at  is  the  shield It  is  lying  on

something. It  is  all  far  off  and  I  see  from  very  high  \_page  turned].

It  is  the  unexpected  which  has  happened  this  morning — Last
night  it  could  not  be  told.  But  note  this  hour.  It  is  sad  but  not
disastrous,  you  will  hear  to  morrow  or  next  day — and  all  will  talk.

M  0  s  c  0  w  a not — like  that, i  c  o  certainly, and  an ^  t^iis

is  something  public — and  ought  to  help. It  does  not  interest  you.


a  tiara  is  there,  with  floating  strings, — not  worn.  You  cannot
complete — leave  it.  Leona — —  — ■ — .

Pontifex  maximus."
(7)  Jxdy  23,  1902. "  Monsignor  catholicus  presbyter  in  terra  non
lontana  ab  ista  rem probabit. nomen  recipe — Longinqua  scribere
debuisti  lincrua  non  bene  uteris. Romenzana  hoc  est  nomen  illius


LIII.]


Appendix.


381


qui  claviculam  ahnyfiaTo<;  tibi  tradere  potest.  En  etiam  Clemens
inest  nominibus  illius. Nec  plura  de  illo."

(8)  Od.  25,  1902. "Went  worth  made  the  device  for  him
—a  fish  and  anchor. Give them both Dont forget, and  Saint
Peters  keys."

(9)  Bee.  4,  1902.  "Manifold  uses  are  there  for  us  all.  look
back  at  that  hagiologus  is  an  important  word."

(10)  Feb.  2,  1903.  "  Cunabula  cum  narthece  ceromatico  possidet
infantem  deum.  Hodie  sanctus  Sanctorum  in  fideles  lumen
impetrat.  quis  in  concilio  dei  gloriam  spectat  ?  tintinnabulis  ridet
omne concinant  cir  cumstantes."

(11)  Feb.  9,  1903.  "Sponsor  cum  matertera  aquam  in  putidillo
praebet.  Lintello  tersunt  no  tergunt — fiaprvptl  o  -apwv  pecnyif^pio'i
6  Stos  ev<j)rjp.etTe  ^apts  KaAAi'crTJj."

Prayer  in  Script  of  Dec.  6,  1904.  See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  125.

"  Ave  tu  qui  summam  sapientiam  nostrae  ignorantiae  appro-
pinquare  sapis— monitis  tuis  animum  meum  rege,  prudentia  tua
difficultates  supera,  magnanimitate  tua  angustias  miseriasque  sum-
move,  denique  in  regna  ilia  nos  ex  terrarum  angulo  dux  noster
viam  monstra,  semper  antecedens  idem  compellens  vestigia  semper
et  ubique

But  the  words  are  not  all  arranged.
It  is  not  as  it  should  be.
magnanimitate, mansuetudine omnibus praecellat, idem  sapiens
iustus  rex,  lumen  in  tenebris  in  tempestatibus  pax,  dux  comesque
in  via,  servit  et  imperat."

[Note  :  The  language  perhaps  recalls  well-known  classical  passages  ;
thus  :

Script:  "idem  sapiens  iustus  rex";  Horace,  Sat.  I.  3.  124,  "si
dives  qui  sapiens  est,  et  sutor  bonus  et  solus  formosus  et  est  rex,"
and  Epp.  i.  1.  107,  "sapiens  uno  minor  est  Jove,  dives,  liber,
honoratus,  pulcher,  rex  denique  regum,"  this  last  very  familiar  to  me.

Script:  "dux  comesque  in  via";  Hadrian,  "  hospes  comesque
corporis."]

Enigmatic  oii  Oracular  Extracts  from  Script.
Sek  Chap.  VI.,  P.  125.
(1)  September  28,  1901.

"  Tt  ttot'  ovk  avapLOjxi-jTu'i  6  pvdjLos  tmv  ovpavcon' ;  jj-wv  c^pa^eis  ;  ovk
kirO'  OTTOJS  ov  Xvpc^as.  8i8vjio<;  6  ttovos  dXXa  oXos.  crTOt)(a^€  kv
dppijTols  alviyjiara  TzXiKOjiai  o"ot  Kat  aAAots  Ttcrtv  ous  e^ei."


382  A-ppendix.  [part

(2)  January  4,  1902.

"  Mousike  endoxis  iravTa  pvOfxl^ei,  aivaparaKTOv  koI  ave^tXevTOV  to
crrjfieiov  ovSe  dvapvdjxrjTov — TrapaKakei  erepoxo;  otq  oii-  Travv  UKpfXrj'S  el.
Kai  8i]  Kai  aAAo6  TtVes  rjSrj  k(ji96yyi(jav  (f^wvy  Kalirep  d^i'verw.  aW
i^Sv  i</\ayyovcrij. ti  Se  ov  Kal  crv  ;  "

(3)  March  19,  1902.

"  ^vvappo^ec  p.6vov  to  a-vvapp.ouTov  KatVep  ov  crvpjSaXov.  oi'Se  yap
avev  (TvvBeTov  Ttvbs  fvpv6p,ov  to  Trai'.  ti  Si)  a"T0t)(q{'ets  ;  Se^^ov  fiaXXou
6  Ti  av  pltprj  To  voovpiivov. 2ot  yap  ovv  Kal  akXois  XeXeKrai  Sy^ra."

(4)  Ma>/  31,  1902.

"  TToXXa  Si]  SeSoKTai,  ovSh'  Se  aTrdvrm'  TtSi'  dpvXovpeviDV  del  (rvvdirrei.
pov(TLKO<s  TL'i  Kai  /xoi'CTatos  lySTy  KaTaXapfSdveTaL  reKTOViKWS  ttws."

(o)  My  13,  1902.

"  Kat  avTos ov  yap  Sj^ttov  dvev  dXrj6eLa<;  et's  TOTrd^eiv

dtfjiKveiTai. Kal  Si)  XeXeKTai. eppi^veverai  6  fSovXopevos."

(6)  January  25,  1903.

"  Who  seeketh  the  sun  at  murk  1 to  each  hour  its  own  light
suffices,  but  all  the  light  is there  somewhere — shadow  is  a  part
— ^Twilight  is  between  the  light  and  the  darkness &  in
twilight  the  shadows  grow  less."

(7)  January  30,  1903.

^^'EvvappoTTei  ra  crol  XeXaXijpeva  Kal  rd  eKetvrjs  SeSoypeva — (rvpirpacr-
cretv  dp.eLVOv  ovSe  dpicnoi  ev  ToiwSg  ol  y^(MpL^ovTe<; — aAAa  ecTTiv  ois
(T)(!,^eiv  Set  cr^^i^etv — dpidprjrui  6  del  Xeyu)V  dpidjx.ol  rd  eiSr] — Kai  oStoj  to
dpidpeiv  (Tvpi^epeL."

(8)  June  21,  1903.

"  oi3  SecrpouTi  rurlv  dX.Xd  XvOeroi^  (evypacriv  els  to  Trdv  ^rrjTvpMS  dv
eXOot,'; — povij  ovk  Swao"ai  aAAci,  crvv  erepu)  Kaiwep  ov  o'vpTrpdcrcrovTi,  "

(9)  October  6,  1903.

"  Autaggeltos  t)  Siavota — Kat  St'  avT'ijv  ivdvTa  St€KeKocr/x);Tat."

(10)  January  29,  1904.

"  enfronen  gengend  ye  Kal  Kpocrtajs  oi'Se  dvev  oo-ioTr/To?  t€  Kai
criuclypoavin-js.  Kal  Sid  ravTa  els  crvvecrw  eXdois  tov  Soy/xuTOS  tou  TravTa
pvOpl^ovTOS  re  Kal  (rvvuppo^i — crwap/xoi't^oi'TOS."

(11)  November  30,  1904.

"  nec  accidit  ad  univensum  sed  in  partibus.  declina  sic  semper
in  finem  pervenies. Cum  ceteris  facilius — tum  exporrecta  facultas


Liii.]  Ajypendix.  383

tibi  ceterisque  uncum  praebet  quo  iutangibile  comprehendere  possis'
Q,aodsi  intangibile  bene  comprehendis,  intactum tactum,  draKruv
kv  To^et — quid  plura  1 — reducis  nuiltifaria  ad  unum  compellans.
Latinitate peccat etsi non  sensu."

(12)  December  4,  1904.

"  (TVV-o.y/xa  ecrrt  to  tl  OTt  (Ti'i'TacrcreTaf  ko.I  crvvSiSeTai  vom  tc  ko.I
Tex^y  AtT(o  Ta  fJ-ipi]  Sera  ovk  avev  Ktjp(j)fj.aTOS'  raS'  si'  AiWt?  crv
yvMcreraL  to  irav  Tay^a,

prjdlv  Tu  jJieXXov  CTKOTtas  re  Kal  a-Ktas  Iv  KaXvfXjxaTL  p.6yL<i  oparov."

List  of  Mystic  Sayings. See  Chap.  VI.,  P.  127.

(1)  March  7,  190.3.
See  above,  p.  377.

(2)  Jan.  29,  1904.
See  above,  p.  382.

(3)  May  26,  1904.

"  aAA'  ot  ^61'  €(rjj.ev  olSe  Se  Kal  Te6vi]K6T€s
Toiv  TTplv  Ae  Xi]6ov

Twv  Trplv  XtXrjdov  oi'SeF  e?  to  SecrTToVat
TOLjap  TO  —evdeii'  ft'  Tts  otSe  Itv^ti'/zcus
dSvvaTOV  ecrTLV  /xt)  deojv  XaXovfxei'o

(.Ip-qKOTUlV.

non  bene  omnia — etsi  quaedam."

(4)  June  10,  1904.

ty^ttTos  evaAios  tov  jxvcrriipLov  kv  TotovTw  jS air ri^ovcriv

TOis  dSvyAoTtts  *  Twi'  jxaOi^TMv  CIS  aS/jAa  Ta  erepoLS  SrjXo-aTa.  Etymo-
logicum  Symbolisticura.

6etoi'  S6o-ts  ISpoTOiS  p.iKp6v  TL  XeXifijievos.  vvvl — rots  Se^a/xevots
avTrjv  TdXrjdi.va  irapaSeL^acra  Tas  ^ai'aToto  TrvXas  dvoi^eTai.  (.ko,  el
Kadapa  upp^aTc  Kadopav  Svvdcrat.  fxycTTiKovs  evpijcreLS  6Tt  Si]  to.
VTroXei<f>d€VTa  KaTaTeLvovTa<s.  del  yap  to.  (ku  tu  tc  evTevOev  p.iTio
Xpva-eu)  (TvvStSiTaL — crvvSeTa  ev  /jlovov  KaOidTaTai.

\^  Note.  The  word  aoT^AoV^;?,  'uncertainty,'  appears  to  be  used
by  the  script  as  though  it  were  a  concrete  noun,  on  the  analogy  of
p.aOrjTq's,  'a  disciple.']


384!  Appendix.  [part

(5)  Ju7ie  24,  1904.

"  Do  not  forgive  Some  time  saeva  indignatio  is  just.  Where
forgiveness  has  been  friendship  cannot  be.  there  is  no  forgiving  a
friend — we  accept  and  regret  remember  if  we  will  but  forgiveness  is
of  the  indifferent  only. Forgive  your  enemies.

xusia  dele  Crousia  /xoi'o<^iA//to^  i)  OvyaT-S^p' 7rai'3eKToj/3  ejowro?

ayyeAf'a  crepacjtiecrtv  cret/^ai^o/ios'  dXA'  ev  ayl(TjJ,aTi  Tiv\  Toji'  fxaQ-qTiov
7rai'8eKT(jjp  Kal  Trai'Swpo?  to  avTO  8vvd/j.ei  el  koL  ovk  e/jyw.  Totyap
cro(^oi  jxovoL  ol  pAiJ.vqij.kv of  ovtol  yap  jj.vi]p.ocrvvy  ^pCn'r(.<i  Xi'jOi]<;  e/xTrAeo)
TO  TrapdSeLyp.a  to  ep-yao-TiKoi'  ei'i  tixacrti'.  ^

(6)  Aug.  21,  1904.

"dAA'  dvev  Kt9apl(Tjj.ov  tdAAei  Tep\pi'^6pi)  yperepa,  ol  81  i<al  uKpodraL,
oi'Tes  avTol  doiSal  ^vy^y  Kal  ov  \ep(Tlv  i/'dAAouo't.  tolovtmv  (xtttoV
aTTTO/xei'O?  dva8o<s'  outoj?  Se^oi'Tai  /jaOrjTai  Katirep  StSttixKaAov  dy I'ooGi'res.

€1  irepo^,  Tt  /cat  ou  cru  j
But  the  end  is  not  yet  nor  here — write  only, interpret  not.  record
the  bits  and  when  fitted  they  will  make  the  whole.

nunc  redit  vox  chori  illius  sine  cithara  cantantium,  modo  quodam
incomprehensibili  vobis  quidem  sibi  autem  dilectissimo,  gloriam  et
omnis  et  omnium  celebrantium.  quam  cum  audivimus,  mortales  con-
gressus  vitare  debemus,  sempiternam  petere  communionem."

(7)  Od.  12,  1904.

"Ne  duis  et  si  tritonis  quidem  in  dies  magis.  Septempedaliter
imponens  caligulas  vestigiis  prodigia  ilia  ille  quoque  ad
fabulatam  casellam  attinget.  Ter  et  quater  renovare  viam.  Charon
in  ripa  stetit — patiens  ille  impatientibus  viatorem — remo  pro  bacillo
utitur — in  capite  pileus,  cymba  canisque  iuxta.  Non  cognoscis
yptt(^»;/xa  1  Vidisti  tamen — ultro  ripam  usque  ad  illam  venisti  ad
sodales  tuos  rursus  regressus.

Mortales  voce  tua  transhumana  permulcis  •  aures — animas  quod
plus  est — Dulcisonans  cantus  per  adamantina  clethra  transgressis
resonat — sic  inter  ilia  et  tua  tanquam  pons  inter  ripas  semper
medium  sustines.

Dum  fluit  amnis  distinctae  ripae — in  mare  profundum  cum  sese
demersit  amnis  ripae  in  contraria  primo  divergentes,  postremo
orbiter  aquas  continentes  circumeunt,  iam  non  oppositae  sed  eaedem."
Jan.  24,  1905.

"  Chiasma  no  ■)(d<Tp.a  yy]s  evepOev  Kal  dvd)  6  ^t^twi/"  Tvvppa.  ev  (^Xoyy
v8ojp  k^ivov  Totavra  TrdAat  Kal  ov8i  ojs  dXi]9rj  to,  8k  8eKTa  8e8eyp.eva
dicere  velis  o  barbarica  usus  lingua  non  tua.


LIII.]


Appendix.


385


dAA'  ol  iJ.v)]Toi  Tois  (/)tAois  jJ-ovoL  crvveuriv.  ol  S'  u/j.vi]toi,  del  irepl
TVfxIiov';  Kal  rat^'ij^axa  KuAii'SoiJi'Tat  (^6(iov  TOis  irapovcrL  7rapkypvTe<s
ovhe  avTols  oxpeXL/xoi.  Kal  ^rj  Travra  roiavra  TraAat  Trw?  ev  /3t/3Atois
yeypuTTTai.  elre  crvv  v(o  ei're  dpadia  pvdoXoyovfxeva  (^lAocroc/jwr  ecrrt
K/Dtvat."

List  of  Quasi-Mathematical  Sayings. See  Chap.  VL,  P.  131.

(1)  Ap.  3,  1901.

"ad  illud  povtl  Sva^eiv  dMwarov."

(2)  Nov.  26,  1902.

"  Tt  ttot'  OFOyU.a^'ets  ;  oiirtva — a-vvapiO p'qTU)  to  Aoyeiov — aAAos  Tts
Trewerat  to  oAov,  crii  8e  ovk  'iva  p.6vrj  evl  7rpo(T~eXd^€LV  SvvacraL."

(3)  Dec.  19,  1902.

"  jj-ovd^eiv  (TVjXfjiopeL  rjSr]  Tuvra  eXeyov. ovSe  Sva^ecv. eva  evl

ei<s. Kal  Oi'i  AeAeh'Tat."

(4)  June  14,  1903.

"  Tptycovtov  OTTt  TO  Tt.  Siio"  X^P^'^  ovojxa<Tai  avTO — op,o — -ev-  6/M0€tSes
ofioTrXevpov — hoc  dicere  volui — 6/j.oTrXevpov  kuI  /xoi'oetSes  ovSe  pepi^eiv
avTo  SwaToi'  ovSe  (rvfji.f3Xi]<TK€cv.*  non  bene  dictum  illud — verbum  non
facile  transcribenti  tibi  quod  alius  dictitet."

(5)  Dec.  28,  1904.

"  TTai'Twi' 6/J,0Lwv ofxoia TO, p-^pi].  rai'Ta crvvepporiKacriv  to,

op.OLOvp.ev a' a)0"ai'Tojs  Kat  to,  oponuOevTa,

ovSe  TavTO.  (JxpeXipa. dXXa  toi  Xeyetv  ireLpdaopai."

*Note  on  No.  (4).  Just  before  writing  the  above,  I  had  been
reading  a  few  chapters  of  Plotinus.  The  word  a-vpfiXi]o-Keiv  is  mere
rubbish.

"Real"  Dreams. See  Chap.  VII.,  P.  148.

The  dates  of  the  "  real "  dreams  recorded  are  as  follows  :
Feb.  1,  1894.
May  8,  1894.

Aug.,  between  13  and  18,  1894.

April,  between  25  and  27,  1895,

Nov.  18,  1896.

April  19,  1898.

April  19,  1901.

Sept.  13,  1901.

Feb. 27,  1902.


386


Appendix.


[part


Aug.  13,  1902.
April  7,  1903.
. May  19,  1904.
Aug.  8,  1904.
Oct.  4,  1904.
Dec.  21,  1904.

It  will  be  noted  tliat  the  "  real  "  dreams  have  been  more  numerous
since  the  inception  of  the  automatic  writing,  but  it  should  be
remembered  that  since  January',  1901,  the  record  has  been  very
much  more  carefully  kept.

List  of  Passages  in  Script  showing  connexion  with  Dreams.

See  Chap.  VII.,  P.  149.


Dates

of  Script.

Dates  of  Dreams.

(1)

April

19,

1901.

(1)  April  19,  1901.

'  May

8,

1901.

(2)  May 9,  1901.

[May

11,

1901.

(3)

June

3,

1901.

(3)  June  13,  1901.

(4)  f  Nov.

22

1901.

(4)  Nov. 25,  1901.

1  Nov.

25,

1901.

(5)

March  31,

1902.

(5)  March  30,  1902.

(6)^

'May

31,

1902.

(C)  June 20,  1902.

^  June

24,

1902.

(7)

June

•31,

1903.

(7)  June  21,  1903.

(8)

'  April

7,

1901.

(8)  April  30,  1904.

April

8,

1901.

-

April

20,

1901.

May

3,

1901.

^  June

3,

1901.

The  following  extracts  describe  some  of  those  '  real '  dreams  which
were  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  touch.  At  the  time  that  the  notes
were  made  I  had  no  idea  that  anyone  but  myself  would  see  the
record.

Extract  from  note  huol:,  dated  Man  9,  1894.  "Last  nighL  I  had  a
vivid  sense  of  touch  in  a  dream.  I  had  a  long  complicated  happy
dream  about  C.H.F.  [a  friend  who  had  been  hopelessly  ill  since
his  boyhood]  who  was  quite  well  again  and  coming  to  be  with
us.  He  was  much  older,  and  in  some  ways  altered.  I  was
tremendously  happy,  happier  than  one  can  be  when  awake  (the
sensation was  keener),  and  at the end,  as I  was  driving  with


LIII.]


Appendix.


387


C.H.F.  'home,'  I  felt  as  if  it  was  all  too  good  to  be  true,  and
touched  his  arm  to  reassure  myself  The  sensation  was  wonderful.
I  had  placed  my  right  arm,  wearing  a  jacket  sleeve  (which  I  can
see  quite  plainly)  against  his  left  arm,  in  a  great  coat — he  was
driving  me,  and  the  sensation  of  touch  was  more  vivid  than  I
have  ever  known  it  to  one's  bare  hand  or  arm.  It  was  a  positive
pleasure  in  itself,  and  brought  a  convincing  sense  of  reality, — so
convincing  that  I  have  felt  all  day  as  if  I  had  really  been  with
C.H.F.  ;  I  cannot  describe  the  sensation;  there  was  no  'thrill,'
no  'emotion,'  but  only  an  extraordinary  sense  of  having  felt
something  real, — a  most  delightful  and  inexplicable  pleasure."

Extract  from  note  book,  dated  April  20,  1898.  "Last  night — or
rather  early  this  morning,  for  when  I  woke  it  was  light — I  had
another  dream  where  physical  and  mental  emotion  were  combined.
There  had  been  some  confused  and  exciting  episodes, — which  I  can-
not disentangle — but  my  general  impression  was  that  some  man
(unknown)  had  been  acting  harshly  or  despotically  to  my  great
indignation.  Suddenly  I  found  myself  walking  along  with  my  right
arm  from  hand  to  elbow  resting  in  contact  upon  his  left  arm.
The  warmth  physically  felt  brought  to  my  mind  a  certainty  that
my  former  impression  about  this  man's  conduct  was  wrong,  and
that  really  all  was  right.  I  can  only  describe  my  mental  sensation
as  a  physical  sensation  of  glow,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  fulfilled
sense  of  touch  was  intense, — so  that  the  recollection  of  it  all  day
gives  me  great  pleasure.  The  sense  of  touch  was  physical  and  mental
— I  was  conscious  of  the  actual  touch  on  my  arm,  and  of  a  similar
touch  on  my  mind,  both  of  which  removed  an  uncomfortable
impression  and  filled  me  with  the  joy  which  comes  with  knowing."

Extracts  from  Script  bearing  on  A.W.V.'s  Experiment,  viz.
an  attempt  to  get  three  greek  words  aut0bl4.tically

A\'TIITTEX  IN  THE  SCRIPT. SeE  ChAP.  VIII.,  P.  156.

Contemporary  comments  by  A.W.V.  are  in  round  brackets.

(1)  June  16,  1901,  Brighton.  "Five  stars  in  the  east  that  is  not
right.  Cant  you  understand — avis  ille  incredibilis  redibit  ante
semensem.  notare  [other  inciderits]  There  is  no  hurry,  show  it  all
to  your  husband. Try  at  night — dont  press — wait."

(2)  July  4,  1901,  Fiiffel  Alp.  "Yellow  is  the  colour  of  the  dawn,
Dogana."

[all  following  extracts  written  at  Cambridge.^


388


Appendix.


[part


(3)  July  31,  1901,  Cambridge,  [after  saying  that  I  had  at  last  under-
stood tvhat  it  wanted] :  "  longaevus  senex  barha  alba  jj-ovoxtroivos  sine
apparatu  .  .  .  nonne  videsl  albipannosus  est  signifer  ille  .  .  .  July
is  not  out.  In  August  you  will  know  more — wait  Dont  ask.  write
often.  I  can  do  it  better  now."  (A.  on  his  return  to  Cambridge
on  Aug.  1  said  that  the  script  of  July  31  interested  him.)

(4)  August  13,  1901.  [after  a  drawing  of  a  cock  with  the  word  "Cock"
written  beside  it,  it  went  on :]

"  a  crested  Cock  that  crows  is  the  emblem— not  a  real  bird,  heraldic
— with  a  motto — cano  canam  albam."

(5)  August 16, 1901. "  J^y^yT^crts Trdpa crol koi aXXio  Tivl
easier  and  easier  though  you  do  not  know. The  cock  is  inside

a  circle  perhaps  a  coin.  Try  for  the  words  again.  Cano  canti
clam  no  carmen  cano  Canam  somehow  belongs — albicapillus

and  albipannosus — aspera  tibi  dictito  sed  non  desperata — si  modo
interpretatore  utaris  commodo.  Long  trailing  draperies  of  white —
turned  to  the  right,  he  carries  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,  and  a
small  square  box  in  the  other.  There  is  a  pleasant  scent.  Some
one  looks  at  him  and  watches  the  light  fall  as  he  passes  from
window  to  window  going  towards  the  east.  A.W.V.
will  understand  this — I  think  of  him  when  I  say  it.  you  do  not
know  [then  exhortations  to  patience  and  faith]."

(A.  said  that  he  did  understand ;  that  the  thing  was  very  much
confused  but  that  he  thought  it  was  trying  to  say  what  he  wanted.)

(6)  August  20,  1901.  "[Remarks  in  Greek  about  others  being
present]  Now  you  must  see  that  it  is  right.  The  long  room  with
the  many  windows  is  near  this  hot  room — he  was  outside — how  plain
it  seems  to  me !  but  you  dont  know. Arthur can  tell  you."

(7)  August  23,  1901.  "  [Mention  of  s^lndial]  Csiuta.  ca.tec\mmen  no
thats  not  right  KaTaKXv(Tjxkvo<i  is  better.  But  it  looks  like  Canta  and
then  something.  The  cock  is  really  important— crowing  in  a  circle
[circle  draivn^  there  is  writing  round  the  bird  letters  raised

JTPA  something  like  that.  And  there  is  something  gold
about  it  somewhere. Canticlere  is  nearer  [drawing  of  bell]  a  bell."

(8)  August  28,  1901.  "[drawing  of  cock  in  circle]  Kikiriki  !  It
is  better  now — the  emblem  is  within  the  circle,  golden  I  think.
Whittingehame  and  Gerald  belong.  Cups  and  a  cross,  the  cross
between,  and  a  bright  light  falls  from  above  upon  them  and  him


LIII.]


Ap'pendix.


389


—  Ask  A.AV.  he  will  recognise  this.  I  speak  with  the  tongue  of  brass
— hard  to  move.  Cappa  or  Cana  is  a  word  that  belongs.  Cantilupe
is  more  like — cant  ilenam  Cantiaris  sedile  iam  sedet  super  mundum
circumspectaus.  [drawing  of  sundial  and  three  x  x  x  ]  in  the  east  to
the  daylight — happily.  Now  write  the  word — it  runs  round  a  dial
or  font."

(A.  said  there  was  something  intelligible  to  him,  besides  the  sundial.)

(9)  August  29,  1901.  "  Comprehendere  magnum  nomen  non
facile  tibi  naXivSpoSea  letter  by  letter  is  easier  to  do  but  they  are  not
right  yet. Begin  again  MALVIDEA  DENDRON The  shape  of  the

letters  is  archaic C  (—  1  V  «^  so  on.  — Does  he  move  now  ?

Cantilect  that  is  not  so  good  as  before — Cantuar  ^  ^  and  a  heraldic
bird,  in  colours — the  light  comes  through,  on  a  window  to  the  east,
more  than  one — "

(A.  said  there  was  a  point  for  him  in  the  above  ;  he  read  ^  ^
as  Is  in  'archaic  letters.' I  had  taken  them  as  initials,  E.G.)

(10)  September  2,  1901.  "Canticlene  has  a  word  to  say — one  for
him  not  you.  Fundet  mith  in  tal  mallim  sham  i  tawan
There  could  be  more.  Malleson  a  daughter  and  James  or  Jameson
— I  think  James  only.  Dont  give  up.  Listen  again — waly  is  the
beginning — perhaps  vale,  two  syllables  e's  to — strong  meat  for  babes
— meet  for  thinkers.  Ibllow  the  valy  — it  comes  again,  and  vale
vale  all  the  way — "

(11)  September  4,  1901.  (after  a  sudden  strong  imptdse  to  ivriie)  :
"  Scribere  aliquid  magus  iamdudum  desiderat.  omine  magno.  Cale-
fracta res  agitur  de  nomine  ipsius — Charles  fort it  is  a  place

by  a  river  Chalfont  is  like  it  now  the  letters  agunto
(7 AT  U  (V  T  0  esagito— Find  it  and  you  will  see — in  fine — But  the

long  white  drapery  has  long  ago  agone — /xoi'oa-ToAos — [xovo-x^ltwo^  /xovos
/xera  6eov  ovSe  aWov  Tivos.  Seen  but  not  followed,  there  were
others  there  but  he  knew  more  than  the  rest.  ...  I  want  the  final
word  Trerpa  or  petrus  .  .  Bay."

(A.  said  that  the  script  of  Sept.  4  was  intelligible  to  him.)

(12)  September  4.  \later  on  the  same  day  as  abovel]  "  Nomen
non  bene  habes — igitur  iterum — tentare  vias.  Balfour  is  the  word
not Chal — several times he has tried for this — wailey  went


390


Appendix.


[part


quor ponis semper idem  1 possideas  iam
alia  bene  dicta  etsi  non  niultipliciter.  ..."

(13)  September  7,  1901. "...  seven  in  a  row — or  was  it  five — •

away  in  the  east  like  stars. Mol  es  to but  the  ^  v_"  is  the  end  of

a  word there  are  o  and  1  before  the  es. oX  Tender

es  fusa  a  long  word  like  that, — foreign,  Indian  I  think — Banipal
and  Assur.  .  .  .  Asta,  aster."

(14)  September  9,  1901.  ".  .  .  Most  of  it  but  not  all — ol  un  c  es
that's  not  right — but  the  m  comes  before  the  es  a  g  iles.  I  cant
tell  you  the  sense,  only  the  letters.  It  was  someone  else's  words,  not
his — His  are  the  other,  quite  separate. — moleskin — that  is  more  like,
the  look  not  the  meaning.  Pye  is  a  bird  too  but  not  ours — gasur.
dailey  is  more  like, — daily  bent  —  ^  —  is  how  it  goes  and  the  first
rhymes  to  a — Find  the  herb  m  o  1  y  that  will  help — it  is  a
guide, i'j'!'^'-  K'^i'  TeAos  A,7^<^€is."

(A.  said  that  part  of  this  script  was  intelligible  to  him,  and  that
a  fresh  point  was  made.)

(15)  September  12,  1901. "Denionstrat  igitur  significationem  illam

diu  exspectatam  rhodius  quidam  insatiabilis  /xoA  es  e/^oAes  mollis

to  wear  the  writing  slants. Thibet  looks  like  a  word, a  tie  between

Pye  gives  one  clue,  but  there  is  another — a  dark  man  who
smoked — Both  were  in  it — which  of  them  spoke  ?  not  yours.  In
the  long  dull  room — with  candles  lighted.  Pale  when  that  is
not  sense,  but  not  very  wrong — .  .  ."

(16)  Sepitember  14,  1901.  ".  .  .  M  oaves  that  is  the  old  mistake
— estote  looks  like  a  part.  On  the  wall,  m  o  1  a  or  m  o  1  i  n  a  is
more  like.  Strange  it  seems  that  you  cannot  read.  On  the  left
there  are  more  A  V  E  N  T  then  the  word  that  ends  in  es  and
something  after  it.  Blow  hot,  blow  cold  Mosset  is  a  name  that
belongs — Pla  net  or  j^lay  net.  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine  comite
• — palely  loitering — I  cant  get  it  to-night — wait — you  will  hear  later
— do  not  try.  let  it  come.  Modo  veniet  cum  non  exspectes —
usque  ad  illud  vale."

(A.  said  there  were  points  in  the  script  of  Sept.  14.)

(17)  September  18,  1901.  \_after  other  names  and  messages  having  no
connexion  with  this  episode  :J  "...  There  is  a  message  for  her —
about a  knife — on  a  table, with letters  engraved upon it — not

English— T"" ^  T/  "7T  G  \  the  letters  look  Hke  that. It  is


LIIT.]


Appendix.


391


a  friendly  wish  Ask  her.  .  .  .  and  there  is  something  dark  about
the  knife — and  flat — curved  at  the  point.  .  .  ."

(A.  told  me  on  Sept.  19  that  in  the  above  writing  there  was  an
allusion  to  a  point  which  he  had  long  looked  for  in  what  concerns
him,  and  that  when  I  went  to  write  on  the  18th  he  thought  of
this  point  and  fixed  his  mind  upon  it.)

(18)  September  20,  1901.  "Designare  iam  dudum  volui  actorem
[or  autorem]  illius  non  meorum  verborum,  illius,  dicere  velim  qui
de  ordine  loquatur.  Doctor  est  indoctus  tamen  litteris  humanioribus
— fac  roges  A.W.V.  si  hoc  non  verum  sit.  [then  general  remarks,  theri]
The  Balfours  .  .  .  perhaps — but  your  husband  could  tell  you  all."

(19)  October  6,  1901.  "...  But  A.W.V.  must  be  satisfied— he
ought  to  recognise  the  long  double  row  What  is  the  word
he  wants  to  complete,  neither  you  nor  I  know  it.  so  it  is  hard  to
get.  It  all  belongs  to  him  but  not  to  me,  his  friends  but  not
mine.  No  one  here  knows  but  one  &  her  I  have  not  met.  I
will  ask  Arthur.  ..."

[Then  came  four  pieces  of  writing  with  no  sort  of  allusion  to  the  above
incident,  then  on  November  1  cfter  other  matter  cpdte  irrelevant,  as  a  sort
of  signature  or  termination  the  follotving] :

(20)  Nov.  1,  1901.  " /xaAAtSecTTepov  kuI  fxaXa  -okSvvij.  moles
divan  y  sur —

MOLDRECArOTO  that's  all."

(21)  Dec.  12,  1901.  "...  This  is  not  your  husband's  word  he
wants  a  word,  but  more  than  a  name.  Carlton  is  more  like  his  or
Charleston.  But  the  east  comes  in  to  his  picture.  Stars  in  the
east,  and  dawn watched  from  a  window with  someone  else

a  time  of  some  anxiety  but  there  was  a  successful  issue.  Ask
Walter  Leaf — he  must  have  known."

[Then  no  more  references  of  any  kind  till  July  1,  1902,  when,  in  the
midst  of  other  matter  written  in  Switzerland,  came  the  following :]

(22)  July  1,  1902.  "  Cantaber  induperatus  and  the  other  word
moleston  agon  lesto  MoUiston  est  /xoAao-ru  ixoXi?  to  eo-rw  fxdXa  8e
trjfjLi  no  you  do  not  understand  leave  it  till  it  is  clearer,  till  after
Friday  next.  E.T.C."

[and  after  Friday  next,  namely,  on  July  7,  1902,  after  other  matter
totally  unconnected,  the  following] :

(23)  July  7,  1902. "Now  again  the  word  moles  n  molens


392  Appendix.  [part

sto  and  Hannibals  Saguntum  belongs saguns  traxit  in  infinitum
verbum  autem  breve — cur  non  scribere  potes  1
guns  molaguns  no  nono — "

[Since  this  there  has  been  no  allusion  to  the  subject.


Classification  of  Attempts  at  Sense  and  Sound  of  Words  in

THE  above  Experiment.

Note :  The  figures  in  brackets  refer  to  the  numbers  in  the  preceding  list.

Sense :

1 .  dw,  dawn  ;

"Five  stars  in  the  east"(l).

"Yellow  is  the  colour  of  the  dawn"  (2).

"  a  crested  Cock  that  crows  is  the  emblem — not  a  real  bird,

heraldic — with  a  motto — cano  canam  albam  "  (4).
"going  towards  the  east"  (5).

"  Canta,"  etc.,  and  attempts  at  "  Chanticlere— "  "  bell  "  (?)  (7).

"  Cups  and  a  cross,  the  cross  between,  and  a  bright  light  falls

from  above  etc.  ...  in  the  east  to  the  daylight"  (8).
"  and  a  heraldic  bird  in  colours — the  light  comes  through,  on.

a  window  to  the  east "  (9).
"away  in  the  east  like  stars"  (13).

2.  a.  fiovoTToiXov  =  one  horse  :

j  "  ei'tTTTTov,"  'of  goodly  horses' (17).
I"  €1?  iTTTTo?,"  '  one  horse  '  (17).
b.  iMovoTTwXov  =  alone,  solitary:

"  /xoi'os  /xera  6eov  ovSl  aWov  Tii'og  (alone  with  God  and  none
other)"  (11).

"  Planet  or  play  net  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine  comite  (bright
it  wanders  in  the  sky  uncompanioned)  palely  loitering  "  (cf.
Keats,  'alone  and  palely  loitering')  (16).

Sound  or  Appearance  of  Letters  :

1.  /xoi'OTrwAoi'  :

"  /xoi/oxtTcyfos  "  (one  garmented)  (3).

"  ixaXivSpoSea,  MALVIDEA  DENDRON  "  (9).

"  lxov6(TToXos,  etc."  (11).

"Mol— 0  and  1  before  the  es"(13).

"  moleskin,  that  is  more  like,  the  look  not  the  meaning  Pye  is
a  bird  too  but  not  ours"  (14).


LIII.]


Appendix.


393


"  mollis — Pye  gives  one  clue — pale  when  "  (not  unlike  ttwAov  in

sound)  (15).
"blow  hot,  blow  cold"  (?)  (16).

2.  €i,  towards :

"The  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic  eC"  (9).
"Is  Th"  (10).

"eC  agunto,  CATUNTO,  esagito "  (1 1).
"eCan  sunto"  (12).

"  Mol  es  to  but  the  eC  is  the  end  of  a  word es,"  etc.  (13).

"es  agiles"  (14).

3.  dw. This  word  seems  to  be  represented  by  the  ag  which  con-

stantly follows  the  es  (see  above,  under  es),  and  perhaps  by
the  word  ago  agone  (11).

4.  Number  of  words  :

Three  words  are  suggested  by  the  phrases  :
"Mol  es  to,"  "Tender  es  fusa,"  "Banipal  and  Assur "  (13).
"  on  the  left  there  are  more  AVENT  then  the  word  ends  in
es  and  something  after  it"  (16).

Extracts  from  Script  possibly  bearing  on  other  circumstances
connected  with  the  incident.

(A)  In  A.W.V.'s  recollection  :

(1)  Senate  House  steps.

Aug.  20. "  The  long  room  with  the  many  windows  is  near

this  hot  room, he  was  outside"  (6).
Sept.  12. "In  the  long  dull  room — with  candles  lighted"  (15),

(2)  Others  present.

Aug.  20. "  aAAo6 Koi  Traprycrai'. otSe ovk eSvvrjOyjcrav  avretTrei',


Sept.  4.  "  there  were  others  there  but  he  knew  more  than
the  rest  "(12).

Sept.  12. "Both were  in it. which  of  them  spoke?  not
yours  "  (15).
(3)  A.  T.  Myers.  (?)

Aug.  20. "  Arthur  can  tell  you  "  (6).
Sept.  12. "Both  ...  not  yours  "(15).

Sept.  20.  "  Designare  iam  dudum  volui  actorem  illius  non  meorum
verborum,  illius,  dicere  velim  qui  de  ordine  loquatur.  Doctor
est  indoctus  tamen  litteris  humanioribus — fac  roges  A.W.V..
si  hoc  non  verum  sit"  (18).


avTos  Se  OVK  e.


394


Appendix.


[part


Oct.  6. "  Designo aliquem tibi et caeteris — -olim  cognosces.
Arthur  is  the  name, another — not  yours"  (19).
(4)  E.  Gwniaj. No  allusion.
(B)  In  fact,  but  not  in  A.W.V.'s  recollection  :
Oih&r  classical  Tripos  paper.

Sept.  9. "Find  the  herb  moly  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide"
(14).

Script  referring  to  First  Experiment  with  Mr.  Constable.
See  Chap.  VIII.,  P,  168.
November  4,  1902. [JFith  letter.]

"  Hegetor <nTOv8aio<; oV/cet TrptoTiArTqi' Tpawe^av r'l ovk  ev

lxvy]ixo(Tvvy  e'x^'^  "  "yyet'^a  ria-iv ; There  is  something  Italian

about  not  Italian  words — but  a  face — pale  with  thick  black  hair
— wait  for  more.  Constantia  is  more  like  what  I  want  Constantia
sapit — Redibit  ante  septenain  cum  clavicula  avenea — This  last  word
is  important  but  you  do  not  understand.  Not  Constantia  Clementia
— Clementia  sapit.  Defer  in  crastinum — medianum  diem  ilium.
Bene."

November  5,  1902. [IFith  letter.]

"  Olivia  felix  in  portelio  sue  iam  mancipum  ceteris  dedit.  This  is
not  the  thing  you  want — wait  for  that.  Something  says  Italian
words  to-night.  sempre  cosi.  bene  sta.  it  confuses.  In  tanto
diletto  d'amor.  you  dont  know  the  words.  Comperire  significa-
tionem  huius  et  alius  cuuspiam.  non  bene  sensisti  illud — cape
mentem — Fac  de  integro  scribas.  Send  him  this  and  another — but
I  cant  get  it  right.  The  letter  in  the  envelope  is  short,  on  one
side  only  of  the  paper :  it  has  been  copied  from  somewhere  and
is  plain  to  read.  There  is  a  name  in  it — a  long  womans  name
ending  ia  and  there  is  a  short  name  like  Jack  too — at  the  right
hand  end  of  a  line. No  more  to-night."

November  7,  1902. [JFith  letter.]

"Constantia  redit.  one  only  word.  desunt  cetera,

darkness  surrounds, {letter  put  doivn)

*  [iam  saepe  antehac  talia  volui  nec  dum  possibile  erat  distinguere
pone  epistolam.  expecta  dum  clariora  fiuut.  Non  tu  deficis  sed
ego.  Your  message  comes  through  Mrs.  Forbes — I  am  doing  that
now — she  is  easier — tell  her  that.  Desine  desine  ne  tent  averis
novas  vias.]  "


LIII.]


Apixndix.


395


November  11,  1902. [JFith  lefler.]

"  dextra — fecit- — iam  sume  silittim  nota.  oi')(l  ixovos  kTrolyjcn  aXXa
(Tvv  erepij)  rivl  eppuiSeiTTepM. Send  back  the  letter — it  is  read.

Moonstone  like  that  a  rubies  eye,  the  eye  of  day  not  night.  Tell
him  the  morrow's  morn — with  whispering  winds  and  blare  of  brass
they  went  forth.  but  one  by  one  returned  at  dead  of  night.  No
sound  was  there, — Nicholson  is  the  word  to  explain.

Mrs.  Forbes  writes  of  the  cedar  wood — you  cannot  find  that —
ask  about  the  chest — with  the  faint  smell  upstairs — in  a  room,  with
a  window  on  a  garden  all  a  maze, ask  someone  this.

Lux  in  tenebris  et  in  terra

P  a  X."

November  18,  1902. [With  letter.]

"  K.  is  ill — ask  to-morrow.  This  is  the  news  for  you.  Curiosa
felicitas — who  said  that  1  It  is  true.  Gurney  wails  to  know — ask
your  husband.

Many  a  boat  —  —  with  shattered  sides  sailed  home  from  the
summer  sea.

[Beference  to  a  vacancy  in  a  Professorship  at  Cambridge.]
Delancy  and  delight — do  you  not  see  1  End."

November  24,  1902. [JFith  letter.]
"  Dolente  doloria

I  cant  do  more  cant  you  ask  for  the  message.  Leave  it  now —
it  is  confusing — Dolour  and  miserie — araminna — a  lady  in  a  house —
masonic.  onestonevery  well  not  yet  yester  day  many  were
the  false  reports  many  messengers  came  and  were  admitted —
none  brought  the  news.  You  will  hear  from  Hodgson  —
important  he  has  tried  the  flowers  but  without
success.  Try  other  flowers  yourself  to  send — white  with  a  scent-
that  helps  . He  withdrew  shuddering,  but  will  visit  you  again."

*  [Note  to  the  above :  Nov.  7.  Words  in  brackets  are  not  counted
as  forming  part  of  the  experiment,  as  during  their  production  the
envelope  was  not  held.]

Notes  on  Second  Experiment  with  Mr.  F.  C.  Constable,
IN  November,  1904. See  Chap.  VHL,  P.  172.

Chronological  Sequence.

(1)  Letter  from  F.C.C.,  received  November  10,  containing:

a.  Request  to  sit.

b.  Letter  of  explanation.  ^

c.  Sealed  envelope.


396


Ap2Jendix.


[PAKT


(2)  Answer  from  M.  de  Gr.V.  agreeing,  saying  that  she  would
take  two  or  three  weeks. Written  on  November  10  or  11.

(3)  Automatic  writing  obtained  with  sealed  envelope  held  in  left


a.  Nov.  18.

b.  Nov.  23.  "  .

c.  Nov.  25.

(4)  Letter  from  M.  de  Gr.V.  to  F.C.C.  giving  impressions. Nov.  25.

(5)  Record  in  Diary. Nov.  25.

(6)  Opening  of  sealed  envelope  by  M.  de  G.V. Nov.  28.

(7)  Letter  from  F.C.C,  received  Nov.  29,  containing  :

a.  Explanatory  letter.

b.  M.  de  G.V.'s  letter  of  Nov.  25  returned.

c.  Second  sealed  envelope.

(8)  Opening  of  second  sealed  envelope. Nov.  29.

(9)  Letter  from  M.de  G.V.  to  F.C.C.  returning  all  documents.

Copies  of  some  of  the  documents  referred  to  :


Mrs.  Verrall  is  requested  to  try  and  get  certain  automatic  writing
while  holding  or  touching  the  enclosed  sealed  envelope.

When — by  impression — she  feels  she  has  obtained  the  writing
asked  for,  she  is  requested  to  break  the  seal  of  the  enclosed  sealed
letter  and  read  what  (if  anything)  is  written  within.

Should  there  be  no  apparent  connection  between  what  (if  anything)
is  written  in  the  sealed  letter  and  the  automatic  writing,  she  is
requested  to  inform  Mr.  Constable  what  the  automatic  writing
consisted  of,  Mr.  Constable  will  then  communicate  again.

Should  Mrs.  Verrall  undertake  this  experiment  she  is  requested
to  carry  it  out  so  that  a  written  record  may  remain  for  evidence
of  what  has  been  done.  F.  C.  Constable.

11.15  a.m.

9  Nov.  1904."

(Ic)  [Sealed  envelope  was  addressed  :]


hand  :


(16)


Wick  Court  near  Bristol. 9  Nov.  1904.
Instructions.


Mrs.  Verrall.


11.17  a.m.
9  Nov.  1904.


Liii.]  Appendix.  397

[It  was  sealed  with  sea!  bearing  initials  F.C.C.  and  was  subsequently
endorsed  as  follows  :]

"  unopened.

Nov.  28  1904.

A  W  Verrall."

"opened  at  11.30  a.m.  on  Nov.  28  1904  by  M.  de  G.V."
[It  contains  :]

" O  Fuchsia."

(3a)  [Script  of  Nov.  18,  1904.]

{Nov.  18,  1904.  Mr.  Constable's  letter  for  the  first  time.  No  aut.  sc.
attempted  since  hearing  from  him  except  on  Nov.  14  in  the  expt.  with
Mrs.  B.)

(10  p.m.  {study, firelight  only.))

"  Cousin  Clement and  a  safety  pin  brooch
It  is  the  unexpected  that  happens. I  have  told  you  that  before.

.5  or  6  words — they  fill  more  than  one  line.
These  experiments  help.

ask  her  to  come.

No  more  now."

(3&)  [Script  of  Nov.  23,  1904.]
{Nov.  23,  1904. 1  p.m.  Study.)

{Mr.  Constables  envelope  in  left  hand.)


" ^AjiP dSJ!)  complete


someone  has  written  down  a  word  for  you  to  read — a  short  word
like  what  is  above.


But  it  was  not  his  own  idea  it  was  an  experiment  suggested  by
someone  else. Another  person  holds  the  other  envelope. The  word
inside  one  is  mere  nonsense  just  a  test,  but  it  is  all  connected  with
the  real  test  of  the  sealed  envelope.
But  what  is  clear  is  this

There  are  2  envelopes  and  the  less  important  is  the  one  you
hold."


398


Ajypendix.


[part


(3c)  Script  of  Nov.  25,  1904.

(Nov.  25,  1904,  9.50  Friday. Study,  alone.)

{Mr.  Cunstahle's  letter.)


the  sign  is  there — in  this  envelope  as  in  the  other.


why  will  you  not  look  for  it. Tell  them  that.

Long  have  they  waited  we  do  not  know  why — but  can  do  no
more. Don't  touch  lier — let  her  work  alone, the  touch  confuses

In  sleep  to  night  we  will  try.  But  there  is  less  in  the  con-
tents than  in  the  circumstances — another's  suggestion,  he  only  carries
out,  and  all  devised  as  a  preliminary  to  the  real  trial."

(4)  This  letter  is  endorsed  as  follows :

Kead  at  MHck  10.10  a.m.,  28.11.1904.
Eeturned  by  post,  28.11.1904.

F.C.C.

[it  is  as  follows  :]

"  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge. Nov.  25  1904.
Dear  Mr.  Constable,

I  have  nothing  very  definite  to  report  about
the  envelope,  which  I  have  not  yet  opened.  I  have  sat  three  times
with  it  on  Nov.  18,  23,  and  to-night.  I  have  a  curious  impression
to-night  that  I  ought  to  write  to  you,  but  I  really  have  very  little
to  say.

My  general  impression  seems  to  be  that  the  contents  of  this
letter  are  less  important  than  the  circumstances  connected  with  the
experiment ;  that  this  envelope  of  yours  is  one  of  two  ;  that  the
experiment  was  suggested  to  you  by  someone  else ;  that  the  whole
thing  has  some  connexion  with  the  question  of  opening  a  sealed
envelope  of  Mr.  Myers',  and  is  somehow  intended  as  a  preliminary
test  before  doing  it.

I  cannot  judge  how  far  I  have  made  up  all  this,  and  the  actual
words  of  the  script  are  not  clear.  So  far  as  I  can  judge,  some
envelope  contains  a  drawing  [_ahove  copied\  and  there  are  attempts
at  a  short  word,  but  it  is  not  stated  that  the  envelope  you  have
sent  me  is  the  one  containing  these.  What  is  clearly  said  is  that
there  are  2  envelopes  and  that  I  hold  the  less  important.

Possibly  it  may  be  that  both  envelopes  have  some  curly  design
within  them,  but  one  only  has  the  word.


LIII.]


Appendix.


399


.  .  .  contrary  to  my  custom,  I  have  more  impression  than  the  words
warrant,  and  so  I  write  this  to  you.  My  chief  impression  is  that
this  letter  should  be  sent  at  once  !

Yours  sincerely,

M.  DE  G.  Verrall.
I  will  write  to  you  after  opening  the  envelope."

(5)  [Record  in  Diary,  Nov.  25.]

"Nov.  25,  10.20  p.m.  strong  feeling  after  aut.  sc.  with  Mr.
Constable's  letter  that  I  am  to  write  him  my  impressions  at  once  ;
I  have  done  so.  but  they  are  vague ;  that  the  contents  are  less
important  than  the  circs,  of  the  expt.  ;  that  the  expt,  was  sug-
gested to  him  by  some  one  else  ;  that  it  is  connected  with  the
sealed  envelope  and  meant  as  a  preliminary  test ;  that  his  envelope
is  one  of  2,  and  the  less  important.  These  are  the  chief  impres-
sions, and  the  script  has  made  curly  drawings  and  an  attempt  at
a  word."

(6)  [For  contents  of  sealed  envelope  see  above.  No.  Ic]

(7a)  "  Wick  Court  near  Bristol  28  Nov.  1904.

Dear  Mrs.  Verrall,

Facts  as  to  present  experiment.

I  dined  with  the  Council  at  the  last  meeting.  Three  others  with
myself  were  speaking  of  Mr.  Myers'  sealed  letter.  One  said  'I
think  we  have  sufficient  material  now  to  open  Myers'  letter.'

I  said — I  think  afterwards — to  Professor  Barrett  or  Mr.  Feilding
'  I  doubt  the  letter  test,  tlie  letter  may  read  itself  to  the  medium.'

Going  home  I  worried  over  a  test.  Could  I  make  a  distinction
between  the  effect  of  a  letter  itself  on  a  medium  and  the  thoughts
impressed  (on  the  letter  1)  by  the  writer  1

So  I  wrote  two  sealed  letters,  one  after  the  other.  One  I  sent
you,  the  other  I  now  enclose,  still  sealed.  So  far  as  I  can  under-
stand you  have  failed  (not  altogether)  as  to  the  contents  and
thoughts  of  the  two  letters.  But  where  did  you  find  out  the  fact
of  two  letters  and  (perhaps)  the  genesis  of  the  two  letters  1

I  think  the  experiment  was  not  suggested  to  me  by  anyone — I
worked  out  the  idea  myself.

Yours  gratefully,

F.  C.  Constable.
Leave  Mrs.  Constable's  endorsement  on  the  envelope."


400


Appendix.


[part


(7c)  [The  second  sealed  envelope  was  addressed]  to  F.  C.  Constable ;
[it  was  sealed  with  seal  bearing  initials  F.C.C.  and  endorsed  as
follows  :]

"  10  Nov.  1904  L.C."
"from  8.30  to  9.30  I  was  thinking  hard  of  Elsie  Hunt.
10.20  a.m.  10.11.1904.  F.C.C."

["  10  Nov.  1904. L.C."  is  in  a  different  hand  and  different  ink.]
[It  was  opened  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Nov.  29  after  reading  the  ex-
planatory letter,  and  contains  the  following :]

"  "Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.
Having  written  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  certain  instructions
and sealed an envelope,  all which I address hereafter  to  Mrs.
Verrall  at  Cambridge,  I  think  of  my  mother. I  seal  this  up.

F.  C.  Constable.
9.11.1904

11.23  a.m."

(9)  [P.S.  of  letter  to  Mr.  Constable  from  M.  de  G.  V.]

"  I  ought  perhaps  to  add  that  I  heard  nothing  of  your  conversation
at  dinner ;  I  was  seated  quite  at  the  other  end  of  the  table,  and
was  not  aware  that  the  question  of  opening  a  sealed  envelope  had
been  discussed."

[Extracts  from  script  enclosed:  Nov.  23,  all.  Nov.  25,  'Don't
touch  '  to  end.]

Extract  from  Script  Referring  to  Experiment  with
Mrs.  Dew  Smith. See  Chap.  VHL,  P.  173.
April  10,  1903.

" /Aova5eA(/)09  Kttt  Xvcnfj.a\o<s  Find  that  out —  Then  comes  Alice
along — tap  tap — nova8ek(po<;  ovSe  Ai)criT€A,T;s  Soy/xara  rots  fxadrjTai's
dA.Aa  TOts  (^lAdtcri  avrii  to  prj/xa.  ■^pvaaSekcfiOV  Tt  (jidi'Tatrfxa  IXXeixpeTai
— Tt  8e  ovK  6pa<s ;

[driming  of  vine  leaf  pattern]
and  a  little  vine  leaf  border  all  round.

Till  (TvveiSoTi  SrjXov  ToSe. (rv  be  (f>povTi(TaL.


Facsimile  of  Albrecht  Durer's  signature
as  used  hy  Mr.  Dew  Smith.


LIII.]


Appendix.


401


Extracts  from  Script  Referring  to  Mr.  Marshall's
Experiment. See  Chap.  VIII.,  P.  175.

1.  Mai/  13, 190-t. "Memory  impedes — the  words are five.  I
will  get  them  to  morrow. Kal  raCr'  dneotj/as  ovS'  €K€tva  Xrj(To^ai.
But  you  must  wait."

2.  May  14,  1904. jxedvcr^cv  jj-aX'  ev(j)povu)S  o  crwc^pov."

3.  June  5,  1904.  "Two  foreign  words  maranthinon  telesphoron.
Two  long  words  not  in  English."

4.  Dec.  30,  1904. "Now  write  these  words
Merenthes  es  to  palai — meranthemos  Sevnpos  avrb?  ef3Sofx6<i."

Complete  List  of  References  in  Script  to  A.  W.  Verrall.
See  Chap.  IX.,  P.  184.

(1)  A]}.  22,  1901.  "A.W.V.  in  descriptione  impiger  (qrei.  Z>;Ta
prodest."

(2)  May  11,  1901.  "  StKatoo-vi'i/  Kal  X^P^  (TVji'jjwd  (TweTolcrir.
A.W.V.  Kal  (xAAw  TLvl  i<rii)s."

(3)  May  23,  1901.  "Diary  follows — not  yours — you  can't  get  it.
A.W.V.  will  understand."

(4)  June  3,  1901.  "Let  it  go — do  not  worry — I  find  it  easier
and  can  soon  give  a  plain  message  for  him  who  runs  not  to  read —
A.W.V.  knows  better  than  you."

(5)  June  16,  1901. See  App.,  p.  387.

(6)  June  27,  1901. "Things  will  alter  at  home  soon — not  Helen
A.W.V."

(7)  July  8,  1901  {Riffel  Alp).  "Edmund  Gurney  helped  me  at
first — now  there  is  no  one  but  me — We  talked  together  of  it, —
in  the  sunny  weather, — in  the  Cloisters  on  Sunday  before  he
knew  you.  Two  of  us  and  then  some  one  came.  He  has  more
nearly  carried  out  his  plans  than  I  have — tell  him  that — A.W.V. —
from  me  &  he  will  know  what  I  mean.  I  was  wrong  in  part,  I
see  now — but  not  altogether.  There  was  another  time  in  a  room,
with  a  small  window,  not  very  light,  &  blue  curtains — that  was  a
midnight  talk."

(8  to  11)  Aug.  16,  28,  Sept.  20,  Od.  6,  1901. See  App.,  pp.  388-91.

(12)  Od.  12,  1901.  "  Cantilupe  and  the  old  man  in  the  long  white
robe  with  the  unjewelled  crown.  Thus  belongs  to  A.W.V.  past
master. Eversley  I  wanted  to  say  before, and  a  disaster  there."

(13)  Nov.  1,  1901.  "the  lozenge  is  important.  Your  husband
knows  it. calls  it  something  else — ask  him."

2c


402


A'pi^endix.


[part


(14)  Nov.  4,  1901.  "It  is  the  woman's  name  your  husband  wants
— it  was  not  Clara — but  I  see  the  curve  besrinnina  it."

(IT))  Nov.  22,  1901. "Your  husband  might  know  the  writing."

(16)  Nov.  25,  1901.  "  I  wrote  in  the  Alps  about  a  talk  in  the
College  court  on  a  Sunday  with  your  husband — not  for  her  to  recognise
But  for  him.  Then  other  things  were  mixed  in, — the  play  and  the
rest  But  now  ask  him  to  recollect  in  the  Long — we  talked  about
our  work  His  has  been  largely  carried  out,  mine  not.  He  must
remember. It  is  is  so  plain  to  me. Now  sign  initials.  FMB."

(17)  Dec.  5,  1901.  "Desn't  A.W.  remember  1  the  light  fell  from
the  right  overhead — and  the  long  white  robe  moved  slowly  while  they
played."

(18)  Dec.  12,  1901. See  App.,  f.  391.

(19)  Feh.  27,  1902.  "Minnie  was  the  name,  and  another  ask
your  husband."

(20)  March  10,  1902.  "Your  husbands  cocks  have  gone  away,
but  I  will  tell  more  later."

(21)  March  Tt,  1902.  "Your  husband's  thought  was
good  but  not  complete  The  old  man  in  white  was  the
best  part  of  it  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  finish  that,  and  now
it  has  all  gone  away."

(22)  April  14,  1902.  "The  chapel  is  too  light — something  has  been
taken  away  was  it  a  cross  in  the  east  ask  if  he  noticed — I  tried  to
sliow  it  you  don't  understand — let  me  write  Cant  uar  is  sedile  ubi
nunc  gentium  ?  non  tuum  respondere.  defer  alii.  The  angular
writing,  crabbed,  comes  again,  but  you  will  not  like  this  turn  the
hist  letter  so  no — not  that  way  m  s  t  Verrall  Verrall  Verrall  V
Verrall."

(23)  Jane  29,  1902.  "This  is  an  emblem  which  your  husband  will
understand."

(24a)  0^1  9,1902.  "  Purpur  regale  in  samite  odorificatum  necnon
insipitum  —  cum  alioquin  talia  in  supellecti  videris,  turn  credere  tu
et  alii  quidam — purple  but  not  fine  raiment  lying  in  a  chest  it  gleams
&  a  scent  is  there.  It  is  something  laid  aside  with  care  that  once
was  worn.  It  is  far  from  you  you  never  saw  it  but  Arthur
knows  what  I  mean.  He  saw  it  worn.  With  it  now  is  a  lock  of
gray  liair  &  a  child's  letter — much  valued.

(24/^)  to  the  dark  tower  came  who?  ask  him  who?  and  where?
The  tower  was  dark  and  cold,  but  we  all  loved  it.  he  will  remember
write  regularly— there  is  truth  in  this."

(25)  Ocf.  27,  1902. "your  husband  thinks  of  something  for  you


on.]


Appendix.


403


to  write — not  words There  is  colour  in  it — and  rapid  movement
red  as  a  darting  flame. Do  not  tell  him  yet— I  will  write  more."

(26a)  Od.  31,  1902.  "Now  for  your  husband's  thought,  it  is  a
sensation  of  colour,  a  vivid  colour.  Tell  him  to  write  down  the
thought  which  was  only  fragmentary  and  passing :  he  will  know
what  is  meant.  Do  not  tell  him  all  this,  do  not  show  it,  till  he
!has  noted  his  thought.

(26^)  I  can  give  you  more  after  a  few  days — about  something  in  a
•drawer — laid  away — to  be  kept,  not  used  though  it  once  was  used.
There  is  a  fragrant  smell,  cedar  wood  or  like  that.  Go  on.  folded
and  white  and  shimmering  purple  with  it,  and  the  hair  as  I  told
jou  and  a  letter  and  something  besides,  a  child's  letter  or  toy  that
had  been  kept  and  was  found  later.  Some  one  could  tell  you  this
Nettie  or  Letty Nellie  perhaps  is  the  name."

(27)  Nov.  18,  1902.  "  Curiosa  felicitas  — who  said  that?  It  is
true. Gurney  waits  to  know, ask  your  husband."

(28)  Jan.  25,  1903.  "you  have  lost  the  thread  write  in  London.
Tell  your  husband  that."

(29)  Jan.  30,  1903.  [after  quoting  a  particular  jihrase]  "ask  your
husband  what  that  means."

(30;  Aug.  31,  1903.  "Hugh  will  not  go  abroad  next  month  he
rests,  then  comes  a  hurried  journej'  to  the  south — and  the  long
break.  Do  not  tell  this  to  Arthur  It  may  not  be  quite  right
perhaps  you  do  not  understand  but  there  is  sense  and  truth  in  it.
you  will  know  before  Christmas."

(31)  Aug.  21,  1904.  "When  he  has  read  the  papers,  all  the  papers,
he  will  see  what  I  mean.  Chapter  and  verse,  chapter  and  verse,
tell  him  that.  AWV  I  mean."

(32)  Oct.  3,  1904.  "Note  the  name  of  the  first  acquaintance  you
meet  to-day and  tell  your  husband  ;  he  will  understand.

omen  occasionis
That  will  come  off — keep  open  wits."

Passages  referring  to  or  showing  Connexion  with  other
"Sensitives" — Cross-Correspondences.  See  Chaps.  X.  and
XL,  PP.  205-275.

Mrs.  Archdale,  p.  206.

(1)  September  \8th,  1901.  " AVomen  are  bound  or  abound.
Stewart  and  Haslemere — what  do  they  here  ? Hazelrigg  is  better."

(2)  November ith, 1901. "Castlereagh  or  Hazelre  is  an  uncle,
I  think — but  I  can't  see  plainly — what  is  Trigge  ? "


404


Appendix.


[part


(3)  November  7th,  1901.  "Stewart  autem  inter  alios  venit  et
ita  veritatem  confirmavit."

(4)  December  22n(J,  1901. "Archdall  not  Archdale."
Mrs.  Piper,  p.  214.

January  31,  1902  [about  2.45  p.m.].  "Panoptikon  cr<^atpas  aTiraAAet
crvvSeyfia  hvcttikov.  tl  ovk  tSt'Sws ;  volatile  ferrum — pro  telo  impinget.
aA.Aoios  o/xov  OVK  d6e(T(f)dT0iai  Secr/xovs  68it)8r^v  TrapexaAet.  afxvySovrj — os
crc^ei'Soi'T/  edi'ovs  Socrts  yai'i'/zei/w  Kyjpl  no  that  is  not  right.  He  was  glad
to  get  the  ring — a  bishop's  ring"  [interrupted  at  3.7  jj.'/n.]

\later  on  same  dai/  about  10  2).m.  in  train  from  King's  Cross  to  Cambridge.^
"Crux  et  praeterea  nihil.  Post  sempiternam  mansuetudinem
omnia  supervacua — in  terris.  pone  superbiam  sunie  togaculum
caritatis  impigre — nutanti  adhibe  fundamentum  roscidulo  rore —
sic  semper  monoicus  sine  apparatu  non  sine  beneficio  universi.
Cur  haesitas^  incunibe  alieno  bacillo.  Ita  sane  desiderium  attinges
magna  cum  gratia  sanctissimi.


quod  voluisti  fecero. En  !  "

Mrs.  Forbes. See  Chap.  XL,  p.  219.

(1)  March  llth,  1901. "  Dianae  sumus  in  fide;  iterum  notare."

(2)  March  '2lsf,  1901. "Ne  falle  rogatri  cem."

(2a)  Aug.  28,  1901. "Signa  sigillo.  Conifera  arbos  in  horta

iam  insita  omina  sibimet  ostendit.


[signed  as  in  facsimile]


(3)  September  20th,  1901. "Ask  Mrs.  Forbes  if  she  has  a  message
for  you — something  about  G  i  m  a  or  some  such  word.  Gimadion
looks  the  length, yf/^a  Aios."


liil]


A'p'pendix.


405


(4)  November  \L'2ncl,  1901.  "Mrs.  Thompson  and  Mrs.  Forbes,  not
together,  you  with  both. It  must  be  recorded."

(5)  December  5ik,  1901.  "  note  the  hour  I  will  tell  someone  else
I  was  here, talbot  helping."

(6)  December  lltli,  1901.  "Ask  Mrs.  Forbes  what  she  wrote  to-day
your  name  is  not  in  it,  but  you  would  understand — It  tried  to  be
Stewart  and  Haslemere  and  about  a  brook — water  running  and  a
flight  of  birds."

(7)  December  I8th,  1901.  "Talbot  wrote  yesterday  or  before  There
was  never  any  need  for  explanation."

(8)  March  lOtli,  1902.  "  Mrs.  Forbes  has  heard,  must  have  heard  by
now.  There  is  a  letter  for  you  gone  astray — it  will  arrive — remember
this  date."

(9)  April  14//i,  1902.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  it— for  you  in  the
house, why  wait  to  tell  "

(9a)  Mai/  12,  1902.  "  Marybuds  no  Mary  Baltimore  was  the  name.
It  is  Helen  who  writes,  not  you — better  than  you  .  .  .  Marian
Baltimore."

(10)  3Iai/  16th,  1902.  "There  is  no  letter  about  Marian  Baltimore
on  the  way  to  you.  But  Mrs.  Forbes  will  have  a  message  for  you  next
week."

(11)  Maij  18th,  1902.  "  Now  this  is  other,  Mrs.  Forbes  will  write  to
you  this  week  something  in  a  drawer  she  wants  you  to  look  for —
a  dark  would  drawer  on  the  right  hand  side  j'ou  are  to  ask  and  send
her  word,  when  you  hear  from  her."

(12)  July  13th,  1902.  "  On  such  an  eve  of  storm  the  message  came
across  the  water  far  away — she  will  not  write  nor  (interrupted)  no
letter  for  you — she  has  not  understood — but  you  will  hear  later — this
is  for  you — to  help.  Count  three  and  five  and  write  then — and
on  the  23rd  of  the  month.  The  words  are  for  you  and  none  other,  but
they  went  to  Mrs.  Forbes — ask  her.  The  message  is  for  you — about
the  water — she  will  know  that.  You  have  not  seen  the  lilies,  my
lilies. Tell  her  1  said  that.

Talbot

Xo  other  message  to  night, write  later  as  I  said.

H. do  the  signature  better  H."

(12a.)  July  23,  1902.  "Double  discharge —  but  do  not  ask.
Cur  resolvere  nolis  1  pertemptanti  facillimum  et  si  tu  nescis.
iioga — roga — rogare  semper.


406


Appendix.


[part


Malleolus  pro  te —  pro  illo  autem  mansuescit  in  manu —
Monsignor  catholicus  presbyter  in  terra  non  lontana
ab  ista  rem  probabit —  nonien  recipe.  Longinqua  scribere  debuisti
lingua  non  bene  uteris.  Romenzana  hoc  est  nomen  illius
qui  claviculam  atViy/^aros  tibi  tradere  potest.  En  etiam
Clemens  inest  nominibus  illius. Nec  plura  de  illo.

Hodie  mane  aliquid  in  Britanniarum  pusilla  insula  evenit,
quod  amicis  tuis  magnum  refert. Fac  scribas — iam  tibi  diem
pronotavi — antehac, sed  non  possum  angustiora  describere.  Even-
tum  non  reipublicae  amico  autem — It  is  interesting  to  a  friend.

Note  the  date.  H."

(13)  October  21th,  1902.  "Try  to  understand.  Mrs.  Forbes  has
the  other  words — piece  together. Add  hers  to  yours.  .  .  .

Write  more  often  Talbot  will  help — all  through  November."

(13«)  Oct.  31,  1902. "You  have  not  understood  all — try  further.
She  has  had  some  words incomplete  to  be  added  to  and
pieced  and  make  the  clue.  .  .  .

Now  for  your  husbands  thought — it  is  a  sensation  of  colour,  a
vivid  colour.  Tell  him  to  write  down  the  thought  which  was  only
fragmentary  and  passing  :  he  will  know  what  is  meant.  Do  not  tell
him  all  this — do  not  show  it,  till  he  has  noted  his  thought.

I  can  give  you  more  after  a  few  days — about  something  in  a
drawer — laid  away — to  be  kept,  not  used,  though  it  once  was  used.
There  is  a  fragrant  smell,  cedar  wood  or  like  that.  Go  on  {end  of
page).

Folded  and  white  and  shimmering  purple  with  it,  and  the  hair
as  I  told  you  and  a  letter  and  something  besides,  a  child's
letter  or  toy  that  had  been  kept  and  was  found  later.
Someone  could  tell  you  this.  Nettie  or  Letty  Nellie
perhaps  is  the  name."

(14)  November  7th,  1902.  "Your  message  comes  through  Mrs.
Forbes — I  am  doing  that  now — she  is  easier — tell  her  that."

(15)  November  llth,  1902.  "Mrs.  Forbes  writes  of  the  cedar  wood
— you  cannot  find  that — ask  about  the  chest — with  the  faint  smell
— upstairs — in  a  room,  with  a  window  on  a  garden  all  a  maze.
Ask  someone  this."

(16)  December  26th,  1902.  "Mrs.  Forbes  will  get  the  words  I
want,  but  wait — -happy  is  the  hour  let  your  thoughts  follow  her,
do  not  write."

(17)  January  14th,  1903. "Mrs.  Forbes  has  sent  it  to  you — or


LIII.]


Appendix.


407


should  have  by  now ;  she  has  got  nearer  and  will  get  the  word.
Write  more  often  this  month — we  can  do  more  now  for  you.  Your
husband's  test  goes  forward,  Mrs.  Forbes  gets  that  better  than  you
do — write  regularly — there  will  be  news  for  you  to  write  next  week
— good  news  before  the  month  is  out."

(18)  January  21s/,  1903.  "wait  for  the  word  from  Mrs.  Forbes.
The  paper  is  hid  in  your  house  and  should  be  found."

(19)  February  =lnd,  1903. "Harriet  de  Vane."

(20)  February  23rd,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  a  message  but
not  about  the  word, you  must  wait  for  that.  .  .  .

It  has  helped  them  &  you  will  get  a  message  now  plain  to
read, send  this  to  her."

(21)  3Iarch  Uth,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  got  the  other  word—
and  will  send  it — not  Symposium,  but  it  helps  and  is  clear.  I
don't  think  she  knows  it  is  for  you — but  you  will  understand."

(22)  March  15//;.,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  is  slow  but  she  has
something  which  you  have  not  seen."

(23)  April  2nd,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  gone  home  ask  her  to
write  next  week  on  Wednesday — she  will  know  why."

(24)  June  29th,  1903.  "  Mrs.  Forbes  has  lost  your  clue— she
cannot  get  it  now."

{2b)  July  17th,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  something  which  should
settle  the  date — it  fills  your  gap."

(26)  July  3lst,  1903.  "The  picture  in  the  picture  frame^ — upon
the  wall — and  no  name  upon  it — in  her  room — ask  Mrs.  Forbes.
She  has  thought  lately  of  the  picture  and  will  remember  {temimrary
interruption]

ask  Mrs.  Forbes  whether  she  knows  the  likeness  in  the  picture
— she  may  know  Go  into  the  gallery  at  Venice,  the  lady  with
the  pearls. \]iere  follows  description  of  unidentified  portrait]

more  another  time — but  ask  Mrs.  Forbes  if  she  knows  .  .  .  more
through  Helen  later. Do  not  tire  her."

(27)  October  Qth,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  comes  home  this  week  and
will  have  a  message  for  you.  But  she  found  no  picture  at  Venice.
She  has  had  a  success  while  she  was  away — ask  about  it.  Her
mother  will  want  her  much  this  winter — she  will  be  in  the  south."

(28)  October  1th,  1903.  "Write  to  Mrs.  Forbes— tell  her  not  to
look  for  the  chain — any  other  trinket  will  do  as  well.  That  is  not
quite  right,  but  I  think  she  will  understand."


408


Appendix.


[part


(29)  October  30ih,  1903.  "Send  this  blue  forget  me  nots  tied  with
short  lengths  of  ribbon— ask  Mrs.  Forbes  to  send  you  a  flower."

(30)  November  23rd,  1903.  "Mrs.  Forbes  has  a  sjDecial  message
for  you  which  you  will  understand

dAAo  Tt  ovSe  (Tol  jJ-ovrj
Cres  cent  saecla

Crenent  crest  [drawing  of  Gimrood  crest], look  up  that  for  help.
Gurney  wrote  the  word ask Mrs.  Forbes."  [drawing  of  four
Retailed  flower]

(31)  January  9tJi.,  1904.  "  Solacia  attamen  eiusdem  doloris  nec
mihi  nec  tibi  attinget — ab  aliis  accipere  debes  :  post  septimam  diem
omnia  comprehendere  potes. Fac  scribas  die  septimo  decimo."

(32)  January  25tJi,,  1904.  "Mrs.  Forbes  message  was  wrong  listen
to  this  :  A  letter  from  Mr.  Forbes  to  her  at  Cranford  will  go  this
month."

(33)  Jidy  I5th,  1904.  "I  cannot  get  the  Greek  words  to  Mrs.
Forbes."

(34)  October  3rd,  1904.  "Ella  Forbes  my  cousin  send  the
letter  to  her It  is  long  since  you  wrote."

(35)  October  16th,  1904. "Tell  this.

in  the  fire-lighted  room  she  and  the  dog  alone,  and  the  thought
came  to  her  as  she  held  up  the  screen  before  the  fire — and  the  dog
stirred  in  his  sleep — he  felt  that  I  was  there.

It  was  only  for  a  moment — but  the  scene  was  plain."

(36)  December  2lst,  1904.  "Wait  now  and  write  regularly — I
will  send  a  message  about  this  through  Mrs.  Forbes — do  not  ask
for  it — it  may  take  time."

(37)  December  28th,  1904.  "I  want  to  confirm  it  through  Mrs.
Forbes  but  she  has  not  understood.  I  want  her  to  write  and
sympathise  with  the  failure  &  not  to  know  what  it  is.  I  shall
try  all  this  week — wait  for  her  letter  &  help.  Think  of  her
often  send  a  message  to  her  in  mind  to  write  &  say  she  is
sure  you  are  disappointed.

If  not  by  Monday  next  it  is  too  late  for  evidence — she  will  hear
the  facts  on  Monday  next."

(38)  January  Uh,  1905.  "  Mrs.  Forbes  has  been  anxious  this
week  but  the  anxiety  is  less  now — I  could  not  make  her  hear  what
I  wanted  her  to  write  to  you — but  ask  to  see  what  she  wrote  on
Monday.  She  could  help  if  you  saw  her— can  you  not  see  her  soon  ?
I  wish  you  would  meet."


LIII.]


Appendix.


409


List  of  Corroborative  Documents  in  Regard  to  Correspond-
ences WITH  Mrs.  Forbes. See  Chap.  XI.

The  Roman  numerals  refer  to  the  number  of  the  incidents  in  the  account

in  the  text.

(I.)  Note  in  note-book  Feb.  28th,  1901,  9.30  A.M.
Note  in  diary  March  4th,  1901,  8.45  a.m.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  March  3rd,  1901.
Confirmation  by  A.W.V.  and  Miss  A.  Johnson.
(IL)  Notes  in  script  book  March  17th,  1901,  3.55  and  4  p.m.
Note  in  diary  March  18th,  11.30  a.m.,  and  March  20th,

10.45  A.M.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  March  19th.

(in.)  Note  in  diary  March  29th,  1901,  10.30  A.M.

Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  March  25th  and  April  16th,  1901.
(IV.)  Note  in  diary  Nov.  26th,  1901.

Note  in  script  book  Nov.  18th,  1901.

Note  in  script  book  Nov.  26th,  9.30  a.m.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Nov.  16th,  1901,  with  aut.  sc.  enclosed.

(V.)  Note  in  script  book  Sept.  21st,  9  a.m.,  1901.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  October  28th,  1901.

(VI.)  Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  October  28th  and  30th,  1901.

(VII.)  No  documents.

(VIII.)  Note  in  diary  Nov.  26th,  1901.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Nov.  25th,  1901.

(IX.)  Note  in  script  book  Dec.  6th,  1901,  11.30  a.m.,  and  Dec.  8th,
5.30  P.M.

Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Dec.  5th  and  Dec.  7th.
(X.)  Note  at  Brighton  on  Dec.  18th,  1901.
Note  in  script  book  Dec.  20th,  1901.
Note  in  diary  Dec.  22nd,  11.45  A.M.,  1901.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Dec.  16,  1901.

(XL)  Note  in  script  book  Dec.  20th,  1901.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Dec.  19th,  1901.

(XII.)  No  documents.

(Xm.)  Entry  in  diary  Jan.  11th,  1902,  9.45  A.M.,  and  Jan.  12th,
10.50  A.M.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Jan.  10th,  1902.


410


Appendix.


[part


(XIV.)  Records  of  table-tilting  Feb.  23rd,  March  8th,  1902.

Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  on  March  3rd,  5th,  11th,  1902.
(XV.)  Note  in  script  book  March  lltli,  9.30  a.m.,  1902.

(XVI.)  Notes  in  diary  Jan.  18th,  1901,  March  24th,  1902,  March
26th,  1902.

Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  March  22nd,  25th,  1902.
(XVIL)  Note  in  diary  April  6th,  1902.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  March  31st,  1902.
(XVIII.)  Note  in  diary  April  25th,  1902.

Note  in  script  book  April  18th,  1902.

(XIX.)  Notes  of  Planchette  sittings  May  5th  and  May  8th,  1902.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  May  6th,  1902.

(XX.)  Notes  of  Planchette  sittings  May  10th  and  May  13th,  1902.
Note  in  script  book  May  13th,  1902.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  May  12th,  1902.
(XXI)  Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  May  31st,  1902.
(XXII.)  No  documents.
(XXIII.)  Notes  of  Planchette  sittings  May  30th,  1902.
(XXIV.)  No  documents.

(XXV.  and  XXVI.)  Note  in  script  book  Aug.  6th,  1902.

Letter  to  Mrs.  F.  from  M.  deG.  V.  on  July  14th,  1902.
Letter  to  Mr.  Piddington  from  M.  de  G.  V.  on  July  14th,
1902.

Post-card  to  Mr.  Piddington  from  M.  deG.  V.  July  14th,

1902  (later  post).
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  July  11th,  July  17th,  July  22nd,  July

25th,  July  30th,  1902.
Detailed  statement  by  Mr.  Piddington  corroborating  above

dates  on  August  9th,  1902.

(XXVII.)  Note  in  script  book  October  31st,  1902,  and  Dec.  14th,
1902.

Note  in  diary  Oct.  31st,  1902.

Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Oct.  30th  and  Nov.  17th,  1902.
(XXVIII.)  Note  in  diary  Nov.  4th,  1902.

Note  in  script  book  Nov.  5th,  1902.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Nov.  2nd,  1902  (endorsed  by
Mr.  Piddington,  Nov.  4th^  and  Dec.  18th,  1902.
(XXIX.)  No  documents.
(XXX.)  No  documents.


LIII.]


Appendix.


411


(XXXI.)  Notes  in  script  book  Nov.  28th,  10  a.m.  and  6.45  p.m.

Note  in  diary  Nov.  28th,  1902,  10  a.m.  and  6.30  p.m.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Nov.  27th,  1902.
Copy  of  Trinity  College  Lecture  Koora  Translation  paper
Nov.  21st,  1902.

(XXXIL)  Note  on  script  of  Nov.  28th,  1902,  sent  before  Dec.
15th  to  Miss  Johnson.
Note  in  script  book  Dec.  19th,  1902.
Note  in  diary  Dec.  19th,  1902.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  of  Dec.  18th,  1902,  sent  about
Dec.  20th  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  with  own  script  of
Dec.  19t]i.

(XXXIIL)  Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  of  Dec.  21st,  1902.
(XXXIV.)  Mrs.  F.'s  original  script  of  Jan.  6th,  1902,  Jan.  11th,
her  copy  of  Feb.  20th,  original  of  March  2nd,  and
of  April  1st  with  her  copy,  all  in  letters  posted  at
or  about  dates  of  writing.
(XXXV.)  Note  in  diary  Jan.  5th  and  Jan.  7th,  1903.
Note  in  script  book  Jan.  22nd,  1903.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Jan.  3rd  and  4th,  1903.
(XXXVI.)  Mrs.  F.'s  original  script  of  Jan.  6th,  1903.
(XXXVII.)  Note  in  script  book  Jan.  22nd  and  23rd,  1903.
Note  in  diary  Jan.  23rd,  1903.
Mrs.  F.'s  letters  of  Jan.  20th  and  Jan.  24th,  1903.
(XXXVIII.)  Note  on  original  script  and  in  script  book  Jan.  18th,
1903.

Note  in  diary  of  Jan.  19th,  1903.
Mrs.  F.'s  letter  of  Jan.  20th,  1903.
(XXXIX.)  Note  in  script  book  Jan.  22nd,  1903.

(XL.)  Note  in  script  book  Jan,  25th  and  27th,  1903.
Note  in  diary  Jan.  30th,  1903.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Jan.  22nd  and  25th,  1903.
(XLI.)  Note  in  script  book  Feb.  5th,  1903.

Post-card  from  Mrs.  F.  Feb.  4th,  1903.
(XLII.)  Note  in  diary  Feb.  24th,  1903.

Separate  statement  on  Feb.  24th,  1903.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Feb.  20th,  1903.
Original  script  from  Mrs.  F.  of  Feb.  22nd  and  23rd
(script  of  Feb.  23rd  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  with
own  script  of  Feb.  23rd).


412


Appendix.


[part


(XLII.)  Answers  to questions  from Mrs.  F. (undated),  Mrs.

Baltimore  Feb.  26th  and  Alfred  Feb.  26th,  1903.
(XLIII.)  Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  March  19th,  1903.

(XLIV.)  Note  in  script  book  April  10th,  1903.
Note  in  diary  April  4th,  1903.
Mrs.  F.'s  letters  April  1st  and  April  6th,  1903.

(XLA'".)  Note  in  diary  April  14th,  1903.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  April  11th,  1903.

(XLVI.)  No  documents.

(XLVII.)  Note  in  script  book  May  2nd,  1903.
Mrs.  F.'s  letter  May  2nd,  1903.
Detailed  account  written  May  12th-14th,  1903.
(XLVIIL)  Mrs.  F.'s  letters  May  11th  and  12th,  1903.

Contemporary  account  May  12th-14th,  1903.
(XLIX.)  No  documents.

(L.)  Detailed  account  written  August  12th,  1903.
Mrs.  F.'s  letter  July  2nd,  1903.

(LL)  Mrs.  F.'s  letter  July  10th,  1903.
(LIL)  No  documents.
(LIIL)  Note  in  diary  August  24th,  1903.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  July  30th,  1903.
Note  of  experiment  on  July  26th  in  envelope  posted
by  Mrs.  F.  on  July  26th,  received  July  27th,  and
opened  July  31st,  1903.
Letter  to  Mrs.  F.  from  M.  deG.  V.  on  Aug.  24th,  1903,
with  Mrs.  F.'s  notes  upon  it  received  Aug.  28th,  1903.
Copy  (July  27th)  of  H.'s script of  July  26th  and
August  23rd  (copied  Aug.  24th)  with  annotations.
(LIV.)  Note  in  script  book  Aug.  10th  and  Aug.  16th,  1903.
Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Aug.  9th,  1903.
Note  of  August  2nd,  1903.
(LV.)  Note  of  Aug.  16th,  1903.

Mrs.  F.'s  script  of  August  11th,  1903,  and  letter.
Corroboration  by  M.A.B.
Note  in  script  book  August  16th,  1903.
Contemporary  account  Aug.  12th,  with  additional  note
Aug.  21st,  1903.

■ (LVL)  Note  in  diary  Aug.  20th,  1903.

Mrs.  F.'s  letter  Aug.  19th,  1903.


LIII.]


Appendix.


413


(LVII.)  Note  in  script  book  October  9th,  1903,  and  Dec.  6th,
1903.

Note  in  diary  Oct.  12th  and  Oct.  18th,  1903.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Oct.  8th  and  Dec.  5th,  1903.
Diary  for  date  of  Mrs.  F.'s  visit  to  me.

(LVIII.)  Note  in  diary  Nov.  5th,  1903.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Oct.  27th,  1903.

(LIX.)  Note  in  script  book  Dec.  6th,  1903.
(LX.)  Note  in  script  book  Nov.  28th,  1903.
Note  in  diary  Nov.  28th,  1903.

Note  on  copy  of  H.'s  script  of  Nov.  29th  on  Nov.  30th,
1903.

(LXL)  No  documents.

(LXIL)  Note  in  script  book  Jan.  16th,  1904,  and  Jan.  27th,  1904.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Jan.  12th,  Jan.  22nd,  Jan.  28th
1904.

(LXIIL)  No  documents.

(LXIV.)  Notes  of  Planchette  writing  April  13th,  1904.

Mrs.  F.'s  letter  of  April  16th,  1904.
(LXV.)  Note  in  diary  July  22nd,  1904.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  July  13th  and  July  17th,  1904.
(LXVL)  Note  in  script  book  Oct.  16th,  1904.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Oct.  15th,  1904.
(LXVIL)  Note  in  script  book  Oct.  18th  and  Oct.  21st,  1904.
Note  in  diary  Oct.  21st  and  Oct.  25th,  1904.
Contemporary  account  on  Oct.  28th,  1904.
Letters  from  Mrs.  F.  Oct.  15th,  Oct.  I7th,  Oct.  19th,  and

Oct.  24th,  1904.
Questions  sent  to  Mrs.  F.  and  returned  with  answers  in
her  letter  of  Oct.  24. See  below.
LXVIIL  Note  in  script  book  Jan.  10th,  1905.

Letter  from  Mrs.  F.  Jan.  11th,  1905.

Questions  sent  to  Mrs.  Forbes  on  Oct.  20,  1904,  with  her  answers,

received  on  Oct.  25.
"On  Sunday,  October  16,  when  you  wrote:

(1)  was  it  in  the  drawing-room?
Ans.  Yes.

(2)  was  there  only  firelight  ?

Ans.  There  was  a  small  lamp  behind  me,  but  little  light.


414.


Appendix.


[part


(3)  was  one  dog,  and  one  only  in  the  room  1
Ans.  Yes.

(4)  did  the  dog  stir  in  his  sleep?

Ans.  The  dog  often  stirs;  he  lay  by  my  feet.  I  could  not  say
whether  he  stirred  at  any  special  moment.

(5)  had  you  a  screen  in  your  hand?
Ans.  Only  a  piece  of  paper.

(6)  had  you  any  thought  of  the  door  to  the  greenhouse  1

Ans.  The  door  to  the  greenhouse  was  open.  /  always  iJdnk  of  it
before  I  settle  down  to  read  or  write  as  I  see  for  myself  that  it  is
open."

Copy  of  Passage  from  Plato's  Symposium  set  for  Translation
IN  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  on  Nov.  21,  1902.  See
Chap.  XL,  P.  242.

Kal  fj  yeAacracra,  Kai TTtus av,  S> ScoKpares,  o/xoAoyotTO  /^.eyas

6eo<i  etvac  Trapa  tovt(dv,  oi  ^acrtv  avrov  ouSe  Oeov  dvat ;  Ttres  ovTOi ;
8'  eyw.  Et?  fjLev,  ecfi'i],  cri',  /it a  8'  iyui.  Kayw  (lttov,  II cos  tovto,  '^4>V^)
Aeyeis ;  koI  ?},  'PaStws,  e^p^.  Xeye  yap  /xot,  ov  Trdurai  deov^  (f>i)<s
evSaiixovas  elvai  Kal  KaXov<s ;  •>]  Tokp/ja-aLs  av  TLva  prj  <pa.vai  KaXov  re
Koi  ev8alpova  demv  eli'ai ;  Ma  At"  ovk  eywy',  ((prjv.  Ei'Sat/xovas  Se  8rj
Xeyeis  ov  tou?  rdyada  Kal  to,  KaAa  K(.Kri)pkvov<s ;  IlaFi)  ye.  'AAAa  py]v
"EpwTa  ye  a)/xoAoy?/Ka?  8l  ei'Setai'  tQiv  dyaOuv  Kal  KaAwr  fTrtdvpeiv  avTwv
TOVTdiv  Siv  kv8e'q^  ecTTcv.  '^IpoXoy^Ka  yap.  Ileus  dv  ovv  Oeo?  eu]  6  ye  ruiv
KttAwv  Kal  dyadu)V  apotpos ;  OuSa/xws,  tijs  y'  eoiKev.  'Opas  ovf,  efjirj,  OTt,
Kal  crv  "EpwTa  ov  Oeov  vop[^€L<;  ;  Tt  ovv  dv,  e'c^J^i',  etV/  o  "Epw?  ;  Ovriroi ;
"H/<tcrTa  ye.  'AAAd  Tt  pijv ;  "[Icnrep  rd  irpoTepa,  e(f)'>],  pera^v  dvrjTov  Kal
dOavdrov.  Tt  ow,  &  Atort/xa  ;  Aaipwv  peya^,  S>  SwKpaTes"  Kat  ydp  irdv
TO  8atp6viov  peTa^v  tan  6eov  re  Kal  OinjTov.  Tti'a  -^v  8'  eyw,  8vvapiv
iXOV ;  'Eppyji'evoi'  Kal  SiaTropOpevov  Oeol's  rd  Trap  dvOpuirrwi'  Kal  dvOpMiroi^
rd  Trapa  demv,  rm'  per  rds  Sev/creis  ^'at  dvcrias,  twv  Se  tus  eTrtra^ets  Te  Kal
a/iot/iJtts  Twi'  dva-im',  ev  pecrm  8e  ov  dpipoTepw  G-vTvXyjpol,  (ixTre  to  irdv
avro  avTw  ^vv8e8e(Tdai.  Sid  tovtov  Kal  rj  pavriKi]  irdca  )(iopel  Kal  ij  tcov
tepe(DV  Te-)(yi]  twi/  Te  Tvepl  rds  OvcTLas  Kal  Tas  TeAeTas  Kal  Tas  fTrwSas  Kal
Tfjv  pavreiav  iraxrav  Kal  yorjTeiav.  9e6s  Se  dvdpu>Tr(i)  ov  plyvvrai,  dXXd
Sid  TOVTOv  TTaad  ea-nv  i)  opiXia  Kal  rj  StaAeKTOs  ^eots  Trpos  dvOptxnrow;,  Kal
eyprjyopoaL  Kal  KadevSovo'L'  Kal  6  pev  wepl  rd  ToiaCra  cro<^os  Saipovtos
dv7]p,  6  Se  dXXo  Ti  0"0^os  wv  ■)]  Tvepl  Te)(^va<;  i]  )^et,povpyia<;  Tti'as  f^dvava-os.
ovTOt  8rj  ot  Saipoves  ttoXXoI  Kal  iravToSaTroL  elcnv,  eis  Se  tovtoiv  eo-Tt  Kal  6
"Ep(x)<;.  ■  ■  -


LIII.]


Appendix.


415


Extracts from Script referring  to  would-be  Evidential
Matter  concerning  Events  in  the  Past. See  Chap.  XII.

(The  numbers  in  brackets  refer  to  the  numbering  in  the  text.)

(1)  Lost  hat.

August  13/A,  1901.  "hat — a  black  hat  in  a  box  belonging  to
him  was  lost  something  blue  near  it.  Ask — you  know  this — a
blue  tie  in  the  hat."

(2)  Dormitory  notice.

January  8th,  1902.  "  Everitt  is  the  name  he  looked  for — long
ago — in  a  dormitory  notice  angelus  I  think — Three  windows  and
the  notice  to  the  right.  He  stood  and  looked — a  black-haired  boy.
It  was  a  relief  not  to  see  the  name. Ask  about  this."

(3)  Cloisters  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

a.  July  8th,  1901.  "You  have  got  it  partly  right  but  he  knows
better  what  I  mean.  Edmund  Gurney  helped  me  at  first — now
there  is  no  one  but  me. — We  talked  together  of  it, — in  the
sunny  weather, — in  the  Cloisters  on  Sunday  before  he  knew
you.  Two  of  us  and  then  someone  came.  He  has  more  nearly
carried  out  his  plans  than  I  have — tell  him  that — A.W.V. — from  me
&  he  will  know  what  I  mean.  1  was  wrong  in  part,  I  see  now
— but  not  altogether.  There  was  another  time  in  a  room,  with  a
small  window,  not  very  light,  &  blue  curtains — that  was  a  mid-
night talk. Could  you  find  the  play  1 " [See  No.  7.]

b.  November  25th,  1901.  "I  wrote  in  the  Alps  about  a  talk
in  the  College  Court  on  a  Sunday  with  your  husband — not  for  her
to  recognize  but  for  him.  Then  other  things  were  mixed  in, — the
play  and  the  rest  But  now  ask  him  to  recollect  in  the  Long —
we  talked  about  our  work.  His  has  been  largely  carried  out,  mine
not.  He  must  remember.  It  is  so  plain  to  me.  Now  sign  initials.
F.M.B."

(4)  Basket  with  fruit.

•  a.  July  nth,  1901.  "A  basket  with  fruit  in  it,  grapes  per-
haps. It  has  a  handle  [sketch  of  basket]  so — light  osier  work.
Someone  lifted  the  leaves  to  look  at  the  purple  fruit,  by  the  sea-
side I  think,  Margate  or  Ramsgate.  I  was  there — I  saw  it — two
windows  not  a  large  room — and  a  sofa  near  the  light  who  sent
the  grapes  ?  were  they  grapes  1  No  more  tonight  I  can't  but  will
sign." [Attempts  at  "  Sidgwick."]


416


Appendix.


[part


b.  August  7th,  1901. "The  basket  had  open  work

pattern — no  lid.  Cant  she  remember  ?  The  basket  was  more  im-
portant than  the  fruit — it  was  used  for  something  else  afterwards."

c.  September  ith,  1901.  "The  basket  had  grapes — she  ought  to
know."

d.  December  lOth,  1901.  "It  was  at  Margate  look  at  the  date  of  the
letter  to  you  abroad. I  was  there. I  took  the  grapes. You  forget."

(5)  River  "Dovinans."

a.  March  31s/!,  1901. "Dovinantis  sub  imagine  ripae."

b.  April  8th,  1901.  "Dovinantis  ripae  flumen  monstr  avi  alicui
exepeta."

c.  Mai/  \st,  1901. "Dovinantis  in  ripa."

d.  Mail  8th,  1901.  "  Doverfield  that's  what  it  is.  A  man  walking
— is  it  Dovercourt  ] Dover  hoc  volui  iamdudum  scribere."

Mui/  23rd,  1901. "  Dominans  in  ripa  stetit  hagiologus."
March  19th,  1902. "  Dover  has  been  given  you  long  ago.  Dover
court  I  think."

g.  April  2nd,  1903. "In  ripis  Douern."

(6)  Manuscript  Play.

a.  June  30///,  1901.  "a  lost  play,  planned,  sketched  out,  not
complete,  hardly  begun  with  childish  papers.  She  will  know — about
a  conquest,  was  it  in  the  east,  others  knew,  almost  at  school
no  at  Cambridge. — on  square  white  paper — in  a  crabbed  hand.

my  sister  would  know  certainly."

b.  July  4th,  1901. "Ella  or  Elea  is  part  of  a  name.  Tamatha
Thamartra — something  like  that — you  do  not  know. The  sheets

were  square — the  writing  very  close — no  margin  on  the  right —
there  must  be  20  or  30  of  them  the  ink  is  quite  faded.  It  was
talked  about, — children  somehow  belong  But  she  will  know.  It
was  more  thought  of  than  written.  Martin  or  Martinmas — is  it
Michaelmas  ] Do  not  search."

c.  Jul//  8th,  1901.  "Could  you  find  the  play?  Is  it  lost?  It
was  a  great  scheme.  Tamburlane — that's  not  the  word  T  want —
Tamil,  or  Thummam — a  Hebrew  looking  word  &  a  woman's  name.
The  form  was  odd  that  was  new — long  lines."  [See  also  above,  No,
3  for  context.]

(7)  Garden.

a.  April  lith,  1901.  "Litteris  quattuordecim  verbum  significa-
tione  ypvxi-Ky]  de  horto  roscidulo  quo  incolit  ipse, si  modo  potes  ! "


LIII.]


Appendix.


417


b.  June  3rd,  1901.  "Roscidulo  iacet  in  horto  semper  etsi  tu  non
sapis — ne  rogaveris — ne  dixeris.  .  .  .  sempervirens  hortulus
thesauros  condidit — quaerere  semper."

G.  August  23rd,  1901.  "a  garden  in  the  sun  and  a  wind
measurer  not  a  sundial. He  stands  beside."

d.  September  1th,  1901.  "In  the  long  green  avenue — go  down
and  you  will  find  it — a  round  white  stone  on  the  ground  [oval
drawn]  nothing  inscribed."

e.  Oct.  6,  1901.  "walking  down  a  garden  path — in  a  level  sun-
light— to  a  white  house, yews, the  garden, years  ago."

/.  December  5th,  1901.  "Holy  or  holly  not  a  stick — a  tree,  I
think — arbustum  in  horto  meo  ubi  semper  pedes  ponebam  ambulans
it  is  easier  in  Latin,  ibi  cur  non  sine  aliis  sola  venis  1  iam  diu  et
saepissime  rogavi  te  ut  talia  facias — non  interponere  moras — fac,  in
praesenti — The  white  stone  belongs  to  this  series."

g.  January  17,  1902.  "Along  the  way, — down  through  the  trees
is  the  white  stone. Why  no  inscription  1 "

h.  August  22,  1903.  "In  the  garden  go  alone  &  write  then  for
the  certainty."

i.  September  17,  1903.  "The  desolate  garden  has  helped  you  to
the  thought  &  the  knowledge  will  come,  but  not  yet."

(8)  Inscription.

a.  March  14,  1901.  "  hieroglyphema  sane  marmario  glyptato  non
sine  caelato  quid  dicam  stellato  cultellario." [signed  x  x  x  ]

b.  April  8,  1901.  "scripsi  illud  w  ^arala  pmovcra  hieroglyphemata
fxol  ponens  Stellato  cultellario  vel  faxis  inscriptione  porcellina  in
marmoreo  topho  glyptata  sacri  canentis  fesulae  more  pavonis."
[followed  later  by  x  x  x  ]

c.  August  28,  1901.  [preceded  by  drawing  of  sun-dial  and  x  x  x;
see  above,  p.  389]  "Now  write  the  word — it  runs  round  a  dial  or
font — look  from  above  [illegible  single  letters]  longer  than  that —
cut  on  grey  stone  glyptatus  in  marmoreo  lapide  cultellario."

(9)  Phrase  for  Dr.  Hodgson.

Quotations  completely  given  in  text,  p.  282.

(10)  Veridical  case.

October  12,  1901.  "Give  it  to  her — yarn  a  tangled  skein.
Veridical  is  the  case — see  what  you  have  said."

2d


418


Apjyenclix.


[part


(11)  Fire.

May  27,  1901.  "  Cressid  {or  Aessid)  is  the  word,  in  Aeneade
— non  possum  scribere  maximam  diligentiam  adhibens — semper  abundat
error.  Nec  opinanti  facilius— tempus  adnotare.  Flagravit  in  ruinas
domus  dehiscens.  Dominus  absens  tabulae  periere  (interrupted  then
resumed)  caminus  nigram  harenam  extulit.  It  stinks  in  the  nostril
odor  infamis  crepitant  flammae  deflagratio  magna  bene
notanda — incolae  omnes  turbati  adsunt.  ventus  impedit  saluti —
tandem  advenit  fuscator  magno  equtum  sonitu — salutat  turba
a  lambent  micant — cessit  in  vaporem.  Tum  fit  deploratio  magna
non  sine  gemitu  lacrimisque.  Talia  vidi  recenti  tempore.  talia
si  describas  sine  remissione  patefiat  Veritas."

(12)  Waters  of  Omar.

December  7,  1903.  "The  letter  is  at  your  house  that  explains
—  good guidance — and  the  waters  of  Omar."

(13)  Neo-Platonists.

a.  March  15,  1901. "optimo  dierum."

April  3,  1901. "optimo  dierum  et  iusuper  diem  mitte
unam."

b.  Man  3,  1901. "  crastino  die."

May  31,  1901. "defer  in  crastinum  diem."
October  17,  1901. "  plurima  eras  vel  crastino  die."

d.  October  12,  1904. "Ter  et  quater  renovare  viam."

e.  June  30,  1901. SqX-tjW^piov  SeXrov  aSeAc^bs  SeA</)tKy  o/x(^)/

Xpijo-erai  ingenium  adhibe. pone  mentem  tuam,  inter-
pretationem  caecam  veritatis  Dei."
/.  April  27,  1901. "  Fac  Die.  faceto  dicto. nomen  nescis —
sed  non  semper  sic  erit."

g.  April  20,  1901. "  viriliter  aspecta  rpoiru'i  -yjeXloio." ;  •
June  23,  1901. "solsituo  die  iam  exacto."

h.  April  22,  1901. "Cardo  KapKivov si  non  istaec  tentare

alia  ne  desperaveris."

i.  January  20,  1903. See  App.,  p.  377.
March  7,  1903. See  App.,  p.  377.

j.  March  20,  1903.  "Never  when  the  wind  blows  from  out
of  the  East  ,  but  on  the  Western  breeze  it  comes
with  sound  of  bells  and  music  heard  afar.  Ask  about
this."


Liir.]


Appendix.


419


(14)  Hills  in  Rome.

a.  April  24,  1901.  "imponere  multum  minanti  saporem  pinguis
terrae  revolventis  in  /cotr/xw  Caelicolosus  vel  alium  non  dissimile.
cur  verba  inhiat  manus'?  ypdcjie  /xaAa  ei>  SeXrots  dXy^Oeia  SeAro —
y/c)a</)etv  perfacile.  deest  iiiterpretatio  optima  sprerare  semper,  infit
carmen  laudis  magnae.  You  have  not  seen  Hodgson's  letter,  wait
for  that. Birmingham  to  Cambridge. Do  nothing — wait."

b.  July  30,  1901.  "caelius  mons  iam  in  scriptura  ante  hunc  diem
apparuit — notare — you  have  it  not  quite  right. Try  again."

c.  April  20,  1901.  dpenoyuTovi  /xayw  Koa-jxov  Tpi86vXov.  alopex
non  sine  vulture  in  monte  Citorio,  pes  manco."

d.  June  3,  1901.  "Ecquid  pretii  in  avibus  1  nullum  sine  vulture
in  Apulo. Mons  Citorius  sacer  est,  multum  tibi  adiuvimentum."

e.  Jime  27,  1901.  "mons  montium  caecus.  in  apice  sedet  super
sedilia  circumspectans  ne  monueris."

/.  June  14,  1903.  "  L.  knows  the  secret  of  the  mound,  ask
her."

g.  July  4,  1901.  "Dogana."

(15)  Columella.

July  3,  1904.  "In  September  remember  the  19th  Columella.
It  is  then  the  fulfilment  will  be,  the  event  has  already  been  fore-
told. Then  Astraea  Redux  &  the  rest  of  it — -Hodgson's  constellation
will  be  plain  to  him  when  he  sees  the  rest — as  he  will.  That  star
is  visible  in  winter  nights  Auriga  Capellae  :  it  was  one  winter  night
that  the  star  and  the  resolve  flashed  out  together,  &  the  shape
of  his  life  was  thus  determined,  though  not  carried  out  for  four
more  years."

\_Noie.  '  Hodgson's  constellation '  and  '  Auriga  Capellae '  ivith  the  sub-
sequent statement  about  '■four  more  years '  were  intelligible  to  Dr.  Hodgson
though  meaningless  to  me.  But  in  the  absence  of  a  detailed  statement  from
Dr.  Hodgson  no  account  of  the  incident  is  included  in  this  paper.']

(16)  Three  letters.

a.  September  22,  1903.  "  Henry  Sidgwick  has  a  message  to
give  before  Christmas,  through  3^ou  if  possible  ....  But
you  must  give  another  message  correctly  first  and  then  ask  her  to
open  my  envelope."

b.  October  4,  1903.  {Description  of  a  pocket-book  containing  a  paper  and
photograph,  date  June,  1872.)

c.  October  7,  1903.  "Henry  Sidgwick's  message  is  next  to
come, it  is  about  3  letters  kept  together  not  of  the  same  date


420


Appendix.


[part


— two  are  in  the  original  envelopes — but  the  third  is  loose.  I  can't
see  whose  the  letters  are,  but  he  valued  them.  Just  these  three
were  always  together.

more  about  that  later — it  will  be  quite  clear  to  j'ou.

Tell  Piddington  to  ask  Mrs.  Thompson  about  Sidgwick's  three
envelopes."

d.  October  8,  1903. "  Sidgwick  has  not  got  the  message  right  yet.
the  letters  are  not  valuable  but  have  always  been  kept  to-
gether— read  some  words  in  one  of  them. June  1872.  is  the  date
— June  9th  I  think- — and  the  writing  is  small  and  not  hard  to  read.

yesterday's  talk  is  a  phrase the  letter  is  from
a  man  This  is  the  one  with  no  envelope."

e.  October  10,  1903.  "You  are  not  right  yet  about  Sidgwick's
message,  do  not  hurry — ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  if  she  can  tell  you  a
question  to  put  at  the  first  chance — you  will  be  in  direct  communi-
cation with  one  of  us  soon  &  should  be  able  to  ask  a  question
j^bout  Sidgwick  to  which  she  knows  the  answer  and  you  do  not.
Let  this  be  your  test. That  is  all  to-day. Try  on  Monday.

June  9th  — /72  Cambridge.

I  had  a  talk  with  him  about  his  work  to-day — he  is  mature  for

his  years,  and  will,  I  feel  sure,  leave  his  mark  on  us  here,  in

a  new  line.  He  is  one  of  the  most  promising  of  the  younger  men,
but  he  will  be  the  better  when  the  influence  of  the  place  has
softened  the  roughness  left  by  the  lack  of  sympathy  for  school
outlook  and  life."

/.  October  12,  1903.  "About  the  letters — write — They  are  in  a
cabinet  with  other  papers — in  my  room.  One  letter  tells  a  piece  of
news  and  was  kept  for  that,  that  is  in  an  envelope  and  the  other
has  something  inside  it,  something  loose  that  might  flutter  out.

Dont  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  yet  See  Mrs.  Thompson  first  if  you
can.  it  is  much  easier  when  someone  else  helps,  you  have  not
got  it  right  yet.  let  him say  it  plainly

— 1 1  was  arranged  that  he  should  refer  to  these  3
letters."

[Note.  The  spacing  represents  a  large  handwriting  in  the  original.]

g.  December  25,  1903.  "But  you  have  not  Sidgwick's  message  clear.
Try  that.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  would  know  about  the  three  letters  in
the  cabinet  one  with  no  envelope."

h.  December  26,  1904.  "  Mrs.  Sidgwick  knows  the  letters  in  the
cabinet,  ask  her."


LIII.]


Appendix.


421


i.  January  1,  1904.  "The  three  letters  will  give  the  answer
wanted. But  the  diary  would  complete."

j.  January  29,  1904.  "The  letters  are  kept  by  some  one — those
we  told  of — you  have  not  asked  the  right  person — find  the  letters."

(17)  Small  book.

a.  April  27,  1904.  "The  little  book  should  help— on  the  table
by  the  door  in  her  room — in  a  soft  flexile  binding  with  gilt
lettering.  Look  inside  short  sentences  like  your  own  Thomas
a  Kempis.  The  book  has  a  marker  or  opens  naturally  at  a
place — read  the  words.  So  he  goes  on  his  way  and  his  place
knows  him  no  longer.  But  the  work  is  done,  the  lesson  learnt,  the
world  is  different  for  the  life  lived  in  it,  and  leave  the  future
till  the  time  of  knowledge  comes.  The  '  mark  has  been  made
here,  that  at  least  is  certain,  and  should  be  enough — Hope,  Faith,
Charity — who  can  say  ? But  ask  and  you  shall  know — Ask  Ask —

The  message  is  not  mine  but  I  have  tried  to  say  it  to  you."

h.  May  11,  1904.  "It  was  a  flat  green  book,  lying  edgewise  on
the  table  &  the  letters  on  it  in  gold  letters.  The  binding  is
flexible  &  projects  beyond  the  leaves  of  the  book.  The  printing
inside  leaves  wide  margins.  The  sentences  are  short  and  broken.
Take  it  and  open  where  the  mark  is  then  read  the  second  para-
graph. That  will  the  words  she  wants  in  answ  [drojwings  of  cross
heart  anchai-]  and  the  greatest  of  these  three.  Write  the  other
words.  You  found  exactly  the  same  idea  in  your  own  book  when
you  took  the  Sortes  two  nights  ago.

This  is  what  he  wanted  to  say.

There  were  in  all  three.  I  have  spoken  of  the  last.  Another  is
in  verse  from  Coriolanus  an  apt  sentence.  Valedixit  ille — in  diem
profuturus.

hactenus — satis."

(18)  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.

a.  October  19, 1903. "And  the  greatest  of  these  is
Charity  but  not  the  hardest  to  win — That  is  a  hard  saying, —
charity  may  be  won  by  all  unhelped,  but  faith  comes  to  many  only
after  long  wrestling  &  Hope  is  always  a  gift  of  the  gods.

Beati  qui  possident,  neque  enim  acquirere  earn  possumus

neque  communicari — accepimus  divinitus,  sine  diligentia  nostra.

Beati  possidentes.

write  this  week  but  not  for  evidence — that  later  for  you  through
others. Wait — it  has  helped — you  have  partly  understood."


422


A23pe7idix.


[part


b. October  21, 1903. "  Praebet  plus  scientiae  tibi  quam  ceteris
attamen  ipsa  negas.

Say  this  to  her  — old  faith  feared  ill,

new  hope  was wise.  faith  fled,  hope  stayed

in  brighter  skies.  Something  has  led  you  astray

there,  you  began  right. Do not  rime.

What  is  the  daughter  of  wonder]  not  Iris  but  another.  Thau-
mantis  thugater  p/t?;/)  tcmv  aX-qOua-i. read  the  context."

C.  October  23, 1903. "  aSeAt^os  €(ttlv  octlotijtos. dyta  y^pv(jLa.
trium  maxima illarum  quae  mortalium  fata — faith  fled,  Hope
stayed when  did  that  happen  ? — no  this  is  not  right.
Stop  it  is  too  difficult — let  her  write.

*  These  three  are  great,  but  greater  than  they  is  Wonder's
daughter.  The  stern  Lawgiver  is  not  so  fair  {page  turned),  Seek
and  ye  shall,  Wisdom  comes  not  unsought,  and  one  comes  to  call
who  is  not — there  for  the  wishing.

The  child  of  wonder  is  a  fairer  fi  gure  and  a  mightier
than  the  rainbow  of  Hope, — no  messenger  but  the  divine. —
Better  than  Faith  Hope  &  Charity  is  Wonder's  Child  "

*  [ r/ie  writing,  which  had  been  very  difficult,  became  quite  easy  at  this
jpoint.]

d.  November  17,  1903.

"Complete  the  message  now:  the  little  book.  Narn  faith
no  it  is  not  right.  Nora  and  faith  but  Hope  is  better —
best  of  all  Wonder,  and  the  Knowledge  that  it  brings.

Not  in  faith  but  in  hope.

Taith  hope  &  charity  are  three  sisters,  but  wonder, — not  curiosity
but  amazement  is  the  mother  of  us  all. Her  let  us  worship."

e.  January  17,  1904.

In  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  letter  a  2 — and  three  words  on  the  paper- —
not  without  hope.

The  question  is  answered.

This  must  succeed — the  other  is  harder.  But  ask  Mrs.  H.  to
look  at  what  we  said  last  month.  That  should  help  you.  Do  not
try  to  experiment  till  you  can  see  her,  after  that  it  will  be  easy.
Sit  with  her  in  the  summer.


LIII.]


A  ppendix.


423


The  text  \or  test]  and  the  answer  are  one  and  are  given — Hope —
y  oungest  daughter  of  to-day,  and  oldest  mother  of  the  race,

To  see  the  Godhead  face  to  face,  no  Beholds  the  Godhead's  very
face.  Shine  at  the  on  the  Wanderer  on  the  Way — That  is  not  quite
right  but  it  is  about  Hope's  vision  which  is  the  true  one  &  leads
on  the  Passionate  Pilgrim."

/.  April  27,  1904  {see  above,  No.  17,  a,  p.  421).

g.  May  11,  1904  (see  above.  No.  17,5,  j^-  421).

h.  May  26,  1904. [after  allusion  to  the  'Ring  and  the  Booh.'^

.  .  ,  And  so  farewell,  and  let  him  only  judge  who  knows — we
know  not  nor  shall  know  but  hope—  Yet  some  through  hope  to  faith
their  way  in  triumph  win — but  more  by  love — and  love  faith  hope
these  three  make  God  in  man."

i.  August  14,  1904.

"  Charity  sufiereth  long  but  Faith  endureth  great  things  and  the
rainbow  wings  of  Hope  are  dewy  with  O  give  the  words  as  I  give
them  to  you.  Dewy  winged  rainbow  winged  daughter
of  Wonder  Hope.  Hope  is  the  messenger  from  gods  to  men,
but  Love  the  messenger  also  of  men  to  gods — Faith  of  men  only
Love  of  both — And  in  one  envelope  the  reference  to  Love  in  the
other  to  Hope.

And  you  will  not  look — Faith  is  not  yours.

Though  I  speak  with  the  tongue  of  an  angel,  you  have  not  heard
or  hearing  have  not  done. Surely  this  is  plain."

[Note.  In  the  above,  spaced  words  represent  larger  writing  in  the
original.]

(19)  Locked  box.

a.  February  12,  1903.  "Hodgson  will  help.  .  .  .  The  key  of  the
box  is  in  a  little  drawer  upstairs — not  on  a  ring — it  lies  in  a  little
drawer,  a  flat  key.  I  told  you  of  the  importance  of  the  key  before.
The  key  is  in  a  locked  drawer,  &  the  key  of  the  drawer  is  on  a  bunch
with  other  keys,  warm,  and  so  carried  constantly  by  some  one.  There
are  several  drawers,  in  reddish  word,  with  little  wooden  knobs  on
them.  In  the  second  from  the  top  is  the  locked  up  key — lying  alone.
The  metal  box  is  heavy  not  very  small — not  a  cash  box  to  carry.

The  letter  is  tied  with  thread  and  there  is  a  word  stamped  on
the  seal, — not  a  figure — a  word  of  4  letters."

b.  February  13,  1903. "  Clavis  regalis  iam  ante  tibi  apparuit
ante  oculos  suspensus.  quo defodietur — insere insere  clavigero
s  u  0."


424


Appendix.


[part


c.  February  22,  1903.  "Direct  leaf  and  Pitherington  to  see  opea
the  chest  and  this  is  the  order  of  the  rite — Seal  green  and  irregular
has  a  word  across  it  in  an  oval  little  print  letters  in  English.  Truth,
Light — no  not  those — Love  you  mistake — that  is  not  outside — you
do  not  hear."

d.  March  17,  1903. See  App.,  p.  352.

e.  March  20,  1903. See  App.,  p.  353.

f.  March  26,  1903. See  App.,  p.  353.

g.  Apiril  17,  1903.  "[drcming  of  oval  seal]  sigillum.  The  envelope
is  square  square  and  white — and  the  paper  has  a  ridge  or  line
upon  it — turn  it  round  for  the  address — there  is  a  date  written  in
ink  at  the  bottom  left  hand  corner.  The  paper  is  thin — foreign
note-paper.

Go  to  the  box  for  it — it  lies  there  with  others  &  is  not  on  the
top.  The  paper  inside  is  folded  once  The  box  has  a  handle  on
the  middle  of  the  top, — a  sunken  handle.  There  is  some  double
looking — two  keys  are  wanted — -the  small  one  &  one  on  a  bunch.

Orotava  or  something  like  that  is  the  pass-word  Life  is  more
like  the  word  on  the  seal.

LIFE  there  is  a  little  frame  round  of  double  lines.  Is  not  this
enough?  The  seal — the  box — the  2  keys  in  different  places  —
the  dark  house  &  high  windows  the  box  &  something  green."

h.  August  18,  1903.  "The  box  that  I  told  of  stands  on  a
chair,  squared  with  metal  clamps — yellowish  wood.  It  is  near  a
window.  Hodgson  expects  a  message  about  it  before  he  will  open
it — you  have  sent  part  of  the  word  to  him  but  not  all.  The  word
you  should  send  is  the  name  of  a  ship — Orinaria  Orellaria,  like
that. It  ends  in — ia.

The  message  inside  is  from  the  Symposium  the  passage  you
know.  It  is  not  in  Greek,  but  in  English  three  words  only.  I
can't  get  at  the  words — there  may  be  more  than  three,  but  the
sense  is  as  I  say.

You  must  go  on — it  will  get  clearer.

^a6/3€  Kal  (TV.

There  has  lately  been  something  broken  near  where  the  letter
lies  in  the  box — broken  glass  is  near — you  can  see  it  as  you  look
at  the  box — nothing  of  value.

Oriana  no  Oronia  Auronia  no  Orona  {or  Orori  a)."

i.  July  13,  1904.  "  I  have  long  told  you  of  the  contents  of  the
envelope. Myers'  sealed  envelope  left  with  Lodge, you  have  not


LIII.]


Appendix.


425


understood.  It  has  in  it  the  words  from  the  Symposium — about
Love  bridging  the  chasm.  They  are  written  on  a  piece  of  single
paper,  folded  &  put  in  an  envelope.  That  is  inside  another  envelope
wh.  has  my  initial  at  the  bottom,  left  hand  &  there  is  a  date  on
the  envelope  too,  the  outside  envelope  not  in  my  writing.  The
whole  thing  has  been  put  with  other  papers  in  a  box  a  small  box
clamped  with  metal."

[reference  to  another  envelope  left  hij  Dr.  Sidgwick  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick.]

j.  July  15,  1904.  "  It  wld  be  important  that  Hodgson  shld  see
the  box  opened — with  the  double  envelope. His  own  may  wait."

(20)  Sealed  envelope.

a.  September  22,  1903.  "In  his  envelope  is  a  drawing,  a  curved
line,  on  one  side  of  the  paper,  and  a  word  or  two  on  the  other
side  .  .  .  2ty/xa  stands  for  Sidgwick  elsewhere,  why  not  there
too  ?  But  you  must  give  another  message  correctly  first  and  then
ask  her  to  open  my  envelope."

h.  My  3,  1904.  "What  is  now  wanted  is  a  fulfilled  prophecy
to  induce  you  to  ojsen  the  envelope  which  contains  the  allusion  to
Plato  and  the  place  of  Love  in  the  scheme.  Try  this."  [See
above,  p.  419.]

c.  July  13,  1904. See  above,  No.  19,  i,  p.  424.

d.  July  18,  1904.  "let  the  trial  be  made  as  they  desire — this
is  clear — that  the  passage  from  the  Symp.  wh.  you  have  found  as
was  told  you  in  the  book  is  in  an  envelope,  sealed  by  me.  I  shld
like  Hodgson  to  know  this  but  it  is  not  in  his  envelope.  I  wrote
the  words  some  time  before  the  book  was  ready — pps.  the  test
is  not  very  good,  but  it  shd.  help."

e.  August  14,  1904.  "  And  in  one  envelope  the  reference  to
Love  in  the  other  to  Hope.

And  you  will  not  look — Faith  is  not  yours."  [See  above.  No.  18,  ^.]
/.  Nov.  25,  1904. "Why  will  you  not  look  for  it. Tell  them

that.  Long  have  they  waited  we  do  not  know  why — but  can

do  no  more." [See  above,  p.  398.]

(21)  Bishop's  ring  and  cross.

a.  June  21,  1902.  Now  this  is  other,  illi  tuo  nuntium  meum.
The  lions  head  looked  out  from  the  right  but  not  to  slay — to  watch
— to  see  in  hope,  to  look  on  the  accomplishment.  Not  Luria  but
Lyssa  gives  the  keynote  he  must  complete.  It  is  better  than
the  Editing— more  full  of  life — more  a  thing  for  men. Can  you  not


426  Appendix.  [part

see  the  lion's  face  1  It  seems  as  if  carved  but  it  is  a  symbol,
etc  Etc  ^  ~J~^ no — not  quite  right. ^ |^  .

Write  more  often — next  week.  Solitudo  expedit.  tibi  aliisque.
Sit  alone  and  listen — it  will  come."

i.  June  24,  1902.  9.45  a.m.  "quo  modo  haesitavisti  in  nomine
meo nuper. Antesignani praevalent — ausculta, dum tibi  lucem


amethystine  the  stone  like  this (  j and carved  ^(/j )  Ask

Si


your  husband — he  will  know. ^ \\  ^  jewel  at


the  centre  of  each  group  of  three,  but  none  at  the  intersection  of
the  arms.

't.-i^lU'  -CmljV^ ^^"7^  i-f^ "^^^/Z^^  .

To  night  again

c.  June  24,  1902. 9.40  p.m. "See  tonight  if  you  cannot  hear

it. These  days  are  easier. Now  for  the  ring — draw  it

and  something  inscribed  upon  it. 3  letters  that  look  like  Hebrew
^ in  the  length of  the ring. Round  the  carved  stone  is  a
gold  rim,  ogive  shaped, the  letters  run  lengthwise,  one  over  the


Liii.]  Appendix.  427

other.  He  had  it  made — it  was  not  lilie  that  before.  Someone
surely  knows  this,  so  that  you  will  see  that  it  is  true.  This  is
evidential,  I  think,  at  last — but  it  has  been  hard  to  get. wait,  the


circlet  of  the  rins;  bifurcates  to  hold  the  stone


nescio  an  videris.  sed  pro  parte  virili  feci  quid  potuerim.  nunc  tua
pars.  Comprehendere,  quaerere, — quod  est  diffi  cilissimum,  credere.
difScile  illud,  sed  necesse.

Eeason  demands  belief, — and  reason  will  give  it.  Faith  is  another
thing — that  comes."

[Note.  The  script  of  June  21,  and  June  24,  1902,  was  shown  to
Miss  Harrison  on  June  26,  1902,  as  attested  by  her  statement  on  the
cniginal  documents.  The  answer  to  my  letter  of  enquiry  about  Dr.  B's
ring  was  not  received  by  me  till  August  3,  after  my  return  to  England.'\

d.  July  1,  1902.  "...  The  chain  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
cross, the  cross  stands,  it  is  not  worn.  .  .  .  E.T.C."

e.  July  7,  1902. ".  . . The ring is quite right,  though  the

letters  may  not  be  correct.  Try  again.  -  no  I  cant  do  it.
But  some  one  has  the  ring  and  can  look. )  i This  is


on  the  tomb,  but  the  other  crross  is  lighter  in  design — and  has
something  glistening  about  it  besides  the  gems,  in  the  trefoils.

Trifoliata  gemmata
stellata. I  have  tried  to  give  those  three  points  before  this,  but  you
would  not  understand." [attested:]  {July  7,  1902,  J.E.R)

■ (22)  Signature.

Quotations  completely  given  in  text,  p.  305,  6.

(23)  Philadelphus  corouarius.

{For  notes  on  extracts  marked  *  see  below,  p.  428.)

5.  August  18,  1903.  "Orinaria,  Orellaria,  like  that.  It  ends  in
— ia  ...  Oriana,  no  Oronia  Auronia  no  Orona  [or
Ororia]." See  above.  No.  19,  h,  p.  424.

6.  *  September  9,  1903.  "  Coronaria,  Campanile — Coronella  no  but
why  the  star  1  Auriga  Capellae  has  the  letters  of  it  but  is  too
long — and  it  should  be  one  word  not  two.


428


Appendix.


[part


Auricapella  auricolorata  Oriflamma  auricomata  goldhaired,  Camilla's
yellow  hair  reminds.

flava  comam —

nexit  in  hastam
0  r  i  t  e  1 1  a

C  0  r  o  n  a  t  a
Ariadne's  crown  in  the  sky.

C  comes  Orionis  Corotana  {or  Corotaria)  [drawing  of  crow7i]  and  the
countless  hosts  of  Heaven."

7.  SejH.  17,  1903.  "you  have  the  key  word  now.  ...  It  is
out  of  your  hands  now — others  will  decide.  Hodgson  will  act,  but
will  not  tell  you  till  it  is  done."

8.  *  October  5,  1903.  "Aurora  fecit  multo  cum  sono  conchyli
superimpendente  Zephyri  flatu.  resonat  mare,  plangitur  ora.  desinit
in  plangorem  Ariadnes  vox.

Ariadne  stella  coronaria  hoc  est  omen  et  nomen — mitte.

Seven  stars  in  the  crown and  Berenice's  hair  too  flava  comam —

Mary  Magdalene  and  the  nard — but  you  will  not  understand.

cingit  corona  flammata  caput  quod  ei  fuit  carissimuni — ibi  florescunt
lilia  olympiaca  non  Romana. palescit  inhians.

no — -you  confuse — Ariadne's  cry — find  that  out  vox  clamantis
et  amantis  in  rupe  deserta — venit  consolator  inopinatus,  caelicolosus
non  mortalis,  in  caelo  posuit  stellam  mortalibus  in  maerore  omen.

Interpretatio  facilis.

Ariadne's  nomen  significationem  demonstrat
Accipe  accipe."

*  Notes  on  above  script.

Sept.  9,  1903.  "Camilla's  j'ellow  hair  reminds"  is  perhaps  a  mere
confusion.  Virgil's  Camilla  has  not  yellow  hair,  but  Virgil's  Camilla
is  obviously  suggested  by  the  words  nexit  in  hastam  {Aen.  XI.  554-5).
Possibly  the  yellow  hair,  flava  comam,  is  an  anticipation  of  Berenice's
deified  locks  of  yellow  hair  in  the  script  of  Oct.  5th.  The  phrase
comes  Orionis,  "  companion  of  Orion,"  suggests  a  constellation,  and
so  do  the  following  words,  "  the  countless  hosts  of  heaven."

Oct.  5,  1903.  The  early  phrases  refer  beyond  a  doubt  to  Catullus'
poem  on  Ariadne  and  Dionysus,  a  famous  passage,  which  is
recalled  by  the  allusions  to  dawn  and  the  sea.  The  lament  of  Ariadne
and  the  unexpected  arrival  of  the  god,  as  well  as  the  inclusion  of
Ariadne's  crown  among  the  stars,  are  referred  to  later  in  the  script.
The  subject  of  the  next  following  poem  of  Catullus  (Cat.  LXVI.)  is


liil]


Appendix.


429


the  transference  to  the  constellations  of  Berenice's  hair,  and  in
this  poem  Catullus  refers,  naturally  enough,  to  both  the  recent
constellations,  Ariadne's  crown  and  Berenice's  hair.

Ibi  vario  ne  solum  in  lumine  caeli

ex  Ariadneis  aurea  temporibus

fixa  cm-ma  fmet,  sed  nos  quoque  fulgeremus

devotae  flavi  verticis  exuviae,

says  the  lock  speaking  of  itself  in  Cat.  LXVI.  59.

The  mention  of  hair  is  apparently  responsible  for  the  introduction
of  Mary  Magdalene  and  the  nard,  but  this  last  allusion  is  at  once
rejected  as  inappropriate  by  the  script.  The  flaming  crown  upon  a
well-loved  head  repeats  the  leading  idea.  I  have  discovered  nothing
to  account  for  the  Olympian  lilies,  a  phrase  which,  as  far  as  I  know,
is  original.

(24)  Symposium.

Quotations  completely  given  in  text,  pp.  310-318.

Extract  from  Script  to  illustrate  Prophecy  Unfulfilled.
See  Chap.  XIII.,  P.  319.

Dec.  29,  1903.  "  Patientia- — patet  quibus  patientia.  o  vos  qui
timetis  audite  nunc  vocem  clamantis  et  proclamantis  in  desertis
locis  nunquam  antea  visa  mox  videbitis,  nunquam  audita  auribus
recipietis — in  longum  aevum  permanebit  Veritas.

Write  now  :  he  comes,  upon  the  sea — in  a  ship — the  letter  will
hardly  reach  in  time.

It  is  not  to  you  he  comes  but  note  this  day  &  watch.

This  is  a  prophecy.  I  will  tell  you  more  presently.  Note  now
the  unexpected  journey  on  the  sea."

List  of  Documents  in  corroboration  of  Statements  concerning
Anticipations  or  Prophecies. See  Chap.  XIII.

The  numbers  in  brackets  refer  to  the  numbering  in  the  text.

(4)  Postmarks  on  Script  of  Oct.  21st  and  Oct.  23rd,  1903,  sent
to  Sir  O.J.L.  before  Oct.  25.

Dr.  Orenfell's  paper  at  Cambridge read on Nov.  10th,  re-
ported in  Cambridge  Review  of  Nov.  r2th,  1903.
Dr.  G.'s  London  paper  reported  in  Times,  Nov.  14th,  1903.
Oxyrhynchus  Papyrus  publ.  June,  1904.


0


Appendix.


[part


(6)  Original  script  Sept.  4th  and  7th,  1901.
Copies  on  Sept.  5th  and  8th,  1901.
Note  in  script  book  Oct.  14th,  1901.

Date  of  visit  to  Winchester,  Sept.  26th-Oct.  2ud,  1901,
noted  in  diary.

(7)  Original  script  March  3rd,  1903,  and  post  mark.
Note  in  script  book  March  7th,  1903.

Notes  in  diary  March  5th,  7th  and  8th,  1903.

Letter  from  H.  F.  S.  on  March  5,  referring  to  Didascalia.

(8)  Script  of  June  27th,  1902.  ,  '
Miss  Harrison's  note  of  July  4th,  1902.

Letter  to  Mr.  Piddington  July  4th,  1902,  endorsed  by  him
as  received  on  July  7th.

Letters  from  Mr.  Piddington  August  14th  and  23rd,  1902.

Letters  of  July  23rd,  July  26th,  August  12th,  1902,  enclosing
cutting  from  the  Courrier  de  Cannes  of  July  1st,  1902,
letters  from  the  Cure  at  Coursegoules  July  24th,  1902,
and  from  the  Superior  of  the  Oratory  at  Juan  les  Pius
August  10th,  1902.

Copy  of  letter  to  Editor  of  Giornale  d'ltalia.

(12)  Original  script  May  11th,  1901.

Copy  in  script  book  May  12th,  1901.
Note  in  script  book  May  16th,  1901.
Note  in  diary  May  17th,  1901.
Account  in  Daily  Mail  May  13,  1901.
Account  in  JVestminster  Gazette  May  16th,  1901.

(14)  Original  script  December  11th,  1901,  and  December  17th,  1901.
Copies  of  script  Dec.  12th  and  Dec.  20th,  1901.
Notes  in  script  book  Dec.  20th,  1901,  Jan.  1st,  1902,  March
3rd,  1902,  March  5th,  1902.
Letter from Mrs. Sidgwick, Nevvnham College,  Cambridge,
December  15,  with  postmark  Cambridge, Dec. 16,  1901
(acknowledging  receipt  of  a  letter  from  M.  de  G.  V.  with
enquiries  about  '  Marmontel ').
Letter  from  Mr.  Piddington  March  23rd,  1902,  describing  Lon-
don Library  copies  of  Marmontel's  Memoirs.
Letters  from  Mr.  E.  H.  Marsh  January  16th,  1902,  February
24th, 1902  (postcard),  March  4th, 1902  (describing  the
chapter  read  by  him  in  Paris  on  Feb. 21), March  10th,
1903 (enclosing corroborative statement of  incident  as


LIII.]


Appendix.


431


narrated  in  this  paper),  March  14th,  1903  (enclosing  letter
as  below).

Letter  from  the  Hon.  Neville  Lytton  March  14th,  1903  (confirm-
ing dates  of  E.H.M.'s  visit  to  Paris  and  E.H.M.'s  reading
of  a  London  Library  book).

(15)  Original  script  of  April  2,  1903,  April  10,  1903,  Feb.  24,  1905,
March  17,  1906,  each  sent  by  post  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
shortly  after  production.

Copies  of  above  script  on  April  3,  1903,  April  11,  1903,
Feb.  25,  1905,  March  18,  1906.

Note  in  script-book,  April  5,  1906.

Entries  in  diary  under  Dec.  11,  1905,  and  April  4,  1906.

Letters  from  Miss  M.  A.  Curtois,  7  Smith  Square,  Westminster,
on  March  23rd,  1906  (asking  me  to  visit  her),  and  on
April  8,  1906  (enclosing  account  of  cross  as  described,
and  photograph  reproduced  in  text).

Note  on  "  Wheel  of  the  Master"

The  "wheel  of  the  master"  on  March  7th,  1903,  was  by  no
means  the  first  appearance  in  the  script  of  a  wheel.  The  mystic
wheel  of  Pythagorean  or  Orphic  significance  appears  usually  to  be
four-spoked  (see  Lower  Italy  Vases  represented  on  pp.  602-603  of
Prolegomena  to  Greek  Religion  hy  Miss  Harrison),  and  the  wheel  of
Ixion  in  the  lower  world  is  expressly  so  described  by  Pindar.  On
seven  occasions  before  the  appearance  of  the  mysterious  "  wheel  of
the  master,"  the  script  had  alluded  to  wheels,  often  in  connexion
with  the  number  four.  Thus  on  March  27th,  1901,  we  have
"petorrita  jrro  carroni.  Saepe  currus  deorum."  Petorrita  is  an  old
Latin  word  for  a  four-wheeled  waggon,  pi^^or  being  equivalent  to
quattuor  (four),  and  rita  representing  rota  (wheel).  Carroni  is  a  false
form,  carrus  being  a  two-wheeled  car.  But  in  spite  of  the  error  the
allusion  is  clear  to  "a  four-wheeled  waggon  instead  of  a  car;  often
the  chariot  of  the  gods."

Again  on  April  24th,  1901,  there  are  drawings  followed  by  the
words  "always  in  fours  symetrically  posited."  The  first  drawing
represents  four  circles  joined  together,  the  second  a  square  and
four  dots.

On  June  27th,  1901,  the  script  wrote;  Onmia  accipe — velociter  currit
alatus  pes,  vehementior  rota  ocissime  autem  nuntius  clei  alipes  super  maria
volitans. "  Receive  the  omens,  swiftly  runs  the  winged  foot,  more


432


Appendix.


[part  liii.


violently  the  wheel,  and  fastest  the  wing-footed  messenger  of  God
flitting  over  the  seas."

On  September  4th,  1901,  there  were  drawings  in  the  script  repre-
senting four  circles  followed  by  an  arrangement  of  lines  and  circles
in  fours  which  might  symbolise  a  four-wheeled  waggon  and  shafts.
The  phrase  sic  semper  sic  uhique  followed  this  drawing  and  the  same
phrase  had  immediately  preceded  the  description  on  March  27th,
1901,  of  the  four-wheeled  waggon.

On  March  2nd,  1902,  there  was  a  further  attempt  to  represent
by  rough  drawings  something  grouped  in  fours.  The  drawings  were
preceded  by  the  words  :  "  1  2  3  4  and  then  again — four  and  four
and  pause — and  then  repeat."  Then  after  the  first  drawing  [for
facsimiles  see  App.,  p.  346]  came :  "  do  you  see  it  now  1 "  and
after  more  drawings,  "  I  have  tried  to  tell  you  this  before."  The
later  drawings  apparently  represent  a  revolving  group  of  four  con-
nected objects  and  are  followed  by  the  words  :  acquiret  vires  eundo,
"  it  will  gain  strength  by  going."  This  suggests,  though  it  does  not
mention,  a  wheel.

On  April  14th,  1902,  a  rough  drawing  was  followed  by  the  words
"  quadriform  too,  as  of  old  I  have  said."  Then  after  another  rough
drawing  the  words  "  not  right."

Another  allusion  on  May  16th,  1902,  to  ambrosial  night  wander-
ing on  her  car  has  been  commented  on  above  (see  p.  43) ;  it  may,
however,  have  no  connexion  with  the  series  of  attempts  to  suggest
a  wheel.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


INDEX  TO  VOL.  XX
(PART  LIII)

1906.


A,  Miss,  Experiments  in  Simultaneous  Wi-iting  with  -  -  65,  362
Anecdotes,  unidentified,  given  in  the  Script  -  111,  112,  143,  144,  376
Anticipations. See  Future  Events.

Aphorisms,  Proverbs,  etc.,  occurring  in  the  Script - - 47-49,  356,  357
Appendix,  Extracts  from  the  Script  illustrating  the  Text  - -  340-432
Archdale,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondences  with - - 206,  207,  403,  404
Archdale,  Stewart,  references  to - . - 206,  207,  229,  403,  404
Assonances  occurring  in  the  Script - . - - - 56,  360,  361
Automatic  Writings,  On  a  Series  of,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall - -  1-432
Part  I.  (General).

Introductory  ------  l

Form  and  Style  of  Script - - -  18
Other  General  Characteristics - -  47
Varieties  of  Dramatic  Form  - - -  67
Comments  in  Script  on  the  Phenomena  -  84
Unverifiable  Statements  or  Allusions -  105
Part  II.  (Verifiable  Matter).

Reminiscences  and  connexion  with  Dreams  133
Experiments  in  Telepathy - - -  156
References  to  Living  Acquaintances -  177
Cross-correspondences - - - -  205

„  (Mrs.  Forbes) -  219


5)


11


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


Automatic  Writings,  Part  II.  (Verifiable  Matter).

„ „ References  to  Past  Events - - -  276

„  „  ,,  „  to  Future  Events  -  -  319
„ ,, Appendix  of  Extracts  from  Script  illustrating

the  Text - 340

„ „ Table  of  Contents  2-5

"  Automatisms,"  possible  instances  of  - ------  47,54

B.

B.,  Mrs.,  Experiments  in  Simultaneous  Writing  with  -  -  65,  362
Balfour,  F.  M. See  Communicators.

Balfour,  Gerald,  Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script  - - - -  193

Baltimore,  Mrs.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Forbes

220,  231-233,  247,  250,  255,  260,  405
Basket  of  Fruit,  references  to ----- - 278,  415,  416

Bayfield,  M.  A.,  and  Automatic  Experiments - - - - 29,  259

Benson,  Archbishop,  Description  in  Script  of  Cross  and  Ring  301-3  ^5,  425
Book,  Small,  references  to  ------- - 296,  421

Box,  Locked,  references  to 299,  423,  424

Browning  Quotations  -  -  -  -  52,  147,  189,  297,  298,  359,  402,  419
Bradgate,  Mrs.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Yerrall  in  Simultaneous  Writing  167

C.

Caelian  Hill,  reference  to ------ 293-294,  419

Cappadocian  Pollux,  references  to  the . - . 142,  143,  342,  344
Caristian  Anecdote,  the - - - - - • 111,  143,  144,  376

Cartwright,  Mrs.  (Control). See  Communicators.

Characteristics,  Other  General,  of  the  Script -----  47-66
See  also  Dramatic  Form  an^i  Form  and  Style.

Childe,  Rol.nd,  references  to 52,  189,  190,  359,  402

Christian  Ritual  or  Symbolism,  Allusions  to - 45,  119-124,  249,  379-381
Chronological  List  of  Events  inducing  contidence  in  Script 91,  92,  369,  370
Classical  Allusions  or  Quotations,  Chief  References

33,  41,  42-46,  50-54,  61,  108,  109,  113-118,  121-132,  137,  144,  145,  153,
163,  222,  241-248,  286-293,  297,  357-361,  377-379,  381-3S5,  414,  418,
419,  421-423,  431-432.
See  also  Plato,  "Symposium"  and  "Thetetetus."
Classical  Ti'ipos  Tip,  Attempt  to  reproduce - - . .  145-147
Classification  of  Topics  in  the  Script  ------  135-137

Columella,  references  to ------- - 294,  419

Comments  by  "  the  Scribe  "  on  the  Phenomena  -  -  84-104,368,371-373
Communicators,  Chief  references  to  :

„  Balfour,  F.  M. - 26,  27,  152,  185,  193,  225,  278,  402

„  Cartwright,  Mrs.  (Control) - -  201,211,367,368


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


iii


Communicators,  Chief  references  to  :

„  Forbes,  Talbot  (through  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Verrall)

220-226,  229,  230,  231,  233,  234,  236-239,  244,  256,
260,  263,  269,  270,  275,  307,  404-414.
„  G-Lirney,  Edmund  (through  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Verrall)

102,  22u,  223,  226,  229,  231,  244,  254,  257,  263,  266,
269,  270,  275,  305-307,  395,  401,  408,  415,  427.
„  "  H."  (through  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Verrall)

209,  220,  228,  234-236,  239-248,  254,  263,  265,  275,
280,  281,  307,  405,  406.
„  "  Impei-ator "  and  "  Rector"  (Controls)

79,  80,  82,  125,  203,  214,  215,  218

Myers,  F.  W.  H. -  26

Sidgwick,  Dr. 26,  277-279,  295-298,  300,  301,  331,  332
Condensed  Expressions  used  in  the  Sci'ipt  ------  55

Consciousness,  Case  where  the  Source  of  the  Message  appears  to  be

Supraliminal  - -  139-140

,,  Conditions  of,  during  Wi'iting - - - - 12-15,  139

Constable,  F.  C,  Experiments  with - - - 17,  96,  168-173,  394-400
,, „ Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script - - -  181
Conversations,  Apparent  interchange  of,  between  Subliminal  Personalities

68-73,  334,  366-368

Cross-Correspondences,  with  other  Sensitives

16,  17,  25,  46,  51,  58,  62,  78,  102,  103,  151,  168,
173-175,  205-218,  400,  403-404.
„  with  i\Irs.  Forbes

16,  51,  87,  90,  95,  97,  98,  121-123,  131,  132,  168,
219-275,  306,  307,  315-317,  351,  356,  369,  371,
394,  395,  404-414.

Crystal  Vision,  Early  experiments  in  ------ -  7

Curtois  Cross,  The,  references  to ----- 335-339,  431

,,  „ Illustration  of ------ -  336

D.

"  Daily  M.ail,"  Case  connected  with  a  Fulfilled  Prediction 329,  330,  430
Daphne,  references  to - - - - - - - - -  58,  59

"  Dawn,  the  One-Horse." See  Dr.  Verrall's  Telepathic  Experiment.
Development  of  the  Automatic  Script . . - . 7-17,  340-355
Dew  Smith,  Mrs.,  Experiments  with  - - - 16,  168,  173-175,  372,  400
„  ,, Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script

183,  184,  204,  255,  372

Dormitory  Notice,  references  to- - - - - - - 277,  415

Dovinans. See  River  Dovinans.

Dramatic  Form,  Varieties  of ------ - 67-83,  275

„  „ Conversations ----- 68-73,  334,  366-368

„  ,, Signatures,  Recognisable  ------  73-83


iv


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


Drawings,  Rough,  appearing  in  the  Script

18,  19,  75,  81,  118,  263,  264,  301-305,  321,  323,  336,  346,  347,  349,

350,  352,  353,  426.
Dreams  and  Impression  in  Sleep,  connexion  between,  and  the  Script

103,  118,  133-155,  302,  355,  374,  385-387


„ Vivid  Sense  of  "Eeality"  in  certain -  118,  148,  149,  385,  386,  387

E.

Eloise  Signature -----  75

Emotional  Excitement  preceding  the  Script - - - 14,  15,  284,  285
Enigmatic  or  Oracular  Sayings ------- 125,  381

Evidential  Value  of  the  Information,  Consideration  of  133, 184,  185,  193-204
Experiments  on  Conditions  of  Writing ------  16

^■

"  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charitt." - -  297

See  also  Plato's  "  Thesetetus."
Fire  Incident,  references  to - - - - 14,  44,  45,  284,  285,  418
Florentine  Cabinet,  references  to ----- 195^  igg^  420
Forbes,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondences  with

16,  51,  87,  90,  95,  97,  98,  121-123,  131,  132,  168,  219-275,
306,  307,  315-317,  351,  356,  369,  371,  394,  395,  404-414.
,,  Corroborative  Documents -----  409-414

Forbes,  Talbot. See  Communicators.

Form  and  Style  of  Script -------- 18-46,  356

See  also  other  General  Characteristics  ------  47-66

Fuchsia  "  Experiment. See  Constable,  F.  C.
Future  Events,  Miscellaneous  references  to - - 294,  319-339,  403
„  List  of  Documents  Corroborating  Anticipations  or

Prophecies  ------- 429,  430

G.

Garden,  references  to 280,  416

General  Characteristics  of  the  Script. See  Characteristics.

Gothard,  Mortimer,  Signature ------- 75,  375

Grenfell,  Dr.,  Lecture  on  the  Logia - - - - - 53,  54,  321,  429

Gui'ney,  Edmund. See  Communicators.

„  „  Reproduction  of  Signature  of - 231,  305-307,  427

Gurwood  Crest,  The,  reproduction  of  - - - - - 20,  263,  408

H.

"  H." See  Communicators.

Handwriting,  Characteristics  of  the -------  20-27

„ "  Recognisable - - - - - - - 25,  36,  82

„  See  also  Signatures.


Index  to  Vol.  XX.  v

Harrison,  Miss  Jane,  references  made  to  in  the  Script -  - -  180

"  Haunting  Bird"  Prediction  concerning - - . -  328-330,430

Hills  in  Eome,  references  to - 293-294,  419

History  and  General  Description  of  the  Script - - -  - 6,  7-132


Hodgson,  Dr.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper 46,  58,  78,  82,  109,  125,

169,  170,  212-218,  404
Spontaneous  references  to,  made  in  Script

78,  82,  91,  99-102,  178,  198,  200-203,  204,  282,  283,

299,  300,  307-310,  318,  351,  395,  417,  419,  423,  427,  429
„  "  Syringa "  Incident - - - -  101,307-310,427-429

Hyslop,  Professor  James,  on  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mi\s  Piper  47,  54,  215

I.

"Imperator''  (Control). ,?ee  Communicators.

Impressions  connected  with  the  Script - -  142,  171-173,  229,  269,  284
,, passing  to  the  wrong  person - - - - 213,  215,  258
Inaccuracies  in  the  Script  foreign  to  the  Normal  Writing  - - 27,  28,  32
Isles  of  the  Blest,  chief  references  to -  35,  44,  112-118,  287,  291-293,  377-379

J.

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Assistance  in  the  Experiments  given  by

1,  79,  135,  168,  197,  221,  411
„  „ Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script - 198,  199

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence,  Spontaneous  reference  to,  in  Script - - 198,  199

K.

Keats  Quotation  -51,  358,  397
Keith,  Alec,  Unidentified  Message  from 75,  374,  375

L.

Languages. See  Latin  and  Greek —

,,  Modern  Foreign,  rare  use  of  - - - - - -  30-32

Latin  and  Greek,  Use  of  in  the  Script - - 6,  8-10,  12,  21-24,  30-46
„  ,, Allusions  to  Fables  -------  41

„  „ Antecedent  Knowledge  of  33

„  „ Crablaed  Style  - - -  40

„  ,, Original  Non-Classical  Phrases - - - -  24,  44

„  „ Philological  Peculiarities  ------  36-41

„  „ Poetical  Phraseology ------  42-44

,,  ,, Propoi'tion  and  Intention  of -----  33

„  „  for  Extracts,  see  Appendix.

Leaf,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  Spontaneous  reference  to,  in  Script  -  -  -  204
Living  Acquaintances,  Spontaneous  references  to  -  -  -  177-204
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Filing  and  care  of  the  Original  Automatic  Writings

1,  11,  12,  134,  135,  216,  219,  411-413


vi


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script  —

60,  89,  178,  198-201,  207-209,  361
See  also  Mr.  Myers'  Sealed  Envelope  Experiment.
"Logia,  The,"  references  to - - 52,53,54,95,96,297,  321,360,422
Lost  Hat,  references  to  277,  415

M.

Manuscript  Play,  references  to  -  279,280,416

"  Marmontel,"  Prediction,  ----- -  181,331-334,430,431

Marsh,  E.  H.,  "  Marnionter'  Prediction,  the - -  181,  331-324,  430,  431
,,  Spontaneous  reference  to,  made  in  Script - - -  181

Marshal],  W.  C,  Telepathic  Experiment  in  connexion  with  the  Script

175,  176,  401

Maupertuis  anrl  Snrrasin,  reference  to  -----  25,  375
Memory,  Experiments  as  to  subsequent,  of  the  Script- - - 9,  12,  13

See  also  Consciousness.
Milton  Quotation - - - - - - - - - 163,  359

Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Controls  of,  ("  Iniperator  "  and  "Rector.")

See  Communicators.
Motor  Impulses  to  write.  Strong 8-14,  51,  78,  87,  88,  150,  154,  187,

214,  221,  225,  226,  228,  231,  284,  302,  332
Munro,  Dr.  H.  A.  J.,  possible  reference  to  -  -  -  -  -  107,  108
Murray,  Gilbert,  Telepathic  Experiment  by,  in  connexion  with  the

Script  ------------  167

Myers,  L)r.  A.  T. Spontaneous  i-eferences  to,  made  in  Script

161,  391,  393,  394

„  „  See  also  Dr.  Verrall's  Experiment.

Myers,  F.  W.  H. Imitations  of  the  Handwriting  of,  by  the  Script -  26

„  „  Sealed  Envelope  left  by,  for  Experimental  pui  poses

78,  79,  172,  268,  271,  272,  299-301,  327,  399,  424,  425
Mystic  Allusions --------  127-131,383

N.

Names,  List  of  unidentified ------  105,  106,  374-376

Neo-Platonist  Theories,  Chief  references  to 33,  116,  125,  128,  132,

286-293,  323,  324,  418,  419,  431,  432
"  Wheel  of  the  Master,"  the  - - -  128,431
Neville,  Ralph,  Communication,  ----- 24,  75,  111,  375,  376

Normal  and  Subliminal  Knowledge,  ditferences  between.
See  Subliminal  Self.


0.

Objects,  Description  of  Unidentified  ------ 110,  111

Omar,  Waters  of  - --------  285,286,418

Original  Non-Classical  Phiases ------- 24,  44-46

"  Our  Lilies"  (Talbot  Forbes)  references  to  - - -  233-235,  256,  257,  258


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


vii


P.

'"  Passionate  Pilgrim,"  The,  references  to  - - - -  66,298,423

Past  Events,  Miscellaneous  references  to - - - - 276-318,  415

Personality. See  Dramatic  Form  assumed  by  the  Script - - 67-83,  275
Personal  Matters,  Small  amount  of  references  to . - - -  104
Phrases,  Meaningless  Introductory ------ 28,  29

„ Terminal - -- -- -- --  -29

Piddington,  J.  G.,  Assistance  in  Experiments  given  by

1,  26,  82,  134,  135,  206-210,  234,  235,  240,  246,  410
„  „ Handwriting,  Imitation  of,  in  Script - - 26,  81

„  „ Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script

26,  82,  178,  198,  201,  202
„  ,, The  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mi-s.  Thompson - -  219

Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of

46,  47,  54,  58,  78,  82,  109,  125,  169,  170,  212-218,  367,  404
„ Cross-correspoi.dences - - - 58,  78,  169-170,  212-218
Plato,  References  to  the  "  Phaedrus "  - . - - -  145-147,360
„  "Philebus"  - - - - - - 144,  385

„ Chief  references  to  the  "Symposium  Incident"

241-248,  250,  268,  271,  272,  275,  299-301,  310-
318,  327,  414,  424,  425,  429.
„  „  the  "  Thefetetus "  52,53,54,95,96,297,321,422


Pompilia's  Grave,  reference  to -------  147,148

Prayers  given  by  Script -  -  -  124,  381

Predictions,  Unfulfilled  319

„ See  also  Future  Events.

Pseudo-Memory,  Possible  instance  of- - - - -  -  -  153

Pseudonyms,  Use  of,  in  the  Report - - - - -  -  -7,  16

Puus  and  Plays  on  Names  -------  59-62,  288,  361

Q.

■Qdasi-Mathematical  Disquisitions  ------ 131,  385

■Quasi-Philosophical,  Mystic  or  Didactic  Utterances  -  -  124-132,  381-385
Quotations,  Recognisable ------- 49-54,  357-360


R.

Pecord  and  Preservation  of  Documents,  etc.

11,  134,  135,  273,  274,  354,  355,  409-414,  429
"  Rector  "  (Control). See  Communicatoi's.
Reminiscences  and  Connexion  with  Dreams

103,  118,  133-155,  302,  355,  364,  385-387
„  „ Dreams,  Connexion  with - - -  148-165,385-387

„  ,, ,, List  of  Passages  showing - - 386,  387

„  „ Revived  Memories,  possible  instances  of

110,  116  117,  123,  125,  128,  131


VIU


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


Eichet,  Professor  Ch.,  Spontaneous  reference  to,  in  Script  -  -  198,199
Eiver  Dovinans,  references  to ----- - 278,  336,  416


S.

Scotch  Ballad  Quotation  52,  358

"  Scott,  Mrs." -----------  219

See  also  Forbes,  Mrs.
"  Scribe,  The,"  Criticisms  by,  on  the  Phenomena - - .  84-104
Script,  The. See  Eecord  and  Preservation  of.
Sealed  Envelopes,  Experiments  in  Eeading  Contents  of

„  Mr.  Con.stable's - - - 17,  96,  168-173,  394-400

„  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  (posthumous)

78,  79,  92,  268,  271,  272,  299-301,  327,  424,  425

Sensations  while  Writing  8,  9,  12-16

Shakespeare  Quotations - - - - - 52,  189,  190,  358-360,  402

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry  and  her  Brothers,  Spontaneous  references  to,

in  Script ----------  193-198

Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Imitation  of  the  Handwriting  of,  in  the

Script  -------  26

„  „  Spontaneous  references  made  to,  in  Script

194-198

„  „  See  also  Communicators.

Signatures  to  Communications ----- 26,  74-83,  344-353

„  Identified,  of  the  Dead  - - - 26,  82,  224,  231,  305-307

„  „ of  the  Living ----- 26,  81,  82

„  Unidentified  ------ 75-81,  203,  217,  218

„  Unintelligible _ - -  81

Sleep  or  Drowsiness  induced  by  Writing  -----  14-16,  351
„ See  also  Dreams.

Smith. See  Mrs.  Dew  Smith.

Subliminal  Knowledge  and  Powers,  differences  between,  and  Supraliminal

19,  27-32,  45,  46,  54,  58,  59,  62,  117,  154,
155,  178,  244,  246,  286,  292,  293,  300
Supernormal  Acc{uisition  of  Knowledge,  Sections  bearing  on.

See  Eeferences  to  Living  Acquaintances,  Past  Events,  Telepathy,
and  Cross-Correspondences.
Sundial  Inscriptions -------- 280,  281,  417

Supraliminal  Knowledge,  Allusions,  etc.,  directly  referable  to -  137-142
Swift  Quotation  -----------  360

"Symposium"  Eeferences  to 78,  79,  241-248,  250,  268,  271,  272,  275,

299-301,  310-318,  327,  369,  414,  424,  425,  429
„ Passages  from,  in  Sealed  Envelope,  - 79,  268,  271,  272,

299-301,  318,  327,  414,  424,  425,  429
„ Quotatiou  from,  in  "Human  Personality"  241-248,250,

275,  299,  315-318,  369,  414,  429


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


IX


"  Symposium  "  Eeferences  to,  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  Script

241-248,  315,  369,  414,  429
Syringa  Incident  101,307-310,427-429

T.

Table  of  Contents  ----------  2-5

Telepathy,  Experiments  in  conveying  Information  telepathically  to

the  Script - - - - 25,  156-176,  247-9,  255,  313,  314,  387-401

„ Gradual  Emergence  of  the  Suggestion - - -  156-165
See  also  Dr.  Verrall's  Telepathic  Experiment.
Tennyson  Quotations,  - - - - - - - - -  51>  358-360

Three  letters,  reference  to  ------ -  295,  296,  419-421

Thomas,  N.  W.,  reference  to ------ - 200,  201

Thompson,  Mrs.,  references  to,  in  Script - -  201,  202,  207,  225,  405,  420
„ Cross-correspondences ----- 151,  207-212

Trinity  College  Cloisters,  references  to - . - - 277,  278,  415

U.

Unidentifiable  Descriptions  106-112
Names ------ 105,  106,  374-376

Unusual  Constructions ---------  39

Unveritiable  Statements  and  Allusions -----  105-132

V.

"Veni  Creator"  incident, ------  324-326,430

Veridical  Case,  reference  to ------- 283,  417

"Verifiable  Matter  contained  in  the  Script -----  131-339

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  Spontaneous  references  to,  by  Script 177,  184-192,  204
„ Complete  List  of  ----- -  401-403

,,  „ Telepathic  Experiment  (the  "One-horse  Dawn''),

Chief  references  to

22,  36,  86,  87,  97,  156-167,  185,  189,  247-249,

255,  277,  313,  314,  387-394

Verrall,  Hugh,  Eeference  to,  - 190,  191,  403

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  Automatic  Experiments  -----  29
„  „  „  in  connexion  with  the  Script

213-217,  230-233,  257,  258,  261,
263,  264,  267,  362,  364
„  „  Spontaneous  references  to,  in  Script

192,  193,  204,  253,  407

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  On  a  Series  of  Automatic  Writings - - -  1-432
Verse,  attempts  at  English  - - - - - - 65,  66,  297,  362-365

„  „  Greek  and  Latin ------ 63-65,  365

„  „  Specimens  of  Verse  composed  between  sleeping

and  waking  361,  362


X


Index  to  Vol.  XX.


•  w.

Wellington  College,  references  to  -  -  161,  186-189,  231,  277,  402,  415-
"  Westminster  Gazette,"  Case  connected  with  a  Fulfilled  Prediction

u  , .  ,  329,  330,  430

"  \A  heel  of  the  Master,"  Notes  on 128  431  432:

Words  Non-existent  and  Unintelligible  '36  37'

»  >,  but  Intelligible  - 36  37
