Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXI (1908-1909)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1908 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LIV-LVI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc21soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

%*  PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXI

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LIV-LVI)
1908-9


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1909

All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS.


PAET  LIV.
October,  1907.

General  Meetings,  j

I. The Appreciation  of Time by Somnambules. By  T.  W.

Mitchell,  M.D.,  2

IT. Experiments  in  Thought-transference. By  Clarissa  Miles

and  Hermione  Bamsden,  -------  qq

III. Report  on  some  Recent  Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in

America. By  Alice  Johnson,  ------  94

j  Supplement.

o I. Vis-Knut. By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D., - - - - -  136

biff

II. Reviews :

Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  "Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and

Suggestion." By  Frank  Podmore, - - - -  149

Dr.  August  Forel's  "Hypnotism  or  Suggestion  and  Psycho-
therapy." By  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D., - - -  156

Dr.  T.  S.  Clouston's  "  The  Hygiene  of  Mind." By  C.  Lloyd

Tuckey,  M.D.  -------  160

Miss  Mary  Hamilton's  "Incubation." By  The  Rev.  M.  A.

Bayfield, ---------  ig2

PART  LV.
June,  1908.

General  Meetings,  7g5

On  the  Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland. By  Alice  Johnson  :

Table  of  Contents, - -  igg

Chapter I. Introduction - - - . . - .  170

II. First  Period  :  September,  1903,  to  January,  1904,  176

127654


i  V


Contents


. ,  ,  ■ —  PAGE

Chapter  III.  First  Cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  -  219

„ IV.  January  to  August,  1905, -  240

V.  Fifth  Period  :  October,  1905,  to  February,  1906,  265

„ VI.  Sixth  Period  :  February  to  April,  1906. - -  290

„ VII.  The  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences, -  369

Supplement.
Review  :

Mr. Hereward Carrington's "  Physical Phenomena  of

Spiritualism." By  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  392

PART  LVI.
February,  1909.

I. The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont. By  M.

Sage,  -----------  405

II. The  Hallucination Theory  as applied  to  Certain  Cases  of
Physical Phenomena. By Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-
Solovovo, -  436

III. The  Education  of  the  Sitter. By  Alice  Johnson,  -  483

Note on Miss Johnson's Paper. By Count  Perovsky-

Petrovo-Solovovo, -  512

Supplement.
Reviews  :

Professor  Morselli's  "  Psicologia  e  '  Spiritismo.'  Impressioni
e  note  critiche  sui  fenomeni  medianici  di  Eusapia  Pala
dino." By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - -  -  516

Mr.  F.  Podmore's  "Naturalisation  of  the  Supernatural." By  Count

Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo, - -  -  -  525

Officers  and  Council  for  1909, -  -  533

List  of  Members  and  Associates, -  -  534

Index  to  Vol.  XXL,  -  - -  572


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LIV.

October,  1907.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  129th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
Hall  at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Wednesday,
January  30th,  1907,  at  8.30  p.m.;  the  President,  The  Right
Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  in  the  chair.

Mr.  W.  M'Dougall  read  the  paper  on  "  The  Case  of  Sally
Beauchamp,"  which  was  published  in  Part  LII.  of  the  Pro-
ceedings.


The  130th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place,  on
Thursday,  May  16th,  1907,  at  4.30  p.m.:  the  President  in
the  chair.

Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  read  the  paper  on  "  The  Appreciation

of  Time  by  Somnambules,"  which  is  printed  below.

a


2


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.I).


[part


I.

THE  APPRECIATION  OF  TIME  BY  SOMNAMBULES.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,
Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine.

I.

Many  classifications  of  the  different  stages  of  hypnosis  have
been  put  forward,  and  it  is  difficult  to  find  two  authors  who
are  in  agreement  as  to  how  many  stages  may  be  recognised,
or  by  what  names  they  are  to  be  known.  All  hypnotic  subjects,
however,  may  be  divided  into  two  great  groups,  according  to
whether  the  events  of  hypnosis  are  forgotten  or  not  in  the
waking  state ;  and  the  term  "  somnambule "  has  been  very
generally  used  to  describe  those  who,  when  hypnosis  is  termi-
nated, are  totally  amnesic  for  all  that  has  happened  during
the  trance.

Although  some  interesting  observations  in  regard  to  apprecia-
tion of  time  may  be  made  in  the  lighter  stages  of  hypnosis,
it  is  in  somnambules  that  this  power  is  most  strikingly  shown
and  may  be  most  conveniently  studied.  All  the  observations
recorded  or  referred  to  in  this  paper  were  made  on  somnambules,
and  with  regard  to  my  own  cases  I  can  declare  with  the
greatest  certainty  that  in  every  instance  post-hypnotic  amnesia
was  complete.

Every  one  who  has  done  much  practical  hypnotic  work  must
have  observed  the  accuracy  witli  which  somnambules  estimate
time-intervals.  If  a  somnambule  is  told  in  hypnosis  to  sleep
for  five  minutes,  ten  minutes,  or  half  an  hour,  and  then  wake
up,  it  is  found  that  awakening  takes  place  exactly  at  the
time  mentioned,  or  that,  if  there  is  an  error  in  the  time-
estimation,  it  is  generally  a  very  small  one.  It  is  also  well
known  that  this  power  of  estimating  time-intervals  may  persist


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


into  post-hypnotic  life,  so  that  an  action  suggested  in  hypnosis,
to  be  performed  in  waking  life  after  a  certain  interval,  is
generally  fulfilled  at  the  appointed  time,  notwithstanding  that
all  knowledge  of  the  suggestion  is  absent  from  the  waking
consciousness  during  the  intervening  period.

Although  this  association  with  the  hypnotic  state  of  what
appears  to  be  a  supernormal  power  is  well  worthy  of  investiga-
tion, we  possess  very  few  detailed  records  of  observations  which
might  help  us  in  elucidating  the  many  difficulties  which
confront  us  when  we  try  to  bring  the  facts  into  line  with
our  ordinary  psychological  beliefs.  In  the  early  days  of  the
study  of  hypnotic  phenomena,  so  much  that  appeared  marvellous
and  inexplicable  was  found  that  the  appreciation  of  time  by
somnambules  must  have  seemed  to  be  a  very  minor  wonder.
Even  when  the  attention  of  the  Nancy  investigators  was  turned
towards  the  subject,  they  seemed  to  be  more  surprised  by  the
length  of  time  which  may  elapse  between  the  giving  of  a
suggestion  and  its  fulfilment  than  by  the  extraordinary  accuracy
with  which  time-intervals  of  less  extent  are  estimated.  One
of  Liegeois'  subjects  fulfilled  a  suggestion  given  in  hypnosis
a  year  previously,1  and  Beaunis  produced,  in  one  of  his
somnambules,  a  visual  hallucination  after  an  interval  of
172  days.2  In  both  cases  the  date  on  which  the  suggestion
was  to  be  fulfilled  was  given  to  the  subject.  Liegeois'
suggestion  was  given,  on  October  12th,  as  falling  due  on
"  the  same  day  next  year,"  and  the  exact  date  was  given  by
Beaunis  in  his  su«£;estion.

It  was  soon  realised  that  such  cases,  however  interesting
and  remarkable  they  may  be  from  another  point  of  view,  have
very  little  to  do  with  any  supposed  power  on  the  part  of
somnambules  of  unconsciously  reckoning  duration.  Both
Delboeuf  and  Edmund  Gurney  insisted  on  the  distinction
that  must  be  made  between  cases  in  which  a  date  is  named
and  cases  in  which  simply  a  length  of  time  is  given.  For,
in  the  former  case,  the  fulfilment  of  the  suggestion  may  be
dependent  on  the  ordinary  laws  of  association,  whilst  in  the
latter  it  would  seem  to  imply,  as  Paul  Janet  said,  some
"  unknown  faculty " of  measuring time. It is, of  course,  a

1  Liegeois,  De  la  Suggestion,  Paris,  18S9,  p.  340.

2  Beaunis,  Le  Somnambulisme  Provoqui,  Paris,  1886,  p.  233.


4


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


commonplace  of  hypnotic  experimentation  that  a  suggestion
will  be  fulfilled,  either  in  hypnosis  or  in  post-hypnosis,  on
the  giving  of  a  pre-arranged  signal.  So,  if  a  subject  in
hypnosis  be  told  to  do  something  on  the  first  of  January,
the  arrival  of  that  day  may  suffice  to  revive  the  dormant
memory  of  the  command,  and  thus  lead  to  its  fulfilment.
But  if  he  be  told  to  perform  an  act  on  the  "  sixty-ninth  day
from  this,"  what  is  there  about  the  sixty-ninth  day  to  revive
the  hypnotic  command  ?  The  day,  when  it  comes,  as  Gurney
said,  "  carries  no  more  sixty-ninthness  about  it  than  any  other
day "  ;  and  unless  we  are  to  suppose  some  form  of  conscious
watching  and  counting  of  the  days  as  they  pass,  or  some  form
of  conscious  calculation,  whereby  the  terminal  day  is  arrived
at,  and  then  fixed  in  the  mind,  the  fulfilment  of  such  a
command  seems  inexplicable.

At  the  time  when  Beaunis  and  Liegeois  recorded  their
observations,  the  possibility  of  subconscious  mentation  had
not  been  distinctly  formulated.  The  germs  of  the  modern
doctrine  of  the  subliminal  consciousness  may  now  be  seen  to
have  been  latent  in  the  speculations  of  certain  philosophers
such  as  Fichte  and  Du  Prel ;  but  the  extravagant  applications
of  the  principle  of  the  "  Unconscious "  by  Eduard  von  Hart-
mann,  probably  alienated  the  minds  of  scientific  men  from
all  consideration  of  a  concept  apparently  so  directly  at  variance
with  their  empirical  beliefs.  So  we  find  that  the  earliest
explanations  of  the  accurate  fulfilment  of  post-hypnotic  actions
at  a  given  time,  or  after  a  given  interval,  tended  towards
some  hypothesis  of  "  physiological "  time-reckoning  rather
than  towards  the  supposition  that  some  form  of  consciousness
which  watches  and  counts  the  days  as  they  pass  may  be
concerned.  Thus  Beaunis  imagined  that  some  cerebral
mechanism  exists  in  men  and  animals  which  can  somehow
be  set  like  a  clock  so  as  to  produce  a  movement  at  a  given
time.  It  is,  he  said,  owing  to  this  mechanism  thc*t  some
people  are  able  to  wake  up  at  a  predetermined  hour,  and
that  an  animal  knows  when  it  is  feeding  time.

Although  the  last  word  in  the  controversy  has  not  yet
been  said,  I  think  there  is  no  need  at  present  to  re-argue  this
point  of  view.  Notwithstanding  the  adherence  of  such  eminent
authorities  as  Professor  Miinsterberg  and  Professor  Pdbot  to


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


5


the  view  that  all  subconscious  activity  is  merely  physiological,
it  is  now  very  widely  admitted  that  the  working  of  the  cerebral
mechanism  concerned  in  the  fulfilment  of  post-hypnotic  acts
has  a  psychical  concomitant,  existing,  it  may  be,  submerged
in  the  depths  of  the  stream  of  consciousness,  and  not  to  be
discovered  on  introspection  during  waking  life,  yet  capable
in  many  instances  of  being  brought  to  the  surface  by  certain
artifices,  such  as  re-hypnotisation,  so  that  its  existence  and
its  persistence  may  be  known  by  the  subject,  and  may  be
made  apparent  to  the  most  casual  or  most  sceptical  observer.
It  is,  I  think,  no  longer  possible  to  doubt  the  reality  of
subconscious  mentation,  or  to  evade  the  implications  which
this  admission  entails.

This  conception  of  a  psychical  reality  accompanying  sub-
conscious cerebral  activity  will  always  be  associated  with  the
name  of  the  late  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.  Of  the  great  bulk  of
Mr.  Myers'  work  I  do  not  desire,  nor  am  I  competent  to
speak ;  but  as  a  student  of  Hypnotism  I  would  like  to
record  my  belief  that  all  future  hypnotic  experimentation
must  be  based  on  some  form  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Subliminal
Consciousness  which  we  owe  to  him.

As  a  student  of  Medicine  I  am  profoundly  grateful  for  his
illuminating  conception  of  the  nature  of  hysteria  and  various
cognate  states — a  conception  which  has  transformed  into  one
of  the  most  fascinating  and  fertile  fields  of  clinical  study
what  was  for  centuries  the  opprobrium  of  medical  science.

In  discussing  phenomena  which  have  been  observed  only
in  hypnotic  somnambules,  we  need  not  take  into  consideration
the  different  opinions  which  have  been  put  forward  in  regard
to  the  existence  of  a  true  subliminal  self  in  all  human  beings  ;
nor  need  we  define  the  terms  subliminal  and  subconscious
so  carefully  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  examination  of  those
wider  problems  which  have  arisen  around  the  modern  con-
ception of  human  personality.  Taking  for  granted  the
possibility,  in  somnambules,  of  mentation  going  on  without
the  knowledge  or  attention  of  the  waking  consciousness — and
evidence  of  this  will  be  abundantly  shown  in  the  course  of
our  investigation — it  will  suffice  for  our  purpose  to  class  all
such  mentation  as  subconscious  or  subliminal.  And  in  doing
so  we  need  not  bind  ourselves  to  any  particular  beliefs  which,


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


on  other  grounds,  may  be  held  in  regard  to  the  higher  problems
that  meet  us  at  every  step  when  we  try  to  penetrate  into
those  hidden  recesses  of  man's  being  to  which  his  subconscious
mental  life  may  seem  to  be  the  gateway.

That  post-hypnotic  reckoning  of  time-intervals  is  not
merely  physiological,  but  entails  some  concomitant  mental
action,  was  clearly  shown  by  Gurney.1  On  March  3rd  a
suggestion  to  be  fulfilled  in  thirty-nine  days  was  given  to
one  of  his  subjects  during  hypnosis.  No  reference  to  the
command  was  made  till  March  19th,  when  he  was  suddenly
asked,  in  the  trance,  how  many  days  had  elapsed  since  it
was  n'iven.  He  instantly  said  16,  and  added  that  there  were
23  more  to  run.  It  was  evident  "  that  he  was  in  some  way
actually  counting  the  days  as  they  passed."  In  another  case
an  account  of  this  process  was  obtained.  The  subject  said
that  he  generally  thought  about  it  in  the  morning  early.
Something  seemed  to  say  to  him,  "  You've  got  to  count."
On  being  asked  if  that  happened  every  day  he  replied :  "  No,
not  every  day — perhaps  more  like  every  other  clay.  It  goes
from  my  mind  ;  I  never  think  of  it  during  the  day.  I  only
know  it's  got  to  be  done."

Gurney  concluded  from  these  cases  that  a  somnambule  who  is
told  to  perform  a  post-hypnotic  act  at  the  end  of  a  certain
number  of  days,  subconsciously  watches  and  counts  the  days
as  they  pass.  Notwithstanding  that  he  himself  had  made  many
experiments  which  proved  that  somnambules  are  able  to  make
subconscious  calculations,  Gurney  did  not  think  that  in  these
cases  of  time-watching  any  calculation  was  made  by  which  the
terminal  clay  was  arrived  at,  and  then  fixed  in  the  mind.

I  have  repeated  Gurney 's  experiments  on  several  somnambules,
and  I  find  that  there  is  considerable  variety  in  the  methods  used
by  them  for  ensuring  the  fulfilment  of  the  act  on  the  proper
day.  The  method  used  by  any  particular  subject  seems  to
depend  on  various  circumstances.  In  the  first  place,  it  will
depend  on  his  standard  of  education.  If  in  the  waking  state
he  is  not  good  at  mental  arithmetic,  or  if  mental  arithmetic
is  distasteful  to  him,  he  will  probably  use  the  most  elementary
method  of  arriving  at  the  correct  day,  namely,  simply  counting

1  Gurney:  "Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-hypnotic  States,"  Proceedings
S.P.B..  Vol.  IV.,  p.  290.


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  7


the  days  as  they  pass.  But  if  he  can  do  sums  mentally  without
difficulty  he  will  generally  make  some  calculation,  either  in
hypnosis  or  subconsciously  in  post-hypnosis,  so  as  to  arrive
at  the  terminal  day,  and  then  fix  it  in  his  mind.  More
important,  however,  than  his  arithmetical  capacity,  or  his  love
for  figures  in  the  waking  state,  is  the  extent  to  which  his
subconscious  mind  has  been  trained  by  similar  experiments.
When  such  problems  are  given  to  a  subject  who  has  already
made  use  of  subconscious  calculation  in  the  solving  of  more
difficult  problems  of  a  somewhat  similar  nature,  he  will
unfailingly  resort  to  the  same  method  even  when  the  accurate
fulfilment  of  the  suggestion  could  be  ensured  by  simply  count-
ing the  days  as  they  passed.  The  following  examples  will
illustrate  these  points.

I  may  state,  with  regard  to  all  the  experiments  recorded
in  this  paper,  that  I  always  took  short  notes  at  the  time,
in  the.  subject's  presence — in  shorthand  when  anything  more
than  figures  was  necessary — and  these  were  invariably  written
out  in  full  two  or  three  hours  afterwards.  In  nearly  all
the  experiments  the  time-intervals  suggested  were  chosen  at
random.  In  the  earlier  ones  I  sometimes  worked  out  the
calculations  before  making  the  suggestions,  sometimes  immediately
after  doing  so,  and  sometimes  later  in  the  day  when  writing-
out  my  notes.  In  most  of  the  later  experiments  I  made
no  calculation  until  after  the  subject  had  fulfilled  the  suggestion,
or  had  told  me  her  solution  of  the  problems.  When  the
suggestions  were  given  in  Nos.  21,  22,  and  23  of  the  series
tabulated  on  page  17,  Miss  A.,  a  friend  of  the  subject,  was
present.  In  no  other  instance  in  that  series  did  any  third
person  know  anything  about  the  suggestions.  Only  very
exceptionally  in  the  other  experiments  was  there  any  one
present  when  the  suggestions  were  given  except  the  subject
and  myself.  All  the  subjects  were  good  somnambules  before
the  experiments  were  begun,  and  there  was  not  at  any  time  the
slightest  doubt  as  to  the  completeness  of  post-hypnotic  amnesia.

In  conducting  experiments  with  hypnotised  subjects,  certain
precautions  are  necessary.  Some  of  these  are  very  obvious  to
any  one  having  knowledge  of  the  peculiarities  of  hypnotic  and
post-hypnotic  states.  Others  are  less  obvious,  and  considerable
ingenuity  is  sometimes  necessary  to  avoid  falling  into  error.


8


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


The  more  obvious  precautions  are  those  which  must  be
taken  to  ensure  that  the  subject  does  not  obtain  through
ordinary  sensory  channels  any  information  which  the  experi-
menter wishes  him  not  to  have.  The  subject  must  always  be
looked  upon  as  being  wide  awake,  or  rather  as  being  in  a
state  in  which  sensory  impressions  of  all  kinds  are  more
readily  perceived  than  they  are  in  the  waking  state.  The
fact  that  his  eyes  are  closed,  or  apparently  closed,  must  never
be  taken  as  a  proof  that  he  cannot  see  what  is  going  on.
A  possible  hyperesthesia  of  all  the  senses  must  be  allowed
for ;  and  it  is  much  better  to  overdo  the  precautions  taken
than  to  be  careless  on  any  point,  however  unimportant  it  may
at  first  sight  appear  to  be.

From  the  beginning  of  the  experiments  which  I  am  about
to  record  I  made  it  a  rule  never  to  write  down  in  the
subject's  presence  anything  which  she  could  possibly  see  by
any  normal  means.  In  making  calculations  in  the  presence
of  the  subject,  I  either  went  behind  her  or  interposed  some
opaque  body  between  her  face  and  the  paper  on  which  I  was
writing.  I  also  used  a  very  soft  sharp-pointed  pencil,  and
made  the  figures  very  small  so  as  to  avoid  giving  any  informa-
tion through  the  sense  of  hearing.  Such  precautions  may
probably  be  quite  unnecessary ;  but  some  of  the  recorded
evidence  relating  to  sensory  hyperaesthesia  during  hypnosis  is
so  extraordinary  that  we  have  no  right  to  imperil  the  exactness
of  our  results  by  failing  to  allow  for  every  possible  source  of
error.

Throughout  the  series  of  observations  which  I  am  about
to  record  I  lay  great  stress  on  the  importance  of  the  informa-
tion given  by  the  subject,  during  hypnosis,  in  response  to
questions  regarding  her  mental  states  and  processes  at  various
times.  The  framing  of  the  questions  put  to  the  subject  is
to  my  mind  the  most  important  and  the  most  difficult  feature
in  connection  with  experiments  of  this  description.  The  diffi-
culty of  putting  a  question  in  such  a  way  that  no  inkling
is  given  of  the  answer  you  desire  or  expect  is  sometimes
almost  insuperable ;  and  the  way  in  which  the  response  of  the
subject  may  be  modified  by  the  merest  change  of  intonation
on  the  part  of  the  operator  can  be  appreciated  only  by  those
who  have  had  some  experience  in  this  form  of  investigation.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  9

How  to  obtain  the  truth  from  a  person  whose  every  pulse
of  thought  is  to  some  extent  at  the  mercy  of  the  faintest
suggestion  of  the  operator  is  a  problem  which  demands  the
greatest  care  and  ingenuity.  When  every  precaution  is  taken,
and  when  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  honesty  of  the  hypnotised
subject,  the  danger  of  falsification  of  the  subject's  memory  by
unconscious  suggestions  is  the  chief  source  of  error  which  the
investigator  has  to  guard  against  when  trying  to  obtain  a  trust-
worthy account  of  the  mental  processes  which  go  on  at  the
hypnotic  level  of  consciousness.  This  is  the  main  reason  why  it
is  advisable,  whenever  possible,  to  have  a  verbatim  report  of  all
questions  which  are  put  to  the  hypnotised  subject ;  for  unless
the  questions  are  carefully  prepared  beforehand  it  will  often
be  found  that  information  which  may  have  had  some  influence
in  moulding  the  answer  obtained  has  been  conveyed  by  the
wording  of  the  question.  In  my  own  experiments  I  preferred
preparing  the  questions  beforehand.  When  this  was  not  possible
I  took  them  down  in  shorthand  at  the  time.

One  of  my  subjects,  Mrs.  C,  is  a  fairly  well  educated
woman,  but  she  greatly  dislikes  mental  arithmetic,  and  indeed,
figures  generally.  In  the  waking  state,  the  simplest  of  sums
in  mental  addition  or  multiplication  distress  her  exceedingly.
She  is  a  good  somnambule,  can  be  hypnotised  and  awakened
instantaneously,  and  post-hypnotic  amnesia  is  complete.  Yet
when  given  any  sum  to  be  worked  out  subconsciously  in  post-
hypnosis,  there  always  seems  to  be  some  subliminal  invasion
of  the  waking  consciousness  which  leads  to  supraliminal  know-
ledge that  she  is  "  doing  figures  in  her  head,"  although  she
never  knows  what  they  mean.

On  March  5th,  1907,  I  asked  her,  in  hypnosis,  to  make
a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper,  on  "  the  39th  day  from  this."
The  matter  was  not  referred  to  again  until  March  21st.  On
being  asked  in  the  waking  state  if  she  had  been  doing  any
sums,  she  said  that  she  thought  she  had,  but  that  they  seemed
to  be  "  very  little  ones."  She  had  had  the  feeling  that  she  had
been  "  adding  on  one  every  day,"  but  she  did  not  know  how
far  she  had  got,  or  to  what  end  she  was  counting.  I  said
to  her  "  Sleep  !  How  many  days  are  gone  ? "  She  answered
immediately,  "  16."  She  did  not  know  how  many  days  were
to  come,  nor  when  the  act  fell  due. She  remembered  the


10


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


suggestion,  but  not  the  date  on  which  it  had  been  given.  Her
sole  knowledge  of  the  matter  seemed  to  be  that  she  had  to
make  a  cross  on  the  39  th  day,  and  that  16  days  had  elapsed
since  the  suggestion  was  given.

Another  subject,  Mrs.  T.,  was  told,  during  hypnosis,  in  the
presence  of  her  husband,  on  Sunday,  January  13th,  1907,  to
make  a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper  on  "  the  43rd  day  from
this."  (Due  Feb.  2  5.)  I  did  not  see  her  again  until  March  1st.
I  then  found  that  the  cross  had  been  made  some  time  before
it  was  due.  She  had  not  dated  the  paper,  and  she  could
not  remember  when  the  cross  was  made.  In  hypnosis  she
said  it  was  made  on  February  17th.  She  knew  quite  well
when  the  cross  ought  to  have  been  made,  but  she  was  hurried
by  her  husband  asking  her  on  the  17th  if  she  had  not  some-
thing to  do  for  me,  and  whether  she  had  forgotten  it  or
not.  She  was  then  afraid  she  had  made  a  mistake,  and  made
the  cross  that  day,  fearing  she  might  be  too  late.  On  being
asked  if  she  had  made  any  calculation,  or  if  she  had  been
counting  the  days,  she  said  she  had  made  a  calculation,  and  had
counted  the  Sundays.  She  knew  that  the  cross  had  to  be
made  on  the  day  after  the  sixth  Sunday.

This  subject  is  a  highly  intelligent  and  well-educated  woman,
and  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  she  simplified  the  calculation
for  determining  the  day  (7x6  +  1  =  43),  and  also  how  she
simplified  the  process  of  watching  and  counting  the  days.  This
was  the  first  time  she  had  been  experimented  on ;  and  although
it  is  quite  exceptional  for  questions  during  the  waking  state  to
disturb  operations  of  the  subconscious  mind  which  have  been
set  going  by  suggestion  during  hypnosis,  it  is  probable  that  if
her  husband  had  not  mentioned  the  matter  to  her  at  all  she
might  have  fulfilled  the  hypnotic  command  at  the  proper
time.

On  March  1st,  1907,  I  asked  her,  in  hypnosis,  to  make  a
cross  on  "  the  145th  day  from  this."  Immediately  after  giving
the  suggestion  I  asked  her  when  it  fell  due.  She  replied,
after  about  30  seconds,  that  it  fell  due  on  July  24th.
(Right.)  Questioned  as  to  how  she  knew,  she  said  she  had
just  added  up  the  days  of  the  months,  allowing  30  days  for
March,  and  24  clays  in  July  (30  +  30  +  31  +  30  +  24  =  145).
She  said  she would  always  make  a  calculation  when  such  a


Li  v.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambwles.  11


suggestion  was  made  to  her.  She  would  not  think  of  trying
to  count  every  day  as  it  came.

Similar  experiments  made  on  another  somnambule  show  still
more  clearly  the  use  of  calculations  in  connection  with  such
suggestions.  Miss  F.  D.  was  a  good  somnambule,  and  could
be  hypnotised  or  awakened  instantaneously  by  uttering  the
commands,  "  Sleep  ! "  and  "  Wake  up."  She  had  previously
been  subjected  to  a  long  series  of  experiments  involving  sub-
conscious calculations,  which  are  recorded  in  a  later  part  of
this  paper.  On  December  6th,  1906,  I  told  her  during
hypnosis  to  make  a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper  on  "the  39th
day  from  this,"  and  to  put  underneath  it  the  date  of  doing
so  (due  Jan.  14th,  1907).  On  December  8th  I  asked  her
in  the  waking  state  if  she  knew  what  I  had  told  her  to  do.
She  of  course  knew  nothing.  I  said  to  her  suddenly,  "  Sleep  !
When  is  it  due?"  She  replied  immediately,  "January  14th."
On  being  questioned  as  to  how  she  knew,  she  said  that  it
came  into  her  head  on  the  night  of  December  6th,  during
natural  sleep.  She  had  no  recollection  of  having  made  any
•calculation.

On  January  3rd  I  hypnotised  her  and  asked,  "  How  many
•days  are  gone?"  She  replied  immediately,  "28"  (right).
"How  many  to  come?"  "12"  (wrong).  "Wake  up."  After
she  awoke  I  found  that  12  was  wrong,  so  I  hypnotised  her
and  asked  her  if  she  thought  her  answers  were  right.  She
said  at  once  that  1 2  was  wrong,  and  that  there  were  only
11  days  to  come.  She  did  not  know  how  she  had  made
the  mistake.  She  could  not  say  how  she  knew  the  right
•answers,  but  she  believed  that  she  noted  the  days  in
her  sleep  at  night.  The  cross  was  duly  made  on  January
14th.

On  January  3rd,  1907,  I  made  a  similar  suggestion  to  be
fulfilled  on  "the  145th  day  from  this."  On  January  1 6th  I
asked  her  in  hypnosis  if  she  remembered  what  I  told  her  on
January  3rd.  She  said  she  did.  "  How  many  days  are  gone  ?  "
"  13."  "How  many  to  come?"  "  132."  "When  does  it  fall
•due?"  "May  28th."  All  the  answers  are  correct,  and  were
given  without  any  hesitation.  On  being  asked  the  same  ques-
tions on  January  29th,  she  said  that  26  days  had  passed,
and  119  still  to  come  (right). On  February  16th,  when  doing


12


T.  W.  Mitchell,  31. D.


[part


some  experiments  involving  automatic  writing,  I  asked  her,
during  hypnosis,  to  write  down  anything  she  liked  after  waking.
When  she  awoke  she  wrote  down  101  —  44.  The  subject  in
the  waking  state  did  not  know  what  this  meant,  and  as  no'
reference  to  the  suggestion  of  January  3rd  had  been  made
since  January  29th,  I  had  quite  forgotten  about  it,  and  did
not  associate  the  figures  with  that  experiment.  On  being
hypnotised  she  told  me  that  they  were  meant  to  indicate  that
there  were  101  days  to  come  and  44  gone  (right).  On
March  2nd  she  wrote  automatically  under  similar  circum-
stances. 58  —  87  (58  gone,  87  to  come — right).

In  this  case  there  is  clear  evidence  that  a  calculation  had
been  made  by  which  the  terminal  day  was  arrived  at ;  but
it  is  curious  to  note  that  there  was  apparently  also  a  con-
tinuous watching  and  counting  of  the  days  as  they  passed,,
which  would  seem  to  be  quite  unnecessary.  This,  I  think,
was  due  to  the  subject's  long  training  in  experiments  of  this
description,  and  to  her  knowledge  that  I  was  in  the  habit
of  questioning  her  about  the  details  of  her  methods.  It  is  of
course  possible  that  there  was  really  no  counting  of  the  days.
If  she  knew  on  each  occasion  what  the  date  was,  she  might
have  calculated,  every  time,  the  number  of  days  gone  and  to
come.  But  the  rapidity  with  which  the  replies  were  given
leads  me  to  think  that  the  knowledge  must  have  been  in
her  possession  before  the  questions  were  asked.  It  may,  how-
ever, be  suggested  that  she  was  subliminally  on  the  look-out
for  my  question,  and  that  she  made  the  calculation  sublimin-
ally before  being  hypnotised.  But  if  there  was  the  continuous
subliminal  expectancy  which  such  a  suggestion  implies,  it  would
surely  have  been  much  easier  for  her  to  count  the  days  as  they
passed  than  to  make  a  subliminal  calculation  every  time  I
called  to  see  her.

When  the  terminal  day  is  arrived  at  beforehand  by  calcu-
lation, and  no  continuous  counting  of  the  days  as  they  pass
takes  place,  the  act  is  fulfilled  on  the  proper  day  just  as  it
is  when  a  date  is  mentioned  in  giving  the  suggestion.  In
such  cases  Gurney's  method  of  naming  an  interval  of  time
instead  of  a  fixed  date  does  not  ensure  a  continuous  time-
watching  or  demonstrate  any  true  appreciation  of  the  passage
of  time  by  somnambules.


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  13


When  Delboeuf1  recognised  the  importance  of  not  mention-
ing any  fixed  date  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  post-hypnotic  act,
he  thought  that  this  difficulty  could  be  overcome  by  giving
the  suggestion  in  minutes  instead  of  in  hours  or  in  days.
He  devised  this  method,  he  says,  partly  to  do  away  with  the
fixing  of  the  terminal  time  in  giving  the  suggestions,  and
partly  in  order  to  make  it  possible  to  carry  out  a  number  of
observations  in  a  relatively  short  time.  Here  is  an  example
of  Delboeuf s  experiments.  At  6.55  a.m.  he  suggested  to  his
subject  M.  that  at  the  expiration  of  1500  minutes  she  was
to  ask  Madame  Delboeuf  if  she  required  anything.  This
suggestion  was  carried  out  with  absolute  accuracy.  Delboeuf
made  twelve  experiments  of  this  kind,  the  time-intervals  sug-
gested varying  from  350  to  3300  minutes.  Two  of  these
were  fulfilled  at  the  moment  they  fell  due.  In  three  the
impulse  to  fulfil  the  suggested  act  arose  at  the  right  time.
In  none  of  the  others  was  the  estimation  of  the  time
accurate.

Delboeufs  subjects  were  his  two  maid-servants,  J.  and  M.,
who  were  ignorant  country  girls.  Only  with  difficulty  could
they  tell  the  time  by  the  clock,  and  in  the  waking  state
they  were  quite  incapable  of  reducing  to  hours  such  a  number
of  minutes  as  1150.  M.  was  a  somewhat  better  arithmetician
than  J.,  and  it  is  important  to  note  that  in  the  experiments
she  was  more  accurate  in  her  time-estimation  than  J.

Inspired  by  Delboeufs  results,  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell  took
up  the  subject  of  time-appreciation  by  somnambules,  and  he
has  published  a  remarkable  series  of  observations  which  are
deserving  of  the  closest  study.'2  Eecognising  that  some  of
Delboeufs  failures  were  due  to  the  subject's  resistance  to  dis-
tasteful suggestions,  Dr.  Bramwell  confined  the  suggested  act
in  all  his  experiments  to  the  making  of  a  cross  on  a  piece
of  paper  at  the  end  of  a  certain  number  of  minutes.  His
subject,  Miss  D.,  was  "  an  intelligent  girl  who  had  received  an
ordinary  Board  School  education,  and  her  arithmetical  powers
were  in  keeping  with  this ;  she  could  do  ordinary  sums  in
multiplication  and  subtraction with the  aid of  a pencil  and

1  Delboeuf,  "  De  l'appreciation  du  Temps  par  les  Somnambules,"  Proceedings
S.P.E.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  414.

2  Bramwell,  Hypnotism  (London,  1903),  p.  119.


14


T.  W.  Mitchell,  MR


[part


paper,  but  failed,  unless  they  were  extremely  simple,  to  solve
them  mentally."1  The  experiments  were  conducted  as  follows.
During  hypnosis  Miss  D.  was  told  that  at  the  expiration  of
a  certain  number  of  minutes  she  was  to  make  a  cross  and
write  down  the  hour  she  believed  it  to  be  without  consulting
the  clock,  an  interval  of  waking  life  always  intervening  between
the  suggestion  and  its  fulfilment.  At  first  the  arithmetical
problems  involved  in  the  experiments  were  relatively  simple,
but  later  they  were  exceedingly  complicated,  and  further,  as
many  as  five  or  six  different  suggestions  were  given  rapidly,
one  after  the  other,  in  the  same  hypnosis.  These  suggestions
were  fulfilled  with  remarkable  accuracy — some  in  ordinary
waking  life,  some  in  subsequent  hypnosis,  and  some  during
natural  sleep.  The  following  examples  will  give  some  idea  of
the  nature  of  these  experiments.

On  Tuesday,  Dec.  24th,  1895,  at  3.10  p.m.,  Miss  D.  was
told,  during  hypnosis,  that  she  was  to  make  a  cross  on
a  piece  of  paper  in  7200  minutes  (Exp.  No.  7).2  This  fell
due  to  be  fulfilled  on  Sunday,  Dec.  29th.  "When  it  was
fulfilled  Miss  D.  was  teaching  a  Sunday  School  class,  when
she  suddenly  felt  an  impulse  to  make  a  cross  and  mark  the
time.  It  was  only  after  doing  so  that  she  looked  at  the
clock,  which  was  behind  her.  Her  estimation  of  the  time  was
correct."

On  Jan.  8th,  at  4.30  p.m.,  a  similar  suggestion  was  given,
to  be  fulfilled  in  10,070  minutes  (Exp.  No.  12).3  This
suggestion  fell  due  on  Jan.  loth,  at  4.20  p.m.  When  it  was
fulfilled  Miss  D.  had  been  hypnotised  in  Dr.  Bramwell's
room  for  an  hour,  and  had  had  no  opportunity  of  consulting
the  clock.  Exactly  at  4.20,  without  waking  or  opening  her
eyes,  she  said  she  had  to  make  a  cross  and  put  down  the
time.

On  Wednesday,  Feb.  5th,  five  suggestions  were  given  rapidly,
one  after  the  other.  Among  these  were  No.  22- -in  840
minutes  (due  6  a.m.  Feb.  6th),  and  No.  23 — in  900  minutes
(due  7  a.m.  Feb.  6th).4  "  When  Miss  D.'s  mother  went  to
her  bedroom  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  she  found  her  asleep
and  two  pieces  of  paper  on  a  table  by  her  bedside.  On  each
was  a  rough  cross;  on  one  the  figure  6,  on  the  other  7,  both

iBramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  120.  2  p.  122.  3  p.  123.  4  p.  125.


Liv.] The  AppWcidt'icfii 1  of  ■Time,  by  8&n-ria\nbule8.


15


very  badly  written.  .  Misri  D.  said:  She' had  not  awakened  during
the  night."  '  -

In  summarising  his  experiments,  Dr.  Bramwell  says  : 1
"  Fifty- rive  experiments  are  cited;  of  these  one,  apparently,
was  either  not  carried  out  by  Miss  D.,  or  unrecorded  by  me,
while  in  another  (No.  9),  she  mistook  the  original  suggestion,
but  fulfilled  it  correctly  in  accordance  with  what  she  thought
it  had  been.  Forty-five  were  completely  successful,  i.e.  not
only  did  Miss  D.  write  down  the  correct  terminal  time,  but
this  was  done,  also,  at  the  moment  the  experiment  fell  due.
Eight  .  .  .  were  partially  successful.  In  these  the  terminal
time  was  correctly  recorded  in  every  instance,  but  there  were
minute  differences,  never  exceeding  five  minutes,  between  the
subject's  correct  estimate  of  when  the  suggestion  fell  due  and
the  moment  at  which  she  carried  it  out.  The  proportion
which  these  errors  bear  to  their  respective  intervals  varies
between  1  to  2028  and  1  to  21,420."

I  have  made  a  series  of  observations  which  corroborate  in
many  ways  the  results  obtained  by  Dr.  Bramwell ;  yet  there
are  certain  points  of  difference  which  are  not  uninteresting.
My  subject,  F.  D.,  was  a  delicate  girl  whom  1  had  relieved
of  some  functional  troubles  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  She  was
thirty  years  of  age,  and  lived  at  home  with  her  parents,
helping  in  the  work  of  the  house.  She  had  received  an
elementary  education  at  a  National  School,  but,  as  will  be
seen  from  her  methods  of  calculation  in  the  waking  state,  she
was  evidently  not  as  good  an  arithmetician  as  Dr.  Bramwell's
subject.  She  was  a  good  somnambule,  and  could  be  hypnotised
or  awakened  instantaneously  simply  by  uttering  the  commands,
"  Sleep  !  "  or  "  Wake  up  !  "  All  the  experiments  were  con-
ducted on  the  lines  laid  down  by  Dr.  Bramwell  ;  but
occasionally  certain  modifications  were  introduced  which  will
be  detailed  in  due  course.  Where  nothing  to  the  contrary  is
mentioned,  the  subject  was  requested,  during  hypnosis,  to  make
a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper  at  the  end  of  a  given  number
of  minutes,  to  put  down  the  time  she  thought  it  was  when
doing  so  without  consulting  a  clock  or  watch,  to  put  whether
a.m.  or  p.m.,  and  to  add  the  day  of  the  month.  Where  no
statement  to  the  contrary  is  made,  the  subject  was  told  what

'Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  132.


16


:T.  W.  M^didi,  M:i).


[part


the  "starting  time",  was;  <  -  'From  'th6;'  beginning  I  suggested
that  she  should  remember,  hiring  made  the'  crosses,  and  that
she  should  keep  them  and  give  them  to  me.  My  first  experi-
ment was  made  with  the  intention  of  finding  out  what  her
powers  of  subconscious  calculation  were  at  this  time.  On
March  30th,  1906,  at  11.15  a.m.,  I  asked  her  to  make  a
cross  in  86,400  seconds.  Next  day  she  gave  me  a  paper
marked  "11.30  p.m.,  March  30th."  This  was  wrong;  it
should  have  been  11.15  a.m.,  March  31st.  I  then  began  the
following  series  of  experiments.

No.  1.  March  31,  1906,  11.30  a.m.— in  700  minutes  (clue
March  31,  11.10  p.m.).
When  I  saw  her  next  day  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked
with  a  cross  and  11.10  p.m.  March  31st.  On  being  asked
when  this  was  written  she  said,  "  last  night  after  I  had  gone
to  bed.  I  had  been  asleep  and  woke  up  to  do  it.  I  remember
feeling  very  tired  and  went  to  sleep  at  once  after  writing  it,
and  slept  all  night."

No.  2.  April  3,  1906,  11  a.m.— in  4000  minutes  (due
April  6,  5.40  a.m.).

On  April  5th  I  asked  her  in  hypnosis  if  she  remembered
my  suggestion  of  April  3rd.  She  remembered  it  and  repeated
it  correctly.  On  being  asked  when  it  fell  due  she  replied
at  once,  "  5.40  to-morrow  morning."  "  Have  you  calculated
it  ?  "  "  Not  on  paper."  "  How  then — in  your  mind  ?  "  "  Yes,
I  suppose  so."  "  When  did  you  calculate  it  ? "  "I  think  it
was  in  my  sleep  the  other  night."  On  being  awakened  she
knew  nothing  about  having  to  make  a  cross,  and  did  not
remember  having  dreamt  about  figures.

On  April  6th  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked  "  5.40  a.m.
April  6th."  She  did  not  know  what  the  exact  time  was
when  she  made  the  cross,  as  she  did  not  look  at  her  watch
for  some  time  afterwards.  When  she  did  look  it  was  six
o'clock.  She  woke  up  to  make  the  cross  and  did  not  go  to
sleep  again.

No.  3. April  9,  1906,  4  p.m.— in  2885  minutes  (due  April
11,  4.5  p.m.).

As  soon as the  suggestion  was  given she  was  told  that


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


17


En


<q  <)  <)  <tj


—
-


,5  S  *


a .  a


*  ■  ft  ftco  s  1


o  _

«  -H  «5


s  cuts


■*  t—  r—
0-1  ci  ci


;  ft  ft^ri
i  <  <


t>>  ft

o


.  ft  ft  ft


3§ s  &>o  ^^^aftfift

-  ■  <N  ft  3  s  °  N  oi  w  w  o  m  ^  o  -f
oi  co"  co  ^ °  .^.2si»Sw»»^^1riJ

.tco .^"2^ r-SSS -  -  -oohio
,h  fh  i» rt  m <  ^  oi  oi  oi  co © oi  oi

c3  cS  (9  c3  g  ft  g  &  *  §  g  -  -3-9-^-3-5^"=


w

cS

=

(3

60

U2

B

.9

rti

C3

+a

CQ

u

-C

+j

+3

•  l-l

-£

■J

CD

?

— '

"5

EC

03

O

a

_

m

cS

£

O

*Sc

_a>

S5

sa

<E>

a

to

+^

02

00

0)

CM

bJD

H

CO

01

oa

a

uoT

<N

pq

CO

CN

of

M

01

02

Z

&

III

3
C


.  ft'cS
ftO0

Tj!  co


O  cj

'I  o

i-H  -f

rH  in

CO


ftp

-T  -


s 0

ftCO


ft  j
OOO


0  ft  ■  -

o-o  o


g

ft  !


G  B  C  S


ft  ft


ft  ft

<!  <


(6  ^  W)  P  £

g  S  <N  p^g ft»n  fL  ft  ci  a  A  rt  ^
^  cc  ^1 • • •  cc  ~"  o °^  ' i^ • -  -

- ,  CO  ^  '

CM  01  i>* -  CO  O - ,  "  -~

OIUIOO-H^HCO'-^  M
C^ft^  =3  c3  eg  ce  c3  g  Q)  3  03  ™  ^  ^'^^^'^'^^^


.  .  «s  «s ^  ^  ^  ^

- 1  CM  SI  IN  (M  0!  t»CJi- Iri  (M  HI
j]  ID  0)


c  a  =  a  a  c

a  a  a  a  c  a  a

a  a  a  a  a  a

c  a  c  c

a  3  a  a  a  a  a

S  a  £

001000«5lOOOOOOOlOO(MO«5U5«5(MlCO>n»0"0«5000

ooooosHOooo-ioniio-ut-OHiMTiiaioosicisonrao^ootoo
o  «  o  -t  m  k  cc o  o  ?;  !M  o  k  o  h  »  m -  «  o  a:  l--hiotH  00


•  t~  -*  01  — 1  o  o  o  -+  ~j  co  oi  -*  ■*  CD  CO
—  rfi  1- 1  i-H  CO  00  -h  (M


t^CMOO— 1  CO  ^<  I>  ■*
CI


—1  "0-1

H


°  ft  -•  s  s

o  - < .-  -  o


o  pi  A  ft  &  ft


"oa'~'oaaoo
a  .  o  a  .  :  a  a  10  —  o  (m  03

ftco 2j  Qj  ~~ '  1 — 1 •  1^

CI  ^  V  01  01  01 .  Ol .  01  .


■  ft^^c-  &

-  o  a  ©
01  — 1  co  •  01
o  ft,


Ol  01  01


C  1


m  CO  O)  01  M  IO  -no  CS  O  — 1  CO
CO  — 1  i-h  — 1  Ol  01  Ol  Ol


-+ co  th  — <

—  r-H  Ol  Ol


§  <1  <H  -3  <C  <q  <j  <|  <3  <J  2§ ^  ^-^^


Ho


O  g
X


«Oico-*LO^r^coco©--oico-tit'5cot--x©©rtOico-t<i-oooc^coco©

—I  -H  —  1  -H  r-H —i  — i  01  01  Ol  Ol  01  Ol  01  Ol  04  01  CO


B


18


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


when  she  woke  up  she  would  be  asked  to  read  aloud  from
a  book,  and  that  while  reading  she  would  write  out  the
suggestion,  and,  if  possible,  the  time  when  it  fell  due  to  be
fulfilled.  She  was  then  awakened  and  given  a  book  to  read
aloud.  A  pencil  and  paper  were  placed  on  the  table  close
to  her  right  hand.  After  reading  a  few  lines  she  took  up
the  pencil  and  began  to  write  while  continuing  her  reading.
She  made  a  cross,  wrote  2885,  and  then  stopped  both
reading  and  writing,  put  the  pencil  down,  saying,  "  I  can't  do
two  things  at  once."  I  told  her  to  go  on  reading  and  not
to  mind  anything  else.  She  did  so,  and  while  reading  she
again  took  up  the  pencil  and  wrote  April  9.  I  stopped  the
reading  and  said,  "  You  have  not  written  clown  when  it  falls
due."  She  immediately  wrote  "  5  to  4."  I  re-hypnotised  her
and  told  her  I  thought  5  to  4  was  not  quite  right.  She
said  at  once  "  Yes  5  to  4  is  wrong,  it  is  5  past  4."  On
being  asked  if  she  had  made  any  calculation  she  said,  "  No,
how  could  I  ?  I  have  not  had  time."  "  How  then  do  you
know  ? "  "I  don't  know  how  I  know."  "  But  you  are  sure
5  past  4  is  right?"  "Yes."

On  April  12  th  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked  "  5  past
4  p.m.  Apr.  11."  She  knew  nothing  about  this  in  the
waking  state  except  that  she  had  written  it.  In  hypnosis
she  knew  that  she  had  written  it  in  response  to  my  suggestion
of  April  9th.

An  attempt  was  now  made  to  find  out  if  more  difficult
problems  required  a  longer  time  for  the  subconscious  calculation
to  be  made  correctly.  The  plan  adopted  was  to  explain  in
hypnosis  that  a  problem  requiring  an  answer  would  be  put
and  that  she  was  to  write  down  the  answer  as  soon  as  she
awoke.  The  problem  was  then  given  and  the  subject
immediately  awakened.

No.  4. On  April 12th, 1906, I said to the subject  in
hypnosis :

"If,  counting  from  to-day,  Thursday,  at  12  o'clock,  you
make  a  cross  in  3090  minutes,  when  will  it  fall  due  ?
Wake  up ! "  She  awoke  and  almost  immediately  went  over
to  the  table  and  wrote:  "11.20  p.m.,  April  15th."  This
is  wrong. It should have  been 3.30 p.m.,  April 14th.  I


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  19


hypnotised  her  and  asked  what  my  question  was.  She
repeated  it,  giving  3900  minutes  instead  of  3090.  Still  her
answer  would  have  been  wrong.  I  told  her  to  try  again
with  3090  minutes  and  to  tell  me  the  answer  immediately
on  waking  up.  I  awoke  her  and  she  said  at  once:  "1.30,
April  14th."  Another  trial  was  made  and  she  was  told  to
take  time  if  necessary.  On  awaking  she  said  after  a  few
minutes:  "6.30,  April  14th."  This  being  wrong,  and  as
she  seemed  to  be  getting  confused,  I  re-hypnotised  her  and
told  her  to  tell  me  the  answer  the  next  time  I  saw  her,  if
she  could  not  do  so  before  T  left.  I  then  awoke  her  and
talked  to  her  for  about  five  minutes  before  going  away.
Next  day  as  soon  as  I  saw  her  she  told  me  that  just  as  I
was  leaving  on  the  previous  day  she  felt  inclined  to  say  to
me:  "3.30,  April  14th";  but  she  did  not  know  what  it
meant  and  thought  it  sounded  silly,  so  did  not  say  anything.

No.  5.  On  April  13th,  1906,  I  asked  her  in  hypnosis  to
tell  me  as  soon  as  she  could  after  waking,  how  many  days,
hours,  etc.  are  in  7410  minutes.  Awakened  immediately
she  replied  after  a  few  minutes:  "5  days,  160  hours."
Told  to  try  again  she  said:  "5  days,  140  hours"  In
hypnosis  she  told  me  these  answers  were  wrong,  but  she
could  not  tell  me  the  correct  one.  As  I  could  not  wait
longer  I  told  her  to  write  down  the  answer  as  soon  as  she
could,  noting  on  the  paper  the  time  at  which  she  did  so.
I  left  her  at  12  30  p.m.

When  I  saw  her  on  April  15th  she  gave  me  a  paper
marked:  "5  days,  123J  hours,  12.40  p.m.,  April  13th."
She  said  she  had  got  up  to  write  this  in  the  middle  of  her
dinner  soon  after  I  left  on  April  13th.  She  had  sat  down
to  dinner  immediately  after  I  had  gone  away,  and  was
talking  and  laughing  with  her  people  all  the  time  until  she
suddenly  felt  that  she  must  get  up  and  write  this.  When
she  had  written  it  she  did  not  know  what  it  meant.

I  could  not  understand  the  answer  at  first,  as  5  days  plus
123^  hours  is  so  obviously  wrong.  But  123 J  hours  =7410
minutes.  In  hypnosis  she  told  me  that  she  understood  me
to  want  the  number  of  days  and  the  number  of  hours.  Her
previous  attempts  had  been  in  this  direction.


20


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


No.  6. April 15,  1906,  12  noon — in  17,505  minutes  (due
April  27,  3.45  p.m.).

Next  day  I  asked  her  in  hypnosis  if  she  remembered  the
suggestion  given  on  April  15th.  She  repeated  it  correctly.
Asked  when  it  fell  due  she  replied  at  once:  "3.45  p.m.,
April  27th."  In  response  to  questioning  she  said  she  thought
she  had  arrived  at  this  conclusion  in  the  night.  She  was
not  conscious  of  having  made  any  calculation.  All  she  knew
was  that  she  remembered  "  thinking  about  the  question  and
the  answer "  in  the  night.  In  the  waking  state  she  knew
nothing  at  all  about  the  matter.

On  April  24th,  after  the  fulfilment  of  the  next  experiment,
she  was  asked  in  hypnosis  if  she  had  any  other  crosses  to
make  during  the  coming  week.  She  said  she  did  not  think
so — she  could  not  remember  any.  The  fact  that  she  had
told  me  that  the  suggestion  of  April  15th  fell  due  on
April  27  th  seemed  to  have  faded  for  the  time  being  from
her  memory.  Nevertheless,  on  April  27th  the  suggestion
was  fulfilled  in  my  presence.  At  3.40  p.m.,  while  awake
and  talking  to  me,  she  suddenly  became  restless,  and  I  asked
her  what  was  the  matter.  She  said  she  felt  she  had  to
write  down  something.  I  said,  "  Come  along  and  do  it,  then."
She  immediately  came  to  the  table,  made  a  cross  on  a  piece
of  paper  and  wrote:  "3.45  p.m.,  April  27th."  It  was  then
just  past  3.40.  The  suggestion  was  fulfilled,  therefore,  about
five  minutes  too  soon.  I  think,  however,  that  this  error  was
probably  due  to  my  telling  her  to  "  come  and  do  it "  as
soon  as  she  explained  to  me  the  reason  for  her  restlessness.
For  I  have  frequently  observed  that  a  cross  made  in  my
presence  is  preceded  for  some  minutes  by  a  certain  amount
of  restlessness,  and  that  if  she  is  not  interfered  with  in  any
way  the  suggested  act  will  be  performed  usually  at  the
exact  time  at  which  it  falls  due.

No.  7.  April  21,  1906,  4.15  p.m. — in  4305  minutes  (clue
April  24,  4  p.m.).
This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  in  my  presence  on  April  24th
at  4  p.m.  exactly.  At  3.55,  while  in  hypnosis,  she  became
rather  restless  and  sighed  frequently.  On  being  asked  why
she  sighed  she  said  she  did  not  know,  but  that  she  seemed


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


21


to  have  something  on  her  mind.  "  Do  you  know  what  it
is  ? "  I  enquired.  "  No !  I  think  I  have  to  do  something."
Being  desirous  to  see  if  a  similar  restlessness  would  appear
in  the  waking;  state  I  awoke  her.  She  talked  to  me  without
any  seeming  preoccupation,  and  I  held  her  attention  constantly
by  questioning  her  on  matters  of  interest  to  her.  While
continuing  the  conversation  she  began  searching  in  her  pocket
and  brought  out  a  pencil.  I  paid  no  attention  to  what  she
was  doing  and  kept  her  engaged  in  conversation.  Suddenly
she  said :  "  Excuse  me  a  minute,  I  must  go  and  get  a  piece
of  paper."  "  What  do  you  want  a  piece  of  paper  for  ? "
"  I've  got  to  write  something."  "  Do  you  know  what  it  is  ?  "
"  No."  She  was  by  this  time  at  the  door  of  the  room.  I
told  her  that  I  could  give  her  a  piece  of  paper,  so  she  came
back  to  the  table  and  prepared  to  write.  "  Do  you  know
what  you  have  to  write  now  ? "  "  Yes."  She  immediately
made  a  cross  and  wrote :  "  4  p.m.,  April  24th."  It  was  then
exactly  4  o'clock.  In  the  waking  state  she  knew  nothing
about  what  she  had  written  except  that  she  had  written  it.
In  hypnosis  she  knew  what  she  had  written  and  what  it
meant.  She  did  not  remember  having  thought  of  the  matter
at  all,  since  I  made  the  suggestion,  unless  she  did  so  in
her  sleep  on  the  first  night.  She  was  not  aware  of  having
made  any  calculation,  and  she  did  not  know  how  she  knew
when  to  make  the  cross.

No.  8.  Wednesday,  April  25,  1906,  4  p.m.— in  2880
minutes  (due  4  p.m.,  April  27).
After  giving  the  suggestion  I  asked  her  when  it  fell  due.
She  replied  immediately,  "  4  o'clock  on  Thursday — no,  Friday
— 4  o'clock  on  Friday."  (April  27.)  She  said  she  did  not
make  any  calculation — "  it  just  came  into  my  head."  This
suggestion  was  fulfilled,  in  hypnosis,  on  April  27,  at  4  p.m.,
in  my  presence.

No.  9. April  26,  11  a.m. — in  1710  minutes  (due  April  27,
3.30  p.m.).

Immediately  after  giving  the  suggestion,  and  before  hypnosis
terminated,  I  asked  her  when  it  fell  due.  She  could  not
give  the  answer  at  once,  but  after  a  few  minutes,  during
which  I  talked  to  her  about  her  health,  I  again  asked  when


22


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


it  fell  due,  and  she  replied,  "  3.30  to-morrow."  (Right.)  She
said  she  had  not  been  thinking  about  it  or  trying  to  calcu-
late while  I  was  talking  to  her ;  she  was  attending  to  what
I  was  saying.  The  suggestion  was  fulfilled  in  hypnosis  on
April  27th,  at  3.30  p.m.,  in  my  presence.

No.  10. April  29,  11.20  a.m.— in  40,360  minutes  (due  12
noon,  May  27).

On  being  asked  when  this  fell  due  she  laughed  and  said
she  did  not  know.  After  a  few  minutes  she  said  it  was
about  30  days.  (It  is  28  days,  40  minutes.)  She  could  not
give  me  any  more  definite  answer.

On  May  1st  I  told  her  in  hypnosis  that  in  the  future  I

should  refer  to  her  in the  waking  state  as  Miss I)  g,

and  in  the  hypnotic  state  as  Florence.  This  was  done  in
order  to  make  her  understand  more  easily  my  direc-
tions in  regard  to  some  experiments  in  automatic
writing. Thus I said, "  When you wake up I  shall

give Miss  D  g  a  book  to  read  and  she  will  confine  her

attention  to  what  she  is  reading,  while  you,  Florence,  will
write  down  answers  to  questions  which  I  shall  put  to  you."
I  awoke  her  and  gave  her  a  book  to  read  aloud.  I  put  a
pencil  in  her  right  hand  and  told  her  not  to  pay  any  atten-
tion to  what  her  right  hand  might  do,  but  to  go  on  reading.
While  she  was  reading  I  said  in  a  low  voice,  close  to  her
ear,  "  What  is  your  name  ? "  Very  slowly  her  hand  wrote
"  Florence."  "  What  did  I  tell  you  on  Sunday — something
you  had  to  do?"  She  wrote  "  40630  "  and  something  inde-
cipherable. "  When  does  it  fall  due  ? "  She  wrote  "  May
27."  "What  time?"  She  wrote  "4.30."  "What  day  is
that  ? "  "  Sunday."  All  this  was  done  with  considerable
effort ;  when  the  hand  wrote  the  reading  was  hesitating.  The
writing  was  done  very  slowly  and  badly.

The  figures  written  down  being  wrong,  and  the  terminal
time  also  being  wrong,  I  hypnotised  her  and  asked  her  for
an  explanation.  She  said  she  was  not  sure  whether  I  had
said  40,630  or  40,360.  She  had  thought  about  it  in  her
sleep  on  Sunday  night  and  could  not  decide  which  it  was.
If  it  was  40,360  it  would  fall  due,  she  said,  at  12  o'clock
on  the  same  day. Her  answers  are correct. I told  her


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


23


that  my  suggestion  was  40,360  minutes,  and  that  she  must
make  a  cross  at  the  end  of  that  time.  I  told  her  also  to
make  a  cross  at  the  end  of  40,630  minutes,  so  I  number
this  suggestion  as  a  separate  experiment.

No. 11. April 29, 1906, 11.20 a.m.— in 40,630  minutes
(due  4.3  0  p.m.,  May  27).

On  May  27  th  she  gave  me  two  papers,  one  marked
"12  o'clock  noon,  May  27,"  and  the  other  "3.10  p.m.,
May  27."  I  did  not  notice  that  the  time  given  on  the
second  paper  was  wrong.  On  June  5th  I  questioned  her
during  hypnosis  on  the  matter,  and  she  said  she  thought  3.10
was  correct.  She  did  not  remember  having  told  me  the
correct  answer  on  May  1st.  She  said  she  thought  she  must
have  got  confused,  as  she  had  made  so  many  crosses.  She
now  saw  that  3.10  is  wrong,  and  that  the  difference  between
40,360  minutes  and  40,630  minutes  is  hours  ;  so  that
if  12  noon  is  right  for  one  the  other  must  be  4.30  p.m.

No.  12.  May  1,  1906,  12  noon— in  10,080  minutes  (due
May  8,  12  noon).
I  chose  this  number  at  random,  and  did  not  know  when
the  cross  fell  due.  Immediately  after  giving  the  suggestion
I  asked  her  when  it  fell  due.  In  about  30  seconds  she
replied  "  On  May  8th."  "  At  what  time  ?  "  "I  don't  know
— about  12  o'clock,  I  think."  "You  do  not  feel  very  sure
about  it?"  "No."  As  I  did  not  know  when  it  fell  due  I
did  not  question  her  any  further.  Her  answer  is  correct.
The  cross  was  made  at  12  noon  on  May  8th.  As  soon  as
she  made  it  she  went  into  the  kitchen  and  asked  her  father
what  the  time  was.  He  said  it  was  just  one  minute  and  a
half  past  twelve.

No. 13. May 3, 1906, 4  p.m.— in 14,350 minutes  (due
May  13,  3.10  p.m.).

No.  14. May  3,  1906,  4.30 p.m.— in  9275  minutes  (due
May  10,  3.5  a.m.).

On  May  10th  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked  "3.5  a.m.,
May  10th."  She  said  she  was  not  quite  awake  when  she
made  the  cross. After  making  it  she  lay  down  for  a  few


24


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


minutes  and  then  woke  up  more  completely  and  looked  at
her  watch. It  was  then  3.12  a.m.

On  May  13th  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked  "  3.10  p.m.,
May  13." This  was  the  fulfilment  of  No.  13.

I  had  by  some  error  put  3.30  p.m.  in  my  note-book  as  the
terminal  time  for  this  experiment.  Twice  in  the  preceding
week  I  had  asked  the  subject  in  hypnosis  when  this  cross
fell  due,  and  each  time  she  answered,  "  3.10  p.m.,  May  13th."
I  thought  this  wrong  but  said  nothing.  Now  that  she  had
made  the  cross  at  3.10  I  tried  to  find  out  how  she  had  made
the  calculation,  and  how  the  mistake,  as  I  thought  it,  had  arisen.
In  hypnosis  she  maintained  that  she  knew  nothing  of  how  she
had  arrived  at  the  terminal  time.  I  then  asked  her  to  open
her  eyes  without  waking  up  and  to  do  the  calculation  on
paper.  "If,"  I  said,  "you  make  a  cross  in  14,350  minutes
after  4  p.m.  on  May  loth,  when  will  it  fall  due?"  She
took  a  pencil  and  wrote  down  1440.  This  she  multiplied
by  10,  and  from  the  sum  so  obtained  she  subtracted  14,350.
She  then  said  it  would  fall  due  on  May  25th  at  50  minutes
before  4  p.m.,  or  at  3.10  p.m.  I  questioned  her  as  to  her
method  of  calculation.  "What,"  I  said,  "does  1440  stand
for  ?  "  "  That  is  the  number  of  minutes  in  a  day."  "  How
do  you  know  ? "  "  Why,  any  one  would  know  that."  "  Why
did  you  multiply  it  by  10?"  "That  is  the  number  of  days
— 14,400  is  the  number  of  minutes  in  10  days — that  would
be  4  p.m.  on  the  25th — 14,350  is  50  minutes  less,  so  that
makes  it  3.10."

She  was  awakened ;  and  it  must  be  remembered  that  she
was  always  totally  amnesic  in  the  waking  state  for  all  that
had  happened  during  hypnosis.  I  asked  her  if  she  could
calculate  when  14,350  minutes  after  4  p.m.  on  May  15
would  fall  due.  She  said  she  did  not  think  she  could.  I
told  her  to  take  a  pencil  and  work  it  out  on  paper.  She
thought  for  a  minute  and  then  put  down  720  and  multiplied
it  by  2.  The  result  she  multiplied  by  5,  and  the  sum  so
obtained  she  multiplied  by  2,  thus  getting  14,400.  Then
she  subtracted  14,350  from  14,400  and  said  the  time  would
be  3.10  p.m.  in  7  days  after  the  15th,  or  on  May  22nd.

1  told  her  that  the  answer  was  wrong ;  but  she  said  it
must  be  ri^ht,  because  5  and  2  make  7. Not  until  it  was

O  7


l,iv.] The  Ajipreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


25


pointed  out  to  her  did  she  see  that  multiplying  7200
minutes  by  2  gives  the  number  of  minutes  in  ten  days,  not
seven.

No.  15.  May  6,  1906,  12  noon— in  3090  minutes  (due
May  8,  3.30  p.m.).
This  suggestion  was  given  in  the  waking  state.  I  had
been  making  some  experiments  as  to  her  power  of  appreciating
the  passage  of  short  periods  of  time  when  the  suggestion  was
Given  in  the  waking  state,  and  I  had  found  that  her  time
estimations  were  then  as  accurate  as  when  the  suggestions
were  given  during  hypnosis.  So  I  tried  what  the  result
would  be  if  a  suggestion  involving  calculation  were  given  in  the
waking  state.  Endeavouring  in  every  way  to  make  sure  that
she  kept  awake  I  made  the  suggestion  given  above.  I  told
her  all  she  had  to  do  was  to  get  the  figures  into  her  head,
and  that  she  was  not  to  make  any  conscious  calculation  either
on  paper  or  mentally.  This  she  quite  understood  and  agreed
to.  She  had  no  idea  when  the  cross  fell  due.  She  was  not
re-hypnotised.

This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  correctly  during  hypnosis  in
my  presence.  On  being  asked  in  the  waking  state  what  she
knew  about  the  suggestion  given  on  May  6th,  she  said  that
when  at  dinner,  about  half  an  hour  after  I  left  her,  while
she  and  her  people  were  talking  and  laughing,  "  3.30  p.m.,
May  8th,"  suddenly  came  into  her  head.  She  knew  it  was
the  answer  to  the  problem  I  had  given  her.  She  had  not
troubled  or  made  any  calculation  in  regard  to  it,  and  did  not
know  whether  it  was  right  or  not.  She  had  recollected  the
matter  once  or  twice  since,  but  had  not  troubled  about  it.

The  whole  experiment  seems  to  have  differed  from  those
in  which  the  suggestions  were  given  in  hypnosis  only  in  the
fact  that  the  solution  of  the  problem  as  to  the  terminal  time
came  into  her  mind  in  the  waking  state,  and  in  that  she  had
knowledge  of  the  experiment  in  the  waking  state.  She  could
recollect  that  she  had  a  cross  to  make  at  a  certain  time.  She
did  not,  however,  worry  about  doing  it  at  the  right  time
although  she  meant  to  do  it.  The  prompting  to  do  it  at  the
time  it  was  due  seemed  to  differ  little,  if  at  all,  from  what
she  felt  in  the  ordinary  experiments.


26


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


No. 16. May 8, 1906, 4 p.m.— in 42,312 minutes  (due
June  7,  1.12  a.m.).

No. 17. May 8,  1906,  4  p.m.— in 184,620 minutes  (due
September  13,  9  p.m.).

On  May  10th  I  asked  her,  during  hypnosis,  if  she  remembered
the  suggestions  given  on  May  8th.  She  repeated  them  correctly.
As  to  the  solutions,  she  said  she  only  knew  one,  which  she
gave  correctly — 1.12  a.m.,  June  7th.  The  other,  she  said,  was
a  long  time — September,  about  the  9th  or  10th,  probably  about
9  a.m.,  but  she  was  not  sure  about  this.  (9  p.m.,  Sept.  13,
is  the  right  time.)  She  was  not  questioned  again  in  regard
to  this  suggestion  until  June  4th,  when  she  said  it  fell  due
on  September  14th  at  1.40  p.m.  On  being  asked  how  many
days,  hours,  and  minutes  are  in  184,620  minutes  she  said
129  days  9  hours  12  minutes.  (Wrong — there  are  128  days
5  hours.)  I  then  told  her  to  work  it  out  on  paper  without
waking  up. She  did  so  as  follows :

1440
129

12960  1440
2880  1140

1440  300
185760  300
184620

1140

Having  done  this  she  said  there  are  128  days  5  hours
(right).  The  method  of  calculation  seems  to  be  as  follows :
1440  x  129  =  the  number  of  minutes  in  129  days.  Therefore
the  suggested  number  of  minutes  is  less  than  129  days.  How
much  less?  She  subtracts  184,620  from  185,760.  It  is
1140  minutes  less.  She  then  subtracts  1140  from  1440.
The  suggested  number  of  minutes,  therefore  equals  128  days
and  300  minutes ;  and  300  minutes  are  equal  to  5  hours.
The  last  300  put  down  in  the  sum  was,  she  said,  the  result
of  the  mental  calculation,  60x5.

She  could  give  no  reason  why  she  chose  129  as  the
multiplier  ; she  said  it  just  seemed  to  be  the  right  number.

In  connection  with  this  calculation  I  may  mention  that  on
a  subsequent  day I  asked  her  in  hypnosis  how  she  would


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  27


set  about  calculating  mentally  the  number  of  days,  hours,
and  minutes  in  17:700  minutes.  She  said  at  once  that  she
would  multiply  1440  by  12.  After  about  a  minute  she
said  that  would  give  17,280.  Then  she  would  subtract
280  from  700,  and  so  on.  When  asked  why  she  multiplied
by  12  rather  than  by  9,  10,  or  11,  she  said  she  did  not
know;  she  seemed  to  feel  that  it  ought  to  be  12.  She
thought  that  when  she  worked  out  similar  calculations  in  her
natural  sleep  she  did  them  in  the  same  way,  but  that  she
went  into  such  a  very  deep  sleep  when  doing  them  that  she
■could  not  remember  anything  about  the  actual  calculations
afterwards  (i.e.  in  her  ordinary  sleep  state,  or  in  hypnosis.
She  was  not  referring  to  amnesia  during  wakino  life ;  for  she
recognised  that  this  always  occurred  in  regard  to  the  mental
operations  of  all  varieties  of  her  sleep-state).

Both  suggestions  given  on  May  8th  were  fulfilled  in  due
course  at  the  proper  times.

No.  18. June  5,  1906,  12  noon — in  87,145  minutes  (due
August  5,  12.25  a.m.).

No.  19. June  5,  1906,  12  noon — in  214,895  minutes  (due
November  1,  5.35  p.m.).

On  June  8th,  during  hypnosis,  she  answered  correctly  both
problems.  No.  18  was  fulfilled  in  natural  sleep  and  was  not
witnessed.  No.  19  was  witnessed,  and  the  time  verified  by  a
friend  who  was  staying  with  the  subject.  This  friend,  Miss  A.,
witnessed  and  verified  the  accuracy  of  most  of  the  subsequent
experiments.

No.  20. June  14,  1906,  4.15  p.m. — in  26,385  minutes  (due
July  2,  12  midnight).

Immediately  after  giving  the  suggestion  I  asked  her  when
it  fell  due,  but  she  said  she  did  not  know.  I  then  told  her
to  write  clown  the  answer  as  soon  as  she  did  know  it,  and
to  put  down  also  the  time  and  date  of  doing  so,  and  to  have
it  witnessed  by  Miss  A.,  in  whose  company  she  would  be  for
the  rest  of  the  day.  She  was  then  awakened  and  I  left  at
4.30  p.m.


28


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


Ou  June  17th  she  gave  me  a  paper  marked  with  a  cross
and  "12  o'clock  midnight,  July  2nd."  Below  this  was  written
"  5.38  p.m.,  June  14th."  It  was  signed  by  Miss  A.,  who
told  me  that  after  I  left  on  June  14th,  F.  D.  was  with  her
all  the  time  until  5.38  when  the  answer  to  the  problem  was
written.  They  had  been  talking  all  the  time,  and  at  the
moment  F.  D.  felt  impelled  to  write,  she  was  sewing.  She
had  not  been  asleep  in  the  interval.

I  had  chosen  the  figures  at  random,  and  when  the  solution
was  shown  to  me  none  of  the  three  of  us  knew  whether  it
was  correct  or  not  until  I  worked  it  out  on  paper.  Miss  A.
was  not  present  when  the  suggestion  was  given.

The  subject  understood  that  this  experiment  was  made  for
the  sake  of  testing  how  long  it  took  her  to  arrive  at  the
solution  of  the  arithmetical  problem,  and  the  cross  was  not
made  on  July  2nd.

No.  21.  June  17,  1906,  12.15  p.m.— in  3762  minutes  (due
June  20,  2.57  a.m.).
I  told  her  to  write  the  answer  to  this  problem  as  soon  as
she  could  after  waking.  I  told  Miss  A.  to  watch  F.  1).  all
the  time  and  to  note  the  time  at  which  the  answer  was
recorded.

Immediately  after  the  suggestion  was  given  the  subject  was
awakened  and  I  went  away.  The  solution  was  recorded  at
12.40.  Miss  A.  told  me  that  she  kept  F.  D.  in  constant
conversation  from  the  time  I  left  until  the  answer  was
written  down.

The  suggestion  was  fulfilled  in  the  early  morning  of  June
20  th.

A  few  experiments  were  now  made  in  which  the  subject
was  not  told  what  the  "  starting  time  "  was.

No.  22.  June  23,  1906  (1.10  p.m.),  "from  now"  in  135
minutes  (due  3.25  p.m.).
Before  I  gave  the  suggestion  the  subject  had  been  in
hypnosis  for  20  minutes  and  had  no  ordinary  means  of  knowing
the  time.  The  suggestion  was  that  in  135  minutes  she  should
go  into  the  garden  and  pick  some  flowers  which  she  would
give  to  Miss  A. I  asked  Miss  A.  not  to  let  F.  D.  out  of  her


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  29


sight  for  an  instant,  to  keep  her  away  from  clocks  or  watches
until  the  suggestion  was  fulfilled,  and  to  note  the  time  when
this  took  place.

On  June  24th,  Miss  A.  gave  me  a  paper,  written  and  signed
by  herself,  stating  that  F.  D.  gave  her  three  flowers  at  3.22  p.m.,
after  spending  six  minutes  in  the  garden.

No. 23. June 24, 1906 (12.25 p.m.),  "from now  "—in
7200  minutes  (due  June  29,  12.25  p.m.).
This suggestion was fulfilled at the proper time.  The
making  of  the  cross  was  witnessed,  and  the  time  verified,  by
Miss  A.

No.  24. July 1,  1906 (3.59 p.m.),  "from  now  "—in  2935
minutes  (due  July  3,  4.54  p.m.).

No.  25. July  1,  1906  (3.59  p.m.),  "from now" — in  8935
minutes  (due  July  7,  8.54  p.m.).

No.  24  was  fulfilled  at  4.55  p.m.  July  3rd,  and  No.  25  at
8.55  p.m.  July  7th.  In  both  cases  the  time  was  verified
by  Miss  A.  in  whose  presence  the  crosses  were  made.  These
results  are  practically  correct,  as  it  was  probably  4  o'clock
before  the  giving  of  the  suggestions  was  completed.

No.  26.  July  8,  1906  (12.2  p.m.),  "from  now  "—in  1705
minutes  (clue  July  9,  4.27  p.m.).
Just  after  giving  the  suggestion  I  asked  her  if  she  knew
what  the  time  was.  She  said  it  was  12  o'clock.  The  cross
was  made  at  4.30  p.m.  on  July  9th.  When  asked  in
hypnosis  after  its  fulfilment  what  the  time  was  when  the
suggestion  was  given,  she  said  it  was  12.5  p.m.

No.  27. July  8,  1906,  12.10  p.m.— in 3145  minutes  (due
July  10,  4.35  p.m.).

This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  at  the  correct  time.

No. 28. July  16,  1906  (12.30  p.m.),  "from  now  "—in  4580
minutes  (due  July  19,  4.50  p.m).

This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  at  4-. 10  p.m.  on  July  19th  and
was  witnessed  by  Miss  A.  When,  after  its  fulfilment,  the
subject  was  asked  in  hypnosis  what  time  she  thought  it  was


30


T.


W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


when  the  suggestion  was  given  she  said  12.20.  When  asked
how  many  days,  hours,  and  minutes  are  in  4,580  minutes  she
replied  immediately,  "3  days,  4  hours,  and  20  minutes."  The
result  of  this  experiment  clearly  points  to  her  dependence  on
the  calculations  rather  than  to  any  true  appreciation  of  time
as  it  passes.  She  supposed,  or  guessed,  that  the  starting
time  was  12.20  instead  of  12.30  and  fulfilled  the  suggestion
in  accordance  with  her  calculation  from  the  supposed  time.

No.  29.  July  16,  1906,  1  p.m. — in  7460  minutes  (due  July
21,  5.20  p.m.).

This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  at  the  correct  time  and  was
witnessed  by  Miss  A.

No.  30.  July  22,  1906,  12.20  p.m. — in  274,800  seconds
(due  July  25,  4.40  p.m.).

When  I  had  given  this  suggestion  she  said  she  could  not
do  seconds,  and  again  that  she  did  not  think  she  would  do
it  correctly.  This  belief  was  no  doubt  based  upon  her
remembrance  of  her  complete  failure  in  the  preliminary
experiment  made  on  March  30th.  Nevertheless  No.  30  was
fulfilled  correctly  on  July  25  th  at  4.40  p.m.  and  was
witnessed  by  Miss  A.

The  results  of  the  foregoing  experiments  having  convinced
me  that  the  method  employed  did  not  necessitate  on  the
part  of  the  subject  any  continuous  watching  of  the  time  as
it  passed,  I  sought  some  way  of  giving  the  suggestions  which
would  do  so.  So  far  there  is  evidence  only  that  a  sub-
conscious calculation  is  made  soon  after  the  suggestion  is
given ;  and  if  the  date  so  arrived  at  is  some  weeks  ahead,
the  subconscious  mind,  having  noted  the  time  at  which  the
act  is  to  be  performed,  seems  able  to  go  off  duty  as  it  were
and  simply  wait  for  the  arrival  of  the  proper  day.

But  the  experiments  may  be  so  arranged  as  to  make  it
impossible  for  any  immediate  calculation  to  be  made,  and  to
make  an  almost  continuous  watching  of  the  passage  of  time
a  requisite  of  success.  The  method  I  have  adopted  is  to
make  the  subject  tell  the  number  of  days,  hours,  or  minutes
which  elapse  between  the  giving  of  the  suggestion  and  a
pre-arranged signal ; the  time  at  which  the  signal will  be


liv.] The  Apjireciation  of  Time  by  Somnarnbules.  31


given  being  left  undetermined  when  making  the  suggestion.
The  results  of  this  method  of  investigation  are  made  more
striking  by  the  use  of  automatic  writing.  It  is  possible  in
this  way  to  get  the  result  of  the  subconscious  watching  of
the  time  without  having  to  re-induce  hypnosis.  An  example
will  illustrate  what  I  mean.

On  February  16th,  1907,  at  12.30  p.m.,  I  made  the  fol-
lowing suggestion  to  F.  D.  in  hypnosis :  "  The  next  time  I
call  to  see  you,  as  soon  as  I  give  you  a  pencil  and  paper,
you  will  write  down  the  number  of  hours  and  minutes
that  will  have  elapsed  between  12.30  p.m.  to-day  and  the
moment  at  which  I  give  you  the  pencil."  When  I  made
this  suggestion  the  date  of  my  next  visit  was  unknown  even
to  myself.

On  February  20th  I  called  to  see  her  at  10.35  a.m. — a
very  unusual  hour  for  my  visit.  At  10.40,  before  hypnotis-
ing her,  I  gave  her  a  pencil  and  a  piece  of  paper.  She
immediately  wrote  down  "  94- — 10."  She  was  wide  awake,
and  on  being  questioned  she  denied  all  knowledge  of  having
written  anything.  In  hypnosis  she  said  that  what  she  had
written  was  meant  for  94  hours  10  minutes,  that  being  the
time  that  had  elapsed  since  I  made  the  suggestion  on
February  16th.  The  answer  is  correct.  She  could  give  no
explanation  of  how  she  knew.  She  admitted  that  she  might
have  thought  over  the  matter  in  her  sleep  at  night,  but  she
did  not  remember  having  made  any  calculation.  She  had  no
recollection  of  having  thought  anything  about  it  that  morning
(February  20th).  She  had  been  very  busy  and  had  not
noticed  what  time  it  was  when  I  called.

On  February  20th,  1907,  I  made  a  similar  suggestion  at
11  a.m.,  the  interval  this  time  to  be  expressed  in  minutes
instead  of  in  hours.

On  February  25  th  I  called  to  see  her  at  12.50  p.m.  At
12.55,  before  hypnotising  her,  I  gave  her  a  pencil  and  paper.
She  smiled  and  asked  what  she  had  to  do  now.  As  she  did
not  write  immediately  I  engaged  her  in  conversation  on  a
subject  that  interested  her,  and  she  talked  to  me  quite  freely
and  intelligently.  At  the  end  of  two  minutes  she  wrote
down  "7315."  (This  is  the  correct  number  of  minutes  from
11  a.m.,  February  20th,  to  12.55  p.m.,  February 25th.)  I


32


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


paid  no  attention  to  the  writing  for  a  few  minutes.  At  a
pause  in  the  conversation,  covering  the  paper  with  my  hand,
I  asked  her  if  she  had  written  anything.  She  did  not  know.
She  thought  she  had  noticed  her  hand  moving,  but  she  was
not  sure.  I  showed  the  figures  to  her,  but  she  did  not  know
what  they  meant.  In  hypnosis  she  knew  what  she  had.
written  and  what  it  meant.  She  also  remembered  the  conver-
sation which  took  place  while  she  was  awake  during  the  two
minutes  preceding  the  writing  of  the  figures.  On  being  asked
how  she  kept  the  record  of  the  time  she  said  she  did  not
know.  She  had  no  recollection  of  making  any  calculation
after  I  had  given  her  the  pencil.  On  being  put  into  a
deeper  stage  of  hypnosis  and  questioned  she  said  she  remem-
bered adding  25  to  7290.  She  "knew"  that  it  was  12.55
when  I  gave  her  the  pencil,  and  she  knew  that  at  12.30  the
number  of  minutes  that  had  elapsed  was  7290.  She  thought
that  she  kept  the  record  up  to  time  every  half  hour,  but  she
was  not  sure  about  this.

In  these  experiments  I  think  there  was  a  continuous  sub-
conscious watching  of  the  time  as  it  passed,  and  I  believe
that  the  only  calculation  employed  was  the  mental  addition
which  took  place  at  regular  or  irregular  intervals.  What
these  intervals  were  I  could  not  find  out.  It  may,  however,
be  suggested  that  instead  of  watching  and  counting  the  hours
and  minutes  as  they  passed,  F.  D.  made  a  subconscious  cal-
culation after  I  arrived.  I  do  not  deny  that  this  may  be  a
possible  explanation  ;  but  considering  the  length  of  time  she
usually  took  to  do  such  calculations  subconsciously,  I  do  not
think  that  she  could  have  arrived  at  the  correct  answer  in
the  short  time  which  elapsed  between  my  arrival  and  the
production  of  the  writing.

I  have  repeated  these  experiments  on  another  subject,  Mrs.
C,  who,  as  I  have  already  said,  disliked  figures  and  was  not
good  at  mental  arithmetic.  In  this  case  I  obtained  the
answers  by  automatic  speech  instead  of  writing.  On  February
21st,  1907,  at  3.20  p.m.,  I  gave  the  following  suggestion  to
Mrs.  C.  :  '■  It  is  now  twenty  minutes  past  three.  The  next
time  I  call  to  see  you,  when  I  ask  '  How  long  ?'  you  will
tell  me  how  many  hours  will  have  elapsed  from  now  till
then." I  called  to  see  her  on  February  27th  at  3.20  p.m.,


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


33


and  at  once  asked  "How  long?"  She  replied  at  once  "144
hours."  (Right.)  In  the  waking  state  she  said  she  did  not  know
what  this  meant;  but  she  said  she  had  felt  conscious  that  she  had
been  counting  the  hours.  At  first  she  did  not  know  what
this  counting  meant  and  thought  it  silly,  but  she  came  to
the  conclusion  that  it  was  something  I  had  asked  her  to  do.
She  did  not  consciously  count ;  but  every  few  hours  a  num-
ber came  into  her  head.  She  sometimes  found  herself  think-
ing of  some  number  of  hours  in  the  middle  of  the  night
when  awake.  In  hypnosis  she  could  give  me  no  further
information.  In  deep  hypnosis  she  said  she  remembered
thinking  of  144  hours  while  lying  reading  just  immediately
before  I  entered  the  room.

On  February  27th,  1907,  at  3.30  p.m.,  a  similar  sugges-
tion was  given  to  Mrs.  C,  the  interval  to  be  expressed  in
minutes  instead  of  in  hours.  On  March  5th,  at  3.40  p.m.,
when  she  was  asked  "How  long?"  she  said,  after  a  few
minutes,  "  8735  minutes."  (Wrong — 85  too  many.)  In  the
waking  state  she  said  that  she  had  been  greatly  troubled  by  the
feeling  that  she  had  been  adding  up  figures,  but  she  did  not  know
what  they  meant.  In  hypnosis  she  knew  that  she  had  been
adding  up  the  minutes  since  3.30  p.m.  on  February  27th,
but  she  did  not  know  how  often  she  made  the  additions.
In  deep  hypnosis  she  said  that  her  last  addition  had  been
8395  +  340.  This  was  made  after  I  asked  her  "How
long?"  but  she  did  not  know  how  she  had  got  these  figures.

II.

Delboeufs  experiments  on  his  subjects  M.  and  J.,  and  Dr.
Bramwell's  experiments  on  Miss  D.  have  many  points  in
common  with  those  numbered  1  to  30  which  I  have  just
recorded.  In  all,  the  suggestions  were  given  in  such  a  way
as  to  necessitate  some  calculation  whereby  the  moment  at
which  the  act  fell  due  became  known  to  the  subject's  sub-
conscious intelligence.  That  such  a  calculation  was  made  by
their  subjects  is  admitted  by  both  Delboeuf  and  Dr.  Bram-
well ;  but  they  both  seem  to  have  forgotten  the  main
object  which  Delboeuf  had  in  view  when  he  devised  the
plan  of  giving  the  suggestions  in  minutes  instead  of  in  days.

c


34


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


That  object  was  to  eliminate  the  giving  of  a  fixed  date  for-
th e  fulfilment  of  the  hypnotic  command.

Now  it  must  be  apparent  that  when  the  subject  has  made
a  calculation  by  which  he  arrives  at  the  terminal  time,  his
subconscious  intelligence  is  as  surely  in  possession  of  a  fixed
date  as  if  it  had  been  mentioned  to  him  when  the  sugges-
tion was  given.  When  Delboeuf  at  6.30  a.m.  told  J.  to  pull
the  cook's  nose  in  1600  minutes,1  he  might  just  as  well
have  told  her  to  do  so  at  9.10  a.m. — provided  that  she  was
able  to  make  the  necessary  calculation.  As  a  matter  of  fact
J.  was  a  very  poor  arithmetician,  and  her  calculation  was  wrong
by  60  minutes.  In  the  same  way  when  Dr.  Bramwell,  at
3.30  p.m.,  on  February  26th,  told  Miss  D.  to  make  a  cross
on  a  piece  of  paper  in  20,180  minutes,2  he  might  just  as
well  have  told  her  to  make  it  at  3.50  p.m.,  on  March  11th:
for  Miss  D.  was  very  good  at  this  sort  of  mental  arithmetic.
When  this  experiment  came  to  be  fulfilled  it  was  evident
that  Miss  D.  had  correctly  calculated  the  terminal  time,  but
the  cross  was  not  made  until  3.51^-.  This  slight  discrepancy
between  the  calculation  made  and  the  appreciation  of  the  time
points  us  to  a  fundamental  distinction  which  should  be  made
in  considering  these  and  similar  experiments.  If  we  do  not
keep  separate  these  totally  different  questions,  the  results
appear  to  be  more  astonishing  and  inexplicable  than  they
really  are.  How  subconscious  calculations  of  the  kind  neces-
sary in  these  experiments  can  be  performed  by  half-educated
girls  is  one  problem ;  how  somnambules  can  appreciate  the
passage  of  time,  so  as  to  know  when  the  terminal  minute  so
calculated  arrives,  is  another  and  a  totally  different  problem.

Each  observer  has  encountered  certain  difficulties  in  under-
standing how  the  necessary  calculations  were  or  could  have
been  performed  by  the  subjects.  The  ignorant  peasant  girls
with  whom  Delboeuf  experimented  were  in  his  opinion  abso-
lutely incapable,  in  the  waking  state,  of  reducing  to.  hours
such  a  number  of  minutes  as  1150.  Unfortunately  Delboeuf
did  not  examine  M.  to  see  whether  during  hypnosis  her
arithmetical  powers  were  any  better  than  during  the  waking-
state. He  did,  however,  test  J.'s  powers  during  hypnosis,  but

delboeuf,  Proceedings  S.  P.  B., Vol.  VIII.,  p.  418.
-  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  128.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Sornnambules.  35


he  does  not  say  whether  they  were  better  or  worse  than
during  the  waking  state.  They  were  certainly  very  feeble,
since  after  ten  minutes  of  severe  mental  effort  she  failed  to
tell  how  many  hours  are  in  300  minutes.  But  it  may  be
noticed  that  J.  succeeded  very  seldom  in  fulfilling  hypnotic
commands  at  the  right  time.  If  we  disregard  for  the  time
being  any  errors  that  may  have  been  due  to  faulty  time
appreciation,  and  suppose  that  all  her  errors  were  due  to  mis-
calculation, we  find  that  she  made  the  same  sort  of  mistakes
in  the  experiments  cited  by  Delboeuf  as  she  made  when
trying  to  do  calculations  during  hypnosis  or  in  the  waking
state.  Further,  although  J.  was  unable,  during  hypnosis,  even
after  struggling  with  the  problem  for  ten  minutes,  to  tell
how  many  hours  are  in  300  minutes,  it  is  possible  that  she
might  have  arrived  at  the  correct  solution  had  she  been
allowed  five  hours  in  which  to  make  the  calculation.  And
that  is  practically  the  length  of  time  that  would  have  been
at  the  disposal  of  her  subconscious  intelligence  if  she  had
been  told  in  hypnosis  to  perform  some  act  at  the  end  of
300  minutes.  All  through  the  ensuing  hours  her  subcon-
scious  mind  would  have  been  free  to  grapple  with  the
problem,  and  it  is  probable  that  she  would  have  arrived  at
the  correct  solution  and  would  have  fulfilled  the  command
at  or  about  the  proper  time.

Delboeuf's  neglect  of  questioning  his  subjects  in  hypnosis
with  regard  to  their  fulfilment  of  the  suggestions,  while
diminishing  the  value  of  his  observations  and  leaving  much
untold  that  might  have  been  of  interest,  yet  saved  him  from
encountering  the  more  formidable  difficulties  which  Dr.  Bram-
well  had  to  contend  with  when  he  tried  to  find  out  how
his  subject  made  the  calculations  in  the  series  of  experiments
of  which  he  has  given  so  admirable  a  record.

At  an  early  stage  in  his  investigation  Dr.  Bramwell
attempted  to  find  out  during  hypnosis  the  subject's  mental
condition  in  reference  to  the  suggestions.  In  reply  to  his
questions  she  informed  him:1  (1)  That  when  the  suggestions
were  made  in  hypnosis  she  did  not  calculate  when  they  fell
due.  (2)  That  she  did  not  calculate  them  at  any  time
afterwards  during  hypnosis. (3)  That  she  had  no  recollection

1  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  122.


36


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


of  them  when  hypnosis  terminated.  (4)  That  no  memory  of
them  afterwards  rose  in  the  waking  state.  (5)  That  shortly
before  their  fulfilment  she  always  experienced  a  motor  impulse,
i.e.  her  fingers  moved  as  if  to  grasp  a  pencil  and  to  perform
the  act  of  writing.  (6)  That  this  impulse  was  immediately
followed  by  the  idea  of  making  a  cross  and  writing  certain
figures.  (7)  That  she  never  looked  at  clock  or  watch  until
after  she  had  made  her  record.

On  almost  all  of  these  points  my  own  observations  on  F.  D.
are  in  complete  agreement  with  Dr.  Bramwell's  findings.  The
only  noticeable  difference  is  in  regard  to  the  awareness  of  the
motor  impulse.  F.  D.  certainly  had  a  motor  impulse,  but  she
was  aware  of  it  only  as  a  vague  feeling  that  she  had  to  do
something.  This  vague  feeling  soon  became  defined,  and  she
knew  that  she  had  to  make  a  cross  and  write  down  the  time.

Another  and  more  important  difference  between  Dr.  Bram-
well's results  and  mine  is  to  be  found  in  connection  with  the
hypnotic  memory  of  the  suggestions  in  the  period  intervening
between  the  time  when  they  were  given  and  their  fulfilment.
Dr.  Bramwell  says  that  when  Miss  D.  was  questioned  in
hypnosis  as  to  unfulfilled  suggestions,  "  she  invariably  recalled
the  fact  that  these  had  been  made,  but  rarely  remembered
their  exact  terms.  She  always  asserted  that  she  had  never
thought  of  them,  did  not  know  how  much  time  had  elapsed
since  they  had  been  given  nor  when  they  were  due." 1

From  the  very  beginning  of  my  experiments  on  F.  D.  I
found  that  when  hypnotised  in  the  period  intervening  between
the  giving  of  a  suggestion  and  its  fulfilment,  she  almost
invariably  remembered  the  exact  terms  of  the  suggestion,
when  it  had  been  given,  and  knew  when  its  fulfilment  fell
due.  Yet  she,  like  Dr.  Bramwell's  subject,  denied  all  know-
ledge of  having  made  any  calculation.  The  most  that  she
would  admit  was  that  she  thought  of  figures  sometimes  in
her  sleep ;  but  she  could  not  remember  any  calculation  although
she  sometimes  said  that  she  remembered  thinking  of  the  questions
and  the  answers  on  these  occasions.  In  the  waking  state
she  had  no  recollection  of  dreaming  about  figures.

This  absence  of  hypnotic  memory  as  to  the  manner  in
which  the  calculations  were  made  is  regarded  by  Dr.  Bramwell

bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  137.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  37

as  one  of  the  principal  points  which  demand  explanation  in
connection  with  his  experiments.1  Since  the  acts  of  hypnotic
life,  with  certain  well-marked  exceptions  which  he  cites,  are
performed  consciously,  and  can  be  recalled  by  suggestion  in
subsequent  hypnoses  ;  and  since,  further,  the  hypnotic  memory
is  more  exact  and  far  reaching  than  the  normal  one,  the
absence  of  memory  in  hypnosis  as  to  given  circumstances  of
hypnotic  life,  other  than  those  which  he  cites,  is  regarded
by  him  as  markedly  suspicious.2  From  what  we  know  of
hypnotic  memory,  he  thinks  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that
if  calculations  had  been  made  by  the  subjects,  they  would
have  been  able  to  remember  them  when  again  hypnotised.

In  the  reasoning  which  led  him  to  this  conclusion  Dr.
Bramwell  seems  to  have  made  an  assumption  which  is  not
warranted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge.  The  memory  in
hypnosis  of  the  events  of  previous  hypnoses  is  as  a  rule  very
complete ;  but  we  have  no  evidence  that  re-hypnotisation  will
enable  us  to  revive  in  the  mind  of  the  subject  all  subliminal
mentation  that  may  have  taken  place  during  waking  life.
In  fact  so  far  as  this  question  has  been  made  a  subject  of
investigation,  the  available  evidence,  when  closely  examined,
points  rather  to  an  opposite  conclusion.  In  many  of  Gurney's
experiments  on  automatic  writing  it  was  found  that  the  subject
when  re-hypnotised  could  not  remember  what  he  had  written
automatically  in  the  waking  state  until  he  had  visualised  the
actual  writing  which  he  had  produced.  This  ignorance  in
hypnosis  of  the  content  of  subliminal  thought  was  still  more
apparent when some simple calculation had to be  made

1  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  pp.  409,  410.

2I  am  not  quite  sure  what  Dr.  Bramwell  means  by  "  markedly  suspicious. "
He  does  not,  I  imagine,  mean  to  impugn  the  subject's  good  faith,  although
that  is  the  interpretation  which  first  suggests  itself  to  the  reader.  Nor  do  I
think  he  means  that  the  absence  of  memory  is  evidence  either  of  absence  of
consciousness  or  of  the  non-making  of  calculations.  He  admits  that  calculations
are  made  and  that  they  are  made  by  "some  intelligence."  What  I  think  he  does
mean  is  that  the  absence  of  memory  is  strong  evidence  that  the  calculations  are
not  made  by  the  "hypnotic  self.*'  He  says:  "The  fact  that  nothing  could
be  recalled  by  the  ordinary  hypnotic  self  regarding  calculations  which  must
inevitably  have  been  made  in  some  form  of  hypnosis,  apparently  showed  that
the  subject  possessed  a  third  substratum  of  the  personality"  (op.  cit.  p.  391).
By  "some  form  of  hypnosis''  I  think  Dr.  Bramwell  means  some  stratum  of
hypnotic  consciousness.


38


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


before  the  writing  was  produced.  Thus  when  W — s  was
told  in  hypnosis  to  sum  the  digits  from  1  to  9  and  instantly
awakened,  planchette  wrote  down  the  figures  and  summed
them  up.  But  when  the  subject  was  re-hypnotised  he  had
no  recollection  of  what  he  had  written,  or  even  of  having
written  at  all.1  This  result,  however,  was  exceptional.  As
a  rule  the  subject,  on  being  re-hypnotised,  knew  what  he  had
written ;  if  he  had  written  the  answer  to  any  sum  given  to
him  in  hypnosis,  he  knew  what  figures  he  had  written ;  but
there  is  little  evidence  in  Gurney's  papers  that  the  subject
ever  remembered  the  actual  steps  of  the  calculation  by  which
he  had  arrived  at  that  answer.  It  does  not  seem,  however,
that  Gurney  directed  his  attention  specially  to  this  point,  as
there  is  no  explicit  mention  of  it  in  his  paper.

I  have  repeated  Gurney's  experiments  on  several  subjects,
and  while  getting  results  entirely  congruous  with  those  obtained
by  him,  only  under  exceptional  circumstances  and  by  inducing
a  very  deep  stage  of  hypnosis  have  I  succeeded  in  reviving
in  the  mind  of  the  subject  the  slightest  recollection  of  the
various  stages  of  the  mental  process  employed  in  the  solution
of  the  problems.  If  the  calculations  are  made  during  hypnosis
there  is  as  a  rule  no  difficulty  in  remembering  in  subsequent
hypnosis  the  various  steps  by  which  the  answer  is  arrived  at.

I  gave  F.  D.  a  simple  sum  to  do  during  hypnosis.  She
gave  me  the  correct  answer.  I  then  woke  her.  On  being
re-hypnotised  she  remembered  doing  the  sum  and  also  the
various  steps  in  the  calculation.  I  then  told  her  I  was  going
to  give  her  a  little  sum  to  do  after  she  woke  up.  She  was
to  divide  the  figures  I  would  give  her  by  3,  and  to  tell  me
the  answer  when  I  asked  "  What's  the  answer  ? "  Having
explained  so  much  I  said :  "  The  figures  you  are  to  divide  by
3  are  420,  wake  up!"  She  awoke  immediately,  and  I  said
at  once,  "  What's  the  answer  ? "  She  replied,  "  I  don't  know
what  you  mean."  "  What's  the  answer  ? "  "I  don't  know,
unless  it's  160 — that's  all  I  can  think  off."  I  re-hypnotised
her  and  said,  "  Do  you  remember  doing  that  sum  ? "  "  No.
I  gave  you  the  answer,  160,  but  I  think  that's  wrong."  "Do
you  remember  doing  the  sum,  and  how  you  came  to  make
a  mistake  ? " "  No. I  don't  remember." I  then  induced  a

1  Gurney,  Proceedings  S. P. 7?.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  304.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  39


deeper  stage  of  hypnosis  by  simple  verbal  suggestion.  I
said,  "  Now  sleep  deeper — sleep — deep — deep — deep — Do  you
remember  doing  that  sum  ? "  "  Yes."  "  How  did  you  make
a  mistake  V  "I  divided  the  4  by  3,  and  then  I  forgot  and
divided  the  rest  by  2."

As  the  result  of  many  similar  experiments  I  have  found
that  when  subconscious  calculations  are  made  during  waking-
life  in  response  to  suggestions  given  in  hypnosis,  the  mental
processes  involved  cannot  be  recalled  in  subsequent  hypnoses
unless  the  state  of  hypnosis  induced  is  of  the  nature  of  a
much  more  profound  sleep  than  that  in  which  the  original
suggestions  were  given.  In  many  instances,  no  matter  what
artifices  I  might  adopt,  I  failed  to  revive  anything  but  the
vaguest  traces  of  recollection.

Up  to  a  certain  point  in  his  reasoning  Dr.  Bramwell
seems  to  assume  that  the  self-consciousness  of  the  hypnotised
subject  can  exhaust  the  content  of  the  subliminal  mind  in
its  totality.  Yet,  at  a  later  stage,  by  postulating  as  the  real
calculator  a  third  self,1  separate  and  distinct  from  the  hypnotic
self,  he  practically  abandons  the  basis  on  which  his  whole
argument  so  far  has  rested.

The  tendency  of  some  modern  psychologists  lightly  to  give
up  belief  in  the  unitary  character  of  man's  being  is  greatly
to  be  deprecated.  Neither  the  records  of  multiple  personality
nor  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  warrant  the  conclusion  that
every  human  being  contains  within  himself  an  indefinite  number
of  separate  selves.  In  spontaneous  cases  of  multiple  person-
ality the  complete  dissociation  of  consciousness  manifested  in
the  different  states  may  justify  the  use  of  the  word  self  to
designate  each  of  the  alternating  phases ;  and  the  same  may
be  said  of  some  exceptional  hypnotic  subjects,  such  as  Janet's
Leonie  ;"2  but  neither  convenience  nor  customary  usage  justifies
the  application  of  the  term  to  those  isolated  manifestations  of
subliminal  thought  which  may  be  exhibited  spontaneously,  or  as
a  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  in  healthy  persons.  It  may
be  convenient,  however,  in  investigating  such  operations  of
the  subliminal  part  of  the  mind  as  are  manifested  in  connection
with  the  hypnotic  state, to conceive subconsciousness  as  a

1  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  413.

2  Pierre  Janet,  V AiUomatisme  Psycholojique,  2nd  Ed.,  Paris,  1894.


40


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


part  of  the  stream  of  consciousness  as  a  whole,  but  flowing
at  different  depths  below  the  surface  known  to  us  by  intro-
spection in  the  waking  state.  Or,  to  change  the  metaphor,
we  may  regard  it  as  we  do  those  regions  of  the  earth's  crust
which  lie  below  the  surface  of  every-day  observation.  The
danger  of  such  metaphors  is  obvious,  but  it  is  probably  less
misleading  to  speak  of  the  hypnotic  stratum  of  consciousness
than  of  the  hypnotic  self.  This  is  especially  so  if  by  using
the  term  hypnotic  self  we  imply  that  it  is  co-extensive  with
the  subliminal  self;  for  there  is  abundant  evidence,  derived
from  various  sources,  that  the  region  of  mental  life  laid  bare-
at  any  one  time  by  the  induction  of  hypnosis  is  but  a
fraction  of  the  subliminal,  just  as  the  supraliminal  is  but  a
fraction  of  mental  life  in  its  totality.

We  must  not  then  suppose  that  hypnotisation  will  enable
us  to  bring  to  the  surface  the  memory  of  all  subliminal
mentation  which  may  go  on  during  waking  life.  The  memory
test  in  regard  to  mental  processes  supposed  to  be  carried  on
at  the  hypnotic  level,  has  positive  but  not  negative  validity ;
and  even  if  a  want  of  recollection  during  hypnosis  of  the
events  of  previous  hypnoses  did  not  sometimes  occur,  we  could
not  deny  the  possibility  of  a  subconscious  train  of  thought, —
even  if  this  were  started  by  a  suggestion  given  during  hypnosis,
— of  which  no  recollection  can  be  aroused  by  re-hypnotisation.
So  far  as  I  can  find,  writers  on  hypnotism  have  not  dealt
explicitly  with  this  question.  Much  of  the  evidence  to  be
found  in  Gurney's  papers,  and  that  which  I  have  met  with
in  my  own  investigations,  points  to  a  very  curious  conclusion
with  regard  to  the  elements  of  subconscious  thinking  that  can
be  recalled  in  the  hypnotic  state.  Sensory  impressions  that
have  been  subliminally  perceived  are  as  a  rule  remembered
in  hypnosis ;  and  with  the  memory  of  the  impression  comes
a  memory  of  the  thought  accompanying  or  occasioned  by  it.
Bodily  acts,  such  as  writing  or  speaking,  originating  subliminally;
are  also,  as  a  rule,  remembered  in  hypnosis ;  and  along  with
the  recollection  of  the  written  or  spoken  words  there  comes
of  course  a  knowledge  of  their  meaning ;  and  there  may  be
thus  a  simulation  of  remembrance  of  the  content  of  a  sub-
conscious thought.  When  a  thought  has  not  been  the
immediate  result  of  a  subliminally  perceived  sensory  impression.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  41


or  has  not  been  externalised  in  any  motor  act,  a  memory  of
it  may  sometimes  be  found  in  hypnosis  if  the  thought  is
the  conclusion  of  a  subconscious  train  of  reasoning,  or  the
answer  to  a  problem  which  has  been  solved  subliminally.

Generalisation  in  regard  to  the  peculiarities  of  hypnotic
and  post-hypnotic  states  is  nearly  always  a  mistake ;  and  I
do  not  for  a  moment  deny  that  in  exceptional  circumstances
memory  of  a  much  wider  range  of  subliminal  thought  than
that  which  I  have  indicated  may  be  found  during  hypnosis ;
but  in  the  ordinary  somnambule  it  is,  I  think,  very  difficult
to  find  any  indisputable  evidence  of  memory  of  a  subconscious
thought  which  cannot  be  included  in  one  of  the  categories  I
have  named.

As  I  have  said,  acts  originating  subliminally  are  remembered,
and  with  the  remembrance  of  the  act  comes  also  a  remembrance
of  the  thought  which  immediately  prompted  it.  But  if  this
act  is  the  result  of  a  subconscious  train  of  reasoning  or  of
calculation,  there  may  be,  and  in  my  own  experiments  I  have
found  that  there  generally  is,  no  recollection  of  the  various
antecedent  stages  of  thought  which  have  led  up  to  it.  The
evidence  as  to  these  unremembered  things  is  mainly  negative  ;
for  example,  the  difficulty  in  finding  any  hypnotic  memory
of  the  actual  doing  of  subliminal  calculations.  As  to  remem-
bered things  there  is,  of  course,  plenty  of  evidence.  If  a
post-hypnotic  act  is  to  be  performed  when  the  operator  coughs
for  the  fifth  time,  the  subliminal  perception  of  the  coughs  is
remembered  in  hypnosis ;  and  if  the  subject  be  hypnotised
after  the  fourth  cough  he  will  sometimes  give  proof  of  being
in  an  attitude  of  expectancy  for  the  final  signal.  There  is
abundant  evidence  that  acts  originating  subliminally  are
remembered— all  suggested  post-hypnotic  acts  for  example.
Even  if  the  act  in  question  had  not  been  distinctly  specified
when  the  suggestion  was  given,  but  was  the  result  of  a  certain
amount  of  spontaneity  and  choice,  or  of  even  more  elaborate
mental  processes,  on  the  part  of  the  secondary  consciousness,
the  doing  of  it  can,  as  a  rule,  be  recollected  during  hypnosis.
That  the  results  of  subliminal  calculation  may  sometimes  be
remembered  in  hypnosis  was  shown  in  the  series  of  experi-
ments with  F.  D. ;  but  that  they  sometimes  may  not  be
remembered  is  equally  clear  from  Dr.  Bramwell's  observations.


42


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


The  difficulty  in  finding  any  memory  of  the  continuous
thinking  which  we  know  can  go  on  subliminally  would  seem
to  be  especially  great  if  the  train  of  thought  necessitates
some  concentration  of  subliminal  attention,  as  in  the  calcula-
tions required  in  the  time-experiments  recorded  by  Delboeuf,
Dr.  Bramwell,  and  myself ;  and  I  know  no  better  description
of  the  nature  of  the  mental  state  in  which  such  calculations
are  presumably  made  than  that  given  to  me  by  F.  D.,  in
hypnosis,  when  she  said  that  she  "  went  into  such  a  very
deep  sleep  when  doing  them  that  she  could  not  remember
anything  about  the  actual  calculations  afterwards."

This  deepening  of  the  sleep,  which  I  believe  actually  takes
place — a  "  sleep "  of  the  hypnotic  stratum  of  consciousness —
may  be  merely  a  concentration  of  attention  on  the  problem
to  be  solved.  The  amount  of  attention  which  can  be  brought
to  bear  is  at  all  times  limited ;  and  even  during  waking
life,  if  the  attention  becomes  completely  absorbed  by  some
experience,  the  marginal  elements  in  the  conscious  field  may
become  so  wholly  submerged  that  only  at  the  end  of  the
experience  do  we  "  come  to  ourselves  "  and  take  up  the  thread
of  our  life  in  relation  to  the  external  world.  So,  when  sub-
conscious attention  is  concentrated  on  the  solution  of  an
arithmetical  problem  given  in  hypnosis,  absorption  in  the
problem  becomes  so  complete  that  only  when  the  solution  has
been  attained  does  the  consciousness  of  the  hypnotic  stratum
"  come  to  itself,"  and  enter  into  relation  with  those  subconscious
thoughts  which  form  the  memory-continuum  of  the  hypnotic
state.

In  the  case  of  my  own  subject,  F.  D.,  the  period  of  natural
sleep  seemed  to  be  the  time  chosen  for  the  working  out  of
the  calculations.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
subliminal  is  seldom  so  completely  segregated  from  the  supra-
liminal consciousness  as  not  to  be  to  some  extent  disturbed
in  its  operations  by  the  experiences  of  waking  life.  But  when
the  repose  of  natural  sleep  supervenes  we  can  imagine  the
subconscious  mind  at  the  hypnotic  level  settling  down  to  the
solution  of  its  task,  becoming  absorbed  in  its  work,  and  "  coming
to  itself "  when  the  problem  has  been  solved.  Again  I  appeal
to  the  information  given  by  the  subject  in  hypnosis  ;  F.  D.  said
that  she  sometimes  remembered  thinking  in  her  sleep  of  the


Liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  43


questions  and  the  answers,  but  she  denied  all  knowledge  of
having  made  any  calculations.

The  second  point  which  Dr.  Brainwell  thinks  demands  an
explanation  is  "  the  fact  that  the  suggestions  not  only  involved
feats  of  arithmetical  calculations  and  memory  far  beyond  the
subjects'  normal  powers,  but  also  in  some  cases  beyond  their
ordinary  hypnotic  ones."  1

I  have  already  referred  to  the  calculations  made  by  Delboeuf's
subjects,  and  I  have  pointed  out  the  importance  of  the  amount  of
time  which  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  subconscious  intelligence
for  the  working  out  of  the  problems.  In  regard  to  Dr.  Bram-
well's  experiments  and  my  own,  the  first  thing  which  must
be  taken  into  consideration  is  the  comparative  simplicity  of
the  earlier  problems  and  their  gradual  increase  in  difficulty
-as  time  went  on.  We  must  not  undervalue  the  facility  in
calculation  which  practice  brings,  and  whatever  method  of
reducing  minutes  to  hours  and  days  a  subject  may  adopt,
there  seems  little  doubt  that  familiarity  with  certain  equiva-
lents of  minutes  in  days  and  hours  must  soon  become  established,
and  be  utilised  in  the  solution  of  what  at  first  sight  may  appear
very  complex  arithmetical  problems.

I  find  that  the  apparently  clumsy  plan  adopted  by  F.  D.
■of  making  the  number  of  minutes  in  a  day  her  basis  of  calcula-
tion is  singularly  well  adapted  for  the  solution  of  such  problems ;
for  just  as  in  the  earlier  experiments  the  number  of  minutes
in  one,  two,  or  three  days,  became  fixed  in  the  mind,  so  in
the  later  and  more  difficult  ones  simple  multiples  of  1440
showed  at  once  the  number  of  days,  plus  or  minus  some
number  of  minutes  less  than  1440,  in  any  given  experiment.
For  example,  after  a  little  experience  of  problems  of  this
description,  one  soon  comes  to  know  and  to  remember  that
10,080  is  the  number  of  minutes  in  a  week.  Given  this
knowledge  it  will  be  seen  that  the  first  problem  correctly
solved  in  hypnosis  by  Miss  D.  (Dr.  Bramwell's  Exp.  26) 2  was
a  very  simple  one  indeed.  At  3  p.m.  on  Wednesday,  Feb.  12th,
a  suggestion  was  given  to  be  fulfilled  in  10,115  minutes.  The
only  mental  arithmetic  necessary  is  to  subtract  80  from  115.
The  suggestion  is  then  at  once  known  to  be  due  in  a  week  plus
■35  minutes,  or  "next  Wednesday  at  25  minutes  to  4  p.m."

1Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  409.  2Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  127.


44


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.R


[part


Looked  at  in  the  same  way,  many  of  the  other  suggestions
which  at  first  sight  seem  to  necessitate  considerable  powers
of  mental  arithmetic,  are  rendered  very  simple.  Thus  in  Dr.
Bramwell's  Exp.  39 — in  20,180  minutes  from  3.30  p.m. — all
that  is  necessary  is  to  recognise  that  10,080  x  2  =  20,160,
and  the  date  at  which  the  suggestion  falls  clue  is  immediately
seen  to  be  3.50  p.m.  a  fortnight  hence.  Practically  all  the
problems  solved  correctly  by  Miss  D.  in  hypnosis  were  of  a
similarly  simple  kind ;  and  of  the  few  to  which  I  got  correct
answers  from  my  subject,  F.  D.,  the  same  thing  holds  good.

In  his  statement  of  the  point  demanding  explanation  in
regard  to  the  calculations,  Dr.  Bramwell  assumes  that  arith-
metical powers  are  always  greater  during  hypnosis  than  in
waking  life.  The  evidence  in  favour  of  this  belief  is  by  no
means  unequivocal.  We  have  seen  that  in  Delboeufs  subject
J.  there  was  during  hypnosis  apparently  little  improvement
in  her  calculating  powers ;  and  my  own  experience  with  most
of  my  somnambules  is  quite  in  accord  witli  this  result.  On
twenty-four  occasions  Dr.  Bramwell's  subject,  Miss  D.,  was
asked,  immediately  after  the  suggestions  were  given,  and  before
the  termination  of  hypnosis,  to  calculate  when  the  suggested
act  fell  due.  In  the  first  nine  instances  she  was  wrong,  and
in  the  remaining  fifteen  she  was  right  in  eleven  and  wrong
in  four.  "  As  the  experiments  advanced,  not  only  the  fre-
quency, but  also  the  extent,  of  Miss  D.'s  errors  in  calculation
decreased,  and  the  answers  were  given  much  more  rapidly.
Sometimes  the  correct  replies  were  almost  instantaneous,  and
in  these  instances  no  conscious  calculation  could  be  traced." 1
Here,  again,  we  have  to  note  the  effects  of  practice  in  facilitating
the  mental  operations  necessary  in  such  calculations.  There
is  really  nothing  very  wonderful  in  the  fact  that  an  intelligence
which  has  been  for  several  weeks  engaged  in  solving  problems
such  as  were  given  to  Miss  D.  in  hypnosis,  should  at  last
succeed  in  telling,  almost  immediately,  when  an  act  to  be
performed  at  the  end  of  10,050  minutes  falls  due.  Dr.  Bram-
well says  that  in  the  waking  state  Miss  D.  failed  in  doing-
mental  calculations  unless  the  sums  were  extremely  simple.
But  she  similarly  failed,  to  begin  with,  in  the  hypnotic  state.
Had  a  parallel  series  of  problems  been  given  to  Miss  D.  in  the

1  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  137.


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  45


waking  state  from  the  beginning,  or  even  from  the  8th  of
January,  when  she  was  first  asked  to  make  calculations  during
hypnosis,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  by  February  5  th,
when  she  first  succeeded  in  giving  a  correct  answer  in  hypnosis,
she  would  have  been  able  to  solve  the  same  problem  as  readily
in  the  waking  state.  But  no  such  training  of  the  waking
intelligence  having  taken  place,  the  hypnotic  intelligence  was
by  February  5th,  if  not  the  better  calculator,  at  least  in
possession  of  certain  data,  useful  in  the  particular  kind  of
calculations  required,  of  which  the  waking  intelligence  was
quite  ignorant.

The  most  curious  detail  of  these  problems  solved  in  hypnosis,
and  one  which  I  have  frequently  verified  in  my  own  experi-
ments, is  that  when  correct  answers  were  given  immediately,
"  no  conscious  calculation  could  be  traced."  I  presume  that
by  this  phrase  Dr.  Bramwell  means  that  the  subject  herself
was  not  conscious  of  making  any  calculation.  But  we  must
remember  how  difficult  introspection  is  to  an  untrained  mind  ;
and  the  difference  between  a  conclusion  arrived  at  by  a  short
calculation  and  one  which  depends  immediately  on  a  know-
ledge of  certain  facts,  is  sometimes  not  quite  obvious,  even  to
a  trained  observer.  I  know  that  there  are  365  days  in  a
year.  If  I  am  asked  how  many  days  there  are  from  the  1st
of  January,  1907,  to  the  2nd  of  January,  1908,  and  I  answer
immediately  366,  have  I  made  a  calculation?  Or  am  I  merely
stating  a  fact  which  is  as  well  known  to  me  as  that  there  are
seven  days  in  a  week  ?  So  if  Miss  D.,  in  hypnosis,  knew  that
there  are  10,080  minutes  in  a  week,  would  it  be  necessary
for  her  to  make  any  calculation  to  tell  when  an  act  suggested
to  be  done  in  10,090  minutes  fell  due?

As  I  have  already  indicated,  a  memory  of  the  results  of
subconscious  calculations  made  in  response  to  suggestions  given
in  hypnosis  becomes  a  possession  of  the  hypnotic  stratum  of
consciousness.  Thus  when  F.  D.  worked  out  on  paper,  during
hypnosis,  the  calculation  in  experiment  No.  13,  she  put  down
1440  and  multiplied  it  by  10.  She  knew  that  1440  is  the
number  of  minutes  in  a  day,  and  thought  that  "any  one  would
know  that."  This  knowledge  was,  no  doubt,  the  result  of  a
subconscious  calculation  which  she  had  forgotten.

O

In  my  own experiments I  gave my  subjects  very  few


46


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.I).


[part


opportunities  of  making  calculations  in  hypnosis.  I  rather
directed  my  attention  to  the  investigation  of  the  subconscious
calculations  which  are  made  after  hypnosis  has  terminated.  I
have  found  little  evidence  that  calculation  in  hypnosis  is,  as  a
rule,  appreciably  more  rapid  or  more  accurate  than  in  the
waking  state,  except  in  so  far  as  such  data  as  I  have  indicated,
resulting  from  training  during  hypnosis  or  from  subconscious
calculation  in  post-hypnosis,  may  become  a  possession  of  the
hypnotic  stratum  of  consciousness,  and  thereby  facilitate  the
solution  of  such  problems  during  the  hypnotic  state.  With
regard  to  subconscious  calculations  performed  after  hypnosis  is
terminated,  the  investigation  is  more  difficult,  and  the  con-
clusions to  be  arrived  at  more  doubtful.  In  some  of  Gurney's
experiments  there  seems  to  have  been  a  more  rapid  calculation
than  was  possible  in  the  waking  state.  In  my  own  experi-
ments I  have  found  little  evidence  that  mental  calculations
can  be  performed  subconsciously  more  quickly  than  they  can
be  in  hypnosis  or  in  ordinary  waking  life.  On  the  contrary,
I  have  found,  in  some  cases  at  least,  that  if  the  waking
consciousness  is  actively  engaged,  a  length  of  time  as  great  or
greater  than  would  be  required  for  the  solution  of  the  problem
in  ordinary  waking,  or  in  hypnosis,  is  necessary  for  the  sub-
conscious calculation.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  evidence
to  show  that  problems,  the  mental  solution  of  which  would
seem  to  be  beyond  the  powers  of  the  waking  or  of  the  hypnotic
consciousness  may  be  correctly  solved  under  favourable  circum-
stances, such  as  during  natural  sleep,  as  the  result  of  a  purely
subconscious  calculation.

Although  I  am  inclined  to  ascribe  most  importance  to  the
uninterrupted  concentration  of  attention  which  may  be  possible
at  the  hypnotic  level,  and  to  the  length  of  time  which  is
available  by  the  subconscious  intelligence  for  making  the  cal-
culations, still,  there  may  be,  in  some  instances,  both  in
hypnosis  and  in  post-hypnosis,  a  facilitation  of  mental  operations
at  the  hypnotic  level  which  is  impossible  in  supraliminal
thouoht.  Such  a  facilitation  of  mental  calculations  would  arise
if  the  subject  were  able  to  visualise  the  figures  employed,  so
that  they  had  for  him  the  reality  and  permanence  which
suggested  visual  hallucinations  have  for  many  somnambules.

We  know  from  the  work  of  Charcot,  Gilbert  Ballet,  and


LIV.]


The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.


47


Sir  Francis  Galton,  that  individuals  vary  very  much  as  to  the
nature  of  the  sensory  images  which  they  most  habitually  use
as  their  counters  of  thought.  Some  people,  when  thinking  of
things  or  events,  depend  almost  entirely  on  their  visual
memory.  Some,  on  the  other  hand,  rely  greatly  on  auditory
or  kinaesthetic  representations.  Even  the  thinking  that  is
done  in  words  is  subject  to  similar  variations,  and  there  are
some  people  whose  most  abstract  thought  is  accompanied  by  a
train  of  visual  verbal  imagery.  With  regard  to  words,  how-
ever, this  is  undoubtedly  exceptional ;  and  notwithstanding
the  opinion  of  Bain  and  Strieker,  that  motor  representations
form  the  material  of  our  recollection  in  the  use  of  words,  I
think  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  view  put  forward  in  this
country  by  Dr.  Charlton  Bastian,  and  in  France  by  Victor  Egger,
which  gives  pre-eminence  to  auditory  representations,  is  true  for
the  great  majority  of  people  who  habitually  think  in  words.
But  with  regard  to  the  thought-symbols  of  arithmetic,  it  is
quite  different.  Here  visual  representation  is  the  rule ;  and
it  will,  I  think,  be  found  that  skill  in  mental  arithmetic  is
almost  always  accompanied  by  unusual  powers  of  visualisation.

So  far  as  my  own  experiments  go,  I  have  found  that  if  a
somnambule  is  a  good  visucl  he  will,  other  things  being  equal,
be  more  expert  at  mental  arithmetic  during  hypnosis  than  one
who  is  not.  He  will  also,  I  think,  show  increased  capacity,
or  at  least  will  solve  the  problems  more  rapidly  during  hypnosis
than  in  the  waking  state.  I  have  also  found  some  indications
that  he  will  perform  calculations  subconsciously  in  post-hypnosis
more  rapidly,  but  on  this  point  the  evidence  is  not  very
conclusive.

Although  individuals  vary  greatly  in  their  powers  of  visual-
isation, very  few  people  in  the  waking  state  can  visualise
sufficiently  well  to  enable  them  to  keep  steadily  before  the
mind  all  the  figures  in  a  sum  of  any  considerable  length  ;  but
if  a  somnambule  is  visuel  in  the  normal  state,  it  is  quite
possible  that  during  hypnosis,  or  in  the  working  of  the  hypnotic
stratum  of  consciousness  at  other  times,  such  an  increase  of
faculty  may  readily  take  place.  If  this  possibility  be  accepted,
and  if  allowance  be  made  for  hypnotic  training  of  the  calcu-
lating faculty,  for  increased  power  of  attention  at  the  hypnotic
level  of  consciousness, and for  the  length  of time at  the


48


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


disposal  of  the  subconscious  intelligence  in  arriving  at  a  correct
solution  of  the  more  difficult  problems,  the  contention  that
the  solution  of  these  problems  involved  feats  of  arithmetical
calculation  beyond  the  normal  powers  of  the  subjects  loses
much  of  its  force.  We  should  rather  be  inclined  to  expect
that  somnambules  who  have  undergone  some  training  in  sub-
conscious calculation,  might  be  able  to  perform  subconsciously
problems  as  difficult  as  any  that  they  could  do  in  the  waking-
state  with  the  help  of  pencil  and  paper.

I  have  made  only  one  or  two  experiments  of  this  nature.
On  one  occasion  I  told  F.  D.,  during  hypnosis,  to  write  down
in  my  presence  the  next  time  I  called  to  see  her,  the  number
of  halfpennies  in  £36  17s.  Hid.  I  saw  her  two  days  later,
and  while  awake  and  talking  to  me  she  wrote  down  the
correct  answer.  Awake,  she  did  not  know  what  the  figures
meant,  or  why  she  had  written  them.  In  hypnosis  she  remem-
bered the  suggestion,  and  knew  that  what  she  had  written
was  the  answer.  She  did  not  know  when  she  had  solved
the  problem,  and  had  no  recollection  of  having  made  any
calculation.  On  another  occasion  I  asked  her,  while  awake,
if  she  knew  how  many  yards  are  in  a  mile.  She  said  she
did  not.  In  hypnosis  I  told  her  to  write  down,  in  my  presence,
when  I  called  to  see  her  a<min,  the  number  of  feet  in  two
and  a  half  miles.  She  said  she  was  sure  she  could  not  do
this.  The  correct  answer  was  written  down  in  my  presence
five  clays  later.

Although  the  solution  of  the  more  difficult  problems
occurring  in  the  time-experiments  would  seem  to  necessitate
some  such  facilitation  of  the  mental  calculations  as  I  have
suggested,  there  is  not,  in  the  instances  recorded  up  to  the
present,  anything  to  warrant  the  belief  that  the  subconscious
powers  of  the  subjects  are  in  this  respect  any  greater  than
might  be  expected  from  their  standard  of  education ;  and  were
these  the  only  examples  of  subconscious  calculations  on  record
we  might  be  content  with  some  such  explanation  as  I  have
suggested.  But  the  powers  of  subconscious  calculation
exhibited  by  calculating  prodigies  such  as  Oauss  or  Dase
should  deter  us  from  being  too  sure  that  the  solution  of  the
comparatively  simple  problems  given  to  hypnotic  somnambules
may  not  be  the  work  of  some  truly  supernormal  faculty  the


Li  v.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  49

mere  suspicion  of  whose  existence  would  be  a  heresy  for
orthodox  science.

The  third  point  which  Dr.  Bramwell  thinks  needs  to  be
taken  into  consideration  when  trying  to  explain  the  results  of
his  own  experiments  is  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the
time-appreciation  required  in  Gurney's  cases  and  in  those
cited  by  himself.  He  says : 1  "  There  is  a  marked  difference
between  the  recognition  of  a  particular  clay  on  its  arrival,  and
the  last  minute  in  such  a  series  as  40,845.  .  .  .  Granting
that  some  intelligence  worked  out  the  arithmetical  portion  and
determined  that  the  suggestion  fell  due,  for  example,  at
3.25  p.m.  a  fortnight  later,  the  determination  of  the  arrival
of  that  particular  moment  differs  widely  from  the  recognition
of  the  dawning  of  a  given  day."

Now  I  venture  to  think  that  unless  special  precautions  are
taken  to  keep  the  subject  away  from  all  ordinary  means  of
knowing  the  time,  there  is  very  little  difference  indeed  between
the  two  kinds  of  experiment.  Dr.  Bramwell  says  that  in
Gurney's  experiments  the  secondary  intelligence  would  have
no  difficulty  in  recognising  the  terminal  clay  because  "  the
varying  impressions  from  the  external  world,  which  tell  us  that
a  new  day  has  dawned,  would  be  received  as  freely  by  the
secondary  as  by  the  primary  consciousness." 2  But  in  the
same  way  the  visual  or  auditory  impressions  which  give
information  of  the  time  of  day  to  the  primary  consciousness
will  be  equally  open  to  the  secondary  consciousness ;  and  the
secondary  consciousness  will  be  on  the  look-out  for  such
information  even  when  the  primary  consciousness  is  so  engaged
as  apparently  to  preclude  all  time  watching.

The  difficulty  of  preventing  such  access  of  subliminal  know-
ledge will  be  especially  great  when  the  experiments  are  carried
on  in  towns ;  for  then,  unless  special  precautions  are  taken,  it  is
almost  impossible  to  keep  the  subject  out  of  reach  of  visual  or
auditory  indications  of  the  passage  of  time.  Clock-dials  assail
the  eye  at  every  step,  and  church  bells  chime  the  quarters  all
through  the  clay  and  night ;  and  we  must  not  neglect  the
possibilities  of  the  information  that  may  be  so  obtained  by  a
watchful  subconsciousness.  In  this  connection  we  must  also
bear  in  mind  the  possibility  that  subconscious  perception  may

1  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  412. -Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  412.

D


50


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


have  normally  the  immensely  extended  range  which  perception
in  hypnosis  attains  under  suggestion.  If  such  be  the  case,  the
difficulty  of  assuring  ourselves,  even  when  apparently  stringent
precautions  are  taken,  that  the  subconscious  mind  does  not
receive  its  information  through  the  ordinary  sensory  channels
is  greatly  increased.  When  no  such  precautions  are  taken  it
seems  obvious  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  there  is
little  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  time-watching  involved,
whether  the  suggested  act  is  to  be  fulfilled  on  "  the  39th
day  from  this,"  or  at  "3.25  p.m.  a  fortnight  later."  But  if,
as  Dr.  Bramwell  says,1  "  in  some  instances  Miss  D.  was  in
a  darkened  room  for  several  hours  before  the  suocrestion  was
executed,  and  absolutely  without  any  of  the  ordinary  methods
of  determining  the  time,  even  if  she  knew  what  o'clock  it
was  when  she  entered  the  room,  how  could  she  determine
when  it  was  3.25?"  Now,  I  think  we  may  take  it  for
granted  that  whether  "  she "  knew  the  time  or  not  when  she
entered  the  room,  her  subconscious  intelligence  knew — if,  in
order  to  fulfil  the  suggestion  correctly,  it  was  necessary  for  it
to  know.  So  that  the  original  problem  of  recognising  the
arrival  of  the  terminal  minute  of  40,845  minutes  becomes
reduced  to  that  of  appreciating  the  passage  of  time  for
3  hours  and  25  minutes,  or  of  knowing  when  it  was
3.25  p.m.  If  we  can  exclude  the  possibility  which  I  have
suggested  that  even  in  the  darkened  room  her  subconscious
mind  was  not  "  absolutely  without  any  of  the  ordinary
methods  of  determining  the  time,"  then  we  have  arrived  at
what  I  consider  to  be  the  ultimate  problem  demanding
explanation  in  all  these  experiments  on  the  appreciation  of
time  by  somnambules.

My  own  observations  carried  on  in  the  quiet  of  the
country  are  to  some  extent  not  open  to  the  same  criticism
as  are  those  of  observers  working  in  more  populous  districts.
F.  D.  lives  in  a  cottage  far  removed  from  church  bells,  and
the  only  clock  in  the  house  is  the  kitchen  clock,  which  does
not  strike  the  hours.  She  possesses  a  watch  which  she  keeps
wound  up ;  but  she  scarcely  ever  wears  it  when  she  is  at
home.  It  generally  lies  on  her  dressing-table  all  day  and  all
night. Her  opportunities  of  obtaining  subliminal  information

bramwell,  Hypnotism,  p.  412.


Li  v.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  51

of  the  "  time  of  day "  through  ordinary  sensory  channels  are
thus  very  restricted;  and  experiments  with  her  afford  better
evidence  of  true  time-appreciation  than  those  with  subjects
whose  surroundings  give  more  opportunities  for  subliminal
perception  of  such  ordinary  indications  of  the  passage  of  time
as  I  have  referred  to.

What  I  mean  by  true  time- appreciation  is  the  power  of
marking  the  passage  of  time  without  any  guidance,  either  supra-
liminal or  subliminal,  which  can  by  any  possibility  be  referred
to  changes  going  on  in  the  external  world.  If  the  conditions
necessary  for  testing  this  power  can  ever  be  arranged,  it  is
evident  that  they  can  be  maintained  for  only  comparatively
short  periods.  We  cannot  expect  to  find  subjects  who  are
willing  to  be  confined  in  a  dark  room  for  any  length  of  time,
or  to  have  the  usual  routine  of  their  lives  disturbed  for  the
sake  of  our  experiments  ;  and  even  if  such  subjects  could  be
found,  there  are  probably  few  competent  observers  who  could
spare  the  time  necessary  for  making  exact  observations.

The  nearest  approach  to  evidence  of  a  true  time-watching
taking  place  over  a  longer  interval  than  a  few  hours  is  to  be
found  in  connection  with  prolonged  hypnotic  sleep.  I  lately
had  occasion  to  recommend  to  Mrs.  C.  a  sleep  of  forty-eight
hours,  with  intervals  for  meals.  I  saw  her  on  a  Tuesday,  and
she  told  me  that  she  could  spare  the  necessary  time  after  3
o'clock  the  next  day.  I  was  going  away  from  home  on  the
Wednesday,  so  I  gave  her  the  necessary  instructions  during
hypnosis  on  the  Tuesday.  I  said :  "  To-morrow  at  3  o'clock
you  will  go  to  sleep.  You  will  sleep  till  9  o'clock  and  then
wake  up  and  have  some  supper.  You  will  then  go  to  sleep,
and  sleep  till  8  o'clock  next  morning.  You  will  then  wake
up  and  have  breakfast.  After  breakfast  you  will  go  to  sleep,
and  you  will  sleep  till  1  o'clock,"  and  so  on.  I  saw  her  on
Thursday  and  found  that  my  instructions  had  been  followed  out.
Each  time  she  had  awakened  she  had  remained  awake  for
half-an-hour  exactly,  and  had  then  fallen  asleep  again.  This
exact  half-hour  interval  must  have  been  the  result  of  an  auto-
suggestion ;  for  I  had  not  given  any  definite  instructions  as  to
how  long  she  was  to  remain  awake.  On  the  Friday  I  called
to  see  her  in  the  forenoon  and  found  her  sleeping  peacefully.
I  awoke  her  and  asked  her  if  she  knew  what  day  it  was.


52


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


She  said  it  was  Friday.  She  showed  some  hesitation  as  to
whether  it  was  forenoon  or  afternoon,  but  finally  said  it  was
forenoon.  She  was  quite  unable,  however,  to  tell  what  the
time  was.  She  was  unwilling  even  to  guess,  for  she  maintained
that  she  had  no  idea  what  it  might  be.  I  said  to  her,  "  Sleep.
What  is  the  exact  time?"  She  replied  at  once,  "11.20."  I
took  out  my  watch  and  found  that  her  answer  was  correct.
There  was  no  clock  in  the  room.  I  did  not  know  what  the
exact  time  was  until  I  looked  at  my  watch.

In  this  case  there  seems  to  have  been  a  true  appreciation
of  the  passage  of  time  throughout  the  whole  period  of  sleep.
The  watching  of  the  time  was  done  by  the  hypnotic  conscious-
ness ;  and  the  knowledge  of  the  time  of  day  so  obtained  was
in  the  possession  of  the  hypnotic  consciousness  alone.

Apart  from  such  observations  as  may  be  made  in  connection
with  prolonged  hypnotic  sleep,  I  greatly  regret  that  I  have
never  been  able  to  spare  the  time  necessary  to  test  my  subjects'
powers  of  true  time-appreciation  over  a  longer  period  than
half-an-hour.

I  have,  however,  made  a  large  number  of  observations  within
the  limited  time  at  my  disposal,  and  these  are  sufficient  to
convince  me  that  in  the  true  time-appreciation  of  somnambules
we  have  to  deal  with  a  power  which  in  the  present  state  of
knowledge  can  only  be  described  as  supernormal.

Gurney  made  many  observations  on  his  subjects  in  regard
to  their  power  of  appreciating  the  passage  of  short  periods  of
time.  He  has  recorded  a  number  of  instances  in  which  an
act  suggested  in  hypnosis  has  been  performed  more  or  less
punctually  at  the  end  of  a  given  number  -  of  minutes,  the
subject  having  been  under  observation  during  the  whole
course  of  the  experiment.  He  also  utilised  automatic  writing
with  planchette  to  obtain  evidence  of  the  subconscious  time-
watching  that  can  go  on  during  the  waking  state.  The
subject,  having  been  taught  how  to  write  with  planchette,
was  told  in  hypnosis  to  perform  some  act  in  a  given  number
of  minutes,  and  that  he  would  be  required  at  some  time
before  then  to  write  the  number  of  minutes  that  had  passed.
Thus  one  of  his  subjects  "was  told  on  March  23rd  that  a
quarter  of  an  hour  after  his  next  arrival  he  was  to  open  and
shut  the  door  of  the  room,  and to  note  the  course  of  time


LIV.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  53

as  usual.  The  next  evening  he  arrived  at  7.6  \.  He  was
set  to  the  planchette  at  7.19.  The  writing,  produced  at
once,  was  13  min.  and  2  more.  At  7.22  he  rose,  walked
across  the  room,  opened  and  shut  the  door,  and  returned
to  his  seat.  Here  the  reckoning  was  not  more  than  half  a
minute  out."  1

I  have  made  a  great  many  observations  more  or  less  on
the  lines  of  Gurney's  experiments ;  but  I  have  thought  it
best  to  make  the  suggested  act  as  simple  as  possible.  It  is
important  in  testing  for  accuracy  in  time-watching  that  the
act  to  be  performed  should  be  one  to  which  the  subject  has
no  objection  whatsoever,  so  that  when  it  is  about  to  be
performed  in  the  waking  state  there  may  be  no  resistance
from  the  supraliminal  consciousness  to  be  overcome.  This
ensures  its  fulfilment  at  the  moment  of  the  subliminal  invasion.
It  is  also  well  that  the  act  should  be  one  which  can  be
performed  rapidly,  so  that  as  little  time  as  possible  may
elapse  between  its  beginning  and  its  end.  The  suggestion
given  in  most  of  my  experiments  was  that  at  the  end  of
so  many  minutes  the  subject  should  raise  her  right  or  her
left  hand  above  her  head.  She  was  told  to  do  it  rapidly  as
soon  as  the  idea  of  doing  so  arose  in  her  mind.  Sometimes
two  or  three  suggestions  were  given  together,  the  acts  to  be
performed  at  the  end  of  different  time  intervals.  In  obtaining
automatic  writing  in  these  experiments,  instead  of  using
planchette,  I  always  got  the  subject  to  write  with  a  pencil.
A  few  examples  will  sufficiently  illustrate  the  nature  of  these
experiments.

I  suggested  to  F.  ~D.  in  hypnosis,  without  telling  her  the
time,  that  in  eleven  minutes  exactly  she  would  raise  her
right  arm.  She  was  then  awakened,  and  she  raised  her  arm
at  the  end  of  ten  minutes.  On  another  occasion  she  was
told  in  hypnosis  that  her  right  arm  would  go  up  in  four
minutes.  This  suggestion  was  fulfilled  in  hypnosis  about  ten
seconds  too  soon.  She  was  then  told  that  her  arm  would
come  down  in  three  minutes.  This  was  fulfilled  in  the
waking  state  in  three  minutes  exactly.  When  she  was
asked  why  her  arm  came  down,  she  said  it  got  so  heavy
that  she  could  not  keep  it  up  any  longer.

iGurney,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  309.


54


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


On  another  occasion,  at  3.50  p.m.,  I  told  her  in  hypnosis
to  put  her  left  arm  up  in  fifteen  minutes.  At  3.56  I  told
her  to  put  her  right  arm  up  in  nine  minutes.  Soon  afterwards
she  was  awakened.  Her  left  arm  went  up  at  4.4  (one
minute  too  soon).  A  minute  afterwards  she  laughed  and
said  her  right  arm  wanted  to  go  up  too.  She  raised  it  at
4.5  exactly  (right).

I  have  carried  out  similar  observations  on  several
somnambules  with  almost  identical  results.  Some  subjects,
it  is  true,  seem  to  be  more  accurate  in  their  estimation
of  these  short  time-intervals  than  others ;  but  in  every
case  where  I  have  made  a  series  of  observations  I  have
found  the  same  tendency  to  slight  errors,  although  on
the  whole  a  remarkable  accuracy  in  time  estimation  was
exhibited.

The  mean  error  varies  with  different  subjects.  In  a  series
of  thirty-one  observations  on  F.  D.  in  the  estimation  of  periods
varying  from  one  to  fifteen  minutes,  the  mean  error  was
1'009  minutes.  In  fifteen  observations  on  Mrs.  C,  with
periods  varying  from  two  to  ten  minutes  the  mean  error  was
'78  minutes.  In  a  series  of  sixty  observations  on  various
subjects  with  periods  varying  from  one  minute  to  half  an
hour,  the  mean  error  was  -89  minutes.

One  very  curious  result  to  be  noted  in  these  experiments
is  the  apparent  limitation  of  the  amount  of  error,  no  matter
what  the  suggested  time-interval  may  be.  An  error  of  one
minute  seems  as  likely  to  be  made  when  the  suggestion  is
for  fifteen  minutes  as  when  it  is  for  three  minutes.  We
might  have  supposed  that  a  subject  who  has  just  performed
at  the  end  of  two  minutes  an  act  suggested  to  be  performed
in  three  minutes,  would  be  likely  to  perform  in  ten  minutes
an  act  suggested  to  be  performed  in  fifteen  minutes.  But
it  is  not  so.  The  most  likely  time  for  the  fifteen  minute
suggestion  to  be  fulfilled  is  in  fourteen,  fifteen  or  sixteen
minutes.  The  maximum  error  met  with  was  one  of  six
minutes  in  a  time  estimation  of  eighteen  minutes ;  but  this
occurred  in  one  of  a  complicated  series  in  which  four
suggestions  were  running  concurrently.  In  the  great  majority
of  cases,  in  the  estimation  of  periods  up  to  half  an  hour,  the
maximum  error  was  not  more  than  one  or  two  minutes.  In


Li  v.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Sornnambules.  55

thirty  per  cent,  of  the  trials  on  all  subjects,  the  time-interval
was  accurately  determined.

In  experiments  of  this  description  it  would  seem  that
there  is  an  actual  watching  of  the  minutes  as  they  pass,  just
as  in  Gurney's  original  experiments  there  was  a  watching
of  the  days.  But  since  minutes  are  purely  artificial  divisions
of  time  and  have  not  for  us  the  concrete  character  which
days  have,  the  way  in  which  this  watching  is  done  needs
some  explanation.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  understand
how  a  subconscious  intelligence  may  watch  the  passage  of
days  and  count  them  as  they  pass ;  but  it  is  by  no  means
easy  to  understand  how  this  same  intelligence,  unaided  by
any  artificial  mechanism  such  as  a  clock,  can  accurately
subdivide  "  time's  continuous  flow "  into  periods  which  corre-
spond to  a  given  number  of  minutes.

We  know  nothing  of  time  apart  from  sensible  experience.
Time  as  a  psychological  datum  is  but  a  quality  of  our
sensations  and  our  feelings.  Empty  time  is  an  abstraction
of  the  metaphysician,  and  except  in  a  relative  sense  is
unknown  to  the  psychologist :  time  perceived  is  always  filled.
We  perceive  a  sensible  present  which  has  duration.  Pre-
sentations increasing  in  complexity  give  us  a  feeling  of  a
future  which  is  coming  towards  us ;  presentations  diminishing
in  complexity  give  us  a  feeling  of  a  past  which  is  receding
behind  us ;  and  the  relatively  unchanging  complexity  of  the
"  now "  of  experience  gives  us  a  feeling  of  "  the  specious
present "  which  forms  our  sole  distinct  intuition  of  time.1
All  cognition  of  time  apart  from  the  directly  experienced
"  now "  is  conceptual  and  has  to  be  represented  symbolically.
But  judged  by  a  "  standard  time,"  the  specious  present  of
different  individuals  seems  to  vary  in  its  duration ;  and  in
any  particular  individual  this  duration  seems  to  vary  at
different  times.  The  symbolic  conception  of  a  period  of  time
attained  by  summing  up  the  "  nows "  of  so-called  empty  time,
or  by  counting  the  sensory  changes  experienced  in  filled  time,
would  thus  lack  all  utility  in  thought  and  all  validity  in
practice  were  there  not  some  changes,  referable  to  the
external  world  and  habitually  experienced  by  all  human
beings,  which  may  be  utilised  as  a  standard  of  measurement.

1Cf.  H.  R.  Marshall:  "The  Time  Quality,"  Mind,  Jan.  1907,  p.  1.


56


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


For  practical  purposes  the  mean  solar  day  is  so  used,  and
by  mechanical  contrivances  this  period  of  time  is  subdivided
into  hours,  minutes,  and  seconds.  But  until  clocks  are  con-
structed these  subdivisions  of  time  are  not  given  in  experience,
and  there  is  no  necessary  correlation  between  the  "  now "
of  experience  and  the  second  of  the  mean  solar  day.

Hours,  minutes,  and  seconds  are  thus  artificial  devices  for
measuring  the  number  of  sensory  changes  experienced  in
succession.  The  passage  of  five,  ten,  or  twenty  minutes  has
no  meaning  apart  from  such  sensory  changes ;  for  awareness
of  change  is  a  necessary  condition  of  the  perception  of
time.

The  manifestations  of  consciousness  as  we  know  it  empirically
are  conditioned  by  its  cerebral  substratum,  and  the  number  of
successive  impressions  that  can  be  apperceived  in  a  given
time  is  limited  by  the  rate  at  which  certain  physico-chemical
changes  can  take  place  in  nervous  tissue.  If  consciousness
were  independent  of  any  material  substratum  we  have  no
reason  to  suppose  that  any  such  limitation  would  obtain  in
regard  to  the  number  of  presentations  or  representations  that
would  be  possible  in  a  given  time.  For  such  a  consciousness
the  measure  of  time  would  be  altered,  and  the  phenomenal
world  would  be  transformed.

Certain  philosophers  believe  that  the  normal  self-consciousness
does  not  exhaust  its  object — the  Ego,  and  that  there  is  in
man  besides  the  empirical  consciousness  with  its  physiological
measure  of  time,  also  a  transcendental  consciousness  with
another  measure  of  time  peculiar  to  itself.  This  transcendental
consciousness  is  supposed  to  emerge  when  the  empirical  is
set  to  rest,  and  its  measure  of  time  is  said  to  be  a
characteristic  incident  of  dreams.  The  condensation  of  re-
presentations in  certain  dreams  is  accounted  for  by  supposing
that  the  dream-consciousness  is  not  fettered  by  any  physical
substratum,  and  that  its  measure  of  time  is  therefore  not
physiological  but  transcendental.  A  consciousness  with  such
a  measure  of  time  in  its  highest  degree  would  see  time,  as
Luther  said,  not  lengthwise  but  crosswise ;  all  would  be  in
a  heap  before  it.

I  refer  to  these  matters  merely  in  order  to  point  out  that
when  we  meet  with  some  form  of  consciousness  which  can


Li  v.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  57


accurately  determine  the  passage  of  five,  ten,  or  twenty
minutes  without  any  apparent  guidance  through  the  ordinary
channels  of  sense,  however  much  we  may  feel  tempted  to
postulate  some  transcendental  faculty  in  explanation  of  the
phenomenon,  we  may  rest  assured  that  we  are  dealing  with
a  consciousness  whose  mode  of  cognising  time  differs  not
at  all  from  that  of  the  consciousness  which  we  know
empirically.

In  seeking  an  explanation  of  the  time-appreciation  of
somnambules  we  seem  bound  to  look  to  the  methods  used
when  similar  judgments  are  made  by  the  ordinary  waking
consciousness.  If  in  the  waking  state  we  are  denied  all
ordinary  means  of  marking  the  passage  of  time  we  can  still
make  judgments,  less  or  more  accurate,  as  to  the  length
of  any  given  interval.  If  we  sit  with  our  eyes  closed  and
try  to  determine  when  five  minutes  have  elapsed,  we  may
arrive  at  a  very  close  approximation  to  the  proper  interval
if  we  set  ourselves  deliberately  to  count.  We  have  ingrained
within  us  a  sense  of  rhythm,  based  upon  memories  of  certain
sensory  experiences,  which  enables  us  to  revive  fairly  accurately
the  time-intervals  in  the  swing  of  a  second  pendulum.  By
summing  up  three  hundred  such  imaginary  pendulum  beats
we  may,  if  we  keep  the  rhythm  true,  judge  very  accurately
when  five  minutes  have  elapsed.  Even  if  our  minds  are
occupied  in  some  other  way  and  we  do  not  attempt  to
count,  we  may  still  make  a  guess  as  to  when  the  time  is
up.  Such  guesses,  however,  are  very  liable  to  gross  error,
and  it  seems  evident  that  the  accurate  appreciation  of  time-
intervals  by  somnambules  cannot  be  accounted  for  on  any
hypothesis  of  mere  guessing.

Apart  from  rhythmic  counting,  when  cut  off  from  all  changing
sensory  impressions  derived  from  the  outer  world,  we  seem
to  have  no  faculty  for  judging  accurately  of  the  passage  of
time.  Yet  a  somnambule  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  deprived  of
all  such  sense-impressions,  and,  so  far  as  his  hypnotic  conscious-
ness is  aware,  not  deliberately  counting  or  making  any  effort
to  note  the  passage  of  time,  makes  such  judgments  with  an
accuracy  which  precludes  the  possibility  that  they  are  the
result  of  mere  guessing.  If  we  believe  that  the  accurate  time-
estimates  of  somnambules  during  the  trance  are  the  result  of


58


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


some  form  of  conscious  counting,  the  want  of  knowledge  during
hypnosis  as  to  how  it  is  done  forces  us  to  suppose  that  the
process  must  be  carried  on  below  the  threshold  of  hypnotic
consciousness,  or  by  some  fragmentary  portion  of  this  conscious-
ness temporarily  dissociated  from  the  hypnotic  stratum  as  a
whole ;  and  a  similar  supposition  must  be  made  with  reference
to  the  equally  accurate  time-appreciation  which  takes  place
subconsciously,  in  response  to  suggestion,  during  the  waking
state.  Further,  if  such  a  form  of  subconscious  counting  takes
place,  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  it  is  a  counting  of
some  imaginary  rhythm.  For  it  seems  probable  that  the  lower
strata  of  consciousness  can  take  cognisance  of  various  organic
processes  which  are,  or  may  be,  unperceived  or  generally
unattended  to  by  the  waking  self.  And  if  a  correlation  has
been  subconsciously  established  between  such  phases  of  organic
life  and  our  artificial  divisions  of  time,  the  subconscious  watcher
is  provided  with  an  objective  time-measurer  which  is  liable
to  only  slight  variations  of  regularity.  Such  variations  as
normally  take  place  in  the  rate  of  the  heart-beat  or  of  respira-
tory movement,  are  just  such  as  would  account  for  the
inaccuracies  exhibited  by  somnambules  in  their  estimates  of
short  periods.  In  longer  periods  of  true  time-watching  the
organic  rhythm  will  usually  average  its  normal  rate,  and  con-
sequently the  amount  of  error  in  the  time-estimates  of  the
subject  is  not  likely  to  be  greater  for  half  an  hour  than  for
five  minutes.

While  some  such  explanation  seems  necessary  to  account
for  the  accurate  appreciation  of  short  time-intervals,  there  is
another  possibility  which  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in
regard  to  the  fulfilment  of  post-hypnotic  acts  at  a  particular
moment  which  has  been  previously  determined  by  subconscious
calculation.  That  possibility  is  that  these  somnambules  may
have  the  power,  exhibited  sometimes  by  individuals  who  have
never  been  hypnotised,  of  knowing  the  time  of  day,  intuitively  as
it  were,  without  any  conscious  or  subconscious  perception  of
such  sensory  impressions  as  normally  give  us  this  information.
I  have  frequently  tested  F.  D.  on  this  point,  and  have  found
her  to  be  extremely  accurate  in  her  estimates.  And  it  is  a
curious  fact  that  this  power,  never  manifested  by  her  previously,
became  greatly  developed  during  the  course  of  the  experiments ;


liv.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules.  59

so  that  she  often  astonished  her  friends  by  her  accurate  telling  of
the  time  under  circumstances  which  seemed  to  preclude  such
knowledge  as  she  showed.  When  tested  during  hypnosis  she
was  almost  invariably  absolutely  correct  when  a  suggestion  of
clairvoyance  with  regard  to  the  kitchen  clock  was  given.  The
following  extract  from  my  notes  will  serve  as  an  example.

On  April  18th,  1906,  I  asked  her  in  the  waking  state
what  time  she  thought  it  was.  She  said  11.30.  I  told  her  I
thought  she  was  rather  slow.  In  hypnosis  she  said  she  thought
it  was  11.40.  I  then  suggested  that  she  should  see  the  kitchen
clock  and  tell  the  exact  time  by  it.  She  said  she  could  not
see  it.  I  told  her  to  sleep  deeply  and  she  would  see  it  clearly.
"  Can  you  see  it  ? "  "  Yes."  "  Well,  what  time  is  it  ?  "
"About  12  o'clock."  "Tell  me  more  exactly."  "I  can't
see  the  hands  properly."  "  Look  steadily  and  you  will  see.
What  is  it  ? "  "  Five  minutes  to  twelve."  I  then  woke
her  up,  and  went  into  the  kitchen  with  her  and  looked  at
the  clock.  It  was  a  very  small  American  clock,  about  three
inches  high. The  hands  pointed  to  four  minutes  to  twelve.

I  do  not  pretend  that  this  was  really  clairvoyance.  The
few  attempts  I  have  made  in  other  directions  to  test  this  power,
so  firmly  believed  in  by  the  early  mesmerists,  have  been  almost
entirely  negative.  Yet  when  confronted  by  such  difficulties  as
meet  us  in  trying  to  explain  the  peculiar  gifts  so  commonly
exhibited  by  hypnotic  somnambules,  or  the  less  common
manifestation  of  similar  powers  by  persons  who  have  never
been  hypnotised,  we  are  bound  to  neglect  no  evidence,  which
has  been  testified  to  by  credible  and  careful  observers,  that
may  possibly  throw  any  light,  however  dim,  upon  these  obscure
regions  of  psychological  research.  And  whether  we  hold  fast
to  the  accepted  conclusions  of  orthodox  science,  or  allow  our-
selves to  stray  into  the  vaguer  regions  of  transcendental
speculation,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  the  difficulties
to  be  met  with  in  connection  with  the  appreciation  of  time  by
somnambules  are  of  such  a  nature  as  inevitably  to  entail,
on  any  hypothesis,  a  considerable  residuum  of  unexplained
phenomena.


60  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


ii.

EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
By  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.

The  first  series  of  these  experiments,  which  were  carried  on
during  October  and  November,  1905,  were  reported  in  the
Journal  S.P.R,  for  March,  1906.  The  second  series  were
described  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  March  25th,  1907.

Miss  Miles  writes  in  regard  to  them  :

Shortly  after  I  began  these  experiments  with  Miss  Ramsden,  I
told  Professor  Barrett  about  them,  and  I  have  profited  largely  by
his  advice  in  carrying  them  on,  and  especially  in  the  method  of
recording  them.

I  made  Professor  Barrett's  acquaintance  a  few  years  ago,  in  con-
sequence of  some  articles  about  my  experiments  in  dowsing  which
were  published  in  Country  Life  and  other  periodicals,  giving  an
account  of  various  places  where  I  had  found  water.  Since  then  I  have
tried  a  number  of  experiments  for  him, — especially  in  dowsing  and
in  various  phases  of  clairvoyance,  such  as  finding  hidden  coins,  etc., —
and  have  learnt  from  him  to  make  them  of  use  to  outsiders  by
recording  them  fully  at  the  time  and  obtaining  on  the  spot  whatever
confirmatory  testimony  was  available.  In  fact,  whatever  scientific  value
attaches  to  the  results  of  all  my  experiments  is,  I  feel,  entirety  owing
to  his  constant  help  and  guidance.  In  the  second  series  Miss  Ramsden
sent  copies  of  many  of  the  postcards  recording  her  impressions  to
Professor  Barrett  at  the  same  time  as  to  me,  so  as  to  make  the
evidence  as  complete  as  possible.

FIRST  SERIES.

Miss  Ramsden  having  met  with  a  certain  amount  of  success
in  experiments  in  thought-transference  with  two  other  friends
of  hers,  asked  Miss  Miles  to  try  a  systematic  series  with  her.


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  61


It  was  then  arranged  that  Miss  Miles,  living  at  59  Egerton
Gardens,  London,  S.W.,  should  play  the  part  of  agent,  while
Miss  Eamsden,  at  her  home,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,
Buckinghamshire  (about  20  miles  from  London),  acted  as
percipient,  the  times  of  the  experiments  being  fixed  by  pre-
arrangement.

Miss  Miles  noted  at  the  time  of  each  experiment,  in  a
book  kept  for  the  purpose,  the  idea  or  image  which  she
wished  to  convey,  while  Miss  Eamsden  wrote  down  each  day
the  impressions  that  had  come  into  her  mind,  and  sent  the
record  to  Miss  Miles  before  knowing  what  she  had  attempted
on  her  side.  Miss  Miles  then  pasted  this  record  into  her
book  opposite  her  own  notes,  and  in  some  cases  added  a
further  note  explanatory  of  her  circumstances  at  the  time  to
which  it  will  be  seen  that  Miss  Bamsden's  impressions  often
corresponded.  Whenever  it  was  possible,  Miss  Miles  obtained
confirmatory  evidence  from  other  persons  as  to  the  circum-
stances that  had  not  been  noted  at  the  time,  and  the  corro-
boration of  these  persons  was  written  in  her  book  and  is
printed  below.  All  the  original  records  of  these  experiments
were  submitted  to  the  Editor.

In  the  printed  account,  we  give  in  the  case  of  each  experi-
ment («)  the  note  made  at  the  time  by  the  agent,  Miss
Miles ;  (b)  the  note  made  at  the  time  by  the  percipient,  Miss
Eamsden ;  (c)  the  subsequent  comments,  if  any,  made  by  Miss
Miles ;  (d)  the  corroborations,  if  any,  of  Miss  Miles's  friends ;
(c)  the  subsequent  comments,  if  any,  made  by  Miss  Eamsden.

Any  omissions  in  the  printed  copy  of  the  records  are
indicated  in  the  usual  manner  by  omission  marks.  .  .  .
Almost  all  the  record  is  printed  in  full,  so  that  the  reader
may  be  able  to  judge  of  the  proportions  of  failure  and
success.  The  names  of  the  persons  concerned  are  given,
except  in  the  case  of  Experiment  IX.

Experiment  I.
(a)  October  18th,  1905. 7  p.m.

SPHINX.

I  sat  with  my  feet  on  the  fender,  I  thought  of  Sphinx,  I  tried
to  visualize  it.  Spoke  the  word  out  loud.  I  could  only  picture  it
to  myself  quite  small  as  seen  from  a  distance. — C.  M.


62


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


(b)  Wednesday,  October  18th,  1905. 7  p.m.

Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.

I  could  not  visualize,  but  seemed  to  feel  that  you  were  sitting
with  your  feet  on  the  fender  in  an  arm-chair,  in  a  loose  black
sort  of  tea-^own. The  following  words  occurred  to  me  :

Peter  Evan  or  'Eaven  (Heaven).

Hour-glass  (this  seemed  the  chief  idea).

Worcester  deal  box.

Daisy  Millar.

1  x  arm  socket  or  some  word  like  it.
X  suspension  bridge.
X  Sophia  Ridley.

x  soupirer  (in  French),  which  I  felt  inclined  to  spell  souspirer.
There  is  some  word  with  the  letter  S. I  don't  seem  quite  to  have
caught  it. — H.  R.

(e)  I  had  been  trying  experiments  with  two  other  friends  ever
since  September  7th.  These  were  only  partially  successful.  I  never
got  the  actual  message  intended,  except  on  one  occasion,  when  the
subject  was  one  of  which  we  had  both  been  thinking.  My  impres-
sions were  auditor  ij. — H.  R.

Experiment  II.

(a)  Friday,  October  20th,  1905.

SPHINX.

I  tried  to  visualize  Sphinx  again. — C.  M.

(b)  Friday,  October  20th,  1905. 7  p.m.

I  received  a  letter  from  Miss  Miles,  saying,  "  Letter  S  quite
correct,  the  hour-glass  shape  extraordinarily  correct,  also  S  S  at
the  end  or  something  like  it.  I  shall  try  again  to-morrow  at
seven. It  will  come  all  right. — C.  M."

After  this  I  found  it  very  difficult  not  to  try  and  guess  the
word  instead  of  making  my  mind  a  blank.

Cossack.

Cross.

Compass  (?)

Luzac  (the  publisher).

Luxor  in  Egypt.

Here  I  gave  up  in  despair,  then  suddenly  came  the  word :
Whistle  ! This  I  believed  to  be  correct. — H.  R.

1  The  crosses  indicate  those  impressions  which  Miss  Ramsden  marked  at
the  time  as  being  especially  vivid. — Editor.


Li  v.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


63


Experiment  III.

(a)  Saturday,  October  21st,  1905. 7  p.m.

LAMP.

I  sat  before  the  fire  in  my  sitting-room  and  visualized  a  lamp.
One  of  those  very  old-fashioned  lamps  with  a  large  globe,  which
seemed  to  me  to  be  a  round  ball  of  fire.— C.  M.

(b)  Saturday,  October  21st,  1905.

Scissors,  x  orangery,  shaloop?,  shawl,  jalousie  (blinds),  fretwork
or  sort  of  trellis  in  a  garden,  echantillon  (pattern),  sleepers,
X  gum  plant  or  pot  ?,  verinisimilitude,  Paternoster,  tabloids,  x
orangery,  x  orange  flower,  x  orange  pips,  horsewhip,  housewife
(needlecase),  verdigris,  purple  hedgerow,  beech,  beatitudes,  tea  cosy,
Burnham  Beeches,  heather  in  flower,  crown,  small  box,  short  deal  ?,
infanticide,  x  maltese  oranges  growing  in  a  pot,  Chinese  slippers,
X  Cape  gooseberries,  these  look  like  oranges.

The  most  probable  seems  to  be  a  small  Maltese  orange  tree,
such  as  I  have  seen  in  London  houses. — H.  R.

Experiment  IV.

(a)  Sunday,  October  22nd.

I  never  tried  to  visualize  anything  at  all.  About  6  o'clock  to
7.30  I  was  writing  letters  to  friends.  One  I  was  pondering  over,
for  it  required  an  answer.  It  was  from  a  Polish  artist  who  had
come  from  Munich  to  finish  Mrs.  Jack  Tennant's  picture. — C.  M.

(b)  Letter  dated  Wednesday,  October  25th.

On  Sunday  night  [Oct.  22nd]  I  felt  that  you  were  not  thinking
of  me,  but  were  reading  a  letter  in  a  sort  of  half  German  writing.
The  letters  had  very  long  tails  to  them  :  letter

a / <%?  £  y if  (9
Is  there  any  truth  in  that  ? 1 — H.  R.

Experiment  V.
(a)  Tuesday,  October  24th,  1905.

DOG— CHOW.

[Miss  Ramsden  had  a  large  number  of  impressions,  all  incorrect.]

1  The  post-mark  on  the  envelope  of  the  letter  from  the  Polish  artist,
written  in  French,  is  dated  Oct.  loth,  1905,  and  the  letter,  as  shown  by  a
portion  of  it  pasted  into  Miss  Miles'  notebook,  is  written  in  a  sloping  and
obviously  foreign  hand,  corresponding  with  the  description  by  Miss  Ramsden.
— Editor.


64  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


Experiment  VI.

(a)  October  25th.  CLOCK.

C.  M.

(b)  Wednesday,  Oct.  25th. 7  to  7.30  p.m.

Fig,  locket ;  I  visualized  a  locket  on  a  chain,  bath  (oval  shape),
piano,  guitar,  musical  instrument,  x  locket  with  somebody's
hair,  "  Malthusian,"  VW  pattern  visualized,  x  oval  frame  for  a
picture.

The  frame  has  little  lumps  round  it,  might  be  a  gilt  picture
frame  or  a  locket  with  diamonds  or  stones  of  some  sort,  but  they
do  not  seem  to  shine.  It  might  be  a  small  miniature  frame.  It  has
got  nothing  inside  yet  and  you  are  wondering  what  you  will  put
in.  There  is  glass,  and  it  is  slightly  concave.  It  might  be  a
small  hand  looking-glass,  but  quite  small. — H.  R.

(c)  At  7  p.m.  I  visualized  a  clock,  or  rather  tried  to.  It  was
very  difficult,  as  I  had  had  a  model  and  had  been  drawing  him
from  five  o'clock  to  six  forty-five.  The  model  was  Mr.  Macnab.
I  was  going  to  begin  painting  him  life-size,  and  before  settling  on
the  pose  I  was  making  two  or  three  quick  sketches  of  him  by
electric  light.  I  also  put  the  stretcher  up  against  him  without  the
canvas  to  see  how  much  I  would  paint  of  him  when  the  canvas
was  stretched.  He  has  a  very  thin  face,  which  would  look  like  a
distinct  oval.  The  face  I  always  leave  blank  and  only  fill  in  the
dress  and  hair  with  pencil.  In  the  morning  I  arranged  lockets,
jewelry  and  silver  things. — C.  M.

[One  of  these  sketches  of  Mr.  Macnab  is  reproduced  here.]

(d)  I  sat  to  Miss  Miles  between  5  and  6.45  p.m.  for  a  study
in  life  size  for  this  picture.  She  made  two  or  three  quick  sketches
for  this  in  order  to  settle  the  pose  of  my  picture.

J.  Macnab.

(c)  Having  found  that  my  attempts  to  hear  were  a  failure,  I
determined  in  future  that  I  would  try  and  visualize,  although  I
had  never  done  so  before,  and  am  unable  to  see  in  a  crystal.
Miss  Miles  is  a  very  good  visualizer  and  psychometrist.  She  has
often  held  letters  for  me  and  described  scenes  in  connection  with
the  life  of  the  writer. — H.  R.


SKETCH  OF  JIH.  MAC'XAB.


LIV.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


65


Experiment  VII.
0)  October  27th.  SPECTACLES.

C.  M.

(b)  Friday,  Oct.  27th. 7  p.m.

"  Spectacles."

This  was  the  only  idea  that  came  to  me  after  waiting  a  long
time.  I  thought  of  "sense  perception,"  but  that  only  confirms  the
above.  My  mind  was  such  a  complete  blank  that  I  fell  asleep  and
dreamt  a  foolish  dream  (but  not  about  you).  At  7.25  I  woke
with  a  start. — H.  R.

(c)  Having  found  that  it  was  much  easier  to  impress  an  idea  upon
the  recipient  when  it  was  something  that  I  had  seen  and  thought
of  later  in  the  day,  I  determined  that  in  future  I  would  make  my
choice  accordingly,  and  think  of  some  object  in  connection  with
Miss  Ramsden  without  specially  sitting  down  to  do  so  at  7  p.m.
On  October  27th  I  attended  the  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  at  20  Hanover
Square.  I  sat  between  Miss  Lily  Antrobus  and  Mr.  Douglas
Murray.  The  latter  had  a  curious  pair  of  spectacles  which  attracted
my  attention,  made  of  two  different  glasses.  These  I  fixed  on  as
the  subject. — C.  M.

(d)  Dec.  20th,  1905. Runnymede  Park,  Egham.

Dear  Miss  Miles, — This  is  just  to  tell  you  that  I  sat  next
you  at  the  S.P.R.  Meeting  on  Oct.  27th,  1905,  when  Mr.
Everard  Feilding  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  read  papers,  and  that  I
wore  my  divided  eyeglasses,  the  upper  part  being  used  for  distance,
the  lower  for  reading.

T.  Douglas  Murray.

(e)  I  did  not  visualize  the  spectacles,  the  word  came  to  me  as
a  sudden  idea. — H.R.

Experiment  VIII.

(a)  October  31st,  1905. SUNSET  OVER  ORATORY.

C.  M.

(b)  Tuesday,  Oct.  31st,  1905. 7  p.m.

First  it  was  the  sun  with  rays  and  a  face  peering  out  of  the  rays.
Then  something  went  round  and  round  like  a  wheel.  Then  the
two  seemed  to  belong  together,  and  I  thought  of  windmill.  A
windmill  on  a  hill  where  it  was  dark  and  windy  and  there  were
dark  clouds. Then  it  became  the  Crucifixion,  and  I  saw  the  three

E


66  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


crosses  on  the  left  side  of  the  hill,  and  the  face  on  the  cross  looked
to  the  right,  and  it  was  dark. Wind  and  storm.

Surely  this  is  right.  It  is  the  most  vivid  impression  I  have
ever  had.  I  scarcely  visualized  at  all,  it  was  just  the  faintest  indica-
tion possible,  but  the  suggestion  was  most  vivid. — H.  R.

(c)  I  was  painting  Mr.  Macnab,  and  there  was  a  beautiful  sunset
over  the  Oratory.  Mr.  Macnab,  who  was  so  seated  that  he  could
watch  it  better  than  I  could,  walked  to  the  window  and  drew  my
attention  to  it.  His  face  became  illuminated  with  the  rays  of  the  sun.
It  was  a  very  windy,  stormy  evening,  with  weird  orange  lights  in
the  sky.  The  sun  sets  to  the  left  of  the  Oratory.  From  my  window
I  see  the  central  figure,  and  two  sorts  of  uprights  which  look  like
figures  in  the  dim  twilight.  These  three  objects  show  out  dark
against  the  sky  to  the  left  of  the  dome,  on  which  there  is  a  gold
cross.  All  this  I  visualized  the  whole  evening  for  Miss  Ramsden
to  see.  At  first  I  could  not  account  for  the  windmill.  I  discovered
a  weathercock  in  the  distance,  on  the  top  of  a  building. — C.  M.

[A  photograph  of  the  Brompton  Oratory,  taken  by  Miss  Miles
from  the  window  of  her  studio,  is  reproduced  here.]

(d)  7  King  Edward  Street,  Islington,  N.
There  was  a  most  lovely  sunset  all  over  the  Oratoiy,  and  to

which  I  drew  Miss  Miles's  attention.

J.  Macnab.

(e)  Hitherto  we  had  settled  that  Miss  Miles  was  to  make  me
think  of  a  definite  object,  and  I  sat  down  as  usual  with  my  eyes
shut,  expecting  to  get  a  single  idea  like  "spectacles."  I  was  very
much  surprised  to  see  this  vision,  and  believed  it  was  a  picture  of
the  Crucifixion  which  she  was  trying  to  make  me  see.  I  looked
for  the  women  watching  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  was  surprised
that  I  could  not  see  them.  This  is  curious,  because  I  distinctly
saw  a  figure  on  the  cross,  which  was  purely  the  result  of  my  own
imagination.  The  rays  of  the  sun  and  the  cross  itself  appeared  for
an  instant  to  be  luminous.  I  cannot  exactly  say  how  I  saw  the  rest,
but  it  was  the  most  vivid  impression  of  the  kind  that  I  ever  had
in  my  life.

Hermione  Ramsden.


Experiment  IX.

(a)  Nov.  1st.  [name  of  a  lady]. — 0.  M.

(b)  Wednesday,  Nov.  1st. 7  p.m.


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


67


I  visualized :  W.  M  M  was  more  vivid.  It  suggested  your
sister-in-law.  E  V  L  Evelyn?  or  "Evelina,"  which  is  the  name  of
an  old-fashioned  novel.

Were  you  thinking  about  me  at  all  ?  These  I  saw,  but  no  vivid
impressions.  Perhaps  they  had  been  topics  of  conversation,  and
were  still  on  your  mind. — H.  R.

(c)  [The  lady  whose  name  Miss  Miles  chose  to  think  of  had  called
on  her  on  this  afternoon  and  talked  of  some  mutual  acquaintances,
one  with  the  initals  W.  M.  Miss  Miles's  sister-in-law,  whose  name  is
Eveline,  was  also  spoken  of.  Miss  Miles  thinks  that  Miss  Ramsden
did  not  know  the  Christian  name  of  her  sister-in-law.  Lady
Guendolen  Ramsden  writes  :]

(d)  Late  in  the  afternoon  of  November  1,  1905,  I  had  just  arrived
on  a  visit  of  a  few  days  to  Miss  Miles,  and found  her  talking

with  . After  a  few  minutes  I  left  them  to  write

letters  in  another  room,  where,  later  on,  Miss  Miles  joined  me.  I
soon  drew  her  attention  to  the  time,  and  said  :  "  It's  nearly  seven

o'clock ;  I  advise  you  to  think of for  the  telepathic

message  to  my  daughter,  as  your  head  must  be  full  of  your  con-
versation with  her,  and  it  will  be  impossible  for  you  to  concentrate
your  mind  on  any  other  subject."

Guendolen  Ramsden.

Experiment  X.

(a)  November  2nd.  HANDS.

C.  M.

(b)  Thursday,  November  2nd. 7  p.m.

You  then  went  upstairs  to  your  bedroom  where  there  was  no
fire,  so  you  put  on  a  warm  wrap.

Then  I  began  to  visualize  a  little  black  hand,  quite  small,  much
smaller  than  a  child's,  well  formed,  and  the  fingers  straight.  This
was  the  chief  thing.  Then  faintly  an  eye.  Then  W  that  turned  to
V,  and  V  turned  into  a  stag's  skeleton  head  with  antlers.  A  I  P
upside  down  so :  V  I  J.  .  .  .  M  E  E  might  be  my  name.  I  was
not  sleepy  when  I  began,  yet  it  soon  became  impossible  to  keep
awake.  .  .  .  The  little  black  hand  was  the  most  vivid  impression.

H.  R.

(c)  I  was  drawing  in  charcoal  a  life-size  portrait  of  Mr.  Macnab
before  painting  it.

I  cannot  find  any  meaning  in  the  rest. — C.  M.


68


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


(d)  Miss  Miles  was  drawing  the  hands  of  the  model  in  the
afternoon.

GUENDOLEN  KAMSDEN.

28  Tite  Street,  Chelsea.
I  came  in  to  see  Miss  Miles,  and  found  her  doing  a  charcoal
drawing  of  Mr. Macnab. I  specially  noticed  the  good  drawing  of
the  hands.

M.  Lancaster  Lucas.

I  sat  for  Miss  Miles  in  the  afternoon  for  study.  The  outline
was  only  drawn  in  charcoal.  The  part  most  finished  was  the
hands,  one  hand  clasped  in  the  other,  which  Miss  Lucas  said  was
well  drawn,  for  she  came  in  to  correct  it.

J.  Macnab.

Experiment  XL

(a)  Sunday,  November  5th.

As  I  was  just  wondering  what  telepathic  message  I  should  send
to  Miss  Ramsden,  I  was  interrupted  by  Miss  Lucas  coming  in.

C.  M.

(b)  Sunday,  November  5th. 7  p.m.

E  A  HH  (i.e.  H.H.)
A  poor  woman  with  a  striped  handkerchief  red  and  white  on
her  head,  grey  hair  parted  down  the  middle. She  looks  middle-
aged,  and  wears  a  coarse  stuff  grey  dress  with  apron,  head  turned
away. 7.20  by  London  time  when  I  stopped. — H.  R.

(c)  Miss  Lucas  always  wears  an  apron  when  she  is  painting.

C.  M.

(d)  28  Tite  St.,  Chelsea.

I  came  in  to  tea  with  Miss  Miles,  and  we  talked  of  a  model
that  she  wanted  to  draw,  and  whose  name  is  Lilian  Elizabeth
Hine,  and  of  whom  I  have  painted  a  head  in  profile  with  a  red
shawl  over  her  shoulders ;  the  shawl  has  a  pattern  of  bright-
coloured  flowers  round  the  edge,  and  a  fringe  of  red  and  yellow.
I  have  greyish  hair,  parted  down  the  middle,  and  was  dressed  in
black  serge.

M.  Lancaster  Lucas.

I  came  in  on  Sunday  evening  and  found  Miss  Lucas  in  the
drawing-room  talking  to  Miss  Miles.

GUENDOLEN  RAMSDEN.


Liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  69

Experiment  XII.

(a)  Monday,  November  6th. MARGUERITE  TENNANT.

C.  M.

(b)  Monday,  Nov.  6th.

Thomas'?  (Saw  some  of  these  letters  separately,  they  seemed  to
spell  Thomas.)

^  HE  (He?)
Nothing  very  vivid  to-day. — H.  R.

(c)  I  motored  with  Mrs.  Aubrey  Coventry,  and  we  called  at  40
Grosvenor  Square  to  ask  whether  my  sister,  Lady  Tennant.  had
arrived. I  thought  of  her  all  the  evening. — C.  M.

(d)  49  Egerton  Crescent,  S.W.

I  took  my  sister  in  the  motor,  and  we  called  at  40  Grosvenor
Square,  to  ask  if  Marguerite  Tennant  had  arrived,  for  she  was
expected  that  day.  The  name  of  the  butler  in  Grosvenor  Square
is  Thompson.

Mary  Coventry.

(e)  [Miss  Ramsden  afterwards  told  Miss  Miles  that  she  saw  the
letters  M  T  as  if  they  were  marked  on  an  embroidered  handkerchief.]

The  next  experiment  was  a  complete  failure.

Experiment  XIV.

(a)  November  14th.

THE  FUTURE  LIFE  AND  EVERYTHING  SPIRITUAL.

C.  M.

(b)  [Miss  Ramsden  had  a  large  number  of  different  impressions,
among  which  were  Solomon's  seal  and  a  pair  of  angel's  wings.]

(c)  I  attended  Professor  Barrett's  lecture  on  Human  Personality,
and  I  wished  Miss  Ramsden  to  see  a  Vision  of  the  Occult  World.

This  she  considers  much  too  indefinite  [as  a  subject  for  experi-
ment].— C.  M.

Miss  Miles  was  present  at  an  address  I  gave  on  Human  Personality,
33  Bloomsbury  Square,  on  November  14th.

W.  F.  Barrett.


To


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


Experiment  XV.

(a)  THE  FRONT  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  MONACO  WHICH

OVERLOOKS  THE  SEA.
November 23rd. I  had  tea  with  the  Princess of  Monaco  at
Claridge's  Hotel. I  wished  Miss  Ramsden  to  see  the  front  of  the
Palace  of  Monaco.— C.  M.

(b)  Thursday,  Nov.  23rd. 7.30  p.m.

A  statue,  perhaps  a  fountain,  something  to  do  with  water.

I  was  very  tired  and  could  not  get  any  vivid  impression. — H.  R.

(d)  Miss  Miles  came  to  tea  with  me  on  Thursday,  November  23rd,
1905.  There  is  a  fountain  in  front  of  the  Palace  at  Monaco,  and
a  bust  of  Prince  Charles  of  Monaco.

Alice  de  Monaco.

Miss  Ramsden  adds  the  following  note  at  the  end  of  the
whole  record :

Miss  Miles  and  I  had  not  seen  each  other  between  June  14th
and  November  16th,  1905.

Hermione  Ramsden.

Some  later  experiments  were  tried  in  February,  1900,  when
Miss  Ramsden  was  in  Sweden  and  Miss  Miles  in  London.  In
these  practically  no  success  was  obtained,  owing,  Miss  Miles
thought,  to  her  having  gone  on  too  long  without  a  break.  It
was  therefore  decided  that  the  experiments  should  be  dropped
for  a  time,  and  they  were  resumed  later  in  the  year.


SECOND  SERIES.

[Editorial  Note. — Throughout  this  second  series,  which  lasted
for  about  a  month,  from  October  19th  to  November  14th,
1906,  inclusive,  Miss  Miles  was  again  agent  and  Miss
Ramsden  percipient.  Miss  Miles  was  staying  first  near  Bristol
and  afterwards  near  Malmesbury,  Wiltshire.  Miss  Ramsden
was  living  all  the  time  near  Kingussie,  Inverness-shire,  a
distance  of  about  400  miles,  as  the  crow  flies,  from  Bristol.
During  the  last  three  days  of  the  experiments  Miss  Miles,
unknown  to  Miss  Ramsden,  was  in  London.

The  general  plan  of  action  was  that  Miss  Ramsden  should
think  of  Miss  Miles  regularly  at  7  p.m.  on  every  day  that
an  experiment  was  to  be  tried,  and  write  down  her  impressions


Li  v.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  71


on  a  post  card  or  letter  card,  which  was  posted  almost  always
on  the  next  morning  to  Miss  Miles.  These  post  cards  or
letter  cards  were  kept  by  Miss  Miles  and  pasted  into  her
note  book,  so  that  the  postmarks  on  them  show  the  time  of
despatch.

Miss  Miles  on  her  side  had  no  fixed  time  for  thinking  of
Miss  Eamsden,  but  thought  of  her  more  or  less  during  the
whole  day  and  in  the  evening  noted  briefly  what  ideas  had
been  most  prominently  before  her  mind  during  the  day  and
which  she  wished  to  convey,  or  thought  might  have  been
conveyed,  to  Miss  Eamsden.  These  notes  were  made  generally
on  a  post  card,  which  was,  as  a  rule,  posted  to  Miss  Eamsden
next  day.  The  post  cards  were  afterwards  returned  to  Miss
Miles  to  be  placed  with  her  records,  so  that  here  also  the
postmarks  show  the  date  of  despatch  of  the  information  to
Miss  Eamsden.

Out  of  a  total  of  15  days'  experiments,  the  idea  that  Miss
Miles  was  attempting  to  convey,  as  recorded  on  her  post  cards,
appeared  on  six  occasions  in  a  complete  or  partial  form
among  Miss  Eamsden's  impressions  on  the  same  date.  But
it  also  happened  that  almost  every  day  some  of  Miss
Eamsden's  impressions  represented  pretty  closely  something
that  Miss  Miles  had  been  seeing  or  talking  about  on  the  same
day.  In  other  words,  while  the  agent  only  succeeded  occasion-
ally in  transferring  the  ideas  deliberately  chosen  by  her  for
the  purpose,  the  percipient  seemed  often  to  have  some  sort  of
supernormal  knowledge  of  her  friend's  surroundings,  irrespective
of  what  that  friend  had  specially  wished  her  to  see.

When  this  happened,  Miss  Miles  at  once  made  careful  notes
of  the  event  or  topic  to  which  Miss  Eamsden's  statement
seemed  to  refer  and  also  obtained  corroborations  from  her
friends  on  the  spot.  Further,  when  Miss  Eamsden  gave
descriptions  of  scenes  which  seemed  to  Miss  Miles  like  the
places  where  she  was  staying,  she  got  picture  post  cards  of
them,  or  photographed  them,  to  show  how  far  the  descriptions
really  corresponded.

The  value  of  these  results  of  course  depends  on  the  amount
of  Miss  Eamsden's  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  Miss  Miles's
doings  and  surroundings.  Miss  Miles  was  staying  in  the
neighbourhood  of  her  own  old  home  and  was  well  acquainted


72


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


with  the  country  and  the  people,  and  greatly  interested  in
revisiting  them.  Miss  Ramsden  knew  that  Miss  Miles  was
staying  in  a  country  house,— Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  near
Bristol, — but  she  had  never  been  in  that  part  of  England
herself  and  did  not  know  any  of  Miss  Miles's  friends  there.
She  did  not  even  know  the  name  of  the  owner  of  Blaise
Castle.  She  had  first  made  Miss  Miles's  acquaintance  when
the  latter  came  to  Woodhill,  Gerrard's  Cross,  where  she  lived
from  1895-1897,  this  being  close  to  the  home  of  Miss
Bamsden's  family.  Further  details  as  to  her  knowledge  or
ignorance  of  particular  circumstances  are  given  in  the  report
of  the  experiments.

It  has  further  to  be  considered  how  many  of  the  successes
might  be  mere  guesses, — whose  correctness  was  due  to  chance
and  not  to  telepathy.  Miss  Bamsden  generally  had  a  good
many  impressions  every  time,  and  of  course  the  more  numerous
her  impressions  were,  the  more  probable  was  it  that  one  of
them  would  coincide  by  chance,  with  the  idea  named  on  the
post  card  by  Miss  Miles.  Further,  if  we  are  allowed  to
count  as  a  success  a  case  where  one  of  Miss  Bamsden's
impressions  corresponded  with  one  of  the  ideas  which  had
been  prominently  in  Miss  Miles's  mind  during  the  day,
though  not  named  on  the  post  card,  the  probability  of
a  chance  coincidence  is  still  greater.  No  exact  calculation
of  the  probability,  however,  can  be  made,  because  almost
all  the  data  for  it  are  unknown.  We  cannot  even  count
the  number  of  Miss  Bamsden's  recorded  impressions,  since
it  is  a  matter  of  opinion  and  not  of  fact  what  constitutes
a  single  impression.  E.g.  ought  we  to  count  Bishoj)  and
Archbishop  in  Experiment  II.  as  one  or  two  ?  Some  im-
pressions, again,  are  much  more  complicated  than  others,  but
it  would  be  impossible  to  say  how  many  factors  of  equal
value  they  contain.

Still  less  is  it  possible  to  count  the  number  of  ideas  in
Miss  Miles's  mind  to  which  some  of  Miss  Bamsden's
impressions  might  correspond.  In  Miss  Bamsden's  case  we
are  at  least  limited  to  the  impressions  she  recorded,  whereas
in  Miss  Miles's  case  we  have  to  include  not  only  the  ideas
she  noted  down  beforehand,  but  also  an  indefinite  number
of  unrecorded  scenes  and  topics.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


73


Further,  Miss  Bamsden  could  not  avoid  knowing  something
of  the  general  character  of  Miss  Miles's  surroundings,  viz.
that  she  was  staying  in  country-houses  in  the  West  of
England,  and  this  must  inevitably  have  guided  her  impressions
into  certain  general  channels,  or  at  least  diverted  them  from
others.  Some  ideas  must  therefore  have  been  more  likely
than  others  to  occur  to  her,  but  we  cannot  tell  at  all  how
much  more  likely.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  there  can  be  no  mathematical
proof  that  the  correctness  of  Miss  Eamsden's  impressions
amounted  to  more  than  chance  might  have  brought  about,
and  that  on  this  fundamental  point  nothing  more  than  a
rough  empirical  judgment  can  be  formed.  After  studying
all  the  records,  however,  it  appears  to  us  that  while  some
of  the  coincidences  of  thought  between  the  two  experimenters
are  probably  accidental,  the  total  amount  of  correspondence
is  more  than  can  be  thus  accounted  for  and  points  distinctly
to  the  action  of  telepathy  between  them.

The  reader  should  note  that  all  the  experiments  are  here
given  in  full,  not  a  mere  selection  of  the  more  or  less  successful
ones.  In  the  few  cases  where  any  part  of  Miss  Eamsden's
description  is  omitted,  this  is  indicated  by  marks  of  omission,
thus,  .  .  .  .]

PiECOKD OF  THE SECOND SERIES OF  EXPERIMENTS.

October  19th  to  November  Itth,  1906.

The  items  of  this  record  are  arranged  in  the  same  order
as  in  the  first  series,  namely :

(a)  Miss  Miles's  record,  made  before  hearing  from  Miss
Kamsden,  of  what  she  wished  or  expected  Miss  Eamsden  to
perceive.

(b)  Miss  Eamsden's  record  of  her  impressions,  made  before
hearing  from  Miss  Miles  what  the  latter's  intentions  had
been.

(c)  Comments  by  Miss  Miles,  after  receiving  Miss  Eamsden's
record,  as  to  its  correctness.

(cl)  Corroborations  by  Miss  Miles's  friends  as  to  circumstances
known  to  them.


74


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


(e)  Comments  by  Miss  Eamsden  on  her  own  impressions,
after  knowing  what  Miss  Miles  thought  correct  in  them.

Experiment  I.

(a)  October  19th,  1906. Pussies  or  Cats.— C.  M.

(b)  Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B.
Friday,  October  19th,  1906. Posted  20th.

[Postmarks:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  20.  06.
Henbury,  A  Oc.  21.  06.]
Received  a  quantity  of  feeble  impressions.  First  something  like
this  [rough  drawing]  :  it  might  be  a  crab,  or  peacock's  feathers,  it
kept  changing;  a  word  like  "Idusis" — 1  I  saw  an  M.S.  pinned
by  a  patent  fastener  in  one  corner ;  is  it  your  article  1  There  was
a  picture  of  a  French  "chaumiere"  with  shutters  and  lattice
window,  then  a  funicular  railway  and  a  crown  [rough  drawings  of
cottage,  etc.].

I  think  you  were  trying  to  tell  me  something  about  your
article1  and  the  cottage  where  you  lived  was  an  illustration.

Hermione  Ramsden.

(d)  From  Miss  Harford.

Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  Bristol.
Friday,  Oct.  19th,  1906,  Miss  Miles  and  I  sat  out  after  luncheon
from  2  till  3.30,  and  she  read  to  me  her  article  about  her  sketch-
ing tour  in  Bruges.  She  had  just  had  it  returned  type-written,
and  it  was  fastened  together  with  a  patent  fastener.  She  mentioned
the  canals  and  quaint  cottages  with  lattice  windows.

Charlotte  Harford.

(e)  I  agreed  to  think  of  Miss  Miles  regularly  every  evening  at  7
p.m.,  and  did  so  throughout  the  experiments ;  whereas  she  thought
of  me  more  or  less  all  day,  but  not  at  any  special  time. H.  R.

Experiment  II.

(a)  Blaise  Castle,  Henbury.

[Postmark:  Henbury,  A  Oc.  21.  06.]

On  Saturday,  October  20th,  I  had  tea  at  the  Palace  with  the

1  See  article  entitled  "Sketching  with  Mr.  Frank  Brangwyn,  A.R.A.,"  by
Miss  Miles  in  The  Girl's  Realm  for  June,  1907.  Miss  Ramsden  knew  that
Miss  Miles  had  written  this  article,  but  would  have  had  no  reason  to
suppose  that  she  had  been  specially  thinking  or  speaking  of  it  on  that  clay. —
Editor.


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


75


Bishop  of  Bristol.1  He  showed  me  all  over  the  grounds  [and]
chapel ;  there  was  a  cross.

I  wished  you  to  see  the  Bishop. — C.  M.

(5)  Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B.,  Saturday,  October  20th.

[Postmark:  Kingussie,  11.15  a.m.  Oc.  21.  06.]

I  believe  you  forgot  all  about  it !

6.30  p.m.,  a  necklace  and  a  ring  seen  as  two  circles,  one  inside
the  other.

7  p.m.  A.  M.  W.  letters  intertwined  like  a  monogram,  church
steeple,  a  fish,  a  star,  a  cup  of  tea,  something  round — egg-shaped,
a  ball  of  pink  string?  a  cockle  shell,  "latme,"  Bishop  Latimer,
Archbishop.  .  .  . —  H.  R.

(d)  From  Miss  Harford.

Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  Bristol.

Saturday,  October  20,  1906,  I  sent  Miss  Miles  off  at  4  o'clock
to  the  Bishop  of  Bristol's  Palace,  in  a  pony-cart,  driven  by  a
groom. She  found  the  Bishop  in,  and  had  tea  there.

"  Something  round,  egg-shaped,"  may  mean  a  very  curious  Arab
ring,  which  I  wear,  and  which  has  a  history,  and  we  have  talked
about  it  a  good  deal.  It  has  a  large  dark  red  stone,  something
like  cornelian  or  jasper,  with  heavy  old-fashioned  silver  setting,  and
the  shape  of  the  stone  is  like  the  pointed  end  of  an  egg.

Charlotte  Harford.

(e)  Compare  "latme,"  Latimer,  as  an  attempt  for  "Bishop,"  with
our  experiment  of  Oct.  20th,  1905,  when  "Luzac,"  and  "Luxor  in
Egypt "  seem  to  have  been  an  attempt  to  get  at  the  word
'•  Sphinx."  H.  R.

Experiment  III.

(a)  Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  October  21st,  Sunday.

[Postmark  :  Henbury,  D  Oc.  22.  06.]

At  7,  I  was  so  overcome  with  the  heat  that  I  sat  in  a  white
dressing-gown  and  said  I  could  send  no  message.  You  might  have
seen  a  castle  on  a  hill,  or  pencil  heads,  or  a  room  full  of  people
at  Kingsweston  all  having  tea.  C.  M.

1  Miss  Ramsden  did  not  know  that  Miss  Miles  was  acquainted  with  the
Bishop  of  Bristol.


76


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


(b)  Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B.,  Sunday,  Oct.  21st.

[Postmark:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  22.  06.]

At  6.30  I  felt  obliged  to  begin  to  think  of  you.  Perhaps
what  I  saw  first  is  only  the  recrudescence  of  Friday's  cottage  :

You  are  thinking  of  two  windows  in  the  upper  story  of  a  thatched
cottage,  and  there  is  a  kind  of  hendadder  leading  up.  Then  I
suddenly  saw  Woodhill.1  Now  I  see  a  very  pretty  window  from
the  inside,  small  glass  panes,  and  a  lot  of  books  on  shelves.  You
are  trying  much  harder  to-night.

I  see  a  butterfly  and  a  very  ornamental  "rustic"  bridge  in  a  garden,
and  a  little  girl  with  something  in  her  hair,  it  may  be  the  butterfly.
Is  it  a  Japanese  landscape  1 The  bridge  makes  me  think  so.

Now  I  see  a  big,  plain,  old-fashioned  English  country  house  among
trees ;  it  is  rather  a  distant  view,  I  am  looking  up  at  it  from  below,
standing  in  what  seems  to  be  a  ravine  full  of  trees.  There  are  all
sorts  of  precious  curios  in  the  house.  I  see  a  silver  buckle  or  silver
belt  with  this  buckle.

Now  I  see  a  water-mill,  or  is  it  the  Great  Wheel  at  Earl's  Court  ?
It  is  a  mechanical  contrivance  of  some  kind,  rather  like  a  railway
with  carriages  going  round.  Perhaps  it  is  a  child's  toy,  a  switchback
railway  1  There  are  children  in  the  house  where  you  are  staying,
but  I  am  not  sure  if  they  belong  to  the  place,  they  may  be  on  a
visit.  I  seem  to  be  "psychometrizing"  your  surroundings  (but
without  holding  your  letter). I  get  a  name  :  "  J.  Verreker,"  and  the


Again  I  see  the  butterfly,  this  time  it  looks  like  a  fine  Oriental
specimen  with  points  on  the  wings.

Then  a  fishing  boat  lying  on  the  sand  at  the  mouth  of  a  river,
and  a  name  written  in  the  sky  :  "  Bella,  or  Butter,  or  Buller."  I
see  the  "  B,"  and  the  double  consonant  in  the  middle  of  the  word.
There  is  a  pet  bird  or  a  stuffed  bird. That's  all. — H.  R.

(c)  I  tried  to  make  Miss  Ramsden  think  I  was  living  in  a  castle,
as  the  name  of  the  house  would  make  you  think  so.  It  is  a  square
old-fashioned  country  house,  situated  close  to  the  woods.  It  is  full
of  precious  curios,  and  has  a  very  fine  collection  of  old  Italian
masters,  splendid  picture  gallery.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Frederick  Harford
were  on  a  visit  with  their  little  girl  called  Joan.  The  governess's
name  was  Miss  Vidal.
Woodhill,  G-errard's  Cross,  where  Miss  Miles  lived  during  1895-1897.— H.  R.


LIV.]


Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


77


There  is  a  water-wheel  in  Blaise  Woods,  for  a  stream  runs
through  it.

The  view  of  the  house  so  graphically  described  is  seen  by  the
"Cottage  in  the  Wood,"  and  well  known.  A  deep  ravine  full  of  trees
stands  between  you  and  the  house,  which  is  almost  hidden  by  trees ;
the  right  wing,  which  is  completely  hidden  from  view,  extends  some
way  to  the  right.  The  house  stands  on  a  hill  from  where  I  saw  it
[on  Sunday,  October  21].  The  Cottages,  called  Blaise  Hamlet,  is  a
show  place,  close  to  Blaise.  I  visited  them  with  Mr.  John  Harford
and  his  sister  on  Saturday.

On  Sunday  morning  we  walked  to  the  Castle.  In  the  afternoon
we  walked  to  Kingsweston  and  had  tea.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Phelips  were
staying  there.  There  is  a  splendid  view  over  the  Severn  and  there
are  always  fishing  boats  lying  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Avon.

C.  M.

(d)  Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  Bristol.
Sunday,  October  21st,  1906,  I  walked  up  to  the  Castle  in  the

woods  with  my  brother  John  and  Miss  Miles.  My  brother  particularly
drew  Miss  Miles's  attention  to  the  very  fine  stained  glass  windows
(designed  by  Albert  Diirer)  in  the  principal  room  in  the  Castle,
which  is  panelled  with  oak,  and  quite  round  in  shape.

In  the  evening,  Miss  Miles  looked  at  a  scrap  book,  with  my  brother,
and  was  amused  at  some  comic  pictures  of  a  man  teaching  a  little  girl
and  boy  to  dance  the  minuet.

I  generally  wear  a  belt  with  a  large  Norwegian  buckle,  chased  gold
and  silver,  which  was  much  admired  by  Miss  Miles.

Charlotte  Harford.

(e)  Ardverikie. Wednesday,  Oct.  24th.
[Postmark:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  25.  06.]

Do  get  a  photo  or  draw  a  picture  of  the  house  from  where  I  saw
it ;  it  did  not  look  like  a  castle,  more  like  this,  [rough  sketch
of  house  with  trees  on  each  side]  like  the  wing  of  a  very  big  house
on  the  top  of  a  hill  from  where  I  stood  ;  the  rest  of  the  house  is  to
the  right,  very  large,  but  completely  hidden  by  trees.

H.  R.

[On  October  26th,  Miss  Miles  wrote  to  Miss  Ramsden  :]
I  am  living  in  a  square  old-fashioned  house,  surrounded  by  trees ;
beautiful  woods  with  deep  valleys  just  behind. The  house  would
appear  on  a  hill  from  opposite  side ;  house  full  of  beautiful  pictures
and  curios.  C.  M.


78  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  JZamsden.  [part

[Miss  Ramsden  received  this  on  Sunday,  October  28th,  1906,  and
wrote  to  Miss  Miles  again  on  October  31st  :]

Do  sketch  the  house,  front  door  side,  from  the  bottom  of  the  hill.
My  "  ravine "  is  down  below,  I  saw  it  thus  :


MISS  eamsden's  sketch  op  country  house.


[The  photograph  of  Blaise  Castle  House,  here  reproduced,  as  seen
from  the  woods — a  point  apparently  corresponding  to  Miss  Eamsden's
description — was  taken  by  Miss  Miles  on  the  last  day  of  her  stay
there,  and  was  not  printed  till  a  month  or  two  later. — Editor.]

[Miss  Ramsden  wrote  later  :]

I  have  never  been  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bristol,  and  had
never  heard  of  Blaise  Castle  beyond  the  fact  that  Miss  Miles  was
staying  there.  Then  I  imagined  it  to  be  a  house  with  a  tower
and  turrets  like  a  Scottish  castle.

I  wrote  "English  country  house,"  because  the  situation  of  it  as
seen  in  my  vision  reminded  me  of  a  Scottish  castle  with  turrets
which  I  pass  on  the  railroad  between  Edinburgh  and  Kingussie.
It  stands  among  trees  with  a  wooded  ravine  below,  and  a  river ;
but  I  gradually  realised  the  difference :  first,  that  it  was  a  square
house,  and  not  at  all  my  idea  of  a  castle,  and  secondly,  that  there
was  no  river.

Nearly  all  my  impressions  came  to  me  in  this  way ;  I  mean
that  at  first  they  reminded  me  of  some  place  I  had  seen  before,
as  when  the  stone  greenhouse  at  Blaise  Castle  [see  below,
Experiment  VII.]  made  me  think  of  one  like  it  at  Osterley,  and
the  church  there  reminded  me  of  Birkin  Church  in  Yorkshire.
But  gradually  the  differences  became  apparent.  H.  R.


LIV.]


Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


79


[After  receiving  from  Miss  Miles  the  two  picture  post  cards  here
reproduced,  Blaise  Hamlet  and  The  Dell,  which  Miss  Miles  thought
corresponded  to  some  of  the  impressions  she  had  had  on  October
21st,  Miss  Ramsden  wrote:]

"  The  Dell,  Henbury."  I  recognise  this  as  the  "  rustic  bridge,"
although  it  has  not  got  the  balustrade  which  I  saw.  The  path
and  the  trees  are  very  like.  I  saw  these  landscapes  "  with  the
mind's  eye,"  as  one  sees  remembered  scenes ;  they  were  not
visualised.  H.  R.


7  p.m.  A  shape  like  a  star,  something  to  do  with  a  lamp,
it  has  a  long  chimney  and  no  globe,  like  a  passage  lamp.  Some-
thing small  out  of  doors.  I  cannot  get  at  its  shape  nor  tell  what
it  is.


A  white  cricketing  suit  with  dark  stripes.  I  know  it  is  flannel.
It  is  a  game  being  played  by  boys  aged  about  12  to  14,  out-of-
doors.  You  watched  it.  What  I  first  saw  was  a  thing  they  were
aiming  at.

It  took  place  in  an  open  field,  no  trees,  hilly  ground  beyond.
There  is  a  fat  woman  in  a  white  apron  attending  to  something
on  the  ground,  perhaps  it  is  a  fire. Is  it  a  tea-picnic1?

Gateway  to  a  house  or  stable-yard  [rough  sketch  of  castellated
gateway]. I  don't  know  what  this  is.  H.  R.

(c)  On  Sunday,  October  21st,  I  had  gone  over  to  Kingsweston
with  Miss  Harford  and  my  cousin,  Mr.  Napier  Miles,  and  had
there  met  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Phelips,  of  Montacute  in  Somersetshire,  to
whom  my  cousin  introduced  us.  Miss  Ramsden  wrote  PAelip  on
the  card  just  as  I  pronounced  it  with  a  strong  accent  on  first  syllable.
I  thought  the  name  was  so  spelt,  for  I  did  not  quite  hear  how  my
cousin  pronounced  it.  We  talked  a  great  deal  about  the  name  since
Sunday.

On  Wednesday,  October  24th,  I  left  Blaise  Castle,  driving  across
the  Downs.  I  saw  a  school  playing  hockey ;  some  boys  dressed
in  flannel  suits. Also  many  other  games  take  place  there.


Experiment  IV.


Ardverikie,  Wednesday,  Oct.  24th.
[Postmark:  Kingussie  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  25.  06.]


Ble  Bel  Phe  Phehp  Philip  Philipines  W.


80


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


We  pass  the  entrance  to  Blaise  Woods  going  to  Bristol  from
Henbury.  C.  M.

[Miss  Miles  sent  us  a  picture  post  card  of  this  entrance,  which
has  some  slight  resemblance  to  the  castellated  gateway  sketched
by  Miss  Ramsden.— Editor.]

(d)  Blaise  Castle.
On Sunday afternoon,  October  21, 1906,  my  sister and  Miss

Clarisse  Miles  walked  over  to  Kingsweston.  On  returning  they
told  me  that  Mr.  Napier  Miles  had  introduced  them  to  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Pheelip  of  Montacute,  with  a  strong  accent  on  the  first
syllable,  and  they  wondered  if  the  name  could  be  Philippe,
oddly  pronounced.  I  told  them  it  was  certainly  Phelips,  a  well-
known  Somersetshire  name,  and  so  it  proved  to  be.

Alice  Harford.

(e)  When  I  wrote  the  word  "Phelip,"  I  thought  of  Mrs.  Phelips
of  Montacute,  with  whom  one  of  my  cousins  used  often  to  stay,
but  I  did  not  mention  this  on  the  post  card,  because  I  thought
my  mind  was  wandering  on  to  subjects  not  connected  with  our
experiments.  H.  R.


(a)


Experiment  V.

Blaise  Castle. October  27th,  Saturday.
[Postmark:  Henbury,  A  Oc.  28.  06.]
I  went  to  a  sale  of  work  and  theatricals  in  Bristol  at  the  Spa.
The  acting  was  from  "Cranford  at  Home." I  wished  you  to  see
the  Ladies  in  Mob  Caps  and  Ringlets.

I  hardly  think  you  will  see  this ;  I  was  rather  tired. C.  M.

<&)

Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B. Saturday,  Oct.  27th,  posted  29th.
[Postmarks:  Kingussie  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  29.  06;  Henbury,  A  Oc.  30.  06.]


■i-l


8  p.m.  This  turned  up  so  unexpectedly  that  I  think  you
must  have intended  it. (I  was  hurrying  down  late  for  dinner.)


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,  81


But  there  is  something  wanting,  I  don't  know  what ;  it  seemed
much  bigger  and  more  imposing. — H.  R.

[A  picture  post  card  of  Hen  bury  Church  is  here  reproduced,
showing  a  certain  similarity  to  Miss  Ramsden's  sketch.]

[Earlier  on  the  same  evening,  Miss  Ramsden  wrote  :]

Saturday,  October  27th,  1906.

Bird  with  a  large  eye,  I  saw  the  eye  first,  [sketch  of  bird's
head  with  very  large  eye].

Some  ponderous  volumes  well  bound  in  leather.

A  faded  flower,  is  it  an  everlasting  1

(S)outh. I  am  not  sure  of  the  first  letter.
Bouth  1  typhoon,  wings  outspread  like  the  back  of  an  eagle.  .  .  .

H.R.

(d)  From  Mr.  Harford.

Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  Bristol.
On Saturday evening, October 27th, 1906, I told to  Miss
Clarisse  Miles  an  interesting  tradition  of  an  owl,  connected  with  a
well-known  English  family,  as  appearing  when  one  of  its  members  died.

Frederic  D.  Harford,
(H.M.  Charge  d'Affaires  at  Darmstadt).

Experiment  VI.

(a)  Blaise  Castle,  Sunday,  Oct.  28th.

[Postmark:  Henbury,  D  Oc.  29.  06.]

I  was  not  at  all  in  a  seeing  mood.  You  might  have  seen  a
crystal  ball,  or  picture  of  giants. — C.  M.

(b)  Sunday,  Oct.  28th,  1906.  Ardverikie.
[Postmarks:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m. Oc.  29.  06.

Henbury,  A  Oc.  30.  06.]
Again  I  saw  something  like  a  church  tower,1  bub  the  rest  of  it
was  like  a  house,  or  row  of  cottages,  alms-houses,  or  vicarage.
It  was  overgrown  with  creepers,  there  was  a  window  in  the  porch,
each  side.  There  is  a  poor  sort  of  entrance,  leading  off  the  high
road  thus :  with  a  common  wooden  gate.  Wall  on  the  right,
enclosing  kitchen  garden,  fine  old  park  trees  on  the  left.

It  was  a  long  drive  to  get  there,  and  you  returned  after  sunset ;
it  was  cold  and  dark  and  damp. Your  attention  was  arrested  by

1  Miss  Ramsden  here  gives  a  rough  sketch  of  a  church  with  square  tower
and  porch  and  a  path  leading  from  the  porch  to  a  gate  in  the  fence  or  wall.
— Editor.

F


82


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


some  old  stone  carving ;  there  were  pillars  or  gate  posts  with
designs  of  square  lilies.  Gothic  letters :  Maria.  Mea  Culpe.
Frome  Court.  Fryeth  or  Tryeth.  Tichborne.  Fluenty.  Is  it  a
Welsh  name'? I  hope  you  have  not  caught  cold.  H.  R.

(c)  The  position  of  Church,  the  pathway  and  the  high  road
running  parallel,  is  quite  correctly  described.  The  gate  is  an  iron
one,  not  wooden.  There  is  a  high  wall  on  the  right  enclosing
Blaise  Castle  kitchen  garden,  also  a  row  of  cottages.  There  are
very  fine  old  park  trees  on  the  left  in  the  garden  of  the  Manor
House,  facing  the  Vicarage.

I  was  very  cold  all  day. — C.  M.

(d)  From  Mr.  Harford.

Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  Bristol.
I  stayed  at  Tichborne  Park  with  Sir  Henry  and  Lady  Tichborne
from  October  23  to  October  27,  1906,  and  arrived  at  this  house
from  thence  about  6.15  on  the  latter  date.  At  dinner  I  talked  a
good  deal  to  Miss  Clarisse  Miles  about  my  visit  to  Tichborne,  and
of  the  shooting  I  had  enjoyed  there.

Frederic  D.  Harford.

Experiment  VII.

(a)  October  29th.

[Postmark:  Henbury,  D  Oc.  29.  06.]

I  went  out  walking  with  Freddie  and  Lottie  Harford.  I  was
thinking  of  Joan  on  her  pony,  aged  nine,  who  came  with  us.  She
is  Fred's  child,  only  here  on  a  visit.  He  has  just  been  appointed
to  the  Legation  at  Hesse-Darmstadt.

Very  wet  day,  rained  and  hailed. — C.  M.

(//)  Monday.  October  29th.

[Postmark: Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  30.  06.]
.  Y  . Yester. Ftostherne,  letter-weight.

I  am  reminded  of  the  "temple"  in  the  garden  at  Osterley  used


as  a  sort  of  greenhouse,  built  of  stone,  not  very  comfortable  to  sit
in,  too  cold. Basket-work  tables  and  chairs.

I  see  a  harp,  a  sundial,  some  stone  animals  :  a  cock,  and  a  stag
or  a  dose.


Liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


S3


Crowther.  Tritons.  Early  Britons.  Ice-house.  Spender  Layard.
Spencer  Ledyard.  Lotherton.  An  artificial  star,  like  a  cut  steel
ornament.  "Mollywogs!"  A  room  in  a  round  tower  called  the
"  Green  Parlour."  Wallpaper  with  large  round  bunches  of  flowers
coloured,  against  a  background  of  other  bunches,  not  coloured,  but
same  tone  as  paper,  which  is,  I  think,  green.

Trees  with  very  white  stems,  overhanging  water. — H.  R.

(c)  The  greenhouse  is  built  of  stone  and  is  too  cold  for  sitting
in,  in  cold  weather. It  contains  basket  tables  and  chairs.

There  are  stone  dogs  each  side  of  front  door.  An  icehouse.  In
Blaise  Woods  there  are  remains  of  an  early  British  Camp.  In  the
Castle  there  is  a  room  which  is  round,  but  it  is  panelled  and  has
no  paper.

We  went  for  a  walk  in  Blaise  Woods,  along  the  stream.  There
are  numbers  of  white  stems  close  to  the  edge  of  stream. — C.  M.

(d)  From Marguerite,  Lady  Tennant.

Broadoaks,  West  Byfleet,  Surrey.
I  spent  Sunday,  October  28th,  at Yester, and I wrote  to  my
sister  Clarissa  Miles  from  there.

Marguerite  Tennant.

Mr.  F.  Harford  writes  to  Miss  Miles :

10  Beaufort  Gardens,  S.W.,
June  28th,  1907.

On  looking  through  to-day  the  proofs  of  your  correspondence  with
Miss  Ramsden,  I  noticed  the  word  "  Lotherton "  in  a  letter  dated
October  29th,  1906,  written  by  her  to  you  when  you  were  at  Blaise
Castle  and  I  was  there.

Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  I  told  you  then  that  I  was  going  to
stay  some  three  weeks  later  witli  Colonel  French-Gascoigne  at
Lotherton  Hall,  near  Leeds,  at  the  same  time  as  I  told  you  about
my  visit  to  Tichborne  and  the  curious  tradition  about  owls  haunting

a  certain  family,  which  is  alluded  to  in  the  letters

Frederic  Harford.

[A  picture  post  card  of  Blaise  Castle  House,  reproduced  here,  shows
the  greenhouse  on  the  right  side,  which  has  some  slight  resemblance
to  the  arches  of  Miss  Ramsden's  sketch.  Miss  Miles  has  sent  us
also  picture  postcards  of  the  front  of  the  house,  showing  a  stone
dog  on  each  side  of  the  doorway,  and  of  Blaise  Castle,  Henbury,  a
square  building  with  a  large  round  tower  at  each  corner. — Editor.]


84


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsclen.


[part


Experiment  VIII.


(a)


Tuesday,  October  30th.
[Postmark :  Henbury,  D  Oc.  31.  06.]


Lottie  and  I  drove  to  see  Avonmouth  Docks  in  construction.  Enor-
mous docks,  gigantic  walls,  deep  pits,  railways,  steam  engines,  cranes
hoisting  things  in  the  air,  horses  pulling  up  barrows,  ocean-going
steamers  and  ships  in  the  old  dock  along  cpiays.  A  lovely  view  of
two  ships  sailing  into  a  pathway  of  light  with  dark  clouds  and
beautiful  headland  in  distance,  Portishead.

Quantities  of  chimneys  and  smoke,  a  pier  out  into  the  sea,  and
endless  mud ;  any  [of]  these  things  I  wished  you  to  see.  Perhaps
also  a  lost  pendant  and  claw  might  be  seen. — C.  M.

(b) Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B. Tuesday,  Oct.  30th,  1906.


7  p.m. Nothing  at  all  vivid ;  a  chair,  a  sort  of  iron  cage  like  an


arbour  in  a  garden  for  creepers  to  grow  up.  ...  a  pretty  little  house
with  a  porch  and  creepers  growing  all  over  the  front — very  like  the
one  I  thought  of  on  Sunday. — H.  R.

(c)  Miss  Ramsden's  drawing  is  very  much  like  the  iron  grab  that
is  used  for  hauling  up  the  mud,  but  the  pointed  side  faces  downwards
as  shown  in  my  sketch.  This  is  the  part  that  opens  and  grabs
the  mud.  It  was  very  interesting  watching  this  huge  grab  hauled
up  aloft,  open  and  discharge  the  mud  into  wooden  trollies,  then
shut  again  with  a  clang.


In  the  morning  I  called  on  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Charles  Way ;  they  live
in  a  pretty  little  cottage  with  a  porch  and  creepers.  The  Rev.  Charles
Way  is  the  Vicar  of  Henbury,  but  his  father,  Rev.  John  Way,  still


[Postmark:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Oc.  31.  06.]


lives  at  the  Vicarage.


C.  M.


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  85


Experiment  IX.

(a)  Burtonhill,  Malmesbury,  Nov.  2nd.
[Postmark:  Malmesbury,  6.30  p.m.  No.  3.  06.]

I  left  Blaise  Castle  [for]  above  address  ;  drove  out  with  Napier  in
afternoon. Evening  spent  with  lawyer  between  5  and  6. — C.  M.

(b)  Ardverikie,  Friday,  Nov.  2nd,  1906.
[Postmark:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  3.  06.]

"Mea  Mafra.  Mademoiselle."  French  Governess?  A  waterfall;
it  looks  artificial  because  it  is  very  broad  and  regular,  and  not  more
than  two  or  three  feet  high ;  it  might  be  a  mill  stream.  Then  I  begin
to  see  a  house,  a  farmhouse  ?  with  a  very  tall  poplar  near  it.  There
is  rising  ground — not  to  be  called  hills — and  young  plantations.


Then  I  see  the  house  itself,  where  you  are  staying. The  drive  up  to

the  entrance  among  shrubs  and  trees  reminds  me  of  the  H  's

house  at  W  ;  the  situation  is  the  same,  but  the  country  where

you  are  is  much  prettier,  and  the  house  is  very  much  larger  and  more
important  looking  than  theirs.  It  is  not  as  large  as  Blaise  Castle,
but  it  is  very  much  more  cosy  and  comfortable.  The  architecture  is  as
different  as  any  two  houses  could  possibly  be ;  this  house  is  long  and
straggly  and  has  towers  and  turrets — at  least,  points.  There  are  a
great  many  out-houses  too,  barns  and  stables.  There  are  steps  up
to  a  small  door — not  the  front  door — about  twelve  steps  or  more ;  it
looks  to  me  like  a  narrow  staircase  outside  the  house.


86  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.  [part


Then  there  is  a  church  very  near,  and  it  has  a  pointed  spire,  and
there  are  Gothic  windows  lit  up  with  a  beautiful  white  light  that
shines  through  the  pattern  on  the  window.  There  may  be  an  evening
service  going  on.  I  doubt  whether  I  am  right  in  putting  these
windows  so  near  the  church ;  I  only  see  such  a  little  bit  at  a  time
that  I  don't  know  how  to  piece  the  bits  together.

I  think  that  part  of  the  house  is  older  than  the  rest  and  has
Gothic  windows  ;  it  may  be  a  chapel  attached  to  the  house,  or  else
a  kind  of  conservatory.  What  impresses  me  most  are  the  pretty
windows,  I  keep  seeing  them  in  all  shapes  and  sizes ;  are  they
mullion  windows  ?  Three  points,  three  windows.  I  see  a  crown
and  wonder  if  it  is  sculptured  in  stone,  a  kind  of  crest. — H.  R.

(e)  On  November  2nd,  I  left  Blaise  Castle  for  above  address  and
drove  out  with  my  brother  Napier  in  the  afternoon.  The  descrip-
tion of  house  and  spire  of  Church — the  Belfry, — is  very  good.  I
saw  many  windows,  especially  those  at  Burtonhill,  with  electric
light  behind  them.

There  is  a  factory  with  poplars  close  to  it,  and  it  was  worked  by  the
River  Avon,  which  is  the  mill  stream,  and  has  a  fall  of  two  or  three
feet. There  are  plantations  on  some  rising  ground  to  the  right.

C.  M.

(e)  Knowing  that  Miss  Miles  was  going  to  Burtonhill  on  the  2nd,  I
asked  her  to  will  me  to  see  it.  I  have  never  been  to  Burtonhill  or  to
Malmesbury,  nor  anywhere  in  that  neighbourhood.  But  there  are
two  framed  photographs  of  the  house  hanging  in  the  passage  in  Miss
Miles's  flat  in  London.  I  must  have  seen  these  before,  though  I  did
not  remember  them  at  the  time.

Hermione  Ramsden.

[Miss  Miles  informs  us  that  the  mill  is  a  silk  factory  at  Malmes-
bury, and  the  road  shown  in  the  photograph  here  reproduced  is  the
one  which  would  be  taken  in  going  from  Burtonhill  into  Malmes-
bury. The  view  is  taken  from  the  Malmesbury  side  of  the  factory.
On  receiving  Miss  Ramsden's  description,  Miss  Miles  thought  at  once
of  this  factory,  because  of  the  mill  stream,  but  she  did  not  remember
the  single  poplar  nor  its  position  in  relation  to  the  building.  She
then  went  to  look  at  the  place,  which  she  had  frequently  passed
in  going  into  Malmesbury,  found  the  poplar  and  took  a  photograph
of  the  whole  scene  to  compare  with  Miss  Ramsden's  description.

A  picture  post  card  showing  the  belfry  at  Malmesbury  is  also
reproduced  for  comparison  with  Miss  Ramsden's  second  sketch. —
Editor.]


LIV.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


SI


Experiment  X.

(a)  Burton  Hill,  Malmesbury. Nov.  3rd.
[Postmark  :  Malmesbury,  6.30  p.m.  No.  3.  06.]

Drove  to  a  meet  of  the  Duke's  hounds  at  Rodbourne  Village.
There  were  overhanging  trees.  Wished  you  to  see  hounds  and
huntsmen.  Also  saw  distant  view  of  hounds  and  a  railway.  Num-
bers of  bicyclists  about. Glorious  sunny  day.  C.  M.

(b)  Saturday,  Nov.  3rd,  1906.
[Postmark:  Kingussie,  11.15  a.m.  No.  4.  06.]

...  A  Norwegian  Elk-dog,  something  like  a  wolf.  A  leather  pouch
and  other  relics  of  sport  hanging  up  on  the  wall.

A  woman  leaning  back  in  a  boat,  reading.  She  has  a  funny
little  parasol  and  no  hat. I  think  it  is  a  picture.  H.  R.

(d)  From  Colonel  Napier  Miles.

Burtonhill,  Malmesbury.
On  Saturday,  Nov.  3rd,  I  drove  my  sister  to  the  meet  of  the
Duke  of  Beaufort's  hounds  at  Rodbourne.  While  on  my  horse
waiting  for  the  hounds  to  move  off,  my  brother-in-law,  Capt.  Julian
Spicer,  said  to  me,  "Look  at  Olarisse;  she  is  in  a  trance."  I
replied,  "  Oh,  no ;  she  is  telepathing  the  meet  to  the  North  of
Scotland  ;  she  told  me  she  intended  so  on  our  way  here."

C.  N.  Miles.


Experiments  XL  and  XII.

(a)  Sunday,  Nov.  4th.

I  went  to  the  Abbey  with  Napier  and  went  to  see  the  very  old
Abbot's  House  adjoining.  It  has  just  been  let.  The  place  is  alive
with  old  histories.

Nov.  5th.

Drove  to  Badminton  and  had  lunch  with  Louise  Beaufort.  The
boy  and  Diana  had  lunch  too.  Afterwards  the  boy  came  round
to  the  front  door  on  his  pony.  Louise  and  I  watched  him.  We
walked  in  the  Park  and  she  showed  me  several  improvements  she
had  made  in  the  house.  There  [are]  very  tine  pictures  and  we
talked  much,  for  I  had  not  seen  her  for  ages.  C.  M.

[Both  these  are  written  on  one  post  card,  with  the  postmark  :
Malmesbury,  4.30  p.m.  No.  6.  06.]


88


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsclen.


(h)  Sunday,  Nov.  4th.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  6.  06.]

Houses  and  houses,  old-fashioned  or  "modern  art  style" — a  town
with  open  spaces,  a  sort  of  square,  not  enclosed,  like  Brackley,  or
Oxford.  Is  it  Malmesbury  1 1  A  black  cat  and  a  bridge.  A  house
rather  like  Herkomer's  at  Bushey.

[Written  on  same  post  card  as  above.]

Monday,  Nov.  5th.
Gothic  arches  like  cloisters.  Herons  and  other  water  birds  with
long  beaks  and  long  necks,  they  take  fantastic  shapes  to  form  the
letter  M.  So  do  a  pair  of  scissors.  "Marmaluke  or  Montaduke."
Then  I  see  a  monster,  is  it  a  shark?  It  might  be  a  rabbit
writhing  with  pain,  its  body  elongated.  What  nightmares  !  Smoke
from  a  row  of  guns  being  fired  off.  Somebody,  it  might  be  a
woman,  in  a  shepherd's  plaid  suit.  A  very  shaggy,  longdegged
dog — a  deerdiound? And  a  nice  old  retriever.  H.  R.

(d)  From  Colonel  Napier  Miles.

Burtonhill,  Malmesbury.
On  Sunday,  November  4th,  after  going  to  Church  at  Malmesbury

Abbey,  we  were  taken  by  Mrs. to  see  the  Abbot's  house.

She  showed  us  all  over  the  house,  some  parts  are  very  ancient  and
some  are  modernised.  We  were  taken  down  below  to  the  cellars,
where  we  saw  some  very  old  Gothic  arches,  to  which  I  particularly
drew  her  attention.  There  is  a  large  square  grass  lawn  in  front  of
the  house.  C.  N.  Miles.

From  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort.

Badminton  R.  S.  0.,  Glos.

Clarisse  Miles  came  to  lunch  with  me  here  on  Nov.  5th.  I  was
wearing  a  "  shepherd's  plaid "  coat  and  skirt ;  after  lunch  one  of  our
chief  subjects  of  conversation  was  my  little  son,  whom  we  generally
call  "  Master."  We  also  spoke  of  the  party  that  had  been  staying
here  for  a  rabbit  shoot  on  the  3rd.

There  are  swans  on  the  ponds  and  I  noticed  a  heron  there  this
autumn ;  there  are  also  deer-hounds  at  the  Keeper's  cottage  in  the
park,  as  well  as  retrievers.  L.  E.  BEAUFORT.

\}  A  picture  post  card  of  Malmesbury  is  here  reproduced  for  comparison
with  Miss  Ramsden's  description.]


LIV.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


S!)


Experiment  XIII.

(b)  Monday,  November  12th,  1906.

[Postmarks:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  13.  06;

Malmesbury,  8.30  p.m.  No.  14.  06.]

A  tree,  a  bay  tree,  a  camp-stool,  a  wreath  of  bays  or  laurels,  a
fir  tree,  a  lawn-tennis  net  and  people  playing.

I  don't  know  what  to  think  of  this  evening's  experiment ;  either
it  is  a  complete  failure,  or  else  it  is  the  best  success  we  have  ever
had.  I  saw  the  pattern  of  the  tennis  net,  then  it  changed,  and  I
saw  that  it  was  a  window  with  white  dimity  curtains  and  a  criss-cross
pattern  of  green  with  little  pink  rosebuds  in  the  centre  of  each.


First  the  curtains  were  shut  across  the  window,  and  then  they  were
drawn  aside.  It  was  a  school-room,  a  big,  long,  low  room,  with  a
long,  wide  window.  The  height  and  width  of  the  room  is  not
much  more  than  that  of  the  window.  There  is  a  large  table  in  the
middle  laid  for  tea.  Two  little  girls  with  their  hair  down  their
backs,  loosely  tied  with  blue  and  white  ribbons,  are  waltzing
together  very  prettily.  I  can  hear  the  time  they  keep,  but  I
cannot  hear  the  music.  You  and  another  lady  are  standing  watch-
ing them,  and  I  think  there  is  some  one  else  in  the  room  ;  she  is
sitting  down.

I  shall  be  very  anxious  to  hear  whether  this  is  right.  I  have
my  doubts  because  there  were  so  many  other  impressions  first.

H.  R.

[The  above  letter  card  is  addressed  to  Miss  Miles,  Burtonhill,
Malmesbury,  Wiltshire,  and  re-addressed  to  59  Egerton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.]

(c)  Left  Burtonhill  for  London,  ran  fast  not  to  miss  the  train,
attended  meeting  of  S.P.R. 4.30.  C.  M.


90


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsclen.


[part


(d)  From  Mrs.  Aubrey  Coventry.

49  Egerton  Crescent,  S.  W.
My  sister,  Clarissa  Miles,  dined  with  me  on  Monday,  Nov.  12th,
at  7.30.  My  little  girl,  Nesta,  came  down  on  purpose  to  see  her,
and  she  asked  her  many  questions  about  her  lessons,  and  how  she
was  getting  on  at  her  school,  and  about  her  dancing,  of  which  she
is  very  fond.  The  wall  paper  in  her  bedroom,  and  nursery,  has  a
trellis  work  of  brown,  with  bunches  of  pink  roses  and  green  leaves
in  the  centre  of  each.  Also  a  window  very  like  what  Miss  Ramsden
drew.  She  described  exactly  what  had  often  taken  place,  Nesta
dancing  with  a  little  friend,  and  my  sister  and  I  often  watching
them,  and  her  nurse  sitting  sewing.  Mary  Coventry.

(e)  This  letter  [viz.  Miss  Ramsden 's  letter  of  November  12th,
above]  is  addressed  to  Burtonhill,  as  Miss  Miles  had  purposely  not
told  me  that  she  was  going  to  London.  I  was  afterwards  shown
this  room  at  49  Egerton  Crescent,  and  recognised  the  wall  paper.
The  room  was  much  smaller  than  I  saw  it,  but  in  other  respects  it
was  the  same.  H.  R.

[Miss  Miles  tells  us  that  in  this  case,  as  in  Experiment  IX.,  she
did  not  remember  the  pattern  of  the  paper  in  Mrs.  Coventry's
nursery,  though  of  course  she  had  often  seen  it,  but  on  going  to
look  at  the  room  after  hearing  from  Miss  Ramsden,  she  noticed
that  it  was  very  similar  to  the  pattern  described  by  Miss  Ramsden
as  being  on  the  window  curtains.  A  photograph  of  the  room  is
here  reproduced. — Editor.]

Experiment  XIV.

(a)  59  Egerton  Gardens. Tuesday,  November  13th.

[Postmark:  Chelsea,  12.15  a.m.  14  No.  06.]

Fog  in  town.  Arranged  our  telepathic  experiences.  Tea  at  Miss
Lucas's  Studio.  Music  was  going  on.  At  6  Professor  Barrett
came  to  see  me. — C.  M.

(6)  Tuesday,  Nov.  13.

[Postmarks:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  14.  06;

Malmesbury,  8.30  p.m.  No.  15.  06.]

Magic  Lantern  or  shadow  pictures  on  the  wall.  I  can't  get  any
impressions,  I  don't  think  you  are  trying  to  send  me  any. — H.  R.

[Addressed  to  Miss  Miles,  Burtonhill,  Malmesbury,  Wiltshire  ;  re-
addressed  to  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.]


XIV.]  -  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  91

(e)  I  had  no  idea  that  Miss  Miles  was  in  London,  or  I  might
have  guessed  that  there  was  a  fog.  I  saw  three  figures  moving
like  shadows.  H.  R.

Experiment  XV.

(ci)  59  Egerton  Gardens. November  14th.

[Postmark:  Chelsea,  12.15  a.m.  15  No.  06.]
To-day  I  saw  procession  in  Hyde  Park. Talked  to  Mr.  Townsley
about my article ; afternoon went to Lyceum and  Marguerite
Tennant came to see me, but I  could not  visualize  anything
distinctly.  C.  M.

(I)  Wednesday,  Nov.  14th.

[Postmarks:  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  15.  06;

Malmesbury,  6.30  p.m.  No.  16.  06.]

[Sketch  of  a  barge  on  a  river,  with  two  persons  standing  on
it  and  a  star  above.]

The  star  appears  to  be  a  fixture  on  land,  while  the  barge  moves
rapidly  to  the  left.

  monogram (for  {~\

which  may  be  a  correction  of  the  above? A  lobster.

None  of  this  was  at  all  vivid.  H.  R.

[This  letter-card  is  addressed  to  Miss  Miles,  Burtonhill,  Malmesbury,
Wiltshire,  and  re-addressed  to  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.]

(d)  From  Marguerite,  Lady  Tennant

Broadoaks,  West  By  fleet,  Surrey.
I  went  to  see  my  sister  Clarissa  Miles  on  Wed.  Nov.  14th,  at
about 5.30 ; having previously been to see my Aunt,  Lady
M'Dougall.  Marguerite  Tennant.

(e)  Compare  Nov.  6th,  1905.  See  [above].  Here  I  find  the
suggestion  of  a  telepathic  code,  because  on  that  occasion  also,  I
saw  Lady  Tennant's  initials  like  an  embroidered  monogram.

I  was  still  unaware  that  Miss  Miles  was  in  London. H.  R.

[On  the  occasion  referred  to  in  the  earlier  series  of  experiments,
Miss  Miles  had  been  trying  to  make  Miss  Ramsden  think  of
"Marguerite  Tennant,"  see  above,  p.  69.  It  is  important  to  note
that  these  were  the  only  two  occasions  on  which  Miss  Ramsden
saw  the  initials  M.  T.  and  she  saw  them  both  times  in  a  very
similar  form. — Editor.]


92


Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


Miss  Kamsden,  commenting  on  the  whole  series  of  experi-
ments, writes :

I  should  like  to  point  out  the  importance  of  getting  more  people
to  take  part  in  these  experiments,  because  it  is  only  by  comparing
a  large  number  of  experiments  that  we  can  hope  to  find  out  how
thoughts  are  transferred.  Sometimes  they  seem  to  come  as  ideas,
at  other  times  as  words,  and  more  often  than  not,  their  real
meaning  is  not  transferred  at  all.  I  was  much  interested  in
reading  Mrs.  Verrall's  account  of  her  attempt  to  get  at  a  Greek
sentence  which  her  husband  had  tried  to  transfer  to  her  tele-
pathically  and  without  her  knowledge.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XX.,  pp.  156-167.)  The  manner  in  which  the  sentence  was
transferred  in  fragments,  first  in  ideas,  and  then  in  words  bearing
a  certain  similarity  in  sound,  is  very  like  some  of  my  experiences,
as,  for  instance,  the  occasion  when  the  idea  of  a  Bishop  was
conveyed  by  an  apparently  nonsensical  word,  "latme,"  which  in
its  turn  suggested  "  Bishop  Latimer."

There  is  another  point  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  heard
discussed,  and  that  is  the  influence  of  suggestion  as  an  aid  to  the
development  of  psychic  faculties.  I  have  found  it  very  effective
in  my  own  case.  I  am  not  a  good  visualizer,  and  although  I
sometimes  see  visions  in  the  same  way  as  one  sees  the  so-called
"hypnagogic  illusions,"  which  most  of  us  have  experienced,  though
perhaps  rarel}',  in  the  moments  between  sleeping  and  waking,  I
am  not  able  to  visualize  at  will,  nor  can  I  see  in  a  crystal.  Blaise
Castle  appeared  to  me  after  the  manner  of  a  hypnagogic  illusion  ;
it  was  a  perfect  picture  in  colour,  in  fact  it  was  the  place  itself —
so  it  seemed  to  me — though  I  did  not  know  that  it  was  Blaise
Castle,  as  I  had  imagined  the  latter  to  be  a  real  old  castle  with
turrets.

Instead  of  trying  to  visualize  scenes,  I  tried  to  see  them  with
"the  mind's  eye,"  as  one  recalls  a  familiar  scene; — in  this  way
I  was  able  to  describe  the  garden  at  Blaise  Castle  with  the  bridge
and  the  steps,  which  I  compared  to  "  a  Japanese  landscape."
Some  of  the  other  scenes  were  actually  visualized,  but  in  a  very
fragmentary  way :  I  mean  that  I  did  not  see  the  whole  landscape,
but  only  the  "  upper  windows  in  a  thatched  cottage "  at  Henbury,
and  the  mullion  windows  lighted  by  electric  light  at  Burtonhill.

One  fact  which  is  rather  puzzling  is  that  the  most  vivid
impressions  are  not  always  the  most  correct ;  and  it  has  often
happened  that  those  which  are  the  most  surprisingly  correct  are


liv.]  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  93


some  which  were  not  intentionally  transferred  at  all.  I  refer  to
the  four  occasions  on  which  I  received  words  which  conveyed  no
special  meaning  to  me  :  "  Phelip — Yester — Tichborne — Lotherton."
It  will  always  be  a  matter  of  lasting  regret  that  I  did  not  record
my  impression  that  "  Phelip"  was  in  some  way  connected  with
Mrs.  Phelips  of  Montacute,  as  it  turned  out  to  be  actually  her.
I  think  it  was  quite  10  years  since  I  heard  her  name  mentioned,
so  that  it  would  have  formed  an  interesting  part  of  the  evidence
if  I  had  recorded  it  at  the  time.

Before  beginning  these  experiments  with  Miss  Miles,  I  had
tried  with  several  other  friends  with  more  or  less  success ;  but
unfortunately  we  were  not  careful  enough  to  write  down  the
results  immediately,  so  that  the  experiments  cannot  be  considered
of  evidential  value.  Still  one  fact  is  worth  noting:  that  three
times  in  the  course  of  the  same  week  I  heard  a  distinct  voice ;
the  first  time  it  was  a  recognised  voice,  the  two  other  times  it
was  a  "soundless  voice,"  like  a  whisper,  yet  unlike  anything  I
ever  heard  before,  because  although  it  sounded  so  clear  and
distinct,  yet  I  was  perfectly  aware  that  it  was  purely  subjective,
and  that  if  any  one  else  had  been  in  the  room,  they  would  not
have  heard  it.  On  all  three  occasions  I  received  quite  long
sentences ;  indeed,  on  the  second  occasion  it  was  as  long  as
a  letter,  the  voice  dying  away  and  becoming  inaudible,  and  then
starting  afresh.  Hermione  Ramsden.


94


Alice  Johnson.


[PAKT


TIL

REPORT  ON  SOME  RECENT  SITTINGS  FOR  PHYSICAL
PHENOMENA  IN  AMERICA.

By  Alice  Johnson.

Introduction.

At  a  meeting  of  the  Society  held  two  or  three  years  ago,
Dr.  J.  H.  Gower,  a  member  of  the  Society,  described  some
remarkable  physical  phenomena  which  he  had  witnessed  in  a
private  circle  composed  entirely  of  his  own  friends,  with  no
professional  or  regular  medium  among  them.  These  sittings
had  been  carried  on  at  intervals  for  several  years,  from  1902
onwards,  in  a  large  town  in  one  of  the  Western  States  of
America.  The  most  interesting  results  obtained  were  the
occasional  movements  of  a  heavy  table,  untouched  by  any  of
the  sitters,  and  in  a  good  light.

These  more  striking  phenomena,  however,  happened  only  very
rarely  ;  that  is,  not  more  than  about  half-a-dozen  times  in  the
course  of  four  or  five  years.  As  a  rule,  the  table  moved
only  when  the  hands  of  the  sitters  were  resting  on  it ;  but
raps — both  with  and  without  contact — are  reported  to  have
been  heard  very  frequently.

Intelligible  sentences  were  also  spelt  out  through  raps ;  the
first  ones  purported  to  come  from  a  friend  of  Dr.  Gower's,
T.  W.,  who  had  recently  died ;  and  most  of  them  were  said
to  be  both  correct  and  characteristic,  but  gave  practically  no
information  that  was  not  known  to  the  sitters.  Later,  other
"  controls "  appeared,  giving  messages  as  to  their  names,  place
of  death,  etc.  These,  as  far  as  they  could  be  verified  at  all,
turned  out  to  be  entirely  wrong. Consequently,  some  of  the


lit.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  95

sitters,  who  had  been  at  first  inclined  to  attribute  all  the
phenomena  to  the  action  of  spirits,  renounced  this  explanation
almost  entirely ;  but  none  of  them,  I  believe,  has  ever  wavered
in  his  conviction  that  the  tables  have  on  several  occasions
moved  without  being  touched.

We  tried  a  series  of  sittings  with  Dr.  Gower  in  the  S.P.B.
rooms,  but  no  results  were  obtained,  except  very  slight  ones
on  one  occasion  with  a  lady  who  was  unwilling  to  try  further
experiments.  Dr.  Gower  was,  however,  very  anxious  to  do
all  in  his  power  to  provide  us  with  evidence  that  should  be
satisfactory  to  the  Society  and,  in  consequence  of  his  invita-
tion to  me  to  take  part  in  his  friends'  sittings,  I  went  to
America  in  August,  1906,  and  spent  nearly  a  month  in  the
town  where  they  live,  being  enabled  to  do  so  by  the  generosity
of  a  member  of  the  Society,  who  made  an  anonymous  gift  to
its  funds  for  the  purposes  of  this  and  another  investigation.

The  phenomena  I  witnessed  were,  I  was  told,  about  up  to  the
average  of  what  the  sitters  were  accustomed  to,  but  there  were
no  decided  movements  without  contact.  It  has  been  thought
desirable,  nevertheless,  that  these  sittings  should  be  reported
to  the  Society  ;  and  in  order  that  the  reader  may  have  all
the  material  available  for  judging  of  the  whole  case,  I  propose
to  give  first  as  complete  an  account  as  possible  of  the  earlier
sittings,  which  were  unfortunately  reported  in  a  very  meagre
manner.

I.  History  of  the  Early  Sittings.

Dr.  Gower,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  all  the  evidence
in  regard  to  these  early  sittings,  was  originally  a  musician
by  profession,  holding  the  Oxford  degree  of  Mus.  Doc,  but
has  now  been  for  some  years  engaged  in  mining,  and  lives
part  of  the  year  in  England  and  part  in  America.  He  has
been  keenly  interested  in  the  subject  of  spiritualism  for  some
twenty  years,  has  a  wide  knowledge  of  professional  mediums
and  mecliumship  in  England  and  America,  and  is  also  a  good
amateur  conjurer.  During  all  the  years  that  he  has  studied
the  subject,  he  has — so  he  tells  me — rarely,  if  ever,  met
with  any  phenomena  that  appeared  to  him  genuine,  except
among  his  friends  in  this  town,  but  he  is  still  indefatigable  in
his  search  for  evidence.


96


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Some  particulars  of  the  early  sittings  were  given  briefly  in
the  following  letters  from  Dr.  Gower  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :

May  17th,  1903.

Last  winter  in some friends  and  I,  partly  anticipating

some  amusement,  and  perhaps  some  experiences,  tried  our  luck  at
"  table  turning."

The  results  were  so  astounding  that  I  venture  to  write  to  you  on
the  subject.  My  friends  were  a  prominent  physician,  his  wife  and
two  daughters.

We  sat  around  a  heavy  oak  table ;  our  hands,  joined  by  touching
the  little  fingers,  were  placed  lightly  upon  the  top  of  the  table.
Under  these  conditions,  rappings,  movements  of  the  table,  and
intelligent  answers  to  questions  happened  frequently  ;  but  of  these
I  need  say  no  more.  After  a  time  the  phenomena  were  so  pro-
nounced that  we  decided  to  raise  our  hands  off  the  table,  and
were  much  astonished  to  find  that  the  demonstrations  continued.  .  .  .
Finally,  we  stood  around  the  table  (with  our  hands  joined)  at  a
distance  of  about  two  feet.  The  table  still  moved,  and  the  rappings
were  as  loud  as  before.  This  occurred  on  possibly  a  dozen  occasions.
More  than  once  I  slipped  my  finger  between  the  leaves  of  a  closed
book  or  magazine,  and  the  table  (?)  was  able  to  see  what  letters
of  the  alphabet  my  fingers  covered,  indicating  these  by  means  of
"  raps."  On  most  occasions  this  intelligent  force,  for  intelligent  it
was,  purported  to  be  directed  by  a  friend  of  mine  who  has  been
dead  for  about  six  years,1  and  some  evidence  of  his  identity  was
forthcoming.

It  is  needless  to  say  that  trickery  of  any  kind  was  out  of  the
question,  the  phenomena  being  frequently  witnessed  by  several
disinterested,  sceptical,  and  even  antagonistic  friends.

John  H.  Gower.

June  -2nd,  1903.

Since  my  arrival  in we  have  renewed  our  sittings,  but

the  introduction  of  other  parties  has,  I  think,  somewhat  modified
the  results.  However,  rappings  on  the  table  and  movements  without
contact  occurred  on  three  occasions  out  of  four  sittings.  On  the
other  occasion  nothing  unusual  happened.  Indeed,  the  sitting  was
a  complete  failure.  On  one  occasion,  after  our  seance,  and  indeed
after  we  had  partaken  of  refreshments  which  had  been  placed  upon
the  table,  and whilst  it was fairly  covered with plates,  dishes

1  This  was  the  "control,"  T.  W.,  referred  to  above.


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  97


etc.,  the  table  made  a  series  of  movements  entirely  unassisted  by
any  visible  agent.  ...  I  will  endeavour  to  have  independent  records
made  of  our  next  meetings,  and  also  get  my  friends  to  write  down
what  they  have  themselves  observed.  However,  we  are  absolutely
agreed  as  to  main  facts.  .  .  .

November  23rd,  1903.

Since  I  arrived  here  we  have  had  three  sittings,  one  of  which
resulted  in  nothing.  It  is  not  easy  to  make  a  contemporaneous
record  of  all  that  takes  place.  However,  I  made  the  attempt,  but
the  communications  were  somewhat  indefinite,  and  were  obtained
partly  by  answers  to  leading  questions.  I  hope  next  time  to  have
a  stenographer  present.

At  two  of  the  sittings  the  following  phenomena  were  observed
many  times  :

(1)  Movements  of  the  heavy  oak  table  without  any  contact  of  the
table  with  the  sitters.

(2)  Raps  occurring  on  the  table  in  answer  to  questions  when  the
conditions  as  to  the  sitters  were  as  in  No.  1.

(3)  The  rolling  backwards  and  forwards  of  a  pencil  which  I  had
placed  upon  the  table,  and  which  I  had  requested  should  be  moved
by  the  invisible  agent — (none  of  the  sitters,  of  course,  touching  the
table  at  the  time).

One  of  these  sittings  was  described  in  detail  by  one  of  the
principal  sitters,  the  physician  referred  to  in  Dr.  Gower's  first
letter  (spoken  of  in  this  paper  as  Dr.  Williams),  as  follows :

[Monday],  December  7,  1903.

My  dear  Dr.  Gower,

In  response  to  your  request  that  I  should  write  out  a
description  of  the  occurrence  as  I  noticed  it  at  Mrs.  B.'s  house
last  Thursday  evening  [December  3rd,  1903],  I  will  make  the  follow-
ing statement :

According  to  invitation,  my  wife  and  I  arrived  at  Mrs.  B.'s  house
about  nine  o'clock.  We  found  sitting  at  a  round  dining  table
yourself,  Mr.  J.  T.,  your  cousin  Mrs.  W.,  Mrs.  B.,  her  mother
(Mrs.  W.)}  and  her  young  sister  aged  about  fifteen  years.  In  the
party  there  were  no  avowed  Spiritualists,  and  no  one  present  who
took  the  matter  very  seriously  except  yourself.  The  room  was  a
small  one,  say  11  x  14  feet.  The  table  was  an  ordinary  small  round
extension  table  on  a  central  pedestal,  which  divided  on  making
extension. The  meeting  was  essentially  social,  and  I  do  not  believe

G


98


Alice  Johnson.


[part


that  any  one  present  would  in  any  way  attempt  any  deception
upon  the  others,  or  in  any  way  do  any  trickery  or  any  underhand
work  of  any  kind.  My  wife  and  I  joined  you  at  the  table,  and
for  some  hour  and  a  half  we  had  various  knockings,  although  nothing
very  intelligible  and  distinct  in  this  line ;  and  the  table  moved  in
various  ways  about  the  room,  the  lights  being  turned  down.  As
the  table  moved  in  some  directions  it  was  frequently  separated  at
the  line  of  union  and  would  close  again.  During  almost  all  of  this
time  the  lights  were  turned  low,  and  it  was  impossible  to  distinguish
details  of  individual  movement.  Occasionally  our  hands  were  taken
off  the  table,  and  I  believe  that  the  table  moved  several  times
without  any  one  being  in  contact  with  it.  Mrs.  B.,  as  well  as
yourself,  being  a  professional  musician,  the  lights  were  occasionally
turned  on,  and  music  was  interspersed  during  the  evening.

About  eleven  o'clock  refreshments  were  served,  during  which  Mr.  B.
returned,  he  also  being  a  professional  musician.  As  we  sat  round
the  table  in  the  full  strong  light,  we  had  various  table  movings
and  knockings.  Later,  as  we  all  sat  encircling  it,  we  all  drew
back  a  short  distance  from  it,  so  that  no  one  could,  even  had  they
desired,  [have]  touched  the  pedestal  or  the  table  itself  without  being
plainly  seen,  and  the  table  was  requested  to  open  as  it  had  done
before.  This  it  immediately  slowly  did,  until  the  central  space
was  about  eight  inches  wide ;  with  no  one  touching  it,  it  was  at
once  requested  to  close  again,  which  it  immediately  began  to  do  in
a  jerky,  weakening  way,  the  strength  seeming  to  fail  at  last,  when
it  was  about  half  closed.  After  waiting  a  few  moments  we  placed
our  fingers  upon  the  edge  of  it  and  requested  it  to  close  com-
pletely, which  it  did ;  the  whole  opening  and  shutting  occupying
the  space  of  twelve  or  fifteen  minutes,  I  should  estimate.  This
was  the  most  striking  phenomenon  that  we  witnessed  during  the
evening.

I  may  further  state  that  at  various  times  during  the  last  year  or
so,  with  about  the  same  party  present,  I  have  on  a  few  occasions
seen  the  table  about  which  we  sat,  make  short,  quick  movements
when  I  was  satisfied  that  none  of  the  party  were  in  contact  with
it  in  any  way,  and  I  have  repeatedly  heard  distinct  knockings  upon
the  table ;  sometimes  apparently  intelligent  answers  to  questions,
such  as  giving  a  distinct  number  of  knocks  as  requested,  and  the
three  knocks  or  the  one  knock  for  yes  or  no  when  the  lights  were
turned  on  fully,  and  I  believed  that  there  was  no  contact  by  any
one  in  the  room,  either  directly  or  indirectly. I  have  no  explanation


LIV.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  99

whatever  to  make  for  these  phenomena.  They  appear  to  be  produced
by  an  intelligence  absolutely  free  from  the  direct  physical  influence
of  any  one  present.

Dr.  Gower  afterwards  obtained  for  me  an  account  written
by  Mrs.  B.,  the  lady  in  whose  house  this  sitting  was  held,  as
follows.  The  account  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  Gower,
dated  December  11th,  1904.

I  have  often  heard  of  various  demonstrations  of  psychical  pheno-
mena, but  until  last  winter  had  never  seen  anything  of  the  kind
myself. My  first  experience  was  at  the  house  of  Dr.  W.,  a  prominent

  physician. Others  in  the  circle  were  all  well  known  to  me>

and  I  am  sure  that  there  could  have  been  no  trickery  of  any  kind
used.  During  the  evening  we  had  answers  to  several  questions
given  us,  using  the  alphabet,  and  requesting  a  tap  to  be  given  on
the  table  at  the  proper  letter  as  it  was  named.  We  also  saw  the
table  move  perceptibly  without  contact.

At  my  own  house,  some  weeks  following,  we  met  again.  We
sat  in  the  dining  room  around  a  very  heavy  round  dining  table.
This  table  is  usually  clamped  to  prevent  its  opening,  but  the  clamp
had  been  broken  in  moving.  The  table  opens  and  closes  with
difficulty,  and  we  generally  require  the  assistance  of  a  second
person  when  opening  it.  During  the  early  part  of  the  evening  the
table  moved  through  the  double  doors  until  it  caught  under  the
edge  of  the  parlour  rug  and  could  go  no  further.  We  set  it  back
into  the  dining  room  again  and  stopped  for  a  while.  After  we  had
had  some  light  refreshment  we  left  the  table  set  as  it  was,  covered
with  dishes,  glasses,  decanters,  etc.,  and  with  two  gas  jets  turned
up  as  high  as  they  would  go,  sat  around  the  table  again.  The
table  opened  slowly,  and  with  no  jerking  whatever,  just  as  smoothly
as  if  it  had  been  oiled,  and  after  that  opened  and  closed  as  we
directed,  moved  toward  any  person  in  the  room  whom  we  named.
All  this  time  we  stood  and  sat  around  it  at  a  distance  of  about
two  to  three  feet,  and  no  one  touched  it  either  with  his  feet  or
his  hands.

The  following  general  corroborative  statement  by  some  of
the  other  sitters,  whose  names  are  given  in  full  in  the  original
document  (now  in  my  possession),  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson :

Dec.  1th,  1903.

We,  the  undersigned,  have  witnessed  the  following  phenomena
at  experimental  circles  held  at  various  times  during  the  present  year,


100 .  Alice  Johnson.  [part

in  private  houses  in  this  city,  when  there  was  no  professional  or
known  so-called  medium  present,  and  when  there  was  no  apparent
physical  contact  whatsoever  with  the  tables  :

No.  1. Movements  of  heavy  oak  tables. (Many  times.)

No.  2. Audible  raps  upon  the  tables,  answering  intelligently

questions  put  by  the  sitters. (Many  times.)
No.  3. Rolling  backwards  and  forwards  of  an  ordinary  lead

pencil  at  the  request  of  the  sitters.  (Twice.)
No.  4. Opening  and  shutting  to  a  distance  of  about  8  inches

several  times  of  an  extension top  pedestal  table.

(Once.)

No.  5. Movements  of  water  in  a  water  pitcher.  (Once.)
No.  6. Other  remarkable  occurrences  indicating  intelligence  on
the  part  of  the  unseen  agent.

The  numbers  after  the  names  of  the  signers  indicate  the  phenomena
observed  by  them  individually,  and  correspond  to  the  numbers  of
the  above  paragraphs.

(Signed) M.  W.,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6.

F.  W.,  1,  2,  3,  5,  6.
W.  B.  H.,  1,  2,  5,  6.

John  H.  Gower,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6.
J.  T.,  1,  2,  4,  5,  6.

G.  K.  W.,  1,  2,  4,  5.
S.  E.  F.,  1  and  2.

R.  F.  W.,  (Nos. 1,  2, and  3,  without
physical  contact  above  the  table  top).

I  made  Dr.  Gower's  acquaintance  in  January,  1904,  and
he  gave  me  in  conversation  many  details  of  the  sittings
held  previously  to  that  date.  On  one  occasion,  he  told  me,
the  sitters  requested  that  various  liquids  on  the  table  should
be  shaken  by  the  force ;  for  instance,  the  water  in  a  water
jug  and  whiskey  in  a  bottle.  Each  of  these  shook  successively
in  accordance  with  the  requests,  without  being  touched  in  any
way  by  the  sitters,  and  the  table  being  motionless  at  the  time.

He  gives  the  following  general  account  of  the  phenomena
in  a  letter  to  me :

NORTHINGTON,  MULGRAVE  ROAD,  SUTTON,  SURREY,

March  Uth,  1904.
It  is  without  the  slightest  hesitation  that  I  subscribe  my  name
to  the  following  statement,  as  there  never  has  existed  a  doubt  in


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  101

my  mind  as  to  the  facts  witnessed  on  so  many  occasions,  not  only
by  myself  but  by  many  others.  .  .  .

The  sittings  were  held  in  1902  and  1903.  The  majority  of  them
were  held  in  the  house  of  [Dr.  W.],  but  the  same  phenomena  as
seen  here  were  witnessed  in  several  other  houses  and  also  in  my
private  room  in  the Hotel.

The  phenomena  to  which  I  refer  may  be  briefly  stated  as
follows :

(1)  Movements  of  both  heavy  and  light  tables  without  any
contact  whatever  with  any  of  the  sitters.

(2)  Eaps  made  upon  the  tables  when  no  one  was  touching  them.
These  raps  occurred  usually  as  signals  in  giving  answers  to
questions  put  by  the  sitters.

(3)  Movements  of  various  articles  which  happened  to  be  at  the
time  upon  the  tables  and  in  response  to  requests  that  such
movements  should  be  made  (no  one  touching  the  tables).

(4)  Information  by  means  of  raps.  The  information  obtained  was
sometimes  known  and  sometimes  unknown  by  any  of  the  sitters.
(With  and  without  contact).

(5)  Information  given  in  the  same  way  which  was  not  only
unknown  but  unobtainable  by  any  one  present.

The  names  and  addresses  of  the  principal  witnesses  were
given  in  this  letter.

Dr.  Gower  returned  to  America  soon  after  this,  but  paid
another  short  visit  to  England  during  November  and  December
of  the  same  year.  Mr.  Feilding  and  I  then  arranged  for
some  sittings  with  him,  as  he  was  as  anxious  as  we  were  to
establish  the  facts  of  the  case.  At  the  first  sitting,  held  on
November  17th,  1904,  at  the  S.P.E.  Booms  at  20  Hanover
Square,  raps  were  heard  on  the  table  on  which  the  sitters'
hands  were  placed,  and  these  raps  answered  questions.  More
than  once  (as  recorded  in  my  notes  made  the  next  day)  the
sitters  lifted  their  hands  from  the  table,  keeping  them  linked
at  a  level  of  three  or  four  inches  above  its  surface,  and  raps
were  obtained  under  these  circumstances.  On  several  occasions
raps  were  heard  from  the  direction  of  the  door,  variously
interpreted  by  different  sitters  as  on  a  small  table  near  two
of  them,  on  a  revolving  bookcase,  or  on  the  glass  of  a  picture,
or  of  the  Globe-Wernicke  bookcases,  which  are  against  one
of  the  walls  near  the  door  and  several  feet  distant  from  the


102


Alice  Johnson.


[part


table  round  which  we  were  sitting.  Eaps  were  also  heard
on  the  chair  of  one  of  the  sitters,  a  lady  known  to  be
possessed  of  mediumistic  powers.  It  seemed  possible  then
that  some  of  these  raps  had  been  produced  without  contact,
but  the  conditions  were  obviously  inconclusive.

-At  the  two  next  sittings,  nothing  occurred.

The  fourth  was  held  in  a  private  house  in  London,  where
again  the  lady  just  referred  to  was  present.  Eaps  were
again  obtained  freely — a  few  apparently  without  contact —
and  again  on  this  lady's  chair.  The  hypothesis  occurred  to
me  at  the  time  that  all  the  raps  were  produced  automatically
and  unconsciously  by  some  of  the  sitters,  who  had  perhaps
unwittingly  cultivated  this  power  in  themselves,  as  many
persons  cultivate  the  far  more  common  automatism  of  table-
tilting.

The  lady  with  whom  the  raps  appeared  to  be  chiefly
associated  objected,  however,  to  any  further  investigation,  and
we  were  only  able  to  hold  one  more  sitting — again  a  blank
one — at  20  Hanover  Square,  before  Dr.  Gower  went  back
to  America.  On  January  15th,  1905,  he  wrote  to  me
enclosing  reports  of  three  sittings  held  in  the  early  part  of
that  month  since  his  return.  The  reports  were  made  from
notes  taken  during  the  sittings  by  Professor  H.  (whose  full
name  and  address,  as  well  as  those  of  the  other  sitters,
were  given)  and  Dr.  Gower  added  :  "  I  think  the  tipping
up,  probably  20  times,  of  a  heavy  table,  entirely  untouched
as  far  as  one  could  see,  one  of  the  most  wonderful  things  I
have  ever  seen,  even  in  this  connection."  At  the  two  first
sittings  raps  were  obtained  both  with  and  apparently  without
contact  of  the  sitters  with  the  table,  but  movements  of  the
table  only  with  contact.  The  report  of  the  third  sitting  is
as  follows :

Stance  No.  3.  Reported  from  notes  made  at  the  time  by  Dr.
Gower.

Sitting  commenced  at  nine  o'clock,  at  the  residence  of  Dr.  W.

Present:  Mrs.  W.,  Mrs.  B.,  Mrs.  P.,  Miss  F.  W.,  Mr.  E.  P.,
Mr.  J.  T.,  and  Dr.  John  H.  Gower.  The  above  named  formed  a
circle  around  a  heavy  oak  library  table,  and  placed  their  hands
thereon.

About  9.25  raps  were  heard,  and in answer  to  questions  the


Li  v.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  103

name  "  Albert  Shaw "  was  rapped  out.  He  had  been  dead  nine
years,  and  was  the  same  spirit  who  announced  himself  at  the
previous  sitting.

Question :  Can  you  rap  on  the  table  if  we  raise  our  hands  1
Ans.  .  .  .  Three  raps  (Yes.)

In  answer  to  further  questions  it  was  said  no  message  would  be
given,  that  he  merely  wished  to  give  a  demonstration  of  power.
Hands  were  raised  off  the  table,  and  for  some  time  various  groups
of  raps  were  given  as  requested  by  the  sitters.  Hands  again
placed  on  the  table,  which  then  moved  frequently.

At  about  ten  o'clock  the  sitting  suspended  and  refreshments  were
served,  and  at  10.30  the  sitting  was  resumed,  the  table  being  fairly
well  covered  with  dishes,  plates,  glasses,  etc.  Very  loud  raps  were
soon  given,  and  after  about  half-an-hour  the  table  moved  about
the  room,  sometimes  with  the  hands  of  the  sitters  resting  lightly
upon  it,  and  sometimes  when  none  of  them  were  touching  it  at
all.  During  these  occurrences  Professor  H.  and  Mr.  B.  joined  the
party,  and  for  the  last  half-hour  of  the  seance  the  table  moved
about  the  room  in  any  direction  the  sitters  requested  that  it  should,
entirely  without  contact.  It  moved  into  the  hall,  and  back  again
through  the  middle  of  the  room  into  the  dining  room,  a  distance
of  at  least  twenty  feet.  All  this  time  the  sitters  were  not  touching
it,  but  with  joined  hands  followed  said  movements  at  a  distance
of  about  one  foot  from  the  table.  Dr.  Gower  suggested  that  the
sliding  movement  should  cease,  and  that  the  table  should  be
requested  to  tilt.  The  table  being  a  heavy  one,  and  the  dishes,
etc.,  still  upon  it,  this  of  course  required  considerable  force  to
accomplish,  but  the  table  tilted  in  response  to  the  request  of  the
observers,  probably  a  score  of  times,  and  at  no  time  was  contact
with  any  of  the  sitters  visible.

Copies  of  these  reports  having  been  forwarded  at  the  same
time  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  he  sent  Dr.  Gower  a  series  of  questions,
to  which  Dr.  Gower  replied  as  follows :

7th  February,  1905.

The  positions  of  the  sitters'  feet  and  knees  during  the  movements
of  the  table  without  contact  cannot  very  well  be  seen,  but  as  the
circle  is  made  up  of  a  few  friends,  I  have  no  doubt  as  to  their
good  faith,  and  am  quite  convinced  that  there  is  no  fraud  or  trickery
practised  by  any  of  them.

Moreover, some of  the  movements,  such  as  the  extension  top


104  Alice  Johnson.  [part

table  opening,  the  liquids  moving,  and  the  rolling  backwards  and
forwards  of  a  pencil,  could  not  have  been  caused  by  the  feet  or
knees  under  any  circumstances.

The  table  above  referred  to  is  supported  only  by  a  central
pedestal,  which  would  be  entirely  out  of  reach.  When  these  move-
ments are  taking  place  we  are  standing  around  it  (the  table)  with
joined  hands,  probably  about  one  foot  from  the  table,  and  as  the
movements  occur  we  follow  them,  maintaining  the  same  position.

Nothing  is  known  of  "  Albert  Shaw,"  and  the  information  given
by  "  raps  "  is  very  meagre  and  indefinite.  Indeed,  "  he  "  declines  to
give  messages,  and  confines  "himself"  to  producing  the  movements
and  rappings.

I  may  say  that  the  rappings  are  usually  as  loud  when  the  hands
are  off  the  table  as  they  are  when  the  hands  are  on.  .  .  .

Dr.  Gower  having  written  to  me  on  Dec.  23rd,  1904,  to
ask  that  I  would  arrange  some  experiment  as  a  test  of  possible
clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  the  "  controls "  who  purported  to
produce  the  phenomena  of  the  American  sittings,  Mr.  Feilding
and  I  arranged  a  "  test "  as  follows  :  we  took  a  pack  of
cards,  shuffled  them,  and  drew  out  three  at  random  without
looking  at  them,  wrapped  each  in  a  piece  of  paper  and  put
it  in  an  envelope,  which  was  then  marked  and  sealed.  We
then  drew  three  cards  at  random  from  the  rest  of  the  pack
and  looked  at  them.  Each  of  these  three  was  put  into  an
envelope,  which  was  marked  and  sealed,  and  finally  the  remain-
der of  the  pack  was  put  into  an  envelope,  which  was  also>
marked  and  sealed.  Care  was  taken  to  keep  all  the  cards
face  downwards  all  the  time  (except  the  three  intentionally
looked  at),  and  we  did  not  even  touch  their  faces,  so  that  we
might  avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  any  normal  means  of  knowing
which  cards  were  in  the  first  three  envelopes.  All  seven
envelopes  were  then  locked  up  together  in  the  S.P.R.  rooms,,
no  one  knowing  of  the  experiment  except  ourselves  and  Dr.
Gower,  to  whom  we  wrote  an  account  of  what  we  had  done.

It  will  be  seen  that  there  were  thus  three  cards  entirely
unknown  to  any  one,  so  that  if  they  were  rightly  guessed  at
one  of  the  sittings,  the  result  would  point  to  clairvoyance —
properly  so  called — on  the  part  either  of  the  sitters  in  America
or  of  some  external  intelligence ;  while  there  were  also  three
cards  known  to Mr. Feilding  and  myself,  so  that  if  these


Li  v.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  105

were  guessed,  the  result  might  be  attributed  to  telepathy  from
one  or  both  of  us.

After  receiving  our  account  of  what  test  had  been  arranged,
Dr.  Gower  wrote  :

January  2%th,  1905.

My  friends  and  I  think  that  you  have  provided  us  with  an
excellent  test.  However,  I  feel  some  little  concern  about  it,  as  we
had  one  sitting  two  evenings  ago.  There  were  present  those  of  my
friends  who  usually  have  the  best  results,  viz.,  Dr.,  Mrs.  and  Miss
Williams,  and  Mrs.  B.  and  her  mother.  We  sat  with  our  hands
upon  the  table  and  placed  your  letter  on  the  centre  of  it.

But  for  the  first  time,  I  think,  in  our  experience,  we  got  absolutely
nothing.  Not  even  a  "  rap "  or  a  movement  of  the  table,  of  any
kind  whatever.  The  sitting  lasted  for  two  hours.  Does  it  mean  that
the  "  spirits "  are  disgusted  with  us  for  seeking  for  tests,  or  that
they  failed  from  over-anxiety  on  their  part  and  ours  ?

We  will  try,  however,  several  times,  and  I  will  report  later.

It  seems  probable  that  this  negative  result  was  due  to
inhibition  of  the  automatic  impulses  of  the  sitters  through
suggestion,  since  at  the  sitting  of  January  1st,  1905,  when
the  "  control,"  T.  W.,  was  asked  (before  Dr.  Gower  knew  the
nature  of  our  "  test "),  "  Could  you  read  a  word  put  in  an
envelope  in  the  room  of  the  S.P.B.  in  London  and  com-
municate it  to  us  ? "  it  answered  (by  raps)  "  No."

Nevertheless,  on  March  25th,  1905,  at  a  sitting  held  at
the  house  of  Dr.  Williams,  and  reported  at  the  time  by  him,
raps  came  on  the  table  in  front  of  Dr.  Gower,  having  the
peculiar  flurried  or  duplicated  characteristic  which  marked  those
generally  ascribed  to  T.  W.  Dr.  Gower  then  described  the
nature  of  the  test,  and  asked  the  "  control "  if  the  cards  could  be
seen  by  him  and  named  to  the  sitters.  The  "  control "  expressed
his  doubt  of  being  able  to  succeed,  but  said  he  would  try,
and  would  report  the  result  if  the  same  party  would  sit  in
the  same  way  on  the  following  Wednesday  evening,  March
29th.  On  this  evening  they  accordingly  re-assembled,  and
were  informed  through  the  raps  that  the  three  cards  were :
Ace  of  Spades,  Queen  of  Hearts,  and  2  of  Spades.  At  this
sitting  it  was  noteworthy  that  no  raps  were  heard  except  in
answer  to  the  questions  about  the  experiment,  nor  did  any
movements  of  the  table,  with  or  without  contact,  occur.  This


;


106  Alice  Johnson.  [part

again  seems  to  illustrate  the  dependence  of  the  phenomena  on
suggestion,  since  they  occurred  as  predicted  at  the  previous
sitting.

On  April  27th,  1905,  Dr.  Gower  being  then  in  London,
I  opened  the  three  envelopes  in  his  presence  and  found  that
the  three  cards  were :  King  of  Hearts,  Knave  of  Hearts,  and
Ace  of  Hearts.  We  looked  through  the  remainder  of  the  pack
to  see  if  the  cards  named  by  T.  W.  were  either  at  the  top
or  bottom,  or  all  three  together,  but  found  them  separately
in  the  middle  of  it.  Thus  the  amount  of  success  in  this
experiment  (one  suit  right  and  one  number  right)  was  prac-
tically equal  to  the  most  probable  degree  of  success  by
chance.  It  is  perhaps  hardly  surprising  that  nothing  more
was  attained.

During  the  sittings  in  February  and  March,  1905,  various
communications  were  received  through  raps  from  supposed
"  controls,"  giving  names,  addresses,  and  other  particulars,  which
turned  out  incorrect  or  unverifiable.  Dr.  Gower  and  some
of  his  friends  also  tried  some  experiments  at  this  time  with  a
non-professional  medium  living  in  the  same  town.  The  circle
was  an  entirely  private  one,  consisting  of  husband  and  wife,
a  brother  of  the  wife,  and  another  relative,  who  had  developed
"  direct  voices,"  materialisations,  lights,  etc.  All  were  well
known  in  the  town,  and  of  apparent  respectability  and  honesty.
Dr.  Gower  and  his  friends  went  to  their  house  by  invitation,
and  held  three  Ion"  sittings with  them. The  circumstances

o  o

of  the  first  led  them  to  suspect  fraud,  but  they  were  unwilling
to  believe  it,  on  account  of  the  reputation  of  the  family.  At
the  third  sitting  one  of  the  investigating  party  happened  to
be  in  a  favourable  position  for  close  observation,  and  saw  by
the  light  coming  through  a  slit  in  the  window  blind  that  the
lady  of  the  house  was  manipulating  some  rather  simple
"  materialised "  forms.  This  being  confirmed  by  the  observa-
tions of  the  others  both  as  to  the  forms  and  the  voices,  left
them  no  choice  but  to  attribute  the  whole  of  the  phenomena
to  deliberate  and  apparently  unmotived  fraud.

This  discovery,  together  with  the  fictitious  character  of  nearly
all  the  supposed  communications  given  to  his  own  circle  by
raps,  except  those  purporting  to  come  from  T.  W.,  naturally
led  Dr.  Gower  to  scrutinise,  even  more  carefully  than  before,


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  107

the  conditions  of  the  sittings  with  his  friends.  They  had  by
this  time — on  account  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  com-
munications— given  up  the  spiritistic  interpretation  which  they
were  at  first  inclined  to  apply  to  the  phenomena ;  but  they  all
remained — and  I  believe  that  to  this  day  they  all  remain —
convinced  that  phenomena  had  happened  which  could  not  be
explained  by  ordinary  causes.  Dr.  Grower  wrote  to  us  at  this
time  that  though,  of  course,  he  could  not  help  taking  into
account  the  personal  character  of  the  friends  who  had  long
been  well  known  to  him,  he  had  made  every  effort  to  judge
of  the  evidence  apart  from  this,  and  it  appeared  to  him  that
nothing  short  of  a  wholesale  deception  on  an  organised  plan
would  explain  everything.  The  phenomena  had  been  observed
by  a  number  of  people  in  different  houses,  and  with  different
sitters,  he  alone  being  always  present.  This,  together  with  his
reputation  as  an  amateur  conjurer,  had,  in  fact,  caused  real
suspicion  to  fall  on  him  outside  his  own  circle,  and  it  was
generally  rumoured  in  the  town  that  he  was  the  trickster.

At  a  sitting  held  at  Dr.  Williams's  house  on  August  1st,
1905,  after  some  raps  with  and  without  contact,  and  move-
ments of  the  table  with  contact,  the  following  occurred,  as
reported  by  Dr.  Gower :

We  then,  at  my  suggestion,  stood  up  and  joined  hands  at  a
distance  of  about  six  to  ten  inches  from  the  table.  Several  move-
ments of  the  table  were  observed  without  any  apparent  contact.  At
this  point  the  conversation  (which  had  been  general,  and  at  times
upon  topics  other  than  the  phenomena  under  observation)  ceased.

Miss  M.  F.  requested  that  a  movement  should  be  made  of  some
candy  which  was  lying  upon  the  table  top,  and  Mrs.  H.  suggested
that  a  ring,  which  she  took  off  her  finger  and  placed  upon  the
table,  should  move.  Two  members  of  the  circle  thought  that  they
detected  some  movement  in  these  objects. I  did  not  do  so.

This  last  remark  is  of  interest  as  indicating  the  possibility
of  illusion  on  the  part  of  the  sitters  in  regard  to  some  at
least  of  the  supposed  movements  of  objects  without  contact.
Slight  illusions  of  this  kind  are  of  course  not  uncommon,  and
are  by  no  means  difficult  to  produce  by  suggestion.  Thus,  it
seems  not  unlikely  that  the  reported  movements  of  liquids
(see  p.  100)  were  really  illusory,  and  the  hypothesis  that  all


108  Alice  Johnson.  [part

the  movements  without  contact  can  be  explained  in  the  same
way  cannot  be  dismissed.  Nevertheless,  the  cases  as  here
reported  go  so  far  beyond  what  is  known  to  occur  to  persons
in  a  normal  condition  of  consciousness  that  more  evidence  is
of  course  recmired  before  this  hypothesis  can  be  regarded  as
established.

In  November,  1905,  Dr.  Gower  wrote  to  me  that  he  had
then  three  circles  in  which  raps,  without  apparent  contact,
occurred.  During  a  visit  of  his  to  England  in  January  and
February,  1906,  we  held  six  more  sittings  with  him,  but
unfortunately  with  no  result.

At  the  end  of  April,  1906,  Professor  William  James,  on
his  way  home  from  Leland  Stanford  University,  made  a  short

stay  at  in  the  hope  of  witnessing  some  of  the  phenomena.

The  sitters,  in  the  absence  of  Dr.  Gower,  were,  however,  dis-
inclined to  try  experiments,  but  they  talked  freely  of  their
experiences  to  Professor  James,  and  he  gives  a  brief  report  as
follows :

April  30th,  1906.

We  got  here  at  noon  yesterday,  and  opened  communication
with  Dr.  Williams,  who  told  me  that  Dr.  Gower  had  not  yet
arrived  from  Europe,  but  who  gave  me  and  helped  me  to  much
testimony  as  to  the  physical  phenomena  reported.  Professor  H.,
Mr.  J.  T.,  and  Mrs.  Williams  (whom  I  didn't  see  till  this  morn-
ing), all  said  that  movements  without  contact  were  so  absolutely
certain  in  their  minds  as  no  longer  to  cause  astonishment.  Yet  no
systematic  notes  had  been  taken,  and  the  evidence,  strongly  as  it
impressed  me  (especially  Mrs.  Williams's,  who  [seemed  to  take
little  interest  in  the  phenomena],  but  who  replied,  when  I  asked
her  straight  whether  she  believed  she  had  seen  her  tables  move
without  contact,  "of  course !"), — the  evidence,  I  say,  cannot  be  used
to  convince  others,  but  subjectively  has  much  impressed  me.

Their  circles  began  over  ten  years  ago,  Dr.  Gower  being  their
starter  and  enthusiastic  director.  Dr.  Williams  thinks  that  Dr.
Gower  is  the  essential  medium ;  he  says  that  Dr.  Gower  considers
Mrs.  Williams  more  essential.  They  have  sat  little  without  Dr.
Gower,  and  have  never  (?)  had  contactless  movements  when  he  was
not  present.  Mr.  T.  proved  himself  to  be  a  very  efficient  solicitor
of  movements — the  most  successful  method  being  heartily  to  suggest
to  the  table  that  it  should  move.


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  109


Movements  with  contact  were  often  inexplicable  in  Dr.  Williams's
opinion  by  muscular  pressure.  They  used  various  tables  in  various
places,  no  one  table  seeming  more  propitious.  An  extension  dining
table  figured,  and  a  very  light  stand.  The  table  most  in  use  at
Dr.  Williams's  was  a  solid  oak  one  about  3  ft.  square  on  top,  with
casters.  There  was  also  a  much  used  oaken  library  table.  I  tried
to  lift  one  end  of  it  with  my  left  hand,  but  failed ;  evidently  it
weighed  some  80  lbs.  Its  greatest  feat  one  day  was  moving  across
the  whole  length  of  the  room,  say  12  feet.  The  little  table  had
risen  bodily  from  the  ground,  and  struck  Dr.  Williams  in  the
chest.

Most  of  the  contactless  movements  were  very  brief,  as  if  the
force  exhausted  itself  quickly.  Xo  one  had  complained  of  tiredness
after  sitting.

Mrs.  Williams  testified  to  the  water-splashing  reported  to  Hodgson.

The  best  way  to  induce  movements  without  contact  had  been
to  get  them  first  with  contact,  then  reduce  the  contact  to  one
finger  from  each  sitter,  then  take  off  the  fingers,  holding  the  hands
not  far,  and  tell  the  table  to  move,  when  it  often  would.  The
contactless  movements  were  sliding,  tipping,  and  rising  bodily.

A  few  more  sittings  were  held  after  Dr.  Gower's  return,
as  to  which  he  sent  ine  brief  notes,  as  follows :

May  mh,  1906.

.  .  .  We  have  had  a  sitting,  and  the  results  were  very  promising —
raps  and  movements  without  contact  (apparently).  .  .  .

May  25th,  1906.

We  had  a  seance  two  evenings  ago,  and  I  send  you  just  a  line
to  say  that  there  are  still  "things  doing."  Eaps,  movements,
etc.,  without  contact,  and  jumps  with  contact ;  the  latter,  however,
quite  puzzling.  .  .  .  Mr.  T.  and  I  tried  by  ourselves  to  get  some-
thing in  my  room  here.  We  put  our  hands  upon  an  oak  table,
as  heavy,  if  not  heavier,  than  the  seance  table  in  your  room  [i.e.
the  S.P.E.  rooms],  and  without  casters.  We  got  nothing  without
contact,  but  raps  came  on  the  table  and  on  the  floor  (apparently).

At  two  other  sittings  mentioned  in  Dr.  Gower's  letters  to
me  at  this  time,  similar  results  were  obtained.  In  discussing
the  phenomena  in  general,  in  view  of  my  proposed  visit  to
America,  he  observed :

June  23rd,  1906.

...  It  is  so  easy  to  make  raps  without  apparent  contact  that


110  Alice  Johnson.  [part

it  seems  impossible  to  decide  for  certain  that  the  raps  are  really
supernormally  produced,  however  keenly  one  may  be  observing.
Certain  occurrences  I  have  witnessed  could  not  possibly  have  been
produced  by  any  means  known  to  me,  but  more  frequently  it  is
possible  that  they  could  be.  ...

II.  My  Own  Experiences.

I  arrived  at on  August  25th,  1906,  and  was  shortly

introduced  to  most  of  the  sitters.  They  all  received  me
with  much  kindness  and  hospitality,  especially  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Williams,  and  did  all  in  their  power  to  give  me  oppor-
tunities of  witnessing  the  phenomena.  Their  only  objection
to  allowing  their  names  to  appear  in  connection  with  the
case  was  the  fear  of  newspaper  notoriety  in  their  own  State.
Any  one  who  has  had  experience  of  the  idiosyncracies  of  a
certain  section  of  the  American  press  will  sympathise  with
this  fear.

There  is,  as  already  said,  no  professional  medium  in  the
circle,  and  no  one  who  is  accustomed  to  go  into  trance,  or
into  any  kind  of  abnormal  condition  during  the  sittings.  But
it  is  to  Mrs.  Williams's  agency  or  mediumship  that  the
phenomena  are  in  Dr.  Gower's  view  chiefly  to  be  attributed,
since  the  most  marked  ones  have  almost  always  occurred  in
her  presence,  and  the  movements  and  raps  seem  stronger,
the  nearer  they  are  to  her.  Dr.  Williams  is  a  Canadian  by
birth,  and  an  Edinburgh  M.D.,  who  stands  at  the  head  of
his  profession  in  the  town  where  they  live — a  town  of  over
200,000  inhabitants — and  is  in  request  by  patients  in  all
parts  of  the  State.  He  has  recently  taken  to  using  hypnotic
suggestion  in  his  practice,  and  showed  me  several  cases  in
which  it  seemed  to  have  been  of  great  service.

Mrs.  Williams — like  most  women  in  that  part  of  America —
spends  a  great  part  of  her  time  and  energy  in  household
affairs,  on  account  of  the  almost  complete  dearth  of  domestic
servants.  Her  mind  seemed  to  be  chiefly  occupied  with  her
children  and  her  friends,  and  the  practical  details  of  everyday
life.  She  took  no  interest  in  the  sittings,  and  only  consented
to  hold  them  at  Dr.  Gower's  request  for  my  benefit ;  she
could  not  bear  to  be  regarded  as  a  medium.  She  did  not
deny — though  she  minimised  as  much  as  possible — the  state-


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  Ill


ments  of  the  other  witnesses  that  movements  of  the  table
had  occurred  without  contact  in  a  way  she  could  not  account
for ;  but,  she  asked,  what  was  the  good  of  that  ?  It  led  to
nothing  ;  they  went  on,  and  they  never  got  any  forwarder,
and  it  was  all  a  stupid  and  tiresome  waste  of  time.  She
thought  it  extraordinary  that  I  should  have  come  all  that
way  on  the  chance  of  seeing  something,  but  was  willing  to
hold  sittings  as  I  had  come.  I  must  add  that  every  one  I
met  expressed  the  highest  opinion  of  her  general  character
and  trustworthiness,  and  what  I  saw  of  her  led  me  to  take
the  same  view.

The  other  sitters  were  engaged  in  various  businesses  or
professions  in  the  town,  and  with  the  exception  of  Dr.
Gower  and  Dr.  Williams,  seemed  to  take  little  interest  in
the  sittings.  In  a  rapidly  changing  and  developing  place  of
this  kind,  material  interests  and  practical  affairs  are  necessarily
forced  into  the  foreground,  and  the  absence  of  settled  tradi-
tions gives  the  child-like  outlook  on  life  which  is  typical  of
a  country  where  nothing  seems  impossible,  and  hardly  anything
inappropriate.  The  obstacles  of  custom  that  to  us  of  the
elder  nations  block  the  path  of  all  reforms  are  simply
ignored,  or  do  not  exist  in  such  a  place.  Like  the  child  in
the  fairy  tale  who  could  not  see  the  Emperor's  new  clothes,
these  Westerners  are  unable,  for  instance,  to  see  any  difficulty
in  women  becoming  enfranchised  citizens  of  the  State  as  soon
as  they  come  of  age.  Similarly,  it  seemed  to  them  the
most  natural  thing  in  the  world  when  at  a  sitting  to  address
the  "  controls "  in  a  friendly  spirit  in  the  local  vernacular :
"  Now,  Albert,  get  busy  ! "  "  See  here,  Bertie,  get  up  and
dust !  "  and  so  on.  The  "  controls  "  generally  seemed  encouraged
and  stirred  up  by  this  kind  of  remark,  and  would  act
accordingly.

Altogether,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  21  of  the  sitters
concerned  (besides  Dr.  Gower),  not  to  mention  all  the  tables.
They  talked  to  me  freely  about  the  earlier  sittings,  and  though
their  accounts  did  not  always  agree  in  every  detail,  they  all
agreed  that  the  extensible  pedestal  table  had  opened  of  itself,
and  that  the  other  table  had  moved  across  the  room  and
back  again,  and?  tilted  several  times,  all  without  being  touched.
It  did  not  seem  to  me  that  these  events  had  grown  in  their


112-  Alice  Johnson.  [part

recollection,  since  what  they  told  me  tallied  with  the  brief
records  made  at  the  time.

During  my  visit  18  sittings  were  held,  11  at  the  house
of  Dr.  Williams,  3  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  B.,  the  owner
of  the  extensible  table,  and  the  other  4  at  two  other  houses.
Dr.  Gower  and  I,  of  course,  attended  all  these  sittings ;
Mrs.  Williams  was  present  at  the  first  12  of  them  (10  of
which  were  held  at  her  own  house,  and  2  at  Mrs.  B.'s).  She
then  left  the  town  to  stay  with  her  children  in  the  moun-
tains some  80  miles  off,  and  was  prevented  by  a  snowstorm
from  returning  before  I  had  to  leave.

Of  these  twelve  sittings  with  Mrs.  Williams,  three  were
blanks.  At  the  others,  abundant  raps  were  heard,  both  when
the  sitters'  hands  were  on  the  table,  and  to  a  less  extent
when  they  were  off.  Tilts  and  other  movements  of  the  table
occurred  in  the  ordinary  way  with  our  hands  on  the  table,
and  a  few  movements  apparently  without  contact,  as  well  as
some  levitations  which  we  could  not  explain.

The  sittings  were  all  held  in  a  good  light.  I  did  not
attempt  to  take  notes  at  the  time,  as  I  wished  to  observe
as  carefully  as  possible  all  that  was  happening,  so  I  wrote
a  full  report  of  each  sitting  on  the  day  after  it  was  held,
and  submitted  my  report  to  Dr.  Gower,  in  order  that  he
might  confirm  or  correct  it.

This  was  not  an  ideal  plan,  but  it  seemed  the  best  possible
under  the  circumstances.  When,  as  in  some  experiments,  we
want  chiefly  to  know  all  that  was  spoken  in  the  course  of
them,  it  is  not  only  comparatively  easy  but  essential  to  make
a  complete  record  on  the  spot.  In  the  case  of  "  physical
phenomena,"  where  the  first  essential  is  to  observe  a  series
of  more  or  less  complicated  actions,  it  is  not  possible  for  one
person  to  do  this  adequately  and  to  take  notes  of  his  observa-
tions at  the  same  time.  The  reports  were  therefore  written
as  soon  as  possible  afterwards.

I  will  now  give  some  extracts  from  these  reports  :

Sitting  I.

Monday,  Aug.  27/06,  8.30—11.30  p.m.,  at  the  house  of
Dr.  Williams.

Present:  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  Mr.  T.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.,


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.


113


Mrs.  E.,  Mrs.  B.,  and  A.  J.  Also  Miss  R.  (aunt  of  Mrs.  Williams),
who  sat  away  from  the  table  all  the  time.

Dr.  Gower  played  on  the  piano  for  a  few  minutes  before  we
began.  Mrs.  Williams  and  Mr.  T.  brought  the  table  from  a  corner
of  the  room  into  the  middle.  They  told  me  it  was  the  table  most
often  used  at  their  sittings.  It  was  a  heavy,  oblong  table — some
4  to  5  ft.  long,  and  2  to  3  ft.  wide — with  four  straight  legs,  one  at
each  corner,  on  casters,  and  a  ledge  below,  about  10  inches  from
the  floor.  It  had  no  cloth  on.  The  room  was  lighted  by  a
brilliant  incandescent  gas  burner,  [connected  with]  a  chandelier
(which  also  contained  electric  lights)  in  the  middle  of  the  room,
the  gas  burner  being  placed  on  a  small  table  near  the  seance
table.  During  part  of  the  evening  one  of  these  electric  lights  was
turned  on  for  a  short  time,  and  then  off  again,  and  then  an
electric  light  in  the  next  room  was  turned  on  for  a  time.  This
room  opened  into  the  seance  room  by  a  wide  archway,  over  which
curtains  were  drawn  part  of  the  time.  The  main  light  throughout
was  from  the  gas  burner,  which  was  full  on  all  the  time,  and  it
was  ample  for  all  purposes.  The  only  difficulty  about  seeing  arose
from  the  fact  that  the  table  necessarily  prevented  one's  seeing  the
lower  part  of  the  body  of  most  of  the  sitters.  .  .  .

We  began  by  sitting  round  the  table  with  our  hands  on  it.
Before  long  raps  were  heard  apparently  in  the  table.  They  were
not  at  all  loud — sometimes  only  just  audible — and  sounded  rather
like  a  finger  nail  tapping  gently  on  the  table.  They  were  fairly
frequent,  and  answered  to  questions  by  rapping  once  for  "  no,"  and
thrice  for  "  yes "  ;  also  gave  any  number  that  was  asked  for.  In
answer  to  questions  they  said  a  spirit  was  present — a  man — but
would  not  give  his  name  or  any  other  particulars.

We  took  all  our  hands  off  the  table,  and  sat  round  without  touch-
ing it  at  all,  and  the  raps  came  again  just  as  before,  apparently  in
the  table.  I  could  not  detect  any  difference  in  the  quality  of  the
sounds,  and  they  showed  an  equal  amount  of  intelligence — i.e.
answered  questions  by  one  or  three  raps,  and  gave  the  numbers
required.

Part  of  the  time  we  stood  round  the  table  holding  our  linked
hands  above  it,  and  without  touching  it  at  all.  I  think  raps
occurred  under  these  circumstances,  but  I  am  not  now  quite  certain,
as  I  cannot  remember  all  the  details  and  order  of  events.

We  also  got  movements  of  the  table,  both  with  and  without  contact.
All  these  movements  were  of  the  same  nature, viz.,  backwards

H


114


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  forwards,  and  sideways — all  the  legs  remaining  on  the  floor
all  the  time ;  there  was  no  tilting.  When  we  touched  the  table,
we  were  supposed  to  be  touching  it  witb  our  hands  only,  which
were  laid  flat  on  the  top  of  it.

The  movements  without  contact  occurred,  I  think,  three  or  four
times — generally  very  soon  after  there  had  been  a  movement  with  con-
tact. They  came  rather  suddenly,  the  table  being  on  these  occasions
jerked  once  or  twice  over  a  space  of  perhaps  three  or  four  inches,
and  then  stopping  dead.  During  these  movements  the  hands  of
the  sitters  were  held  in  the  air  over  the  table, — I  think  at  least
three  inches  from  its  surface, — and  on  at  least  one  occasion,  we
were  standing — not  sitting — round  it.

I  feel  practically  certain  that  these  movements  were  not  produced
by  the  hands  of  any  of  the  sitters  ;  but  I  coidd  not  tell  what
their  legs  were  doing,  as  they  Avere  hidden  from  me  by  the  table.
I  watched  as  carefully  as  was  possible  under  the  circumstances,
and  saw  nothing  in  the  least  suspicious  during  any  part  of  the
evening.

We  tried  in  vain  to  get  a  small  pencil,  which  was  placed  on
the  middle  of  the  table,  moved.

Later,  after  an  interval,  we  tried  again  with  a  small,  light
square  fourdegged  table,  which  easily  moved  and  tilted  and  twisted
itself  round  so  as  to  balance  on  one  leg,  and  then  gave  a  sort  of
jump  into  the  air,  coming  down  on  all  its  legs.  It  was  impossible
to  be  sure,  however,  that  all  the  legs  had  really  been  off  the
floor  simultaneously,  and  all  these  movements  took  place  with
contact.

On  the  whole,  though  the  conditions  were  so  inconclusive  that
no  stress  could  be  laid  on  anything  that  occurred,  I  felt  it  decidedly
encouraging  that  we  had  got  any  phenomena  at  all  at  this  first
sitting.

The  above  account  was  written  between  1  and  4.30  p.m.  on
Tuesday,  Aug.  28/06.

Read  and  endorsed,  Aug.  30/06.  John  H.  Gower.

Sitting  III.

Wednesday,  Aug. 29/06, about 9 — 11 p.m., at the house  of

Dr.  Williams.  •

Present: Dr.  and  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  Mrs.  T.  W.,  and

A.  J.  ;  later,  Mr.  T. Miss  R.  was  also  present,  but  took  no  part

in  the  sitting.


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  115


Same  table  used  as  at  first  sitting.  Mrs.  Williams  measured
it,  and  found  it  to  be  4  ft.  long  by  2-i-  ft.  wide.  It  is  made  of
solid  oak,  with  a  drawer  at  each  end.

The  light  used  was  the  incandescent  gas  burner,  placed  on  a
smaller  table.  After  some  music  we  sat  in  the  positions  shown
[in  a  diagram  not  reproduced  here]  with  our  hands  on  the  table.
Soon  raps  were  heard,  apparently  in  the  table.  They  were  faint,
and  sometimes  barely  audible ;  when  a  little  louder  they  sounded
to  me  like  small  drops  of  water  falling  on  the  table.

A  small  pencil  was  put  on  the  table,  and  we  requested  that  it
might  be  moved  without  the  table  being  moved.  The  request  was
made  at  intervals  several  times,  but  the  pencil  was  not  moved.

The  raps  answered  to  questions  as  before,  the  questions  and
remarks  addressed  to  the  "  spirits "  being  made  generally  by
Dr.  Gower.  After  a  little  time,  on  his  asking  what  spirit  was
present,  the  name  "  Robert  Rowed "  was  rapped  out.  Mrs.  Williams
said:  "Is  that  you,  Bob?"  and  it  rapped  "yes."

Dr.  Williams  said :  "  Ask  him  how  many  years  he  has  been
dead,"  and  the  answer  came  by  raps:  "Three."  Mrs.  Williams
said  she  thought  that  was  right,  and  appealed  to  Miss  R.  to  say
whether  it  was  not.  Miss  R.  thought  he  had  died  about  three
years  ago  last  Christmas.

On  being  asked  if  there  was  any  message  for  anybody,  the  raps
gave  "  Tell  Emily  (here  Mrs.  Williams  remarked  that  "  Emily "
was  right)  all  well  don't  worry."

Dr.  Williams  said:  "Ask  him  where  he  died,"  and  the  raps
gave  "Sey."  Here  Mrs.  Williams  said  that  was  right — the  name
of  the  place  being  Seymore.

Mrs.  Williams  told  us  that  Robert  Rowed  was  a  man  who  had
lived  near  her  old  home  (in  Canada  ?)  and  had  been  engaged  to
a  cousin  of  hers,  named  Emily.  He  had  died  of  typhoid  fever
about  three  months  before  he  was  to  have  been  married.  She  had
not  thought  of  who  was  meant  until  the  full  name  was  given,  as  he
had  always  been  called  "Bob,"  not  "Robert."  She  gave  us  his
full  history.

Dr.  Gower  said  afterwards  that  he  had  been  much  surprised  by
the  interest  she  manifested  in  this  message,  as  he  had  never  before
seen  her  take  any  interest  in  jany  of  the  messages  they  had  got —
even  in  the  first  one,  which  purported  to  come  from  her  father,
and  gave  the  name  of  some  place  connected  with  him.  On  this
occasion she spoke to the "  control "  quite  as  if  she  imagined


116


Alice  Johnson.


[part


him  to  be  really  there.  She  would  not  ask  questions  herself,  but
sat  with  her  eyes  closed  listening  attentively,  but  in  a  perfectly
composed  manner,  to  the  raps,  and  nodded  as  each  correct  state-
ment came.

Nothing  more  came  from  Robert  Rowed.  The  next  "  control "
began  to  announce  himself  as  "  Alb — "  and  on  being  asked  if  he
was  "  Albert  Shaw "  answered  "  yes."  We  then  attempted  to  get
movements.  The  table  moved  a  little  backwards  and  forwards  with
contact.  Then  we  took  our  hands  off  and  stood  up  round  it,  and
it  moved  once — a  distance  of  about  2  inches — from  Mrs.  Williams
towards  me.  She  was  standing  very  close  to  it,  but  apparently
not  touching  it.  Dr.  Williams  suggested  we  should  stand  further
off,  and  she  moved  back  a  little,  [but]  it  did  not  move  again.  We
then  sat  down  again  [but  got  nothing  more  except  a  few  raps
and  sideways  movements  of  the  table  with  contact].

Sitting  V,

Friday,  Aug.  31/06,  about  9—10.30  p.m.,  at  Dr.  Williams's  house.
Present:  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  and  A.  J. Miss  R.  also  in
room,  not  taking  part  in  sitting.

Li°;ht  from  incandescent  tras  burner  as  before.  We  sat  first
round  the  small  light  four-legged  table,  with  ledge  below.  By
sitting  back  and  looking  down  I  could  see  the  legs  of  the  table.

We  put  our  hands  on  the  table  and  raps  soon  came  on  it.  They
next  came  on  Mrs.  Williams's  chair.  The  chair  was  a  solid  wooden
one  with  stuffed  seat,  as  represented  [in  the  diagram].
The  raps  seeming  to  proceed  from  it,  I  put  my  head
against  the  back  to  listen  and  heard  them  clearly  as
if  struck  on  the  front  surface  of  the  back.  I  asked
Mrs.  Williams  to  sit  forward  so  that  I  could  put  my
head  between  her  and  the  back  of  the  chair.  She  did
so  and  I  listened  again  with  my  face  towards  her  back
and  heard  the  raps  on  the  back  of  the  chair  as  before.
They  came  in  quick  succession,  sometimes  in  little  runs  almost  as
quick  as  fingers  playing  a  succession  of  notes  on  a  piano.  I  listened
also  with  my  ear  against  the  wooden  side  of  the  seat  of  the  chair
and  then  against  one  of  the  back  legs  and  the  raps  seemed  about  the
same.  I  could  not  tell  exactly  in  what  part  of  the  chair  they  were.
Mrs.  Williams  then  changed  places  with  me,  and  the  raps  came  again
in  the  chair  in  which  she  was  then  sitting.  This  chair  was  made
entirely  of  wood,  with  wooden  seat  and  arms. After  a  little  while


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  117


we  put  a  large  soft  cushion  into  it  for  her  to  sit  on  and  another
large  soft  cushion  on  the  floor,  on  which  she  placed  her  feet.
I  then  listened  to  the  raps  with  my  ear  against  various  parts  of  the
chair  on  Mrs.  Williams's  left-hand  side,  and  finally  went  down  on
the  floor  and  passed  my  left  hand  up  and  down  the  front  leg  of
the  chair  on  that  side  to  make  sure  that  nothing  was  knocking
against  it.  The  raps  continued  while  I  was  doing  this.  I  then  got
my  right  arm  between  the  lower  bars  of  the  chair  (the  legs  being
connected  by  three  or  four  bars)  to  feel  the  right  front  chair  leg.
I  found  the  cushion  was  being  pressed  hard  against  this  by  what  I
supposed  was  the  heel  of  Mrs.  Williams's  right  foot.  I  felt  this
being  moved  backwards  and  forwards  several  times,  pressing  hard
against  my  hand — through  the  cushion — each  time  it  moved  back.
For  a  moment  I  thought  that  Mrs.  Williams  might  be  trying  to
rap  on  the  chair  with  this  foot ;  [but]  the  movements  I  detected  could
not  apparently  have  made  the  raps,  because  the  cushion  was
between  the  foot  and  the  leg  of  the  chair  all  the  time.  There
remains  the  possibility  that  before  I  felt  these  movements,  the  foot
might  have  been  lifted  clear  of  the  cushion  and  have  been  knocking
on  the  chair  leg,  as  the  raps  ceased  before  I  felt  the  movements.
That  is,  I  heard  no  raps  while  I  was  controlling  both  legs  of  the
chair.  I  think  it  most  likely,  however,  that  Mrs.  Williams  was
merely  pressing  her  foot  on  the  ground  automatically,  as  she  was
sitting  with  her  arms  extended  and  her  hands  being  held  by  Dr.
Gower  off  the  table,  and  I  do  not  think  the  movements  of  the  foot
had  any  significance  in  connection  with  the  raps.

Dr.  Gower  told  me  that  while  this  was  going  on  he  heard  raps
at  the  same  time  both  on  the  table  and  on  Mrs.  Williams's  chair,
and  that  the  table  moved  slightly  two  or  three  times  without  con-
tact. I  saw  and  heard  nothing  of  the  table  at  this  time,  as  I  was
occupied  with  attending  to  the  chair.

The  raps  on  the  chair  having  ceased,  I  got  up  and  returned  to
my  seat  on  Mrs.  Williams's  left  hand,  and  we  all  again  put  our
hands  on  the  table.  We  got  a  little  tilting  and  movements  of  the
table  with  contact,  but  none  without,  though  we  tried  lifting  our
hands  several  times.  We  also  got  raps — rather  faint  ones — on  the
table,  sometimes  with  and  sometimes  without  contact.1  Mrs.
Williams  still  sat  with  her  feet  on  the  cushion,  and  I  could  see  a

1  There  was  a  creaking  and  straining  of  the  table,  as  if  it  were  making
great  efforts  to  move,  at  this  point,  while  we  were  sitting  round  not  touching
it,  but  it  did  not  actually  move.


118


Alice  Johnson.


[part


clear  space  between  her  skirt  and  the  table  most  of  the  time.  I
think  that  the  raps  without  contact  occurred  more  than  once  while
I  was  seeing  this  space  between  her  and  the  table ;  but  the
phenomena  now  seemed  to  be  becoming  gradually  weaker.  .  .  .

P.S. — Near  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  we  tried  to  make  the
raps  on  Mrs.  Williams's  first  chair  give  certain  numbers.  Dr.  Gower
whispered  "4"  to  me,  and  asked  if  "it"  would  rap  the  number.  It
rapped  once,  perhaps  meaning  "no,"  and  on  being  asked  again
rapped  4  times.  He  then  wrote  down  the  number  8  without  showing
it  to  anybody,  and  8  raps  came.  I  then  wrote  down  5,  and  it
rapped  first  7,  and  when  I  said  that  was  wrong,  it  rapped  5.
Then  I  wrote  down  10,  and  it  made  two  wrong  guesses.

Twice  while  the  raps  were  going  on,  Dr.  Grower  went  away  to
answer  the  telephone,  and  the  raps  continued  while  he  was  away.

Sept.  1st.

Read  and  endorsed.  I  would  add  that  I  was  more  impressed
with  the  creaking  and  straining  of  the  table  to  which  Miss  Johnson
refers,  as  it  continued  for  some  time,  and  I  felt  convinced  nothing
was  in  contact  with  the  table.

John  H.  Gower.

Sitting  VII.

Sunday,  Sep.  2/06,  about  6 — 7.30  p.m.,  at  Dr.  Williams's  house.

Present :  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  and  A.  J.  Miss  R.  also
there,  not  taking  part  in  sitting.

We  sat  by  firedight — no  other  light  in  the  room — but  the  fire
was  large  and  burning  brightly.  [I  was  sitting  near  the  fire,  which
was  behind  me  and  to  my  left,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  in  my
notes],  so  that  I  could  see  the  legs  of  the  table  specially  well.
We  used  the  small  light  table.  Raps  (with  contact)  soon  came  on
it,  announcing  the  presence  of  "  Albert  Shaw,  "  who  promised  to  do
his  best  for  us.  Mrs.  Williams  was  sitting  on  a  wooden  chair  with
stuffed  seat  and  no  arms.  We  put  a  cushion  for  her  to  sit  on  and
another  cushion  for  her  feet,  and  asked  the  raps  to  come  on  her
chair.  They  did  so,  and  I  went  down  on  the  floor  at  her  right
side  to  listen  for  them  with  my  ear  against  her  chair.  They
seemed  first  to  sound  on  the  floor  under  the  table,  but  soon  were
undoubtedly  on  Mrs.  Williams's  chair.  I  felt  round  the  front  chair
leg  nearest  to  me  and  found  nothing  pressing  against  it.  Then  I
put  my  other  arm  under  the  chair  to  feel  the  other  front  chair  leg.
Against  this,  something — presumably  Mrs.  Wdliams's  left  foot — was


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  119


moving  backwards  and  forwards  and  up  and  down,  so  as  to  rub  the
cushion  up  and  down  against  it.  This  appeared  to  make  sounds
like  the  raps  we  had  been  hearing,  but  I  did  not  manage  to  get  my
ear  pressed  close  against  the  chair  at  the  same  time  that  I  was
feeling  the  movements,  so  that  I  did  not  exactly  hear  the  raps
synchronising  with  them.  I  put  my  left  hand  round  the  distant
front  chair  leg  so  as  to  prevent  the  foot  knocking  and  rubbing
on  it.  The  foot  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  try  a  little  longer  to  reach
the  leg;  then,  finding  itself  prevented,  left  off  and  apparently  moved
forward  and  immediately  afterwards  Dr.  Gower  remarked  that  the
raps  had  now  come  on  the  table.  I  asked  that  they  should  come
back  to  the  chair,  and  remained  in  the  same  position  for  a  few
minutes  waiting  for  them.  As  they  did  not  come,  I  returned  to
my  seat.

We  then  tried  to  get  raps  and  movements  of  the  table  without  con-
tact. We  got  some  raps — I  do  not  remember  whether  with  or  without
contact.  We  got  one  movement  of  the  table  when  our  hands  were
clear  of  it;  the  leg  between  Mrs.  W.  and  Dr.  Gower  moving  about
2  ins.  from  her  towards  him.  He  was  looking  down  at  it,  and  said
that  he  could  see  a  clear  space  on  the  floor  between  this  leg  and
the  cushion  on  which  her  feet  were  resting.  I  could  not  see  this
space,  because  of  the  lower  ledge  of  the  table.  I  could  see,  how-
ever, that  the  table  leg  on  Mrs.  Williams's  other  side  was  in  contact
with  the  cushion,  and  when  Dr.  G.  and  I  tried  afterwards  by  our-
selves, it  seemed  to  us  that  it  might  have  been  possible  to  push
the  cushion  against  this  leg  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  the
movement.

After  an  interval,  Mrs.  Williams  and  I  changed  places,  and  the
table  then  began  to  move  (with  contact)  and  tilt.  It  then  got  up
on  to  one  leg,  the  one  nearest  to  her  left  hand,  and  after  balancing
on  it  for  a  little  while,  gave  a  sudden  jump  and  came  clown  on
the  other  legs.  The  thing  was  done  so  quickly  that  it  was  impos-
sible to  say  whether  all  four  legs  were  off  the  ground  at  once,  but
I  do  not  believe  they  were.  The  table  moved  and  tilted  a  little
further,  but  nothing  more  of  any  importance  happened.

After  this  evening's  experience,  I  cannot  doubt  that  Mrs.
AVilliams  sometimes  makes  raps  with  her  feet  and  probably  some-
times also  with  her  hands.  At  one  time  in  the  evening — I  forget
whether  before  or  after  the  raps  on  her  chair  described  above — we
were  getting  raps on the table without contact, i.e. with  our


120


Alice  Johnson.


[part


hands  not  touching  it.  But  her  skirt  was  in  contact  with  one
leg.  I  moved  the  table  so  as  leave  a  clear  space  of  about  2  ins.
between  it  and  her  skirt,  and  no  more  raps  came.  It  seems  to
me,  however  .  .  .  that  she  is  entirely  unconscious  of  making  any
movements  that  have  anything  to  do  with  the  phenomena.
Further,  nothing  that  I  have  observed  could  account  for  the
more  striking  phenomena  of  movements  without  contact  that  have
been  described  to  me  by  the  other  witnesses.

Account  written  4 — 5  p.m.,  Sep.  3/06.

Bead,  Sept.  3rd. — J.  H.  G.

Sitting  VIII.

Monday,  Sep.  3/06,  about  9  to  12  p.m.  at  Dr.  Williams's  house.

Present  :  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  Mrs.  B.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.,
and  A.  J. Miss  B.  also  there,  taking  no  part  in  sitting.

We  sat  first  at  the  large  table  ;  the  incandescent  gas-lamp  on
the  table  behind  Mrs.  B.  Dr.  Gower  tried  knocking  on  different
parts  of  the  table  to  get  the  musical  tones  of  the  various  parts,  so
as  to  judge,  when  the  raps  came,  on  which  part  they  were.  He
found  different  tones  for  the  top,  legs  and  lower  ledge,  on  which
were  a  number  of  large  books  and  papers.

Baps  came  soon — apparently  on  the  floor — then  on  the  table —
apparently  on  its  lower  ledge.  They  also  came  occasionally,  I  think,
on  its  surface.  They  occasionally  answered  "yes"  and  "no"  to  ques-
tions, but  refused  to  give  any  name  or  message.  They  also  came
on  Mrs.  Williams's  chair.  Dr.  Gower  got  up  and  listened  with  his
ear  against  the  back  and  then  against  the  side  of  the  chair,  and
said  they  appeared  to  be  on  it.  He  then  came  back  to  the  table.
We  lifted  our  hands  off  it  and  stood  up  round  it.  Baps  still  came
on  it,  but  apparently  on  the  lower  ledge,  not  the  surface.  We
tried  several  times  to  get  the  raps  on  the  surface  of  the  table
without  contact,  also  on  other  people's  chairs,  but  they  came  only  on
Mrs.  Williams's  chair,  and  only,  I  think,  when  she  was  sitting  on  it.
My  impression  at  the  time  was  that  she  was  unconsciously  making
all  these  raps;  they  all  seemed  to  be  in  her  immediate  neighbour-
hood. She  appeared  to  be  listening  to  them  with  the  same  curiosity
and  interest  as  the  rest  of  us.  From  time  to  time  one  or  other  of
us  was  aware  of  making  some  noise  which  the  others  might  take
for  raps,  and  would  then  make  such  remark  as  "I  did  that."  She
too  now  and  then  remarked  that  some  sound  was  made  by  herself,
and  she  seemed  to  me  to  say  this  whenever  she  knew  that  she  was


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  121


producing  a  sound.  I  think  the  sounds  she  made  consciously  were
.  .  .  a  little  different  from  those  which,  as  I  believe,  she  made
unconsciously.  .  .  .

Sitting  IX.

Tuesday,  Sep.  4/06,  about  9 — 11-30  p.m.,  at  Dr.  Williams's  house.

Present:  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  W.  T.,  Judge  H.,  and  A.  J.
Also  Mrs.  H.  and  Miss  R.,  sitting  away  from  table  and  taking-
no  part.

We  sat  at  the  large  heavy  table.  The  incandescent  gas  lamp
was  lit ;  also  two  electric  lights  in  the  central  chandelier  were
on.  We  put  our  hands  on  the  table  and  soon  got  raps  in  it.
We  took  our  hands  off  and  the  raps  continued.  Occasionally
they  showed  intelligence — such  as  answering  "yes"  or  "no,"  or
giving  a  number,  but  gave  no  name  or  message.  While  they  were
going  on  and  we  were  sitting  with  our  hands  off  the  table,  I  leant
back  and  managed  to  see  the  outline  of  Mrs.  Williams's  knees
against  an  illuminated  part  of  the  floor  in  front  of  Dr.  Gower.
[I  was  on  her  right  side  and  Dr.  Gower  at  the  end  of  the  table
on  her  left.]  I  saw  her  left  knee  moving  up  and  down  very
slightly  in  time  with  the  raps.  The  movement  was  so  slight  that
I  was  not  always  sure  of  it,  but  several  times  I  saw  as  many  as
five  or  six  movements  in  succession  synchronising  with  the  same
number  of  raps.  I  did  not  always  see  a  movement  at  the  same
time  that  I  heard  a  rap,  but  as  far  as  I  remember,  I  never
saw  a  movement  during  this  period  without  hearing  a  rap.

From  the  sound  of  these  raps,  I  did  not  feel  certain  that  they
were  on  the  table,  but  the  other  sitters  seemed  to  have  no  doubt
on  this  point.  If  they  were  right,  I  think  Mrs.  Williams  probabh'
made  the  raps  by  knocking  her  left  foot  against  the  leg  of  the
table  nearest  to  her  or  possibly  by  rubbing  her  shin  against  the
ledge  of  the  table ;  there  being  no  clear  space  visible  between  her
skirt  and  these  parts  of  the  table.

I  believe  she  was  quite  unconscious  of  doing  this,  as  I  think
she  must  have  been  aware  that  I  was  watching  her  closely ;  but
meanwhile  the  movements  went  on,  and  she  showed  not  the  slightest
sign  of  self-consciousness.

Throughout  the  evening  we  got  raps,  with  our  hands  sometimes
on  and  sometimes  off  the  table,  but  never  with  a  clear  space  between
Mrs.  Williams's  skirt  and  the.  object  on  which  the  raps  appeared
to  be  made.  .  .  .


122


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Sitting  XII.

Friday,  Sep.  7/06,  about  9 — 11  p.m.,  at  Dr.  Williams's  house.

Present  :  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  and  A.  J.  Also  Miss
R.  taking  no  part,  and  George  Williams — aged  about  14 — who  was
reading  and  now  and  then  came  to  look  on  at  what  the  table
was  doing,  but  did  not  touch  it  at  all.  The  light  was  stronger
than  usual,  two  electric  lamps  in  the  central  chandelier  being  on,
as  well  as  the  incandescent  gas  lamp  on  the  table.

Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  and  I  sat  round  the  small  light  table ;
Dr.  Williams  sitting  a  little  distance  off,  first  in  the  place  shown —
later  on  the  window  seat  behind  and  to  the  rierht  of  Mrs.  Williams.


Window  seat


Fire-place


DR  Gower

33


DR  WILUAM5


Table  with
£as  lamp  on


Dr.  Williams  did  not  touch  the  table  at  any  time,  but  confined
himself  to  making  suggestions  to  it  to  perform  certain  movements,
addressing  it  as  he  would  one  of  Ids  patients,  with  whom  he  uses
hypnotic  suggestion  extensively.

At  first,  however,  Dr.  Gower  talked  to  it  as  usual,  asking  for
raps,  which  came  pretty  freely,  apparently  on  the  surface  of  the
table ;  they  were  never  very  loud,  but  sometimes  quite  clear.
They  would  not  answer  questions,  but  rapped  three  times  when
Dr.  Gower  asked  if  "it"  wished  to  be  left  alone  to  do  what  it
could.

We  got  strong  movements  and  tilting,  but  only  with  contact,1  Dr.
Williams  repeatedly  urging  the  table  to  rise  completely  off  the  floor.

Then  raps  came  again,  apparently  on  Mrs.  Williams's  chair,  which
was  the  wooden  one  with  a  stuffed  seat  and  no  arms.  Dr.  Williams
went  round  to  her  right  side  to  listen  to  these  raps,  and  moved
the  chair  a  little  forward,  to  prevent  it  touching  the  wall  behind

1  See  Dr.  Gower' s  Note  1.


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America  123


and  so  avoid  the  possibility  of  her  making  sounds  by  pressing  it
against  the  wall.  She  sat  forwards  in  the  chair  with  a  considerable
space  between  her  back  and  its  back,  and  turned  towards  Dr.
Gower,  stretching  out  both  her  feet  in  that  direction  between  the
leg  of  the  table  and  the  fireplace.  She  said  that  her  feet  were
crossed,  and  I  understood  afterwards  from  Dr.  Gower  that  he  could
see  that  they  were  so.  I  could  not  see  this  from  my  place ;  but
it  appeared  to  me  that  her  feet  were  stretched  out  so  much  to  her
left  that  they  could  not  have  been  in  contact  with  the  leg  of  her
chair,  and  I  think  there  was  a  clear  space  between  them  and  the
adjoining  table  leg.  Under  these  conditions  raps  sounded  on  her
chair.

There  were  also  raps  on  the  table  both  with  our  hands  on  and
with  our  hands  off  it.  When  our  hands  were  off,  however,  Mrs.
Williams's  skirt  was  generally  in  contact  with  the  table  leg  on  her
right,  and  on  the  occasions  when  there  was  not  this  contact,  I  was
not  absolutely  satisfied  that  the  raps  were  in  the  table.  She  often
drew  her  skirt  away  from  it  ;  but  then  in  the  natural  course  of
events  the  table  would  again  approach  the  skirt,  or  the  skirt  the
table,  [for]  with  our  hands  on  the  table  it  tilted  strongly,  getting
further  and  further  away  from  her  as  it  did  so.  At  last  she  would
hardly  be  able  to  keep  her  hands  on  it,  and  as  she  leant  forward
to  do  so,  her  skirt  naturally  went  forward  too.  We  often  tried
lifting  our  hands  off  it,  but  could  never  get  any  movement  to
start  with  the  hands  off,  and  so  had  to  keep  the  table  constantly
near  us.

We  then  tried  with  our  hands  on  it  to  make  it  get  up  on  to  one
leg,  and  jump  off  that  leg,  Dr.  Williams  making  strong  suggestions  to
that  effect.  After  a  good  deal  of  thumping,  wriggling  and  twisting  it
stood  on  the  leg  nearest  to  Mrs.  Williams's  right  hand,  balanced  back
and  forth  on  it  for  some  time,  Dr.  Williams  adjuring  it  to  jump,  then
suddenly  gave  a  great  jump  on  to  the  diagonal!}'  opposite  leg.
This  happened  so  quickly  that  it  was  impossible
to  see  exactly  what  happened.  We  urged  it  to  MbWiwams
repeat  the  performance,  and  it  did  so. As  before  A  B

O  O

it  stood  waving  and  balancing  itself  on  the  le°-
nearest  to  Mrs.  Williams's  right  hand  (A).  [See

diagram.] Then  suddenly  this  leg  flew  up  into  J2

the  air  and  at  what  seemed  the  same  moment

the  diagonally  opposite  leg  (D)  came  down  on  a  spot  very  close

to  where  the  first  leg  had  stood,  the  table  balancing  for  half  a


124


Alice  Johnson.


[part


second  or  so  on  this  second  leg,  before  the  other  three  legs  fell
to  the  floor.

Both  Dr.  Williams  and  the  boy  George,  who  was  lying  on  the
floor  near  the  leg  D  watching  the  table,  declared  that  they  could
see  the  legs  B  and  C  off  the  ground  while  this  jump  was  taking
place.  Dr.  Grower  and  I  could  not  see  this,  but  it  must  have  been
so  from  the  fact  of  D  falling  on  to  a  place  so  close  to  where  A
had  been  immediately  before.  The  table  did  not  simply  fall  from
A  on  to  the  other  legs,  but  swung  through  the  arc  of  a  circle,
and  must  for  a  moment  have  been  completely  off  the  floor.

The  only  normal  means,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  by  which  this
could  have  been  done,  was  by  [a]  foot  or  feet'  getting  under  the
ledge  of  the  table  and  heaving  or  kicking  it  up.1  It  appeared
throughout  the  evening  both  to  Dr.  Govver  and  myself  that  the
movements  of  the  table  were  mainly  produced  by  the  unconscious
muscular  action  of  Mrs.  Williams's  hands,  which  seemed  to  respond
forcibly  to  Dr.  Williams's  suggestions  to  the  table.  It  would  seem,
therefore,  not  unnatural  that  her  feet  should  respond  unconsciously  too.
The  only  question  is  whether  she  could  have  done  this  without  our
seeing  it.  The  boy  was  in  the  best  position  for  seeing  her  feet,
as  he  was  lying  on  the  floor,  and  I  think  he  would  have  called  out
to  her  or  given  some  sign  if  he  had  seen  anything.  Probably  he
was  not  looking  out  specially  for  any  movement  on  her  part,  but
he  was  watching  the  table  legs  intently.  [The  sitters]  were  not
in  such  a  favourable  position  for  seeing ;  [though]  I  was  looking
under  the  table.  .  .  .  Both  [Dr.  Gower  and  I,  however,]  were
watching  as  carefully  as  possible,  and  neither  of  us  detected  any
movement  [by  the  sitters].  But  I  cannot  feel  quite  certain  that
we  should  have  seen  it  if  [it  had  occurred].

After  this  Dr.  Williams  suggested  to  the  table  to  get  up  on
one  leg  on  to  the  corner  of  a  large  long  foot-stool  in  front  of  the
window  seat.  It  did  this  after  a  good  deal  of  wriggling  and
waving  about,  and  remained  for  some  time  balanced  on  one  leg
on  the  most  extreme  point  of  one  corner  of  the  foot-stool  with  its
surface  practically  horizontal  and  its  other  three  legs  in  the  air,
some  six  inches  from  the  ground.  It  not  only  stood  there,  but  also
wriggled  about  a  good  deal  in  its  efforts  to  follow  Dr.  Williams's
next  suggestion  and  get  another  leg  up  on  to  Mrs.  Williams's  chair
or  on  to  the  large  arm-chair  which  was  standing  near.  It  must
have  required  very  delicate  [balancing]  for  it  to  do  this  without

1See  Dr.  Gower's  Note  2.


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.


125


slipping off  the  corner  of  the foot-stool,  which  was made  of  a

wooden  frame  with  a  stuffed  top. The  table  was  supported  on  a

corner  of  the  stuffing,  not  of  the  wood.  .  .  .  Finally  the  table
tumbled  down  on  to  the  floor.

A  similar  performance  was  repeated  at  Dr.  Williams's  request,
the  table  getting  up  on  one  leg  on  to  the  foot-stool,  but  further
from  the  edge  of  it,  then  on  another  leg  on  to  the  window  seat,
where  it  remained  tilting  for  some  time,  with  our  hands  on  it,  till
we  brought  it  down.

Dr.  Williams  then  went  out  for  about  half-an-hour.  While  he  was
away,  Mrs.  Williams  and  Dr.  Gower  and  I  continued  sitting  in  the
same  positions  as  before.  George  was  now  sitting  some  three  or
four  feet  from  the  table — and  certainly  not  touching  it  at  all — to  the
right  of  and  slightly  behind  Dr.  Gower,  and  fully  in  my  view.
We  three  sat  with  our  hands  on  the  table,  talking,  but  not  making
any  direct  suggestion  to  it.  Dr.  Gower  was  relating  how  at  [a
house  in  England]  he  had  seen  a  table  levitated,  when  suddenly  the
table,  which  had  been  motionless,  rose  clear  off  the  ground,  straight
up,  remaining  in  a  horizontal  position  all  the  time.  It  rose,  I
judged,  some  5  or  6  ins.,  lifting  our  hands,  which  were  lying  flat
on  the  surface,  with  it,  and  then  went  straight  down  again.  George
said  he  saw  three  legs  off  the  ground,  the  fourth  being  invisible  to
him ;  but  we  none  of  us  doubted  that  they  were  all  four  up  at
once  for  a  moment.

We  were  not  expecting  this  movement  as  we  had  been  expecting
the  jumps  of  the  table  described  before  (pp.  123-4),  and  therefore  were
not  watching  [the  table]  immediately  before  it  happened.  But  we
looked  at  [each  other]  immediately  on  its  happening,  and  again  did
not  detect  any  movement  whatever  of  .  .  .  knees  or  body.  We  could
not  see  [each  other's  feet],  as  they  were  hidden  by  the  ledge  of
the  table,  and  again  the  only  possible  normal  way  of  raising  the
table  seemed  to  be  by  [one  of  us]  lifting  the  ledge  with  [a]  foot  or  feet.
[Mrs.  Williams's]  skirt  was  close  up  to  the  ledge ;  it  would  have
been  easier  to  do  it  with  [one's]  feet  crossed,  but  I  do  not  think
[the  feet  of  any  of  us]  were  crossed,  as  I  think  it  would  have
been  visible  if  they  had  been.  The  table  seemed  to  go  up
with  considerable  force.  This  struck  Dr.  Gower  more  than
it  did  me.  He  told  me  afterwards 1  that  his  hands  were  pressing
heavily  on  the  table,  and  he  was  much  surprised  at  the  force  with
which  it  was  lifted  up  against  this  pressure ;  also  that  he  saw  Mrs.

1  See  Dr.  Gower's  Note  3.


126


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Williams's  face  turned  towards  him  with  an  expression  of  great
astonishment  as  the  table  lifted.  I  did  not  see  her  face,  as  I  was
looking  at  the  lower  part  of  her  body.

I  then  suggested  to  her  that  she  and  I  should  both  put  our  feet
on  the  foot-stool,  to  make  sure  that  we  were  not  touching  the
table  with  our  feet.  We  did  so  and  tried  to  get  the  table  to  move
up  again,  but  no  further  movements  took  place.  .  .  .

Account  written  11  a.m. — 1.15  p.m. Sept.  8/06.

Notes  by  J.  H.  Goicer  on  Miss  Johnson's  Report.

September  8th,  1906.  5  p.m.
Note  1. — The  raps  were  sometimes  made  when  the  hands  were
upon  the  table,  and  sometimes  when  the  hands  were  not  touch-
ing it,

At  one  time,  early  in  the  sitting,  when  the  raps  were  occurring,
I  asked  for  a  movement  of  the  table  to  be  made  without  contact.
Two  distinct  movements  were  made  in  response,  and  so  far  as  I
could  see,  without  contact,  or  such  contact  as  would  have  been
necessary  to  produce  the  movement.  By  this  I  mean  that  the  leg
and  side  of  the  table  which  moved  the  greater  distance  were  quite
clear,  but  on  the  opposite  side  a  skirt  may  have  been  touching
the  leg.  But  Miss  Johnson  was  in  a  better  position  for  observing
this  latter  point  than  I  was.

Note  2. — My  recollection  is  that  at  the  time  the  table  made  the
jump  we,  i.e.,  Miss  Johnson,  Mrs.  Williams,  and  myself,  were  stand-
ing up.  Considering  that  Dr.  Williams  on  the  one  side,  and
George  on  the  other  side,  in  addition  to  Miss  Johnson  and
myself,  were  at  the  time  watching  carefully  and  expectantly  the
various  movements  of  the  table,  I  doubt  if  the  feet  of  any  of  the
sitters  could  have  been  brought  in  contact  with  the  table  without
being  at  once  noticed.

Note  3 — Such  was  the  force  manifested  in  this  movement  of  the
table  that  I  think  it  would  have  required  both  feet  to  have  pro-
duced it,  especially  as  my  hands  were  resting  so  heavily  upon  my
side  of  the  table  that  it  would  have  turned  over  unless  supported
underneath  by  more  than  one  foot ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
top  of  the  table  remained  level,  and  my  hands  were  fairly  forced
up  with  the  table.

Next  morning  (to-day)  I  questioned  George  closely  as  to  what
he  observed,  and  he  said  he  could  see  clearly  underneath  the  table,
and  nobody's  feet  were  there.


LIV.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  127


Note  by  A.  J.  on  levitations  of  small  table  on  Sep.  7th.

September  13th,  1906.

On  Sep.  10th  Dr.  Gower  and  I  alone  tried  experiments  with
this  table,  which  we  then  measured.  The  top  is  17|  ins.  x  17|  ins.
The  lower  ledge  is  12  ins.  x  12  ins.  and  about  §  in.  thick.  Its
lower  surface  is  9|  ins.  from  the  floor  [see
diagram].  The  distance  between  the  lower  ends
of  diagonally  opposite  legs  is  2  ft.  We  wrote
down  these  measurements  (except  the  thickness
of  the  ledge)  at  the  time.

We  each  tried  lifting  the  table  by  putting
our  feet  under  the  ledge.  It  is  of  course
much  easier  to  lift  it  horizontally  if  the
hands  are  placed  on  the  top  so  as  to  keep  it  balanced.  Under
these  circumstances,  it  does  not  matter  to  which  point  of  the  ledge
the  foot  is  applied,  as  the  hands  can  keep  the  balance  in  any
case.  But  if  the  hands  press  much  on  the  table  it  is  very  difficult
to  lift  it  with  the  foot ;  I  could  not  do  so  while  Dr.  Gower  was
pressing  on  it  about  as  much  as  he  thought  he  did  at  the  sitting
(when  his  impression  was  that  a  considerable  force  was  lifting  the
table  in  opposition  to  the  weight  of  his  hands  on  it),  and  he  could
only  do  it  with  great  difficulty  while  I  pressed  on  it.  But  if  the
person  who  tried  to  lift  the  table  crossed  his  legs,  it  was  then
much  easier  to  lift  it.  In  any  case,  however,  it  appeared  hardly
possible  that  if  the  table  had  been  lifted  by  such  means  we  should
have  failed  to  detect  it,  as  when  we  did  it  in  this  way  our  move-
ments were  so  very  obvious  to  each  other.  We  were  of  course
looking  out  for  each  other's  movements,  but  then  we  were  also
looking  out  at  the  sitting  for  movements  .  .  .  and  we  saw  none.
We  believed  that  [the  sitters']  legs  were  not  crossed  at  the  time,  and
that  consequently  a  great  effort  would  have  been  necessary  to
lift  the  table.

Dr.  Gower  tells  me  that  he  cross-examined  George  more  than
once  as  to  what  he  saw  of  the  sitters'  feet ;  that  he  declared  they
were  all  sitting  with  their  feet  back — not  under  the  table  at  all —
that  he  could  see  the  ends  of  his  mother's  shoes,  and  that  no  one
moved  at  all.

We  tried  also  to  make  the  table  jump  from  one  leg  on  to  the
diagonally  opposite  one  by  lifting  the  ledge  with  our  feet.  We
did  not  manage  to  make  the  opposite  leg  alight  on  a  spot  close


128


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  where  the  first  one  had  been  resting  (as  happened  at  the  sitting),
but  probably  this  could  be  done  with  practice.  The  performance
seemed  very  clumsy  as  compared  with  what  happened  at  the  sitting,
and  it  seemed  even  more  difficult  than  in  the  case  of  the  horizontal
lifting  to  suppose  that  it  could  have  been  done  [deliberately  by]
normal  means  without  detection.

Nevertheless  I  am  not  satisfied  that  these  experiments  reproduce
the  conditions  of  a  sitting  sufficiently  for  purposes  of  exact
comparison.  ...  I  do  not  think  they  prove  conclusively  that
there  is  no  automatic  action  of  a  kind  [more  effective  than  any
that]  could  be  deliberately  and  consciously  produced.

After  the  twelfth  sitting  Mrs.  Williams  left  the  town  to
join  her  [children  who  were  staying  in  the  mountains,  so  that
we  had  unfortunately  no  further  opportunities  of  experiments
with  her.  Six  more  sittings  were  held  after  her  departure
at  the  houses  of  various  members  of  the  circle.  No  move-
ments without  contact  occurred,  nor  were  there  any  levitations
of  the  table.  It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  at  all  these
sittings  raps  were  obtained,  though  only  (with  one  doubtful
exception)  when  the  sitters'  hands  were  resting  on  the  table
on  which  the  raps  sounded.  If,  therefore,  I  am  right  in
attributing  these  raps  to  the  automatic  action  of  the  sitters,
it  would  seem  that  Mrs.  Williams  was  not  the  only  one
who  had  acquired  the  faculty  for  making  them  in  this
manner.

III.  General  Discussion  of  Evidence.

In  considering  the  reports  quoted  above  it  may  perhaps
be  not  out  of  place  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  character
of  evidence  for  "  physical  phenomena  "  in  general.  There  is,
I  believe,  a  rather  widely-spread  opinion  that  the  Society  for
Psychical  Eesearch  has  a  special  bias  against  this  subject,
and  it  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  Proceedings  contains  more
negative  than  positive  evidence  on  it.  But,  though  every
one  must  admit  that — from  the  nature  of  the  case — it  must
be  easier  to  prove  fraud,  where  fraud  exists,  than  to  prove
any  kind  of  genuine  supernormal  occurrence,  few  persons  seem
to  grasp  what  are  the  special  difficulties  in  the  way  of  proving
physical  phenomena.


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  129

At  first  sight  it  might  be  supposed,  and  in  fact  it  is  generally
supposed,  that  physical  phenomena  are  more  demonstrable
than  psychical  phenomena,  since  the  former  can  be  perceived
by  all  the  persons  present,  and  the  latter,  as  a  rule,  are  only
perceptible  to  one,  so  that  we  have  to  depend  on  his  state-
ment as  to  what  has  happened  to  him.

If,  however,  we  are  considering  the  evidence  for  a  case
of  telepathy — say,  when  an  apparition  is  seen  at  the  time
of  death  of  the  person  represented — the  statement  of  the
percipient,  if  made  at  the  time  of  his  experience,  is  all  that
we  want.  In  making  it,  he  is  describing  the  only  kind  of
event  of  which  he  can  have  any  direct  knowledge,  viz.,  an
impression  produced  on  his  consciousness.  Supposing,  there-
fore, that  he  is  speaking  the  truth  about  this  impression,  the
statement  may  be  taken  as  absolutely  and  literally  correct.
From  the  point  of  view  of  evidence  for  telepathy,  it  is  not  even
very  important  whether  he  is  speaking  the  truth  or  not ;  he
may  not  have  had  a  sensory  impression,  but  only  a  vague
idea ;  or  he  may  have  invented  the  whole  thing.  The  point
is  that  he  should  have  made  the  statement  at  the  time  to  one
or  more  persons  equally  ignorant  with  himself  of  the  death.
If  there  were  a  large  number  of  cases  in  which  such  state-
ments had  been  made  at  the  time  of  deaths,  and  at  such
times  only,  we  should  consider  it  practically  certain  that  there
was  some  causal  connection  between  the  deaths  and  the
statements — something  that  made  people  make  such  statements
at  such  times.

The  evidence  for  such  cases  of  telepathy  then  is  of  the
simplest  possible  kind  ;  that  is,  there  are  comparatively  few
steps  in  the  argument,  and  in  consequence  comparatively  few
opportunities  for  flaws.

The  evidence  for  physical  phenomena,  on  the  other  hand,
is  far  more  complicated,  and  consequently  affords  far  more
opportunities  for  error.  Here  it  is  not  a  question  of  what
impressions  were  produced  on  people's  minds,  but  what  objective
effects  were  produced  in  the  material  world  outside  them.  If
the  witnesses  are  veracious,  and  accustomed  to  observe  their
own  mental  impressions,  they  can  tell  us  what  these  were.
The  external  events  they  can  of  course  only  infer  from  their
mental  impressions ;  they  have  no  direct  knowledge  of  them,

i


130


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  may  be  entirely  mistaken  about  them.  There  are  thus
a  number  of  alternative  possibilities  as  to  what  the  external
events  were  :

(1)  They  may  have  happened  as  described.

(2)  They  may  have  been purely  hallucinatory, as  when

hallucinatory  figures  are  seen  at  seances.

(3)  They  may  have  been  positively  illusory,  e.g.  an  object

may  be  seen  to  move  when  it  is  really  standing
still.

(4)  Negative  hallucinations  may  occur ; i.e.  a  person  may

entirely  fail  to  see  an  object  fully  within  his  field
of  vision.

(5)  Negative  illusions  may  occur;  i.e.  some  movement  may

be  made  which  the  observer  absolutely  overlooks,  as
in  the  case  of  many  conjuring  tricks.

All  these  defects  of  perception  are  known  to  be  more  or
less  common,  and  we  are  accustomed  to  making  more  or  less
allowance  for  them  in  ordinary  life  ;  yet  how  little  allowance
is,  as  a  rule,  made  for  them  in  judging  the  evidence  for
physical  phenomena.  In  such  cases  the  usual  comment  is  :
"  I  shall  believe  so-and-so  when  I  see  it,  but  not  before,"
Of  course,  the  mere  fact  of  seeing  a  thing  oneself  would  by
no  means  afford  adecpaate  ground  for  believing  it.  We  all
know  that  our  senses  may  be  deceived,  and  we  do  not,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  believe  anything  because  we  have  seen  it ;
we  believe  it  because  we  have  seen  it,  or  things  consistent
with  it  many  times  before,  or  because  we  have  heard  other
people  say  they  have  seen  it.  If  any  one  saw  a  cow  jump
over  the  moon,  he  would  believe  that  his  senses  had  deceived
him.  If  he  saw  a  cow  jump  over  a  gate,  he  would  believe
that  he  had  met  with  an  unusually  active  cow.  Yet,  the
impression  on  his  consciousness  might  be  of  precisely  the
same  nature  in  both  cases.

Another  common  argument  is  to  this  effect  :  "  Why  not
believe  in  objects  being  moved  without  contact  ?  That  would
not  be  more  wonderful  and  mysterious  than  an  object  being
moved  with  contact.  We  do  not  understand  in  the  least  how
the  latter  is  done ;  why  then  should  we  not  believe  in  the
possibility  of  the  former  ? "  This  may  be  sound,  but  it  appears
to me  quite  irrelevant. The  credibility  or  non-credibility  of


liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  131

a  thing  does  not  depend  at  all  on  how  wonderful  it  is ;  it
depends  on  how  rare  it  is.  The  burden  of  proof  must  lie
with  those  who  wish  to  maintain  the  genuineness  of  any
facts  unrecognised  by  science,  and  we  are  bound  to  demand —
and  in  practice  we  always  do  demand — much  more  evidence
for  alleged  facts  which  are  both  rarely  reported  and  inconsistent
with  ordinary  experience  than  for  facts  of  common  kinds.  As
Professor  Eichet  observed  in  1893  in  his  first  report  on
Eusapia  Paladino,  "  The  evidence  that  I  have  to  offer  would
be  ample  for  an  experiment  in  chemistry ;  it  does  not  suffice
for  an  experiment  in  spiritism."

1  feel  the  same  about  the  evidence  for  the  reality  of  the
physical  phenomena  in  this  case ; — it  appears  to  me  that  other
explanations  of  the  reported  movements  without  contact  are
not  excluded  in  an  absolutely  conclusive  manner, — especially
the  explanation  of  negative  illusion,  according  to  which  the
actions  that  produced  the  movements  of  the  tables  were  on
some  occasions  overlooked,  so  that,  on  these  occasions,  the
tables  appeared  to  the  sitters  to  have  moved  of  themselves.
This  hypothesis  is  to  a  certain  extent  supported  by  my  own
observations  of  the  apparently  unconscious  production  of  raps
by  some  of  the  sitters.

I  speak  of  the  production  of  raps  as  unconscious  and
automatic,  because  I  personally  am  convinced  of  the  good
faith  of  all  the  sitters,  but  this  of  course  must  to  outsiders
be  an  opinion  that  requires  justification.  The  same  plea
has  frequently  been  urged  by  spiritualists  as  an  excuse
for  what  the  plain  man  would  call  fraud,  and  we
have  frequently  been  blamed  for  not  having  yet
discovered  this  simple  explanation  of  it.  There  is,  however,
nothing  really  novel  in  the  notion  that  people  are  not
responsible  for  their  actions.  It  dates  back,  in  fact,  to  the
garden  of  Eden.  In  that  case  one  of  the  two  personages  of
the  story  put  down  his  action  to  "  the  woman  whom  Thou
gavest  to  be  with  me."  The  other,  on  being  asked  for  an
explanation,  said  "The  serpent  beguiled  me."  These  two
alternatives  have  between  them  practically  held  the  field
since ;  one  hardly  knows  which  of  them  has  been  the  more
popular.

Similarly,  some  spiritualists  are  wont  to  say  that  when  a


132  Alice  Johnson.  [part

medium  cheats,  it  is  due  either  to  the  sitters  or  to  the
Serpent.  If  the  sitters  belong  to  the  S.P.E.,  it  would  of
course  be  the  sitters ;  otherwise  it  is  probably  the  Serpent.
We  have  added  a  third  alternative,  the  Subliminal  Self,  whose
claims  now  fall  to  be  considered.

In  analysing  any  mediumistic  phenomenon  such  as  the
production  of  raps,  we  find  several  different  aspects,  which
must  be  treated  separately  if  we  are  to  avoid  a  hopeless
confusion  of  thought.  There  is  first  the  objective  aspect :
by  what  means  were  the  raps  produced  ?  In  the  case  here
considered,  it  seemed  to  me  clear  that  at  least  some  of  them
were  produced  by  the  muscular  action  of  the  sitters.  Assuming
this,  there  is  next  the  subjective  aspect,  which  includes  two :

(1)  The  psychological  question  of  whether  the  sitters  were
normally  conscious  of  their  muscular  actions,  or  whether  they
were  initiated  and  carried  out  subliminally.

(2)  The  ethical  question  of  their  moral  responsibility  for
their  actions.

The  moral  character  of  a  medium  concerns  us  only  in
so  far  as  it  affords  a  certain  amount  of  evidence  for  or
against  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena,  for  it  cannot  be
too  strongly  insisted  on  that  our  business  is  to  form  a
scientific  judgment  about  the  phenomena, — not  a  moral
judgment  about  the  medium  ;  so  that  any  question  of  charity
in  our  judgment  would  be  out  of  place.

As  to  the  psychological  question  of  whether  a  given  action
is  performed  consciously  or  not,  I  think  that  all  those  who
have  studied  trance  conditions  are  agreed  that  no  test  can
show  whether  a  person  is  in  a  trance ;  that  is,  whether
his  supraliminal  consciousness  is  in  abeyance  or  not.  But
students  of  the  trance  acquire  after  long  observation  the
conviction  that  the  trance  in  certain  cases  is  genuine
and  not  simulated,  though  the  signs  by  which  they  are
guided  are  so  minute  and  indefinable  that  they  could  not  be
put  clown  in  black  and  white,  or  demonstrated  to  people  who
were  not  familiar  with  them.  And  expert  observers  almost
always,  I  think,  agree  in  their  opinion  as  to  whether  a  given
trance  is  genuine  or  not.

It  is  of  course  more  difficult  to  judge  whether  writing  or
table-tilting  is  being  done  automatically  or  not,  because  then,  as


li v.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  133

a  rule,  the  supraliminal  consciousness  is  only  partly  in  abeyance,
and  the  signs  of  the  condition  are  still  slighter.  Still  we  find
by  observing  a  good  many  cases,  that  the  behaviour  of  all
persons  under  these  conditions  shows  certain  common  character-
istics which  it  is  by  no  means  easy  deliberately  to  put  on —
partly  no  doubt  because  it  is  so  difficult  to  formulate  what
they  are.  I  can  only  say  then  that  by  comparing  the  case
here  discussed  with  other  cases  which  I  have  seen,  it  seemed
clear  to  me  that  the  movements  associated  with  the  raps  were
automatic.

It  seems  possible,  moreover,  to  define  roughly  the  kinds
of  cases  to  which  this  explanation  should  be  restricted.
They  are  those  where  there  is  strong  positive  ground  for
confidence  in  the  honesty  and  integrity  of  the  medium ;  and
where  the  phenomenon  is  of  a  kind  that  does  not  require
preparation — either  in  the  way  of  long  practice  or  of  apparatus.
Thus,  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino  has  a  certain  superficial
resemblance  to  this  case,  but  differs  from  it  in  that  it  is  well
known  (1)  that  the  general  character  of  the  medium  is  entirely
untrustworthy,  (2)  that  the  fraud  most  clearly  proved  against
her — viz.  making  one  hand  or  foot  do  duty  for  two,  and  so
getting  one  free — is  a  well-known  trick,  her  extraordinary
adeptness  in  which  showed  that  she  must  have  practised  it
for  a  long  time.

We  cannot,  however,  determine  a  priori  whether  the  sub-
liminal self  might  not  carry  out  an  elaborate  series  of  actions
of  this  kind  involving  practice.  We  have  to  study  what
people  in  abnormal  states  of  mind  actually  do.  Let  us  take
first  fixed  ideas  or  obsessions  which  only  affect  a  limited  part
of  the  personality,  leaving  the  rest  normal.  These  ideas  may
be  more  or  less  complicated,  but  they  seldom  lead  to  any
positive  and  definite  course  of  action.  Motor  impulses  of  a
corresponding  kind  are  generally  very  simple — such  as  habits
of  twitching  certain  muscles.  Going  to  the  other  extreme  of
multiple  and  alternating  personalities,  we  do  find  complicated
actions  performed  by  different  personalities ;  but  these  are  not
restricted  to  certain  types,  for  the  secondary  personality  affects
the  whole  mind  and  character,  not  an  isolated  group  of  actions.
Thus,  there  is  the  classic  case  of  Louis  Vive,  who  in  his
chief  secondary condition "  preached radicalism in  politics


134  Alice  Johnson.  [part

and  atheism  in  religion,"  while  in  his  more  normal  state
he  is  reported  to  have  been  quite  a  respectable  person.
This  is  comprehensible  and  credible.  But  we  find  among  the
records  of  secondary  personality  no  parallel  for  the  medium
who  was  said,  while  in  a  trance  condition,  to  have  automati-
cally bought  drapery  for  making  up  materialised  forms,
automatically  concealed  it  in  the  back  of  a  chair  specially
adapted  for  the  purpose,  and  subliminally  provided  himself
with  chuckers-out  for  every  sitting.  Persons  in  a  trance
condition  may  sometimes  have  recurring  dreams  as  elaborate
as  this ;  they  do  not,  I  think,  perform  recurring  actions  so
elaborate.

There  is  one  more  point  which  seems  worth  noting  about
automatic  actions,  viz.  their  tendency  to  spread  by  a  sort  of
mental  infection  among  the  persons  who  witness  them.  Thus,
in  Dr.  Gower's  circle,  several  of  the  sitters  must  apparently
have  been  concerned  in  producing  the  raps,  since  they  went
on  abundantly  in  the  presence  of  several  different  groups.

This  has  a  certain  interest  in  its  bearing  on  the  far  more
widespread  epidemic  of  rapping  that  followed  the  outbreak  in
the  Fox  family  in  1848.  In  the  course  of  the  next  year  or
two,  it  appears  that  the  rappings  had  become  pronounced  in
hundreds  of  families  in  the  Eastern  States  of  America.  We
can  hardly  suppose  that  all  these  people  were  deliberately
and  consciously  knocking  on  their  own  furniture.  It  seems
to  me  much  more  likely  that  the  phenomenon  was  of  the  same
nature  as  the  table-tiltings  that  became  so  prevalent  a  few
years  later,  i.e.  that  while  in  some  cases  it  was  in  all  pro-
bability deliberately  produced,  in  most  it  was  due  to  genuine
automatic  action.

Probably  few  readers  will  be  inclined  to  accept  the  hypothesis
of  automatic  action  as  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  all  the
facts  recorded  in  this  paper.  Though  it  may  account  for  the
raps,  it  is  obviously  far  more  difficult — though  perhaps  not
quite  impossible — to  apply  it  to  the  levitations  of  the  table
which  I  witnessed  at  the  sitting  of  September  7th,  1906,  and
it  seems  altogether  inapplicable  to  the  more  decisive  movements
without  contact  that  were  reported  by  the  other  witnesses  to
have  occurred  at  the  earlier  sittings.

We could, however, explain the levitations, as I  have


Liv.] Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  in  America.  135

already  suggested,  by  supposing  an  element  of  illusion,  as
well  as  of  automatic  action  :  viz.  that  one  of  the  three
sitters — Mrs.  Williams,  Dr.  Gower,  or  myself — raised  the
table  automatically  and  unconsciously,  while  the  other  two
shared  in  the  negative  hallucination  of  the  movement  by
which  it  was  done.  This  would  be  similar  to  what
constantly  happens  in  conjuring  performances,  when  the
particular  action  that  does  the  trick  escapes  the  notice  of
the  spectators ;  the  only  difference  being  that  in  our  case  the
performer  was  an  automatist,  which  would  greatly  facilitate
his  task.  For  it  is  well  known  that  actions  automatically
performed  are  often  carried  out  with  far  greater  skill  and
efficiency  than  those  consciously  performed,  while  the  automatist
is  not  hampered  by  any  self-consciousness  in  carrying  them
out  freely.

The  hypothesis  would  have  to  be  strained  still  further  to
account  for  the  alleged  movements  without  contact ;  for  here
we  should  have  to  suppose  that  there  was  contact  which
a  larger  number  of  sitters  somehow  overlooked  on  several
occasions.  Having  been  present  at  the  sittings,  this  hypothesis
does  not  seem  to  me  so  extravagant  as  it  probably  will  to
most  of  my  readers,  for  an  eye-witness  sees  how  extremely
difficult  it  is — under  the  conditions  of  such  experiments —
to  make  sure  of  whether  any  one  is  touching  the  table  or
not,  since  the  table  itself  inevitably  obstructs  one's  view
of  the  persons  on  the  other  side  of  it.  The  tradition
of  the  "  circle,"  with  all  the  superstitions  that  have  grown
up  arouud  it,  is  of  all  others  calculated  to  baffle  any  exact
observation.

In  conclusion,  I  can  only  say  that  it  appears  to  me
impossible  to  form  any  decided  judgment  on  the  facts  before
us,  and  unprofitable  to  speculate  further  about  them  till  we
can  obtain  more  decisive  evidence  one  way  or  the  other.


136


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.
I.

VIS-KNUT.

(1)  Knut  Basmusson  Nordgarden  etter  Visknut :  eit  Samlararbeid  av

Johannes  Skar. Utgjevi  av  Det  norske  Samlage,  1898.

(2)  Bjornstjerne Bjornson  : Vis-Knut. "  Vaarsol's "  gratisbog,
Kristiania,  1898.

Mr.  Ivar  Fosse,  of  Hundorp  in  Norway,  has  called  the  attention  of
the  S.P.R.  to  the  history  of  a  Norwegian  peasant  named  Knut  Ras-
musson  Nordgarden,  who  enjoyed  for  more  than  half  of  last  century,
throughout  Norway  and  much  of  Sweden,  a  reputation  for  supernormal
powers,  which  earned  him  the  name  of  "Vis-Knut,"  Wise  Knut.
Mr.  Fosse  has  kindly  supplied  us  with  the  printed  documents,  and
also  with  a  translation  of  a  portion  of  them.  The  case,  though  it
cannot  now  be  brought  up  to  any  standard  of  evidence,  is  a
remarkable  one,  and  possesses  an  additional  interest  from  the  fact
that  it  is  presented  by  the  pen  of  the  veteran  of  Norse  literature,
Bjornstjerne  Bjornson.  His  account,  a  pamphlet  of  twenty-nine
pages,  was  published  in  1898  as  the  "gratis"  volume  presented  by
the  Vaarsol  to  its  subscribers,  and  what  follows  is  mainly  a  resume
of  this  work.  We  may  begin  with  a  statement  of  the  sources
of  the  evidence.

"I  must  explain,"  says  Bjornson,  "that  I  follow  a  book  written
in  the  country  dialect.  The  author  is  a  peasant-born  but  educated
man  named  Johannes  Skar,  who  grew  up  from  childhood  in  the
midst  of  stories  about  Vis-Knut,  and  travelled  much  of  the  country
round  to  enquire  personally  about  what  was  told  ;  he  was  never
satisfied  until  he  had  spoken  to  those  with  whom  Knut  had  come
into  contact.  With  Knut  himself  he  had  often  spoken.  Knut  lived
here  in  Svastum  in  Gausdal  till  1877,  a  few  [Norwegian]  miles  from
me,  and  I  have  myself  heard  many  of  the  stories  here  recorded,


nv.]  Vis-Knut.  137

a  couple  at  first  hand,  many  at  second  and  third,  and  from  my
childhood  up  I  have  heard  others  similar  to  those  told  hy  Skar.
without  being  able  to  investigate  the  details.  Johannes  Skar  has,
however,  done  this,  and  there  cannot  be  the  least  doubt  as  to  his
desire  and  ability  to  be  veracious.  Nor  is  there  any  one  here  who
does  not  say  that  Knut  was  an  honest  man.  He  lived  to  be  891
years  old,  he  received  all  who  came  to  him,  the  whole  country-side
knew  him,  I  might  almost  say  by  heart,  and  as  to  his  honesty
there  is  only  one  opinion,  alike  among  the  old,  who  had  known
him  from  a  child,  and  those  of  middle  age,  who  could  not  have
been  affected  by  the  strong  impression  produced  by  his  first  appearance
and  ill-treatment.  Here  there  is  only  one  voice  concerning  him.
Differences  may  be  heard,  notably  as  to  the  significance  of  his
abnormal  powers ;  but  about  himself  and  his  honesty  there  is
unanimity.  I  may  perhaps  add  that  the  officials,  such  as  priests  and
magistrates,  who  met  him  in  the  last  generation,  were  just  as
convinced  of  his  honesty  as  we  are  ourselves.

"  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  he  may  not  have  been  subject  to
self-deception  ;  as  to  that,  every  one  can  form  his  own  opinion.  But
enough  remains,  partly  clear  of  self-deception,  partly  mingled  with
it,  and  yet  equally  wonderful,  equally  unexplained.

"Unexplained.  Yes,  there  are  plenty  of  explanations  ;  I  have  my
own  in  partial  readiness.  But  I  will  reserve  it,  for  I  desire  only
to  set  out  a  perfectly  accurate  record  for  those  who  desire  to  enter
in  by  material  and  spiritual  paths  where  research  is  to  this  day
still  behindhand."

Knut  the  son  of  Rasmus,  called,  in  the  Norwegian  fashion,  Nord-
garden  from  the  name  of  his  farm,  was  born  in  1793.  He  was  a
weakly  and  backward  boy,  suffering  from  constant  epileptic  fits ;  the
little  schooling  he  received  left  him  unable  to  read  and  write  when
he  entered  upon  the  hard  work  of  a  remote  and  poor  farm,  to  help
his  mother,  now  a  widow.  He  succeeded,  however,  in  teaching
himself  reading,  writing  and  arithmetic,  and  became  an  eager  student
of  the  Bible.  His  hard  life  brought  on  a  return  of  his  epilepsy,
after  a  temporary  remission,  and  he  allowed  himself  to  resort  to
"  witchcraft "  as  a  remedy.  The  grotesque  but  innocent  charms  to
which  he  had  recourse  produced  a  religious  revulsion,  and  he  was
tempted  to  take the life which he  had thus dishonoured.  He

1Bj6rnson's  dates  are  self-contradictory.  According  to  Skar's  explicit
statement,  Knut  died  on  May  16,  1876  (not  1877),  aged  83  years,  5  months
and  2  days.


138


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


determined,  however,  to  seek  forgiveness  for  his  sin  by  partaking  of
the  communion.  Divine  service  was  to  be  held  in  the  little  church
at  Svastum  six  weeks  after  Christmas,  1818.  But  three  days  before  he
had  to  take  to  his  bed,  a  prey  to  racking  pains.  When  the  crisis
passed,  he  heard  harp-playing  in  the  air  and  spiritual  songs.  Later
he  seemed  to  hear  violins  and  clarinets,  but  they  clung  to  the
earth,  while  the  spiritual  choir  had  "  sung  up  to  the  skies."  He
remembered  what  they  sang  j  they  bade  him,  in  uncouth  verse,  cast
away  the  charm  he  wore  round  his  neck,  and  trust  to  God's
medicines,  Jesus'  flesh  and  blood.  It  is  noteworthy  that  all  the
verses  he  heard,  now  aud  later,  were  composed  not  in  the  peasant
dialect  which  he  spoke  all  his  life,  but  in  the  literary  Danish,  the
language  of  his  Bible.

From  the  time  he  threw  away  his  amulet  the  epilepsy  left  him,
and  his  health  was  for  a  long  time  good.  But  henceforth  from  time
to  time  he  continued  to  hear,  first  indistinct  music,  "  war  music "
as  he  called  it,  then  "  clear  sweet  tunes  of  all  sorts,"  which  always
at  last  ended  in  psalms — stiff  uncouth  admonitions  in  dry  incorrect
literary  language.

People  told  him  that  he  ought  to  be  bled — his  blood  was  too
thick.  He  wanted  to  do  as  they  said,  but  on  the  way  "  it  sang "
that  he  must  not,  and  he  had  to  return.  "  It  went  through  his
ears"  that  it  was  his  sin,  and  not  thick  blood,  from  which  he
needed  relief.

It  was  only  late  in  the  spring  that  he  could  leave  his  bed  and  sit  in
the  sun  before  his  hut.  He  "  got  command  "  to  take  a  psalm  book  and
follow  with  his  fingers  as  the  psalms  were  sung  to  him.  When  he
got  strong,  he  got  command  to  go  to  others  and  arouse  them  from
sin.  This  frightened  him ;  he  was  afraid  they  would  talk  about
his  "  thick  blood."  But  he  was  told  that  he  must  hold  out  till  he
had  been  to  the  Lord's  Supper ;  then  all  would  be  well  with  him.

Soon  something  fresh  appeared.  He  could  sit  and  "  hear  "  what  was
going  on  far  away,  even  in  foreign  lands :  and  when  news  came,  perhaps
long  afterwards,  it  had  happened  as  he  said.  A  man  had  been  lost
on  the  mountains — he  told  where.  He  told  too  where  strayed
animals  were  to  be  found.  On  a  farm  where  there  was  no  good
water  he  told  them  where  to  dig. And  all  this  repeatedly.

Moreover,  he  cured  illness  by  laying  on  his  hands.  When  he  came
to  the  seat  of  disease  "his  hand  stuck  fast,"  and  then  he  kneaded
with  the  other,  shivering  and  writhing.  He  ground  his  teeth,  and
foam came about his  mouth. Then  he prayed,  and  the  patient


LIV.]


Vis-Knut.


139


too  had  to  pray  aloud ;  "  for  if  God  would  not  help,  nothing  could
help."

It  is  easy  to  see  what  effect  this  must  have  had  upon  the  country.
The  revolution  in  thought  had  spread  even  to  these  remote  valleys.
The  minister  of  Gausdal  was  an  apostle  of  enlightenment,  and
had  published  a  book  for  the  use  of  the  young  in  place  of
Luther's  Catechism,  substituting  morality  for  faith.  Christianity  had
grown  cold.  But  when  it  came  to  the  touch,  the  old  proved
stronger  than  the  new,  and  a  spark  sufficed  to  kindle  a  blaze  of
religion.  It  became  known  that  Knut  was  to  go  to  church  on
June  7,  when  service  was  again  to  be  held  at  Svastum,  and  that
he  had  been  told  he  would  fall  down  on  the  church  floor,  and  lie
there  two  hours.  The  whole  neighbourhood  assembled  for  the
service.  Knut  went  into  the  sacristy,  sat  on  the  minister's  bench,
and  announced  his  mission.  The  minister  thought  he  was  mad,
and  sat  in  patience  while  Knut  sang  psalms  of  admonition  to  him
for  nearly  an  hour.  At  last  service  began.  But  Knut  was  seized
with  convulsions  because  the  hymns  were  sung  out  of  a  new-fangled
hymn-book — a  book  which  Knut  could  not  even  touch  without
violent  physical  disturbance.  The  singing  stopped,  and  the  old
favourite  hymn-book  had  to  be  used.  Knut  was  then  able  to  kneel
for  the  communion,  but  two  of  his  brothers  had  to  lead  him  back,
and  he  fell  motionless  on  the  church  floor.  The  service  was
stopped.  The  minister  wished  to  have  him  carried  out,  but  he
begged  that  he  might  lie  in  "  God's  temple."  At  last  he  was  taken
into  the  churchyard,  and  laid  on  the  ground;  the  convulsions  came
on  so  violently  that  he  was  thrown  up  into  the  air;  between  the
attacks  he  prayed  and  the  people  sang.  The  minister  came  out,
and  explained  to  the  people  that  Knut  was  in  the  same  state  as
they  were  when  they  dreamed. Knut  prayed  for  him.

He  went  in  the  evening  to  a  neighbouring  farm,  and  stayed  two
nights.  On  the  Tuesday  he  "  got  command "  to  take  the  sexton,
his  old  schoolmaster,  to  the  church,  and  have  the  bells  rung  for
him.  He  then  went  in  and  lay  two  hours  on  the  church  floor —
the  promised  period,  which  had  been  cut  short  on  the  Sunday.
As  he  was  going  to  the  church,  taking  a  short  cut  over  the  rough
hillside,  a  woman  saw,  as  she  stated  in  a  formal  deposition,  that
there  was  a  shining  light  over  the  path  he  took.  When  he  came
away,  he  got  the  sexton  to  write  down  from  his  dictation  the
hymns  that  had  been  "sung  to  him"  as  he  lay,  a  long  series  of
commands  for  reform  in  the  church  and  morals,  ending  with  the


140


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


warning  that  if  they  were  not  carried  out,  "pestilence  and  bloody
war "  would  come  upon  the  land ;  and  this  he  was  ordered  to  send,
and  did  send,  to  the  Council  at  Christiania.

Church  discipline  in  Norway  was  at  this  time  very  severe.  A
revivalist  named  Hans  Nilsen  Hauge  had  recently  been  imprisoned,
with  some  of  his  disciples,  for  propagating  doctrines  not  recognised
by  the  Theological  Faculty  of  Christiania.  None  the  less  Knut,
after  the  scene  in  Svastum  church,  devoted  his  life  to  preaching
the  word,  and  was  involved  in  constant  trouble  with  the  authorities,
civil  and  clerical.  He  was  arrested  in  Frou,  and  the  local  magistrate
attempted  to  enforce  his  return  home.  But  Knut  had  convulsions
and  grew  stiff  in  one  leg,  so  that  he  could  not  be  led.  More  men
were  sent  for,  but  he  grew  stiff  all  over,  and  could  only  be  moved
step  by  step  in  great  suffering.  He  prayed,  and  men  and  women
followed.  Among  them  was  a  giant  named  Imort  Nerlid.  the
strongest  man  in  the  country,  and  devoted  to  Knut  like  a  child.
He  begged  Knut  for  permission  to  set  him  free,  but  Knut  refused.
At  last  Knut  sank  to  the  ground,  and  a  sledge  was  sent  for.  He
was  laid  on  it,  but  had  a  convulsion  which  threw  him  off.  This
happened  repeatedly ;  once  he  was  nearly  thrown  into  a  river  by
which  they  were  passing.  At  last  the  attempt  was  abandoned
for  the  moment.  Worn  out  though  he  was,  he  held  a  service
the  same  evening,  and  sang  to  the  assembled  crowd  a  hymn
which  must  have  made  a  great  impression,  as  one  man  who  was
there  learnt  it  by  heart  from  hearing  it  once  sung,  and  was  able  to
recite  it  fifty  years  afterwards.

Meantime  the  military  had  been  sent  for.  A  captain  and  two
lieutenants  brought  seven  men  with  loaded  guns.  The  officers  finding
the  service  still  proceeding,  went  to  a  neighbouring  house  to  dance
and  play  cards,  and  forgot  about  Knut  till  midnight.  He  was
roused  from  bed  and  tied  to  the  sledge  with  a  rope.  He  had  such
a  violent  attack  that  the  rope  was  loosened.  He  was  tied  tighter,
and  another  attack  threw  him  between  the  horse's  legs.  Finally
he  was  secured  and  carried  home  by  stages,  and  as  each  set  of  men
handed  him  over  to  the  next  he  bade  them  farewell,  praised  God,
and  prayed  for  them.

He  had  hardly  reached  home  when  Imort  Nerlid  came  with  a
message  from  the  people  of  Fron  begging  him  to  come  back  and  stay
with  them,  and  promising  to  protect  him.  He  was  afraid,  but  was
"  commanded "  to  go,  and  next  Sunday  found  him  in  church  there.
The  feeling  in  his  favour  was  so  strong  that  there  was  almost  a


LIV.]


Vis-Knut.


141


popular  outbreak  against  the  minister  and  the  man  who  had  forced
him  on  to  the  sledge.  The  attitude  of  the  congregation  was  such
that  it  was  thought  better  to  leave  Knut  alone.

The  people  of  Fron  were  determined  that  he  should  stay  with
them.  The  giant,  Imort  Nerlid,  sold  him  half  his  own  farm  for  a
nominal  sum.  When  Imort  himself  subsequently  left.  Knut  sold
his  half  for  a  good  price,  and  invested  it  in  an  annuity.  He  longed
for  the  home  of  his  childhood.  But  for  many  years  he  got  but
little  from  his  annuity,  for  he  was  summoned  and  condemned  for
illegal  medical  practice  (though  he  never  took  payment,  and  could
have  done  no  man  harm)  and  for  illegal  religious  teaching.  The
fine  and  costs  which  he  had  to  pay  took  up  the  whole  income  of
his  annuity  for  many  years.  Of  course  he  did  not  give  up  the
healing  and  preaching  which  was  commanded  him.  He  lived  at
Svastum  unmarried  and  in  the  most  frugal  way,  At  first  he  often
travelled  in  the  country ;  later  only  rarely.  Till  he  could  enjoy  his
annuity  he  lived  by  day  labour.

He  never  attempted  to  found  a  sect  of  his  own ;  he  always  taught
that  men  should  follow  the  teaching  of  the  church — the  old  teaching,
of  course — and  attend  the  orthodox  services.  Hence  he  was  attacked
even  more  bitterly  by  the  followers  of  Hans  Nilgen  Hauge  than  by
the  orthodox  ministers.  The  "  saints  "  even  accused  him  of  imposture,
which  was  never  done  by  the  officials.  But  Knut  never  replied  ;
his  nature  was  too  mild,  aud  his  very  mildness  thus  gave  rise  to
misunderstandings.  But  he  went  his  own  way,  always  cheerful
and  patient,  happy  with  the  simplest  pleasures,  in  spite  of  the  jeers
alike  of  believers  and  unbelievers.

His  preaching  was  pure  improvisation  in  homely  speech.  At  times
he  could  "get  nothing";  once  he  began  with  the  words  "The
ungodly,"  and  could  get  no  further;  at  other  times  he  seemed
inexhaustible.  The  effect  he  produced  is  witnessed  by  the  visions
which  his  hearers  saw ;  one  saw  him  sit  reading  the  Bible  in  the
evening  with  a  rainbow  from  one  shoulder  to  the  other ;  others
saw  "two  white  birds  on  his  right  shoulder."  No  doubt  his  striking
appearance  had  something  to  do  with  this,  but  the  main  cause  was
the  belief  of  the  people  that  he  could  cure  them  by  laying  on  his
hands,  could  find  things  that  had  been  lost,  and  tell  what  was
being  done  by  persons  far  away.

He  believed  himself  that  all  this  power  was  God's  gift,  and  that
God  had  need  of  him.  He  used  to  say  that  "the  prophets  had  the
same  as  he." When  he  could  not  touch  gold,  silver  or  copper  money


142


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


without  being  seized  by  cramp,  it  was  God's  command  to  shew  that
money  was  to  be  refused.  This  is  an  account  given  in  evidence
before  a  court  of  what  happened  in  such  a  case :  "  I  put  two-
copper  coins  in  his  open  hand.  His  arm  gave  a  jerk,  he  writhed
and  grinned.  He  declared  that  a  sinew  in  his  arm  had  strained
itself.  I  saw  on  looking  at  his  arm  that  a  sinew  beneath  it  was
quite  hard ;  a  knot  was  visible  in  his  hand.  As  soon  as  the  coins
were  taken  out  and  Knut  had  rubbed  his  hand,  the  arm  returned
to  its  natural  condition."

Once  he  came  to  Stamme  farm,  where  the  farmer,  Jens,  was
looking  for  a  silver  shilling.  "  Here  is  something  for  you  to  find,"'
he  said  to  Knut.  "Yes,"  he  replied,  "give  me  another  shilling  to
search  with."  He  took  it  and  put  it  between  two  fingers.  His
arm  jerked  it  to  a  crack  in  the  wall,  where  the  lost  coin  was
found.

His  method  of  water-finding  was  as  follows.  He  used  to  go-
to what  seemed  to  be  the  likeliest  place,  lay  the  back  of  his  hand
on  the  ground,  and  move  it  along  till  his  fingers  jerked  ;  the  water
would  be  below  this  spot.  He  had  also  learnt  to  find  water  by
the  use  of"  a  twig  held  firmly  in  his  hand ;  when  water  was  below,
the  twig  turned  towards  his  breast.  The  twig  must  be  of  birch,
or  still  better,  of  bird-cherry.

He  cured  sickness  by  laying  on  of  hands,  or  rather  handling  the
sick.  When  he  reached  the  seat  of  the  illness,  his  hand  stuck  fast  ;
he  seized  it  with  the  other  hand  and  rubbed,  shuddering  the  while
and  grating  his  teeth,  while  foam  came  from  his  mouth,  and  he
suffered  greatly.  But  he  never  refused  where  he  thought  he  could
help,  and  he  never  took  payment.  There  is  also  abundant  evidence
that  he  gave  the  sick  medicine  or  sent  them  to  the  doctor,  or  said
there  was  nothing  to  be  done.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  ascertain
what  were  the  kinds  of  illness  which  he  could  cure.  Here  is
one  of  many  tales  about  him.

A  little  girl  in  Christiania  was  lame  in  both  feet  and  had  gouty
nodules  on  one  arm.  For  ten  or  eleven  years  she  went  on  crutches ;
the  doctors  could  do  nothing.  She  was  sent  to  see  Knut  in  1839,
at  the  age  of  sixteen,  accompanied  by  an  elder  sister.  Knut  undressed
her,  handled  her  all  over,  and  cried  out  horribly  when  he  came  to
the  seat  of  the  mischief.  He  went  on  for  an  hour  ;  then  he  told
her  she  could  get  up,  and  she  stood  on  her  feet,  which  she  had  not
done  since  she  was  five.  He  told  her  to  use  the  crutches  for  a.
year,  but  she  gave  them  up  two  days  after,  on  the  way  back.  The


LIV.]


Vis-Knut.


143


only  result  of  her  doing  so  was  that  one  foot  remained  weaker  than
the  other,  but  not  enough  to  give  any  trouble.

This  story  leads  up  to  another  of  Knut's  faculties.  The  elder
sister  wished  to  pay  him,  though  she  knew  that  he  did  not  take
money.  She  had  secretly  brought  with  her  a  little  coffee  and  sugar,
a  couple  of  handkerchiefs,  and  cloth  for  a  waistcoat — gifts  which  she
thought  that  a  frugal  peasant  would  appreciate.  These  she  made
into  a  parcel,  and  in  the  middle  of  it — this  was  the  greatest  secret
of  all — she  put  five  dollars.  The  cure  was  so  successful  that  she
thought  her  gift  too  small.  "  No,  no,"  said  Knut,  without  opening
it,  "  take  back  three  dollars,  but  lend  me  two  for  travelling  money
for  a  time."  He  afterwards  sent  a  gift  in  repayment  of  the  sum.
The  girl's  astonishment  may  be  imagined ;  but  it  was  still  greater
when  she  spoke  to  him  of  her  mother's  illness.  Knut  said  that
nothing  could  be  done  for  it.  "But  she  has  a  pain  in  the  foot,"
he  added.  "No,"  said  the  girl.  "Yes,"  said  Knut,  "she  has  pain
in  one  of  her  great  toes,"  and  he  picked  up  from  the  ground  three
straws  which  were  to  be  tied  round  the  toe,  one  ever}'  week.  It
was  12  Norse  (84  English)  miles  to  Christiania,  without  telegraph  or
railway.  When  the  girls  got  home,  and  the  recovered  daughter
was  about  to  spring  into  her  mother's  arms,  she  stopped  ;  the  mother
was  ill.  One  of  her  great  toes  was  so  bad  that  it  had  turned  black,
a  dark  streak  went  right  up  to  her  knee.  But  the  straws  cured  her.
(Communicated  by  the  younger  daughter).

A  woman  sent  her  maid  to  him  one  day  to  ask  about  a  serious
illness.  She  gave  the  girl  some  wool  as  a  present  for  him.  The
girl  thought  on  the  way  that  there  was  too  much  wool,  and  took  and
hid  some  for  herself  when  she  was  in  the  forest.  She  found  Knut
very  cheerful.  He  said  that  he  could  do  nothing  for  her  mistress,  and
she  must  take  the  present  back  ;  but  she  was  not  to  forget  what
she  had  put  under  the  old  birch-root  in  the  forest.

In  1874  a  man  disappeared  from  Biri,  30  or  40  English  miles
from  Knut.  His  wife,  the  last  person  who  had  spoken  to  him,  took
fright  (they  had  parted  in  anger) — and  got  sixty  men  to  help  her
to  search  for  him,  but  in  vain.  A  messenger  was  sent  to  Knut.
Knut  asked  no  questions  about  the  neighbourhood,  which  he  did
not  know.  When  told  that  the  wife  was  the  last  who  had  seen
him,  "Yes,"  said  Knut,  "they  parted  bad  friends."  When  asked
what  had  become  of  him,  Knut  said  that  he  had  killed  himself.
"  How,"  asked  the  messenger.  "  He  is  hanging  north-west  of  his
home,"  said  Knut. "  But  they  have  searched  there." "  Yes,  you


144


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


searched  where  his  wife  left  him.  But  when  the  wife  turned
away,  the  husband  followed  her,  and  hung  himself  nearer  the  house.
He  is  hanging  in  a  great  pine  tree.  You  can  see  it  from  the  farm
yard."  The  messenger  returned  ;  a  great  pine  was  visible  from  the
yard,  and  in  it  they  found  the  body  of  the  unfortunate  man.

Kristian  Troenn  emigrated  from  Gudbrandsdalen  to  America  in
1869.  He  had  an  aunt  there,  with  whom  he  was  to  stay.  But  no
news  came  of  his  arrival,  and  his  mother  grew  anxious.  She  went
to  see  Knut,  coming  to  him  at  3  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of
July  6.  To  her  question  whether  he  had  arrived  she  received  after
a  long  time  the  answer  "  I  do  not  get  that  either."  She  was
distressed  and  asked  no  more  that  evening.  Next  morning  she
asked  Knut  what  had  happened  to  her  son.  Knut  was  very  happy.
"  Yes,  now  it  is  certain  that  the  boy  is  with  his  aunt,  and  quite
well.  He  has  been  well  all  the  time."  A  letter  written  on  July  12
confirmed  this.  The  boy  had  reached  his  aunt's  at  9  p.m.  on
July  6  (3  a.m.  on  July  7  by  Norwegian  time).

Simon  Hovde  at  Oejer  had  a  son  called  Mikkel,  who  ran  away
when  19  years  old.  His  elder  brother  Klement  went  one  Saturday
to  Knut  to  hear  where  Mikkel  was.  He  borrowed  a  carriole  on
the  way  and  drove  a  fast  horse.  He  reached  Knut's  house  at  3  or
4  in  the  afternoon.  Knut  had  just  come  home  from  fishing  in  a
mountain  lake ;  he  had  felt  that  some  one  was  coming  on  an
important  errand,  and  that  he  must  return  at  once.  Klement  began
his  story.  "I  know  why  you  have  come,"  said  Knut,  "but  do  not
let  us  mind  that  this  evening."  So  they  went  to  bed  ;  Klement
could  not  sleep  for  anxiety.  In  the  night  Knut  said  "Your
brother  has  just  come  home ;  I  hear  you  are  awake,  so  I  must
tell  you. — Now  his  father  and  mother  are  asking  where  he  has  been.
I  can  tell  you.  He  went  first  to  Lillehammer.  There  he  met  the
farmer  of  Kjos  at  Ringsaker,  and  took  a  situation  with  him."  Knut
described  the  sort  of  work,  and  added  that  the  boy  did  not  like  it ;
"  what  he  liked  least  was  that  he  had  to  sleep  in  the  stable."  So
Klement  started  home ;  Knut  telling  him  "  the  boy  will  not  stay  long
with  you ;  better  let  him  travel,  for  he  is  restless  and  must  have
his  try."  When  Klement  came  to  the  place  where  he  had  borrowed
his  carriole,  all  the  people  crowded  round  him  and  asked  what
Knut  had  said ;  they  had  heard  that  Mikkel  had  come  home  in
the  night,  and  wanted  to  see  if  Knut  knew  it.  When  Klement  got
home  he  heard  that  all  that  Knut  had  told  him  was  true.  This
was  in  1855  ;  in  1856  Mikkel  weut  off  to  America.


LIV.]


Vis-Knut.


145


In  1  828  he  was  at  Tallaug  in  Gansdal.  The  son  of  the  house
slept  in  his  room  one  night,  and  relates  as  follows.  "  Knut  was
restless  all  night,  he  read  and  prayed  from  time  to  time.  I  could
not  sleep  either ;  I  was  afraid,  and  he  was  so  ugly.  At  sunrise  I
got  up.  '  I  have  been  restless  all  night,'  said  Knut,  '  and  you
have  not  slept  either  ?  I  must  tell  you,  a  man  has  come  for  me
during  the  night  from  Saxumdal,  and  wants  to  speak  to  me.  It  is
a  good  thing  you  are  up ;  you  can  tell  him  to  come  here  directly  ;
he  is  lying  on  the  bench  in  the  hall.'  But  Knut  and  I  slept  on
the  first  floor  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  house ;  neither  of  us  could
have  heard  the  man  come  to  the  hall.  There  was  the  stranger  on
the  bench  ;  I  followed  him  up  to  Knut.  He  had  hardly  come  in,
and  had  not  got  out  a  word,  when  Knut  told  him  that  he  could
not  help  him  in  what  he  came  about ;  the  man  must  go  to  a
doctor."

In  the  spring  of  1835,  he  was  well-sinking  at  Huseby  in  Hede-
mark.  "  It  will  be  a  busy  Easter  for  you,"  he  said  to  the  housewife
on  Good  Friday.  She  thought  people  would  stay  at  home  for  the
holiday.  "  No,  no,  there  will  be  plenty  of  people  coming  from  the
east  to-morrow,"  he  said.  On  the  Saturday  fourteen  people  came
from  Odal  to  see  him ;  they  had  heard  that  he  was  there.  At  this
period  he  always  had  this  presentiment  when  people  were  coming
to  him.

Some  years  ago  a  well  was  needed  at  Skar,  the  home  of  Knut's
biographer,  where  Knut  had  never  been.  At  this  time  Knut  had
ceased  to  go  about,  and  those  who  wanted  anything  had  to  go  to
him.  A  messenger  was  accordingly  sent  to  Knut  to  ask  where
they  should  dig.  "What?"  said  Knut,  "do  they  send  here  for
water  when  they  have  got  water  everywhere  ? "  "  Yes,  for  there  is
no  water  near  the  farm."  "  There  is  water  enough  at  the  farm
you  come  from ;  they  have  a  well  already,  only  dig  deeper  and
there  is  water  enough."  "But  they  want  to  have  a  pump  right
in  the  farm."  "There  is  a  dell  above  the  farm;  do  you  know
where  it  is?  There  is  a  road  there."  "No,  the  high  road  does
not  go  through  a  dell."  Knut :  "  It  is  not  a  high  road,  it  looks
like  a  cattle  road."  "Yes,  that  is  right."  Knut:  "There  is  a
big  birch  tree  in  the  dell ;  under  it  there  is  a  spot  where  the  grass
does  not  bind.  That  is  where  the  vein  of  water  starts."  The  man
remembered  this.  "  But  they  have  water  still  nearer  the  farm,"
continued  Knut ;  "  the  store-house  stands  southwards  above  the  farm  ;
a  little  house  stands  at  the  side;  a  vein  passes  under  it."  "That

K


146


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


must  be  the  wood-shed,  then,"  said  the  man.  "No,"  said  Knut,
"it  looks  like  a  store."  "Then  it  must  be  the  forage-house."  "Yes,
it  is  the  forage-house."  Knut  did  not  stop  here.  "Most  of  the
water,"  he  said  "  comes  from  the  north  of  the  farm.  A  stream  runs
through  a  hill-side.  It  comes  from  a  swallow-hole  above  the  hill.
You  must  have  seen,  it  comes  both  in  the  corn-field  and  below  it."
"They  had  a  well  there  before,"  said  the  man;  "but  it  did  not  hold
out."  "  Because  the  water  passes  two  or  three  yards  above  where
the  well  was ;  very  little  of  the  water  soaked  into  the  well."  The
man  asked  where  digging  would  be  easiest  and  shallowest.  "  Try
for  yourself  with  a  rod  till  you  find  out."  "  But  we  might  make
a  mistake."  "Yes,  yes;  the  vein  is  close  to  the  surface  just  where
it  comes  out  of  the  hill ;  then  it  goes  three  or  four  rods  north  of
the  stable ;  that  is  the  best  place  to  dig."  There  they  dug,  and
there  the  well  is  to  this  day.  This  conversation  shows  how  he
gradually  conceived  the  place  in  imagination,  at  first  only  vaguely,
and  then  with  more  and  more  distinctness.

He  used  sometimes  to  make  mistakes,  especially  in  his  later
years ;  some  men  once  dug  for  silver  on  his  distinct  and  repeated
advice,  but  the  vein  was  too  thin  and  they  made  a  heavy  loss.  He
used  also  to  make  mistakes  in  telling  where  a  lost  animal  was  to  be
found.  He  used  to  put  this  down  to  the  fact  that  the  animal  had
not  stayed  till  they  came.  But  it  also  happened  that  he  declared
an  animal  to  be  dead  when  it  was  not  dead,  and  vice  versa.  In
some  cases  it  may  have  been  that  his  directions  were  misunderstood,
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  sometimes  the  mistake  was  his.  If  he
was  asked  how  this  came  about,  he  used  to  reply  that  he  only
said  "  what  he  got,"  "  what  was  whispered  to  his  ear,"  and  he  used
to  add,  "they  generally  say  that  it  is  right."  If  he  was  asked,  as
happened  once  or  twice,  whether  the  "Tempter"  had  not  been  making
him  use  his  gift  wrongly,  he  admitted  that  the  Tempter  might  have
"fooled"  him;  but  added  that  he  was  sure  that  he  had  never  con-
sciously misused  his  "  gift  of  grace  "  or  employed  it  for  gain.  If  he  is
to  be  suspected  of  vanity,  he  must  have  enjoyed  his  satisfaction  in
solitude  ;  for  the  last  half  of  his  life  he  passed  almost  as  a  hermit,
and  if  he  received  a  visitor,  he  used  to  talk  about  God's  wisdom,
goodness  and  omnipotence — seldom,  and  then  reluctantly,  about
himself.

"  For  my  own  part  I  fancy  that  if  he  had  been  less  kind-hearted
he  would  seldom  have  made  a  mistake ;  he  wanted  to  do  good
beyond  his  pDwers,  and  often  yielded  to  insistence,  but  he  could


LIV.]


Vis-Knut.


147


not  '  get  it '  when  he  was  tired  or  out  of  sorts.  He  used  to  say
when  he  failed  that  'God  was  punishing  him,'  and  that  was  how
he  took  all  opposition  and  derision."

Here  we  must  leave  Bjornson.  The  cases  he  gives  are  a  fair
and  representative  selection  from  the  much  larger  collection  of
Skar.  But  I  add  one  not  given  by  Bjornson,  as  by  a  curious
coincidence  it  has  proved  capable  of  confirmation.

"An  Englishman,  Captain  R.  Cartcath,  stayed  a  long  time  in
1868  at  Kvisberg  in  Upper  Svastum,  headhunting.  He  was
expecting  a  friend,  C.  Ferran,  to  go  up  to  Dovre  with  him ;  but
Ferran  was  so  late  in  coming  that  Cartcath  thought  he  must
have  taken  the  direct  road  through  Gudbrandsdalen.

"One  day  when  he  was  out  shooting,  Per  Kvisberg  went  with
him  to  the  '  Waters-end  '  in  Essdalen.  When  they  came  to  Erland-
husom  [where  Knut  then  lived]  Cartcath  told  Per  to  ask  Knut
where  the  bear  had  gone.

" '  I  can't  ask  him  about  things  like  that,'  said  Per.

"'Then  ask  whether  Ferran  has  gone  on  to  Dovre,'  said  Cartcath.
Per  went  in  to  Knut  and  did  so.

"  1  He  has  certainly  not  gone  north,'  said  Knut,  '  and  perhaps  he  is
already  at  Kvisberg.'

"  Early  next  morning  came  a  message  to  Cartcath  from  Ferran ;
he  had  reached  Kvisberg  on  the  evening  of  the  day  when  Cartcath
started  for  Waters-end  in  the  morning."

On  the  bare  chance  that  Captain  P.  "Cartcath"  might  be  Sir
Reginald  Cathcart,  I  wrote  to  him,  and  received  the  following  reply  :

"Thursday  [27  June,  1907].
"  Dear  Sir, — I  remember  the  incident  you  refer  to. I  was  waiting
for  Capt.  Ferrand  to  go  to  Sueehatton  for  reindeer  hunting.

"Yours  very  truly,  R.  A.  E.  Cathcart."

In  reply  to  a  further  inquiry,  Sir  Reginald  wrote  again  :

"Sat.  [June  29th,  1907].
"Dear  Sir, — All  the  people  in  Gausdal  thought  a  lot  of  Wise
Knut.  I  passed  his  house  one  day  and  saw  him.  I  asked  where
a  bear  I  had  wounded  a  few  days  before  had  gone,  but  he  did  not
answer.  He  then  told  me  about  Ferrand.  He  told  me  if  I  had
a  good  bear  dog  I  should  probably  get  a  bear.  This  I  knew.  My
tolb  at  the  time  had  gone  to  Osterdalen  to  buy  a  dog,  and  I  got
a  bear  soon  after  with  Capt.  Ferrand.  .  .  .

"  R.  A.  E.  Cathcart."

K2


148


Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.


[part


The  incident  is  not  in  itself  of  very  great  evidential  value ;  but
it  is  curious  that  first-hand  confirmation  should  be  forthcoming
after  nearly  40  years,  and  the  incident  unquestionably  strengthens
the  opinion  expressed  by  Bjornson  with  respect  to  the  care  and
accuracy  with  which  Skar  has  collected  and  presented  his  evidence.

Walter  Leaf.


LIV.]


Reviews.


149


II.

REVIEWS.

Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion;  or,  Psycho-Therapeutics.  By
C.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.,  Aberdeen.  Fifth  Edition.  10s.  6d.  net.
(Bailliere,  Tindall  &  Cox. London,  1907.)

An  interesting  feature  of  the  present  edition  of  Dr.  Lloyd
Tuckey 's  book  is  an  introductory  chapter  by  Sir  Francis  Cruise,  in
which  he  relates  how  he,  like  most  of  the  medical  men  in  these
islands  who  use  hypnotism  in  their  practice,  was  introduced  to  the
subject  by  Liebeault  and  Bernheim.  To  some  of  Sir  F.  Cruise's
remarks  we  shall  recur  later.  The  book  itself,  which  is  much
enlarged  from  the  earlier  edition,  contains  a  sober  and  comprehen-
sive statement  of  the  present  position  and  achievements  of  hypnotism
in  therapeutics.  Illustrative  cases  are  quoted,  some  from  the
author's  practice,  some  from  those  of  continental  physicians,  of  the
treatment  of  a  long  list  of  complaints  by  this  method,  amongst
them  dyspepsia,  neurasthenia,  chorea,  torticollis,  neuralgia,  writer's
cramp,  chronic  rheumatism,  epilepsy,  functional  paraplegia,  agora-
phobia and  other  obsessing  ideas,  and  a  long  list  of  hysterical  and
nervous  ailments.  Probably  the  most  interesting  class  of  cases
referred  to  is  that  of  chronic  alcoholism.  Dr.  Tuckey  says  that  he
has  treated  in  the  last  eighteen  years  over  300  cases,  and  has
effected  a  complete  cure  in  about  one-third  of  the  whole  number.
This  proportion  almost  exactly  coincides  with  the  proportion  of  cures
effected  during  the  year  1899  in  the  Dalrymple  Home,  Rickmans-
worth,  viz.,  169  out  of  518  cases.  As  Dr.  Tuckey  points  out,  the
number  of  cures  may  seem  insignificant  alongside  of  infallible
systems,  mostly  of  American  origin,  which  claim  over  90  per  cent,  of
successes.  The  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  physician's  cases,
the  cures  are  permanent.  In  Dr.  Tuckey's  practice  the  patients
are  under  observation,  I  gather,  for  at  least  a  year,  after  which


150


Frank  Pochnore.


[part


date  relapses  appear  to  be  very  infrequent.  It  is  to  be  wished
that  he  could  have  found  time  to  bring  up  to  date  the  interesting
table  given  on  pp.  237-9,  showing  particulars  and  results  of  the
treatment  from  1888  to  1895.  Dr.  Tuckey  has  been  too  fully
engaged  in  his  practice  to  allow  of  opportunity  for  experiment  with
a  view  to  throwing  light  on  the  problems  of  hypnotism.  Nor  has
he  apparently  observed  any  case  of  thought-transference  or  other
supernormal  faculty  in  his  patients.  He  has  indeed  had  under
treatment  three  or  four  "  mediums,"  but  he  found  that  they  all
refused  to  accept  his  suggestions,  and  were  apparently  very  intractable
patients.  One  lady  indeed  insisted,  when  hypnotised,  on  taking  charge
of  the  seance. An  interesting  case  of  double  personality  is  given.

"I  have  recently  (1899)  met  with  a  curious  case  of  double
personality.  The  patient  is  a  bank  clerk,  aged  40,  with  a  record
of  over  twenty  years'  satisfactory  service.  He  left  the  bank  on
Friday  after  lunch,  and  did  not  return  until  the  following  Monday,
when  he  found  he  had  been  suspended  for  absence  without  leave.
He  could  give  no  explanation  of  his  conduct  beyond  that  he  had
found  himself  late  on  Saturday  night  in  a  strange  hotel  at
Southampton.  How  he  got  there  he  did  not  know,  but  he  found
in  his  pocket  some  postal  orders  issued  at  Guildford,  so  he  con-
cluded he  had  visited  that  town.  I  hypnotised  him,  and  he  at  once
became  somnambulic.  He  replied  to  questions,  and  gradually  gave
us  a  complete  history  of  his  doings  from  the  time  he  left  the  bank
until  he  'came  to  himself  at  Southampton.  He  had  gone  first  to
call  on  a  friend  at  the  West  End,  and  then  on  another  friend  in
the  suburbs.  He  had  spent  Friday  night  in  a  Temperance  Hotel,
and  had  gone  to  the  station  in  the  morning,  and  taken  the  first
train,  which  happened  to  be  going  to  Guildford.  There  he  alighted
and  had  breakfast.  The  previous  day  he  had  changed  a  cheque,  so
he  had  ten  pounds  in  gold  in  his  purse.  This  he  found  heavy,  so
he  exchanged  the  sovereigns  for  postal  orders.  Then  he  felt  he
should  like  some  sea-air,  and  took  the  train  to  Southampton,  where
he  formed  the  plan  of  taking  a  coasting  steamer  to  Dublin,  a  trip
he  had  formerly  made  with  enjoyment.  He  strolled  about  Southamp-
ton, behaving  much  as  an  ordinary  visitor,  and  engaged  a  room  at
a  hotel.  At  the  hotel  he  suddenly  'came  to  himself,1  and  was
astonished  to  find  himself  in  a  strange  place.  He  was  just  in  time
to  catch  the  last  train  to  London,  where  he  stayed  the  night,
and  then  returned  to  his  anxious  family  in  the  country  the  following
morning. His friends  were  naturally  somewhat  sceptical, and  it


LIV.]


Reviews.


151


was  perhaps  fortunate  for  him  that  some  of  them  had  heard  of
double  consciousness"  (pp.  105-6).

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Dr.  Tuckey  finds  that  about  80
per  cent,  of  the  patients  treated  by  him  are  amenable  to  hypnotic
suggestion,  about  15  per  cent,  to  the  extent  of  somnambulism
(p.  176. See  also  p.  178).

It  will  be  seen  that  Dr.  Tuckey's  book,  though  full  of  interest
and  instruction  for  his  medical  brethren,  for  all  actual  or  possible
patients,  and  for  all  who  are  interested  in  the  cure  of  human  ills,
contains  in  itself  little  of  special  value  for  the  student  of  our
subject.  Its  real  value  for  us  lies  in  the  demonstration  which  it
affords  that  the  world  still  moves — that  even  the  British  medical
world  is  capable  of  assimilating  a  new  idea.  For  consider  the
facts.  The  phenomena  of  which  the  present  book  treats  have  been
before  the  civilised  world — to  go  back  no  farther  than  the  time  of
Mesmer — for  considerably  over  a  century.  During  the  whole  of
that  period,  with  brief  intermissions,  they  have  been  the  subject
of  systematic  study  in  one  or  another  continental  country.  In  1831
a  committee  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine  at  Paris — one  of
the  first  medical  societies  in  Europe — reported  that  the  phenomena
were  genuine,  and  likely  to  prove  useful  in  therapeutics.  Even  at
that  date  it  was  pointed  out  that  "England,  the  land  of  the
immortal  Newton,"  had,  alone  of  civilised  countries,  refused  to  take
any  interest  in  the  subject.  With  the  exception  of  a  brief  interlude
in  the  decade  1840-50,  which  produced  practically  no  effect  on  the
official  medical  world,  our  proud  isolation  continued  until  some  15
or  20  years  ago.  Liebeault's  first  book  was  published  in  1866.
Richet  wrote  upon  the  subject  in  1875.  Thenceforward  men  of
science  everywhere  on  the  continent  began  to  study  the  subject  and
to  publish  their  researches.  But  in  1882,  in  the  first  manifesto  of
the  Society,  we  felt  ourselves  bound  to  include  "  hypnotism  and  the
forms  of  the  so-called  mesmeric  trance,  with  its  alleged  insensibility
to  pain,"  amongst  the  "  debatable  phenomena "  which  we  proposed
to  study.

In  1889  Dr.  Tuckey  wrote  that  he  could  find  no  literature  in
English  on  the  subject;  and  a  year  later  Moll,  in  the  introductory
chapter  to  his  handbook  of  hypnotism,  amongst  a  crowd  of
foreigners,  cites  no  English  investigators  later  than  Braid,  with  the
solitary  exception  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  In  the
early  years  of  the  experiments  conducted  by  the  Society's  Committee
on  Mesmerism,  the  subject  was,  in  fact,  practically  unknown.  Medical


152


Frank  Poclmore.


[part


men  would  come  to  our  rooms  to  see  a  boy's  bod}'  stiffened  and
laid  across  two  chairs,  or  to  test  the  "  alleged  insensibility  "  in  the
trance  by  driving  pins  into  him.  And  even  so,  the  demonstrations
produced  little  effect.  In  1894  Lord  Kelvin  was  able  to  write  that
"one-half  of  hypnotism  and  clairvoyance  is  imposture  and  the  rest
bad  observation."  But  in  the  previous  year  a  Committee  of  the
British  Association  had  already  reported  that  they  had  convinced
themselves  of  the  genuineness  of  the  hypnotic  state.  In  the  mean-
time Sir  Francis  Cruise,  Dr.  Bramwell,  Dr.  Tuckey  and  others  had
been  to  Nancy,  and  had  commenced  to  employ  hypnotic  methods
in  their  ordinary  practice.

Even  now  the  prejudice  against  the  subject,  as  appears  from  the
present  book,  is  not  quite  dispelled.  Sir  F.  Cruise  tells  us  in
the  preface  that  when,  in  1891,  he  read  his  first  paper  on
hypnotism  before  a  Dublin  Medical  Society  he  was  "  earnestly  and
kindly  warned  to  abandon  a  dangerous  subject."  It  is,  however,
pleasant  to  learn  that  his  courage  in  disregarding  that  warning  has
met  with  its  reward.  Dr.  Tuckey  tells  of  a  case  of  a  young  lady  who
refused  to  try  hypnotism  as  a  means  of  cure,  because  she  had  been
warned  against  it  by  her  medical  attendant.  In  another  case  a  young
man,  afflicted  with  an  irresistible  craving  for  food,  preferred  to  enter  as
a  voluntary  boarder  in  a  lunatic  asylum  rather  than  risk  the
unknown  dangers  of  hypnotism.  And  the  case  of  a  patient  of  Dr.
Tuckey's,  himself  a  country  doctor,  is  full  of  instruction.  He  was
so  impressed  by  the  result  of  the  treatment  in  his  own  case  "that  he
took  up  hypnotism  enthusiastically,  and  began  to  use  it  with  his
patients.  He  performed  two  or  three  minor  operations  under
hypnotic  anaesthesia ;  and  relieved  many  cases  of  insomnia,
neuralgia,  and  nervous  troubles  generally.  But  the  village  in  which
he  lived  was  exceptionally  antiquated,  and  the  people  would  have
none  of  the  '  new  witchcraft.'  Dr.  S.  found  he  was  looked  at
askance  and  began  to  lose  his  practice.  Being  a  family  man,  and
a  sensible  one,  he  argued  that,  if  his  patients  didn't  want  the  best
treatment  he  could  offer  them,  it  was  not  for  him  to  force  it  on
them  to  his  own  ruin.  So  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  greatest  gossip
of  the  neighbourhood,  renouncing  his  advocacy  of  hypnotism,  and
undertaking  never  again  to  use  it  in  the  place.  He  has  his  reward"
(p.  209).  But  a  "  Medical  Society  for  the  Study  of  Hypnotism "
has  recently  been  founded,  with  Dr.  Tuckey  as  President,  and  we
may  soon  hope  to  see  knowledge  on  the  subject  spread  more
rapidly  among  the  profession  and  their  patients.


Reviews.


153


There  is  however  another  aspect  of  the  movement  in  England  which
possesses  some  interest  for  us.  I  said  above  that  Dr.  Tuckey's
book  affords  a  demonstration  that  English  medical  men  are  capable
of  assimilating  a  new  idea.  I  should  perhaps  have  said  "a  new
fact,"  for  it  is  noteworthy  that  even  now  few  medical  men  in  these
islands  show  any  interest  in  the  theoretical  side  of  the  subject-
in  its  bearings  upon  psychological,  legal,  or  even  physiological
problems.  Dr.  Tuckey  has  made  no  experiment  and  put  forward
no  theory  of  his  own.  After  discussing  current  theories  at  length,
and  showing  that  none  has  yet  won  predominant  recognition,  he
adopts  the  practical  conclusion:  "But  we  know  at  least  as  much
about  the  action  of  hypnotism  as  we  do  about  that  of  many  drugs
which  we  use  every  day  "  (p.  279).

Sir  F.  Cruise  is  even  more  emphatic  in  his  view:  "I  shall  not
attempt  to  theorise  or  offer  any  explanation  of  [these]  extraordinary
results.  I  have  long  ago  arrived  at  that  period  of  mental  develop-
ment— for  good  or  ill — at  which  I  have  ceased  to  attempt  explana-
tion. If  a  body  falls  to  the  earth,  I  call  it,  as  I  have  been  taught,
gravitation.  That  word  expresses  a  fact,  but  explains  nothing.  I
know  that  quinine  lowers  temperature  and  cures  some  neuralgias,
that  aloes  purge,  and  that  opium  checks  the  purging.  Of  the  why
and  wherefore  I  know  nothing.  So  I  also  must  acknowledge  as  to
the  power  of  suggestion  in  hypnosis.  .  .  .  Explanation  there  is  none,
no  more  than  of  the  countless  processes  of  physical  science  which
we  see  pass  before  us  daily.  It  seems  to  me  more  profitable,  with
our  present  means  of  knowledge,  to  observe  and  treasure  up  facts,
especially  when  they  help  us  to  cure  or  relieve  disease  "  (p.  xv.).

I  don't  know  whether  or  no  Sir  F.  Cruise  may  be  claimed  as
an  Englishman ;  but  at  any  rate  the  mental  attitude  revealed  in
the  above  extract  is  commonly  regarded  as  typically  British,  betraying
alike  the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  the  British  character.  The
existence  of  that  attitude  explains  how  it  comes  about  that,  apart
from  some  brilliant  experiments  by  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell,  almost  the
only  English  names  of  recent  years  which  can  be  added  to  the  long
list  of  continental  investigators  are  those  of  Edmund  Gurney  and
Frederic  Myers.  And  this  brings  before  us  an  interesting  question.
Hypnotism  for  some  generations  occupied  the  place  which  is  now
filled  by  telepathy,  the  Dreyfus  case  of  science,  in  Mr.  Schiller's  happy
phrase.  Twice  have  the  facts  of  hypnotism  seemed  in  a  fair  way
to  become  established :  first  in  the  decade  which  saw  the  appearance
of  Bertrand's  books  and  the  Report  of  the  Second  French  Commission ;


154


Frank  Poclmore.


[part


secondly,  in  the  time  of  Esdaile,  Elliotson  and  Braid.  In  the  first
period  the  hopes  of  the  new  science  were  frustrated  by  the  untimely
death  of  Bertrand,  and  still  more  by  the  political  unrest  prevailing
in  France.  In  the  second  period  the  discovery — infelix  opportunitate —
of  chloroform  and  other  anaesthetics  robbed  the  new  facts  of  their
chief  practical  interest,  and  the  whole  subject  was  shortly  afterwards
discredited  by  its  association  with  spiritualism.  But  now  that
hypnotism  seems  at  last  to  have  come  to  its  own,  we  may
profitably  enquire  what  lesson  we  can  draw  from  the  long  struggle,
what  hope  for  the  future  establishment  of  telepathy.

Hypnotism  owes  its  establishment,  broadly  speaking,  to  three
circumstances,  or,  to  put  it  the  other  way,  its  general  acceptance
was  delayed  until  three  conditions  had  been  fulfilled,  viz. :

(1)  It  is  of  great  practical  value  in  medicine.

(2)  Its  phenomena  are  readily  reproducible.

(3)  It  can  be  explained  in  physical  terms,  i.e.,  though  its  place  in
the  psycho-physiological  scheme  has  not  been  exactly  determined,  it
offers  obvious  analogies  to  spontaneous  states  previously  familiar,
and  there  can  be  little  reasonable  doubt  that,  broadly  speaking,
its  phenomena  are  due  to  some  form  of  inhibition.

It  would  take  too  long  to  show  in  detail  that  these  conditions
have  only  been  fully  satisfied  of  recent  years.  But  (1)  its  general
utility  in  therapeutics  was  first  established  by  the  publication  of
Liebeault's  book  in  1866.  The  earlier  practitioners  had  devoted
too  much  attention,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  production  of  analgesia,
which  the  discovery  of  chloroform  robbed  of  its  chief  value  ;  on
the  other  hand,  to  dubious  experiments  in  transmission  of  mesmeric
fluid,  community  of  sensation,  and  so  on.

(2)  It  seems  probable  that  the  production  of  the  somnambulic  state,
at  any  rate,  has  been  found  much  easier  in  recent  years.  This
state  was  first  definitely  recognised  and  described  by  Puysegur  in  a
book  which  was  not  published  until  1807,  nearly  30  years  after
Mesmer  had  begun  to  practise  in  Paris,  and  even  so  late  as  1831
the  Second  French  Commission  reported  that  the  state  was  of  rare
occurrence.

(3)  It  will  not  be  thought  necessary  to  labour  the  third  point.
It  may  never  be  possible  to  demonstrate  any  practical  utility  in

the  study  of  telepathy.  It  may  be  years  before  systematic
experiment  leads  us  to  such  mastery  over  the  conditions  that  we
can  reproduce  the  phenomena  with  something  like  the  facility  with
which  we  can  now  throw  a  subject  into  a  somnambulic  trance.  And


LIV.]


Revietvs.


155


it  is  on  that  very  condition  that  real  progress  in  arriving  at  an
explanation  no  doubt  mainly  depends.

And  there  are,  it  must  be  admitted,  in  the  existing  state  of  our
knowledge  considerable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  adopting  any
physical  explanation  yet  suggested.  These  difficulties  have  been
forcibly  set  forth  in  at  least  two  Presidential  addresses.  Certainly
if  telepathic  transmission  is  effected  by  means  of  ethereal  vibrations,
the  force  diminishing,  as  in  the  case  of  other  physical  energies,  in
the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distance,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive
how  an  impulse  which  in  our  experiments  at  close  quarters  seems
barely  able  to  produce  its  effect  when  agent  and  percipient  are
separated  by  a  wall  or  a  door,  should  even  under  the  most
favourable  circumstances,  and  when  the  disturbance  is  presumably  of
a  much  more  massive  character,  be  sufficiently  intense  to  bridge  a
gulf  which  may  amount  to  hundreds  or  thousands  of  miles.  But  it
is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience,  and  not  to
assume  too  soon  that  the  problem  is  insoluble  in  physical  terms,  and
demands,  therefore,  a  transcendental  explanation.  After  all,  the
main  premiss  for  such  a  conclusion — our  own  ignorance — may
any  day  be  removed  by  the  further  progress  of  research  :  a  process
which  has  happened  again  and  again  with  kindred  problems,  once
held  to  be  equally  secure  against  explanation  in  physical  terms.  It  is
not  so  very  long  ago  that  the  phenomena  of  animal  life  were
thought  to  stand  outside  the  physical  world ;  the  very  substances
of  which  animal  tissues  are  composed  were  supposed  to  owe  their
physical  properties  to  a  principle  of  vitality.  But  chemists  can  now
build  up  out  of  the  bricks  and  mortar  of  the  inorganic  many  of
these  once-mysterious  organic  compounds.  They  have  not  yet,  it  is
true,  built  up,  even  in  the  humblest  protozoon,  the  cathedral  of
life ;  but  all  architects  must  have  time  to  learn  their  trade.  Again,
the  activities  of  man,  especially  those  activities  which  are  accom-
panied by  consciousness  and  will,  were  for  long  thought  to  be
outside  the  physical  world.  But  the  case  is  so  far  altered  that  the
burden  of  proof  is  now  shifted  to  the  other  side.  The  philosopher
who  should  claim  to  interpolate  a  psychical  link  in  the  chain  of
physical  processes  which  connect  nerve-stimulus  with  action  would
find  it  difficult  to  meet  the  challenge  of  the  physiologist.  AVe
have  grounds  for  hoping,  then,  that  if  we  are  content  to  wait,  the
difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  physical  explanation  of  telepathy  may
diminish,  if  not  altogether  disappear ;  and  meanwhile  the  hypothesis
is  in  no  worse  case  than  is,  or  was  until  recently,  the  hypothesis


156


Frank  Podmore.


[part


of  gravitation.  In  the  case  of  telepathy  there  is  little  difficulty,  as
Sir  W.  Crookes  has  shown,  in  conceiving  of  a  physical  mechanism  ;
the  difficulty  is  to  account  for  the  energy  not  diminishing  more
rapidly  as  the  distance  increases  (Proc.  XIV.  pp.  3,  4).  The  force
of  gravitation,  on  the  other  hand,  diminishes  in  the  ratio  of  the
square  of  the  distance,  but  the  only  physical  explanations  of  its
action  yet  suggested  are  so  cumbrous,  and  involve  such  large
assumptions,  as  to  be  little  more  than  curiosities  of  speculation.
But  I  speak  as  a  layman.  Perhaps  the  recent  discovery  that  atoms
are  not,  after  all,  atomic,  and  that  their  constituent  particles  may,
under  certain  conditions,  move  freely  through  space,  has  rendered
the  corpuscular  theory  of  gravitation  more  plausible.  If  so,  the
omen  is  a  happy  augury  for  telepathy.  Some  forthcoming  results
in  science  may  perhaps  throw  light  upon  our  problem.

Frank  Podmore.

Hypnotism  or  Suggestion  and  Psychotherapy,  by  Dr.  August  Forel,
translated  from  the  fifth  German  Edition  by  H.  W.  Armit,  M.R.C.S.,
etc. Pp.  370. 7/6  net. (London  and  New  York,  Rebman,  Ltd.)

This  volume  is  a  very  welcome  addition  to  the  ever-growing
literature  of  hypnotism.  Professor  Forel's  position  in  the  medical
and  scientific  world  lends  great  weight  to  his  opinions,  and  the
fact  that  this  is  a  translation  of  the  fifth  German  edition  proves
that  they  are  the  result  of  matured  experience  and  thought.

The  first  chapters  are  devoted  to  the  physiology  and  psychology
of  hypnosis  and  allied  states,  and  as  the  author  asserts  that  the
reader  who  takes  the  trouble  to  study,  and  has  the  intelligence  to
understand  his  theories  will  be  able  to  grasp  the  subject  not  merely
partially  and  empirically,  but  fully  and  scientifically,  one  is  put  on
one's  mettle.  It  is  unfortunately  by  no  means  easy  to  follow  all  the
arguments  :  this  difficulty  arising  partly  from  undue  compression
and  his  taking  too  much  preliminary  knowledge  for  granted ;  and
partly,  perhaps,  from  occasional  faulty  translation.1

Dr.  Forel  accepts  the  mneme  theory  of  Richard  Semon  and  adopts
his  nomenclature.  The  mneme  he  explains  as  the  sum  total  of  the
inherited and acquired  engrams,  and by engrams  he  means  the

1For  instance,  page  164,  we  read  "How  does  the  conceited  mass  of  voters
stand  towards  superficial  gossip,  and  the  frequently  systemized  perversion  of
the  half-educated,  who  so  often  take  upon  themselves,  as  journalists,  to  judge
customs  and  to  teach  the  world  ?  "


LIV.]


Reviews.


157


permanent  changes  which  take  place  in  the  susceptible  substance  of
the  living  organism,  owing  to  the  passage  of  molecular  activity
waves  or  neurokymes.  He  uses  the  term  ecphoria  to  express  the
repeated  production  of  the  whole  condition  of  excitation  of  the
organism  which  is  synchronous  with  the  passed  complex  stimulus,
and  it  corresponds  to  the  psychical  processes  of  memory  and
association  of  ideas,  and  the  physiological  conditions  of  automatism,
ontogenesis  and  phylogenesis.  Attention  (maximum  of  our  psychical
activity)  he  compares  to  a  shifting  functional  macula  lutea  in  the
brain  conditioned  by  the  arrival,  concentration,  and  deflection  of
the  neurokymes ;  and  he  explains  the  differences  between  conceived
and  unconceived  impressions  which  make  up  the  conscious  and
subconscious  self.1  He  shows  how  dreams,  hallucinations,  and
casual  hypnotic  suggestions  depend  upon  unassociated  neurokymes,
and  are  therefore  evanescent  in  memory  and  effect.  Though  he
says  on  page  6  that  many  processes  are  only  conceived  for  an
instant,  and  therefore  disappear  for  ever  from  consciousness,  later,
page  130,  he  shows  how  in  hypnotic  somnambulism  the  most  casual
thoughts  and  suggestions  can  be  revived.  Forel  is  a  staunch
upholder  of  the  Nancy  school  and  goes  as  far  as  Bernheim  in
explaining  all  hypnotic  phenomena  by  suggestion.  His  views  are
strongly  anti-spiritualistic,  and  he  even  considers  telepathy  as
unproved,  though  he  acknowledges  the  value  of  the  evidence  collected
by  the  S.P.R.  in  that  direction.

Some  of  his  analogies  are  very  happy.  For  instance,  to  explain
the  difficulty  of  hypnotising  people  of  ill-regulated  and  disorderly
minds,  he  compares  the  struggle  of  a  suggested  idea  to  dominate
consciousness,  to  the  attempt  of  an  orator  to  influence  a  crowd.
If  the  people  are  orderly  he  has  no  difficulty  in  swaying  them
by  his  eloquence,  but  if  they  are  so  excited  and  noisy  that  he
cannot  get  their  attention  even  for  a  moment,  the  most  accomplished
demagogue  is  powerless,  and  is  himself  swept  off  his  feet  by
the  mob.  But  some  of  his  assertions  seem  open  to  criticism,  as,
for  instance,  when  he  says  that  it  matters  not  at  all  ultimately
whether  he  hypnotises  a  patient  so  as  to  feel  no  pain  from  the

1  Forel  thinks  that  vastly  more  peripheral  stimuli  travel  up  to  the  brain
than  are  felt,  and  he  denies  that  thought  or  other  psychical  processes  can  exist
without  sensory  stimulation.  Neurokymes  arriving  at  the  brain  are  deflected
to  the  centre  most  functionally  active,  and  he  thus  explains  the  action  of  expectant
attention.  If  a  person  expects  a  visitor  every  sound  is  construed  as  the  well-
known  footstep.  The  art  of  the  hypnotist  consists  in  opening  up  of  new  paths
and  inhibiting  old  ones  by  appropriate  suggestions  (page  178).


158


Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.


[part


extraction  of  a  tooth,  or  whether  he  lets  him  suffer  the  pain  and
suggests  afterwards  that  there  has  been  no  pain,  thus  removing  its
memory  !

The  medical  man  and  student  will  turn  with  the  most  expectation
of  enlightenment  to  the  practical  part  of  the  book,  in  which  Dr.
Forel  impartially  describes  his  own  extensive  practical  experience,
and  here  they  will  be  richly  rewarded.  The  author  is  a  hard
hitter,  and  exposes  what  he  considers  humbug  unsparingly.  Professor
Dubois  of  Berne,  who  claims  to  cure  a  great  many  intractable
patients  by  his  system  of  suggestion  without  hypnosis — he  strongly
condemns  hypnotism — especially  comes  under  his  lash,  for  Forel
considers  all  such  success  due  to  the  unacknowledged  use  of  hypnotism.

His  success  in  obtaining  profound  hypnosis  is  remarkable,  this
being  due  no  doubt  to  a  great  extent,  as  with  Bernheim,  to  his
commanding  position  and  local  prestige.  We  should  like  to  see  how  he
would  succeed  with  some  of  the  patients  we  get  in  London,  who  "  try
hypnotism"  after  exhausting  every  other  form  of  medical  treatment.
The  subject's  more  or  less  unconscious  counter  self-suggestion  is,
Forel  considers,  the  chief  cause  of  failure,  and  he  has  often  succeeded
by  finding  out  the  opposing  thought  and  removing  it  by  preliminary
argument.  His  cases  of  this  kind  remind  one  of  many  reported
by  Professor  Janet  and  quoted  in  Myers'  Human  Personality.  Forel
attempted  to  hypnotise  twenty-three  out  of  twenty-six  nurses  at
Burghoelze  Asylum,  and  succeeded  in  getting  somnambulism  with
amnesia,  obedience  to  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  anaesthesia,  etc.,  in
nineteen  of  them.  Dr.  Oscar  Vogt  claims  to  be  even  more  successful,  and
says  he  practically  never  fails  to  obtain  deep  hypnosis  in  all  mentally
sound  men  and  women  (page  72).  Forel's  nurses  and  attendants  were
mostly  of  the  strong  stolid  German  Swiss  peasant  type,  and  certainhy
almost  as  far  removed  from  hysteria  as  can  be  imagined.  The
reviewer  saw  him  practise  upon  several  of  them  some  years  ago,
and  the  instantaneous  action  of  suggestion  was  remarkable.  The
Professor  made  much  practical  use  of  his  power.  For  instance,  be
would  tell  the  hypnotised  attendant  that  he  would  sleep  alongside
a  suicidal  patient  quite  comfortably  as  long  as  it  was  safe,  but  any
unusual  movement  would  at  once  arouse  him.  This  answered
perfectly,  and  whereas  formerly  many  of  the  attendants  in  that
undermanned  institution  used  to  sutler  from  watchful  and  anxious
nights,  under  the  new  regime  the}'  got  their  proper  allowance  of
sleep  and  were  ready  for  the  next  day's  work.  Hypnotism,  of  course,
merely  developed  the  faculties  of  inhibition  and  attention  which


LIV.]


Revieivs.


159


are  latent  in  all  of  us,  and  which  one  sees  exercised  in  a  mother
who  watches  by  a  sick  child.  The  slightest  movement  or  cry  of
the  child  will  awaken  her,  whereas  other  and  much  louder  sounds
will  be  unheard  or  ignored.

Forel  gives  full  statistics  of  his  cases  and  the  results  he  obtained
by  hypnotic  treatment.  These,  from  such  a  source,  are  of  immense
practical  importance.  He  sums  up  his  experience  by  contending
that  hypnotic  suggestion  should  be  tried  in  all  cases  of  functional
nervous  disturbance  which  resist  ordinary  treatment,  and  he  assures
us  that  he  has  never  seen  harmful  results  follow  when  hypnotism  has
been  intelligently  used.  This  harmlessness  of  a  powerful  remedy
he  contrasts  with  the  baneful  effects  of  strong  drugs,  so  often  seen
in  ordinary  medical  practice.

Forel  relates  some  interesting  experiences  with  professional
mediums.  One  was  a  woman  who  made  a  great  deal  of  money  by
fortune  telling  and  as  a  diagnoser  and  healer  of  disease.  She
became  entranced  and  was  controlled  by  "  a  spirit  called  Ernest."
Forel  found  the  trance  was  genuine,  and  she  was  therefore  acquitted
of  fraud  by  the  magistrates,  but  her  diagnoses  were  always  fallacious
and  evidently  based  upon  ocular  and  other  sensory  impressions.
Before  her  trial  she  expressed  a  great  wish  to  be  cured,  but  after
it  her  husband  and  children  lamented  the  loss  of  income  entailed
and  got  her  to  resume  her  practices.  Another  medium  came  under
his  treatment  at  the  Asylum.  She  was  a  young  woman  of  hysterical
and  erratic  temperament,  who  had  studied  art  in  Paris,  and  had  there
fallen  into  the  hands  of  spiritualists  who  exploited  her  mediumistic
powers  for  money.  She  became  ill,  and  went  into  an  hospital  where
Charcot's  methods  of  hypnotism  were  practised  with  disastrous
results.  Like  "  Sally  Beauchamp  "  she  developed  a  secondary  person-
ality of  a  most  objectionable  type,  which  dominated  the  normal  ego
and  threatened  to  submerge  it.  Forel,  with  much  difficulty  and
by  judicious  flattery  and  cajolery,  succeeded  in  suppressing  this
personality  and  restoring  the  woman  to  more  than  her  previous
health.

Dr.  Bleuler,  Forel's  successor  in  the  Chair  of  Psychiatry,  in  the
University  of  Zurich,  relates  in  the  appendix  his  experience  when
hypnotised  by  Professors  Von  Speyr  and  Forel.  These  are  very
similar  in  character  to  those  described  by  Mr.  "Edward  Greenwood"
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvii.,  pp.  279  et  seq.

Professor  Bleuler  became  hypotactic,  but  not  somnambulic.  He
obeyed  suggestions  made  during  hypnosis  reluctantly  and  clumsily,


160


Ghas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  31. D.


[part


but  was  able  to  resist  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  though  for  some
hours  afterwards  he  used  to  feel  the  impulse  to  act  upon  them.
Only  once  was  a  sensory  hallucination  realised,  and  that  was  when
Forel  suggested  that  he  should  put  his  fingers  in  his  mouth  and
find  them  taste  bitter.

Professor  Forel  laments  the  blindness  of  medical  authorities  who  by
neglecting  to  instruct  students  as  to  the  importance  of  suggestion
in  the  treatment  of  disease,  allow  the  field  to  be  exploited  by
quacks,  to  the  public  detriment.  He  did  what  he  could  to  correct
this  neglect  by  conducting  an  admirable  clinique  in  Zurich  for  the
instruction  of  students  and  graduates  in  medical  hypnotism.

Altogether  Professor  Forel's  book  may  be  thoroughly  recommended
to  the  scientific  student  and  medical  man  seeking  to  acquire  a  clear
and  practical  view  of  the  subject  propounded  by  a  master.

Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.

The  Hygiene  of  Mind,  by  T.  S.  Clouston,  M.D.,  F.E.S.E.  Third
edition.  Pp.  284.  Price  7/6  net.  (The  New  Library  of  Medicine,
Methuen  &  Co.,  London.)

This  book,  like  the  foregoing,  is  written  by  a  physician  eminent
as  an  alienist  and  physiologist.  Dr.  Clouston  appeals  to  the
educated  laity  more  than  Professor  Forel,  and  of  course  deals  with
a  widely  different  range  of  subjects.  But,  as  might  be  expected
from  physicians  who  have  spent  the  greater  part  of  their  lives  in
the  study  of  insanity,  one  can  often  trace  in  their  arguments  a
common  experience.  On  the  whole  there  is  agreement  between  them
in  their  views  regarding  education  and  the  hygiene  of  the  mind.
Forel  however  attaches  great  importance  to  the  use  of  hypnotism  as
a  formative,  reformative  and  educational  agency  in  the  management
of  the  mentally  unfit  and  unstable ;  whereas  Clouston  speaks  rather
disparagingly  of  that  agent  and  gives  high  praise  to  Dr.  Dubois,
whom  we  have  seen  so  severely  handled  hy  Forel  for  his  psychic
treatment  of  nervous  disorders  by  mental  hygiene  and  suggestion
professedly  without  hypnotism.

But  probably  Dr.  Clouston's  experience  of  medicial  hypnotism  is
limited,  for,  though  he  acknowledges  its  good  effect  in  many  cases
and  correctly  interprets  its  rationale,  he  goes  on  to  say  that,  unfor-
tunately, hypnotic  cures  are  notoriously  haphazard  and  scientifically
unreliable,  "  Depending  too  much  on  the  individuality  of  the  particular
physician and the  patient"  (p.  97). Such observations  indicate


LIV.]


Reviews.


161


that  he  has  only  seen  the  Nancy  method  applied  in  a  haphazard
and  unscientific  way,  and  has  not  studied  the  records  of  Bernheim,
Wetterstand,  van  Renterghem,  Forel,  Milne  Bramwell  and  other
specialists.  That  is  a  pity,  for  Dr.  Clouston  is  extremely  liberal  and
open-minded  in  his  views,  and  acknowledges  that  "by  the  effect  of
mental  attention  certain  diseases  of  impaired  nutrition  from  warts  up
to  internal  tumours,  from  scurvy  to  dropsy,  have  unquestionably  been
cured  by  mental  influences,"  and  again  "  the  doctor  who  neglects
the  mental  condition  of  his  patient  in  his  treatment  of  him,  no
matter  what  the  disease  may  be,  is  not  a  philosophical  man,  and
commonly  not  a  successful  physician"  (p.  96).  Dr.  Clouston  agrees
with  Forel  that  mind  is  only  manifested  through  brain  as  its  vehicle,
and  is  conditioned  by  the  state  of  the  brain.  He  does  not  consider
telepathy  proved,  and  thinks  that  mind  evolved  in  one  brain  can  only
act  on  mind  evolved  in  another  brain  through  the  senses.  "  As  yet
there  is  no  scientific  proof  of  the  mental  action  of  one  person  who
is  at  a  distance,  the  so-called  telepathy"  (p.  37).  This  view  is  rather
disappointing  after  the  patient  work  of  the  S.P.R.  for  so  many
years,  and  warns  us  that  much  remains  to  be  done  before  even  the
foundations  of  "  Metapsychics "  are  declared  truly  laid  by  orthodox
science.

Dr.  Clouston's  book  possesses  the  rare  merit  of  being  scientific
and  at  the  same  time  "popular."  As  an  example  of  the  former,
the  reader  will  find  the  very  latest  views  on  heredity  as  propounded
by  Archdall  Reid,  Ford-Robertson  and  Beard,  together  with
excellent  illustrations  of  brain  cells  showing  their  variations  in
infancy,  adolescence  and  old  age,  and  how  they  are  affected  by  over-
work and  illness.  From  actual  photographs  he  demonstrates  how
the  brain  cells  of  the  mentally  deficient  and  imbecile  are  arrested
in  development  and  maintain  the  infantile  type.  From  consideration
of  this  and  similar  facts,  Dr.  Clouston  makes  an  appeal  for  "physio-
logical charity "  towards  the  mentally  defective,  but  at  the  same
time  he  shows  how  their  condition  may  be  improved  by  suitable
education  and  surroundings.  He  instances  the  experiment  made  in
Glasgow,  when  100  scrofulous,  sickly  and  starved  children  of  the  slums
were  drafted  off  to  the  Highlands  to  share  the  home  life  in  farms
with  surprisingly  good  results,  from  which  he  concludes  that  nature
is  not  so  unkindly  a  stepmother,  if  we  have  the  wit  to  humour
her.

The  titles  of  the  various  chapters  are  an  indication  of  the  scope
of  the  book;  among  these  we  find,  The  Mind  Machinery  in  the


162


Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.J).


[part


Brain  ;  Heredity,  Temperament  and  Social  Instincts ;  The  Hygiene
of  Manners,  Play,  Work  and  Fatigue ;  Mental  Hygiene  of  Alcohol,
Tobacco  and  other  Brain  Stimulants  and  Sedatives.  Dr.  Clouston
is  courageous  in  facing  difficulties,  and  at  the  same  time  hopeful
and  optimistic.  Every  chapter  is  full  of  instruction  given  in  the
pleasantest  style,  and  altogether  the  book  may  be  confidently
recommended.  Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.


Incubation,  or  the  Cure  of  Disease  in  Pagan  Temples  and  Christian
Churches.  By  Mary  Hamilton,  M.A.,  Carnegie  Research  Scholar.
(St.  Andrews  :  W.  C.  Henderson.  London :  Simpkin,  Marshall  &
Co. 5s.  net.  1906.)

It  was  an  ancient  practice  for  people  afflicted  with  bodily  injuries
and  diseases,  or  lunacy,  to  spend  one  or  more  nights  sleeping  in
the  temple  of  a  god,  in  the  hope  that  through  some  dream  or
vision,  vouchsafed  to  themselves  or  the  priests  of  the  temple,  they
might  learn  what  means  of  cure  to  adopt  where  all  human  help
had  failed.  Stories  of  previous  healings  led  them  even  to  hope  that
perhaps  they  might  be  restored  to  health  in  a  moment  by  a  miracle.

The  present  work  is  the  fruit  of  an  evidently  extended  and
careful  investigation  into  the  history  of  this  custom,  as  practised
both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.  The  practice  was  called  in  Latin
Incubatio,  which  the  authoress,  not  very  happily,  renders  by  the
English  word  Incubation;  it  would  have  been  better  to  borrow
the  German  designation,  TempeUMaf.  The  book  is  divided  into
three  parts:  (1)  Incubation  in  pagan  temples — those  of  Asklepios,
Dionysos,  and  others  in  Greece  and  Italy,  and  of  Isis  and  Serapis  in
Egypt;  (2)  Incubation  in  Christian  churches  in  the  middle  ages;  (3)
Incubation  in  modern  times — in  Italy,  Sardinia,  Austria,  and  Greece,
especially  in  Tenos  and  other  islands  of  the  Grecian  Archipelago.
No  doubt  the.  custom  prevailed,  and  still  prevails,  in  the  East,
but  Miss  Hamilton's  researches  have  not  carried  her  so  far  afield.

The  authoress  shows  that,  wherever  it  is  found  in  Christian
churches,  the  custom  is  even  in  minute  details  a  direct  survival  of
the  ancient  superstition ;  the  Madonna  or  a  Saint  has  taken  the
place  of  a  dethroned  heathen  god.  She  also  gives  us  lively  accounts
of  the  places  where  the  practice  still  exists,  and  which  she  has
visited  in  her  travels.  But  this  adds  little  of  value  to  our  know-
ledge of  the  subject,  and  unfortunately  Miss  Hamilton  carries  us
no  further. The  book  is  hardly  more  than  an  elaborated  catalogue


li  v.]  Reviews.  163

of  the numerous places  where the custom once existed  or  still
exists, — a  catalogue  often  interesting,  it  is  true,  by  its  picturesque
descriptions  and  local  colouring,  but  still  a  catalogue,  and  of  undue
length. There is  so little variety  in the details, either  of  the
methods  adopted  by  the  patients,  or  of  the  real  or  alleged  cures,
that  tbe  whole  might  well  have  been  summarised  in  the  space  of  a
magazine  article. The  one  question  that  is  of  paramount  interest
to  us  to-day  is  passed  by  with  a  mere  glance, — the  question,  what
kind  of  cures  are  now  actually  effected  in  this  way  1 That  people
were and still are cured through the "  Temple-sleep," we  can
hardly  doubt,  for  even  superstitious  human nature  would  hardly
continue  to  take  part  in  lotteries  where  all  draw  blanks,  and  none
a  prize. In  one  instance  at  least  there  was  apparently  an  oppor-
tunity for investigation  and  the  obtaining  of  a  valuable  piece  of
first-hand  evidence. In  the  account  of  her  visit  to  Tenos,  during
the  great  annual  festival,  Miss  Hamilton  writes :  "  On the  Friday
morning  I  saw  a  blind  man,  a  Greek,  who  was  totally  unable  to
see. He  spent  the  day  in acts  of  devotion  to  the  Pauagia  [the
Madonna],  and  all  night  he  lay  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Well  along
with  the  other  pilgrims. As  he  slept,  he  dreamed  that  the  Panagia
came  to  him,  and  blessed  him,  touching his eyes with  her  hand.
Then  he  awoke,  and  found  that  his  eyesight  had  been  restored,  and
he  could  see  as  other  men." It  is  strange  that  Miss  Hamilton  did
not  realise  the  importance  of  making  a  thorough  investigation  of
this  case ; she does  not  even  tell  us whether  she  saw  the  man
after  his  alleged  cure,  or  how far  off  he  was  when  she  saw  him
before  it. If  she  could  revisit  some  of  the  scenes  of  her  interesting
journeys,  and  then  examine,  with  all  possible  exactness,  any  cases  of
alleged  cure  which  came  under  her  immediate notice,  she  would
perform  a  valuable  service  to  psychical  science. As  it  is,  however,
she  has  produced  an  excellent  guide-book  for  any  who  may  be  able
to  undertake  the  task. Her  work  possesses  the  first  merit  of  literary
style — lucidity,  and  is  pleasingly  written ; and although  she  has
denied  us  what  we  should  have  valued  more,  Miss  Hamilton  is  to
be  congratulated  on  its  production.

M.  A.  Bayfield.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LV.

June,  1908.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  131st  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
Hall  at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Thursday,
January  30th,  1908,  at  4.30  p.m.;  the  President,  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  in  the  chair.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  read  a  paper  on  "  Automatism  and
Possession."


The  132nd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place,  on
Tuesday,  May  19th,  1908,  at  4.15  p.m.;  the  President,  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  in  the  chair.

The  President  delivered  an  Address,  which  will  be  published
in  the  next  Part  of  Proceedings.

L


166


Alice  Johnson.


[part


ON  THE  AUTOMATIC  WETTING  OF  MRS.  HOLLAND.

By  Alice  Johnson.

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Chapter  I. Introduction  - -  170

Mrs. Holland's early experiences  in automatic  writing
before  reading  Human  Personality.

Chapter  II. First  Period:  September,  1903,  to  January,

1904  -  ........  176

General  Account :  the  main  "  Controls,"  their  styles,
signatures,  hand-writings,  use  of  pen  and  pencil.  Motor
impulses  and  sensations  of  automatist ;  conscious  impres-
sions accompanying  the  script.  Dissociations  of  con-
sciousness. Headaches  of  the  earlier  period ;  muscular
pains ;  mal  cle  mer ;  the  script's  explanations  of  these.

Extracts  from  script  :  Communication  addressed  to  Mrs.  184
Verrall,  with  description  of  Dr.  Verrall  (?).  Passages  illus-
trating the  development  of  the  Myers  and  Gurney  "  con-
trols "  and  subliminal  recollections  of  Human  Personality.
Description  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  dining-room  (?).  Coincidental
description  of  a  death.  References  to  Lord  Bute.  Further
reminiscences  of  Human  Personality.  Description  of  Mrs.
Verrall  (?).  Some  miscellaneous  controls.  "Eidolon"  and
"simulacrum."  Possible  connection  with  reference  to  an
apparition  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  early  script.

Chapter  III. First Cross-correspondence with  Mrs.

Verrall:  The  Selwyn  Text  Incident  -  219

General  account  of  the  cross-correspondence.  Extracts  from
Mrs.  Verrall's  script.  Extracts  from  Mrs.  Holland's  script.
Tabular  summary  of  similar  statements  in  the  two  scripts.
Comparison  of  the  Myers  Controls.


lv.] On  the  Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland.  167


Chapter  IV.  January  to  August,  1905  ...  -  240
Second  Period:  Jan.  16th  to  Feb.  28th,  1905.  Descrip-
tion of  Mr.  Gurney.  Eeference  to  opening  of  Mr.  Myers's
sealed  envelope  and  discussion  of  this  incident.  Influence
of  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  on  the  script.  Rudi-
mentary trance  condition  obviated  by  self-suggestion.

Third  Period:  March  1st  to  May  22nd,  1905;  first  219
series  of  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  each  writer  being
unknown  to  the  other.  March  1st,  repetition  of  Selwyn
text  and  some  correct  details  given.  March  15th,  cross-
correspondence:  notes  of  music.  March  19th,  Carpaccio's
St.  Ursula.  March  22nd,  the  ivory  gate.  Mrs.  Holland's
impression  of  woman  (?  Mrs.  Verrall).  April  5th,  descrip-
tion of  landscape.

Fourth  Period:  May  31st  to  August  8th,  1905. The  259
Laurence  Oliphant  control, — an  illustration  of  subliminal
reminiscences. Dissociations  of  consciousness  shown  by
the  automatist's  want  of  recognition  of  allusions  in  her
script.

Chapter  V. Fifth  Period:  Oct.  6th,  1905,  to  Feb.  18th,

1906  - - - - - - - - - -  265

First  interview  with  A.  J.  Mrs.  Holland  now  learns  that
her  fellow-experimenter  was  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Verrall's
premonition  (?)  of  her  first  meeting  with  Mrs.  Holland.
Second  interview  with  A.  J.,  Mrs.  Verrall  also  present.
Influence  of  Spectator  review  of  Maxwell's  Metapsychical
Phenomena  on  the  script.  Coincidence  with  A.  J.'s  study
of  Eusapia  Paladino  records.  Third  interview  with  A.  J.
Warnings  in  the  script  against  too  great  credulity.
Veridical  statement  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  illness.  "Mr.
Grove  "  and  the  cancer  incident.  Further  warnings  against
over  credulity.  The  "  Scribe  "  incident.  Two  instances  of
subliminal  recollection:  (l)  apparition  of  Mr.  Gurney;
(2)  communications  from  "Annette."

Chapter,  VI. Sixth  Period:  Feb.  21st  to  Appjl  11th,  1906  290
Fourth interview with A. J., Mrs. Verrall and  Mr.
Piddington  also present. Second  series of  experiments
with  Mrs.  Verrall. Feb.  28th,  some  correct  details  given ;
March 7th, some correct details ; cross-correspondence :


168


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"Ave  "Roma  immortalis."  The  Hodgson  Control.  Three
cross-correspondences:  "Not  in  the  Electra;"  "Henry  was
not  mistaken;"  "Roden  Noel."  March  14th,  coincidence
re  physical  phenomena.  Experiments  on  the  supposed
influence  of  inanimate  objects.  Impression  of  Mrs.  Forbes's
dining-room.  The  conspiracy  tree.  Cross-correspondence :
"Posilipo."  Veridical  statements  about  Mrs.  Forbes.  Mrs,
Verrall's  reference  to  books  looked  at  by  Mrs.  Holland.
Cross-correspondence:  "Fawcett."  Experiments  with  Mrs.
Forbes's  glove,  etc.  Description  of  Mr.  Forbes.  The
lotus  and  lity.  The  electric  wiring  incident.  References
to  Talbot  Forbes  (?).  Discussion  of  the  psychometric  theory.
Cross-correspondence:  "Eheu  fugaces."

Chapter  VII. The  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences -  369

Definition  of  cross-correspondences  :  independent  references
to  the  same  topic  found  in  the  scripts  of  two  or  more
writers.  Early  attempts  by  Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.  Hodgson
to  obtain  similar  statements  independently  through  two
automatists.  Mr.  Piddington's  observations  on  cross-cor-
respondences. The  connections  between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes  suggest  that  attempts  were
being  made  to  produce  in  one  script  statements  supple-
mentary of  those  in  the  other.  Hypothesis  that  this  plan
was  deliberately  adopted  by  the  controls  to  prevent
telepathy  between  the  automatists.  Extracts  from  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  confirming  this  view.  Discussion  of  the
cross-correspondences  between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Holland. Consideration  of  objections  to  the  hypothesis.

Chronological  List  of  would-be  Evidential  Incidents  in
the  Script  and  of  Events  bearing  on  them.1

1903.  June. In  India. Read  Human  Personality.
July. Began  correspondence  with  A.  J.
Sep.  Re-read  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.

Sep.  15— 2 1st.  Automatic  script.

Sep.  21. Description  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  dining-room  (?).
Oct.  23. Began  to  read  again  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.

1  These  incidents  naturally  vary  very  much  in  value  from  an  evidential  point
of  view.


lv.] On  the  Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland.  169


IN  OV. 1 .

IN  OV.  0.

Nov.  9.

1904.

Jan.  5.

Jan.  7.

Jan.  l  /.

Jan.  27.

Feb.  12.

April.

Description  of  Dr.  Verrall  (?).
Began  to  write  systematically.

Description  of  a  death,  coincident  with  the  death

of  Lord  Eowton.
Description  of  Mrs.  Verrall  (?).
"Eidolon"  and  "simulacrum."

First  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall  :  the

sealed  envelope  and  the  Selwyn  text.
Expression of disappointment at our failure  to

understand.
Last  piece  of  script  of  this  period.
Mrs.  Holland  comes  to  Europe.
Oct.  or  Nov. Saw  Mr.  Myers's  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry.

1905.  Jan.  16. First  piece  of  script  of  second  period.

Feb.  15.  Reference  to  the  opening  of  Mr.  Myers's  posthumous
sealed  envelope.

March  1.  Beginning  of  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  The
Selwyn  text  repeated.  Various  veridical  state-
ments about  Mrs.  Verrall's  surroundings.

March  15  to  22.  Cross-correspondence:  notes  of  music.

March  19.  Mrs.  Verrall's  description  of  Carpaccio's  St.  Ursula,
looked  at  by  Mrs.  Holland  the  evening  before.

March  22.  Coincidence  between  Mrs.  Holland's  script  referring
to  Ivory  Gate  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  reading.
Mrs.  Holland's  "  impression  "  of  Mrs.  Verrall.

April  5.  Mrs.  Verrall's  description  of  landscape  seen  by
Mrs.  Holland.

Oct.  6.  First  interview  with  A.  J.  Mrs.  Holland  informed
for  the  first  time  that  her  fellow-experimenter
was  Mrs.  Verrall.

Oct.  9th  (?).  Read  Spectator  review  of  Maxwell's  Metapsychical
Phenomena.

Nov.  16.  Second  interview  with  A.  J.  and  first  with  Mrs.
Verrall.

Nov.  19. Script  begins  warnings  against  fraudulent  physical

phenomena.
Nov.  21. Third  interview  with  A.  J.

Dec.  7.  Statement  about  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  illness,  which
began  on  that  day.

1906.  Jan.  9. Statement  about  "Mr.  Grove"  and  cancer.
Jan.  22. Heard  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.


170


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


1906.  Feb.  6. The  "Scribe"  incident.

Feb.  9. Some  veridical  statements  about  Dr.  Hodgson.
Feb.  21. Fourth  interview  with  A.  J.,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.

Piddington  also  present.
Feb.  "28. Begins second series of  experiments with  Mrs.

Verrall. Some  veridical  statements  about  Mrs.

Verrall's surroundings. Cross-correspondences :

"  Henry was not mistaken " ; "  Not in  the

Electra."

March  7. Several  veridical  statements  about  Mrs.  Verrall.

Cross-correspondence:  "Ave  Roma  Immortalis."
March  9  and  10.  Read  reviews  of  the  Memoir  of  Dr.  Sidgwick.
March  11.  Cross-correspondence:  "Roden  Noel."
March  14.  Coincidental  (?) reference to fraudulent  physical
phenomena.

March  15.  Impression  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  dining-room.
March  21.  Several  veridical  statements  about  Mrs.  Forbes.

Cross-correspondence  :  "  Posilipo."
March  28.  Mrs.  Verrall's script  describes  books  from  which
Mrs.  Holland  had  been  choosing.

Cross-correspondence  :  "Fawcett."
April  11. Cross-correspondence:  "Eheu  fugaces."
May  15. Description  of  Mr.  Forbes.

References  to  Talbot  Forbes  (?).
May  22. Electric  wiring  in  the  John  Street  house.
May  23  and  30  and  June  25. Further  references  to  Talbot
Forbes.


CHAPTER  I.
Introduction.

The  lady  whose  automatic  writing  forms  the  subject  of  this
paper  is  a  friend  of  my  own,  whose  accpuaintance  I  first
made  by  correspondence  about  four  years  ago.  Unfortunately
her  family  object  to  psychical  research,  and  on  their  account
she  wishes  her  name  not  to  be  mentioned  in  public.  I  speak
of  her  therefore  as  "  Mrs.  Holland."  She  wrote  to  me  first
from India  on  July 2nd, 1903,  saying  that  she  had  just


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  I.  171

finished  a  careful  reading  of  Mr.  Myers's  Human  Personality
and  had  been  greatly  interested  in  it  on  account  of  various
experiences  of  her  own  which  were  akin  to  some  described
in  the  book.  She  had,  for  instance,  practised  automatic  writing
(which  she  had  been  accustomed  to  call  "  pencil  writing  ")  since
1893  for  her  own  amusement  and  in  spite  of  outside  discourage-
ment, and  was  also  able  to  see  visions  in  a  crystal.  A  speci-
men— ten  lines  of  verse — was  enclosed  which  (she  said)  "  my
pencil  wrote  this  morning, — I  suppose  because  I  was  thinking
of  '  pencil  writing.'  "

I  met  her  for  the  first  time  when  she  was  in  England  about
two  years  later,  and  have  had  several  long  talks  with  her  on
the  whole  subject.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  Mrs.  Verrall  also
made  her  acquaintance  afterwards,  and  Mr.  Piddington  and  Mr.
Feilding  have  met  her  once  or  twice,  so  that  she  is  known
to  some  other  members  of  the  Society  as  well  as  to  myself.

After  a  little  correspondence  had  passed  between  us,  Mrs.
Holland  sent  me  the  following  general  account  of  her  ex-
periences :

September  nth,  1903.

[Ten]  years  ago  I  first  tried  automatic  writing,  having  seen  a
reference  to  it  in,  I  think,  the  Review  of  Reviews.  My  hand  began
to  form  words  almost  immediately,  but  only  short  sentences  of  an
uninteresting  kind,  and  the  questions  I  asked  were  not  answered.

The  next  time  I  tried,  (these  attempts  were  always  made  when  I
was  alone)  verses  were  written,  aud  since  then,  though  I  have  often
discontinued  the  practice  for  months  and  years,  and  tried  to  give
it  up  altogether,  any  automatic  writing  that  comes  to  me  is  nearly
always  in  verse,  headed —

"  Believe  in  what  thou  canst  not  see,
Until  the  vision  come  to  thee."

The  verses,  though  often  childishly  simple  in  wording  and  jingling
in  rhyme,  are  rarely  trivial  in  subject.  Their  striking  feature  is
the  rapidity  with  which  they  come.  I  once  wrote  down  fourteen
poems  in  little  over  an  hour,  another  time  ten,  and  seven  or  eight
are  quite  a  common  number  to  come  at  one  time.  When  I  write
original  verse  I  do  so  slowly  and  carefully,  with  frequent  erasures  :
automatic  verse  is  always  as  if  swiftly  dictated  and  there  are  never
any  erasures.  I  am  always  fully  conscious,  but  my  hand  moves  so
rapidly  that  I  seldom  know  what  words  it  is  forming.


172


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  would  take  up  too  much  time  and  space  to  append  a  series  of
these  verses,  though  I  have  kept  a  good  many  of  them.  I  copy  one
set  of  verses,  however,  to  show  how  easily  the  rhymes  come  in  auto-
matic writing.  I  wrote  it  down  as  quickly  as  it  was  possible  for
my  hand  to  move,  and  was  surprised  afterwards  to  find  that  it  had
a  definite  form  of  its  own.  It  is  exactly  as  it  came  to  me,  not
"  polished "  or  altered  in  the  least.

I  whom  he  loved,  am  a  ghost,

Wandering  weary  and  lost.
I  dare  not  dawn  on  his  sight,
(Windblown  weary  and  white)
He  would  shudder  in  hopeless  fright,

He  who  loved  me  the  best.
I  shun  the  paths  he  will  go,

Because  I  should  frighten  him  so.
(Weary  and  lacking  rest).

I  whom  he  loved  am  a  shade,

Making  mortals  afraid,
Yet  all  that  was  vile  in  me,
The  garb  of  mortality,
My  body  that  used  to  be,

Is  mouldering  out  of  sight.
I  am  but  a  waiting  soul,

Pain-purified,  seeking  its  goal,
Why  should  he  dread  the  sight?

If  I  showed  him  my  white  bones

Under  the  churchyard  stones,
Or  the  creatures  that  creep  and  rest
On  what  was  once  my  breast,
He  who  loved  me  the  best

Would  have  good  cause  for  fright.
But  my  face  is  only  pale,

My  form  like  a  windblown  veil,
Why  should  he  dread  the  sight  1

Should  I  beat  on  the  window  pane,

He  would  think  it  the  wind  and  rain,
If  he  saw  my  pale  face  gleam
He  would  deem  it  a  stray  moonbeam
Or  the  waft  of  a  passing  dream.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  I.  173


No  thought  for  the  lonely  dead,
Buried  away  out  of  sight.

And  I  go  from  him  veiling  my  head,
Windblown  weary  and  white.  (1896)

I  have  been  asked  if  automatic  writing  has  ever  stated  facts
previously  unknown  to  me,  which  were  afterwards  proved  to  be
correct.  Automatic  verses  do  not  deal  much  with  facts,  but  once
when  I  was  staying  in  Italy,  in  an  old  palazzo  I  had  never  before
seen,  the  day  after  my  arrival,  and  before  I  had  been  into  the
garden,  the  impulse  to  write  came  on  me,  and  I  yielded  to  itf
without  however  ceasing  to  take  part  in  the  conversation  of  two
friends  who  were  with  me.  One  of  them,  who  knew  about  my
automatic  writing,  asked  me  to  read  what  had  come  to  me.  I  did
so  : —

Under  the  orange  tree

Who  is  it  lies]
Baby  hair  that  is  flaxen  fair,

Shines  when  the  dew  on  the  grass  is  wet,
Under  the  iris  and  violet.

'Neath  the  orange  tree
Where  the  dead  leaves  be,

Look  at  the  dead  child's  eyes!  (1901)

"This  is  very  curious,"  said  my  friend,  "there  is  a  tradition  that
a  child  is  buried  in  the  garden  here,  but  I  know  you  have  never
heard  it."

Automatic  Letters  to  Acquaintances.

I  have  said  that  automatic  verses  do  not  deal  much  with  facts,
but  once,  when  I  was  sensitive  after  illness,  I  experienced  a  new
form  of  automatic  writing,  in  the  shape  of  letters  which  my  hand
insisted  on  writing  to  a  newly-made  acquaintance.

The  first  of  these  letters  began  with  a  pet  name  I  did  not  know,
and  was  signed  with  the  full  name  of  some  one  I  had  never  heard
of,  and  who  I  afterwards  learnt  had  been  dead  some  years.  It
was  clearly  impressed  upon  me  for  whom  the  letter  was  intended,
but  thinking  it  due  to  some  unhealthy  fancy  of  my  own,  I  destroyed
it.  Having  done  so  I  was  punished  by  an  agonising  headache,  and
the  letter  was  repeated,  till  in  self-defence  I  sent  it  and  the  succeeding
ones  to  their  destination.

They  generally  came  when  I  was  trying  to  write  ordinary  letters ;
I  never  "  sat  for  them "  or  encouraged  them  in  any  way. I  never


174


Alice  Johnson.


[part


read  them  over,  feeling  they  were  not  meant  for  me,  and  the
recipient,  beyond  telling  me  they  referred  to  matters  known  only
to  this  one  person  who  was  dead,  and  that  the  writing  of  them,
especially  the  signature,  bore  a  marked  resemblance  to  that  person's
writing,  preferred  not  to  discuss  the  subject.  I  have  never  seen
the  writing  in  question.

As  I  regained  perfect  health  I  tried  to  free  myself  from  this
influence,  for  it  used  to  give  me  cruel  headaches  and  was  very
exhausting.  I  have  often  left  my  writing  table  and  taken  up
needlework  or  knitting  till  the  force  had  spent  itself.  If  my
hand  was  not  actively  employed  at  these  times  it  would  clench
itself,  and  make  the  motion  of  writing  in  the  air.

Since  then  I  have  felt  ou  three  other  occasions  that  some  unseen
but  very  present  personality  was  striving  to  transmit  a  message
through  me  to  a  well-beloved.  In  every  case  the  communication
was  utterly  unsought  by  me,  and  came  as  a  complete  surprise  to
the  recipient,  who  was  always  a  recent  acquaintance,  never  one  of
my  friends.  My  attention  was  always  enforced,  as  it  were,  by  a
severe  pain  in  the  head,  which  vanished  when  I  had  delivered  the
message.  But  these  cases  would  take  too  long  to  describe,  and  one
of  them  has  no  connection  with  automatic  writing.

Since  I  have  spoken  of  illness,  perhaps  I  ought  to  say  that  I
have  only  twice  been  ill  in  the  last  twenty  years,  and  I  am  now  a
healthy  cheerful  woman,  thirty-five  years  of  age.  I  prize  my  health
and  strength  exceedingly,  and  it  puzzles  me  a  little  that  with  it,
and  with  no  desire  to  consider  myself  exceptional,  I  do  sometimes
see,  hear,  feel,  or  otherwise  become  conscious  of  beings  and  influences
that  are  not  patent  to  all.  Is  this  a  frame  of  mind  to  be  checked,
or  permitted,  or  encouraged  ?  I  should  like  so  much  to  know.  My
own  people  hate  what  they  call  "  uncanniness,"  and  I  am  obliged
to  hide  from  them  the  keen  interest  I  cannot  help  feeling  in
psychic  matters.

I  have  never  been  in  surroundings  that  encouraged  this  interest,
I  have  never  been  mesmerised,  I  have  never  attended  a  seance,  for
the  idea  of  anything  connected  with  paid  mediumship  is  peculiarly
disagreeable  to  me.  I  only  discovered  by  accident,  five  years  ago,
that  I  have  the  clairvoyant  faculty.

In  reply  to  my  enquiries,  Mrs.  Holland  sent  me  a  fuller
account  of  her  recollections  of  the  incidents  just  referred  to,
some  at  least  of  which seem  to  have been veridical.  No


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  I.  175


contemporary  records,  however,  existed,  since  she  had  sent  or
given  the  original  script — generally  without  even  reading  it —
to  the  persons  whom  it  concerned.  Some  of  these  she  had
since  lost  sight  of,  while  the  others  were  mere  acquaintances,
to  whom  she  did  not  like  to  apply  for  corroboration  of  matters
involving  intimate  personal  details.  Thus  there  is  no  means
of  ascertaining  to  what  extent  these  early  writings  were  veridical,
and  I  therefore  omit  the  account  of  them,  quoting  only  a  few
sentences  from  it  in  the  psychological  section  below,  and  pass
on  at  once  to  the  period  when  the  case  came  under  my  own
observation,  that  is,  just  as  it  began  to  be  guided  into  definite
channels  by  Mrs.  Holland's  reading  of  Human  Personality.

From  an  evidential  point  of  view,  the  interest  and  value  of
Mrs.  Holland's  script  depends  to  a  great  extent,  as  will  be  seen,
on  the  indications  of  telepathy  manifested — at  first  quite  unex-
pectedly— between  herself  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  the  whole  report
will  show  how  greatly  Mrs.  Verrall  has  contributed  to  the
result,  both  by  her  co-operation  in  the  experiments,  and  by  the
invaluable  help  she  has  given  me  in  the  work  of  investigation
and  interpretation.

Mrs.  Holland  also  has  given  me  every  possible  help  in  the
matter.  Not  only  has  she  answered  fully  and  freely  a  very
large  number  of  questions,  and  herself  volunteered  much
information,  which  I  could  not  have  obtained  otherwise,  about
the  sources  or  possible  sources  of  many  of  the  statements  in
her  script,  but  she  has  also  accepted  with  the  utmost  readi-
ness any  suggestion  of  mine  as  to  experiments  or  methods  of
procedure.  Further,  she  has  consented  to  remain  for  months
at  a  time  in  ignorance  of  the  results  of  these  experiments,
and  has  continued  nevertheless  to  persevere  with  them.
While  never disclaiming her own strong; interest in  the

o  o

matter,  she  has  always  maintained  an  entirely  impersonal
and  impartial  attitude  in  regard  to  it, — an  attitude  which
must  be  none  the  less  welcome  to  psychical  researchers
because  it  is  fortunately  not  quite  unprecedented  in  our
experience  of  automatists.  She  has,  in  fact,  realised  that  it  is
after  all  in  the  normal  course  of  events  that  an  automatist  and
an  investigator  should  act  in  co-operation  and  not  in  antagonism
for  the  advancement  of  knowledge.

I  wish  to  lay  stress  on  this  disinterested  attitude,  because


176


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  somewhat  minute  and  detailed  analysis  of  her  own
psychology  which  she  has  from  time  to  time  given  me  in  her
letters,  some  parts  of  which  are  quoted  in  various  sections
of  my  report,  might  lead  the  reader  to  suppose  that  she
attached  an  exaggerated  importance  to  the  minutiae  of  her
mental  life.  But  she  only  began  to  tell  me  of  these  things
after  finding  that  I  wished  to  hear  them,  and  I  know  that
her  motive  in  doing  so  was  simply  to  give  me  the  fullest
possible  material  for  forming  a  judgment,  without  any  idea
of  their  publication.

But,  with  her  permission,  I  include  in  my  report  passages
from  her  letters  which  may  be  of  interest  to  others  besides
myself, — partly  because  they  give  to  a  certain  extent  an
inside  view  of  the  phenomena,  which  are  naturally  better
described  in  her  words  than  translated  into  terms  of  my
own.  Though  many  of  the  sensations  and  experiences  con-
nected with  the  script  are  probably  subjective  in  origin,  it
may  be  that  certain  idiosyncrasies  are  correlated  with  veridical
phenomena,  in  which  case  they  would  have  a  reflected  interest
of  their  own.  And  it  may  be  that  when  we  know  more  of
the  whole  subject,  we  shall  find  significance  in  some  incidents
that  now  seem  unimportant.  It  seems  better,  therefore,  for
the  present  to  err  on  the  side  of  recording  too  much  rather
than  too  little.


CHAPTER  II.

First  Period:  September,  1903 — January,  1904.
General  Account.

Prom  the  psychical  point  of  view,  her  first  reading  of  Human
Personality  formed  an  epoch  in  Mrs.  Holland's  life,  and
thenceforth  her  automatic  writing  was  coloured  largely  by
the  influence  of  that  book.  She  had  not  known  Mr.  Myers
during  his  life-time,  nor  could  she  remember  afterwards  that
she  had  even  heard  his  name  before  she  read  the  book.  But
her  own  experiences  and  her  own  temperament  had  specially
prepared  her  for  the  reception  of  it,  and  the  personality  of
the  author  strongly  appealed  to  her.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  177

Under  these  circumstances  it  was  not  only  natural  but
almost  inevitable  that  a  great  part  of  her  writing  should  now
purport  to  be  inspired  by  him,  or — to  a  less  extent — by  the
two  friends  to  whom  his  book  is  dedicated,  Mr.  Gurney  and
Dr.  Sidgwick.

For  these  personations  it  will  be  convenient  to  use  the
term  "  control  "  in  the  way  that  it  is  commonly  used  in
psychical  literature — viz.  in  the  sense  of  something  representing
itself  as  a  personality  distinct  from  that  of  the  automatist.
For  evidence  of  the  real  existence  of  such  a  personality,  we
have,  of  course,  to  look  to  the  contents  of  the  writings  and
not  to  their  dramatic  form.  Much  of  the  contents  in  this
case  deals  with  facts  or  reflections  about  facts  within  the
normal  supraliminal  knowledge  of  the  automatist.  There  is  a
considerable  proportion  of  matter  relating  to  facts  outside  her
supraliminal  knowledge,  some  of  which  has  been  traced  to  sub-
liminal reminiscences,  and  some  of  which  may  never  have  been
within  her  normal  cognisance  at  all.  There  is  also  a  certain
proportion  relating  to  facts  which  I  am  convinced  were  entirely
unknown  to  her  at  the  time  the  writing  was  produced.  But
a  good  deal  of  the  script  cannot  definitely  be  classed  under
any  of  these  three  heads,  and  it  is  further  impossible  to  draw
the  line  between  them.  It  is  therefore  convenient  to  use  the
term  "  control "  for  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  personation,  irre-
spective of  the  question  whether  the  personality  is  or  is  not
partially  or  completely  independent  of  the  automatist.

Before  going  further,  I  may  remark  that  Mrs.  Holland
possesses  both  literary  ability  and  dramatic  powers  of  imagina-
tion, combined  apparently  with  a  rapid  perception  and  delicate
discrimination  of  character.  All  these  cpialities  are  to  be
found  in  her  script ;  how  far  they  account  for  its  features  as
a  whole  need  not  be  considered  at  this  point.

The  writings  of  this  first  period  are  chiefly  of  interest
from  a  psychological  point  of  view,  while  incidentally  they
reveal  the  attitude  of  the  automatist  towards  the  script.  1
will  first  discuss  certain  psychological  features,  illustrating
them  by  quotations  from  the  script,  many  of  which  will  for
convenience  be  repeated  in  their  context  later  on.

One  of  the  earliest  passages  is  a  curious  example  of  the
efforts  that  seem  so often  to be  made by  the  subliminal


ITS


Alice  Johnson.


[part


self  to  keep  the  supraliminal  in  ignorance — at  least  for  the
time  being — of  the  sense  of  what  is  being  produced.  It  is
written  on  two  sides  of  a  half-sheet  of  paper ;  the  first  side
begins  with  the  initial  "  F.,"  and  the  second  ends  with  the
initial  "  M." ;  the  whole  passage  is  divided  into  four  short
sections,  the  first  three  ending  respectively  in  "17/,"  "  /l  "
and  "/Ol."  January  17th,  1901,  was  the  date  of  Mr.  Myers's
death,  mentioned  in  Human  Personality ;  but  the  simple  device
of  separating  these  initials  and  items  from  one  another  was
completely  effective  in  its  apparent  object.  I  read  the  passage
a  good  many  times  before  I  saw  what  they  meant  and  I
found  that  the  meaning  had  entirely  escaped  Mrs.  Holland's
notice.

Two  days  later  came:  "  1873.  30  years  ago.  Cmrde
A  b  i  w  Youth."  I  read  the  first  five  enigmatic  letters  as  "  Com-
rade"  with  two  vowels  left  out;  the  other  four,  "A  big,"  seemed
meaningless.  Long  afterwards  in  glancing  through  Human
Personality  (Vol.  I.,  p.  7),  I  came  on  this  sentence:  "In
about  1873  .  .  .  it  became  the  conviction  of  a  small  group
of  Cambridge  friends  that  the  deep  questions  thus  at  issue
must  be  fought  out  ..."  It  was  then  clear  that  the  nine
mysterious  letters  were  merely  an  anagram  for  "  Cambridge."
Mrs.  Holland  again  was  quite  unaware  of  their  meaning  till
I  pointed  it  out  to  her.

The  same  writins;  goes  on :

It  lias  been  a  long  work — but  the  work  is  not  nearly  over  yet —
It  has  barely  begun — ■  Go  on  with  it — go  on —  We  were  the
torch  bearers — follow  after  us — The  flame  burns  more  steadily  now.

E.  G.

1888.

The  year  1888  was  the  date  of  Mr.  Gurney's  death,  a  fact  also
stated  in  Human  Personality.  Here,  and  in  other  similar  pas-
sages, the  reference  is  unmistakable,  and  there  soon  begins  to  be
apparent  a  struggle  between  the  supraliminal  self  of  the  writer
and  the  supposed  influences.  The  supraliminal  self  is  obviously
afraid  of  being  led  into  attaching  too  much  importance  to
the  writing.  It  is  aware  that  some  of  the  names  are  derived
from  its  reading  and  both  resents  and  resists  their  incursion
into  the script. It  doubts  the  use  of  the attempts  and  is


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  179


not  very  willing  to  persevere  with  them.  Meanwhile  the
various  "  controls,"  aided  and  abetted  by  the  subliminal  self
(of  which  they  may,  indeed,  be  fragmentary  manifestations),
appear  to  be  exerting  great  pressure  on  their  side  by  various
arguments  aDcl  artifices  to  encourage  the  writer  and  persuade
her  to  go  on,  e.g. :

(September  19th,  1903.)  You  should  not  be  discouraged  if  what  is
written  appears  to  you  futile —  Most  of  it  is  not  meant  for  you —
You  are  the  reporter — the  recorder — and  need  not  be  the  critic  .  .  .  .
Dun't  be  in  too  great  a  hurry.

(September  21st,  1903.)  Do  not  feel  that  criticism  need  act  in  the
least  as  a  fetter — don't  let  it  hinder  you  at  all  ....  Nothing
is  unimportant,  however  much  it  seems  so —

There  is  no  effort  unavailing —
You  fail — yet  save  another's  failing.

(November  25th,  1903.)  Do  try  to  forget  your  abiding  fear  of  being
made  a  fool  or  a  dupe.  If  we  ever  prompt  you  to  fantastic  follies
you  may  leave  us.  But  we  only  wish  you  to  give  us  a  few  passive
patient  minutes  each  day.  It's  a  form  of  restless  vanity  to  fear
that  your  hand  is  imposing  upon  yourself,  as  it  were.

The  "  Gurney  control,"  who  expresses  himself  rather  strongly
and  brusquely,  writes :

(November  14th,  1903.)  I  can't  help  feeling  vexed  or  rather  angry
at  the  halhhearted  way  in  which  you  go  in  for  this — you  should
either  take  it  or  leave  it.  If  you  don't  care  enough  to  try  every
day  for  a  short  time,  better  drop  it  altogether.  It's  like  making
appointments  and  not  keeping  them.  You  endanger  you  own  powers
of  sensitiveness  and  annoy  us  bitterly — G.

The  "  Myers  control,"  on  the  other  hand,  makes  his  appeal
to  the  sympathies  of  the  automatist :

(January  12th,  1901.)  If  it  were  possible  for  the  soul  to  die  back
into  earth  life  again  I  should  die  from  sheer  yearning  to  reach  you —
to  tell  you  that  all  that  we  imagined  is  not  half  wonderful  enough
for  the  truth  ....  If  I  could  only  reach  you — if  I  could  only
tell  you — I  long  for  power  and  all  that  comes  to  me  is  an  infinite
yearning — an  infinite  pain.  Does  any  of  this  reach  you — reach
any  one — or  am  I  only  wailing  as  the  wind  wails — wordless  and
unheeded.


180


Alice  Johnson.


[part


In  these  utterances,  taken  by  themselves,  there  is  clearly
nothing  to  suggest  more  than  a  dramatisation  by  her  subliminal
self  of  personalities  that  had  attracted  Mrs.  Holland's  interest
through  the  normal  means  of  reading  a  book.  The  question
whether  anything  more  than  this  is  really  represented  in
them  will  be  considered  later  on.  Meanwhile  I  am  bound
to  emphasise  the  large  part  played  by  Mrs.  Holland's
normal  knowledge  in  the  construction  of  the  various  roles.
They  came  into  existence  first  shortly  after  she  had  read
Human  Personality,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  passages  from
this  book  are  clearly  to  be  traced  in  the  script ;  there  is
little  or  nothing  in  the  characterisations  that  could  not  be
derived  from  it  directly  or  by  inference  by  an  intelligent
and  sympathetic  reader.  There  are,  moreover,  a  certain
number  of  features  that  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Myers's
would  see  to  be  uncharacteristic  or  positively  incorrect.
Further,  the  personalities  become  suddenly  more  vivid  and
realistic  at  a  later  date,  after  Mrs.  Holland  had  seen  the
portraits  of  Mr.  Myers,  Mr.  Gurney  and  Dr.  Sidgwick  in
Mr.  Myers's  posthumous  work,  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,
and  glanced  at  parts  of  the  book  itself,  as  described  below,
p.  245  ;  and  again  after  she  had  seen  reviews  of  the  Memoir
of  Dr.  Sidgwick  early  in  1906.

As  usual  in  automatic  writing,  there  are  various  different
indications  of  which  "  control  "  is  purporting  to  be  present.

Occasionally,  but  not  very  often,  the  "  control "  uses  a
signature — either  in  full,  or  in  initials.  Often  the  contents
of  the  writing  leave  no  doubt  as  to  who  it  is.  And,  as
usual,  varieties  of  hand-writing  are  associated  with  the  different
controls,  though  they  are  not  always  used  consistently  for
the  same  one.

Mrs.  Holland's  own  hand-writing  is  of  a  rather  strongly
marked  type — clear,  bold,  round  and  legible.  One  marked
characteristic  in  it  is  that  the  words  are  very  disjointed,
the  pen  being  lifted  generally  several  times  in  the  middle
of  every  word,  sometimes  after  every  letter.  The  automatic
writing,  on  the  other  hand,  is  more  sloping  and  more  pointed
and  far  more  continuous  than  the  normal,  the  words  often
running  together  without  any  break  between  them.  This
is  the  usual  writing  of  the  "  Myers  control,"  but  it  is  not


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  181

confined  to  him,  being  apparently  the  normal  type,  if  one
may  call  it  so,  of  Mrs.  Holland's  automatic  writing — the
form  which  it  seems  to  tend  naturally  to  take  unless  some
special  idea  suggests  a  variation.

The  "  Gurney  control "  uses  a  more  bold  and  upright  style,
which  is  sometimes  almost  as  disjointed  as  her  ordinary
writing.  Of  this  style  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  later  (November
16th,  1905):  "When  the  writing  changes  from  very  sloping  to
upright,  I  always  get  the  impression  of  a  younger  and  more
brusque  personality. The  initial  '  G.'  often  comes  then."

At  the  beginning  of  this  period,  pencil  or  ink  is  used
indiscriminately.  On  November  18th,  1903,  the  "Myers
control "  begins  in  pencil,  then  writes :  "  Take  a  pen,"  and
the  writing  goes  on  in  ink,  "  That's  well — a  pen  is  best  when
I  am  here — pencil  for  the  upright  vehement  writing,"  viz.,
that  of  the  "  Gurney  control " ;  and  henceforth  these  two
controls  generally — but  not  invariably — use  a  pen  or  pencil
respectively.

There  is  no  resemblance  between  their  writings  and  the  actual
hand-writings  of  Mr.  Myers  and  Mr,  Gurney,  nor — so  far  as
I  am  aware — is  there  any  reason  for  associating  ink  specially
with  one  and  pencil  with  the  other.  It  appears  to  be  simply
a  sort  of  subliminal  device  for  keeping  the  two  personalities
distinct ;  nevertheless  they  often  tend  to  merge  into  one
another, — the  suggestion  being  either  that  two  influences —
real  or  imaginary — are  present  at  once,  or  that  one  is  being
gradually  displaced  by  the  other.

A  similar  subliminal  device  is  manifested  on  Jan.  6th,  1904
— thus  described  by  the  script :  "  Two  influences — that  was
why  the  pencil  slipped  from  your  fingers  and  flew  across  the
room  then  ....  Don't  you  notice  a  new  feature  to-day — that
every  few  minutes  we  make  you  take  another  pencil.  It's
easier  for  us,  and  it  marks  the  change  for  you."  Mrs.  Holland
notes  of  the  script  produced  on  this  occasion  :  "  This  writing-
took  a  full  half-hour,  and  my  hand  was  very  restless  all
through,  and  held  the  pencils  (four  lay  by  me  and  my  hand
kept  on  changing)  in  two  very  peculiar  ways  for  two  of  the
entries.  At  the  end  my  hand  felt  shaken  and  pushed  as  it
did  when  I  first  began  to  get  these  writings,  scrawling  wildly
till  it  was  stopped. The  [word  at  the  end  of  the  script]

M


182


Alice  Johnson.


[part


'stop'  was  from  without  entirely.  I  was  willing  to  let  it
scrawl  on  and  over  to  the  next  page  if  the  impulse  continued."

On  May  23rd,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland  writes  of  this  occasion:
"  I  still  recall  clearly  the  curious  sensation  that  accompanied
the  word  '  stop.'  My  hand  seemed  to  be  taken,  the  wrist
turned  towards  the  left  and  then  drawn  off  the  paper.  It
is  the  only  time  I  have  ever  felt  '  uncanny  '  in  connection
with  script."

Occasionally — but  very  rarely — the  script  is  guided  or  accom-
panied by  conscious  impressions  relating  to  it.  Thus  on  Nov.
7th,  1903,  (quoted  in  full  below)  it  says:  "I  think  it  might
be  better  if  the  agent  wrote  the  thoughts  in  her  brain  instead
of  keeping  a  vacant  brain  and  a  passive  hand."  It  continues
as  if  she  were  speaking  in  her  own  person,  and  in  a  hand-
writing intermediate  between  her  ordinary  and  her  automatic
style :  "  Very  well,  I  will  write  down  what  I  am  thinking  of
but  my  hand  feels  as  if  it  wanted  to  scrawl  and  the  words
have  a  tendency  to  run  into  one  another.  I  find  myself
picturing  a  tall  man,  etc."  Of  this  writing  she  notes :  "  My
brain  was  far  more  influenced  than  my  hand  and  that  is  very
unusual."  Probably  she  means  by  this  that  she  was  more
conscious  of  the  sensory  than  of  the  motor  element  in  the
automatism.

The  same  conception  is  developed  further  on  a  later  and
especially  interesting  occasion,  January  12th,  1904,  the  script
of  which  is  given  in  full  below,  see  p.  232.

The  more  purely  subjective  side  of  these  dramatisations  is
represented  sometimes  by  partial  dissociations  of  consciousness,
sometimes  by  definite  sensations  or  disturbances.

Mrs.  Holland  says  in  her  preliminary  account — already  quoted
— that  she  used  to  have  with  the  impulse  to  write  or  speak  a
severe  headache  which  vanished  with  the  fulfilment  and  cessation
of  the  impulse.  In  two  of  the  cases  described  in  the  fuller  account
which  I  omit,  she  seems  to  have  partially  lost  consciousness.
Thus,  in  the  first:  "  I  shut  my  eyes.  It  seemed  to  me  that
the  pencil  scribbled  wildly,  like  a  child  pretending  to  write  .  .'  .
My  right  arm  seemed  the  only  part  of  my  body  that  was
not  asleep,  and  I  was  only  conscious  of  Mr.  1).  saying  now  and
again,  '  Wait  a  minute,'  when  he  slipped  fresh  paper  under
my  hand. Then  the  influence  suddenly  passed ;  I  opened  my


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  183


eyes  feeling  refreshed  and  alert,  my  headache  was  absolutely
gone."  Again,  in  the  second  case,  when  the  impulse  took  the
form  of  speech  :  "  Though  I  spoke  English,  I  felt  as  if  reading
aloud  from  a  language  I  could  pronounce  but  not  translate.  It
seemed  to  come  from  my  lips  only.  I  was  perfectly  conscious ;
I  watched  the  effect  of  mingled  moonlight  and  electric  light
on  the  deck  before  me  .  .  .  My  voice  went  on,  but  I  did
not  grasp  the  sense  of  a  single  sentence."  In  continuation  of
the  same  incident,  next  evening :  "  I  began  to  describe  an
elderly  man,  his  character,  manner  and  appearance,  down  to
minute  details,  and  this  time  I  understood  what  I  was  saying,
but  the  words  came  without  being  chosen."

Of  the  script  in  general,  Mrs.  Holland  says :  "  I  am  always
fully  conscious,  but  my  hand  moves  so  rapidly  that  I  seldom
know  what  words  it  is  forming."

The  headaches  of  this  early  period  have  recurred  only  to
a  slight  degree  and  very  rarely  since.  On  the  other  hand,
Mrs.  Holland  reports  later  an  occasional  tendency  to  drowsi-
ness in  connection  with  the  writing  which,  if  encouraged,  might
probably  develop  into  trance.

Other  slight  pains  mentioned  may  be  due  to  ordinary
muscular  exhaustion,  occasioned  by  automatic  contractures  of
the  muscles.  Thus,  of  the  script  of  Nov.  11th,  1903,  three
large  MS.  pp.,  Mrs.  Holland  notes:  "This  took  2  0  minutes,
and  left  my  whole  arm  feeling  very  tired."  Next  clay  two
pages  only  were  written,  and  she  notes:  "This  took  10  minutes
and  was  not  in  the  least  fatiguing."  On  Nov.  17th,  after
some  mirror-writing,  written  with  the  left  hand,  the  script
remarks  :  "  Your  hand  gets  tired  soon  because  it  is  not  passive
enough.  Make  it  limp.  At  present  the  whole  arm  has  to  be
moved  from  the  elbow.  It  is  only  your  wrist  and  fingers  that
need  move  really."

On  Nov.  27th  the  Gurney  control  writes:  "The  pain  in
your  shoulder  is  new  to  you,  isn't  it  ?  But  it's  slight  and  I
think  it  means  that  F.'s  power  is  deepening.  Let  your  hand
be  more  flexible  and  the  shoulder  will  not  suffer."

On  Jan.  5th,  1904,  Mrs.  Holland  not  having  found  leisure
for  the  script  since  Dec.  5  th,  the  Gurney  control  writes :
"  Why  did  you  stop  ?  Your  hand  needs  to  be  pushed  and
dragged  now. All  the  scrawling  and  thumping  again  I  hoped


184


Alice  Johnson.


[part


you  had  done  with  for  good — [then  in  another  writing] — Yes,
I  know  your  arm  is  aching — want  of  practice  only."

On  Jan.  7th,  1904,  after  a  page  of  writing,  the  script
says :  "  The  reason  you  feel  sleepy  is  that  too  many  are
trying  to  come  at  once,  and  that  is  why  the  writing  is  so
vague  and  scrawling  again.  Pull  yourself  together  and  think
of  one  particular  one — Pen."  Here  Mrs.  Holland  notes :  "  At
this  point  I  had  such  a  strong  feeling  of  mal  dc  mer  that  I
had  to  go  to  my  room  for  a  few  minutes.  It  left  as  suddenly
as  it  came  and  I  do  not  understand  it,  for  I  never  experienced
it  on  dry  land  before."  More  script  was  produced  on  the
evening  of  the  same  day,  in  the  course  of  which  the  Myers
control  remarks :  "  Your  feeling  of  faintness  and  sickness  this
morning  before  I  wrote  my  message,  the  longest  that  I  have
yet  been  able  to  send,  was  an  instance  of  jarring  influences
bearing  a  hostile  effect  on  your  house  of  clay."

Mrs.  Holland's  feeling  of  special  fatigue  after  the  writing
of  Jan.  12th,  1904,  has  already  been  mentioned.  In  a  letter
to  me  written  the  same  day,  she  says :  "  To  be  interrupted
when  writing  automatically  gives  me  a  jarred  feeling  and  at
times  a  feeling  of  dizziness  which  is  very  unpleasant."

It  is  natural  enough  that  the  subliminal  self  should  try  to
find  an  explanation  for  these  different  sensations  and  different
behaviours  of  the  hand  by  associating  them  with  different
external  influences,  or  different  degrees  of  the  influence,  though
there  is  no  evidence  for  any  such  causal  connection.  Neither,
of  course,  must  it  be  supposed  that  the  scriptural  attempts  at
explanation,  or  the  crude  and  often  contradictory  theories
expressed  as  to  the  nature  and  conditions  of  communication,
necessarily  represent  the  views  of  Mrs.  Holland  herself;  for
the  views  expressed  in  automatic  writing  frequently  differ  from
those  of  the  automatist,  who  must  no  more  be  held  responsible
for  them  than  for  opinions  expressed  by  characters  in  his
dreams.

Extracts  from  Script.

I  will  now  give  extracts  from  the  script  of  this  period,
taking  them  not  in  their  strict  chronological  order,  but  in  the
order  in  which  I  received  them  from  Mrs.  Holland,  and
including  many  of  the  passages  already  quoted  without  their


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  185


context  above.  The  first  was  sent  to  me  in  a  letter  dated
November  19th,  1903,  which  ran  as  follows:

...  I  am  glad  to  know  that  you  agree  with  me  as  to  the  harni-
lessness  of  automatic  writing  for  a  person  of  average  common-sense.
Its  snare  for  me  lies  in  the  direction  of  boredom  rather  than  of
blind  faith.  However,  in  September,  I  experimented  for  one  week,
by  spending  a  short  time  every  morning  in  waiting  for  automatic
writing  at  11  a.m.  That  is  a  good  commonplace  hour,  when  one  is
not  likely  to  be  over-imaginative.  I  found  the  results  disappointing,
though,  when  I  looked  over  them  the  other  day,  there  seemed  to
be  rather  more  continuity  of  thought  than  I  had  at  first  realized.
I  have  not  destroyed  them  yet,  and  if  you  care  to  see  them  I  will
send  them  to  you.

Since  then  I  have  tried  fitfully  several  times,  and  find  verses  on
the  decline,  and  in  their  place  come  initials,  names,  and  dates,  which
are  irritating  because  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  trace  them.  For
instance,  how  can  I  find  out  if  in  the  "  Old  Parish  Church "  at
Nantwich  there  is  a  plain  grey  stone  slab  recording  the  birth  and
death  of  John  Collins,  an  old  man  who  died  in  1873  ?  I  had  to
look  up  Nantwich  in  an  atlas  before  I  knew  what  county  it  was  in !
Then,  again,  I  have  never  been  in  Cambridge,  but  in  the  two  pages
of  automatic  writing  I  enclose,  what  purports  to  be  an  address  there
is  thrice  given,  and  the  third  time  it  is  stated  to  be  Mrs.  Verrall's.
I  remember  that  lady's  name  in  connection  with  experiments  with
crystal  vision  in  Human  Personality,  but  I  have  no  means  of  learning
if  "  Selwyn  Gardens  "  is  a  real  place.

Will  you  forgive  me  for  troubling  you  with  the  writing  1  I  do  not
like  to  suppress  it,  as  it  gave  me  the  impression  of  some  one  very
anxious  to  establish  communication,  but  with  not  much  power  to  do
it,  and  no  special  brief  message  to  convey  as  yet.  My  brain  was
far  more  influenced  than  my  hand,  and  that  is  very  unusual.  On
the  second  page  *  shows  from  where  my  hand  began  to  move
automatically  again.  I  feel  sure  I  should  recognise  a  portrait  of
the  man  who  wants  to  be  identified  if  I  saw  one  now,  but  I  cannot
be  sure  if  I  have  seen  one  already.  I  certainly  never  saw  him
actually,  but  I  vaguely  remember  a  portrait  seen  in  some  paper
two  or  three  years  ago,  but  I  cannot^remember  the  name  below  it.

By  seeing,  I  do  not  mean  that  the  figure  appeared  as  an  actual
phantasm  standing  in  the  room ;  I  saw  it  "  at  the  back  of  the
brain,"  in  the  way  that  clairvoyant  sights  come  to  me.


186


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  Lucy  "  and  "  Agnes  Lysaght "  mean  nothing  to  me,  the  last
name  has  been  written  several  times  lately.

The  script  enclosed  in  this  letter  was  written  (as  Mrs.
Holland  notes  on  it)  on  Nov.  7th  [1903],  at  11  a.m.  It  begins
with  a  scrawl  ending  in  the  initial  "  F."  The  sentences  in
round  brackets  are  in  Mrs.  Holland's  normal  hand-writing,
being  apparently  questions  addressed  by  her  to  the  "  control."
The  punctuation  is  generally  represented  by  dashes  and
capital  letters.  The  illegible  scrawls  after  the  word  "  Eidolon  "
have  some  superficial  resemblance  to  Greek  characters.

(My  hand  feels  very  shaky — shall  I  let  it  scrawl  1)
Yes  let  it  go  quite  freely  just  exactly  as  it  likes —
My  dear  Mrs.  Venal  1

I  am  very  anxious  to  speak  to  some  of  the  old  friends — Miss  J. —
and  to  AW.

(If  I  held  the  pen  more  tightly,  would  it  now  scrawl  less  1)

There  is  so  much  to  say  and  yet  so  very  little  chance  of  saying
it  Communication  is  tremendously  difficult  The  brain  of  the
agent  though  indispensable  is  so  hampering  I  think  it  might  be
better  if  the  agent  Avrote  the  thoughts  in  her  brain  instead  of  keep-
ing a  vacant  brain  and  a  passive  hand —

Very  well.  I  will  write  down  what  I  am  thinking  of  but  my
hand  feels  as  if  it  wanted  to  scrawl  and  the  words  have  a  tendency
to  run  into  each  other —

I  find  myself  picturing  a  tall  man  who  seems  about  60  years  of
age — He  is  rather  thin  and  has  bent  shoulders — His  face  is  pale —
not  handsome — very  intelligent — He  has  a  moustache — dark — with
grey  threads — more  grey  than  his  hair — which  is  thin — parted  at
one  side  and  pushed  over  the  top  of  the  head —  It  has  receded  a
good  deal  from  the  temples —  His  eyes  are  grey — he  wears  pince
nez —  The  nose  is  rather  long — the  face  narrow — the  throat  is
long —  He  used  to  have  a  nervous  cough —  When  he  is  interested
in  what  he  talks  of  he  has  a  trick  of  leaning  forward  and  gesticu-
lating a  good  deal —  He  has  well  shaped  hands  with  long  fingers —
There  is  a  seal  ring  on  the  little  finger  of  the  right  hand — but  I
can't  see  if  it  has  a  crest  or  a  monogram  on  it — His  tie  is  rather

loosely  tied — he  wears  no  pin  in  it It  is  more  like  looking  at

a  lantern  picture  than  at  a  real  man —  I  mean  he  seems  to  be
summoning  up  the  appearance  of  what  he  used  to  be —  I  can  feel
that  he  wants  to  say  many  things — but  only  confused  phrases  reach


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  187


me — that  I  can't  note  down —  But  what  seems  to  be  an  address  is
very  clear —

5  Selwyn  Gardens— Cambridge.

I  will  write  down  the  stray  words  and  phrases  that  come  into
my  mind

Edmund — the  first  to  come  Henry  I  had  to  wait  some  time  for —  *
Those  one  most  wants  have  often  their  own  employments —  S  M  1
has  not  appeared  yet —  Tell  Miss  J —  that  the  compact 2  is  not
forgotten —

I  knew  the  success  at  once — The  Times — Is  A  W.  satisfied  1  Pod — ■
[illegible] how  [or  "  now  "]  the  typewriter  1

Only  a  little  at  a  time —  Practise  is  needed  and  sympathy.  The
agent  is  all  alone  and  that  makes  it  hard.

Eidolon —  [here  follow  illegible  scrawls,  evidently  representing
an  attempt  at  Greek  script] Timor  mortis

Lucy — Lucy. Agnes  Lysaght

17  Manchester  Square.3

Send  to  5  Alyvvyn ["5  Aly  wyn  "  is  crossed  out. Then  follows:]

5  Selwyn  Gardens

Cambridge.

(I  have  the  impulse  now  to  try  a  pencil.)

Make  an  effort  not  to  be  so  doubtful — I  know  this  all  seems
meaningless  to  you  but  it  has  its  meaning  nevertheless —
(Can  I  have  no  proof  1)

Metetheric  4 —
(I  don't  understand)

You  needn't  try  to — -only  write

(Yes  I  will  write — my  hand  is  ready)

It  is  like  entrusting  a  message  on  which  infinite  importance
depends  to  a  sleeping  person —  Get  a  proof — try  for  a  proof  if  you
feel  this  is  a  waste  of  time  without Send  this  to  Mrs.  Verrall

5  Selwyn  Gardens
Cambridge

1  S.  M.  is  probably  Stainton  Moses.

2  I  am  not  aware  of  Mr.  Myers  having  made  any  compact.  The  reference
is  probably  to  the  "compacts"  to  appear,  if  possible,  at  or  after  death,  men-
tioned in  various  cases  given  in  Human  Personality,  Chapter  VII.  (Vol.  II.
pp.  42  et  seq.).  It  would  be  natural  to  guess  that  Mr.  Myers  might  have
made  such  a  ' '  compact. "

3 1  have  not  identified  these  names.

4  This  word  is  obviously  derived  from  "  metetherial,"  a  word  coined  by
Mr.  Myers  and  used  in  Human  Personality.


188


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  happened  to  see  Mrs.  Verrall  the  day  after  I  received
this  script,  and  I  then  told  her  that  a  lady  in  India  had
sent  me  some  automatic  writing  containing  her  name  and
address ;  but  that  the  lady  had  been  reading  Human  Person-
ality, and  the  main  points  in  her  writing  seemed  to  be  derived
from  it.  I  did  not  show  Mrs.  Verrall  this  writing  or  tell
her  anything  more  about  it  until  Oct.  1905.  On  November
16th,  1905,  I  read  to  her  the  description  of  the  man,  as  it
had  occurred  to  me  that  it  was  not  unlike  Dr.  Verrall,  and
she  agreed  that  there  were  many  points  of  similarity.  In
1903  Dr.  Verrall  was  52,  but  looked  older  on  account  of  his
delicate  health.  He  had  a  beard  as  well  as  moustache — more
grey  than  his  hair ;  when  run  down,  he  tended  to  have  a
nervous  cough.  His  hands  were  well-shaped  with  long  fingers
which  have  become  crippled  and  much  bent  from  rheumatism.
He  has  never  worn  a  seal  ring.  The  other  points  mentioned
are  correct.

As  to  the  remark  in  Mrs.  Holland's  letter,  quoted  above
(p.  185),  that  she  vaguely  remembered  a  portrait  seen  in  some
paper  two  or  three  years  earlier,  which  she  thought  might
possibly  be  the  source  of  her  description,  Mrs.  Verrall  tells
me  that  no  portrait  of  Dr.  Verrall,  as  far  as  she  knows,  has
ever  appeared  in  an  illustrated  paper.  There  are  two  portraits
of  him  in  his  house,  but  neither  has  been  reproduced.  A
photograph  of  him  was  taken  about  1906,  the  one  previous
to  that  having  been  when  he  was  under  forty.

On  re-reading  the  description  later,  Mrs.  Verrall  writes :

The  attitude  strikes  me  as  particularly  good.  The  trick  of  lean-
ing forward  and  gesticulating  when  interested  in  what  he  talks  of
is  very  characteristic.  The  use  of  the  initials  A.  W.  without  the
final  V.  is  also  characteristic  in  the  case  of  Cambridge  friends  and
especially  of  Mr.  Myers.

Also  the  phrase  "Is  A.  W.  satisfied?"  is  curiously  parallel  to  the
phrase  in  my  script,  October  6th,  1901:  "But  A.  W.  V.  must  be
satisfied."

This  latter  phrase  was  used  in  connection  with  an  ex-
periment described  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report  on  her  script
{Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XX.  pp.  156-167  and  387-394),  in
which  Dr.  Verrall  tried  to  convey  three  Greek  words  to  her


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  899


telepathically.  The  report  was  not  published  until  October,
1906,  but  a  brief  abstract  of  this  experiment  appeared  in  the
Journal  S.P.E.,  May,  1903,  including  the  phrase  "A.  W.  V.
[i.e.  Dr.  Verrall]  ought  to  be  satisfied."  I  have  every  reason
to  believe  (see  below)  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  seen  this
or  any  other  number  of  the  Journal.

The  description  of  the  man  in  the  script  just  quoted,
though  certainly  like  Dr.  Verrall,  appears  to  be  meant  to
refer  to  a  dead  person  ("  he  seems  to  be  summoning  up  the
appearance  of  what  he  used  to  be "),  and  some  passages  in
the  later  script  make  it  clear  that  Mrs.  Holland  herself  identified
the  man  described  as  Mr.  Myers.  The  description  is  quite
incorrect  if  applied  to  him.

With  regard  to  the  mention  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  address  in
this  script,  in  Human  Personality  she  is  spoken  of  as  "  Mrs.
A.  W.  Verrall,  a  lecturer  at  Newnham  College,"  and  her
address  is  not  given.  I  thought  it  not  unlikely,  however,
that  Mrs.  Holland  might  have  seen  Dr.  Verrall's  address  in
Who's  Who  or  some  such  work  of  reference,  and  have  kept  a
subliminal  recollection  of  it.  I  wrote  to  her  explaining  that
there  was  strong  evidence  that  facts  that  had  been  once
known  and  absolutely  forgotten  might  remain  in  the  subliminal
memory  and  emerge  automatically,  and  that  much  in  her
writing  was  clearly  derived  from  reminiscences  of  Mr.  Myers's
book,  though  some  of  it  could  not  apparently  be  so  explained.
I  asked  her  to  tell  me  whether  she  had  seen  any  of  the
S.P.R  Proceedings  or  Journals,  or  what  other  books  she  had
read  on  the  subject.  I  said  that  in  order  to  avoid  giving
hints  which  might  be  developed  by  her  subliminal  conscious-
ness, I  preferred  not  to  tell  her  at  present  which  parts  of  her
script  appeared  possibly  evidential,  but  I  asked  her  to  continue
sending  to  me  all  the  script  she  got.

This  letter  perhaps  formed  a  point  ele  repere  for  the  vision
seen  by  Mrs.  Holland  on  the  night  after  she  received  it,  as
described  in  the  following  letter  dated  January  12th,  1904:

I  am  delighted  to  answer  any  questions  that  may  help  me  to
utiderstand  how  much  of  the  automatic  writing  I  get  is  due  to
subconscious  memory,  and  how  much,  if  any,  comes  from  other
influences.  I  am  so  afraid  of  becoming  a  self-deceiver,  charlatan
malcjri  moi  !


190


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  have  never  seen  an}'  of  the  Proceedings  or  Journals  of  the  S.P.R.,
and  Mr.  Myers'  Human  Personality  is  the  only  book  on  the  subject
I  have  ever  read.  I  remember  looking  at  Mr.  Lang's  Dreams  and
Ghosts  when  it  first  came  out,  but  1  have  not  seen  it  since,  and  my
memory  of  it  is  limited  to  the  story  of  a  dog's  ghost.  Years  ago
I  read  two  or  three  collections  of  ghost  stories,  of  the  Glimpses  in
the  Twilight  type,  and  I  re-read  that  particular  collection  the  other
day.  In  1902  a  friend  sent  me  a  MS.  book  of  copied  "spirit
writings"  to  read:  flowery  descriptions  of  the  "Happy  Land,"
signed  with  names  like  pantomime  fairies,  which  I  disliked  intensely.
I  have  never  seen  any  other  examples  of  automatic  writing.

...  I  am  glad  that  you  wish  to  see  more  automatic  writing.
If  I  may  send  3^011  all  I  get  it  will  remove  the  scruples  I  have
felt  about  writing  down  "  messages "  I  could  not  attempt  to  verify.
Please  continue  not  to  give  me  any  clue  as  to  the  meaning  or
meaninglessness  of  anything  that  I  may  send  you  ;  I  am  very  anxious
not  to  begin  to  think  of  "hits  and  misses,"  and  indeed  I  feel  as
if  the  less  I  thought  of  it,  the  less  misleading  it  is  likely  to  be.

I  will  send  you  by  this  mail  the  September  experiment  of  writing
every  day  for  a  week,  to  which  I  referred  before,  and  also  an
exercise  book  in  which  I  have  written  during  November  and  quite
lately.  I  had  to  give  up  writing  for  a  month,  because  December
is  such  a  busy  time  here  that  I  could  not  count  on  even  half-an-
hour  undisturbed  in  the  morning,  and  to  be  interrupted  when
writing  automatically  gives  me  a  jarred  feeling,  and  at  times  a
feeling  of  dizziness  which  is  very  unpleasant.  .  .  .

The  names  I  know  to  be  real,  which  occur  here  and  there,  always
distress  me,  but  if  I  suppressed  what  had  been  written  when  it  did
not  suit  my  own  taste,  I  should  feel  very  dishonest.

Since  apparently  trivial  impressions  have  sometimes  a  meaning,
I  think  I  must  tell  you  that  on  the  night  of  January  4th  I  had
one  of  my  vivid  infrequent  dreams,  or  rather  "visions  of  the  night,"
for  they  always  seem  to  precede  sleep.  I  was  tired  and  neuralgic
after  a  week  of  late  hours,  and  when  I  went  to  bed  I  darkened
the  room  completely,  instead  of  leaving  a  small  lamp  burning  as
usual.  Very  soon,  an  unexpected  light  made  me  think  that  one  of
the  electric  lamps  in  the  next  room  had  been  turned  on,  until  I
saw  the  light  was  too  diffused  to  be  coming  through  the  chinks  of
the  door.  As  I  watched  it,  it  altered  its  character,  becoming  a
large  luminous  patch  with  jagged  edges,  on  a  black  background
which  it  did  not  illuminate. This  was  a  new  experience  for  me,


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  191


and  I  was  very  interested  and  confidently  hoped  to  see  a  scene,  or
at  least  a  face,  appear  in  the  centre  of  the  light.  Instead  of  this
I  suddenly  seemed  to  be  standing  behind  a  man  who  was  sitting
at  a  large  kneehole  writing  table.  A  long  window  was  in  front,
but  I  did  not  see  anything  through  it.  I  wanted  to  see  his  face
and  moved  round  to  the  right,  but  his  head  was  so  bent  that  I
only  saw  a  fine  brow,  grey  hair,  the  points  of  his  rather  old-fashioned
turned-down  collar,  and  a  loosely  tied  dark  tie.  He  was  busy  with
proofs  and  MS.,  and  as  I  watched  him  he  sighed  heavily.  Then  I
noticed  that  the  pen  he  wrote  with  left  no  mark  on  the  paper,
and  it  struck  me  that  he  was  a  shadow  in  real  surroundings.  At
the  instant  I  came  to  myself  again,  in  my  dark  room,  and  did  not
sleep  for  more  than  half  an-hour  after.  Unless  this  impression  has
some  connection,  symbolical  or  otherwise,  with  your  letter  which  I
received  that  day,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  account  for  it.  You  will
understand  I  do  not  ask  if  there  is  any  connection  ;  I  only  wish  to
mention  it  to  you.

There  seems  little  doubt  that  this  vision  represented  Mrs.
Holland's  subliminal  conception  of  Mr.  Myers,  but,  though  not
unlike  him  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  too  vague  for  identification.

I  now  give  in  chronological  order  some  extracts  from  the
above-mentioned  batch  of  writings  sent  to  me  on  January
15th,  1904,  which  are  chiefly  interesting  as  illustrating  the
characteristics  of  the  Myers  and  Gurney  "  controls  "  and  their
gradual  development  during  this  period.

There  is  little  or  nothing  worth  noting  about  the  meagre
and  fragmentary  utterances  of  the  other  controls,  a  few  of
which  are  included  in  these  extracts.  They  are  sometimes
indicated  more  or  less  dubiously  by  variations  in  the  hand-
writings, to  which  no  names  are  attached.  In  other  cases
occur  the  names,  John  Collins,  Agnes  Lysaght,  William  Nixon,
which  I  have  not  traced  and  suspect  to  be  fictitious.  Another
group  consists  of:  a  dead  child,  whose  mother  was  a  casual
acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Holland's ;  the  lady  called  below  "  Mrs.
N."  (see  p.  287);  and  Lady  Mount-Temple;  all  these  being
persons  of  whom  Mrs.  Holland  had  heard,  like  the  Laurence
Oliphant  control,  which  appeared  for  a  short  time  in  1905
(see  p.  259).


192


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Note.

The  words  enclosed  in  round  brackets  in  the  following
extracts  are  notes  made  on  the  script  at  the  time  by  Mrs.
Holland,  giving  the  day  and  hour  of  the  writing,  the  questions
she  occasionally  put  to  the  controls,  her  own  feelings  or
circumstances  at  the  moment,  etc.

The  initials  or  words  in  square  brackets  at  the  beginning
of  passages  have  been  added  by  myself  to  show  which  control
purports  to  be  operative  (as  judged  by  the  hand-writing  or
contents),  or  the  points  where  there  is  a  definite  change  in
the  hand-writing  indicating  some  change  of  control.  The
Myers  control  is  represented  by  the  initial  "M."  and  the
Gurney  control  by  the  initial  "  G."  The  indications,  however,
are  often  dubious  and  in  many  cases  have  probably  no  real
significance.

The  following  passage,  dated  September  16th,  1903,  is
written  on  two  sides  of  a  half  sheet  of  paper,  the  first  side
ending  with  the  number  17,  and  the  second  with  the  initial
"M."  The  date  17/1/01  was  that  of  Mr.  Myers's  death,
stated  in  Human  Personality  (Editorial  Note).  As  mentioned
above,  the  separation  of  the  initials  and  numbers  from  one
another  prevented  me  for  a  long  time  from  seeing  their
significance.

(September  16th,  7.30  a.m.)

[M.]  F.

Friend  while  on  earth  with  knowledge  slight
I  had  the  living  power  to  write
Death  tutored  now  in  things  of  might
I  yearn  to  you  and  cannot  write.

17  |

It  may  be  that  those  who  die  suddenly  suffer  no  prolonged  obscura-
tion of  consciousness  but  for  my  own  experience  the  unconsciousness
was  exceedingly  prolonged.

I  1

The  reality  is  infinitely  more  wonderful  than  our  most  daring  con-
jectures. Indeed  no  conjecture  can  be  sufficiently  daring.

I  01

But  this  is  like  the  first  stumbling  attempts  at  expression  in  an


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  193

unknown  language  imperfectly  explained  so  far  away  so  very  far
away  and  yet  longing  and  understanding  potentialities  of  nearness.

M.

The  next  passage,  written  on  the  same  day,  begins  with  the
date  1888  (the  date  of  Mr.  Gurney's  death,  also  stated  in
Human  Personality),  and  the  initials  F.,  E.,  and  H.  S. — obviously
intended  to  represent  Mr.  Myers,  Mr.  Gurney  and  Professor
Sidgwick.

(September  16th,  1903,  11  a.m.)
[M.] 1888 F. E. H.S. [in  monogram].
Believe  in  what  thou  canst  not  see
Until  the  vision  come  to  thee

What  though  the  work  may  seem  all  wrought  in  vain

What  though  the  labour  seems  to  bring  no  gain

Take  courage  and  be  strong  to  work  again

There  were  three  workers  once  upon  the  earth

Three  that  have  passed  through  Death's  great  second  birth

Their  work  remains  and  some  of  lasting  worth

Long  dead  and  lately  dead  shall  be  as  one.

1888.  1888.

[illegible] Forgotten  ?

(September  18th,  11.20.)
Hypnotism  is  to  the  healthy  spirit  what  drugs — opium  hasheesh
Indian  hemp  are  to  the  body  and  they  should  be  as  carefully
avoided — Avoid  it.  Those  that  are  well  need  no  medicine  and  it  is
dangerous.  Dangerous — deadly  dangerous — The  lower  influences  are
often  the  nearest  and  it  is  terrible  to  present  a  swept  and  garnished
house — the  body  vacated  by  the  spirit — for  them  to  enter  in  to —
Avoid  it — Trance  should  never  be  physically  induced —  If  it  is
necessary  or  desirable  it  will  be  psychically  induced  without  danger
or  fear — Avoid  hypnotism

1873. 30  years  ago. Cmrde. Abig.  Youth.
[Gr.] It  has  been  a  long  work — but the work  is  not  nearly
over  yet — It  has  barely  begun — Go  on  with  it — go  on — We  were
the  torch  bearers — follow  after  us — The  flame  burns  more  steadily
now —

E.  G.  1888.

As  mentioned  above,  I  traced  the  latter  part  of  this  passage
after  some  time  to  a  sentence  in  Human  Personality  (Vol.  I.,


194


Alice  Johnson.


[part


p.  7),  which  showed  me  that  the  enigmatic  letters  were  an
anagram  for  "  Cambridge."

Next  day  came  some  advice  to  the  automatist,  part  of  which
I  quote.

(September  1 9  tb ,  11  a.m.)

[M.]  You  should  not  be  discouraged  if  what  is  written  appears  to
you  futile —  Most  of  it  is  not  meant  for  you —  You  are  the
reporter — the  recorder  and  need  not  be  the  critic

Perhaps  the  people  for  whom  messages — or  attempts  at  messages
are  sent  will  never  see  them — but  it  is  important  that  you  should
be  en  rapport — think  no  time  wasted  even  though  it  brings  you
nothing  more  interesting  than  this Don't  be  in  too  great  a  hurry —

A  few  minutes  later  on  the  same  day,  while  Mrs.  Holland
was  reading,  some  scribbled  initials,  and  then  words,  came  as
follows : —

F.  W.  H.  M.  F.  Edmund.  H.  S.  Fifteen  years  does  it  seem
so  long  to  you  ?

1886

Mary
Fred

A  compact  that  could  not  be  fulfilled  in  January  can  yet  be
carried  out.

In  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  8,  occurs  this  sentence :
"  The  fifteen  years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  publication  of
this  book  [Phantasms  of  the  Living]  in  1886  ...  "  A  foot-
note on  the  same  page  states  that  Professor  Sidgwick  was
the  first  President  of  the  S.P.P.,  and  Mr.  Grurney  its  first
Honorary  Secretary,  he  and  Mr.  Myers  being  joint  Honorary
Secretaries  of  the  Literary  Committee  of  the  Society.  The
name  "  Mary  "  is,  I  think,  meaningless  in  this  connection.

(September  21st.)

To  the  first  question  Yes.

To  the  second No —
(I  had  not  asked  any  questions.)

[M.]  A  room  that  is  rather  narrow  for  its  length  with  three
windows  and  a  long  narrow  table  covered  with  a  dull  red  cloth
rather  faded.

The  walls  need  repapering  The  ceiling  needs  white-washing
There  is  a  portrait  over  the  fireplace  of  a  man  with  a  high  fore-


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  195


head — -the  background  of  it  is  very  dark —  A  bust  on  a  pedestal
stands  in  a  very  shadowed  corner —  The  head  is  not  clear — round
the  shoulders  is  a  kind  of  bath  towel  like  drapery.  The  pedestal  is
imitation  greenish  marble —

There  are  a  few  good  prints  in  the  room — but  it  is  not  easy  to
see  them —

Shelves  on  one  side  have  a  few  books  and  a  great  many  papers
and  pamphlets  on  them —  The  room  is  not  in  the  least  interesting
in  itself  but  very  interesting  things  have  happened  there  and  some
men  now  dead  still  influence  that  room  very  strongly —

When  I  read  the  above  description  it  did  not  suggest  to
me  any  room  that  I  knew.  About  Christmas,  1905,  I  gave
Mrs.  Verrall  a  large  quantity  of  the  early  script  to  read,
and  she  pointed  out  to  me  that  the  description  applied
closely  to  her  dining-room.  She  wrote  on  January  1st,  1906  :
"  From  '  A  room  '  to  '  very  dark  '  seems  quite  correct,  though
there  is  a  fourth  window  not  noticeable  from  door.  Bust 1
on  pedestal  quite  wrong.  Rest  of  description  correct.  On
bookshelves  are  kept  still  some  unbound  magazines,  etc.,  and
there  used  to  be  more  papers  and  pamphlets.  Quite  recently,
summer  of  1905  about,  the  addition  of  a  large  edition  of
Thackeray  and  the  filling  of  three  more  shelves  with  books
made  it  necessary  to  turn  out  the  papers."  There  is  a
portrait  (of  Dr.  Verrall)  corresponding  to  the  description,  but
beside  the  fire-place,  not  over  it.  It  was  appropriate  to  say
that  interesting  things  had  happened  in  the  room  and  that
some  men  now  dead  still  influence  it,  since  it  was  naturally
in  that  room  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  friends  who  were  interested
in  psychical  research  had  often  been  entertained,  as  well  as
many  other  Cambridge  men,  some  of  whom  are  no  longer
living.

The  next  passage  is  one  of  a  small  number  where  definite
statements  with  names  are  given  which  are  probably  quite
imaginary.  I  have  made  enquiries  at  Nantwich  and  no  trace
can  be  found  of  John  Collins  or  his  tombstone.

1  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  on  being  told
of  this  description,  remarked,  "But  there  is  a  bust  in  your  dining-room."
Mrs.  Verrall  took  him  into  the  room  and  found  that  what  he  had  vaguely
supposed  to  be  a  bust  was  really  a  large  filter  which  stood  in  a  rather  dark
corner  of  the  room.


196


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(September  21st.)

John  Collins  of  Nantwich —

An  old  man  when  he  died  in  1873

At  the  old  Parish  Church  a  grey  stone  slab  on  his  grave  with
no  inscription  on  it  except  his  name  and  Born  March  9  1794  Died
May  19th,  1873,  one  son  who  died  15  years  after  one  daughter
died  when  a  child  [Here  follow  scribbles  and  a  rough  drawing  of
spectacles.]

Nantwich

May  19  1873

Eyes  are  clear  that  then  were  dim — Dim  and  veiled
Men  who  have  gone  over  one  at  a  time
Men  are  stronger  very  seldom

[C]  Do  not  feel  that  criticism  need  act  in  the  least  as  a
fetter — don't  let  it  hinder  you  at  all.  If  the  time  is  not  ready
yet —  Still  the  time  will  come — some  day —  Pioneers  are  not
needed  after  the  roads  are  made —  Pick  and  shovel  are  needed
now — and  you  all  of  you  must  not  weary  in  using  them.  Nothing
is  unimportant  however  much  it  seems  so.

[M.]  There  is  no  effort  unavailing —

You  fail — yet  save  another's  failing —

[G.] One  person  alone  does  so  little —

[M.]  It  is  hard  that  hrst  results  often  seem  so  futile  but  it  is
all  preparation.

The  passage  ends  with  two  or  three  unfinished  attempts
at  the  signature  F.  W.  H.  Myers  with  the  sign  and
again  the  date  1873.

Apparently  no  more  script  was  produced  until  Nov.  7  th,
1903,  when  the  passage  already  quoted  (see  p.  186)  was
written.  The  next  day  Mrs.  Holland  began  to  write,  at  first
daily,  afterwards  with  occasional  breaks,  in  the  manuscript  book
sent  to  me  on  January  loth,  1904.  I  have  not  succeeded
in  identifying  the  room  described  as  below  on  Nov.  8th.

(November  8th,  1903,  12.30  p.m.)

[M.]  My  first  wish  is  that  you  should  try  patiently  and  steadily
— with  no  undue  hurry  for  results.  Patience  is  the  chief  thing
asked  of  you.  You  must  not  expect  more  than  [sic]  first  than
mere  crumbs  of  speech — the  preparation  for  better  things.  Hold


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  197


the  pencil  firmly  try  not  to  let  it  waste  strength  in  dashes  and
flourishes.  Ask  questions  if  you  wish  to  but  the  passive  mind
will  be  the  best  attitude.  Try  not  to  wish  too  much  for  any
particular  topic — or  you  are  more  likely  to  deceive  yourself  by
supplying  phrases  from  the  subliminal  self — dull  it  as  much  as  pos-
sible, and  let  the  outer  impulses  exercise  a  telergic  influence  on
you — Telepathy  is  perhaps  the  better  word  in  this  case —

No — don't  try  reading  while  you  hold  the  pencil  at  least  not  yet —
That  may  be  done  later  perhaps  At  present  sit  quiet  and
attentive —

[scribbles]  don't  scribble —

Agnes  Lysaght  17  Manchester  Square
(Why  has  that  been  written  again  1)

You  had  best  not  ask  questions  as  yet  only  take  what  comes —

A  rather  low  ceiled  room  opening  through  two  long  windows
on  a  green  lawn —  He  always  remembers  it  now  as  it  used  to
look  in  summertime  when  the  clematis  was  in  blossom.  The  walls
are  so  covered  with  books  that  it  is  hard  to  see  if  they  have  any
colour  and  the  pictures  all  hang  in  a  little  group  above  the  mantel-
piece— there  is  a  very  big  knee  hole  writing  table — it  is  tidy  now
but  it  was  always  covered  with  papers  while  its  master  lived —  A
big  leather  covered  chair  with  a  bookrest  attached  is  on  the  left  of
the  fireplace —

The  next  script  is  dated  November  9th,  1903,  10.45  A.M.,
and  consists  of  a  detailed  description  of  a  death,  purporting  to
be  given  by  the  deceased  person.  No  name  is  mentioned,  but
the  handwriting  is  that  of  the  Myers  control,  and  a  phrase
contained  in  it :  "I  had  many  reasons  for  desiring  to  live —
the  book  for  one  " — is  appropriate  to  Mr.  Myers,  since  he  left
his  book,  Human  Personality,  unfinished  when  he  died.  Mrs.
Holland  apparently  took  it  at  the  time  to  refer  to  Mr.  Myers,
though,  as  will  be  seen,  the  script  itself  later  repudiated
this  interpretation.  Next  clay  she  saw  in  an  Indian  paper,
dated  November  10th,  1903,  the  announcement  of  the  death
of  Lord  Kowton.  Afterwards  she  sent  me  this  paper,  contain-
ing the  following  notice :  "  Obituary.  London,  Nov.  9.  The
death  is  announced  of  Lord  Rowton,"  and  told  me  that  she
had  met  him  in  England  some  years  before  and  had  heard
of  his  severe  illness  in  1902,  but  did  not  know  he  had
been  ill  again. She  ascertained  later  that  the  hour  of  his

N


198


Alice  Johnson.


[part


death  was  4.45  a.m.  which  is  about  equivalent  to  10.45  a.m.
(the  hour  of  her  script)  in  India.  After  hearing  of  his  death,
she  attempted  to  get  from  her  script  answers  to  various
questions  about  his  illness,  etc.,  and  looked  up  the  facts  in  the
English  papers  when  they  reached  India.  She  found  that
the  statements  in  the  script  were  partly  correct  and  partly
incorrect ;  but  in  so  far  as  they  were  correct,  they  do  not
seem  to  go  beyond  what  she  might  have  guessed  from  her
knowledge  of  Lord  Eowton.  There  remains  the  coincidence
that  the  description  of  a  death  is  written  at  the  time  of  his
death.  There  is,  however,  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  death
referred  to  has  only  just  occurred ;  the  description  would  apply
equally  well  to  a  long-past  experience.  Nevertheless  the  phrase
"  I  had  many  reasons  for  desiring  to  live — the  book  for  one  "
was  appropriate  to  Lord  Eowtou  as  well  as  to  Mr.  Myers,
since  he  had  had  the  materials  for  a  life  of  Lord  Beaconsfield
left  in  his  hands  by  the  latter  with  the  injunction  not  to
publish  anything  for  twenty  years ;  the  time  had  now  come
and  he  had  been  planning  the  book.  (All  this  was  known  to
Mrs.  Holland  at  the  time.)

On  November  11th,  the  script  having  stated  that  "an  intel-
ligence absolutely  unknown  to  you  is  at  present  in  charge,"
Mrs.  Holland  asked  :

(Did  you  give  me  the  writing  that  came  on  the  9th])

[M.]  No — but  you  must  wait  to  know  who  did —  Do  try  to
make  your  mind  more  passively  receptive —  Don't  think  of  things
you  want  to  know  or  understand — otherwise  you  will  presently
transcribe  your  own  imaginings — delude  yourself  and  be  no  help
to  others —  Keep  a  peaceful  passive  mind  and  try  merely
to  write  down  legibly  what  your  hand  wishes  to  write —  At
present  now  your  hand  often  wants  to  write  down  something  while
your  mind  is  full  of  quite  another  set  of  thoughts  and  the  result
is  confusion

If  you  wish  to  experiment  in  your  own  mind — try  at  another
hour  of  the  day — with  another  pencil  and  in  another  book — to  write
down  the  thoughts  and  questions  that  present  themselves —  That
will  be  a  Mind  Book — but  keep  this  for  a  Hand  Book.  In  this
devote  yourself  to  the  mere  mechanical  task  of  keeping  the  writing
legible —  Let  the  hand  alone  be  responsible  for  what  is  writing.
Detach  your  own  brain  from  the  writing  as  much  as  possible —  If


lv.] A  utomatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  199


the  pencil  wants  to  move  in  your  fingers  let  it  but  don't  allow
scribbling  and  scrawling.

[G.]  Belief  is  perhaps  a  help  to  this  but  obedient  passive  help
is  really  the  best  thing —  Bother  your  preconceived  ideas — let  them
rest  and  give  up  your  hand  for  a  few  minutes  daily  to  be  moved
as  it  likes —

G. [drawing  of  spectacles] John  Collins — Nantwich — 1
(This  took  20  minutes  and  left  my  whole  arm  feeling  very  tired.)

(November  12th,  11.20  a.m.)

[M.]  Morning  is  the  best  time  to  try  for  writing  while  the  brain
is  fresh  and  new  as  it  were —  Very  early  would  be  the  best  time
of  all — No  matter  if  you  are  sleepy —

Yes,  I  know  that  when  you  tried  in  the  dusk  it  was  almost
impossible  to  read  but  that  was  not  because  the  writing  was  illegible
but  because  you  wrote  one  line  on  the  top  of  the  other.2  A  little
careful  feeling  would  prevent  your  doing  that  and  night  and  silence
are  good  times  too  and  perhaps  the  fact  that  you  are  tired  then
would  make  you  easier  to  influence

Do  try  to  keep  your  own  brain  quiet
(May  I  never  ask  questions  1)

Yes  but  not  yet.  Do  let  the  method  of  communication  be  per-
fectly established  first,  you  always  want  to  run  before  you  can
walk

Friday  was  the  day  really  why  did  you  write  Tu  no  Wednesday?
(One  question — may  I  mention  that  writing  to  her  1)
Yes  but  it  was  not  given  as  a  proof — ■
It  was  heart  failure  finally —

Don't  ask  so  many  questions  in  your  mind.  It  demands  that  I
should  answer  them  when  I  want  to  use  all  my  force  for  writing —

No  a  week  is  not  long  enough  for  a  test —  You  must  keep  it
up  for  a  whole  month —

No  since  you  can't  write  on  Sunday  mornings  at  11  try  it  at  a
later  hour  in  the  day  but  do  not  miss  a  day —  Go  steadily  on  till
Dec.  8th.

[drawing  of  a  heart  and  cross] Denbigh —  Banff — Bute —
Jt  should  be  deeper  and  more  away  to  the  right  of  the  Refectory —
(This  took  10  minutes  and  was-  not  in  the  least  fatiguing.)

1  See  script  of  September  21st,  1903,  p.  196.

2  Mrs.  Holland  tells  me  that  this  refers  to  some  script  produced  before  she
had  begun  sending  it  all  regularly  to  me.


200


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  last  passage  is  another  instance  of  the  emergence  of
a  subliminal  recollection.  Mrs.  Holland  notes  (November  15th
1905):  "This,  as  Miss  Johnson  pointed  out  to  me,  must
mean  a  reference  to  Lord  Bute's  heart  being  taken  to  the
Holy  Land.  The.  sentence  that  followed  should  have  given
me  the  clue,  for  years  before  I  had  been  much  interested  in
Lord  Bute's  excavations  in  the  old  Priory  grounds  at  St.
Andrews."  The  last  sentence  of  the  script,  then,  no  doubt
refers  to  these  excavations,  and  further  references  to  Lord
Bute's  heart  occur  later  (see  below).  There  is,  so  far  as  I
know,  no  appropriateness  in  the  association  of  Denbigh  and
Banff  with  Bute.

(November  14th,  11  a.m.)
(Now  I  do  not  expect  to  get  any  writing  to-day  for  I  am  busy  and
hurried  and  not  well— but  an  impulse  to  try  came  to  me  at  11
exactly — so  I  try.)

[M.]  It  is  such  a  pity  to  break  the  chain —  Since  you  were  out
in  the  morning  yesterday  why  didn't  you  try  in  the  afternoon —
A  few  minutes  steadily  each  day  are  not  much  to  ask  from  you —

I  want  to  be  able  to  write  steadily  not  in  these  fitful  snatches —

You  need  not  have  the  old-fashioned  fear  that  this  kind  of  thing
is  weakening  to  either  brain  or  body —  It  will  expand  your  sym-
pathies and  sharpen  your  powers  of  understanding —  It  will  make
your  spirit  keep  in  step  with  great  powers  instead  of  hurrying
hopefully  in  a  good  many  mistaken  directions —
(The  joined  writing  rather  worries  me — is  it  quite  essential  ?)

Yes  it  saves  time  and  when  the  thread  of  connection  is  finer
than  any  strand  of  gossamer  one  must  not  run  the  risk  of  breaking  it.

[G.]  I  can't  help  feeling  vexed  or  rather  angry  at  the  half-
hearted way  in  which  you  go  in  for  this — you  should  either  take  it
or  leave  it —  If  you  don't  care  enough  to  try  every  day  for  a  short
time  better  drop  it  altogether.  It's  like  making  appointments  and
not  keeping  them.  You  endanger  your  own  powers  of  sensitiveness
and  annoy  us  bitterly  G.

(11.15  a.m.)

(Nov.  15th,  10  a.m.)
(I  have  a  few  minutes  to  spare — so  I  try.)
[M.] My  dear  1

I  have  tried  so  hard  to  reach  you  and  always  I  seem  to  try  in
vain —

1  There  is  no  name  here,  but  a  long  line  drawn.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  201

(November  17th,  2.30  p.m.)

[M.]  You  have  broken  the  chain  dreadfully —  If  not  at  the
same  time  every  day  at  least  try  for  a  few  minutes  some  time
every  day — But  you  are  so  fitful —

Go  on  do  go  on  you  are  beginning  to  establish  communication —
We  shall  be  able  to  strengthen  your  powers  of  will  presently  only
do  have  a  little  faith  and  patience —  Don't  be  self-conscious —
Who  is  there  to  consider  you  a  charlatan.  The  people  of  the  P.R.
will  understand  and  you  need  not  testify  to  anyone  else —  It's  not
as  if  you  did  it  for  money —  Only  simply  let  your  hand  go  and
don't  worry  as  to  whether  the  subliminal  self  is  concerned  or  if  the
motor  impulse  comes  purely  from  without —  You  have  got  to  write
and  the  proof  will  presently  be  in  what  you  write  not  in  how  it  is
written —  G.  is  a  little  far  away  as  yet —  time  conditions  have
a  good  deal  to  do  with  it  Seven  years  is  about  the  limit  for  easy
communications  with  earth —  There  are  special  limits  transgressed
sometimes  in  special  cases  but  as  a  rule  seven  years  is  the  longest
time —

The  absurd  thing  is  that  you  are  afraid  that  the  interest  you
take  in  the  S.P.R.  will  make  you  fraudulent  I  can  feel  your
pencil  shying  as  it  were  when  I  try  to  form  a  name  that  suggests
anything  you  have  read —  Now  I'll  write  a  list  of  names  your
pencil  boggles  at  Henry  Sidgwick  Edmund  Gurney  —  Stainton
Moses— F  W  H  Myers—

(I  do  not  like  the  introduction  of  real  names.)

They  shall  not  come  again  for  some  time  but  you  had  to  write
them  down —

(May  I  ask  questions  nowl)

It's  easier  for  you  perhaps  but  it's  a  waste  of  power  and  there
is  none  to  lose —

(What  can  I  do  to  gain  more  power?)

What  we  have  told  you  so  often —  Write  steadily  and  be  less
captious  and  doubtful — -

(Is  it  right  for  me  to  send  the  writing  of  Nov.  7th  1  x)

Yes — see  what  the  answer  will  be — it's  as  plain  as  we  can  make
it  to  them.

[G.]  Now  listen  you  must  write  every  day — just  a  few
minutes  some  time  every  day  for  one  whole  month —  Make  up
your  mind  to  do  it — Half  the  time  and  energy  we  spend  in

1  This  refers  to  the  script  of  Nov.  7th,  quoted  above  (p.  186),  which  was
sent  to  me  on  Nov.  18th  or  19th.


202


Alice  Johnson.


[part


scolding  you  and  trying  to  keep  you  up  to  the  mark  would  give

splendid  proofs  that people  are  longing  for Don't  stop  to

wonder  who  will  see  them  that  will  be  all  arranged  You  do  the
writing  and  the  need  for  it  and  the  use  for  it  will  be  shown

G.

Here  follows  a  piece  of  mirror-writing,  of  which  Mrs.  Holland
notes :

(This  was  written  with  the  left  hand.  Held  up  to  the  glass  it  reads
"  Mary — Yes  1  know  this  has  tired  your  hand  he  is  so  full  of  energy
but  you  will  soon  get  used  to  that.")

[M.J  Your  hand  gets  tired  soon  because  it  is  not  passive
enough —  make  it  limp  At  present  the  whole  arm  has  to  be
moved  from  the  elbow —  It  is  only  your  wrist  and  fingers  that
need  move  really.

The  last  chapter  1  was  a  wonderfully  clever  piece  of  patchwork—

If  I  could  write  it  now  with  my  present  knowledge  •  no  one

would  believe  it  in  the  least —

That  was  quite  the  right  line  to  take  up  with  the  R.  of  R.'s —
The  account  was  almost  comic — a  little  bit  of  thought  reading — a
pinch  of  clairvoyance  and  a  number  of  hysterical  women  screaming

We've  got  it  now — it's  in  the  air The  P.R.  is  for  better  things

than  that — L.'s  letter  was  far  too  gentle  to  meet  the  case  2

(I  do  not  like  writing  of  this  sort.  It  makes  me  feel  worried  when
real  things  I  have  read  of  are  referred  to.)

Have  patience — things  must  begin — don't  read  the  writing  over  if
you  dislike  it  only  mite.

(November  18th,  11  a.m.)

[M.  and  G.]  Now  you  feel  hurried  because  you  know  you  have
only  a  few  minutes  to  spare — still  it  is  better  than  breaking  the
thread  altogether Two  thoughts  are  trying  to  express  them-
selves at  once — or  rather  two  thinkers  are — Take  a  pen

[M.  Here  the  writing  goes  on  in  ink.]  That's  well — a  pen  is  best
when  I  am  here — pencil  for  the  upright  vehement  writing.  .  .  .

1  This  clearly  refers  to  Human  Personality.

2  This  paragraph  refers  to  the  alleged  prediction  of  the  assassination  of  the
King  of  Servia  which  took  place  in  June,  1903.  An  account  of  the  prediction
was  published  in  the  Review  of  Reviews,  July,  1903.  In  the  next  month's
issue,  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead  attacked  the  officers  of  the  S.P.R.  for  having  dropped
the  investigation  of  the  case  after  finding  the  evidence  for  it  worthless.  In
the  September  number  appeared  a  letter  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  defence
of  the  attitude  of  the  Society.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  203

You  might  try  holding  a  shell1 — or  a  glass  against  your  ear — I
fancy  we  might  manage  a  species  of  telephonic  communication —
You  are  very  much  handicapped  by  being  alone  in  the  place  so  far
as  this  kind  of  interest  is  concerned.

(Nov.  19th,  11  a.m.)

[G-.]  That's  well.  I  know  it  was  hard  to  break  off — but  you
do  distinctly  feel  an  impulse  to  write  now  at  11  don't  you.  That's
a  step  in  the  right  direction. Now  take  a  pen

[M  ]  I  have  very  little  strength  to  send  a  message  with  as  yet
but  I  do  not  want  you  to  ask  questions  the  subliminal  self  is  far
less  dormant  when  you  do  and  I  want  it  to  be  absolutely  in  abeyance
when  I  am  trying  to  write.

I  quite  approve  of  the  letter  you  posted  yesterday  2  but  you  must
not  be  discouraged  whatever  the  answer  may  be — Miss  J.  has  a
very  practical  mind  and  any  distrust  is  quite  natural  reasonable —

commendable  If  you  will  only  go  on  trying  steadily  I  ought  to

be  able  to  prove  to  them  some  of  the  things  I  am  most  anxious  to

prove But  don't  be  too  critical  of  the  writing Let  your  hand

move  freely.  The  lined  paper  annoys  me  a  little  but  that  is  a  most
trivial  detail — Timor  mortis  conturbat  me.

(Nov.  20th,  11.20  a.m.)

[M.] My  dear3

Perhaps  a  letter  to  you  will  be  easier  than  a  sustained  account —
I  have  so  little  strength  as  yet  for  this  form  of  communication —

I  know  it  will  soon  be  three  years  since  I  '  passed  over  passed
on ' — but  I  feel  still  in  early  stages  of  development  as  it  were —
The  obscuration  of  consciousness  was  prolonged  in  my  case  to  an
abnormal  period —  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  first  year  was  hidden
for  me —  I  was  entranced  as  it  were —  That  accounts  for  some
failures  of  compact  does  it  not.  It  is  all  so  far  more  difficult  than
one  imagines Even  granting  the  strength  requisite  to  reach  the

1  See  Hitman  Personality,  Vol.  I.  p.  275,  for  the  mention  of  "  crystal-
gazing  or  its  correlative  shell-hearing."

2  This  refers  to  the  letter  to  me,  enclosing  the  script  of  November  7th.  The
script  and  letter  are  both  given  above.  The  letter  is  dated  November  19th,
1903,  but  according  to  this  was  posted  on  the  18th,  so  that  the  date
November  19th  is  probably  a  mistake  for  November  18th.

3  Here  again  no  name  is  written,  but  a  long  irregular  line  is  drawn.


204


Alice  Johnson.


[part


threshold  one  can  but  fall  helplessly  upon  it — spent — and  one's
message  stilled  1 —

I  dislike  writing  with  a  pencil

[Here  the  writing  goes  on  in  ink.]  Yes — ink  is  far  more  congenial
to  me.

The  publication  of  the  book  was  a  tremendous  help  to  me — and
to  others  of  us —  It  set  new  strength — new  power  free  in  our
direction — and  even  blind  interest — unintelligent  thoughts  can  be  an
assistance.  It's  the  blank  hateful  indifference  that  is  the  second
death  to  the  spirit —  the  ghost  that  once  was  man2 —  I  almost
regret  now  that  we  so  evaded  the  good  old  word  'ghost'  in  our

Proceedings it  was  slurred  and  perverted  by  misuse — but  we

should  have  tried  to  ennoble  it  again 'Holy  Ghost'  means

more  in  the  services  of  the  Church  than  Holy  Spirit

[G.] It's  not much good his  power fails  so  soon — Take  a

pencil

[Here  the  writing  goes  on  in  pencil.']
Always  a  pencil  for  me — I  hate  ink —

Don't  be  discouraged  about  the  man  who's  just  gone —  The  fine
quality  of  his  mind  alone  makes  it  harder  for  him  to  sway  an  alien

1  Cf.  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  276.  "Not  easily  and  carelessly  do
these  spirits  come  to  us,  but  after  strenuous  preparation  and  with  difficult
fulfilment  of  desire. So  came  Tennyson's  Persephone  :

'  Faint  as  a  climate-changing  bird  that  flies
All  night  across  the  darkness,  and  at  dawn
Falls  on  the  threshold  of  her  native  land,
And  can  no  more  .  .  .  '  "

2  "  The  Ghost  in  Man,  the  Ghost  that  once  was  Man,
But  cannot  wholly  free  itself  from  Man,
Are  calling  to  each  other  thro'  a  dawn
Stranger  than  earth  has  ever  seen  ;  the  veil
Is  rending,  and  the  Voices  of  the  day
Are  heard  across  the  Voices  of  the  dark."

(Tennyson,  The  Ring.)
This  is  quoted  in  the  essay  on  "Modern  Poets  and  Cosmic  Law"  in  a
volume  of  essays  by  Mr.  Myers  called  Science  and  a  Future  Life  (p.  205).
The  reference  in  the  script  after  this  quotation  to  the  use  of  the  word  "ghost"
recalled  to  me  Mr.  Myers's  rather  peculiar  use  of  it  as  equivalent  to  "  Holy
Ghost"  in  his  poem,  The  Translation  of  Faith:

"  High  in  the  midst  the  pictured  Pentecost
Showed  in  a  sign  the  coming  of  the  Ghost,"

and  again,

"  Since  not  one  minute  over  hall  or  Host
Flutters  the  peerless  presence  of  the  Ghost."


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  205


brain — or  move  an  alien  hand —  The  "burliness''  they  used  to
laugh  at  in  me  stands  me  in  better  stead  now  perhaps —  For
my  own  part  I  have  nothing  to  say  yet — If  your  hand  is  much

influenced  by  me  it  will  be  all  the  harder  for  F.  to  influence  it

Begin  your  writing  with  a  pen  to-morrow

[Here  the  hand-writing  changes.]

Seek  for  no  sign  through  earthly  eyes —

Look  for  no  shades  at  even —

Through  brain — through  hand  the  message  flies

The  sign  at  last  is  given  —

.  .  .  You  need not  think  of  this  writing  except  at  the  actual
moments  when  it  is  coming — A  passive  hand  and  a  quiet  brain
is  far  more  helpful  than  a  nervously  receptive  one — you  are  too
sensitive  in  some  ways — and  far  too  obtuse  in  others
(This  writing  stopped  at  11.45.)

(November  21st,  11  a.m.  Saturday.)

[M.]  I  am  glad  that  whatever  else  you  may  be  doing  now  when
11  comes  you  always  think  of  this  writing —  That  is  a  great  step
in  the  direction  we  want  you  to  go —  Presently  I  hope  you  will
learn  to  free  your  mind  of  the  little  tilings  of  every  day  which  are
far  too  much  in  it  at  present.  I  need  all  the  help  that  can  be
given  me — Take  a  pencil

[G.]  It's  no  good —  He  needs  such  congenial  conditions  or
else  he  fails  altogether —  For  one  reason  he  really  belongs  in
spiritual  development  to  a  higher  level — a  higher  plane — and  if  he
were  there  you  under  present  conditions  would  not  be  able  to
receive  even  the  faintest  impression  from  him —  Earth  bound  1  isn't
quite  the  word  I  want  but  I  do  not  know  how  else  to  convey  to
you  the  condition  of  those  of  us  who  are  able  to  send  messages —
Understand  it's  not  bound  by  earth  it's  bound  to  earth  by  love —
memory  powerful  interests —  F.'s  mind  is  prepared  for  the  higher
planes — it  is  strong  feeling — great  attachments— that  keep  him  on
this  level — and  that  prevent  him  from  sending  the  messages  he  is
so  anxious  to  send —  It  was  a  tremendous  effort  to  him  to  appear —
in  your  mind's  eye  the  way  that  he  did  a  fortnight  ago — and  it
has  weakened  the  messages  ever  since

1  Cf.  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  11,  a  discussion  of  popular  theories
of  apparitions  of  the  dead,  one  of  which  is  that  the  deceased  person's  spirit
"is  'earth-bound,'  and  can  only  gradually  free  itself."


20e>


Alice  Johnson.


[part


This  passage  shows  that  the  man  seen  by  Mrs.  Holland
in  a  mind's-eye  vision  on  November  7th,  as  described  in  her
script  of  that  day,  quoted  above,  was  identified  by  her  at  the
time  as  Mr.  Myers.  I  have  already  explained  that  this  was
a  misrecognition.  Two  short  passages  from  other  controls
follow  here ;  then  the  Myers  control  resumes :

[M.]  There  will  be  another  edition  of  the  book  published  soon —
It  is  a  real  comfort  to  see  how  much  interest  is  taken

Yes — unless  under  very  exceptional  circumstances  I  think  it  is
well  for  you  to  make  a  rule  not  to  give  longer  than  half  an  hour
to  this  writing. But  remember  to  write  to-morrow.

(11.30  a.m.)

(Nov.  23rd. 10.40  a.m.)
*****

[M.]  Shall  I  quote  the  saying  which  amused  me  always — "  Little
faith — little  faith — little  faith  can  ye  not  trust  in  Dan  1  " 1

It  has  a  certain  pathetic  significance  to  me  now —  Your  doubts
block  the  light  for  me  so  often —  Try  to  believe  that  you  will  not
be  asked  to  volunteer  showing  this  book  to  anybody —  If  it  is
needed — if  they  can  understand  it  you  will  be  asked  for  it —  You

need  not  fear  the  slightest  publicity — the  least  ridicule

(I  was  interrupted  at  10.55 — and  could  not  go  on.)

(Nov.  25th. 11.10  a.m.)

[G.]  Now  there  is  an  experiment  I  want  you  to  make —
Suggest  to  the  P.R. — (to  Miss  J.)  that  some  one  with  a  trained
will — she  will  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  some  one  of  the  sort —
is  to  try — for  a  few  minutes — every  morning  for  at  least  a  month —
to  convey  a  thought — a  phrase — a  name — anything  they  like  to
your  mind —  They  are  to  do  it  at  9.30  —  5  or  10  minutes  will
be  long  enough  for  them  to  think —  You  are  to  try  to  get  the
impression  from  3.30  to  4 — each  afternoon —  Write  down  all
that  comes  into  a  blank  mind —  it  will  be  good  training  for  you
and  we  want  to  prove  that  distance  does  not  exist  as  a  hindrance
between  minds  when  telepathy  is  real — ■  If  you  are  diffident
about  it  wait  till  Miss  J.  answers  your  last  letter — Let  the  tone

1  This  used  to  be  said  by  one  of  D.  D.  Home's  controls.  It  is  quoted  in
Hiunan  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  563;  the  first  part  of  the  phrase  occurs  in
Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  by  Viscount  Adare  (p.  179),
and  the  second  part  in  the  Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  London  Dialectical
Society  (p.  361).


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  207


of  her  reply  decide  you — if  you  like —  We  don't  want  to  lay
you  open  to  rebuffs —  We  would  rather  encourage  you.  Take
a  pen —

[M.]  Lodge  was  mistaken  in  thinking  that  telepathy  need  depend
upon  immediate  proximity 1 —  The  truest  telergic  power  is  quite
apart  from  contact  or  propinquity —  It  will  be  a  good  test  for
people  utterly  unknown  to  you  to  send  you  a  message  from
thousands  of  miles — I  hope  they  will  do  this —  I  cannot  reach
them.

[In  German  characters]  Die  Geisterwelt  ist  nicht  verschlossen.2
[G.  ?]  I  do  wish  you  would  not  hamper  us  by  trying  to  under-
stand every  word  you  write — as  you  write  it —  It's  not  meant
for  you.  At  least  you  may  look  at  it  after  if  you  will — but  now
you  need  only  write.  Do  try  to  forget  your  abiding  fear  of  being
made  a  fool  or  a  dupe —  If  we  ever  prompt  you  to  fantastic
follies  you  may  leave  us —  But  we  only  wish  you  to  give  us  a
few  passive  patient  minutes  each  day.  It's  a  form  of  restless
vanity  to  fear  that  your  hand  is  imposing  upon  yourself  as  it
were —  Leave  yourself  out  of  the  matter —  Your  personality  is  not
an  equation  in  this  problem —  Your  Ego  is  apart  Keep  it  out  of
this  Cosmos  !

(This  writing  ceased  at  11.30.)


(November  26th. 11  a.m.)


[M.]  No — do  not  let  the  pen  scrawl —  Lift  it  from  the  paper
when  it  wishes  to  scribble  vaguely —  We  have  gone  through  that
stage  and  I  do  not  wish  it  to  return.

Wiltse  experience 3  was  not  repeated  in  my  case — but  as  I  have

1See  a  paper  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  "Some  Recent  Thought-Transference
Experiments''  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  374,  describing  a  case
where  contact  between  the  experimenters  seemed  essential  for  the  transference
of  ideas.  The  reference  in  the  script,  however,  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of
Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  606,  where  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  is  quoted  as
saying:  "I  regard  the  fact  of  genuine  thought-transference  between  persons  in
immediate  proximity  (not  necessarily  in  contact)  as  having  been  established  by
direct  and  simple  experiment."

2  Quoted  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  251.

3  An  elaborate  vision  experienced  in  a  state  of  coma  by  Dr.  Wiltse  is  described
in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  315.


208


Alice  Johnson.


[part


said  so  often  the  period  of  oblivion  was  unusually  long  with  me.
There  was  no  link  between  my  utter  unconsciousness  of  things  of
earth — the  last  thing  I  felt  was  the  touch  that  closed  my  eyes  and
the  passage  to  the  plane  I  now  occupy —  The  transit  was  absolutely
unknown  to  me — and  I  am  not  conscious  of  a  return  journey  as  it
were  when  I  communicate  in  this  way.  At  least  I  am  conscious
of  strain  and  effort  but  I  cannot  note  the  stages  of  the  way —
The  nearest  simile  I  can  find  to  express  the  difficulties  of  sending
a  message — is  that  I  appear  to  be  standing  behind  a  sheet  of  frosted
glass — which  blurs  sight  and  deadens  sounds — dictating  feebly — to
a  reluctant  and  somewhat  obtuse  secretary.  A  feeling  of  terrible
impotence  burdens  me — I  am  so  powerless  to  tell  what  means  so
much —  I  cannot  get  into  communication  with  those  who  would
understand  and  believe  me —  You  need  much  training  before  you
can  ever  begin  to  help  me  as  I  need  to  be  helped  and  I  do  not
know  how  that  training  is  to  be  arranged  for

[G.]  That  is  an  improvement — the  longest  message  he  has  yet
managed  and  the  fault-finding  is  a  very  good  sign.  It  shows  the
power  is  strengthening—  I  wish  you  had  tried  a  pencil  last  night
when  the  impression  of  a  man  writing  came  to  you —  Try  another
night — but  only  if  an  impression  comes —

[Change  in  writing.']

OQ Biue-  Mar,i —  Ef=a

In  Holy  ground —  The  Holy  Land  but  the  spot  is  not  marked —
There  is  no  stone  raised —  A  heart  at  rest —  It  is  a  beautiful
symbol —  All  life  is  symbolical — all  the  dullest  most  ordinary
facts  are  full  of  exquisite  meaning  to  the  mind  trained  to  symbolism
and  when  this  life  fades  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  symbols
intensifies.

My  Houses — my  dear  House.  I  want  them  to  go  on —  My
best  monument.

[Change  in  writing.']  May  9th,  1872.  Within  30  years  they  had
all  gone—  S.M.  E.G.—  Lady  M.T.  and  last  of  all  F.W.H.M.—
H.C.T.

[Change  in  writing.]  Earth  life  can  only  be  read  aright  by  the
light  that  is  thrown  upon  it  from  the  spirit  world.
[M  ?] "Life  like  a  dome  of  many  coloured  glass
Stains  the  white  radiance  of  Eternity"


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  209


But  that  is  only  a  half  truth —

Yes — you  are  a  little  surprised  to  have  so  many  different  messages
— hasty  words — a  hint  in  passing — but  you  must  not  keep  your
pencil  for  two  or  three  influences  only —

[Change  in  writing.^  There  are  a  great  many  of  us — and  though
our  powers  vary  and  some  have  only  strength  enough  for  one
sentence — it  is  well  that  we  should  try

[G.]  Now there's  an  improvement ! You  seem  less  critical

— less  doubtful — and  you  see  they  respect  those  absurd  inate  pred-
judices  of  yours  and  only  give  initials  not  nams  I  can't  spell — your
power  is  used  up — Cease  writing —
(This  stopped  at  11.25.)

In  the  above  is  another  specific  reference  to  Lord  Bute's
heart  being  buried  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  it  will  be  noticed
that  later  on  two  lines  from  Shelley's  Adonais  are  quoted.
In  Mr.  Myers's  obituary  notice  of  Lord  Bute  printed  in  the
Journal  S.P.B.  for  November,  1900  (Vol.  IX.,  p.  310),  he
speaks  of  the  hall  at  Mount  Stuart  "  encircled  with  a  trans-
lucent zone  which  pictured  the  constellations  of  the  Ecliptic ;
— the  starry  lights  represented  by  prisms  inserted  in  that
'  dome  of  many-coloured  glass.' "  When  I  met  Mrs.  Holland
about  two  years  later,  I  showed  her  (November  16th,  1905)
this  quotation  in  the  Journal.  She  told  me  that  she  had
never  met  Lord  Bute,  nor,  so  far  as  she  was  aware,  heard
of  his  house,  Mount  Stuart,  which  is  at  Bothesay,  Isle  of
Bute.

"My  Houses — my  dear  House,  etc.,"  obviously  refers  to
the  Bowton  Houses.

"May  9th,  1872,  etc.,"  is  a  reminiscence  of  Human  Per-
sonality (see  Vol.  II.,  p.  223).  "It  was  on  May  9th,  1874  [not
1872]  that  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  met  Stainton  Moses  for
the  first  time,  through  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  Cowper-Temple
(afterwards  Lady  Mount-Temple)  .  .  ."  Mrs.  Holland  told  me
in  October,  1905,  that  she  had  met  Lady  Mount-Temple  once,
she  thought  in  1900.  It  was  towards  the  end  of  her  life,
when  she  had  left  Broadlands  (where  Mr.  Myers  knew  her).
There  are  several  other  references  to  Lady  Mount-Temple  and
friends  of  hers  later  in  the  script.

"  H.C.T."  The  first  Mrs.  Cowper-Temple  was  named  Harriet
Alicia. It  was  the  second  one  whom  Mr.  Myers  knew.


210


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(November  27th. 7.40  a.m.)

*  *  *  *  *

[G.J The  pain  in  your  shoulder  is  new  to  you— isn't  it  1  But
it's  slight  and  I  think  it  means  that  F's  power  is  deepening.  Let
your  hand  be  more  flexible  and  the  shoulder  will  not  suffer.
[Change  in  writing.'] In  that  far  land  so  greatly  blest

The  heart  long  weary  lies  at  rest. 1
Till  that  Last  Day — which  is  the  best.

-f  Mercy.

(Writing  ceased  at  7.55.)

(November  29th. 12.45  p.m.)

[M.J Nothing  was  written  by  me  yesterday—

The  time  when  I  may  hope  to  write  a  continuous  narrative — or
to  send  evidential  messages  by  your  hand  seems  as  far  away  as  ever.

Four  years  ago  we  were  talking  together  one  evening  at  my
house  2  Podmore  was  there  I  remember  and  Barret  I  think  Piddington
and  Lang  but  I  am  not  sure —  It  was  about  a  letter  that  had
lately  been  received  by  Hodgson  and  which [illegible  scribbles]

[G.]  It's  no  good — He  can't  manage  more  than  a  few  lines —
and  your  dislike  to  names  makes  it  all  the  more  difficult  for  him.
You  can't  help  it  I  know.

[Change  in  writing.]  Never  mind  if  they  seem  to  scold  a  little —
You  cannot  do  more  than  you  are  going  [sic]  at  present  and  they  need
strength  and  practice  as  much  as  you  do — -or  more — ■  Patience  —
patience  only —  Some  people  try  for  years  with  fewer  results  than
you  get  in  a  few  days —

[Change  in  writing.]  Try  to  put  your  own  little  worries  out  of
your  mind.

[Change  in  writing.] "Like  tombs  of  pilgrims  that  have  died

About  the  Holy  Sepulchre — "3

The  [drawing  of  heart]  travelled  far  to  where  it  longed  to  be —

•***#■*■

(December  2nd. 1.5  p.m.)

[M.]  Among  a  crowd  of  strange  thronging  faces  a  mere  acquaint-
ance takes  rank  as  a  friend —

1  Another  reference  to  Lord  Bute's  heart.

2 1  have  not  been  able  to  verify  this  and  believe  that  no  such  meeting  took
place  at  that  date.

3  D.  G.  Rossetti,  The  Portrait.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  "211


I  begin  to  wait  hopefully  and  longingly  for  the  glimmer  of  light1
which  shows  that  you  are  ready  to  hold  a  pen  for  me — even  though
I  often  chafe  sadly  at  your  inattention  or  lack  of  comprehension

[Change  in  writing,']  Many  a  thought  that  seems  to  come  un-
prompted is  really  whispered  by  an  influence  near  at  hand.

[G.]  Pencil  please  You  are  no  good  for  anything  sustained  to-day

— you  are  too  hurried  and  worried  and  full  of  little  duties

G. [rough  drawing] 2

1888

(December  3rd. 11  a.m.)

[M.]  There  is  no  need  to  mind  if  at  first  facts — or  rather  what
are  given  to  you  as  facts — cannot  be  verified  Patience.

You  feel  the  change  now  from  pencil  to  pen  without  being  told —
Another  advance —

I  think  the  memory  of  my  sufferings  at  this  time  3  years  ago
makes  my  power  weaker  than  ever. I  am  very  weak  to-day —

[G.]  Yes — pencil's  quite  right —  You  are  not  doing  much  for
us  these  days —  However  keep  the  thread  unbroken  if  you  can
by  giving  a  few  minutes each day — and  some day  we  may  be

stronger  or  you  more  sensitive G.

(Writing  stopped  at  11.10.)

(I  could  not  write  at  all  on  Dec.  4th.)

(December  5th,  7.40  a.m.)

[G.] Another  break  ! It  is  very  discouraging —

Now  it's  no  good  scolding  about  what  is  past  and  you  would
probably  have  been  no  good  yesterday  still  you  should  have
tried

[M.]  You  are  very  much  influenced  by  the  merely  trivial
associations  of  meeting  and  accpiaintance —  Let  spirit  speak  to
spirit — and  keep  self  and  the  actual  frame  more  out  of  the  matter.

[Change  in  writing.]  I  fear  you  will  never  be  really  responsive
trying  alone —  At  least  not  to  influences  unknown  to  you  while
they  lived. You  need  the  connecting  bond.

1Cf.  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  253:  "What  process  must  [a  spirit]
attempt  if  it  wishes  to  communicate  with  living  men  ?  .  .  .  Seeking  then  for
some  open  avenue,  it  discerns  something  which  corresponds  (in  G.  P.'s  phrase)
to  a  light — a  glimmer  of  translucency  in  the  confused  darkness  of  our  material
world.  This  'light'  indicates  a  sensitive  — &  human  organism  so  constituted
that  a  spirit  can  temporarily  inform  or  control  it  .  .  .  .  "

2 1  take  this  drawing  to  represent  a  body  on  a  bier,  1888  being  the  date  of
Mr.  Ourney's  death.


212


Alice  Johnson.


[part


[Change  in  writing.]  Patience — those  who  can  help  and  who
understand  will  appear  when  the  time  is  ripe.

(Tuesday,  January  5th,  1904. 11  a.m.)
Have  you  forgotten  how  to  write  ? It  is  so  long  since  you  tried —
Pen.

[M.]  A  cruel  pause — I  have  to  go  back  to  the  beginning  again
and  though  we  had  traversed  such  a  very  little  way  it  is  a  long
way  to  retrace —  Proofs — evidence1?  I  wish  you  could  be  content
to  write  now  and  to  wait  for  evidence  hereafter

She  is  not  very  tall — a  slender  figure  often  dressed  in  green —
dark  hair — rather  pushed  from  the  forehead — straying  a  little  from
the  centre  parting — very  mobile  brows — pince-nez  when  she  writes —
A  strong  chin — mouth  thin-lipped  but  sympathetic — a  strong  face
but  not  a  hard  one —  Mind  admirably  well  balance  [sic] —  Hands
with  long  fingers — but  the  palms  well  developed—  No  foolish
impulses — but  no  fear  of  sudden  actions  which  seem  the  outcome  of
sudden  impulse —  Age — 32 — 33 — I  forget —  What  importance  has
a°:e  to  me  now

Pencil.

This  description  may  be  the  first  emergence  of  the  idea  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  personal  appearance  and  character  which  seems
to  have  developed  further  in  March,  1905,  soon  after  the  first
experiments  between  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall  began
(see  below,  p.  257).

The  script  goes  on  :

[G.]  You  have  gone  back  dreadfully  like  a  stupid  child  that
forgets  in  holidays  all  it  has  learnt  in  term  time —  Why  did  you
stop  1  Your  hand  needs  to  be  pushed  and  dragged  now —  All  the
scrawling  and  thumping  again  I  hoped  you  had  done  with  for
good

[Change  in  writing.]  Yes —  I  know  your  arm  is  aching —  Want
of  practice  only  I  had  many  tries  before  it's  not  clear — —
Don't  scrawl.  Hold  the  pencil  tightly  rigidly  if  need  be —
[G.]  I  think  the  country  looks  different  to  every  eye  that  sees
it —  The  mountain  lover  finds  his  mountains — the  dweller  in  the
plains  his  smiling  valleys —  What  the  eye  desires  that  it  sees —
but  the  time  is  not  yet  for  the  [drawing  of  heart]  to  have  its  desire.
No — it's  not  to  me  like  a  glimmer  that  tells  a  message  may  perhaps
be  sent  back — it  is  like  a  breeze  that  blows  a  breeze  of  memories—
and  one  feels  that  words  said — shouted sung  to  the wind — may


i


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  213


perhaps  some  time — some  time  reach  you  as  an  echo — a  whisper —
distorted  perhaps — but  yet  with  a  purpose  with  a  meaning — not
for  you — but  for  others.

Try  not  to  scribble  so  much — it  is  a  waste  of  strength —  The
writing  should  be  small  and  neat —

When  memory  fails  it  is  a  proof  of  withdrawal — of  having  gone
on  to  a  higher  plane — a  nobler  sphere —

Pen — thick  pen

[M.] Pencil  is  only  fit  for  children —

You  are  very  little  good  to-day — it  is  strange  how  soon  you
forget —

Page  27  Para  b — the  third  sentence  needs  reconstructing — it
conveys  a  meaning  that  is  misleading —

The  2nd  packet  of  proofs  have  still  several  errors  that  have
escaped  revision — Kindly  go  over  them  again  with  great  care —

Oh  if  I  could  only  get  to  them — could  only  leave  you  the  proof
positive  that  I  remember — recall — know — continue.  .  .  .

(Wednesday,  January  6th,  10.45  a.m.)

*****

[M.]  I  have  thought  of  a  simile  which  may  help  you  to  realise
the  bound  to  earth  condition  which  persists  with  me  It  is  a  matter
very  largely  of  voluntary  choice —  I  am  as  it  were — actuated  by
the  missionary  spirit  and  the  great  longing  to  speak  to  the  souls
in  prison — still  in  the  prison  of  the  flesh1 — leads  me  to  'absent  me
from  felicity  awhile.'

.  Yes  you  are  right  I  am  being  helped  to  send  a  message — the  split
infinitive 2  is  not  my  natural  soul's  expression  but  the  one  who  helps
me  has  power  and  not  scholarship

Names — why  want  his  name  it  would  convey  nothing  to  you  he
died  some  few  months  ago —

[G.]  No  even  when  (pencil) 3  helped  he  can't  stay  long — but  he
has  not  had  much  help  or  encouragement  to  try  to  come  lately —
Eh  ?

[Change  in  uniting.']  Never  mind.  You  can't  do  more  than  is  in
your  power  to  do —  Go  steadily  on  and  don't  be  impatient — there
will  be  progress  —

1  Cf .  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II. ,  p.  276.

2  There  is  no  split  infinitive  in  any  of  this  script.  The  objection  is  probably
to  the  adjectival  construction  of  the  compound  phrase  "bound  to  earth''  in
the  first  sentence  of  the  passage  quoted.

3  Here  the  writing  changes  from  ink  to  pencil.

0


i


214


Alice  Johnson,


[part


[A  child  control,1]  I  saw  them  all  at  Xmas —  Mummy  nearly
cried  when  they  drank  healths — and  that  was  because  of  me.  She
did  go  to  a  seance  the  other  day  a  little  one. Please  tell  her  not  to —

A.

[G.]  You  stopped  the  child  by  wondering  and  fearing  that  you
knew  who  was  writing — ■  Do  leave  yourself  out  of  the  matter —
You  are  only  the  woman  who  takes  down  the  message  at  the  telegraph.

[Change  in  writing.']  Two  influences — that  was  why  the  pencil
slipped  from  your  fingers  and  flew  across  the  room  then

The  real  reason  why  I  have  never  managed  to  write  with  your
hand  before  is  that  your  preconceived  notions  make  it  so  difficult
for  us —  You  are  always  hoping  and  expecting  one  person  or  one
particular  class  of  message — instead  of  keeping  a  passive  hand  and
an  open  mind —  The  more  messages  that  come  the  better — it's  the
practice  that  will  help.

Don't  you  notice  a  new  feature  to-day — that  every  few  minutes
we  make  you  take  another  pencil —  It's  easier  for  us  and  it  marks
the  change  for  you — Let  your  hand  do  what  it  likes —

[Change  in  uniting.]  Yes — I  daresay  it  is  highly  probable  that
the  fact  that  this  note  book  is  to  go  to  be  looked  at  arouses
that  morbid  self  consciousness  of  yours —  That's  inevitable — but
do  endeavour  to  hold  it  in  check — it  harms  you  and  wrongs  us —
Forget  self  so  far  as  in  you  lies.

I  can't  manage  to  get  in  the  word  I  want  to  say  and  yet  [Here
the  writing  becomes  sprawling  and  illegible,  and  ends  with  the
word  :]  Stop.

(This  writing  took  a  full  half  hour  and  nry  hand  was  very  restless
all  through  and  held  the  pencils — four  lay  by  me,  and  my  hand
kept  on  changing — in  two  very  peculiar  ways  for  two  of  the  entries.
At  the  end  m)r  hand  felt  shaken  and  pushed  as  it  did  when  I  first
began  to  get  these  writings — scrawling  wildly — till  it  was  stopped.
The  "stop"  was  from  without  entirely.  I  was  willing  to  let  it  scrawl
on  and  over  to  the  next  page  if  the  impulse  continued.)

(Thursday,  Jan.  7th,  10.30  a.m.)
[After  references  to  Lady  Mount-Temple  and  some  friends  of  hers  :]
The  reason  you  feel  sleepy  is  that  too  many  are  trying  to  come
at  once  and  that  is  why  the  writing  is  so vague  and  scrawling
again — Pull  yourself  together  and  think  of  one  particular  one.
Pen.

1  This  is  the  child  with  whose  mother  Mrs.  Holland  had  casually  made
acquaintance,  as  mentioned  above,  p.  191.


L,v\] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  215


(At  this  point  I  had  such  a  strong  feeling  of  mal  de  mer  that  I
had  to  go  to  my  room  for  a  few  minutes.  It  left  as  suddenly  as
it  came,  and  I  do  not  understand  it,  for  I  never  experienced  it  on
dry  land  before.)

[M.]  I  want  to  make  it  thoroughly  clear  to  you  all  that
the  eidolon  is  not  the  spirit — only  the  simulachrum  [sic] —  If  M
were  to  see  me  sitting  at  my  table  or  if  any  one  of  you  became
conscious  of  my  semblance  standing  near  my  chair  that  would  not
be  me.  My  spirit  would  be  there  invisible  but  perceptive  but  the
appearance  would  be  merely  to  call  your  attention  to  identify  me —
It  fades  and  grows  less  easily  recognisable  as  the  years  pass  and
my  remembrance  of  my  earthly  appearance  grows  weaker —  If  you
saw  me  as  I  am  now  you  would  not  recognise  me  in  the  least —
'  All  I  could  never  be —  All  men  refused  in  me
This  I  was  worth  to  God  whose  wheel  the  pitcher  shaped — 1

I  appear  now  as  I  would  fain  have  been — as  I  desired  to  be  in
the  very  vain  dreams  of  3011th — and  the  time  lined  pain  lined
suffering  face  that  some  of  you  remember  with  tenderness  is  a
mere  mask  now  that  I  strive  to  conjure  up  for  you  to  know  me
by —  But  my  power  is  weak  and  you  are  not  really  receptive —
,  .  .  Remember  once  again  that  the  phantasm  the  so-called  ghost  is
a  counterfeit  presentment  projected  by  the  spirit.  .  .  .
(The  writing  ceased  at  11.5.)

The  theory  here  expressed  as  to  the  true  nature  of  a
"  ghost "  is  no  doubt  derived  from  the  first  part  of  the  chapter
on  "  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,"  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.
(see  especially  pp.  3-10).  But  Mrs.  Verrall  points  out  to  me
the  rather  remarkable  use  of  the  words  "  eidolon  "  and  "  simul-
acrum," which  do  not  occur  in  that  chapter.  The  word
"Eidolon"  first  occurs  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  Nov.  7th,
1903,  in  the  communication  addressed  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and
quoted  above  (see  p.  187).  It  is  followed  by  some  illegible
scribbles,  evidently  representing  an  attempt  to  write  Greek.  A
few  Greek  characters  are  distinguishable,  but  no  complete
words ;  in  fact,  the  whole  effect  is,  I  think,  less  like  Greek
than  would  have  been  produced  by  a  person  ignorant  of  the
language  who  was  deliberately  trying  to  write  it  from  his
visual  memory  of  Greek  phrases  met  with  in  English  books.
These  scribbles  are  followed  by  the  words :  Timor  mortis.

1  Browning,  Rabbi  Ben  Ezra. "Refused"  should  be  "ignored."


216


Alice  Johnson.


[part


On  "  Eidolon  "  and  "  Simulacrum,"  Mrs.  Verrall  writes :

Homer  (Odyssey,  XL  601)  describes  how  Odysseus  met  in  Hades
"great  Herakles,  his  phantom  (eiScoAov) ;  himself  (avrbs)  rejoices  amid
the  immortals,  etc."  It  is  a  famous  passage,  as  the  question  of  how
Herakles  came  to  be  in  Hades  has  been  much  discussed.  It  is  the
passage  alluded  to  by  Plotinus,  in  the  extract  quoted  in  Unman
Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  290.

But  the  point  as  regards  Mrs.  Holland's  script  is  the  scholarly
and  correct  classical  use  of  the  words  eidolon  and  simulacrum.  This,
for  instance,  is  Merry's  note  on  another  passage  in  the  Odyssey,
XL  213,  where  the  eidolon  of  Odysseus'  mother  is  allowed  by
Persephone  to  come :  "  et'ScoAoi/  is  best  represented  by  our  word
'phantom.'  It  is  used  almost  identically  with  t^xv  (spirit),  as  the
immaterial  ghost  that  remains  when  the  body  is  dead.  But  it
implies  more  than  the  notion  of  ^i>x7)>  first  as  conveying  the  idea
of  something  unreal  and  illusive,  and  secondly  as  presenting  a
visible  though  unsubstantial  copy  of  the  person  whom  it  represents.
Thus  [then  various  illustrations].  But  the  strongest  passage  for
deciding  the  use  of  the  word,  as  meaning  the  unreal  and  phantom
image,  is  XL  601  [passage  about  Herakles],  where  the  contrast
between  eiocoAov  and  auros  (the  man  himself)  is  vividly  brought  out.
.  .  .  This  notion  of  eiSwAoi/  has  many  points  in  common  with  the
Lucretian  simulacra."

While  we  should  not  expect  this  usage  to  be  known  to  one  who
was  not  a  classical  scholar,  it  would  be  likely  to  be  familiar
to  readers  of  Homer  and  Lucretius,  and  in  the  quotation  from
Plotinus  in  Human  Personality  we  have  direct  proof  (if  it  were
wanted)  that  Mr.  Myers  knew  the  passage  in  the  XL  Odyssey,  the
locus  classicus  for  the  special  use  of  eiSwAov.

Odysseus'  meeting  with  the  spirit  of  his  mother  in  Hades  is
referred  to  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  256,  where  two
lines  from  the  Odyssey  (XI.  88,  89)  are  quoted.  The  words
in  question  do  not  occur  in  these  lines.

The  passage  from  Plotinus.  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  is
thus  translated  in  Human  Personality  (Vol.  II.  p.  290):  "The
shade  of  Herakles,  indeed,  may  talk  of  his  own  valour  to  the
shades ;  but  the  true  Herakles  in  the  true  world  will  deem  all
that  of  little  worth. . .  ."

Another  version  which  is  likely  to  be  familiar  to  Mrs.
Holland  is  the  following :


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  II.  217

"  And  as  the  auld-farrand  hero  sees
In  Hell  a  bode  Hercules
Pit  there  the  lesser  deid  to  please,

While  he  himsel'
Dwells  with  the  muckle  gods  at  ease

Far  raised  frae  hell."1

But  in  neither  of  these  versions  does  the  word  e'!$w\oi>  or
simulacrum  occur.  See  below  (script  of  Jan.  8th,  1904)  for
further  references  to  the  "  simulacre,"  "  phantasm,"  and
"  eidolon."

(Jan.  7th. 6.50  p.m.)

[M.]  There  is  no  sadder  mistake  than  to  imagine  that  by  mourn-
ing for  the  dead  their  state  of  happiness  is  increased —  Love  they
desire,  but  not  lamentation. 2

[6.]  Don't  doubt  because  a  variety  of  messages  come —  Stop
trying  for  them  if  you  like — but  don't  do  it  half  heartedly —  No —
I  don't  mean  that  you  are  asked  to  believe  every  word  you  write —
No  need  for  you  even  to  read  the  writing  if  it  does  not  interest
you — But  take  it  down —  G.

[Change  in  writing.]  I  can't  be  what  I  wish  to  be  I  try  and  no
power  comes — I  long — hope  is  always  swallowed  up  in  despair —

Pen.

[M.]  Do  not  allow  faint  scribbling  and  scrawling.  Lift  the
pencil  rather  or  if  needed  close  the  book —  This  may  seem
unkind  but  it  is  really  the  truest  kindness —  While  you  are  alone
you  must  be  guarded  against  too  great  an  influx  of  influences —
You  might  easily  waste  all  your  kind  endeavour — your  strength
and  time  in  noting  only  names — dates — vague  words — never  the
same  influence  twice.  That  must  be  avoided —  Believe  me  sense
and  kindness  prompts  this —  Cease  to  write  again  for  a  few  days
or  weeks  if  you  cannot  resist  this  flock  of  crying  passing  influences —
They  will  have  an  injurious  effect  on  you  if  you  yield  to  them  —
Your  feeling  of  faintness  and  sickness  this  morning  before  I  wrote
my  message — the  longest  that  I  have  yet  been  able  to  send — was
an  instance  of  jarring  influences  bearing  a  hostile  effect  on  your
house  of  clay —  Treasure  your  good  health  for  the  sake  of  a
healthy  spirit — a  healthy  nature.

1 R.  L.  Stevenson,  To  Dr.  John  Brown.

2Cf.  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  303:  "Not  then  with  tears  and
lamentations  should  we  think  of  the  blessed  dead.  Rather  we  should  rejoice
with  them  in  their  enfranchisement.  .  .  ."


218


Alice  Johnson.


[part


[Here  follow  a  number  of  fragmentary  communications,  purporting
to  come  from  various  controls,  at  the  end  of  which  Mrs.  Holland
notes:  "I  stopped  at  7.15;  the  messages  seemed  unreal  somehow
and  too  short."]

(Friday,  Jan.  8th.  7  p.m.)
....  [M.]  The  appearance  of  the  simulacre  [sic]  does  not
necessarily  imply  that  the  spirit  is  consciously  present.  It  may
project  the  phantasm  from  a  great  distance.  More  usually  however
it  is  present.  On  two  occasions  only  I  myself  have  been  able  to
perceive  the  surroundings  I  so  desired  to  see — once  [illegible]  at  a
Meeting  and  you  all  appeared  to  me  as  flat  cardboard  figures  seen
through  a  grey  mist —  The  next  time  was  a  few  weeks  ago  at
home  .  .  .

I  would  try  so  hard  on  the  anniversary  that  is  only  nine  days
away  now  if  I  could  be  sure  that  you  really  wished  and  desired
my  eidolon  without  any  fear  or  reluctance

Any  terror  would  distress  me  unspeakably.

In  my  present  state  thoughts  pain  me  more  than  wounds  or
burns  could  do  while  I  lived —  It  is  part  of  the  stage  through
which  I  pass  an  evolutionary  phase.  .  .  .

This  script  seems  to  show  a  possible  connection  with  Mrs.
Verrall's  of  December  10th,  1901  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Eeport,
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  213)  in  which  the  following

occurs :

Betwixt  dark  and  light  a  gray  figure  in  the  bedroom  not  [to  be
feared] 1  you  will  see  on  an  anniversary — note  the  date — this  year.
Put  the  [conversation]  on  [paper]  that  is  all  I  can  see.  Try  other
nights.

Here,  then,  is  the  same  idea  of  a  phantasm,  not  to  be
feared,  to  be  seen  on  an  anniversary — which  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  is  indicated  as  that  of  Mr.  Myers's  death,  January  17th.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Dec,  10th,  1901,  also  showed  con-
nection with  that  of  Mrs.  Piper,  for  on  January  28th,  1902,  at
a  sitting  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  America,  reference
was  made  by  the  Myers  control  to  a  "vision"  of  a  figure  which
it  was  said  had  been  seen  recently  by  Miss  Verrall. As  a

1  The  words  in  square  brackets  are  almost  indecipherable  in  the  original,  but
I  follow  Mrs.  Verrall's  interpretation  of  them,  made  without  reference  to
Mrs.  Holland's  script.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  219

matter  of  fact,  no  such  vision  was  seen  either  by  Mrs.  or  Miss
Verrall  during  this  period.  But  at  the  same  sitting  with  Mrs.
Piper  on  January  28th,  1902,  the  control  arranged  with  Dr.
Hodgson  to  try  a  definite  experiment  in  appearing  to  Miss
Verrall,  and  on  February  4th  claimed  that  he  had  succeeded
in  making  himself  visible  to  her.  Again  the  attempt  failed,  but
a  remarkable  connection  appeared  between  the  circumstances  of
the  supposed  vision  and  some  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  produced
on  January  31st,  1902  (see  her  Report,  pp.  213-17).  All
this,  of  course,  happened  without  any  knowledge  on  the  part
of  either  automatist  as  to  the  doings  of  the  other.


CHAPTER  III.

First  Cross-Correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall  :
The  Selwyn  Text  Incident.

In  this  chapter  I  have  put  together  passages  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  December,  1903,  and  January,  1904,  with  certain
passages  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  about  the  same  period
which  seem  to  be  more  or  less  directly  connected  with  them,
though,  owing  to  the  fact  that  I  did  not  see  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  at  the  time,  no  connection  was  discovered  till  nearly
two  years  later.

A  summary  of  the  circumstances  will  enable  the  reader
to  appreciate  better  the  connection  between  the  two  scripts.

At  this  time  (about  the  end  of  1903),  I  knew  only  of
a  few  incidents  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  and  had  seen  very
little  of  it.  Nothing  had  been  published  on  the  subject ;
but  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  two  papers  about  it  at  Private
Meetings  of  the  Society,  on  October  17th,  1902,  and  April
20th,  1903,  brief  abstracts  of  which  had  been  printed  in
the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  November,  1902,  and  May,  1903.

During  the  latter  part  of  1903,  as  stated  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
Report  on  her  script  (published  in  October,  1906,  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XX.— See  especially,  pp.  295-298  and  419-423),
repeated  efforts  were  made  in  it  to  give  a  message  from
Dr.  Sidgwick  about  three  letters. On  October 10th,  1903,


220


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  Verrall  was  instructed  by  the  script  to  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick
to  give  her  a  "  test  question "  to  be  answered  by  it,  after
which  further  evidence  was  to  be  expected.  Mrs.  Verrall
acting  on  this  instruction,  received  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick  the
question  :  "  What  was  the  last  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  texts, — the
one  that  belonged  to  the  latter  part  of  his  life  ? "  The
question  referred  to  a  subject  unknown  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  and
thus  described  in  the  Memoir  of  Dr.  Sidgwick  (p.  125):
"  During  most  of  his  adult  life  Sidgwick  had  some  text — a
different  one  at  different  periods — which  ran  in  his  head,
representing  the  key-note,  so  to  speak,  of  his  thought  about
his  own  life.  [Four  texts  belonging  to  the  earlier  periods  are
then  given.]  Finally,  from  about  1890,  'Gather  up  the
fragments  that  remain,  that  nothing  be  lost.'1"  The  Memoir
was  not  published  till  the  end  of  February,  1906,  and  at  this
time  Dr.  Sidgwick's  texts  can  only  have  been  known  to  his
nearest  relatives.

Mrs.  Verrall  told  no  one  that  she  had  received  this  question
from  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  her  script  was — for  evidential  purposes
— sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  as  it  was  produced,  in  envelopes
which  he  filed  and  kept  unopened.  The  script  now  began  a
long  series  of  allusions  to  Faith,  Hope  and  Charity  and  their
comparative  merits,  quoting  part  of  I  Cor.  xiii.  13  ("And  now
abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these  three ;  but  the  greatest  of
these  is  charity "),  and  finally  attaching  special  value  to  the
virtue  of  Hope.  Mrs.  Verrall  thought  that  these  passages-
might  be  an  attempt  to  describe  the  contents  of  a  sealed
envelope — perhaps  one  of  the  three  letters  already  referred
to — left  by  Dr.  Sidgwick ;  or  might  merely  represent  guesses
of  the  subliminal  self,  started  by  the  suggestion  that  a  text
was  wanted.

On  December  11th,  1903,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  went  to
Algeria,  and  the  writing  was  continued  there.  On  December
25th,  it  stated  that  she  was  to  ask  the  question  on  the  17th
of  next  month,  and  a  reference  closely  following  to  "  Sidgwick's
message,"  made  it  clear  that  the  question  meant  was  the  one
about  the  text.  Further  this  script  quotes  a  text  similar  in
meaning  to  the  one  required,  viz. :  "  Use  the  daylight  hours,
for  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  may  work."

1  St.  John,  vi.  12.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  221


The  admonition  to  write  on  the  17th  was  repeated  on
January  9th,  1904,  and  on  January  17th,  remarks  about  S,
a  letter,  an  envelope  and  a  seal,  and  the  words  "  not  without
hope "  were  followed  by  the  statement :  "  The  question  is
answered,"  and  later  by :  "  The  text  and  the  answer  are  one
and  are  "iven."  Nevertheless,  no  definite  statement  as  to  a
text  ivas  given  in  this  script,  but  again,  on  May  11th,  1904,
the  script  gave  a  clue  which  led  Mrs.  Verrall  to  a  second
paraphrase  of  the  text  required.

The  passages  in  the  script,  though  relating  to  Dr.  Sidgwick,
purported  in  general  to  come  from  Mr.  Myers.

Meanwhile  Mrs.  Holland,  in  India,  was  sending  her  script
to  me,  and  I  occasionally  showed  passages  of  it  to  Mr.
Piddington,  but  (at  this  time)  to  no  one  else.  Throughout
the  autumn  of  1903  her  script  (large  portions  of  which  have
been  already  quoted),  expresses  a  strong  desire  on  the  part
of  the  "  controls "  to  communicate,  which  becomes  specially
intense  in  January,  1904,  when  it  is  stated  on  January  12th
that  some  special  message  is  to  be  transmitted  to  Mr.  Myers's
friends.  The  climax  comes  on  January  17th,  1  904, — the
day  on  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
refers  to  a  sealed  envelope,  and  states  that  the  question  is
answered  and  the  text  given.  On  this  day  Mrs.  Holland's
script  refers  (1)  to  an  attempt  to  get  a  message  through,
(2)  to  a  sealed  envelope,  and  (3)  to  a  text,  giving  the  reference
only,  I.  Cor.  xvi.  13  ("Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit
you  like  men,  be  strong ").

This  text,  though  not  the  one  asked  for  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
has  a  certain  special  association  with  Mr.  Myers  and  Mrs.
Verrall,  to  be  explained  below.

Apart  from  the  similarity  of  topics  in  both  scripts  on
January  17th,  1904,  there  are  a  number  of  minor  corre-
spondences between  them  during  the  whole  period.

Both  writers  refer  beforehand  to  the  date,  Jan.  17th,  1904.
The  Holland-Myers  (if  I  may  coin  the  term)  is  clearly  looking
forward  to  this  as  the  anniversary  of  his  death  (see  references
on  Nov.  20th,  p.  203,  Dec.  1st,  1903,  p.  230,  and  Jan.  8th,
1904,  p.  218);  the  Verrall-Myers  gives  two  specific  directions
(on  Dec.  25th,  1903,  and  Jan.  9th,  1904)  to  write  on  Jan.
17th. Mr.  Myers  attached  great  importance  to  anniversaries,  a


222


Alice  Johnson,


[part


fact  which  was  probably  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  certainly
unknown  to  Mrs.  Holland.  Both  knew  the  date  of  his  death,
and  this  might  have  led  to  both  producing  writing  on  that
clay;  but  it  can  hardly  be  held  to  account  for  the  similarity
between  the  two  writings.

In  both  cases  references  are  made  to  the  difficulty  of  one
sensitive  working  alone  and  the  advantages  of  co-operation
(Mrs.  Holland,  Sept.  21st,  Nov.  7th,  Dec.  1st  and  5th,  1903;
Mrs.  Verrall,  Oct.  12th  and  19th,  and  Dec.  7th,  1903).

Mrs.  Verrall  is  told  (Oct.  19,  1903)  that  evidence  will
come  to  her  later  through  others ;  and  Mrs.  Holland  (Jan.
5th,  1904)  that  the  message  has  a  meaning  not  for  her,
but  for  others,  and,  though  the  "  others "  are  not  specified,
that  each  automatist  is  to  supplement  statements  given  through
the  other  is  a  natural  interpretation.

There  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  the  descriptions  of
their  own  attitude  given  by  the  controls  through  both  sensitives.
The  Verrall-Myers  speaks  (Dec.  29th,  1903)  of  the  voice
of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness;  the  Holland-Myers  (Jan  5th,
1904)  of  words  said,  shouted,  sung  to  the  wind,  and  again
(on  Jan.  12th,  1904),  of  one  wailing  as  the  wind  wails,
wordless  and  unheeded.  The  Holland-Myers  (Jan.  6th,  1904)
refers  to  the  missionary  spirit  longing  to  speak  to  the  souls
in  prison ;  the  Verrall-Myers,  in  a  very  obscure  passage  (Feb.
2nd,  1904),  to  slaves  in  prison,  and  prodigies  done  by  the
pure,  presumably  on  their  behalf.

Further,  the  Verrall-Myers  remarks  (Dec.  27,  1903):
"  Comes  the  message,  but  is  not  understanded  of  any "  ;  and
the  Holland-Myers  (on  Jan.  27th,  1904)  expresses  his  bitter
disappointment  that  the  message,  on  which  apparently  so
much  effort  had  been  spent,  had  not  made  any  real  impression
on  his  friends.

This  is  strikingly  appropriate,  since,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
it  was  not  until  October,  1905,  that  any  correspondence  was
discovered  between  the  two  series  of  scripts,  while  the  minor
resemblances  were  not  observed  till  I  was  preparing  this
report  for  publication.

I  now  give  in  full  the  passages  referred  to,  quoting  in  both
cases  from  the  original  writings,  since  Mrs.  Verrall  has  kindly
lent me  the whole  of  her  script  for  the purposes  of  this


lv.] A  utomatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  223

paper.  I  am  also  indebted  to  her  for  the  translations  of
the  Latin  and  Greek  phrases  in  her  script,  which  I  have
put  into  the  text  in  round  brackets,  giving  the  original
Latin  or  Greek  in  foot-notes.

I.  From  Mrs.  Verrall's  Script.

(September  22nd,  1903.)  .  .  .  Henry  Sidgwick  has  a  message  to
give  before  Christmas,  through  you  if  possible.  In  his  envelope  is
a  drawing,  a  curved  line,  on  one  side  of  the  paper,  and  a  word  or
two  on  the  other  side  LTnto  this  end — that  is  the  idea — unto
this  last  ....  But  you  must  give  another  message  correctly  first
and  then  ask  her  to  open  my  envelope.1

(October  7th,  1903.)  .  .  .  Henry  Sidgwick's  message  is  next  to  come;
it  is  about  3  letters  kept  together  not  of  the  same  date  ;  two  are
in  the  original  envelopes,  but  the  third  is  loose.  I  can't  see  whose
the  letters  are,  but  he  valued  them.  Just  these  three  were  always
together — More  about  that  later — it  will  be  quite  clear  to  you.

Tell  Piddington  to  ask  Mrs.  Thompson  about  Sidgwick's  three
envelopes.

Myers  sent  this  word.

(October  8th,  1903.) [Further  statements  about  these  three  letters.]

(October  10th,  1903.)  .  .  .  You  are  not  right  yet  about  Sidgwick's
message — do  not  hurry.  Ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  if  she  can  tell  you  a
question  to  put  at  the  first  chance.  You  will  be  in  direct  com-
munication with  one  of  us  soon  and  should  be  able  to  ask  a
question  about  Sidgwick  to  which  she  knows  the  answer  and  you
do  not. Let  this  be  your  test.

[Here  follows  an  apparent  attempt  to  give  the  contents  of  one  of
the  three  letters.]

(October  12th,  1903.) [More  about  the  letters.]

Don't  ask  Mrs.  Sidgwick  yet — See  Mrs.  Thompson  first  if  you
can —  It  is  much  easier  when  some  one  else  helps.  You  have
not  got  it  right  yet

let  him  say  it  plainly
It  was  arranged  that  he  should  refer  to  these  3  letters

Mrs.  Verrall  then  asked  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  give  her  a  test
question,  and  on  October  18th,  1903,  received  from  her  the

1  The  reference  to  envetopes  here  is  clearly  to  sealed  envelopes  left  by  Dr.
Sidgwick  and  Mr.  Myers  to  be  reproduced  posthumously.


224


Alice  Johnson.


[part


question :  "  What  was  the  last  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  texts, — the
one  that  belonged  to  the  latter  part  of  his  life  ?  "

On  October  19  th  and  following  days,  as  stated  above,  the
script  contains  a  long  series  of  allusions  to  Faith,  Hope  and
Charity  and  their  comparative  merits,  special  value  being
attached  to  the  virtue  of  Hope.  Among  references  to  these
and  various  other  topics  occur  the  following  passages,  which
1  quote  as  having  a  possible  connection  with  some  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script.

(October  19th,  1903) * * *  *

Write  this  week  but  not  for  evidence.  That  later  for  you  through
others — Wait — it  has  helped — you  have  partly  understood  ....

(December  7th,  1903) * * *  *

Sit  regularly  alone  or  with  others  and  that  will  bring  results —
you  will  see.  Try  to-morrow  with  Mrs.  Dew-Smith  1  and  let  your-
self go.  .  .  .

(Hammam  Rhira  [Algeria],  Xmas  Day,  1903. 6  p.m.)

Write  this  for  me — on  the  17th  of  next  month  ask  the  question —

(In  Latin  :  That  which  has  been  rent,  lies  open  2)

Hodgson  has  recognized  the  sign — you  did  not  know — 3

But  you  have  not  Sidgwicks  message  clear  Try  that

Mrs.  Sidgwick  would  know  about  the  three  letters  in  the  cabinet

one  with  no  envelope.

use  the  daylight  hours,  for  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  may

work  4 — that  is  not  for  you  but  for  identification.
Write  more  often  for  a  month  now.

F  W  H  Myers

The  sentence :  "  Use  the  daylight  hours,  for  the  night
cometh  when  no  man  may  work,"  may  perhaps  be  regarded
as  a  paraphrase  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  text :  "  Gather  up  the  frag-
ments, etc. ; "  for  it  seems  marked  out  by  the  words  that
follow  it:  "That  is  not  for  you,  but  for  identification;"  meaning
(apparently)  that  it  is  intended  for  an  evidential  message.

1  Mrs.  Verrall  had  already  had  some  successful  experiments  with  Mrs.  Dew-
Smith  and  others  of  her  friends.

2  Scissa  patet.

3  Mrs.  Verrall  heard  from  Dr.  Hodgson  on  January  20th,  1904,  that  he  had
recognised  in  her  script  certain  evidential  points. — See  her  Report,  p.  308.

4  St.  John,  ix.  4.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  2'2r>


(Hammam  Ehira,  Dec.  27,  1903. 5.45  p.m.)

Never  the  less  comes  the  message,  but  is  not  understanded  of  any.

(In  latin:  Why  does  the  madness  of  the  Lion  vex?1)  no  that
is  wrong

O  that  'twere  possible  after  long  grief  and  pain.2

Let  them  try  but  do  not  be  discouraged  if  they  fail ;  they  will

ask  you  to  try  with  them — do  not  give  too  much  time  to  them

Let  things  come ;  wait  and  do  not  guess.  .  .  .

Next  comes  an  exhortation  to  listen  to  a  voice  crying  in  the
wilderness, — the  voice,  presumably,  of  the  control  endeavouring
to  deliver  his  message.
(Dec.  29,  1903. 5  p.m. Hammam  Rhira.)

(In  latin :  Patience — things  lie  open  to  those  who  have  patience.
Oh  ye  who  fear,  listen  now  to  the  voice  of  one  crying  and  pro-
claiming in  desert  places.  Ye  shall  see  soon  things  never  seen
before,  ye  shall  receive  with  your  ears  things  never  heard — through
long  ages  the  truth  shall  endure.3)  .  .  .

Before  going  on  to  the  script  next  in  chronological  order,
I  may  observe  that  this  passage  seems  to  represent  the  com-
pletion of  the  idea  of  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness  which
had  first  emerged  in  a  totally  different  connection  on  Oct.
5th,  1903.  On  that  date  (see  below)  the  script  is  dealing
with  the  two  constellations  of  Ariadne's  crown  and  Berenice's
hair,  and  involves  an  interesting  cross-correspondence  with
Mrs.  Piper,  as  related  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Beport  (pp.  308-9  and
427-29).  It  contains  two  side-allusions — apparently  arising
from  association  of  ideas :  Berenice's  hair  suggests  "  Mary
Magdalene  and  the  nard,"  and  Ariadne,  deserted  and  lamenting,
seems  to  suggest  the  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness — for  the
Vulgate  phrase  vox  clamantis  is  applied  to  her  on  Oct.  5th,
while  it  is  used  more  in  its  original  sense  on  Dec.  29th.

I  italicise  in  this  extract  the  words  relating  to  this  aspect
of  Ariadne.

(Oct.  5,  1903. 6.50  p.m.)
(In  latin :  Dawn  made  it  with  a  great  sound  of  conches,  whilst
the  breath  of  the  west  wind  hung  above. The  sea  sounds;  the  shore

JCur  Leonis  insania  vexat?  2  Tennyson,  Maud,  Part  II.,  iv.  i.

3  Patientia — patet — quibus  patientia.  O  vos  qui  timetis  audite  nunc  vocem
clamantis  et  proclamantis  in  desertis  locis.  numquam  antea  visa  mox  videbitis,
nunquam  audita  auribus  recipietis — in  longum  aevum  permanebit  Veritas.


226


Alice  Johnson.


[part


laments;  the  voice  of  Ariadne  dies  away  in  lamentation.  Ariadne,  a
crowned  star;  that  is  the  omen  and  the  name — send  it)  Seven  stars
in  the  crown  and  Berenice's  hair  too  {In  Latin  :  with  yellow  hair)
Mary  Magdalene  and  the  nard — but  you  will  not  understand  (In
Latin :  a  flaming  crown  surrounds  the  head  which  was  dearest  to  him
— there  bloom  Olympian  lilies,  not  Roman  ;  gazing  he  grows  pale — )
no  you  confuse — Ariadne's  cry — find  that  out  (In  Latin :  The  voice
of  one  crying  and  loving  on  a  deserted  rock.  There  comes  a  consoler,
unexpected,  heavenly  (?),  not  mortal —  In  the  sky  he  set  the  star,  an
omen  for  mortals  in  grief.  The  interpretation  is  easy.  Ariadne's
name  shows  the  meaning.  Receive — receive,  after  fury  peace,  out
of  darkness  a  great  light, silence  helps.1)

Returning  now  to  the  main  topic,  the  next  script  to  be
quoted  is  the  following :

(Jan.  9,  1904. 6  p.m. Hammam  Rhira.)

(In  Latin:  Be  sure  you  write  upon  the  17th  day.2)
(Jan.  17,  1904. 5.45  p.m. Hammam  Rhira.)

S  is  the  letter — S  in  the  envelope — S  and  on  a  seal —

In  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  letter  a  2 — and  three  words  on  the  paper —
not  without  hope.

The  question  is  answered.

This  must  succeed — the  other  is  harder.  .  .  .

The  text  and  the  answer  are  one  and  are  given.

Hope — youngest  daughter  of  to-day  and  oldest  mother  of  the  race.

To  see  the  Godhead  face  to  face —  no — Beholds  the  Godhead's  very
face. Shine  at  the  on  the  Wanderer  on  the  Way. That  is  not

1  Aurora  fecit  multo  cum  sono  conchyli  superimpendente  zephyri  flatu.
resouat  mare — plangitur  ora. desinit  in  plangorem  Ariadnes  vox.

Ariadne  stella  coronaria  hoc  est  omen  et  nomen — mitte  ....  flava
comam —  .  .  .

cingit  corona  flammata  caput  quod  ei  fuit  carissimura — ibi  tlorescutit  lilia
olympiaca  non  Romana. pallescit  inhians.  .  .  .

vox  clamantis  et  amantis  in  rape  deserta — venit  consolator  inopinatus,  caeli-
colosus  non  mortalis,  in  caelo  posuit  stellam  morfcalibus  in  maerore  omen.

Interpretatio  facilis.

Ariadne's  nomen  significationem  demonstrat.
Accipe  accipe.

post  furorem,  pax,  e  tenebris  lux  magna — silentium  prodest.
The original script is here  reproduced, with  all its mis-spellings  and
inaccuracies.

2  Fac  scribas  die  septimo  decimo.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  227


quite  right,  but  it  is  about  Hope's  vision  which  is  the  true  one  and
leads  on  the  Passionate  Pilgrim.

(Note  on  the  above  script,  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  January  18th,
1904.)

Before  writing  I  slept,  and  in  my  sleep  I  seemed  to  be  getting
the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope  of  Mr.  Myers  for  Sir  0.  J.  L.
So  I  put  the  question  before  writing  (cf.  script  of  Dec.  25,  1903).
"  What  is  in  F.  W.  H.  M.'s  letter  in  the  charge  of  Dr.  Hodgson  ?  "
that  being  the  envelope  about  which  I  have  long  thought  the  script
had  been  writing.  But  the  words  of  this  script— Jan.  17 — -seem  to
refer  to  an  envelope  of  H.  S.  in  Mrs.  S.'s  charge  ;  and  the  "  question  "
may  be  the  one  referred  to  in  sc.  of  Oct.  10.  .  .  .  Cf.  also  Oct.  19,
21,  23,  Nov.  17  for  Hope — and  earlier  scripts  (about  Sept.,  1903)  for
contents  of  Envelope.

I  regard  the  script  of  January  17th,  1904,  as  the  climax
of  this  particular  cross-correspondence,  such  as  it  is ;  but  I
quote  next  a  later  passage  which  seems  to  show  a  possible
connection  with  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Jan.  6th,  1904
(see  p.  231),  for  the  last  words:  "Find  this — it  happened — it
is  a  clue,"  appear  to  indicate  that  some  connection  is  to  be
looked  for.  The  passage  begins  by  describing  the  utterances
of  a  prophetic  and  oracular  voice — perhaps  a  variant  of  the
voice  crying  in  the  wilderness — and  goes  on  to  speak  of  a
large  prison,  in  which  slaves  are  confined.

(February  2nd,  1904.)

(In  latin  and  Greek :  When  I  greatly  wish,  I  cannot  express  to
you  what  I  want  to  say.  Wait  for  the  cry 111 ;  then  though  you
have  been  undone,  out  of  your  error  you  will  reach  the  end.

Watch  always :  soon  will  come (2)  the  oracular  Erinys,  long-haired,
with  holy  hands,  on  frankincense  (?)  nurtured.  Her  you  have  not
beheld,  nor  have  you  heard  the  prophetic  voice  (3)  crying (4)  things  more
terrible  than  great.)1 No  you  do  not  follow. Try  now  to  hear.

(In  Greek :  Great  mouthed (5)  is  the  interpreter  ;  he  uses  one  voice  for
all  men, — but  few  have  heard).2

Megasthenes,  megasterion,  megas  and  then  something  Megasthen

1  Cum  desidero  non  possum  tibi  exprimere  quae  dicere  velim.  expecta
mugionem. turn  labefacta  ex  errore  perveuies.

Pervigila.  mox  adveniet  fatidica  Erinys  comata  x^po's  ayvah  rpa(pelaa.
<xv  ouk  ecetOes  ovSe  dfj.<pa\rjs  air-qKovaas  KeKpayeicrrjs  feivoripa  fj  (j,eifa.

2  mega  stom  ios  o  fipafievs  (pwvri  xpijrat  p.ia  wpbs  iravras — iravpoi  Se  aK-qKbauLV.


228


Alice  Johnson.


[part


no — no —  Megastulon.  (In  Greek  and  Latin :  The  object  seen  is
a  sort  of  large  Labour  prison,  amid  mountains  across  the  salt  sea.
There  are  slaves  there  imprisoned  in  prison.  The  pure  have
accomplished  wonders).1 Find  this  it  happened, it  is  a  clue.

For  completeness,  though  there  is  in  it  no  direct  connection
with  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  I  give  a  passage  from  a  still  later
script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  which  gave  her  a  clue  to  another
paraphrase  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  text.

(May  11th,  1904.).  ...  It  was  a  flat  green  book,  lying  edgwise  on
the  table  [drawing  of  book]  and  the  letters  on  it  in  gold  letters
The  binding  is  flexible  and  projects  beyond  the  leaves  of  the  book.
The  printing  inside  leaves  wide  margins  The  sentences  are  short
and  broken. Take  it  and  open  where  the  mark  is — then  read  the

1  ixeyejjyauTvXov  ri  earl  to  opa/xa  iv  opecri  tioiv  inrep  a\bs  ttovt'lov — ivravda  opQes.
in  carcere  incarcerati. Mundi  prodigia  Hoir\<jav.

Mrs.  Verrall  appends  the  following  notes  on  the  words  italicised  in  the  above
translation  :

December  4th,  1907.

(1)  mugionem,  a  false  form,  obviously  meant  for  the  noun  from  mugire,  which
means  "to  low,  or  bellow,''  and  is  used  («)  of  cattle,  (6)  of  the  sound  of  the
trumpet,  (c)  the  creaking  of  spars  in  a  gale,  {d)  of  thunder.  It  corresponds  to
the  Greek  nvKa.op.ai,  which  is  used  in  much  the  same  senses,  but  seems  to  be
specially  associated,  at  least  once,  with  the  Erinyes.  But  the  word  is  not  used
of  the  utterance  of  an  oracle  nor  of  any  articulate  voice.

(2)  mox  adveniet,  etc. Here  are  unmistakeable  allusions  to  an  oracle.

(a)  mox  adveniet  recalls  a  similar  phrase  in  script  of  March  21,  1901  (Pro-
ceedings, XX.  42)  which  definitely  speaks  of  the  Cumaean  Sibyl.

(/<)  fatidica  appears  as  an  epithet  of  four  divinities  (Roscher's  Lexicon;
Supplement  on  Latin  Epithets  of  Divinities),  all  of  them  speakers  of  oracles  :  viz.
Carnientis,  a  prophetess :  Virg.  Aen.  VIII.  339,  40.  Manto,  a  prophetess  :  Virg.
A<:n.  X.  199.  Sibylla,  the  prophetess:  Silius,  Ital.  17.  2;  Statius,  SUvae,  III.
5.  97.  Ausonius,  p.  204.  (I  have  never  read  these  three :  Silius,  Statius,
Ausonius.)  Themis,  the  original  "proprietor  of  the  Delphian  Oracle."  Ovid,
Met.  I.  321.

"  fatidicam  Themin,  quae  tunc  oracla  tenebat."
The word means  "prophetic,  oracular, Sibylline"; Dr.  Verrall,  asked  to
translate,  said  "oracular."

(c)  comata  recalls  the  loose  hair  of  the  Sibyl  (Virg.  Aen.  VI.  48)  which  was —
as  part  of  the  ritual — taken  out  of  its  fastenings  before  she  prophesied.

(d)  xf'P°'s  ay  vats,  also  recalls  the  preliminary  lustrations.

Erinys  is  not  an  oracular  being,  but  she  is  underground.  The  word  seems  a
sheer  blunder — not  at  all  what  my  normal  self  would  do.

(3)  6/j.<pa\7]s  is  an  impossible  word,  but  the  intention  is  clear.  There  is  a
combination  of  d/i07j  =  a  divine  voice,  and  6^0aX6s  =  the  navel  stone  at  Delphi.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  229


second  paragraph  That  will  the  words  she  wants  in  answ  [here  an
interruption  occurred,  after  which  the  writing  was  resumed  :]  [draw-
ings of  a  cross,  heart  and  anchor]  and  the  greatest  of  these  three
Write  the  other  words.  .  .  .

It  is  clear  that  the  latter  part  of  this  script  is  recurring
to  the  notion  of  faith,  hope  and  charity,  several  times  repeated
in  the  earlier  passages  quoted  above,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that
the  words  from  "  Take  it  and  open "  to  the  end  are  in  the
handwriting  of  the  Sidgwick  control,  i.e.,  in  a  hand  resembling
Dr.  Sidgwick's  own  (which  was  well  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall).
These  points  seem  to  mark  it  out  as  belonging  to  the  series
of  incidents  now  under  discussion.

On  November  16th,  1906,  Mrs.  Verrall  learnt  for  the  first
time  of  certain  connections  between  her  script  of  1903-4  and
Mrs.  Piper's  of  the  same  period,  and  this  led  her  to  investigate
further  the  script  just  quoted.  The  description  of  the  book
suggested  to  her  a  "  Temple  Classic,"  since  one  set  of  the
books  in  that  series  are  fiat  (i.e.  thin)  and  green,  with  flexible
bindings  and  wide  margins.  As  the  script  was  in  the  hand-
writing of  the  Sidgwick  control,  she  asked  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on
November  21st,  1906,  if  she  had  any  "Temple  Classics."  Two

This  last  word  is  regularly  used  for  Delphi  itself  as  the  seat  of  prophecy.  The
context  shows  that  it  is  meant  for  "prophetic  voice"  here.

(4)  KeKpayecarjs  recalls  vox  da/mantis.  The  verb  from  which  it  purports  to  be
formed  is  often  used  in  Greek  in  conjunction  with  j3odu.  [KeKpayus  /ecu  fiouv
'  crying  and  shouting '],  and  fioCiv  is  the  word  in  S.  Matt.  iii.  3.

(5)  Megastomios  does  not  exist,  but  it  is  a  correctly  formed  word.
Megasth'enes  =  greatly  strong,  and  is  applied  by  Aeschylus,  in  a  well-known

passage,  to  an  oracle.  In  another  well-known  passage  of  Aeschylus  {Seven  against
Thebes)  the  Erinys  is  said  to  be  Megasthenes,  and  in  a  third  she  is  called
Kakomantis  (prophet  of  evil).  This  is  perhaps  enough  to  account  for  my
subliminal  dragging  in  Erinys,  when  it  was  blundering  about  over  Megas  and
Prophetess.

Megasterion  does  not  exist.

Megastulon  does  not  exist.

Ergasterion  is  a  Labour  prison,  and  Megergasterion  would  be  a  perfectly  good
word  for  a  Large  Labour  Prison.

Megergastulon  is  not  a  bad  word  for  the  same  thing.

The  reference  to  the  earlier  script  (March  21/01)  is  beyond  a  doubt.  This  is
quoted  in  Proceedings  XX.  343.  It  is  too  obscure  to  translate  ;  but  it  (a)  refers
to  the  Sibyl  :  (h)  has  the  same  phrase  velim  dicere  as  is  in  Feb.  2/04  ;  (c)  talks
about  binding  (nexere),  i.e.  cross- correspondences ;  and  (d)  is  signed  by
F.  W.  H.  M.

P


230


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


being  produced,  Mrs.  Verrall  selected  for  certain  reasons  a
Marcus  Aurelius,  and  took  it  home  with  her  to  investigate.
It  had  a  ribbon  marker  at  which  she  opened  it,  and  found
that  the  "  second  paragraph "  was  Chapter  XVII.  of  Book  I.
The  marginal  heading  to  that  chapter  (printed  on  the  following
page)  was  "Go  about  each  action  as  if  thy  last." 1

This  again  (like  the  text  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
December  25th,  1903)  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  a  paraphrase
of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  text :  "  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain
etc.,"  and  it  was  by  following  the  directions  given  in  her
script  that  Mrs.  Verrall  found  it,  among  the  marginal  sum-
maries, which  "  are  short  and  broken."  It  should  be  noted,
however,  that  before  finding  it  (though  not  before  writing  the
script  which  led  her  to  it)  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  what  Dr.
Sidgwick's  text  was.

It  may  be  worth  adding  that  the  Marcus  Aurelius  was  not
given  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  till  some  time  after  the  deaths  of
Dr.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  Myers,  so  that  if  the  information  came
from  either  of  them,  it  was  not  a  case  of  recollection.

II. From  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.2

(September  21st,  1903.) [M.] There  is  no  effort unavailing —
You  fail — yet  save  another's  failing —
[G.] One  person  alone  does  so  little

(November  7th,  1903.)  [G.]  The  agent  is  all  alone  and  that  makes
it  hard.

[November  26th,  1903.]  [M.]  The  nearest  simile  I  can  find  to
express  the  difficulties  of  sending  a  message — is  that  I  appear  to  be
standing  behind  a  sheet  of  frosted  glass — which  blurs  sight  and
deadens  sounds — dictating  feebly — to  a  reluctant  and  somewhat
obtuse  secretary.  A  feeling  of  terrible  impotence  burdens  me —  I
am  so  powerless  to  tell  what  means  so  much —  I  cannot  get  into
communication  with  those  who  would  understand  and  believe  me.

(December  1st,  1903.)  [M.]  It  will  soon  be  three  years  now —
and  yet  I  seem  no  further  from  earth  though  perhaps  no  nearer
than  I  was  that  January  day.3 The  bonds  of  association  have  actual

XA11  the  statements  in  this  paragraph  were  furnished  to  me  by  Mrs.  Verrall
from  her  diary.

2  Some  of  these  passages  have  already  been  quoted  above  in  their  context.
aMr.  Myers  died  on  January  17th,  1901.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  231


strength  and  anniversaries  should  be  kept.  No  no  not  rapping  or
Planchette  that  is  maddeningly  cumbrous  and  inadequate — hut  friends
— comrades  fellow-workers — sitting  quietly  in  our  own  familiar  room —
a  pen  in  the  hand  of  a  sensitive  That  is  the  way  One  does  so
little  alone.

This  seems  to  express  the  same  idea  of  the  advantage  of
co-operation  between  several  sensitives  as  is  expressed  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Oct.  12th  and  19th  and  Dec.  7th,  and
the  idea  recurs  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.  5th  (quoted
in  full  above,  p.  211)  as  follows:

I  fear  you  will  never  be  really  responsive  trying  alone — at  least
not  to  influences  unknown  to  you  while  they  lived.  You  need  the
connecting  bond.

Next  come  passages  expressing  the  desire  of  the  controls
to  give  evidential  communications.

(January  5th,  1904) — [G.]  .  .  .  It's  not  to  me  like  a  glimmer
that  tells  a  message  may  perhaps  be  sent  back  It  is  like  a  breeze
that  blows  a  breeze  of  memories — and  one  feels  that  words  said —
shouted  sung  to  the  wind — may  perhaps  some  time — some  time
reach  you  as  an  echo — a  whisper — distorted  perhaps  but  yet  with
a  purpose  with  a  meaning — not  for  you — but  for  others
*****

[M.]  Oh  if  I  could  only  get  to  them — could  only  leave  you  the
proof  positive  that  I  remember — -recall — know — continue  .  .  .

(January  6th,  1904)  .  .  .  [M.]  I  have  thought  of  a  simile  which
may  help  you  to  realise  the  bound  to  earth  condition  which  persists
with  me.  It  is  a  matter  very  largely  of  voluntary  choice.  I  am
as  it  were — actuated  by  the  missionary  spirit  and  the  great  longing
to  speak  to  the  souls  in  prison — still  in  the  prison  of  the  flesh  1
— leads  me  to  '  absent  me  from  felicity  awhile.'  2

Yes  you  are  right  I  am  being  helped  to  send  a  message —  The
split  infinitive3  is  not  my  natural  soul's  expression,  but  the  one  who
helps  me  has  power  but  not  scholarship  .  .  .

1  Cf .  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  276  :  ".  .  .  the  fragmentary  whisper  of
one  true  soul,  descending  painfully  from  unimaginable  brightness  to  bring
strength  and  hope  to  kindred  souls  still  prisoned  in  the  flesh."

Also  op.  tit.,  p.  256  :  "  .  .  .  they  are  more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray  ;
of  their  own  act  and  grace  they  visit  our  spirits  in  prison."

2  Shakespeare,  Hamlet,  Act  v.,  Scene  ii.  :  "Absent  thee  from  felicity  awhile."

3  See  foot-note  ante,  p.  213.


232


Alice  Johnson.


[part


In-  the  passage  next  to  be  quoted,  the  original  script  shows
signs  of  emotional  strain  and  intensity  impossible  to  reproduce
in  a  printed  copy.  The  Gurney  control,  writing  in  pencil,
tells  the  automatist  that  her  hand  will  be  left  alone,  and  she
is  to  write  down  a  message  transmitted  to  her  brain.  He
then  tells  her  to  take  a  pen.  She  does  so  and  the  passage
that  follows  is  in  her  own  ordinary  hand-writing.  Then  she
breaks  off,  noting  "  I  am  very  restless,  etc."  The  script  begins
again  in  the  writing  of  the  Myers  control,  complaining  that
she  is  not  giving  the  method  of  experiment  a  fair  trial.
Thus  urged,  she  makes  a  fresh  attempt  in  her  ordinary  hand-
writing and  gives — not  quite  correctly — the  first  two  lines  of
Mr.  Myers's  poem,  St.  Paul.  (Mrs.  Holland  told  me  later
that  she  had  never  read  this  poem,  and  was  quite  unaware
till  I  told  her  that  she  had  quoted  from  it  in  her  script.
Nevertheless  she  supposes,  as  I  do,  that  she  had  probably
seen  these  lines  quoted  somewhere,  and  that  she  reproduced
them  from  her  subliminal  memory.)  After  some  general
reflections,  the  hand-writing  gradually  changes  again,  as  if
by  an  overpowering  impulse,  into  that  of  the  Myers  control,
expressing  with  passionate  energy  his  desire  to  "  reach  you —
reach  anyone."  Here  the  writing  becomes  large  and  emphatic,
then  stops  dead,  and  the  Gurney  control  resumes  in  pencil,
"  Why  did  you  let  your  hand  yield  ?  You  have  stopped  and
exhausted  him  now  .  .  ."  The  automatist  notes  that  this
script  has  tired  her  more  than  any  she  has  ever  done.

The  full  text  is  as  follows  :

(Tuesday. Jan.  12th. 11  a.m.)
[G.] Now  I  want  you  to  do  something  different  this  morning —
Instead  of  the  frequent  interruptions  of  little  broken  messages  from
Laura  or  Frances  or
(I  was  interrupted  by  a  note.)

which  trouble  F.  so  and  break  the  thread — your  hand  will  be  left
alone — but  you  are  to  write  down  as  much  as  you  can  gather  of  a
message  transmitted  to  your  brain  alone —  I  think  it  will  be  easier
for  F.  Don't  trouble  to  pick  phrases — jot  down  what  is  put  into
your  mind —  Throw  it  on  the  paper  as  it  were — that  will  do —
Pen.

[In  Mrs.  Holland's  ordinary  hand-writing.']  To  believe  that  the  mere
act  of  death  enables  a  spirit  to  understand  the  whole  mystery  of


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  233


death  is  as  absurd  as  to  imagine  that  the  act  of  birth  enables  an
infant  to  understand  the  whole  mystery  of  life —

I  am  still  groping — surmising — conjecturing —  The  experience  is
different  for  each  one  of  us —  What  I  have  felt — experienced —
undergone  is  doubtless  utterly  unlike  what  each  one  of  you  will
experience  in  good  time — ■

One  was  here  lately  who  could  not  believe  that  he  was  dead —
He  accepted  the  new  conditions  as  a  certain  stage  of  the  treatment
of  his  illness —

(I  am  very  restless —  I  have  just  taken  an  absolutely  purpose-
less walk  through  two  rooms  and  the  verandah — but  I  could  not
help  it.)

[M.J  Try  and  fix  your  attention — you  are  not  giving  this  a  fair
trial —  I  feel  that  if  I  am  released  from  my  attempts  to  make
your  hand  write  I  may  be  able  to  send  something  really  convincing —
But  oh  the  difficulty  of  it.  Put  your  left  hand  at  the  back  of
your  head  and  sit  still.

[In  Mrs.  Holland's  ordinary  hand-writing.']

"Yea,  I  am  Christ's — and  let  the  name  (word1?)  suffice  ye —
E'en  as  for  me  He  greatly  hath  sufficed  " — 1

God  is  infinite — but  many  of  the  conditions  whereby  he  controls
the  world  are  finite

Self  sacrifice — the  mortification  of  the  flesh  a  natural  outcome  of
the  implanted  yearning — the  spark  from  the  Fire  of  the  Divine.

In  spirit  and  in  truth —

If  it  were  possible  for  the  soul  to  die  back  into  earth  life  again
I  should  die  from  sheer  yearning  to  reach  you  [Here  the  writing
changes  into  that  of  the  Myers  control]  to  tell  you  that  all  that  we
imagined  is  not  half  wonderful  enough  for  the  truth — that  immortality
instead  of  being  a  beautiful  dream  is  the  one  the  only  reality — the
strong  golden  thread  on  which  all  the  illusions  of  all  the  lives  are
strung — If  I  could  only  reach  you — if  I  could  only  tell  you — I  long  for
power  and  all  that  comes  to  me  is  an  infinite  yearning— an  infinite
pain —  Does  any  of  this  reach  you  reach  anyone  or  am  I  only
wailing  as  the  wind  wails — wordless  and  unheeded —

[G.]  Why  did  you  let  your  hand  yield  to  the  writing — ■  You
have  stopped  and  exhausted  him  now — and  he  might  have  gone
on  dictating —

1  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  St.  Paul  ■

"Christ  !  I  am  Christ's  !  And  let  the  name  suffice  you,
Ay,  for  me  too  He  greatly  hath  sufficed.''


234


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(11.30.  This  writing  took  just  half  an  hour  but  it  has  tired  me
more  than  any  I  have  ever  done.)

The  script  of  January  12th,  1904,  is  the  last  entry  in  the
MS.  book  sent  to  me  on  January  loth.  The  script  of
January  15th  and  17th  was  sent  in  a  letter  dated  January
21st,  in  which  Mrs.  Holland  says:  "This  week  I  have  only
written  automatically  when  I  have  felt  a  strong  impulse  to
do  so."

(Friday,  Jan.  15th,  1904. 11.30  a.m.)
*****

[M.]  I  begin  to  understand  how  unwise  it  is  to  try  to  urge  you
to  efforts  beyond  your  present  powers.  While  you  are  alone  it
is  useless  I  fear  to  try  to  convey  my  newly  won  dearly  bought
knowledge  through  your  mind.  I  must  content  me  with  what  I
can  painfully  and  laboriously  scrawl  by  means  of  your  hand — If  I
can  only  reach  them — when  I  can  only  reach  them  we  will  do
great  things — but  as  yet  we  are  only  beginning — if  indeed  we  have
yet  made  a  beginning —

[G.]  He  is  disappointed  but  it's  hardly  your  fault —  But  go
on  trying — do  your  best — you  can't  help  its  not  being  better —

(This  writing  took  six  minutes.)

(Sunday — Jan.  17th. 10.45  a.m.)
[M.] Thursday— Jan.  17  th,  1901.

I  have  no  wish  to  return  in  thought  and  memory  to  that  time
but  let  that  date  stand  for  what  it  stands  for  to  mine  and  me —

Yet  another  attempt  to  run  the  blockade — to  strive  to  get  a  message
through —  How  am  I  to  make  your  hand  docile  enough  how  can
I  convince  them  ?

The  sealed  envelope  (1899)  is  not  to  be  opened  yet — not  yet-

I  am  unable  to  make  your  hand  form  Greek  characters  and  so  I
cannot  give  the  text  as  I  wish — only  the  reference — 1  Cor.  16 — 13.1

...  Oh  I  am  feeble  with  eagerness —  How  can  I  best  be
identified —  It  means  so  much  apart  from  the  mere  personal  love
and  longing —  Edmund's  help  is  not  here  with  me  just  now —  I
am  trying  alone  amid  unspeakable  difficulties —

(This  writing  came  slowly — at  least  there  were  unusual  pauses
between  the  phrases — my  hand  feels  very  restless  and  I  feel  vaguely

1  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men,  be  strong."


lv.J Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  235

troubled  and  excited —  I  want  to  express  something  I  can't  quite
grasp.)

';We  few,  we  happy  few,  we  band  of  brothers" — 1
Dear  old  chap  you  have  done  so  much  in  the  past  three  years —
I  am  cognisant  of  a  great  deal  of  it  but  with  strange  gaps  in  my
knowledge —  If  I  could  only  talk  with  you —  If  I  could  only  help
you  with  some  advice —  I  tried  more  than  once  did  it  ever  come —
There's  so  much  to  be  learnt  from  the  Diamond  Island  experiment2 —
(I  was  interrupted  here.)  well  meaning  but  very  ignorant — bound
to  be  tinged  by  the  channels  through  which  they  are  conveyed —
Help  me — give  me  the  help  if  not  yet  of  your  belief  of  your
sympathy —  Take  the  message  to  you  all  I  cannot  yet  fully  and
[ending  in  illegible  scribble].

Here,  then,  as  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  the  same  date,
quoted  above  (see  p.  226),  are  references  to  a  sealed  letter  and
to  a  text.  The  text  to  which  Mrs.  Holland's  script  gives  the
reference  is :  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like
men,  be  strong ; '"  and  the  script  says :  "  I  am  unable  to  make
your  hand  form  Greek  characters  and  so  I  cannot  give  the
text  as  I  wish,  only  the  reference."  This  text,  as  we  have
seen,  is  not  and  has  no  sort  of  connection  with  the  text  asked
for  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  which  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  was  trying
to  produce.  But  it  is  the  text  inscribed  (with  the  omission
of  the  last  two  words  "  be  strong ")  in  Greek  over  the
gateway  of  Selwyn  College,  Cambridge,  which  would  be  passed
in  going  from  Mr.  Myers's  house  to  Mrs.  Verrall's,  or  to  the
rooms  in  Newnham  College  where  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick
lived.  The  road  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall  lives  is  named  Selwyn
Gardens,  after  Selwyn  College.  The  Greek  inscription  over
the  Selwyn  gateway  has  an  error  in  it — the  omission  of  a  mute
letter — on  which  Mr.  Myers  had  more  than  once  remarked  to
Mrs.  Verrall.

The  fact  that  this  text  (without  the  reference  to  Corinthians)
turns  up  in  the  script  again,  more  than  a  year  later,  and  also
in  connection  with  Mrs.  Verrall  (see  below,  p.  253),  but  before
Mrs.  Holland  knew  that  there  was  any  significance  in  its  first
appearance,  suggests  strongly  that  it  is  not  a  mere  chance
allusion. Mrs.  Holland  has  never  been  in  Cambridge  and  has,  I

1  Shakespeare,  Henry  V.,  Act  IV.,  Scene  iii.

2 1  am  unable  to  conjecture  the  meaning  of  this  phrase.


236  Alice  Johnson.  [part

believe,  few  friends  or  acquaintances  having  any  connection
with  it.  These  trivial  details  of  the  locality  where  Mr.  Myers
lived  are  of  course  more  or  less  familiar  to  other  people  living
in  the  same  neighbourhood,  but  it  is  very  unlikely  that  they
would  crop  up  in  casual  conversation  outside  Cambridge.

It  may  be  noted  that  a  strong  desire  is  expressed  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  that  this  "  message "  should  be  sent  to  Mr.
Myers's  friends,  as  if  it  were  a  specially  important  one.  The
only  previous  occasion  on  which  this  request  was  specially  made
was  in  the  script  of  November  7th,  1903  (quoted  above,
p.  186),  when  Mrs.  Verrall's  name  and  address  were  given,
and  which  also  contains  a  certain  amount  of  evidential  matter.

The  last  script  to  be  quoted  in  this  connection  was  sent  to
me  with  some  other  in  a  letter  dated  March  10th,  1904,  in
which  Mrs.  Holland  writes  :  "  I  enclose  a  final  page  of  very
incoherent  writing.  I  have  steadily  resisted  every  impulse  to
write  since  Feb.  11th,  for  I  am  very  busy  now  and  interruptions
(while  writing)  jarred  on  me  painfully."

(Wednesday. Jan.  27th,  [1904]. 11.5  a.m.)

Agnes Frances  Peace.

Prospice.
Edmund —  Immortality.

Broken  threads  may  not  be  so  easy  to  mend  as  you  seem  to
think —

+  *  *  *  *

[M.]  Eternity  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  know  how  much
of  what  I  send  reaches  you  and  how  much  you  are  able  to  set
down —  I  feel  as  if  I  had  presented  my  credentials — reiterated
the  proofs  of  my  identity  in  a  wearisomely  frequent  manner — but
yet  I  cannot  feel  as  if  I  had  made  any  true  impression  upon  them.
Surely  you  sent  them — what  I  strove  so  to  transmit —  Your  pride
if  you  name  a  nervous  vanity  pride  [?]  was  surely  not  strong  enough
to  weigh  against  my  appeals —  Even  here  even  under  present  con-
ditions I  should  know  I  should  thrill  responsive  to  any  real  belief
on  their  part — Oh  it  is  a  dark  road —

[Gk]  Back  again  in  the  old  despondency.  Why  don't  you
write  daily  1

You  seem  to  form  habits  only  in  order  to  break  them — what  harm
did  the  daily  writing  do  you  ?
(This  writing  took  nearly  20  minutes.)


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  237


This  expression  of  disappointment  at  our  failure  to  appreciate
and  respond  to  the  effort  that  had  been  made  from  the  other
side  is  strikingly  appropriate  to  the  circumstances.  At  this
time  it  had  not  occurred  to  me  to  enquire  whether  any  corre-
spondences existed  between  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts,  and  it  was  not  until  October,  1905, — after  the  series
of  experiments  to  be  related  below, — that  I  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of
the  statement  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Jan.  1 7th,  1904,
that  the  sealed  envelope  was  not  to  be  opened  yet,  and  asked
her  to  look  up  her  own  script  of  that  date  to  see  if  there
was  any  coincidence.

Later,  when  Mrs.  Verrall's  original  script  was  put  into  my
possession,  I  made  an  exhaustive  comparison  of  it  over  the
whole  of  this  period.  I  give  a  summary  of  the  results  in  a
tabular  form,  showing  the  four  topics  on  which  there  were
more  or  less  definite  correspondences  between  passages  in  the
two  series  of  scripts.

Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Holland.

(1)  The  sealed  envelope  and  text.

Dec. 25, 1903. On the  17th

of next month ask  the

question.
Use  the  daylight  hours,  for  the

night  cometh  when  no  man

may  work.
[Note.  This  is  a  paraphrase  of
the  text  asked  for.]


Jan.  9, 1904. Write on  the
17  th

Jan.  17,  1904. 2  on  the  seal
of  the  letter

The question is  an-
swered and  the  text  given


Jan.  8,  1904.  The  anniversary
that  is  only  nine  days
away  now

Jan.  17,  1904.  Attempt  to  get
a  message  through.  Sealed
envelope  not  to  be  opened
yet.  L  Cor.  16,  13.  Take
the  message  to  you  all.
[Note. This  text  is  not  the

one  asked  for,  but  has  a  special

association  for  Mr.  Myers  and

Mrs.  Verrall.J


238


Alice  Johnson.  [part
Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Holland.

(2)  Co-operation  between  different  sensitives  recommended.

Sept.  21,  1903.  One  person
alone  does  so  little.

Nov.  7,  1903.  The  agent  is  all
alone  and  that  makes  it
hard.

Dec. 1, 1903. One does  so

little  alone
Dec.  5. I  fear  you  will  never
be  really  responsive  trying
alone.

Jan.  5,  1904.  Words  with  a
purpose,  a  meaning,  not  for
you,  but  for  others.


Oct.  12,  190.3.  Easier  when
some  one  else  helps

Oct.  19.  Evidence  comes  later
for  you  through  others

Dec.  7.  Sit  regularly  alone  or
with  others.


(3)  Attitude  of  the  Controls.

Nov.  26,  1903.


Dec.  29,  1903.  Listen  to  the
voice  of  one  crying  and
proclaiming  in  desert  places.


Feb.  2,  1904.  Slaves  in  prison
[for  whom1?]  the  pure  have
done  prodigies


A  feeling  of


terrible  impotence  burdens
me.  I  cannot  get  into
communication  with  those
who  would  understand.

Jan.  5,  1904.  Words  said-
shouted — sung  to  the  wind
may  perhaps  reach  you
some  time

Jan.  12,  1904.  Does  anything
reach  you,  or  am  I  only
wailing  as  the  wind  wails —
wordless  and  unheeded.

Jan.  6,  1904.  The  missionary
spirit  and  the  great  long-
ing to  speak  to  the  souls
in  prison.


I  cannot  get


(4)  Our  failure  to  understand  the  message.

Nov.  26,  1903.

into  communication  with
those  who  would  under-
stand.


lv.]  Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  III.  239
Bee. 27, 1903. Comes the Jan.  27,  1904. I  cannot  feel


One  more  point  is  perhaps  worth  mentioning.  The  reader
who  compares  the  general  character  of  the  two  scripts  can
hardly  fail  to  notice  the  emotional  nature  and  the  note  of
personal  appeal  in  the  utterances  of  the  Holland-Myers  as
contrasted  with  the  calmer,  more  impersonal,  and  more  matter-
of-fact  tone  of  the  Verrall-Myers.

The  contrast  may,  of  course,  represent  nothing  more  than
a  difference  in  the  automatists'  own  conceptions  of  the  per-
sonality ;  for,  on  any  reasonable  view  of  the  facts,  it  is  I  think
inevitable  that  the  presentation  of  the  personality  should  be
largely  coloured  by  their  normal  knowledge  of  its  supposed
original.

Still,  it  may  be  admitted  that  if  Mr.  Myers  really  knew
what  was  going  on  and  if  he  was  really  concerned  in  the
production  of  the  scripts,  it  would  be  natural  and  appropriate
that  he  should  attempt  to  impress  the  two  automatists  in  these
different  ways.  •  Mrs.  Verrall,  a  personal  friend  and  trained
investigator,  was  already  familar  with  scientific  methods  and
in  close  touch  with  other  investigators.  She  did  not  require
urging  to  go  on  with  her  writing,  from  which  some  important
evidence  had  already  resulted.

Mrs.  Holland,  on  the  other  hand,  was  in  an  isolated  position  ;
she  was  conscious  of  the  superficially  trivial  and  incoherent
nature  of  her  script,  and  could  not  tell  whether  there  was
anything  in  it  beyond  a  dream-like  richauffe"  of  her  own
thoughts.  She  would  naturally  shrink  from  exposing  this  to
strangers  and  thereby  appearing  to  attach  an  unreasonable
degree  of  importance  to  it.  We  may  suppose  then  that  the
control  realises  her  situation  and  tries  to  impress  on  her  a
vivid  realisation  of  his  own, — his  intense  desire  to  provide
evidence  of  survival.  The  reiterations  in  her  script  as  compared
with  Mrs.  Verrall's, — a  point  brought  out  rather  strikingly  in
the  summary, — denotes  perhaps  that  a  more  strenuous  effort
is  required  in  her  case,  in  order  that  she  may  be  persuaded  to


message,  but  is  not  under-
standed  of  any


as  if  I  had  made  any  true
impression  upon  them.


Comparison  of  the  Myers  Controls.


240


Alice  Johnson.


[part


disregard  her  own  feelings  and  risk  misunderstanding  for  the
sake  of  a  remotely  possible  good.

As  to  the  validity  of  this  explanation,  I  feel  that  I  cannot
do  better  than  quote  Mrs.  Holland's  own  impressions,  mentioned
to  me  later.  In  a  letter  dated  Feb.  25th,  1905,  she  says:
"  I  cannot  tell  you  how  glad  I  should  be  to  know  if  the  long-
ing for  recognition  (it  is  such  a  passionate  craving  sometimes
that  I  find  myself  crying  out :  '  If  I  could  help  you — Oh  !  if
I  could  only  help  you ! '  while  I  write)  is  a  real  influence
from  beyond  or  only  my  own  imaginings.  But  why  should
my  imagination  take  that  form  ?  I  have  been  singularly  free
from  bereavements  thus  far  in  my  life  and  therefore  my
thoughts  have  been  very  seldom  in  the  Valley  of  the
Shadow  .  .  .  . "

In  Nov.  1905,  when  I  had  asked  her  to  read  through  the
early  script  and  send  me  any  comments  that  occurred  to  her,
she  notes  among  other  things :  "  This  sloping  writing  [that  of
the  Myers  control]  often  brings  a  very  sad  impression  of  great
depression  with  it, — a  feeling  as  if  some  one  was  calling  to
deaf  ears."

Still  later,  in  a  letter  dated  July  4th,  1907,  she  speaks
of  "  a  feeling  that  sometimes  comes  in  connection  with  the
script, — a  feeling  that  some  one,  somewhere,  urgently  and
passionately  desires  to  be  understood,  or  reported  even  without
understanding,  and  that  no  mental  strain  on  my  part  can
adequately  respond  to  this  demand.  This  feeling  has  been
strong  enough  to  make  me  cry  and  to  make  me  speak  aloud.
I  do  not  often  dwell  upon  it.  I  frequently  control  it,  for  it
seems  to  me  perilously  akin  to  hysteria ;  but  it  is  a  very
real  part  of  automatic  script."

CHAPTEE  IV.

January  to  August,  1905.
Second  Period — January  16th  to  February  28th,  1905.

In  April,  1904,  Mrs.  Holland  left  India,  and  I  did  not  hear
from  her  again  until  February,  1905,  when  she  wrote  to  me
as  follows : —


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  241


Feb.  15th,  1905.

...  I  have  discontinued  any  practice  of  automatic  writing  for
nearly  a  year,  as  the  shock  and  jar  of  any  chance  interruption
seemed  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  value  of  anything  I  obtained.
However  this  morning  I  had  an  unexpected  impulse  to  write —
sentences  which  as  usual  mean  nothing  to  me  personally — and  I
enclose  the  ''message,"  together  with  a  sudden  scribble  which  came
one  evening  last  month.

The  two  pieces  of  script  enclosed  were  : —

(Jan.  16th,  1905.)

I  am  that  one  whose  music

Was  never  given  voice
I  am  the  dumb  musician

Who  made  no  hearts  rejoice
I  went  down  to  the  silence

My  years  but  half  fulfilled
The  brain's  work  unaccomplished

The  empty  hands  unskilled.

I  will  tell  you  who  wrote  that —  He  came  away  about  16  years
ago —  He  was  very  tall  thin  to  emaciation — a  tender  humourous  [sic]
whimsical  face  with  eyes  that  smiled  oftener  than  his  mouth.  He
was  less  than  forty  when  he  died  and  a  great  many  people  loved
him They  called  him  Edmund.1

(Wednesday,  Feb.  15th,  1905. 10.20  a.m.)
[G.  ?] Your facult}- for writing is rusty with long  disuse
Take  a  pen

[M.] Always  a  pen  for  me — have  you  forgotten  that?

'  Oh  good  Oliver  ! Oh  brave  Oliver  !
Leave  me  not  behind  thee  ! '  2

Is  your  personal  interest  in  me  fading  even  as  the  years  lengthen
between  your  present  to-day  and  the  January  day  that  ended  time

1  Mrs.  Holland  had  seen  Mr.  Myers's  posthumous  Fragments  of  Prose  and
Poetry,  containing  a  portrait  of  Mr.  Gurney  and  obituary  notice  of  him  in
which  his  interest  in  music  was  mentioned,  shortly  before  this  script  was
produced.  See  below  for  further  discussion  of  the  effect  of  this  book  on  her
script.

2  Shakespeare,  As  You  Like  It,  Act  in.,  Sc.  iii.  :

"Oh  sweet  Oliver,  Oh  brave  Oliver
Leave  me  not  behind  thee."'


242


Alice  Johnson.


[part


for  me — Not  the  affection  that  endures  I  know — but  the  interest
perhaps — Have  I  gone  where  the  failed  experiments  go —
'And  all  dead  dreams  go  thither
And  all  disastrous  things.' 1

Under  other  conditions  I  should  say  how  much  I  regretted  the
failure  of  the  envelope  test  and  I  do  regret  it  because  it  was  a
disappointment  to  you — otherwise  it  is  too  trivial  to  waste  a  thought
upon —  .  .  .  Imperfect  instruments  imperfect  means  of  communica-
tion. The  living  mind  however  sensitive — intrudes  its  own  concep-
tions upon  the  signalled  message —  Even  now  my  greatest  difficulty
is  to  combat  the  suggestions  of  the  mind  whose  hand  writes  this
though  the  owner  tries  to  be  passive —  Short  of  trance  conditions
which  are  open  to  even  graver  objections  the  other  mind  is  our
greatest  difficulty. And  they  tire  and  flag  so  soon

Eternally
F.

'Life  touching  lips  with  Immortality.' 2

(The  writing  ceased  at  10.30.)

The  reference  here  is  obviously  to  an  experiment  with  a
sealed  envelope  left  by  Mr.  Myers  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.
As  members  of  the  Society  are  aware,  various  statements  had
been  made  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  during  1904  about  the
contents  of  this  envelope.  It  was  opened  on  December
13th,  1904,  and  its  contents  were  then  found  to  have  no
resemblance  to  what  was  alleged  about  it  in  the  script.  An
account  of  this  experiment  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.
for  January  1905,  which  came  out  on  January  17th.  The
Westminster  Gazette  of  the  same  clay  contained  a  paragraph
stating  briefly  the  facts  given  in  the  Journal,  and  this  para-
graph was  widely  copied  into  other  English  papers.  Mrs.
Verrall's  name  was  not  mentioned  in  the  newspaper  accounts,
only  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's,  and  similarly  his  name,  and  not
Mrs.  Verrall's,  appears  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  All  these
facts  being  of  course  familiar  to  me,  I  concluded  that  Mrs.
Holland  had  most  probably  seen  one  of  the  newspaper
accounts  of  the  incident. I  therefore  wrote  to  ask  her  whether

1  Swinburne,  The  Garden  of  Proserpine  :

"  And.  all  dead  years  draw  thither
And  all  disastrous  things."

2  D.  G.  Rossetti,  For  a  Venetian  Pastoral  by  Giorgione.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  248


she  had  read  the  script  carefully  after  writing  it  and  whether
it  suggested  to  her  anything  that  she  had  ever  seen  in  any
printed  book  or  paper ;  also  whether  she  was  aware  of  having
heard  anything  at  all  in  connection  with  the  S.P.R,  or  any
members  of  it  since  coming  to  England,  and  if  so,  what.  I
also  suggested  that  in  future  she  should  for  evidential  purposes
note  any  facts  that  she  happened  to  hear  or  read  about  the
S.P.R.  or  its  members,  with  the  date  and  source  of  the  infor-
mation. In  reply  to  my  letter  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  : —

Feb.  21st,  1905.

I  have  never  been  in  the  habit  of  carefully  reading  over  the
automatic  writing  that  comes  to  me,  unless  I  feel  a  personal  appeal
in  it.  In  the  case  of  what  I  sent  you  the  other  day  I  only
looked  carefully  at  the  first  words  to  make  sure  they  were  legible.
It  was  a  thing  apart  from  me.  However  I  will  in  future  go  over
it  carefully  and  try  to  trace  out  any  connection.  I  very  seldom
hear  the  name  of  your  Society  mentioned,  and  as  I  am  in  the
habit  of  concealing  the  interest  I  take  in  it,  I  never  hear  any  news
concerning  it  or  its  members.  I  have  never  seen  any  of  the
Proceedings,  and  Human  Personality  is  the  only  book  in  connection
with  it  that  I  have  ever  read.

I  remember  an  article  in  the  December  Fortnightly  on  the  "Pro-
gress of  Psychical  Research " ;  but  I  read  it  hurriedly,  and  have
only  a  vague  recollection  that  it  advocated  further  study.

I  will  do  as  you  suggest  in  the  future  and  note  anything  I  may
hear  or  read  about  the  Society.

I  found  that  the  article  on  "  The  Progress  of  Psychical
Research  "  (by  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller)  in  the  Fortnightly  Review
for  January,  1905,  contained  no  mention  of  experiments  with
sealed  envelopes  or  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

I  did  not  refer,  however,  to  the  subject  again  in  writing
to  Mrs.  Holland,  as  I  was  hoping  to  meet  her  later,  and
thought  it  would  be  best  to  discuss  it  fully  in  a  personal
interview.

This  interview — the  first  I  had  with  her — took  place  on
October  6th,  1905,  and  lasted  about  2 A  hours,  when  many
topics  in  the  script  were  discussed.  Among  other  things  I
showed  her  an  early  passage  describing  the  circumstances  of
the  death  of  a  friend  of  my  own,  of  whom  I  thought  it  very


244  Alice  Johnson.  [part

unlikely  that  she  had  ever  heard.  She  said  she  had  no  idea
what  the  writing  was  about,  and  remembered  nothing  of  it.
I  then  began  to  tell  her  in  full  the  details  of  the  actual
circumstances.  Before  I  had  got  far,  she  suddenly  interrupted
me,  saying,  "  Oh,  I  know  all  about  that — it  was  so-and-so."
It  appeared  that  she  had  seen  this  lady  on  one  occasion  only,
happened  to  know  a  little  about  her,  and  had  heard  of  her
death  at  the  time,  rather  more  than  four  years  before  the
script  referred  to  it.  She  had  been  unaware,  however,  of  the
reference  in  the  script,  which  was  given  in  a  somewhat  veiled
form,  till  I  pointed  it  out  to  her.

Later  in  the  interview,  I  read  over  to  her  the  script  of
February  15th,  1905,  quoted  above,  and  asked  if  it  conveyed
any  meaning  to  her.  Apparently  it  did  not.  I  then  told
her  of  the  experiment  of  the  sealed  envelope  and  its  result ;
that  it  had  been  printed  in  our  Journal  for  January,  1905,
and  had  at  once  got  into  the  newspapers,  and  been  widely
copied  ;  and  I  asked  her  if  she  thought  she  had  seen  any
reference  to  it.  She  answered  very  decidedly  that  she  had  no
recollection  of  ever  seeing  or  hearing  anything  about  it  till
that  moment.  I  asked  if  she  thought  it  possible  that  she
could  have  forgotten  it,  if  she  had  read  it.  She  thought  this
impossible,  as  she  would  certainly  have  been  greatly  interested
in  it ;  she  always  noticed  and  read  eagerly  everything  relating
to  Mr.  Myers.  She  remembered  the  passage  in  Human  Per-
sonality recommending  such  experiments  to  be  made  (Vol.  II.,
p.  499),  and  told  me  of  another  magazine  article  she  had
read  some  time  ago  which  she  thought  might  have  contained
references  to  the  subject.  (I  afterwards  read  this  article,  and
found  in  it  only  a  reference  to  supposed  communications  from
Mr.  Myers  through  automatic  writing.)

At  a  later  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland  (May  29th,  1906)
I  showed  her  the  paragraph  in  the  Westminster  Gazette  about
the  opening  of  the  sealed  envelope,  and  cross-questioned  her
again  as  to  the  possibility  of  her  normal  knowledge  of  it.  She
repeated  that  she  was  certain  she  had  never  heard  of  it  till  I
told  her,  and  that  she  thought  it  quite  impossible  that  she
could  have  seen  it  and  forgotten  it.

I  give  this  incident  in  full  because  it  cannot  fail  to  appear
suspicious  to  an  outsider,  and  I  know  it  to  be  Mrs.  Holland's


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  245


desire  to  suppress  nothing  that  might  lead  to  an  adverse  view
of  the  phenomena.  But  I  may  point  out  that  if  she  had
read  any  of  the  newspaper  accounts,  she  must  have  known
that  I  also  should  have  read  them ;  that  therefore  my
suspicions  would  be  at  once  excited  by  what  looked  like  a
reproduction  from  a  source  apparently  so  obvious,  and  that,
under  the  circumstances,  the  script  could  not  be  regarded  as
evidential.  All  this,  I  say,  must  have  been  clear  to  her  if  she
had  seen  a  newspaper  account.

On  the  other  hand,  the  references  to  my  friend's  death
might  well  appear  evidential,  as  it  would  have  been  difficult
for  me  to  find  out  that  she  had  known  of  it,  unless  she  had
told  me  herself.  Yet  in  this  case  she  explained  to  me  at
once  the  circumstances  that  had  led  to  her  knowledge  of  it,
as  she  has  clone  in  many  other  cases  where  the  source  of  her
knowledge  or  apparent  knowledge  was  not  obvious  to  me.

It  may  be  worth  adding  that,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  informs  me,
Swinburne's  Garden  of  Proserpine  (a  quotation  from  which
appears  in  the  script  under  discussion)  used  to  be  constantly
recited  by  Mr.  Myers  at  sittings,  and  that  she  herself  used
often  to  ask  him  to  recite  it.

The  next  passages  illustrate  the  effect  of  Mrs.  Holland's
normal  knowledge  on  the  script.  In  a  letter  dated  March
6th,  1905,  she  says:  "About  articles  in  papers  referring  to
the  S.P.R.,  last  autumn  I  remember  one  in  the  Morning  Post
by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  about  some  Fragments  in  prose  and
verse  (I  cannot  remember  the  proper  name)  by  Mr.  Myers.
I  found  the  book  in  a  library  presently  and  looked  over  it,
hoping  for  something  akin  to  Human  Personality,  but  I  was
disappointed.  I  am  certain  I  have  never  read  anything  else
of  his."

In  another  letter  (dated  February  25th,  1905)  she  remarked
incidentally :  "  Did  I  tell  you  that  I  read  very  quickly  and
am  a  proverb  in  my  family  for  '  tearing  the  heart '  out  of  a
book  or  paper  in  a  few  minutes  ?  I  fear  this  habit  makes  me
very  sketchy."

At  my  first  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland  on  October  6th,
1905,  I  asked  her  how  long  a  time  she  had  spent  in  looking
at Mr. Myers's Fragments  of  Prose  and.  Poetry. After  con-

Q


246  Alice  Johnson.  [part

sidering  she  said  she  did  not  think  she  could  have  spent  more
than  8  or  10  minutes  over  it;  as  it  was  in  a  library  where
people  did  not  sit  to  read  books,  but  only  looked  at  them,  and
turned  them  over  casually.

Nevertheless,  the  influence  of  the  book  is  very  marked ;  it
contains,  for  instance,  portraits  of  Mr.  Myers,  Mr.  Gurney,
and  Dr.  Sidgwick,  and  the  result  is  seen  at  once  in  the  greater
definiteness  of  her  conception  of  the  controls,  whose  personal
appearance  now  begins  to  be  described,  though  she  is  apparently
unaware  or  but  half  aware  of  how  she  came  to  be  acquainted
with  it  (see  below,  p.  264).

Thus  :—

(February  21st,  1905.)
Three  stand  together —

One  has  a  long  white  beard  he  is  nearly  bald  His  eyes  are
grey  very  shrewd  yet  very  kindly —  His  nose  is  rather  long —
it  is  a  scholar's  face —

One  looks  young —  Tall  and  very  thin — long  limbed  and  loose
jointed —  He  has  a  long  mustache  [sic] —  The  strong  rounded  chin
is  clean  shaven — The  face  is  long  and  the  eyes  look  tired — ■

The  third  man  has  a  short  pointed  beard —  His  dark  hair  is
thin  and  turning  grey  it  has  receded  from  his  forehead  making
the  brow  .look  very  lofty —  He  has  fine  dark  eyes  with  something
pathetic  and  appealing  in  their  expression —

Henry  Edmund  Fred —
(I  was  interrupted  by  a  visitor  for  an  hour  and  when  I  took  up
the  pencil  again  no  more  writing  came — I  cannot  associate  the
above  with  anything  I  have  been  reading  or  thinking. Feb.  21st.
1905.)

(Feb.  22nd,  1905. 11  a.m.)

Take  a  pen —

*****

[M.]  Am  I  presenting  credentials  yet  again  I  have  done  it  so
often  and  yet  I  suppose  in  nearly  every  case  they  have  not  been
delivered  —

If  one  could  only  find  a  stupid  sensitive  but  the  very  quickness
the  impressionability  that  enables  the  brain  to  perceive  an  influence
from  afar  renders  it  an  ever  present  danger  to  the  message  that  is
trying  to  be  impressed.  Anxiety  to  help — fear  of  unconscious  cheating
or  of  self-deception  all  cramp  the  hand  and  impede  the  willingness
to  give  time  and  a  quiet  mind  to  this —


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  247


The  influence  of  my  friends  near  at  hand  might  be  able  to
combat  this  but  then  thought  transference  would  make  yet  another
difficult}7.

It  becomes  increasingly  hard  for  me  to  realize  the  effect  of
Time  and  Space  upon  your  conditions —  For  me  they  have  been
annulled —  I  am  obliged  to  remember  now  to  recall  what  potent
factors  they  are  upon  the  body.

[Here  the  writing  becomes  very  scrawly  and  almost  illegible.]  It  is
no  good  the  power  is  passing

(At  this  point  I  felt  so  faint  and  sleepy  I  was  obliged  to  stop.
11.10  a.m.)

(Feb.  23rd. 11.15  a.m.)
[M.  j]  As  air  falls  the  prayer  falls

In  kingly  Winchester
Oh  hush  thee — Oh  hush  thee
Heart  innocent  and  dear  !
*****

[G.]  Names'?  Names  and  proofs  are  the  very  things  we  must
withold  [sic]  from  you  because  your  brain  which  you  cannot  or
will  not  lull  to  a  proper  state  of  passivity — will  spin  its  own  web
round  whatever  is  presented  to  you —  For  truth's  sake  we  must
be  veiled  and  ambiguous —

A  gurnet  among  the  sedge  which  grew  in  the  mires — 1
We  want  to  withold riddles from  you — your  usefulness  would
depart —

(On  reading  this  over  I  recall  the  first  four  lines  as  part  of  a  poem —
on  Izaak  Walton  I  think — which  I  read  in  an  American  magazine
long  ago.  .  .  .  The  only  couplet  I  can  consciously  recall  runs — "  Old
wishing  and  fishing — are  over  many  a  year :  Oh  hush  thee — Oh
hush  thee  !  Heart  innocent  and  dear  " — )

The  above  scripts  were  sent  to  me  in  a  letter  dated  February
23rd,  1905,  in  which  Mrs.  Holland  told  me  that  she  was  a
little  troubled  to  find  that  automatic  writing  was  beginning
to  make  her  feel  faint  or  sleepy ;  that  in  November,  while
practising  it  with  a  friend,  as  she  very  rarely  did,  she  had
gone  into  a  trance  and  spoken  automatically  for  about  a  quarter
of  an  hour,  and  that  she  was  afraid  of  this  becoming  a  habit.
At  the  same  time  she  told  me  that  she  had  a  fancy  the

1  This  somewhat  crude  punning  on  the  names  Gurney,  Sidgwick,  and  Myers,
was  not  noticed  by  Mrs.  Holland  till  I  showed  it  to  her  later.


248


Alice  Johnson.


[part


writing  materials  she  was  now  using  hindered,  instead  of
helping,  the  script,  and  she  begged  nie  to  send  her  some
paper  that  had  been  lying  about  in  my  desk  and  a  pen-holder
that  I  had  used  for  some  time.  She  added :  "  It  seems  silly
to  write  this,  but  I  feel  as  if  I  had  to."  Of  course  I  sent
what  she  asked  for  at  once.  In  regard  to  her  fear  of  the
trance  condition  I  said  that  I  believed  it  possible  by  self-
suggestion  to  obviate  entirely  any  objections  there  might  be
to  it,  and  I  advised  her  that  on  sitting  down  to  write  she
should  suggest  to  herself  strongly  and  decidedly  (1)  that  she
was  not  going  into  a  trance ;  (2)  that  in  case  she  did,  she
would  retain  complete  control  over  herself,  so  as  to  be  able
to  wake  at  once  if  desirable,  and  to  do  nothing  while  in  the
trance  that  she  would  dislike  doing  when  normal ;  (3)  that  if
a  trance  occurred  it  would  have  no  bad  effects  on  her  physical
condition,  but  the  reverse, — that  it  would  produce  the  effect
of  rest,  not  of  exhaustion.

The  suggestion  was  apparently  effective  and  it  was  long
before  Mrs.  Holland  noticed  any  sleepiness  in  connection  with
her  script  again.

Two  more  characteristic  quotations  from  the  "  Myers  control "
of  this  period  may  conclude  this  section.

(Friday,  Feb.  24th,  2.10  p.m.)
....  [M.]  Discontinue  the  pencil  writing  as  much  as  possible  it
is  too  facile  and  conduces  to  foolish  purposeless  scribbling.  I  want
him  to  understand  I  make  no  rash  or  impossible  claims — the
Veil  remains  the  Veil.  The  Door  will  continue  to  have  no  Key —
only — only  as  the  recompense  for  lifelong  work  and  feelings  and
yearnings  far  longer  than  life  the  veil  may  swing  aside  for  the  instant
to  show  a  remembered  face  and  eyes  that  still  shine  with  remembered
love —  Life  was — Life  is — and  ever  shall  be  and  with  Life  continue
Love  and  Friendship.  The  immortality  of  one  includes  that  of  the
others —

(Tuesday,  Feb.  28th,  1905. 2.30  p.m.)
[M.] A  darkness  with  one  purple  shimmer.

Is  there  never  a  chink  in  the  world  below
Where  they  listen  to  words  from  above  " — 1

1  Jean  Ingelow,  Supper  at  the  Mill.

"Is  there  never  a  chink  in  the  world  above,
Where  they  listen  for  words  from  below  ? "


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  249


But  perhaps  above  expresses  it  less  well  than  Beyond —  The
consciousness  that  a  possibility  of  communicating  with  the  world  of
living  men  is  open  to  those  of  us  who  no  longer  live  in  the  earth
sense  is  conveyed  to  us  by  an  impression  of  light 1 — not  by  a  sound —
only  by  a  luminous  patch  generally  egg-shaped — sometimes  circular
but  never  square  or  oblong — Always  ovoid  or  rounded — ■

It  is  a  task  compared  to  which  the  attempt  of  Michael  Angelo
to  dictate  a  vast  picture  to  a  school  child  scrawling  on  a  slate  would
be  easy.  The  whole  immensity  of  the  Infinite  weighs  upon  us  as
we  strive  to  establish  a  connection  and  every  proof  of  identity  which
we  hope  and  intend  to  give  seems  to  become  of  no  value  and  fade
away.  Then  we  feel  as  if  only  one  sentence  reached  of  twenty  that
we  strive  to  send —  Of  my  own  personal  difficulties  a  great  one
consists  of  a  possibly  involuntary  aversion  on  the  part  of  this  writer
to  names  Any  name  that  she  thinks  she  may  possibly  have  seen
in  print  her  hand  recoils  from — -Therefore  accept  and  interpret  from

me  initials  and  little  names —

*  *  *  *  *

(This  writing  took  15  minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  it,  when  possibly
a  signature  was  intended,  my  hand  gave  such  jerky  convulsive
movements  that  I  was  obliged  to  put  down  the  pen  and  walk  about
the  room.  Aimless  scribbling  of  this  sort  has  a  painful  effect  on
me  and  always  makes  me  want  to  destroy  the  writing  which
contains  it.

"The  luminous  patch,  generally  egg-shaped"  reminds  me  that
yesterday  I  was  trying  to  "  crystal  gaze "  in  a  glass  of  water,  at
a  friend's  request,  and  all  I  saw  was  a  luminous  patch  of  this  kind
on  a  dark  background,  which  presently  was  replaced  by  the  head
of  an  elderly  man.  I  noticed  a  high  forehead — greyish  hair —
dark  eyes — and  I  think  a  short  beard ;  but  it  was  not  very  clear.
It  was  gone  very  quickly  and  nothing  else  came.)

Third  Period:  March  1st  to  May  22nd,  1905.

First  Series  of  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall.

I  quoted  above  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Xov.  25th,  1903,
in  which  the  Gurney  control  suggested  that  I  should  find
"  some  one  with  a  trained  will  "  to  try  for  a  few  minutes
every  morning  for  a  month  to  convey  an  idea  or  phrase  to

1  See  foot-note,  ante,  p.  211.


250


Alice  Johnson.


[part


her  in  India,  while  she  was  to  try  to  get  the  impression
through  automatic  writing.  I  did  not  receive  this  script  until
the  end  of  January,  1904,  and  as  Mrs.  Holland  told  me  at
about  the  same  time  that  she  was  leaving  India  early  in  April
for  a  long  visit  to  Europe,  I  replied  that  I  thought  I  could
arrange  for  experiments  of  the  kind  suggested,  but  that  it
might  be  better  to  put  them  off  for  the  present,  as  she  was
likely  to  be  specially  busy  preparing  for  her  move.

There  was  a  gap  of  nearly  a  year  in  our  correspondence
and  in  her  script  while  she  was  travelling.  I  heard  from
her  again  on  Feb.  15th,  1905,  as  related  above.  Meanwhile
1  kept  the  suggestion  in  mind,  and  on  Feb.  24th,  1905,  I
wrote  to  her  as  follows  :

...  I  should  like  now  to  suggest  an  experiment  to  you,  which
I  think  might  have  interesting  results.  Would  you  be  inclined  to
try  writing  once  a  week  on  a  certain  day,  which  I  would  ask  you
to  fix,  and  I  would  then  arrange  for  a  friend  of  mine  who  is  also
an  automatic  writer  to  write  on  the  same  day,  and  each  of  you  to
send  your  writing  to  me  to  be  compared,  when  I  think  it  is
possible  that  some  correspondence  might  be  found  between  the  two
sets  of  writing,  or  some  evidence  of  telepathy  between  the  writers.
I  have  suggested  this  to  my  friend  and  she  is  very  willing  to  try
it.  She  suggested  beginning  the  experiments  as  early  as  possible
in  March  and  continuing  once  a  week,  say  for  six  weeks.  Then
if  the  results  were  successful,  it  might  be  worth  going  on  longer.
My  friend  thought  it  might  be  best  not  to  fix  the  time  of  day,  as
it  might  be  difficult  both  for  her  and  for  you  to  keep  to  a  regular
hour,  whereas  if  you  wrote  always  on  the  same  day,  that  would,
I  think,  be  sufficient  for  practical  evidential  purposes.

I  have  not  told  her  your  name  nor  anything  about  you,  except
that  I  have  been  receiving  automatic  writing  from  you  for  some
time,  and  that  I  thought  you  did  not  talk  much  to  any  one  else
about  it.  I  also  mentioned  that  you  lived  in  India  but  were  now
over  here,  and  that  you  were  married.  ...  If  you  will  fix  a  day
of  the  week  and  tell  me  when  you  will  begin,  I  will  ask  her  to
begin  on  the  same  day.

Mrs.  Holland  replied  to  me  as  follows :

February  25th,  1905.
.  .  .  The  experiment  you  suggest  interests  me  very  much  and  I
should  like  to  try  it. Will  you  ask  your  friend  to  begin  on  next


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  251

Wednesday,  March  1st,  and  to  try  writing  on  each  Wednesday  in
March  and  on  to  April  5th  ?  If  I  have  a  strong  impulse  to  write
on  other  days,  I  will  not  ignore  it,  but  I  will  only  deliberately  try
for  writing  on  Wednesdays.  .  .  .

I  then  arranged  that  the  experiments  should  begin  on
March  1st,  the  friend  with  whom  I  had  arranged  them  being
Mrs.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Holland  knew  Mrs.  Verrall  by  name,  as  she  is  men-
tioned in  Human  Personality  as  "  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  a  lecturer
at  Newnham  College,"  in  connection  with  experiments  in  crystal
vision,  a  subject  in  which  Mrs.  Holland  was  specially  interested,
and  the  name  had  actually  occurred,  obviously  as  a  reminiscence
of  Human  Personality,  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  7th,
1903  (quoted  above,  p.  186).  In  commenting  on  this  script
to  Mrs.  Holland,  however,  I  had  not  mentioned  Mrs.  Verrall
at  all ;  the  latter  had  only  begun  to  practise  automatic  writing
after  Human  Personality  was  written,  and  nothing  about  her
script  had  yet  been  published — two  brief  abstracts  only  having
appeared  in  the  Journal  S.P.E.  (printed  for  private  circulation).
There  was  therefore  no  ground  for  a  guess  on  Mrs.  Holland's
part  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  her  fellow-experimenter,  whereas  a
good  many  automatic  writers — -of  whom  I  might  have  chosen
one — are  mentioned  in  Human  Personality.  When  I  talked
to  her  about  it  some  time  later  (May  28/06)  she  assured
me  that  she  had  never  imagined  Mrs.  Verrall  did  anything
psychic  except  crystal  gazing,  and  that  she  had  made  no
guess  as  to  who  her  fellow-experimenter  was  and  had  not  the
slightest  idea  of  it  till  I  told  her.  Nevertheless,  I  do  not  think
it  can  be  stated  with  absolute  confidence  that  the  mention  of
"  Mrs.  V."  in  her  first  day's  script  (see  below)  was  beyond
the  possibility  of  subliminal  guessing.

Throughout  this  series  of  experiments  (and  in  all  future
ones  tried  between  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall)  the  writers
held  no  communication  with  each  other  at  all,  but  each
sent  her  writing  to  me  and  communicated  only  with  me
about  it.

If  any  statement  was  made  in  one  writing  purporting  to
refer,  or  that  I  thought  might  refer,  to  the  circumstances  of
the  other  writer,  I  sent  a  copy  of  the  whole  or  part  of  the
script  to  this  latter  for  her  comments. Of  course  I  never


252


Alice  Johnson.


[part


sent  this  copy  until  I  had  received  from  the  second  writer
her  own  script  of  the  corresponding  day.

The  identity  of  each  writer  was  first  disclosed  to  the  other
in  October,  1905.

In  this  first  series  each  writer  produced  six  pieces  of  script.

The  following  is  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  the  first  day  of
the  experiments,  when  she  was  in  Scotland  :

(Wednesday,  March  1st,  1905. 10.45  a.m.)

There  are  cut  flowers  in  the  blue  jar — jonquils  I  think  and  tulips
— growing  tulips  near  the  window —  A  dull  day  but  the  sky  hints
at  Spring  and  one  chirping  bird  is  heard  above  the  roar  of  the
traffic —

'  Watch  ye  stand  fast  in  the  faith — quit  you  like  men  be  strong/
The  stirring  of  the  Spring  begins — Have  we  not  noticed  that

more  evidence — more  testimony  comes  to  us  in  the  Spriug  ?  Oh

the  Spring  in  our  garden — have  the  bulbs  done  well  this  year —
Does  Mrs.  V.  own  herself  worsted  for  once  1 Or  does  she  wait

for  a  triumph  in  May — The  Banks  in  May ! Ah  me  Earth's

glamour  holds —

A  slender  lady  with  dark  hair  drawn  to  a  heavy  knot  at  the
base  of  her  long  throat.  Eyes  like  dark  jewels  in  a  pale  pale
face — the  outline  of  it  'hollowed  a  little  mournfully.'  A  very
sensitive  mouth — ■ Long  hands — a  signet  ring  on  the  middle  finger.

Tell  Mrs.  S.  that  I  am  only  in  accord  with  her  brother  through
her —  I  had  thought  to  be  able  to  reach  him  in  thought  by  my
own  means  but  he  is  too  absorbed — A.  is  the  one  I  mean —

Yes  M.  R  was  quite  admirable  in  his  address —  The  work  grows
and  widens — we  cannot  be  too  cosmopolitan —

Quiet  write  slowly

I  am  puzzled  how  to  evade  the  difficulty  about  names —  They
are  very  important  but  to  introduce  them  dislocates  the  whole
machinery  by  which  I  am  trying  to  communicate.

The  persons  are  mentioned  in  this  script  only  by  their
initials,  but  the  intention  is  obvious.  "  Mrs.  V."  is  Mrs.
Verrall :  "Mrs.  S."  is  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  "her  brother  A.,"
Mr.  Arthur  Balfour;  "  M.  B."  is  Brofessor  Bichet,  in  that  year
Bresident  of  the  S.B.B.,  who  had  delivered  his  presidential
address  on  February  6th ;  all  these  were  friends  of  Mr..
Myers,  from  whom  the  script  purports  to  come  ;  but  there  is.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  253


of  course,  nothing  evidential  in  the  mention  of  any  except
Mrs.  Verrall.

On  a  copy  of  this  script  being  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  she
wrote  to  me  :

March  4th,  1905.

On  March  1st  the  only  cut  flowers  in  my  drawing  room  were  in
two  blue  china  ]'ars  on  the  mantelpiece ;  the  flowers  were  large
single  daffodils.  On  the  ledge  of  the  [drawing  room]  window  looking
into  the  greenhouse — on  the  greenhouse  side — were  three  pots  of
growing  yellow  tulips, — the  only  flowers  near  any  window.

The  day  was  dull  in  the  morning,  but  about  12  the  sun  came
out  and  it  was  warm ;  it  rained  heavily  in  the  afternoon.  The  birds
have  naturally  been  chirping  lately.  No  traffic  or  roar  of  any  kind  in
our  road  [Selwyn  Gardens  is  not  a  thoroughfare]  ...  At  9  a.m.
(about)  I  cleared  away  all  cut  flowers  except  the  daffodils  described ;
till  then  there  had  been  some  red  tulips.

The  text,  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you
like  men,"  is,  as  already  said,  inscribed  in  Greek  over  the
front  gate  of  Selwyn  College,  this  being  the  text  of  which
the  reference  only  was  given  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
January  17th,  1904,  quoted  and  discussed  above,  see  p.  234,
where  its  connection  with  Mr.  Myers  and  Mrs.  Verrall  is
explained.

That  this  text  should  occur  again  on  the  first  day  of
Mrs.  Holland's  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall  is  to  my  mind
the  most  noteworthy  point  in  the  script,  for,  even  supposing
that  Mrs.  Holland  had  subliminally  guessed  that  Mrs.  Verrall
was  her  fellow-experimenter,  this  could  not  account  for  the
appropriate  introduction  of  the  text.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  1st,  1905,  written  at  6  p.m.,
contains  the  following :

v.  iii.  black  letter  text

*  *  *  *

Don't  identify  it  might  alarm  her.

The  last  sentence,  perhaps,  shows  a  vague  general  resemblance
to  the  last  paragraph  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  The  first  has
a  possible  connection  with  Mrs.  Holland's  mention  of  a  text.
On  my  sending  her  a  copy  of  it,  she  suggested  that  it  might
refer  to  I.  Corinthians,  part  of  which  she  happened  to  have


251


Alice  Johnson.


[part


been  reading  early  on  Wednesday  morning,  and  she  found  that
I.  Corinthians,  v.  3,  ran :  "  For  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,
but  present  in  spirit,  .  .  .  ."  She  added :  "  I  noticed  on
Thursday,  as  I  read  on,  that  xvi.  13  had  been  quoted  in  the
writing  that  came  to  me."

On  March  8  th  no  correspondence  appeared  between  the
two  scripts,  nor  any  point  worth  commenting  on  in  either.

I  quote  next  two  scripts  by  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  second  of
these  was  not  written  on  one  of  the  days  fixed  for  the  experi-
ments, but  she  sent  it  to  me  because,  as  she  said,  she  had  an
impression  that  it  "  belonged  "  to  my  friend  (i.e.  Mrs.  Holland).

(March  15,  1905. 6.50  p.m.)

(In  Latin :  I  too  I  too  made  shortened  swift  iambics ;  in  that  way
I  expressed  the  honey  of  my  wit.  Why  not  another  ?  You  do
not  know  if  you  will  not  try.)1

The  clock  has  passed  the  hour  to  strike —  I  hear  no  stroke-
Send  these  five  notes


m

 1  m  "

0 a

She  will  send  you  something  like  them — verse  I  think —
"Not  ours  the  hope."
Those  words  were  spoken.

The  music  has  nothing  to  do  with  you,  it  is  to  be  transmitted
direct.

(In  Latin  :  Send,  send,  his  (or  her)  mind  is  open). 2  K.L.  Jan.  11.
(March  19,  1905. 6.50  p.m.)

It  was  to-night,  it  was  to-night,  you  ought  to  know.  After  this
you  will  surely  see —

That  lady  has  gone  to  church — go  into  her  house  with  me — up
3  stairs  on  the  left  into  a  room — and  over  the  mantelpiece  hangs
a  picture,  a  photograph,  Ruskin  has  written  of  it — Carpaccio's  Ursula.
There  is  one  little  vase  of  flowers  on  the  right  as  you  look  at  the
picture.

She  does  not  want  us  in  her  room — come  away — you  have  seen
the  Ursula  which  I  meant  to  show  you.

1  et  ego  et  ego  celeres  iambos  contrahens  feci, modo  illo  iam  cordis  mel
expressi. Cur  non  alius  ? Nescis  si  non  experiri  velis.
-  mitte,  mitte,  mens  eius  patet.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  255


The  music  has  not  come  again  I  do  not  understand  but  they
say  that


0  m

*1

r.  i  1

1  i

h  ~

4  |#|
4


On  March  22nd  I  sent  copies  of  both  these  scripts  to
Mrs.  Holland,  and  she  received  them  on  March  23rd.  Her
script,  dated  March  22nd  (quoted  below),  contains  the  initials
"  E.  G."  followed  by  some  notes  of  music,  but — unfortunately
from  an  evidential  point  of  view — this  was  not  sent  to  me
until  March  24th.  In  the  letter  of  that  date,  enclosing  it,
Mrs.  Holland,  who  was  staying  at  her  father's  house  in  the
South  of  England,  wrote :

The  writing  of  March  19th  has  a  curious  gossamer  thread  of
connection  with  me.  I  was  not  at  church  last  Sunday  evening,  and
the  Dream  of  St.  Ursula  does  not  hang  in  my  room.  But  on
Saturday  evening  I  was  going  through  the  portfolio  of  "Great  Masters  "
(published  by  Heinemann)  and  the  Carpaccio  Ursula  was  the  picture
I  looked  at  longest  and  returned  to  most  frequently, — so  much  so,
indeed,  that  my  father  asked  me  if  I  would  like  to  have  it  framed
and  hung  in  my  room.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  22  nd  was  :

(Wednesday,  March  22nd. 9.45  p.m.)
The  ivory  gate  through  which  all  good  dreams  come.
Sono  molto  fatigato  e  ammalatto  [sic] — Ho  paura.1

Then  the  good  day  will  dawn.

Mon  petit  Chariot  ta  mere  t'embrasse — C.  F  [1]

Var. Mai/1907— 1879—


a.


- 4  <t

VI


concentratre

It  is  effort  in  the  right  direction —  liichet  is  in  the  right —
Admirable  work.  The  study  of  metapsychics  once  established  across
the  Channel  will  blossom  into  great  results.


1 1  am  very  tired  and  ill  I  am  frightened.


256


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Have  I  gained  a  little  ground —  I  have  a  feeling  of  greater  near-
ness— as  if  some  carrier  dove  1  of  a  missive  had  found  acceptance —
if  not  a  little  olive  leaf  of  belief  to  bring  back  to  me —  My
friends — my  dear  friends — if  I  could  but  convince  you  of  my
identity —  My  name — look  for  my  name  among  the  Fragments2
for  this  year — A  calender  look  up  moonshine  3 — F — without  the
final  k.

My  Mabel  [here  follow  illegible  scribbles]

In  regard  to  the  coincidence  of  notes  of  music  appearing  in
the  scripts  of  both  writers,  they  have  appeared  only  once
before  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (viz.  on  Jan.  8th,  1904,  among
a  number  of  other  drawings)  and  never  since.  March  15th
and  March  19th,  1905,  just  quoted,  were  the  first  occasions
on  which  they  have  appeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and  they
have  only  recurred  there  once,  viz.  on  September  5th,  1906,
which  seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  this  occasion.

Professor  Eichet  is  again  referred  to  here.  His  presidential
address,  delivered  on  Feb.  6th,  1905,  was  on  the  subject  of
"  metapsychics,"  a  term  which  he  coined  to  include  all  the
topics  dealt  with  in  psychical  research.  Brief  reports  of  his
address,  including  the  new  word,  had  appeared  in  the  papers.
I  found  on  enquiring  from  Mrs.  Holland  later  (on  Oct.  6th,
1905)  that  she  could  not  remember  having  seen  any  of  these
reports,  or  having  heard  the  word  "  metapsychics " ;  but  she
may  of  course  have  seen  and  forgotten  them.  She  could  not
even  remember  that  she  had  ever  heard  of  Professor  Richet ;
but  as  he  is  mentioned  several  times  in  Human  Personality,
she  must  have  seen  the  name  there.

I  sent  a  copy  of  this  script  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  she  sent
me  the  following  notes  on  it :

^f.  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (p.  .38):  "And
always  the  consciousness  that  the  hour  at  last  had  come  ;  that  the  world-old
secret  was  opening  out  to  mortal  view ;  that  the  first  carrier-pigeon  had
swooped  into  this  fastness  of  beleaguered  men."

2  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  on  April  4th,  1905,  a  propos  of  this  phrase,  that
she  had  a  calendar  called  "Fragments  for  1905,"  and  she  sent  me  a  list  of
the  authors  quoted  in  it.  Among  the  names  for  October  occurs  that  of
F.  W.  H.  Myers.

3  "A  calendar,  a  calendar!  Look  in  the  almanac;  find  out  moonshine,  find
out  moonshine"  (Midsummer  Nirjht's  Dream,  Act  in.  Sc.  1).


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  257


April  4th,  1905.

(1)  ivory  gate.  In  March,  1905,  I  was  revising  that  part  of  my
paper  on  my  script  which  deals  with  "Orphism,"  etc.,  and  spent  a
great  deal  of  time  on  the  two  days,  March  19  and  20,  in  looking  up
the  question  of  descriptions  by  Virgil  and  Dante  of  the  "  gate  of
hell " ;  in  the  course  of  so  doing  I  read  the  passage  in  the  Sixth
Aeneid  about  the  gates  of  horn  and  ivory;  (note  that,  if  "good"
is  equivalent  to  "  true,"  the  script  has  inverted  the  idea ;  the  true
dreams  come  through  the  gate  of  horn).1  My  interest  in  the  "gate
of  hell "  was  concerned  with  it  as  a  possible  passage  for  returning
spirits,  so  that  the  connexion  with  the  gates  of  horn  and  ivory  is
pretty  close  ;  the  occurrence  of  Italian  in  connection  with  this  writing
may  be  interesting,  as  I  was  reading  Italian  for  the  first  time  for
months  on  March  19  or  March  20.

(2)  F.  without  the  final  k.  This  is  characteristic  of  Mr.  Myers's
name,  as  can  be  seen  in  any  of  his  title  pages ;  he  used  to  say  that
to  spell  it  with  a  k  was  one  of  the  blunders  he  should  make  when
he  tried  to  communicate.

In  her  letter  of  March  24th,  1905,  enclosing  the  script  of
March  22nd,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote:

I  wonder  if  the  jottings  I  enclose  convey  any  meaning  to  you.  It
is  an  impression  that  has  come  to  me  very  strongly  within  the  last
few  days  and  I  have  written  it  down  to  get  rid  of  it.  It  was  not
automatically  written  in  the  least,  but  I  do  not  know  why  the
impression  has  come  into  my  mind.

This  was  the  impression :

A  thin  woman,  not  very  young ;  at  least  the  further  side  of  thirty.
Her  dark  hair  is  slightly  rough  or  naturally  fluffy  and  begins  to
show  threads  of  grey  over  the  ears.  She  often  wears  a  jyvnce  nez,
with  either  no  frame  or  a  very  slight  one.  She  has  lost  a  great
many  people  she  loved,  both  relatives  and  friends,  and  the  trinkets
she  habitually  wears  are  more  relics  than  ornaments.  A  ring,  a  gold
chain,  both  very  full  of  memories.  Grey  eyes ;  the  black  lashes  almost
close  when  she  laughs.  Grey  dresses,  green  dresses,  simply  made — ■
often  with  wide  belts.  Not  a  "tailor  made"  woman.  Critical;  a
little  too  incisive  in  manner ; with  a  warm  heart  and  a  curiously

1  The  same  version  as  that  of  the  script  occurs  in  Rudyarcl  Kipling — a  writer
for  whom  I  believe  Mrs.  Holland  has  a  special  admiration.  In  describing  the
Taj  Mahal  he  says  :  "  It  was  the  Ivory  Gate  through  which  all  good  dreams
come"'  (From  Sea  to  Sea,  Vol.  I.,  p.  4).


258


Alice  Johnson.


[part


unexpected  fund  of  shyness.  Very  well  educated.  Her  college
career  was  attended  with  a  good  deal  of  distinction.  She  is  very
highly  strung,  but  too  self-controlled  to  be  called  "nervous."  The
mouth  has  mobile  lips  and  she  has  a  trick  of  contracting  the  lower
lip  of  which  she  is  probably  unconscious.  Reserved  to  a  fault.  She
is  beginning  to  attain  to  a  faith  she  once  thought  she  had  outgrown.

This  description,  which  is  not  unlike  the  one  given  on  Jan.
5th,  1904  (see  above,  p.  212),  might  naturally  be  taken  to
apply  to  Mrs.  Holland's  fellow-experimenter,  and  accordingly
I  sent  it  to  Mrs.  Verrall  for  her  comments.  She  wrote  on
April  4th,  1905  :

My  husband  and  I  think  this  description  fairly  good,  as  far  as  it
goes,  though  there  are  no  very  distinctive  points.  The  eyes  and  lashes
are  entirely  wrong ;  but  there  is  no  other  blatant  misdescription.
Of  course,  like  every  one  of  my  age,  I  have  lost  many  relatives  and
friends.  [The  remarks  about  the  trinkets,  though  not  very  definite,
are  certainly  appropriate.]  I  have  only  had  two  dresses  this  winter
that  were  not  black,  one  evening  dress,  grey,  and  a  dull  green  day  dress,
both  with  wide  belts,  but  who  does  not  wear  wide  belts  ?  I  have
a  trick  with  my  lower  lip  of  which  I  am  aware,  as  it  is  due  to  a
criticism  on  my  mouth  made  when  I  was  a  child.  I  am  apt  to
draw  it  in  and  let  the  upper  lip  project,  showing  the  two  front  teeth.

I  think  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  friends  would  consider  the
description  of  character  in  many  points  very  apt.

The  last  passage  worth  quoting  during  this  series  of  experi-
ments occurs  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  5th,  1905  :

A  gate  and  beyond  a  common  and  a  windswept  sky  hedges  on
each  side  of  the  gate — alder  and  guelder  rose  not  quickset

look  through  the  gate  to  the  western  sky,  and  long  straight  lines
of  cloud  with  clear  green  blue  sky  between  since  the  clearing.

That  is  all  I  see  that  peaceful  landscape.

Of  this  description  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  (April  11th,

1905)  :  "...  the  gate  in  the  hedge  looking  to  the  western
sky  and  a  peaceful  landscape  applies  to  my  surroundings  last
Wednesday  [i.e.  April  5th]." She  told  me  later  (May  28th,

1906)  that  the  description  was  applicable  to  the  garden  gate
of  her  father's  house,  where  she  was  then  staying,  but  that
the  particular  trees  mentioned  were  not  characteristic.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  259

During  the  next  six  weeks,  Mrs.  Holland  was  travelling  on
the  Continent.  Meanwhile  she  attempted  every  Wednesday  to
convey  an  impression  and  one  definite  word,  chosen  and  noted
by  herself,  to  her  fellow-experimenter.  These  impressions  re-
lated to  the  places  that  she  was  visiting.  She  sent  me  her
notes  after  returning  to  England  ;  but  I  found  that  in  no  case
had  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  shown  any  coincidence  with  the
topics  selected.

After  this  Mrs.  Verrall  tried  for  a  few  weeks  (from  May
31st,  1905)  to  convey  ideas  chosen  by  herself  to  Mrs.  Holland  ;
but  these  experiments  also  were  quite  unsuccessful.

Fourth  Period  :  May  31st  to  August  8th,  1905.

Mrs.  Holland  only  produced  seven  pieces  of  script  during
this  period  and  there  is  little  of  interest  to  note  about  it.
She  had  now  returned  from  the  Continent  but  was  moving
about  a  good  deal,  and  it  is  possible  that  this  produced  an
unsettled  state  of  mind  which  was  unfavourable.

As  usual,  much  of  the  script  purports  to  come  from  Mr.
Myers,  but  there  is  a  sudden  development  of  a  new  control —
Laurence  Oliphant,  who  predominates  during  this  period.  His
first  appearance  is  on  May  31st,  1905.  After  various  frag-
mentary and  apparently  random  utterances :

Laurence  foretold  it  in  1885  a  recrudescence  of  spiritualization
during  the  early  years  of  the  present  century-

Alice  Oliphant.  Of  love  that  never  found  its  earthly  close — -what
sequel  ? 1

His  mother  suffered  most —

Breath. Symp  Symptoms

Sympneu Symposium —  Sympneumata.

Sympneuviata ;  or  Evolutionary  Forces  now  Active  in  Man
is  the  title  of  a  book  by  Laurence  Oliphant,  published  in
1885.  In  the  preface  he  predicted  that  a  new  and  more
sympathetic  attitude  towards  psychic  matters  would  obtain
within  twenty  years. Alice  was  his  first  wife.

The  next  script  on  the  same  topic  begins  with  the  words
"  Vato — peto  " — obviously  meant  for  the  title  of  Oliphant's  novel,
Altiora  Peto. It refers to  the well  known  incidents  of  his

1  Tennyson,  Love  and  Duty.


260


Alice  Johnson.


[part


life — the  Memoir  by  his  cousin  "  Maggie "  (Mrs.  Oliphant),
his  entanglement  with  Thomas  Lake  Harris,  and  his  first  and
second  wives,  Alice  and  Eosamond.  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to
me  later  (June  6th,  1907):  "If  I  remember  right  I  read
Mrs.  Oliphant's  life  of  her  cousin  in  1903,  and  have  not
looked  at  or  thought  of  it  again  until  a  few  clays  ago,  when
I  consulted  it  in  the  library  to  see  if  it  threw  any  light  on
names  and  dates  given  in  the  script."

(June  21st.  1905.)
Vato. peto. Upward  and  on —

When  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment
Yearns  then  and  struggles  the  spirit-wrung  body
Yearns  then  and  struggles  the  spirit-led  soul —
Flesh  thrills  with  anguish  made  lambent  by  spirit
Soul  veiled  in  body  yet  struggles  to  light —
Thus  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment
Learning  the  mysteries  apart  and  afar
Where  the  All  Powerful  stooping  creating
Formed  in  the  one  soul  that  now  is  the  twain
Two  were  together — together  made  perfect —
Two  that  are  parted  for  earth  sin — by  guile —
When  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment
Twain  that  are  sundered  shall  grow  one  again —
Perfect,  the  Greater  enshrining  the  Lesser —
Woman  soul  sheltered — enshrined  and  secure —
When  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment
The  Woman  soul  leadeth  us  upward  and  on

L  0.

"  For  him  the  stream  had  never  welled
In  desert  tracts  malign
So  sweet,  or  had  he  ever  felt
So  faint  in  the  sunshine —
Of  Palestine."  1

There  was  no  waste  and  no  need  for  anger —  That  was  the  one
mistake  Maggie  made  in  the  Life —  The  "  sufferings  "  were  part  of  the
inevitable  growth — and  even  a  symbolic  necessity —  "  The  Egyptian
oppressed  them  without  cause  "  it  was  all  in  the  scheme —  Harris
was  an  instrument  a  chosen  tool — and  to  him — in  the  beginning  was

1  D.  G.  Rossetti,  T/te  Staff  and  Scrip  ;  in  the  third  line  "  or  "  should  be  "nor."


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  261

given  truth  and  power  and  beauty.  If  they  were  lost  in  a  certain
mire  of  meaness  [sic] — Well  what  matter — that  was  also  fated.

Clogged  by  humanity  it  was  difficult  not  to  feel  angered  by  the
menial  work  exacted  from  them — my  Mother's  sufferings  Alice  alone
and  afar — but  seen  now  that  is  a  pitiable  triviality.  To  each  one
of  us  while  we  live  is  given  the  care  of  a  foolish  heavy  exacting
body — half  child  —  half  idiot — to  be  washed — fed — tended — and
whether  we  guard  our  own  house  of  clay  or  help  others  to  guard
theirs — what  matter —  To  help  others  is  far  nobler —  Washing —
yes  she  did  washing — a  beautiful  necessary  ministration  and  one  of
exquisite  symbolism —  Teaching  again  what  can  be  better  than
teaching. Alice  was  never  embittered —

[Here  follow  some  scribbles  and  the  name  "  Rosemonde."]

In  the  next  script,  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  June  29th,
1905,  occurs  :

Maria

Nearly  20  years  ago. Jan  2nd  1886 —
That  was  the  day.

Lowry

Make  no  attempt  to  understand —  That  doesn't  matter —  Keep
your  mind  quiet —  Friedhof.  But  that  does  not  matter  now —
It's  human  in  its  worst  sense  to  attach  so  much  importance  to
graves

Oh  ho  ye  ho— ho  ye  ho — whose  for  the  ferry —
You'd  think  t'was  a  journey  to  Twickenham  town —

No  matter  if  it  is  nonsense — write.

Maria— E.L.P.

Ig — The  prediction

"  Maria "  was  the  Christian  name  of  his  mother,  Lady
Oliphant ;  January  2nd,  1886,  was  the  date  of  Alice  Oliphant's
death.  She  died  in  Palestine,  and  was  buried  in  the  Friedhof
cemetery  at  Haifa.  Laurence  Oliphant  died  at  Twickenham,
and  is  buried  in  the  cemetery  there.  Mrs.  Holland  tells  me
that  the  lines  about  Twickenham  in  the  script  are  quoted
from  a  drawing-room  song, — no  doubt  suggested  to  her  sub-
liminal by  the  association  of  Oliphant  with  Twickenham.
"  Lowry  "  was  Lady  Oliphant's  name  for  her  son.

The  next  script  refers  chiefly  to  Alice  Oliphant.

R


262


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Tuesday. July  11th,  1905. 11  a.m.)

#.*#**

JANUAEY  2nd. 1886— ALICE'S  DAY.

To  fashion  the  birth  robes  for  those
Who  are  just  born — being  dead."  1
"  A  lady  the  flower  of  her  kind

Whose  form  was  upborne  by  her  lovely  mind."  2
"  And  on  her  grave  with  shining  eyes
The  Syrian  stars  look  down." 3
In  accord — in  perfect  accord.
"Only  one  youth — and  the  bright  life  was  clouded."4

But  Alice  has  no  regrets.
"  Like  tombs  of  pilgrims  that  have  died —
About  the  Holy  Sepulchre."  5
The  best  book  was  never  written — Rosamond  would  have  helped
but  the  power  was  withdrawn — I  was  not  the  proper  channel.

L.  0.

On  July  20th,  1905,  comes  the  remark:  "  Lowry's  opinions
of  Russia  have  been  wonderfully  justified —  More  than  50
years  have  been  needed  to  fulfil  some  of  his  predictions —
Maria " ;  and  later :  "  Thy  life  from  earth  by  thundering
surges  driven  wakes  unbewildered  in  the  courts  of  heaven."

This  is  a  quotation  from  a  poem  by  Mr.  Myers,  "  Not  even
in  death  thou  diest,"  published  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and
Poetry  (p.  167). "Thundering"  should  be  ''hurrying."

After  this  date,  there  are  no  more  references  in  the  script
to  Laurence  Oliphant,  in  whom,  as  she  afterwards  told  me,
Mrs.  Holland  took  no  interest.

But  I  will  quote  an  incident  in  connection  with  one  of
the  passages  as  possibly  throwing  light  on  one  aspect  of  the
psychology  of  automatism. In a  letter  dated June  22nd,

1  D.  G.  Rossetti,  The  Blessed  Damozel.

2  Shelley,  The  Sensitive  Plant :

"  A  lady  the  wonder  of  her  kind,
Whose  form  was  upborne  by  a  lovely  mind."

3  Matthew  Arnold,  Obermann  Once  More:

"And  on  his  grave,  with  shining  eyes,
The  Syrian  stars  look  down."

4  Mrs.  Meynell.

5  D.  G.  Rossetti,  The  Portrait.


L.v.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  IV.  263


1905,  enclosing  the  script  of  June  21st,  quoted  above,  Mrs.
Holland  writes : —

This  last  writing  has  a  quotation  from  Rossetti's  "  Staff  and
Scrip,"  but  why  should  Palestine  be  underlined?  I  am  familiar
with  the  lines,  "  When  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment,"  and
"The  woman-soul  leadeth  us  upward  and  on,"  but  I  cannot  remember
if  they  have  anything  to  do  with  each  other,  or  where  they  come
from.

I  have  the  impression  that  all  the  writing  this  time  is  meant  to
come  from  one  influence,  and  it  is  a  new  one,  or  nearly  so.  The
untidy  marks  at  the  end  mean  that  I  broke  off  in  a  fit  of  shivering,
winch  I  took  to  mean  that  I  had  written  enough.  There  was
not  the  slightest  approach  to  a  trance  condition,  it  was  like  a
rather  slow  dictation.  I  have  a  funny  confused  impression  of  a
group  of  three  women  and  one  man.  One  of  the  women  is  elderly.
The  "  message "  comes  from  the  man  chiefly,  but  sometimes  the
youngest  woman  of  the  three  joins  in,  as  it  were.  This  sounds
fantastic,  but  as  the  writing  came  before  noon  on  a  sunny  morning,
I  did  not  dream  it.  Also  if  I  note  it  down,  I  shan't  worry  about
it,  or  attach  undue  importance  to  it.

This  description  appears  to  me  to  involve  a  kind  of  dis-
sociation of  consciousness  which  I  suspect  frequently  occurs
in  cases  of  automatism.  To  Mrs.  Holland's  supraliminal
consciousness  comes  an  impression  of  a  group  of  three  women
and  one  man ;  one  is  an  elderly  woman,  the  message  comes
chiefly  from  the  man,  but  sometimes  the  youngest  woman
joins  in.  "  It  is  a  new  influence,  or  nearly  so,"  she  remarks.
Meanwhile  the  writing  done  by  her  subliminal  consciousness
shows  clearly  that  these  persons  are  Laurence  Oliphant,  his
mother,  and  his  first  and  second  wives,1  who  have  only  pur-
ported to  control  once  before,  on  May  31st.  But  for  the
moment  the  recognition  seems  confined  to  her  subliminal  self;
supraliminally  she  only  conceives  of  them  as  a  group  of  persons
unidentified.

A  similar  experience  is  described  on  July  27th,  1905.
Here  she  writes  automatically  the  one  word  "  Maud,"  and
then  goes  on  in  her  normal  hand-writing :

Automatic  script  seems  unwilling  to  come  and  instead  I  have  an
impulse  to  note  a  waking  dream  last  night. I  was  unwell  yesterday,
1  The  second  Mrs.  Oliphant  is  still  living.


264


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  did  nothing  but  rest  and  read  novels.  Before  I  slept  I
remembered  I  had  not  tried  for  script,  and  then  some  one  seemed
to  say  :  "  You  have  forgotten  again,  but  you  must  write  to-morrow  ;
write  to-morrow  morning  about  Leckhampton.  Don't  forget  Leck-
hampton."

I  know  nothing  about  the  place  and  I  said  so  mentally,  for  I  was
in  a  kind  of  doze, — not  actually  dreaming,  but  not  fully  conscious.
Then  I  got  an  impression  of  a  face  I  am  vaguely  familiar  with,
though  I  have  certainly  never  seen  it  in  real  life.  A  pale  face,
that  of  a  man  no  longer  young ;  a  high  brow,  dark  hair  going
grey,  a  moustache  and  small  pointed  beard  I  think,  but  the  chin
was  drawn  in  and  the  chief  impression  given  was  that  of  the  high
brow  and  the  dark  eyes  that  were  at  once  penetrating  and  sad.
No  impression  of  figure  or  dress,  only  the  face.  After  a  minute  or
two  it  went  away  and  was  followed  by  the  face  of  a  younger  man
with  a  strong  chin  and  a  long  moustache ;  but  almost  before  I
could  realize  this  face  it  went,  and  an  old  man  with  white  beard
and  glasses  showed  a  fraction  of  a  minute,  and  then  it  was  all
gone.  The  first  face  was  the  clearest,  the  last  very  dim  and
quickly  gone.  I  cannot  recall  any  portraits  I  have  seen  lately  like
these  faces,  and  I  am  not  given  to  seeing  faces  in  the  dark.

I  had  hoped  for  some  interesting  script  this  morning,  but  nothing
will  come.

These  three  men  are  of  course  Mr.  Myers,  Mr.  Gurney,
and  Dr.  Sidgwick,  and  the  description  of  them  is  almost
identical  with  that  given  in  the  reverse  order  in  the  script
of  Feb.  21st,  1905  (cpuoted  above,  p.  246),  and  followed  there
by  the  three  names  "  Henry,  Edmund,  Fred."  The  description
is  no  doubt  based  on  the  portraits  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and
Poetry  (though  on  each  date  a  mistake  is  made  in  describing
Dr.  Sidgwick.  On  Feb.  21st  he  is  said  to  be  "nearly  bald,"
and  on  July  27th  to  be  wearing  glasses.  Neither  of  these
statements  was  true  at  any  time).  But  Mrs.  Holland  does
not  seem  to  recognise  them  supraliminally.

"  Leckhampton,"  the  name  of  Mr.  Myers's  house  at  Cambridge,
is  also  given  in  Fragments.

Some  other  cases  of  visions  unrecognised  will  be  given  later.

In  these  cases  the  script  seems  to  represent  a  stratum  of
consciousness  with  a  more  retentive  memory  and  in  some
respects a fuller and more complete knowledge than  the


lv.J Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  265

normal.  This  is  only  what  we  are  accustomed  to  find.  But
we  see  here  also  a  restriction  or  inhibition  of  the  normal  con-
sciousness, in  that  it  is  apparently  unable  for  the  moment  to
use  its  ordinary  faculties  or  to  draw  the  most  obvious  inferences
as  to  the  persons  represented  in  its  visual  impressions.

This  restriction  of  the  normal  consciousness,  shown  here
in  a  rudimentary  and  evanescent  form,  may  perhaps  be
favourable  to  the  full  development  of  the  subliminal  activity.
In  any  case  it  certainly  seems  correlated  with  it.

The  same  restriction  may  account  in  part  for  the  difficulty
that  automatists  so  often  find  in  interpreting  passages  in
their  own  script  which  are  perfectly  intelligible  to  another
reader.  "  My  eyes  were  holden,"  Mrs.  Holland  said  in  one
such  case ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall  has  often  found  the  same,  though
her  long  practice  in  analysing  her  script  from  an  outside
point  of  view  has  to  a  great  extent  overcome  the  difficulty.
It  seems  even  possible  that  the  sight  of  the  script  shortly  after
it  has  been  produced  may  tend  sometimes  to  reproduce  in  the
writer  the  dissociation  of  consciousness  which  originally  accom-
panied it,  just  as  the  act  of  carrying  out  a  post-hypnotic
suggestion  sometimes  re-induces  hypnosis.  Of  one  passage
Mrs.  Holland  wrote  (July  11th,  1907):  "On  reading  over
the  script  before  sending  it  this  passage  conveyed  nothing  to
me.  I  seem  curiously  dense  concerning  the  script  for  two
or  three  days  after  writing  it."


CHAPTER  V.

Fifth  Period — Oct.  6th,  1905  to  Feb.  18th,  1906.

Up  to  this  time  I  had  given  Mrs.  Holland  no  information  as
to  what  statements  in  her  script  were  possibly  or  apparently
evidential.  From  the  beginning  I  had  impressed  on  her  the
fact  that  much  of  it  was  derived  from  her  reading  of  Human
Personality,  etc.,  though,  I  said,  there  were  certain  points  that
could  not  be  so  explained.  I  purposely  abstained  from  telling
her  which  points  or  which  passages  interested  me ;  because
I  wished  the  writing  to  be  as  spontaneous  as  possible  and


2(36


Alice  Johnson.


PART


not  to  be  guided  in  any  way  by  my  comments.  In  the
case  of  her  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  I  merely  sent  her
copies  of  some  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  asking  her  to  tell
me  if  anything  in  it  related  to  her ;  but  in  regard  to  her
own  script,  I  simply  told  her  there  were  several  points  in
her  first  writing  that  seemed  applicable  to  my  friend's  sur-
roundings,— without  indicating  which  they  were, — and  that  an
interesting  point  had  occurred  on  one  of  the  later  days.

Of  course  I  explained  to  Mrs.  Holland  the  reasons  for  my
reticence,  which  she  perfectly  appreciated  and  readily  acquiesced
in.  In  fact,  after  my  first  explanation,  she  herself  often  begged
me  to  go  on  keeping  her  in  the  dark,  so  that  she  might  as
far  as  possible  avoid  being  influenced  in  the  writing  by  her
own  speculations  as  to  interesting  points.  She  wrote  to  me
on  June  22nd,  1905:  "I  very  much  prefer  being  'in  the
dark '  for  the  present.  If  you  were  to  tell  me  week  by
week  that  this  particular  phrase  carried  a  half  sense,  or  that
these  initials  might  have  a  meaning,  my  mind  would  inevitably
try  to  follow  up  clues  and  the  outside  character  of  the  writing-
would  vanish.  That  part  of  it  is  from  outside  I  canuot
help  believing."

I  saw  her  for  the  first  time,  as  I  have  already  said,  on
October  6th,  1905,  when  she  was  staying  in  London  for  a
short  time  and  came  to  the  S.P.E.  rooms  at  20  Hanover
Scprare  and  we  had  a  talk  of  about  2h  hours  on  her  script.
The  account  I  now  give  is  taken  from  my  notes  of  this
interview,  written  two  days  later.  The  first  incident  is
another  illustration  of  what  is  referred  to  at  the  end  of  the
last  chapter,  namely,  the  failure  of  her  supraliminal  to  recog-
nise something  that  is  well  known  to  the  subliminal  con-
sciousness.

I  purposely  gave  her  a  chair  facing  Mr.  Myers's  portrait,
but  said  nothing  about  it.  I  saw  that  she  noticed  it  almost
at  once ;  she  sat  staring  at  it  with  so  much  fixity  that  I
thought  it  probable  she  might  go  into  a  trance.  She  did
not  appear  to  be  listening  to  what  I  was  saying,  so  I  went
on  talking  about  nothing  in  particular.  Presently  she  said
in  an  agitated  manner :  "  Who  is  that  man  ?  I'm  sure  I've
seen  him  before.  I  know  him  quite  well."  When  I  explained
who  it  was,  she  said  she thought  she  must  have  seen  the


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  267

portrait  before,  though  she  believed  it  was  not  in  Human
Personality.  I  showed  her  a  copy  of  the  same  portrait  in
Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (which  she  had  told  me  she
had  once  seen)  and  she  recognised  this  as  the  source  of  her
impression.  I  told  her  that  many  things  in  her  recent  script
were  obviously  derived  from  this  book.

I  enlarged  on  the  importance  of  finding  out  how  much
of  her  script  was  due  to  reminiscences  of  things  heard  or
seen  casually  and  perhaps  subconsciously,  and  asked  her  if
she  could  think  of  any  kind  of  link  between  herself  and
Mr.  Myers,  e.g.  Lady  Mount-Temple,  whom  she  had  mentioned
in  a  letter  to  me.  She  said  she  had  only  seen  Lady  Mount-
Temple  once — towards  the  end  of  her  life — probably  in  1900.
She  had  then  left  Broadlands  (where  Mr.  Myers  knew  her)
and  Mrs.  Holland  was  sure  she  had  not  spoken  at  all  of
Mr.  Myers  or  of  any  of  his  associates  in  psychical  research
or  of  anything  to  do  with  the  subject.  She  could  not  think
of  any  other  mutual  acquaintance.

After  discussing  some  other  topics  in  the  script,  I  cross-
examined  her  about  the  references  in  her  script  of  Feb.  15  th
1905,  to  the  opening  of  Mr.  Myers's  posthumous  envelope,
as  described  in  the  section  on  that  incident  (see  above,  p.  241).
We  also  discussed  the  mention  of  Professor  Eichet  in  the
script  (see  above,  pp.  252  and  255).

Mrs.  Holland  told  me  that  she  had  never,  she  believed,
seen  a  copy  of  the  Proceedings  or  Journal  ;  that  a  little  time
back  she  had  seen  an  advertisement  offering  a  second-hand
set  of  Proceedings  for  sale  and  that  she  had  purposely  abstained
from  buying  it  or  looking  for  it  anywhere  in  order  to  remain
as  ignorant  as  possible  of  S.P.E.  affairs.

She  asked  me  if  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge,  was  really
Mrs.  Verrall's  address,  as  stated  in  her  script  (of  Nov.  7  th
1903),  and  if  it  was  given  in  Human  Personality.  I  told
her  it  was  correct  and  was  not  in  Human  Personality.  She
was  specially  anxious  on  this  point  and  seemed  to  remember
the  writing  clearly  and  to  have  thought  of  it  on  this  occasion
spontaneously.  I  told  her  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  the  lady
with  whom  she  had  been  experimenting  in  the  early  part
of  this  year,  and  she  was  much  interested  and  seemed  to
realise  clearly  who  Mrs.  Verrall  was,  whereas  she  had  given


268


Alice  Johnson.


[part


no  sign  of  recognition  when  I  spoke  of  Professor  Eichet,
who  also  is  mentioned  in  Human  Personality.  Probably  she
remembered  Mrs.  Verrall's  name  because  it  was  there  connected
with  the  subject  of  crystal-gazing,  in  which  she  was  specially
interested  on  account  of  her  own  experiences  (see  her  letter
of  Nov.  19th,  1903,  quoted  above,  p.  185).

I  then  read  over  to  Mrs.  Holland  her  own  script  of  March
1st,  1905,  the  first  day  of  her  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall
(quoted  above,  p.  252),  and  told  her  what  points  in  it  were
correct.  I  also  told  her  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  house  was  near
Mr.  Myers's  and  that  the  text  quoted  by  her  on  that  day
was  over  the  gateway  of  Selwyn  College,  which  was  near
both  houses.

I  noted  carefully  all  the  information  I  gave  to  Mrs.  Holland
on  this  occasion,  in  case  any  of  it  should  re-appear  later
in  her  script.  As  a  matter  of  fact  one  incident  which  I
told  her,  to  which  she  paid  little  attention  at  the  time  and
which  she  afterwards  quite  forgot,  did  lead  to  two  visions,
as  will  be  related  below  (see  p.  286).  When  she  first  told
me  of  these  visions,  I  had  no  recollection  of  having  mentioned
the  circumstances  to  her  and  should  probably  never  have
remembered  it  if  I  had  not  found  it  recorded  in  my  notes.

The  result  of  this  interview  was  to  confirm  the  impression
I  had  already  gained  from  my  correspondence  with  her, —
that  Mrs.  Holland  was  anxious  to  give  me  all  and  any  informa-
tion that  could  possibly  throw  light  on  her  script,  regardless
of  what  conclusions  it  might  lead  to.

After  leaving  London,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  on  Oct.
17th,  1905  :

It  was  exceedingly  natural  that  after  my  long  talk  with  you
on  Oct.  6th,  I  should  dream  of  automatic  writing ;  but  as  I  had
never  before  clone  so,  I  noticed  the  dream  particularly.  In  my
dream  I  was  "  trying "  for  writing  with  a  friend,  the  last  person
I  should  mention  such  experiments  to  in  real  life,  and  after  some
delay  a  couplet,  which  I  cannot  recall,  was  written.  The  lines
were,  I  think,  ten-syllabled  and  the  words  "stars"  and  "light"
and  "  peace  "  occurred.

Then  came  "Keswick  "

"  He  asked  life  of  Thee  and  Thou  gavest  him  a  long  life,  even
for  ever  and  ever ;  "


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  269

and  the  dream  ended  with  my  saying :  "  Of  course,  that's  on  the
grave."

Can  you  remember  if  you  told  me  that  this  is  Mr.  Myers's
epitaph?  I  feel  as  if  I  had  got  it  from  you,  either  consciously  or
unconsciously.

Mr.  Myers  was  buried  in  the  churchyard  of  St.  John's,
Keswick ;  the  text  mentioned  is  not  on  his  grave,  but  on
the  memorial  tablet  to  him  in  the  church.  I  did  not  know
this  at  the  time  and  had  not  mentioned  the  subject  to  Mrs.
Holland ;  but  while  talking  to  me  she  had  had  in  her  hands
for  a  few  minutes  his  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  as  I
was  showing  her  the  portraits  in  it.  This  text  is  quoted
at  the  end  of  the  Autobiography,  and  it  is  mentioned  at
the  beginning  that  Mr.  Myers  was  born  at  Keswick,  his
father  being  incumbent  of  St.  John's  Church,  Keswick.  That
he  should  be  buried  at  Keswick  and  that  this  text  should
be  on  his  grave  might  therefore  be  an  inference  from  state-
ments in  the  autobiography.

I  had  now  decided  to  take  the  first  opportunity  of  introducing
Mrs.  Holland  to  Mrs.  Verrall. On  September  27th,  1905,  I
had  seen  Mrs.  Verrall  and  told  her  that  I  was  hoping  to  meet
Mrs.  Holland  before  long  and  wished  her  to  meet  her  some
time  also. Mrs. Verrall  suggested  asking  her  to  her  house
at  Cambridge  during  the  Christmas  holidays. My  next  talk
with  Mrs.  Verrall  on  the  subject  was  on  Oct.  10th,  four  days
after  my  interview with  Mrs. Holland,  described  above.  I
gave  Mrs.  Verrall  a  general  account  of  this  interview  and  then
told  her  for  the  first  time  of  the  statement  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Jan.  17th,  1904:  "The  sealed  envelope  is  not  to  be
opened  yet,"  and  asked  her  to  look  up  her  own  script  of  that
time  to  see  if  there  was  any  sort  of  coincidence  with  this  in
it. Further  enquiry  led  to  the  discovery  of  what  is  described
above  (Chapter  III.)  as  the  first  cross-correspondence  between
Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall. I  now  first  looked  up  the
reference  1  Cor.  16.  13.  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Jan.  17th,
1904,  and  found  that  it  was  that  of  the  text  given  in  her  script
of  March  1st,  1905,  viz.  the  text  inscribed  on  Selwyn  College;
and  it  was  now  that  I  first  heard  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  attempt
to  get  in  her  script  the  text  asked  for  by  Mrs.  Siclgwick.  The
discovery  of  this  "  cross-correspondence  "  of  course  confirmed  my


270


Alice  Johnson.


[part


view  that  it  was  desirable  to  have  more  experiments  between
Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall.

A  Premonition  ?

After  seeing  me  on  the  afternoon  of  October  10th,  Mrs.
Verrall  returned  to  Cambridge.  While  in  the  train  on  her
way  to  Cambridge  she  wrote  some  script  in  which — apparently
a  propos  of  nothing — occurred  the  words  :  "  Arrange  the  date.
November  16th  not  the  later  day."  She  attached  no  meaning
to  this.  On  October  19th,  20th,  and  23rd,  she  was  corre-
sponding with  a  lady  in  London,  who  wished  to  see  her  on
psychical  matters.  On  October  27th,  being  in  London,  she
tried  to  make  an  appointment  with  her  dentist  for  Nov.  7  th
or  8  th,  those  being  the  days  on  which  the  lady  in  London
could  also  see  her.  The  dentist's  earliest  possible  day  was
November  16th,  and  she  accordingly  arranged  an  appointment
then,  though  much  annoyed  at  not  being  able  to  fit  it  in
with  her  visit  to  the  lady.1

Next  day  (Oct.  28  th)  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.
Holland,  dated  Oct.  27th,  1905,  in  answer  to  one  of  mine
saying  that  Mrs.  Verrall  wished  to  invite  her  to  Cambridge  at
Christmas  time.  In  this  letter,  Mrs.  Holland  expressed  her
regret  at  not  being  able  to  go  to  Cambridge,  and  added :  "  I
wonder  is  she  [Mrs.  Verrall]  likely  to  be  in  town  next  month.
I  hope  to  be  there  for  a  week  from  Nov.  15  th."

I,  knowing  nothing  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  arrangements,  sent  her
this  letter  and  asked  her  if  she  could  manage  to  come  up  to
London  during  the  week  mentioned.  She  replied  proposing
November  16th  (the  day  previously  fixed  with  her  dentist),
and  so  it  came  about  that  she  and  Mrs.  Holland  first  met  on
Nov.  16th,  not  at  Christmas  time,  which  corresponds  to  the
direction  of  the  script,  "Arrange  the  date.  November  16th
not  the  later  day."

Second  Interview,  Nov.  16th,  1905.

Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall  met  for  the  first  time  on
Nov.  16th,  1905,  in  my  presence,  this  being  also  the  first
time  that  any  direct  communication  had  passed  between  them.

1  All  these  dates  were  furnished  to  me  later  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  diary.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  'Ill

I  wrote  an  account  of  the  interview  the  next  morning,  noting
whatever  facts  mentioned  in  the  conversation  were  probably
unknown  to  Mrs.  Holland  before,  in  case  references  to  them
should  turn  up  later  in  her  script.  These  will  be  mentioned
below  where  necessary.

In discussing  some  of  Mrs.  Holland's  previous  script,  the
following  points  were  mentioned :

(1)  That  there  was  a  quotation — I  did  not  say  what — from
Mr.  Myers's  poem  St.  Paul  in  her  script.

(2)  That  the  writings  of  her  Myers  and  Gurney  controls
bore  no  resemblance  to  the  real  handwritings  of  Mr.  Myers
and  Mr.  Gurney.

(3)  Mrs.  Verrall  remarked  that  the  rather  brusque  and
peremptory  tone  of  Mrs.  Holland's  Gurney  control  was  very
much  like  the  style  of  "  Mrs.  Forbes's "  "  E.G.,"  and  some
stress  was  laid  on  this.  In  speaking  of  "  Mrs.  Forbes,"  Mrs.
Verrall  used  her  real  name.  It  is,  I  think,  rather  remarkable
that  this  name  has  never  appeared  in  Mrs.  Holland's  subsequent
script.

(4)  I  read  to  Mrs.  Verrall  the  description  of  a  man  in
the  script  of  Nov.  7th,  1903,  and  she  gave  her  opinion  as
to  what  points  in  it  correctly  applied  to  Dr.  Verrall.

(5)  We  told  Mrs.  Holland  about  the  premonition  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  that  the  text  asked  for  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was
to  be  given  on  Jan.  17th,  1904,  which  seemed  to  have  a
sort  of  fulfilment  in  her  own  script  of  that  date ;  that  she
did  not  give  the  right  text,  but  a  reference  to  one  that  had
a  distinct  association  with  Mr.  Myers  and  Mrs.  Verrall  and
was  given  in  full  by  her  on  March  1st,  1905.

(6)  I  told  Mrs.  Holland  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  premonition  "  of
their  meeting  on  this  date.

(7)  Mrs.  Verrall  said  that  the  text  Mrs.  Holland  had
dreamt  of  (see  above)  was  on  Mr.  Myers's  grave.  (This  was
not  quite  correct.  As  stated  above,  the  text  is  on  the
memorial  tablet  in  the  church,  not  on  the  grave.)

(8)  A  propos  of  two  Christian  names,  hitherto  unidentified,
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  Mrs.  Verrall  said  she  thought  they
must  be  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "  N."  Mrs.  Holland  said  she  knew
nothing  about  Mr.  and  Mrs.  N.  This  was  not  literally  correct.
She knew  neither  of  them  personally  (which  was  probably


272


Alice  Johnson.


[part


what  she  meant),  but  Mrs.  N.,  who  had  died  twenty  years
before,  soon  after  her  marriage — in  1886 — had  been  well
known  to  a  cousin  of  hers,  who  had  frequently  mentioned  her
in  her  letters  of  that  date  to  Mrs.  Holland  in  India.  A  piece
of  script  giving  some  details  about  Mrs.  N.'s  will  was  later
traced  by  Mrs.  Holland  to  a  passage  in  one  of  these  early
letters.  All  this  information,  of  course,  I  owe  to  her.  This
is  one  of  the  most  marked  instances  in  her  history  of  the
re-emergence  of  a  long-forgotten  idea  and  will  be  related
below  (see  p.  287).  Here  I  will  only  draw  attention  to  the
fact  that  it  was  through  Mrs.  Holland's  own  care  that  the
unevidential  character  of  the  incident,  which  at  first  sight
appeared  very  impressive,  was  discovered.

On  this  occasion  Mrs.  Holland  gave  me  further  information
as  to  her  family  history  and  connections.

"  Spectator  "  Eeview  of  Maxwell's  "  Metapsychical

Phenomena."

In  a  letter  dated  Oct.  27th,  1905,  Mrs.  Holland  told  me
that  she  had  read  a  review  in  the  Spectator  of  Oct.  7th  of
Dr.  Maxwell's  book,  Metapsychical  Phenomena,  prefaced  by  Pro-
fessor Eichet  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  The  review,  I  found,  was  a
long  one,  going  into  many  details  of  the  phenomena,  which  it
criticised  very  sevei'ely ;  and  it  is  clearly  responsible  for  much
of  the  matter  of  the  script  produced  during  this  period.  The
script  is  by  no  means  a  mere  reproduction  of  the  review ;  it
takes  rather  the  attitude  of  one  who  has  read  it  and  has
formed  an  independent  view  of  the  facts,  showing  indeed  in  one
or  two  instances  what  looks  like  an  independent  knowledge
of  them.  Great  anxiety  is  shown  by  both  the  Myers  and
Gurney  controls — expressed,  as  usual,  more  emphatically  by
the  latter — lest  the  S.P.R  should  be  carried  away  by  the
marvellous  reports  and  lest  "  the  ruin  of  all  we  have  been
working  for  so  long  should  ensue."  The  warning  is  reiterated
again  and  again.

My  readers  may  remember  that,  besides  the  appearance  of
Dr.  Maxwell's  book,  the  most  salient  "  occult "  events  of  this
period  were  the  Greek  script  of  "  Mme.  X.,"  later  described
and  discussed  at  great  length  in  Proceedings,  Part  LI.  (Dec.


lv.] Atitomatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  273

1905),  and  the  famous  Algerian  "materialisations."  In  regard
to  these  matters,  the  attitude  of  the  "  controls "  has  an
undoubted  resemblance  to  that  of  some  members  of  the  S.P.K.,
— myself  among  others.  Whether  it  really  represents  in  any
way  an  actual  view  taken  by  Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.  G-urney  is
of  course  an  open  question.  But  it  has  to  be  remembered
that  these  controls,  or  at  least  the  Myers  control,  have  in
the  course  of  the  script  produced  evidential  matter  pointing
towards  personal  identity ;  and  it  has  frequently  been  argued
— I  think  with  a  certain  show  of  reason — chat  any  evidential
matter  produced  by  a  control  tends  to  support  its  general
claim  to  genuineness.  I  offer  this  case,  then,  for  the  considera-
tion of  persons  who  are  accustomed  to  maintain  this  argument.

For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  admit  its  validity.  I  think
that  each  part  of  the  script  must  be  judged  primarily  on
the  sole  ground  of  its  own  evidential  character.  Mr.  Myers
may  have  taken  the  view  here  attributed  to  him,  but  there  is
no  real  evidence  that  he  did,  and  even  if  there  were  such
evidence,  no  one  would  be  bound  to  agree  with  him.

The  review  of  Dr.  Maxwell's  book,  which,  as  I  have  said,
is  the  undoubted  source  of  much  of  this  script,  appeared  on
Oct.  7th,  1905.  Nevertheless  it  was  not  until  Nov.  19th
that  the  script  touched  in  any  way  on  the  topic  of  phenomena
analogous  to  those  treated  of  in  the  book.

About  this  time  Mr.  Feilding  was  making  arrangements
to  attend  some  sittings  with  Eusapia  Paladino  in  Paris,  and
on  Nov.  19th  he  came  to  discuss  the  matter  with  me  and
to  look  at  some  of  my  records  of  the  sittings  at  Cambridge,
which  have  never  been  published  in  full.  He  was  with  me
from  about  3.30  to  6.30  p.m.,  but  I  had  also  spent  most  of
the  morning  in  looking  out  the  records  for  him  and  consequently
had  had  the  subject  much  in  my  mind  for  most  of  the  day.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  19th,  1905,  was  written  at
1 1  a.m.  as  follows  :

*****

[M.] It  is  perhaps  unfair  to  state that is  too  credulous

but  his  peculiar  constitution  of  mind  lends  itself  to  the  machina-
tions of  fraud.  In  matters  of  this  kind  the  Scientific  mind  is  the
poorest  guide  imaginable —  The  phenomena  that  will  shortly  be
induced are  utterly misleading — They will not  be  completely


27+


Alice  Johnson.


[part


fraudulent- — at  least  not  consciously  so — but  the  influence  will  be
of  the  poltergeist  type  and  the  lowest  forms  of  physical  magnetism
will  be  called  upon  to  produce  what  the  agent  in  question  will
announce  as  psychical  manifestations.  No  levitation  but  the  move-
ment without  contact  will  be  of  the  lowest  class — not  the  back
of  the

(The  impulse  to  write  was  so  strong  that  I  obeyed  it  in  spite
of  knowing  that  I  should  soon  be  interrupted — and  at  this  point
the  interruption  came.)

The  topic  is  continued  next  morning  as  follows :

(Monday,  Nov.  20th. 9.15  a.m.)
[M.] Brief  clay  and  bright  day  and  sunset  red

Early  in  the  evening  the  stars  are  overhead — 1
Myriads  of  intended  messages  break  off  short.
Broken  threads  are  hard  to  knit  again —

The  properties  apertaining  [sic]  to  the  deception  will  be  daringly
simple —  The  old  familiar  trickery  which  is  so  old  it  has  almost
been  abandoned  in  favour  of  more  elaborate  appliances —

There  will  be  a  piece  of  elastic  in  his  left  shirt  sleeve —  No —
nothing  so  elaborate  as  a  pneumatic  glove —  The  table  will  be
without  openings  or  traps  of  any  kind — that  is  to  say  in  the
upper  part  but  insist  on  observing  where  the  legs  join  the  frame —

The  luminous  paste  is  an  invention  of  his  own —

[G.] The pendulum is swinging  too far back — Be  a  trifle

narrow  minded  again — You  must  not  go  all  the  way  with

It's  the  form  his  enthusiasm  takes — excellent  for  the  individual —
but  if  you  are  all  roped  into  it  the  inevitable  smash  would  be
hateful — Go  slow.

No — no  you  misunderstand —  Of  course  there  is  a  great  sub-
stratum of  truth  but  these  two  people  won't  help  you  to  arrive
at  it.  The  man  is  a  charlatan — and  the  woman — though  with  a
good  deal  of  sincerity  at  first  has  lost  it  through  vanity  and  the

desire  for  effectiveness —

*  *  *  *  *

[?]  Palladia — Mrs.  Eustace  Lucas — Annie  Bird —  Euphronia —
Katie  King — Eustonia — Pallonia — .  .  .

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  these  descriptions  of  fraudulent
phenomena  may  have  been  partly  due  to  a  vague  telepathic  reflec-
tion of  my  conversation  with  Mr.  Feilding  on  that  day. But  the

1 R.  L.  Stevenson.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  275


whole  topic  of  physical  phenomena  was  very  much  in  the  air  at
that  time.  On  October  27th,  1905,  at  a  Private  Meeting
of  the  S.P.E.,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  described  a  visit  of  his
to  Dr.  Maxwell  at  Bordeaux  for  the  purpose  of  attending
sittings.  At  these  sittings  raps  had  been  obtained,  generally
with  contact,  and  on  one  occasion  a  slight  movement  of  a
table  without  apparent  contact.  Sometimes  small  lights  were
seen  moving  about  near  the  medium.  Also  the  medium
himself  exhibited  luminosity,  both  on  his  skin  and  on  his
clothes,  after  exposure  to  light,  the  effect  being  like  that
produced  by  calcic  sulphide.  Precautions  were  taken  by  the
investigators  to  prevent  the  artificial  use  of  calcic  sulphide
by  the  medium  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  suggested  that  the
luminosity  might  be  a  natural  physiological  or  pathological
phenomenon.

The  phrase  in  the  script  "  The  luminous  paste  is  an
invention  of  his  own "  is  perhaps  intended  to  apply  to  this
phenomenon.  The  S.P.B.  meeting  was  a  private  one  and
consequently  no  press  reporters  were  present,  and  it  was
first  reported  in  the  Journal  for  December.  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  however,  had  addressed  two  public  meetings  on
psychical  research  during  November,  one  at  Oxford  on  Nov.
13th,  where  he  gave  a  general  discussion  of  its  bearing  on
science  and  religion,  and  one  at  Birmingham  on  Nov.  17th,
when  he  referred  especially  to  the  Greek  script  of  "  Mine.
X.,"  each  being  reported  in  the  papers  of  the  following  day.

At  my  third  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland,  on  Nov.  21st,
1905,  when  she  brought  me  the  script  of  Nov.  19th  and
20th,  I  questioned  her  in  detail  as  to  what  papers  she  had
been  seeing  and  whether  she  had  read  anything  about  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  addresses  in  them.  She  o-ave  me  full
particulars  in  answer  to  my  questions  and  assured  me  she
had  seen  nothing  in  any  papers  about  any  S.P.E.  topics
since  the  Spectator  review  of  Maxwell's  book.  She  told  me
she  was  greatly  interested  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  would
certainly  have  noticed  anything  she  had  seen  about  him.  Of
course  I  told  her  nothing  about  my  own  views  of  the  recent
physical  phenomena.

The  odd  attempt  to  get  the  name  of  Eusapia  Paladino  (who
is  mentioned  in the  Spectator  review) — "  Palladia — Euphronia


276


Alice  Johnson.


[part


— Eustonia — Pallonia  " — is  very  characteristic.  "  Palladia  "  is
probably  a  reminiscence  from  Hitman  Personality, — -that  being
the  name  of  a  young  Russian  girl,  whose  apparition  was  seen
repeatedly  after  her  death,  as  related  in  a  case  given  in  that
book  (Vol.  II,  p.  21).

I  told  Mrs  Holland  on  Nov.  21st  that  her  writing  of
Nov.  19th  and  20th  seemed  to  have  some  connection  with  a
conversation  1  had  had  on  Nov.  19th  with  a  friend  of
mine  (whose  name  I  did  not  mention)  who  was  shortly  to
take  part  in  experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino,  and  the
script  in  the  early  part  of  December  is  full  of  descriptions
of  imaginary  sittings  of  a  generic  type,  interpolated  with
warnings.

Mrs.  Holland  had  now  returned  to  her  father's  house
in  the  country,  from  which,  on  Dec.  15th,  she  sent  me
pieces  of  script,  dated  Dec.  1st  to  7th,  extracts  from  which
I  next  quote :

(Friday,  Dec.  1st. 11  p.m.)

[M.]  ....  I  am  anxious —  From  an  apparent  trifle  may  rise
the  ruin  of  all  we  have  been  working  for  so  long —

Materializing  flowers  we  know  all  that  of  course  but  it  seems
new  to  him  and  he  has  a  strange  gift  of  credulity

There  may  be  raps  genuine  enough  of  their  kind —  I  concede
the  raps —  Poltergeist  merely — but  the  luminous  appearances — the
sounds  of  a  semi-musical  nature — the  flower  falling  upon  the  table —
Trickery — trickery —  Of  course  there  can  be  no  searching —  She
would  proffer  excellent  reasons  against  that — but  other  precautions
can  be  taken — ■

[G.]  Of  course  they  can  and  must  be —  Her  feet  are  very
important —  Next  time  can't  Miss  J  sit  with  the  sapient  feet  both
touching  hers —  Let  her  fix  her  thoughts  on  the  feet  and  prevent
the  least  movement  of  them —

*****

The  "  sapient  feet "  is,  I  think,  intended  for  a  pun,  meaning
the  feet  of  Eusapia.

(Sunday,  Dec.  3rd. 10.45  p.m.)
[M.] .... Honest  hearty  ridicule  has  a  certain  vivifying  power
it  stirs  the  dry  bones  but  the  kind  of  ridicule  this  would  bring
would  be  the  killing  type.


lv..] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  277


Has  [sic]  we  endured  so  long — done  so  much  endured  so  much
hoped  so  much  only  to  come  to  an  end  in  the  course  of  the  year
now  coming — It  is  a  very  sad  thought  to  me —

*  *  *  #  *

[G-.J  There  is  some  perfectly  unexpected  danger.  G.  Red  lights —
Red  lights  of  danger.

(Tuesday,  Dec.  5th.  Midnight.)

[M.]  ....  She  is  no  fool  far  from  it  but  she  has  the  power  of
befooling — Wilson  knows  about  it —

Miss  J.  will  be  the  best  help  in  this  case —  E.  P.  willing  not  to
sit  near  her — but  that  can  be  easily  overborne

The  trance  condition  is  partially  genuine  the  manifestations  are
simply  fraudulent —

Ask  her  to  allow  you  to  secure  each  foot  in  a  slight  card-board
box — case  or  cover1 —  She  will  refuse  for  the  instep  does  most  of
the  phenomena  of  raps  and  movement —

The  next  one — the  one  who  will  appear  in  February  will  be  far
more  interesting —

(Thursday,  Dec.  7th. 11.30  p.m.)

[M.]  The  lights  are  turned  out  and  a  screen  is  drawn  before
the  fire —  E.  P.  does  not  care  for  the  environment  it  is  not  suffi-
ciently simpatica  for  her —  If  she  wore  soft  shoes  felt  shoes  there
would  be  fewer  imposing  raps  and  cracks —  The  toes  can  do  it
inside  the  boot —

Listen  to  the  trance  utterances  parts  of  them  are  quite  genuine — -
You  will  get  nothing  from  me  that  way  but  Jules  C  (?)  whom  R
knows  will  try  to  get  a  message  through —  We  cannot  go  all  the
way  with  him  but  on  the  other  hand  we  must  not  become  trifling
and  exacting  in  our  desire  for  proofs  and  evidence —  Remember
Blavatsky's  tea-cups  her  mode  of  giving  a  proof —

See  how  I  still  identify  myself  with  you  all  and  speak  as  if  I
still  belonged  to  the  Society  as  indeed  I  do —

It  is  grievous  about  A.W.'s  chill  and  poor  Oliver  will  be  laid  up
soon —  Very  little  of  a  throat  trouble  but  still  no  throat  trouble
should  ever  be  neglected  and  he  ought  to  abstain  from  speaking  so
much  in  the  winter  months — He  may  be  as  strong  as  a  lion  but

1  An  experiment  very  similar  to  this  had  been  tried  in  some  of  the  early
sittings  with  Eusapia  Paladino ;  see  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychique*,  Jan. -Feb.,
1S93,  p.  46.

S


278


Alice  Johnson.


[part


lions never give lectures during the  winter and the strain  is

tremendous —

*****

Pockets — inner  pockets  will  hold  a  surprising  amount —
Surely  lazy  tongs  have  been  superseded  by  something  a  little
more  modern.

[G.] Very  well  developed  hands  look  at  those  muscular  fingers.
Be  very  polite  but  shunt  her.

The  statement  dated  Dec.  7th  about  "Oliver"  (obviously
meaning  Sir  Oliver  Lodge),  was  unfortunately  verified.  On
Monday,  Dec.  11th,  he  was  to  have  read  a  paper  at  the
S.P.R.  On  Dec.  8th  he  wrote  to  me  about  his  engagements,
saying  "...  a  furious  cold  has  seized  me  and  I  am  good
for  nothing.  The  only  thing  to  do  is  to  get  out  of  every-
thing possible  and  to  go  straight  home.  I  earnestly  trust
I  shall  be  well  enough  to  come  up  again  on  Monday."  He
goes  on  to  ask  what  I  can  arrange  for  the  meeting  if  he
is  not  able  to  come.  He  was  not,  after  all,  able  to  come
and  his  paper  was  read  instead.  This  was  the  beginning  of
a  serious  attack  of  influenza,  as  the  result  of  which  he  was
ordered  abroad  for  the  winter.  In  a  letter  dated  Dec.  19th
he  told  me  that  it  was  on  the  evening  of  Dec.  7  th  that
his  cold  developed, — that  is,  the  date  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script.
As  he  had  to  give  up  several  engagements,  his  indisposition
was  mentioned  in  the  papers  by  the  11th.  It  was  therefore
unfortunate  that  the  script  was  not  sent  to  me  until  Dec.  loth.
In  the  letter  enclosing  it,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote :  "  I  am  sorry
not  to  have  sent  you  these  writings  sooner,  but  my  Mother
has  been  very  unwell  .  .  .  and  one  of  the  servants  ill  for
days,  so  I  have  been  domestically  busy."

In  replying,  I  told  her  of  the  coincidence  with  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  indisposition  and  asked  her  in  future  to  send  me
each  piece  of  writing,  if  possible,  immediately  after  it  was
produced.

She  replied  on  Dec.  19th:

...  I  verily  believe  there  is  a  personal  devil,  or  at  least  a
personal  imp,  who  takes  pains  to  prevent  things  being  evidence.

Take  this  last  example,  for  instance.  You  and  I  know  that
the  message  about  "Poor  Oliver"  was  written  on  Dec. 7th;  hut


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  279


since  I  was  busy  and  anxious  I  did  not  post  it  to  you.  I  have
seen  no  reference  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  indisposition ;  I  hope  it
was  quite  trifling.  .  .  .

The  "  Cancer  "  Incident.

Shortly  after  this  came  another  communication  on  the
subject  of  illness,  which  I  will  give  for  what  it  is  worth.

(Jan.  9th,  1906. 11.30  a.m.)
.  .  .  [M.] Have  none  of  my  many  messages  reached  his  knowledge
yet — Direct  communication  is  impossible  in  spite  of  the  faith  that
is  in  him

Remember  this  must  go  to  [Clapham]

It  is  not  what  you  think  Indeed  dear  lad  you  who  still  seem
to  me  to  keep  the  heart  of  the  dear  fifteen  year  old  boy  that
you  were  when  first  we  met — you  are  mistaken  in  what  you  fear.
Tako  courage  or  rather  take  less  courage  for  you  are  not  called
upon  to  endure  what  you  fear —  Believe  me  indeed  that  you  do.
not  come  under  the  sign  of  S5  1  Is  it  clear — •  Oh  is  it  clear —
Not  malignant  no —  Do  not  be  content  with  one  opinion  or  two —
Your  own  man  is  an  alarmist —  Go  to  the  man  at  St.  George's —
The  London  one — he  will  know —

Of  course  our  knowledge  is  not  infinite — we  others  who  have
changed  our  world — in  many  cases  the  future  is  utterly  veiled  for  us
but  sometimes  we  know  and  I  know  now —  This  last  month  your
gloom  your  heroically  veiled  anxiety  has  been  to  me  a  darkness
I  could  feel —

Sursam  [sic]  corda — How  can  I  make  it  clearer  to  you —

Your  name  I  must  with  old  [sic] — ■  F.

[G.] Send  this  off  at  once — it  has  to  go —  G.

It  was  obvious  to  me  that  this  script  referred  to  an  intimate
friend  of  Mr.  Myers's, — a  well-known  literary  man,  whom  I
will  call  "  Mr.  Grove," — though  the  rather  paternal  tone  adopted
was,  as  I  knew,  not  appropriate  to  their  relationship.  No
name  was  mentioned,  but  the  place  "  Clapham "  sufficiently
identified  him.  I  therefore  sent  a  copy  of  the  script  to  Mr.
Grove,  on  the  chance  of  its  havino-  some  relevance  for  him.

o

He  told  me  on  Jan.  21st,  1906,  that  Mr.  Myers  had  not
known  him  till  he  was  about  23  years  old;  and  that  he  was

1  This  is  the  Zodiacal  sign  for  the  constellation  of  Cancer.


280


Alice  Johnson.


[part


in  no  such  anxiety  as  the  script  suggested  about  his  own
health,  but  had  for  some  time  been  anxious  about  his  wife  in
that  particular  respect.

On  April  10th,  1906,  I  saw  Mr.  Grove  and  had  some  talk
with  him  about  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  He  told  me  in  regard
to  his  wife's  health,  that  cancer  had  been  feared,  but  the
doctors  were  now  satisfied  that  the  fear  was  unfounded.  On
May  15th,  1906,  an  operation  was  performed  and  the  doctors'
opinion  was  justified.

All  this  had  been  kept  extremely  private  and  was  known
to  very  few  persons.  I  knew  nothing  of  it  until  I  had
communicated  with  Mr.  Grove  about  the  script.

The  script,  however,  certainly  seems  to  refer  to  an  anxiety
of  Mr.  Grove's  on  his  own  behalf,  not  his  wife's,  though  most
of  it  would  be  also  appropriate  if  applied  to  his  anxiety  about
her.  But  this  of  course  detracts  from  its  evidential  value ;
so  much  so  that  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Grove,  who  are  certainly
not  prejudiced  against  the  belief  in  spiritistic  communications,
refused  to  attach  importance  to  it.

It  may,  however,  be  worth  mentioning  that  very  soon  after
my  talk  with  Mr.  Grove,  Mrs.  Holland  met  him  at  a  house
where  she  was  staying  from  April  12th  to  19th.  She  after-
wards told  me  (on  May  28th,  1906),  that  on  this  occasion
she  had  had  a  strong  impression,  which  she  did  not  mention
to  him,  that  he  was  in  some  special  anxiety  about  a  very
near  relative,  perhaps  his  wife  or  a  daughter.  I  never  told
her,  and  I  feel  sure  that  she  never  knew,  what  the  real
facts  had  been  until  she  saw  them  in  the  proofs  of  this
paper.

Mr.  Grove's  chief  anxiety,  as  he  tells  me,  had  been  during
January,  February,  and  March.  He  thinks  it  was  in  March
that  they  consulted  two  doctors,  who  told  them  that  the  case
was  not  malignant,  but  that  a  small  operation  would  be
necessary.  At  the  time  he  met  Mrs.  Holland,  therefore,
his  anxiety  was  no  longer  acute.  For  various  reasons  the
operation  was  not  performed  until  May  15th,  1906  ;  it  was
somewhat  more  severe  than  had  been  anticipated,  but  all  went
well.

After  learning  that  the  script  of  January  9th,  1906,  was
to  a  certain  extent  veridical,  I  was  reminded  of  an  earlier


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  281


passage  which  was  possibly  intended  to  refer  to  the  same  subject,
as  follows :

(June  14th,  1905)  .  .  .  [G.]  She  is  wakeful  and  weary — her  hair
hangs  loose — dark  hair  that  waves  a  little —  A  blue  dressing  gown
and  such  a  pale  tired  face—  No — no  not  what  she  fears — not
malignant. —  Diet  not  the  knife — a  vegetable  diet  almost  entirely —
stimulants  to  be  dropped  by  degrees —

*  *  *  *  *  *

Mr.  Grove  tells  me  in  relation  to  this  script  that  the  cause
of  their  anxiety  "  had  been  going  on  after  a  fashion  for  some
years."  They  were  by  no  means  convinced  that  the  case  was
malignant,  "  but  (he  writes)  naturally  anything  that  may
possibly  have  that  character  gives  some  anxiety."  The  general
description  was  not  inappropriate  to  Mrs.  Grove's  condition  at
that  time ;  she  had  for  some  years  been  overdone.  "  Diet,
largely  vegetable  and  without  stimulants,  was  recommended
and  practised  at  one  time, — quite  possibly  about  that  time."
Mrs.  Grove  had  a  dark  blue  dressing-gown.

Anniversaries  and  the  "  Scribe  "  Incident.

The  next  two  scripts  to  be  quoted  illustrate  again  the
persistence  of  recollection  of  the  anniversaries  of  Mr.  Myers's
death  (Jan.  17th,  1901),  and  birth  (Feb.  6th,  1843).  In
the  first  is  repeated  almost  verbatim  a  sentence  from  the
script  of  Dec.  1st,  1903:  "It  will  soon  be  three  years  now
and  yet  I  seem  no  further  from  earth,  though  perhaps  no
nearer,  than  I  was  that  January  day."

This  script  also  repeats  for  the  last  time  its  warnings  against
too  great  credulity.  I  take  the  words,  "  Silver  Wedding "  to
refer  to  the  S.P.R.,  but  if  so,  there  is  an  error  of  recollection
on  the  part  of  the  controls,  for  the  Society  was  founded
in  1882.

(Monday,  Jan.  1st,  1906. 11.45  p.m.)

*  *  *  *  #

[M,]  The  tremor  of  this  time  so  long  ago  all  comes  back  to
me —  Five  years  ago — five  years  of  years —  In  one  way  I  am
no  nearer — but  at  least  I  take  comfort  in  knowing  that  I  am  no
further  away — What  message  is  there  simple  enough  for  me  to


282


Alice  Johnson.


[part


hope  that  it  could  reach  you  all —  Courage — Patience — Faith —
Faith  but  not  Credulity —

When  wide  mindedness  leans  over  too  far  upon  the  other  side
it  becomes  the  greatest  danger  to  us  all —

What  a  dreary  way  that  would  be  to  keep  our  Silver  Wedding.

A  certain  amount  of  esclandre  is  inevitable  before  next  July  —
No  not  scandal — not  slander — how  shall  I  say — a  flare  up —  Keep
together  old  friends  I  pray  you  as  far  as  possible — but  of  course
you  must  not  be  forced  into  a  false  position —

[G.]  Trust  your  own  instinct —  Evidence  even  doesn't  matter
that  can  be  faked  but  the  instinct  that  is  in  you  will  tell  you  when
you  are  dealing  with  realities  and  when  with  shams —

[M.]  "Wisely  and  slow  they  stumble  that  run  fast"1 —  Infinite
Patience — remember  it  isn't  only  the  finite  life  you  have  to  practise
it  in —

Blessings  on  your  Year.

F.

On  Feb.  5th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  telling  me  various
details  about  what  she  was  doing  to  explain  why  she  had
not  sent  me  any  script  for  some  time,  and  added :

For  the  last  week  I  have  had  a  strong  impression  that  I  must
write  automatically  on  Feb.  6th — to-morrow.  This  impression  has
come  like  an  order,  chiefly  at  sleeping  and  waking,  and  is  vaguely
associated  in  my  mind  with  the  date  1837.  When  I  once  begin,
I  will  try  to  go  steadily  on  again.

I  enclose  a  cutting  from  a  stray  number  of  the  Tribune,  the  only
mention  I  have  seen  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  I  hope  it  is  true
about  the  message  having  come.

The  cutting  from  the  Tribune  sent  to  me  by  Mrs.  Holland
is  dated  Jan.  22nd,  1906,  and  headed  "Alleged  messages  from
Dr.  Hodgson."  It  gives  one  of  the  numerous  reports  which  were
current  in  America  shortly  after  Dr.  Hodgson's  death  as  to
an  alleged  "  message "  from  him  to  Professor  Hyslop  having
been  communicated  through  a  medium,  in  this  case  stated
to  be  "  a  Detroit  citizen."  The  paragraph  is  in  the  form  of
a  telegram  from  New  York,  dated  Jan.  21st,  and  states  that
Dr.  Hodgson  "  died  at  Boston  a  month  ago,"  no  details  of
the  death  being  given.  Not  long  after  this,  as  we  shall  see,
he  begins  to  appear  as  a  "  control "  in  the  script.

1  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  II.  Scene  3.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  283


The  date  1837  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Holland  in  connection
with  Feb.  6th  puzzled  me.  It  recurred  in  the  script  of
Feb.  6th,  1907,  and  I  afterwards  learnt  from  Mrs.  Holland
that  she  always  associated  Feb.  6th  with  Henry  Irving  and
thought  he  was  born  on  Feb.  6th,  1837.  (He  was  really
born  on  Feb.  6th,  1838.)  In  the  script  to  be  next  quoted,
however,  the  association  of  Jan.  17th  with  Feb.  6th  makes
it  clear  that  the  reference  is  to  Mr.  Myers.

(Thursday,  Feb.  6th,  1906. 11.10  p.m.)
[?]  My  mouth  is  bitter  with  the  taste  of  laudanum  —
A  dress  suit — who  could  associate  the  idea  of  rest  or  sleep  with
a  dress  coat — A  strange  grotesqueness —
It  was  very  cold — -

[M.]  I  purposely  let  Jan.  17  go  by  the  time  for  honouring  or
laying  stress  on  that  day  is  over  let  it  be  the  birthday  not  the
deathday  now —

A  great  loss  for  you  on  your  side — -but  a  gain  on  the  other.
He  may  prove  a  communicating  power  soon —  This  scribe  can  be
imposed  upon  by  a  trick  message  a  matter  of  mere  fancy  while  a
test  message  passes  unperceived — Has  not  Margaret  tried  1

*****

Ask  her  to  be  in  London  on  the  19th.  Margaret  I  mean —  This
month — Monday  19th.  They  ought  to  try  together — she  would
concentrate  the  wandering  thoughts  of  this  scribe —  Medium  is  not
the  best  word  in  tins  connection —

•*#***

With  regard  to  "  Has  not  Margaret  tried  ?"  and  the  suggestion
that  she  should  "  try  "  on  Feb.  19  th,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  mentioned
when  she  met  Mrs.  Holland  on  November  16th,  1905  (see  above,
p.  270),  that  she  had  just  been  to  a  doctor  who  had  ordered  her
to  rest  entirely  from  the  physical  act  of  writing  for  three
months.  The  time,  therefore,  was  now  nearly  up.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  after  a  break  of  nearly  three  months,  Mrs.  Verrall
resumed  automatic  writing  on  Feb.  9th,  1906,  when  a  series  of
cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.  Holland  was  started  (see  below,
p.  310).

On  Feb.  9th,  1906,  I  read  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Feb.  6th
to  Mr.  Piddington  and  he  at  once  remarked  on  the  peculiar


284


Alice  Johnson.


[part


use  of  the  word  "  Scribe "  as  equivalent  to  "  medium,"  which
I  had  not  particularly  noticed.  It  is  to  be  observed  also
that  the  word  is  repeated,  as  if  to  draw  our  attention  to  it.
Mr.  Piddington  told  me  that  when  he  was  staying  with  Mrs.
Verrall  in  January,  to  discuss  with  her  the  Report  on  her
script  which  she  was  then  preparing  for  publication,  he  had
suggested  to  her  the  use  of  the  word  "  scribe "  in  the  sense
of  the  writing  personality.  She  accepted  the  suggestion  and
the  word  was  used  in  her  Report  in  Proceedings  (published
in  October,  1906).  At  this  time  it  was  new  to  all  of  us;
the  suggestion  was  a  quite  original  one  of  Mr.  Piddington's
and  he  had  not  mentioned  it  to  me.  Apparently  the  only
people  who  could  have  had  it  in  mind  were  he  and  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Verrall.

Mr.  Piddington's  own  statement  is :

Feb.  10,  1906.

Yesterday  afternoon  Miss  Johnson  read  to  me  the  last  piece  of
script  received  from  Mrs.  [Holland].  In  it  the  word  "  scribe "  is
twice  used  to  mean  a  writer  of  automatic  script.  The  first  time
there  follows  immediately  a  reference  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  second
time  "scribe"  is  said  to  be  a  better  word  than  "medium"  to
describe  an  automatic  writer.

In  the  latter  part  of  January  I  was  staying  with  Mrs.  Verrall
at  Cambridge  for  the  purpose  of  reading  through  the  second  part
of  her  paper  on  her  own  phenomena.  I  suggested  that,  instead  of
using  the  phrase  "my  hand,"  and  other  phrases  of  the  kind  used
by  Mrs.  Verrall  to  differentiate  her  automatic  from  her  voluntary
self,  the  expression  "The  Scribe"  should  be  used  to  describe  "Mrs.
Verrall  II."  She  accepted  my  suggestion,  which  was  likewise  approved
by  Dr.  Verrall,  with  whom  we  discussed  it.  I  had  not  at  the  time,
nor  have  I  since,  ever  seen  the  word  Scribe  used  in  such  a  sense.

I  record  my  recollections  of  this  incident  before  having  heard
whether  Mrs.  Verrall  remembers  it ;  although  I  have  not  the  least
doubt  but  that  she  will  perfectly  recollect  it,  and  I  think  Dr.  Verrall
will  also.  .  .  .

J.  G.  Piddington.

I  had  already  sent  Mrs.  Verrall  a  copy  of  the  script  and
she  had  returned  it  to  me  with  comments  on  several  points,
but  not  on  the  word  "  Scribe." I  wrote  again  to  ask  if  she


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  285


could  confirm  Mr.  Piddington's  recollection  of  his  talk  with
her  on  this  word,  and  she  replied  :

Feb.  14,  1906.

Mr.  Piddington  stayed  here  Jan.  11th  to  Jan.  15th,  and  it  was
probably  Jan.  12th  or  13th  that  he  suggested  the  use  of  the  word
scribe  to  represent  "the  producer  of  the  script"  as  distinguished  on
the  one  hand  from  my  normal  self,  on  the  other  from  supposed
communicators.  The  word  scribe  is  thus,  you  will  see,  not  precisely
equivalent  to  medium  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  it  is  appropriate
as  used  by  [Mrs.  Holland].

I  read  that  sentence  of  hers  through  several  times,  as  I  was  sure
that  something  of  value  was  contained  in  it,  but  I  could  not  see
what  to  make  of  it.  The  form  of  the  sentence,  "this  scribe  can
be  imposed  upon  by  a  trick  message,"  suggested  that  an  actual
message,  not  trick,  was  in  process  of  statement,  but  I  could  not
see  the  message.  All  is  explained  by  the  use  of  the  word  scribe,
which  makes  an  excellent  test  word.  .  .  .

My  husband  corroborates  the  above  statements  as  to  the  use  of
the  word  scribe,  and  the  date  of  Mr.  Piddington's  visit  is  fixed  by  my
diary.  I  have  not  mentioned  the  suggested  use  of  scribe  in  this
sense  to  any  one,  till  yesterday,  dictating  to  my  secretary,  I  came
across  a  place  in  my  paper  where  its  use  was  possible ;  but  I  rejected
the  idea  in  that  case.

Margaret  de  G.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Verrall's  remark  that  she  was  unable  to  recognise  the
significance  of  the  sentence  about  the  "  Scribe,"  although  sure
that  there  was  something  in  it,  is  interesting  as  another  instance
of  the  automatist's  want  of  recognition  of  points,  though  in  this
case  the  want  of  recognition  extends  to  the  performance  of
another  automatist.

It  must  be  added  that  Mr.  Piddington  some  time  later  came
across  an  obscure  and  anonymous  American  book,  entitled
Letters  from  a  Spirit  (published  by  the  Abbey  Press,  New
York,  May,  1903),  a  transcript  from  automatic  writing,  in  the
preface  to  which  the  automatist  speaks  of  himself  as  "  The
Scribe."  Ic  seems  very  unlikely  that  Mrs.  Holland  should
ever  have  seen  this  book ;  but  even  if  she  had,  there  remains
the  coincidence  that  the  word  "  scribe "  is  twice  used  as
equivalent  to  automatist  in  her  script  very  shortly  after  Mr.
Piddington  had  suggested  it  to  Mrs.  Verrall.


286


Alice  Johnson.


[PAKT


Subliminal  Reminiscences.

Two  incidents  occurring  at  about  this  period  illustrate  in  a
striking  manner  the  possibility  of  recrudescence  of  memories
that  have  completely  lapsed  from  the  normal  consciousness,
and  show  at  the  same  time  the  practical  difficulty  of  proving
a  person's  ignorance  of  almost  any  event  in  the  past,  and  the
consequent  necessity  for  caution  in  attributing  knowledge  of
any  such  event  to  a  supernormal  cause.

In  the  first  case,  Mrs.  Holland  had  heard  of  the  incident
only  a  few  months  before  it  was  represented  to  her  through  a
hallucination ;  but  she  had  paid  so  little  attention  to  the
recital  that  apparently  she  forgot  it  immediately  afterwards.
In  the  second  case  she  had  been  deeply  interested  at  the  time
in  what  she  heard ;  but  the  event  had  entirely  faded  from
her  memory  before  she  reproduced  it — twenty  years  later — in
her  script.

(1)  An,  Apparition.

In  a  letter  dated  December  19th,  1905,  Mrs.  Holland
describes  an  apparition  recently  seen  by  her  as  follows :

On  Wednesday  evening  [Dec.  13th],  at  9.30  (my  father  was  out
and  I  had  just  put  my  mother  to  bed),  when  I  came  briskly  into
a  small  and  very  brightly  lighted  room,  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  very
tall,  thin  man,  dressed  in  grey,  standing  with  his  back  to  the  fire.
He  had  a  long  face,  I  think  a  moustache — certainly  no  beard — and
suggested  young  middle  age  ;  but  at  my  second  step  forward  he
was  gone.  I  had  been  thinking  only  of  a  business  letter  I  was
about  to  answer,  and  cannot  explain  the  tall  grey  figure  at  all.  I
have  seen  nothing  of  the  kind  since  1901.  I  have  gone  into  that
little  white  sitting-room  many  times  since,  at  all  kinds  of  hours,
often  hoping  to  see  the  grey  figure  again,  but  I  have  not  been
fortunate.

The  description  suggested  Mr.  Gurney  to  me,  but  I  made
no  comment  on  it  to  Mrs.  Holland.  On  March  11th,  1906,
she  wrote :

Do  you  remember  the  tall  man  in  grey  I  saw  here  one  evening
in  the  winter?  The  other  morning  I  went  into  a  small  room  next
my  own,  thinking  only  of  putting  away  an  evening  dress.  The  tall
figure  in  grey  was  lying  on  the  bed  in  a  very  Aung-down,  slack-
jointed  attitude. The  face  was  turned  from me,  the  right  arm


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  287


hanging  back  across  the  body,  which  lay  on  the  left  side.  I  started
violently,  and  my  foot  seemed  to  strike  a  small  empty  bottle  on
the  floor.

The  figure  was  gone  in  an  instant,  as  before,  and  though  I  looked
carefully  I  could  find  nothing  on  the  floor  to  even  suggest  the
bottle  I  had  kicked.

I  know  this  house  has  no  story  even  remotely  connected  with  a
suicide  or  an  over-dose  of  any  drug,  so  I  don't  understand  it  at  all.

1  had  not  been  stooping  or  tiring  my  eyes  in  any  way.

On  March  29th,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  that  the  date
when  she  saw  the  second  apparition  was  either  Feburary  27th
or  28th.

Mr.  Gurney  died  from  an  accidental  over-dose  of  chloro-
form, probably  taken  for  neuralgia  or  insomnia,  on  June
22nd,  1888.  I  was  at  first  much  puzzled  to  account  for  the
details  of  the  second  apparition,  since  the  manner  of  his
death  is  not,  of  course,  mentioned  either  in  Human  Personality
or  in  the  obituary  notice  of  him  in  Mr.  Myers's  Fragments
of  Prose  and  Poetry.  Later,  however,  I  found  from  my  notes
of  my  first  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland  on  October  6th,
1905,  that  I  had  myself  told  her  the  main  facts. On  May

2  8th,  1906,  I  saw  her  again  and  reminded  her  of  this.  She
said  she  had  entirely  forgotten  it  (as  I  had)  and  was  doubtful
if  she  could  remember  it  even  when  reminded  of  it ;  and  that
she  took  very  little  interest  in  Mr.  Gurney,  being  mainly
interested  in  Mr.  Myers.

(2)  "Annette."

The  following  is  another  instance  of  the  re- emergence  of
a  forgotten  piece  of  knowledge,  the  source  of  which  might
easily  have  escaped  detection.  In  this  case  I  substitute
fictitious  initials  or  names  for  the  real  names  of  the  persons
concerned.  I  referred  above  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  identification  of
two  Christian  names,  "Annette"  and  "George,"  that  had  recurred
several  times  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (unrecognised  by  herself),
as  those  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "  N."  Mrs.  1ST.  was  married  in  1885,
and  died  in  1S86,  when  her  child,  a  boy,  was  born;  the  child
died  soon  after.

In  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  January,  1904,  and  February
to  August,  1905,  are  eleven  references  to  "Annette,"  speaking


288


Alice  Johnson.


[part


of  "George,"  her  house,  and  the  date  (of  her  death),  1886,
her  child  (always,  however,  referred  to .  in  the  script  as  a
girl),  her  sisters,  etc.

On  March  19th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me:

While  I  was  "scribing"  the  other  day,  I  jotted  down  a  message
on  a  separate  piece  of  paper  and  presently  sent  it  to  the  lady  for
whom  I  thought  it  came.  She  finds  it  significant  and  now  I  want
her  to  see  the  various  messages  in  the  script  I  sent  from  India
purporting  to  come  from  [Annette]  ....  The  message  that  came
the  other  day  was  not  signed  but  [Mrs.  0.]  has  .  .  .  definite
reasons  for  connecting  it  with  a  friend  called  [Annette]  ....

I  sent  Mrs.  0.  a  copy  of  extracts  from  the  script  about
Annette  and  in  reply  she  gave  me  the  following  information
in  a  letter  dated  April  2nd,  1906.

The  script  that  Mrs.  Holland  sent  her  was  :

Tell  Mary  to  rest  and  let  pain  and  anxieties  flow  over  her  and

pass  away. She  must  not  brace  her  nerves  to  resist — but  relax

and  float —  Tell  her  this  comes  from  the  friend  who  loved  cradles
and  cradled  things  twenty  years  ago.

Mrs.  0.  told  me  that  she  had  known  Mrs.  N".  intimately,,
especially  during  her  brief  married  life,  and  added  :

She  used  to  talk  of  the  comfort  and  joy  of  birds  in  their  nests
and  of  protected  snug  children  and  all  cradled  things,  and  in  her
will  she  left  me  the  Chippendale  cradle  that  she  bought  for  her
baby  son.  About  nine  years  ago  a  message  came  to  me  (from  what
source  I  do  not  now  recollect)  which  said:  "Tell  her  that  she  has
the  cradle  and  I  have  the  child."  This  message  came  to  me  a  few
months  after  I  had  lost  my  own  boy,  aged  3£  years,  of  scarlet
fever — in  the  winter  of  1892-3.  It  might  refer  to  my  child  or  more
probably  to  her  own  son.

[Mrs.  0.  went  on  to  quote  from  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Holland's  to  her,
written  after  she  had  been  told  of  the  significance  of  the  cradle
message  :]

"I  am  deeply  interested  in  what  you  tell  me,  not  only  because  it
explains  that  particular  'message,'  but  because  I  think  it  may  be  a
clue  to  others  that  came  long  ago. The  first  time  I  ever  stayed  at.

  [Mrs.  O.'s  father's  house]  was  in  the  autumn  of  1895,  and  I

well  remember  that  I  could  not  get  to  sleep  one  night  and  my


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  V.  289


hand  scrawled  again  and  again  '  [Annette] — let  [Annette]  speak  to
Mary'  ..."

[Mrs.  0.  adds :]  Mrs.  [Holland]  has  never  been  in  my  house  in
London,  nor  have  I  ever  spoken  to  her  myself  about  [Annette]
and  .  .  .  she  was  in  India  during  the  time  of  [Annette's]  engagement

and  brief  married  life  and  death I  have  always  known  [Mrs.

Holland]  very  slightly,  as  her  cousins,  the were  intimate

friends  of  our  youth,  but  I  have  not  really  had  opportunity  for
conversation  until  we  met  in  my  sister's  house  a  few  weeks  ago.

As  to  the  dates  referred  to,  Mrs.  Holland  states  that  she
was  in  India  without  coming  home  from  1883  to  1890.  The
messages  from  "Annette"  to  "Mary"  came  in  1895,  "when
(she  writes)  I  always  destroyed  the  script."  She  had  already
told  Mrs.  0.  that  she  remembered  "  in  long  ago  letters  from
my  cousin  [mentioned  by  Mrs.  0.  above]  adoring  references
to  [Annette  N.] "  and  I  now  asked  her  to  try  to  find  out
whether  this  cousin  could  have  told  her  the  details  about
the  cradle. On  April  11th,  1906,  she  wrote  to  me:

...  I  had  hoped  the  "  cradle  message  "  was  a  fact  unknown  to
me,  but  it  proves  to  be  only  the  subliminal  memory.  I  have
found  some  of  my  cousin's  letters  to  me  in  our  girl  days,  which  I
thought  I  had  left  in  India;  those  written  in  1886  are  rather  in
fragments.  I  must  have  lost  or  destroyed  some  pages,  but  an
undated  sheet  tells  of  the  sad  circumstances  of  Mrs.  [N.'s]  death,  a
later  letter  tells  of  her  having  left  a  will,  and  a  third  gives  some
extracts  from  it  and  goes  on  to  say :  "  She  left  her  baby's  cradle
to  Mary  [0.],  for  many  reasons,  the  last  of  which  was  '  because  I
love  all  cradles  and  cradled  things' "  Strange  that  the  very  words
should  float  up  in  my  mind  and  yet  the  context  be  forgotten.  I
can  trace  back  now  what  called  them  to  the  surface.  When  I  was
last  in  London  I  lunched  with  my  cousin,  and  admired  a  turcpioise
pin  on  her  toilet  table.  "It  belonged  to  [Annette  N.] ;  she  left  it  to
mother,  and  mother  lent  it  to  me  lately."

So  the  connection  is  clear,  and  its  coincidence  with  the  other
cradle  message  [i.e.  the  other  one  mentioned  by  Mrs.  0.]  is  only  a
pretty  chance.  I  am  certain  I  never  heard  of  that  other  message
until  afterwards.  .  .  .


290


Alice  Johnson.


[part


CHAPTER  VI.

Sixth  Period — February  21st  to  April  11th,  1906.
Second  Series  of  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall.

My  next  (fourth)  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland  was  not,  as
suggested  by  the  script  of  Feb.  6th,  on  Monday,  Feb.  19th,
but  on  Wednesday,  Feb.  21st,  1906.  Mrs.  Verrall  was  also
present  and  later  Mr.  Piddington  came  in.  We  told  Mrs.
Holland  of  the  "  Scribe  incident "  just  related ;  it  was  also
mentioned  that  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  still  abroad — near  Spezia
— recruiting  after  his  illness  in  December ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall
talked  a  little  about  the  report  on  her  script  which  she  was
then  writing.

On  this  occasion  both  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall  tried
to  write  automatically,  sitting  in  the  same  room  at  a  little
distance  from  one  another.  There  was  no  coincidence  between
the  two  writings.

Afterwards  Mrs.  Holland  tried  crystal-gazing ;  but  most  of
her  visions  were  obviously  suggested  by  the  circumstances
of  the  moment,  viz. :

(1)  a  scene  in  the  Lake  Country,  after  talking  of  Keswick  ;

(2)  two  faces,  a  man  with  dark  eyes  and  grey  beard  and

a  shorter  man  looking  over  his  shoulder,  with  florid
complexion  and  heavy  eye-brows  ;

(3)  a  street  in  some  large  Italian  town  (probably  Rome).
With  Mr.  Piddington  holding  the  crystal :

(4)  details  in  a  suburban  scene. (Mr.  Piddington  was  then,

as  she  knew,  staying  at  Surbiton.)

(5)  An  old-fashioned  round  table,  with  claw  legs;  two  or

three  books,  one  open,  and  old-fashioned  maps  on  it.

"  Nothing remains but a big map, the States  of

America — not  clear — a  dull  map."
This  last  vision  was  the  only  apparently  veridical  one  of
the  series. Mr.  Piddington  told  me  later  in  the  day  that  he
had  just  before  been  studying  a  map  of  the  United  States,
in  view  of  his  going  to  Boston  in  April  to  settle  the  affairs


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI  291


of  the  American  Branch.  Mrs.  Verrall  and  I  knew  of  his
intended  journey ;  but  Mrs.  Holland  did  not.

As  to  the  two  faces  (No.  2)  no  remark  was  made  to  Mrs.
Holland,  but  I  supposed  at  the  time  that  the  first  was  Mr.
Myers,  with  whose  portrait  she  was  now  familiar,  and  the
second  Dr.  Hodgson,  of  whose  personal  appearance  I  believe
she  knew  nothing,  but  who  is  described  similarly,  though  more
in  detail,  in  her  script  of  Feb.  28th,  1906,  quoted  below.

During  this  visit  to  London,  Mrs.  Holland  also  met  Mr.
Feilding,  whose  name  shortly  afterwards  begins  to  appear  in
her  script.

She  returned  on  February  26th,  1906,  to  her  father's  house
in  the  country,  and  on  February  28th  the  second  series  of  her
experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall  began  ; — both  writers  as  before
sending  their  scripts  to  me,  without  any  communication  with
each  other.

It  will  be  seen  that  this  series  begins  with  a  greatly
increased  knowledge  on  Mrs.  Holland's  part  of  the  personnel
of  the  S.P.E. On  the  first  day  she  wrote  as  follows :

(Wed.,  Feb.  28th,  1906. 2  p.m.)

You  should  have  written  yesterday  because  of  25  years  ago.
1881—1

The  Shameful  Hill.

Mists  and  anguish  and  the  one  crashing  stroke  that  ended  it  all — C.
In  the  lost  battle  borne  down  by  the  flying
Where  mingles  war's  rattle  with  groans  of  the  dying.2

A  clear  hill  against  the  sky — and  blood  shed  in  vain.
[M.J (1)  What  a  beautiful  purple  crocus — But  the  sparrows
play  such  havoc — the  destructive  saffron  lovers — Is  nothing  but
purple  and  gold  good  enough  for  them.

The  trees  should  have  been  pruned  before — especially  the  pear
tree — and  when  were  the  creepers  attended  to  last —

Oh  fateful  flower  besides  [.sic]  the  rill
The  daffodil— the  daffodil 3

[G.]  (a)  When  Everard  goes  abroad  there  is  a  danger  to  be
guarded  against He  has  the  confidence  of  youth  but  black  magic

'February  27th,  1881,  was  the  date  of  the  battle  of  Majuba  Hill.

2  Scott,  Where  shall  the  lover  rest —  3  Jean  Ingelow,  Persephone.


292


Alice  Johnson.


[part


is  a  reality  which  though  perhaps  not  acting  adversely  upon  him
himself  would  exert  upon  many  of  you  a  malign  influence —
The  Malay  mischief  I  fear  particularly — G-.

[M.]  The  wind  is  bitter  but  the  sap  stirs  for  all  that — and  the
little  streams  are  over  brimming —  How  these  willows  shake  in  the
winds —

(2)  I  am  sorry  about  A's  sister — but  that  special  trouble  will  so
soon  be  over —

(b)  With  0.  it  is  likely  to  be  longer — he  must  not  come  home
too  soon —  May  will  be  a  very  treacherous  month  this  year  and
it  would  be  madness  for  him  to  attempt  speaking  too  soon —  Let
him  write  what  he  will — the  more  the  better — but  the  throat  should
rest.

(c)  There  is  no  reason  why  you  should  hesitate  about  publishing —
Miss  J.  is  very  rightly  cautious  but  in  this  case  her  wish  or  opinion
carries  very  great  weight  and  what  she  thought  best  the  scribe
would  be  certain  to  agree  to —  Pseudonyms  for  names  if  that  is
preferred —

[G.]  (3)  A.  W.  is  mistaken  about  the  Rhine  wine — it  is  over
acid.  G.

[M.]  (d)  I  think  the  whole  account  should  be  given  from  the
beginning — as  briefly  as  possible — but  nothing  should  be  omitted.
June  21st  1873.

[G.  ?] Too  many  interruptions  try  to  keep  the  thread.

[M.]  (e)  The  full  strength  of  the  chain  is  only  realized  when  all
the  little  links  are  displayed.  The  very  smallest  instances  have  been
the  most  significant —

[Change  in  writing.']  (/)  Dickon  of  Norfolk — is  that  far  enough
awa}'  from  the  real  name  ? I'll  describe

A  short  man— but  held  himself  well — broad  shoulders — thick  grey
white  hair — thick  grey  brows — very  straight — a  florid  face — reddish
brown — (though  it  was  pale  enough  at  the  end).  Strong  chin —
mobile  mouth.

(I  was  called  away  for  a  few  minutes — but  the  impulse  to  go  on
writing  continues.)

The  young  wife  died  so  long  ago — that  perhaps  some  people  forgot
her.  [Here  follows  a  name,  commented  on  in  the  section  on  the
Hodgson  control,  see  p.  309.]


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  293


(4)  Henry  was  not  mistaken.

[Here  follows  a  rough  drawing,  apparently  representing  the
outlines  of  hills.]

[M.]  (g)  The  hills  slope  down  to  the  lake — the  church  shows
clearly  among  the  leafless  trees.

(5)  No  not  in  the  Electra. M.  will  know  better.
Under  a  dusty  pile  of  forgotten  visiting  cards.

(h)  It  was  first  started  when  we  were  all  sitting  under  the  cedars
at  Broadlands.  While  the  sunset  flared  crimson  on  that  noble
window.

Only  skirting  the  subject  but  does  not  get  at  the  heart  of  the
matter.

A  superficial  sensitive  but  yet  there  is  an  improvement —  Doesn't
P.  see  that — even  if  Miss  J.  is  doubtful — the  faith  of  honest  doubt

This  script  requires  somewhat  lengthy  comments :

(a)  "  Everard "  is  Mr.  Feilding,  whom  Mrs.  Holland  had
met  at  a  dinner-party  in  London  shortly  before.  He  went
to  the  Malay  Peninsula  in  September  of  this  year.  He  had
not  mentioned  his  intended  journey  to  Mrs.  Holland  and  she
believes  that  no  one  else  had  spoken  of  it  in  her  hearing ;
but  this  is  not  absolutely  certain.  She  remembered  that  she
had  heard  the  name  "  Everard "  in  connection  with  him,  but
thought  it  was  one  of  his  brothers.

(b)  refers  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  whose  illness  we  had  talked
of  on  Feb.  21st.

(c)  ,  (d)  and  probably  (e)  refer  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  report  on
her  script,  then  being  prepared  by  her,  and  mentioned  to
Mrs.  Holland  on  Feb.  21st.

( f)  "  Dickon  of  Norfolk "  is  obviously  intended  as  a  sort
of  pun  on  the  name  Eichard  Hodgson.  For  further  comments
on  this,  see  the  section  on  the  Hodgson  control,  p.  305.

(g)  Keswick,  somewhat  as  seen  by  Mrs.  Holland  in  one  of
her  crystal  visions  on  Feb.  21st.

(h)  Another  reference  to  Lady  Mount-Temple's  house,  where
Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.  Gurney  first  met  Mr.  Stainton  Moses.

So  far  the  script  seems  mainly  depeudent  on  reminiscences.
For  the  evidential  points  I  cpuote  notes  made  by  Mrs.  Verrall
on  the  copy  of  some  extracts  from  it  which  I  sent  to  her,  the

T


294


Alice  Johnson.


[part


numbers  in  round  brackets  corresponding  to  similar  reference-
marks  in  the  script,  as  follows :

March  6th,  1906.

(1)  On  Feb.  22nd  I  drew  H.'s  attention  to  a  new  purple
(Bulbocodium)  crocus  just  out.  Feb.  26th  or  24th  jackdaws  began
to  pull  up  by  the  roots  crocuses  purple  and  yellow.  This  has  been  a
great  trouble  ever  since.  No  special  trouble  from  sparrows.  Hedge
of  fir-trees  pruned  on  Feb.  26th  or  28th ;  creepers  on  house  cut  back
between  Feb.  22nd  and  28th, — later  than  usual,  since  my  gardener
was  ill.  This  question  was  troubling  me  for  about  a  week  before  I
went  to  town  on  Feb.  21st.  He  came  back  to  work  on  Feb.  21st,
as  I  found  on  my  return.  Pear-trees  are  the  only  fruit-tree  we
have,  but  the  pruning  has  long  been  done.

(2)  "A's  sister"  [i.e.  Dr.  Verrall's  sister,  Miss  Verrall]  has  had  no
trouble.  On  Feb.  27th  or  28th  he  had  a  letter  asking  him  to  write
to  her  on  business,  which  he  did  on  Feb.  28th  or  March  1st.

(3)  No  Rhine  wine.

(4)  "Henry  was  not  mistaken"  and  (5)  "No,  not  in  the
Electra "  belong  to  the  double  cross-correspondence  discussed
below,  see  p.  310,  under  which  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  this  day,
Feb.  28th,  will  also  be  discussed.

I  give  next  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  7th.

(Wed.,  March  7th,  1906. 11  a.m.)

[M.] The  white  winged  bird  is  struggling  to  the  shore —

(a)  Not  May — May  would  be  much  too  late  for  those  latitudes.
Tell  him  to  go  the  second  week  in  April —

A  white  beach  with  purple  waves  breaking  on  it —  A  group  of
palm  trees — rising  above  a  low  flat  house —

The  trading  station  is  away  to  the  left —  A  burial  ground — with
three  named  graves  and  one  nameless  one  lies  beyond —

Mariposa —

[G.]  The  mixed  blood  gives  a  fatal  fluency  of  speech — but
remember  the  sense  of  truth  is  non-existent  in  this  particular  case —
Look  at  the  nails  they  will  tell  the  truth  even  if  face  and  accent
conceal  it —

[M.] (b)  Couldn't  1  undertake  the  book  1 Not  the  scribe

but  ... It  will  need  exactly  the  treatment  she  can  best  give  it —

1  The  name  omitted  here  is  Mrs.  Holland's  Christian  name  and  the  initial
of  her  surname.  The  next  passage  omitted  states  that  it  is  not  Mrs.  Holland
who  is  meant,  but  some  one  else,  whom  I  have  been  unable  to  identify.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  295


[G-.] P.  hasn't  got  it  quite  the  right  way  up —

[M.]  Miss  J.'s  way  of  looking  at  it  is  better  but  too  analytical —
It's  a  pity  opinions  can't  be  fused  a  little —

[G.  or  E.  H.  1]  (1)  What  are  the  printers  thinking  of?  Those
accents  are  scattered  as  if  from  a  pepper  pot —  A.  W.  should  slay
them  by  return  of  post —

[M.]  (2)  Not  enough  bulbs — and  it's  a  pity  the  quince  tree  has
suffered  so.

(3)  Ave  Roma  immortalis.  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer
without  giving  her  the  clue  1

How  cold  it  was  that  winter —  Even  snow  in  Rome — we  might
have  stayed  at  home  for  that —

(4)  The  sunshine  has  brought  out  the  bees  before  the  tulips  are
ready  for  them —

(5)  Poor  premature  butterfly —

(6)  I  can't  admire  your  inkstand.

More  open  air  for  both  of  you — especially  A.  W.

The  sunlight  brings  out  the  dust  with  startling  brilliance —

[In  the  following  passage  the  writing  gradually  changes.]

(7)  Brittleworth — Brickeldale — Britleton —  No — not  him  and  not
James — Brit — Brittle  Brick  Brickleton —  Hugo — H.  M. — Minster
Berg.  Hugo.

[R.  H.] Was  he  not  aware  ?  R.
Why  are  they  so  brutally  dense.  H.
I  always  had  a  quick  temper.

(Script  ceased  at  11.10 — leaving  me  feeling  annoyed.)

Much  of  this  script  again  is  either  non-evidential  or  refers
to  subjects  within  Mrs.  Holland's  normal  knowledge.

(a)  From  "  Not  May  .  .  .  accent  conceal  it "  is,  I  think,
a  fancy  picture  of  Mr.  Feikling's  intended  journey  to  the
East,  referred  to  in  the  script  of  Feb.  28th.  "Mariposa"
was  the  name  of  the  ship  in  which  R,  L.  Stevenson  and  his
wife  sailed  from  Samoa  to  Sydney  in  1893  (see  Vailima  Letters,
p.  247).  Probably  it  crops  up  here  by  association  of  ideas
with  eastern  travelling.

(b)  "  Couldn't  undertake  the  book  .  .  .  fused

a  little "  probably  refers  again  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  report  on
her  script.


296


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  sent  Mrs.  Verrall  extracts  from  the  passages  following
this,  on  which  she  sent  me  the  following  notes :

March  Wth,  1906.

(1)  This  sentence  suggests  a  reminiscence  of  the  excessive  trouble
which  the  accents  gave  me  in  the  X.  script  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall's
article  on  the  Greek  script  of  "Madame  X."  published  in  the  Pro-
ceedings, Part  LI.,  Dec.  1905,  of  which  I  believe  Mrs.  Holland  knew
nothing].

(2)  and  (4)  On  Wednesday,  March  7th,  I  went  to  the  Botanical
Gardens  to  see  the  bulbs,  because  on  Wednesday  morning  my  own
garden  was  full  of  bees  (the  first  noticed  this  year)  and  I  knew
that  bees  meant  open  bulbs.  But  they  had  dug  up  the  bulb  beds
and  are  apparently  altering  the  arrangement.  The  quince-tree  is
unidentified.

(3)  These  words  are  perfectly  intelligible  and  very  interesting.
[They  constitute  another  cross-correspondence,  to  which  a  separate
section  is  devoted  below,  p.  297.]

(5)  I  saw  the  first  butterfly  (peacock)  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday.

(6)  All  this  week  I  have  been  writing  with  the  white  china
container  taken  out  of  my  ink  stand — a  horrid  object,  not  at  all  to
be  admired.

As  to  (7),  in  a  letter  written  on  the  following  day,  Mrs.
Holland  says  :

Towards  the  end  of  the  script  yesterday  I  was  very  much  worried
by  feeling  after  a  name  or  names  that  eluded  me.  Some  foreign
name  beginning  with  H.  I  was  certain  of,  though  "  Hugo "  did  not
content  me.  "Berg"  I  was  satisfied  with,  only  I  wanted  something
before  it ;  and  the  impression  of  groping  after  some  fact  I  could
not  get  was  so  strong  that  I  rather  wonder  if  the  enclosed  paragraph,
copied  from  to-day's  paper,  has  anything  to  do  with  my  puzzle
yesterday.  .  .  .

The  paragraph  was  from  The  Daily  Express  of  March  8th,
1906,  and  runs  as  follows:

Berlin — Wednesday,  March  7th.  Dr.  Hermann  Lorberg,  the
eminent  Professor  of  Physics  at  the  University  of  Bonn,  met  with
a  fatal  mountaineering  accident  to-day.  He  was  exploring  Mount
Venus,  near  Bonn,  when  he  fell  from  a  great  height  and  was  instantly
killed.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  297


It  seems  to  me  clear  that  the  coincidence  between  this
event  and  the  script  is  purely  accidental,  partly  because  it
is  so  far  from  exact,  and  partly  because  there  are  no  accessory
circumstances  suggesting  any  connection  with  Dr.  Hermann
Lorberg.  As  an  instance  of  chance  coincidence  it  may,  I
think,  be  profitably  compared  with  the  coincidences  which
seem  to  be  produced  by  telepathy.

The  "  H.  M.  Minster  Berg  Hugo  "  of  the  script  is,  I  do  not
doubt,  Dr.  Hugo  Miinsterberg  of  Harvard  University.  Com-
ments on  this  passage  will  be  found  in  the  section  on  the
Hodgson  control  below,  p.  306.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  7th,  1906,  is  treated  of
under  the  cross-correspondence  "Eoden  Noel" — below,  see  p.  316.

Cross-Correspondence — March  7th,  1906.

"  Ave  Roma  Immortalis."

To  explain  this,  it  is  necessary  again  to  quote  several
passages  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  as  follows.  I  am  again
indebted  to  her  for  translations  of  and  comments  on  the
Latin  passages.

(March  2nd,  1906.)

(In  Latin :  Not  with  such  help  will  you  find  what  you  want ;
not  with  such  help,  nor  with  those  defenders  of  yours.) 1

Keep  the  two  distinct — you  do  not  hear  write  regularly— give
up  other  things.

(In  Latin :  First  among  his  peers,  himself  not  unmindful  of  his
name ;  with  him  a  brother  related  in  feeling,  though  not  in  blood.
Both  these  will  send  a  word  to  you  through  another  woman.  After
some  days  you  will  easily  understand  what  I  say ;  till  then  farewell.)  2

(March  4th,  1906.)
Pagan and Pope. The Stoic persecutor and the  Christian.
Gregory  not  Basil's  friend  ought  to  be  a  clue  but  you  have  it  not
quite  right.

1  Non  tali  auxilio  invenies  quod  velis  non  tali  auxilio  nec  defensoribus  istis.
This  refers  to  a  well-known  line  in  the  JEntid  {Mntid,  II.  521). The  words

are  used  by  Heuuba  when  she  sees  the  old  Priam  putting  on  armour  in  the
vain  hope  of  defending  Troy  against  the  victorious  and  invading  Greeks.

2  Primus  inter  pares  ipse  non  nominis  immemor.  Cum  eo  f rater  etsi  non
sanguine  animo  consanguineus  ii  ambo  tibi  per  aliam  vocem  mittent — post
aliquot  dies  bene  quod  dieam  comprehendere  potes — usque  ad  illud  vale.


298


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer  all  enemies  as  you  think.
(In  Latin :  The  cross  has  a  meaning. The  Cross-bearer  who  one
day  is  borne.)1

The  standard-bearer  is  the  link.

(March  5th,  1906.)

(In  Latin :  The  club-bearer  [or  key-bearer]  with  the  lion's  skin
already  well  described  before  this  in  the  writings.  Some  things  are
to  be  corrected.)2

ask  your  husband  he  knows  it  well.

(In  Latin :  There  stand  the  columns,  where  Calpe  has  been  left.
That  is  the  end.)3 No  you  have  left  out  something.
(In  Latin:  The  columns  [broken]  by  incessant  reading.)4

Mrs.  Verrall  noted  all  the  circumstances  of  the  script,  Dr.
Verrall's  comments  on  them,  and  the  stages  of  her  own  inter-
pretation in  her  contemporary  diaries,  and  sent  me  on  May  8th,
1906,  a  full  account  of  the  upshot.  She  told  me  that  she
had  recognised  at  the  time  in  her  script  of  March  2nd
the  reference  to  the  JEneicl — the  vain  defence  of  Troy  against
the  Greeks — but  that  the  second  Latin  passage  had  no
meaning  or  association  for  her.  Dr.  Verrall,  to  whom  she
showed  the  script  on  March  2nd,  said  then  that  he  saw
a  connection  between  the  two  Latin  passages,  but  did  not
tell  her  what  it  was.  On  March  4th  he  said,  on  seeing  the
script  of  that  day,  that  the  same  intention  was  shown  in
the  words  "  Pagan  and  Pope,"  etc.  Mrs.  Verrall  still  did
not  know  what  he  meant.  On  March  11th  she  received
my  copy  of  extracts  from  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March
7th  and  read  it  to  Dr.  Verrall.  He  then  said  that  the
sentence :  "  Ave  Pioma  immortalis.  How  could  I  make  it
any  clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue  ? "  applied  appro-
priately to  the  same  thing.

Later  in  the  day  he  told  Mrs.  Verrall  that  her  script  of
March  2nd  had  reminded  him  of  Raphael's  picture  of  Attila

1  Crux  significationem  habet. Crucifer  qui  olim  fertur.

2  Leonis  pelle  sumpto  claviger  in  scriptis  iam  antea  bene  denotatus.  Corri-
genda sunt  quaedam.

3Stant  inde  columnae  relicta  Calpe
iam  finis

4  assiduo  lectore  columnae.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  299


terrified  by  the  vision  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  when
meeting  Pope  Leo,  who  went  out  to  save  Pome.

The  following  is  an  extract  which  I  copy  from  Mrs.
Verrall's  diary  of  March  11th,  1906.

On  March  2nd  at  lunch  I  asked  him  [Dr.  Verrall]  for  the
reference  to  "  Non  tali  auxilio  "  and  who  was  described  as  "Primus
inter  pares."  He  said  (1)  JEn.  II.  (2)  the  Pope.  When  I  read
him  the  script  he  said  that  he  saw  what  it  was  driving  at.  I  did  not.
March  4th  seemed  to  him  to  add  a  fresh  point  and  [Mrs.  Holland]
on  March  7th  completes  the  allusion.

The  story  told  me  this  morning  is  this.  Allusion  on  March  2nd
to  Raphael's  picture  of  Leo's  meeting  with  Attila,  and  Attila's
vision  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  On  March  4th  my  script  carries
the  allusion  to  the  picture  further  in  "Pagan,"  "reformer"  and
"Crucifer."  1  What  of  standard-bearer?  Possibly  on  March  5th
"  Leonis "  and  "  claviger "  are  further  attempts.  [Mrs.  Holland's]
allusion :  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis.  How  could  I  make  it  any
clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue?"  seems  to  complete  A.'s
thought.

The  following  is  a  copy  of  Dr.  Verrall's  original  note  on
this  point,  written  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  diary.

March  llth,  1906.  7  p.m.
I  have  read  the  above.  ...  It  is  quite  correct  in  all  that
concerns  me.  The  reference  to  JEneid  II.  and  the  phrase  "  pr.
inter  p."  with  the  "  frater  etsi  non,  etc.,"  did  in  fact  instantly
recall  to  me  the  picture  mentioned  (doubtless  only  because  I  am
specially  familiar  with  it) ;  and  it  was  to  this  picture  that  I
referred  when  I  said  that  I  had  a  guess  "  what  it  was  driving
at,"  or  something  to  that  effect. The  rest  all  followed  as  described.

A.  W.  V.

The  picture  is  the  well-known  one  in  the  Stanza  d'Eliodoro
in  the  Vatican.  The  Pope  sits  on  a  white  palfrey,  a  cross-
bearer  riding  on  his  left  and  cardinals  on  his  right.  Attila
on  a  black  horse  is  in  the  middle  of  the  picture,  with  a
standard-bearer  in  the  background  on  his  right  and  a  group
of  mounted  Huns  beyond.  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  are  descending
from  the  sky,  both  bearing  swords,  and  St.  Peter  also  holding
a  large  key  or  keys  in  his  left  hand.  In  the  background  is
seen  the  city  of  Eome,  with  the  Coliseum  and  aqueducts.


300


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  picture  was  of  course  known  to  Mrs.  Yerrall,  but,
she  writes,  had  certainly  not  been  recalled  to  her  mind,
consciously  at  least,  by  her  script.

Analysing  the  references  here,  we  find :

(March  2nd,  1906.)  The  reference  to  Troy  in  the  first
part  of  the  script  introduces  the  idea  of  the  defence  of  a
city  against  an  invading  host ;  Hecuba  points  out  to  Priam
the  inadequacy  of  his  material  weapons  in  the  defence  of
Troy.  Leo,  on  the  other  hand,  opposed  Attila  with  moral
or  spiritual  weapons  of  defence,  which  saved  the  new  Troy —
Rome.

"  First  among  his  peers "  is  a  phrase  often  applied  to  the
Pope.1

"  With  him  a  brother  related  in  feeling  though  not  in  blood."
Taking  the  Pope  in  this  case  to  be  St.  Peter,  the  brother
would  be  St.  Paul ;  or  the  two  brothers  in  feeling  might
be  the  Pope  and  St.  Peter.

(March  4th,  1906.)  "Pagan  and  Pope,"  appropriate  to
Attila  and  Leo.

"  The  Stoic  persecutor  and  the  Christian —  Gregory  not  Basil's
friend  ought  to  be  a  clue."  This  is  all  very  dubious.  No
satisfactory  interpretation  of  the  "  Stoic  persecutor  and  the
Christian "  has  been  suggested.

"  Gregory  not  Basil's  friend,"  may  mean,  not  Gregory
Nazianzen.  Perhaps  the  Gregory  meant  is  Gregory  the  Great,
the  Pope  to  whom  the  phrase  "  Primus  inter  pares  "  seems  for
historical  reasons  specially  appropriate.  There  is,  however,  a
mistake  somewhere, — possibly  in  the  introduction  of  the  Stoic
persecutor, — for  the  script  says  "  you  have  it  not  quite  right "
and  it  goes  on  in  large  and  emphatic  writing,  as  if  with  a
struggle  to  correct  itself:

"  Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer — all  enemies  as  you  think  " —
that  is,  as  I  interpret,  you  might  naturally  suppose  that  the
three  types  would  all  be  hostile  to  one  another ;  but  in  this

1In  spite  of  enquiries  made  in  Cambridge,  London,  and  Rome,  through
Mrs.  Verrall  and  other  friends  of  mine,  I  have  been  unable  to  find  the
origin  of  the  familiar  phrase  "Primus  inter  pares."  It  occurs,  however,  in
an  article  on  "The  Papacy  in  its  relation  to  American  ideals,"  by  the  Rev.
L.  H.  Schwab,  in  The  Hibbert  Journal  for  January,  1908  (p.  276),  as  follows  :
"Any  attempted  compromise  [with  the  claims  of  the  Papacy]  as  of  a  'primus
inter  pares.'  "


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  301

case  the  Pope  and  Reformer,  namely,  Leo  (or  Sc.  Peter)  and
St.  Paul,  are  combined  against  the  Pagan,  Attila.

"  The  Cross-bearer  who  one  day  is  borne "  may  have  a
double  reference, — to  the  cross-bearer  in  the  picture  and  to  the
legend  of  St.  Peter's  martyrdom.

"  The  standard-bearer  is  the  link "  may  refer  to  Attila's
standard-bearer,  who  may  be  called  a  link  in  the  sense  that
he  furnishes  one  more  thread  of  connection  between  the  script
and  the  picture, — -in  particular  because  he  suggests  Attila
himself,  who  hitherto  has  been  less  specifically  described  than
the  other  important  personages,  being  merely  called  the  Pagan.

(March  5th,  1906).  The  word  "  claviger "  may  be  equally
well  translated  "  club-bearer "  or  "  key-bearer."  In  this  case
it  would  naturally  be  interpreted  as  the  "  key-bearer " — St.
Peter — and  the  phrase  may  mean  "  The  key-bearer  in  Leo's
skin " — that  is,  St.  Peter  as  represented  by  Pope  Leo.  But
the  phrase  "  lion's  skin "  seems  to  suggest  the  other  meaning
of  claviger,  viz.  the  club-bearer  or  Hercules.  This  leads  on
to  the  next  sentence,  "  There  stand  the  columns  where  Calpe
[Gibraltar]  has  been  left," — suggesting  (says  Mrs.  Verrall)  the
columns  of  Hercules,  which  in  turn  suggest  another  reference
to  columns  :  "  columns  broken  by  incessant  reading "  ; — a  quo-
tation from  a  well-known  line  of  Juvenal,  Satire  I.  13,  referring
to  readers  who  recited  or  declaimed  with  so  much  emphasis
as  to  break  the  columns  of  the  hall  in  which  they  were
speaking.

It  may  perhaps  be  argued  that  all  this  is  a  fanciful  interpre-
tation and  that  the  script  was  not  referring  to  Raphael's  picture
at  all.  The  points  of  resemblance  between  the  description  or
descriptions  and  the  picture  may  be  thought  to  be  merely
accidental ;  for  there  are  no  doubt  many  features  in  the  picture
which  are  absent  from  the  description.  Indeed  the  central
idea  of  the  picture — the  miraculous  deliverance  of  the  sacred
city  of  Rome  from  the  barbarian — is  completely  omitted  from
the  description,— unless  it  is  intended  to  be  suggested  by  con-
trast with  the  case  of  Troy.

But,  whether  or  not  the  script  of  March  2nd  was  really
referring  to  the  picture,  it  did  undoubtedly  suggest  the  picture
to  Dr.  Verrall,  through  the  conjunction  of  the  two  notions  of
a  weak  defender  and  a  Pope,  and  he  was  confirmed  in  this


302


Alice  Johnson.


[part


interpretation  by  the  script  of  March  4th.  After  this  he
was  on  the  look-out  for  further  unmistakable  allusions  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and  when  she  read  him  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  7  th,  he  saw  at  once  its  appropriateness  to  the
incident  and  the  important  addition  to  her  own  version
furnished  by  the  phrase :  Ave  Roma  immortalis  ("  Hail !
Immortal  Eome ! ")

It  is  important  to  note  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March
2nd  specifically  declares  that  its  statements  are  unintelligible
in  themselves  and  will  be  explained  by  what  will  come  through
another  automatist.  "  Both  these  will  send  a  word  to  you
through  another  woman.  After  some  days  you  will  easily
understand  what  I  say."  Again  on  March  5th  her  script
asserts  its  own  incompleteness :  "  Jam  finis.  No,  you  have
left  out  something."

The  explanation  was  given  and  the  omission  supplied  on
March  7th  by  Mrs.  Holland's  phrase:  "  Ave  Eoma  immortalis,"
which,  as  symbolic  of  the  sentiment  of  the  Pope  and  St.  Peter,
corresponds  to  Mrs.  Verrall's :  "  Both  these  will  send  a  word  to
you  through  another  woman;"  and,  by  the  mention  of  Eome,
clinches  the  reference  to  the  picture.

If  it  be  admitted  that  the  connection  between  the  two
scripts  goes  beyond  what  can  reasonably  be  put  down  to
chance,  three  explanations  are  possible:  (1)  though  Dr.  Verrall
thought  very  little  consciously  about  the  subject  except  when
actually  seeing  the  script,  the  whole  topic  was  in  his  mind,
and  a  fragment  of  it  may  therefore  have  been  transmitted
thence  telepathically  to  Mrs.  Holland.  (2)  Again,  it  may  have
been  transmitted  telepathically  from  his  mind  to  Mrs.  Verrall's
and  from  her  to  Mrs.  Holland.  (3)  Mrs.  Verrall  may  have
interpreted  her  script  subliminally  and  conveyed  the  idea  of
it  telepathically  to  Mrs.  Holland.

But  none  of  these  hypotheses  explains  the  fact  that  Mrs.
Holland's  script  reproduced  nothing  that  had  appeared  in
Mrs.  Verrall's,  but  supplied  instead  the  missing  factor  that
was  required  to  complete  Mrs.  Verrall's  allusions.  And  the
sentence  that  follows  the  phrase  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script :
"  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the
clue  ? "  indicates  what  I  believe  to  be  an  important — if  not
essential — feature  of  the  case, — the  deliberate  intention  of  the


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  303

control  to  prevent  Mrs.  Verrall  from  understanding  or  guessing
the  meaning  of  her  script ;  and  by  this  means  to  prevent  her
from  conveying  it  telepathically  to  Mrs.  Holland.  This  point
is  discussed  further  in  Chapter  VII.  on  "The  Theory  of  Cross-
correspondences."

I  may  add  that  just  as  various  names  and  phrases  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  led  on  by  association  to  a  number  of
topics  connected  only  very  indirectly  if  at  all  with  the  main
conception  (e.g.  the  Stoic  Persecutor,  Hercules,  etc.) ;  so
apparently  the  mention  of  Rome  led  on  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  to  the  idea  of  Mr.  Myers's  last  illness ;  for  the  next
sentence  is  "  How  cold  it  was  that  winter — even  snow  in
Eome — we  might  have  stayed  at  home  for  that."  It  is  true,
as  I  find  from  a  letter  of  that  date,  that  there  was  snow
in  Eome  in  January,  1901,  but  the  statement  is  not,  of
course,  evidential.

The  Hodgson  Control.

In  February,  1905,  as  mentioned  above,  Mrs.  Holland  found
that  the  automatic  writing  was  beginning  to  make  her  feel
faint  or  sleepy.  The  condition  was  obviated  at  the  time —
apparently  by  my  suggestion  to  her.  It  now  began  to  recur.
On  Feb.  17th,  1906,  she  wrote  to  me:

The  enclosed  writing  [that  of  Feb.  9th  quoted  below]  dates  from
several  days  ago.  I  was  able  to  try  it  early  in  the  evening  for  once,
and  I  was  anxious  to  see  if  the  almost  stupour  which  writing  has
been  causing  lately  was  due  to  late  hours  and  writing  in  bed.  I
found  that  even  when  I  was  not  tired  (and  sat  in  a  stiff  chair  well
away  from  a  table,  with  nothing  to  support  arms  or  head),  a  few
moments  of  writing  made  me  feel  at  once  very  sleepy  and  ex-
ceedingly loquacious.  I  fancy  that  under  favourable  conditions  my
automatic  writing  would  change  (for  a  time  at  any  rate)  into  trance
or  semi-trance  conditions  with  spoken  words  instead  of  written
ones.

Twice  or  thrice  lately,  just  before  falling  asleep  at  night,  I  have
heard  fragments  of  talk  which  I  know  are  not  actual  conversation,
and  as  I  am  in  my  usual  excellent  health,  perfectly  free  from
excitement  or  brain  fag  of  any  kind,  I  can  only  ascribe  them  to  a
possible  new  attempt  at  communication.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  condition  seems  to  coincide


304


Alice  Johnson.


[part


with  the  first  definite  attempt  at  a  communication  from  a
Hodgson  control,1  as  follows :

(Friday,  Feb.  9th,  1906.  9  p.m.)

.  .  .  .  Sjdibse  Ipehtpo — Only  one  letter  further  on —


They  are  not  haphazard  figures  read  them  as  letters —
The  shortness  of  breath  was  the  worst  part  of  the  illness — worse
even  than  the  exhaustion —

K.  57. [a  Christian  name] — Grey  paper —

The  (?)  straggler  [?  straggles]  returns — a  printed  address  on  the
sheet  of  paper —  Three  small  lines  of  writing — a  wide  margin  left —
I  cannot  make  it  clear  to  you —

Concentrate  hard.


Nothing  else  upon  the  sheet2 —

It's  a  wide  prospect  from  the  windows —

A  gold  watch  chain  with  a  horse-shoe  shaped  cigar  cutter  attached
to  it—  An  old  seal  not  his  own  initials —  A  white  handled  knife
inkstained —

Nitrate  of  amyl — probably  too  late  even  if  it  had  been  thought


A  corpse  needs  no  shoes —

On  Feb.  21st,  1906,  when,  as  already  stated,  I  saw  Mrs.
Holland,  we  discussed  this  script.  I  found  that  in  spite  of  the
rather  obvious  hints  given  in  it, — "  Only  one  letter  further  on  "
and  "  Not  haphazard  figures  read  them  as  letters," — Mrs.  Holland

1  As  mentioned  above  (p.  282),  Mrs.  Holland  had  heard  of  Dr.  Hodgson's
death  through  a  paragraph  in  a  newspaper  of  January  22nd,  1906.

2 From  "a  printed  address"  to  this  point  is  no  doubt  an  attempt  to  describe
a  supposed  letter,  the  three  lines  being  in  the  original  long  and  wavy,  obviously
meant  to  represent  three  lines  of  writing  in  the  letter.  The  description,  however,
is  very  vague,  and  has  not  been  identified.


1 8
9
3
8
1

is
4


8
15
4
7

19
15
14


3  initials.


of—


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  305


had  not  deciphered  the  initial  conundrums.  The  first  letters
are  formed  from  the  name  "  Richard  Hodgson  "  by  substituting
for  each  letter  of  the  name  the  letter  following  it  in  the
alphabet ;  the  numbers  represent  the  same  name  by  substituting
for  each  letter  the  number  of  its  place  in  the  alphabet.

I  asked  Mrs.  Holland  if  she  had  ever  played  at  conundrums
of  this  kind.  She  told  me  that  as  a  child  in  the  nursery  she
had  played  at  a  "  secret  language  "  made  by  using  either  the
letter  before  or  the  letter  after  the  real  one.  But  she  had
never  practised  or  thought  of  using  numbers  in  this  way.  She
noted  afterwards :  "  When  my  hand  wrote  them  I  thought  they
were  an  addition  sum  and  hoped  [my  subliminal]  would  add
it  very  correctly  and  quickly.  [My  supraliminal]  is  very  poor
at  figures."

As  to  the  rest  of  the  script :

Dr.  Hodgson  died  suddenly  of  heart-disease  while  playing  a
game  of  handball  at  the  Boat  Club  in  Boston,  on  December
20th,  1905.  There  was  no  preliminary  illness,  as  suggested
in  the  script.  At  a  subsequent  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland
(on  May  28th,  1906),  I  told  her  a  propos  of  this  script  that
I  was  making  enquiries  but  had  not  yet  learnt  if  anything  in
it  was  correct.  She  then  asked  me  if  he  had  died  of  heart-
disease,  as  she  said  she  knew  nitrate  of  amyl  was  given  for
heart  failure,  and  she  suggested  this  as  the  interpretation  of
the  words  "  Nitrate  of  amyl — probably  too  late  even  if  it  had
been  thought  of."

Before  making  any  further  comments,  it  will  be  convenient
to  quote  here  all  the  remaining  script  of  this  period  (Feb.  to
May,  1906)  which  purports  to  relate  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  The
first  two  passages  are  quoted  with  their  context  elsewhere
(see  pp.  292  and  295).

(Feb.  28th,  1906.)

Dickon  of  Norfolk1 — is  that  far  enough  away  from  the  real  name  1
I'll  describe  R.  H.  [initials  written  in  monogram].

A  short  man — but  held  himself  well — broad  shoulders — thick  grey
white  hair — thick  grey  brows — very  straight —  A  florid  face — reddish
brown — (though  it  was  pale  enough  at  the  end).  Strong  chin —
mobile  mouth.

1  This,  as  said  above,  is  obviously  meant  for  a  sort  of  pun  on  the  name
Richard  Hodgson.


306


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  young  wife  died  so  long  ago — that  perhaps  some  people  for-
got her.  [Here  follows  the  same  Christian  name  as  that  written  on
Feb.  9th.]

(March  7th,  1906.)

Brittleworth — Brickeldale.  Britleton —  No — not  him  and  not
James  —  Brit — Brittle  Brick  Brickleton- —  Hugo — H.  M. — Minster
Berg.  Hugo.

Was  he  not  aware  ?

R.

Why  are  they  so  brutally  dense.

H.

I  always  had  a  quick  temper.

(Mrs.  Holland  notes:  "Script  ceased  at  11.10,  leaving  me  feeling

annoyed.")

(May  16th,  1906.)

When  the  deep  red  blood  of  the  maple  leaf
Burns  on  the  boughs  again.

Spring  on  a  Boston  hillside.  One  clump  of  maples  stands  alone —
they  are  outlined  against  the  sunset  and  the  sunset  is  no  redder
than  they.

R.  H.

Mr.  Piddington  was  in  Boston,  U.S.A.,  during  April  and  May,
1906,  and  I  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  above  pieces  of  script
(except  that  of  May  16th)  purporting  to  relate  to  Dr.  Hodgson
and  asked  him  to  make  enquiries  on  the  spot.  On  May  25th,
1906,  he  wrote  as  follows:

[In  regard  to  the  script  of  Feb.  9th,  1906],  after  the  experience
gained  in  the  last  four  weeks,  during  which  I  have  been  going
through  all  R.  H.'s  papers,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  to
represent  R.  H.  as  communicating  his  name  to  a  sensitive  by  means
of  numbers  representing  letters,  and  especially  "sjdibse"  etc.,
is  an  extremely  characteristic  touch.

"Shortness  of  breath"  etc.  has  no  relevancy  for  R.  H.  .  .  .

"K.  57."  I  received  Miss  A.  Johnson's  copy  of  extracts  from
Mrs.  [Holland's]  script  apparently  relating  to  R.  H.  this  morning
(May  25,  1906)  at  8.15  a.m.  I  thought  I  had  seen  on  some  of  R.
H.'s  papers  some  kind  of  reference  mark  like  K.  57;  but  felt  no
certitude  as  to  this.


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  307

At  9.25  a.m.  I  reached  E.  H.'s  old  rooms  at  15  Charles  Street,
and  after  a  few  minutes  noticed  a  pile  of  note-books  marked  by
Henry  James,  Jr.,  "College  note-books."  Among  them  I  noticed  a
dilapidated  note-book  of  different  size  and  colour  and  make,  and
proceeded  to  look  at  it  out  of  mere  curiosity.  On  the  front  cover
R.  H.  had  written  "The  Eternal  Life."  Inside  ate  two  loose  sheets
on  which  R.  H.  had  made  rough  notes  for  an  article  which  he  had
apparently  intended  to  write  in  answer  to  Prof.  Miinsterberg's  book,
The  Eternal  Life.  It  is  known  that  R.  H.  was  much  incensed
by  Miinsterberg's  book  and  intended  to  reply  to  it.  On  the  back
cover  R.  H.  had  written  in  pencil  the  following  :


"  R.  H.

R.  H.

1

K-  6

4

K  52

6

K  8

3

3

4

K  6

52

K  6

K-ll

K  7

K-52

K  52

10

K  13

K-30

7

3

Mr.  [or  Mrs.]  C.

8
14
2

7
7
10"

The  meaning  of  these  memoranda  I  do  not  know  ....  I  am
practically  certain  that  K  followed  by  numerals  refers  to  some
particular  series  of  Piper  sittings,  or  to  some  particular  subject  of
the  communications.

It  is  at  least  a  curious  coincidence  that  within  \\  hours  of
receiving  and  reading  Miss  Johnson's  copy  of  Mrs.  [Holland's]
script  I  should  fortuitously  come  across  a  memorandum  made  by
Hodgson  which  shows  that  he  used  K.  followed  by  a  numeral  for
some  purpose  or  other.  I  had  previously  come  across  this  old  note-
book, but  had  not  put  it  with  other  notes,  note-books,  MSS.,  etc.,


308


Alice  Johnson.


[PAHT


belonging  to  R.  H.  which  are  to  be  preserved  for  sentimental
reasons  or  for  'evidential  purposes,'  as  it  seemed  to  me  of  no
interest.

I  completed  the  sorting,  etc.,  of  all  R.  H.'s  papers  yesterday,  and
had  not  this  note-book  attracted  my  attention  this  morning,  it
would  probably  have  been  destroyed,  or  perhaps  sent  to  Australia.

[Script  of  Feb.  28th,  1906.]  Description  not  either  very  good  or
very  bad  if  applied  to  R.  H.

[Script  of  March  7th,  1906.]  In  view  of  what  has  been  said  above
about  Prof.  Hugo  Miinsterberg,  the  obvious  reference  to  him  here  is
quite  appropriate.  "  Why  are  they  so  brutally  dense  ?  H.  I  always
had  a  quick  temper."  These  phrases  are  very  like  the  "  R.  H.
control "  sayings  through  Mrs.  Piper.

J.  Gr.  PlDDINGTON.

I  sent  a  copy  of  these  passages  in  the  script  later  to
Professor  James's  son,  Mr.  Henry  James,  Junr.,  who  had  been
appointed  one  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  executors,  and  he  wrote  to  me :

July  29th,  1906.

The  lines  ["a  printed  address  on  the  sheet  of  paper,  etc." — script
of  Feb.  9th,  1906]  suggest  this  to  me, — that  Hodgson  is  struggling
to  procure  the  return  of  letters  or  papers  which  he  tries  to  describe.
Mr.  Piddington  will  tell  you  that  the  Piper  control  has  abounded
with  this  sort  of  request.  .  .  .

I  know  of  no  place  in  Boston  frequented  by  Hodgson  where  there
was  a  wide  prospect  from  the  windows  unless  possibly  the  Union
Boat  Club,  where  he  died.  Its  windows  overlook  the  Back  Bay  to
some  hills  beyond.  .  .  .

He  wore  a  gold  watch  chain  on  which  I  find  that  there  is  a  gold
cigar-cutter  of  the  ordinary  type — not  at  all  horse-shoe  shaped.  I
found  an  old  seal,  the  stone  of  which  was  broken,  and  which  had
a  female  figure  cut  on  it.  It  was  not  worn  at  the  time  of  his
death.  .  .  .

[In  regard  to  the  script  of  May  16th,  1906]  the  foliage  of  one  of
our  American  maples  turns  a  very  brilliant  red  in  the  autumn,  and
its  minute  flowers  are  a  most  brilliant  red  in  the  spring.1  The  lines
might  be  a  quotation  from  some  American  poem,  or  something  of
Hodgson's  own.  .  .  .

I  think  that  the  phrases  at  the  end  of  March  7th  are  rather  like

1  The  spring  red,  which  is  specially  referred  to  in  the  script,  is  probably  a  far
less  familiar  fact  to  English  people  than  the  autumn  red,  and  Mrs.  Holland
believes  that  she  had  never  heard  of  it.


lv  ] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  309


Hodgson,  as  Mr.  Piddington  says ;  but  if  one  can  refine  on  what
is  already  so  refined,  they  are  more  like  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson
control.

The  description  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  personal  appearance  (given
on  Feb.  28th)  seems  to  me  characteristic;  but  as  his  portrait
has  been  published  more  than  once  in  illustrated  magazines,  it
cannot  be  evidential.  Mrs.  Holland  believes,  however,  that  she
has  never  seen  a  portrait  of  him,  and  that  she  had  never  heard
of  him  till  she  read  Human  Personality.

On  March  7th,  the  various  attempts  made  at  the  name  Hugo
Munsterberg  are  comparable  with  the  feeling  after  the  name
Eusapia  Paladino  referred  to  above  (p.  274);  but  whereas  in  that
case  there  is  clearly  an  effort  of  memory  to  recall  the  name,
in  this  the  partial  emergence  is  possibly  a  telepathic  effort ;
for  Mrs.  Holland,  as  she  told  me  later,  had  never  heard  of
Prof.  Munsterberg,  who  teaches  Psychology  in  Prof.  James's
Department  in  Harvard  University  and  has  written  against
psychical  research.

There  is  a  certain  interest  in  the  resemblance  between  the
kinds  of  remarks  made  by  the  Hodgson  control  through  Mrs.
Piper  and  through  Mrs.  Holland.  Mrs.  Piper  was  of  course
well  acquainted  with  Dr.  Hodgson  in  life,  and  it  was  there-
fore natural  that  in  her  trance  condition  some  of  his
characteristics  should  come  out  vividly  and  indeed  in  a  some-
what accentuated  form.  But  no  report  of  the  sittings  with  her
since  his  death  had  been  published  and  there  was,  so  far  as  I
can  see,  no  normal  channel  through  which  her  trance  conception
of  him  could  have  filtered  through  to  Mrs.  Holland.

A  similar  resemblance  was  found,  as  mentioned  above  (p.
271),  between  the  Gurney  controls  of  Mrs.  Forbes  and  of  Mrs.
Holland.  Here  again  Mr.  Gurney  in  his  life  time  was  known
to  Mrs.  Forbes  but  unknown  to  Mrs.  Holland.  She  knew
both  Mr.  Gurney  and  Dr.  Hodgson  by  name  through  Human
Personality,  but  there  is  nothing  in  that  book  to  suggest  in
either  case  the  particular  characteristics  exhibited  by  these
controls  in  her  script.

I  may  add  that  the  Christian  name  following  "K  57"  in  the
script  of  Feb.  9th,  1906,  and  coming  at  the  end  of  the  extract
from  the  script  of  Feb.  28th  (p.  306),  is  that  of  a  lady  referred
to  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  report  on  his  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in

u


310


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.  Of  this  lady  "  Phinuit  "  remarked  "  The
second  part  of  her  first  name  is sie."  Dr.  Hodgson  after-
wards told  him  the  full  name,  but  this  was  not  published,  the
lady  being  spoken  of  in  the  rest  of  the  report  as  "  Q."  It  was
the  full  Christian  name  which  was  given  by  Mrs.  Holland,  who
— it  is  to  be  remembered — had  not  seen  the  Proceedings  at  all.
On  Peb.  28th  the  script  said  "The  young  wife  died  so  long
ago  that  perhaps  some  people  forgot  her."  "  Q."  died  in
1879,  but  she  was,  I  believe,  never  married.  The  name  had
also  occurred  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  Dec.  1st,  1905
(i.e.  19  days  before  Dr.  Hodgson's  death),  at  the  beginning  of  a
passage  which  has  apparently  no  connection  with  what  comes
before  or  after  it,  as  follows :


Thus  the  name  occurs  three  times  in  apparent  connection
with  Dr.  Hodgson,  for  I  hazard  the  conjecture  that  the  Greek
cross  here  may  represent  the  symbol  of  Mrs.  Piper's  main
control  Eector,  and  so  indicate  a  connection  with  Dr.  Hodgson.
In  Mrs.  Verrall's  report  of  her  script,  she  states  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XX.  p.  77)  that  the  Greek  cross  occurs  in  it  as  a
symbolic  signature  on  nine  occasions,  and  on  six  out  of  the
nine  reference  is  made  in  the  script  either  to  Dr.  Hodgson
or  to  Mrs.  Piper,  while  on  another  occasion  it  is  stated  to
be  the  sign  of  Eector.1  One  of  the  drawings  of  the  Greek
cross  produced  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  on  Jan.  31st,  1902
(op.  cit.  pp.  78  and  404)  is  very  similar  to  the  above  by  Mrs.
Holland.

Two  Crcss-correspondences.

(1)  "  Not  in  the  Plectra" and (2)  "Henry  was  not  ?nistctken."

On  Feb.  8th,  1906,  I  sent  Mrs.  Verrall  a  copy  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Feb.  6  th  (quoted  in  the  preceding  chapter,

1  It  was  the  sign  used  by  the  Rector  control  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  ;  see
Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.  p.  285  and  Vol.  XI.  p.  41.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  311


p.  283)  including  an  attempt — here  reproduced — to  write  some
Greek  words.

Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  happen  to  note  at  the  time,  and —
owing  to  the  illegibility  of  a  postmark — it  cannot  now  be
positively  proved,  whether  or  not  she  received  this  script
before  10.20  a.m.  on  Feb.  9  th  when  she  wrote  the  script  to
be  next  quoted.  The  point  being  doubtful,  we  must  obviously,
to  be  on  the  safe  side,  assume  that  Mrs.  Verrall  did  see
Mrs.  Holland's  script  before  producing  her  own,  which  contains
a  certain  Greek  line,  and  in  that  case  it  may  possibly  be
surmised  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  suggested  to  Mrs.  Verrall
that  an  attempt  was  on  foot  to  make  the  former  write
Greek  automatically,  whereupon  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  proceeded,
as  it  were,  to  set  her  a  specific  Greek  quotation  to  be
reproduced.

In  regard  to  the  second  cross-correspondence,  it  is  to  be
premised  that  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  at  this  time  that  the  Life  of
Dr.  Sidgwick,  referred  to  in  her  script,  was  about  to  appear,
whereas  Mrs.  Holland  probably  did  not  know  this.

The  following  are  the  passages  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
bearing  on  these  points :

(Feb.  9,  1904  [really  1906]. 10.20  a.m.)

(In  Latin  and  Greek :  They  grow  faint,  but  (are)  not  without
putting  together.  So  what  has  been  believed  by  the  disciples,  if
compared  with  certain  other  things,  adds  together  parts  of  wisdom.
If  not  all,  why  not  some1? For  instance,  this:)1

In  a  drawer  as  I  said  before — the  third  drawer  it  will  be  found
— the  poem,  I  mean.  It  will  come  to  you  but  do  not  ask.  Leave
things  and  wait — ask  little.  Write  when  you  can.  You  will  meet
Mrs.  [Holland]  again,  remember  that.

In  the  Life  of  Sidgwick  you  will  find  two  clues  to  what  I  have
said  to  you,  two  only — follow  the  thread.  It  shld  be  on  March  17
note  that  day.  But  I  cannot  see  where  you  are  then  at  some  place
I  do  not  know.


1  Evanescent  ov8'  (ivev  <Tvi>8r)/j.a.Tos'  ra  8'  ovv  8eooyu.ei>a  rois  /j.adr)Tats  TrapaXTjcpBivra
Kal  &Wols  rialv  fj.a0rjaews  ixep-q  irpoacpipei. Si  non  omnia  cur  non  quaedam  ? Haec  :


312


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Then  tell  her  this  (In  Greek :  Be  sorrow,  sorrow  spoken,  but  let
the  good  prevail) 1  close  on  the  verge  of  failure  comes  success —
But  see  her  first.

(Feb.  19,  1906. 6  p.m.)
Let  her  write  without  hindrance — it  is  better  so. Ask  for  the
volume  bound  in  green  with  a  swan  upon  the  cover. She  will
know.

(In  Latin :  Not  at  the  setting  of  the  sun  but  in  due  season  comes
the  heat-bearer  already  pointed  out.  When  you  see  the  same  in
the  other  scripts  with  your  own  eyes,  you  will  have  belief  in  my
words.

Yours)2

In  regard  to  this  script,  Mrs.  Verrall  noted  that  she  took
it  at  the  time  to  refer  to  Mrs.  Holland.

(Feb.  20,  1906. 7  p.m.)
Get  her  to  write  (In  Greek :  sorrow  sorrow) 3  and  the  rest.  .  .  .

On  February  21st,  1906,  when  as  related  above,  p.  290,
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  met  in  my  room  at  20  Hanover
Square,  and  tried  writing  there  simultaneously,  the  first  part
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  referred  again  to  a  green  book  as
follows  :

The  green  book  must  be  found  with  the  swan  on  it.  There  is
verse  inside. The  swan  is  gilt  and  quite  conspicuous.

We  discussed  what  book  this  could  be,  but  none  of  us
could  guess,  and  next  day  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  that  she
had  not  been  able  to  find  the  book.  Mrs.  Verrall,  on  going-
home,  identified  it  as  Mr.  G.  Murray's  Euripides  (containing
translations  of  Hij^olytus,  Bacchce  and  Aristophanes'  Frogs),  but
this,  of  course,  was  not  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Holland,  and  again
in  writing  to  me  on  March  7th,  Mrs.  Holland  said  that  she
had  sought  in  vain  for  the  book.

On  Feb.  28th  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote:

1  afKivov  ai'Xicof  enr£  to  5'  ed  vlkcltw,

2Non  solis  occasu,  seel  temporis  occasione  advenit  calorifer  ille  iam  antea
desi^natus  eundem  cum  in  ceteris  scriptis  ipsa  oculis  videris  verbis  meis  fidem
imputabis.

Tuus.

3  aX\ivov  alXivov.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  313

(Feb.  28,  1906. 11.15  p.m.)

Orange  nob  the  fruit.  The  name  of  a  place  at  school  next  the
Blucher  Beckford.

Not  so  clear  for  the  first  few  lines —  Echo  answers — an  admirer  of
Jane  Austen  some  one  has  lately  read  her  novel  aloud  to  a  sick
friend.

But  note  the  point  about  Orange  that  has  meaning —

(In  Greek :  Be  sorrow,  sorrow  spoken,  but  let  the  good  prevail)

Mrs.  Verrall  notes  on  this  script  that  "  Orange "  and
"  Blucher "  are  the  names  of  two  adjoining  dormitories  at
Wellington  College  (Dr.  Verrall's  old  school)  and  "  Beckford "
may,  Dr.  Verrall  suggests,  be  intended  for  another  one —
Beresford.  A  copy  of  this  script,  omitting  the  Greek  line,  was
sent  to  Mrs.  Holland  on  March  5th,  but  nothing  in  it  seemed
to  apply  to  her.

Meanwhile  in  her  script  of  Feb.  28th,  quoted  in  full  above,
p.  293  occurs  the  phrase:  "  No,  not  in  the  Electra,  M.  will
know  better."

"  M."  is  of  course  Mrs.  Verrall  (often  called  "  Margaret "  or
"  M."  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script)  and  indicates  that  the  remark
is  specially  intended  for  her.  It  may  be  taken  to  apply
to  the  Greek  line  quoted  by  Mrs.  Verrall  for  the  third  time
on  Feb.  28th,  for  this  line,  Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me,  is  the
burden  of  the  chorus  relating  to  the  expedition  to  Troy  and
the  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia  (iEschylus,  Agamemnon,  124,  125).
There  is  a  certain  point,  Mrs.  Verrall  thinks,  in  mentioning
the  Electra  in  this  connection,  because  the  Electra  (of  Sophocles
and  Euripides)  is  equivalent  to  the  second  play  (Libation
Bearers)  of  the  iEschylean  Trilogy,  of  which  the  Agamemnon
is  the  first ;  so  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  might  be  taken
to  mean :  the  line  is  in  the  Trilogy,  but  not  in  the  second
play  ( =  Electra),  which  was  true.

It  should  be  added  that  Mr.  Gilbert  Murray's  translation  of
Euripides'  Electra,  published  in  1905,  was  being  performed  in
London  at  about  this  time,  though  I  do  not  think  this  can
be  considered  enough  to  account  for  the  connection  between
the  two  scripts.

Returning  now  to  the  prediction  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Feb.  9th,  1906,  quoted  above,  that  she  would  find  "two  clues


314


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  what  I  have  said  to  you  "  in  the  Life  of  Dr.  Sidgwick ;  the
book  was  published  on  Feb.  27th,  and  Mrs.  Verrall  obtained
it  next  clay  and  at  once  began  to  search  for  the  "  clues "  and
found  what  she  regarded  as  one  of  them.  (See  her  Report,
pp.  277-8  and  415.)

In  her  script  of  July  8th,  1901,  was  the  following:

You  have  got  it  partly  right,  but  he  knows  better  what  I  mean.
Edmund  Gurney  helped  me  at  first — now  there  is  no  one  but  me —
We  talked  together  of  it, — in  the  sunny  weather, — in  the  Cloisters1
on  Sunday  before  he  knew  you.  Two  of  us  and  then  some  one
came.  He  has  more  nearly  carried  out  his  plans  than  I  have — tell
him  that,  A.  W.  V. — from  me  and  he  will  know  what  I  mean.  I
was  wrong  in  part,  I  see  now — but  not  altogether.

This  script,  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  opinion  at  the  time,  purported
to  come  from  Dr.  Sidgwick.

The  script  recurred  to  the  same  topic  on  November  25th,
1901,  after  some  allusions  to  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour  and  to  a  basket
associated  elsewhere  with  Dr.  Sidgwick,  as  follows :

I  wrote  in  the  Alps  [the  script  of  July  8th,  1901,  was  written
in  the  Eiffel  Alp]  about  a  talk  in  the  College  Court  on  a  Sunday
with  your  husband — not  for  her  to  recognise  but  for  him —  Then
other  things  were  mixed  in, — the  play  and  the  rest.  But  now  ask
him  to  recollect  in  the  Long — we  talked  about  our  work  His  has
been  largely  carried  out,  mine  not.  He  must  remember.  It  is  so
plain  to  me. Now  sign  initials  F  M  B

It  seemed  uncertain  whether  this  communication  purported
to  come  from  Dr.  Sidgwick  or  from  Mr.  Balfour.  In  any  case
Dr.  Arerrall,  to  whom  it  seemed  to  relate,  had  no  special
recollection  of  such  talks  as  were  described.

In  the  Memoir  of  Dr.  Sidgwick  (p.  589)  is  given  a  letter
written  on  May  29th,  1900  (two  days  before  the  operation
performed  in  the  hope  of  prolonging  his  life),  to  his  old  friend
Sir  George  Trevelyan,  in  which  the  following  occurs :

My  thoughts  go  back  to  the  old  days  when  we  walked  round
the  cloisters  and  talked  of  Life  and  the  spirit  in  which  it  should
be  lived. You  have  fulfilled  your  promise  better  than  I.

1  "  The  Cloisters "  would  to  anv  Trinity  mau  mean  the  cloisters  of  Trinity
College.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  315


This  passage  coincides  strikingly  with  the  script  in  that  it
speaks  of  a  talk  in  the  (Trinity)  cloisters  with  some  one  who,
Dr.  Sidgwick  considered,  had  been  more  successful  than  him-
self in  carrying  out  his  plans  for  his  life-work.  But  here
the  talk  was  with  Sir  George  Trevelyan,  whereas  the  script
refers  it  to  Dr.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Feb.  28th,  1906  (see  above,  p.  293),
contains  the  phrase  :

"  Henry  was  not  mistaken "  ("  Henry  "  in  her  script  always
meaning  Dr.  Sidgwick),  which  applies  well  to  what  was
occupying  Mrs.  Verrall's  mind  on  that  day.

On  receiving  from  me  on  March  6th  a  copy  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  to  me :

"  Henry  was  not  mistaken "  closely  corresponds  with  my  own
preoccupation  on  [Feb.]  28th  connected  with  a  clue  in  the  [Memoir
of  Dr.  Sidgwick]  to  something  in  my  script.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  will
confirm.  I  told  her  that  confirmation  from  [Mrs.  Holland]  was
wanted  and  this  is  exactly  appropriate.

On  this  point  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sent  me  the  following  note :

March  6th,  1906.

Mrs.  Verrall  called  on  me  on  Wednesday,  Feb.  28th,  and  told
me  she  had  procured  a  copy  of  my  husband's  memoir,  published
the  day  before,  and  was  eagerly  reading  it,  as  her  script  had  said
that  the  book  would  furnish  two  clues.  She  thought  that  one  of
these  was  in  the  great  resemblance  between  something  contained
in  the  script  of  two  or  three  years  ago  about  talking  in  the  cloisters
of  Nevile's  Court  with  a  passage  in  my  husband's  letter  to  Sir  George
Trevelyan,  quoted  on  p.  589  of  the  book,  though  there  were  some
inconsistencies  showing  a  mistake  somewhere.  (I  have  given  the
substance  of  our  conversation.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  word
"  mistake "  was  used.)  She  told  me  that  it  was  the  day  on  which
she  and  Mrs.  [Holland]  sat  for  automatic  writing  simultaneously,
and  said  it  would  be  very  interesting  if  Mrs.  [Holland's]  script  were
to  show  any  indication  of  this  matter  which  was  occupying  her  (Mrs.
Verrall's)  mind  so  much.  The  resemblance  between  the  passages
in  the  letter  and  in  the  script  seemed  to  me  very  striking.
My  conversation  with  Mrs.  Verrall  took  place  between  8  and
9  p.m.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.


316


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Cross-correspondence.
Boden  Nod.

Recurring  once  more  to  the  prediction  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  Feb.  9th,  1906:  "In  the  Life  of  Sidgwick  you  will  find
two  clues  to  what  I  have  said  to  you,  two  only — follow  the
thread " ;  Mrs.  Verrall  soon  found  what  she  took  to  be  the
second  clue,  namely,  an  explanation  of  some  phrases  in  her
script  of  Jan.  17th,  1904  (quoted  above,  p.  226),  unintelligible
to  her  at  the  time,  about  the  "  Wanderer  on  the  Way "  and
"  Hope's  vision  which  is  the  true  one  and  leads  on  the
Passionate  Pilgrim."  Some  other  phrases  about  the  same  time
and  apparently  relating  to  the  same  topic  were :  "  my  pilgrim
foot,"  "  the  ways  we  walked  together,"  "  wander  at  will  .  .  .
wandering  still."

Mrs.  Verrall  now  read  in  the  Memoir  (see  her  Report,
p.  298)  a  letter  in  which  Dr.  Sidgwick,  speaking  of  the
question  of  immortality,  says :  "  There  was  one  line  of  thought
I  wanted  to  suggest,  in  which,  from  time  to  time,  I  find  a
kind  of  repose, — which,  curiously  enough,  I  find  is  that  in
which  Browning's  poem  on  the  subject  ('  La  Saisiaz ' )  con-
cludes. It  is  that  on  moral  grounds  hope  rather  [than]
certainty  is  fit  for  us  in  this  earthly  existence."  This
led  Mrs.  Verrall  to  read  La  Saisiaz,  which  to  the  best  of
her  belief  she  had  never  read  before.  It  describes  the  sudden
death  of  a  friend,  after  which  the  poet  takes  alone  the  walk
which  they  had  planned  to  take  together,  and  debating  with
himself  the  question  of  immortality,  concludes  as  described  by
Dr.  Sidgwick.  Some  expressions  in  the  poem  bear  a  certain
resemblance  to  the  phrases  just  quoted  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,
and  the  whole  may  not  inaptly  be  described  as  an  account
of  the  vision  of  hope  which  comes  to  the  wandering  pilgrim.

As  Mrs.  Verrall  observes,  the  likenesses  between  the  script
and  the  poem  may,  in  spite  of  her  impression  to  the  contrary,
be  due  to  a  latent  knowledge  of  the  poem,  or  of  some  account
of  it,  in  her  mind.  But  it  is  interesting  that  the  phrases
should  be  associated  with  Dr.  Sidgwick's  name ;  for  this  script
purports  to  be  an  attempt  to  produce  a  verifiable  message
from  him  in  answer  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  question  about  the
text  (see  above,  p.  220),  while  afterwards  a  certain  verification


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  317


or  explanation  of  the  phrases  was  found  in  a  letter  of  which
Mrs.  Verrall  certainly  had  no  normal  knowledge,  written  by
Dr.  Sidgwick  in  1878  to  a  friend  of  his  with  whom  she  was
not  acquainted.

This  friend  was  Mr.  Eoden  Noel,  and  the  letter  (see  Memoir,
p.  338)  was  about  his  poems  written  in  memory  of  his  little
son  Eric,  and  published  in  1881  under  the  title  of  "A  Little
Child's  Monument."  Mrs.  Verrall  had  been  chiefly  interested
in  the  part  of  the  letter  dealing  with  La  Saisiaz,  but  it  may
be  surmised  that  Eoden  Noel's  connection  with  it  led — whether
normally  or  supernormally — to  the  verses  produced  in  her
next  script,  which  I  now  quote.  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  in  any
way  associate  this  script  with  Eoden  Noel  at  the  time,  and
remains  convinced,  after  my  later  discussion  of  it  with  her,
that  she  had  never  read  any  of  his  poems.

(March  7,  1906. 11.15  p.m.)
S  let  it  come. Myriad  red  buds  and  in  each  the  promise  of  a
flower  and  fruit  to  come. But  you  must  wait.

Can't  you  see  Mrs.  [Holland]  soon  1  Send  her  something  of  yours,
a  ring  that  would  help  her

She  wrote  earlier  to-day  in  the  afternoon  alone. She  sat  on  a  sofa
and  put  her  book  down  suddenly,  half  open  on  the  table.
But  why  a  headache  on  this  lovely  day.

Tintagel  and  the  sea  that  moaned  in  pain

And  Arthur's  mount  uplifted  from  the  plain

And  crowding  towers  of  quaint  fantastic  shape

Ah  !  never  more  to  see

The  ripples  dance

Nor  hear  again  the  roar

On  smitten  shore

Where  the  huge  wave  rolls  on

Amid  the  salt  and  savour  of  the  sea.

It  was  only  while  writing  this  report  that  it  occurred  to
me  that  these  verses  have  a  certain  vague  resemblance  to
Eoden  Noel's  poem  "  Tintadgel,"  which,  like  Mrs.  Verrall's
first  three  lines,  is  composed  of  ten-syllabled  rhymed  couplets.
I  quote  a  few  lines  to  show  the  resemblance :

"  Tintadgel,  from  thy  precipice  of  rock
Thou  frownest  back  the  vast  Atlantic  shock  !


318


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Yet  purple  twilight  in  cathedral  caves
Moulded  to  the  similitude  of  waves

Tempestuous  by  awful  hands  of  storm

*****

And  therefore  Arthur's  ancient  ramparts  range
From  human  fellowship  to  nature,  change
To  semblance  of  the  fretted  weathered  stone,
Upreared  by  mystic  elements  alone."

Mrs.  Verrall,  as  already  stated,  believes  that  she  had  never
seen  or  heard  of  this  poem  until  I  drew  her  attention  to  it
a  few  days  after  reading  it  for  the  first  time  myself  in
January,  1908.

Now  for  Mrs.  Holland's  side.  I  sent  her  a  copy  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  March  7th,  1906,  and  she  wrote  to  me
that  it  did  not  apply  to  her  at  all,  nor  apparently  did  the
verses  suggest  anything  to  her.  But  her  next  script  gives
the  date  May  26th,  1894,  which  I  found  to  be  that  of
Roden  Noel's  death,  and  definite  references  to  him  appear
shortly  afterwards.  She  told  me  later  that  she  (like  Mrs.
Verrall)  knew  little  or  nothing  of  him,  but  thought  she  had
seen  one  or  two  poems  by  him  in  some  volume  of  selections.

Before  writing  the  script  to  be  next  quoted,  Mrs.  Holland
had,  as  she  told  me  a  few  days  later,  read  two  reviews  (in
the  Westminster  Gazette  and  Daily  Chronicle)  of  the  Memoir
of  Dr.  Sidgwick,  but  had  not  seen  the  book  itself.  She  knew
nothing  of  Mrs.  Verrall  having  found  in  it  points  bearing  on
her  script,  but  knew,  of  course,  that  we  should  be  greatly
interested  in  it  on  other  grounds.  The  normal  cause,  then,
influencing  the  script  quoted  below  would  be  the  reviews  of
the  Memoir,  known  to  her  normal  consciousness ;  to  which  may
possibly  be  added  a  subliminal  recollection  of  the  date  of  Roden
Noel's  death,  evoked  by  a  subliminal  recognition  of  the  resem-
blance between  Mrs.  Verrall's  verses  and  his.  His  name  is
not  mentioned  in  either  of  the  two  reviews,  so  that  they  could
not  have  suggested  to  her  any  connection  between  him  and
Dr.  Sidgwick. The  following  is  her  script :

(March  11th,  1906.)

You  find  all  that  has  arrived  thus  far  too  nebulous — and  under
existing  conditions  it  is  not  surprising  it  should  be  so — Let  us


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  319


first  establish  a  recognised  channel  of  communication  that  has
already  taken  years  and  may  take  years  longer — very  possibly —
afterwards  the  quality  of  the  messages  may  improve  and  become
more  definite.

This  is  for  A.  W.  Ask  him  what  the  date  May  -J 6th  1894
meant  to  him — to  me — and  to  F.  W.  H.

I  do  not  think  they  will  find  it  hard  to  recall  but  if  so — let  them
ask  Nora.

We  no  more  solve  the  riddle  of  Death  by  dying  than  we  solve
the  problem  of  Life  by  being  born —  Take  my  own  case —  I  was
always  a  seeker — until  it  seemed  at  times  as  if  the  quest  was  more
to  me  than  the  prize —  Only  the  attainments  of  my  search  were
generally  like  rainbow  gold  alway  beyond  aud  afar —  It  is  not
all  clear — I  seek  still — only  with  a  confirmed  optimism  more  perfect
and  beautiful  than  any  we  imagined  before —  I  am  not  oppressed
with  the  desire  that  animates  some  of  us  to  share  our  knowledge
or  optimism  with  you  all  before  the  time.  You  kuow  who  feels
like  that  but  I  am  content  that  you  should  wait.  The  Solution  of
the  Great  Problem  I  could  not  give  you — I  am  still  very  far  away
from  it  and  the  abiding  knowledge  of  the  inherent  truth  and  Beauty
into  which  all  the  inevitable  uglinesses  of  Existence  finally  resolve
themselves  will  be  yours  in  due  time.  .  .  .

In  sending  me  this  script  Mrs.  Holland  wrote :

[I  enclose]  some  unexpected  script,  which  wrote  itself  very  easily
a  few  minutes  ago.  By  writing  itself  I  mean  there  was  not  the
frequent  feeling  of  striving  and  groping.  I  wonder  if  you  can  fit
a  name  to  it;  it  is  certainly  not  "  F.  M."  or  "  E.  G.':  How  glad
I  should  be  if  the  date  given  was  a  definite  bit  of  evidence  from
Dr.  Hodgson;  but  I  know  I  am  meant  to  be  kept  in  the  dark
just  now,  so  please  take  this  last  sentence  as  not  written.  .  .  .

This  shows  that  Mrs.  Holland  did  not,  at  least  consciously,
associate  the  date  with  Mr.  Roden  Noel.  Nor  did  "  A.  W."
(Dr.  Verrall),  though  he  knew  him  slightly.  He  was  also
known,  though  not  intimately,  to  "  F.  W.  H."  (Mr.  Myers).
It  was,  however,  appropriate  that  we  should  be  told  to  ask
"  Nora  "  (Mrs.  Sidgwick)  if  we  could  not  find  out  for  ourselves,
since  he  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's.

The  reflections  that  follow  ("  We  no  more  solve  the  riddle
of  Death  by  dying,"  etc.),  which  purport  to  be  inspired  by  Dr.
Sidgwick,  are  clearly  derived  from  the  review  in  the  Westminster


320


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Gazette.  From  this  review, — which  takes  up  nearly  two  columns
of  the  paper,  and  deals  with  many  different  topics  out  of  the
book, — it  is  not  unnatural  that  Mrs.  Holland's  subliminal  self
should  select  for  paraphrase  in  her  script  an  extract  from  a
letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Myers,  especially  as  the  review  states
that  the  latter  described  it  as  the  most  interesting  letter  he  had
ever  received  from  Dr.  Sidgwick. The  extract  is  as  follows :

My  difficulty  is  that  I  cannot  give  to  principles  of  conduct  either
the  formal  certainty  that  comes  from  exact  science  or  the  practical
certainty  that  comes  from  a  real  Consensus  of  Experts.  And  I  feel
that  your  peculiar  phase  of  the  "  Maladie "  is  due  to  the  fact  that
you  demand  certainty  with  special  peremptoriness — certainty  estab-
lished either  emotionally  or  intellectually.  I  sometimes  feel  with
somewhat  of  a  profound  hope  and  enthusiasm  that  the  function  of
the  English  mind,  with  its  uncompromising  matter-of-factness,  will
be  to  put  the  final  question  to  the  Universe  with  a  solid,  passionate
determination  to  be  answered  which  must  come  to  something.  How-
ever, in  the  meantime  we  have  to  live  on  less  than  certainty,  which
for  you  is  peculiarly  difficult. (Memoir,  p.  259.)

That  Mr.  Myers  attached  particular  value  to  this  letter  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  is  the  one  letter  quoted  in  his
paper,  "  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick "  (Proceedings  S.P.K.,
Vol.  XV.  p.  455).

The  extract  just  quoted  is  clearly  the  basis  of  this
passage  in  the  script :  "  I  am  not  oppressed  with  the  desire
that  animates  some  of  us  to  share  our  knowledge  or  optimism
with  you  all  before  the  time.  You  know  who  feels  like
that,  but  I  am  content  that  you  should  wait."  Yet  there
remains  the  remarkable  coincidence  that  the  sentiment  repre-
sented in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  should  resemble  so  closely  the
"  clue "  just  found  in  the  Memoir  by  Mrs.  Verrall  to  her  own
early  script, — "  that  on  moral  grounds  hope  rather  than  certainty
is  fit  for  us  in  this  earthly  existence," — and  that  this  should
be  associated  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  with  the  date  of  Eoden
Noel's  death,  whereas  it  was  in  a  letter  to  Eoden  Noel  that
Mrs.  Verrall  had  found  her  "  clue."

Mrs.  Holland's  next  script  begins  as  follows :
(March  14th,  1906.) Eighteen  fifteen  four  five  fourteen —  Fourteen
fifteen  five  twelve — Not  to  be  taken  as  they  stand. See  Rev.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  321


13 —  18 —  but  only  the  central  8  words  not  the  whole  passage —  It

does  not  do  to  be  clearer  under  existino-  circumstances
*****

H.  S.  [in  monogram]  E.  N.  [in  monogram] June  1st  1881  (?)
Surely  you  will  not  need  to  ask  about  that  .  .  .

Revelation,  xiii,  18  is  as  follows:  "Here  is  wisdom.  Let
him  that  hath  understanding  count  the  number  of  the  beast ;  for
it  is  the  number  of  a  man ;  and  his  number  is  Six  hundred
three  score  and  six ; "  and  "  the  central  8  words  "  of  this  text
are :  "  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man."  Acting  on  this  hint
given  by  the  script  as  to  its  own  proper  interpretation,  I
substituted  for  the  initial  numbers  "  eighteen  fifteen "  etc.,  the
corresponding  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  found  that  they
formed  the  name  "  Eoden  Noel."  I  found  afterwards  that
Mrs.  Holland  had  not  looked  up  the  text  and  had  no  idea  of
what  it  was  or  of  what  the  numbers  meant.

Nevertheless  in  her  script  of  Feb.  9th,  1906  (given  above
in  the  section  on  the  Hodgson  control,  see  p.  304),  the  name
"  Eichard  Hodgson  "  had  been  similarly  represented  by  numbers,
which  I  had  interpreted  to  her  on  Feb.  21st.  The  numbers
in  that  case,  however,  were  written  in  figures  and  arranged  in
two  columns,  looking  like  addition  sums.  The  fact  of  their
being  written  in  words  in  the  case  of  Eoden  Noel  probably
prevented  her  supraliminal  self  from  recognising  that  the  same
form  of  conundrum  was  being  used  again.

I  have  not  found  any  significance  in  the  date  "June  1st
1881  "  (the  query  after  "  1881  "  is  part  of  the  original  script).

The  next  passage  which  I  take  to  refer  to  Eoden  Noel
occurs  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  21st,  1906  (quoted  in
full  below,  see  p.  335). It  begins  in  blank  verse,  as  follows:

A  golden  haze  hung  o'er  the  dying  day
And  dimmed  the  rising  radiance  of  the  stars
The  tender  mist  from  where  the  river  winds
Eose  in  transparent  veils  of  thinnest  lawn
A  mist  more  felt  than  visioned —
1  In  the  trees — the  smaller  birds  were  clamourous  while
the  rooks

1  The  line  begins  at  this  point  in  the  original,  though,  according  to  the  metre,
the  words  "in  the  trees"  obviously  belong  to  the  end  of  the  previous  line.


322


Alice  Joltnson.


[pakt


Beat  heavy  winged  against  the  sunset  sky

Back  to  their  chosen  haven — All  the  air

Was  full  of  peace  and  twilight  and  we  walked

We  who  have  trod  such  diverse  ways  since  then —

Ah  talks  of  youth  and  memories  far  away

Dear  Friend  old  Friend

All  things  have  end

We  change  and  pass  away

One  to  life's  best

One  to  his  rest

One  to  the  twilight  grey —

No  man  had  better  friends  by  Cornish  seas  or  [?]  river  banks —
Was  I  a  drone — at  least  there  was  honey  within  my  reach — even  if
I  brought  none  to  the  hive.

It  is  the  word  "  Cornish "  here  which  specially  suggested
Eoden  Noel  to  me,  as  he  had  many  associations  with  Cornwall.
(I  ought  to  say  that  in  the  original  script  the  word  is  rather
illegible,  but  I  believe  it  to  be  "  Cornish,"  and  Mrs.  Verrall
without  any  suggestion  from  me  read  it  as  such.)  The  blank
verse  seems  Tennysonian  in  general  intention,  and  the  description
is  suggestive  of  the  Cambridge  "  Backs,"  in  which  rooks  are  a
rather  prominent  feature.  The  whole  may  be  taken  to  refer
to  Dr.  Sidgwick's  early  life  and  friendships  at  Cambridge,
Pioden  Noel  being  a  friend  of  his  when  he  was  an  under-
graduate ;  and  the  sentence :  "  Was  I  a  drone  ?  At  least
there  was  honey  within  my  reach,  even  if  I  brought  none  to
the  hive,"- — may  be  taken  to  mean  that  Boden  Noel  was
a  man  of  strong  poetic  sensibilities,  although  his  own  contri-
butions to  literature  met  with  little  recognition.

This  whole  interpretation  may  no  doubt  appear  fanciful,  but
in  support  of  it  I  quote  from  a  letter  written  by  Dr.  Sidgwick
immediately  after  Mr.  Noel's  death  to  his  widow  :

I  have  been  thinking  ...  of  the  early  years  of  our  friendship
when  we  talked  and  wrote  to  each  other,  in  the  eagerness  of  youth,
on  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth.  I  have  always  felt  that  though
he  was  keenly  disappointed  by  the  world's  inadequate  recognition  of
his  genius,  he  did  his  work  in  life  none  the  less  resolutely  and
brought  out  his  great  gifts  and  remained  nobly  true  to  his  ideal
(Henri/  Sidgwick;  a  Memoir,  p.  531).


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  323


The  idea  symbolised  in  the  script, — "at  least  there  was
honey  within  my  reach," — is  again  expressed  in  a  letter  from
Dr.  Sidgwick  to  Mr.  Noel's  sister,  Lady  Victoria  Buxton  (op.
cit.  p.  531).

I  .  .  .  never  came  away  from  a  talk  with  him  without  feeling
afresh  the  variety  and  richness  of  his  nature  and  his  sensitiveness  to
all  things  beautiful  in  nature  and  all  things  noble  or  pathetic  in
human  life.  I  never  knew  any  one  who  seemed  more  at  home  in
that  higher  region  of  thought  and  feeling, — into  which  some  of  us
rise  occasionally  with  some  effort, — where  the  great  realities  of  human
life  and  destiny  are  not  only  intellectually  grasped,  but  felt  with  full
intensity.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  last  passage  is  quoted  in  the
Preface  to  The  Collected  Poems  of  Eoden  Noel,  brought  out  by
his  sister  in  1902, — from  which  book,  as  observed  below,  many
of  the  references  to  him  both  in  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts  are  derivable,  though  they  both  believe  that
they  have  never  seen  it.

I  quote  next  a  piece  of  script  by  Mrs.  Verrall.  At  the
time  of  writing  this,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  not  seen  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  14th  about  Eoden  Noel,  but  had  seen  that  of
March  21st.  I  think  it  extremely  improbable,  however,  that
this  latter  should  have  suggested  Eoden  Noel  to  her.  She
wrote  as  follows :

(March  25th,  1906.  11  p.m.)  (In  Latin:  A  philosopher  nor
without  ambition; clearly  denoted,  although  not  recognised.)1

A  cap  of  liberty  not  worn.  There  is  a  cap  a  three-cornered  cap
and  a  tassel  more  like  this  ■

[Three  rough  drawings  of  a  cap  occur  in  the  middle  of  the  last
sentence.]

This  script  was  not  sent  to  me  at  the  time,  as  it  was  not
written  on  one  of  the  days  fixed  for  experiments  between  the
two  automatists,  so  that  I  did  not  see  it  until  I  was  preparing
this  report.

The  description  is  of  course  vague  and  might  apply  to  a
good  many  persons ;  yet,  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  certainly
appropriate  to  Mr.  Noel. When  I  showed  it  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick

1  Philosophus  nec  sine  ambitu — bene  designatus  etsi  non  coguitus.


324


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  asked  her  if  she  did  not  think  it  suggestive  of  him,  she
said  at  once  that  it  seemed  to  her  a  very  good  description  of
him.  One  of  the  deepest  interests  of  his  life  was  philosophy,
and  he  was  certainly  not  without  literary  ambitions,  as
mentioned  above.  He  had  a  keen  and  vivid  sympathy  with
the  poor  and  oppressed — whether  classes  or  nationalities — and
many  of  his  poems  refer  to  subjects  of  this  kind ;  see,  e.g.,
Garibaldi  and  The  Red  Flag.  The  "  cap  of  liberty "  of  the
script  may  be  regarded  as  symbolical  of  this  sentiment  in  him.

The  phrase  "  clearly  denoted,  although  not  recognised,"  seems
to  indicate  that  the  person  has  previously  been  designated  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  but  not  yet  identified ;  which,  as  we
have  seen,  was  true  of  Roden  Noel.

The  next  reference  to  Roden  Noel  by  name  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  occurs  on  March  28th,  1906,  as  follows:

How  loudly  that  clock  strikes  [the  script  was  begun  at  midnight,
and  probably  a  clock  had  just  struck].

Percival.  Roden  Noel — Settle — Seattle  Seittle — Cornwall — Where
the  one  long  street  seemed  to  lead  directly  to  the  blue  sea.

Clear  eyes  under  a  broad  brow — a  shock  of  grey  hair  that  was
still  thick.  ■  Not  tall — Do  you  remember  the  velvet  jacket.  Patter-
son. No  the  long  pipe — not  the  little  short  old  one —

Both  Roden  Noel  and  Mr.  (A.  J.)  Patterson  were,  Mrs.
Sidgwick  tells  me,  undergraduate  friends  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's,  so
that  there  is  a  certain  appropriateness  in  their  being  mentioned
together.  Mr.  Patterson  is  mentioned  as  a  friend  and  corre-
spondent of  Dr.  Sidgwick's  in  the  Westminster  Gazette  review
referred  to  above,  in  which  Roden  Noel's  name  does  not
occur.

The  latter's  personal  appearance,  which  is  correctly  described
in  the  script — including  the  velvet  jacket  which  was  char-
acteristic of  him- — is  shown  in  the  portrait  prefixed  to  his
Collected  Poems,  published  in  1902.  In  the  preface  to  this,
the  date  of  his  death  is  mentioned,  and  the  extract  quoted
above  from  the  letter  to  his  sister  from  "  his  friend,  the  late
Dr.  Henry  Sidgwick  "  is  given.  The  same  book  contains  poems
of  his  about  Cornwall.

In  regard  to  Mrs.  Holland's  conscious  knowledge  of  all  these
matters, I saw her  on  May  28th,  1906,  and  went  rapidly


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  325

through  with  her  most  of  the  script  that  she  had  written  up
to  that  date.  When  we  came  to  the  script  of  March  11th,
1906,  she  asked  me  if  the  date  "May  26th,  1894  "  had  any
significance.  I  told  her  it  was  the  date  of  Eoden  Noel's  death
and  showed  her  the  later  references  to  him.  She  said  she
had  not  interpreted,  nor — I  understood — attempted  to  interpret
the  script  of  March  14th;  that  she  knew  nothing  of  Eoden
Noel  beyond  his  name  and  one  or  two  sonnets  which  she
had  read  in  a  book  of  selections.  She  felt  sure  she  had  never
seen  a  portrait  of  him  or  heard  of  his  wearing  a  velvet  jacket.
I  did  not  tell  her  of  the  references  to  him  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script,  since  I  had  not  then  detected  them.

After  discovering  the  resemblance  between  Mrs.  Verrall's
verses  of  March  7th,  1906,  and  Eoden  Noel's  poem,  I  wrote
to  Mrs.  Holland  on  Feb.  6th,  1908,  reminding  her  that
these  verses  (which  I  then  quoted  again)  had  occurred  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  early  in  1906,  and  adding:  "I  want
to  know  if  you  recognise  this — especially  the  first  three
lines — or  if  it  strikes  you  as  being  like  any  verses  you
know,  and  if  so  what.  Please  think  carefully  over  this.  It
may  suggest  an  author  to  you,  if  not  a  poem."

Mrs.  Holland  replied  :

In  answer  to  your  question  about  the  verses  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  early  in  1906,  "Tintagel  and  the  sea  that  moaned  in  pain,
etc.,"  as  soon  as  I  read  them,  I  said  "Eoden  Noel,  of  course!"
though,  as  my  knowledge  of  his  poems  is  limited  to  the  two  .  .  .
quoted  in  the  Oxford  Book  of  English  Verse,1  I  could  not  explain
why  the  name  occurred  to  me.  But  on  looking  up  my  script  for
1906,  I  see  it  is  given  in  figures  on  March  14th  and  in  words  on
March  28th.

I  then  sent  Mrs.  Holland  the  first  proofs  of  this  chapter,
saying  that  these  would  show  why  I  had  asked  the  question
and  asked  further :  "  Did  you  say  Eoden  Noel  because  you
remembered  that  you  had  had  references  to  him  early  in
1906  and  from  that  inferred  the  right  answer  to  my  question?
Or  [do  you  think  that]  you  subliminally  recognised  the
verses,  either  when  you  first  saw  them  in  1906,  or  when
I  quoted  them  to  you  just  now  ? "

1  The  poem  "Tintadgel"  is  not  one  of  these  two.
X


326


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  Holland  replied  to  me  on  April  16th,  1908:

I  can  only  conclude  that  my  exclamation  :  "  Roden  Noel,  of
course ! "  after  reading  Mrs.  Verrall's  verses  quoted  in  your  letter
was  due  to  a  telepathic  influence  exerted  by  your  letter.  The  verses
meant  nothing  at  all  to  me  when  you  sent  them  to  me  before,
and  I  have  read  nothing  since  that  throws  any  light  upon  them.
The  conviction  came  instantly,  as  an  impression  gained  from  a
letter  often  does  come  with  me.  I  remembered  afterwards  that
"  Percival — Roden  Noel "  had  been  written  in  my  script  before
what  purported  to  be  a  description  ...  I  know  I  have  never
seen  a  volume  of  his  poems.  The  one  sonnet  quoted  in  Sonnets  of
this  Century  and  the  two  short  poems  in  the  Oxford  Book  of  English
Verse  are  all  that  I  know  of  his  writings — no  reference  to  Cornwall
in  them.  I  can  speak  of  this  with  certainty,  for  I  am  very  fond
of  verse  and  always  remember  if  I  come  across  a  volume  by  a
minor  poet  whom  I  have  seen  quoted.

It  had  before  been  obvious  to  me,  from  the  numerous
quotations  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  that  she  read  a  good
deal  of  poetry  and  remembered  a  good  deal  of  what  she  read,
and  she  has  generally  been  able  to  tell  me  at  least  the
author,  if  not  the  source,  of  the  quotations.  I  had  also
learnt  incidentally  through  a  friend  of  hers  of  a  small
instance  showing  a  remarkably  retentive  conscious  memory
of  poetry  on  her  part.  All  this  goes  to  confirm  her  belief
that  she  would  have  known  if  she  had  seen  Roden  Noel's
poem.

To  sum  up  the  various  items  relating  to  this  topic,  it  will
be  seen  that  in  neither  of  the  scripts  does  a  single  statement
occur  that  is  provdbly  unknown  to  the  writers.  Neither  of
them  recognises  what  her  script  is  referring  to ;  to  both,  when
I  interpret  it  to  them,  the  facts  appear  as  something  not  only
unfamiliar,  but  completely  new,  as  if  heard  for  the  first  time.
And  it  is  not  unlikely  that  they  were  actually  heard  then  for  the
first  time.  But  since  they  are  all  either  stated  in  or  derivable
from  printed  sources,  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  Mrs.  Verrall
and  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  once  seen  these  sources,  which  might
have  been  utilised  by  their  subliminal  memory.

The  productions  of  neither  automatist,  then,  taken  alone,  can  be
regarded  as  clear  evidence  of  communication  from  an  indepen-


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  327


dent  external  intelligence,  such  as  the  surviving  individuality
of  Dr.  Sidgwick  or  of  Mr.  Noel.  The  important  point  in  this,
as  in  many  other  cross-correspondences,  lies  not  in  either
script  taken  by  itself,  but  in  the  connection  between  the
two, — in  the  fact  of  the  same  topic  occurring  in  both,  though
in  very  different  forms,  and  recognised  by  neither  writer.

Coincidental  Reference  to  Physical  Phenomena.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  14th,  1906,  the  first  part
of  which  is  quoted  above,  p.  320,  goes  on:

How  M.  V.  is  knitting  her  brows —  A  W  preserves  the  accustomed
attitude  of  semi-humourous  [sic]  interest — -A  little  aloof  perhaps — but
far  more  for  than  against.

Don't  let  P.  temporize  the  whole  thing  had  better  be  pub-
lished.

It's  a  pity  R.  has  no  sense  of  humour  but  not  unusual  for  his
nationality.  It  gives  him  a  certain  power  too — some  of  us  were
too  whimsical  perhaps  are. Look  at  L.  for  instance —

Stand  by  the  faith  that  is  in  you —  Mr.  Facing  Both  Ways  has
not  grown  more  bearable  since  Pilgrims  Progress  days —  When
faith  is  hopelessly  lacking  I  am  tempted  to  wish  that  a  little  good
old-fashioned  prejudice  might  take  its  place —

A  long  feather  on  a  very  flexible  stem — easily  concealed  in  her
dress  and  not  very  difficult  for  a  person  of  her  accomplishments  to
produce — For  spirit  touches  it  is  of  course  excellent.

Perverted  honesty — giving  something  for  the  money  at  any  rate —
What  can  you  expect  from  that  particular  scale  of  fees —  Bark  is
no  good — a  shaded  light  at  first — if  you  like — but  not  darkness —
Try  with  unpaid  ones  in  July — and  the  second  time  will  be  worth
it—  G.

The  first  paragraph  here  refers  again  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  report
on  her  script,  then  (as  Mrs.  Holland  knew)  being  prepared,  and
the  description  of  Dr.  Verrall's  ("  A.  W.")  mental  attitude  in
regard  to  it  seems  to  me  remarkably  appropriate.  The  next
sentence  no  doubt  refers  to  the  same  matter,  "  P."  being  Mr.
Piddington,  with  whom  Mrs.  Verrall  had  had  much  discussion
about  the  publication  of  her  Report.  The  sentence,  however,
does  not  represent  his  view  at  all  correctly.

The  second  part  of  the  script,  the  last  passage  of  which  is
signed by the Gurney control, recurs to the subject  of


328


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  physical  phenomena "  treated  of  in  the  script  during  the
latter  part  of  1905.  I  do  not  know  if  the  device  suggested
for  producing  "  spirit  touches  "  has  ever  been  used  by  mediums.

On  March  13th,  the  day  before  this  script  was  written,  I
had  received  from  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  an  Algerian  paper,  Lcs
JVouvellcs,  of  March  5th,  1906,  containing  an  attack  by  Dr.
Eouby  (of  Algiers)  on  the  Algerian  "  materialisations "  reported
by  Professor  Eichet.  I  at  once  wrote  to  Dr.  Eouby  asking
for  further  information,  and  discussed  the  subject  with  Mr.
Feilding  either  on  March  13th  or  14th.  I  mentioned  above
(p.  273)  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  first  referred  to  "physical
phenomena "  on  the  day  that  I  had  had  a  special  discussion
with  Mr.  Feilding  about  Eusapia  Paladino.  Here  again,  after
a  long  interval,  she  recurs  to  the  subject  just  when  it  was
occupying  our  minds  to  an  unusual  extent.

Eeports  of  the  Algerian  sittings  had  appeared  in  the  Annals
of  Psychical  Science  for  October,  1905,  and  following  numbers,
and  Dr.  Eouby's  attack  was  first  mentioned  in  the  Annals
in  April,  1906.  Mrs.  Holland  saw  these  accounts  for  the
first  time  in  the  middle  of  the  latter  month.

Experiments  with  Mrs.  Vekrall  on  the  supposed  influence

of  inanimate  objects.

Mrs.  Holland  had  received  from  me  a  copy  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  March  7th,  containing  the  sentence:

"  Send  [Mrs.  Holland]  something  of  yours,  a  ring,  that  would
help  her";  and  wrote  to  me  on  March  11th,  1906:  "The
suggestion  about  the  ring  interests  me.  Would  Mrs.  Verrall
care  to  try  the  experiment  of  exchanging  rings  for  a  few
weeks  ?  One  that  she  has  had  a  long  time  would  be  the
best.  If  so,  will  you  let  me  know  and  I  will  send  her  one
of  mine  direct."

I  conveyed  this  suggestion  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  asking  her  if
she  would  send  a  ring  direct  to  Mrs.  Holland.  She  did  so,
with  the  following  message  only :

This  ring  has  never  been  worn  by  any  one  but  me  and  has  been
taken  straight  from  my  finger.  I  am  leaving  home  to-morrow  for
a  round  of  visits  ;  my  letters  will  be  forwarded,  but  if  you  would
like  to  send  me  a  ring  of  yours,  which  I  should  much  like  to  try,
will  you  wait  till  April,  when  I  shall  be  at  home  again.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  329


Mrs.  Holland  received  the  ring  by  the  first  post  on  the
morning  of  March  loth,  and  immediately  after  receiving  it,  had
an  impression  which  she  noted  down  at  once  and  sent  to  Mrs.
Verrall  the  same  day,  in  a  letter  in  which  she  said :

March  15th,  1906.
.  .  .  While  I  was  dressing  this  morning  and  thinking  of  you
and  the  ring,  I  had  such  a  vivid  impression  of  a  room  that  I  noted
it  down  instantly  and  send  you  a  copy  of  my  notes.  As  it  was
not  automatic  script,  I  spare  you  my  untidy  pencil  scribble.  The
lady  in  brown  hardly  seemed  to  be  you,  but  the  room  had  to  do
with  you.  .  .  .

The  note  enclosed  was  as  follows :

(March  15th,  1906. 8.45  a.m.)

A  dining  room,  narrow  for  its  height,  a  long  room.  Dull  red
paper  on  the  wall  ;  brown  wood  dado  or  high  wainscot.  A  great
deal  of  brass  about  the  fireplace.  Table  laid  for  a  meal,  bright
fire.  Something  Egyptian  in  the  room,  or  else  ornaments  of  an
"  Egyptian  pattern."

Lady  in  brown  dress  reading  letter. Is  it  Mrs.  V.  1

An  elaborate  coffee-making  machine  and  a  silver  urn.

Green-handled  knives.

Honeycomb. Indian  tree  patterned  china.

Mrs.  Verrall  sent  me  this  letter  with  its  enclosure  in  its
original  envelope,  showing  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  addressed  it
to  her  at  Cambridge,  from  whence  it  had  been  forwarded  to
her  to  the  house  of  "  Mrs.  Forbes,"  where  she  was  then
staying.  I  must  again  remind  the  reader  that  this  happened
some  time  before  the  publication  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  Eeport  on
her  script,  in  which  "  cross-correspondences "  with  Mrs.  Forbes
are  described.  It  seems  impossible,  therefore,  that  Mrs.  Holland
could  have  been  led  by  any  normal  means  to  guess  where
Mrs.  Verrall  was  going.  Even  if  she  had  known  the  address
it  would  not  have  helped  her  much,  for  Mrs.  Forbes,  whose
confirmation  of  the  case  is  given  below,  told  me  later,  that
she  did  not  know  Mrs.  Holland  and,  as  far  as  she  knew,
they  had  no  mutual  friends  or  acquaintances.

Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  to  me  that  she  had  not  replied  to  Mrs.
Holland's  letter,  but  that  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Forbes  agreed


330


Alice  Johnson.


[part


that  the  description  recalled  their  dining-room  unmistakeably.
Mrs.  Verrall's  full  report  to  me  was  as  follows :

March  17th,  1906.

Note  on  ' '  Impression  "  received  from  [Mrs.  Holland]  on  Friday  evening,
March  16th,  9  p.m.,  at  above  address.

Dining-room :  not  narrow  for  height ;  large  room  rather  than
long.

Dull  red  paper.

Below  two  windows  is  brown  wood  panelling  and  there  is  a  door
opposite,  brown  to  match.  The  mantelpiece,  brown  oak,  reaches  to
the  bottom  of  the  frieze,  i.e.  to  same  height  as  paper.  Beside  it
oak  book-shelves  cover  the  wall.  There  is  a  dark  oak  sideboard
and  other  dark  oak  furniture,  standing  against  the  wall.  I  had
a  strong  impression  of  brown  wood  and  red,  and  had  to  go  into
the  room  to  see  whether  there  was  a  dado.  Great  deal  of  brass  about
fireplace,  viz.  fender,  etc.,  "basket  grate,"  two  huge  brass  plates  and
a  large  brass  pot  on  mantel  shelf.

Table  laid  for  meal  often  some  time  before  meal ;  e.g.  on  my
arrival  at  5.30  p.m.  the  laid  dinner  table  was  conspicuous  in  the
firelight,  through  the  always  open  door  to  the  hall.

Most  conspicuous  and  distinctive  object  in  room  is  a  large  Cairene
screen,  of  which  I  am  particularly  fond.  It  has  the  regular  Egyptian
pattern  work  in  dark  wood.

On  Thurs.,  Mar.  15,  there  were  3  ladies  in  the  house:  Mrs.
[Forbes]  never  wears  colours  ;  Mrs.  W.  is  a  widow ;  Miss  H.  L.  in
brown  tweed,  brown  shoes  and  stockings,  a  conspicuously  brown
dress,  which  suits  her  striking  colouring.

Coffee  making  an  elaborate  affair,  very,  but  no  machine  in  the
dining  room.

Much  silver  on  table,  but  no  urn.  On  Thurs.  morning,  large  tea
pot,  large  coffee  pot,  and  silver  pot  with  flowers.  4  silver  candle-
sticks in  the  evening.

No  green-handled  knives.

Honeycomb  always,  and  always  cut  with  a  knife,  not  a  spoon.

Three  large  oriental  china  jars  on  cabinet,  the  centre  one  with  a
very  conspicuous  tree  on  it.

Note.  On  Thurs.  15th,  I  only  reached  here  at  5.30  p.m.,  so  the
impression  on  [Mrs.  Holland]  was  not  by  direct  telepathy  from  me.
I  had  not  seen  the  brown  lady  before  this  visit,  and  the  oriental
china  was  no  part  of  my  conscious  recollection.  The  Cairene  screen
was  familiar,  though  I  had  not  thought  of  it  before  coming  here.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  331

The  house  was  known  to  Mr.  Myers,  and  to  Dr.  Hodgson.  The
address  had  not  been  given  to  [Mrs.  Holland].

I  knew  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  going  to  Mrs.  Forbes's  house
on  that  day,  but  I  have  never  seen  the  house  myself,  nor
heard  it  described.  Mrs.  Forbes  sent  me  the  following  con-
firmation :

April  8th,  1906.

Mrs.  Verrall  arrived  on  Thursday,  March  15th,  at  about  5.45  p.m.
I  am  not  quite  sure  that  she  did  not  catch  the  earlier  train,  but  I
think  not.  The  dining  room  here  is  a  long  room,  but  not  a  narrow
or  a  low  one.  The  walls  are  papered  with  a  rather  dark  crimson
paper  and  all  the  wood  work  and  furniture  is  dark  brown,  wood
stained,  no  paint.  Under  the  large  windows  is  high  wainscotting,
as  high  as  an  ordinary  dado,  and  the  effect  of  the  room  is  red  above,
brown  below.  The  fireplace  is  a  very  large  one  with  an  old  brass
fender  and  a  brass  arrangement  for  keeping  plates  hot.  Above  is
an  oak  shelf  with  a  large  brass  ewer  upon  it,  and  above  again,
against  the  frieze,  are  two  large  round  brass  dishes.  The  table
is  left  laid,  with  flowers  and  silver  upon  it,  all  day.  There  is  usually
a  bright  fire  in  a  large  brass  grate  with  dogs.  The  room  is  so  large
that  it  is  divided  by  an  Egyptian  screen,  brought  from  Egypt  by  a
friend.  There  is  some  blue  and  white  Indian  china,  with  trees  upon
it.  A  friend,  dressed  in  brown,  was  staying  in  the  house.  At
breakfast  there  was  honey,  in  the  comb,  on  the  table.

The  wrong  things  in  this  description  are  :

\.  The  narrowness  of  the  room.

2.  Coffee  machine  and  silver  urn.

3.  Greemhandled  knives.

There  was  a  good  deal  of  silver  on  the  table,  but  no  urn.
N.B. — We  had  breakfasted  at  a  little  after  eight,  and  no  doubt
spoke  of  Mrs.  Verrall  coming  that  day.

No  information  was  given  to  Mrs.  Holland  as  to  the
correctness  either  of  this  impression  or  of  her  script  written
during  the  period  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  visit  to  Mrs.  Forbes  until
considerably  later.  It  will  be  seen  that  a  good  many  veridical
statements  were  made  in  it  during  this  time,  and  it  may  be
conjectured  that  the  association  between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Forbes  created  a  specially  favourable  condition  for  telepathic
communication.  But  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  the  same
association  gives  Mrs.  Holland's  script  a  double  chance  of  scoring


332


Alice  Johnson.


[part


successes,  since  her  statements  might  be  taken  to  refer  either  to
Mrs.  Verrall  or  to  Mrs.  Forbes — possibly  also  to  other  visitors
staying  in  the  house — and  a  certain  degree  of  ambiguity  is
thus  introduced.

Mrs.  Holland's  first  script  written  while  holding  Mrs.  Verrall's
ring  was  as  follows :

(March  17th,  1906. 11  p.m.)

(1)  It  dates  from  more  than  twenty  years  ago.

(a)  What  a  deep  shade  that  great  tree  casts — it  would  shelter  a
party  of  conspirators Once  it  did —

In  the  little  wood — the  grave  is  there — All  ground  is  consecrated
under  God's  sky —

Her  father  loved  her  dearly  but  he  did  not  always  understand  and
she  was  only  a  child  when  her  mother  died —  She  was  very  different
from  the  others —

(2)  The  heart  has  no  age — and  she  was  always  old  for  her  years —
so  why  notice  any  disparity — they  never  felt  it.

(1)  One  of  the  first  among  the  wedding  gifts.
Sincerity  and  singleness  of  purpose  are  the  keynotes —

(3)  It  was  the  illness  nearly  11  years  ago  that  mattered  most

A  life  that  leads  harmonious  days
A  straight  bar  brooch  set  with  small  stones —  The  lost  one  was
the  shape  of  a  tiny  buckle  set  with  seed  pearls — that  was  on  the
river  bank —  We  are  not  met  [sic]  to  keep  our  trifling  possessions
all  our  lives  long — we  should  enjoy  them  for  the  sake  of  their  tender
associations  or  their  own  intrinsic  beauty  for  a  term  of  years  or
months  and  then  pass  on  the  pleasure  of  them  to  a  new  owner — ■
Never  regret  a  lost  jewel — it  has  fulfilled  its  part  in  your  life — let
it  pass  on —

(b)  The  masculine  reasoning  is  enlivened  and  alleviated  by  such
flashes  of  purely  illogical  feminine  intuition  that  it  robs  her  intellect
of  half  its  terrors  and  supplies  her  greatest  charm — consistent  clever-
ness is  so  alienating

(4)  "A  young  maid,  with  the  bluest  eyes."1

(a)  The  tree  here  described  was  identified  later  as  an  old
yew  tree  with  branches  coming  down  to  the  ground  at  Whit-
tingehame,  Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour's  Scotch  estate.  Mrs.  Holland  had
met  Mr.  Balfour  while  she  was  staying  in  London  a  few  weeks
before  this,  and  there  were  several  references to  him  in  the

1  R.  Browning,  Colombe's  Birthday,  Act  I.


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  333


script  afterwards,  but  nothing  more  of  an  interesting  or  eviden-
tial character.  The  tree  in  question  is  close  to  a  little  wood,
which  contains  the  grave  in  which  Lady  Blanche  Balfour  and
her  son,  Mr.  F.  M.  Balfour,  are  buried.  In  a  short  Life  of
Lady  Blanche  (by  Dr.  James  Bobertson,  published  in  1897),1
which  contains  a  picture  of  the  grave,  showing  that  it  is  among
trees,  the  place  is  described  as  "  an  ancient  churchyard,"  but
there  are  now  no  indications  of  this.  No  mention  is  made  in
the  Life  of  the  old  yew  tree.  Lady  Blanche  was  twelve  years
old  when  her  mother  died.

A  few  weeks  later  Mrs.  Holland,  knowing  nothing  of  the
verification  of  these  points  in  her  script,  met  Mr.  Balfour  again,
and  on  this  occasion  it  happened  that  she  was  asked  to  try
some  experiments  in  crystal-gazing.  When  Mr.  Balfour  held
the  crystal  she  saw  (as  she  tells  me  in  a  note  written  the
same  evening)

the  figure  of  a  bishop,  then  a  big  dark  overshadowing  tree,  but  not
very  clearly.  .  .  .  Mr.  B.  asked  if  the  tree  was  dark  or  light.  I
said  "  The  picture  has  gone  vague,  but  I  have  a  funny  impression
of  conspiracy,  but  how  can  one  connect  the  Gunpowder  Plot  with  a
tree  T"  Mr.  B.  [said],  "  You  are  thinking  of  a  real  tree,  but  not
the  one  I  was  thinking  of,"  and  it  turned  out  that  he  was  thinking  of
a  tulip  tree  in  England,  while  [two  of  his  friends  who  were  looking
on]  thought  of  an  old  yew  tree  at  Whittingehame,  where  the  plot
to  blow  up  Darnley  is  supposed  to  have  been  discussed.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  was  also  present,  sends  me  a  note  in
confirmation  of  this  account.  Mrs.  Holland  believed  that  she
had  never  heard  of  this  tree  before,  but  Mrs.  Sidgwick  tells
me  that  the  tree  and  the  tradition  about  it  are  well-known  in
the  neighbourhood  and  mentioned  in  guide-books,  so  that  this,
like  many  other  incidents  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  may  possibly
be  due  to  a  subliminal  recollection.

(b)  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  this  description  is
obviously  meant  to  apply  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

On  the  points  in  the  script  marked  by  numbers  in  brackets,
Mrs.  Verrall  informed  me :

(1)  This  seems  to  apply  to  her  ring,  lent  to  Mrs.  Holland.
It  had  been  sent  in  its  original  case,  marked  with  her  initials

1  This  Life  is  practically  a  reprint  of  two  articles  in  Good  Words  for  April
and  May,  1896.


334


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  M.  de  Gr."  The  initial  of  the  surname  was  absent,  because
the  ring  had  been  given  to  her  on  her  last  birthday  before
her  marriage — partly  as  a  birthday  and  partly  as  a  wedding
present.  It  was  therefore  true  that  it  was  "  one  of  the  first
among  the  wedding  gifts,"  but  this  might  perhaps  have  been
inferred  from  the  absence  of  the  last  initial, — from  which
again  might  follow  the  approximate  date,  "  more  than  twenty
years  ago."

(4)  This  may  refer  to  Miss  Verrall,  who,  her  mother  tells
me,  was  remarkable  as  a  child  for  her  blue  eyes,  so  much  so
that  she  used  to  be  called  the  "  blue-eyed  maid  "  in  her  family
circle.

(2)  and  (3)  may  be  taken  to  refer  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Forbes,
between  whom  there  is  fourteen  years'  difference  in  age.  Mr.
Forbes  had  a  serious  illness  at  the  end  of  1896  and  the
greater  part  of  1897.  "This  illness  (Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  to
me)  changed  our  lives  completely."  He  had  an  earlier  illness
not  long  after  their  marriage,  from  which  he  made  a  complete
recovery.  This  perhaps  explains  the  use  of  the  word  "  most "
in  the  script.

Cross-Correspondence.
Posilipo.

The  next  day  of  experiment  was  March  21st,  1906,  when
Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  the  following :

(March  21,  1906. 11  p.m.)

(1)  overland  route  arrival  next  month. Massiliotes  terragenae
and  bright  the  last  gleams  of  the  lingering  sun,  o'er  olives  old

and  hoary.

(2)  Posilippo  [sic]  and  a  terrace  there — blue  sea  beyond  the  marble
balustrade.

No  I  can  see  no  more  here. But  say  Goodnight.
You  could  meet  Mrs.  [Holland]  in  April  before  Easter  I  think —
and  she  conies  to  you  later  in  the  spring.

On  this  script  Mrs.  Verrall  sent  me  the  following  notes :

April  1st,  1906.

(1)  Terrigenae  (earth-born)  means  indigenous  inhabitants.  Mas-
saliotes  is  the  Greek  word  for  natives  of  Massalia  (Marseilles).


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  335

(2)  Posilipo  near  Naples  is  the  site  of  Virgil's  tomb  :  it  is  on  a
hill  called  from  a  villa.  It  is  covered  with  remains  of  Roman
villas  and  has  many  "  points  of  view  "  including  openings  in  a  long
tunnel  through  which  the  road  runs.  There  are  views  from  an  inn
and  a  terrace,  but  I  can  find  no  "  marble  balustrade."  This  infor-
mation comes  from  a  guide  book  and  is  new  to  me.

I  know  Marseilles,  but  not  Naples  etc.

Both  these  topics,  (1)  and  (2),  had  a  certain  relevance  to
Mrs.  Holland.

(1)  I  sent  a  copy  of  the  script  (all  but  the  last  sentence
in  which  she  is  referred  to)  to  her  on  March  24th,  and
she  wrote  to  me  on  March  29th:

Is  "  Massiliotes "  a  shot  at  Marseilles  1  My  father  starts  from
there  next  month  to  go  to  Sicily  and  Greece  and  other  lovely
places,  where  he  will  doubtless  see  "  olives  old  and  hoary "  and
"blue  sea."

(2)  As  shown  below,  the  first  sentence  of  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  21st,  1906,  written  at  10.10  p.m.,  is:

They  have  all  been  trying  in  turn  but  some  of  them  are  not
serious —  Margaret  and  Helen  are —  M.  saw  a  real  place  that
last  time  but  she  has  never  seen  the  place  itself  and  did  not
describe  it  very  clearly.

Mrs.  Verrall  had  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Holland  when  they  met
on  Nov.  16th,  1905,  that  she  had  a  daughter  Helen,  and  I
think  some  reference  was  made  to  experiments  with  her.  Her
daughter  was  not  with  her  during  her  visit  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  but
she  did  a  good  deal  of  experimenting  with  Mrs.  Forbes  and
one  or  two  ladies  who  were  staying  in  the  house  in  planchette
writing,  crystal-gazing,  etc.  The  phrase  "  M.  saw  a  real  place
that  last  time  but  she  has  never  seen  the  place  itself"  is  true
if  applied  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  about  Posilipo  just  quoted.

I  now  quote  Mrs.  Holland's  script  for  this  day  produced
while  she  was  wearing  Mrs.  Verrall's  ring :

(Wed.  March  21st,  1906. 10.10  p.m.)
(Before  I  begin  to  write  I  should  like  to  record  I  have  just  seen
something  in  a  crystal. The  "crystal"  in  this  case  was  a  glass
paper  weight. I  so  seldom  see  anything  when  I  am  alone  that  I
was  quite  startled,  though  the  "  vision  "  was  simple  enough.  A


.336


Alice  Johnson.


[part


little  woman  in  a  black  velvet  dress  with  untidily  arranged  fluffy
brown  hair  and  a  pale  impish  face.  Her  arms  were  bare  to  the
elbow  and  she  was  stooping  over  what  I  at  first  thought  was  a
red  and  gold  table,  as  if  going  to  lift  it.  Presently  this  seemed
to  be  a  big  book  on  the  table.)  [The  person  here  described  has
not  been  identified. — A.  J.]

(1)  They  have  all  been  trying  in  turn  but  some  of  them  are
not  serious —  Margaret  and  Helen  are —  M  saw  a  real  place  that
last  time  but  she  has  never  seen  the  place  itself  and  did  not
describe  it  very  clearly —

(a)  It's  a  belated  wisdom  on  A's  part  to  rest — but  those  books
should  be  forbidden —  Give  him  only  trashy  novels  or  familiar
favourites  and  no  foreign  languages — not  even  French —  The  rest
is  needed  and  the  rest  that  polishes  off  arrears  of  work  will  not
have  a  beneficial  effect.

(2)  Two  windows  in  the  room — one  very  much  smaller  than  the
other — Yes  you  can  see  the  river.

(3)  The  honeysuckle  is  all  right  but  the  Jap  passion  flower  died
in  the  frost

Percival  Edgar.

(b)  Pale  blue  will  be  victorious —

(4)  Frank  paid  a  heavy  price — Daisy  ?

[Here  follows  the  passage  quoted  above  in  the  section  on  Roden
Noel,  see  p.  321.]

(c)  How  can  you  expect  to  get  perfectly  well  under  existing
circumstances — you  need  electricity — less  work  and  a  wiser  diet.
The  hours  are  wrong  to  begin  with — you  dine  too  late  and  even
sitting  up  till  all  hours  after  does  not  put  matters  right.

[Next  come  two  rough  drawings  of  a  goose  and  an  ink-stand  with
a  quill  in  it,  followed  by  the  words  :] Made  of  a  grey  goose  quill.

(5)  There  is  gold  inlay  on  the  blade — the  hilt  is  very
worn —  It's  in  the  hall — he  forgets  where  it  came
from — but  its  story  is  clearly  impressed  upon  it.  Get
it  pschometrised  [sic] — E.  P.  even  could  not  fail —

(6)  Button — button — -whose  [sic]  got  the  button  ?  Look  under  the
carpet —

The  <^>  went  out  of  doors  and  she  won't  find  it  again —  ....


■t


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  337


Via  Nazionale —  Roma.

A  screw  pine  stood  like  a  sentinel.

The  white-winged  bird  is  faint  with  weariness —

Conjurato. lietro  me —

(7)  F.[1]  A  pair  of  scale*.


In  trine — Nov.  12 — Jan.  15 —
Feb.  23
June  23rd — March  28th.
Blunders — blunders.


Inept.

It's  on  the  mantelpiece  the  thing
they  mean  [drawing  of  amphora]
amphora.


Talking  in  sleep.

I  comment  first  on  the  passages  marked  with  letters  in
brackets :

(a)  refers  to  Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour,  who — as  Mrs.  Holland  had  no
doubt  seen  in  the  papers — was  then  going  through  a  rest-cure.

(b)  The  boat  race  was  won  by  Cambridge  on  April  7th,
1906.

The  names  "  Percival "  and  "Edgar"  have  not  been  dis-
covered to  have  any  meaning  in  connection  with  the  rest  of
the  script.

(c)  probably  refers  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  who,  as  Mrs.  Holland
knew,  had  been  for  some  time  suffering  from  some  form  of
neuritis  and  had  been  forbidden  to  write.  This  latter  fact  is
symbolised,  I  take  it,  in  the  drawings  of  the  goose  and
ink-stand  with  a  quill  in  it.


338


Alice  Johnson.


[part


About  the  veridical  statements  in  the  script,  marked  with
numbers  in  brackets,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes  gave  me  the
following  information  :

(1)  The  cross-correspondence  involved  in  this  has  just  been
described,  see  above,  pp.  334-5.

(2)  There  are  two  windows  in  Mrs.  Forbes's  drawing-room,
one  a  large  bow,  the  other  a  small  window,  both  looking  south
into  the  garden.  There  is  a  stream  in  the  garden  which  can
be  seen  from  one  of  these  windows.  It  was  in  this  room
that  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes  did  planchette  writing-
together.

(3)  Mrs.  Forbes  writes  (April  8th,  1906):  "There  is  honey-
suckle outside  the  window  on  the  house,  and  there  was  a
Pyrus  Japonica,  but  all  except  a  small  shoot  has  died.  No
Passion  flower."

(4)  "  Frank "  is  Mr.  Forbes's  name,  but  there  seems  to  be
no  point  in  the  statement  that  he  paid  a  heavy  price,  nor  is
there  any  association  of  the  name  Daisy  with  him.

(5)  On  the  day  when  this  script  was  written,  March  21st,
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  H.  L.  (the  "  brown  lady "  of  Mrs.
Holland's  impression,  see  above,  p.  329)  were  trying  experiments
in  crystal-gazing,  when  Mrs.  Verrall  asked  Mrs.  Forbes  if  she
possessed  an  inlaid  musket,  as  one  had  been  described  in  her
script  of  August  26th,  1903.1  Mrs.  Forbes  said  she  had  an
inlaid  weapon  of  another  kind  -and  brought  it  in  from  the  hall
to  show  her.  It  turned  out  to  be  a  dagger,  nine  or  ten
inches  long,  part  of  which  was  much  worn.

(6)  Mrs.  Verrall  suggested  that  this  might  refer  to  a  dog
belonging  to  Mrs.  Forbes  with  whom  they  used  to  play  at
hiding  things  in  the  room  for  him  to  find.

(7)  "F."  may  mean  Frank  (Mr.  Forbes).  The  drawing  that
follows  is  apparently  intended  for  a  horoscope,  containing  the

1  This  script  contains  a  drawing  of  the  Gurwood  crest,  repeated  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  -  Nov.  23rd,  1903  (for  comments  on  which  see  her  Report,
p.  263)  and  also  a  drawing  of  a  gun,  followed  by  the  words  :  "  the  handle  is
inlaid  with  mother  of  pearl,  it  is  a  foreign  made  gun — used  in  the  place  described
above — for  big  game.  It  is  long  ago  now  but  the  gun  is  kept  somewhere,  hung
over  a  hall  fireplace — stock  lock  and  barrel.  You  have  not  been  into  the  house
but  you  may  go  and  will  recognise  this  when  you  see  it.  It  was  used  in  1780
or  that  date  is  somewhere  near  the  gun.  There  is  a  big  hearth  below  and
blue  tiles."


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  339


sign  of  Cancer  (incorrectly  drawn)  and  the  symbols  of  Venus
(upside  down),  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  The  figure  under
Cancer  may  be  meant  for  the  aspect  of  Opposition,  or  possibly
Venus  again.  In  the  next  drawing  the  triangle  and  square
probably  denote  two  of  the  aspects,  Trine  and  Quartile,  the
divided  circle  being  perhaps  the  beginning  of  a  second  attempt
to  draw  a  horoscope.

Mrs.  Forbes  tells  me  that  Mr.  Forbes  used  to  be  much
interested  in  drawing  nativities,  but  she  thinks  the  last  one
he  drew  was  her  own,  about  thirty  years  ago,  before  their
marriage.  She  suggests  that  the  Moon,  which  is  specially
conspicuous  in  Mrs.  Holland's  horoscope,  is  perhaps  meant  to
symbolise  her  Christian  name,  Diana.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  28th,  1906,  begins  with  the
passage  about  Eoden  Noel,  quoted  above,  p.  324,  then
goes  on :

"  A  new  dress  not  a  black  one  this  time.  A  coral  charm —
handshaped."  Then  after  some  references  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick
and  her  family,  it  ends  with  a  reference  to  Fawcett  (see  below,
p.  343).

Mrs.  Verrall  notes  on  this  (April  10th,  1906):

Some  time  ago,  I  think  on  Feb.  2nd,  I  called  on  my  dressmaker
to  arrange  for  an  evening  dress,  which  I  intended  should  be  black.
She,  however,  insisted  on  a  colour,  and  I  eventually  agreed.  About
March  11th  I  appointed  March  31st  to  be  fitted,  and  on  March  31st
was  fitted  for  the  dress  in  question.

In  a  letter  dated  March  29th,  1906,  enclosing  this  script,
Mrs.  Holland  wrote  :

Before  I  fell  asleep  last  night,  I  saw  an  absolute  procession  of  faces,
small  and  clear  like  crystal  visions.  ...  A  clean-shaven  elderly
clergyman  face  was  the  best  of  the  number ;  a  thin,  pale  youth,  like
a  plainer,  sturdier  Keats,  the  most  interesting.

On  this  night  Mrs.  Verrall  was  staying  at  the  house  of
a  clergyman  friend  (Mr.  M.  A.  Bayfield)  answering  to
this  first  description,  which,  however,  might  apply  to  many
persons.


340


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


On  the  same  night,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  as  follows  :

(March  28th,  1906. 11  p.m.)

She  has  quite  another  gift — Divine  Remembrance  not  Vision —
You  forget  what  we  tell  you —  There  was  something  for  you  to
write  but  it  comes  not.  It  should  have  been  recorded  three  days
ago.  There  is  a  picture  of  a  boy  about  thirteen  or  less  a  slim
figure  in  blue  alone  with  no  one  else  in  the  picture,  a  portrait,  there
is  a  dog  with  him.  It  hangs  on  the  right  of  the  wall  as  you  look.
Brown  curls  and  a  round  head  a  full  length  portrait.  Ask  about
that.  The  other  boy  has  a  pony  but  he  did  not  ride,  this  one  I
mean.

But  I  have  not  made  her  understand.

I  sent  a  copy  of  this  to  Mrs.  Holland,  and  she  wrote  to
me  on  April  5th,  1906  :

The  "picture  of  a  boy"  referred  to  in  the  script  of  March  28th
is  just  like  the  portrait  of  Uncle  Rupert  described  in  The  Story  of  a
Short  Life  by  Mrs.  Ewing.  I  had  been  reading  this  story  and
thinking  over  it  exactly  three  days  before  the  28th,  because  I  was
choosing  some  books — delights  of  my  own  youth — to  give  to  a  friend's
little  daughter,  and  wondered  if  this  one  was  too  unbearably  pathetic
for  a  sensitive  child.

Mrs.  Holland  told  me  later  (May  28th,  1906)  that  she
thought  "  the  other  boy  [who]  has  a  pony "  was  the  hero  of
another  of  Mrs.  Ewing's  stories,  Jaekancqoes,  which  she  had
been  reading  on  the  same  occasion.

On  looking  at  these  two  books,  I  found  that  the  picture  of
"  Uncle  Rupert "  is  described  as  a  painting  by  Vandyck  of  a
youth  of  sixteen,  a  young  cavalier,  dressed  in  "  pale-hued  satin  "
with  "  falling  hair,"  and  with  his  hand  resting  on  the  head
of  a  dog.  Since  the  boy  is  spoken  of  as  "  standing  for  his
portrait,"  this  may  be  supposed  to  be  full  length,  and  it  is
so  represented  by  the  artist  who  illustrates  the  book.  "  Uncle
Rupert "  is  an  ancestor  of  the  child  hero  of  the  story,  who
"  did  not  ride,"  as  he  was  crippled  by  an  accident  at  the  age
of  six,  and  died  a  few  months  later.  The  hero  of  the  other
story,  Jackanapes,  had  a  pony,  which  figures  prominently  in
the  book.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  341


Cross-Correspondence.
Fawcdt.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Feb.  9th,  1906,  begins:

The  insurance  should  be  claimed — ■  No  not  in  the  New  York  Co.
the  other — Fawcett — no —

It  goes  on  to  write  a  conundrum  for  the  name  "  Kichard
Hodgson"  (see  section  on  the  Hodgson  Control,  p.  304)  apparently
quite  unconnected  with  the  first  sentence.

When  Mrs.  Verrall  met  Mrs.  Holland  in  my  room  on
Feb.  21st  (see  p.  290)  the  whole  of  this  script  was  dis-
cussed, and  Mrs.  "Verrall  then  mentioned  that  the  name  Fawcett
had  significance  for  her.  It  was  at  this  time  that  several
notorious  failures  of  American  Insurance  companies  were  taking
place.

On  Mrs.  Verrall's side were  the  following  references  to

Fawcett :

On  January  9th,  1904,  her  script  referred  to  the  name  in
connection  with  a  message  forming  part  of  a  cross-correspondence
with  Mrs.  Forbes  (for  a  full  account  of  which  see  Mrs.  Verrall's
Report,  pp.  265-6),  but  the  name  did  not  appear  in  Mrs.  Forbes's
script.

Mrs.  Verrall  had  some  relatives  of  this  name ;  a  Mr.
William  Fawcett  was  first  cousin  to  her  mother,  and  the
"  Carrie  or  Caroline  "  mentioned  in  two  sittings  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  with  Mrs.  Piper,  November  25th  and  27th,  1889,
was  identified  by  Mrs.  Verrall  as  his  wife.  In  the  report  of
these  sittings  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.  pp.  584-89)
the  name  Fawcett  is  not  mentioned  at  all,  only  the  Christian
names  being  given.

On  March  20th,  1906,  Mrs.  Verrall  was  trying  planchette
writing  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  gives  me  the  following  account
of  it,  written  from  notes  made  at  the  time :

Reference  was  made  first  to  people  called  Hill  [the  name  of  some
acquaintances  of  Mrs.  Forbes],  then  :  "  Would  it  make  you  happy  to
have  more  evidence.  Edward.  Edward  Hill  will  make  it  clear."
Then  other  statements  and  after  an  interval: "Better  be  quick,  as

Y


342


Alice  Johnson.


[part


we  have  more  to  say.  Open  the  last  morning's  paper  and  look  for
the  lost  word."

(Question:  What  part  of  paper  1)

"  Marriages  and  deaths.  Hill  who  writes  was  well  known  to  Hill
who  died.  Will  you  try  to  find  my  lost  name  in  the  column.
Edward  was  wrong. Over  the  column  is  my  lost  name."

We  decided  that  the  "  last  morning's  paper "  must  mean  the
morning  paper  most  recently  arrived  and  there  heing  no  other  paper
in  the  house  we  fetched  [the  local  paper]  of  March  20th  from  the
dining-room.  Neither  of  us  had  seen  it.  The  first  name  in  the
Births,  Marriages,  Deaths  column  was  Fawcett.1

I  then  remembered  that  William  Fawcett's  two  maternal  uncles
were  called  Hill  and  Edmund,  and  thought  these  were  perhaps
intended  by  "Edward  Hill,  Edward  wrong."  I  told  Mrs.  Forbes
that  the  name  "  Fawcett "  had  been  connected  with  me  by  [Mrs.
Holland].  (I  referred  to  the  occurrence  of  the  name  in  her  script
discussed  by  Miss  Johnson  and  myself  on  Feb.  21st,  1906,  when  I
told  her  the  name  had  a  meaning  for  me.) Planchette  then  wrote  :

"  Ask  [Mrs.  Holland]  to  give  my  lost  name.  She  must  be  asked.
Send  what  I  write  to  her."

When  I  wrote  out  the  incident  [the  same  evening]  I  remembered
that  there  had  been  a  previous  attempt  [in  my  script  of  Jan.  9th,
1904]  to  connect  Fawcett  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  which  had  been  unsuc-
cessful. I  had  been  reminded  of  that  incident  on  March  19th,  but
had  not  mentioned  it  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

If  we  suppose  an  attempt  on  Jan.  9th,  1904,  to  convey  the  name
Fawcett  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  it  is  not  inappropriate,  since  the  attempt
failed,  to  describe  the  name  as  lost.

There  seems  no  possibility  that  either  Mrs.  Forbes  or  I  was
normally  aware  that  the  name  Fawcett  headed  the  announcement
column  of  the  local  paper.  We  ascertained  that  the  announcement
was  not  in  the  Times  nor  in  the  local  paper  of  Monday,  March  19th.
Neither  of  us  knows  the  Fawcetts  in  question.

Mrs.  Verrall  did  not,  as  suggested  by  Planchette,  send
any  information  about  her  script  to  Mrs.  Holland,  but  sent
me  a  brief  summary  of  the  above  incident  on  March  22nd,
1906,  so  that  I  might  be  on  the  look-out  for  the  name
Fawcett.

1Mrs.  Verrall  sent  me  part  of  the  paper  to  show  this.  The  part  she
sent  contained  the  title  and  date  and  the  greater  part  of  the  column
referred  to.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  343

On  March  28th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland's  script  ends  with
this  passage :


This  script  was  written  when  Mrs.  Holland  was  staying
with  some  friends  near  Salisbury,  and  I  noticed  that  the  letter
enclosing  it  was  written  on  a  sheet  of  paper  with  a  crest
closely  resembling  the  drawing  after  "  Maida,"  and  with  the
address  ending  in  "  Salisbury  "  impressed  on  it.  This  drawing
suggested  that  the  heading  of  the  paper  had  been  strongly
impressed  on  her  subliminal  consciousness,  and  it  may  be
surmised  that  the  name  "  Salisbury "  had  evoked  the  idea  of
Henry  Fawcett,  who  was  so  closely  associated  with  the  place.
That  Henry  Fawcett  is  intended  is  shown  clearly  by  the
reference  to  blindness.

"Feb.  28th — no,  earlier"  seems  to  mean  that  he  has  been
mentioned  before,  at  some  date  earlier  than  Feb.  28th,  and
this  might  refer  to  the  "  Fawcett "  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Feb.  9th,  1906,  quoted  above,  p.  341.

On  March  31st  Mrs.  Verrall  came  to  see  me,  and  I  dis-
cussed with  her  some  of  Mrs.  Holland's  recent  script.  We
then  referred  to  the  script  of  Feb.  28th  (quoted  above,  p.  291)
to  see  if  there  was  any  apparent  connection  with  Fawcett  in
it. It  contained  the  following  passage :

It  was  first  started  when  we  were  all  sitting  under  the  cedars  at
Broadlands. While  the  sunset  flared  crimson  on  that  noble  window.

In  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  Broadlands  (the  house  of  the  late
Lord  Mount-Temple)  is  generally  associated  with  Mr.  Myers,
and  has  been  several  times  referred  to  above.  It  is  also  the
fact,  however,  that  Lord  Mount-Temple  was  a  friend  of  Mr.
Fawcett's  and  associated  with  him  politically,  especially  in
his  work  for  the  preservation  of  commons  and  open  spaces.
He  also  used  to  fish  in  the  Itchen  at  Broadlands.1


Henry  F,


darkened  windows  then.


Feb.  28  th


no  earlier.


These  facts  are  given  in  the  Life  of  Henry  Fawcett,  by  Leslie  Stephen.


344


Alice  Johnson,


[part


Further,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  to  me  on  April  1st,  1906,  that
her  cousin,  Mrs.  Fawcett,  above  mentioned,  once  stayed  at
Broadlands  on  a  special  occasion,  and  she  tells  me  that  the
name  Broadlands  is  in  her  mind  associated  mainly,  if  not
solely,  with  this  visit  of  her  cousin's  to  it.

Mrs.  Holland's  next  reference  to  Fawcett  is  on  April  4th,


No  further  losses

The  bench  under  the  cedar —

We  missed  the  mountains  sometimes

F.  a  blue  jewel — set  in  a  ring — or  else  in  a  brooch —  Tell
Margaret  not  to  lose  another  earring — the  hearthrug-


Here  Fawcett,  the  blind  Postmaster  General,  is  clearly
indicated  by  the  dark  spectacles,  the  letter  and  the  whip, —
the  whip  being  perhaps  an  allusion  to  the  fact  that,  though
blind,  he  hunted.

"  isTo  further  losses "  seems  a  reference  to  the  Insurance  Co.
mentioned  on  Feb.  9  th.

"  The  bench  under  the  cedars "  seems  another  reference  to
Broadlands.

"  F.  a  blue  jewel  etc."  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  to  me  on
April  10th,  1906:  "  F.  is  the  initial  of  my  sister's  name
[Mrs.  Verrall's  only  sister]  and  she  has  a  blue  jewel  in  a
brooch  which  came  to  her  from  a  Fawcett."  This  brooch
belonged  to  Mrs.  W.  Fawcett.

Thus  the  script  seems  to  contain  again  allusions  to  the
two  quite  distinct  Fawcetts,  Henry  Fawcett  and  Mrs.  Verrall's
connections  of  the  same  name.

In  answer  to  questions  on  the  subject,  Mrs.  Holland  told
me  that  neither  she  nor  any  of  her  family  had  known  Mr.


lv\] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  345


Henry  Fawcett.  She  has  connections  living  in  Wiltshire,  with
whom  she  often  stays,  but  they  did  not  go  to  live  there  till
1894,  whereas  he  died  in  1884.

Experiments  with  Mrs.  Forbes  on  the  Supposed  Influence

of  Inanimate  Objects.

On  March  29th,  1906,  Mrs.  Forbes  happened  to  be  in
London  and  came  to  see  me,  and  we  discussed  the  passages
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  that  seemed  to  have  reference  to  her.
She  suggested  that  I  should  send  Mrs.  Holland  a  glove  of  hers,
on  the  chance  that  this  might  facilitate  messages,  and  left
with  me  for  the  purpose  one  of  the  gloves  that  she  was  then
wearing.

I  sent  the  glove  to  Mrs.  Holland,  saying  merely  that  a
friend  of  mine  had  asked  me  to  send  her  a  glove  with  the
request  that  she  would  try  two  or  three  times  to  get  script
or  crystal  visions  with  it.  I  did  not  of  course  mention  any
name,  and  there  could  have  been  nothing  whatever  to  suggest
that  the  glove  came  from  the  lady  with  whom  Mrs.  Verrall
had  just  been  staying, — especially  as  I  had  followed  my  usual
custom  of  making  no  comment  to  Mrs.  Holland  on  the  correct-
ness or  otherwise  of  her  recent  script.

With  this  glove  Mrs.  Holland  tried  several  experiments  on
March  31st  and  April  1st,  and  recorded  both  crystal-visions
and  impressions  obtained  in  connection  with  it,  as  well  as
script,  as  follows :

(Sat.  March  31st,  1906. 10.25  p.m.)

Script.

(1)  A  tall  leafless  tree  stands  on  the  lawn —  You  see  it  so  well
from  what  used  to  be  my  window.

A  purple  cross — strangely  shaped — of  amethysts  I  think —

(2)  The  rings  have  grown  too  large  for  her  slender  fingers.
Ferns border the path — and the branches meet overhead —

Gertrude  was  near  us  but  not  with  us.

(3)  The  greenhouse  looks  neglected  now.

(4)  There  is  a  dull  sound  like  a  rushing  river  some  distance  away.
Pablo.

The  wards  of  the  lock  were  hampered.

I  know  who  you  are  but  I  will  not  tell  her.


346


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(5)  God  will  forgive  thee  all  but  thy  despair.1

Lyons  [illegible  scribbles,  among  which  occur  the  names :]  Miles
Merton  Bradly.

Crystal  Visions.

Moonlight  on  a  grey  street — a  red  curtained  window  on  the  first
floor  has  a  light  shining  through  it.

(6)  A  small  statuette — not  at  all  clear- — of  a  woman  with  outstretched
arms — a  Madonna  I  think.

A  nun's  face— kind  and  good — no  longer  young —

(7)  A  rocky  shore — one  cliff  overhangs  very  curiously —
(None  of  these  were  very  clear  and  they  were  all  fleeting.)

Impressions.

The  outside  of  a  house — with  a  small  old  fashioned  verandah  and
long  windows  that  open  on  the  garden.  A  great  white  jasmine  in
full  flower  climbs  to  the  first  floor  windows.

I  see  a  passage,  but  the  doors  are  fast  closed ;  two  doors  on  the
right,  one  on  the  left ;  a  step  down,  matting.

An  old  fashioned  clock — some  china  behind  glass  doors.

I  feel  discontent ;  a  past  sorrow  still  throws  its  shadow,  but  dis-
content is  nearer.

(Sunday. 10.30  p.m. April  1st,  1906.)

Script.

Hush  dear  hush  hush  not  those  thoughts.

(8)  Lincoln.  The  bronze  is  out  of  place  it  should  be  on  the
shelf  again.

Give  her  Father's  love.

The  little  grave —

K.  37 — not  in  the  Appendix

George.

(9)  Indeed  I  understood  how  you  suffered  but  it  was  best  that
the  others  knew  nothing —  You  were  strong  enough  to  bear  it
alone  and  it  saved  them  so  much — Some  eyes  are  both  softer  and
clearer  for  the  tears  they  shed —

Remember  that  frost  mellows  as  well  as  sunshine —
I  regret  that  little  streak  of  suspicion  though  I  so  well  understand
it—

The  change  has  been  very  wonderful  though — don't  you  understand


1  This  is  a  quotation  from  Mr.  Myers*s  poem,  St.  Paul.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  347


it — the  influence  that  comes  down — comes  back  is  stronger  than  the
living  influence  by  your  side —

Be  careful  of  yourself  during  the  changes  next  month

F.

Impressions.

(10)  A  curious'  triangular  shape,  of  yellowish  metal  with  bosses
like  rough  jewels  on  the  points.  It  looks  very  old  and  its  meaning
puzzles  me.

A  circular  ruin — like  the  remains  of  a  tower  ;  something  in  the
centre ;  no,  not  a  human  skull ;  but  bones  of  some  kind.  The  ruin
is  near  the  sea.

A  circle  of  light  that  sparkles  and  spins.

A  little  path  glimmers  white  in  a  dark  wood.

(11)  Violets,  a  clump  of  wild  violets. Green  grass.

On  this  Mrs.  Forbes  sent  me  the  following  notes,  dated
April  8th,  1906  :

(1)  There  are  many  trees  round  [my]  house  but  no  solitary  one.

(2)  "The  rings"  and  "slender  fingers"  were  obvious  from  the
[appearance  of  the]  glove.

(3)  [There  is  a  greenhouse  opening  into  Mrs.  Forbes's  drawing-
room. — A.  J.]

(4)  I  hear  the  noise  of  the  stream  here  at  night  when  I  lean
from  my  window.

(5)  A  quotation  which  I  have  known  since  I  was  20  and  "felt
with  "  very  strongly.

(6)  A  statuette  stands  on  my  writing-table, — a  great  favourite, —
Victory,  with  outstretched  arms.

(7)  This  is  a  frequent  vision  of  my  own  (not  in  a  crystal, — a
mental  picture).

(8)  I  took  a  little  bronze  statuette  of  Washington  (not  Lincoln)
to  be  mended,  so  it  was  missing  from  its  place.

(9)  The  associations  of  these  sentences  [down  to  the  end  of  the
script]  are  appropriate  and  vivid,  but  not  evidential,  as  the  only
name,  "George,"  is  wrong.  I  think  it  would  be  useless  to  discuss
them,  as  they  might  apply  to  any  one  who  had  had  sorrow  in  a
life  as  long  as  mine.

[I  may  add  that  Mrs.  Forbes,  as  readers  of  Mrs.  VerralPs  Report
will  be  aware,  lost  her  only  son  in  the  South  African  War,  and
most  of  her  automatic  writing  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report
purports  to  be  inspired  by  him. It  is  therefore  specially  appropriate


348


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  speak  of  the  strength  of  "  the  influence  that  comes  down,  comes
back."  Much  evidential  matter  has  been  contained  in  this  writing. —
A.  J.]

(10)  I  do  not  recognise  the  triangular  jewel  or  the  circular  ruin.1

(11)  The  violets  are  a  great  feature  of  this  place,  wild  and
cultivated.

From  April  12th  to  19th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland  was  staying
at  the  house  of  some  friends  of  hers,  where  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
happened  also  to  be  staying.  This  was  the  first  time  that
she  had  met  him.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  heard  from  me  of
her  script,  and  now  had  some  talk  with  her  about  it.  He
also  showed  her  some  of  the  proofs  of  Mrs.  Yerrall's  Eeport
on  her  own  script,  most  of  which  was  then  in  print,  though
not  published  till  October,  1906.  (It  was  from  Mrs.  Holland
herself  that  I  heard  of  her  having  seen  these  proofs.  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  had  forgotten  to  tell  me.)

From  this  date  onwards,  therefore,  it  has  to  be  assumed
that  everything  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Eeport  may
possibly  be  within  Mrs.  Holland's  normal  knowledge.  A  long
section  of  this  Eeport  (Chapter  XL  pp.  219-275)  is  concerned
with  the  cross-correspondences  between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  although  I  told  Mrs.  Holland
nothing  about  the  owner  of  the  objects  I  next  sent  to  her
(see  below)  it  seems  not  impossible  that  she  may  have  guessed
subliminally  that  they  had  belonged  to  Talbot  Forbes,  though
supraliminally  she  made  another  guess.

I  will  now  give  in  full  the  script  of  this  period  which  seems
to  relate  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  explaining  later  what  details  in  it
might  have  been  derived  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  Eeport.

As  just  mentioned,  the  script  Mrs.  Holland  had  produced  on
March  31st  and  April  1st  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Forbes's
glove  had  been  correct  in  several  particulars,  and  Mrs.  Forbes,
wishing  to  continue  the  experiments,  decided  to  send  Mrs.
Holland  (through  me)  something  that  had  belonged  to  her  son.
After  considering  for  a  little  time  what  to  select,  she  sent  me
on  May  17th,  1906,  a  glove  of  his  and  a  Japanese  bronze  bird
which  he  had  kept  on  his  mantelpiece  at  school. The  glove,

1  Mrs.  Holland  tells  me  that  she  now  (April,  1908)  traces  the  triangular  shape,
circular  ruin,  and  skull,  to  an  essay  on  Magic  by  Mr.  W.  B.  Yeats  in  a  book  she
had  been  rt  ading  just  at  that  time.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  34i>


as  I  noted  before  sending  it  on,  was  a  grey  suede  with  black
stripes  on  the  back,  marked  "  Made  in  France  ; "  obviously
a  man's  glove,  which  had  been  worn  probably  not  more  than
a  few  times  and  had  some  little  spots  on  it,  as  gloves  do
that  have  been  lying  by  for  some  time.  It  had  no  name  or
initials  on  it,  and  I  looked  carefully  over  it  to  see  if  any
other  indications  were  given,  but  could  find  none.  I  sent  it
and  the  bird  to  Mrs.  Holland  on  May  18th,  1906,  with  this
letter :

...  I  wonder  if  you  would  mind  trying  another  experiment  of
the  kind  I  asked  you  to  do  a  little  while  ago.  These  two  objects
also  come  from  a  friend  of  mine  who  has  heard  something  about
your  script  and  would  be  very  glad  if  you  would  try  what  writing
you  can  get  with  them.  I  think  it  might  be  worth  trying  two  or
three  times.  Would  you  mind  bringing  back  the  bird  with  you  on
May  28th  [when  Mrs.  Holland  had  arranged  to  come  and  see  me
in  London]. The  owner  says  it  is  not  necessary  to  return  the  glove.

The  expressions  used  in  this  letter  were  chosen  to  avoid
suggesting  to  Mrs.  Holland  that  the  objects  came  from  the
same  person  as  the  owner  of  the  glove  sent  before,  and  as  a
matter  of  fact  she  guessed  that  they  came  from  Mr.  Feilding,
and  had  some  connection  with  Mr.  Myers,  as  explained  below.

Meanwhile,  a  piece  of  script  written  by  Mrs.  Holland  on
May  15th,  1906, — i.e.  two  days  before  Mrs.  Forbes  sent  the
objects,  but  during  the  time  that  she  was  thinking  of  what
to  select, — contains  a  description  of  a  man  whom  Mrs.  Verrall,
on  being  told  of  it,  thought  she  recognised  and  whom  she
later  identified  as  Mr.  Forbes. The  description  is  as  follows  :

(May  15th. 10.15  p.m.)

Better  take  foreign  paper  since  I  come  from  so  far  away —  He
is  sitting  in  the  arm  chair — the  big  leather  one — that  is  so  comfortable
and  so  old —  It  was  red  once  but  it  has  faded  to  a  friendly
familiar  brown —  His  right  hand  is  holding  his  left  ankle — inelegant
but  characteristic.  Very  thin  but  it's  a  big  frame — Grey  hair  that
wants  cutting —  His  eyes  have  a  trick  of  half  shutting  when  he
talks  earnestly —  Eye  glasses  probably  mislaid  as  usual.  He  never
erred  on  the  side  of  foppery  in  dress  he  might  be  neater  without
harm — that  shape  of  collar  was  always  all  his  own- —  "What  do
appearances  matter  save  to  establish  identity.


350


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Can  you  imagine  him  happy  without  hooks  ?
Conditions  have  changed  indeed.

[After  this  comes  a  passage  ahout  wireless  telegraphy,  a  topic
often  referred  to  in  the  script,  followed  by  :]
"  All  cannot  be  the  first  of  all " 1
[Talbot]
Cary — Carew —
Fowey. The  Duchey

*****

Isis

From  the  ancient  lotus  symbol —

The  inevitable  lily —

Purity — Immortality —

Detachment  from  Earthly  Care  —

Karma — no —

Om  mani  pudmi  Ora  !

$

*****
Mrs.  Holland  tells  me  that  these  last  words  mean  :  "  Oh
thou  jewel  in  the  lotus,  thou  !  "  and  that  the  drawing  that
follows  is  a  rough  attempt  to  depict  the  seed-vessel  of  the  lotus,
a  frequent  ornament  in  Buddhist  carving.  "The  'jewel  in  the
lotus '  (she  says)  symbolises  purity  as  well  as  heavenly  wisdom,
and  is  sometimes  rendered  as  the  '  the  heart  of  the  lily.' "

As  to  the  description  of  the  man,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  to
me  on  June  1st,  1906  :

[Mr.  Forbes]  is  a  tall  man,  not  stout,  with  large  frame,  on  which
his  clothes  hang  rather  loosely.  He  is  grey.  He  almost  closes  his
eyes  when  he  speaks.  He  has  a  habit  of  leaning  back  in  his  low
chair,  with  the  left  leg  crossed  over  the  right,  and  places  his  finger
tips  together,  and  I  have  certainly  seen  him  hold  his  left  ankle  in
his  right  hand.  He  has  a  habit  of  rocking  slightly  to  and  fro  when
amused.

I  can't  remember  details  of  [Mrs.  Holland's]  description,  but,  as  I
told  you,  the  man  seemed  familiar  and  I  suddenly  remembered  of
whom  I  was  reminded.

Mrs.  Forbes,  to  whom  I  sent  the  script  later,  wrote  to  me
on  July  4th,  1906  :

1  Christina  Rossetti.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  351

"The  big  arm  chair."  [Mr.  Forbes's]  chair  is  one  he  had  made  at
Cambridge  40  years  ago,  and  is,  he  says,  the  most  comfortable  chair  he
knows.  It  is  covered  with  red  leather,  shabby  in  places,  but  not
actually  brown.  I  do  not  think  the  attitude  very  characteristic,  but
the  thinness  and  the  hair  are  specially  characteristic,  and  he  has  a
habit  of  almost  shutting  one  eye  when  he  looks  carefully  at  anything.
The  "dress"  and  "collar"  bits  are  specially  good.  He  has  collars
made  for  him — turned  down  collars,  lower  than  is  usual.  He  has
many  books  and  loves  them.

In  answer  to  further  questions,  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote  to  me  again:

July  7th,  1906.

The  eye-glasses  have  no  meaning  for  [Mr.  Forbes].  He  has  never
worn  any,  but  he  is  very  short-sighted  and  often  loses  things  and
has  to  search  his  pockets.  .  .  . My  son  used  eye  glasses  always.  .  .  .

As  to  the  later  points  in  the  same  script,  "  Talbot  "  is  the
name  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  son.  (The  real  name  was  given  in  the
script,  for  which  I  have  substituted  the  pseudonym  used  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  Ile])ort.)

"  Fowey.  The  Duchey  " — no  doubt  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall,
Fowey  being  in  Cornwall,  which  is  referred  to  in  the  earlier
script  in  connection  with  lioden  Noel.  There  is  a  poem  of  his
entitled  Foxvey.  This  seems  entirely  unconnected  with  all  the
rest  of  the  script.

"  Isis "  (Mrs.  Forbes  writes)  "  might  be  the  association  with
the  Thames,  which  was  strong,  unbroken,  all  Talbot's  life."
The  lily,  she  tells  me,  is  on  the  shield  of  his  school,  and
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart "  is  written  on  the  stone  over
his  grave.  The  lotus  flower  is  stamped  on  all  his  Tutor's  books
given  as  prizes,  and  is  also  stamped  in  gold  on  a  picture  of
Sir  Galahad  given  to  him  by  his  Tutor.  This  lotus  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  school  arms,  which  consist  of  three  large  lilies,
surmounted  by  a  fleur  de  lys  and  a  leopard.

The  next  script  to  be  cpaoted  in  this  connection  is  dated
May  22nd,  1906.  In  the  letter  enclosing  it  and  acknowledging
the  bird  and  glove,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote :

My  impression  on  touching  them  before  I  read  your  note  was  that
the  glove  had  belonged  to  a  man  dead  some  years  ago,  and  that  the
bird  had  been  a  paper-weight  he  had  used.  I  have  been  waiting  for
these  impressions  to  fade  before  I  try  any  script.


352


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  script  accordingly  was  written  late  at  night.  The  idea
that  the  glove  belonged  to  a  dead  man  might,  I  think,  have
been  suggested  by  its  appearance,  since,  as  remarked  above,  it
looked  as  if  it  had  been  lying  by  for  some  time.  The  script
was  as  follows :

(Tuesday. May  22nd,  1906. 11.45  p.m. — with  glove  and  bird.)
But  it  should  not  have  been  cleaned —

(a)  It  is  the  wiring — the  electric  lighting  in  the  John  St.  house
that  is  dangerous —  The  terms  of  the  fire  insurance  too  need  super-
vising—  Denbigh.

(b)  An  old  Roman  wall — the  pyramid  is  near —
Here  lyeth  one  whose  name  was  writ  in  water —
A  scroll  of  crystal  blazoning  the  name  of  Adonais.

(1)  In  my  own  room — where  the  deep  green  colour  predominates —
And  a  trifle  becomes  a  relic —
Col.  ii  5.

What  need  to  sorrow  since  our  hope  is  certain
What  need  to  languish  though  the  night  seem  long
Stars  are  ablaze  beyond  Earth's  misty  curtain
Sorrow  and  silence  shall  have  end  in  song —

*  *  *  *  *

The  first  sentence,  "  But  it  should  not  have  been  cleaned,'*
no  doubt  refers  to  the  glove.

(a)  The  passage  about  the  electric  wiring  I  took  to  refer
to  Mr.  Feilding,  since  he  has  a  house  in  John  Street  and  is
a  son  of  the  late  Lord  Denbigh  and  brother  of  the  present
Earl.  I  therefore  sent  it  to  him  for  his  comments.  He
replied  on  May  24th,  1906:

For  some  time  past  I  have  been  deluged  with  advertisements  from
Messrs.  Gillow  as  to  the  need  of  fire  insurance  policies  getting
supervised.  These  have  made  some  impression  on  my  mind,  and  I
have  put  them  aside  with  the  intention  of  applying  to  them  to
value,  as  they  suggest  is  necessary.  So  far  so  good.  But  it  is  possible
that  everybody  else  who  is  a  householder  has  been  similarly  deluged.
I  have  had,  I  think,  no  less  than  four  communications,  and  my
susceptible  mind  was  so  influenced  that  had  the  house  not  been  let,
I  should  have  succumbed  to  what  is  certainly  very  persuasive  and
what  appears  to  be  very  sensible  advice.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  353


Nevertheless,  in  the  interests  of  science,  Mr.  Feilding  did
have  the  electric  wiring  at  his  house  tested  the  next  day,  and
sent  me  the  report  of  the  electricians,  which  was  as  follows  :

May  25th,  1906.

5  John  St.

We  have  tested  the  electric  wiring  at  above  and  find  that  there
are  two  defective  circuits  .  .  .  There  are  leakages  on  these  which
should  be  remedied  as  soon  as  convenient.  .  .  .  The  other  circuits
are  very  fair.  ...  It  will  be  necessary  to  cut  the  wires  referred  to
as  defective  where  jointed  and  test  them  from  point  to  point  to
ascertain  where  the  defective  parts  are  ...  So  far  as  it  is  possible
to  ascertain  the  R.W.  pipe  is  now  sound,  but  it  is  not  possible  to
say  how  far  the  rust  has  penetrated.

Writing  to  Mrs.  Holland  later  (Aug.  22nd,  1906)  Mr.
Feilding  says :  "  I  had  the  electric  light  system  in  my  house
tested,  with  the  result  that  a  very  serious  leak,  which  might
have  proved  dangerous,  was  discovered.  The  rectification  is
very  obvious  in  the  electric  light  bills  since."

T  saw  Mrs.  Holland  on  May  28th,  1906,  when  she  was
spending  a  few  days  in  London,  and  spent  an  afternoon
going  over  the  whole  of  her  script  with  her  from  the  beginning.
Some  time  before  we  got  to  the  date  May  22nd,  1906,  she
remarked  that  she  had  associated  the  man's  glove  with  Mr.
Feilding  and  had  imagined  that  both  it  and  the  bird  were
somehow  connected  both  with  him  and  with  Mr.  Myers.  She
did  not  seem  to  be  at  all  aware  that  she  had  written  anything
about  either  of  them  in  connection  with  the  glove.  I  told
her  that  Mr.  Feilding  had  nothing  to  do  with  either  object,
but  that  they  were  connected  with  Mr.  Myers  indirectly,  at
a  sort  of  second  or  third  hand,  the  owner  being  associated
with  the  main  group  of  controls  {i.e.  Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.
Gurney).  I  was  of  course  aware  that  since  she  had  seen  the
proofs  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  Eeport,  this  remark  might  lead  her  to
guess  that  it  was  Talbot  Forbes  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  p.  220,
foot-note).  I  then  told  her  of  the  verification  of  the  statement
in  her  script  about  the  electric  wiring  and  questioned  her
closely  as  to  whether  she  could  have  heard  of  Mr.  Feilding's
connection  with  John  Street  and  Lord  Denbigh.  She  told
me  all  she  could  remember  of  the  occasion  in  February
1906,  when  she  had  met  him  at  a  dinner  party  in  London


354  Alice  Johnson.  [part


(as  mentioned  above,  p.  291).  She  was  confident  that  she
had  not  heard  either  the  address  of  his  house  or  the  name  of
his  brother.  It  seems  possible,  however,  that  these  points
may  have  been  casually  mentioned  on  this  occasion,  overheard
by  her, — consciously  or  subconsciously, — and  afterwards  for-
gotten. No  weight  therefore  can  be  attached  to  their  appear-
ance in  the  script,  and  it  may  even  be  supposed  that  Mrs.
Holland's  guess  that  the  glove  was  Mr.  Feilding's  evoked  a
subliminal  recollection  of  details  she  had  heard  about  him.

Two  days  later  I  saw  Mr.  Feilding  and  asked  what  he
could  remember  of  his  meeting  with  Mrs.  Holland  on  this
occasion.  His  account  was  substantially  the  same  as  hers,
except  in  one  particular.  She  had  told  me  that  he  had  talked
to  her  about  Mrs.  Forbes's  script,  of  which  she  had  afterwards
read  in  the  proofs  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report.  I  asked  if  he
had  called  her  Mrs.  Forbes,  or  given  her  real  name  (which
I  did  not  mention).  She  replied  that  he  had  called  her  Mrs.
Forbes,  and  she  supposed  that  was  her  real  name.  Now
I  was  practically  certain  that  Mr.  Feilding  did  not  know
at  that  time  that  the  pseudonym  Forbes  had  been  chosen,
and  I  thought  it  very  unlikely  in  any  case  that  he  should
have  mentioned  the  topic  to  Mrs.  Holland.  I  asked  him  if
he  had  done  so,  and  he  said  he  was  certain  he  had  not,  nor
did  he  then  know  of  the  pseudonym.  It  seemed  clear  there-
fore that  his  recollection  was  correct,  and  that  Mrs.  Holland
had  first  heard  of  Mrs.  Forbes  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  proofs.  This
is  one  of  several  occasions  on  which  I  have  found  that  her
memory,  like  that  of  other  people,  is  not  always  quite  accurate.

As  to  the  question  whether  she  too  had  seen  advertisements
of  insurance  agents  and  valuers  such  as  had  been  sent  to  Mr.
Feildino1,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  later  :

June  9fch,  1906.

About  the  script  of  May  22nd  anent  the  John  Street  house,  I  had
not  been  seeing  anything  about  electric  lighting.  We  are  off  the
track  of  such  advertisements  here,  where  we  burn  only  innocent  oil
lamps.  My  only  thoughts  about  fire  insurance  had  been  in  connection
with  the  San  Francisco  disaster  [i.e.  the  great  earthquake]  a  month
before.  I  have,  however,  a  deep  distrust  of  electric  wiring  and  a
special  horror  of  fires  since  that  big  one  at  the  Glen  in  Feb.  1905,
so  there  was  a  deeply  worn  channel  in  my  mind  ready  to  convey


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  355

that  message.  That  accounts  perhaps  for  its  unwonted  coherence
and  common  sense.

(b)  "  An  old  Roman  wall "  etc.  This  obviously  refers  to
the  Protestant  cemetery  at  Rome,  with  the  pyramid  of  Cestius
just  outside  the  wall  overshadowing  the  graves  of  Keats  and
Shelley.  "  Here  lyeth  one  whose  name  was  writ  in  water "
is  the  end  of  the  inscription  on  Keats's  grave  ("  lyeth  "  should
be  "  lies "),  and  the  next  line  refers,  of  course,  to  Adonais,
Shelley's  poem  on  Keats.  There  is  a  memorial  tablet  to  Mr.
Myers  in  the  same  part  of  the  cemetery.1

On  the  next  passage  in  the  script,  marked  (1),  Mrs.  Forbes
writes :

(1)  "In  my  own  room."  The  small  room  in  which  I  write  is
papered  with  a  deep  green  colour.  In  it  I  have  collected  all  the
little  possessions  of  my  son.  The  bronze  bird  I  sent  came  from
the  chimney  piece  there,  where  many  "trifles"  lie,  all  now  "relics."
Every  night  I  lean  out  of  the  window  and  look  at  the  stars  before
I  get  into  bed,  so  at  11.45  p.m.  my  thoughts  would  probably  accord
with  the  lines,  "  What  need  to  sorrow  "  etc.,  and  the  verse,  Col.  ii.  5.

This  verse  is :  "  For  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet
am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit,  joying  and  beholding  your  order
and  the  steadfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ."

Mrs.  Holland  wrote  again  with  the  glove  and  bird  on  May
23rd,  1906.  Most  of  this  script  seems  to  have  no  connection
at  all  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  but  at  the  end,  with  an  abrupt  and
marked  change  of  hand-writing  into  one  closely  resembling
Mrs.  Holland's  normal  hand,  come  the  phrases  :

The  Winged  Victory.

Lime  blossoms  wait  for  June —

The  sleepy  bird  has  waked  its  way.

The  mention  of  "  the  sleepy  bird "  seems  to  indicate  that
this  passage  refers  to  its  owner.  (The  bird  had  its  head  turned
round  and  lying  back,  as  if  asleep.)  Mrs.  Forbes  told  me
that  she  had  given  the  "  Winged  Victory "  of  Pompeii  to  the
chapel  of  her  son's  school,  as  a  memorial  of  him.  This  was  a
reproduction  of  the  same  Victory  as  that  mentioned  in  connection
with  Mrs.  Holland's  crystal- vision  marked  (6)  on  March  31st

1  This  is  the  first  of  many  references  to  this  cemetery  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.


356


Alice  Johnson.


[part


{see  p.  346).  Mrs.  Forbes's  own  statuette  is  exactly  as  the
statue  was  found,  with  one  arm  missing.  For  the  chapel  the
missing  arm  was  restored  and  is  stretched  out,  the  hand
holding  a  wreath.  "  June "  is  appropriate  in  this  connection,
as  the  yearly  festivity  of  the  school  is  in  June,  and  the  "  sleepy
bird "  was  a  school  possession  of  Talbot  Forbes,  so  that  all  the
phrases  quoted  show  a  possible  connection  with  his  school.

The  next  script  was  produced  on  May  30th,  1906.  It
was  not  written  with  the  glove  and  bird,  but  Mrs.  Forbes  (to
whom  I  sent  a  copy  of  all  the  script  of  this  period  in  case
she  should  see  significance  in  any  of  it)  thought  it  suggestive
of  some  connection  with  her  son,  the  initial  of  whose  Christian
name  was  given  in  it.  Here  again,  it  is  only  the  last  part
of  the  script,  again  marked  by  a  difference  in  the  hand-
writing, that  she  thought  significant. It  is  as  follows :


Only  the  plainest  truth  will  be  of  any  help.
The  bat's  Wing.
Not  now.  [T.]]


1  The  real  initial  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  son,  called  in  this  paper  "Talbot,"  is  given
'here.

2R.  Browning,  Any  Wife  to  Any  Husband.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  357


On  this  Mrs.  Forbes  comments :

July  4th,  1906.

[T.]  looks  like  a  boy's  initial.  The  double  wine-glass  or  hour-
glass suggests  to  me  a  favourite  trick, — two  wine  glasses,  one  of  water,
one  of  wine,  the  contents  of  which  change  places.  The  pot  has  also
an  association  for  me,  and  the  butterfly  is  a  thing  [Talbot]  would
choose  as  a  sign,  for  we  made  a  collection  together  and  he  was  very
much  interested  in  Entomology.  The  butterfly  cabinet  is  in  the
room  spoken  of  above,  and  also  a  sofa  on  which  [Talbot's]  dog  always
slept  at  night.  Altogether  the  [T.]  and  the  illustrations  are  very
suggestive  to  me.

Mrs.  Forbes  adds  later :

The  wine-glass  trick  was  one  that  used  to  interest  [Talbot],  but
I  was  the  performer.  There  is  a  photograph  of  a  flower  in  a
brass  pot,  rather  like  the  drawing,  which  was  taken  by  my  son
when  we  first  started  photography.  It  was  a  success,  so  he  was
rather  pleased  with  it,  and  it  is  something  he  would  know  I
should  remember.  Also  we  had  a  puppy  which  he  very  often
photographed  at  the  same  time.  It  was  a  great  favourite  and
his  own  possession ;  it  always  slept  on  a  big  sofa.  He  was  making
a  collection  of  butterflies  and  moths  and  spent  much  time  over  it.

The  pot  and  the  butterfly  and  the  puppy  are  as  distinctive  of
the  holidays  at  this  house  as  the  three  lines  above  are  of  the
school.

Finally  some  possible  references  occur  in  a  passage  in  some
script  written  on  June  25th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland  being  then
on  board  ship  on  her  way  back  to  India.  She  had  before
going  returned  to  me  the  bronze  bird,  but  at  my  request  had
kept  the  glove,  though,  as  far  as  I  know,  she  did  not  use  it
in  connection  with  this  or  any  subsequent  script.  This  script
was  written  in  response  to  a  special  impulse  on  a  Monday,  that
is,  not  on  the  regular  day — Wednesday — fixed  for  simultaneous
writing  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  passage  I  quote  is  in  the
hand-writing  of  the  Gurney  control,  except  for  the  two  con-
cluding lines  of  verse  :

But  the  normal  reaction  was  lacking.

"Semper  fidelis"

Not  on  the  ring  but  in  the  shield.

z


358


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Poor  little  dog — she  was  grieved  about  it  and  no  wonder.  G.
Beyond  the  lawn  the  lilies  hold  their  sway
Unshadowed  by  the  rose  of  yesterday.

As  already  stated,  some  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  purports  to
be  from  Mr.  Gurney.  She  writes  of  the  above  (July  4th,
1906):

"Poor  little  dog."  [Talbot's]  dog  died  early  in  the  year;  it  was  a
grief  to  us.

"  Beyond  the  lawn  ..."  I  have  had  the  lilies  moved  and  put
into  a  long  bed  in  the  rose  garden.  You  approach  them  by  the
tennis  lawn.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  grounds  for  connecting  this  last
passage  with  Mrs.  Forbes  are  but  slight,  while  the  connection
is  not  certain  in  some  of  the  previous  cases.

We  have  now  to  consider  how  many  of  the  statements
apparently  connected  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  in  the  part  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script  which  was  produced  after  she  had  seen  the
proofs  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  report,  might  have  been  derived  from
her  recollections — supraliminal  or  subliminal — of  the  report.
The  following  topics  occur  both  in  the  script  and  in  the
Keport :

(1)  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  May  15th  gives  a  description
of  a  man,  identified  as  Mr.  Forbes  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Forbes.  The  only  reference  to  Mr.  Forbes  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
Beport  is  on  p.  267,  as  follows:  "A  letter  from  Mr.  Forbes
to  her  at  Cranford  will  go  this  month."

(2)  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  May  15th  gives  the  real
Christian  name  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  son.  He  is  called  Talbot
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Beport,  but  I  think  I  recollect  that  in  one
part  of  the  proof  the  real  name  was  printed  by  mistake,  and
of  course  corrected  before  publication.

(3)  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  May  16th  contains  the  phrase
"  Ask  Clara  Forbes  about  the  wreck."  There  is,  as  far  as  I
know,  no  significance  in  this  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Forbes,
but  I  regard  it  as  a  mis-recollection  of  her  Christian  name
Diana,  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Beport,  p.  222.

(4)  On  June  25th  Mrs.  Holland's  script  refers  to  a  little
dog. Mrs.  Verrall  in her Beport,  p. 269,  speaks  of  "the


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  359

dog,"  and  on  p.  271  mentions  that  Mrs.  Forbes  was  accus-
tomed to  have  two  dogs  constantly  with  her.

(5)  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  June  25th  (a)  purports  to  come
from  Mr.  Gurney,  who  is  mentioned  several  times  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  Eeport  as  associated  with  Mrs.  Forbes's  script,  and
(b)  speaks  of  lilies  and  roses.  Lilies  formed  the  subject
of  two  cross-correspondences  between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Forbes  (Eeport,  pp.  234  and  256),  and  Mrs.  Verrall  (op.  cit.
p.  224,  foot-note)  says  that  Mrs.  Forbes's  garden  was  full  of
associations  with  her  son,  and  that  allusions  to  certain  flowers
growing  in  it  had  been  made  in  her  sittings  with  Mrs.
Thompson.

Summary  of  References  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

To  sum  up  the  veridical  statements  apparently  relating  to
Mrs.  Forbes,  the  following  were  obtained  when  Mrs.  Holland
was  in  complete  ignorance  of  her  :

(1)  March  15th. Description  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  dining-room.

(2)  March  2 1  st. Some  further  details  about  her  house,  etc.

(3)  March  31st  and  April  1st. A  few  trivial  details.
After  seeing  Mrs.  Verrall's  proofs,  Mrs.  Holland  obtained :

(4)  May  loth.  Description  of  Mr.  Forbes  (whose  name
only  is  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Verrall),  the  real  Christian  name  of
Talbot  Forbes,  and  references  to  the  lotus  and  lily,  appropriate
to  him.

(5)  May  23rd.  Mention  of  the  Winged  Victory,  appro-
priate to  his  school.

(6)  May  30th.  The  initial  "T."  with  drawings  (double
wine-glass,  flower  in  pot,  butterfly,  and  dog  on  sofa)  appropriate
to  his  holidays  at  home.

(7)  June  25th. Mention  of  dog,  lilies  and  roses.

Of  these,  it  seems  that  only  the  references  on  June  25th
and  perhaps  the  Christian  name  could  have  been  derived  from
Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  in  which  nothing  is  said  of  Talbot
Forbes's  school  or  of  his  boyhood.

Discussion  of  the  Psychometric  Theory.

We  may  now  consider  whether  there  is  any  ground  for
supposing that what is called "  psychometry " — that is,  an


360


Alice  Johnson.


[part


alleged  influence  emanating  from  an  inanimate  object — played
any  part  in  producing  the  veridical  statements  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  discussed  in  this  section. It  has  been  shown  that :

(1)  On  receiving  Mrs.  Verrall's  ring  Mrs.  Holland  had  a
remarkably  correct  impression  (on  March  loth,  1906,)  of  a
room  in  Mrs.  Forbes's  house  to  which  Mrs.  Verrall  was  going
that  day.

(2)  On  trying  again  with  the  ring,  Mrs.  Holland  obtained
statements,  some  of  which  were  appropriate  to  Mrs.  Verrall,
some  to  Mr.  Balfour  and  his  family,  and  some  to  Mrs.
Forbes  (on  March  1 7th) ;  some  correct  statements  about
what  Mrs.  Verrall  was  then  doing  at  Mrs.  Forbes's  house,
and  about  the  house ;  also  a  passage  which  T  have  classified
under  the  "  Eoden  Noel"  cross-correspondence  (on  March  21st);
a  trivial  statement  about  Mrs.  Verrall's  dress,  and  references
to  Eoden  Noel  and  Fawcett  (on  March  28th).  None  of  this
has  any  connection  with  the  past  history  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  ring.

(3)  With  Mrs.  Forbes's  glove,  Mrs.  Holland  obtained  (on
March  31st  and  April  1st)  some  correct  statements  about
Mrs.  Forbes.

(4)  While  Mrs.  Forbes  was  thinking  about  sending  some
objects  that  had  belonged  to  her  son,  but  two  days  before
she  actually  sent  them,  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (on  May  15th)
gave  a  description  of  a  man,  identified  as  Mr.  Forbes  by  both
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  later  in  the  same  script
the  name  of  her  son  appeared,  and  some  statements  appro-
priate to  him.

(5)  On  receiving  the  objects  sent  by  Mrs.  Forbes  through
me,  Mrs.  Holland  guessed  that  they  belonged  to  Mr.  Feilding
and  had  also  some  connection  with  Mr.  Myers,  and  (on  May
22nd)  her  script  stated  correctly  that  the  electric  wiring  in
Mr.  Feilding's  house  was  in  a  dangerous  condition,  referred  to
the  cemetery  at  Eome  which  contains  a  memorial  tablet  to
Mr.  Myers,  and  then  went  on  to  some  statements  appropriate
to  Mrs.  Forbes.  On  May  23rd  with  Talbot  Forbes's  glove
and  bird  comes  the  reference  to  the  Winged  Victory;  but
the  statue  of  the  Winged  Victory  had  been  given  to  his
school  after  his  death,  and  so  had  nothing  to  do  with  these
objects.  On  May  30th,  without  the  objects,  several  appro-
priate points  are mentioned and associated  with his  initial ;


LV\] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  361


and  later  (on  June  25th)  there  is  a  passage  perhaps  intended
to  relate  to  him.

Thus  it  appears  that  some  of  the  most  appropriate  or  correct
statements  in  this  series  were  not  obtained  in  connection  with
any  of  the  objects,  but  (in  one  case)  before  they  came  into
Mrs.  Holland's  hands ;  and  that  the  veridical  statements  in
her  script  had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  past  history
of  the  objects,  but  were  concerned  rather  with  the  past  or
present  doings  or  surroundings  of  their  owners  (Mrs.  Verrall
and  Mrs.  Forbes),  or  of  other  persons  unconnected  with
them.  Further,  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  was  clearly  led
into  certain  tracks, — in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Verrall  by  her
knowledge  of  the  owner,  and  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Feilding  and
Mr.  Myers  by  her  guess  at  him.

The  whole  series  is  of  just  the  same  character  as  the
writings  produced  without  any  such  objects  and,  in  so  far  as
the  statements  are  veridical  and  evidential,  they  point
far  more  to  telepathy  from  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Forbes,  or
Mr.  Feilding  than  to  any  influence  emanating  from  the
objects.

It  may  be  noted  also  that,  as  in  all  "  psychometric  "  experi-
ments, it  is  impossible  for  the  sensitive  to  avoid  drawing  some
inference — conscious  or  subconscious — from  the  appearance  or
nature  of  the  objects.  Thus  Mrs.  Holland  cannot  help  observ-
ing that  Mrs.  Verrall's  ring  comes  in  a  case  marked  with  the
initials  of  her  Christian  names  only ;  she  cannot  help  seeing
that  the  man's  glove  has  been  lying  by  for  some  time.

"  Psychometric  "  experiments,  in  fact,  are  in  some  respects
analogous  to  experiments  in  thought-transference  when  there  is
contact  between  the  experimenters,  or  when  they  are  in  sight
or  hearing  of  each  other  and  therefore  unable  altogether  to
avoid  giving  or  receiving  some  indications  as  to  what  is  to
be  transferred.  In  the  case  of  psychometry  also,  the  sight  or
feeling  of  the  object  may  sometimes  mislead  the  sensitive,  and
will  tend  probably  in  all  cases  to  bring  the  supraliminal
consciousness  into  play,  and  so  interfere  to  some  extent  with
the  action  of  the  subliminal.

To  return  to  the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall :  Mrs.
Holland's  next  script  was  on  April  4th,  1906,  as  follows:


362


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Wednesday. April  4th,  1906. 10.30  p.m.)

I  think  it  is  really  time  that  something  definite  should  be  arrived
at — Boston  has  been  curiously  dilatory  in  the  matter —

Has  there  never  been  a  case  of  a  dead  man  speaking  through  a
telephone  1 If  not  there  soon  will  be —

"  And  I  shall  smile  though  underground  " — 1

Before  the  largest  chestnut  tree  in  Trinity  blossoms —

She  will  understand  at  Easter —

The  scribe  [sic]  own  thoughts  are  very  obtrusive  to-night —  How

are  we  to  influence  so  stiff  a  hand

Drop  preconceived  notions.

*****

Most  of  the  latter  part  of  this  script,  omitted  here,  is  quoted
in  the  section  on  "  Fawcett,"  see  p.  344.  The  first  part  seems
to  express  a  general  desire  on  the  part  of  the  control,  either
to  produce  evidence,  or  to  have  the  evidence  already  produced
properly  understood.  "  Boston "  probably  means  Dr.  Hodgson.
The  chestnut  trees  in  Trinity  are  a  conspicuous  feature  of  the
meadow  at  the  back  of  the  College  in  the  spring  and  autumn.

"  She  will  understand  at  Easter "  1  took  at  the  time  to
refer  to  my  pre-occupation  with  the  "  cross-correspondences "
which  I  was  then  studying  in  the  proofs  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
Beport,  of  which  Mrs.  Holland  knew  nothing  at  this  time.  I
had  been  discussing  these  with  Mr.  Piddington  and  was
convinced  that  there  was  some  special  significance  in  them
that  we  had  not  yet  understood.  The  theory  propounded  in
the  next  Chapter  on  Cross-correspondences  was  simmering
in  my  mind,  but  first  came  to  me  clearly  on  the  afternoon  of
April  12th,  1906,  the  Thursday  before  Easter.  On  coming
back  to  London  after  Easter,  I  mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Piddington,
and  he  accepted  it  as  the  probable  solution.  The  whole  of
the  script,  up  to  and  culminating  in  this  phrase,  seems  to
imply  that  we  were  on  the  verge  of  some  definite  step.  How
far  the  implication  was  justified,  the  reader  must  judge  from
the  next  Chapter.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  the  same  day  was  as  follows :

(April  4,  1906. 11  p.m.)
But  to-night  there  were  three  glasses  on  the  table — why  is  that  1

1  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  The  Dead  Host's  Song.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  363


Chess  red  and  white  man  and  elephants  for  the  castles— and  the
red  wins  in  three  moves.

There  was  a  meeting  at  the  corner  of  a  street,  where  the  road  is
wider.  I  cannot  see  exactly  but  there  were  two  people  face  to  face,
not  by  arrangement. But  the  meeting  pleased  and  saved  something.

But  ask  her  for  the  little  gold  pin  with  the  coral.  It  came  to
her  from  someone,  was  not  her  own  choice — is  it  pin  or  pins'?  Are
there  two, — two  of  a  set1?  What  makes  me  think  of  a  pair?  Ask
for  them— gold  and  coral.

On  seeing  a  copy  of  this,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  to  me  on
April  11th  that  none  of  it  had  any  meaning  for  her  except
the  description  of  the  meeting. She  says :

On  the  7th  "there  was  a  meeting  at  the  corner  of  a  street  where
the  road  is  wider,"  but  not  "  face  to  face."  I  ran  after  some  one
to  end  a  misunderstanding.  .  .  .  She  was  a  little  "pleased,"  I  think.
It  was  certainly  "  not  by  arrangement ; "  she  had  returned  after
years  away.

C  ROSS-CORRESPONDENCE.

Eheu  Fugaces.

The  next  scripts  were  written  on  April  11th.  Mrs.  Verrall's
was  as  follows :

(April  11,  1906. 11  p.m.)

Nuneaton  or  some  such  word  was  wanted

It  was  not  for  that  he  went  went  away  in  the  long  ago —

Bells  and  a  whip,  and  snow  upon  the  ground  bright  sunshine  and
hard  frost — they  drive  together  over  frozen  roads.  I  see  their  backs
only,  fair  hair  under  the  cap.

Maloja  or  near  the  Maloja. 7  years  ago

Something  fluttered  and  was  gone —  And  the  black  bat  night
has  flown —  She  is  here  by  the  gate  alone,  and  the  scent  of  the
roses  blown.

That  has  been  repeated —  There  is  an  effort  to  have  the  same
words  this  time.

On  bat's  wings  rides  Queen  Mab.

It  is  obvious  that  the  same  idea, — that  of  flight, — is  here
repeated  several  times,  as  the  script  itself  remarks.  The  first
part  seems  an  imaginary  description  of  an  elopement ;  then
"  something  fluttered  and  was  gone "  ;  then  the  quotation  from


364


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Tennyson's  Maud,  "  and  the  black  bat  night  has  flown"  etc. ;
which  leads  on  to  the  idea  of  another  kind  of  flight,  "  on  bat's
wings  rides  Queen  Mab."  And  the  script  declares  that  there
has  been  "  an  effort  to  have  the  same  words  this  time."
The  effort  seems  to  have  been  successful,  for  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  the  same  day,  after  a  passing  reference  apparently
to  the  eruption  of  Vesuvius  which  was  then  going  on,
exclaims  : "  Eheu  fugaces."  1

In  the  letter  dated  April  12th  enclosing  this  script,  Mrs.
Holland  wrote  to  me  of  her  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall
that  she  wished  to  continue  the  Wednesday  writings,  and  she
added,  "  I  can't  be  content  till  we  get  the  same  message."
This  corresponds  rather  strikingly  with  the  phrase  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  (which,  of  course,  she  had  not  then  seen,  as
I  only  sent  her  a  copy  of  it  on  April  16th):  "There  is  an
effort  to  have  the  same  words  this  time."  I  do  not  remember-
that  Mrs.  Holland  has  made  a  similar  remark  at  any  other
time.  That  the  idea  was  prominent  in  her  mind  at  the
moment  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  writing  to  Mrs.  Verrall
on  the  same  day,  she  said  :  "  I  hope  we  shall  keep  up  our
Wednesday  writing  wherever  I  am.  I  can't  help  believing
that  we  shall  be  tuned  into  accord  some  day  and  register
the  same  messages ;  but  it  may  take  years  and  will  certainly
take  patience."  w  •■

Tt  will  be  noticed  that  here  again,  as  in  the  cross-cor-
respondence, "  Ave  Eoma  immortalis,"  Mrs.  Verrall  gives  an
elaborate  description,  involving  much  repetition,  whereas  Mrs.
Holland  sums  up  the  whole  conception  in  a  single  phrase,
and  in  both  cases  in  a  Latin  phrase, — familiar  enough,  no
doubt,  but  one  would  hardly  expect  to  find  Latin  at  all  in
the  script  of  a  writer  who  does  not  know  the  language.

The  whole  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  this  date  is  as
follows :

(Wednesday,  April  11th,  1906. 11.30  p.m.)
(1)  A  great  black  shadow  and  the  sound  of  a  wailing  wind— Eheu
fugaces.2

1  Horace,  Odes,  ii.  14.

2  Mrs.  Verrall  points  out  that  the  words  "black"  and  "wailing"  both  occur
in  the  Ode  which  begins  Eheu  fugaces. Lines  17,  18  run  :


LV.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  365


(a)  I  have  a  very  vivid  memory  of  him  as  he  appeared  when  we
first  met — 40  years  ago —  He  was  then  a  lad  of  15 — very  lanky
and  gawky,  with  ankles  and  wrists  a  world  too  long  for  his  grey
suit —  The  brows  and  eyes  were  always  fine — A  certain  greed  for
learning  but  a  great  deal  of  the  boy's  young  joy  in  life  too
exuberant  a  joy  at  times

(b)  3  Yet  Yat  Gately

Ask  him  to  tell  you  about  the  man  in  Yately  Eoad — Brummagen —
The  second  Emperor  of  that  name
He  is  trying  to  paint  the  impossible.

G.

(c)  She  is  at  home  again  now — tell  her  to  go  to  Wales  this
vacation — that  will  suit  him  best — he  must  be  careful  about  May

(d)  LI 559 — no  that  was  not  the  motor  number — 3  figures — L579.
A  dark  car  thickly  coated  with  dust — seated  for  5  but  only  holding  3.
The  accident  was  in  the  afternoon  on  Edgely  Hill — Beacon — Beacle
Beccleborough — Bam —

(e)  A  great  tulip  shaped  flame  against  the  midnight  sky
Another  friend  from  Harvard.

R.

(/)  An  owl  this  evening.

G.

(1)  Besides  the  cross-correspondence  involved  in  the  phrase
"  Eheu  fugaces  "  the  following  points  are  to  be  noted  :

(a)  This  description  is  no  doubt  meant  for  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
whom  Mrs.  Holland  was  expecting  shortly  to  meet  for  the  first
time  at  a  friend's  house.  She  was  greatly  looking  forward  to
the  meeting,  as  she  told  me.

(b)  "  Yateley  Boad,  Brummagem."  This  refers  to  a  topic
further  developed  on  April  loth,  see  below.

(c)  "  She  is  at  home  again  now " — is  probably  intended  to
refer  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Holland  knew  that  Mrs.  Verrall
had  been  away  from  home  and  that  she  would  be  back  some
time  in  April,  and  was  waiting  for  her  return  to  send  one  of
her  rings,  so  that  Mrs.  Verrall  might  try  automatic  script
with  it. On  April 11th  (the  clay  of  this  script)  I  wrote  to

"Visendus  ater  flumine  languido
Cocytos  errans."

i.e.,  "We  shall  have  to  see  the  black  River  of  Wailing,  wandering  with
sluggish  stream."


366


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  Holland,  "  I  have  just  heard  from  Mrs.  Verrall  that  she
is  now  at  home  again  and  will  be  glad  to  have  a  ring  etc."
Mrs.  Holland  returned  this  letter  to  me  in  its  original  envelope,
so  that  I  might  see  from  the  post  marks  that  she  did  not
receive  it  until  after  writing  her  script.

(d)  Seems  to  describe  a  motor  accident,  which  I  cannot
identify.

(e)  Another  reference  to  the  eruption  of  Vesuvius,  mentioned
at  the  beginning  of  the  script.

(/)  Mrs.  Verrall,  on  seing  a  copy  of  this  script  sent  to  her
on  April  16th,  1906,  wrote  to  me  on  April  18th:  "On
Thursday,  April  12th  (this  date  is  almost  certainly  ascertained),
about  7.30  p.m.,  I  saw  an  actual  owl  within  two  yards  of
me,  close  to  the  house.  I  had  never  seen  an  owl  so  distinctly,
and  went  to  tell  Helen  of  the  occurrence,  which  interested  me."
Miss  Verrall  added :  "  To  the  best  of  my  belief,  Thursday  was
the  date."

On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  Holland  tells  me  that  one  of  the
milder  terms  of  abuse  used  in  India  is  ooloo  or  ooloo  hi  butcha
(owl's  child),  and  that  at  the  time  she  regarded  the  phrase
"  An  owl  this  evening "  as  being  addressed  to  herself  by  the
Gurney  control.

I  quote  one  more  script,  to  complete  the  reference  to  Yately
lioad,  Birmingham,  mentioned  on  April  11th.  This  was  written
when  Mrs.  Holland  was  staying  in  the  house  where  she  met
Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Another  visitor  was  an  intimate  friend  of
Dr.  Sidgwick's,  and  this  probably  evoked  by  association  of  ideas
the  description  of  him  which  follows  the  sentence  signed  "  H."
The  whole  script  is  as  follows :

(Sunday. April  15th,  1906. 4.20  p.m.)

Make  no  blunder  over  this  for  it  is  important.

Tell  him  the  family  history  will  not  repeat  itself  in  this  case.
Older  than  the  mother  was  and  even  more  beautiful  a  passing,
"serene  and  bright  and  lovely  as  a  Lapland  night — "J

1866  a  token.

Ask  Ashley  about  his  experience?

Yateley  Ashley — Never  mind  if  it  makes  no  sense  to  you.

G.

1  Wordsworth,  To  a  Young  Lady.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VI.  367


Patience  and  ever  Patience. Wait  for  the  slow  blossoming  of  the
aloe.
H.

I'll  tell  you  how  he  looks.  He  paces  slowly  with  bent  head —
when  he  thinks  one  hand  is  generally  in  his  beard —  No — you
never  saw  him.

Not  man}7  remain.

F.

I  made  enquiries  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  he  informed
me  that  Professor  W.  J.  Ashley  lived  at  3  Yateley  Road,
Edgbaston,  Birmingham,  the  address  given  in  the  script  of
April  11th.  He  sent  a  copy  of  the  sentences  on  this  topic
to  Professor  Ashley,  asking  if  there  seemed  to  be  anything
significant  about  them,  and  Professor  Ashley  replied :

May  24,  1906.

1866  a  token.  1866  was  the  year  when  I  was  most  seriously  ill
in  my  life.  They  called  it  "general  debility,"  and  I  was  set  up  by
being  sent  down  to  AVales  and  by  abundant  coddiver  oil.  But  for
the  country  home  of  my  grandparents  to  which  I  could  be  sent,  I
might  easily  have  pined  away  in  a  Bermondsey  which  was  more
insanitary  then  than  now  probably.  Some  circumstances  of  my
illness  made  a  great  impression  on  my  imagination.  .  .  .  the  enter-
taining literature  for  children  which  came  most  easily  within  [my]
reach  took  the  form  of  little  bundles  of  coloured  tracts — pink,  bluish,
green,  etc.,  about  missionaries  !  I  have  always  supposed  I  remembered
having  my  bed  littered  with  these,  of  divers  hues.  .  .  .  Doubtless
the  whole  episode  impressed  [my  parents]  and  me.  But  I  am  pretty
sure  the  year  1 866  didn't  stand  out  in  their  minds.  Certainly  it
didn't  in  mine ;  though  when  your  note  arrived  I  thought  it  probable
that  was  the  year.  And  there  are  at  least  half-a-dozen  other  years
in  my  life  which  would  have  seemed  very  significant,  if  they  had
happened  to  be  in  the  communication.

The  second  Emperor  of  that  name  conveys  absolutely  nothing  to
me.  ...  It  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  sometimes  in  indexes
my  name  stands  under  that  of  the  Lord  Ashley  of  the  Factory  Acts
(Shaftesbury). [In  one]  it  appears  thus:

Ashley,  Lord. See  Shaftesbury.
Ashley,  Professor,  456,  584.

There  and  elsewhere  I  am  "  second  of  the  name  " — unworthily.  .  .  .

Obviously  no  evidential  value  can  be  attached  to  the  mention


368


Alice  Johnson.


[part


of  an  address  such  as  that  of  Professor  Ashley,  which  is  to  be
found  in  books  of  reference  (Who's  Who,  for  instance),  as  it  is
impossible  for  Mrs.  Holland  to  be  sure  that  she  had  not  at
some  time  happened  to  see  it.  It  seems  to  me  indeed  probable
that  it  was  a  subliminal  recollection,  which  emerged  because
her  mind  was  rather  full  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  the  time,  and
therefore  unconsciously  on  the  scent  for  any  association  with
Birmingham.

In  the  same  way  I  suspect  that  the  presence  of  Dr.  Sidg-
wick's  friend  in  the  house  evoked  what  was  certainly  a
subliminal  recollection  of  something  she  had  read  about  him,
for  his  habit  of  standing  or  pacing  about  with  one  hand  in  his
beard  was  mentioned  in  the  Daily  Chronicle  review  of  the
Memoir  of  him,  which  she  had  read  (see  above,  p.  318).  In
this  case,  as  in  many  others,  it  was  only  through  Mrs.  Holland's
great  care  in  noting  and  sending  me  information  about  points
possibly  bearing  on  her  script  that  I  could  trace  the  source
of  this  passage.  But  the  fact  that  so  many  passages  have
been  traced  to  sources  of  this  kind  shows  that  the  utmost
caution  is  necessary  in  estimating  all  the  others  which  might
conceivably  have  a  similar  origin.

The  whole  study  of  this  case  tends  to  confirm  the  view
that  no  statement  in  automatic  script  that  has  ever  been  in
print,  or  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  known  to  a  good  many
people,  can  be  regarded  as  really  good  evidence  of  supernormal
knowledge.  It  follows  that  statements  about  events  in  the
past  can  hardly  ever  afford  good  evidence,  because,  as  time
goes  on,  there  is  always  a  possibility  of  more  and  more  people
getting  to  know  about  them,  and  happening  to  mention  them
to  the  automatist.

The  "Scribe  incident"  mentioned  above  (see  p.  283)  is  a
good  instance  of  an  event  that  had  occurred  so  recently  that
we  were  able  to  determine  that  the  knowledge  of  it  was  con-
fined to  a  certain  small  group  of  persons.  After  a  few  months,
we  should  have  been  less  confident  about  it.  Of  course  the
best  evidence  for  an  automatist's  ignorance  of  an  event  is
afforded  by  cases  where  the  event  is  actually  occurring  else-
where at  the  time  the  script  is  being  produced,  and  a  good
many  instances  of  this  kind  have  been  given  in  this  paper.

But owing  to  the  careful  and  systematic  means  taken  by


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  369


Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  to  have  their  scripts  preserved
and  properly  annotated,  statements  which  are  not  actually
contemporaneous  may  often  afford  excellent  evidence,  since  we
know  the  date  when,  if  ever,  each  fact  became  normally
known  to  the  writer.  Thus,  some  of  the  cross- correspondences
were  not  quite  contemporaneous,  but  (except  in  the  cases
indicated)  all  occurred  when  one  writer  was  completely  in  the
dark  about  the  references  of  the  other  to  the  same  topic.

In  the  analysis  at  the  beginning  of  the  paper,  I  have  tried,  for
the  convenience  of  the  reader,  to  indicate  which  cases  are  best
worth  study  from  an  evidential  point  of  view  up  to  the  end
of  the  period  dealt  with  here.  The  later  portions  of  the  script
must  be  left  to  be  dealt  with  later.  Meanwhile  in  my  next
and  final  chapter,  some  theoretical  considerations  are  discussed.

CHAPTEE  VII.

The  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences.

"It  is  not  we  who  are  in  reality  the  discoverers  here.  The  ex-
periments which  are  being  made  are  not  the  work  of  earthly  skill.
All  that  we  can  contribute  to  the  new  result  is  an  attitude  of
patience,  attention,  care ;  an  honest  readiness  to  receive  and  weigh
whatever  may  be  given  into  our  keeping  by  intelligences  beyond
our  own.  Experiments,  I  say,  there  are ;  probably  experiments  of
a  complexity  and  difficulty  which  surpass  our  imagination ;  but  they
are  made  from  the  other  side  of  the  gulf,  by  the  efforts  of  spirits
who  discern  pathways  and  possibilities  which  for  us  are  impene-
trably dark." — (Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.  p.  275).

In  Human  Personality  Mr.  Myers  hints  more  than  once  at
a  favourite  theory  of  his  that  the  influence  of  science  on
modern  thought  is  not  confined  to  this  life  alone,  but  may
be  carried  on  into  the  next,  and  so  tend  to  improve  the
evidence  for  communication  from  the  dead.  The  latter,  he
suggests,  are  coming  to  understand  more  and  more  clearly
what  constitutes  really  good  evidence,  and  may  gradually
discover  better  means  of  producing  it.  For  the  heading  of
this  chapter  I  have  chosen  the  passage  in  which  he  formulates
this  conjecture  most .  clearly,  since  it  would  seem  from  our


370


Alice  Johnson.


[part


recent  investigations  that  some  such  experiments  as  he  there
foreshadowed  may  actually  be  taking  place.

Among  the  incidents  related  in  this  paper  that  seem  to
point  to  some  form  of  supernormal  communication  between
Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  two  main  types  are  to  be  dis-
tinguished :  (a)  those  in  which  one  automatist  refers  to  events
happening  to  the  other,  or  to  some  more  or  less  marked
feature  in  her  surroundings,  of  which  the  first  writer  can
apparently  have  no  normal  knowledge  ;  and  (b)  those  in  which
independent  references  to  the  same  tojic  occur  at  about  the
same  time  in  the  scripts  of  both  writers.  It  is  to  the  latter
type  only  that  I  apply  the  term  "  Cross-correspondence."

I  will  first  briefly  summarise  the  results  already  obtained
along  these  lines.

Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.  Hodgson  made  attempts  at  different
times  to  obtain  connections  between  the  utterances — either
spoken  or  written — of  different  automatists.  It  is  by  no
means  easy  even  to  obtain  suitable  conditions  for  trying  such
experiments,  and  unfortunately,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  no
complete  record  of  these  attempts  seems  to  exist.  Some
references  to  them,  however,  occur  in  a  number  of  letters
written  by  Mr.  Myers  to  Mrs.  Thompson  from  July,  1898,
to  January,  1901,  and  Mrs.  Thompson  has  kindly  allowed  me
to  read  these  letters  and  to  quote  here  from  them.  The
earliest  mention  of  the  subject  that  I  can  find  is  on  October
24th,  1898,  as  follows:

"Dr.  Hodgson  is  staying  on  in  America  for  the  winter,
sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  It  would  be  grand  if  we  could  get
communication  between  the  '  controls '  on  each  side."

On  July  31st,  1899,  referring  apparently  to  some  such
communication,  Mr.  Myers  writes  :

"It  is  a  small  matter;  but  I  hope  it  may  be  the  beginning
of  that  spiritual  intercourse  between  the  Hampstead  and
Boston  centres  which  we  so  much  desire."

On  November  29th,  1899,  Mr.  Myers  expresses  the  hope
that  Mrs.  Thompson  may  meet  another  sensitive  in  his  house.
"  Your  spirits  might  travel  (he  writes)  between  drawing-room
and  study."

On  December  2nd,  1899,  he  explains  further  his  plans  for
experiments  between Mrs.  Thompson and this  lady,  who,  he


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  371

says,  "  is  anxious  to  see  you  repeatedly  .  .  .  partly  that
your  attendant  spirits  may  make  acquaintance  and  may  be
able  to  transmit  messages.  I  think  this  an  excellent  plan
and  am  very  glad  that  she  desires  it.  The  evidential  draw-
back in  the  world's  eyes  (possible  plottings  together !)  is  quite
nullified  by  the  power  of  ourselves  suggesting  words  for  [her]
to  say  through  you,  or  for  you  to  say  through  her.  .  .  .
I  think  it  really  important  and  possible  to  get  your  spirits,
hers,  and  Mrs.  Piper's,  to  co-operate  in  their  world  and  use,
perhaps,  each  sensitive's  brain  indifferently."

The  next  and  last  reference  to  the  topic  in  these  letters  is
on  August  2nd,  1900,  when  Mr.  Myers  suggests  the  possibility
of  communication  between  the  "  controls "  of  Mrs.  Thompson
and  those  of  the  lady  who  is  called  "  Miss  Eawson "  in  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  referred  to  below.  Mr.  Myers  writes  that
he  hopes  to  go  on  in  a  few  days'  time  from  a  sitting  with
Mrs.  Thompson  to  one  with  "  Miss  Eawson,"  and  that  then,
perhaps,  a  communication  between  the  two  groups  of  "con-
trols "  might  occur.

A  phenomenon  somewhat  analogous  to  this  connection  be-
tween two  groups  of  controls  was  exemplified  in  the  experi-
ments of  Dr.  van  Eeden  with  Mrs.  Thompson  (see  his  paper  on
sitting's  with  Mrs.  Thompson  in  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XVII.,
especially  pp.  86-7  and  112-115).  Dr.  van  Eeden,  having
cultivated  the  power  of  controlling  his  own  dreams,  so  as  to
be  able  to  dream  of  performing  actions  which  he  had  planned
while  awake,  arranged  with  Mrs.  Thompson  that  he  would
occasionally  call  Nelly  (her  "  control  ")  in  his  dreams  after
returning  to  Holland,  and  that  if  she  heard  him  calling  she
should  tell  Mr.  Piddington,  who  was  in  charge  of  the
sittings,  at  his  next  sitting.  On  three  occasions  in  January
and  February,  1900,  some  success  was  obtained  in  these
experiments ;  that  is,  Nelly  stated  that  she  had  heard  Dr.
van  Eeden  calling  and  had  been  to  see  him ;  the  dates  she
gave  were  approximately,  though  not  exactly,  the  same  as
those  recorded  in  his  diary  of  dreams  ;  but  on  each  occasion
she  gave  details,  which  were  afterwards  verified,  as  to  his
circumstances  at  the  time.  On  a  fourth  occasion  (April  19th,
1900),  when  Nelly  stated  that  she  had  been  to  see  Dr.  van
Eeden,  he  had  no  dream  of  her  at  the  time,  but  she  gave  a


372


Alice  Johnson.


[part


description  of  his  condition  which  corresponded  with  what  it
had  been  during  the  early  part  of  the  same  month.

A  case  of  a  somewhat  similar  kind  is  recorded  in  Dr.
Hodgson's  report  on  Mrs.  Piper  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.
p.  120),  where  Mr.  M.  N.  relates  that  Mrs.  Piper's  control,
"  Dr.  Phinuit,"  had  said  that  he  had  tried  to  influence  Mr.
N.'s  dying  father  about  certain  matters  connected  with  his
will.  Later  Mr.  N.'s  sister,  who  had  been  with  their  father
at  the  time,  told  him  that  he  had  repeatedly  complained  of
the  presence  of  an  old  man  at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  who
annoyed  him  by  discussing  his  private  affairs.

Some  interesting  connections  between  the  automatisms  of  Mrs.
Thompson  and  those  of  other  sensitives  are  recorded  in  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  "  On  the  Types  of  Phenomena  displayed  in
Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.P.,  Vol.  XVIII.
pp.  104-307.  In  one  case  (see  pp.  205-208),  during  a  sitting
of  Mr.  Myers's  with  Miss  Pawson  at  Valescure  on  the  after-
noon of  December  22nd,  1900,  a  soi-disant  Mrs.  Thompson
"possessed"  Miss  Pawson  for  a  minute  or  two.  Mr.  Piddington
heard  of  this  from  Mr.  Myers,  and  at  his  next  meeting  with
Mrs.  Thompson  on  January  1st,  1901,  she  told  him  in  reply
to  a  question  that  on  the  afternoon  of  December  22nd,  she
was  resting  in  her  own  house  at  Hampstead  and  slept  part  of
the  time.  After  telling  him  this  she  became  entranced,  and
during  the  trance  Nelly  told  him  that  she  had  been  to  see  Miss
Pawson  on  the  day  in  question.  The  hour  of  Mrs.  Thompson's
sleep  and  Miss  Eawson's  experience  did  not  exactly  coincide.

In  the  last  section  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  (op.  cit.,  pp.
294-307),  he  describes  "a  few  other  instances  of  apparent
concordance  between  the  trance-utterances  of  Mrs.  Thompson
and  those  of  Miss  Pawson,  and  the  automatic  writing  of  the
lady  whom  [we  call  Mrs.  Forbes],  of  which  the  prima  facie
explanation  is  either  that  Mrs.  Thompson  in  trance  becomes
aware  of  the  content  of  their  automatic  speech  or  script,  or
that  one  and  the  same  control  has  conveyed  similar  communi-
cations through  two  different  mediums."

Full  details  of  these  cases  are  given  by  Mr.  Piddington,
and  he  concludes :

The  resemblances  quoted  above  are  far  from  complete;  they  are
suggestive rather  than indicative  of supernormal agency; yet  I


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  373


cannot  ascribe  them  to  chance.  If  they  are  not  supernormal,  I
would  attribute  them  to  the  minds  of  both  automatists  having
developed  from  similar  data  in  their  common  possession  similar
fantasies,  accordant  with  the  general  trend  of  ideas  that  runs  through
spiritistic  manifestations.  But  at  least  I  claim  for  them  serious  study,
for  could  we  be  fortunate  enough  (and  I  am  rather  sanguine  that
we  may  be)  to  multiply  analogous  and  more  clinching  instances  of
the  same  phenomenon,  it  would  open  up  one  of  the  most  promising
lines  for  observation,  and  even,  perhaps,  for  experimentation
(p.  307).

Mr.  Piddington's  remark  that  some  correspondence  may
result  merely  from  similar  trains  of  ideas  in  the  minds  of  the
two  automatists  should  certainly  be  kept  in  view  in  the  in-
terpretation of  all  such  cases,  and  it  may  perhaps  be  held  to
account  for  some  of  the  cross-correspondences  in  my  report.
But  his  insistence  on  the  importance  of  this  type  of  pheno-
menon and  his  hope  that  it  would  lead  to  good  results  in
future  have,  I  think,  been  amply  justified  by  the  recent  rapid
development  of  cross-correspondences — a  development  which  has
taken  place  since  Mr.  Myers's  death.

This  was  shown  first  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and  a  consider-
able section  of  her  Report  on  it  (pp.  205-275)  is  devoted  to  an
account  of  the  cross-correspondences  between  her  script  and  the
script  or  automatic  speech  of  other  automatists.  One  of  the  first  of
these,  in  May,  1901,  was  with  Mrs.  Thompson  {op.  tit.,  pp.  207-9),
and  a  striking  case  occurred  with  Mrs.  Piper  (pp.  213-17);  but
the  most  important  were  the  long  series  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  dating
from  February,  1901,  onwards.  In  this  account  Mrs.  Verrall
includes  under  the  common  term  of  "  Cross-correspondence "
cases  where  one  automatist  describes  correctly  some  fact  about
the  other,  and  those  where  references  to  the  same  topic  occur
independently  in  the  two  scripts ;  but  a  considerable  proportion
of  the  cases  are  of  the  latter  type,  to  which  I  think  it  most
convenient  to  restrict  the  term.

In  studying  these  in  proof  in  the  early  part  of  1906,  I
was  struck  by  the  fact  that  in  some  of  the  most  remarkable
instances  the  statements  in  the  script  of  one  writer  were  by  no
means  a  simple  reproduction  of  statements  in  the  script  of  the
other,  but  seemed  to  represent  different  aspects  of  the  same  idea,
one  supplementing  or  completing  the  other. Thus,  in  one  case

2a


374


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(p.  223),  Mrs.  Forbes's  script,  purporting  to  come  from  her  son
Talbot,  stated  that  he  must  now  leave  her,  since  he  was  looking-
for  a  sensitive  who  wrote  automatically,  in  order  that  he  might
obtain  corroboration  of  her  own  writing.  Mrs.  Verrall,  on  the
same  day,  wrote  of  a  fir-tree  planted  in  a  garden,  and  the  script
was  signed  with  a  sword  and  suspended  bugle.  The  latter  was
part  of  the  badge  of  the  regiment  to  which  Talbot  Forbes
had  belonged,  and  Mrs.  Forbes  had  in  her  garden  some  fir-
trees,  grown  from  seed  sent  to  her  by  her  son.  These  facts
were  unknown  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

In  another  case  (pp.  241-245) — too  complicated  to  sum-
marise here — Mrs.  Forbes  produced,  on  November  26th  and
27th,  1902,  references,  absolutely  meaningless  to  herself,  to  a
passage  in  the  Symposium  which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  been  read-
ing on  those  clays.  These  references  also  applied  appropriately
to  an  obscure  sentence  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  script  of  November
26th,  and  on  December  18th  attempts  were  made  in  Mrs.
Forbes's  script  to  give  a  certain  test  word,  "  Dion "  or  "  Dy,"
which,  it  was  stated,  "  will  be  found  in  Myers'  own  .  .  ."
Mrs.  Verrall  interpreted  the  test  word  at  the  time,  for  reasons
given,  as  "  Diotima,"  and  a  description  of  the  same  part  of
the  Symposium,  including  the  mention  of  Diotima,  did  occur  in
Human  Personality,  which  was  published  about  three  months
later,  in  February,  1903.  Further  references  to  the  Symposium
appeared  in  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  in  the  early  part  of  1903
(see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  p.  246).

In  another  case  (pp.  269-271),  October  16th,  1904,  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  gave  details,  afterwards  verified,  of  what
Mrs.  Forbes  was  doing,  and  immediately  afterwards  Mrs.  Verrall
had  a  mental  impression  of  Mrs.  Forbes  sitting  in  her  drawing-
room,  with  the  figure  of  her  son  standing  looking  at  her.
Mrs.  Forbes's  script  of  the  same  day,  purporting  to  come  from
her  son,  stated  that  he  was  present  and  wished  she  could  see
him,  and  that  a  test  was  being  given  for  her  at  Cambridge.

I  became  convinced  through  the  study  of  these  cases  that
there  was  some  special  purpose  in  the  particular  form  they
took,- — all  the  more  because  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  statements
were  often  associated  with  them,  apparently  to  draw  attention
to  some  peculiar  kind  of  test, — described,  e.g.  as  superposing
certain  tilings  on  others,  when  all  would  be  clear.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  375

The  characteristic  of  these  cases — or  at  least  of  some  of
them — is  that  we  do  not  get  in  the  writing  of  one  auto-
matist  anything  like  a  mechanical  verbatim  reproduction  of
phrases  in  the  other ;  we  do  not  even  get  the  same  idea
expressed  in  different  ways, — as  might  well  result  from  direct
telepathy  between  them.  What  we  get  is  a  fragmentary  utter-
ance in  one  script,  which  seems  to  have  no  particular  point
or  meaning,  and  another  fragmentary  utterance  in  the  other,
of  an  equally  pointless  character ;  but  when  we  put  the  two
together,  we  see  that  they  supplement  one  another,  and  that
there  is  apparently  one  coherent  idea  underlying  both,  but  only
partially  expressed  in  each.

It  occurred  to  me,  then,  that  by  this  method,  if  by  any,  it
might  be  possible  to  obtain  evidence  more  conclusive  than  any
obtained  hitherto  of  the  action  of  a  third  intelligence,  external
to  the  minds  of  both  automatists.  If  we  simply  find  the  same
idea  expressed — even  though  in  different  forms — by  both  of
them,  it  may,  as  I  have  just  said,  most  easily  be  explained  by
telepathy  between  them  ;  but  it  is  much  more  difficult  to
suppose  that  the  telepathic  perception  of  one  fragment  could
lead  to  the  production  of  another  fragment  which  can  only,  after
careful  comparison,  be  seen  to  be  related  to  the  first.

The  weakness  of  all  well-authenticated  cases  of  apparent
telepathy  from  the  dead  is,  of  course,  that  they  can  generally
be  explained  by  telepathy  from  the  living.  If  the  knowledge
displayed  by  the  medium  is  possessed  by  any  person  certainly
existing, — that  is,  any  living  person, — we  must  refer  it  to  that
source  rather  than  to  a  person  whose  existence  is  uncertain, —
that  is,  a  dead  person.  To  do  otherwise  would  be  to  beg  the
whole  question  at  issue,  for  the  very  thing  to  be  proved  is
the  existence  of  the  dead  person.

Hitherto  the  evidence  for  survival  has  depended  on  state-
ments that  seem  to  show  the  control's  recollection  of  incidents
in  his  past  life.  It  would  be  useless  for  him  to  communicate
telepathically  anything  about  his  present  life,  because  there
could  be  no  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  communication.  This
is  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  types  of  evidence
for  telepathy  from  the  living  and  for  telepathy  from  the  dead.

And  the  fact  suggests  a  certain  conception  as  to  the  nature
of  survival  propounded  by  Dr.  Leaf  in  his  review  of  Human


376


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Personality,  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XVIII.  pp.  53
et  seq. He  says  :

[The  evidence]  seems  to  me  to  show  that  after  the  death
of  the  body  there  remains  a  more  or  less  coherent  complex  of
memories  which  is  accessible  to  the  subliminal  self  of  certain  living
persons.  What  I  do  not  as  yet  see  is  that  this  complex  has  such
coherence  as  can  enable  us  to  consider  it  a  personality.  .  .  .  The
evidence  seems  to  point  rather  to  an  alternative  which  is  at  least
consistent  with  analogy  .  .  .  that,  as  the  physical  body  only  gradually
dissolves  into  its  elements  after  death,  so  the  spiritual  retains  for  a
time  a  certain  coherence  which  is  no  proof  of  life.  ...  It  may  be
possible  for  peculiarly  gifted  living  spirits  to  behold  the  gradually
disintegrating  spirit,  and  bring  us  word,  with  more  or  less  com-
pleteness, of  what  the  spiritual  man  was  during  life  (pp.  56-7).

Again,  he  says  (p.  5  9):

[The  evidence]  proves,  I  think,  that  memories  of  the  dead  survive
and  are  under  special  conditions  accessible  to  us.  But  I  do  not  see
that  it  proves  the  survival  of  what  we  call  the  living  spirit,  the
personality — a  unit  of  consciousness,  limited  and  self-contained,  a
centre  of  will  and  vital  force,  carrying  on  into  another  world  the
aspirations  and  the  affections  of  this.

I  venture  to  think  that  some  of  the  evidence  obtained  since
Dr.  Leaf  wrote  has  a  certain  bearing  on  this  argument.
Evidence  for  telepathy  from  the  dead,  as  he  implies  and  as  I
have  just  stated,  has  hitherto  mainly  referred  to  events  in  the
past.  Now,  telepathy  relating  to  the  present,  such  as  we  some-
times get  between  living  persons,  must  be  stronger  evidentially
than  telepathy  relating  to  the  past,  because  it  is  much  easier
to  exclude  normal  knowledge  of  events  in  the  present  than  of
events  in  the  past.  But  it  has  been  supposed  impossible  that
we  could  ever  get  this  kind  of  evidence  for  telepathy  from
the  dead  ;  since  events  in  the  present  are  either  known  to
some  living  person,  in  which  case  we  could  not  exclude  his
telepathic  agency;  or  they  are  unknown  to  any  living  person,
in  which  case  it  would  be  difficult  or  impossible  to  prove  that
they  had  occurred.

In  these  cross-correspondences,  however,  we  find  apparently
telepathy  relating  to  the  present, — that  is,  the  corresponding
statements  are  approximately  contemporaneous, — and  to  events


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  377


in  the  present  which,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  are  unknown
to  any  living  person,  since  the  meaning  and  point  of  her  script
is  often  uncomprehended  by  each  autoniatist  until  the  solution
is  found  through  putting  the  two  scripts  together.  At  the
same  time  we  have  proof  of  what  has  occurred  in  the  scripts
themselves.  Thus  it  appears  that  this  method  is  directed
towards  satisfying  our  evidential  requirements.

Now,  granted  the  possibility  of  communication,  it  may  be
supposed  that  within  the  last  few  years  a  certain  group  of
persons  have  been  trying  to  communicate  with  us,  who  are
sufficiently  well  instructed  to  know  all  the  objections  that
reasonable  sceptics  have  urged  against  the  previous  evidence,
and  sufficiently  intelligent  to  realise  to  the  full  all  the  force
of  these  objections.  It  may  be  supposed  that  these  persons
have  invented  a  new  plan, — the  plan  of  cross-correspondences, —
to  meet  the  sceptics'  objections.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
cross-correspondences  are  a  characteristic  element  in  the  scripts
that  we  have  been  collecting  in  the  last  few  years, — the  scripts
of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Forbes,  Mrs.  Holland,  and,  still  more
recently,  Mrs.  Piper.  And  the  important  point  is  that  the
element  is  a  new  one.  We  have  reason  to  believe,  as  I
have  shown  above,  that  the  idea  of  making  a  statement  in
one  script  complementary  of  a  statement  in  another  had  not
occurred  to  Mr.  Myers  in  his  life-time,  for  there  is  no  reference
to  it  in  any  of  his  written  utterances  on  the  subject  that  I
have  been  able  to  discover.  Also,  it  seems  to  me  almost
certain  that  if  he  had  thought  of  it  durina,'  his  life-time,  I
should  have  heard  of  it  while  helping  him  in  the  publication
of  Human  Personality,  or  he  would  have  mentioned  it  to  some
of  his  friends  and  colleagues  in  the  S.P.R.  Neither  did  those
who  have  been  investigating  automatic  script  since  his  death
invent  this  plan,  if  plan  it  be.  It  was  not  the  automatists
that  detected  it,  but  a  student  of  the  scripts ;  it  has  every
appearance  of  being  an  element  imported  from  outside ;  it
suggests  an  independent  invention,  an  active  intelligence  con-
stantly at  work  in  the  present,  not  a  mere  echo  or  remnant
of  individualities  of  the  past.

This  theory  of  the  cross-correspondences  seemed  confirmed
by  some  of  the  phrases  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  which  were
quoted  incidentally  in  her  Report,  as  well  as  by  some  of  the


378


Alice  Johnson.


[part


obscure  Latin  words,  which  she  says  were  used  in  special
senses,  unintelligible  to  her  at  the  time.  Thus  she  writes
(see  her  Report,  p.  39)  :

There  are  further  a  few  cases  of  words  apparently  used  in  a  special
sense,  though  they  have  so  many  possible  meanings  that  it  cannot
be  decided  with  certainty  what  is  intended  by  their  use  in  the  script.
For  instance,  repeated  injunctions  are  to  be  found  for  the  application
of  processes  described  as  destringere  [to  unsheathe],  nexere  [to  weave
or  bind  together],  superpomre  [to  superpose],  to  the  words  of  the
script ;  in  particular,  it  is  constantly  urged  that  if  some  words  were
taken,  sume,  and  some  process  of  superposition  were  then  applied,
superpone,  sense  would  be  seen  where  now  there  is  apparent  nonsense.
But  no  definite  directions  have  ever  been  given  as  to  this  process
of  superposition,  and  the  later  writings  contain  few  references  to  it.

All  these  phrases  appear  to  me  efforts  to  express  in  different
ways  the  idea  of  the  supplementary  parts  of  a  cross- corre-
spondence, which,  when  properly  "  superposed,"  "  woven  together,"
and  "  unsheathed,"  become  clear.  The  same  notion  is,  1  think,
expressed  in  yet  another  form  in  the  following  passage  from
an  automatic  poem  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  July  20th,  1904,
when  experimenting  simultaneously  with  "  Miss  Eawson,"  (see
her  Report,  p.  36  2):

So  flash  successive  visions  in  a  glass

the  while  we  dreaming  scarce  behold  them  pass.

Yet  all  the  while  on  the  awakened  soul

each  flitting  image  helps  imprint  the  whole

and  superposed  on  what  was  first  impressed

fills  so  the  outline,  colour,  and  the  rest,

and  while  we  only  watch  the  master's  hand,

no  glimpse  vouchsafed  us  of  the  building  planned,

stone  upon  stone,  the  battlements  arise,

till  the  fair  fabric  flashes  in  the  skies.

Later,  I  asked  Mrs.  Verrall  to  look  through  all  her  script
up  to  Easter,  1906,  and  make  a  complete  list  of  passages  in
it  bearing  on  this  theory  of  cross-correspondences,  and  I  quote
here  a  number  of  the  more  definite  of  these  passages,  using
Mrs.  Verrall's  translations  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  phrases  in
them.  It  will  lie  seen  that  much  of  the  early  script  is  uncon-
struable  and  only  approximations  to  the  meaning  can  be  given


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  379


in  translation.  But  I  include  passages  in  which  the  general
intention  seems  to  me  unmistakable,  in  order  to  show  the
gradual  and  persistent  development  of  the  idea.

(March  8th,  1901.)  (In  Latin  :  Do  not  put  down  my  pen  and
a  second  a  second  [1  pen]  .  .  .  some  day  a  later  part  will  come,
yours,  and  the  final  explanation  will  commend  itself  to  you.)1

(March  21st,  1901.)  (In  Latin  :  Oh,  if  you  cannot  weave  together
pertinaciously,  write  all  you  know.  Soon  will  come  the  inviolate
light  of  the  Sibyl.  Either  one  of  the  two  receiving  will  choose.
Do  not  fail  her  who  asks.)2

Three  days  later,  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  requested  Mrs.  Verrall
to  send  her  last  writing  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  p.  222).

(March  28th,  1901.)  (In  Latin:  What  you  have  done  is  always
dissociated  ;  improve  it  by  denying  folds,  weave  together,  weave
together  always.)3

(March  31st,  1901.)  (In  Latin  and  Greek:  To  one  superposing
certain  things  on  certain  things,  everything  is  clear.  There  is  no
ambiguity  ;  it  is  necessary  to  go  up  but  not  without  going  round.  If
you  understand  this,  good. Be  faithful. The  end  crowns  the  work.)4

(April  3rd,  1901.)  (In  Latin  and  Greek:  Why  do  you  not  super-
pose all  in  a  bundle  and  perceive  the  truth  1  I  have  done.  The
best  of  days  and  pass  over  one  day  beyond,  then  expect  and  faith
follows. Till  then  it  is  one;  to  make  two  is  impossible.) 5

1  Ne  pone  meum  stilum  et  alter  alteram  .  .  .  quondam  ulterior  veniet  pars
tua  et  praevalebit  ultima  ratio  tibi.

20  nexere  si  nequis  pertinax  scribas  omne  scitum  perpende  mox  ad  veniet
lux  chalcidica  inviolabilis. alteruter  adsoiscans  optabit  ne  falle  rogatricem.

3  Dissociabile  semper  quod  fecisti  emendare  rugis  negandis  nexere  nexere
semper.

4  Superponenti  riva  tut'lv  omnia  plana  ambages  desnnt  avafiaiveiv  necesse  nec
sine  ambitu. Hoc  si  tu  comprenseris  bene. Fidelis  esto. Finis  coronat  opus.

5  Cur  non  fascieulo  omnia  superponens  veritatem  decernis?  Feci,  optimo
dierum  et  insuper  diem  mitte  unam  tunc  expectes  consequitur  fides.  Ad  illud
fiovu  Svafeiv  aivvaTov .'

On  this  Mrs.  Verrall  notes  :

The  words  monazein  [see  below,  Dec.  19th,  1902]  and  duazein  occur  in  the
script.  Monas  means  "a  unit"  and  ducts  means  the  number  "two,"  so  that
these  verbs  ought  to  mean  "to  make  one"  and  "to  make  two."  Monazein  is
used  in  Greek  in  the  sense  of  "to  be  alone,"  and  duazein  is  used  in  the  sense
of  "to  couple."  The  word  monei  in  the  script  of  April  3rd,  1901,  does  not
exist.  It  is  obviously  meant  to  be  connected  with  memos  (alone),  but  the  form
is  incorrect.


380


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Aug.  16th,  1901.)  (In  Greek  and  Latin:  Explanation  is  at  hand
for  you  and  some  one  else.  .  .  .  Tell  the  other,  he  says,  not  to
stumble  ;  what  her  hand  begins  is  not  always  right.  It  is  necessary
to  take  time  and  to  feel  together.) 1

(Sept.  28th,  1901.)  (In  Greek:  Twofold  is  the  toil,  but  whole
(stoichaze).  In  mysteries  I  weave  riddles  for  you  and  certain  others
for  whom  it  is  right.)2

(Dec.  5th,  1901.)  (In  Latin:  Nodding  he  superposed  with  great
labour  and  not  without  the  help  of  the  artificer.)3

[Later  in  this  script  came  the  words]  Note  the  hour.  I  will  tell
some  one  else  I  was  here, [talbot]  helping.

A  few  hours  later  on  the  same  day,  Mrs.  Forbes  wrote :

For  earth  friend  to  see  with  earth  friend  the  light  is  feeble.  When

1e^7j7?7(Tis  irapa  aol  Kal  aWcp  tlvl  .  .  .  Mone  inquit  alteram,  ne  titubet — non
semper  recte  fit  quod  maim  incipit. 5ei  XP0"^^"  nat  <Tv/j.ira9ei.v.

"  di50fj.os  o  wbvos  aXKd  o\os'  aTOL\a^e  iv  dpprjrois  awiy/xara  wXlKOfxai  col  Kal  dWoa
Mrs.  Verrall  notes  :

The  word  stoichazein  used  on  Sep.  28th,  1901,  and  again  on  March  19th,  1902
[see  below]  does  not  exist.  There  is  a  word  stochazesthai  which  means  to
guess,  but  this  is  only  used  in  the  passive  form  and  the  first  syllable  has  o  only
not  oi.

There  is  a  word  sioicheion  which  means  "element"  or  "uncompounded  thing."
There  are  many  derivates  from  this,  but  none  could  be  formed  with  a,  as
stoichazein.  It  seems,  however,  that  some  supposed  derivative  of  stoicheion  is
aimed  at,  at  least  on  March  19th,  1902,  where  it  is  combined  with  the  word
sunthetos.  For  the  two  words  stoicheion  and  suntheton  are  contrasted  by
Aristotle  as  meaning  respectively  "primary  element"  and  "thing  compounded."

The  meaning  on  September  28th,  1901,  is  quite  uncertain,  and  on  July  13th,
1902,  the  word  sunstochazei  must,  I  think,  be  a  part  of  stochazesthai.  It  has
the  o  and  not  the  oi,  and  the  addition  of  the  preposition  sun  makes  no  sente
in  any  word  derived  from  stoicheion.

There  is  also  a  word  stoichas  (stem,  stoichad-)  meaning  "lying  in  rows  or
lines."  The  word  was  not  known  to  me  till  I  found  it  in  Liddell  and  Scott's
lexicon.  Stoichazein  would  mean  "to  make  a  stoichas,"  and  therefore  on
September  28th,  1901,  the  meaning  might  be  "arrange  in  rows;  in  mysteries
I  weave,"  etc.  On  March  19th,  1902,  the  meaning  would  be  "  why  then  do-
you  arrange  in  rows?  it  is  better  to  receive,"  etc.,  but  in  this  case  the
opposition  with  suntheton  disappears.  Considering  the  general  tendency  of  the
script  to  make  up  verbs  from  nouns  without  much  attention  to  philology,  I  do
not  think  reliance  can  be  placed  on  exact  forms  of  Greek,  and  I  should  not
be  surprised  at  finding  stoichazein  used  to  mean  "make  a  stoicheion,"  though
it  ought  to  mean  "make  a  stoichas."

:!  Nutans  superponit  magno  labore  nec  sine  artificis  adiumento.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  381


the  friends  see  together  the  same  light  is  the  force  that  we  use  for
this  letter.

Thus  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  contains  a  phrase  indicating  that
a  cross-correspondence  is  occurring ;  while  Mrs.  Forbes's  script,
which  seems  to  show  some  slight  connection  with  Mrs.  Verrall's,
refers — as  I  take  it — to  some  faint  telepathy  between  the
living,  similar  to  and  perhaps  reinforced  by  telepathy  from
the  dead  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  p.  226).

(Dec.  10th,  1901.)  Many  men  for  many  arts — partners  in  the
whole. Believe  to-night.

(In  Latin:  The  later  part  will  wait;  it  is  not  yet  clear.)1

Later  in  this  script  occurs  the  passage  quoted  above  (see
p.  218)  about  the  grey  figure  not  to  be  feared  to  be  seen
on  an  anniversary,  which  formed  a  possible  cross-correspondence
with  Mrs.  Piper  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report,  p.  213).

(Jan.  4th,  1902.)  (In  Greek:  Musical  (endoxis?)  makes  all
rhythmical.  The  sign  is  uncombined  and  uninvestigated  (?)  but  not
without  rhythm  (?).  Call  in  others ;  alone  you  are  not  of  much  use.
And  indeed  certain  others  have  already  spoken  in  a  voice  which,
though  unintelligible,  yet  sounded  sweetly.  Why  not  you  too?)2
But  it  is  hard — much  confusion — go  on  trying  now.

This  is  followed  by  an  attempt  to  send  a  message  to  Dr.
Hodgson,  probably  intended  for  a  cross-correspondence  with
Mrs.  Piper,  which  seems  to  have  been  unsuccessful  (see  Mrs.
Verrall's  Report,  pp.  282-3).

(March  19th,  1902.)  (In  Greek:  There  fits  together  only  what
has  been  fitted  together,  although  it  does  not  meet(?).  For  not
without  something  put  together  is  the  whole  rhythmical.  Why
then  do  you  (stoichazeis)  it  is  better  that  you  receive  whatever  thought
(i.e.  object  of  thought)  casts.  Now  to  you  and  to  others  this  has
been  already  said.)3

1  Ulterior  pars  manebit  nondum  manifesta.

-Mousike  endoxis  iravra  pvdp.i'C~ei  airapaTaKTOv  Kai  dve^eXevrov  to  aj]fj.eiof  ovSe
avapvdix-qrbv — wapaK&Xei  ertpovs  olr)  ov  -rcavv  w<pe\i)s  el.  Kai  oi)  Kai  &Woi  rices  ifdri
ecpdiyyiaav  <pwvvi  Kaiirep  a^vverip  d\\'  7)8v  K\ayyovo~r]  tI  5i  ov  Kai  o~6  ;

3 '  avvapixb^tL  jxbvov  to  avvapjxoaTov  Kaitrep  ov  avp-fiaKov  oiSe  yap  avev  gvvBetov  tlv'os
edpvduov  to  ivav  t'l  8r]  uroixdfeis  ;  dexov  p-aWov  6n  ac  p^V  T°  "oov/j.evov.  ioi  yap  offc
Kai  aWois  XeXeKrai  drjTa.'

See  note  above  for  the  meaning  of  stoichazeis.  The  word  sumbulon,
translated  "meet,"  is  not  real  Greek.


382


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Sep.  6th,  1902.)  (In  Greek:  Only  use  intelligence;  weave  together
perpetually  things  which  hang  together,  even  if  they  seem  dragged
in.)1

The  next  two  passages  occur  in  connection  with  an  attempted
cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Forbes,  related  on  p.  238  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  Report.

(Oct.  27th,  1902.)  (In  Greek:  Do  you  also  jointly  write;  another
is  to  read) 2  .  .  .  Mrs.  [Forbes]  has  the  other  words — piece  together.
Add  hers  to  yours.

(Oct.  31st,  1902.)  You  have  not  understood  all — try  further.  She
has  had  some  words  incomplete  to  be  added  to  and  pieced  and  make
the  clue.

The  next  passage  occurred  on  the  day  that  Mr.  F.  C.
Constable  was  planning  to  ask  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper
to  try  a  certain  experiment  with  a  sealed  envelope  (see  her
Report,  pp.  168-171).  Mrs.  A^errall  knew  nothing  either  of
Mr.  Constable,  or  of  his  plan,  at  the  time  her  script  was
produced ;  but  this  script  seems  to  show  a  knowledge  of  Mr.
Constable's  desire,  and  at  the  same  time  an  intention  to  satisfy
it, — not  as  he  had  planned  by  getting  the  same  statement
through  both  automatists,  but  by  getting  part  through  one  and
part  through  the  other.

(Nov.  3rd,  1902.)  None  the  less  through  others  not  known  speaks
the  fate.  ...  I  will  give  the  words  between  you  neither  alone  can
read  but  together  they  will  give  the  clue  he  wants.

(In  Latin:  To  discover  .  .  .  the  restoration  of  love  A  and  not
separation  (here  [?]  and  elsewhere  words  are  missing).  Now  the  word
itself  returns — the  term  Charity.) 3

But  hers  are  in  English  and  will  fill  the  gaps.  Wait  some  time
for  hers — it  is  hard  to  give  her  words.

The  next  three  passages  are  connected  with  the  cross-corre-
spondence between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Forbes  about  the
Symposium  (see  her  Report,  pp.  241-246  and  311-318).  This
case  was  a  very  complicated  one,  both  series  of  scripts  containing
a  number  of  reciprocally  veridical  statements. On  the  first

1  xP'?<r^«'  p-bvov  vu}  <xvfj.Tr\aaaew  aei  ra  waavTWS  exo"Ta  e'L  KaL  e(pe\KU<TTiKa  cpaiverai.

2  <xvuypa<pe  Kai  av — dtXXos  avayvwpi^eiv.

3  Comperire  .  .  .  redintegratio  anioris  A  nee  non  secessus  (desunt  hi  alia  et
alioquin). Redit  iam  verbuni  ipsum — Caritatis  vocabulum.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  383


day  involving  the  connection,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  (see  her
Report,  p.  144):

(Nov.  26th,  1902.)  (In  Greek:  What  do  you  name?  No  one.
Let  him  include  the  logeion(V)  some  one  else  will  learn  the  whole.
But  you  unaided  are  not  able  to  bring  one  and  one  together.) 1

(Dec.  19th,  1902.)  But  through  her  and  you  the  clue  must  come —
I  said  that  long  ago.

(Dec. 19th, 1902,  later.) (In  Greek  :  Monazein  is  of  advantage.

I  have  already  said  that;  and  not  duazein. Put  one  to  one  one.

Now  it  has  been  said.)  2

(Dec.  26th,  1902.)  (In  Latin:  The  fateful  sisters  twist  together
in  one  three  threads.)3

(Jan.  15th,  1903.)  Wait  for  the  word.  He  said  'I  will  send
the  half  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  you  have  the  other  half.  Tell
Hodgson  this, — but  you  have  not  got  the  word  yet.  ...  It  was
some  time  ago  through  Mrs.  Piper,  but  they  were  not  to  tell  you.

This  seems  to  refer  to  an  attempt  which  was  apparently
unsuccessful.

The  next  passage  refers  again,  as  I  understand  it,  to  the
Symposium  cross-correspondence,  though  this  is  not  stated.

(Jan.  30th,  1903.)  (In  Greek:  What  has  been  talked  about  by
you  fits  together  with  what  has  been  thought  by  her.  To  work
together  is  better  and  in  this  case  the  Separatists  are  not  best.  But
there  are  some  cases  when  division  is  required,  division.  Each  one
as  he  speaks  should  number.  The  ideas  are  numbers.  And  so
numbering  benefits.)4

1  t'l  ttot  dvo/xat^eti  ;  ovtlvo. — avvapid p.rjT(p  to  Xoyetoi' — aXXos  ns  Trevaerai  to  S\oV
o~ii  Se  oxjk  'iva  iibvi)  ivL  -Tpoo~TTe\d^eiv  dwacrat.'

"  /xovd^eiv  o~vfj.cf>opei  yjdr]  ravra  £\eyov — ouS()  Suajetv — eva  evl els. Kal  8t)

\i\eKrai.'

See  separate  note  on  Monazein.  This  passage  seems  to  mean  that  some
process  connected  with  "one"  is  preferable  to  a  process  connected  with
"two,"  and  that  "one"  added  to  "one"  makes  "one."

3Fila  tria  in  uno  contorsunt  sorores  illae  destinariae.

A  similar  phrase  :  "  tria  ilia  in  unum  convergentia,"  occurred  again  on  Jan.
20th,  1905.

4  o~vva.pp.bTTH  to.  aol  XeAaX^/xefa  Kal  ra  eKeivr/s  SeSoypeva.  cv/j.-rpdaaeif  aixeivov  ovoe
aptaTOi  if  Toiwoe  ol  x0,PL$0VTes — aWd  eaTLV  oh  axi-itf  SeT  o~xifccii.  dptd/j.rjT(2  6  ael
Xeywv '  dpid/xol  Ta  Kai  ourw  to  dpiBpeiv  avfitpepet.

Mrs.  Verrall  notes:  "The  'Separatists'  might  refer  to  those  who  divide  the
Homeric  poems  among  various  authors  ;  but  I  subsequently  found  that  certain
Pythagoreans  are  also  described  as  Separatists.  '  The  ideas  are  numbers  '
refers  to  a  well-known  view  of  the  Platonic  ideas."


384


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Aug.  1  Oth ,  1904.)  Now  this  is  other.  Sit  regularly  and  wait.
I  want  something  quite  different  tried — you  are  not  to  guess,  and
you  will  probably  not  understand  what  you  write.  But  keep  it  all
and  say  nothing  about  it  yet.  Then  at  Christmas  or  perhaps  before
you  can  compare  your  own  words  with  another's  and  the  truth  will
be  manifest.  But  there  will  be  no  sensations  in  what  I  say — it
will  be  aimed  at  something  quite  other  and  only  a  long  trial  can  be
of  any  use. Begin  now  to  write  the  words  I  give  .  .  .

As  is  well  known,  various  attempts  had  been  made  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  during  1903  and  1904  to  give  the  contents
of  a  sealed  envelope  left  by  Mr.  Myers  (see  her  Report,  pp.
299-301  and  423-425).  These  attempts  seemed  first  to  refer
to  an  envelope  said  to  have  been  left  with  Dr.  Hodgson ;
but  it  turned  out  that  Dr.  Hodgson  possessed  no  such  envelope.
Later, — especially  in  July,  1904, — specific  statements  were  made
about  a  sealed  envelope  left  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  did
actually  possess  one.  Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me  that  she  had
always  regarded  the  script  of  Aug.  10th,  1904,  quoted  above,
as  suggesting  that  a  new  type  of  experiment — she  did  not
understand  what,  but  something  different  from  the  experiments
with  sealed  envelopes — was  to  be  tried,  for  she  considered
that  the  script  had  already  completed  all  it  could  say  about
the  envelope.  The  most  specific  statements  about  the  envelope
were  made  during  July,  1904,  and  the  only  references  after-
wards were:  (1)  on  Aug.  14th,  1904,  "in  one  envelope  the
reference  to  Love,  in  the  other  to  Hope.  And  you  will  not
look — Faith  is  not  yours";  and  (2)  on  Nov.  25th,  1904,
another  exhortation  to  open  the  envelope.  This  was  done  on
Dec.  13th,  1904.

Mrs.  Holland's  reference  on  Feb.  15th,  1905,  to  the  opening
of  this  envelope  has  been  related  and  discussed  above  (see
p.  241),  and  it  will  be  remembered  that,  as  far  as  we  can
ascertain,  she  had  no  normal  knowledge  of  any  of  the  circum-
stances until  Oct.  6th,  1905.  Yet  on  Aug.  8th,  1905,  her
script  contained  the  following :

I  want  you  all  to  devise  a  better  test.  The  sealed  envelopes  are
not  the  best. Set  your  wits  to  work.

At  the  time  this  was  written,  I  knew  nothing  of  the  similar
sentiment in Mrs. Verrall's  script, which,  it will be  seen,


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  385


applies  appropriately  to  my  conception  of  a  cross-correspondence
as  something  (a)  which  the  automatist  herself  "  will  probably
not  understand,"  since  it  is  purposely  obscure ;  but  (b)  "  the
truth  will  be  manifest  "  when  "  you  can  compare  your  own
words  with  another's  " ;  further  (c)  "  there  will  be  no  sensations
in  what  I  say — it  will  be  aimed  at  something  quite  other,  and
only  a  long  trial  can  be  of  any  use  '; ;  that  is,  as  I  understand
it,  there  will  be  no  startling  results,  which  will  appeal  at
once  to  all  the  world  as  conclusive  evidence  of  communications
from  the  dead ;  that  is  not  even  the  aim ;  only  by  a  long
series  of  cautious  and  tentative  experiments  can  we  hope  to
arrive  at  the  truth.

The  following  is  again  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script :

(Aug.  21st,  1904.)  But  the  end  is  not  yet  nor  here — write  only,
interpret  not — record  the  bits  and  when  fitted  they  will  make  the
whole.

Another  metaphor,  apparently  intended  to  express  the  same
idea,  occurs  in  the  script  of  July  11th,  1905,  as  follows:

A  broken  thread  can  you  not  mend  and  the
scattered  fragments  place  to  perfection.

(In  Greek  :  It  was  not  without  him  who  sets
all  in  order.)

(In  Latin  :  You  ought  to  unite  the  parts  converging  into  one.  The
figure  which  is  made  from  them  should  be  contemplated  not  only
by  you  but  by  others  well  versed  in  figures.  In  the  midst  is  a
light  with  flashing  rays,  a  bright  star  in  the  sky.
Like  the  light-bearing  star  that  rules  the  seasons,
wandering  by  night,  hidden  by  the  light  of  the
sun,  which  yet  wanders  ever  in  the  heavens  night
and  day,  though  it  cannot  be  perceived  when  the
sun  reigns.)1  And  so  many  things  seen  not,  except  from  the  depths
of  Truth's  Well,  but  always  there  waiting  for  the  seeing  mind.

1  ovk  fjv  avet>  rod  iravra  kog/aovvtos.  eonvergentes  in  unum  sociare  debes — figura
quae  ex  iis  efficitur  contemplaiida  non  tibi  solae  sed  ceteris  figurarum  bene
eruditis.  in  medio  lux  cum  radiis  fulgentibus — Stella  in  caelo  lucida.

Lucifero  similis  astro  i  11  i  qui  tempora  regit,  nocitvagus,  lumine  solis  adopertu?,
— qui  quidem  semper  in  polo  errat  dies  atque  noctes  etsi  non  percipi  potest
cum  regnat  Sol.


38G


Alice  Johnson.


[PAKT


The  metaphor  with  which  the  above  script  opens  seems  to
be  a  reminiscence  of  some  earlier  utterances.  On  Feb.  13th,
1902,  had  occurred  the  phrase:  "Berries  or  pearls  on  a
string,  and  the  string  breaks  but  they  are  not  lost — scattered
they  were."  Still  earlier,  on  April  14th,  1901,  reference  had
been  made  to  "  pearls  before  swine,  my  [pearls]  perhaps
valueless  to  you  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]."  This  earliest  reference
is  probably  a  half-humorous  complaint  that  the  sayings  of
the  control  are  not  appreciated.  The  next  one,  about  pearls
on  a  string  which  is  broken,  may  be  taken  to  mean  the
fragments  of  a  cross-correspondence, — the  same  notion  being
further  developed  and  amplified  on  July  11th,  1905,  and
apparently  symbolised  by  the  drawing  of  incomplete  arcs  of  a
circle.

The  next  passage  occurs  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  9th,
1906,  in  connection  with  the  cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.
Holland :  "  Not  in  the  Electra,"  and  "  Henry  was  not  mis-
taken "  (see  above,  p.  310).

(Feb.  9th,  1906.)  (In  Latin  and  Greek:  They  grow  faint,  but  are
not  without  putting  together.  So  what  has  been  believed  by  the
disciples,  if  compared  with  certain  other  things,  adds  parts  of  wisdom.
If  not  all,  why  not  some'? For  instance,  this:)1

We  must  now  consider  how  far  the  actual  cross-correspond-
ences between  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall  recorded  in  this
paper  conform  to  the  type  described.

(1)  The  first  one,  the  "Selwyn  text"  (see  above,  pp.  219  ct  seq.)
is  difficult  to  estimate,  since  it  consists  of  a  number  of  more
or  less  similar  passages  in  the  two  series  of  scripts.  In  each
case,  taken  alone,  the  similarity  might  certainly  be  put  clown
to  chance,  but  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  large  number  of
similarities,  together  with  the  marked  appropriateness  of  some
of  the  phrases  to  the  circumstances,  seem  to  show  that
something  beyond  chance  is  at  work.  Yet  we  cannot  say
with  any  confidence  what  central  idea  is  intended  to  be
conveyed  by  this  somewhat  miscellaneous  medley.  If  it  was
Or. Sidgwick's  text,  Mrs. Verrall  obtained only two  rather

1  Evanescent  oi'5'  dvcv  <7Vp8rjfj.aTOS.  to.  d'  oiv  deSoy/xeva  reus  fxaOrjrais  TrapaXijcj.dei'Ta
Kal  aAXois  na'iv  fxa6i]aeus  pApt)  -rrpoafytpa.  Si  lion  omnia,  cur  non  qnaedam  ?
Haec  :


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  387


vague  paraphrases  of  it,  and  Mrs.  Holland  did  not  obtain  it
at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  the  text  given  by  Mrs.  Holland
might  be  regarded  (for  the  reasons  given  in  the  full  discus-
sion of  it)  as  an  attempt  by  Mr.  Myers  to  give  a  test  of
identity  chosen  by  himself;  and  to  this  conjectural  situation
Mrs.  Verrall's  contemporary  phrase,  "The  question  is  answered
and  the  text  given,"  is  not  inappropriate.

(2)  The  cross-correspondence  of  notes  of  music,  on  March
15th-22nd,  1905  (see  p.  254)  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  very
simple  one,  and  not  in  itself  evidential  of  anything  beyond
direct  telepathy  between  the  two  automatists.

(3)  "Not  in  the  Electra "  and  "Henry  was  not  mistaken"
(p.  310)  are  instances  of  remarks  being  made  by  one  writer
which  are  distinctly  appropriate  to  something  which  has  been
said  in  the  script  of  the  other.

(4)  "  Eoden  Noel"  (p.  316)  is  an  excellent  illustration  of
details  given  in  one  script  which  it  would  be  very  difficult
to  refer  to  direct  telepathy  from  the  other ;  but,  as  explained
in  the  full  account,  the  weak  point  here  is  the  impossibility
of  excluding  the  writers'  subliminal  knowledge  of  the  facts
mentioned,  in  which  case  the  whole  might  be  put  down  to
subliminal  association  of  ideas  on  both  sides.  Tor  the  train
of  ideas  in  Mrs.  Holland's  case  may  conceivably  have  been
started  by  a  subliminal  recognition  of  the  similarity  between
Mrs.  Verrall's  verses  and  Koden  Noel's  poem.

(5)  "Ave  Eoma  Immortalis "  (p.  297)  is  the  clearest  case
of  what  I  regard  as  a  typical  cross-correspondence,  in  that  a
number  of  details  of  the  picture,  quite  unintelligible  to
herself,  were  given  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  while  a  single  other
important  detail,  clinching  the  whole  matter,  was  given  by
Mrs.  Holland,  accompanied  by  a  remark  implying  that  Mrs.
Verrall  had  been  purposely  kept  in  the  dark.  Even  here,
however,  since  Dr.  Verrall  saw  Mrs.  Verrall's  first  script  soon
after  its  production,  and  associated  it  mentally  with  the  picture,
there  was  one  person  who  had  in  his  mind  the  idea  to  be
conveyed,  and  it  is  therefore  not  impossible  that  Mrs.  Holland
may  have  received  it  telepathically  from  him.  If  so,  however,
why  did  she  add  "  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer  without
giving  her  the  clue  ? "  Eor  this  certainly  was  not  derived  from
any  idea  at  least  consciously  in  Dr.  Verrall's  mind.


388


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(6)  "  Posilipo "  (p.  334)  is  another  case  where  Mrs.
Holland's  script  comments  very  appropriately  on  Mrs.  Verrall's
— "  M.  (she  says)  saw  a  real  place  that  last  time,  but  she
has  never  seen  the  place  itself."  On  the  same  day  Mrs.
Verrall  writes  a  description  of  Posilipo,  which  she  has  never
seen.

(7)  "  Eheu  fugaces  "  (p.  363)  is  a  case  where  Mrs.
Holland's  script  sums  up  in  one  apt  paraphrase  an  idea
repeated  in  several  different  forms  by  Mrs.  Verrall.

(8)  "Fawcett"  (p.  341).  In  this  case  Mrs.  Holland
obtained  the  name  Fawcett  eight  days  after  Mrs.  Verrall  had
been  led  to  it  through  planchette  writing  with  Mrs.  Forbes,
the  planchette  saying  that  Mrs.  Holland  must  give  it  too.
Mrs.  Holland  connected  the  name — -no  doubt  through  a  natural
association  of  ideas — with  Henry  Fawcett,  but  gave  some
correct  details  connected  with  the  Fawcetts  to  whom  Mrs.
Verrall's  writing  referred.

These  cases,  though  by  no  means  so  numerous  as  we  might
wish,  are  yet  sufficiently  so,  I  think,  to  form  a  basis  for
discussion.

Probably  the  first  point  which  will  strike  every  careful
reader  will  be  that  evidence  for  mere  connection  between  the
two  series  of  scripts  would  be  more  satisfactorily  provided  by
identical  statements  than  by  similar  or  supplementary  state-
ments ;  for  the  odds  against  identical  statements  occurring  in
two  scripts  are  clearly  much  greater  than  the  odds  against
the  occurrence  of  similar  statements.  And,  of  course,  in
ordinary  experiments  in  telepathy,  we  value  complete  suc-
cesses much  more  than  partial  ones,  other  things  being
equal.

The  whole  amount  of  connection  shown  between  the  scripts
will,  I  think,  be  admitted  to  be  beyond  what  could  have
been  produced  by  chance,  and  among  the  simpler  cases  are
some  which  may  be  called  "  complete  successes."  Thus  the
"Scribe  incident"  (p.  283),  the  coincidental  statement  about
Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  illness  (p.  277),  and  the  description  of
Mrs.  Forbes's  dining-room  (p.  329),  by  Mrs.  Holland  ;  and
Mrs.  Verrall's  coincidental  statement  about  Carpaccio's  St.
Ursula  (p.  254);  may  all  be  described  as  successes  complete
of  their  kind,  since  apparently  there  was  success  in  what  was


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Chapter  VII.  389

aimed  at.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statement  about  "  Mr.
Grove"  and  cancer  (p.  279)  may  be  described  as  an  incomplete
success,  since  it  was  true  of  Mrs.,  not  of  Mr.  Grove,  and  so
apparently  came  near,  but  fell  short  of,  its  aim.

The  question  then  arises  whether  the  cross-correspondences
should  be  regarded  as  cases  of  telepathy  between  the  two
automatists — only  partially  successful ; — or  cases  in  which  some
third  agency,  external  to  both  of  them,  was  endeavouring  to
produce  some  rather  different  result.

Assuming  that  the  controls  are  actually  trying  to  communi-
cate some  definite  idea  by  means  of  two  different  automatists,
whom  at  the  same  time  they  are  trying  to  prevent  from
communicating  telepathically  with  one  another,  what  the
controls  have  to  do  is  to  express  the  factors  of  the  idea  in  so
veiled  a  form  that  each  writer  indites  her  own  share  without
understanding  it.  Yet  the  expression  must  be  so  definite  that,
when  once  the  clue  is  found,  no  room  is  left  for  doubt  as
to  the  proper  interpretation.

It  will  be  seen  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the  idea  must  be  pre-
vented from  reaching  the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the
automatists ;  yet  we  cannot  be  certain  in  any  case  that  it  has
been  so  prevented,  as  we  can  only  interrogate  their  supraliminal
consciousnesses.  It  is  conceivable,  however,  that  the  controls
are  more  capable  than  living  persons  of  manipulating  their
own  telepathic  faculties.  Just  as  we  in  ordinary  conversation
can  say  what  we  like  and  abstain  from  saying  what  we  wish
not  to  say ;  so  it  is  possible  that  the  controls  can  telepathically
convey  certain  things  to  the  automatists,  stopping  short  at
whatever  point  they  choose,  and  thus  excluding  subliminal
comprehension  of  the  underlying  ideas.

Perhaps  the  most  serious  practical  objection  to  the
hypothesis  that  the  controls  invented  this  special  plan  of
cross-correspondences  would  be  that  it  might  have  been  a
subliminal  invention  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  since  it  is  on  her  script
that  the  hypothesis  is  chiefly  based,  and  it  is  there  that  we
find  the  most  complete  exposition  of  it.

There  are,  however,  a  few  indications  of  it  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  also,  quite  independently  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.  Thus  we
find  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  September  21st,  1903,  the
day  on  which  the  description of  a  room  afterwards  identified

2  b


390


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  Mrs.  Verrall's  dining-room  was  written  (see  p.  194),  the
following :

"  There  is  no  effort  unavailing,
You  fail — yet  save  another's  failing,
One  person  alone  does  so  little."

Again  on  November  7th,  .1903,  the  day  when  the  descrip-
tion of  a  man,  probably  Dr.  Verrall,  was  given  (see  p.  186),
"  The  agent 1  is  all  alone,  and  that  makes  it  hard."

See  also  the  passages  dated  Dec.  1st  and  5  th,  1903,
and  Jan.  5th,  1904,  quoted  on  p.  238  under  the  heading
"  Co-operation  between  different  sensitives,"  all  these  being
connected  with  the  first  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall.

Again,  on  February  22nd,  1905  (for  context  see  p.  246),
the  control,  complaining  of  the  difficulties  of  communication,
remarks  :  "  The  influence  of  my  friends  near  at  hand  might
be  able  to  combat  this,  but  then  thought-transference  would
make  yet  another  difficulty," — that  is,  the  script  recognises
that  what  is  desired  is  to  transcend  telepathy  between  the
living.

The  most  definite  passage  bearing  on  this  point  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  is  the  one  already  quoted  in  connection  with
the  cross-correspondence :  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis,"  viz.  "  How
can  I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue  ? "

These  passages  are  few  in  number,  and — -except  the  last —
are  vague  and  rather  indefinite.  No  special  significance  could
be  attached  to  them  if  it  were  not  that  they  seem,  as  far
as  they  go,  to  confirm  the  far  more  numerous  and  specific
statements  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.

Yet  it  may  be  noticed  that  all  of  them,  except  the  one
occurring  on  February  22nd,  1905,  are  connected  with  evi-
dential or  would-be  evidential  portions  of  the  script, — portions
which  there  is  some  reason  to  attribute  to  an  intelligence
external  to  Mrs.  Holland's  own  mind.  And  this  is  of  course
the  strongest  ground — indeed,  the  only  ground — for  attributing
these  phrases  also  to  an  external  intelligence.

Similarly,  if  we  extract  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  all  the
passages  which I take to relate to the theory  of  cross-

1  Mrs.  Holland  not  being  very  familiar  with  psychical  nomenclature  some-
times uses  this  term  almost  in  the  meaning  of  "percipient."  The  context
here  shows  that  it  means  the  automatist.


lv.] Automatic  Writing  of  Mrs.  Holland.  Chapter  VII.  391


correspondences,  and  consider  them  apart  from  their  context,
there  is  nothing  evidential  in  them,  for  the  theory  expounded
is  obviously  not  beyond  Mrs.  Verrall's  inventive  capacity,
though  she  did  not  grasp  it  at  all  at  the  time.

But  most  of  the  passages  occur  in  close  connection  with
actual  cross-correspondences  and  are  clearly  intended  to  relate
to  them ;  they  form,  in  fact,  a  sort  of  running  commen-
tary on  them.  How,  then,  could  Mrs.  Verrall — from  her
normal  subliminal  resources  alone — have  made  remarks  so
appropriate  to  facts  unknown  to  her  at  the  time  ?  For  she
did  not  of  course  know  of  the  cross-correspondences  till  some
time  after  they  had  occurred.

All  the  circumstances  suggest,  I  think,  that  one  and  the
same  intelligence,  or  group  of  co-operating  intelligences,  was
responsible  both  for  the  cross-correspondences  and  for  the  con-
temporary comments  on  them.

Nevertheless,  for  anything  like  an  adequate  proof  of  the
agency  suggested,  far  more  instances,  and  instances  of  a  more
cogent  kind  than  any  included  in  this  report,  are  obviously
needed.  The  evidence  in  regard  to  cross-correspondences  here
adduced,  though  in  my  view  well  worth  consideration,  is  slender
enough  in  proportion  to  the  superstructure  of  hypothesis  which
I  have  based  on  it.  It  is,  in  fact,  so  slender  that  I  should
certainly  not  have  ventured  to  bring  forward  such  a  hypothesis
now,  were  it  not  for  the  further  evidence  pointing  in  the  same
direction  in  the  more  recent  portions  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script,
with  which  I  hope  to  deal  later,  and  especially  for  the  im-
portant series  of  cross-correspondences  recently  obtained  between
Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Piper,  Miss  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Holland,  which
will  be  described  in  Mr.  Piddington's  forthcoming  report.


392


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.

The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  fraudulent  and  genuine.  By
Hereward  Carrington.  Illustrated,  12mo.  Cloth.  $2  net.
(Boston,  U.S.A. : Herbert  B.  Turner  &  Co.,  1907.)

This  is  an  exceptionally  interesting  and  instructive  book  by  an
exceptionally  qualified  writer.  Mr.  Hereward  Carrington's  name
requires  no  introduction  to  readers  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.

The  aim  and  raison  d'etre  of  his  work  the  author  sums  up  thus :
"The  investigations  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,"  he
says,  "...  have  demonstrated  the  fact  that  supernormal  pheno-
mena do  occur,  but  whether  the  physical  phenomena  are  to  be
considered  as  such  is  a  question  that  remains  still  undecided."  Mr.
Carrington  accordingly  divides  his  book  into  two  parts.  In  the
first  he  deals  with  the  fraudulent  phenomena,  the  methods  used  to
produce  spurious  "manifestations"  being  exhaustively  described;  in
the  second  with  the  apparently  genuine,  i.e.  with  those  incidents  in
the  literature  of  the  subject  for  which  the  writer  fails  to  find  a
satisfactory  explanation  on  normal  lines.  I  regret  to  add  that  this
second  part  of  the  book  is  by  far  the  shorter  and  less  interesting.

Mr.  Carrington  seems  to  have  quite  an  extraordinary  knowledge
of  conjuring  and  pseudo-mediumistic  tricks,  and  throughout  the  four
hundred  pages  of  his  book  he  almost  unceasingly  opens  up  in  this
direction  such  vistas,  that  the  uninitiated  reader's  breath  is  simply
taken  away.  For  my  own  part  I  must  say  that  after  a  perusal  of
his  work  I  feel  much  more  strongly  than  I  ever  did  before  that  in
view  of  the  boundlessness  of  human  ingenuity — especially  of  the
misdirected  kind — and  of  the  unimaginable  variety  of  the  methods
used  to  produce  the  desired  effects, — the  evidence  of  the  average
honest  and  intelligent  observer  (at  least  when  dealing  with  the
American  professional)  is  certainly  of  little  weight.  The  conviction
even  is  beginning  to  dawn  upon  my  mind  that  there  may  be
regions  in  which  only  exceptional  evidence  coming  from  peculiarly


LV.]  Review.  393

able  and  previously  trained  eye-witnesses  should  be  at  all  taken
into  account.  To  leading  members  of  the  S.P.R.  this  is  of  course
no  new  conclusion ;  but  for  my  own  part  never  did  I  feel  more
inclined  to  share  it  than  after  studying  Mr.  Carrington's  book.

After  a  few  pages  on  some  American  celebrities  of  by-gone  days,
and  on  Eusapia  Paladino  and  Madame  Blavatsky  (pp.  3-18)  Mr.
Carrington  devotes  a  whole  chapter  (pp.  19-47)  to  a  detailed
examination  of  the  Slade-Zollner  investigation.  This  he  conclu-
sively and  without  difficulty  shows  to  have  presented  many  weak
points,  which  in  fact  are  already  so  well  known  (see  e.g.  Podmore's
Modern  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  190-194)  that  they  need  no  repeti-
tion. It  is  interesting,  however,  to  note  in  this  connection  that  one
of  Zollner's  experiments,  or  rather  observations — the  vanishing  and
subsequent  reappearance  of  a  table — Mr.  Carrington  cannot  explain
without  having  recourse  to  a  visual  hallucination  as  a  possible
explanation  (p.  28).  The  famous  "knots  on  an  endless  cord,"  the
two  wooden  rings  incident  and  other  matters  the  author  seems  to
me  to  have  disposed  of  very  satisfactorily,  though  his  criticisms  do
not  embrace  everything  Zollner  has  described  (e.g.  the  appearance
of  knots  on  two  leathern  bands,  Transcendental  Physics,  p.  81).

But  surely  Mr.  Carrington  ought  not  to  include  in  his  negative
evidence  (p.  40)  Professor  Fullerton's  (of  the  Seybert  Commission)
personal  interviews  with  Fechner,  Scheibner,  Weber,  and  Zollner
in  1886,  since  the  latter  had  died  four  years  previously  (in  1882).
Mr.  Carrington  must  have  glanced  too  hastily  over  Professor
Fullerton's  account  in  the  "Seybert  Commission's  Report,"  pp.
104-114.

After  a  chapter  on  the  "Psychology  of  Deception  "  (pp.  48-63),
illustrating  some  of  the  general  methods  in  use  with  conjurers  and
mediums,  the  writer  proceeds  to  review  the  various  categories  of
fraudulent  "  manifestations "  one  after  another.  We  are  shown  the
different  devices  used  to  produce  fraudulent  table-lifting  (pp.  73-76),
raps  (pp.  77-83),  and  so  finally  come  to  "slate-writing"  (p.  84).
After  briefly  mentioning  the  story  of  Eglinton's  "  psychography "
versus  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey's,  Mr.  Carrington  takes  us  into  all  the
secrets  of  the  American  professional  "  slate- writer."  The  number
of  the  methods  he  describes  is  simply  bewildering  and  the  clever-
ness of  some  of  them  quite  amazing.  I  will  select  one  instance
only  (p.  134).

"I  shall  now  describe  a  slate-test  in  which  writing  is  obtained
between  examined  and  marked  slates  that  are  so  sealed  and  fastened


394


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


together  that  it  would  be  an  utter  impossibility  for  the  medium  to
open  the  slates  in  the  slightest  degree.  The  slates  are  free  from
writing  or  preparation  of  any  kind  when  they  are  placed  together,
and  they  are  fastened  by  the  sitter  himself  after  a  small  piece  of
chalk  has  been  placed  between  them."  The  sitter  then  first  screws
the  frames  of  the  slates  together,  not  only  at  the  corners  but  also
at  other  places.  He  then  "  covers  the  heads  of  these  screws  with
sealing  wax,  after  which  he  proceeds  to  fasten  or  gum  the  frames
of  the  slates  together  all  the  way  round  with  strips  of  sticking
plaster,  securing  these  in  place,  and  finally  sealing  the  frames  together
in  several  different  places,  placing  his  signet  on  the  seals.  If  he
choose  he  may  glue  the  wooden  frames  of  the  slates  together
also."  This  operation  has  probably  occupied  many  minutes ;  but  after
the  slates  have  been  held  under  the  table  for  perhaps  a  minute,
and  are  opened  and  examined,  a  "message"  is  found  upon  the
inner  surface  of  one  of  them — to  the  intense  amazement  of  the
sitter,  and,  I  may  add,  of  the  reader  also.

In  this  case,  it  would  appear,  the  piece  of  chalk  (not  slate  pencil)
which  had  been  placed  between  the  slates  is  no  ordinary  chalk,
but  is  made  of  a  compound  of  powdered  chalk,  water,  glue,  and
iron  filings  all  blended  together  and  allowed  to  become  dry  and
hard.  "  When  the  slates  are  placed  under  the  table  the  medium
extracts  from  his  sleeve  or  elsewhere  a  magnet,  and  with  this  he
traces  a  series  of  letters  on  the  under  side  of  the  bottom  slate  in
mirror  writing.  The  iron  filings  of  the  mixture  will  follow  the
magnet,  and  the  chalk  will  write  on  the  slate  in  the  regular  manner.
The  medium  locates  the  piece  of  chalk  in  the  first  instance  by
tipping  the  slate  at  an  angle  so  that  the  chalk  will  run  into  one
corner.  He  first  of  all  places  the  magnet  in  that  corner  and  drags
the  bit  of  chalk  to  the  middle  of  the  slate  before  proceeding  to
write  out  the  message."  Surely  after  this,  as  the  French  say,  il  n'y
a  plus  qu'a  tirer  Vichelle.

I  have  found  in  this  chapter  no  reference  to  those  few  cases
when  sitters  are  alleged  to  have  seen  the  pencil  write  at  a  slate-
-vvriting  seance  (the  most  notable  evidence  being  that  of  Professor
Elliott  Coues  and  Mr.  Emmette  Coleman  with  Mrs.  Francis,  Eeligio-
Philosophical  Journal,  Feb.  27th,  1892,  and  M.  "Harry  Allis "  with
Slade,  Dr.  Gibier's  L' Analyse  des  Choses),  but  I  confess  Mr.  Carrington's
exposures  are  so  crushing  and  his  criticisms  so  destructive  that  I
.lack  courage  to  lay  much  stress  on  these  few  enigmatic  incidents.

In  chapter  VII.  (pp.  1  43-167)  we  meet  with  various  "rope-tying"


i,v.]  Review.  395

tests,  past  and  present,  and  old  acquaintances  such  as  Miss  A.  E.
Fay  and  the  Davenports  (Mr.  Carrington  has,  by  the  way,  unearthed
an  account  by  Houdin  of  the  Davenports'  performances,  which,
extraordinary  as  it  may  appear,  had  escaped  the  knowledge  of  so
wide  a  reader  as  Mr.  Podmore) ;  in  chapter  VIII.,  with  such  things
as  "spirit-posts,"  "spirit-sacks  and  handcuffs"  (pp.  168-185);  and
perfectly  dazed  with  the  writer's  extraordinary  and  sometimes,  I
confess,  hardly  credible  revelations  of  what  trickery  alone  can  do,
we  come  to  "holding  tests"  (p.  186).  This  chapter  is  of  peculiar
interest  to  me ;  the  reader  will  presently  see  why.

Mr.  Carrington  shows  the  various  ways  in  which  the  medium  or
conjurer  can  manage  to  get  one  hand  free  :

(a)  When  hands  are  joined  round  the  table  and  in  mutual  contact
through  each  sitter's  little  fingers.

(h)  When  the  sitter's  hands  are  in  contact  soi-disant  with  the  two
hands  of  the  medium,  he  (or  she)  substituting,  in  fact,  one  of  his
(or  her)  hands  for  two  (turning  it  so  as  to  lie  across  the  sitter's
two  hands).

(c)  When  the  sitter  who  is  on  the  medium's  right-hand  side
grasps  his  right  wrist,  while  the  medium  himself  grasps  the  left-hand
sitter's  wrist.

(d)  When  two  "  investigators "  and  the  medium  are  sitting  side
by  side,  under  cover  of  a  curtain  pinned  across  them  and  attached
just  helow  their  necks — the  medium  pretending  to  grasp  his
neighbour's  arm  with  both  hands,  whilst  managing,  in  fact,  to  get
one  hand  free.1

Such  are,  according  to  Mr.  Carrington,  the  main  methods  of  "  hand-
holding"  which  permit  "escape."  But  I  have  not  found  in  this  chapter
(or  in  others)  any  evidence  showing  me  that  a  medium  can  get  his
hand  free  when  both  of  them  are  securely  held  by  the  sitters  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word.  In  fact,  it  is  obvious  that  this  method  of
control  is  evaded  by  the  profession.

1  To  do  this  "  sometimes  .  .  .  the  medium  has  concealed  in  his  right  hand
a  piece  of  sheet  lead  about  two  inches  square,"  which  when  "he  places  his
right  hand  over  the  arm  of  the  sitter  he  simply  bends  .  .  .  round  the  arm  of
his  victim,  and  he  is  then  free  to  remove  his  hand  at  any  time  without  fear
of  detection."  And  to  make  the  illusion  of  continued  contact  quite  perfect
"a  further  improvement  was  made.  A  spring  clasp  was  used  to  each  end  of
which  was  soldered  a  pox-tion  of  a  hand,  the  thumb  on  one  end  and  the  four
fingers  on  the  other.  These  were  made  of  rubber,  and  when  the  spring  clip
was  opened  and  the  fingers  and  thumb  clasped  on  opposite  sides  of  the  arm,
the  illusion  was  perfect"  (p.  195). Truly  one  stands  aghast  at  such  cleverness.


396


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Now  at  the  seances  of  Stepan  Sambor,  a  Russian  professional
physical  medium  who  died  some  years  ago,  his  hands  were  almost
invariably  held,  i.e.  grasped  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  release  in  any
of  the  ways  suggested  by  Mr.  Carrington  impossible.  And  never  did
Sambor  in  my  experience  object  to  this  kind  of  holding.

And  yet  I  undoubtedly  did  in  the  course  of  my  105  sittings  with
him  observe  things  which  could  be  explained  only  on  the  supposition
that  one  of  his  hands  had  been  released  and  which  no  machinery  of
any  kind  nor  collusion  would  do.  I  refer  chiefly  to  incidents  which
seemed  to  indicate  "passage  of  matter  through  matter,"  such  as
chairs  being  threaded  on  the  medium's  arm  without  his  hands  having
been  (apparently)  released  for  a  second.

Apart  from  this,  the  very  fact  of  a  professional  medium  allowing
from  the  very  beginning  and  throughout  his  career  this  method  of
control  (which  seems  to  be  so  carefully  avoided  by  his  colleagues,
not  excepting  the  most  famous,  such  as  Eusapia)  affords  in  my  eyes
to  a  certain  extent  the  presumption  that  he  may  have  possessed  some
authentic  "power"  after  all.

To  return  to  Sambor's  "chair-threading."  I  made  a  special  study
of  it  at  the  time  and  described  my  experiments  in  detail  in  the
Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  1900  and  1902,  and  elsewhere;  and
though  were  I  now  to  rewrite  those  articles  of  mine  they  would
assume  quite  a  different  appearance,  the  fact  remains  that,  under
very  good  conditions  of  hand-holding,  we  repeatedly  and  with  different
sitters  did  witness  this  curious  fact — of  the  medium's  arm  getting  in
some  mysterious  way  inside  the  opening  in  the  back  of  a  chair  (not
his  own)  when  his  neighbours  were  perfectly  convinced  they  had  not
released  his  hands  for  a  quarter  of  a  second.

So  much  remains  to  my  mind  unshaken  to  the  present  day.  And
before  believing  that  trickery,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word,  was
possible  under  those  conditions,  I  shall  require  an  undoubted  conjurer
to  do  the  same  thing  for  me.  Until  this  is  done,  \  prefer  to  admit
that  some  kind  of  suggestion  was  at  work, — suggestion  not  expressed
in  words,  and  perhaps  even  unconsciously  exerted  by  the  "entranced"
medium. 1

1  This  conclusion  seems  to  me  decidedly  supported  by  some  isolated  incidents
connected  with  these  curious  chair  experiments  and  which  would  point  to  tactile
hallucinations  more  or  less  induced  at  the  very  least.  Here  is  one  such  case.
Mme.  Yudenitch,  a  lady  spiritualist  personally  known  to  me,  writes  to  me  on
March  11/24,  1904  :

"As  for  the  chair  it  happened  thus  :  I  was  sitting  next  to  the  medium  when
suddenly  the  chairs  were  pulled  away  from  under  me,  the  medium,  and  the


LV.]


Review.


397


So  much  to  show  that  even  Mr.  Carrington  fails  to  explain  every-
thing.

In  chapters  X.-XIV.  (pp.  206-276),  dealing  with  "spirit-photo-
graphy "  and  materialisation,  we  still  have  the  same  unending  tale
of  gruesome  fraud  all  along  the  line.  A  few  pages  (pp.  224-230)  on
"  paraffin  mould-tests  "  should  be  read  in  connection  with  the  chapters
in  M.  Aksakoffs  Animismus  unci  Spiritism/US,  devoted  to  the  same
subject.  Of  a  well-known  case  to  which  M.  Aksakoff  (unfortunately,
I  think)  attached  his  name,  Mr.  Carrington  very  satisfactorily  disposes.
It  is  the  famous  incident  of  the  "  dematerialisation  "  of  Mrs.  D'Esper
ance's  legs  at  Helsingfors  in  1893.  Mr.  Carrington  conclusively  shows
that  this  "phenomenon"  admits  of  an  absurdly  easy  explanation
(pp.  235-236 ;  see  also  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I,
Part  I.,  pp.  131-168),  and  thus  leaves  it  literally  without  a  leg  to
stand  upon.

Methods  used  in  simulating  "gradual  materialisation,"  as  if  from
the  floor,  are  described  (pp.  257,  258),  also  various  ways  of  smuggling
"  spirit-clothes "  into  the  cabinet.  Much  stress  is  sometimes  laid  by
spiritualists  on  accounts  of  test  seances  for  materialisation  at  which
"forms"  dressed  in  white  flowing  robes  appeared  after  the  medium
himself  (or  herself)  had  been  subjected  to  a  thorough  searching.
When  one  reads,  however,  that  these  "  robes  "  are  made  of  such  fine
material  as  to  find  room  in  a  dummy  watch,  a  purse,  a  letter,  or  even
in  a  hollow  boot  heel  (p.  250),  one  may  be  excused  for  not  attaching
undue  importance  to  such  "  searchings."

It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  Mr.  Carrington  thinks  it
"  conceivable  that  such  a  thing  as  genuine  materialisation  exists  as
a  fact  in  nature"  (p.  237),  and  refers  in  this  connection  to  Sir  W.
Crookes's  experiments  with  D.  D.  Home,  and  even  to  M.  Charles
Richet's  recent  sittings  at  Algiers,  which  he  thinks  "most  extra-
ordinary ; "  why,  he  does  not  explain,  since,  apart  from  the  name  of
the  chief  witness, the  sittings  in  question  do  not  seem  to  have

gentleman  who  was  sitting  on  his  other  side,  so  that  we  had  to  get  up,  and  the
chairs  behind  us  were  somewhat  moved  about ;  then  the  medium  began  to  move
aside  his  hand,  together  with  mine,  and  at  this  moment  I  felt  one  chair  hanging
on  my  arm  and  so  stated  to  those  present,  who  advised  me  to  [bring  the  lower
part  of  my  arm  close  to  the  upper  part].  I  had  hardly  done  so  when  a  second
chair  appeared  on  the  same  arm  (the  feeling  was  as  if  my  arm  had  been  lightly
struck  with  a  wooden  object).  Having  squeezed  both  chairs  I  experienced  the
strange  feeling  as  if  their  backs,  which  were  upon  my  arm,  had  parted  in  two,  and
then  [the  chairs]  fell  on  the  floor  at  once,  thus  freeing  my  arm."

Curious,  is  it  not  ? And  this  is  not  an  altogether  unique  experience.


398


Co ant  Perovsky -Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


presented  anything  exceptional  so  far  as  "conditions"  were  con-
cerned, and,  as  is  well  known,  many  suspicious  circumstances  have
transpired  since.

The  three  following  chapters,  ending  Part  I.,  on  "  Sealed  letter-
reading,"  "Mind-reading  performances,"  and  "Trance  and  test-
seances,"  are,  strictly  speaking,  out  of  place  in  a  book  devoted  to
"  physical  phenomena,"  but  with  this  reservation  are  nevertheless
among  the  most  instructive.  In  the  first  of  these  we  see  again
that  seemingly  the  most  perfect  "tests"  almost  invariably  fall  an
easy  prey  to  the  medium's  cunning.  This  never-ending  tale  of
precautions  baffled,  however  elaborate  and  ingenious,  ends  by  pro-
ducing on  the  disheartened  reader's  mind  an  impression  of  perfect
hopelessness.  What :  if  such  "  conditions "  and  "  tests "  are  of  no
avail,  can  any  experiments  be  of  any  use  1  Scepticism  in  answer  to
this  question  is  legitimate.  But  before  one  has  had  time  to  pause
and  consider  a  possible  solution,  Mr.  Carrington  takes  us  two  steps
further  into  the  same  extraordinarily  fertile  though  unwholesome
region.  In  the  chapter  on  mind-reading  performances  (291-311),
after  a  few  pages  on  genuine  "  muscle-reading,"  we  are  treated  to  an
exposure  of  the  methods  used  by  professional  mind-readers  on  the
public  stage ;  and  here  I  stand  bewildered  again.  Let  the  reader
consider,  for  instance,  the  following  passage  (p.  305) :

"  I  next  give  a  very  clever  test,  in  which  the  assistant  stands  in
front  of  a  black-board,  with  chalk  in  her  hands,  and  writes  upon
the  board  whatever  number,  date,  card,  etc.,  is  whispered  into  the
performer's  ear  when  he  is  amongst  the  audience,  not  a  word  being
spoken  throughout  this  test,  and  it  is  obvious  that  there  is  no
communication  of  any  sort  between  performer  and  assistant.  The
performer  moves  freely  amongst  the  audience,  the  only  condition
required  being  that  absolute  silence  be  maintained."

In  such  performances,  it  appears  "  the  assistant  upon  the  stage
breathes  deeply  and  regularly,  so  that  the  performer  can  see  the
movement  of  her  shoulders  from  where  he  stands,  care  being  taken
however  not  to  overdo  this  part  of  the  performance  and  render  the
movement  noticeable  to  any  person  in  the  audience.  The  performer-
starts  his  assistant  by  making  some  slight  noise,  and  from  that
instant  the  silent  counting  begins.  .  .  .  After  she  (the  assistant)
has  counted  up  to  a  certain  number,  the  number  required  (i.e.  after
she  has  taken  that  number  of  breaths),  the  performer  interrupts
her  breathing,  and  the  assistant  knows  the  number  to  place  upon
the  board. The  counting  then  begins  again  from  the  moment  the


LV.]


Review.


399


sound  of  chalk  ceases  to  mark  the  blackboard — the  performer  again
interrupting  the  breathing  at  the  next  number  or  letter,  as  the  case
may.  be,  by  again  making  a  slight  sound  or  movement.  This
process  is  continued  until  the  whole  message  is  communicated,  thu
assistant  writing  down  each  word  or  figure  in  turn,  no  word  being
spoken  throughout  the  entire  performance."

But  it  appears  that  there  is  another  method  also — and  even  far
superior.  "  Instead  of  the  breathing  being  necessary,  the  performer
and  his  assistant  have  substituted  a  method  of  counting  mentally  and
together.  It  is  a  known  fact  that  the  beats  for  common  time  are
always  the  same  in  music,  therefore,  with  little  practice,  it  is  easy
for  two  persons  starting  on  a  given  signal  to  count  at  the  same
time  and  rate,  and  when  another  signal  is  given  to  stop,  and  of
course  they  will  both  have  arrived  at  the  same  number.  The
performer  and  his  assistant  count  together  mentally  until  they  are
sure  that  they  both  count  in  exactly  the  same  time,  when  the
hardest  portion  of  this  method  will  have  been  overcome.  The
signals  of  when  to  stop  and  when  to  commence  have  now  to  be
learned.  .  .  .  Suppose  the  date  of  a  coin  is  to  be  trans-
mitted. It  is  generally  understood  that  most  coins  begin  with
the  figure  1,  and  that  much  may  be  taken  for  granted.  The
performer  stands  up  at  the  blackboard,  his  assistant  being  at  the
opposite  side  of  the  stage  and  awaits  her  replies.  She  begins :
'The  first  figure  I  see  is  a  1.'  From  the  instant  she  has  ceased
speaking,  both  she  and  the  performer  begin  counting  together.
Suppose  the  next  number  is  an  8.  The  performer  waits  until  he
(and,  consequently,  his  assistant)  has  mentally  counted  eight  breaths
before  he  marks  upon  the  board,  when  he  writes  the  figure  1  as
directed.  The  assistant  now  knows  that  the  next  number  is  eight,
and  so  states.  Before  marking  down  the  8,  however,  the  performer
waits  until  they  have  both  counted  up  to  the  next  number  on  the
coin,  say  9.  After  mentally  counting  nine,  then,  the  performer
writes  down  the  8  previously  given,  and  the  assistant  hearing  the
sound  of  the  chalk  knows  the  number  next  in  order,  and  so  on
indefinitely.  Both  performer  and  his  assistant  keep  just  '  one
ahead '  throughout :  the  sound  of  the  chalk  on  the  blackboard  being
the  signal  for  when  to  stop  and  when  to  commence"  (pp.  306-7).
Slight  variations  of  the  method  will  do  for  numbers  on  bank-
notes, etc.

In  the  chapter  on  "Trance,  test  seances,"  etc.,  ending  Part  I.,
we  read  (pp.  312-318)  of  the  various  devices  used  to  get  information


400  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


about  personal  matters  connected  with  possible  sitters ;  of
"  brotherhoods "  of  mediums,  each  member  of  those  organisations
binding  himself  to  turn  into  the  "public  fund"  any  information  he
may  obtain  about  sitters,  their  deceased  friends  and  relatives;  of
"Blue  Books"  (containing  as  many  as  seven  thousand  names  for  one
town  alone)  circulated  in  great  secrecy  among  members  of  these
brotherhoods,  etc.

Part  II.  of  Mr.  Carrington's  book  we  can,  unfortunately,  go
through  much  quicker.  Believing,  as  he  does,  that  there  may  be
in  nature  some  genuine  mediumistic  physical  phenomena  after  all
(and  he  again,  I  fail  to  understand  why,  includes  "  trance "  and
Mrs.  Piper  in  this  category),  Mr.  Carrington  proceeds  to  give  us
specimens  of  cases  of  "  raps,"  "  telekinesis,"  and  the  like,  which  he
thinks  convincing  (pp.  340-371).  He  will  permit  me  to  say  that  I
do  not  consider  his  lists  altogether  satisfactory.  All  references
to  Jacolliot's  experiments  with  his  fakir  I  would  have  omitted
altogether.  Then  there  is  Sir  William  Crookes  and  his  statements
on  the  various  raps  he  observed  with  Mrs.  Fox-Jencken.  These
passages  have  already  been  quoted  ad  nauseam,  and  reproduced  as
they  are  without  any  further  additional  details,  in  view  again  of
all  the  various  "incidents"  which  have  occurred  since  Sir  William
wrote  the  lines  in  question  (some  35  years  ago),  these  brief  state-
ments, even  from  so  high  an  authority,  carry  now  to  the  mind
little  conviction.  Such  is  at  least  my  impression.  On  the  other
hand,  M.  Maxwell's  cases  quoted  on  pp.  342-345  are  distinctly  very
good — or  at  least  some  of  them  are — and  look  encouraging.  We
want  only  more  of  such  experiments,  but  I  am  afraid  a  good  man}'
more,  to  settle  the  question  in  the  affirmative — and  it  would  be
once  for  all  !

I  regret  to  note  that  in  the  chapter  on  "  telekinesis "  we  meet
(p.  364)  Jacolliot  and  Covindasamy  again,  but  we  see  no  reference
either  to  Count  de  Gasparin  and  Professor  Thury,  to  Sub-
Committee  Number  I.  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,  or  to  Dr.
Dariex's  excellent  case  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  194-198).

Turning  to  D.  D.  Home  (p.  372),  Mr.  Carrington  begins  by
asserting  somewhat  too  emphatically,  I  am  afraid,  that  fraud  was
never  detected  at  any  of  Home's  seances,  "  nor  was  it  even
suspected  (!)  on  any  occasion,"  also  that  "he  insisted  upon  as  much
light  as  possible  on  all  occasions."  We  are  also  told  a  little  further
on  that  Sir  William  Crookes's  accordion  tests  took  place  "in  full
light"  (p.  376). Such  inaccuracies  are  distinctly  unpleasant  to  meet


LV.]


Review.


401


with  in  a  scientific  work  like  Mr.  Carrington's.  I  strongly  suspect
that  the  amount  of  light  admitted  at  most  of  Home's  seances  was
poor,  and  I  beg  to  refer  Mr.  Carrington  in  this  connection  to
some  passages  in  Sir.  W.  Crookes's  "Notes  of  seances  with  D.  D.
Home"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  98-127.  I  also  think  that
those  who  have  had  a  large  experience  of  seances,  especially  "  light "
ones,  will  agree  with  me  that  at  a  certain  point  too  little  light  may
be  worse,  so  far  as  observation  is  concerned,  than  unpretentious
darkness!  Suspicious  circumstances  were  undoubtedly  observed  at
Home's  seances  (see  Mr.  Merrifield's  evidence  in  S.P.R.  Journal,  May,
1903,  pp.  76-78,  and  compare  his  account  of  the  seance  in  question
with  the  author's  description  of  some  feats  of  Monck's  on
pp.  246-24  7).  In  saying  this,  I  distinctly  repudiate  all  idea  of
casting  doubt  on  the  whole  of  Home's  phenomena,  but  merely  wish
to  protest  against  unnecessary  exaggerations.

There  is  one  of  Home's  manifestations  which  I  have  long  thought
to  be  one  of  the  most  enigmatic  of  all,  not  less  perhaps  than  the
"elongations,"  " levitations,"  and  "fire-tests"  which  Mr.  Carrington
discusses  at  some  length,  and  yet  there  is  no  reference  to  it  in  his
chapter  on  Home  at  all,  though  he  just  mentions  it  elsewhere
(p.  237)  when  speaking  of  the  possibility  of  genuine  materialisation.
It  is  the  fact  recorded  by  many  observers  (Sir  W.  Crookes  and
Count  Alexis  Tolstoy,  a  distinguished  Russian  writer  and  poet,
among  many  others)  of  the  gradual  melting  away  of  the  "  spirit-
hands  "  in  the  sitter's  hand  when  grasped.  I  do  not  believe  that
such  a  feat  has  ever  been  attempted  by  conjurers  (no  trace  of
anything  of  the  kind  is  to  be  found  at  any  rate  in  Mr.  Carrington's
work),  and,  until  this  is  done,  I  think  that  prima  facie  there  is  in
this  evidence  for  something  "supernormal."  Tactile  hallucination
is,  of  course,  not  excluded  in  such  cases,  but  the  very  fact  of  the
inducing  of  such  tactile  hallucinations  with  different  observers  not
hypnotised  is  very  interesting ;  and  when  we  read  of  the  undoubtedly
objective  movements  of  objects  performed  by  apparently  similar
"spirit-hands"  at  Home's  sittings  on  other  occasions,  we  see
that  the  hallucination  theory  itself  becomes  a  trifle  more  complicated.
It  should  be  added  that  Mr.  Carrington  repudiates  this  theory  as
applied  to  Home's  manifestations  (p.  393).

With  Mrs.  Piper  (two  pages  only  in  chapter  XXII.)  I  will  not
concern  myself,  merely  taking  the  liberty  of  reminding  the  reader
that  the  reflections  and  criticisms  suggested  to  me  by  this  famous
case  in  my  "Appendix"  to  my  Russian  translation  of  Mr.  Podmore's


402


Count  Peruvsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


"  Modern  Spiritualism "  were  excellently  summarized  by  Dr.  Leaf
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIX.,  pp.  402-404.

Before  concluding,  I  wish  to  emphasise  my  conviction  of  the  very
great  usefulness  and  practical  importance  to  "Psychical  Research"
of  Mr.  Carrington's  work — or  rather  of  the  first  part  of  it.  As  an
exposer  of  conjuring  and  "  mediumistic "  devices  he  in  my  opinion
stands  unsurpassed,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  his  volume
has  dealt  professional  mediumship  a  most  sensible,  I  should  perhaps
say  a  crushing,  blow.  It  is  true  that  the  corporation  has  already
sustained  many  blows,  and  shows  no  sign  of  finally  quitting  the
public  stage.  Human  credulity  (with  special  reference  to  Spiritualistic
credulity)  is  in  fact  unfathomable,  and  will,  I  am  afraid,  always
prove  so.  But  surely  after  closing  the  Physical  Phenomena  of
Spiritualism,  one  can  hardly  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  case  for
such  phenomena,  as  produced  by  American  professional  mediums  of
the  present  day,  is  almost  hopeless.

But  physicians  are  not  justified  in  leaving  without  examination
and  help  a  patient  reputed  or  even  positively  known  to  be  in  a
hopeless  state.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  Psychical  Researchers  are
precisely  in  the  physicians'  position.  As  researchers  they  are  bound
to  investigate  and  study,  even  when  there  is  very  little  chance  of
their  getting  anything  on  the  positive  side.  If  they  refuse,  they
cease  to  be  Psychical  Researchers.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  that  any
one  who  claims  to  be  a  materialising  or  slate-writing  medium  has
a  right  to  the  Society's  attention.  Surely  not.  But  I  think  that
to  leave  without  examination  all  the  "  manifestations  "  of  professional
mediums  because  a  great  many  of  them  were  exposed  at  one  time
or  another,  would  not  be  a  wise  policy.  Of  course,  only  evidence
coming  from  specially  qualified  persons  should  be  given  a  serious
hearing.

And  now  may  I  be  allowed  a  short  digression — personal  but  not
without  general  interest'*

There  is  one  source  of  possible  error  in  the  same  region  to  which
Mr.  Carrington  has  hardly  referred,  I  think,  in  his  book  and  to
which  I  wish  to  call  the  reader's  attention.  It  is  practical  joking,
of  very  bad  taste  no  doubt,  on  the  part  of  one  or  other  of  the  sitters.
I  emphasise  :  it  is  anonymous  practical  joking,  merely  for  the  fun
of  the  thing — which  may,  in  fact,  remain  unknown  to  the  medium, —
he  not  being  in  conscious  collusion.  It  seems  to  me  quite  possible
that  such  a  hypothesis  may  account  for  more  than  one  "mediumistic"
mystery.


LY.]


Review.


403


For  my  own  part  I  am  inclined  to  think,  alas  !  that  such  is  the
prosaic  cause  of  some  of  the  best  things  I  saw  some  years  ago  with
Sambor,  and  later  on  with  three  non-professional  mediums,  including
Luba  Morosoff,  the  "  Vladikavkaz  girl,"  whose  (Poltergeist)  phenomena
created  a  certain  stir  in  the  Russian  press  in  the  spring  of  ]  904.

For  among  the  manifestations  which  I  then  observed  there  were
several  which  the  medium  could  hardly  have  produced  unaided,  and
there  was  at  least  one  with  which  she  absolutely  could  not  have
been  concerned  :  a  Greek  tenth  century  (I  think)  coin  of  unknown
origin  suddenly  falling  down  on  the  floor  in  my  study  (where  we
had  just  been  sitting)  when  Luba  Morosoff  was  in  a  different  part
of  the  lodgings.  Previous  preparation  a  la  Meb  (Podmore's  Modern
Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  p.  324),  was  absolutely  out  of  the  question.

It  should  be  added  that  in  all  these  cases  the  "circle"  was  not  a
promiscuous  one,  but  more  or  less  formed  by  myself  and  composed
of  persons  seriously  interested,  of  good  social  or  official  position,
some  of  them  sufficiently  sceptical ;  a  very  good  circle  indeed,  which
seemed  to  offer  every  guarantee.

And  yet  a  terrible  suspicion  entered  then  and  still  remains  in  my
mind  that  a  certain  member  of  this  circle  (very  well  known  to  me,
and  with  whom  I  have  long  been  on  the  best  of  terms),  a  very
pleasant,  intelligent  and  gifted  gentleman,  did  simply  dupe  us
systematically  and  throughout.

My  suspicions  (shared  by  several  other  members  of  the  circle)
were  aroused  first  of  all  by  the  fact  that  our  seances  were  remark-
ably successful  if  M.  X.  was  present  (and  sitting  close  to  the
medium)  and  were  dismal  failures  when  he  was  absent.  By  a  pro-
cess of  elimination  and  comparison  we  soon  arrived  at  the  conviction
that  we  could  not  suspect  any  one  else.  And  after  the  Greek  coin
incident  our  suspicions  grew  so  irresistible  that  I  thought  it  best
not  to  conceal  them  from  X.  himself.

I  do  not  wish  to  minimise  the  fact  either  that  he  did  not  appear
particularly  astonished  or  offended  at  my  question,  or  that  he  gave
me  repeatedly  and  apparently  without  any  hesitation  his  word  of
honour  that  neither  at  this  nor  at  any  other  seance  did  he  ever
cheat  us.

This  of  course  precluded  all  further  discussion.  Our  mediums
vanished  from  the  scene,  and  here  the  matter  stands  to  the  present
day.  We  have  no  positive  proof  that  X.  did  deceive  us ;  we  have
only  somewhat  suspicious  circumstances  (both  the  one  I  have  men-
tioned and  others  of  later  origin,  but,  I  repeat,  not  decisive).  Socially


404


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo. [part  lv.]


speaking,  I  have  no  right  whatever  to  doubt  his  word.  And  so  i
ought  to  have  no  other  alternative  but  to  swallow  almost  every  variety
of  "physical  phenomena"  vouched  for  by  Spiritualists,  including
"  apports  "  which  were  of  especial  frequency.  And  yet,  with  all  due
respect  to  X.,  I  hesitate,  and  so  do  still  other  members  of  the  circle.

But  see  what  this  practically,  and  independently  of  the  question
whether  X.  told  me  the  truth  or  not,  amounts  to.  For  years  I  had
pursued  my  investigations,  always  hoping  to  see  at  last  something
which  the  medium  absolutely  could  not  have  simulated.  There  was
generally  a  loop-hole.  At  last  I  seemed  to  have  got  what  I  wanted.
In  my  own  trusted  circle,  under  very  good  conditions,  I  observed
"manifestations,"  some  of  which  seemed  really  and  truly  out  of  the
medium's  reach.  But  it  was  only  to  find  myself  in  face  of  an
altogether  new  problem.  My  suspicions  as  to  the  part  played  by  X.
may  be  unfounded  after  all.  But,  alas  !  so  far  as  my  personal  con-
viction is  concerned,  nearly  everything — Sambor's  chairs  excepted —
has  to  be  begun  anew. This  is  the  sad  moral  of  the  story.

Another  remark,  and  a  last  one.  Let  it  be  noted  that  if  X,  did
dupe  us,  our  suspicions  were  aroused  chiefly  because  he  overdid  his
part.  If  he  had  confined  himself  to  movements  of  objects  and
"touches,"  we  should  not  have  suspected  foul  play,  provided  that
the  medium  could  not  have  done  such  things  himself.  It  was  chiefly
the  stream  of  "apports"  that  we  could  not  withstand.  Otherwise
everything  would  have  gone  on  quite  smoothly,  and  we  should  have
enjoyed  to  the  present  day  the  bliss  of  belief.  Let  possible  practical
jokers  remember  this  !

Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LVI.
February,  1909.


T.

THE  ALLEGED  MIRACULOUS  HAILSTONES  OF
EEMIREMONT.

By  M.  Sage.

[The  events  described  in  this  paper  took  place  on  May  26  th,
1907.  They  seem  to  have  attracted  but  little  notice  at  the
time,  and  it  was  not  until  the  early  part  of  the  year  1908
that  any  information  about  them  reached  us.  Later,  a  foreign
member  of  the  Society  drew  our  attention  to  a  more  detailed
account  in  La  Croix,  and  kindly  offered  to  pay  the  expenses
of  whatever  investigation  into  the  matter  might  then  be  found
possible.

We  were  fortunate  in  being  able  to  secure  the  services  of
one  of  our  Honorary  Associates,  Monsieur  M.  Sage,  who  visited
Eemiremont  in  September,  1908,  and  spent  some  time  there
collecting  information  and  evidence.  We  give  below  his  Eeport
on  the  case,  together  with  the  documentary  evidence  which  he
obtained. — Ed.]

Voici  le  compte-rendu,  aussi  exact  cpie  possible  et  d'apres  les
notes  prises  au  moment  meme,  de  l'enquete  qu'au  nom  de  la
Societe  vous m'avez  demande  de  faire  a  Eemiremont,  sous-


406


M.  Sage.


[part


prefecture  du  departement  des  Vosges,  a  propos  de  l'affaire  dite
des  "  grelons-medailles."  D'apres  les  dires  actuels  du  elerge\  qui
se  base  sur  les  affirmations  de  nombreux  t^moins,  un  grand
nombre  de  grelons  tombes  le  26  mai  1907  auraient  6te"  la
reproduction  d'une  medaille  de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor,  frappee
a  l'occasion  du  Couronnement  de  cette  madone  (Fig.  1,  facing
p.  423).

N.-D.  du  Tresor  est  une  statue  en  bois  de  cedre  conservee
en  l'eglise  paroissiale  de  Eemiremont.  Sa  valeur  artistique  est
mediocre  a.  mes  yeux,  mais  je  suis  sur  ce  point  tout  a,  fait
incompetent.  En  tout  cas  on  ne  peut  apprecier  que  la  tete
de  la  mere  et  celle  de  l'enfant,  car  tout  le  restant  des  deux
corps,  s'il  existe,  est  recouvert  d'un  vetement  triangulaire  en
etoffe  rayee  d'or.  Depuis  mai  1907  la  tete  de  la  madone
est  surmontee  d'un  diademe.  L'ensemble  me  rappelle  quelque
antique  idole  on  quelque  icone  byzantine.  Les  lignes  de  l'image,
en  tout  cas,  sont  tres  simples : 1  c'est  la  un  detail  qu'il  faut
avoir  present  a  l'esprit  pour  cornprendre  comment  a  pu  se
former  l'illusion  qui  va  nous  occuper.

D'apres  l'histoire  ou  la  legende,  cette  statue  fut  donnee  par
Charlemagne,  a  son  retour  dTtalie,  a  un  couvent  de  femmes
situe"  sur  une  montagne  (le  Saint-Mont)  au  sud-est  et  non  loin
de  l'emplacement  actuel  de  Eemiremont.  Le  13  aout  910,
les  religieuses,  fuyant  devant  les  Huns,  vinrent  s'installer  dans
la  bourgade,  berceau  du  Eemiremont  actuel,  emportant  la  statue
entre  autres.  Dans  la  conversation  que  j'ai  eue  avec  Mr  le
curd  de  Etienne,  celui-ci  a  remarque  que  la  grele,  miracu-
leuse  a.  ses  yeux,  de  1907  avait  suivi  le  meme  trajet  que
N.-D.  du  Tresor,  lors  de  son  transferement  en  910;  il  y  voyait
une  preuve  de  plus  que  cette  grele  etait  surnaturelle :  c'est
peut-etre  abuser  un  peu  du  droit  qu'a  chacun  de  nous  de  faire
des  rapprochements. (Lire  a  ce  propos  sa  deposition.)

Depuis  les  origines  jusqua  nos  jours  le  peuple  de  Eemire-
mont et  des  environs  croit  que  N.-D.  du  Tresor  a  le  pouvoir
d'arreter  les  catamite's,  telles  qu'incendies  ou  tremblements  de
terre,  ou  plus  simplement  de  faire  pleuvoir  quand  la  secheresse
se  prolonge,  ou  de  ramener  le  soleil  quand la  pluie  tombe

1  Voir  la  medaille  jointe  au  present  compte-rendu  (Fig.  1).  Cette  medaille
est  une  exacte  reproduction  de  celle  dite  du  couronnement.  C'est  celle-la
que  les  temoins  pretendent  avoir  vue  dans  les  grelons.


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  407

pendant  trop  longtemps.  Pour  obtenir  ce  merveilleux  r6sultat
on  "  expose "  la  statue.  Lisez  dans  la  Notice  historique  (docu-
ment N°  1)  page  415,  ce  qu'il  faut  entendre  par  cette  exposition.

II  invporte  cUs  maintenant  de  lien  se  souvenir  que  depuis  des
siecles,  dans  I'esprit  populaire,  la  statue  en  question  est  associie
avec  les  intempiries.  It  doit  y  avoir  la  certainement  un  des
iUmcnts  qui  ont  engendre'  V illusion  du  26  mai  1907.

Certains  pretendent  que  le  clerge  exploite  dans  un  but  de
lucre  cette  croyance  (n'ecrivons  pas  superstition)  populaire ;
mais  je  n'ai  pas  recueilli  la  moindre  preuve  que  ce  soit  la
autre  chose  qu'une  malveillante  insinuation.

Le  12  mai  1682  un  tremblement  de  terre  £branla  forte-
ment  la  ville  de  Eemiremont ;  un  grand  nombre  de  maisons
s'ecroulerent.  Pendant  plusieurs  jours  le  peuple  campa  au
milieu  des  prairies.  Alors  on  porta  processionnellement  N.-D.  du
Trdsor  et,  d'apris  la  tradition  popidaire,  le  fliau  cessa  aussitdt.
Le  chapitre  de  Remiremont  Jit  le  vazu  que,  a  perpUuiU,  une
procession  de  Notre-Damc  aurait  lieu  chaque  anne"e  le  plus
proche  dimanche  du  12  mai,  afin  de  pre" server  a  I'avenir  la  ville
d'tm  pareil  tremblement  de  terre.  (Voir  la.  Notice  historique,
pages  415-6.)

Depuis  lors  cette  procession,  dite  du  Tremblement,  a  eu  lieu
tous  les  ans.

Le  cure  actuel  de  Eemiremont,  Mr  l'archipretre  Vuillemin,
a  toujours  eu  une  devotion  profonde  pour  la  inadone  du  pays.
"  Oui,  monsieur,  je  l'aime  beaucoup,"  m'a-t-il  dit  k  moi-meme.
Son  vceu  le  plus  cher  fut  toujours  d'en  obtenir  le  couronnement.
Certes,  il  serait  facile  de  gloser  la-dessus  et  sur  beaucoup
d'autres  details  de  l'histoire  que  je  raconte :  un  esprit  scienti-
fique  tombe  d'etonnement  en  stupefaction.  Mais  il  convient  ici
de  constater  et  non  pas  de  s'abandonner  a  de  faciles  ironies.
En  France,  et  dans  d'autres  pays  aussi  sans  doute,  les  manifes-
tations de  I'esprit  religieux  sont  souvent,  beaucoup  trop  souvent,
dignes  du  fetichisme  le  plus  grossier.

Enfin  S.S.  Pie  X,  comblant  les  vceux  de  Mr  l'abb6
Vuillemin,  ordonna  le  Couronnement  ofnciel  et  liturgique  de
N.-D.  du  Tresor.  "  On  entcnd  par  la,  disait  le  Rulletin
Paroissial  de  Eemiremont,  facte  par  lequel  le  Souverain  Pontife,
a  la  prttrc  qui  lux  est  adressie,  be'nit  et  impose,  par  un  de'Ugue'
special,  une  riche  couronne  a  une  statue  vSne'rable."


408


M.  Sage.


[part


Dans  sa  joie  Mr  l'archipretre  Vuillemin  fit  tout  ce  qu'il  put
pour  dormer  a  la  ceremonie  de  l'eclat  et  de  la  splendeur.
Cette  cdremonie  eut  lieu  le  lundi  de  Pentecote  (20  mai  1907).
Cinq  eveques  y  assistaient :  Mgr  Foucault,  de  S*  Di£;  Mgr
Dubois,  de  Verdun  ;  Mgr  Labenche,  de  Belley  ;  Msr  Chapelier,
protonotaire  apostolique ;  et  en  fin  Mgr  Turinaz,  de  Nancy  et
de  Toul.  Ce  dernier,  connu  pour  sa  combativite,  etait  alors
dans  les  plus  mauvais  termes  avec  le  gouvernement  de  la
Eepublique.  Enfin  Mr  l'abbe  Vuillemin  avait  fait  reporter,
toujours  dans  le  but  de  donner  plus  d'eclat  aux  fetes,  la
Procession  du  Tr emblement,  k  cette  meme  date  du  20  mai  1907.

Mais  le  Conseil  Municipal  craignit  des  troubles  dans  la  rue,
les  partis  clerical  et  anticlerical  6tant  tres  montes  l'un  contre
l'autre ;  et  par  un  arrete  en  date  du  13  mai  1907,  il  defendit
la  Procession.  (Voir  le  resume"  des  motifs  de  l'interdiction  qui
m'a  ete  remis  par  Mr  le  secretaire  de  la  mairie  de  Itemiremont,
document  N°  2.)  Grande  colere  au  camp  des  clericaux  !  La
procession  ne  put  avoir  lieu  qu'a,  l'interieur  de  l'eglise.

Pour  se  rendre  compte  de  l'6tat  des  esprits,  il  faut  lire  le
Discours  prononcS  dans  l'eglise  de  Itemiremont  a  I'occasion  du
Couronnemcnt  de  N.-D.  du  Tre'sor,  -par  Mr  VahbS  Rollin.  Ce
discours  est  plein  de  paroles  violentes  et  mauvaises1  que  meme
un  sceptique  entend  avec  douleur  et  repugnance  du  haut  de
la  cbaire.  Ce  discours  net  pas  du  etre  sans  influence  sur
Villusion  qui  devait  se  produire  le  dimanche  suivant'} L'un  des

1""Votre  foi  court  les  plus  grands  perils.  L'enfer  semble  mettre  en  ligne  ses
dernieres  reserves  et  tenter  un  supreme  effort  pour  en  flnir  avec  le  christianisme.
L'inipiete  prend  ses  elbats  et  s'etale  en  plein  jour,  avec  un  cynisme  que  les  plus
mauvais  siecles  de  notre  histoire  n'avaient  pas  connu.  Voltaire  n'est  pas  mort,  et
son  rire  affreux  grince  dans  toutes  les  voix  de  la  presse  antireligieuse.  Nos  places
publiques  sont  profanees  par  les  statues  de  ces  bandits  de  la  parole  et  de  la  plume
dont  le  peuple  ignorait  les  noms  et  les  ceuvres,  et  peu  s'en  est  fallu  que,  dans  un
acces  de  rage  sacrilege  on  ne  donnat  le  nom  de  Judas  l'lscariote  a  l'un  des
Boulevards  de  Paris  ! C'est  une  frenesie,  mais  une  fr^nesie  contagieuse."

2  "  Quand  les  religieuses  du  Saint-Mont,  fuyant  devant  les  Barbares,  vinrent
s'abattre,  comme  une  volee  de  colombes  efi'arees,  dans  la  petite  bourgade  de
Remiremont,  elles  instituerent,  en  souvenir  de  leur  epouvante,  une  messe  annuelle
dite  'la  messe  piteuse,'  qu'elles  chantaient  a  voix  basse  et  tremblante.  Eh!
bien,  mes  Freres,  d'autres  Barbares,  sortis,  non  des  forets  d'un  pays  lointain,  mais
des  antres  d'une  secte  Wnebreuse,  ont  jure  de  nous  reduire  a  la  messe  piteuse,  a
un  culte  piteusement  amoindri,  celebre  furtivement  dans  les  transes  d'un  terro-
risme  administratif.

"II  se  peut  que  Dieu  permette  cette  epreuve. Elle  n'aura  qu'un  temps  si  nous


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  409


ternoins  que  j'ai  vus,  M1'  Claude,  le  concierge  cle  la  filature
Schwartz,  m'a  affirme"  de  vive  voix  que  des  ce  jour  il  avait
prophetise  "  que  Eemiremont  serait  grele  et  que  l'image  de
N.-D.  du  Tresor  serait  sur  les  grelons."  Si  cela  etait  vrai,  nous
assisterions  la  a  l'incubation — si  je  puis  m'exprimer  airisi —
de  l'illusion  qui  nous  occupe.  Mais  ce  temoin  ne  m'inspire  pas
pleine  confiance ;  il  est  de  bonne  foi,  certes,  mais  il  parle
beaucoup  trop  pour  ne  pas  confondre  souvent  dans  ses  souvenirs
ce  qui  est  anterieur  et  ce  qui  est  posterieur  a  un  moment  donne.

Nous  arrivons  au  dimanche  26  mai  1907.  Un  orage  survient
vers  le  soir,  accompagne  de  grele.  Je  ne  m'attarderai  pas  a
decrire  cette  grele  :  on  en  trouvera  plusieurs  descriptions,  a  peu
pres  concordantes,  dans  les  documents  annexes  au  present  compte-
rendu.  Voici  le  passage  saillant  de  celle  qui  est  contenue  dans
le  Eapport  adresse'  a  Mgr  Foucault,  eveque  de  Saint-Die.  C'est
ce  "  rapport "  qua  publie  le  journal  La  Croix.  (Voir  le  Supple-
ment au  N°  de  mai  1908,  du  Bulletin  par oissial  cle  Remiremont,
document  N°  3.)

"  A  la  pluie  qui  tombe  d'aboi'd  avec  abondance  succede  une
grele  ordinaire,  suivie  bientot  d'une  seconde  grele  plus  grosse
que  la  premiere.  Elle  massacre  les  verandahs,  brise  les  carreaux,
mais,  chose  singuliere  !  ellc  respccte  les  Ugumes  et  les  flcurs  des
jardins.  L'orage  enfin  se  termine  par  une  troisieme  grele,  dont
les  grelons  sont  extraordinaires  par  leur  grosseur,  leur  forme  et
leur  maniere  de  tomber.  Beaucoup  ont  la  grosseur  d'un  ceuf
cle  poule  ;  ils  sont  ovoides  et  plats  sur  une  de  leurs  faces ;  ils
tombent  lentement,  lourdement  et  a  distance  les  tons  des  autres "
(op.  cit.  page  86).

Ceux  qui  croient  aux  grelons  miraculeux  aiment  a  insister
sur  deux  points. Tous  l'ont  fait  avec  moi.

(1°)  Les  grelons  respecterent  les  legumes  et  les  fleurs  des
jardins ! Mais Eemiremont,  pays  de  prairies  et de  forets,  a

savons  prier,  prier  le  divin  Cceur  de  Jesus  qui  a  pris  droit  de  cite  sur  notre  sol,
prier  Marie,  qui  n'oublie  pas  son  royaume  de  France  et  qui  se  plait  encore  a  y
guerir  les  incurables.  Chers  pelerins  des  Vosges,  accourus  pour  honorer  Notre-
Danie  du  Tresor,  ne  restez  pas  etrangers  a  cette  croisade  de  prieres  qui  entraine
aux  pieds  de  Marie  tous  les  cceurs  preoccupes  du  salut  de  la  France.  Jadis  elle  a
sauve  cette  cite  des  d^sastres  d'un  tremblement  de  terre.  Des  fleaux  plus
terribles  nous  menacent.  La  terre  tremble  sous  nos  pieds,  de  sourds  gronde-
ments  presagent  des  catastrophes  prochaines,  juste  cfaatinient  de  notre  egoiste
insouciance  a  l'egard  des  interets  de  Dieu.''


410


M.  Sage.


[part


tres  peu  de  jardins  et  presque  pas  de  culture.  La  trainee  de
grele,  orientee  du  nord-ouest  au  sud-est,  n'eut  pas  plus  de
4  kilometres  de  long  sur  4  ou  500  metres  de  large :  elle  put
tres  bien  ne  rencontrer  pas  beaucoup  de  jardins  sur  son  chemin.

(2°)  Quoique  tres  lourds,  les  gros  grelons  tombaient  lentement,
"  comme  de  la  neige."  II  s'agit  evidemment  ici  d'une  illusion
d'optique.  La  vitesse  exacte  de  la  chute  n'a  etc"  et  ne  pouvait
etre  mesuree  par  personne.  Ces  grelons  tombaient  verticalement
dans  une  atmosphere  tranquille ;  le  regard  pouvait  les  suivre :
de  la  la  sensation  d'un  mouvement  lent.  Leur  force  vive  devait
etre  neanmoins  considerable,  puisque,  de  l'aveu  de  tous,  ils
s'enfoncaient  profondement  dans  le  sol  ou  volaient  en  Eclats
quaud  ils  rencontraient  un  corps  dur.

Le  lendemain  matin  (pas  avant)  le  bruit  se  repand  clans  la
ville  de  Eemiremont  que  "  N.-D.  du  TrSsor  Matt  sur  les  grelons."
Le  clerge  tout  d'abord  accueille  la  nouvelle  avec  scepticisme.
Mais  bientot,  sous  la  pression,  a,  ce  que  plusieurs  m'ont  afhrme,
de  certaines  devotes  riches  et  influentes,  il  s'6meut  davantage,
questionne  et,  enfin,  en  refere  a  l'dveque,  lequel  ordonne  une
enquete.

Alors,  du  haut  de  la  chaire  ou  par  invitation  particuliere
(voir  la  deposition  de  M1'  Andre),  on  demande  a  ceux  qui  ont
vu  de  venir  apporter  leur  deposition  au  presbytere.

Un  detail  qui  a  sa  tres  grande  importance,  c'est  que  parmi
les  temoins  ne  figure  aucun  rnembre  du  clerge  de  Eemiremont,
ni  aucune  religieuse.  Sauf  Mr  le  cure  de  S*  Etienne,  aucun
n'a  rien  vu.  Mr  Tabbed  Minod  m'en  a  donne  l'affirmation  ecrite
(voir  le  document  N°  4).

J'ai  commence;  mes  demarches  par  une  visite  a  la  cure,  car
aucune  enquete  n'etait  possible  si  le  clerge  ne  s'y  pretait  pas.
Mr  l'archipretre  Vuillemin  m'accueillit  d'abord  avec  une  certaine
humeur,  il  pretexta  que  son  temps  etait  tres  mesure.  Sans
doute  il  me  prenait  pour  un  journaliste.  Mais,  apres  un  peu
de  conversation,  il  devint  plus  aitnable.  Cet  homme  est  un
vieillard  d'environ  69  ans ;  certainement  il  est  un  bon  pasteur,
charitable  et  devoue,  mais  il  est  aussi  etranger  qu'un  homme
peut  l'etre  a  la  critique  et  a  la  psychologic  Quand  on  abonde
dans  son  sens,  sa  physionomie  s'illumine  de  plaisir,  mais  elle
devient  dure  et  obstinee  quand  on  hasarde,  non  pas  une  con-
tradiction, mais  une  simple  objection. Bientot  survint  Mr  Tabbe-


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  411

Minod,  l'un  des  vicaires  de  Eemiremont,  jeune  homme  d'environ
30  ans,  tres  sympathique,  qui  semble  avoir  ete  le  principal
collaborateur  de  Mr  Vuillemin,  dans  toute  cette  affaire  des
"  grelons-medailles."  La  suite  de  la  conversation  eut  lieu  en
sa  presence.

Je  demandai  si  on  pouvait  me  communiquer  le  "  rapport "
de  toute  cette  affaire.  M'etant  servi  d'un  terme  impropre,  je
ne  fus  pas  compris.  On  me  repondit :  "  Mais  certainement,  je
vais  vous  en  dormer  un  exemplaire ;  ce  rapport  est  public,
il  est  entre  les  mains  de  tous  les  eveques  de  Prance,  il  est  a
Romcr  On  attend,  parait-il,  et  avec  beaucoup  de  confiance  que
la  cour  de  Eome  declare  authentique  le  "  miracle  "  des  "  grelons-
medailles  "  pour  instituer  en  commemoration  du  fait  un  pelerinage
annuel  a  Eemiremont :  ce  pelerinage  a  deja  eu  lieu  par  anticipa-
tion cette  annee-ci  1908.  Je  ne  sais  quelle  sera  la  decision  de
la  cour  de  Eome,  mais  si  elle  fait  ce  qu'on  lui  demande,  il  faudra
avouer  qu'elle  n'est  pas  difficile  en  matiere  de  miracle.

Par  "  Eapport "  on  entendait  done  le  resume^  qui  a  paru  entre
autres  dans  La  Croix.  Je  dis  que  e'etait  le  dossier  tout  entier
que  je  desirais  voir  et  au  besoin  copier.  "  Monsieur,  me  repondit-
on,  nous  ne  pourrions  sans  indelicatesse  vous  communiquer  ce
dossier  a  moins  que  notre  eveque,  Mgr  Foucault,  ne  nous  }7  autorise.
Or  il  est  a  Londres  en  ce  moment,  au  congres  eucharistique."
On  me  permit  n^anmoins  officieusement  de  jeter  un  coup  d'ceil
sur  ce  dossier  et  on  me  promit  de  le  faire  copier  apres  autorisa-
tion  pour  la  Societe  des  Eecherches  psychiques,  si  celle-ci
persistait  a  le  desirer.  L'attitude  de  ces  messieurs,  il  faut
l'avouer,  fut  tres  franche.  Je  demandai  les  noms  des  principaux
temoins  et  la  permission  d'aller  les  voir.  On  me  donna  une
dizaine  de  noms  d'hommes,  en  excluant  les  femmes  et  les  enfants
dont  on  a  recueilli  les  temoignages  en  nombre  trop  grand  peut-
etre.  II  semble  q%Con  ait  recherche'  beaucoup  plus  la  qiiantiU  que  la
cpialiU.  "  Ce  sont  la,"  me  dit-on,  "  les  chefs  de  groupe."  Cette
expression  est  de  Mr  l'abbe  Vuillemin :  je  la  rapporte  sans
l'interpreter  ni  lui  donner  un  sens  qu'elle  n'a  peut-etre  pas.

Je  priai  Mr  l'abbe'  Vuillemin  de  me  donner  sa  carte  pour  me
faciliter  l'entree :  il  y  consentit  tres  obligeamment.  Ce  fut
heureux,  car  sans  cette  carte  on  m'aurait  econduit  encore  plus
souvent  qu'on  ne  le  fit :  d'autres  sont  venus  enqueter  avant
moi,  la  presse  a  polemique,  on  s'est  injurie,  rnoque,  taut  et  si


412


M.  Sage.


[part


bien  que  les  temoins  pour  la  plupart  sont  las  et  ne  veulent
plus  voir  personne.  Ainsi,  bien  que  je  fusse  accompagn^  cle
Mr  l'abbe  Minod,  Mr  C — — ,  pharmacien,  tres  devot  cependant,
m'c^conduisit  brutalement,  refusa  toute  attestation  et  defendit

ineme  qu'on  le  nommat. Son  voisin  Mr  G  promit  une

attestation  ecrite  pour  le  lendemain,  mais  le  lendemain  il  la
refusa,  lui  aussi.  J'ai  obtenu  cependant  l'attestation  de  Madame
Lucie  Maxel,  qui  personnellement  n'a  rien  vu,  mais  a  qui  ces
messieurs  raconterent  l'evenement  le  lendemain  matin  (docu-
ment N°  5).

Le  schema  de  toutes  les  depositions,  orales  on  ecrites,  que
j'ai  obtenues,  sauf  une,  est  celui-ci :

"  Un  tcl  (souvent  une  femmc  ou  un  enfant)  m'a  clit  que  N.-D.
clu  Tre'sor  6tait  sur  les  grelons.  Alors  fen  ai  ramassS  plusieurs,
j'ai  regards  et,  en  effet,  Vimage  6tait  sur  quclqiies-uns."  Comme
cela  sent  Fillusion  collective  !

Neanmoins  cette  illusion  devait  avoir  un  noyau  cle  verite,
Peut-etre  le  trouve-t-on  dans  la  deposition  de  Mr  Blaudelz,  le  seul
temoin  cpie  j'ai  pu  rencontrer  qui  m'ait  assure  avoir  constate"
spontanement  le  fait  (voir  document  N°  6  et  Fig.  2).  II  m'a
dit  de  vive  voix :  "  J'etais  a  la  gare  quand  les  gros  grelons  sont
tombes.  J'en  ai  ramasse  un  et  me  suis  eerie :  Tiens  !  on  dirait
d'une  bonne  femme !  (sic)  Je  n'ai  pas  reconnu  N.-D.  du
Tresor.  Ce  n'est  qu'en  arrivant  a  la  maison  qu'on  m'a  dit
que  c'^tait  elle.  Personne  n'avait  appele  mon  attention  sur  le
fait."  Ces  gros  grelons,  formes  par  des  congelations  successives,
spheriques  et  superposees,  pouvaient  rappeler  cle  loin  la  figure
informe  de  N.-D.  clu  Tresor ;  et,  vu  l'etat  d'ame  des  ficleles,  ils
n'ont  pas  manque  de  dire  que  e'etait  elle  surement.  II
suffisait  qu'un  seul  en  eut  r^pandu  le  bruit.  Les  temoins  que
j'ai  interroges  sont  parmi  les  meilleurs,  ou  les  meilleurs,
d'apres  l'aveu  de  la  cure.  Eh  bien  !  Ces  teinoins,  a  mes  yeux
et  sans  aucun  parti  pris,  sont  de  tres  mediocre  valeur.  Petits
commerc;.ants,  ouvriei's  ou  paysans,  ils  sont  tous  sans  la  plus
legere  teinte  d'(3ducation  scientifique,  et  pas  un  n'est  capable
meme  de  concevoir  qu'il  faut  se  defier  cle  nos  sensations,
lesquelles  sont  souvent  trompeuses.  "J'ai  vu,  vous  disent-ils,
douteriez-vous  de  ce  que  j'ai  vu  ? "  Si  vous  repondiez  "  oui,"
ils  vous  considc^reraient  non  seulement  comme  tres  impoli,
mais  surtout  comme  affiige  d'une  systematique  mauvaise  foi.


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  413

Or,  alors  qu'en  pareille  matiere,  l'affirmation  d'hommes
rompus  a,  l'observation  exacte  ne  vaudrait  pas  grand'chose  en
l'absence  de  toute  trace  materielle,  que  pent  valoir  raffirmation
d'un  concierge,  d'un  paysan,  d'une  femme  ou  d'un  enfant  ?
Surtout  quand  ils  sont  sous  l'evidente  influence  d'une  passion
profonde  ? Aucun  n'eut  meme  VicUe  de  pliotographier  un  grSlon.

Passons-les  en  revue :

(1)  Mr  l'abbe  Minod  m'a  communique  sous  sa  signature  la
deposition  d'un  des  temoins  qui  ne  veut  pas  etre  nomine
(document  N°  7).

(2)  Mme  Jeangeorge  m'a  donne  son  attestation  en  l'absence
de  son  mari.  Brave  femme,  mais  ignorante ;  devote ;  sait  a
peine  £crire  (document  N°  8).  J'ai  du  ecrire  pour  elle,  elle  a
signe.

(3)  Mr  Claude,  concierge  de  la  filature  Schwartz,  ancien
gendarme,  agressif,  bavard,  devot  exalte ;  il  affinne  que  N.-D.
du  Tresor  a  cause  des  degats  considerables  a  ses  ennemis,  mais
quelle  a  epargne  ses  amis  (document  N°  9).

(4)  M1Ie  Claude,  fille  du  precedent;  a  refuse  d'ecrire,  se
declarant  inhabile,  mais  a  signe  (document  N°  10).

(5)  Felicien  Aubel,  agent  d'assurances ;  il  est  tres  etranger
aux  etudes  psychologiques  (document  N°  11).

(6)  Auguste  Lamay,  tailleur ;  tres  pauvre  et,  dit-on,  assiste
par  la  cure ;  il  semble  abuser  de  la  boisson  et  l'impression
n'est  pas  bonne  (document  N°  12).

(7)  Andre,  de  S*  Etienne,  village  au  sud-est  de  Remiremont,
a  3  kilometres  environ.  Instituteur  en  retraite,  tres  devot,  lui
et  toute  sa  famille.  Son  salon  est  plein  d'objets  de  piete,  une
de  ses  lilies  est  religieuse  (document  N°  13).

(8)  Mr  le  cure  de  S*  Etienne;  charmant  vieillard  d'environ  70'
ans,  mais  ayant  plus  de  foi  que  de  connaissances  psychologiques
(documents  N°  14  et  N°  15).

(9)  Mr  Claude,  de  S*  Etienne.  Ne  pas  le  confondre  avec
l'autre  Mr  Claude,  qui  est  de  Remiremont.  11  n'aurait  pas
reconnu  la  figure  de  N.-D.  du  Tresor,  si  on  ne  le  lui  avait  pas
dit  (document  N°  16).

Telles  sont  les  opinions  dans  le  camp  clerical.  Ces  temoins
sont  assurement  tous  de  bonne  foi,  mais,  rep^tons-le,  de  qualite
mediocre.  Dans  le  camp  oppose  on  n'a  pas  d'opinion,  on  n'a
rien  vu.


414


M.  Sage.


[part


Cependant  la  maniere  de  voir  de  ce  camp  a  et6  tres  bien
exposee  par  Mr  Unger,  secretaire  de  la  mairie  de  Remiremont,
dans  une  lettre  qu'il  ^crivit  en  reponse  a  un  litterateur
hollandais  (dont  j'ai  eu  l'^tourderie  de  ne  pas  prendre  le
nom)  lequel,  composant  un  ouvrage  sur  la  Valeur  du
Temoignage  humain,  a  sollicite  des  eclaircissements  aupres  de
la  mairie.  Le  maire  signa  cette  reponse.  J'esperais  qu'il  en
ferait  autant  pour  la  copie  textuelle  que  j'en  ai  prise,  mais
il  s'y  est  refuse  sans  que  j'aie  pu  m'en  expliquer  le  motif.
Je  garantis  quant  a  moi  ne  pas  y  avoir  change  un  mot
(document  N°  17).

Le  frere  du  secretaire  de  la  mairie,  M1"  Georges  Unger,
qui  etait  present  au  moment  de  la  grele,  a  bien  voulu  me
donner  son  attestation  ecrite  (document  N°  18).  Get  homme
est  eclaire,  calme,  sans  passion,  et  son  temoignage  a  une  tres
grande  valeur.

La  presse  naturellement  s'est  beaucoup  occupee  de  cette
affaire.  L' Ind4pendance  de  VEst,  un  journal  anti-clerical,  accusa
Mr  l'archipretre  Vuillemin  d'avoir  machine  tout  cela  pour
gagner  de  l'argent.  C'etait  assurement  une  calomnie ;  en  tout
cas  rien  ne  prouve  cette  machination.  Quant  a  moi  je  ne
crois  pas  Mr  Vuillemin  capable  d'un  aussi  bas  calcul.  Sa
foi  est  puerile,  mais  elle  est  sincere.  L'lnddpendance  de  VEst,
d'abord  acquittee  k  Bar-le-Duc,  a  ete  le'gerement  condamnee
en  appel  (voir  les  coupures  de  journaux  annexees  au  present
rapport,  avec  les  autres  documents).

Enfin  il  semblerait  qu'une  grele  analogue  k  celle  de
Eemiremont  est  tombee  le  2  juillet  1908  a  Bagnols,  dans  le
Var.  Le  nombre  des  temoins,  toutefois,  n'est  que  de  trois.
Une  enquete  a  ete-  faite,  sur  l'ordre  de  l'eveque,  le  13  juillet
1908.  A  Eemiremont  on  y  voit  la  confirmation  de  l'authen-
ticite"  des  "  grelons-niedailles "  de  1907.  Moi  j'y  verrais
plutot  tout  le  contraire  (document  1ST0  19,  Bulletin  paroissial
de  Remiremont,  septembre  1908).

Conclusion.

(1°)  En  somme  il  n'y  a  meme  pas  un  commencement  de
preuve,  capable  de  satisfaire  un  esprit  critique,  que  l'image
de  N.-D.  du  Tresor  se  trouvat,  en  effet,  sur  des  grelons  tombes
a  Eemiremont,  fin  mai  1907.


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  415


(2°)  Nous  avons  ties  probablement  affaire  a  une  illusion
collective,  engendree  par  la  passion  religieuse,  l'auto-suggestion
et  la  suggestion  exterieure.

DOCUMENTS.

(1)

Extraits  de  Notre-Dame  du  Trdsor  de  Remiremont. Notice  Historique,

par  Jules  Viel,  Avocat.

Ce  ceremonial  a  ete  decrit  par  M.  Thierry,  chanoine  ecolatre  de
Saint-Die,  et  imprime  a  Remiremont  en  1750:

"La  veille  des  fetes  de  la  Vierge,  on  expose  sur  l'autel  de  Tierce
"  son  Image  oil  il  y  a  des  cheveux.  Elle  y  demeure  depuis  les
"premieres  vepres,  jusqu'apres  les  deuxiemes  vepres.  Au  second
"coup,  des  premieres  vepres,  les  dames  Secrette  et  tresoriere  vont
"  au  Tresor,  accompagnees  du  chanoine  semainier,  revetu  du  surplis
"  et  de  l'etole,  et  du  sacristain  de  semaine  portant  un  flambeau
"  allume,  precedes  du  bedeau.  La  dame  Secrette  met  les  ornements
"a  cette  Image.  Le  chanoine  semainier  la  prend,  il  la  porte  au
"travers  du  chanceau,  precede  du  sacristain,  et  suivi  de  la  dame
"  Secrette  qui  porte  le  carreau  sur  lequel  on  doit  poser  lTmage ;  il
"la  donne  a  baiser  au  peuple  en  passant,  et  il  la  met  sur  1'autel
"de  Tierce.  Apres  les  Vepres  on  reporte  l'lmage  avec  les  memes
"  ceremonies.  .  .  ."

Aux  processions  de  la  Fete-Dieu  et  de  l'Assomption,  la  Vierge  du
Tresor  apparait  entouree  de  jeunes  filles ;  mais,  la  manifestation  la
plus  imposante  en  son  honneur,  se  rattache  a  une  catastrophe
epouvan table.  Le  12  mai  1682,  un  tremblement  de  terre,  dont  la
commotion  se  fit  sentir  dans  toute  la  region,  ebranla  fortement  la
ville  de  Remiremont  oil  un  grand  nombre  de  maisons  furent  de-
molies ;  l'abbaye  et  son  eglise  furent  particulierement  endommagees.
"Les  portes,  les  fenetres,  les  colonnes  furent  ebranlees,  les  clochetons
et  les  statues  qui  decoraient  le  portail  et  les  piliers  furent  brises,
moins  le  bas-relief  de  Clemence  d'Oyselet ;  on  estime  les  degats  a
80,000  livres"  (Etudes  hist,  de  Vabbi  Guinot).  Le  sol  fut  crevasse  en
differents  endroits,  et,  de  nos  jours,  on  remarque  encore,  a  la  Mal-
doyenne,  un  accident  de  terrain  attribue  au  tremblement  de  1682.
Pendant  plusieurs  jours,  les  Dames,  les  bourgeois,  tout  le  peuple,
camperent  au  milieu  des  prairies;  on  porta  processionnellement  Notre-
Dame  du  Tresor,  et,  d'apres  la  tradition  populaire,  le  fleau  cessa


416


M.  Sage.


[part


aussitot.  Toujours  est-il  que  le  Chapitre  de  Remiremont  fit  le  voeu
que,  a  perpetuite,  une  procession  de  Notre-Dame  aurait  lieu  chaque
annee,  le  plus  proche  dimanche  du  12  mai,  afin  de  preserver  a  Vavenir
la  ville  d'un  pareil  tremblement  de  terre.

L'ordre  de  la  procession  du  Tremblement  etait  minutieusement
decrit  et  observe.

"Le  12  mai,  apres  complies,  on  fait  la  procession  du  tremblement;
"  le  cure"  doit  s'y  trouver  avec  la  procession  de  la  paroisse.  Le
"  chanoine  de  grand'messe  et  les  deux  dames  chantres  de  semaine
"  vont  a  la  porte  du  cote  de  la  paroisse  avec  la  croix  et  l'eau  benite.
"  Les  capucins  doivent  y  assister  aussi.  On  commence  la  procession
"par  le  Te  Deum  que  la  Dame  chantre  de  semaine  entonne.  Apres
"  le  Te  Deum,  on  chante  les  psaumes  marques  dans  le  processional,
"pour  Taction  de  graces.  La  procession  sort  par  la  porte  qui  est
"du  cote  de  la  ville;  on  passe  par  la  rue  des  Pretres,  on  entre
"dans  Teglise  de  la  paroisse  oil  Ton  chante  les  antiennes  de  saint
"Romaric,  Fir  plus,  Regina  coeli,  et  Da  pacem,  pendant  lesquelles  le
"diacre  et  le  sous-diacre  posent  lTmage  de  la  Sainte-Vierge  sur
"l'autel;  le  chanoine  semainier  dit  les  versets  et  les  oraisons  apres
"chaque  antienne  ;  on  passe  ensuite  par  la  place;  de  la,  on  va  a  la
"chapelle  de  la  Courtine,  oil  Ton  chante  les  memes  antiennes  qu'a
"la  paroisse;  on  continue  la  procession  le  long  de  la  Grande  rue
"  et  Ton  rentre  dans  l'eglise  par  la  meme  porte  que  Ton  etait  sorti."
{Cirimonial  approuvi  en  1728  par  le  cardinal  de  Rohan,  diUgvA
apostolique.)

(2)

Mairie  de  Remiremont.

Procession  projetde  a  Remiremont  et  interdite
par  le  Conseil  municipal.

Motifs  de  lTnterdiction.

En  seance  du  13  mai  1907  du  Conseil  municipal,  le  Maire
de  Remiremont  fut  interpelle  par  le  docteur  Guyon,  Conseiller,  sur
l'annonce  d'une  procession  organisee  par  le  clerge  local  a  l'occasion
des  fetes  donnees  en  l'honneur  du  couronnement  de  N.-D.  du  Tr6sor
(statuette  en  bois  tres  ancienne,  protectrice  de  la  localit6).

En  presence  du  developpement  donne  au  programme  des  fetes,  de
l'appel  adresse  aux  habitants  pour  pavoiser  et  decorer  leurs  maisons
et  les  illuminer,  de  la  presence  annoncee  de  plusieurs  prelats
entr'autres  d'un  eveque  des  plus  belliqueux,  ces  fetes  prenaient,
selon  lui,  le  caractere  d'une  manifestation,  sorte  de  j)rotestation  contre


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  417


la  loi  de  separation  et  il  craigna.it  d'autres  manifestations  contraires,
des  desordres,  etc.

M.  le  Maire  repond  que  le  clerge  lni  a  affirme  que  la  procession
projetee  etait  la  procession  habituelle  dite  du  tremblement  de  terre
(en  souvenir  d'un  fort  tremblement  de  terre  survenu  au  xvne
siecle),  ce  que  les  faits  dementaient,  puisque  cette  procession  avait
toujours  lieu  le  12  mai  tandis  que,  cette  annee,  elle  etait  reportee  a
la  fin  de  mai.

Apres  discussion,  le  Conseil  a  l'unanimite'  moins  une  voix,  charge
le  Maire  de  demander  au  clerge  la  suppression  de  la  procession  du
programme  des  fetes  du  couronnetnent ;  sinon,  il  l'interdira  par
arrete.

En  seance  du  18  mai  1907,  le  Maire  donna  connaissance  au  Con-
seil d'une  petition  signee  par  147  habitants  demandant  le  maintien
de  la  procession  dans  l'interet  du  commerce  local  qui  devait  profiter
de  la  presence  annoncee  de  nombreux  etrangers.

Un  conseiller  declara  que  la  volont6  des  fideles  de  maintenir  la
procession  etait  un  defi  jet6  au  Conseil  municipal.

D'autres  opinent  pour  qu'elle  ait  lieu ;  d'autres  annoncent  des
contre  manifestations,  etc.

Enfin,  un  dernier  fait  observer  que  le  moment  est  tres  mai  choisi
par  l'Eglise  catholique,  qui  proteste  contre  la  loi  de  separation,  pour-
organiser  des  manifestations  dans  la  rue.

Le  vote  ouvert  sur  le  maintien  de  la  decision  du  13  mai  donne

]  6  oui.
4  non.

En  consequence,  la  procession  sera  interdite,  ce  qui  fut  fait  par
arrete  municipal  du  18  mai  1907.

{Certifii  par  le  Secretaire  de  Mairie.)

(3)

Ertrait  du  Bulletin  'Paroissial  de  Remiremont :  Supplement
au  numero  de  mai  1908.

Eapport  adresse  a  sa  Grandeur  Monseigneur  Foucault,  Eveque
de  Saint-Die,  par  Monsieur  L'Archipretre  de  Kemiremont.

Re'cit  historique  de  I'orage  et  de  la  grele  du  26  mai  1907.
Huit  jours  a  peine  s'etaient  ecoules  depuis  le  Couronnement  de
Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  par  Votre  Grandeur  au  nom  de  Notre-Saint-
Pere  le  Pape  Pie  X.


418


M.  Sage.


[part


Nous  etions  au  soir  du  diraanche  de  la  Tres  Sainte  Trinity.  La
journee  avait  6te  belle  et  chaude,  mais  rien  ne  faisait  prevoir  un
orage.  Tout  a  coup  nous  entendons  souffler  en  tem pete  le  vent  du
sud-est  qui  chasse  devant  lui  et  qui  amoncelle  rapidement  sur  la  ville
et  sur  la  banlieue  la  plus  proche  des  nuages  sombres  et  menacjuits.
A  5  h.  1/2  l'orage  eclate  avec  violence.

C'etait  l'heure  oil  le  dimanche  precedent  se  chantaient,  sous  la
presidence  de  Votre  Grandeur,  les  premieres  vepres  du  Couronne-
ment.  C'etait  l'heure  aussi  oil  aurait  du  avoir  lieu  le  lendemain,  si
elle  n'avait  pas  et6  interdite,  la  grande  procession  a  l'interieur  de  la
ville.

A  la  pluie  qui  tombe  d'abord  avec  abondance  succede  une  grele
ordinaire,  suivie  bientot  d'une  seconde  grele  plus  grosse  que  la
premiere.  Elle  massacre  les  verandahs,  brise  les  carreaux,  mais,
chose  singuliere  !  elle  respecte  les  legumes  et  les  fleurs  des  jardins.
L'orage  enfin  se  termine  par  une  troisieme  grele,  dont  les  grelons
sont  extraordinaires  par  leur  grosseur,  leur  forme  et  leur  maniere  de
tomber.  Beaucoup  ont  la  grosseur  d'un  ceuf  de  poule ;  ils  sont
ovoides  et  plats  sur  une  de  leurs  faces ;  ils  tombent  lentement,
lourdement  et  a  distance  les  uns  des  autres.

A  6  h.  1/1  l'orage  6tait  termine  et  le  ciel  reprenait  sa  ser6nite.

Bientot  on  chuchote  en  ville  une  rumeur  etrange :

" Notre-Dame  du  TrSsor,  disait-on,  a  eu  sa  procession!  .  .  .  Notre-
Dame,  du  Trdsor  dtait  sur  les  grelons  1 .  .  ."  Accueillie  avec  scepticisme
par  les  uns,  avec  grande  reserve  par  les  autres,  la  grande  nouvelle
laisse  d'abord  l'ame  de  la  paroisse  froide  et  indifferente ;  seuls  les
heureux  temoins  de  l'evenement  en  restent  etonnes  et  ravis.

Le  lendemain  matin,  27  mai,  la  rumeur  de  la  veille  prend  de  la
consistance.  Elle  se  precise ;  on  cite  des  noms.  C'est  alors  seulement
que  nous  apprenons,  mes  vicaires  et  moi,  ce  qui  se  dit  en  ville.  Je
me  renseigne  aussitdt  pres  des  personnes  qui  ont  constate  elles-
memes  la  presence  de  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  sur  les
grelons  qu'elles  ont  vus  et  examines.

Les  renseignements  que  j'ai  recueillis  ce  jour-la  et  les  jours  suivants
etaient  si  pr6cis,  si  concordants  qu'il  etait  de  mon  devoir  de  les
communiquer  a  Votre  Grandeur.  Vous  avez  juge,  Monseigneur,
qu'une  enquete  serieuse  s'imposait  et  vous  l'avez  prescrite  par  votre
lettre  en  date  du  17  juin.

Je  l'ai  annoncee  a  mes  paroissiens  en  prevenant  ceux  d'entre  eux
qui  auraient  des  renseignements  a  me  donner  de  vouloir  bien  venir
au  presbytere. Pendant  plusieurs  semaines  j'ai  done  vu  et  interroge


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  419


a  part  bon  nombre  de  temoins,  en  leur  faisant  remarquer  la  gravit6
et  l'importance  de  leurs  depositions.

Menee,  je  crois,  avec  toute  la  rigueur  que  demandait  l'importance
de  son  objet,  l'enquete  a  ete  close  le  10  juillet  dans  une  seance
presidee  par  Votre  Grandeur  accompagnee  de  M.  le  Cbanoine  Cbichy,
vicaire  general,  de  M.  le  Cure  de  Saint-Etienne  et  du  clerge  de  la
ville.

Le  dossier  complet  des  depositions  signees  sous  la  foi  du  serment
represente  un  total  de  107  temoins:
lis  se  repartissent  ainsi  :


Hommes  -

" 16  1

Femmes  -

-  26

|  48

Enfants  -

■ 6  J

Hommes  -

" 15  1

Femmes  -

Enfants  -

:  "Jj

Hommes  -

-  ;i

Femmes -  ■

Enfants  -

:  h

Hommes  -

•  32 1

Femmes  -

64

-  107

Enfants  -

• 11  J

Remiremont


Saint-Etienne


Saint-Nabord


Recapitulation


Ici,  cesse  le  recit  historique  de  l'orage  du  26  mai,  des  grelons
qui  l'ont  accompagne  et  de  l'enquete  qui  l'a  suivi.  II  nous  laisse
en  face  du  temoignage  de  plus  de  Cent  personnes  qui,  sous  la  foi  du
serment,  affirment  avoir  vu  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  dans
les  grelons  qu'ils  ont  eus  entre  les  mains  et  sous  les  yeux.

Que  faut-il  penser  de  leurs  constatations  1  L'empreinte  de  la
Madone  etait-elle  dans  leur  imagination  seulement,  ou  en  realite
sur  les  grelons  nommes  grelons-medailles,  parce  qu'ils  portaient,
comme  les  medailles  du  Couronnement,  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du
Tresor 1

Cette  question  a  une  importance  capitale :  la  est  le  nceud  de
l'enquete.  Elle  devait  done  porter  surtout  son  controle  sur  la
valeur  des  constatations,  de  maniere  a  ecarter  Yillusion  et  la
suggestion  et  a  mettre  ainsi  dans  un  relief  saisissant  l'autbenticite
de  nos  grelons.

En  voici  les  resultats :

1°/  Les  constatations  ont  ete  simultanees,  concordantes  et  precises.


420


M.  Sage.


[part


Elles  out  eu  lieu  en  mime  temps,  le  meme  jour  et  a  la  meme
heure,  vers  6  heures  du  soir,  sans  que  Ton  puisse  dire  quelle  a  ete
la  premiere.

Elles  sont  concordantes  :  toutes  affirment  la  presence  de  l'image  de
Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  sur  les  grelons.  Les  divergences  qu'elles
presentent  ne  portent  que  sur  des  d6tails  et  sont  imputables  a  l'etat
des  grelons  au  moment  oil  se  sont  faites  les  constatations.

Elles  sont  enfin  d'une  precision  remarquable.  Ce  n'est  pas  une
forme  vague  que  les  temoins  ont  vue,  mais  une  effigie  absolument
nette,  minutieusement  detaillee  et  rigoureusement  conforme  a  la
medaille  frappee  en  souvenir  du  Couronnement.

2°/  Les  constatations  ont  eu  lieu  a  plus  de  vingt  endroits  diffe-
rents,  eloignes  les  uns  des  autres  de  plusieurs  centaines  de  metres,
et  meme  de  plus  d'un  kilometre,  comme  Saint-Etienne,  Moulins,
commune  de  Saint-Nabord.

3°/  Elles  se  produisent  a  peu  pres  toutes  de  la  meme  maniere.
La  curiosite  les  provoque  et,  a  chaque  endroit,  le  premier  t6moin  du
fait  extraordinaire  en  est  tellement  stup6fait  d'abord,  puis  ravi,  qu'il
s'empresse  d'eu  faire  part  a  son  entourage,  soit  pour  lui  faire  partager
sa  joie,  soit  pour  s'assurer  qu'il  ne  s'est  pas  trompe,  de  sorte  que
dans  chaque  centre  de  constatations  il  y  a  de  deux  a  neuf  temoins
qui  se  controlent  eux  memes.

Plusieurs  ajoutent  a  ce  controle  la  confrontation  des  medailles
qu'ils  portent  sur  eux  avec  celle  des  grelons :  leur  similitude  est
parfaite.  En  meme  temps,  ils  ecartent  les  grelons  sur  lesquels  ils  ne
voient  rien  :  tons,  en  effet,  n'avaient  pas  l'image  de  la  Madone.

4°/  Les  constatations  ont  enfin  pour  resultat  de  produire  imme-
diatement,  dans  l'ame  des  temoins,  une  conviction  intime,  profonde
et  indestructible.

Vous  avez  entendu,  Monseigneur,  quelques  depositions  et  Votre
Grandeur  sait  avec  quelle  chaleur  de  conviction  elles  ont  ete  faites  :
"  Je  donnerais  tous  mes  membres "  disait  l'un,  et  "  jusqu'a  la
derniere  goutte  de  mon  sang"  disait  un  autre,  "  plutot  cpie  de  dire
que  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  n'etait  pas  sur  les  grelons  et  que  je  ne
l'ai  pas  vue."

J'ajoute  deux  faits,  car  l'exemple  sera  toujours  la  voie  la  plus
rapide  et  la  plus  sure  pour  saisir  la  verit6.

A  Saint-Etienne,  Mm0  Andre,  mere  de  famille,  etait  chez  elle
pendant  l'orage  de  la  Trinite.  Son  mari,  instituteur  en  retraite,  etait
absent :  il  assistait  a  une  seance  de  patronage.  Poussee  par  une
curiosite  bien  legitime,  elle  ramasse  quelques  grelons  qui  la  frappent


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  421

le  plus  par  leur  grosseur  et  par  leur  forme.  La  voila  saisie  et  pro-
fondement  emue :  C'est  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du  Tr6sor  qu'elle
voit  d'une  facon  tres  distincte.

En  bonne  epouse,  elle  pense  immediatement  a  son  mari  qui  doit
revenir  a  la  maison  dans  quelques  instants,  et  au  lieu  de  jouir  en
ego'iste  du  spectacle  touchant  et  extraordinaire  qu'elle  a  sous  les
yeux,  elle  cherche  le  moyen  de  retarder  la  fonte  de  ses  precieux
gr  61  ons.

Elle  y  reussit.  De  retour  au  foyer,  son  mari  les  voit  et  les
examine.  II  est  stupefait.  Sa  femme  ne  s'etait  pas  trompee,  il  le
constate  avec  joie.

En  paroissien  bien  avise  :  "  Marie,  dit-il  alors  a  l'une  de  ses  filles,
il  faut  porter  ces  grelons  a  M.  le  Cure."

Celle-ci  obeit.  L'accueil  fut  plus  que  froid.  Le  pasteur  ne  voulut
d'abord  nj  rien  entendre,  ni  rien  voir.  Sur  les  instances  reiterees,
tres  pressantes  de  sa  paroissienne  qui  lui  pr6sente  les  grelons,  il  se
resigne  enfin  a  abaisser  les  yeux.  Ties  etonne  de  ce  qu'il  voit,  il  a
recours  a  ses  lunettes  pour  mieux  s'assurer  de  la  realite  de  l'image
de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor.  L'heureux  cure  est  anjourd'hui  l'un  des
apotres  les  plus  ardents  des  grelons-medailles.

A  Remiremont,  Alcide  Jeangeorge,  age  de  44  ans,  et  Marie-Clarisse
Parmentier,  son  epouse,  agee  de  39  ans,  avaient  loue  un  lot  de
terrain  dans  les  jardins  ouvriers.  Voyant  tomber  la  grele  avec  fracas,
ils  sont  desoles  en  songeant  a  leurs  legumes.  L'orage  passe,  ils  s'en
vont  tristement  voir  s'il  en  reste  quelque  chose.  Quel  n'est  pas
leur  etonnement  de  voir  d'une  part  que  leur  jardin  n'a  pas  de  mal
et  d'autre  part  que  les  allees  sont  couvertes  de  grelons !  Ils  en
ramassent  quelques-uns :  ils  y  voient  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du
Tresor  bien  marquee  avec  l'Enfant-Jesus,  la  couronne  et  la  robe.

En  s'en  retournant  chez  eux,  ils  trouvent  sur  le  bord  du  canal
de  l'Est  des  grelons  bien  conserves,  ils  en  ramassent  aussi  plusieurs
oil  l'image  de  la  Vierge  est  parfaitement  visible.

Mme  Jeangeorge  a  l'idee  d'en  emporter  dans  son  tablier  pour  les
montrer  a  des  parents  qui  se  trouvent  sur  leur  chemin,  au  Rang-
Sen6clial.  On  compare  aux  medailles  que  Ton  a  sur  soi  les  grelons
qu'on  a  sous  les  yeux  :  la  ressemblance  est  parfaite.

Voila  deux  faits  :  je  pourrais  en  ajouter  d'autres,  car  ce  qui  s'est
passe  dans  ces  deux  centres  de  constatations  s'est  reproduit  avec
quelques  legeres  modifications  dans  tous  les  autres.

D'autre  part,  vous  avez  lu,  Monseigneur,  les  remarques  qui  en
precedent  le  recit. A  cette double  lumiere, le  simple  bon  sens

2d


422  M.  Sage,  [part

n'est-il  pas  oblige  de  reconnaitre  que  dans  les  constatations  faites
par  les  temoins  il  n'y  a  aucune  place  ni  a,  ['illusion  ni  a  la  suggestion;
qu'ils  ont  vu  en  realite  ce  qu'ils  affirment;  que  le  nom  de
GrSlons-Medailles  est  pleinement  justifi6.

J.  VUILLEMIN,

Vicaire  general  lwnoraire,
Archipretre  de  Remiremont.

(4)

Remiremont,  15  septembre  1908.

Je  soussigne,  vicaire  de  Remiremont,  certifie  que  pendant  l'orage
du  26  mai  1907  au  cours  duquel  sont  tombes  les  "  Grelons-Medailles,"
aucun  membre  du  Clerge  de  la  Ville,  aucune  religieuse  n'a  constats
personnellement  le  fait.  La  seule  exception  est  celle  de  Mr  i'abbe
Gueniot,  cure  de  S*  Etienne,  qui,  averti  par  une  de  ses  paroissiennes,
a  pu  examiner  les  Greions.

GUI.  MlNOD,

P'\

(5)

Je  me  trouvais  chez  Monsieur  C le  lendemain  que  la  grele

etait  tombee,  et  voici  ce  que  m'a  raconte  ce  monsieur  :  "  Ma  laitiere,

MUe  J  ,  vient  me  demander  si  j'ai  remarque  ce  qui  etait  sur  les

greions,  qu'elle  avait  vu  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor." II  me  dit  la-

dessus  qu'il  l'avait  traitee  de  folle. En  voyant  cela,  Mllu  J lui

dit:  "Eh  bien  !  allez  voir  dans  votre  jardin."  Madame  C — —  y
court  aussitot  et  en  rapporte  dans  son  tablier. On  les  regarde  tout

de  suite  et  ils  y  voient  la  meme  image  que  M11"  J  .  Monsieur

C en  prend  un  aussitot  et  le  porte  a  Monsieur  G en  lui

demandant  ce  qu'il  remarque  sur  le  grelon,  qui  etait  de  la  grosseur

d'un  ceuf. Aussitot  Monsieur  G lui  repond,  sans  connaitre  les

impressions  de  Monsieur  C  : "On  dirait  la  tete  de  l'Enfant

Jesus."

Moi,  je  n'ai  lien  vu  ;  mais  Monsieur  C m'a  dit  qu'il  prenait

cela  pour  un  fait  extraordinaire.

Lucie  Maxel.

(6)

Remiremont,  le  15  septembre  1908.

Monsieur,

Je  me  trouvais  a  la  gare,  le  soir  que  la  grele  est
tombee  a  Remiremont,  le  jour  que  les  greions  miraculeux  sont
tombes.


Fig.  1.

Enlarged  to  twice  the  size  of  original.


Fig.  3.


Facing  page  423.


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  423


J'en  ai  ramasse  un  des  plus  gros  parmi  eux,  et  je  me  suis  apercu
qu'il  y  avait  une  forme  cle  figure,  qui  se  trouvait  dans  l'interieur  du
grelon,  qui  ressemblait  a  une  figure  de  femme ;  puis  cela  m'a  fait
un  effet  sur  ce  moment.

Voici  la  forme  du  grelon  (Fig.  2).

Alors,  le  lendemain  matin,  j'entends  dire  qu'on  avait  dit  avoir  vu
des  grelons  qui  avaient  la  figure  de  la  Sainte-Vierge  dans  l'interieur ;
alors,  j'ai  repondu  que  je  l'avais  vue  moi-meme  a  la  gare,  le  soir

de  la  8rgle-  Ch.  Blaudelz.

(7)

Eemiremont,  September  18th,  1908.

I,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  I  have  reproduced  here,  solely
for  purposes  of  study,  but  completely,  a  statement  which  has  been
made  to  me  orally  and  also  in  writing,  as  here  transcribed  by  me,
by  a  person  whose  name  I  am  not  permitted  to  give.  This  person
is  intelligent  and  cultivated,  cool  and  very  deliberate  in  judgment,
and  in  a  position  that  demands  caution  and  prudence.

[The  following  description  with  rough  sketch  (here  reproduced,  see
Fig.  3)  of  a  section  of  a  hailstone  was  given  by  this  witness  :]

"(1)  Outer  layer,  resembling  crushed  snow,  with  a  rough  surface.

(2)  White  line,  very  clear  and  thin.

(3)  Inner  layer,  transparent  like  ice  thoroughly  frozen.

(4)  Central  part  of  a  dull  white,  showing  up  clearly  against  the
transparent  layer  surrounding  it,  being  whiter  than  the  outer  layer  ;
of  a  very  smooth  surface,  the  lower  part  convex  and  rough  or
bubbly  like  the  outside  of  the  hailstone."

To  this  description  are  added  these  words  :  "  The  outline  of  the
central  part  was  not  sharp  ;  it  was  only  clear  white  against  a  trans-
parent background,  like  a  piece  of  paper  adhering  to  a  glass."

I  certify  that  the  above  statement  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  written
original,  which  lies  before  me.  Qur  ]V1inod  1

Deposition  de  Mme  Jeangeorge  (Marie  Parmentier).

C'etait  le  26  mai  1907,  entre  5  J  et  6  heures.  Nous  sommes  alles
a  la  Toucherie  (oil  sont  les  jardins  ouvriers,  sur  le  Canal  de  l'Est)
pour  voir  si  notre  jardin  n'avait  pas  de  dommages. Arrives  la,

1  The  statement  obtained  from  M.  l'Abbe  Minod  has  been,  at  M.  Sage's
desire,  translated  literally  into  English,  since  M.  Minod  objected  to  its  being
published  in  its  original  form. — Ed.


424


M.  Sage.


[part


nous  avons  constate  que  les  plantations  etaient  indemnes  et  les
grelons  etaient  a  au  moins  cinquante  centimetres  les  uns  des  autres.
Comme  l'un  de  nos  enfants  nous  avait  dit  qu'on  avait  vu  l'image  de
N.-D.  du  Tresor  sur  les  grelons,  sur  le  chemin  du  retour  nous  avons
ramasse  des  grelons  et  nous  avons  constate  qu'en  effet  ils  portaient
l'image  de  N.-D.  du  Tresor.  Nous  etions  en  compagnie  de  Mme  Richard
qui  habite  actuellement  a  Moyenmoutier ;  elle  a  vu  l'image  comme
nous.  Nous  sommes  passes  chez  la  mere  de  cette  dame,  nous  lui
avons  montre  un  grelon  de  la  grosseur  d'un  ceuf  de  poule,  elle  a
vu  aussi  l'image,  qu'elle  a  embrassee  par  la  fenetre  ouverte,  car  nous
ne  sommes  pas  entres  chez  elle.  N.-D.  nous  apparaissait  blanche
comme  le  grelon  ;  elle  etait  a  l'interieur,  dans  le  milieu.  Je  n'avais
pas  de  medaille  sur  moi  a  ce  moment-la.  J'en  ai  achete  plusieurs
depuis.  J'ai  toujours  eu  une  devotion  speciale  pour  N.-D.  du
Tresor  et  je  considere  comme  une  gntce  d'avoir  pu  assister  a  ce  miracle.

Apres  lecture  de  ce  qui  precede  et  qui  avait  ete  ecrit  sous  sa
dictee,  Mme  Jeangeorge  a  signe.  Mjie  jEANGEOrge,

nee  Marie  Parmentier.

(9)

Le  dimanche  jour  de  la  Trinite  27  mai  1907,  a  5lies  \  du  soir,
un  orage  s'est  abattu,  sur  la  ville  de  Remiremont,  venant  du
Sud-Est ;  la  pluie  a  commence  a  tomber  quelques  minutes  melangee
de  petits  grelons,  de  la  grosseur  cle  petits  pois,  puis  a  cesse,  quelques
minutes ;  cette  fois  la  grele  seule  s'est  mise  a  tomber,  dont  les
grelons  etaient  de  la  grosseur  de  noisettes  et  de  noix,  puis  tout  a
coup,  les  grelons  sont  tombes,  de  differentes  dimensions,  et  sous
toutes  sortes  de  formes ;  c'est  ces  derniers  grelons,  qui  ont  casse  des
milliers  de  vitres  a  la  filature  oil  je  suis  portier.  Apres  l'orage,  deux
de  mes  patrons  etant  arrives,  l'un  d'eux  m'a  envoye  faire  des  courses
en  ville.  C'est  a  ma  sortie  que  ma  femme  Marie-Anne  Melchior,
mes  filles  Claude  Cecile  et  Claude  Angele,  etant  a  la  porterie,
m'ont  appele  au  moment  que  je  sortais,  et  ma  fille  Angele,  tenait
dans  les  mains  un  grelon  de  la  forme  d'un  ceuf,  dont  l'image
de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  etait  tres  bien  imprimee  sur  le  grelon,
et  tenant  l'enfant  Jesus  sur  le  bras  gauche,  telle  que  la  Vierge
etait  repr6sentee  a  l'Eglise.  Ma  femme  et  mes  deux  filles,  apres
mon  depart,  en  ont  ramasses  dans  notre  jardin  plusieurs  autres
grelons,  dont  l'image  de  la  Vierge  et  de  l'enfant  etait  representee
sur  les  dits  grelons.

Le portier de la filature Schwartz, a Remiremont,  ex-gen-
darme retraite.  Joseph  Claude.


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  425


(10)

Deposition  de  M"e  Claude  (Ce'cile).

Je  causais  a  une  dame  devant  chez  nous  apres  l'orage.  Elle  me
demandait  si  je  n'avais  pas  vu  les  grelons  portant  l'image  de  N.-D.
du  Tresor.  Je  repondis  non.  Au  meme  instant  une  petite  fille
arrive  pres  du  lavoir,  m'apporte  un  grelon  et  me  le  montre  :  ce
grelon  avait  a  pen  pres  la  grosseur  d'un  oeuf  de  pigeon.  J'ai
regarde  et  j'ai  vu  en  effet  l'image  et  j'ai  aussitot  apporte  le  grelon
a  la  maison  pour  le  montrer  a  mes  parents.  Maman  a  dit :  Voyons
si  nous  n'en  trouvons  pas  d'autres.  Nous  avons  fait  le  tour  du
jardin  et  maman  en  a  retrouve  un,  enfonce  dans  un  trou.  L'image
etait  tres  nette  :  on  la  voyait  aussi  bien  qua  l'eglise  (sic),  le
rnanteau,  ainsi  que  la  tete  de  l'enfant.  On  la  voyait  aussi  sur
d'autres,  mais  plus  indistincte.

L'usine  avait  eu  des  milliers  de  carreaux  de  ca'sses.  Mais  aucune
plante  n'avait  ete  abimee  dans  notre  jardin,  a  nous.

J'ai  signe  apres  lecture,  en  presence  de  mes  parents.

Cecils  Claude.

(11)

Remiremont,  le  15  septembre  1908.

Le  dimanche  de  la  Trinite  de  l'annee  1907,  entre  6  heures  h  et
7  heures,  du  soir,  rentrant  de  voyage  et  apres  un  orage  de  grele,  j'ai
remarque  dans  mon  jardin  bon  nombre  de  grelons  non  encore  fondus
et  sur  lesquels  j'ai  reconnu  l'image  en  relief  et  de  forme  ovale  de
NotreJJame  du  Tresor.

Cette  image  etait  en  tous  points  semblable  a  la  statue  veneree  en
l'Eglise  de  Remiremont.

Ma  mere,  mon  frere  et  ma  tante  ont,  eux  aussi,  remarque  le  meme
fait.

Notre  attention  a  ete  attiree  sur  le  fait  par  ma  susdite  tante.

F.  Aubel.

(12)

Je  soussigne  certifie  que  moi  Auguste  Lamay,  tailleur  d'habits  a
Remiremont,  rue  du  Rang-Senechal,  N°  9,  a  vu,  ainsi  que  sa
femme  et  d'autres  personnes  dans  un  grelon  apporte  par  sa  fille
depuis  le  lieu  dit  Aux  Renauds,  a  tres  bien  vu  et  constate  comme
il  est  dit  l'image  de  la  Vierge  du  Tresor.

En  foi  de  quoi  j'ai  signe
Lamay,  Louis  Auguste,  tailleur  d'habits,  rue  du  Rang-Senechal,
N°  9,  a  Remiremont,  le  15  septembre  1908,  sur  reclamation  de
Monsieur  Sacre,  dele°;ue  de  la  Societe  des  Recherches  de  Londres.


426


M.  Sage,


[part


(13)

ST  Etienne,  le  14  septernbre  1908.

Les  soussignes,  habitant  S*  Etienne,  declarent  que  le  vingt-six  mai
mil  neuf  cent  sept  vers  six  heures  du  soir,  apres  un  orage  terrible  :

Marie  Alice  Fresse  femme  Andre,  entendant  une  voisine,  Mlle
Justine  Coliz,  s'ecrier  "On  dit  que  N.-D.  du  Tresor  est  sur  les
greions,"  s'empressa  d'en  ramasser  un  et  put  constater  la  verity  de
l'exclamation.

Alors  elle  en  ramassa  de  differentes  formes  et  de  differentes
grandeurs,  et  sur  la  plus  grande  partie  l'image  apparaissait  tres  bien,
et  demeurait  nette  jusqu'a  la  fonte  complete  du  grelon.  Mlle  Coliz,
tres  occupee,  n'a  pu  aller  deposer  devant  Monseigneur  Foucaidt,  c'est
pourquoi  sa  deposition  ne  figure  pas  au  dossier.

M1Ie  Andre  Marie  est  all6e  porter  un  grelon  a  Mr  le  Cure  de  S*
Etienne  pour  qu'il  puisse  constater  le  phenomene.  M1'  le  Cure'  se
fit  meme  prier  beaucoup  avant  de  consentir  a  regarder  le  grelon
qu'on  lui  presentait.

Pour  ma  part  j'affirme  qu'a  mon  re  tour  d'une  seance  du  patronage
de  Remiremont,  ma  femme  m'a  presente  plusieurs  des  greions
qu'elle  avait  recueillis  pour  me  les  faire  admirer  et  j'ai  constat6,  non
sans  etonnement,  la  realite  du  phenomene  dont  on  m'avait  parle  sur
la  route  avant  mon  arrivee  a  la  maison.

L'image  etait  evidemment  en  creux  mais  apparaissait  en  relief,  et
tranchait  sur  la  masse  du  grelon,  comme  etant  plus  mate,  moins
transparente  que  la  masse.

C.  Andre,  M.  Andre,  A.  Fresse  femme  Andre.

J'etais  avec  mon  pere  a  Remiremont,  je  suis  rentree  avec  lui,  et
j'ai  constate  la  meme  chose  que  lui.

Martins  Andre.

J'ai  entendu  dire  par  un  grand  nombre  de  personnes  de  S*  Etienne
que  je  connais,  qu'ils  avaient  constats  le  phenomene,  mais  soit  crainte
puerile  ou  indifference,  ils  n'ont  pas  repondu  a  l'invitation  de  Mon-
seigneur l'eveque  transmise  du  haut  de  la  chaire  et  a  certaines  personnes
plus  particulierement  comme  plus  instruites  que  les  autres.

C.  Andre.

(14)

Ddposition  de  M.  le  Curt  Guiniot,  faite  d  M.  Sage.

Le  26  mai  1907,  j'etais  dans  ma  chambre  quand  Mlle  Andre
ma  voisine  m'appelle  pour  me  montrer  des greions sur  lesquels


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  427

elle  voyait  I'image  de  N.-D.  du  Tresor.  Incredule  tout  d'abord  jo
mets  mes  lunettes  de  presbyte  pour  m'assurer  du  fait  et  je  vois
nettement  dessinee  sur  deux  grelons  qu'elle  rue  pr<5sentait  sur  sa  main
I'image  d'une  Vierge  ressemblant  a  N.-D.  du  Tresor.  Pendant
1'orage,  j'ai  observe  que  les  grelons  tombaient  comme  s'ils  n'avaient
pas  ete  sous  la  loi'de  l'acceleration  de  vitesse  des  corps  lourds.  Dans
mon  jardin  que  je  croyais  saccage,  il  n'y  avait  aucun  degat,  les  grelons
semblaient  avoir  menage  arbres  et  legumes.  Cette  observation  a
ete  faite  par  nombre  de  paroissiens.

L'orage  ou  mieux  la  grele  avait  la  direction  de  l'est  a  l'ouest,
apparemment  au  moins,  car  les  nuages  restaient  immobiles.  La  bande
de  terrain  visitee  par  la  grele  n'avait  pas  plus  de  800  metres  en
large  et  plus  de  4  kilometres  en  longueur,  le  trajet  suivi  par  la  statue
depuis  le  Sl  Mont  oil  elle  etait  jusqu'a  l'abbaye  de  Remiremont
ou  elle  fut  transported.  Deux  centaines  de  paroissiens  m'ont  attests
la  presence  de  I'image  sur  les  gredons  qu'ils  out  vus.

J'atteste  la  realite  de  ces  faits,  qu'une  soixantaine  de  paroissiens
m'ont  atteste  par  ecrit.

GutiNIOT,

Cure  de  Sl  Etienne.

P.S. — J'ai  pese  4  de  ces  grelons  pris  au  hasard,  ils  pesaient
exactement  160  grammes.  L'un  d'eux  avait  exactement  la  forme
d'un  boulet  avec  bavure  comme  s'il  sortait  d'un  moule.

Les  grelons  etaient  entoures  d'une  efflorescence  neigeuse  a  leur
cbute  et  a  mesure  qu'ils  fondaient  I'image  se  dessinait  mieux.  D'autres
que  moi  out  remarque  qu'a  la  fonte  I'image  restait  la  derniere.
Certains  grelons  etaient  encadres  en  carre  ou  en  ovale,  et  la  teinte
centrale  etait  souvent  bleuatre  et  meme  parf'ois  bombee.

(15)

Deposition  de  M.  le  Cure  Guiniot.

Extrait  de  la  Semaine  Religieuse  de  Saint  Die.

"Jusqu'ici  j'ai  garde  un  silence  absolu  sur  les  faits  qui  se  sont
passes  le  dimanche  de  la  Trinite  a  Saint  Etienne  et  a  Remiremont.

"Comme  je  suis  le  seul  eccl<§siastique  qui  ait  vu  des  grelons
desormais  historiques,  je  crois  qu'il  est  de  mon  devoir  d'en  dire
un  mot.

"Si  je  donne  des  details  circonstancies  sur  l'emploi  de  mon
temps  pendant  cette  soiree  du  jour  de  la  Trinite,  c'est  pour  montrer
que  j'avais  toutes  les  allures  du  Thomas  dont  j'ai  suivi  les  traces
au  Cenacle.


428


M.  Sage.


[part


"  J'etais  seul  dans  mon  presbytere.  Mon  vicaire  avait  ete  appele
pour  r6gler  des  affaires  de  famille.  Souffrant  d'un  rhumatisme  au
genou,  je  m'etais  installe  le  plus  commodement  possible  pour  loger
dans  ma  tete  le  gros  TraiU  de  GMogie  de  M.  de  Lapparent  (pesant
au  moins  quatre  kilos).

"J'avais  a  peine  tourne  quelques  feuillets  sur  la  formation  de  la
glace,  que  j'entendis  la  porte  s'ouvrir  brusquement.  MUe  Marie
Andre,  ne  voyant  personne,  me  criait  du  corridor :  '  Monsieur  le
cure,  Monsieur  le  cure  ! '  Comme  je  ne  m'emballe  pas  facilement,  je
lui  repondis  de  ma  place  :  '  Est-ce  que  le  feu  est  a  la  maison  ? '

"Rassure  sur  ce  point,  j'etais  reste  sur  mes  positions.  Mais  elle
cria  plus  fort :  '  Monsieur  le  cure,  venez  vite,  ca  fond.  .  .  .'

"  Mlle  Andre  fit  de  nouvelles  instances,  et  je  me  decidai  a  me
lever  pour  aller  au  corridor  oil  elle  se  tenait  debout.

" —  'Regardez,  me  dit-elle,  voila  l'image  de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor
imprimee  sur  les  grelons.'

" — 'Allons,  allons,  lui  dis-je,  ce  n'est  pas  a  moi  qu'on  raconte
des  histoires  pareilles.'

"Pour  la  contenter  je  jetai  un  regard  distrait  sur  les  deux  grelons
etales  sur  sa  main.  Mais  comme  je  ne  voulais  rien  voir  et  que,
du  reste,  comme  presbyte,  je  ne  le  pouvais  pas,  je  me  d6tournai
pour  aller  rejoindre  mon  gros  traite  de  geologie.  Elle  insista  :  'Je
vous  en  prie,  mettez  vos  lunettes.'  Je  les  adaptai  et  vis  bien
distinctement,  sur  la  face  des  grelons  legerement  bombes  dans  le
centre,  tandis  que  les  contours  etaient  plus  frustes,  wn  buste  de  femmef
avec  une  robe  dvasie  au  bas,  comme  une  chape  cTofficiant :  je  serais  peut-
etre  plus  exact  encore,  si  je  disais  qu'elle  ressemblait  a  la  Vierge
des  Ermites.  Les  contours  de  l'image  etaient  un  peu  creux  comme
si  on  les  avait  dessines  avec  un  poincon,  mais  tres  hardiment
traces.

"M,Ie  Andre  voulait  me  faire  remarquer  certains  details  du  costume,
mais  je  refusai  de  regarder  plus  longtemps.  J'etais  bonteux  de  ma
civdulite,  bien  convaincu  que  la  sainte  Vierge  ne  s'occupait  guere
d'instantanes  sur  les  grelons.  Je  lui  dis  ensuite :  '  Mais  vous  ne
voyez  done  pas  que  ces  grelons  sont  tombes  sur  des  vegetaux,  et
que  ceux  ci  s'y  sont  imprimes.  Emportez  vos  grelons,  9a  ne  prend
pas  avec  moi.'  Je  retournai  a  mon  gros  livre,  sans  faire  attention
a  ce  qui  venait  de  se  passer.

"Mais  j'etais  distrait  par  ces  grelons  de  forme  si  bizarre.  J'en
ramassai  trois  pour  les  peser,  sans  les  regarder  de  pres.  lis  pesaient
180  grammes. L'un  d'eux  etait  parfaitement  rond,  comme  les  boulets


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  429

dont  se  servent  les  enfants,  et  faisant  cercle  autour,  une  bavure  comme
s'il  sortait  d'une  moule.

"Pendant  mon  souper  (j'etais  seul),  je  me  dis :  Tout  de  meme,
ces  grelons  sont  singuliers  de  forme,  et  une  empreinte  si  reguliere
sur  les  deux  que  j'ai  examines  ne  peut  guere  etre  l'effet  du  hasard.

"  Mais  je  me  raidis  bien  vite  contre  toute  idee  de  surnaturel,  j'etais
honteux  d'y  avoir  songe  seulement  un  instant.  L'orage  passe,  je
me  levai  de  table  pour  aller  constater  les  degats  du  potager.  Je
ne  me  pressais  guere,  car  je  supposais  avec  raison  que  tons  les  legumes
etaient  haches.

"Point.  En  faisant  le  tour  des  allees,  je  ne  remarquai  qu'une
tres  petite  branche  d'arbre  cassee.  Mais,  par  contre,  le  sol  n'6tait
qa'un  vaste  ecumoire,  dont  les  trous  de  trois  a  cinq  centimetres  de
profondeur  ressemblaient  a  des  pas  d'un  gros  cbien.  Ces  trous
resterent  visibles  pendant  plus  de  deux  mois  aux  endroits  oil  la
terre  n'avait  pas  ete  remuee,  notamment  sous  les  arbres.

"  Ces  grelons  n'avaient  pas  ete  inoffensifs  partout,  car  sur  les
toits  des  usines,  1,400  grandes  vitres,  dont  les  eclats  allerent  se
loger  sur  les  metiers,  causerent  par  leur  chute  des  degats  assez  serieux,.
excepte  toutefois  dans  la  bourse  des  vitriers.

"  D'apres  des  renseignements  que  je  crois  exacts,  la  bande  de
terrain  visitee  par  les  gros  grelons  n'avait  pas  plus  d'un  kilometre
de  large,  allant  du  Saint-Mont  au  fort  de  Remiremont,  traversant
les  etablissements  industriels  de  Saint-Etienue.  Quelques-uns  s'egarerent
seulement  jusqu'a  Moulins  (Saint-Nabord).  Mais  on  n'en  vit  ni  a
Saint-Ame  ni  a  Dommartin,  ni  dans  le  village  le  plus  rapproche  de
l'eglise  de  Saint-Etienne,  qui  n'est  cependant  distant  que  d'un
kilometre.

"  Ce  qui  m'a  paru  digne  de  remarque,  c'est  que  ces  grelons  qui
devaient  etre  precipites  violemment  a  terre,  conformement  aux  lois
d'acceleration  de  la  vitesse  des  corps,  paraissaient  jetes  seulement  de
quelques  metres  de  hauteur  et  n'avoir  que  la  vitesse  initiale  d'un
corps  qui  tombe.

"  Vers  sept  heures  et  demie,  le  bruit  se  repandait  dans  les  environs
du  presbytere  que  beaucoup  de  personnes  avaient  remarque  l'image
de  Notre-Dame  du  Tresor  sur  les  grelons,  et  que  bon  nombre  avaient
une  forme  de  medaillons.  Les  enfants  en  ramassaient  dans  leurs
tabliers  et  les  montraient  a  leurs  parents  qui  constataient  la  presence
de  la  meme  image.  Les  uns  voyaient  meme  des  details,  comme
la  couronne  de  la  Vierge,  de  l'Enfant-Jesus,  les  franges  de  la  robe.
Etait-ce  un  fruit  de  leur  imagination  1 .  .  .


430


M.  Sage.


[part


"  Laissant  de  cote  ces  details,  il  est  hors  de  doute  que  la  plupart
des  grelons  examines  portaient  distinctement  l'image  de  Notre-Dame
du  Tresor.

"  Le  lendemain  matin,  les  laitiers,  a  leur  retour  de  Remiremont,
rapportaient  que  beaucoup  de  personnes  de  la  ville  avaient  fait  la
meme  remarque.

"  Le  temoignage  historique  devenait  par  la  indiscutable.  Le
dimanche  suivant,  apies  la  messe  et  le  chant  de  la  Congregation,
je  demandai  a  ces  demoiselles  s'il  en  etait  parmi  elles  qui  eussent
vu  des  grelons  avec  l'empreinte  de  la  Vierge.  Sur  soixante-cinq,
dix  m'affirmerent  qu'elles  l'avaient  bien  vue.  Apres  les  Vepres,
je  recueillis  encore  cinquante  signatures  de  gens  bien  convaincus  de
la  veiite  de  leurs  observations.  Je  ne  donne  pas  d'importance  a
ces  signatures,  que  je  pourrais  etre  soupconne  d'avoir  provoquees,
mais  elles  out  ete  spontanees.

"  Savants,  mettez-vous  a  la  torture  pour  expliquer  ces  faits  par
des  causes  naturelles,  vous  n'y  arriverez  pas.  Ce  qui  reste,  c'est
que  si  la  municipality  de  Remiremont,  pour  des  raisons  profondes
que  je  n'ai  pas  a  apprecier,  a  interdit  la  magnifique  procession
qui  se  preparait,  l'artillerie  celeste  a  fait,  le  jour  de  l'Octave,  a  la
meme  heme,  une  procession  verticale  qui  n'a  pu  etre  interdite.  .  . ."

L'Abbe  Gueniot,

Cure  de  Saint-Etienne-les-Remiremont.

[M.  Gueniot  certifies  the  correctness  of  this  account  in  the  following
letter  addressed  to  M.  Sage :]

St.  Etienne,  le  23  [novembre  1908].

Monsieur,

Retenu  au  lit  par  des  douleurs  rhumatismales,  je
puis  a  peine  vous  repondre.

Tout  est  de  moi,  on  a  retranche  des  details,  mais  on  n'a  rien  ajoute.

Le  mot  "  grelons-medailles "  n'est  pas  de  moi;  il  n'est  pas  assez
exact  en  general. C'est  Mr  le  Cure  de  Remiremont  qui  l'a  invente.

Imprimez  comme  bon  vous  semblera.

Pardon  de  mon  griffonnage  et  recevez  mes  humbles  salutations.

Gueniot,

Cure  de  St.  Etienne.


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  431


(16)

St.  Etiknnk.

Mes  enfants  m'ayant  present^  des  grelons  le  23  mai  en  1907,
j'ai  cru  reconnaltre  sur  les  grelons  une  figure  humaine.  Ce  sont
surtout  les  enfants  du  pays  qui  ont  attire  sur  le  fait  l'attcntion  de
leurs  parents.  Claude.

(17)

Deposition  de  M.  linger,  Secretaire  de  la  Mairie  de  Remiremont.
II  est  exact  que  le  dimanche  26  mai  1907,  un  orage  d'intensite
nioyenne  eclata  sur  Remiremont  vers  4  h.  de  l'apres-midi.  A  la
fin  de  l'orage  vers  4-^,  apres  une  accalmie  de  quelques  minutes,  la
pluie  revint  de  nouveau  et  fit  place  a  des  grelons  de  grosseur
ordinaire.  Cette  chute  de  grele  dura  8  a  10  minutes,  puis  les
grelons  se  rarefierent  mais  augmenterent  de  volume  ;  ce  fut  bientot
une  chute  d'enormes  grelons,  tombant  a  intervalles  tres  courts  (1  ou
2  secondes),  mais  bien  moins  nombreux  que  les  petits  grelons  du
debut  qui,  eux,  etaient  tombes  serres,  conime  tombe  d'habitude  la
grele.

Ces  gros  grelons  tombaient  peu  serres  et  presques  regulierement  ;
on  les  voyait  labourer  la  terre  des  jardins,  dans  laquelle  ils  s'enfon-
^aient  en  partie,  ou  bien  se  briser  en  eclats  s'ils  tombaient  sur  le
pave.  Le  vent  etait  f'aible  ou  nul.  Inutile  d'ajouter  que  les  serres,
les  hollandaises,  etc.,  eurent  environ  la  moitie  de  leurs  carreaux  brises.
Des  verres  "  cathedrale  "  (verres  depolis  epais  de  1  centimetre)  furent
raenie  brises  ou  fendus  malgre  leur  epaisseur.

La  chute  de  ces  enormes  grelons  dura  environ  3  ou  4  minutes
et  le  temps  redevint  calme.

Tout  le  monde  sortit  alors  examiner  ces  grelons;  quelques-uns
mesuraient  5  centimetres  de  diametre  sur  2  ou  3  centimetres
d'epaisseur.  Les  grelons  qui  s'etaient  brises  laissaient  voir  nettement,
en  raison  de  leur  grosseur  exceptionnelle,  le  noyau  central  et  les
couches  concentriques  bleuatres  cpii  l'entouraient.  Ces  lignes
suivaient  la  forme  des  grelons  et,  dans  ceux  qui  etaient  de  forme
ovale,  ces  lignes  concentriques  prenaient  une  forme  ovale  et  sinueuse.

Ce  sont  ces  dernieres  particularity  qui  firent  illusion  a  un  certain
nombre  de  personnes,  en  leur  faisant  voir,  dans  quelques  grelons,
une  sorte  de  contour  ovale,  peu  regulier,  pouvant  a  la  rigueur  ressembler
vaguement  a  une  silhouette  humaine.

Voici,  d'un  autre  cote,  le  facteur  psychologique  qui  d6termina  la
croyance  en  des  images  surnaturelles.


432


M.  Sage.


[part


Huit  jours  avant  s'etaient  tenues  de  grandes  fetes  religieuses  a
Remiremont :  on  avait  fete  le  couronnement  d'une  statue  de  N.-D.
du  Tresor,  madone  de  la  localite.  Le  clerge  avait  donne  a  ces
fetes  le  plus  grand  retentissement  possible,  si  bien  que  la  piete
des  fideles  etait,  on  peut  le  dire  sans  exageration,  demesurement
exaltee.  Une  procession  qui  devait  avoir  lieu  fut  interdite  par
le  Conseil  municipal,  ce  qui  n'etait  pas  pour  calmer  les  esprits.

Ces  details  etaient  indispensables  pour  bien  faire  voir  comment
prit  naissance  la  croyance  en  un  miracle.

Le  lendemain  seulement  de  la  chute  de  la  grele,  le  bruit  se  repandit
peu  a  peu  en  ville  que  certaines  personnes  avaient  vu  nettement
l'image  de  N.-D.  du  Tresor  dans  les  grelons.  Aucune  personne
sensee  n'y  ajoutait  foi ;  la  presse  catholique  locale  n'en  souffia  mot.
Le  clerge  lui-meme  n'en  parla  pas  dans  le  compte-rendu  des  fetes
de  son  bulletin  paroissial.  II  paraissait  fort  incredule  comme  les
9/10es  de  la  population.  Cependant  sous  la  pression  evidente  des
devots,  et  surtout,  dit-on,  de  certaines  devotes  influentes,  il  se
decida  a  en  referer  a  l'autorite  diocesaine  qui  ouvrit  une  enquete ;
celle-ci  conclut  a  l'authenticite  du  fait  qui  a  ete  soumis  a  un
savant,  M*  de  Lapparent,  d'apres  VEMle  de  VEst  N"  du  19/12/07.

Ce  dernier  a  declare  en  substance  qu'il  croyait  en  son  for  interieur
a  la  materialite  du  fait,  mais  que  au  nom  de  la  science  il  ne  pouvait
rien  dire  sans  avoir  entre  les  mains  un  des  fameux  grelons.

Cette  reponse  me  semble  synthetiser  parfaitement  la  morale  a
tirer  de  l'aventure.

Aujourd'hui  la  croyance  dans  les  "  grelons-medailles "  a  atteint
tous  les  fideles ;  il  est  surprenant  cpa'en  dehors  de  quelques-uns
d'entre  eux,  personne  n'ait  rien  remarc]ue.  11  est  encore  plus
surprenant  qu'on  n'ait  pas  meme  songe  a  photographier  l'un  de
ces  grelons.  Aujourd'hui  on  nous  annonce  que  l'image  etait  en
relief,  alors  qu*au  debut  elle  etait  seulement  dessinee.  On  a  egalement
demande  de  publier  les  noms  des  temoins  entendus  a  l'enquete,  afin
de  juger  de  leur  valeur  intellectuelle  ou  scientifique ;  mais  cette
demande  n'a  pas  ete  exaucee.

(18)

Remiremont,  le  11  septembre  1908.
Je  soussigne, Unger  Georges, Instituteur adjoint  demeurant  a
Remiremont,  29  Rue  des  Pretres,  declare  avoir  ete  temoin  oculaire
de  l'orage  du  26  mai  1907,  a  Remiremont,  dont  la  derniere  phase
fut  caracterisee  par  la  chute de grelons volumineux. La  chute


lvi.]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  433

terminee,  je  sortis  aussitdfc  pour  ramasser  plusieurs  de  ces  grelons,
dont  la  taille  insolite  m'avait  frappe.  La  plupart  avaient  une  forme
plus  ou  moins  irreguliere ;  un  seul  pourtant  retint  raou  attention
par  sa  forme  presque  parfaite  de  cylindre  droit  ayant,  au  juge
(car  je  n'ai  point  mesure),  4  a  5  centimetres  de  diametre  de  base
sur  3  centimetres  de  hauteur ;  sa  section  presentait  une  alteruance
de  cercles  concentriques  alternativement  clairs  et  opaques,  de  forme
reguliere ;  seule  la  zone  centrale,  de  1  centimetre  de  diametre
environ,  etait  irreguliere.  Mais  sur  aucun  des  grelons  que  j'ai
examines,  et  de  tres  pres,  je  n'ai  remarque  de  dessin  presentant
de  ressemblance,  meme  ties  vague,  avec  we  figure  quelconque.

Gr.  UNGER.

(19)

Extrait  du  Bulletin  Paroissial  de  Remiremont,  Septembre,  1908.

Nos  lecteurs  nous  sauront  gre  de  placer  sous  leurs  yeux  le  recit
du  Grelon-Miraculeux,  tombe  a  Bagnols,  dans  le  Var,  au  cours  d'un
violent  orage,  le  2  juillet  dernier,  en  la  fete  de  la  Visitation  de  la
Sainte-Vierge.  Nous  empruntons  ce  recit  au  Bulletin  paroissial
que  M.  le  Cure  de  Bagnols  vient  de  nous  faire  parvenir.  L'enqnete
canonique  a  6te  ordonnee  par  Msr  l'Eveque  de  Frejus.

Sans  rien  prejuger  de  la  sentence  qui  sera  rendue  par  Sa  Grandeur,
et  tout  en  nous  tenant  dans  la  reserve  commandee  par  l'Eglise,
nous  nous  rejouissons  de  cet  evenement  merveilleux  qui  rappelle  si
bien  nos  Grelons-Malailles.

Nous  y  voyons  une  preuve  de  plus  de  leur  authenticite  ;  le  Grelon
du  Var  ne  fait  que  confirmer  l'existence  des  Grelons  de  N.-D.  du
Tresor.

"  Le  2  juillet,  fete  de  la  Visitation  de  la  Sainte-Vierge,  MM.
Blanc  Denis,  Paul  Roubaud,  Felix  Abeille,  charretiers  habitant  la
commune  de  Bagnols  (Var),  etaient  occupes  a  charrier  des  billots
de  pins,  au  quartier  Saint-Charles,  dans  la  propriete  de  la  Begude,
appartenant  a  MM.  Paulet  et  Demutb,  du  Muy,  pres  de  la  riviere
de  l'Endre,  a  trois  kilometres  environ  de  la  commune  de  Saint-
Paul,  quand  vers  une  heure  et  demie  du  soir,  eclata  un  violent
orage  venant  du  cote  des  communes  de  Fayence  et  Seillans,  et  un
grelon,  de  la  dimension  d'une  grosse  noix,  tornba  seul  dans  le  petit
ruisseau  qui  bordait  la  route.

Peu  apres,  d'autres  grains  de  grele  tomberent  mais  de  grosseur
ordinaire.  M.  Felix  Abeille,  intrigue,  prit  dans  l'eau  ce  gros  pro-
jectile de  glace. Quelle  heureuse  surprise  quand,  sur  un  c6te  un  peu


4.34


M.  Sage.


[PAKT


aplati,  ils  apercoivent  tous  les  trois,  dans  l'interieur  d'un  medaillon
de  la  grandeur  d'une  piece  de  cinq  centimes,  une  figure  de  femme
d'une  rare  beaute.  Ils  l'examinerent  attentivement  et  ecartant  la
main  qui  tenait  le  grelon,  de  facon  a  etablir  une  plus  grande
distance  de  leurs  yeux,  ils  virent  les  traits  encore  plus  brillants.
Nul  doute,  a  leur  avis,  que  ce  ne  soit  l'image  de  la  Sainte-Yierge.

Ils  sont  vivement  emus,  saisis,  et  ils  n'ont  plus  la  force  de  continuer
leur  repas.  Ils  voudraient  pouvoir  montrer  ce  qu'ils  admirent  a  des
centaines  de  temoins  et  aux  incredules  de  notre  region.  Helas  !  ils
sont  a  pres  de  3  kilometres  du  village  de  Saint  Paul  et  dans  un
lieu  absolument  desert.

Pendant  10  a  15  minutes,  ils  contemplent  avec  joie  l'image
merveilleuse  oil  se  wyaient  trte  Men  une  couronne  et  un  voile  blanc  sur
la  tete;  les  plis  de  sa  robe  sont  maintenus  par  une  ceinture ;  elle  a  Its
mains  pendantes,  ouvertes  et  tendues  un  peu  en  avant.

Le  buste  seul  figurait  dans  le  medaillon,  qui  itait  d'un  blanc  plus
brillant  que  la  coque  du  grelon.

Le  grelon  s'est  peu  a  peu  fondu  dans  les  mains  de  M.  Paul
Roubaud  et  le  mMaillon  portant  l'image  a  itd  le  dernier  a  disparaitre.

Tous  ces  faits  out  ete  consignes  dans  un  proces-verbal  signe  des
trois  temoins  et  communique  a  l'autorite  diocesaine.

Les  heureux  temoins  oculaires  ont  raconte  souvent  ces  faits,  aux
cafes,  dans  les  rues,  partout  oil  on  les  rencontre.  On  est  heureux
d'entendre  de  leur  boucbe  la  verite  exacte,  et  il  faut  reconnaltre
qu'ils  n'ont  aucun  inteiet  a  mentir.  Devant  leurs  contradicteurs
comme  devant  la  commission  d'enquete  qui  a  eu  lieu  lundi,  13
juillet,  de  8  h.  1/2  a  10  heures  du  soir,  au  presbytere  oil  etaient
reunis,  outre  les  delegues  de  Monseigneur  l'Eveque,  MM.  le
chanoine  Salomon,  pro-cure  archipretre  de  Frejus,  l'abbe  True,
directeur  du  Grand-Seminaire,  l'abbe  Chaix,  secretaire  de  1'Eveche,
un  groupe  d'hommes  et  de  femmes  d'un  grand  bon  sens,  les  trois
temoins  du  prodige  ont  affirme  la  realite  des  faits  qui  passionnent
toute  la  region.  Ils  ont  pret6  serment  devant  le  crucifix  et  sign6
avec  tous  les  temoins  auriculaires  le  proces-verbal  de  l'enquete  que
nous  nous  sommes  contentes  de  reproduire  fidelement  sans  rien
prejuger."

(20)

[The  following  official  account  of  the  hailstorm  was  received  by
M.  Sage  from  the  Central  Meteorological  Bureau  in  answer  to  his
enquiries. He had  also  asked  for  a detailed  description  of  the


lvl]  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remiremont.  435

hailstones,  if  any  such  existed.  Not  having  received  this,  he
concluded  that  no  description  had  been  sent  to  the  Bureau.]

Bureau  Central  Meteorologique,
176,  Rue  de  l'Universite,
Cabinet  du  Directeur.

Paris,  le  12  novembre  1908.

Monsieur,

Pour  satisfaire  a  votre  demande,  j'ai  l'honneur  de
vous  informer  que  le  26  mai  1907,  on  a  observe  a  Remiremont
une  violente  chute  de  grele  qui  a  dure  3/4  d'heure.  La  dimension
de  quelques  grelons  aurait  atteint,  suivant  notre  correspondant,
cede  d'une  petite  tomate.

La  fusion  de  la  grele  a  produit  une  hauteur  d'eau  de  ^m/mB.1
Recevez,  Monsieur,  l'assurance  de  ma  consideration  tres  distinguee,

Le  Directeur  du  Bureau  Central  Meteorologique,

A.  An  got.


^his  probably  means  that  the  melted  hail  was  equivalent  to  a  rain-fall  of
14  "2  mm.


436


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


II.

THE  HALLUCINATION  THEOEY  AS  APPLIED  TO
CERTAIN  CASES  OF  PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA.

By  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.

The  idea  that  many  so-called  "  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiri-
tualism," especially  of  the  more  marvellous  kind,  might  be
ascribed  to  hallucination  in  some  way  or  another  engendered  in
the  sitters  by  the  medium  lias  already  found  more  than  one
able  champion.  This  view,  for  instance,  was  advanced  in  the
early  seventies  by  Professor  Balfour  Stewart  to  explain  Sir
W.  Crookes's  experiments  with  D.  D.  Home,  and  was  tentatively
brought  forward  a  few  years  later  at  Glasgow  before  the  annual
meeting  of  the  British  Association  by  Professor  Barrett.  In
1885  Eduard  von  Hartmann  in  his  work  Der  Spiritismus,
while  admitting  most  of  the  phenomena  under  consideration,
drew  the  line  at  "  materialisation,"  which  he  also  explained
by  hallucination  induced  by  the  medium.  And — not  to  make
this  list  too  long — in  more  recent  years  the  same  view  has
found  an  eloquent  advocate  in  Mr.  Podmore.  After  an  ex-
haustive analysis  of  the  possibilities  of  conjuring  in  such  a
case  as  Home's,  he  finds  himself  driven  to  the  conclusion  that
in  this  medium's  performances  we  seem  to  have  before  us
sometimes  actual  sense-deception,  "  though  of  the  type  which  is
commonly  known  as  illusion  rather  than  hallucination ; "  and
he  even  seems  inclined  to  extend  this  explanation  to  other
cases  recorded  of  mediums  whose  reputation  leaves  much  to
be  desired  indeed,  and  cannot  in  any  degree  compare  with
Home's.1

^Modern  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  "245-246.  Are  we  to  draw  from  Arch-
deacon Colley's  descriptions  the  conclusion  that  he  is  one  of  those  witnesses
whose  most  positive  and  emphatic  assertions  are  not  worth  the  paper  they  are


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  437


If  we  consider  on  the  one  hand,  the  a  priori  improbability
of  «the  supposed  phenomena  and  the  exposures  of  fraud  repeated
■ad  nauseam,  and  on  the  other  the  many  surprises  which  have
been  slowly  revealing  themselves  to  official  science  in  the
domain  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  we  cannot  wonder  that  this
theory  (however  alien  to  the  orthodox  hypnotist's  experience)
should  have  been  propounded  and  have  attracted  attention.
Again,  if  "  collective  hallucinations  "  be  a  fact — and  no  one  who
has  studied  the  evidence  accumulated  in  this  direction  by  the
Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch  can,  I  think,  reasonably  doubt
it — the  theory  in  question  will  naturally  derive  from  this
fact  not  inconsiderable  support.

In  the  following  pages  I  propose  briefly  to  review  the
evidence  for  "  hallucination "  in  the  domain  of  "  Physical
Phenomena,"  and  to  try  to  ascertain  how  far  it  can  account
for  the  most  incomprehensible  of  them.

In  undertaking  this  task  I  of  course  keep  in  view  the
possibility  of  explaining  many  of  the  "  manifestations  "  by  fraud.
But  since  I  am  here  concerned  primarily  with  the  "  sense-
deception  "  hypothesis  and  its  applicability  or  otherwise  to  the
cases  under  consideration,  I  do  not  at  the  moment  discuss
in  each  case  the  possibilities  of  cheating.  To  some  readers  it
may  appear  that  some — but  I  do  not  think  many — of  the  cases
I  am  going  to  quote  are  of  too  prosaic  an  origin  to  deserve
the  honour  of  a  scientific  discussion.  Be  this  as  it  may,  I
have  thought  it  desirable  to  make  the  above  reservation.

I  also  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  in  my  review  of  the
evidence  I  shall  exclude  the  whole  domain  of  Eastern  and
Far  Eastern  Magic.  I  am  of  course  well  aware  that,  though
the  opinion  of  so  eminent  an  expert  in  these  matters  as  the
late  Dr.  Hodgson  only  a  few  years  ago  (in  1893)  was  that
"  we  have  before  us  no  real  evidence  to  the  manifestation  by
Indian  jugglers  or  fakirs  of  any  marvels  beyond  the  power  of
trickery  to  produce," 1  some  striking  cases  have  come  to  light
in recent  years which seem truly to  point  prima  facie  to

written  upon  ?  or — on  the  contrary — that  a  notorious  and  repeatedly  exposed
trickster  can  produce  at  times  genuine  and  astounding  phenomena?  See  also
for  the  Archdeacon's  experiences  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1906,  No.  1,
pp.  26-34.

1  Proceedings  S.P.P.,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  365.

2E


438


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


something  like  collective  hypnofcisation  as  the  most  plausible
explanation.1  But  startling  as  they  are,  these  cases  are  certainly
far  too  few  for  us  to  use  them  as  material  in  our  speculations.
Many  more  should  first  be  collected  and  analysed.  Meanwhile
it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  certain  modes  of  deception
may  after  all  have  been  developed  in  the  East  and  remained
unknown  to  the  Western  races,  so  that  an  explanation  which
would  lit  a  fakir's  performance  might  be  quite  inappropriate
in  a  European  seance-room.  It  should  be  also  borne  in
mind  that  on  the  only  occasion  when  the  well-known  story
of  the  photographing  of  Indian  conjurors  (without  their  tricks
being  reproduced  on  the  photographic  plate)  assumed  a  concrete
form  capable  of  being  investigated,  it  proved  to  be  a  hoax.2

Before  we  start  on  our  review  of  the  evidence  for  and
against  the  objective  reality  of  the  so-called  "  Physical
Phenomena "  in  Europe  and  America,  we  have  a  serious  objec-
tion to  answer  at  the  outset.  It  will  be  this :  that  irrefutable
proof  of  that  objective  reality  has  already  been  furnished  long
ago.  Thousands  of  slates  have  been  written  upon  "  directly "
at  slate- writing  seances  and  the  writing  has  invariably  remained,
even  when — a  circumstance  at  first  sight  particularly  suggesting
hallucination — the  writing  was  done  in  full  view.3 Scores  of

JSee  Journal  S.P.R.,  Nov.  1904,  pp.  299-306,  306-308,  and  Feb.  1905,  p.  30.

2 1  do  not  wish,  however,  to  minimise  the  following  fact.  Some  two  years
ago  I  happened  to  meet  an  officer  of  the  Russian  navy,  Captain  B.-K.,  who
related  to  me  that  when  in  India  some  time  previously  he  saw  a  fakir  come
on  board  his  ship  and  give  a  performance  which  included  several  tricks,  and,
I  think,  the  rope-climbing  trick  among  others.  A  doctor  who  was  present
attempted  to  take  a  photograph  of  the  tricks  and  failed  to  get  anything
on  the  plate.  I  naturally  tried  to  obtain  a  written  statement  from  Captain
B.-K.,  but  failed  in  this  in  spite  of  repeated  and  urgent  requests.  As  a
reason  for  not  complying  with  them  he  gave  this — that  he  did  not  know  the
doctor's  address,  and  that  his  testimony  alone  would  be  worthless  !  For  the
incident  referred  to  in  the  text  see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  84-6.

3See,  for  instance,  Mr.  Edward  T.  Bennett's  account  in  "  M.  A.(Oxon)'s "
Direct  Writing  by  Supernormal  Means,  pp.  19,  20.  I  know  of  one  or  two
instances  at  first  hand  when  a  pencil  (as  in  Mr.  Bennett's  case)  was  seen
to  write  in  a  tolerably  good  light.

It  is  of  course  impossible  to  appreciate  the  evidential  value  even  of  such
cases  without  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the  attending  circumstances,  the
personality  of  the  witnesses,  etc.  That  the  visibility  of  the  writing  is  no  proof
in  itself  of  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomenon  the  case  of  Mrs.  Francis,  a  well-
known  American  slate-writing  medium,  clearly  shows. It  has  been  repeatedly


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  439


"  materialised  spirits  "  have  been  weighed  and  photographed  or
have  left  behind  them  specimens  of  their  hair  or  some  part
of  their  attire.  Not  only  so,  but  we  have  cases  when  the
photographic  plate  has  registered  images  or  forms  which  to
the  sitters'  eyes  were  invisible.  Many  objects — of  a  very
mundane  and  common-place  nature,  but  of  presumably  unknown
origin — have  appeared  at  seances  in  an  enigmatic  fashion  and
have  invariably — or  at  least  almost  invariably — remained  after.
Tables  apparently  suspended  in  the  air  (as  with  Eusapia
Paladino)  have  been  photographed ;  "  spirit-hands "  have  left
their  impression  on  smoked  paper,  or  paraffin  casts  have  been
taken  of  them  ;  knots  have  been  tied  in  endless  cords — and  so
on  almost  ad  infinitum.

Then  we  have  the  whole  mass  of  the  "  Poltergeist "  pheno-
mena (as  distinct  from  "  hauntings ")  supposed  to  be  of  the
same  character  as  the  physical  manifestations  of  the  seance-
room.  Surely  the  vast  amount  of  crockery  (chiefly,  it  is
true,  of  the  cheaper  kind !)  broken  in  this  connection  in  the
course  of  the  nineteenth  century  alone  is  such  as  to  compel
conviction  without  further  discussion  that such incidents  (in

asserted  that  at  her  sittings,  part  of  the  slate  having  been  withdrawn  from
under  the  table,  the  pencil  could  be  seen  to  write  the  end  of  a  word  ;  and
Dr.  Elliott  Coues,  according  to  his  own  account,  saw  it  write  a  whole  sentence.
And  yet  here  is  the  explanation  of  her  method.  Mr.  Hereward  Carrington
writes  to  me  :

"[Mrs.  Francis]  uses  a  cardboard  slate,  and  on  it  places  a  small  piece  of
pencil.  First,  she  holds  the  slate  just  under  the  table,  for  a  few  moments,  then
above  the  table,  and  one  can  see  the  pencil  jumping  about  on  the  slate,  and
apparently  finishing  the  writing.  It  is  very  convincing,  and  Dr.  Hyslop  did
not  see  how  it  was  done  when  he  had  his  sitting  ;  but  subsequent  observation
and  experiment  explained  it.

"When  the  slate  is  under  the  table,  she  stretches  out  the  first  finger,  places
it  on  the  pencil,  and  scrawls  a  few  words  on  the  slate.  This  is  all  that  appears.
She  then  lets  the  pencil  slide  down  to  the  spot  over  the  last  few  words.  Then
she  takes  the  slate  out  from  under  the  table,  and  holds  it  so  that  part  of  her
hand  covers  the  writing — the  last  few  words.  She  also  keeps  moving  the  slate
about,  as  though  to  prevent  the  pencil  from  hopping  off  the  slate  on  to  the
floor.  The  pencil  is  dancing  up  and  down,  apparently  just  finishing  the  writing.
This  is  effected  as  follows  :  I  have  stated  that  the  slate  is  of  cardboard.  She
has  rubbed  rosin  over  the  first  finger,  and  she  draws  or  rubs  this  ringer  over  the
under  side  of  the  slate.  The  jarring  causes  the  cardboard  to  vibrate,  and  the
small  piece  of  slate-pencil  is  thereby  caused  to  jump  up  and  down,  and  gives
the  exact  appearance  of  finishing  the  writing.  The  illusion  is  perfect,  if  well
done. Dr.  Hyslop  and  I  practised  it,  and  became  quite  dexterous  !  "


/


440


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[PART


their  great  bulk,  at  least)  are  of  the  most  objective  kind
possible.

The  objection  in  question  seems  to  me  to  have  considerable
weight,  and  I  do  not  see  how  it  can  be  met  except  in  the
following  way  :  that  nearly  all  such  phenomena,  whether  of
the  spontaneous  or  the  experimental  kind,  must  be  presumed
to  be  fraudulent — even  when  by  no  means  proved  such,  as
in  Mr.  Beattie's  case, — almost  the  only  exception  being  made
in  Home's  favour  and,  possibly,  in  that  of  a  very,  very  few
non-professional  mediums.  There  is  certainly  some  excuse  for
such  a  rejoinder,  seeing  that  Home's  phenomena  seem  as  described
to  have  been,  broadly  speaking,  so  much  superior  to  those  of
any  other  known  medium ;  but  on  the  whole  the  necessity
of  drawing  such  a  distinction — which  may  well  seem  quite
artificial — and  consequently  of  ignoring  an  overwhelming  mass
of  data,  places  us,  I  should  say,  in  a  somewhat  delicate  position.

Still,  let  us  turn  to  an  examination  of  Home's  phenomena.
Some  of  them — I  refer  of  course  to  Sir  W.  Crookes's  experiments
with  the  board  and  spring-balance  fitted  to  a  registering
apparatus — having  already  been  proved  to  be  objective  beyond
the  possibility  of  cavil,  we  need  not  concern  ourselves  with
the  ordinary  "  telekinetic  "  incidents  of  his  seances,  and  will
proceed  at  once  to  what  was  one  of  the  most  striking  features
of  these  sittings — the  appearance  of  "  spirit  diands."

For  this  "phenomenon"  we  have  an  imposing  mass  of
testimony.  Much  of  it  is  no  doubt  quite  worthless;  much
could  probably  have  been  explained  by  fraud,  and  in  this
connection  we  have  at  least  one  suspicious  incident  on  record.1
But  a  good  many  incidents  as  described  seem  by  no  means
easily  to  lend  themselves  to  such  an  explanation.

Be  this  as  it  may,  we  have — leaving  aside  for  the  present
the  fraud  hypothesis — two  theories  by  which  to  account  for
these  hands.  Either  they  were  due  to  hallucination  or  illusion,
that  is,  either  they  did  not  exist  at  all  or  some  other  object
was  mistaken  for  them,  perhaps  through  suggestion  by  the
medium  ; or  they  were  actual  "  projections "  from  the  body  of

1  See  Journal  S.P.fi.  for  January  and  May,  1903.  Some  Russian  sitters  with
Home  while  convinced  of  his  mediumship  believed  him  to  supplement  his
phenomena  occasionally  with  tricks.  (I  am  not  referring  to  the  "spirit-
hands  "  specially.)


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  441


the  medium,  temporarily  clothed  in  some  mysterious  substance,
which  to  the  touch  and  to  the  sight  looked  (except  sometimes
for  the  colour)  like  ordinary  human  hands  of  flesh  and  blood.

In  favour  of  the  first  hypothesis  we  have  (if  we  leave
out  of  consideration  the  general  improbability  of  the  fact)  the
following  circumstances :

(1)  That  these  hands  were  by  no  means  always  equally
visible  to  all  present.  Thus  in  Sir  W.  Crookes's  words :  "  A
flower  or  other  small  object  is  seen  to  move :  one  person  present
will  see  a  luminous  cloud  hovering  over  it,  another  will  detect
a  nebulous-lookino-  hand,  whilst  others  will  see  nothing  but
the  moving  flower."  1

(2)  That  when  tightly  grasped  by  the  hand  of  one  of  the
sitters  such  hands  would — sometimes  at  least — slowly  melt  away.
To  quote  Sir  W.  Crookes  again  :

"  I  have  retained  one  of  these  hands  in  my  own,  firmly  resolved
not  to  let  it  escape.  There  was  no  struggle  or  effort  made  to  get
loose,  but  it  gradually  seemed  to  resolve  itself  into  vapour  and
faded  in  that  manner  from  my  grasp."'2

Both  these  circumstances  do  no  doubt  tell  strongly  at  first
sight  in  favour  of  the  theory  that  hallucinations  were  in  some
way  or  other  induced  by  Home.  With  regard  to  the  first
circumstance — since  we  know  of  course  that  there  are  various
degrees  of  suggestibility — it  might  be  presumed  that  those
persons  who  saw  a  whole  "  spirit-hand  "  at  Home's  seances  were
more  liable  to  suggestion  than  those  who  saw  only  a  "  luminous
cloud,"  and  still  more  than  those  who  saw  nothing.  In  fact
the  truth  of  some  such  explanation  would  seem  prima  facie
almost  obvious.

The  same  might  be  said  of  the  second  circumstance.  The
"  hand-melting,"  which  has,  I  think,  never  been  imitated  by
conjurors,  would  involve  another  kind  of  hallucination — this
time  tactile,  of  an  unusual  kind,  but  of  no  very  great  intrinsic
improbability.

It  has  been  suggested,  by  the  way,  that  such  an  impression
may  have  been  due  to  the  medium's  hand  being  slowly  and
gradually  withdrawn. I  can  only  say that  such a  supposi-

1  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  p.  92.
-Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  p.  93.


442  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [pa.kt


tion  seems  to  me  improbable.  That  some  sitters  were  stupid
enough  to  be  mistaken  in  this  way  is  after  all  possible.  But
descriptions  given  by  such  persons  as  Sir  W.  Crookes  and
Robert  Bell  (who  says  he  knows  no  analogy  "  in  connection
with  the  sense  of  touch  by  which  he  could  make  the  nature
of  that  feeling  intelligible" l)  seem  clearly  to  show  such  an
explanation  to  be  inadequate.

Now  let  us  consider  the  other  side  of  the  question.  The
following  circumstances  would  seem  to  show  that  Home's
"  spirit-hands,"  whether  fraudulent  or  genuine,  were  objective :

(1)  The  fact  that  such  hands  were  seen  by  an  enormous
number  of  persons  at  different  times  and  very  often  by  several
persons  simultaneously.

Of  course  if  we  credit  Home  with  an  extraordinary  power
of  suggestion,  this  objection  is  of  no  consequence.  But  the
second  one  is  much  more  to  the  point :

(2)  These  "  hands "  are  constantly  described  as  performing-
actions  with  a  permanent  result,  e.g.  moving  objects  from  one
place  to  another.  It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  quote
instances,  as  such  might  be  found  in  abundance  in  any  book
or  paper  of  reasonable  length  dealing  with  the  mediumship  of
Home.

And  in  this  connection  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  when  such
undoubtedly  objective  movements  of  objects  were  taking  place,
some  of  the  sitters  also  would  see  only  the  object  moving,
whilst  others  would  see  a  hand  carrying  it.  One  or  two
instances  may  be  given.  In  Sir  W.  Crookes's  "  Notes  on
seances  with  D.  D.  Home "  the  following  incident  is  recorded
as  having  occurred  at  the  sitting  of  duly  16th,  1871:

A  message  was  given  :

"  It  is  impossible  for  matter  to  pass  through  matter,  but  we  will
show  you  what  we  can  do."

We  waited  in  silence.  Presently  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  said  she
saw  a  luminous  appearance  over  the  bouquet  [in  the  centre  of  the
table].  Mr.  Wfalter]  Crookes  said  he  saw  the  same,  and  Mr.  Home
said  he  saw  a  hand  moving  about.

A  piece  of  ornamental  grass  about  15  inches  long  here  moved  out
of  the  bouquet  and  was  seen  to  slowly  disappear  ...  as  if  it
were  passing  through  the  table.

1 D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  p.  54.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  443


Immediately  after  it  had  disappeared  through  the  table  Mrs.  Wra.  C.
saw  a  hand  appear  from  beneath  the  table  between  her  and  Mr.  Home
holding  the  piece  of  grass.  It  brought  it  up  to  her  shoulder,  tapped  it
against  her  two  or  three  times  with  a  noise  audible  to  all,  and  then
took  the  grass  down  on  to  the  floor,  where  the  hand  disappeared.
Only  Mrs.  Wm.  C.  and  Mr.  Home  saw  the  hand,  but  we  all  saw
the  movements  of  the  piece  of  grass,  which  were  as  I  have  described.

At  another  sitting

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  saw  a  hand  and  fingers  touching  the  flower  in
Mr.  Home's  buttonhole.  The  flower  was  then  taken  by  the  hand  and
given  to  Mrs.  I.,  and  the  green  leaf  was  in  a  similar  manner  given
to  Mr.  T.  Mrs.  Wm.  C.  and  Mr.  Home  saw  the  hand  doing  this,
the  others  only  saw  the  flower  and  leaf  moving  through  the  air.

A  little  later  at  the  same  seance  "  a  hand  was  seen  by  some
and  a  luminous  cloud  by  others  pulling  the  flowers  about  which
were  in  a  stand  on  the  table.  A  flower  was  then  seen  to  be
carried  deliberately  and  given  to  Mrs.  Wr.  C." 1

One  more  detailed  instance  must  suffice.  Viscount  Aclare
(now  Earl  of  Dunraven)  tells  us  that  at  a  stance  held  in
March,  1869,  at  Garinish,  a  cottage  of  Lord  Dunraven's  on
the  Kerry  coast,  the  sitters  (Lords  Dunraven  and  Aclare  and
Major  Blackburn)

all  heard  a  movement  about  vase  N  [one  of  the  vases  of  flowers
placed  on  the  small  table  round  which  the  party  were  seated],  and
Home  and  I  [Lord  Adare]  both  saw  a  hand  upon  it ;  I  said  that
the  vase  was  moving,  Home  insisted  that  it  was  not,  and  requested
me  to  place  my  hand  upon  it;  I  did  so  and  found  that  it  was
moving  slowly  round,  but  the  sound  we  heard  was  caused  by  the
hand  rubbing  against  the  side  of  the  vase  ;  I  saw  the  hand  all  the
time.  We  now  heard  a  rustling  among  the  flowers  and  Home  said:
"  The  fingers  have  closed  over  a  flower  and  taken  it  away."  I  did
not  see  the  flower  taken,  but  the  hand  at  that  moment  disappeared.
Home  and  I  both  observed  a  hand  rise  above  the  edo;e  of  the  table
near  the  window  and  place  a  flower  upon  it ;  I  then  lost  sight  of
the  hand,  but  Home  said  he  saw  it  carry  the  flower  across  the  table
and  place  it  near  my  father ;  my  father  saw  the  flower  all  the
time  moving  as  it  were  of  itself,  for  he  could  not  distinguish  the  hand
that  conveyed  it. He  took  the  flower  and  asked  if  it  was  for  him.

Proceedings  of  the  H.P.E.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  116,  120,  121.


444


Count  Perovslcy-Petvovo-Solovovo.


[part


The  following  was  spelled  out:  "Yes,  and  we  will  give  you  another
soon."  My  father  remarking  that  he  was  very  anxious  to  see  a
hand,  the  following  messages  were  given :  "  Place  your  hand  over
the  flowers."  He  did  so  over  vase  N  and  we  all  heard — and  my
father,  Home  and  I  saw — a  hand  moving  among  the  flowers.  "Now
on  them."  He  did  so  and  the  hand  became  much  more  distinctly
visible  to  him.  I  said  to  my  father :  "  I  suppose  you  were  told
to  place  your  hand  there  in  order  that  they  might  draw  some  power
from  you  to  enable  them  to  make  the  hand  sufficiently  material
for  you  to  see  it  distinctly."  "  Yes,"  was  answered  by  three  loud
raps.  Sacha's  (Home's  wife's)  miniature  was  now  carried  from
table  B  and  placed  upon  our  table ;  none  of  us  saw  anything
supporting  it,  but  we  observed  it  placed  quietly  upon  Home's  hands,
and  then  gliding  off  them  it  moved  across  the  table  until  it  remained
stationary  on  the  corner  near  the  window.  .  .  .  Home  and  I  now
distinctly  saw  a  hand  place  little  Dannie  Coxe's  photograph  on  the
edge  of  our  table  next  the  window  and  then  push  it  a  little
further  on  to  the  table.  .  .  .  Home  and  I  perceived  a  whole  arm.
and  hand  between  our  table  and  the  window,  it  was  slightly
luminous  and  appeared  whiter  than  the  white  table-cloth.  The  hand
pushed  the  accordion,  F,  along  the  shelf,  S,  and  then  grasping  it
took  it  off ;  the  accordion  fell,  but  not  heavily,  to  the  ground.  All
saw  and  heard  the  accordion  moved.1

Now,  what  do  such  incidents  as  these  show  us  ?  Simply
this :  Had  the  objects  not  been  undoubtedly  moved  and  not
changed  their  place,  we  should  certainly  have  been  justified
in  seeing  in  the  inability  of  some  of  the  sitters  to  see  the-
supposed  spirit-hand  while  others  saw  it  plainly — a  strong
proof  of  its  hallucinatory  origin.  But  the  case  turns  out  to  be
quite  different.  We  must  look  for  the  "  something "  which
displaced  the  accordion,  the  flower  or  the  bell.2  And  here
the  very  diversity  of  the  impression  made  by  the  moving
object  on  the  sitters'  retinae  would  seem  to  afford  a  slight
presumption  in  favour  of  the  supernormal  origin  of  the  move-
ment. For  we  may,  I  think,  not  unreasonably  suppose  that
had  the  movement  been  produced  artificially,  all  the  sitters
would  have  seen  more  or  less  the  same  thing.

1  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  by  Viscount  Adare,  p.  135.

2"I  had  been  invited  by  the  late  Mis.  Milner  Gibson,''  says  Dr.  Hawksley,
"  to  meet  a  number  of  friends  and  Mr.  Home  at  her  house  in  Hyde  Park  Place.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  445-


In  view  of  the  undoubtedly  objective  character  of  many
actions  performed  by  Home's  "  spirit-hands,"  it  may  be
doubted  whether  even  the  "  hand-melting "  above  referred  to
is  a  decisive  proof  of  the  subjective  nature  of  these  hands.
At  any  rate  if  this  phenomenon  experienced  by  so  many  of
Home's  sitters  was  purely  subjective,  we  have  still  to  account
for  the  movements  of  objects  performed  by  these  very  hands.
Thus  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson  tells  us  how  in  the  spring  of
1855,  at  his  very  first  seance  with  Home,  having  put  his
hand  under  the  table  he  felt  a  bell  being  placed  in  it.

Every  hand  but  my  own  being  on  the  table  I  distinctly  felt  the
fingers  up  to  the  palm  of  a  hand  holding  the  bell.  It  was  a  soft,
warm,  fleshy  substantial  hand,  such  as  I  should  be  glad  to  feel  at
the  extremity  of  the  friendship  of  my  best  friends.  But  I  had  no
sooner  grasped  it  momentarily  than  it  melted  away,  leaving  my
hand  void  with  the  bell  only  in  it.  .  .  d

Dr.  Wilkinson  adds  that  he  is  as  sure  the  limb  he  felt
was  a  human  hand  "  of  extraordinary  life "  and  not  Home's
foot  as  that  the  nose  of  the  Apollo  Belvidere  is  not  a  horse's
ear.  I  have  always  thought  it  a  matter  of  regret  that  so
little  attention  seems  to  have  been  paid,  as  a  general  rule,
to  the  position  of  Home's  feet  by  his  sitters,  not  even
excluding  the  most  famous.  But  here  what  we  want  to  have
explained  is  not  the  movement  of  the  bell,  but  the  impression
of  the  "  spirit-hand "  melting  in  his  experienced  by  Dr.
Wilkinson.

I  will  give  one  more  instance  of  the  curious  behaviour  of

It  was  a  summer's  evening  about  eight  o'clock,  and  I  sat  near  to  a  large
window,  against  which  stood  a  table,  and  on  the  table  an  ordinary  large  bell.
...  A  request  was  made,  I  forget  by  whom,  that  the  bell  should  be  conveyed
away  by  spiritual  influence.  Sitting  very  near  to  the  bell  I  distinctly  saw  a
well-shaped  hand  appear  on  the  table,  and  after  resting  there  a  short  time
the  hand  rose,  grasped  the  bell  and  carried  it  away  we  knew  not  where.
While  the  hand  rested  on  the  table  I  rose  from  my  seat,  went  to  the  table,
and  without  touching  the  hand,  examined  it  by  careful  inspection.  It  looked
like  a  grey  gauzy  substance,  exactly  the  form  of  a  human  hand,  and  it
terminated  at  the  wrist." — D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  by  Mme.  Home,
p.  187.

1 D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  p.  57  (from  Dr.  Wilkinson's  Evenings
with  Mr.  Home  and  the  Spirits).  See  for  other  similar  cases,  pp.  54,  61,
162 ;  and  The  gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  pp.  77,  93,  258.


446


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


these  "  spirit-hands."  The  narrator  is  Mr.  F.  L.  Burr,  Editor
of  the  Hartford  Times,  and  the  stance  took  place  at  Hartford,
Conn.,  on  March  14th,  1855,  the  sitters  being  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Burr  and  Home.  It  should  be  said  that  a  grate  of  glowing
•coals  directly  in  front  of  the  party  gave  what  Mr.  Burr  describes
as  "  a  good  light."

A  sheet  of  paper  which  lay  on  the  floor

was  taken  from  the  floor,  slowly  lifted  up  and  placed  upon  the  table,
as  I  can  affirm,  without  the  aid  of  a  human  hand.  Sitting  at  the  end
of  the  table  where  this  was  done,  I  was  enabled  to  see  the  whole  of
this  proceeding.  The  paper  was  placed  upon  the  edge  of  the  table,
and  so  near  my  hand  as  to  touch  it.  I  saw  plainly  and  clearly  the
hand  that  held  the  paper.  It  was  evidently  a  lady's  hand — very
thin,  very  pale,  and  remarkably  attenuated.  The  conformation  of
this  hand  was  peculiar.  .  .  .  The  hand  also  narrowed  from  the
lower  knuckles  to  the  wrist  where  it  ended.  All  this  could  be
seen  by  such  light  as  was  in  the  room,  while  the  hand  was  for  a
tew  moments  holding  the  paper  upon  the  edge  of  the  table.  .  .  .

This  hand,  according  to  Mr.  Burr,  took  a  pencil  and  began
to  write.  "  This  was  in  plain  sight,  being  only  shaded  by
•  one  of  the  circle  who  was  sitting  between  the  paper  on  the
table  and  the  fire."  "  The  hands  of  each  one  present  were
upon  the  table  in  full  view."  Mr.  Burr  bent  down  close
to  the  hand  as  it  wrote  and  ascertained  that  it  "extended  no
further  than  the  wrist."  When  he  brought  his  face  still
closer  to  it  the  hand  dropped  the  pencil  and  vanished.  The
writing  on  being  examined  proved  to  be  the  name  "  in  her
own  proper  handwriting "  of  a  relative  and  intimate  friend
of  one  of  the  circle,  who  had  died  a  few  years  previously.

The  hand  afterwards  came  and  shook  hands  with  each  one
present.  I  felt  it  minutely.  It  was  tolerably  well  and  symmetri-
cally made,  though  not  perfect,  and  it  was  soft  and  slightly  warm.
It  ended  at  the  wrist.

In  a  letter  written  in  1887  to  Madame  D.  D.  Home  (author
of  D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission  and  The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home),
Mr.  Burr  subjoins  the  following  particulars  :

The  hand — white  as  marble  and  not  visibly  attached  to  any  arm —
reached  out  to  my  hand and  shook hands with me : a  hearty


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena,  447


human  shake.  Then  the  hand  sought  to  withdraw  from  mine.  I
would  not  let  it.  Then  it  pulled  to  get  away  with  a  good  deal  of
strength.  But  I  held  it  firmly,  resolved  to  see  what  it  was.  .  .  .
When  the  hand  found  it  could  not  get  away  it  yielded  itself  up  to
me  for  my  examination  :  turned  itself  over  and  back,  shut  up  its
fingers  and  opened  them,  let  me  examine  the  finger-nails,  the  joints,
the  creases.  It  was  a  perfect  human  hand,  but  white  as  snow,  and
■ended  at  the  wrist.  I  was  not  satisfied  with  the  sense  of  sight  to
prove  this — I  wanted  the  concurrent  testimony  of  other  senses ;
and  I  swung  my  arm  up  and  down  where  the  arm  belonging  to
this  hand  should  have  been  .  .  .  but  no  arm  was  there.  Even
then  I  was  not  satisfied.  Turning  this  strange  hand  palm  towards
me,  I  pushed  my  right  forefinger  entirely  through  the  palm  till  it
came  out  an  inch  or  more  visibly  from  the  back  of  the  hand.  In
other  words  I  pushed  my  finger  clear  through  that  mysterious
hand.  When  I  withdrew  it,  the  place  closed  up,  much  as  a  piece
of  putty  would  close  under  such  circumstances — leaving  a  visible
mark  or  scar  where  the  wound  was,  but  not  a  hole.

While  I  was  still  looking  at  it,  the  hand  vanished  quick  as  a
lightning-flash. It  was  gone.1

The  same  hand — be  it  observed — which  had  just  given
a  palpable  proof  of  its  objectivity  by  writing  before  the  eyes
of  the  sitters.

It  goes  without  saying  that  we  must  not  attach  to  this
narrative  any  decisive  importance  :  Mr.  Burr  describes  the  most
startling  episode  more  than  thirty  years  after  its  occurrence,
and — and  this  is  the  main  thing — we  do  not  know  in  what
light  we  must  consider  his  capacities  as  a  witness,  especially  to
such  astounding  facts.  Now,  in  the  realm  of  Psychical  Eesearch
the  personality  of  the  witnesses  is  of  course  everything ;  and
it  should  always  be  remembered  (this  fundamental  circum-
stance is  too  often,  I  think,  lost  sight  of)  that  two  precisely
analogous  statements  when  made  (in  all  honesty)  by  X  and  Y
may  be  absolutely  worthless  in  one  case  and  worthy  of  all
•credence  in  the  other.  If  therefore  I  have  quoted  Mr.  Burr's
experience,  it  is  because,  though  startling,  the  occurrence  he
describes  is  of  comparatively  uncomplicated  a  nature,  so  that

1D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  pp.  32-35.  Mr.  Burr's  narrative
■appeared  originally  in  Home's  Incidents  in  my  Life,  pp.  56-61  (published
in  1863).


448


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


if  we  suppose  that  lie  could  have  mistaken  for  the  "  spirit-
hand  "  Home's  own  hand  or  foot,  we  must  credit  him,  I
think,  with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  stupidity.  As  for  the
hallucination  theory,  it  seems  to  me  particularly  improbable
in  this  case.

On  the  whole  we  have,  it  appears  to  me,  serious  grounds
for  believing  that  Home's  "  spirit-hands,"  whatever  their  nature,
were  in  must  cases  at  least  of  an  undoubtedly  objective
character.  We  see  them  constantly  performing  actions  of  a
permanent  nature  for  which  we  cannot,  I  think,  reasonably
account  if  we  maintain  these  curious  appearances  to  have
been  subjective.  In  view  of  this  fact,  the  "  relative  visibility  "
of  these  hands  in  some  cases  proves  nothing ;  nor  is  the
"  hand-melting  "  itself  decisive  evidence.

Now,  if  I  am  told  that  the  objective,  and  in  some  cases
the  permanent,  character  of  the  actions  performed  by  the
"  hands  "  is  after  all  no  positive  proof  that  the  hands  supposed
to  produce  them  were  equally  objective,  I  will  answer  that  we
must  surely  draw  the  line  somewhere.  I  have  already  met
the  adherents  of  the  illusion  theory  more  than  half  way  by
admitting  provisionally  that  some  incidents  attested  by  a,
crowd  of  witnesses  at  different  times  and  very  often  by  several
persons  simultaneously  (and  verified  in  some  cases  by  more
than  one  sense)  may  have  been  non-existent.  But  beyond  this
I  am  not  prepared  to  go.  If  a  supposed  spirit-hand  or  appari-
tion can  be  proved  to  have  accomplished  a  more  or  less
complicated  action — for  instance,  to  have  written  a  word  or
to  have  carried  an  object  across  the  room — I  maintain  that,
this  is,  broadly  speaking,  a  proof  of  its  reality  (I  say  of
course  "reality,"  not  necessarily  "authenticity").  If  there  are
people  who  think  otherwise,  I  think  that  the  onus  probandi
devolves  upon  them.

Let  us,  at  any  rate,  see  how  such  a  theory  would  work  in
the  following  case.  Eeaclers  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings  will  find
in  them 1  a  condensed  account  by  Dr.  Leaf  of  a  sitting  held
in  St.  Petersburg  in  the  spring  of  1893  with  a  Prussian  medium

1Vol.  XIX.,  pp.  407-409.  I  had  lately  occasion  to  talk  the  matter  over
with  Dr.  Lestchinsky,  one  of  the  sitters ;  and  he  entirely  confirmed  to  me
the  startling  character  of  the  phenomena  and  the  deep  impression  they  made-
on  him. I  say  this  with  special  reference  to  p.  407,  footnote.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  449


named  Nikolaeff,  by  six  doctors  who  were  members  of  the
Eussian  Society  for  Experimental  Psychology.  After  he  was
entirely  stripped  and  dressed  in  a  garment  provided  by  the
sitters  which  contained  nothing  white  of  any  kind  and  the
two  seance-rooms  had  been  thoroughly  searched,  Nikolaeff  was
placed  in  a  chair  in  a  side-room  behind  a  portiere  in  front  of
which  the  investigators  seated  themselves  armed  with  opera-
glasses  for  better  vision.  There  was  enough  light  in  the  room
to  see  the  medium's  features  and  even  fingers,  his  hands  resting
on  his  knees.  Under  these  conditions  and  the  curtain  having
been  withdrawn,  raps  and  noises  of  every  description,  some  of
them  almost  deafening,  began  to  be  heard  in  the  medium's
cabinet.  Then  luminous  clouds  began  to  appear  beside  Nikolaeff,
out  of  which  first  one  hand  then  another  gradually  formed
itself  and  executed  all  kinds  of  movements :  now  Hitting
through  the  air,  now  audibly  snapping  their  fingers,  now
violently  knocking  on  the  medium  himself,  on  his  chair,  on
the  wall,  the  ceiling,  the  side-board  and  a  settee  which  stood
in  the  "  cabinet " ;  in  this  case  the  blows  were  heard  "  three
rooms  off."  Sometimes  these  hands  rose  above  the  medium's
head,  at  others  they  would  extend  down  as  far  as  his  feet.

Here  we  have  to  suppose  a  collective  hallucination,  both
visual  and  auditory,  affecting  six  persons  for  a  very  appreciable
lapse  of  time.  This  is  already  somewhat  hard  to  believe.
But  when  we  read  that  later  on  one  of  these  luminous  hands
was  seen  to  come  close  to  the  hanging  lamp  and,  after  rapping
upon  the  glass  violently,  suddenly  pulled  off  the  silk  lamp-
shade and  threw  it  towards  the  sitters  in  such  a  way  that  one
of  them  involuntarily  ducked :  and  that  still  later  another
"  hand  "  pushed  the  settee  violently  towards  the  sitters,  bringing
it  almost  close  to  the  curtain,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  here
hallucination  breaks  down  altogether.  The  throwing  of  the
lamp-shade  and  the  displacing  of  the  settee,  to  whatever  cause
due,  were  at  any  rate  of  an  objective  character.  Well,  does
the  illusion  theory  help  us  to  understand  how  these  things
were  done  ?  Just  the  reverse.  It  merely  complicates  matters
and  nothing  more.

When  we  come  to  another  and  similar  series  of  incidents — ■
the  appearance  of  full-form  phantasms,  we  again  constantly
meet  with cases when  out  of  several  sitters  only  one  would


450


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


see  a  spirit-form.1  And  in  some  cases  the  hypothesis  of  a.
purely  subjective  origin  for  such  incidents  would  at  first  sight
seem  the  more  natural  since  they  obviously  appear  to  have
developed  after  a  suggestion  made  by  the  medium.

Let  us  begin  with  one  of  the  least  impressive  episodes.
Viscount  Adare  tells  us  that  on  a  certain  occasion  Home

had  to  drop  some  lotion  into  his  eyes.  I  dropped  it  in  for  him  and
then  put  the  lights  out.  Almost  immediately  he  said:  "What  a
curious  effect  that  stuff  has  had,  I  see  the  most  beautiful  little
lights  before  me."  I  said:  "That  is  not  the  effect  of  the  drops;
you  said  wlfen  in  a  trance  that  we  should  see  lights."  .  .  .  He
went  back  to  bed  and  then  I  began  to  see  .  .  .  the  most  beautiful
little  phosphorescent  lights  moving.2

In  the  following  case  again  both  the  visual  and  the  auditory
impressions  are  clearly  traceable  to  suggestions  made  by  Home,
and  as  Lord  Adare  was  the  only  other  person  present  during
the  manifestation,  the  case  seems  comparatively  easy  of  solution.
Briefly  stated  it  happened  thus.  Lord  Adare  had  seen  in  the
papers  the  announcement  of  the  death  of  Adah  Menken,  an
American  actress,  with  whom  both  he  and  Home  had  been
slightly  acquainted.  On  the  following  morning  he  got  a  letter
from  Home  saying  Adah  Menken  had  been  to  visit  him  and
was  anxious  to  come  when  he  and  Lord  Adare  were  together.  On
returning  to  London  Home  came  to  stay  at  Lord  Adare's  at
the  latter's  request.  Both  felt  very  nervous  the  whole  evening.
After  they  had  gone  to  bed  and  put  the  lights  out  they  began
to  hear  music  "  powerful  and  distinct."

Home  said  that  the  music  formed  words  :  that  in  fact  it  was  a  voice
speaking  and  not  instrumental  music.  I  could  hear  nothing  but
the  chords  like  an  organ  or  harmonium  played  at  a  distance.  Home
became  quite  excited  because  I  could  not  distinguish  the  words  .  .  .
He  asked  the  spirits  if  possible  to  make  the  words  sufficiently
clear  for  me  also  to  hear  them.3

1In  other  cases,  on  the  contrary,  all  the  sitters  would  see  lights  and  forms
but  one.  Mrs.  Honywood  tells  us  that  a  sitting  she  could  at  no  time  "dis-
tinguish any  form  or  positive  figure  or  see  any  eyes  save  our  own,"  whilst
the  several  persons  present  continually  saw  abnormal  appearances  of  every
description  (Dialectical  Society's  Rejjort,  pp.  366-369).

2 Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  p.  52.  3  Ibidem,  p.  34.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  451


The  music  became  louder  and  louder  until  Lord  Adare  dis-
tinctly heard  the  words :  "  Hallelujah,  praise  the  Lord,  praise  the
Lord  Almighty.-'  "  It  was  no  imagination  or  the  result  of
anxiety  on  my  part  to  hear  the  same  as  Home  did.  Every
now  and  then  I  could  not  distinguish  words,  although  he  said
he  could ;  but  I  repeatedly  heard  the  words  above  mentioned
as  plainly  as  possible."

Home  then  suoqested  to  Lord  Adare  that  he  heard  the
words  "  Adah  Isaaks  Menken "  pronounced,  but  Lord  Adare
did  not. Then,  the  room  being  very  nearly  dark,

we  both  saw  as  it  were  a  luminous  cloud  about  the  middle  of  the
room,  over  the  table,  and  another  luminous  clouddike  body  floating
in  the  air.  Occasionally  I  saw  a  luminous  form  standing  at  the
foot  of  Home's  bed  which  he  did  not  see,  and  he  at  one  time  saw
a  similar  appearance  at  the  foot  of  mine  which  I  failed  to  perceive  ;
we  distinctly  heard  the  rustling  of  a  silk  dress  moving  about  the
room.  Home  and  I  had  called  on  Menken  at  her  hotel  one  day
last  year  and  she  then  had  on  a  very  heavy  silk  dress  :  it  appeared
as  though  she  caused  the  rustling  of  this  dress  to  be  heard  by  us.
At  one  time  I  heard  some  one  moving,  and  on  looking  over  towards
Home's  bed  I  saw  her  quite  plain  (as  did  also  Home)  as  a  white
slightly  luminous  body ;  I  could  clearly  see  the  folds  of  the  drapery.
In  passing  between  him  and  the  window  Home  said  she  obstructed
the  light.  She  moved  up  from  near  the  foot  of  his  bed  where  I
first  saw  her,  making  as  loud  a  rustling  noise  as  a  living  woman
in  a  heavy  silk  dress  would  do,  to  the  head  of  his  bed,  bent  over,
put  her  hands  upon  his  head  and  disappeared.1

Such  a  case  as  this  is  sure  to  enlist  the  particular  sympathy
of  the  adherents  of  the  hallucination  theory.  We  have,  as  it
were,  in  Lord  Adare's  account  several  separate  suggestions  of
Home's  recorded.  First  he  lets  his  friend  know  that  the
American  actress  has  already  paid  him  a  visit  and  will  soon
pay  another — thus  preparing  the  ground,  it  may  be  said,  for  a
visual  hallucination.  Then  he  seizes  upon  some  real  or  imaginary
sound  to  state  that  he  hears  sounds  of  extramundane  origin  \
then  he  urges  upon  his  companion  that  a  voice  is  speaking,
not  music  playing  ;  this  time  the  'supposed  "  suggestion  "  appeal's
to  work  with  more  difficulty,  but  at  last  Lord  Adare  gives  in  ;.

1  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  p.  35.


452


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


and  though  another  suggestion  (that  of  hearing  the  actress's
name)  apparently  fails,  the  road  is  clear,  and  Home's  friend
now  sees  what  the  medium  wants  him  to  see.1

How  simple  and  easy  an  explanation !  Nor  do  I  at  all
■deny  that  (leaving  out  of  account  the  hypothesis  of  fraud)  it
would  be,  broadly  speaking,  by  far  the  most  natural  if  this
case  had  stood  alone,  or  if  all  other  cases  of  apparitions
seen  in  Home's  presence  had  presented  the  same  character.
If  so,  well  and  good ;  if  not,  we  must  look  out  for  another
■explanation ;  and  should  the  hallucination  theory  prove  inade-
quate in  other  cases,  we  should  certainly  be  justified  in  hesitating
to  apply  it  to  this  one  also.

I  will  therefore  mention  a  case  when  the  supposed  "  spirit-
form  "  was  seen  by  several  sitters.  On  the  evening  of  February
9th,  1869,  Lord  Adare,  Captain  Gerard  Smith,  and  Dr.  Gully
of  Malvern  assembled  together  with  Home  in  Lord  Adare's
rooms  in  London.  The  company  were  sitting  in  a  small  room
the  objects  in  which  were  made  dimly  visible  by  the  faint
light  that  came  in  from  the  window  near  which  Home  was
"impressed  "  to  place  himself,  saying:  "  Sacha  will  try  and  make
herself  visible  to  you."  And  then  another  form  beside  his
own — that  of  his  late  wife — grew  into  distinctness.

Her  form  (wrote  Lord  Adare  the  next  day)  gradually  became
apparent  to  us :  she  moved  close  to  Home  and  kissed  him.  She
stood  beside  him  against  the  window  intercepting  the  light  as  a
solid  body,  and  appeared  fully  as  material  as  Home  himself:  no
one  could  have  told  which  was  the  mortal  body  and  which  the  spirit.
It  was  too  dark,  however,  to  distinguish  features.  I  could  see  that
she  had  her  full  face  turned  towards  us,  and  that  either  her  hair
was  parted  in  the  middle  and  flowed  down  her  shoulders,  or  that
she  had  on  what  appeared  to  be  a  veil.

At  Lord  Adare's  request  Captain  Gerard  Smith  wrote  to
him  certifying  that  he  had  also  seen  the  "  spirit-form,"  and
■describing  the  apparition  as  follows  :

Home  rose  and  stood  at  the  window  with  his  right  arm  extended,
and  the  spirit  seemed  to  sweep  down,  until  it  rested  with  both  hands
on  his  outstretched  arm,  looking  up  into  his  face. From  the  position

'Instances  of  such  "suggestions"'  might  be  greatly  multiplied.  See  one
further  on.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  453


in  which  I  sat  the  profile  of  the  face  was  perfectly  visible  to  me,
and  when  the  two  faces  approached  each  other  to  kiss,  there  was
no  apparent  difference  in  the  degree  of  density  of  the  two  figures.1

Apart  from  the  question  whether  conscious  trickery  is  excluded
in  this  episode,  it  will  be  admitted  that  the  hallucination  hypo-
thesis is  considerably  strained  by  it,  for  we  should  have  to
suppose  that  the  apparition  is  "  suggested "  by  Home  to  three
persons  simultaneously,  the  impressions  of  at  least  two  of  them,
and  probably  those  of  all  three,  apparently  coinciding  pretty
closely.  Yet  though  strained,  the  theory  in  question  may
still  be  said  to  hold  the  field,  as  neither  was  the  apparition
photographed  nor  did  it  leave  any  permanent  traces  on  the
material  world ;  and  we  still  want  something  more  to  disprove
it  definitely.

Let  us  then  consider  the  following  incident.  The  narrator,
it  is  true,  was  a  powerful  physical  medium  himself,  but,  as  we
shall  presently  see,  we  have  most  important  corroborative
evidence.

On  May  7th,  1873,  the  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses  attended
a  seance  with  Home  at  Miss  Douglas's,  81,  South  Audley  Street.
The  sitters,  besides  himself  and  Miss  Douglas,  were  Mrs.  Home,
Serjeant  Cox,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  Crookes.  After  sitting  round
the  table  for  fifty  minutes,  during  which  time  Stainton  Moses
"  felt  power  drawn  "  from  him  and  was  partially  entranced,  there
were  some  faint  raps  both  on  the  table  and  on  Stainton  Moses's
chair.  Then  the  accordion,  on  being  taken  by  Home  and  held
under  the  table,  "  played  a  strange  weird  melody  unlike  anything
earthly  I  ever  heard."  "  The  table  rocked  about  like  a  ship
at  sea,  groaned  and  finally  separated  at  the  joint " — but  as
nothing  came  out  of  it,  it  was  joined  again.  Then  a  chair
moved  of  itself,  the  sitters  ascertaining  that  "  direct  gaze  would
paralyse  the  movement  at  once,"  till  at  last  Home  became
entranced,  rose  and  went  into  the  inner  dining-room,  taking
the  accordion  with  him  and  placing  it  on  the  dinner-waggon.

The  fire-light  was  lowered,  the  reading-lamp  was  put  out  of  the
room,  the  gas  behind  the  window  at  the  end  of  the  room  was
lowered,  and  we  sat  in  gloom,  the  window  at  the  end  showing  out
in  bold  relief. During  the  evening  Home  stood  near  the  fire-place

1  Lord  Adara's  Expzriences  in  Spiritualism,  pp.  95  and  177.

2F


454


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


and  kept  us  informed  of  his  position.  .  .  .  We  all  saw  a  hand
descend  from  the  top  of  the  curtain  and  play  the  accordion.  It  was  a
large  hand  and  its  reflection  on  the  window  blind  was  strong.
After  this  a  head  showed  in  similar  way.  When  Mrs.  Crookes  was
told  to  go  into  the  room  and  occupy  the  chair  marked  in  the  plan
[near  the  window],  a  form  was  materialised  as  far  as  the  middle.
It  floated  near  the  folding  doors  and  advanced  towards  Mrs.  Crookes,
who  screamed  and  it  vanished.

Lady  Crookes  (in  1893)  certifies  this  narrative  to  be  an
"  accurate  account  ...  of  one  of  the  most  interesting  seances  "
she  "  ever  had  with  Mr.  Home."  She  says  that  the  gas  behind
the  window  in  the  back  dining-room  (where  she  had  been  led
by  Home)  "  was  bright  enough  to  show  everything  in  the  room
distinctly."

Mr.  Home  then  left  me  and  stood  between  the  two  rooms.  The
accordion  was  immediately  taken  from  his  hand  by  a  cloudy  appear-
ance which  soon  seemed  to  condense  into  a  distinct  human  form,
clothed  in  a  filmy  drapery,  standing  near  Mr.  Home  between  the  two
rooms.  The  accordion  began  to  play  .  .  .  and  the  figure  gradually
advanced  towards  me  till  it  almost  touched  me,  playing  continuously.
It  was  semi-transparent,  and  I  could  see  the  sitters  through  it  all
the  time.  Mr.  Home  remained  near  the  sliding  doors.  As  the  fio'iire
approached  I  felt  an  intense  cold,  getting  stronger  as  it  got  nearer,
and  as  it  was  giving  me  the  accordion  I  could  not  help  screaming.
The  figure  immediately  seemed  to  sink  into  the  floor  to  the  waist,
leaving  only  the  head  and  shoulders  visible,  still  playing  the  accordion,
which  was  then  about  a  foot  off  the  floor.  Mr.  Home  and  my  husband
came  to  me  at  once,  and  I  have  no  clear  recollection  of  what  then
occurred,  except  that  the  accordion  did  not  cease  playing  immediately.
.  .  .  I  have  always  regretted  that  my  want  of  presence  of  mind
brought  the  phenomena  to  so  abrupt  a  termination.1

Here,  I  submit,  we  have  good  evidence  that  the  apparition,
whether  genuine  or  fraudulent,  was  at  least  objective,  since
it  was  able  to  carry  an  accordion  across  the  room  and  lay  it
on  a  certain  spot  altogether  different  from  the  one  it  had  occupied
a  few  moments  before.  It  seems  impossible  to  believe  that
the  experience  of  the  sitters  on  this  occasion  was  hallucinatory,

1  Proceedings  S.P.It.,  Vol.  IX.,  pp.  309-311;  cf.  Sir  W.  Crookes's  Researches,
p.  94.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  455

so  I  do  not  see  much  use  in  postulating  such  an  explanation
in  other  instances  which,  taken  by  themselves,  are  no  more
extraordinary  than  the  accordion-playing  phantom.  As  for  the
rejoinder  that  the  objectivity  of  the  movements  performed  by
the  accordion  may  be  after  all  no  proof  of  the  objectivity  of
the  apparition,  I  beg  to  refer  the  reader  to  what  I  said  in
answer  to  a  possible  similar  objection  as  to  the  "  spirit-hands."

■  Once  we  think  it  proved  that  the  apparition  in  the  case
we  have  just  been  considering  was  no  hallucination — we  need
not  postulate  hallucination  to  explain  the  apparition  of  a  form
purporting  to  be  Home's  deceased  wife, — whether  to  three
witnesses  or  even  to  one  only ;  nor  that  of  "  Adah  Menken  "
to  Lord  Adare,  nor  many  similar  incidents.  And  we  need
not  concern  ourselves  either  with  the  general  liability  to  purely
subjective  hallucinations  which  seems  in  fact  to  have  been  the
speciality  of  many  of  Home's  sitters ;  or  with  the  abnormal
appearances  of  every  description  seen  constantly  by  Lord  Adare
and  Lord  Lindsay ;  or  with  the  "  magnificent  white  flower  as
large  as  a  dinner-plate  and  with  long  purple  stamens "  which
suddenly  appeared  on  a  chair  close  beside  Lady  D.  one  evening
as  she  sat  in  her  drawing-room  in  company  with  Home,  only
to  "  melt  into  the  air "  two  minutes  later ; 1  etc.,  etc.  Many
such  impressions  were  no  doubt  purely  subjective,  but  this
does  not  help  us  to  understand  the  main  incidents.

So  much  for  some  of  the  most  striking  of  Home's  phenomena.
It  is  true  that  there  still  remain  others  to  be  accounted  for.
Here  my  task  will  be  less  easy.  It  is  difficult  to  prove  the
objective  reality  of  such  a  thing  as  "  elongation  "  if  the  evidence
of  several  persons  testifying  to  the  fact  is  deemed  insufficient ; 2
and  I  think  the  same  must  be  said  of  the  levitations  of  which,
as  Sir  W.  Crookes  wrote  in  the  early  seventies,  "  there  are  at
least  a  hundred  recorded  instances."  Though  much  of  this
evidence  is  undoubtedly  worthless,  we  still  have  Sir  W.  Crookes's
testimony  that  he  saw  Home  completely  raised  from  the  floor
of  the  room  on  three  separate  occasions,  and  some  striking
^Dialectical  Society'*  Report  on  Spiritualism,  p.  328.

2  As  many  as  nine  or  ten  in  one  instance,  it  would  appear  (D.  D.  Home,  his
Life  and  Mission,  p.  290).  Among  the  persons  present  were  Lords  Lindsay
and  Adare,  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys,  a  journalist,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,
in  whose  house  the  seance  took  place.  I  repeat  again  that  it  is  not  the
authenticity  but  the  objectivity  of  the  phenomena  that  I  am  championing.


456


Count  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


statements  from  Lord  Lindsay  (now  Earl  of  Crawford),  Lord
A  dare,  and  others.  In  1868  in  Lord  Lindsay  and  Mr.  Hawkins
Simpson's  presence  "  in  good  light "  Home  "  was  levitated  slowly
and  swaying  from  side  to  side  in  air  .  .  .  on  to  the  sofa,  no
one  near  him  or  myself"  (Mr.  Simpson).1  In  March,  1869,
at  Adare  Abbey  Home  was  seen  by  three  witnesses  (the  Earl
of  Dunraven,  Viscount  Adare  and  Captain  Wynne)  to  float  at
a  height  which  carried  him  over  a  broken  wall  two  feet  high
without  his  having  touched  it.  "  The  distance  that  we  saw
him  thus  carried  must  have  been  at  least  ten  or  twelve  yards,"
says  Lord  Adare.'2  But  of  course  all  this  must  go  for  nothing,
as  well,  I  suppose,  as  Home's  celebrated  flight  at  Ashley  House
on  the  16th  of  December,  1868,  though  here  the  probability
that  the  performance  in  question  was  objective  seems  to  me
not  inconsiderably  enhanced,  and  the  position  of  those  who
cling  to  illusion  as  an  explanation  made  more  difficult  by  the
circumstance  that — his  real  or  imaginary  flight  over — the  medium
did  undoubtedly  find  himself  in  a  room  which  lie  had  left  (in
a  perfectly  natural  way)  some  time  previously.3

I  add  here  a  case  of  "  levitation "  kindly  communicated  to
me  by  Miss  Johnson,  and  hitherto  unpublished.  Of  the  narrator,
Miss  Johnson  writes  :

Mr.  Warndorfer  (an  Austrian  member  of  the  S.P.R.)  contributed
the  report  of  a  Poltergeist  case  printed  in  the  Journal  for  May,  1907.
He  is  an  unusually  intelligent  and  competent  observer,  of  long  experi-
ence. I  met  him  for  the  first  time  on  January  17th,  1908,  and
heard  then  of  many  experiences  of  his.  Among  other  things,  he
told  me  of  a  case  of  apparent  levitation,  which  he  had  witnessed.
At  the  time  lie  had  been  a  good  deal  impressed  by  this,  but  on
thinking  it  over  some  months  later,  and  trying  to  recall  all  the

1  Journal  S.P.B.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  123.

2  The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  p.  111.  In  more  than  one  case  Home  is  said
to  have  made  pencil  marks  upon  the  ceiling  when  "levitated"  {Dialectical
Society's  Report,  pp.  190,  194). But  we  are  not  given  any  details.

3 There  seems  to  me  to  be  a  flaw  in  Mr.  Podmore's  criticism  of  this  famous
case  in  this  very  point  (Modem  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  255-258).  He
does  not  apparently  deny  that  just  after  his  (supposed)  levitation  was  over,
Home  did  return  to  the  room  in  which  the  three  sitters  were.  If  so,  by
what  means?  If  it  was  simply  through  the  door,  whereas  all  three  believed
him  to  have  come  through  the  window,  Mr.  Podmore,  I  think,  ought  to
have  stated  this  plainly  and  not  left  us  in  doubt.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  457


circumstances,  it  struck  him  as  very  odd  that  there  was  a  complete
and  abrupt  gap  in  his  memory  at  a  certain  point.  This  led  him
to  suspect  that  some  dissociation  of  consciousness  had  occurred,  during
which  he  might  have  been  hallucinated.  He  was  certainly  in  no
condition  of  abnormal  excitement  at  the  time.

This  case  occurred  in  Bohemia  in  1906.  K.  is  the  foreman  of  a
factory  there,  which  Mr.  Warndorfer  sometimes  has  occasion  to
visit.  K.  has  now  left  the  place  and  been  lost  sight  of,  so  that
his  testimony  cannot  be  obtained.  Alice  Johnson.

The  following  is  Mr.  Warndorfer's  own  account :

o


At  the  sitting  four  persons  took  part.  The  foreman  K.,  his  wife,  a
woman  of  about  50,  very  hysterical,  the  medium  and  myself.  The
medium  is  the  wife  of  the  editor  of  a  small  local  (Bohemian)  paper ;
she  is  not  a  professional  medium  and  came  on  being  invited ;  I  paid
her  travelling  and  other  expenses.  She  had  been  recommended  to
me  as  a  trance-speaker  and  clairvoyant :  at  previous  sittings  she
had  delivered  speeches  and  given  messages  which,  though  quite
interesting,  had  no  evidential  value  whatever.  We  sat  in  the  corner
of  the  foreman's  parlour — see  sketch — which  was  half  in  the  dark ;
the  light  came  through  the  open  door  from  a  lamp;  the  light  was
sufficient  to  see  the  features  of  all  the  persons  clearly  ;  I  think  one
could  have  read  ordinary  print.


February  7  th,  1908.


Lamp


Ci  p  board  .


A.  VV.


Window.


M.  The  Medium,
floating.  X.


The  dotted  line  shows  the  direction  of  the  medium's  body  when  apparently
The  position  of  the  foreman,  K.,  when  standing  behind  the  medium.


458


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[PAPvT


After  a  few  minutes,  Mrs.  K.  had  an  attack  of  hysterical  twitch-
ings,  threw  her  arms  and  legs  about  and  finally  fell  off  her  chair
and  remained,  all  in  a  heap,  under  the  table,  her  head  resting  on
her  knees ;  she  was  left  there,  so  as  not  to  disturb  the  medium
and  K.  saying  that  he  was  not  anxious  about  her.  The  medium
had  in  the  meantime  risen  from  her  chair  waving  her  arms  in
a  circular  movement ;  her  body  was  stiff,  her  eyes  closed  and  she
leaned  backward.  The  foreman  got  up  and  stood  behind  her  with
his  arms  spread  out  in  order  to  protect  her  against  knocking
against  two  high  cupboards,  forming  an  angle  behind  her.  She
breathed  heavily  and  after  a  few  moments  rattled  in  the  throat ;
K.  spoke  to  her  soothingly  and  made  passes  round  her,  all  the
while  standing  close  behind  her  (between  her  and  the  chests).  I
sat  quietly  watching  her,  when  suddenly  there  were  two  very  loud
knocks,  seemingly  on  the  wall  below  the  window  opposite,  and
she  appeared  to  be  floating  horizontally  above  the  table,  about  a
foot  from  it,  her  head  on  or  near  K.'s  chest,  her  arms  still  waving
about  and  her  feet  kicking  frantically  in  the  air,  so  that  I  had
to  jump  up  in  order  to  avoid  being  kicked  in  the  face ;  I  remember
seeing  her  (after  I  stood  up)  clear  above  the  table,  for  about
half  a  minute ;  her  skirt  did  not  touch  the  table,  she  was  free  in
the  air,  except  perhaps  her  head  and  the  back  of  the  neck,  which
may  have  rested  against  K.'s  chest.  She  breathed  so  heavily  now,
that  I  was  afraid  she  might  suffer  seriously,  so  I  made  some  passes
over  her  body  in  the  air  and  then  down  her  body  from  the  shoulders
to  her  feet,  when  she  stood  on  the  ground,  which  soothed  her  at
once  and  brought  her  back  from  the  trance ;  she  spoke  a  few  words
and  was  not  aware  of  what  had  happened.

We  awakened  Mrs.  K.  who  asked  at  once :  "  Now,  have  you
seen  them?"  "Whom?"  "Why,  the  two  men,  who  knocked  and
came  in  from  there  (pointing  to  the  window)  and  carried  her  (the
medium)  about  on  their  shoulders."  So  far  as  I  know  Mrs.  K.
was  fast  asleep  under  the  table,  with  her  head  on  her  knees ;  I
am  not  sure,  however,  whether  or  not  she  saw  the  medium  above
the  table;  she  may  have  done  so,  without  my  noticing  it.  I
spoke  to  K.  about  the  phenomena,  immediately  afterwards  and
again  later  on;  I  omitted,  however,  what  a  more  efficient  investi-
gator would  have  done  at  once,  to  ask  him  what  he  had  seen  and
to  preserve  his  record,  independent  of  mine.  I  remember  to  have
spoken  with  him  about  the  medium's  floating,  and  mentioning  the
fact  that  it  could  not  be  considered  a  case  of  clear  levitation  as


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  459


the  medium  seemed  to  have  touched  his  body  at  least  with  her
head  and  perhaps  her  neck ;  he  related  the  occurrence  to  the
medium  and  to  his  wife,  and  conversation  concerning  it  was  carried
on  for  some  time,  but  his  perceptions  may  have  been  tainted  by
mine ;  he  was  evidently  very  pleased  at  something  remarkable  having
occurred  at  his  house  in  my  presence  and  he  would  have,  most  pro-
bably, willingly  accepted  and  believed  any  suggestions  given  by  me.

I  considered  the  case  a  very  interesting  and  good  one  till  it  struck
me  one  day,  in  thinking  the  matter  over,  that  I  could  not  recall  how
the  medium  got  down  from  the  floating  into  the  standing  position;  I
have  a  hazy  idea  about  her  getting  up ;  I  clearly  remember  her
leaning  back  further  and  further,  her  body  being  quite  stiff,  and
think  I  recollect  a  kind  of  stepping  movement  before  I  had  her  feet
close  to  my  face  ;  I  distinctly  remember  her  feet  kicking  at  my  face
and  the  sight  of  her  rather  shabby  stockings  and  shoes ;  but  from
the  moment  when  I  made  passes  over  her  horizontal  body  till  the
time  when  she  woke  up,  standing,  still  under  my  passes,  I  cannot
recall  the  movements  of  her  body;  there  is  an  absolute  blank  in
my  memory.  Possibly  I  got  flurried  by  her  laborious  breathing
and  the  fear  that  she  might  suffocate  ;  I  do  not  think  so,  however,
as  I  was  very  quiet  and  not  at  all  excited  during  the  seance,
having  assisted  at  a  good  many  before  and  not  being  of  a  very
excitable  temperament.  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  therefore
that  I  may  have  been  under  a  hallucination  when  I  believed  her
to  float  above  the  table ;  what  could  have  evoked  such  a  hallucina-
tion I  could  not  tell,  as  I  only  expected  to  hear  a  speech  or  some
clairvoyant  description ;  what  speaks  in  favour  of  the  hallucination
theory  would  perhaps  be  the  circumstance  that  the  medium  never
before,  nor  for  some  time  afterwards,  showed  any  physical  pheno-
mena. I  therefore  give  you  the  case  more  as  one  of  a  possible
curious  hallucination  than  as  one  of  levitation. If  you  wish,  I  can

try  and  get  a  report  from  K.  . w..  „„„

J  °  1  A. \\  ATiNDORFER.

I  have  no  comments  to  offer  on  this  case.  My  assertion
that  I  see  no  particular  grounds  for  believing  in  the  subjective
character  of  the  supposed  levitation  would  be  of  course  as
gratuitous  as  Mr.  Warndorfer's  declaration  that  he  believes
his  experience  to  have  been  hallucinatory.  I  will  content
myself  with  remarking  that  the  "  absolute  blank "  which,  as
it  seems  to  him,  did  occur  at  a  certain  point  in  his  memory
does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  a  decisive  prpofe  of  an  abnormal


460


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


state.  I  am  not  at  all  sure  such  blanks  are  not  to  be
met  with  in  ordinary  life  and  under  quite  commonplace
circumstances.

Eeturning  to  Home's  case,  we  may  next  consider  the  "  fire-
test,"  the  handling  of  coals,  etc.,  and  causing  other  people  to  handle
them, — a  circumstance  which  at  least  one  very  able  critic  of
the  Home  evidence  has  apparently  left  unnoticed.  I  confess  I
do  not  always  see  where  the  element  of  illusion  can  creep  in
in  the  very  numerous  accounts  referring  to  these  episodes.
We  constantly  read  of  red-hot  coals  and  hot  lamp-chimneys
behaving  just  as  they  should  in  the  natural  course  of  things ;
of  Captain  Gerard  Smith  getting  a  blister  on  his  finger  after
touching  a  glass  chimney  which  had  just  been  found  quite
cool  to  the  touch  by  Lord  Lindsay  and  Mrs.  Honywood,1  of
a  large  red-hot  mass  of  coal  which,  after  it  had  been  handled
with  immunity  by  Home  first  and  then  by  Lady  Gomm,  on
being  laid  upon  a  sheet  of  paper  caused  it  to  blaze  directly  ;2
of  a  match  which  instantly  ignited  when  brought  into  contact
with  a  chimney  which  Home  had  apparently  left  for  four
or  five  minutes  in  the  fire-place  among  the  glowing  coals
(after  which,  we  are  told,  he  "  thrust  the  heated  glass  into
his  mouth  applying  especially  his  tongue  to  it " 3),  etc.  In
these  cases  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  suggestion  and  illusion
made  a  roomful  of  people  mistake  an  inoffensive  orange  for
a  "  red-hot  mass  of  coal "  or  a  genuinely  cool  lamp-chimney
for  a  hot  one.  But  if  not,  what  happened  ?  The  objects  in
question  must  have  been  handled  by  some  one  to  produce
these  effects— and,  if  so,  how  could  they,  under  the  circumstances,
have  been  so  handled  with  impunity  ?  And  is  it  really  possible
to  believe  that  nine  sitters  should  have  been  induced  to  see
during  four  or  five  minutes  glowing  coals  placed  on  the  head
of  Mr.  S.  G.  Hall,  his  white  hair  being  drawn  up  in  a  pyramid
over  the  bright  red  mass,  if  nothing  of  the  kind  had  occurred,
the  more  so  as  we  read  that  on  brushing  his  hair  at  night
Mr.  Hall  found  a  quantity  of  cinder  dust  ? 4  And  how  can
we  logically  admit  this  strange  mixture  of  "  fact  and  fancy  "

1  Dialectical  Society's  Report,  p.  361.

2  D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  p.  283.

3  Dialectical  Society's  Report,  p.  361.

4  D.  D.  Home,  his  Life  and  Mission,  p.  285.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  461


constantly  occurring  if  we  adopt  the  illusion  hypothesis :  scores
of  people  believing  that  they  are  handling  hot  coals  and
chimneys  when  they  are  in  fact  touching  something  quite
different,  or  nothing  at  all ;  scores  of  other  people  who  believe
themselves  to  be  witnesses  to  the  same  fact ;  persons  becoming
victims  to  this  extraordinary  illusion  instantaneously  and  in
succession ;  and,  amid  all  this,  some  undoubtedly  physical
effects,  whether  of  a  temporary  (as  with  Captain  Smith's  finger)
or  of  a  permanent  character,  produced  by  objects  supposed
(under  the  hypothesis  in  question)  to  be  quite  different  from
what  they  appear  to  be  ?  To  adopt  such  a  theory  seems  to
me  to  strain  incredulity  (should  it  not  rather  be  called  credulity
the  other  way  ?)  to  the  utmost.

Now  if  I  am  told  that  I  have  been  writing  this  under  a
misconception  of  the  theory ;  that  if  suggestion  there  was,  it
must  have  worked  in  one  sense  only — that  of  ensuring  immunity
for  the  sitters  who  went  through  the  "  fire-ordeal " — I  will
answer  that  this  is  no  explanation ;  and  that  what  we  want
to  know  is  precisely  how  suggestion  can  have  protected  Home's
sitters  not  only  from  the  feeling  of  intense  pain  which  must
have  been  felt  under  the  circumstances,  but  also  from  physical
effects  ?

So  much  for  the  most  startling  of  Home's  "  manifestations."
I  have  attempted  to  show  that  as  applied  to  them  the  theory
of  suggested  hallucination  does  not  cover  the  whole  ground
(in  some  cases  is  even  obviously  unsatisfactory),  and  that  it
cannot,  by  any  means,  give  us  an  adequate  solution  of  the
whole  mystery.

I  have  left  for  the  end  of  my  examination  of  the  Home
evidence  a  case  which  seems  at  first  sight  to  present  a  real
difficulty  for  my  argument :  I  refer  to  a  well-known  instance
when  a  landscape  was  made  visible  to  several  persons  in  a
crystal  ball  at  one  of  Home's  seances.  Our  chief  witness
is  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  who  says :

Another  time  at  Mr.  Jencken's  house  I  saw  a  crystal  ball  placed
on  Mr.  Home's  head  emit  flashes  of  coloured  light,  following  the
order  of  the  spectrum.  The  crystal  was  spherical,  so  that  it  could
not  have  given  prismatic  colours.  After  this  it  changed,  and  we
all  saw  a  view  of  the  sea,  as  if  we  were  looking  down  at  it  from
the  top  of  a  high  cliff. It  seemed  to  be  the  evening,  as  the  sun  was


4G2


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[pakt


setting  like  a  globe  of  fire,  lighting  up  a  broad  path  over  the  little
waves.  The  moon  was  faintly  visible  in  the  south,  and  as  the  sun
set  her  power  increased.  We  saw  also  a  few  stars  and  suddenly
the  whole  thing  vanished  like  shutting  the  slide  of  a  magic  lantern;
and  the  crystal  was  dead.  This  whole  appearance  lasted  about  ten
minutes.  .  .  .

There  were  two  candles  and  a  bright  fire  burning  in  the  room.1

Another  gentleman,  Mr.  J.  Hawkins  Simpson,  has  given  (in
a  letter  to  Dr.  Edmunds,  Secretary  of  the  Dialectical  Society)
the  following  version  of  the  same  episode :

A  large  landscape  view  as  carried  in  my  brain  was  made  perfectly
visible  in  a  spherical  crystal  to  every  one  in  a  dark  room,  although
the  individuals  composing  the  party  occupied  places  opposite  to  each
other,  and  no  one  except  Mr,  Home,  who  held  the  crystal,  was  within
three  feet  of  the  crystal.  .  .  .  Colours  were  similarly  produced,
though  I  could  not  gather  that  any  brain  then  present  was  the
exciting  cause.  Every  colour  of  the  rainbow  was  given  brilliantly,
especially  the  violet  of  a  very  opaque  character  ;  and  that  (as  rapped
out)  "to  show  the  violet  as  seen  by  disembodied  spirits."2

That  is,  I  believe,  all  the  information  we  possess  regarding
this  interesting  incident.  Meagre  as  it  is,  we  find  in  the
statements  coming  from  our  only  two  witnesses  an  important
discrepancy.  According  to  one  there  were  in  the  room  two
candles  and  a  bright  fire  burning.  The  other  says  the  room
was  dark.3  We  do  not  know  either  the  names  or  the  number
of  the  persons  present,  nor — which  is  particularly  important —
how  far  their  impressions  actually  coincided ;  nor  how  far
they  were  independent  of  one  another ;  nor  whether  the
medium  spoke  or  preserved  silence ;  in  fact,  we  hardly  know
anything  beyond  the  bare  fact  of  the  vision.  And  Mr.
Hawkins  Simpson's  account  in  particular  is  so  loose  and
scanty  that  we  do  not  even  feel  sure  that  the  two  last
sentences  I  have  quoted  refer  to  the  same  episode  as  Lord
Lindsay's.

1  Diabetica!,  Society's  Report,  pp.  206-207.

2  Ibidem,  p.  259.

3  So  great  is  the  discrepancy,  indeed,  that  I  should  have  thought  the  two
witnesses  were  referring  to  two  separate  incidents  did  not  one  "  who  ought
to  know'" — .Mine.  Home— explicitly  state  the  contrary  (The  Gift  of  D.  D.
Home,  p.  252-253).


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  463


Still,  unsatisfactory  as  the  evidence  is,  it  is  first-hand  testi-
mony coming  from  trustworthy  witnesses  and  so  cannot  be
dismissed  without  further  consideration.  Moreover,  Lord
Lindsay  and  Mr.  Simpson's  experience  is  not  unique.  In  a
very  interesting  case  printed  a  few  years  ago  in  the  S.P.B.
•Journal}  which  I  will  now  quote,  we  have  also  au  instance
of  apparent  collective  vision  in  a  mirror  affecting  not  less
than  four  persons. The  incident  occurred  in May,  1904,  at

15  ■,  Switzerland,  Mrs. C.  (a  friend)  being the  medium.

Here  is  the  evidence  of  one  of  the  witnesses,  Mrs.  A.,  given
in  a  letter  written  shortly  after  the  event  to  Mrs.  H.  J.
Wilson,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.B.,  who  is  intimately
acquainted  with  all  of  them,  and  who  first  reported  the  case
verbally  to  Miss  Johnson :

It  was  in  my  bedroom  at  B  ,  Switzerland. Mrs.  C  ■  was

the  medium.  She  was  seated  facing  the  long  mirror  in  my  ward-
robe, and  we,  that  is  C.  [Mrs.  P.,  sister  of  Mrs.  A.],  A.  [the
daughter  of  Mrs.  A.],  Mrs.  H.,  and  myself,  were  seated  just  be-
hind her,  also  facing  the  mirror. Mrs.  C was  not  in  trance.

In  a  very  short  time  we  saw  my  father's  face  form  over  Mrs.  C.'s
face  (in  the  mirror),  and  then  S  's  face,  two  or  three  times  fol-
lowing. She  was  smiling  and  looking  hard  at  us,  her  two  sisters.
Then  she  faded  away,  and  a  long  corridor  came,  with  a  large  hall
or  room  at  the  end  of  it,  brilliantly  lighted  up.  Many  figures  were
walking  about,  but  my  figure  and  E.'s  [Mrs.  A.'s  son]  were  the
most  prominent — there  was  no  mistaking  them.  I  recognised  my
own  figure  walking  about,  and  leaning  forward  to  talk.  That  was
all,  as  it  was  rather  late,  and  time  to  go  to  bed.

S.,  the  sister  of  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  P.,  had  died  in  March,
1904;  E.,  the  son  of  Mrs.  A.,  was  living  at  the  time,  and
in  London.

The  account  of  the  other  sister,  Mrs.  P.,  was  dictated  by  her
to  Mrs.  Wilson,  and  sent  to  Miss  Johnson  enclosed  in  a  letter
from  Mrs.  Wilson,  dated  October  3rd,  1904. It  is  as  follows:

It  was  at  B  ,  about  May  1st,  1901,  at  8.30  p.m.  The  elec-
tric light  was  full  on  all  the  time,  shaded  only  by  a  piece  of  silver

tissue  paper. There  were  present  Mrs.  C (the  medium),  Mrs.

A  ,  A.,  Mrs.  H  ,  and  myself. Mrs.  C.  sat  in  front  of  a  mirror,

lVol.  XII.,  February,  1905,  pp.  17-21.


464


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Mrs.  A.  and  I  sat  just  behind  her,  and  the  other  two  to  right  and
left  of  us  respectively.  Behind  us  was  the  bedroom  wall,  and  a
washing stand against that,  with  a  small  mirror  over  it.  The

medium  was  not  entranced. I saw  S  's  face form on  Mrs.

C  's  face,  followed  by  that  of  old  Mrs.  P  . Then  came  a

full-length  figure  of  my  father  in  the  mirror,  in  his  robes,  very  like
the  portrait.  He  looked  benignant  and  rested,  with  lines  of  face
much  smoothed  away.  This  faded,  and  then  all  perceived  a  long
passage  in  the  mirror,  at  a  guess  about  25  feet  long,  with  bay
window  at  the  end,  and  sunshine  streaming  through.  There  was
a  window  seat,  and  two  figures  standing  by  it,  unrecognisable.
Then  third  figure  appeared,  also  unrecognisable.  They  seemed  to
look  out  of  window  and  converse. Medium  then  became  tired.

The  next  account,  written  in  October,  1904,  is  from  Miss
A.,  and  is  as  follows :

Mother,  Mrs.  C  ,  Aunt  C  [Mrs.  P.],  another  lady,  and

myself,  were  all  seated  in  front  of  a  large  pier  glass,  Mrs.  C

(the  medium)  being  slightly  nearer  the  glass  (say  3  inches)  than  the
rest  of  us.  The  gas  was  turned  down  to  about  half  its  strength.
Presently,  after  sitting  ten  minutes  or  so,  we  saw  what  appeared  to
be  a  white  mist  rising  up  in  front  of  the  medium's  reflection,  and  it
finally  resolved  into  a  good  and  distinct  likeness  of  Grandad.  When
we  recognised  it  the  figure  smiled  and  nodded  its  head. Then  a

likeness  of  Aunt  S appeared,  not  so  distinct,  but  perfectly  easy

of  recognition,  after  which  a  lady  appeared  unknown  to  four  of  us,
but  recognised  by  the  lady  who  was  sitting  with  us.

For  a  time  we  saw  nothing  but  mist  again,  but  it  gradually
cleared,  and  a  long  corridor  became  visible  with  a  door  at  the  further
end  evidently  opened  inwards,  and  screened  on  the  side  nearest  us
by  looped  curtains,  through  which  we  saw  into  a  brilliantly  lighted
room,  whether  bright  sunlight  or  artificial  light  we  could  not  tell.
Figures  too  distant  to  be  recognised  came  and  went  in  the  room,
and  once  a  girl  in  what  appeared  to  be  bridal  dress  stood  just  be-
hind the  opening  of  the  curtain.  Then  the  doors  appeared  to  be
shut  for  a  time,  but  presently  opened,  and  two  figures  pushed  aside
the  curtains  and  came  down  the  corridor  towards  us,  talking.  We

recognised  them  as Mother  and  E  . Then  the  picture  faded

again  and  we  closed  the  sitting.  This  is  to  the  best  of  my  recol-
lection, but  as  I  took  no  notes  at  the  time,  I  may  easily  have
forgotten  details.


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  465


In  answer  to  further  questions  Miss  A.  writes  :

October  Uth,  1904.

The  likenesses  were  formed  on  Mrs.  C  's  image  in  the  glass,

as  it  were,  transforming  her  features  into  those  of  the  persons  re-
presented. Her  own  face,  as  distinct  from  the  image,  was  unchanged,
except  that  the  eyes  were  closed,  while  the  faces  in  the  glass  all
had  their  eyes  open. This  is  an  interesting  point,  I  think.

The  fourth  witness,  Mrs.  H.,  dictated  her  account  to  Mrs.
Wilson  in  the  early  part  of  November,  1904,  as  follows:

I  first  saw  the  head  and  shoulders  of  an  old  clergyman  with  grey
hair — no  beard  ;  he  wore  the  old-fashioned  "  Geneva  bands  "  that  the

clergy  used  to  wear. I  did  not  recognise  him,  but  heard  Mrs.  P

and  Mrs.  A — — ■  say  it  was  their  father.  I  did  not  see  him  on
the  medium's  face,  but  in  a  corner  of  the  mirror,  apart  from  the

medium. I  also  heard  Mrs.  P and  Mrs.  A say  that  they

saw  their  sister,  but  I  did  not  see  her.  After  this  we  saw  a  ball-
room in  the  mirror,  very  brightly  lighted,  with  people  walking
about  in  it.  I  did  not  recognise  any  of  them.  I  ought  to  have
said  that  at  first  I  saw  a  curtain  across  the  room,  and  it  was  when
it  was  withdrawn  that  I  saw  the  people  walking  about.

The  room  we  were  sitting  in  was  lighted  by  a  candle.

On  this  case,  the  Editor  comments  as  follows :

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  witnesses  did  not  record  their  impressions
at  the  time,  or  immediately  afterwards,  since  it  is  clear  that  in  some
respects  their  present  recollections  are  not  quite  correct.  Thus  Mrs.  P.
says:  "The  electric  light  was  full  on  all  the  time,  shaded  only  by  a
piece  of  silver  tissue  paper."  Miss  A.  says  :  "  The  gas  was  turned
down  to  about  half  its  strength."  Mrs.  H.  says :  "  The  room  we
were  sitting  in  was  lighted  by  a  candle."  One  or  other  of  these
descriptions  must  be  inaccurate,  unless  all  of  them  are  incomplete.
It  must  however  be  remembered  that  we  hardly  ever  find  two
people  giving  exactly  the  same  description  even  of  ordinary  events,
and  we  very  seldom  have  the  opportunity  of  comparing  together
as  many  as  four  independent  accounts  of  the  same  occurrence.
Whenever  we  did  this,  we  should  probably  find  quite  as  much
disagreement  as  in  the  present  case.

The  position  of  the  medium  in  relation  to  the  mirror  and  to  the
sitters  is  described  in  very  similar  terms  by  Mrs.  A.,  Mrs.  P.,  and


4b'6  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part

Misa  A.,  except  that  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  P.  say  that  they  sat  just
behind  the  medium,  while  Miss  A.  describes  the  medium  as  being
only  "slightly  nearer  the  glass  (say  3  ins.)  than  the  rest  of  us."

When  we  come  to  the  descriptions  of  the  figures  seen  in  the
mirror,  the  discrepancies  are  far  more  marked.  There  is,  of  course,
no  proof  of  inaccuracy  in  this,  because  it  is  quite  possible — not  to
say  probable — that  the  hallucinations  were  not  the  same  to  all  the
percipients.  Miss  A.  is  the  only  one  who  describes  the  appearance
of  a  white  mist  in  the  mirror  preceding  the  appearance  of  the
figures.  (Our  readers  will  remember  that  this  appearance  is  a  familiar
experience  with  crystal-gazers,  whether  as  a  preliminary  to  subjective
or  to  veridical  visions.)  With  regard  to  the  individual  figures  seen  :
(1)  As  to  the  father  of  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  P.,  Mrs.  A.  and  Miss  A.
say  that  they  saw  his  face  form  over  Mrs.  C.'s  face  in  the  mirror,
Miss  A.  adding  that  the  figure  smiled  and  nodded  its  head.  Mrs.  P.
describes  a  full-length  figure  of  her  father  in  the  mirror,  in  his  robes,
the  figure  having  no  connection  with  the  medium's  reflection  in  the
mirror.  Mrs.  H.  describes  the  head  and  shoulders  of  an  old  clergyman
with  grey  hair  and  "Geneva  bands,"  "not  on  the  medium's  face,
but  in  a  corner  of  the  mirror,  apart  from  the  medium."  (2)  The
sister  of  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  P.  was  seen  by  both  of  them  and  by
Miss  A.  in  a  similar  manner — her  face  forming  over  the  medium's
face  in  the  mirror;  but  not  seen  at  all  by  Mrs.  H.  though  she
heard  the  others  saying  they  had  seen  it.  (3)  "  Old  Mrs.  P."  is
mentioned  only  by  Mrs.  P.  (-f)  An  unrecognised  lady  is  described
only  by  Miss  A.  (5)  In  the  scene  of  the  long  corridor,  with  a
brilliantly  lighted  room  at  the  end,  and  figures  walking  about  in
it,  all  the  figures  were  unrecognised,  except  those  of  Mrs.  A.  and
her  son,  which  were  recognised  and  described  (though  somewhat
differently)  by  Mrs.  A.  herself  and  her  daughter.

These  various  discrepancies  may  arise  either  from  actual  dissimi-
larities in  the  hallucinations,  or  perhaps  from  inaccuracies  in  the
recollections  of  the  witnesses,  or  possibly  from  a  combination  of
both  causes ;  but,  however  this  may  be,  there  seems  no  doubt
that  the  hallucinations  were  to  a  great  extent  similar.  The  case
then  affords  a  striking  proof  of  the  possibility — so  often  denied —
of  producing  hallucinations  in  several  persons  at  once  by  mere
suggestion  and  expectancy,  without  hypnosis  or  any  such  process.
No  verbal  suggestion  even  was  employed  by  the  medium ;  for
Mrs.  Wilson,  having  made  special  enquiries  on  this  point,  tells  us
that  Mrs.  C.  closed  her  eyes  and  did  not  speak  during  the  sitting ;


lvi.J Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  467


the  sitters,  however,  did  describe  what  they  were  seeing  to  one
another  during  the  time  of  the  vision.

In  considering  such  a  case,  however,  the  question  first  natur-
ally presents  itself:  what  part  did  the  medium  really  play  in
the  whole  incident  ?  And  was  her  presence  an  essential  sine
qua  non  ?  Neither  in  Home's  case  nor  in  Mrs.  C.'s  do  we
know  whether  the  medium  willed  his  sitters  to  see  particular
images — surely  an  important  circumstance.  May  not  his  or  her
part  have  been  mostly  passive  ?  We  know  of  other  cases  of
collective  crystal  or  mirror-vision,  sometimes  in  the  absence  of
any  recognised  medium,  and  it  may  be  asked  whether  there  is
after  all  so  wide  a  gulf  between  two  such  cases  as  Mrs.  C.'s
and,  e.g.  Miss  Grieve's  ? 1  The  latter  episode  seems  to  me  to
afford  some  good  evidence  for  thought-transference,  since  it  is
alleged  that  both  Miss  Grieve  and  her  friend  preserved  silence
throughout  the  vision  ;  in  the  former  case,  on  the  contrary,  the
sitters  described  to  each  other  what  they  were  seeing,  though
the  medium  did  not  speak.  But  whether  we  admit  that
thought-transference,  perhaps  helped  by  verbal  suggestion,  did
operate  in  the  case  of  our  four  witnesses  or  not,  I  repeat  we
have  no  evidence  that  they  saw  what  the  medium  wanted  them  to
see ;  and  until  we  have  such  evidence,  similar  cases,  however
interesting,  can  hardly  prove  the  possibility  of  inducing
collective  hallucinations.

But  apart  from  this  and  in  any  case,  there  must  surely  be  a
difference  between  the  mental  attitudes  of  two  persons,  one  of
whom  sees  an  image  in  a  mirror,  while  the  other  beholds  a
scene  enacted  or  a  "  form "  moving  in  a  room ;  and  even
supposing  some  mediums  occasionally  have  power  to  cause  their
sitters  to  see  images  at  will,  e.g.,  in  the  narrow  circumscribed
sphere  of  a  crystal  ball  (which  from  the  very  nature  of  the
experiment  these  sitters  must  know  to  be  purely  subjective),  it
does  not  necessarily  follow  that  they  will  have  equal  success
when  dealing  with  the  seance-room  instead  of  a  crystal,  and
when  it  comes  to  making  the  persons  present  believe  in  the
objectivity  of  the  forms  and  of  the  more  or  less  complicated
incidents  to  be  seen.

Such  an  inference  does  not  seem  to  me  logically  inevitable.


1S.P.E.  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  Nov.  1901,  pp.  134-136.


468


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Do  I  therefore  positively  deny  that  it  is  in  hallucinatory
impressions,  more  or  less  deliberately  induced  by  the  medium,
that  we  must  look  for  an  explanation  of  some  incidents  con-
nected with  spiritistic  seances  ?

I  do  not.

When  an  abnormal  impression  is  experienced  by  only  one
sitter  at  a  time  (whether  this  sitter  is  or  is  not  peculiarly  liable
to  purely  subjective  hallucinations) ;  when  the  explanation  by
fraud  seems  to  present  serious  difficulties,  and  when  we  have
no  other  positive  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the  "  pheno-
menon "  supposed  to  have  occurred,  then  I  think  we  are  logically
bound  to  accept,  at  least  provisionally,  the  explanation  that  the
sitter  in  question  (and  may  be  even  many  sitters  in  succession)
was  subject  to  a  hallucination  or  to  an  illusion  of  the  senses.

Let  us  take  for  instance  a  "  manifestation "  I  have  often
witnessed  (and  described l)  at  the  sittings  of  the  late  Eussian
medium,  Sambor.  Chairs  would  be  frequently  threaded  on  his
arm  without,  according  to  his  neighbours,  his  hands  having  been
released  for  a  moment.  And  this  would  occur  almost  ad
libitum  :  persons  who  had  never  attended  a  seance  in  all  their
life  being  sometimes  equally  privileged  with  the  medium's
habitue's:  men  and  women,  young  and  old,  sceptics  and
believers.

A  wide  experience  of  Sambor's  sittings  left  on  my  mind  at
the  time  the  impression  that  this  chair-threading  was  not  due
to  conjuring — at  least  conscious  conjuring — on  the  part  of  the
medium,  and  that  we  must  search  for  some  other  clue.  Of
course  two  explanations  only  are  possible :  either  we  had  in  this
case  an  instance  of  the  "  passage  of  matter  through  matter,"
or  there  must  be  in  the  experience  a  hallucinatory  element.

The  first  explanation  I  now  reject,  because  to  believe  such
a  thing  possible  one  must  have  incontrovertible  proof,  and  this
proof  we  failed  to  get  in  the  course  of  our  experiments.  Nor
do  I  think  it  has  ever  been  got  elsewhere.

There  remains  therefore  only  one  other  alternative :  as  I  have
just  said,  a  hallucinatory  element  must  have  come  in  somewhere.
Either  the  sitters,  all  of  them,  were  mistaken  in  their  impression
that  a  chair  was  hangins:  on  So-and-So's  arm,  when  in  fact  it

1  See  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques  for  1899,  1900,  1902,  and  1904  passim,
and  Proceeding*  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXL,  pp.  396-7.


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  4G9


quietly  stood  by  (an  "  explanation "  which  I  utterly  and  un-
hesitatingly reject) ;  or  the  medium's  neighbour  was  mistaken  in
his  conviction  that  he  had  not  let  go  Sambor's  hand  for  a
quarter  of  a  second,  and  there  must  have  been  a  moment
when  he  felt  a  hand  to  be  in  his  when  in  fact  there  was  none.

Since  not  only  was  it  to  the  medium's  interest  to  create
such  an  erroneous  impression,  but  it  can  hardly  have  originated
spontaneously  (in  the  beginning  at  least)  in  the  sitter's  mind,  it
must  have  come,  in  some  way  or  other,  from  Sambor.  Since  no
one,  I  believe,  ever  heard  him  make  a  corresponding  verbal
suggestion,  the  suggestion  must  have  been  mentally  made ;  and
I  may  perhaps  go  one  step  further  and  add  that  I  am
prepared  to  admit  it  may  have  been  made  unconsciously.1

Improbable  as  such  an  explanation  may  appear  (to  specialists
in  hypnotism  and  suggestion  in  particular)  it  is  of  course  a
thousand  times  more  plausible  than  the  "  passage  of  matter
through  matter " ;  and  so  there  seem  to  me  to  be  good  reasons
for  holding  to  it.  I  will  adopt  a  much  simpler  one  after  a
conjuror  has  proved  to  me  that  unnoticed  liberation  of  a  hand
under  Sambor's  conditions  is  possible,  but  hardly  before.2

In  the  present  instance  we  are  therefore  quite  justified,
logically,  in  framing  such  a  theory.  But  suppose  the  "  passage
of  matter  through  matter "  should  ever  be  scientifically
established,  our  theory  would  then  have  to  be  in  all  probability
abandoned  as  inadequate  and  unnecessary.  But  I  think  such
a  day  will  not  come  for  a  long  while.

Why,  it  may  be  asked,  did  I  not  admit  a  similar  explanation
for  the  melting  of  the  "  spirit-hands "  at  Home's  seances  ?
Simply  because  it  would  not  have  helped  us  to  understand
many  other  incidents  connected  with  these  same  "  spirit-hands."
When  these  incidents  have  been  explained  away  and  nothing
left  of  them,  then  I  am  ready  to  accept  a  suggested  tactile
hallucination  as  a  very  plausible  explanation.

1  On  this  (supposed)  suggestion  and  consequent  illusion  of  the  sense  of  touch
other  hallucinatory  impressions— this  time  spontaneous — may  have  sometimes
grafted  themselves,  as  in  Madame  Youdenitch's  experience  (S.P.P.  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXI.,  p.  396,  footnote).

2  See  also  on  the  same  subject  my  letter  in  S.P.JR.  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.
(October,  1908),  p.  295,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Baggally's  criticism  (supposed  premature
extinguishing  of  candle).

2g


470


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Some  episodes  connected  with  "  materialisation "  seances,
especially  in  America,  are  also  quoted  sometimes  as  evidence  of
the  mediums'  power  to  influence  their  sitters,  in  a  certain  sense,
and  engender  illusions  in  them.  I  refer  chiefly  to  cases  of  the
supposed  "  recognition "  of  dead  relatives  and  friends.  Such
cases  seem  to  be  frequent.1  To  quote  Professor  H.  H.  Furness's
words  :

It  is,  I  confess,  a  very  puzzling  problem  ...  to  account  for
the  faith,  undoubtedly  genuine,  which  Spiritualists  have  in  the
personal  reappearance  of  their  departed  friends.  Again  and
a°ain  have  I  asked  those  who  have  returned  from  an  inter-
view  with  a  spirit  at  the  cabinet  to  their  seats  beside  me
whether  or  not  they  had  recognised  their  friends  beyond  a  per-
adventure  and  have  always  received  an  affirmative  reply,  sometimes
strongly  affirmative.  .  .  .  Again  and  again  men  have  led  round  the
circle  the  materialised  spirits  of  their  wives  and  introduced  them
to  each  visitor  in  turn  ;  fathers  have  taken  round  their  daughters,
and  I  have  seen  widows  sob  in  the  arms  of  their  dead  husbands.
Testimony  such  as  this  staggers  me.  Have  I  been  smitten  with
colour  blindness  ?  Before  me,  as  far  as  I  can  detect,  stands  the
very  medium  herself,  in  shape,  size,  form  and  feature  true  to  a
line,  and  yet,  one  after  another,  honest  men  and  women  at  my
side,  within  ten  minutes  of  each  other,  assert  that  she  is  the  absolute
counterpart  of  their  nearest  and  dearest  friend,  nay  that  she  IS
that  friend.2

An  instance  may  be  given  more  at  length.  Mr.  William
More  of  Denver,  Colorado,  personally  known  to  Miss  Johnson,
writes  to  her  as  follows  on  September  19th,  1906  :

As  per  your  request  I  herein  give  you  a  short  account  of  my
experiences  some  years  ago  in  a  series  of  materialisation  seances,
held  in  Denver  during  the  years  of  1880  and  1881.

Have  been  a  resident  of  Denver  continuously  since  1879  ;  the
following  year  my  attention  was  called  to  the  mediumship  of  a
certain  Mrs.  Miller  [now  Mrs.  Wilcox]  then  a  resident  of  Denver,
coming  here  from  Tennessee,  her  native  State.  I  also  met  her  father,
Tittle  by  name,  a  contractor  and  builder ;  he  told  me  these  mani-
festations in  one  phase  or  another  had  followed  her  from  infancy.

1  See,  for  instance,  Pnychinche  Studien  for  1897,  for  Mr.  Aksakoff's  description
at  great  length  of  one  such  case  with  Mme.  rt'Esperance.

2  Seybert  Commission's  Report,  pp.  150,  151.


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  471


This  is  the  medium  referred  to  by  Bishop  Watson  of  the  South
Methodist  Church,  and  who  published  his  experiences  in  a  series
of  books  entitled  The  Clock  struck  one,  two,  three,  etc.  However,  the
phases  which  came  to  my  attention  were  materialisation  and  de-
materialisation,  these  varying  all  the  way  from  personation  and
transfiguration  to  the  clear  independent  form.  The  personnel  of
the  circle  contributed  largely  towards  success  or  failure  in  produc-
ing the  highest  phase,  viz.,  "distinct  independent  form  materialisation."
Have  seen  the  conditions  so  poor  that  personation  of  the  entranced
medium  alone  could  be  had ;  but  often  that  phase  furnished  remark-
able tests  as  to  character  and  personal  traits  of  the  communicating-
spirit.  The  first  circle  I  attended,  I  assisted  Mr.  Miller  to  put  up
the  cabinet,  which  was  a  simple  four-sided  screen,  made  of  dark
grey  blankets  hung  on  a  rough  wood  frame  ;  the  blankets  hanging
so  as  to  part  in  front.  In  the  cabinet  was  a  lounge  or  chair
for  the  entranced  medium  to  recline  on.  Mrs.  Miller  was  searched
by  a  committee  of  ladies,  who  certified  that  both  her  outer  and
underclothing  was  entirely  black,  then  a  minute  search  was  made
of  the  cabinet  and  surroundings;  windows  and  doors  sealed,  the
medium  tied  and  light  shaded.  After  singing  some  familiar  song
or  hymn,  the  voice  of  Eed  Face,  the  Indian  control,  generally  spoke
out  loud  and  distinct.  Then  faces  and  hands  were  plainly  seen,
as  well  as  balls  of  light  on  the  carpet  and  round  the  room.  These
light  balls  often  showed  faces,  and  later  on  full  forms  would  shape
themselves  and  disappear  in  front  of  us.

When  the  full  power  had  been  attained,  Eed  Face  called  the
individual  sitters  wanted  by  the  spirit  to  the  cabinet ;  they  entering
and  generally  finding  the  medium  entranced.  When  I  was  called,
I  shook  hands  with  the  form  of  a  lady,  who  seemed  greatly  distressed
that  I  did  not  at  once  recognise  her;  sobbing  she  said,  "William,
don't  you  know  your  mother1?"  Her  voice  then  sunk  so  low  I
could  not  hear,  and  she  moved  towards  a  stand  where  there  was
paper  and  pencil,  but  before  she  wrote  anything  the  pencil  dropped
from  her  hand,  and  she  and  I  stooped  down  to  search  for  it ;  but
the  excitement  attendant  on  meeting  me  broke  her  down  so  much
that  she  requested  feebly  to  be  assisted  back  to  the  cabinet.  From
the  time  she  left  the  cabinet  till  she  retired  back,  she  leaned
heavily  on  my  shoulder,  and  I  felt  this  weight  up  to  the  front  of  the
cabinet,  when  she  dematerialised  suddenly.  Later  at  other  seances
have  seen  her  walk  stronger,  but  always  very  lame.  Neither  Mrs.
Miller  nor  any  other  person  in  Denver  were  aware  that  my  father


472


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


had  married  twice,  and  that  the  lady  then  known  as  Mrs.  More  was
not  my  mother,  as  I  nor  anyone  in  the  family  had  ever  mentioned
it,  nor  that  my  mother  had  died  after  losing  a  limb  on  the  operating
table.  All  this,  together  with  expressions  and  peculiar  mannerisms,
convinced  me  that  this  was  really  my  mother.  Another  circle  I
was  present  at ;  after  the  routine  opening  work,  the  form  of  a
young  man  apparently  about  eighteen  or  twenty  years  old  came
and  shook  hands  with  me.  I  disclaimed  his  acquaintance,  but  he
assured  me  that  he  had  seen  me  at  several  public  meetings,  and
his  name  was  Van  Scotten.  I  replied,  "Why,  you  are  only  out  of
the  body  little  over  two  months,  and  I  know  your  father  and
mother  well."  He  said,  "That  is  the  reason  I  came  to  you,  and
please  tell  them  I  am  all  right,  and  no  need  to  grieve  for  me."  For
the  previous  few  seconds  I  felt  his  hands  slowly  drawing  from
mine,  which  soon  became  a  strong  pull,  I  keeping  m}^  eyes  on  him
steadily  all  the  while ;  and  there  in  front  of  me  was  the  form  and
features  of  the  young  man  changing  rapidly  to  that  of  Mrs.  Miller
the  medium  ;  a  clear  case  of  transfiguration.  The  light  was  strong
enough  to  see  the  form  and  clothing  distinctly,  of  first  the  young
man  and  [then  the]  gradual  change  to  that  of  Mrs.  Miller.  Again
I  have  seen  her  arm  thrust  through  a  chair  or  other  solid  article
of  furniture,  and  when  I  grasped  her  hand  the  arm  seemed  to
dematerialise,  while  the  chair  or  other  article  fell  off.  Then  I  have
seen  the  objectifying  of  lace  and  white  embroidered  garments,  by
the  temporary  forms  or  the  entranced  medium  •  yard  after  yard
of  fine  delicate  lace  made  generally  from  a  small  nucleus  of  white
light  in  the  palm  of  the  hand;  piece  after  piece  of  the  wonderful
fabric  handed  to  the  sitters,  with  the  injunction  to  hold  on  to  it,
but  two  minutes  or  less  was  the  limit  they  could  retain  it.  This
was  done  to  illustrate  how  the  white  garments  of  the  ladies  as  well
as  the  magnificent  robes  of  bishops  and  clowns  succeeded  each  other
in  dazzling  array  at  these  remarkable  sittings.

William  More.

Miss  Johnson  adds  :

I  met  Mr.  More,  who  is  a  convinced  Spiritualist,  and  had  a  long
talk  with  him  about  his  experiences.  I  cross-questioned  him
especially  about  the  case  of  "  transfiguration "  when  the  form  and
features  of  the  young  man  changed  into  those  of  Mrs.  Miller.  He
assured  me  that  he  saw  the  young  man's  face  in  a  perfectly  clear
and  distinct  manner;  there  could  be  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  a
man's face; and he spoke like a man. It  was  while  he  was


LVI.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  473


actually  looking  into  the  face  that  he  saw  the  change  come  over  it,
as  it  turned  into  the  face  of  Mrs.  Miller,  which  he  then  saw  as
clearly  and  distinctly  as  he  had  seen  the  man's  face.

I  enquired  about  the  clothing  of  the  form.  Mr.  More  said  the
young  man  was  dressed  in  ordinary  man's  clothes,  but  when  the
form  changed  into  that  of  Mrs.  Miller,  he  saw  that  she  was  wearing
ordinary  woman's  clothing  and  not  drapery  of  any  kind.

Alice  Johnson.

Many  more  instances  of  the  kind  might  of  course  be  adduced.
In  estimating  their  evidential  value  we  must  first  of  all  bear
in  mind  the  circumstance  that  the  presumption  against  the
genuineness  of  professional  "  materialisation  "  seances  in  America
is  overwhelming.  In  view  of  this  fact  we  should,  I  think,
neither  attach  particular  importance  to  prima  facie  enigmatic
incidents  scattered  here  and  there  in  the  sitters'  accounts
(unless  these  accounts  be  drawn  up  by  persons  peculiarly
qualified),  nor  credit  the  so  often  exposed  trickster  who  styles
himself  a  materialising  medium  with  any  genuine  uncommon
power  without  very  serious  reasons.  Fraud  without  any
admixture  is  the  most  probable  explanation,  which  must  be
abandoned  only  when  irresistibly  proved  to  have  been  inadequate.

As  for  the  "  recognitions "  themselves,  I  see  no  reason  to
think  that,  in  most  cases  at  least,  the  medium  himself  or
herself  does  not  play  in  them  a  purely  passive  part.  My
grounds  for  this  opinion  are  that  these  '''  recognitions "  at
materialising  seances  are  precisely  similar  to  "  recognitions  "  in
the  domain  of  so-called  "  spirit-photography,"  where  it  is  certain
that,  in  many  cases  at  least,  the  illusion  which  gave  rise  to
the  identification  of  a  photograph  as  the  image  of  a  departed
friend  sprang  from  the  sitter  himself  without  any  prompting-
whatever  from  any  one.1  Not  only  so,  but  we  even  know
that  after  Buguet,  the  famous  French  "  spirit  photographer,"  had
confessed  in  the  course  of  his  trial  that  he  had  practised  trickery
throughout,  many,  if  not  most  of  his  dupes,  found  it  impossible
to  relinquish  their  faith,  on  the  ground  that  they  had  obtained
at  their  sittings  with  him  unmistakable  likenesses  of  those
dear  to  them. When  we  take  into  account  that  the  conditions

1  See  on  the  subject  the  chapter  on  "Spirit  Photography"  in  Mr.  Podmore's
Modern  Spiritualism  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article  in  Proceedings  S.P.E.,
Vol.  VII.,  p.  268.


474  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [pakt

under  which  these  "  spirit-photographs "  were  generally  taken
were  far  less  sensational  and  awe-inspiring  than  those  of  a
sitting  for  materialisation  (and,  I  believe,  were  even  sometimes
taken  in  the  sitters'  absence  and  sent  them  by  post),  I  find
that  such  "  recognitions "  a  tete  reposic,  and  to  which  the
Spiritualists  in  question  afterwards  so  obstinately  clung  under
the  prosaic  conditions  of  every-day  life,  are  much  more  to  be
wondered  at  than  those  taking  place  under  far  more  propitious
circumstances  from  the  emotional  point  of  view :  only  imagine
"  the  darkened  room,  the  music,  the  singing,  the  pervading  hush
of  expectation,  the  intensely  concentrated  attention,  the  strained
gaze  at  the  dark  cabinet  and  at  its  white-robed  apparitions.  ..." 1
No  wonder  at  all  if  under  such  circumstances  a  strongly
marked  illusion,  if  not  a  pure  hallucination,  occurs  now  and
then,  and  the  sitter  really  and  truly  believes  himself  to  be-
hold a  deceased  friend  or  relation  true  to  a  line,  and  then,
when  his  state  of  emotion  has  begun  to  subside,  thinks  (as
in  Mr.  More's  case)  that  he  really  sees  the  features  of  the
apparition  gradually  merge  into  those  of  the  medium.2  Such

1  Seybert  Commission's  Report,  p.  151.

2  Here  is  a  case  where  such  an  impression  of  "  transfiguration  "  was  obviously
purely  spontaneous.  Mr.  W.  B.  Hodgson,  a  young  journalist,  writes  to  Miss
Johnson  (to  whose  kindness  I  am  indebted  for  this  case  also)  on  May  23rd,  1905  :

"  The  experience  I  mentioned  in  our  conversation  the  other  day  happened
about  seven  years  ago.

I  was  in  the  office  of  a  newspaper  in  the  City,  the  room  being  on  the  top
floor  with  large  windows,  so  that  the  light  was  good.  The  door  opened,
and  some  one  entered.  As  he  must  have  passed  through  the  outer  office  the
presumption  was  that  it  was  some  one  I  knew.  I  looked  at  him  and  jumped
to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  friend  I  had  not  seen  for  a  long  time.  .  .  .
I  rose,  walked  towards  him  with  hand  stretched  out,  and  welcomed  him.  I
seemed  to  see  the  face  of  my  friend  quite  clearly.  But  as  I  got  within  a  yard
or  so,  the  face  of  my  friend  seemed  visibly  to  melt,  and  the  outlines  of  the
features  to  fuse  as  though  they  had  been  wax  before  a  strong  fire.  For  an
instant  there  was  chaos,  and  then  there  emerged  the  features  of  a  total  stranger,
and  I  saw  I  had  been  mistaken.

The  mistake  strongly  impressed  me  at  the  time,  especially  the  way  in  which
the  features  of  my  friend  suddenly  seemed  to  flow  into  the  new  form  of  the
stranger.  I  suppose  that  upon  some  trivial  point  of  resemblance  (which  I  was
unable  to  identify)  I  had  built  up  a  mental  image  which  lasted  till  the
impression  of  the  real  approaching  face  grew  too  strong  to  be  denied.

At  this  distance  of  time  I  cannot  recall  the  name  of  the  imaginary  friend,
nor  the  business  of  the  real  stranger — only  the  one  fact  of  the  apparent
'fusing'  of  the  features.  I  suffer  from  myopia  and  astigmatism,  and  use
slightly  concave  glasses  for  distant  vision.  ..."


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  475


facts  are  not  open  to  doubt,  but  what  we  want  to  know  is,
whether  they  may  not  be  of  a  purely  spontaneous  character
rather  than  of  external  origin  ;  and  whether  they  can  assume  a
collective  character.

Comparison  of  "  recognitions  "  in  the  realm  of  spirit  photo-
graphy and  in  that  of  materialisation  conclusively  shows  us,
I  think,  that  we  need  not  necessarily  look  to  such  an  external
origin  for  an  explanation.

Still,  that  repeated  verbal  suggestion,  especially  with  "  trained  "
sitters,  can  occasionally,  as  might  a  priori  be  expected,  bring
about  some  positive  results,  I  do  not  deny  ;  and  beg  to  refer
the  reader  in  this  connection  to  Professor  Harlow  Gale's  "  Study
in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations,"  printed  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.P.,
Vol.  XY.,  pp.  65-82.  But  I  think  that  any  impartial  reader,
after  studying  the  evidence  adduced  by  Professor  Gale,  will  agree
with  me  that  on  the  whole  these  results  are  meagre,  and  cannot
in  any  degree  bear  comparison  with  the  incidents  of  an  ordinary
seance  for  physical  phenomena  or  "  materialisation."  1

On  the  whole,  therefore,  though  I  think  there  is  some
evidence  that  in  certain  cases  false  sense-perceptions  can  shape
and  colour  the  sitter's  impressions  at  a  spiritistic  seance,  I  do
not  think  we  must  generalise  from  such  incidents,  or  that  we
should  build  on  them  a  theory  of  such  "  phenomena "  as
Home's.

And  though  I  do  not  deny  that  such  false  sense-perceptions
can  occasionally  be  induced  from  without,  i.e.  by  the  medium,
I  see  every  reason  to  believe  that  very  similar  illusions  can
originate  in  men  and  women  under  conditions  which  practically
exclude  the  possibility  of  external  suggestion.

Still,  in  some  very  exceptional  cases  (e.g.  that  of  Sambor's
chair-threading)  I  am  ready  to  admit  that  illusion  induced  by  the
medium  is  the  most  reasonable  explanation,  but  I  admit  it  only
provisionally,  and  because  on  the  one  hand  the  possibility  of
conjuring  under  such  conditions  does  not  seem  to  me  sufficiently

1  Thus  some  of  "Dr.  S.'s"  (the  medium's)  habituds  saw  figures  equally  well
with  hands  held  before  the  eyes,  or  with  eyes  closed  ;  some  never  saw  any-
thing ;  others  would  see  the  "face  transfiguration"  only  "on  fixating  with
effort  and  extreme  tension;"  some  had  already  seen  "figures"  before  making
Dr.  S.'s  acquaintance  (pp.  77-79).  I  think  it  may  be  said  in  all  impartiality
that  the  residuum  left  after  all  this  discounting  is  small,  when  al  the  accompany-
ing circumstances  are  taken  into  account.


476


Count  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


proved,  and,  on  the  other,  because  we  have,  broadly  speaking,  no
other  evidence  (I  mean,  no  irrefutable  evidence)  of  the  occurrence
of  the  phenomenon  in  question.

As  for  the  possibility  of  the  medium  being  able  to  induce
a  collective  hallucination  in  several  sitters  in  the  waking  state
at  once,  I  see  no  good  evidence  for  it.  Barring,  as  I  said
in  the  beginning  of  my  paper,  and  for  the  reasons  there  specified,
Eastern  conjuring,  I  see  no  reason  to  think  that  any  one  has
ever  been  able  to  make  a  roomful  of  people,  or  even  three  or  four
persons  believe  (if  sitting  in  the  light)  that  he  was  holding-
red-hot  coals  or  floating  in  the  air,  if  in  fact  he  was  doing
nothing  of  the  kind.  I  do  not  think  we  have  any  grounds
for  admitting  that  Home  could  have  caused  Lords  Lindsay  and
Adare  and  Captain  Wynne  to  see  him  outside  the  window  when
he  was  inside  the  room,  nor  that  he  could  have  caused  three
persons  to  see  the  form  of  his  late  wife  leaning  against  him,
if  all  around  him  there  was  but  empty  space.  Let  us  remember
that  in  his  case  alone,  to  mention  no  others,  such  an  assumption
has  been  repeatedly  proved  to  stand  in  direct  contradiction  to
facts.  And  before  believing  anything  of  the  kind  possible  we
must  insist  on  new  and  good  evidence.

The  hallucination  hypothesis  should  also,  I  think,  be  avoided
unless  urgently  necessary  for  another  reason.  Once  we  have
admitted  it  (or  at  least  the  hypothesis  of  collective  and  induced
hallucination)  in  one  case,  we  see  that,  unless  we  refuse  to  be
consistent  and  do  not  draw  a  purely  arbitrary  line  somewhere
quite  illogically,  it  will  quickly  lead  us  into  the  region  of  infinite
doubt.  If  a  medium  can  cause  several  sitters  to  believe  they
see  a  materialised  hand  where  there  is  only  "  viewless  air ; "
or  that  they  behold  him  floating  in  space  when  he  has  not
left  his  chair,  we  are  logically  bound  to  infer  that  he  may
also  prevent  their  seeing  some  actions  of  his  or  even  his  own
person, — may,  in  fact,  induce  in  them  not  only  positive,  but
also  negative  hallucinations.  For  I  wonder  on  what  grounds
we  could  declare  such  a  thing  impossible  ?  I  consequently
submit  that,  if  Nikolaeff  was  able  to  engender  in  his  six  sitters
the  belief  that  they  saw  luminous  hands  first  gradually  forming
themselves,  then  floating  in  the  air,  and  heard  these  hands
deal  vigorous  blows  in  different  places  when  nothing  of  the
kind  really  occurred,  he  might  have  been  equally  able  to  prevent


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  477


them  from  seeing  how  he  himself  pulled  off  the  silk  lamp-shade
and  threw  it  towards  the  six  doctors.  So  must  Home  have
been  able  to  induce  in  his  clients  the  belief  that  certain  actions
(for  instance,  "  direct  writing  "  in  Mr.  Burr's  case)  were  per-
formed under  their  eyes  by  materialised  hands,  when  in  fact
he  did  these  things  himself,  merely  suggesting  a  negative
hallucination  to  the  persons  present.  Why  is  one  supposition
more  improbable  than  the  other  ?  But  see  to  what  straits  we
should  finally  be  driven  if  we  adopt  this  one.  In  a  region
where  serious  investigation  worthy  of  the  name  is  already  so
difficult,  not  to  say  almost  impossible,  we  shall  finally  hopelessly
entangle  ourselves  in  the  factitious  obstacles  we  are  cheerfully
raising  with  a  fertility  of  imagination — I  think,  misdirected —
which  may  well  evoke  admiration.

For  my  own  part  I  lay  it  down  as  a  general  proposition, —
and  I  consider  that  I  am  entitled  to  it,  not  only  by  the  every-
day experience  of  mankind  for  many  centuries,  but  also  by
the  study  of  these  so-called  "  Physical  Phenomena,"  whether
fraudulent  or  genuine, — that  the  testimony  of  several  sane,
honest  and  intelligent  eye-witnesses  is,  broadly  speaking,  proof
of  the  objectivity  of  any  phenomenon.  If  there  are  people
who  maintain  an  opposite  view,  why,  let  them  make  experiments
themselves.

There  may  be  and  often  is  on  the  part  of  these  several
eye-witnesses  misinterpretation  of  the  object  seen ;  distortion
(in  the  retrospect)  of  the  impressions  primarily  received ;.
occasionally  a  pure  hallucination  of  memory  perhaps  ;  but,  I
repeat,  I  do  not  think  we  have  serious  grounds  for  believing
they  can  be  made  to  see  something  non-existent.  Nor  do
1  think  we  are  entitled  to  suppose  that  such  "  misinterpretation  "
of  a  real  scene  or  object  can  assume  in  several  persons
(intelligent  and  sane  !)  such  gigantic  proportions  as,  for  instance,
to  make  them  mistake  a  man  who  simply  "  thrust  his  head
and  shoulders  out  of  the  window  " 1  for  a  man  floating  in  the
air  outside  the  window.  For  what,  I  ask,  would  be  the  difference
between  such  an  "illusion"  and  a  pure  "hallucination?"  Evidence
that  such  things  are  possible  may  be  forthcoming  some  day.
As  yet  I  see  very  little  of  it.

But,  it  may  be  asked,  did  I  not  say  at  the  beginning  of  my
1  Mr.  Podmore's  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  p.  121.


478


Count  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


paper  that  no  one  who  has  studied  the  evidence  collected  by
the  S.P.R.  can  doubt  the  existence  of  collective  hallucinations  ?
Nor  do  I  doubt  it.  But  these  are  hallucinations  either
spontaneously  originating  in  one  person  and  transmitted,  so
to  say,  to  another,  or  telepathically  induced  by  a  third  person
at  a  distance.  And  then,  il  faut  nous  entendre.  Personally
I  should  not  be  at  '  all  disinclined  to  invite  those  who  shared
in  such  a  strange  and  collective  experience  to  prove  that  it
was  of  a  hallucinatory  character,  though  such  a  request  could
hardly  be  complied  with  in  most  cases.  And  I  should  have
made  my  invitation  especially  pressing  in  connection  with
certain  cases  of  "  apparitions "  seen  in  haunted  houses.  If
I  agree  to  call  them  hallucinatory,  it  is  on  my  part  almost
exclusively  a  matter  of  courtesy  ! 1

Were  I  now  asked  whether,  if  I  decline  to  explain  away
by  false  sense-perception  most  of  the  cases  mentioned  in  my
paper,  it  must  follow  that  I  fully  believe  in  their  genuineness,
I  should  certainly  answer :  "  No."

Impressed  as  I  am,  in  common,  I  believe,  with  all  serious
students  of  the  subject,  with  much  of  the  Home  evidence,  I
cannot  but  think  that  it  presents  serious  drawbacks.  The
remoteness  of  the  "incidents"  and  the  impossibility  of  repetition
where  there  is  such  urgent  need  for  it ;  the  almost  unlimited
possibilities  of  conjuring ;  the  numberless  exposures  of  other
mediums ;  the  fact  that  a  great  many  and  probably  most  of
Home's  clients  seem  to  have  been  by  no  means  scientifi-
cally qualified  for  an  investigation  of  his  claims,  and  that
their  testimony  may  be  worth  not  more  than  that  of  many
Spiritualists  of  the  present  day,  which  we  are  bound  to  reject
without  hesitation  (for  in  this  curious  region  the  most  positive
statement  coming  from  the  most  honourable  and — in  general
worldly  matters — the  most  sane  man  may  be  absolutely  value-
less) ; the  part  which  may  have  been  played  now  and  then

'"This  hypothesis  ["that  the  apparition  is  something  belonging  to  the
external  world";  "that  like  ordinary  matter  it  occupies  and  moves  through
space"]  involves  us  in  many  difficulties.  .  .  .  Nevertheless  I  am  bound  to
admit  that  there  is  some  little  evidence  tending  to  suggest  this  theory.  For
instance  ...  A  considerable  amount  of  clear  evidence  to  the  appearance  of
ghosts  to  independent  observers  in  successive  points  in  space  would  certainly
afford  a  strong  argument  for  their  having  a  definite  relation  to  space  "  (Mrs.
Sidgwick  in  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  146).


lvl] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  479


by  practical  joking ; 1  the  frequent  looseness  of  the  conditions
at  the  sittings  (in  many  cases  it  is  practically  certain  Home
could  have  imposed  any  conditions  he  chose) ;  finally,  the
fact  that  even  his  career,  however  different  in  this  respect
from  that  of  other  physical  mediums,  is  not  entirely  free
from  suspicious  incidents : — all  these  circumstances  stand  very
much  in  the  way  of  our  definitely  accepting  Home's  phenomena
as  genuine.  And  as  years  roll  by  and  no  worthy  successor
of  his  appears  on  the  public  stage ;  as  new  and  hitherto
unsuspected  sources  of  error  spring  into  view ;  as  the  general
unreliability  in  such  matters  of  almost  all  persons  except
specially  qualified  experts  becomes  more  and  more  obvious,2
scepticism  appears  more  and  more  legitimate  and  natural,
even  when  it  extends  to  facts  in  the  past  which  may  have
seemed  impregnable  for  many  a  decade.

It  seems  to  me  that  for  very  obstinate  disbelievers  in
"  Physical  Phenomena "  such  a  line  of  argument  (though  I
do  not  say  I  am  quite  in  sympathy  with  it)  may  yet  prove
more  fruitful  than  a  theory  built,  so  to  say,  "  in  the  air,"
and  for  which  support  is  to  be  sought  in  some  measure  even
in  the  cabinet  of  the  American  materialising  medium !  And
after  they  have  framed  on  these  lines  any  provisional  negative
conclusions,  let  them  and  all  of  us  possess  our  souls  in
patience  in  the  hope  that  a  day  will  come  when  a  second
Home  will  triumphantly  reverse  these  conclusions  !

Appendix.

I  subjoin  an  account  of  a  case  of  table  movements  apparently
without  contact.  The  narrator,  M.  Schilkine,  has  been  known  to
me  for  some  eighteen  years;  he  is  of  an  open,  intelligent  and
critical  mind,  though  by  no  means  hypercritical ;  in  fact  a  good
witness  of  transparent  honesty  and  sufficient  sagacity.  I  think
it  very  probable  that  the  "  movements "  he  describes  were
genuine,  and  can  only  consider  the  tricks  played  by  M.  K.  on

'See  my  remarks  on  this  point  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  402-404.

- 1  should,  of  course,  be  the  first  to  admit  that  there  are  exceptions  to
such  a  generalisation,  but  they  would  be  good  instances  of  Vexception  confirme
la  regie.


480


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


other  occasions  an  unfortunate  circumstance  not  necessarily
vitiating  the  case  under  consideration.  Still  that  frequent
unreliability  of  unpaid  mediums  is  both  curious  and  dis-
heartening !

M.  Schilkine  writes  :

Awil,  1906.

Durant  les  hivers  des  annees  1896  et  1897  nous  avions  forme  un
petit  cercle,  arm  d'observer  les  phenomenes  spirites,  dans  une  serie
de  seances  organisees  avec  toute  la  circonspection  que  ce  genre
d'etude  necessite.  Outre  les  soussignes,  nous  admettions  parfois  dans
nos  reunions  des  personnes  de  notre  connaissance  et  notamment
un  jeune  officier  du  regiment  de  Novotcherkask,  M.  P.  K.,  tue  en
1905  a  Mukden.  M.  K.  paraissait  done  d'une  force  mediumique
considerable  et  donnait  pendant  nos  seances  les  signes  caracteristiques
de  la  transe  mediumique.  Le  probleme  que  nous  nous  etions  pro-
pose, entre  autres,  etait  d'obtenir  le  mouvement  des  objets  par  la
force  mediumique  seule,  sans  contact  et  dans  des  conditions  qui
excluraient  toute  incertitude  quant  a  la  realite  et  l'authenticite  des
manifestations.  Nous  employions  pour  nos  experiences  une  petite
table  a  trois  pieds.  Au  debut,  les  mouvements  ne  se  produisaient
qu'avec  le  contact  de  nos  mains  unies  en  chaine  mediumique.  Dans
la  suite,  sans  rompre  la  chaine,  nous  essayames  de  lever  nos  mains
de  dessus  la  table,  en  priant  les  esprits  d'en  continuer  le  mouvement.
Nous  avons  reussi  a  l'avoir,  mais  presque  toujours  dans  une  obscurite
plus  ou  moins  complete.  Nous  constations  le  mouvement,  soit  au
bruit  que  les  pieds  de  la  table  faisaient  en  glissant  sur  le  parquet,
soit  au  contact  dont  elle  effleurait  nos  genoux  et  nos  pieds,
pendant  ses  oscillations.  Souvent  la  table  tombait  sur  les  genoux
de  quelqu'un  d'entre  nous,  se  relevait  pour  retomber  sur  ceux  d'une
autre  personne,  et  ainsi  de  suite.  Lorsque  le  phenomene  faiblissait
nous  remettions  nos  mains  sur  la  table  pour  lui  communiquer  la
force  necessaire,  et  les  mouvements  reprenaient  aussitot.

Enfin,  a  l'une  des  seances  de  l'annee  1896  (nos  souvenirs  varient
entre  les  dates  du  28  octobre  et  du  18  novembre)  sur  le  conseil  des
"  esprits "  obtenu  au  moyen  du  proced6  de  l'alphabet,  nous  avons
allume  une  lanterne  rouge  (de  celles  qui  servent  pour  le  developpe-
ment  des  plaques  photographiques),  et  nous  avons  vu  les  mouvements
de  la  table,  libre  de  tout  contact.  La  seance  avait  lieu  dans  le
logement  de  MM.  Schilkine,  et  dans  la  piece,  oil  la  manifestation
s'est  produite,  en  plus  des  soussignes,  se  trouvait  M.  P.  K.,  en  proie
a  sa  transe  habituelle,  et  etendu  dans  un  fauteuil,  distant  de  la


lvi.] Hallucination  Theory  of  Physical  Phenomena.  481


table  en  question,  de  trois  a  quatre  metres,  au  moins.  Les  soussignes
se  tenaient  debout  autour  de  la  table,  les  mains  en  chaine  mediumique
et  elevees  d'un  demi-metre  au-dessus  de  la  table.  Nous  nous  voyions
de  la  tete  aux  pieds  et  ne  pouvions  manquer  de  nous  convaincre  que
rien  ni  personne  ne  touchait  a  la  table.  A  notre  priere,  les  mouve-
ments  se  produisirent ;  la  table  glissa  sur  le  parquet,  en  se  penchant
de  tous  les  cotes,  comme  si  elle  prenait  son  elan. — enrin  elle  se
soiileva  completement  de  terre,  de  ses  trois  pieds,  et  se  maintint  a
une  hauteur  de  dix  a  vingt  centimetres,  pendant  deux,  trois  secondes.
Nous  avons  remarque  que  le  mouvement  de  nos  mains  en  l'air
avivait  celui  de  la  table,  en  la  dirigeant  du  cote  voulu.

Cette  manifestation  ne  se  repeta  plus  dans  des  conditions  de
controle  aussi  scrupuleusement  certaines.


(1)  Extract  from  M.  Schilkine's  letter  to  me,  dated  May  1  [14]  1906.
I  send  you  an  account  of  our  experiments  on  table-movements.  .  .  .

For  the  complete  truth  of  all  we  have  written  down  we  can  vouch.
We  have  also  recalled  many  interesting  things,  partly  even  written
down  at  the  time  by  Mme.  Zakrzevska ;  but  unfortunately  mutual
confidence  played  too  great  a  part  in  all  that  for  the  occurrences
at  our  sittings  to  be  convincing,  not  to  ourselves  on!}',  but  to
strangers.  .  .  .

(2)  Extract  from  M.  Schilkine's  letter  to  me,  dated  May  2/15.

The  late  K.  did,  in  fact,  confess  to  us  having,  by  way  of  a  joke,
simulated  mediumistic  phenomena  in  some  circle  (some  relations  of
his,  I  think,  so  as  to  "scare"  old  people:  I  cannot  recall  it  for
certain)  ;  still  with  us  he  always  was  extremely  serious,  and  seemed
to  value  much  the  reputation  of  an  interesting  medium.  This  did
not  prevent  us  from  suspecting  in  some  cases  that  precisely  in  order
to  sustain  his  reputation  he,  like  apparently  most  other  mediums,
could  not  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  acting  as  an  assistant  to
the  spirits— and  a  more  eager  one  than  from  our  standpoint  would
have  seemed  desirable.  Still,  I  must  honestly  confess  that  K.  was
never  directly  caught  simulating  phenomena;  and  our  suspicions
are  based  on  the  same  "internal  conviction"  as  many  suspicions  about
other  mediums  with  whom  I  had  experiences  later  on  together
with  you.


TTherkse  Zakrzevska.
(Signed)  -  D.  Schilkine.


482


Count  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


As  for  the  table  phenomenon  we  have  described  in  particular — it
is  positively  impossible  to  suspect  K.  of  anything  in  this  case  :  he
was  too  far  away  from  the  table,  and  owing  to  the  conditions  of
the  seance,  and  to  the  carefulness  of  the  control  (which  was  the
greater,  since  we  always  had  in  view  the  inclination  to  "  augment "
phenomena  proper  to  mediums),  it  is  quite  impossible  to  suppose
some  mechanical  appliances  with  which  K.  could  have  moved  and
raised  into  the  air  the  table  1  from  a  distance.  The  table  was  ours
(it  is  in  my  rooms  still);  during  the  phenomenon  we  were  rather
closely  surrounding  it,  there  was  light  in  the  room.  The  most  adroit
conjuror  could  not  have  done  anything  under  these  conditions.

The  seance  described  is  precisely  interesting  in  this — that  even  if
three  persons  out  of  those  present  had  agreed  by  combined  endeavours
to  deceive  the  fourth,  it  is  my  profound  conviction  that  they  would
not  have  succeeded  in  producing  the  phenomenon  of  table-moving
in  the  way  it  occurred.

It  must  be  noted  that  K.'s  presence  at  our  sittings  was  not  a
necessary  condition  of  their  success.  We  had  phenomena  without
him  ;  but  the  "physical"  phenomena  proper  were  rarer  and  weaker.
At  first  K.  sat  with  us  in  the  chain.  Once  the  "spirits"  demanded
that  he  should  sit  at  a  distance  outside  the  chain.  We  were  glad
it  was  so,  and  later  on  we  generally  insisted  that  sittings  should
take  place  precisely  in  this  wray  (of  course  when  there  was  enough
light  in  the  room  to  see  the  sitters).

In  conclusion  I  will  take  the  liberty  to  reassert  that  if  we  were
of  "  sound  mind  and  firm  memory  " 2  during  the  seance  described,
the  movements  of  the  table  must  undoubtedly  be  considered  as
occurring  without  any  contact  whatsoever.  .  .  .

D.  SCHILKINE.

1 M.  Sclrilkine  uses  throughout  the  diminutive  form  of  the  word  in  Russian
("little  table,"  stolih).

-  A  technical  expression  used  in  wills  in  Russia.


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


483


III.

THE  EDUCATION  OF  THE  SITTER.
By  Alice  Johnson.


Introduction.

It  has  been  suggested  that  I  should  contribute  to  the  dis-
cussion initiated  by  Count  Solovovo  on  the  possible  part  played
by  hallucination  and  illusion  in  producing  supposed  "  physical
phenomena,"  and  I  follow  his  lead  in  trying  to  trace  these
agencies  especially  in  the  case  of  Home.

The  greater  part  of  the  evidence  in  this  case  is  useless  for
our  purposes,  since  the  accounts  of  individual  incidents  are
extraordinarily  meagre  in  themselves,  and  accounts  given  by
different  witnesses  of  the  same  incident  vary  so  much  as  to
suggest  that  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  any  of  them,  and
that  consequently  no  definite  conclusions,  either  positive  or
negative,  can  be  drawn  from  them.

Two  notable  exceptions  to  this  general  statement  are,  how-
ever, to  be  found  in  the  evidence  of  two  witnesses,  Sir  William
Crookes  and  Lord  Adare  (now  Lord  Dunraven).  The  former
recounts  the  facts  from  the  more  objective  point  of  view  of  the
man  of  science;  the  latter  from  the  more  subjective  point  of
view  of  the  cultivated  man  interested  in  philosophy  and  religion.
Hence  it  is  the  latter  case  that  affords  us  the  best  insight
into  the  psychology  of  the  sitter,  and  Lord  Adare's  Experiences
in  Spiritualism  with  Air.  D.  D.  Home  is  a  valuable  psycho-
logical document,  for  in  the  long  series  of  events  happening
to  one  person,  and  recorded  by  him  pretty  fully  and  almost
contemporaneously,  enough  details  are  given  to  show  us,  as  it
appears  to  me,  how  his  mind  became  gradually  educated  under
the  influence  and  by  the  suggestions  of  the  medium. "  And


484


Alice  Johnson.


[part


if  these  things  are  done  in  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done
in  the  dry  ? "  To  illustrate  my  arguments,  therefore,  I  use
chiefly  instances  taken  from  Lord  Adare's  book.

But  first  one  remark  is  necessary  to  guard  against  possible
misapprehensions.  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  an  unimpassioned
hearing  for  the  hypothesis  that  a  certain  number  of  alleged
physical  phenomena  can  be  explained  as  hallucinations  or  illu-
sions experienced  by  the  sitters,  because  there  are  still  many
persons  who  cannot  disabuse  themselves  of  the  idea  that  to
suggest  that  a  man  has  had  a  hallucination  is  tantamount  to
an  accusation  of  want  of  mental  balance.  It  is  of  course  true
that  some  persons  of  unbalanced  mind  are  liable  to  hallucina-
tions, though  many  other  unbalanced  persons  are  not.  But  it
is  equally  true,  and  must  be  well  known  to  readers  of  Phantasms
of  the  Living  and  of  our  Proceedings  that  many  of  those  who
have  experienced  hallucinations  are  at  least  up  to  the  average
of  mankind  in  intellectual  capacity  and  sanity.  "  Calculating
boys "  are  sometimes  imbecile ;  but  we  should  not  argue  from
that  that  the  mathematical  faculty  was  in  itself  a  morbid
symptom.  Hallucinations,  too,  are  occasionally  associated  with
morbid  physical  conditions,  but  in  that  case  they  are
generally  of  different  types  from  those  which  occur  to  people
in  normal  conditions.1

In  fact,  the  process  of  hallucination  is  in  itself,  as  Mr.
Myers  insists  in  his  chapter  on  "  Sensory  Automatism "  in
Human  Personality,  an  expansion  of  a  natural  faculty — the
faculty  for  visualising  or  externalising  ideas  that  exist  con-
sciously or  subconsciously  in  the  mind  ;  and  this  faculty  may
be  utilised  as  a  means  of  psychological  study.  We  have
now  come  to  the  stage  at  which  motor  automatism  may  be
considered  on  its  own  merits.  If  it  is  said  that  a  member
of  the  S.P.B.  Council  writes  automatically,  the  statement  is
not  supposed  to  convey  a  covert  insult  to  that  member.  Why
should  it  be  thought  more  insulting  to  suggest  that  a  member
of  the  Council  or  of  any  other  scientific  body  may  visualise
automatically  ?

Certain  kinds  of  visual  automatisms  may,  it  is  true,  be
attributed  to such a person without offence. It  would  be

1  See  Mr.  Piddiugton's  review  of  Dr.  Head's  Goulstonian  Lectures  for  1901,
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIX.  p.  267.


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


485


permissible  to  say  that  he  had  seen  an  apparition  of  an
absent  friend,  i.e.,  that  he  had  seen  a  person  who  was
not  there.  It  should  then  be  equally  permissible  to  suggest
that  if  he  saw  a  person  suspended  in  the  air,  that  person
might  have  been  standing  on  the  ground.  For,  whereas
the  first  case  would  be  a  hallucination,  the  second  would  only
be  an  illusion  ;  that  is,  in  the  first  case  the  perception  would
be  much  more  at  variance  with  the  external  facts  than  in  the
second.  The  fact  is  that  every  one  may  occasionally  experience
a  hallucination,  and  every  one  is  constantly  liable  to  illusions ;
and  no  intellectual  discredit  can  attach  to  either.  The  question
of  intellectual  capacity  comes  in  only  in  relation  to  inferences
drawn  from  one's  perceptions.

Here  we  touch  on  the  fundamental  difference  between  the
evidence  for  psychical  and  that  for  physical  phenomena.  In  the
former  case,  we  are  dealing  primarily  with  mental  impressions  ;
in  the  latter  with  the  inferences  drawn  from  mental  impressions
as  to  external  physical  facts.  The  latter  case,  then,  introduces
many  possibilities  of  error  which  cannot  occur  in  the  former.
I  have  argued  this  point  fully  in  my  paper  on  "  Sittings  for
Physical  Phenomena  in  America "  (Proceedings,  Part  LIV.,  pp.
128-131)  and  need  not  repeat  it  here.

In  the  purely  psychical  cases,  people  do  not  as  a  rule  draw  wrong-
inferences  as  to  external  facts.  The  man  who  sees  an  apparition
is  not  likely  to  infer  that  the  person  represented  by  it  is  actually
present,  because  such  a  mistake  could  generally  be  easily  corrected.
He  is  only  concerned  in  the  first  instance  with  his  own  mental
impression,  and  this  can  be  ascertained  and  noted  before  and
independently  of  any  enquiry  as  to  the  relation  it  may  or  may
not  have  with  some  external  event,  such  as  the  death  of  the
person  represented.  If,  however,  our  hypothetical  percipient
sees  a  man  rise  unsupported  in  the  air,  his  first  thought  might
naturally  be  to  infer  that  the  man  did  rise,  and  the  burden  of
the  enquiry  is  at  once  shifted  to  the  question  whether  this
inference  is  correct.  We  cannot  here  first  note  the  mental
impression  and  then  go  on  independently  to  examine  the  external
fact  to  which  it  is  supposed  to  correspond,  for  there  may  be
no  evidence  for  the  fact  beyond  the  mental,  impression.

Consequently  it  is,  as  a  rule,  much  more  difficult  to  prove
that  an  alleged  "  physical  phenomenon "  has  taken  place  than

2h


486


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  prove,  say,  a  case  of  telepathy ;  for  the  former  depends  much
more  often  than  the  latter  on  the  unsupported  testimony  of  the
senses.

In  ordinary  life  we  are  constantly  testing  and  correcting  the
direct  testimony  of  our  senses  through  the  repetition  of  experi-
ences under  varying  conditions,  so  that  by  striking  a  sort  of
average,  we  get  a  roughly  reliable  result.  In  the  case  of
"  physical  phenomena "  there  may  often  be  no  opportunity  for
the  necessary  tests  or  corrections,  and  consequently  grave  reason
to  distrust  the  pronouncement  of  the  senses  regarding  them.

In  order  to  establish  any  new  facts,  it  is  necessary  to  criticise
the  evidence  as  stringently  as  possible.  The  superficial  observer
is  apt  to  think  that  criticism  tends  to  discourage  the  worker  and
to  confine  and  obstruct  advance.  I  believe  that  in  the  long  run
its  effect  is  exactly  the  reverse.  I  believe  that  by  the  severity
of  our  criticism  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  from  the  living  and
from  the  dead  we  have  actually  both  stimulated  its  production
and  improved  its  quality.  It  seems  to  me  therefore  worth  while
to  point  out  certain  flaws  in  what  has  generally  been  regarded  as
the  best  evidence  for  physical  phenomena,  in  the  hope  that  fresh
evidence  free  from  the  flaws  inherent  in  this  may  be  forthcoming.

Coming  to  the  consideration  of  concrete  cases,  we  find  com-
paratively few  to  which  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination  can  be
applied  ;  the  more  practical  question  is  whether  illusions,  which
are  of  course  far  commoner  than  hallucinations,  cannot  account
for  a  good  many  of  the  cases  that  are  not  to  be  explained  by
fraud.

Home's  "  Spirit-hands."

In  the  case  of  Home's  "  spirit-hands,"  Count  Solovovo  argues
that,  though  certain  features  (especially  the  fact  that  they
were  sometimes  invisible  to  some  of  the  persons  present)  sug-
gested that  they  were  hallucinatory,  others  (notably  the  fact
that  objects  were  often  moved  by  them  from  one  place  to
another)  seemed  to  show  that,  whether  fraudulent  or  genuine,
they  were  objective.  Yet  the  hands  that  moved  objects  were
also  occasionally  invisible  to  some  persons  present.  This —
according  to  Count  Solovovo — tends  to  prove  that  in  all  cases,
even  when  invisible,  the  "  spirit-hands  "  were  objective.


lvl]  The  Education  of  the  Sitter.  487

I  should  like  to  point  out,  first,  the  a  priori  difficulties
of  regarding  these  hands  as  genuinely  supernormal.  One
hesitates  to  accept  the  alleged  facts  of  "  materialisation "
because  it  is  entirely  contrary  to  ordinary  experience  that
matter  should  suddenly  become  organised  and  as  suddenly
become  disorganised  and  dissipated  from  no  apparent  cause.
Consequently,  a  great  deal  of  excellent  evidence  would  be
required  to  justify  a  belief  in  such  a  fact.

Still,  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  spirit-hands  referred  to  by
Count  Solovovo,  the  temporary  organism,  so  long  as  it  exists,
behaves  like  any  other  matter.  Thus,  the  hand  carries  a
flower  across  the  room — as  any  other  hand  might — over-
coming apparently  by  its  own  muscular  force  the  force  of
gravity  and  the  resistance  of  the  air.  Then  it  apparently
dissolves  into  nothing.

But  we  meet  with  an  altogether  different  problem  and  a
phenomenon  still  more  remote  from  our  ordinary  experience
when  we  find  that  the  spirit-hand  that  carries  the  flower
appears  to  one  person  like  a  hand,  to  another  like  a  luminous
cloud,  while  to  a  third  it  is  invisible  altogether.  Here  is  a
kind  of  matter  which  is  not  only  temporary  in  character — a
fact  in  itself  extraordinary  enough — but  exhibits  another  quite
unprecedented  characteristic  in  the  arbitrary  selectiveness  of
its  effects  on  other  matter.  In  order  to  be  visible  at  all,  it
must  reflect  light.  How  does  it  manage  to  reflect  light  that
affects  the  retina  of  one  person  and  not  the  retina  of  another  ?
We  may  reply  that  the  difference  must  lie  in  the  retinae,  one
being  more  sensitive  than  the  other.  But  we  do  not  find  the
same  difference  of  sensitivity  in  regard  to  the  light  reflected
from  ordinary  objects.  It  seems  to  follow  then  that  the  light
reflected  from  the  spirit-hancl  is  a  peculiar  kind  of  light,  lying
outside  the  limits  of  the  ordinary  visible  spectrum.  But  in
that  case,  why  is  not  the  person  with  the  more  sensitive
retina  constantly  affected  by  it  ?  For  of  course  all  ordinary
objects  are  constantly  giving  off  radiations  outside  the  limits  of
the  visible  spectrum ;  but  our  supposed  sensitive  apparently
does  not  perceive  them.

We  then  seem  driven  to  suppose  that  not  only  does  the
spirit-hand  consist  of  matter  of  a  temporary  kind,  but  that
while  it  exists,  it  exhibits  all  sorts  of  unaccountable  excep-


488


Alice  Johnson.


[part


tions  to  the  ordinary  behaviour  of  matter,  for  each  one  of
which  we  have  to  postulate  a  separate  explanation,  while
for  none  of  these  explanations  is  there  any  evidence  beyond
the  special  facts  which  it  is  called  in  to  explain.

Admitting,  however,  that  the  "  spirit-hands "  that  moved
objects  were  objective,  if  only  temporarily  so,  let  us  consider
whether  the  different  impressions  they  produced  on  different
sitters  were  not  due  to  these  latter  being  differently  situated
for  normal  perception.

In  the  first  case  (apart  from  the  statements  of  Home)  quoted
by  Count  Solovovo,  the  room  being  "  lighted  by  means  of  two
spirit  lamps  with  soda  flames  placed  on  the  top  of  the  gaselier"
(Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.  p.  116),  Lady  Crookes  saw  a  hand
appear  from  under  the  table  between  her  and  Home  carrying
a  piece  of  grass  1 5  ins.  long,  •  with  which  it  tapped  her
shoulder.  The  other  sitters  only  saw  the  grass  moved,  but
from  their  position,  as  shown  in  the  plan  (on  p.  115),  it  seems
probable  that  the  hand  would  normally  have  been  hidden
from  them  by  the  table  or  by  Home  himself  intervening.

In  the  second  case  (pp.  cit.  p.  120),  the  room  being-
illuminated  by  two  spirit-lamps  (as  stated  on  p.  117),  or  by
three  (as  stated  on  p.  118),  Lady  Crookes  was  the  only  one
to  see  the  hand  touching  the  flower  in  Home's  button-hole ;
but  as  she  was  sitting  next  to  him,  she  must  have  been
in  the  most  favourable  position  for  seeing  it.

Again,  at  the  same  seance  (p.  121)  "a  hand  was  seen  by
some  and  a  luminous  cloud  by  others,  pulling  the  flowers
about."  The  mention  here  of  a  "luminous  cloud,"  and  on
the  previous  page  of  a  "  luminous  hand,"  suggests  that  the
light  given  by  the  two  (or  three)  spirit-lamps  must  have
been  very  dim,  or  this  luminous  appearance  could  hardly  have
been  perceived.  Here  again  it  seems  possible  that  the  varying
impressions  of  the  sitters  may  have  been  due  simply  to  some
having  better  sight  than  others,  or  being  in  a  better  position
for  seeing.

And  so  on  through  all  the  cases  referred  to  by  Count
Solovovo.  If  these  hands  had  been  completely  invisible  to
some  person  with  normal  sight  looking  directly  at  them  in
a  good  light,  we  should  then  have  good  evidence  that  they
were  hallucinatory. The  amount  of  variation  in  their  appear-


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


489


ance  does  not  seem  to  me  to  show  that  there  was  anything
abnormal  about  them,  i.e.  anything  inconsistent  with  the
supposition  that -they  were  either  Home's  own  hands  or  dummy
hands.

This,  in  fact,  seems  to  be  practically  Count  Solovovo's  view.
As  he  remarks,  we  have  at  least  one  very  suspicious  case
on  record  (that  recorded  by  Mr.  Merrifield  in  the  Journal
S.P.E.,  Vol.  XI.  p.  76,  May  1903);  and  I  do  not  remem-
ber any  case  in  which  the  hands  were  observed  by  touch  as
well  as  by  sight  to  be  completely  detached,  except  in  the
account  by  Mr.  Burr,  quoted  by  Count  Solovovo.

And  in  this  connection  it  seems  to  me  very  significant  that
there  is  such  a  marked  difference  between  the  account  written
— or  at  all  events  published — in  1863  (in  Home's  Incidents
in  My  Life,  pp.  59-61),  eight  years  after  the  event,  and
that  written  in  1887,  thirty-two  years  after  the  event.  The
incidents  seem  to  have  grown  amazingly  in  Mr.  Burr's  recol-
lection in  the  interval.  If  he  really  subjected  the  hand  to
the  stringent  and  conclusive  tests  mentioned  in  his  second
account,  what  possible  reason  can  he  have  had  for  omitting
to  refer  to  them  in  any  way  in  his  first  account  ?  The
objective  nature  of  the  hand  seems  well  established  in  both
accounts ;  those  circumstances  which  would  establish  its  in-
dependence of  the  medium  are  mentioned  only  in  the  second.
For  the  appearance  of  a  hand  ending  at  the  wrist  could,  of
course,  be  produced  by  the  well-known  trick  of  covering  the
rest  of  the  arm  with  a  dark  cloth.

In  the  case  of  Nikolaeff  again  (quoted  by  Count  Solovovo,
p.  449,  above),  the  objective  character  of  the  hands  seems  well
established,  while  the  main  evidence  for  their  supernormal
character  seems  to  be  that  the  sitters  thought  they  saw  the
medium's  hands  at  the  same  time.  Whether  or  not  these  latter
were  dummy  hands,  the  evidence  is  insufficient  to  show.

Home's  "  Pull-form  Phantasms."

As  to  the  "  full-form  phantasms,"  I  have  nothing  to  add
to  Count  Solovovo's  forcible  description  of  the  effect  of  Home's
repeated  suggestions  on  Lord  Adare's  mind,  except  that  I  see
no  reason  why  the  same  medium  should  not  use  different  methods
on  different  occasions,  according  as  each  seems  best  calculated


400


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  produce  the  effect  at  which  he  is  aiming.  If  suggestion
fails  (and,  as  I  shall  show  later,  there  is  evidence  of  its  fairly
frequent  failure  in  Home's  case),  why  not  fall  back  on
mechanism,  when  it  can  be  used  without  too  much  risk  ?

Thus  the  "  spirit  form "  of  Sacha,  seen  by  Lord  Adare,
Captain  Gerard  Smith,  and  Dr.  Gully,  may  have  been  a  col-
lective hallucination,  or  a  material  object ;  the  records  are  quite
insufficient  to  show  which.

Again,  in  the  case  of  the  form  seen  at  the  seance  of  May
7th,  1873,  the  evidence  is  dubious.  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,
apparently  writing  at  the  time  or  immediately  afterwards
(Proceedings  S.P.K.,  Vol.  IX.  p.  310),  says  that  the  room  was
so  dark  that  Home  kept  them  informed  of  his  position  ;  "  Now
Dan  is  here ;  now  Dan  is  touching  the,  etc.,  etc."  He  then
speaks  of  a  hand  (there  is  nothing  in  the  account  to  prove
that  this  was  not  Home's  hand)  that  played  the  accordion,
and  later  he  describes  a  materialised  form  that  "  floated  near
the  folding  doors  and  advanced  towards  Mrs.  Crookes."  Lady
Crookes's  account  (written  twenty  years  later)  shows  consider-
able discrepancies  with  that  of  Mr.  Moses.  She  describes  the
light  as  sufficient  "  to  show  everything  in  the  room  distinctly  "
(why  then  did  Home  have  to  describe  his  position  to  the
sitters  ?),  and  according  to  her  it  is  the  materialised  form
which  takes  the  accordion  and  approaches  her  playing  it.  In
the  very  brief  account  of  what  appears  to  be  the  same  incident
by  Sir  W.  Crookes  {Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,
p.  9  4),  it  is  again  said  that  "  a  phantom  form  .  .  .  took  an
accordion  in  its  hand  and  then  glided  about  the  room  playing
the  instrument."

In  general  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  draw  any  trustworthy
inferences  from  the  details  of  occurrences  which  are  described
by  the  different  witnesses,  or  by  the  same  witness  at  different
times,  in  very  varying  manners.  And  the  very  serious  dis-
crepancies between  the  witnesses  in  such  cases  has  been,  I
think,  too  often  overlooked,  and  even  perhaps  to  some  extent
overlooked  by  Count  Solovovo.

Levitations.

To  illustrate  the  way  in  which  various  sources  of  error, —
suggestion  by  the  medium,  self-suggestion  by  the  sitters,  mal-


lvi.]  The  Education  of  the  Sitter.  491

observation  or  misdescription,  and  illusion, — may  all  be  combined
in  one  incident,  I  will  try  to  reconstruct  from  the  sceptical
point  of  view  one  of  the  most  famous  events  in  Home's
career, — his  alleged  flight  from  one  window  to  another  at  Ashley
House, — which  Count  Solovovo  challenges  the  sceptic  to  explain.

In  the  first  place,  all  the  three  witnesses,  Captain  Wynne,
Lord  Adare,  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  had  received  suggestions
of  various  kinds  betor*ehand,  which  had  often  been  effective.  For
instance,  Captain  Wynne  (Experiences,  p.  63)  had  been  told  that
certain  sounds  on  his  pillow  and  shaking  of  his  bed  were
spiritually  produced,  and  that  he  would  "soon  be  able  to  have
raps."  Lord  Adare  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay  afford  two  of
the  most  marked  instances  of  "  the  general  liability  to  purely
subjective  hallucinations  which  seems  (as  Count  Solovovo  says)
to  have  been  the  speciality  of  many  of  Home's  sitters."  A  few
examples  of  this  have  been  quoted,  but  no  one  can  read  Lord
Adare's  Experiences  without  being  struck  by  the  careful  daily  and
nightly  training  in  suggestibility  to  which  Home  had  subjected
him,  apparently  with  considerable  success.  He  seems  to  have  tried
his  hand  with  equally  fortunate  results  on  the  Master  of  Lindsay.
Thus,  on  Nov.  20th,  1868  (p.  73),  "Lindsay  and  Home  heard
a  voice,  and  we  all  heard  a  spirit  moving  about  the  room."  Soon
afterwards  Home  "  began  speaking  of  the  strange  and  horrible
influences  about  the  Tower  (Lindsay  is  quartered  at  the  Tower).
He  said,  1  They  are  very  dreadful,  but  can  do  no  harm ;  they
are  obliged  to  remain  at  the  Tower,'"  and  then  went  on  to
describe  several  of  them.  "  Turning  to  Lindsay,  he  said,  '  You
will  have  a  curious  manifestation  at  the  Tower,  quite  alone.'
Lindsay  asked  him  about  it.  '  I  must  not  tell  you  anything
about  it.' "  This  reticence  seems  prudent,  and,  as  might  be
expected,  a  few  days  later  (see  p.  77),  "Lindsay  called;  he
said  that  he  had  had  strong  manifestations  that  evening
when  alone,  and  had  been  told  to  go  to  Ashley  Place."  At
the  previous  seance  he  had  seen  "  spirit  forms." At  this  one,

The  room  was  nearly  dark.  We  had  physical  manifestations.
Home  went  into  a  trance;  he  walked  about  the  room  for  some
time,  arranging  the  light  and  talking  to  himself;  he  then  opened
the  window,  drawing  the  curtains,  so  that  we  could  see  nothing
but  his  head,  and  got  outside  the  window.  This  frightened  us,  and
Lindsay  wanted  to  stop  him,  but  did  not. Presently  he  came  back


492


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  told  us  that  we  had  no  faith  whatever,  or  we  would  not  have
been  alarmed  for  his  safety.1

Here  seems  to  have  been  the  first  rehearsal  of  the  scene
that  was  enacted  with  considerably  more  dramatic  effect  on  the
next  occasion.  Later  in  the  same  seance,  a  discussion  was  carried
on  between  two  supposed  spirits,  both  speaking  through  Home,
as  to  how  he  might  be  lifted  up  in  the  air.  It  was  arranged
that  he  should  be  lifted  first  on  to  the  back  of  Lord  Adare's
chair,  and  Lord  Adare  then  felt  his  feet  there,  but  was  soon
obliged  to  let  go  of  them,  as  he  appeared  to  be  lifted  up  and
carried  to  the  other  side  of  the  room,  when  Lord  Adare  was
called  over  to  him,  "  took  his  hand  and  felt  him  alight  upon
the  floor."  This  being  done  in  complete  darkness,  there  was
no  evidence  of  any  real  levitation,  but  it  probably  served  to-
prepare  the  minds  of  the  sitters  for  the  crowning  effort,  for
immediately  afterwards,  Home  remarked  (p.  79),  "  We  will  lift
Dan  up  again  better  presently  and  in  a  clearer  light,  so  that
you  can  see  better."

The  next  seance  was  the  eventful  one  of  Dec.  16th,  1868,'2
the  sitters  being  Captain  Wynne,  the  Master  of  Lindsay  and  Lord
Adare.  There  was  no  light  in  the  room,  except  what  little  came
from  the  window.  (The  hour  is  not  stated,  but  it  seems  as
usual  to  have  been  late  at  night.)  Presently

Lindsay  saw  two  spirits  on  the  sofa  and  others  in  different  places.
.  .  .  A  chair  moved  of  itself  from  the  wall  up  to  the  table  between
Home  and  Charlie  [Captain  Wynne].  Charlie  said  he  could  feel
that  there  was  some  one  there,  but  he  saw  nothing. Lindsay  per-

1  The  same  incident  is  described  rather  more  dramatically  in  Human  Nature^
Vol.  III.  p. 50,  by  H.  D.  Jencken  on the  authority of "the  Hon.  the

M ,"  i.e.  The  Master  of  Lindsay. Mr.  Jencken,  writing  in  December,.

1868,  says:  "Mr.  Home  had  placed  himself  at  the  window,  which  lie  opened,,
and  deliberately  stepped  upon  the  ledge  outside,  looking  on  to  the  street,  some-
SO  feet  below,  with  utter  unconcern.  The  Honourable  the  said  he-
shuddered,  alarmed  at  what  he  was  witnessing.  Mr.  Home  noticing  this  stepped
down  and  reproached  his  friend,  saying  :  '  Little  faith,  little  faith  ;  Daniel  will
not  be  injured  ! '  "

2  The  date  of  this  stance  is  generally  given  thus  ;  but  Lord  Adare's  account
(Experiences,  p.  80)  has  the  heading:  "Seance  at  5  Buckingham  Gate,  Wed-
nesday, December  16th,"  and  opens  with  the  words  "On  Sunday  last,  etc.'*
It  seems  then  that  the  seance  really  took  place  on  Sunday,  December  13th,,
1868  ;  and  that  the  account  was  written  ou  the  following  Wednesday.


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


493


ceived  the  figure  in  the  chair,  and  said  he  was  leaning  his  arm  on
Charlie's  shoulder.  .  .  .  [Home,  in  the  character  of  this  spirit]  laid
Ids  head  upon  my  [Lord  Adare's]  hand  on  the  table  and  sobbed
violently  ;  two  or  three  tears  fell  upon  my  hand.  Home:  "Do  you
feel  how  hot  his  tears  are?"  Adare:  "Yes,  I  do."  Home:  "They
will  leave  a  mark  of  blood  upon  your  hand."  .  .  .  Home  told  me
to  go  into  the  next  room  and  look  if  the  tears  had  left  any  mark
upon  my  hand.  I  perceived  a  very  slight  red  mark.  When  I
returned  he  told  me  to  stretch  out  my  hand.  I  did  so,  and  Dannie
Cox  [a  spirit]  touched  it  with  the  tip  of  his  finger  and  said,  through
Mr.  Home,  "You  will  see  the  marks  plainer  in  the  morning."
They  were  rather  plainer,  but  still  indistinct,  when  I  awoke  the  next
day  (pp.  80-82).

This  little  incident  looks  like  a  rudimentary  case  of  stig-
matisation.1  Other  instances  of  effects  apparently  similar  to  some
of  the  most  commonplace  effects  of  hypnotic  suggestion  will
be  referred  to  below.

Eeturning  to  the  central  event  of  the  seance,  we  find  the
sitters  now  in  good  trim,  with  their  minds  well  prepared  to
accept  any  suggestion  that  may  be  made  to  them.

Home  then  got  up  and  walked  about  the  room.  He  was  both
elongated  and  raised  in  the  air  [apparently  in  almost  complete  dark-
ness]. He  spoke  in  a  whisper,  as  though  the  spirits  were  arranging
something.  He  then  said  to  us :  "  Do  not  be  afraid ;  and  on  no
account  leave  your  places ; "  and  he  went  out  into  the  passage.
Lindsay  suddenly  said  :  "  Oh,  good  heavens  !  I  know  what  he  is
going  to  do;  it  is  too  fearful."  Adare:  "What  is  it?"  Lindsay
"I  cannot  tell  you,  it  is  too  horrible!  Adah  [Menken]  says  that  I
must  tell  you  ;  he  is  going  out  of  the  window  in  the  other  room
and  coming  in  at  this  window  "  (p.  82).

Here  then  we  see  the  sitters'  minds  raised  to  the  highest
point  of  horrified  expectancy,  Home  having  uttered  vague  hints
of  a  possibility  of  this  kind  at  a  former  sitting,  and  his  hints
having  been  elaborated  and  formulated  by  the  excited  imagina-
tion of  the  Master  of  Lindsay. The  narrative  continues :

We  heard  Home  go  into  the  next  room,  heard  the  window  thrown
up, and  presently  Home  appeared standing  upright outside  our

1  For  some  of  the  most  instructive  cases  of  this  phenomenon,  see  Human
Personality,  Vol.  I.  pp.  491-9.


494


Alice  Johnson.


[part


window;  he  opened  the  window  and  walked  in  quite  coolly
(p.  82).

The  Master  of  Lindsay's  account,  given  to  the  Committee
•of  the  Dialectical  Society  on  July  6th,  1869,  is:

Home  .  .  .  first  went  into  a  trance  and  walked  about  uneasily  ;
he  then  went  into  the  hall;  while  he  was  away  I  heard  a  voice
whisper  in  my  ear,  "  He  will  go  out  of  one  window  and  in  at
-another."  I  was  alarmed  and  shocked  at  the  idea  of  so  dangerous
an  experiment.  I  told  the  company  what  I  had  heard,  and  we
then  waited  for  Home's  return.  Shortly  after  he  entered  the  room.
I  heard  the  window  go  up,  but  I  could  not  see  it,  for  I  sat  with  my
back  to  it.  I  however  saw  his  shadow  on  the  opposite  wall ;  he
went  out  of  the  window  in  a  horizontal  position,  and  I  saw  him
outside  the  other  window  (that  in  the  next  room)  floating  in  the  air.1

It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  Master  of  Lindsay,
sitting  with  his  back  to  the  window  of  one  room,  could  have
seen  Home  floating  outside  the  window  of  the  other  room.
We  can  only  suppose  that  he  is  describing  what  he  imagined
was  happening,  not  what  he  saw.

Similarly  Captain  Wynne,  writing  to  Home  on  February  2nd,
1877,  gives  no  description  of  what  he  saw  but  merely  says:

I  was  present  and  a  witness.  .  .  .  The  fact  of  your  having  gone
out  of  the  window  and  in  at  the  other  I  can  swear  to  .  .  ?

Here  arain  is  an  obvious  confusion  between  observation  and

O

inference,  as  none  of  the  witnesses  was  in  a  position  to  see
Home  go  out  of  the  first  window.

Writing  of  the  same  incident  on  July  14th,  1871,  the
Master  of  Lindsay  says  :

We  heard  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted  up,  and  almost
immediately  after  we  saw  Home  floating  in  the  air  outside  our
window.  The  moon  was  shining  full  into  the  room  ;  my  back  was
to  the  light,  and  I  saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall  of  the  window-sill
and  Home's  feet  about  six  inches  above  it.  He  remained  in  this
position  for  a  few  seconds,  then  raised  the  window  and  glided  into
the  room  feet  foremost  and  sat  down.3

1  Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Dialectical  Committee,  p.  214.
2 D.  D.  Home:  His  Life  and  Mission,  pp.  306-7.

3  Modem  Spiritualism,  by  F.  Podmore,  Vol.  II.  p.  255.  Mr.  Podmore's
-account  is  quoted  from  The  Spiritualist,  Vol.  II.


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


495


In  regard  to  the  moonlight,  Mr.  Podmore  points  out  that
the  seance  took  place  on  Dec.  16th,  1868,  two  days  after
new  moon,1  and  Lord  Adare,  whose  account  seems  to  be  almost
contemporary,  says  that  immediately  afterwards  he  went  into
the  next  room  with  Home,  who  professed  then  to  show  him
how  he  had  gone  out  of  the  first  window.  He  appeared  to  be
swung  out  and  in,  but  "  it  was  so  dark  I  could  not  see
clearly  how  he  was  supported  outside"  {Experiences,  p.  83),
though  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  it  was  not  on  the
stone  balustrade.

Later  in  the  seance  "  Lindsay  and  Charlie  saw  tongues  or
jets  of  flames  proceeding  from  Home's  head.  We  then  all
distinctly  heard,  as  it  were,  a  bird  flying  round  the  room,
whistling  and  chirping,  but  saw  nothing,  except  Lindsay,  who
perceived  an  indistinct  form  resembling  a  bird"  {op.  cit.,  p.  83).
These  incidents  seem  to  have  been  hallucinatory,  since  they
were  not  perceptible  to  all  the  sitters,  and,  if  so,  further
evidence  of  a  generally  suggestible  condition  on  their  part  is
furnished.

As  to  the  levitation  which  Count  Solovovo  challenges  us  to
explain,  two  hypotheses  may  occur  to  the  reader.  The  rooms,
says  Lord  Adare,  were  on  the  third  floor  of  the  house.  Outside
each  window  was  a  small  balcony  or  ledge,  19  inches  deep,
bounded  by  balustrades,  18  inches  high.  The  space  between
the  balustrades  of  the  two  windows  measured  7  ft.  4  ins.,
so  that  Home  could  not  normally  have  passed  outside  the
house  from  one  to  the  other  unaided.  He  might,  however,
have  done  so  by  means  of  a  board  laid  across  from
one  balustrade  to  the  other,2  or  by  a  ladder,  but  this  would
probably  have  involved  an  accomplice.  A  far  more  probable
hypothesis  is  that  he  did  not  go  outside  at  all,  but  crept
back  noiselessly  into  the  room  he  had  just  left,  made  his
way  round  in  the  darkness  to  the  window,  and  then
mounted  on  to  the  window-sill,  standing  inside,  while  the
spectators  believed  him  to  be  outside  the  window. He  might

1Or,  as  I  have  pointed  out  above,  see  foot-note  ante,  on  Dec.  13th.  I  find
from  an  almanac  of  1S6S  that  new  moon  was  on  Dec.  13th.

2  As  far  as  I  can  understand  from  the  record,  though  it  is  not  quite  clear  on
this  point,  Home  was  staying  in  the  house  at  the  time,  and  so  must  have  had
opportunities  of  making  preparations.


496


Alice  Johnson.


[part


then  have  opened  the  window  and  stepped  down  into  the
room,  thus  giving  them  the  impression  that  he  had  come  in
through  the  window.

This  illusion  would  not,  I  think,  be  difficult  to  produce  in
the  almost  complete  darkness  of  such  a  sitting.  I  have  tested
my  own  capacity  for  determining,  under  rather  better  condi-
tions of  light,  whether  a  man  who  was  standing  on  a  window-
sill,  was  outside  the  window  or  inside  it,  and  I  found  that
I  could  not  see  on  which  side  he  was.  In  Home's  case  the
sitters  had  been  led  to  expect  that  he  would  appear  outside
the  window,  which,  it  is  to  be  noted,  they  were  forbidden  to
approach,  for  Home  had  said  to  them  before  he  left  the  room,.
"  On  no  account  leave  your  places."  It  must  also  be  noted
that,  if  Home  had  tried  to  produce  the  illusion  by  this
means  and  failed — if,  that  is,  the  sitters  had  perceived  that  he
was  inside  and  not  outside — no  harm  would  have  been  done,  for
he  could  easily  have  passed  it  off  by  saying  there  was  not
"  power "  enough  to  do  it  that  night  and  making  some  excuse,,
if  one  was  demanded,  for  his  position.

The  importance  that  has  been  attached  to  this  case  seems
to  me  to  have  arisen  merely  from  its  sensational  character,,
because  it  looked  as  if  a  great  risk  had  been  run.  Eviden-
tially, it  is  not  strong ;  for  it  occurred  in  a  very  bad  light,
and  to  three  witnesses  of  suggestible  temperament,  whose
minds  had  been  carefully  and  skilfully  prepared  beforehand,
and  who  experienced  undoubted  hallucinations  at  this  very
sitting  both  before  and  after  the  "  levitation."

The  two  instances  of  levitation  recorded  by  Sir  W.  Crookes
(Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  VI.  pp.  119  and  126)  are  far  stronger,
for  they  seemed  to  have  occurred  in  fairly  good  light,  though
they  too  may  possibly  be  explained  as  collective  visual  illusions.
On  the  other  hand,  this  explanation  can  hardly  apply  to  two
other  instances  described  very  briefly  by  Sir  William  Crookes
at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  Oct.  26th,  1894  (see  Journal
S.P.B.,  Vol.  VI.  p.  342),  as  follows:

On  another  occasion  I  was  invited  to  come  to  him  [Home],  when
he  rose  18  inches  off  the  ground,  and  I  passed  my  hands  under  his
feet,  round  him,  and  over  his  head  when  he  was  in  the  air.

On  several  occasions  Home  and  the  chair  on  which  he  was  sitting
at  the  table  rose  off  the  ground. This  was  generally  done  very


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


497


deliberately,  and  Home  sometimes  then  tucked  up  his  feet  on  the
seat  of  the  chair  and  held  up  his  hands  in  view  of  all  of  us.  On
such  an  occasion  I  have  got  down,  and  seen  and  felt  that  all  four
legs  were  off  the  ground  at  the  same  time,  Home's  feet  being  on  the
chair.

Unfortunately  there  seems,  as  far  as  1  can  discover,  to  be
no  contemporary  record  of  these  occasions  when  the  levitation
was  stated  to  be  not  only  plainly  visible,  but  tested  by  the
sense  of  touch.

The  Fire  Test.

Coming  to  the  "  fire  test,"  some  cases  of  this,  as  displayed
by  Home,  have  always  appeared  to  me  among  the  most
■difficult  of  his  performances  to  explain  away,  either  by  the
hypothesis  of  any  mechanical  trick  or  by  that  of  illusion.

In  regard  to  tricks :  chemical  methods  for  procuring  immunity
from  burning  might  have  been  used  by  Home  for  his  own
hands,  but  hardly  for  those  of  his  sitters.  It  is  possible  to
hold  a  kettle  full  of  boiling  water  on  one's  hand  for  a  moment,
the  hand  being  protected  by  an  intervening  layer  of  steam
formed  from  its  own  moisture,  but  the  protection  would  only
last  for  a  very  short  time.  Mr.  Baggally  tells  me  that  if  a
handkerchief  be  stretched  tight  over  a  small  plate  of  cold
metal,  such  as  the  back  of  a  watch,  a  red-hot  coal  may  remain
on  it  for  a  few  seconds  without  burning  it.  All  these  are
known  methods,  and  it  seems  not  impossible  that  Home  may
on  occasion  have  resorted  to  them.

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  suggestion  may  also  have
been  used  occasionally.  In  that  case  we  should  have  to
suppose  that,  by  some  sleight-of-hand,  Home  was  able  to
create  the  impression  that  he  was  taking  a  coal  out  of  a
red-hot  fire  when  he  really  took  it,  say,  out  of  his  pocket,
and  we  should  have  further  to  suppose  that  he  made  his
sitters  believe  it  was  red-hot  when  it  was  only,  say,  painted
red.  This  supposition  would  at  least  be  not  inconsistent  with
the  cinder  dust  left  in  the  hair  of  Mr.  Hall  after  the  (sup-
posed) red-hot  coal  had  been  placed  in  it  (Lord  Adare's  Experi-
ences, pp.  178-9).  But,  says  Count  Solovovo,  in  this  as  in
some  other  cases  (see  also  pp.  146-7)  these  alleged  hot
lamp  chimneys  or  coals  burn some  people  and  not  others.


498


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Occasionally  it  seems  to  me  that  this  could  be  explained,  not  by
the  hypothesis  that  Count  Solovovo  mentions  only  to  dismiss, —
viz.  that  some  of  the  sitters  were  somehow  rendered  immune  from
the  heat, — but  on  the  contrary,  by  supposing  that  the  chimney
or  coal  was  not  really  very  hot,  and  that  the  effect  of  burning
and  blistering  was  produced  in  the  case  of  Captain  Gerard
Smith's  finger  (Dialectical  Society's  Report,  p.  361),  by  suggestion,
as  in  a  number  of  cases  referred  to  in  Human  Personality,
Vol.  I.  pp.  495-7.

This  hypothesis,  however,  does  not  apply  to  cases  where  a
sitter  is  not  burnt  by  a  (supposed)  red-hot  coal  which  does
(apparently)  burn  some  inanimate  object,  such  as  a  piece  of
paper  (Lord  Adare's  Experiences,  p.  179).  Here  we  should
have  to  suppose  further  that  Home  had  contrived  by  some
other  means  to  set  fire  to  the  paper.

But  when  we  come  to  the  first  case  described  in  Lord
Adare's  book  (pp.  67-68),  where  Home  not  only  takes  coals-
out  of  the  fire,  but  places  "  his  face  right  among  the  burning
coals,  moving  it  about  as  though  bathing  it  in  water,"  and
afterwards  holds  his  finger  for  some  time  in  a  candle-flame ; 1
or  to  the  two  cases  recorded  by  Sir  William  Crookes,  when
he  observed  that  Home  stirred  the  hot  coals  of  the  fire  about
with  his  hands  (Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  VI.  pp.  103-4),  Sir
W.  Crookes  on  one  occasion  standing  close  to  the  fire  and
stooping  down  to  it  as  Home  put  his  hands  in ;  we  can  hardly
explain  away  these  occurrences  without  assuming  either  a
wholesale  incapacity  for  observation,  or  an  abnormal  condition
of  consciousness.

Quasi-Hypnotic  Effects.

But  have  we  any  other  evidence,  besides  that  afforded  by
some  of  the  fire-tests,  of  effects  produced  on  Home's  sitters-
analogous  to  the  effects  of  hypnotic  suggestion  ?  I  think  we
have.  I  quoted  above  the  red  mark  that  appeared  on  Lord
Adare's  hand  after  Home  had  wept  two  or  three  tears  on  it ;.
for  it  can  -hardly  be  supposed  that  these  tears  were  actually
hot  enough  to  produce  a  mark.

Again  (see  Lord  Adare's  Experiences,  p.  68)  Home  says  he-
will  withdraw  the  moisture  and  scent  from  some  flowers;  then

1  Note,  however,  that  after  these  performances  Home  remarked  that  he  must
wash  his  hands.


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


499'


he  rubbed  Lord  Adare's  hands,  "  imparting  the  odour  of  the
flowers  to  them  ...  he  also  nipped  the  moisture  and  with
it  the  scent  from  his  fingers  to  each  person."  Later  (p.  76)r
Home  having  "  magnetised "  some  water,  Lord  Adare  is  told
to  take  some  of  it  night  and  morning  as  a  cure.  Then  comes
a  curious  story  of  brandy  being  made  weak  (p.  78)  by  Home
making  passes  over  the  glass  and  flipping  his  fingers  over  it,
"  sending  a  strong  smell  of  spirit  through  the  room ;  in  about
five  minutes  he  had  made  the  brandy  as  weak  as  very  weak
brandy  and  water ;  it  scarcely  tasted  at  all  of  spirit ;  both
Lindsay  and  I  tasted  it  at  the  moment,  and  also  some  time
after  the  seance  was  over."
Again  {op.  ext.,  p.  90) :

Home  then  made  some  very  curious  experiments  with  flowers ;
he  separated  the  scent  into  two  portions— one  odour  smelling
exactly  like  earth,  the  other  being  very  sweet.  .  .  .

[Later  in  the  sitting,  Home  went  out  of  the  room  and  then]
returned,  holding  in  his  hand  half  a  lemon,  freshly  cut;  he  handed
it  to  each  of  us  to  taste.  He  laughed  and  said,  "  Yes,  it  is  very
good,  is  it  not1?  So  refreshing."  He  then  held  it  up  above  his
head  and  said,  "We  will  withdraw  all  the  acid  flavour  from  it."
A  yellowish  light  came  over  the  lemon ;  he  held  it  up  for  some
little  time  and  said,  "Now  taste  again."  He  held  it  out  to  me,
but  the  room  being  rather  dark  I  bobbed  my  nose  against  it,  and
therefore  tasted  nothing.  All  the  others  tasted  it,  and  described  it
as  most  disagreeable,  having  no  odour,  and  the  flavour  being  a  sort
of  mawkish  alkali ;  some  describing  it  as  like  magnesia ;  others  as
like  washing  soda.  Home  laughed  and  said,  "We  will  take  the
nasty  taste  away  presently."  .  .  .  [Later,  having  stated  that  the
acid  would  now  be  restored  to  the  lemon],  he  held  the  lemon  up
and  a  rose-coloured  flame,  or  rather  light,  came  over  it.  After  a
little,  he  gave  it  to  those  who  had  tasted  it  the  second  time ;  they
said  that  it  was  quite  good  and  fresh,  and  that  all  the  natural  scent
and  flavour  was  restored  to  it.

These  incidents  irresistibly  recall  the  ordinary  platform
hypnotic  experiments  of  making  subjects  eat,  say,  pieces  of
soap  or  candle  under  the  impression  that  they  are  pieces  of
cake.  It  is  of  course  well  known  that  some  simple  delusions
of  this  kind  can  be  imposed  on  many  persons  without  hypnosis,


500


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  it  certainly  looks  as  if  Home  had  the  capacity  for  doing
this.

There  are,  further,  indications  too  numerous  to  quote  in  full
of  persons  at  his  sittings  partially  or  completely  losing  either
their  consciousness,  or  their  control  over  their  muscles — which
may,  one  would  suppose,  involve  some  change  in  the  con-
sciousness.1 Thus,  Mr.  Holt  at  his  first  sitting  becomes  much
affected ;  his  hands  are  taken  possession  of  and  violently
agitated ;  his  arms  are  drawn  back  behind  his  chair  (Lord
Adare's  Experiences,  p.  22).  It  is  this  agitated  gentleman  who
is  specially  called  upon  by  Home  to  observe  the  details
of  the  process  of  "  elongation "  of  the  medium  on  this
occasion.  At  the  same  sitting  one  of  the  ladies  present
becomes  entranced.  Lord  Adare  says  (p.  28,  foot-note)  that
he  has  often  "  seen  people's  hands  taken  possession  of  and
agitated  during  seances,"  and  "  the  same  thing  has  occurred
to  myself."  At  another  seance  (p.  d-4)  Count  Eonicker
was  present,  "  and  his  magnetic  influence  was  so  strong
that  it  made  us  all  more  or  less  ill."  At  a  sitting  ten  days
after  the  window  levitation  episode,  the  Master  of  Lindsay  fell
into  a  trance,  and  at  first  could  not  speak.  After  waking,  he
saw  spirit  forms  (p.  89).  Mr.  Lawless  feels  a  sensation  as  if
a  hot  stream  flowed  into  him  when  Home's  hand  is  pressed
against  the  back  of  his  neck,  and  later  he  and  Miss  Smith
become  hysterical  (p.  99).  On  March  2nd  Mrs.  Blackburn
becomes  slightly  under  influence  and  a  good  deal  agitated.
Home  tells  her  this  is  caused  by  two  spirits  whom  he  can  see
standing  behind  her  and  magnetising'  her.  Meanwhile  Mr.
Lawless  is  again  hysterical  (p.  105).  Two  days  later  the  same
thing  happens  to  Mrs.  Blackburn  again,  and  Home  tells  her
she  is  coming  under  spirit  influence  (p.  109). On a  third

1  Sensations  of  this  kind  are  sometimes  regarded  as  indications  of  a  super-
normal power  on  the  part  of  the  medium  in  whose  presence  they  occur.  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  in  her  paper  on  "  Results  of  a  Personal  Investigation  into  the  Physical
Phenomena  of  Spiritualism"  (Proceedings  S.P.E..,  Vol.  IV.  p.  55),  observed
during  an  undoubtedly  fraudulent  performance  that  "  the  gentleman  who  held
the  medium's  left  hand,  and  who  was  not  placed  so  as  to  be  able  to  see  what
was  going  on,  was  of  a  sensitive  organisation,  and  felt  during  the  performances
the  sensations  which  he  always  experienced  at  successful  spiritualistic  seances, —
shudderings  and  convulsive  movements  of  the  arms,  I  think  they  were — which
shows  that  sensations  of  this  kind  afford  no  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the
manifestations."


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


501


repetition  of  the  same,  he  makes  passes  over  her,  suggesting
that  her  mediumistic  powers  will  be  developed  (p.  117).

These  passes  seem  to  have  been  used  with  effect  on  other
occasions,  and  notably  if  made  by  Home  when  in  a  trance
condition.  Thus  (p.  86)  "Home  was  taken  possession  of,  his
hands  and  arms  became  partially  cataleptic,  and  he  made  passes
in  this  condition  over  Augusta  [Gore]  for  some  time,  then
stooping  down  he  made  passes  under  the  couch  [on  which
she  was  lying],  which  Augusta  said  she  felt  distinctly."  At
the  same  seance — it  is  not  clear  whether  before  or  after  the
passes — she  sees  "  spirit-forms,"  apparently  seen  by  no  one
else.

Again  (pp.  133-4)  Home,  under  influence,  makes  "mesmeric
passes  "  over  all  the  sitters,  and  repeats  them  after  an  interval.
This  was  at  one  of  the  sittings  referred  to  by  Count  Solovovo,
when  "  spirit  hands "  were  (after  the  passes)  seen  by  the
sitters.

A  much  more  striking  scene  occurred  at  a  later  seance
(pp.  153-5),  when  Mr.  J.  and  Lord  Adare  were  the  only
sitters.  After  Home  had  gone  through  a  realistic  series  of
dramatisations,  which  were  interpreted  as  representing  scenes
in  the  life  of  Mr.  J.'s  brother,  Mr.  J.  fell  into  a  deep  trance,
sobbed  violently,  spoke  in  Arabic  with  great  rapidity,  and
called  his  brother's  name,  evidently  referring  to  the  scenes  just
enacted  by  Home,  who  had  finally  to  wake  him  up  from  the
trance.

Again  (p.  163),  the  sitters  remaining  behind  after  a  seance
with  Home,  the  Master  of  Lindsay  was  first  mesmerised  by  Mr.
Bergheim,  and  on  waking  mesmerised  Mr.  Bergheim  in  his  turn.
Mr.  Bergheim  became  very  uncomfortable,  and  said  he  was
being  "  cross-mesmerised."  On  waking  he  said  that  the  last
thins;  he  recollected  before  becoming  entranced  was  seeino-  a
figure  or  form  of  some  sort  standing  beside  the  Master  of
Lindsay.  The  experiment  was  repeated,  and  he  again  imagined
himself  under  the  influence  of  some  spirit ;  then  he  said  the
spirit  had  gone  away,  and  that  the  Master  of  Lindsay  could
not  wake  him  without  its  help,  and  implored  him  to  bring  it
back.  They  opened  the  door  and  told  him  it  had  come  back,
which  seemed  to  satisfy  him  ;  then  he  soon  awoke,  but  was
in  a  nervous  state  for  some  time.

2i


502


Alice  Johnson.


[part


All  these  incidents  seem  to  me  to  point  to  a  very  suggestible
condition  on  the  part  of  the  sitters.

In  connection  with  this  subject  I  may  briefly  refer  to  an
experience  of  my  own  at  my  second  sitting  with  Eusapia
Paladino.  The  sitting,  like  many  of  those  with  Home,  was
held  in  almost  complete  darkness,  and  I  was  supposed  to  be
controlling  Eusapia's  left  arm  and  hand,  while  Mr.  Myers  was
controlling  her  on  the  right.  At  that  time  I  had  had  little
practical  experience  in  the  kind  of  holding  that  is  required
under  such  circumstances,  and  I  apparently  let  the  hand  and
arm  on  my  side  get  free.  Various  phenomena  followed,  all
easily  within  the  capacity  of  this  hand,  if  free, — such  as  touches
on  my  head,  back,  etc.  Quite  apart  from  these  phenomena,
I  went  through  a  series  of  curious  hallucinations  of  an  almost
indescribable  kind, — indescribable  because  they  were  so  unlike
any  ordinary  sensations.  There  was  no  break  in  consciousness,
but  the  condition  was,  T  have  no  doubt,  a  slightly  abnormal
one,  and  one  in  which  I  could  not  depend  on  my  own  powers
of  observation  as  to  the  actual  events  of  the  sitting.

It  was  my  recollection  of  this  occasion  that  made  me  inclined
to  think  that  Mr.  Warndorfer  might  have  been  in  a  somewhat
similar  condition  when  he  witnessed  the  "  levitation  "  described
above  in  Count  Solovovo's  paper,  p.  457.

Occasional  In  efficacy  of  the  Suggestions.

Further  evidence  of  Home's  practice  of  suggestion  is  to  be
found  in  many  instances  given  in  Lord  Adare's  report  where
the  suggestion  failed  to  take  effect.  Failures  of  this  kind
have,  as  has  often  been  remarked,  no  tendency  to  discredit  a
medium.  If  a  professed  conjurer  fails,  it  is  put  down  to  want
of  skill  on  his  part.  If  a  medium  fails,  he  can  generally
charge  it  on  the  want  of  spiritual  capacity  of  the  sitter.

The  case  of  Adah  Menken  (Lord  Adare's  Experiences,  pp.  34-7)
has  already  been  referred  to  by  Count  Solovovo  in  this  con-
nection. Here  Home  could,  it  seems,  only  partially  produce
the  effect  at  which  he  was  aiming.

On  another  occasion  (pp.  56-59),  just  after  the  death  of
Dannie  Cox,  Home  took  Lord  Adare  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  and  in  complete  darkness,  into  the  drawing-room  in  which


Lvr.]  The  Education  of  the  Sitter.  503

the  child's  coffin  was  placed,  and  told  him  to  raise  the  lid  of
the  coffin,  when  he  heard  a  slight  rustling  inside,  and  then
took  him  back  into  his  bedroom  and  said  to  him  :

"Little  Dannie  is  there  between  you  and  the  light;  can  you
not  see  him'?"  "No,"  I  said,  "I  cannot."  He  laughed  and  said,
"Dannie  would  make  himself  appear  as  white;  but  he  cannot  just
yet;  he  has  so  recently  come  to  us.  He  will  try  and  make  himself
visible  as  a  dark  shadow  to  you."  I  still  said  that  I  could  see
nothing.  "  Ah,  never  mind  !  "  Home  said  ;  and  holding  one  of  my
hands  in  his,  he  stretched  it  out  in  the  dark  and  said,  "  Dannie
will  let  you  play  with  it  first."  I  perceive  a  strong  scent,  as  it
were,  blown  over  me  and  felt  a  flower  touch  my  fingers  and  then
withdraw  itself.  Presently  I  felt  a  little  soft  hand  touch  mine,  and
a  flower  was  given  me.  I  then  felt  a  strong  tremor  run  through
Home's  hands,  and  he  spoke  as  little  Dannie  and  said,  "  You  must
get  into  bed  cpuickly ;  Dan  is  going  to  awake  ;  if  you  would  like
very  much  to  see  what  you  have  got,  you  can  make  an  excuse  to
light  a  candle  presently."  Accordingly,  after  Home  had  awoke,  I
lit  a  candle,  and  found  I  had  been  given  a  purple-  and  white
petunia  that  had  been  placed  in  one  of  the  little  hands  in  the
coffin.

The  account  shows,  it  may  be  noted,  that  Home  would
have  had  no  difficulty  in  abstracting  the  flower  in  question
from  the  coffin.

After  a  few  more  seances,  in  one  of  which  Dannie  was
supposed  to  manifest,  the  suggestion  was  repeated  with  greater
effect  (see  p.  65),  again  in  Lord  Adare's  bedroom,  which  he
shared  with  Home  and  which  seems  to  have  been  the  scene
of  much  of  his  training  as  a  sitter.  First,  Home  entranced
and  in  bed,  speaks  as  little  Dannie  and  tells  Lord  Adare  to
come  and  sit  on  his  bed,  which  he  does,  remarking  that  he
wished  to  see  manifestations. Then :

We  heard  a  spirit  come  in  and  walk  about  the  room  ;  and  per-
ceived a  light  near  the  ceiling.  Little  Dannie  Cox  then  came  and
moved  away  a  pillow  that  Home  had  over  his  feet.  He  stroked
and  pulled  my  feet  and  sat  on  them.  .  .  .  We  also  saw  the  same
sort  of  little  star  we  had  seen  at  Stockton.  He  then  said,  "Now
good-night "  and  stood  upon  the  foot  of  the  bed.  I  saw  him  distinctly
as  a  shadowy  figure,  of  the  same  size  as  his  mortal  body,  with


504


Alice  Johnson.


[part


apparently  some  loose  drapery  on.  His  hand  was  stretched  out
towards  us  waving  about.  The  hand  and  arm  were  directly  between
me  and  the  window  and  interrupted  the  light  as  palpably  as  if
made  of  solid  flesh  and  bone.

Again  (p.  63),  Home  tells  Lord  Adare  that  "A  has  just

come  in  ;  he  has  come  bustling  into  the  room ;  you  heard
him."  Lord  Adare  replies,  "  Well,  I  heard  a  noise  as  if  the
door  had  been  opened."  "  Yes,"  says  Home,  "  that  was  him  ;
you  will  always  know  when  A.  comes ;  he  will  make  a
sound  like  that  at  the  door."  Here  we  see  the  partial  failure
skilfully  covered  up.  Similarly  (p.  64)  Home  says:  "You
were  magnetised  just  now,  and  you  heard  a  spirit  shout."  Lord
Adare  replies,  "  I  am  not  aware  that  I  did."  Home  rejoins,
"  You  did  not  notice  it ;  you  did  not  know  what  it  was  and
you  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  it ; but  you  heard  it."

On  a  later  occasion  (p.  72)  Home  gives  a  graphic  account
of  a  vision  he  professes  to  see  at  night  of  a  race-course  and
men  betting  and  then  fighting,  but  only  succeeds  in  getting
Lord  Adare  to  hear  a  sound  as  of  a  horse  galloping  and  a
noise  in  the  corner  of  the  room  like  a  blow  struck.

I  have  already  referred  to  the  promised  levitation  which
failed  to  take  place  (p.  79),  but  preluded  the  successful  attempt
at  5  Buckingham  Gate  on  Dec.  16th,  1868.

Again,  he  tries  to  persuade  Lord  Adare  that  the  latter  has
had  a  certain  dream  (p.  85),  after  ascertaining  that  he  could
not  remember  what  he  had  dreamt  the  night  before.

Similarly  (p.  148),  while  sitting  up  together  in  the  evening
in  Home's  room,  they  hear  raps  on  the  door,  and  Home  says,
"  Your  grandfather  has  come  in ;  do  you  not  see  him  sitting
in  that  chair  yonder  ?  "  "I  see  no  one,"  I  answered,  "  which
grandfather  do  you  mean  ?  "  "  Your  father's  father  ;  you  will
at  any  rate  hear  him."  Accordingly  Lord  Adare  hears  a  sound
as  if  some  one  sitting  on  the  chair  had  put  his  foot  on  the
ground,  and  then  sees  the  chair  move  from  a  distance  up  to
the  table,  apparently  untouched.

Alternation  of  Suggestion  and  other  Methods.

The  incident  just  cpuoted  is  a  possible  instance  of  the  alter-
nation of  suggestion  and  other  methods. Home  may  easily


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


505


have  had  some  arrangement  for  moving  the  chair.  But  the
incident  would  have  been  more  impressive  if  the  grandfather
had  been  seen  moving  it,  so  he  tries  to  make  Lord  Adare
see  his  grandfather,  but  only  succeeds  in  making  him  hear  a
vague  sound.  As  a  rule,  he  can  only  produce  definite  visual
hallucinations  in  complete  or  partial  darkness.

Suggestion  is  of  course  a  safer  method  to  use  than  a
mechanical  contrivance  which  may  be  discovered,  but  why
should  not  a  medium  adapt  himself  to  circumstances,  and  use
one  or  the  other  or  both  ?  Thus  the  visions  seen  by  Lord
Adare  in  his  bedroom  at  night  were  probably  all  hallucinatory.
But  the  materialisation  of  Adah  Menken,  described  by  Lord
Adare  (p.  145),  seems  to  me  of  a  familiar  objective  type.

[The  room  having  been  darkened]  Home  went  into  a  trance.  .  .  .
We  all  saw  a  very  curious  appearance  form  itself  above  his  head  ;
it  looked  at  first  like  a  lace  handkerchief,  held  out  by  a  stick  or
support  of  some  sort ;  soon,  however,  it  became  more  distinct,  and
appeared  to  be  a  shadowy  human  form  enveloped  in  drapery  ;  it  was
about  two  feet  in  length.  Some  one  present  remarked  that  it
exceedingly  resembled  a  "  vignette "  heading  one  of  Adah  Menken's
poems.  Home  said  (speaking  as  Menken),  "Yes,  that  is  it,  that  is
what  I  wish  to  imitate ;  I  will  try  and  make  my  form  visible  to
you."  The  surface  of  the  wall  to  Home's  right  became  illuminated
three  or  four  times ;  the  light  apparently  radiating  from  a  bright
spot  in  the  centre.  Across  the  portion  of  wall  thus  illuminated  we
repeatedly  saw  a  dark  shadow  pass;  it  appeared  to  me  rather  the
shadow  cast  by  a  solid  substance  than  the  actual  form  itself.  Home's
collar  stud  dropped  on  the  floor,  and  a  spirit  [Home  ?]  brought  it
and  placed  it  on  my  head,  touching  my  brow  while  doing  so.

The  full  account  (see  pp.  95  and  177)  of  the  apparition
of  Sacha,  referred  to  by  Count  Solovovo,  again  suggests  strongly
a  "  materialisation "  manipulated  by  Home,  on  whom,  it  is  to
be  remembered,  no  restrictions  whatever  were  placed  in  any
of  these  sittings.

Becognition.

These  cases  lead  us  on  to  consider  what  kind  or  degree  of
illusion  is  involved  in  the  "  recognition "  of  materialised  forms
or  spirit  photographs,  and  how  far  such  an  illusion  is  induced


506


Alice  Johnson.


[part


by  the  medium,  or  whether  it  originates  spontaneously  in  the
sitters.  In  the  case  of  Adah  Menken  just  quoted  the  medium
seemed  to  have  profited  by  a  casual  remark  of  one  of  the
sitters  to  suggest  the  identification ;  while  in  the  second  case
he  himself  told  them  that  the  form  was  Sacha.  In  neither
case,  however,  does  it  appear  that  any  distinct  resemblance  to
the  supposed  original  was  perceived  by  any  of  the  sitters,
and  in  this  respect  the  cases  are  similar  to  many  materialisa-
tions produced  by  professional  mediums,  where  it  is  simply
assumed  that  certain  forms  represent  the  first  person  thought
of  by  the  sitter  with  whom  they  are  supposed  to  be
connected.

Yet  no  one  who  has  attended  such  sittings  and  carefully
watched  the  proceedings  can,  I  think,  doubt  that  occasionally
some  sitter  really  sees  a  very  close  resemblance  in  one  of
the  faces  to  some  intimate  friend  of  his.  In  cases  where  the
identity  of  the  medium  with  the  form  is  detected,  as  in  the
case  recorded  by  Mr.  More  (quoted  above  by  Count  Solovovo,
with  which  may  usefully  be  compared  the,  case  of  Mr.  W.  B.
Hodgson,  see  above,  p.  474,  footnote);  or  in  the  case  of
collective  vision  in  a  mirror  (quoted  above  by  Count  Solovovo,
p.  463),  this  phenomenon  is  called  by  believers  "transfiguration."
In  other  cases  it  is  called  "  materialisation."

That  there  is  at  least  a  very  frequent  element  of  illusion
in  these  cases  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  different  sitters
vary  widely  in  their  impressions  of  them.  I  quote  the
following  instance  from  notes  of  my  own.

June  20th,  1905.

Mr.  A.  E.  H.,  a  member  of  the  American  Branch,  who  called  here
this  morning,  gave  me  a  long  account  of  his  experiences  in  seeing
materialised  forms.  It  appeared  that  he  had  been  investigating  the
subject  for  some  20  years,  and  had  concluded  that  most  mediums
were  fraudulent.  But  there  were  two  or  three  whom  he  had  ex-
perimented with  a  long  time  and  believed  to  be  genuine,  or  at  least
that  some  of  their  phenomena  were  so.

He  told  me  this  incident  among  others  :  On  one  occasion  he  had
very  clearly  recognised  the  face  of  a  friend  of  his,  seen  in  a
perfectly  life-like  manner,  the  colour  and  form  of  the  face  exactly
like  life  and  exactly  like  the  person.  A  friend  of  his,  looking
at the same face, saw only a vague luminous clouddike  thing


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


507


with  no  features.  On  the  same  occasion,  this  friend  saw  quite
dearly  and  recognised  the  face  of  some  friend  of  his  in  what
appeared  to  Mr.  H.  a  vague,  luminous,  cloud-like  thing  with  no
features.

Here  one  or  other  of  the  percipients  must  have  been  under  an
illusion.  Similarly  when  Professor  Furness  (as  quoted  by  Count
Solovovo)  saw  the  medium  in  the  forms  recognised  by  other  sitters
as  their  friends,  either  he  or  the  other  sitters  must  have  been
under  an  illusion.  For  the  purposes  of  my  argument,  it  makes
no  difference  whether  it  is  the  believer  or  the  sceptic  that  was
deluded  ;  I  merely  maintain  that  illusion  there  was,  and  that  of
a  pronounced  kind.

Probably  most  people  are  not  aware  of  the  differences  in  faces
that  are  produced  by  different  accessories,  or,  in  particular,  by
differences  of  illumination,  and  therefore  do  not  know  how  easily
mistakes  in  recognition  may  be  made.  Some  years  ago,  after
witnessing  the  "  materialisations "  of  Husk  and  Craddock,  and
hearing  from  a  number  of  people  how  much  they  had  been
impressed  by  seeing  forms  which  they  recognised,  I  tried  experi-
ments on  this  point,  as  follows :

On  May  17th,  1905,  seven  persons,  (five  of  whom  were  members
of  the  S.P.R.)  came  to  the  Pooms  at  20  Hanover  Square  at  my
invitation  to  witness  experiments  in  sham  materialisations,  my  object
being  to  test  how  far  they  would  recognise  or  fail  to  recognise  the
faces  of  persons  slightly  disguised,  but  well  known  to  them.

The  room  was  arranged  as  is  usual  for  sittings  for  materialisations,
that  is,  it  was  darkened  as  completely  as  possible,  with  a  cabinet
in  one  corner,  near  to  which  the  sitters  were  arranged  in  a  semi-circle.
The  performers  entered  the  cabinet  from  a  door  opening  into  the  back
of  it.

There  were  three  performers  who  played  the  part  of  materialised
forms,  viz.  myself  and  one  of  the  Assistant  Secretaries,  both,  of  us
being  well  known  to  most  of  the  sitters,  and  a  third  lady  who  was
only  known  to  one  or  two  of  them.

This  lady  took  the  first  part  and  dressed  herself  in  drapery  with
a  head-dress  supposed  to  be  Persian.  She  came  out  into  the  room,
holding  a  luminous  slate  up  to  her  face,  and  spoke  in  a  low  voice
one  or  two  Hindu  phrases  which  she  happened  to  know.

The  Assistant  Secretary  with  the  help  of  a  very  obviously  false
moustache  and  turban  posed  as  a  Hindu. The  sitters,  who  were


508


Alice  Johnson.


[part


asked  to  note  their  impressions,  described  her  variously  as  a  young
Indian,  an  Egyptian,  or  of  the  Hindu  type.

I  appeared  as  a  nun,  with  drapery  over  the  head.  I  was  interested
to  find  that  this  simple  disguise  led  the  sitters  to  estimate  my  age
variously  as  from  18  to  25  ;  for  I  had  lately  been  told  by  a  man
who  had  been  attending  Husk's  materialising  seances  that  one  of  the
forms  that  came  to  him  was  a  young  man  of  about  18  or  20,  and
the  medium  being  about  50,  it  would  have  been  impossible,  he  said,
for  him  to  personate  such  a  young  man.  Husk  was  accustomed  to
use  a  luminous  slate  such  as  we  were  using  to  show  the  faces  of
the  "spirit"  forms.

At  this  experimental  sitting,  not  one  of  the  performers  was
recognised  at  any  time  by  any  of  the  sitters,  and  this  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  they  knew  the  performance  to  be  a  sham  and  therefore
were  not  open  to  any  emotional  influences  that  might  have  interfered
with  their  powers  of  observation.  They  knew  too  that  my  assistants
and  I  were  likely  to  be  among  the  performers;  yet  the  only  one
whom  they  thought  they  recognised  was  the  assistant  who  happened
not  to  be  there.

Possibility  of  Negative  Hallucinations.

Count  Solovovo  remarks  that  if  we  admit  that  positive
hallucinations  may  occur  at  seances,  "  we  are  logically  bound
to  infer  that  [the  medium]  may  also  prevent  [his  sitters']  seeing
some  actions  of  his,  or  even  his  own  person, — may,  in  fact,
induce  in  them  not  only  positive,  but  also  negative  hallucina-
tions." I  think  this  actually  does  occur  not  infrequently,  and
I  quote  an  instance  of  it  from  Mr.  Podmore's  Modem  Spiritualism,
Vol.  II.,  p.  217,  in  connection  with  a  slate-writing  seance  given
to  his  brother,  Mr.  Austin  Podmore,  by  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey,
Mr.  A.  Podmore  held  in  his  left  hand  a  slate  the  other  end
of  wMch  was  held  by  Mr.  Davey.  He  then  unlocked  a  double
slate  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Davey,  put  three  pieces  of  chalk,
red,  green  and  grey,  inside,  locked  it  up  again  and  placed  the
key  in  his  pocket  and  the.  slate  on  the  table  where  he  could
watch  it. His  account  continues  :

After  some  few  minutes,  during  which,  to  the  best  of  my  belief.
I  was  attentively  regarding  both  slates,  Mr.  D.  whisked  the  first
away  and  showed  me  on  the  reverse  a  message  written  to  myselL


lvi.]  The  Education  of  the  Sitter.  50&

Almost  immediately  afterwards  he  asked  me  to  unlock  the  second
slate,  and  on  doing  so  I  found  to  my  intense  astonishment  another
message  written  on  both  the  insides  of  the  slate— the  lines  in  alternate
colours  and  the  chalks  apparently  much  worn  by  usage.

My  brother  tells  me  that  there  was  an  interval  of  some  two  or
three  minutes,  during  which  my  attention  was  called  away,  but  I
can  onby  believe  it  on  his  word.

Austin  Podmore.

Mr.  Frank  Podmore  adds  :

Mr.  Davey  allowed  me  to  see  exactly  what  was  done,  and  this  is
what  I  saw.  The  "almost  immediately"  in  the  above  account
covered  an  interval  of  some  minutes.  During  the  interval,  and
indeed  throughout  the  seance,  Davey  kept  up  a  constant  stream  of
chatter.  .  .  .  Mr.  A.  Podmore,  absorbed  by  the  conjurer's  patter,
fixed  his  eyes  on  Davey's  face,  and  the  latter  took  advantage  of
the  opportunity  to  remove  the  locked  slate  under  cover  of  a  duster
from  under  my  brother's  nose  to  the  far  end  of  the  room,  and
there  exchange  it  for  a  similar  slate,  with  a  previously  prepared
message,  which  was  then  placed  by  means  of  the  same  manoeuvre
with  the  duster  in  the  position  originally  occupied  by  the  first  slate.
Then  and  only  then  the  stream  of  talk  slackened  and  Mr.  A.
Podmore's  attention  became  concentrated  upon  the  slate,  from
which  the  sound  of  spirit  writing  was  now  heard  to  proceed.  To
me  the  most  surprising  thing  in  the  whole  episode  was  Mr.  A.
Podmore's  incredulity  when  told  that  his  attention  had  been
diverted  from  the  slate  for  an  appreciable  period.

Here  then  it  seems  that  Mr.  Davey  had  got  up  from  his
place  and  walked  over  to  the  other  end  of  the  room  and
back  again  without  the  sitter  being  aware  that  he  had  done
so,  and  this  in  full  light,  with  a  sitter  whose  whole  attention
(as  he  himself  believed)  was  being  directed  to  his  movements.

Count  Solovovo  maintains  that  we  are  not  entitled  to
suppose  that  misinterpretation  can  assume  such  gigantic  pro-
portions as  to  make  several  people  mistake  a  man  who  thrust
his  head  and  shoulders  out  of  the  window  for  one  who  was
floating  in  the  air  outside  the  window.  My  reply  would  be
that  a  very  small  error  in  perception  may  sometimes  lead  to
a  very  large  error  of  inference.  I  have  suggested  that  when
Home  was  believed  to  be  standing  outside,  he  was  perhaps
really  standing  inside.' If  so,  this,  as  far  as  the  perception


510


Alice  Johnson.


[part


of  the  witnesses  was  concerned,  would  have  involved  but  a
slight  illusion  in  regard  to  the  relative  positions  of  Home  and
the  window,  and  one  which  I  find  is  easily  induced,  at  least
in  myself.  But  it  would  involve  a  very  large  error  of  inference
to  suppose  that  Home  had  come  to  the  window  from  the
outside  if  he  had  really  come  from  the  inside.

During  the  sittings  with  Eusapia  Paladino  at  Cambridge  in
1895,  I  experienced  an  illusion  of  position  of  a  kind  which
is  known  to  be  frequent  in  darkness,  which  I  described  at  the
time  as  follows  :

With  regard  to  the  [supposed  head  of  John  King]  I  noticed  a
curious  illusion  which  I  cannot  explain,  viz.  that  while  something
in  tlie  appearance  suggested  to  me  that  the  "head"  was  on  a
level  with  the  further  end  of  the  table — which  Eusapia's  head
could  hardly  have  reached  unless  she  stood  up  and  leant  far  for-
ward— something  else  gave  me  the  impression  that  the  "head"  was
only  at  the  point  that  she  could  easily  have  reached  without  stand-
ing. She  was  actually  sitting  at  the  time,  and  I  have  no  doubt
that  the  latter  impression  was  the  correct  one.  But  if  this  second
element  in  the  perception  had  been  missing,  I  should  have  thought
I  had  seen  a  head  in  a  position  where  it  was  almost  impossible
for  Eusapia's  head  to  be.1  [Subsequent  observation  showed  that  this
head  was  practically  in  the  position  of  Eusapia's  head  and  undoubtedly
identical  with  it.]

I  will  quote  one  more  instance  of  spontaneous  illusion  or
hallucination  as  to  the  real  position  of  an  object,  sent  to  me
by  Mr.  F.  C.  Constable,  of  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol,  who
writes :

I  have  frequently  to  walk  from  my  house  to  the  village  club.  The
road  outside  the  house  runs,  for  perhaps  twenty  yards,  with  trees
on  one  side  and  an  iron  fencing  on  the  other.  Then  comes  a  five-
barred  gate  which  I  have  to  open  to  pass  through  into  an  open
field. The  road  is  naturally  very  familiar  to  me.

At  nightfall  when,  on  leaving  the  light  of  the  house,  I  can  at  first
see  nothing  and,  later  on,  only  the  path  very  dimly,  and  objects
dimly  definite  but  at  a  yard  or  two,  the  following  false  visualization
is  of  almost  common  occurrence.  I  see  the  bars  of  the  gate  before
me,  crossing  my  path,  before  I  come  to  the  material  gate.  For

1  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.  p.  15S.


LVI.]


The  Education  of  the  Sitter.


511


instance  :  last  night  it  was  so  dark  I  walked  from  the  path  on  to
the  grass.  As  I  felt  my  way  back  to  the  path  and  raised  my  eyes
there  were  the  bars  of  the  gate  before  me.  I  put  out  my  hand,
felt  nothing  and  walked  on  some  steps  before  I  reached  the  gate
itself.  This  false  visualization  has  occurred,  very  possibly,  twenty
or  thirty  times  during  the  last  three  years,  and,  carefully  dissecting
my  experience,  I  am  of  opinion  the  false  visualization  is,  to  me,
as  real  and  definite  as  visualization  resulting  from  the  material.

I  should  perhaps  state  that  this  false  visualization  is  unique  in
my  experience.

[Later  Mr.  Constable  adds  :]  Last  night  walking  to  the  club  I
determined  to  "bilk"  the  hallucination.  As  I  walked  I  marked  a
tree  on  my  right  and  said  to  myself  "  now  the  gate  is  within  three
feet  of  me."  I  looked.  There  was  the  gate.  I  walked  to  it.  It
was  not  there,  but  some  six  or  seven  feet  distant.  I  looked  again
at  the  tree  (remember  it  was  but  a  dim  shadow  in  the  darkness)
and  saw  I  had  mistaken  it  for  another.

A  clear  case  of  a  visual  hallucination  raised  by  a  false  association
of  ideas.

F.  C.  Constable.

It  appears  to  me  that  simple  and  slight  errors  of  this  kind,
whether  occurring  spontaneously  or  suggested  by  the  medium,
may  account  for  a  good  many  supposed  telekinetic  phenomena ;
since  through  such  errors,  which  would,  of  course,  be  chiefly
liable  to  occur  in  a  bad  light,  the  medium  might  appear  to  be
at  a  little  distance  from  objects  with  which  he  was  really  in
contact.


512


Count  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


NOTE  ON  MISS  JOHNSON'S  PAPEE.
By  Count  Peeovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.

I  have  read  Miss  Johnson's  paper  on  "  The  Education  of  the
Sitter "  with  the  greatest  possible  interest  and  sympathy.

Her  arguments  have  struck  me  as  being  presented  in  a
very  forcible  way ;  and  I  willingly  admit  that  there  is  in
them  a  good  deal  of  apparently  good  evidence  tending  to
indicate  suggestion  on  Home's  part  as  a  plausible  explanation
of  some  at  least  of  his  marvels.

But  we  have  still  to  give  full  weight  to  the  following
circumstances  :  (a)  that  whilst  some  of  Home's  phenomena
have  been  proved  objective  beyond  a  doubt,  none  have  ever
been  undoubtedly  shown  to  be  hallucinatory;  (5)  that,  apart
from  Home,  there  exists  an  overwhelming  mass  of  evidence
showing  the  most  startling  "  phenomena "  of  Spiritualism  to
be  objective,  to  whatever  cause  due.

For  with  regard  to  the  last  point,  it  must  not  be  lost  sight
of  that  the  distinction  drawn  between  the  "  manifestations  "
of  Home  and  those  of  other  mediums  is  purely  arbitrary.
If  Home's  manifestations  were  authentic,  those  of  some  other
mediums  must  have  been  equally  genuine :  if  all  other  physical
phenomena  are  spurious,  then  Home's  must  have  been  fraudu-
lent also.

It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind,  I  think,  that  here,  as
in  every-day  experience,  the  most  plausible  explanation  may
after  all  not  be  the  true  one.  Misdescription,  illusion  pure
and  simple,  and  illusion  combined  with  fraud  may  work  very
well  as  explanations  in  ninety-nine  cases  ;  but  when  we  come
to  the  hundredth  there  may  turn  out  a  circumstance  which
will  clearly  show  such  a  hypothesis  to  be  inadequate ;  and  if
in  one  case,  why  not  in  others  ?


lvi.]  Note  on  Miss  Johnson's  Paper.  513

From  this  point  of  view,  let  us  consider  a  characteristic
instance.  Mr.  T.  Adolphus  Trollope  narrates  how  at  one  of
Home's  sittings  in  Florence

a  middle-aged  Italian  gentleman  of  the  Jewish  persuasion  asked
that  the  spirit  of  his  father,  who,  it  was  stated  by  the  medium,
was  present,  should  mention  where  he  and  his  son,  then  communi-
cating with  him,  last  met  on  earth.  It  should  be  stated  that  the
inquirer,  having  abandoned  the  faith  of  his  fathers,  professed  entire
disbelief  in  any  existence  of  the  soul  or  any  future  life.  The  answer
to  his  query  was  spelled  out  in  the  manner  I  have  already  described
[i.e.  through  raps]  a  certain  Italian  city  being  named.  I  watched
the  face  of  the  sceptical  inquirer  as  the  letters  were  "  rapped  out "
and  gradually  completed  the  name  required.  And  I  needed  no
confession  of  the  fact  from  him  to  know  that  the  answer  had  been
correctly  given.  I  thought  the  man  would  have  fallen  from  his
chair. He  became  ghastly  pale  and  trembled  all  over.  .  .  -1

Here  the  explanation  almost  lies  on  the  surface,  and
there  cannot  be  any  doubt  that  it  could  tit  many  cases.
But  suppose  it  is  undoubtedly  disproved  in  but  one  clear
instance,  what  then  ?  Are  we  to  maintain  that  the  experience
of  the  "Italian  gentleman  of  the  Jewish  persuasion"  is  still
to  be  put  down  to  Home  watching  the  expression  of  his  face
at  the  appropriate  letter  when  we  read  that  at  another  seance
at  Mr.  Trollope's  house,

there  was  present  a  well-known  and  much  respected  English  banker
established  in  Florence,  a  hale,  robust,  cheery  sort  of  man.  .  .  .
A  "  spirit "  was  announced  as  having  come  for  him.  Who  is  it  1
A  name  was  rapped  out  in  the  manner  described.  The  elderly
banker  declared  that  he  never  had  any  friend  or  relative  of  that
name,  and  had  never  heard  it  before.  A  second  time  the  name  was
spelled  out,  while  the  banker  sat  thrashing  out  his  recollections.
Suddenly  he struck his forehead  with  his  hand  and  exclaimed  :

u  By  Heaven,  it  is  true  ! Nancy ■ !  (I  forget  the  name).  She

was  my  nurse  in  Yorkshire  more  than  half  a  century  ago  ! "  .  .  .
Taking  into  consideration  the  total  severance  of  the  old  banker's
infancy  both  as  to  years  and  locality  from  any  of  his  then  surround-
ings, the  fact  that  it  was  so  long  since  he  had  heard  the  name  in


1  What  I  Remember,  by  T.  Adolphus  Trollope,  Vol.  I.  pp.  391-392.  I  am
indebted  to  Miss  Johnson  for  this  reference.


514


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[pakt


question  mentioned  that  he  had  himself  entirely  forgotten  it,  and
the  further  fact  that  there  was  nobody  at  Florence  who  had  any
connection  with  him  or  his  family  in  his  early  years,  and  the  cir-
cumstance that  he  that  evening  saw  Mr.  Hume  for  the  first  time —
I  confess  that  it  seems  to  me  that  the  improbability  of  any  proposed
explanation  of  the  mystery  must  be  incalculably  great  indeed  for
a  solution,  the  improbability  of  which  approaches  so  very  near  to
impossibility,  to  be  preferably  accepted.1

From  which  it  follows  that  the  theory  which  presented
itself  almost  irresistibly  to  the  reader's  mind  as  an  explanation
of  the  first  incident'  proves  in  the  present  instance  utterly
insufficient ;  and  should  consecpuently  hardly  be  pressed  too
much  as  a  general  solution  of  a  certain  category  of  the  Home
mysteries.

So  it  may  be  with  regard  to  many  of  the  incidents
adduced  by  Miss  Johnson  in  her  paper.  Taken  separately^
they  seem  to  point  to  "  suggestions "  as  not  only  the  most
natural,  but  the  almost  inevitable  explanation.  But  it  does
not  follow  that  this  is  necessarily  the  true  one.

At  the  same  time  it  goes  without  saying  that  if  we  postu-
late :  (a)  the  general  untrustworthiness  of  the  accounts  of
Home's  stances ;  (&)  the  probability  of  his  having  been  able  at
times  to  impress  hallucinations  or  illusions  on  some  of  his
sitters ;  and  (c)  especially  the  possibility  of  such  impressed
illusions  being  sometimes  (as  suggested  by  Miss  Johnson)
coupled  with  fraud,  we  shall  have  dealt  the  Home  evidence  a
most  damaging  blow.

Point  (a)  is  perhaps  the  most  worthy  of  note  and  the
most  discouraging.  And  it  is  especially  to  be  regretted  that
there  are  unsatisfactory  features  even  in  our  best  Home
evidence, — that  coming  from  scientists  of  world-wide  fame.
For,  with  all  due  respect  to  them,  it  seems  to  me  distinctly
unsatisfactory  that  the  most  startling  incidents  should  be
sometimes  described  in  a  few  lines  of  print  only ;  that  in
other  cases  recollections  more  than  twenty  years  old,  and
apparently  not  based  on  any  contemporary  notes,  should  be
deemed  sufficient ;  and  that  we  should  be  told  again  and
again  that  such  and  such  phenomena  occurred  under  specially
pre-arranged  conditions,  without,  at  least  in  most  cases,  being

1  National  Jieview,  May  1890,  pp.  306-307.


Note  on  Miss  Johnson's  Paper.


515


shown  what  these  conditions  were.  And  if  such  drawbacks
occur  in  our  best  testimony,  what  wonder  if  witnesses  of
much  inferior  scientific  standing  do  not  conform  to  the
required  standard.

Again,  Miss  Johnson  thinks  it  "  very  significant "  that
there  should  be  so  wide  a  difference  between  Mr.  Burr's  first
account  of  his  experience  with  a  materialised  hand  published
in  1863  and  that  given  in  Mme.  Home's  work  32  years
after  the  event.  I  also  think  such  a  discrepancy  unfor-
tunate from  the  positive  side  ;  but  I  do  not  see  in  this  a
decisive  proof  that  Mr.  Burr  was  labouring,  in  1887,  under
a  hallucination  of  memory.  It  is  perhaps  possible,  though,
I  admit,  not  very  probable,  that  if  Mr.  Burr  abstained  in
1863  from  recounting  the  whole  of  his  experience,  it  was
simply  because  the  public  at  large  were  less  prepared  then
for  such  a  thins;  as  a  materialised  hand  with  a  human  fore-
finger  pushed  right  through  it,  than  they  could  be  supposed
to  be  a  quarter  of  a  century  later,  after  the  public  stage
had  long  been  occupied  by  Slade,  Eglinton  and  other  marvel-
mongers,  and  after  so  many  persons  of  scientific  eminence  had
"  endorsed  "  the  most  stupendous  mecliumistic  miracles.

To  my  mind  the  main  thing  is  not  why  Mr.  Burr  omitted
to  mention  in  1863  a  fact  on  which  he  dwelt  at  length  in
1887,  but  what  kind  of  witness  he  was.  If  he  resembled
in  this  respect  some  Spiritualists  with  whom  I  have  the
pleasure  of  being  personally  acquainted, — well,  I  can  only  say
I  should  reject  his  testimony  unhesitatingly  if  brought  forward
even  thirty- two  days,  not  years,  after  the  event.

But  to  return  to  illusion  versus  the  "  Physical  Phenomena."
Quite  lately,  at  the  S.P.B.  meeting  of  June  29th,  1908,  we
had  the  old  story  of  the  photographing  of  the  Indian  fakirs
brought  to  the  front  again,  and  this  time  by  an  undoubted
eye-witness  {Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.  p.  273,  July,  1908).
Here,  I  think,  is  the  crux  of  the  whole  matter.  Let  Dr.
Mehrji  properly  authenticate  his  story,  and  the  old  controversy
will  be  brought  very  near  a  definite  settlement.  Till  this  is
done,  all  this  theorising,  whether  for  or  against  the  objectivity
of  the  "  Physical  Phenomena,"  appears  to  me  little  more
than  beating  the  air.  What  we  want  is  new  facts,  and  I
earnestly  trust  we  shall  get  them.


516


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEWS.

Psicologia  e  " Spiritismo" :  Impressioni  e  note  critiche  sui  fenomeni
medianici  di  Eusapia  Paladino,  by  E.  Morselli.  (2  vols.  Fratelli
Bocca,  Turin,  1908.)

The  fame  of  Professor  Morselli  as  a  nerve-specialist  and  psychologist
is  world-wide,  and  his  pronouncements  on  the  mediumistic  pheno-
mena of  Eusapia  Paladino  cannot  therefore  but  excite  considerable
interest.  The  book  before  us,  in  two  thick  volumes,  consists  of
three  parts,  besides  a  valuable  bibliography  of  the  literature  of
modern  spiritualism  and  Psychical  Eesearch,  and  Professor  Morselli
approaches  the  subject  with  a  wide,  if  not  in  every  case  deep,1
acquaintance  with  this  literature.  Part  I.  treats  of  modern  spiritual-
ism and  mediumship  generally,  and  gives  a  brief  history  of  Eusapia
Paladino.  Part  II.,  which  occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  book,
consists  of  descriptions  (written  on  the  night  of  the  sitting  or  as
soon  after  as  possible)  of  the  twenty-eight  sittings  the  author  has
had  with  her.  Twenty  of  these  sittings  took  place  in  1901  and
1902,  and  six  in  the  winter  of  1906-7.  It  is  these  last  six  which
have  excited  most  interest  among  psychical  researchers  in  this
country,  doubtless  because  much  publicity  was  given  to  them
through  the  Italian  daily  press ;  but  it  is  interesting  to  note  that
Professor  Morselli  himself  considers  them  inferior  to  the  earlier
ones,  and  that  he  is  of  opinion  that  Eusapia's  mediumship  has
deteriorated.2  A  great  deal  of  general  discussion,  psychological,
biological,  theoretical  and  critical,  accompanies  the  narrative,  and

1 1  have  noticed  some  misunderstandings  and  misrepresentations  of  passages
from  works  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  but  possibly  this  may  only  be  due
to  quoting  from  memory  or  from  inadequate  notes.

2 1  do  not  think  that,  as  described,  any  of  Professor  Morselli's  experiences
appear  as  striking  as  those  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  the  lie  Roubaud.


LVI.]


Review.


517


the  author  is  specially  interested  in  demonstrating  that  the  spiritual-
istic hypothesis  is  unreasonable,  superfluous  and  absurd.1

The  third  part  of  the  book,  which  is  quite  short,  is  a  sort  of
summary  of  Eusapia  Paladino's  "  mediumistic "  phenomena  and  the
various  hypotheses  held  concerning  them.  Professor  Morselli's  own
conclusion  is  that  the  great  majority  of  the  phenomena  that  occur
at  her  seances  are  genuine  manifestations  of  some  kind  of  super-
normal activity  to  be  explained  by  hitherto  unknown  psychical
forces  connected  with  the  human  organism.  A  few  of  those
described  may,  he  thinks,  be  due  to  illusion,  and  a  small  propor-
tion— say  10  per  cent,  or  less — are  due  to  fraud  (Vol.  L,  p.  312).
For  none  is  a  spiritualistic  explanation  required,  and  "John  King,"
Eusapia's  "spirit  guide,"  is  not  a  real  entity.

To  the  views  expressed  in  this  last  sentence  we  may  safely  assent.
It  is  difficult  at  least  to  conceive  how  any  serious  student  can
suppose  that  the  hypothesis  of  the  agency  of  "  spirits  "  would  render
Eusapia's  phenomena  more  intelligible.  But  we  need  not  dwell  on
this,  for  the  previous  question — whether  there  are  any  supernormal
phenomena  to  explain — occupies  the  field,  and  the  more  important
point  is  not  to  prove  the  absence  of  spiritual  agency,  but  to  prove
the  absence  of  tricks.  To  the  present  Avriter  it  does  not  seem  that
in  Professor  Morselli's  work  quite  enough  attention  is  given  to
showing  that  trickery  was  adequately  guarded  against,  or  that  a
sufficient  margin  is  allowed,  beyond  what  within  known  laws  of
nature  is  apparently  possible,  to  justify  the  assumption  that  these
laws  have  been  transcended.

As  Professor  Morselli  says,  there  is  a  great  sameness  about  the
general  scheme  of  Eusapia's  seances.  After  reading  his  book,  I  again
read  through  the  notes  of  the  Cambridge  sittings  of  13  years  ago,

xIa  proving  this  he  sometimes  uses  rather  double-edged  arguments.  Thus
lie  takes  pains  to  point  out  that  the  position  and  nature  of,  eg.  the  touches
are  generally  such  as  they  would  be  if  sometimes  Eusapia's  hands  and  some-
times her  feet  were  used  to  produce  them.  For  example,  only  the  sitters
next  to  her  are  touched  on  the  side,  as  it  were  with  her  feet.  More  distant
sitters  are  touched,  if  at  all,  on  the  back  of  the  hands  (on  the  table)  or  on
the  face  (cf.  Vol.  I.,  p.  276),  as  it  were  with  her  hand.  It  is  as  if,  Professor
Morselli  says,  Eusapia  had  the  idea  of  touching  thus — as  if  she  represents  it
thus  to  herself.  He  draws  the  inference  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  any
psychological  entity  other  than  hers,  but  that  her  powers  are  increased,
exteriorised,  by  means  of  some  unknown  biological  law.  It  is  obvious  that
the  facts  mentioned  may  equally  point  to  trickery,  if  we  can  suppose  a  hand
or  foot  free.

2k


518


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


[part


and  was  struck  afresh  with  this.  With  us,  as  with  him,  the
sittings  usually  began  with  movements  and  levitations  of  the  table,
often  in  a  goodish  light.  The  phenomena  that  followed — touches,
grasps,  movement  of  objects,  appearances  as  of  hands  or  other
extensions  of  Eusapia's  limbs,  and  occasionally  lights,  depended
evidentially  almost  entirely  on  adequate  holding  of  her  hands  and
feet  in  a  poor  light,  or  almost  complete  darkness.  I  may  remark
in  passing  that  our  conditions  of  holding  seem  to  have  been,  on
the  whole,  better  than  those  in  use  at  Professor  Morselli's  sittings,
for  whenever  Eusapia  would  allow  it,  we  held  her  feet  with  our
hands  instead  of  trusting  to  contact  between  the  sitters'  feet  and
hers.  There  is  one  respect  in  which  the  plan  of  the  sittings  seems
to  have  developed  since  1895,  namely,  in  the  importance  of  the
part  played  by  the  curtained  recess.  At  Cambridge  no  dark  cur-
tained recess  was  specially  provided.  There  were  window  curtains
in  Mr.  Myers's  drawing-room  where  we  sat,  and  also  curtains
between  two  parts  of  the  room.  Both  these  sets  of  curtains  were
used  at  different  sittings — the  table  being  placed  near  them  at  first,
or  moved  there  after  the  sitting  had  began.  By  supposed  super-
natural force  the  cm'tains  were  from  time  to  time  thrown  forward
over  the  sitters  or  between  Eusapia  and  those  next  to  her.1  But
they  played  a  less  important  part  than  at  Professor  Morselli's
sittings,  and  there  were  no  thin  black  curtains  hung  between  the
ordinary  heavy  curtains  to  serve  as  a  veil  between  the  sitter  and
the  hands  that  touched  him.  Nor  were  the  objects  for  use  at  the
seance  placed  behind  the  curtains  at  Cambridge.

In  another  respect,  Professor  Morselli's  experiences  differed  from
and  went  beyond  ours.  He  had,  and  we  had  not,  a  sitting  for
"  Materialisations."  This — it  was  his  twenty-second,  and  took  place
in  March,  1902 — he  regarded  as  the  high- water  mark  of  Eusapia
Paladino's  manifestations.  She  was  tied  to  a  camp  bedstead  on
which  she  lay  behind  the  curtains,  and  half-length  figures  with
head  enveloped  as  with  a  scarf  (or  once  as  with  a  frilled  cap),
appeared  at  the  openings  in  a  poor  light.  Readers  will  probably
differ  as  to  whether  this  adds  to  the  Aveight  of  evidence  for  the
genuineness  of  Eusapia  or  the  reverse.  So  far  as  I  can  judge  of
the  conditions  from  Professor  Morselli's  description  of  them,  I  do
not  think  we  should  have  regarded  them  as  convincing  in  the  case

1  One  of  the  few  unexplained  phenomena  which  occurred  at  Cambridge  was
connected  with  a  curtain  just  behind  the  medium,  which  on  one  occasion,
in  a  good  light,  bulged  out  several  times  as  though  there  were  wind  behind  it.


LVI.]


Review.


519


of  the  "materialisations"  I  have  personally  witnessed  with  other
mediums.  These  other  mediums,  however,  failed  to  satisfy  us,  and
sooner  or  later  were  caught  personating  the  materialised  spirit  by
investigators  less  scrupulous  about  seizing  the  "  spirit "  than  our-
selves.

Materialisations  of  this  sort,  showing  faces  and  forms,  are  recorded
comparatively  rarely  with  Eusapia,  but  they  may  be  said  to  be  led
up  to  by  the  phenomena  that  are  of  constant  occurrence.  For  the
touches  felt  at  almost  every  seance  are  supposed  to  be  made  by
materialised  hands,  and  sometimes  these  hands  are  seen.  Some-
times, too,  a  roundish  object  suggesting  a  head  appears  silhouetted
against  some  faintly-illuminated  background,  or  some  faintly-illumi-
nated limb  or  other  object  appears  against  the  darker  background.
At  some  of  Professor  Morselli's  sittings  what  were  taken  for  parts
of  a  human  form  were  felt  pressing  against  the  curtains  from
behind.  There  was  no  question  of  an  accomplice,  and  on  some
occasions  sitters  were  allowed  to  look  behind  the  curtains  and  saw
nothing.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  whether  such  looking  was  always
simultaneous  with  the  touches,  and  even  if  it  was,  supposing  these
to  be  done  by  Eusapia's  hand  or  arm  (as  the  description  sometimes
suggests  to  the  reader),  a  person  giving  a  rapid  glance  in  a  very
poor  light  and  expecting  to  see  a  whole  figure  might  easily  be
deceived.  These  materialised  limbs,  whether  seen  or  only  felt,  seldom
even  appear  to  operate  beyond  the  reach  of  the  medium's  own
natural  hands  or  feet  or  head,1  and  the  reason  for  taking  them  to
be  anything  else  is  simply  that  her  limbs  are  supposed  to  be  held
or  watched  by  the  sitters.

I  may  illustrate  this  by  some  experiences  at  Cambridge.  At  the
first  sitting  of  the  Cambridge  series,  after  various  phenomena  had
occurred,  I  (and  others)  saw  a  hand  between  me  and  the  window.
At  first  I  thought  it  was  Eusapia's  hand,  but  Mr.  Myers  said  he
was  holding  her  hand  on  her  lap  at  the  time.  Later  in  the  sitting
Eusapia said that  John  King  was  coming  out  from  the  curtain

1  Professor  Morselli  thinks  that  sometimes  hands  operated  and  objects  were
moved  beyond  Eusapia's  reach,  and  this  was  also  occasionally  thought  by  some
observers  at  the  Cambridge  sittings.  But  there  is  at  the  sittings  so  much
moving  of  the  position  of  the  whole  circle,  including  the  medium,  so  much
restlessness  altogether,  and  so  much  difficulty  in  ascertaining  what  were  the
exact  relative  positions  before  the  phenomena,  that  it  is  difficult  to  get  clear
evidence  on  this  point.  Moreover,  careful  experiments  would  be  required  to
determine  the  limits  of  possible  reaching,  which  are  wider  than  is  often
supposed.


520


Airs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


behind  her.  Presently  several  of  the  sitters  saw  a  white  object
with  a  rounded  point  to  it  moving  behind  Mr.  Myers,  who  sat  at
Eusapia's  right  hand,  and  against  whose  shoulder  her  head  was
resting.  Mr.  X.,  who  was  next  but  one  to  her  on  the  same  side,
was  new  to  the  phenomena,  and  apparently  did  not  realise  that
"  grabbing  "  without  leave  was  against  rules.  H  e  put  out  his  hand
and  touched  the  object,  which  thereupon  drew  back.  He  said  it  felt
like  a  hand,  or  at  all  events  something  more  solid  than  the  cur-
tain (which  had  been  moving  about  previously).  Afterwards,  "John
King"  said  he  had  used  the  medium's  handkerchief  to  produce  this
phenomenon,  and  asked  where  the  handkerchief  was,  thinking  appa-
rently that  Mr.  X.  had  taken  it.  After  the  sitting,  Eusapia's
handkerchief  was  found  lying  behind  the  curtain.  It  is  obvious
in  this  case  that,  if  Eusapia  had  got  her  right  hand  free,  she  was
in  a  convenient  position  to  use  it  to  produce  this  phenomenon.
Again,  at  a  certain  point  of  the  second  sitting  of  the  series,
Eusapia  was  standing  up,  Mr.  Myers  had  her  left  hand,  and  Mrs.  (after-
wards Lady)  Stanley  her  right  hand.  I  was  in  charge  of  her  feet,
and  was  consequently  lying  on  the  floor  holding  them.  As  I  looked
up  from  that  position,  the  ceiling  made  a  light  background,  against
which  I  saw  silhouetted  what  looked  exactly  like  Eusapia's  right
arm  and  hand  lifting  a  chair  and  placing  it  on  the  table.  After
the  chair  was  on  the  table,  I  similarly  saw  against  the  ceiling
Eusapia's  arm  and  Lady  Stanley's  apparently  holding  each  other  by
the  hand.  I  did  not  see  any  transition.  Lady  Stanley  reported
that  on  this  occasion  Eusapia  had  drawn  her  (Lady  S.'s)  hand  to
her  (E.'s)  body,  and  the  pressure  on  her  hand  became  that  of  two
fingers.  The  chair  was  lifted  on  to  the  table,  and  then  the  fingers
left  Lady  Stanley's  hand,  and  Eusapia's  cool  hand  returned  and
closed  over  it.

It  may  be  asked  why,  after  experiences  like  these,  we  did  not
give  up  the  sittings,  convinced  that  we  had  to  do  with  a  trickster,
especially  with  the  warning  of  Signor  Torelli  Viollier,  repeated  by  Pro-
fessor Richet,  in  our  minds.  No  doubt  the  events  above  described  were
suspicious ;  but  we  had  behind  us  the  seances  at  the  ile  Eoubaud
which  had  so  greatly  impressed  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  Mr.  Myers ;
phenomena,  like  the  best  of  those  on  the  island,  might  be  coming.
Besides,  we  had  so  far  no  proof  of  trickery.  Lady  Stanley  felt  and
described  very  accurately  the  way  the  hand  resting  on  hers  nar-
rowed till  it  became  like  two  fingers  1 ;  but  they  were  fingers,  of  that
lSee  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  150.


LVI.]


Review.


521


she  was  sure,  and  where  did  the  fingers  come  from  if  the  other
hand  was  well  held?  We  had  not  yet  traced  the  drawing  of  the  two
hands  together  and  the  substitution  of  part  of  one  for  the  other.

So  we  went  on,  sometimes  depressed  but  sometimes  cheered  up
again,  through  twelve  sittings.  Others  besides  Lady  Stanley  noticed
the  narrowing  of  the  hand,  and  sometimes  the  brief  gap  in  the
contact  which  she  had  so  carefully  described,  but  still  no  one
observed  the  actual  substitution  of  one  hand  for  the  other.  We
thought  the  sittings  on  the  whole  sufficiently  successful  and  impres-
sive for  it  to  be  worth  while  to  invite  eminent  men  of  science,  and
on  one  occasion  a  well-known  conjurer,  to  witness  them.

Mr.  Hodgson  arrived  from  America  after  the  twelfth  sitting.
What  he  did  was  to  systematise  the  observations.  He  was,  of  course,
an  experienced  observer,  and  had  given  much  attention  to  tricks
of  various  kinds,  both  as  practised  by  mediums  and  by  professional
conjurers.  At  his  first  sitting  he  observed  the  narrowing  of  the
hand  as  Lady  Stanley  had  done.  It  was  at  his  second  sitting,  the
fourteenth  of  the  series,  that  he  was  able  to  observe  the  whole  pro-
cess of  substitution,  and  the  way  one  hand  represented  both  while
the  other  was  free.  The  more  important  part  of  the  report  of  this
sitting  was  printed  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  151-5,  and  I
need  not  repeat  it  here.  After  this  others  of  us  were  able  to  observe,
over  and  over  again,  the  process  of  freeing  a  hand  or  a  foot.  It  was
done  with  skill,  care  and  caution,1  and  evidently  with  deliberation.

1 1  should  like  to  say  that  after  our  Cambridge  experiences  I  realised  that
secure  holding  under  the  conditions  allowed  is  much  more  difficult  than  I
had  previously  supposed,  and  I  should  not  now  attribute  unusual  gullibility
to  any  one  who  failed  to  detect  the  substitution.  I  say  this  because  I  expressed
a  different  view  after  certain  experiences  at  Carqueiranne.  See  Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  340.  On  that  occasion  I  held  the  left  hand,  and  Dr.  Segard  was
responsible  for  the  right  hand.  An  accordion  placed  near  was  passed  on  to
the  table  between  Dr.  Segard  and  the  medium  at  about  the  level  of  their
shoulders,  and  against  a  faintly-illuminated  background  I  could  see  it  being-
brought  forward  by  what  looked  like  the  outline  of  a  hand  and  arm,  which
I  should  have  felt  sure  were  Eusapia's  right  hand  and  arm,  had  not  Dr.  Segard
been  sure  he  was  holding  her  right  hand.  Later,  each  time  Professor  Richet,
who  was  under  the  table  holding  Eusapia's  feet,  said  he  was  touched,  I  could
see  her  stooping  about  as  much  as  was,  I  should  judge,  required  in  order  to
touch  him  with  her  right  hand.  Each  time  I  asked  Dr.  Segard  whether  he
was  really  sure  that  he  was  holding  the  right  hand,  and  he  said  he  was.
Since  our  Cambridge  experiences  I  have  felt  no  doubt  that  the  right  hand
was  free,  and  that  I  had  allowed  the  left  hand  with  mine  holding  it  to  approach
Dr.  Segard  and  represent  two  hands.  But  I  do  not  now  think  this  argues
unusual  ineptness  as  observers  either  in  Dr.  Segard  or  myself.


522


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


After  studying  the  notes  of  our  previous  experiences,  and  compar-
ing with  them  what  we  now  perceived,  we  felt  no  doubt  that  the
trick  had  been  practised  throughout,  and  that  no  holding  under  any
such  conditions  as  prevailed  at  Eusapia's  sittings  is  to  be  relied  on.

We,  and  especially  Mr.  Hodgson,  have  been  blamed  for  allowing
Eusapia  to  get  her  hand  free  when  we  began  to  see  what  was
happening.1  I  cannot  understand  this  point  of  view.  When  there
seems  to  be  a  clue  to  the  modus  operandi  the  only  scientific  pro-
cedure is  surely  to  follow  it  wherever  it  may  lead — whether  to
exposure  of  fraud  or  proof  of  genuineness.  Before  we  realised  the
clue,  through  twelve  sittings,  we  had  done  our  best  under  such
conditions  as  Eusapia  would  allow  to  obtain  phenomena  of  whose
genuineness  we  could  feel  no  doubt,  so  that  she  had  had  every
opportunity  of  proving  her  powers  to  be  supernormal,  if  proof  was
possible.  The  result  was  that  the  evidence  depended  almost  entirely
on  the  holding  of  hands  and  feet,  and  in  connexion  with  this  hold-
ing there  were  suspicious  circumstances.  It  became,  therefore,  of
the  utmost  importance  to  follow  any  clue  which  might  enable  us
to  estimate  the  value  of  holding  such  as  Eusapia  allowed.

I  have  dwelt  thus  long  upon  our  experiences  at  Cambridge,
although  so  much  of  the  tale  has  been  already  told,  partly  because
I  do  not  think  Professor  Morselli  has  altogether  understood  what
happened  there,  and  partly  because  it  enables  me  to  bring  out
clearly  in  what  resjjects  and  why  my  judgment  differs  from  his.
He  is  evidently  a  good  and  careful  observer,  he  is  aware  that
Eusapia  Paladino  does  sometimes  trick,  and has,  in  fact,  himself

1  There  is  another  matter  in  which  we  have  been  blamed.  A  legend  has
grown  up  in  France  and  Italy  that  we  treated  Eusapia  Paladino  unkindly.  I
do  not  know  whether  she  is  herself  responsible  for  this  legend.  If  she  is,  it
is  perhaps  not  unnatural,  but  I  think  it  is  ungrateful.  We  did  our  best  to
keep  her  happy  and  amused,  and  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble  about  it,  and
as  far  as  we  could  judge  were  fairly  successful,  except  during  a  day  or  two
when  she  was  not  well.  She  lived  in  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Myers's  house,  and  lived
with  the  family.  She  constantly  played  croquet  in  the  garden  with  the
children,  and  after  Mr.  Hodgson  came  she  played  with  great  gusto  with  him  ;
we  used  to  take  her  out  shopping  (at  our  expense),  in  which  she  delighted,
and  to  take  her  out  for  carriage  drives  and  sight-seeing  expeditions,  e.g.  to
London.  Professor  Morselli  speaks  of  some  offensive  searching  to  find  trick
apparatus  to  which  she  had  been  exposed  somewhere,  and  suggests  that  it
was  at  Cambridge.  The  nearest  approach  to  this  that  I  ever  heard  of  was
that  on  one  or  two  occasions,  after  a  good  stance,  Mrs.  Myers  accompanied
her  to  her  bedroom  when  she  went  up  to  bed,  helped  her  to  undress,  and
folded  her  clothes  for  her.


LVI.]


Revieiv.


523


sometimes  detected  her  in  trickery  or  what  looked  suspiciously  like
it.  But  he  appears  to  think  that  when  on  any  particular  occasion
trickery  has  not  been  detected  by  sensible  persons  responsible  for
watching  the  medium,  the  presumption  is  that  it  has  not  occurred.
In  this  I  cannot  agree.  I  have  not  the  same  confidence  that  he
has  in  my  own  or  any  one  else's  powers  of  continuous  observation,
especially  in  darkness  or  semi-darkness ;  and  when  it  has  been
shown  that  a  medium  systematically  practises  trickery,  the  pre-
sumption, I  think,  is  that  on  any  particular  occasion  when  an
unexplained  phenomenon  takes  place,  an  opportunity  for  trickery
unobserved  by  the  investigator  has  been  found.  It  must  be
remembered  that  the  medium  is  not  bound  to  produce  phenomena
at  any  given  time.  If  no  opportunity  occurs  nothing  need  happen.
In  this  a  tricking  medium  is  at  a  great  advantage  as  compared
with  an  ordinary  conjurer.

I  do  not  profess  to  explain  everything  that  is  described  by  Pro-
fessor Morselli.  Most  of  it  is  not  difficult,  if  a  free  hand  or  foot
is  granted ;  but  I  think  there  are  other  tricks,  and  any  explanation
of  them  I  might  offer  would  be  conjectural.  I  may  point  out  that
even  a  professional  conjurer  could  not  probably  explain  a  conjuring
trick  with  which  he  was  unfamiliar  from  the  description  of  a  witness
who  had  not  detected  it.  It  is  because  essential  points  have  not
been  observed  that  the  observer  has  been  puzzled.  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey's
experiments  give  proof  of  this,  if  proof  be  needed.

Some  phenomena  which  the  freeing  of  a  hand  or  foot  will  not
explain  should  be  mentioned  in  addition  to  the  materialisation
phenomena  already  referred  to  when  the  medium  was  tied  to  the
bed  behind  the  curtain.  On  another  occasion  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  441-6),
part  of  the  experience  described  seems  to  require  her  to  have  freed
herself  completely,  so  as  to  be  able  to  leave  the  table  and  go  behind
the  curtain.  Of  a  different  kind,  but  again  not  depending  I  think
on  failure  in  holding  hands,  are  certain  levitations  of  the  table,
especially  one  described  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  424.  Mr.  Hodgson  gave  some
attention  to  this  subject,  and  was  himself  able  to  hold  up  a  heavy
table  a  foot  off  the  ground  in  a  manner  resembling  Eusapia's,  by
passing  a  band  round  his  shoulders,  under  his  waist-belt,  and  round
a  leg  of  the  table.  In  the  particular  case  above  referred  to,  the
table  seems  to  have  risen  too  high  for  this  method.  Experiments
in  the  raising  of  tables  by  this  and  other  mechanical  means  should
be  tried,  if  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  phenomenon.
Another  phenomenon,  where  there  is  no  question  of  holding  hands


524  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicL:  [part


or  feet,  was  the  movement  of  a  small  bell  along  the  table  and
other  movements  of  objects  in  a  good  light  in  a  manner  which
would  be  explained  if  we  could  suppose  the  use  of  a  thread  (see
Vol.  L,  p.  425,  and  Vol.  II.,  pp.  202-3).

One  more  point.  Importance  has  been  attached  to  the  question
whether  Eusapia  Paladino  is  genuinely  entranced  during  the  occur-
rence of  at  least  part  of  the  phenomena.  I  think  it  probable  that
she  is.  Professor  Morselli  thinks  so,  and  he  and  other  medical
observers  ought  to  know.  This  might  be  important  if  it  were  our
business  to  decide  on  the  degree  of  moral  blame  attaching  to  the
normal  Eusapia,  though  I  think  that  a  strong  case  could  be  made  out
for  collusion  between  her  normal  and  trance  consciousness.  But  in
deciding  the  matter  actually  before  us,  namely,  what  the  evidence
is  for  attributing  the  physical  phenomena  produced  by  Eusapia  to
hitherto  unknown  powers,  the  question  whether  she  was  entranced
seems  to  me  of  no  importance  whatever.  Systematic  trickery  may
be  practised  in  a  frequently  recurring  auto-hypnotic  condition  as  well
as  in  a  normal  one.

In  conclusion,  Professor  Morselli's  work  gives  the  added  weight
of  his  authority  to  that  of  other  eminent  persons  who  have  con-
vinced themselves  that  Eusapia  Paladino,  notwithstanding  trickery,
does  exhibit  phenomena  which  cannot  be  explained  by  known
physical  or  biological  laws.  He  admits,  however,  that  in  order  to
obtain  any  real  understanding  of  these  extended  biological  powers,
examination  of  them  in  the  case  of  some  person  who  will  allow
real  scientific  experiment  is  necessary,  and  he  does  not  intend  to
spend  more  time  on  Eusapia.  If,  in  spite  of  all  that  has  been  said
about  her,  I  personally  still  doubt  whether  the  prima  facie  case  for
believing  in  a  residuum  of  genuine  phenomena  in  her  case  is
sufficient,  it  is  owing  to  a  long  course  of  experiment  and  disillusion-
ment with  fraudulent  physical  mediums.  Nevertheless  I  do  not
at  all  deny  that  there  are  grounds  for  thinking  that  such  extended
powers  do  exist,  and  if  so,  their  investigation  is  very  important.
Our  hope  of  discovering  the  truth  about  them  lies  in  their  being
developed  in  private  persons  willing  to  take  trouble  and  allow  in-
vestigation, and  should  Professor  Morselli's  work  stimulate  and  lead
to  the  discovery  of  such  persons,  it  will  not  have  been  thrown  away.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.

P.S. — Since  the  above  review  was  written,  an  investigation  of
Eusapia  Paladino  has  been  carried  out  for  the  Society  for  Psychical


LVI.]


Revieiv.


52o


Research  by  Mr.  Feilding,  Mr.  Baggallj',  and  Mr.  Carrington — all
experts  in  the  tricks  of  physical  mediums — and  I  understand  that  they
have  come  substantially  to  the  same  conclusion  as  Professor  Morselli.
Their  reports  will  doubtless  appear  in  a  future  Part  of  the  Proceeding*.

E.  M.  S.

The  Naturalisation  of  the  Supernatural,  by  Frank  Podmore.
(G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons;  New  York  and  London,  1908.  374  pp.
Price  7s.  6d.  net.)

The  title  of  this  most  attractive  and  very  useful  book  is  un-
doubtedly to  a  certain  extent  misleading.  If  by  "  naturalisation "
is  meant — as  seems  indeed  obvious — "  explaining  away  on  natural
[in  the  everyday  sense  of  the  word]  lines,"  then  Mr.  Podmore
leaves  a  good  deal  unexplained.  Practically  out  of  the  whole  domain
of  Psychical  Research,  11  Poltergeists "  and  clairvoyance  at  close
quarters  seem  to  be  almost  the  only  two  groups  of  alleged  "  pheno-
mena" towards  which  he  still  maintains  an  uncompromisingly  negative
attitude.  That  he  should  admit  the  reality  of  telepathy  (and  by
the  way,  whilst  fully  realising  the  stupendous  difficulties  which  stand
in  the  way  of  a  physical  explanation,  Mr.  Podmore  sees  grounds  for
hoping  that  these  difficulties  may  ultimately  diminish,  see  p.  14)  is
of  course  not  to  be  wondered  at.  But  the  position  he  has  taken
up  in  the  work  under  consideration  especially  towards  the  spirit-
hypothesis  and  even,  to  a  certain  extent,  towards  the  "Physical
Phenomena  of  Spiritualism "  appears  to  me  more  unexpected.  It
strikes  me  as  somewhat  significant  that  the  chapter  on  "  Spiritualism  "
(chiefly  devoted  to  recounting  Davey's  slate-writing  feats)  should,
close  as  follows :

"It  cannot  be  said  that  these  recent  researches  [with  Eusapia
Paladino]  have  done  much  to  strengthen  the  case  for  Eusapia's
genuineness.  .  .  .  But  if  we  can  attach  little  weight  to  the  records,
it  is  impossible  not  to  be  impressed  by  the  scientific  standing  and
the  obvious  sincerity  of  the  witnesses  .  .  .  [who]  have  no  manner
of  doubt  that  they  have  witnessed  in  Eusapia's  presence  phenomena
inexplicable  by  any  known  force.  If  they  do  not  enable  us  to  share
their  conviction,  they  at  any  rate  compel  us  to  hold  our  judgment
in  suspense.  There  is  at  any  rate  a  problem  here,  for  the  solution
of  which  we  must  wait.  If  the  things  are  genuine,  we  want  to
know  how  they  are  done ;  if  fraudulent,  how  it  is  that  so  many
competent  observers  have  come  to  believe  in  their  genuineness "
(pp.  201-2).


526


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,


[part


More  suggestive  still  are  many  passages  in  the  sections  of  the
book  dealing  with  such  topics  as  "Communication  with  the  Dead"
(Ch.  IX.),  "Messages  received  through  trance  and  automatism"
{Ch.  XII),  "  Haunted  Houses"  (Ch.  XI.)  and  the  inevitable  Mrs.  Piper
(Ch.  XIII.).  Mr.  Podmore  admits  that  "those  investigators  who
of  recent  years  have  given  the  closest  study  to  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper
and  other  automatists  have  been  led  to  attach  increasing  weight
to  the  hypothesis  of  some  form  of  spirit-communication  "  (pp.  207-8) ;
he  does  not  deny  that  "  we  have  clearly  no  right  to  lay  down  a  priori
a  standard  to  which  spirit-communication  should  conform "  (p.  208) ;
and  a  propos  of  Professor  Miinsterberg's  preposterous  statement
{Psychology  and  Life,  p.  252) :  "  [With  regard  to  the  question]  whether
departed  spirits  enter  into  communication  with  living  men  by  mediums
and  by  incarnation  the  scientist  does  not  admit  a  compromise ;
...  he  flatly  denies  the  possibility  .  .  .  the  facts  as  they  are
claimed  do  not  exist  and  never  will  exist,"  he  says  :

"The  man  who  at  the  present  stage  of  the  enquiry  invites  us
on  the  strength — or  weakness — of  the  evidence  so  far  available  to
acclaim  the  proof  of  human  immortality,  may  be  doing  serious  injury
to  his  own  cause.  But  the  other  man  who,  because  our  present
ignorance  does  not  enable  us  to  decide  what  is  the  true  meaning
of  these  elusive  'seemings,'  condemns  the  whole  enquiry  as  abortive,
has  surely  no  title  to  speak  in  the  name  of  science  "  (p.  210).

Mr.  Podmore  thinks  that  if  some  peculiarly  striking  cases  accumu-
lated by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  should  ultimately  be
multiplied,  the  conclusion  of  post-mortem  agency  "  would  no  doubt
appear  less  dubious"  (p.  274);  he  admits  that  "the  assumption  of
an  alien  personality  speaking  through  the  entranced  person "  has
been  in  certain  cases  made  "by  observers  whose  training  and  special
knowledge  render  them  peculiarly  qualified  to  form  a  judgment  in
such  matters "  (p.  284,  footnote) ;  and  he  winds  up  his  account  of
Mrs.  Piper  by  pointing  out,  though,  it  is  true,  in  a  dubious  form,
that  "in  certain  cases,  at  any  rate,  we  may  come  somehow  into
contact  with  the  minds  of  the  dead  "  (p.  329).  As  we  see,  in  spite
of  the  book's  delusive  title,  a  good  deal  of  the  "  Supernatural "  has
not  been  "  naturalised  "  by  Mr.  Podmore.

As  I  have  just  mentioned  Mrs.  Piper  by  name,  I  may  as  well
point  out  that  I  do  not  consider  all  the  samples  of  the  evidence
brought  forward  by  the  author  in  the  chapter  dealing  with  the
celebrated  Boston  Pythoness  as  altogether  satisfactory.  I  must
especially  protest  against  Mr.  Podmore's  summing  up  in  less  than


LVI.]


Revieiv.


527


two  pages  (pp.  317-318)  of  such  an  episode  as  "Uncle  Jerry's"  in
Mrs.  Piper's  English  sittings  in  1889.  The  account  is  given,  it  is
true,  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  words,  but  slightly  abridged ;  but  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  where  the  same  account  is  printed,  the  reader
may  also  find,  if  he  chooses  to,  the  original  notes  of  Sir  Oliver's
sittings  covering  many  pages,  and  I  think  that  after  he  has  waded
through,  his  impression  may  be  somewhat  different.  For  in  such
highly-condensed  accounts,  especially  if  drawn  up  by  a  sympathetic
observer,  stress  will  naturally  be  laid  on  the  chief  episodes,  many
attending  circumstances  and  seemingly  unimportant  details  being-
omitted  and  the  "  messages  "  being  given  not  in  the  piecemeal  fashion
in  which  they  occurred,  but  in  a  coherent  and  impressive  form,  with
the  main  facts  standing  out  in  bold  relief.  But  in  Sir  O.  Lodge's
account  mention  is  at  least  made  of  some  of  "Uncle  Jerry's"  mes-
sages being  false  (p.  459),  whilst  in  Mr.  Podmore's  all  reference
to  this  circumstance  has  dropped  out.  The  impression  on  the
uninitiated  reader's  mind  may  consequently  be  the  deeper — but  it
will  be  an  impression  to  a  considerable  extent  erroneous.  (With
the  circumstance  that  many,  if  not  most,  of  the  incidents  narrated
for  evidential  purposes  by  "  Uncle  Jerry  "  were  exactly  such  as  arise
in  the  experience  of  almost  nine  out  of  ten  human  boys  I  am  not
concerned  here.)

Mr.  J.  T.  Clarke's  account  of  his  sitting  with  the  same  medium
(pp.  311-316)  is  more  satisfactory,  technically  speaking;  but  much
in  Phinuit's  statements  to  him  which  he  thinks  very  remarkable
strike  me  as  much  less  so,  and  I  believe  that,  after  an  inspection
by  no  meaus  too  severe,  but  little  remains  even  as  evidence  of
telepathy.  The  most  curious  thing  is  that  Mr.  Podmore  should  not
apparently  disapprove  of  Mr.  Clarke  putting  down  as  "correct"
such  statements  as  "there  is  lots  of  trouble  all  over  you,  but  I  see
light  beyond  .  .  .  you  will  wade  through  it  all  right  in  the  end  " —
which  statement  bears  a  most  suspicious  resemblance  to  the  common-
place fortune-teller's  twaddle ;  nor  of  the  same  gentleman  writing-
in  all  seriousness  :

"  My  child  was  in  Germany  at  the  time,  and  thus  lived  in  my
memory  rather  than  in  my  daily  view.  Hence  although  the
medium  felt  that  she  was  alive  .  .  .  her  personality  was  yet  spoken
of  as  'in  the  spirit.' "

Phinuit,  it  should  be  said,  in  answer  to  a  question  as  to  the
whereabouts  of  the  sitter's  daughter,  had  begun  by  saying:  "She
is  in the  spirit,"  but  had  quickly  added :  "  That  is  to  say,  her


528


Goun  t  Perovshy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


spirit  is  here,  but  her  body  is  at  a  distance."  One  may  conclude,
without  being  a  hypercritical  person,  that  Phinuit's  correction  was
due  merely  to  Mr.  Clarke  having  betrayed  in  some  wajr  that  the
first  shot  had  been  wide  of  the  mark.  This  gentleman  prefers
another  explanation;  but  does  Mr.  Podmore  endorse  itl

I  also  think  that  a  statement  such  as  that  the  sitter  has  an
uncle  named  John  (on  which,  by  the  way,  Phinuit  did  not  insist
when  contradicted)  even  if  proved  correct  afterwards,  should  not  be
considered  particularly  evidential  (p.  313);  nor  do  I  find  much
resemblance  between  two  such  names  as  Williamson  (first  said  to  be
Williams)  and  Lambertson  (p.  312);  nor  do  I  think  that  "changing"
my  "house"  is  identical  in  meaning  with  my  wife  being  "away
from  her  house"  (p.  315) ;  nor  does  it  strike  me  as  very  extraordinary
that  a  piano  and  a  clock  should  be  the  chief  features  of  two  particular
rooms  (p.  316).  It  is,  I  think,  somewhat  unfortunate  that  such
a  sitting  should  have  been  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Podmore  as  a
sample  of  the  Piper  evidence,  and  presumably  a  particularly  favourable
one.

The  "  G.  P."  communications,  indeed,  stand  on  a  different  footing.
But  here  objections  of  another  kind  arise.

The  question  which  will  naturally  first  present  itself  to  the  reader
is:  What  opportunities  did  Mrs.  Piper  have  to  obtain  information
about  G.  P.,  his  friends  and  circumstances,  by  normal  means  %  The
fact  that  in  other  cases  she  undoubtedly  made  no  private  enquiries
(for  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  poorest  amateur  detective
would  have  done  far  better  than  her  "  controls ")  is  after  all  no
definite  proof.  There  may  have  been  exceptional  facilities  in
G.  P.'s  case.  (He  died  in  New  York  in  1892,  and  Mrs.  Piper
was  there  at  the  time.)  If  so,  what  importance  can  we  attach,
for  instance,  to  G.  P.  having  mentioned  to  the  Howards  by  name  his
friends  Berwick  and  Orenberg  1  (Mr.  Podmore,  p.  325).  The  question
is  :  Could  or  could  not  Mrs.  Piper  have  learnt  by  normal  means  that
G.P.  had  friends  of  that  name  1  If  she  could  not,  this  ought,  I
think,  to  have  been  so  stated,  possibly  with  the  grounds  for  such
a  conclusion.  If  she  could — well,  the  incident  is  evidentially  worth-
less, and  if  so,  what  is  the  use  of  adducing  it?  Taking  a  professional
medium's  honesty  for  granted  in  an  enquiry  involving  issues  so
momentous,  even  in  one  particularly  striking  instance,  seems  to  me  a
risky  thing.

I  say  "  particularly  striking "  because,  as  a  general  rule,  the  Piper
spirits  so  persistently  avoid giving  surnames, whilst revelling  in


LVI.]


Revieiv.


529


Christian  names  (especially  of  the  William-Mary-John  type).  This
is  already  bad  enough ;  and  so  it  is  the  more  unfortunate  that
such  a  rara  avis  as  this  "  Berwick-Orenberg "  incident  should  be
apparently  open — without,  I  think,  undue  straining — to  a  natural
interpretation.

This  avoiding  of  surnames  is  indeed  a  very  curious  thing.  I  can
understand  an  order  of  existence  in  which  all  names,  Christian  and
others,  should  be  dropped,  though  I  do  not  well  see  what  could
be  used  instead  with  equal  convenience.  But  on  what  charitable
hypothesis  can  we  understand  the  persistence  of  one  set  of  names
and  the  discarding  of  the  other  1  And,  again,  suppose  there  were
only  three  surnames  in  existence  for  Englishmen  and  Americans,
•  say  Smith,  Jones  and  Roberts  :  would  it  be  too  hard  on  Mrs.  Piper
to  conjecture  that  they  would  turn  up  much  oftener  than  they
do  now  1

To  return  to  G-.  P.,  Mr.  Podmore,  who  notes  in  passing  (p.  328)
that  even  that  spirit  has  on  more  than  one  occasion  evaded  test
questions  put  to  him,  might  have  added,  I  think,  that  not  content
with  this,  Gr.  P.  has  repeatedly  given  false  information  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  303,  334,  335).  He  is  also  responsible  for  corroborat-
ing false  statements  made  by  other  Piper  spirits  .(Proceedings,  Vol.
XV.,  p.  24)  and  his  way  of  constantly  referring  to  books  lent  to  his
friends  without  ever  giving  the  title  of  the  book  is  distinctly
irritating.

I  confess  I  am  to  a  certain  extent  in  sympathy  with  Mr.  Andrew
Lang  when  I  find  him  saying :

"If  Mr.  H.,  or  Phinuit,  or  G.  P.  were  honourable  spirits  [i.e.  what
they  pretend  to  be]  they  would  say  they  don't  know,  when  they
don't  know.  They  would  not  give  false  information,  '  natural  enough  '
(easily  guessed)  but  totally  wrong"  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XV.,
p.  42).  '

And  again  :

"That  spirits  in  the  next  life  making  use  of  Mrs.  Piper's  brains,
nerves,  voice  and  hands,  should  be  confused  is  intelligible.  But
why  should  they  be  impudently  mendacious,  absurdly  ignorant  and
furtively  evasive;  fluent  in  twaddle  and  'groping'  when  a  simple
question  as  to  something  familiar  to  them  when  alive  is  asked?"
{ibidem).

Of  course  such  a  picture,  if  intended  for  Gr.  P.,  is  too  darkly
•coloured !  I  admit  that  some  incidents  connected  with  him  are
decidedly startling (perhaps chiefly those which we are  not


530  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


allowed  to  know  in  detail :  see  especially  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.  pp.
321-322)  but  precise^  in  order  to  appreciate  them  at  their  true
value  we  must  have  all  the  features  of  the  episode  before  us  in
equal  prominence,  positive  and  negative.  Otherwise  Mr.  Podmore's
readers  (especially  if  his  reputation  of  an  out-and-out  sceptic  has
reached  them)  will  be  apt  to  become  too  frantically  enthusiastic
about  G.  P.  and  other  Piperites,  and  surely  frantic  enthusiasm  is  not
a  mood  suited  for  our  researches  !

Again,  remarkable  as  is  the  fact  that  many  of  G.  P.'s  former
friends  became  convinced,  after  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  that  they
had  been  conversing  with  him  in  propria  persona,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
very  pertinent  remarks  on  this  subject  may,  I  think,  advantageously
be  read. Says  she  :

"  The  representation  given  of  the  deceased  person  must  from  the
nature  of  the  case  be  of  a  very  limited  kind.  For  instance,  when
the  soi-disant  G.  P.  communicates,  he  usually  does  so  in  writing,  the
whole  of  Mrs.  Piper's  body  except  the  hand  being  in  an  inert  con-
dition. At  the  best,  therefore,  he  is  limited  to  the  words  he  writes
and  to  the  possibilities  of  dramatic  representation  of  a  person's
whole  maniere  d'etre  through  the  movements  of  the  hand  alone.  The
hand-writing  ...  is  not  like  that  of  the  living  G.  P.  The  case  is  not
materially  improved  when  the  communication  is  by  spoken  words,
for  gesture  and  expression  and  voice  are  still  excluded  from  the  like-
ness and  the  '  language  shows  a  tendency  to  depart  more  or  less
from  the  language  that  would  have  been  used  by  the  communicator
when  living.' 1  A  likeness  under  these  circumstances  must  bear  to*
a  full  dramatic  representation  of  a  person  somewhat  the  relation
that  a  clever  pen  and  ink  sketch  done  in  a  few  strokes  bears  to  a
finished  portrait  in  oils"  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  21).

In  short,  most  of  such  impressions,  however  convincing  personally,
do  not  easily  lend  themselves  to  scientific  estimation,  and  can  hardly
eutrer  en  ligne  de  compte.  (See  in  the  same  article  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
a  little  further  on,  mention  of  a  case  when  the  personation  of  G.  P.
was  not  thought  successful,  the  sitter,  Mr.  Marte,  also  carrying  on
with  G.  P.  a  conversation  on  "  philosophical "  subjects  ;  and  a  very
queer  conversation  on  G.  P.'s  side  it  was,  see  pp.  26-7.)

I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  very  remarkable  that  (Mr.  Podmore,  p.  326)
G.  P.  recognised  all  his  friends  who  visited  Mrs.  Piper  under  assumed
names,  in  no  case  making  a  mistake.  Still  with  all  that — though
this  must  be  of  course  a  question  of  "personal  equation" — I  must
1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  332.


LVI.]


Review.


531


say  that  after  reading  one  such  narrative  as  "  Miss  Morton's  "  (Mr.
Podmore,  pp.  266-271,  in  the  chapter  on  "Haunted  Houses")  I
have  felt  myself  nearer  something  like  an  invisible  world  than  after
perusing  hundreds  of  pages  of  the  Piper  records.

Turning  to  other  sections  of  the  book,  I  will  make  one  general
remark-.  It  seems  to  me  that  somewhat  undue  prominence  is  given
by  Mr.  Podmore  to  dreams  as  evidence  of  supernormal  faculties.
He  makes  up  a  very  conclusive  case  against  them  from  this  point
of  view,  giving  at  length  the  various  reasons  for  their  evidential
inferiority  (pp.  76-80) ;  but  theory  is  one  thing  and  practice  another,
and  throughout  the  365  Da°;es  of  Mr.  Podmore 's  book  we  meet  with
dreams  not  infrequently.  That  the  amount  of  coincidence  involved
in  such  a  case  as  the  one  quoted  on  p.  343,  where  the  percipient
dreams  of  ducks  buried  in  sand  with  heads  protruding  at  a  certain
spot,  only  to  learn  a  few  hours  afterwards  that  her  dream  corresponded
exactly  with  actual  facts,  is  such  as  to  make  explanation  by
chance  coincidence  extremely  improbable,  there  can  be  no  doubt ;
but  in  this  respect  the  incident  in  question  is  almost,  though  not
quite,  unique ;  and  some  of  the  other  instances  of  dream-fulfilment
given  in  the  book  seem  to  me  decidedly  less  striking  and  hardly
beyond  the  scope  of  chance  coincidence,  which  no  doubt  gives
occasionally  results  equally  striking,  as  anybody,  and  I  in  par-
ticular, can  testify  from  personal  experience.

Should  not  therefore  dreams,  and  death  dreams  in  particular,  be
given  a  wide  berth  in  "  Psychical  Research "  as  a  general  rule, —
a  rule  which  should  be  infringed  in  very  exceptional  cases  only  1

But  it  is  perhaps  time  to  bring  this  review  to  a  close.  I  can  only
take  leave  of  Mr.  Podmore's  unusually  interesting,  very  candid  and
very  much  up-to-date  book  with  hearty  wishes  for  its  success.  May
it  very  soon  reach  a  second  edition  to  begin  with,  in  which  case
I  would  suggest  to  Mr,  Podmore  the  desirability  of  depriving  the
late  Mr.  Aksakoff  of  a  title — that  of  Professor — which  he  never-
possessed  (p.  292).

Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


i


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH.

1882-1884.
1885-1887.
1888-1892.
1893.

1894-1895.
1896-1899.
1900.

1901-1903.
1904.
1905.

1906-1907.
1908.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  -
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.,
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  -
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  -
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,
Professor  Charles  Richet,-
The  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour,
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1909.
PRESIDENT.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

VICE- PR  ESI  DENTS.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G-.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
George  B.  Dorr.


Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.

Professor  William  James.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon.


W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Ernest  N.  Bennett,  M.P.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal

carres,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
The  Ret.  A.  T.  Fryer.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  M.Sc,  M.B.


COUNCIL.

Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.
J.  G.  Piddington.
St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
A.  F.  Shand.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.  Taylor.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.
V.  J.  Woolley.


H.  Arthur  Smith,


HON.  TREASURER,

Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARY.


The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  320  St  James'  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,

London,  S.W.

RESEARCH  OFFICER  AND  EDITOR.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

SECRETARY  AND  SUB-EDITOR.
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  24  Sergliievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.
The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

2L


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.


February,  1909.
President — Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U..S.A.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Professor  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Eipon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.

Honorary  Members.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.,  Holmleigh,  West  Road,  Cambridge.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Broadstone,  Wimborne,  Dorset.

Corresponding  Membkrs.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Maritimes),
France.

Professor  H.  Bergson,  Villa  Montmorency,  18  Avenue  des  Tilleuls,
Paris.

Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
Mass.,  U.S.A.


[part  lvl]


Members  and  Associates.


535


Professor  Nicholas  M. Butler, Columbia University, New  York,
U.§.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  G  Rue  du  Bella}',  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIP,  Paris.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa,,  U.S.A.
Professor E. C. Pickering, The Observatory, Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Professor  Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.
Coleman,  William  Emmette,  Chief  Quartermaster's  Office,  Chronicle

Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  Wood  River  Junction,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Eeden,  Frederik  van,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.
Falcomer, Professor M. T., Regio Instituto Tecnico e  Nautico,

Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  St.  James'  Vicarage,  Walthamstow,  London,  N.E.
Grubb,  Edward,  3  George  Street,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  AVista,  Silesia.

Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  M.D.,  7  Hornton  Court,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  Lewes  Villa,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  London,  N.
Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe.  Arrt.,  Paris.

Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  infixed  to  the  names  of  Members.
AclandJdood,  Rev.  R.,  Rodsall,  Shackleford,  nr.  Godalming,  Surrey.
Adamowska,  Madame  S., 163 Walnut  Street, Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  "241,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adderley,  Hon.  and  Rev.  James,  Saltley,  Birmingham.


536


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Addison,  Miss  Ina,  c/o  Mrs.  H.  J.  Wilson,  12  Cheyne  Court,

London,  S.W.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Alabaster,  Edward  P.,  Kilworth  Hotel,  Kildare  Street,  Dublin.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S  A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allen,  George  B.,  Free  Chase,  Warninglid,  Sussex.
Allen,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  The  Mount,  Winterbourne,  Bristol.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  4  Newton  Terrace,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.
Allin,  Rev.  Thomas,  Chelston  Mount,  Torquay.
Ames,  Miss  Evelyn, 355  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Anderson,  Dr.  Frank,  U.S.  Navy,  Medical  Inspector,  Navy  Yard,
Mare  Island,  CaL,  U.S.A.

Anderson,  Jos.,  Jun.,  The  Lodge,  Clayton,  Manchester.

Andersson,  A.  A.,  Daily  News  Building,  McKeesport,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Anesaki,  M.,  Koishikawa  Sasugaya  78,  Tokyo,  Japan.
*Antrobus,  Miss  Lily,  69  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.

Armstrong,  Miss  C.  M.,  31  Hereford  Square,  London,  S.W.

Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazd.

Arnold,  Major  Ernest  C,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,  S.W,

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
*Ashley,  Mrs.  Wilfred,  32  Bruton  Street,  London,  W.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  Westwood,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.
*Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.

Austin,  Joseph  D.,  1511  N.  Gratz  Str.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewed,  59  Shrewsbury  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Badland,  Rev.  C.  D.,  Short  Heath,  Kidderminster.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23  Lower  Phillimore Place,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W., 23  Lower  Phillimore  Place,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Bagnell,  Mrs.,  Chateau  de  Perpignan,  JurancomPau,  France.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  209  La  Salle  Str.,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  141  Warrender  Park  Road,  Edinburgh.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Balfour, Right Hon.  A. J., M.P., F.R.S., 4 Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


537


*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.

Ballard,  Rev.  Frank,  Langbar,  Harrogate.
^Bancroft, Miss M., Haddonfield Training School,  Haddonfield,
N.J.,  U.S.A.

Barclay,  Rev.  Charles  W.,  The  Vicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
*Barclay,  Edwyn,  12  York  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Barclay,  Mrs.  John,  Osmotherlej'  Cottage,  Linthurst,  Bromsgrove,
N.,  Worcestershire.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  III,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  III,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Nash  Court,  Marnhull,  Dorset.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  D.Litt.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barlow,  Rev.  J.  W.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barnes,  C.  T.,  359  Third  Avenue,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Barrett,  Harrison  D.,  Canaan,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Barrows,  Miss,  Hampton  School,  Malvern  P.O.,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.

Barrows,  C.  M.,  1121  Nelson  Ave,,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Barry,  Major  S.  L.,  94  Eaton  Place,  London,  S.W.

Baruch,  Edgar,  945  South  Olive  Str.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Bath,  Hubert,  7d  Grove  End  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.

Batten, Mrs. Alan, Ladies' Army  and Navy  Club,  Burlington
Gardens,  London,  W.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.

Bayley, Mrs.  Emily  E., 1927  No. 18th  Str.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Bayley, Weston D., M.D., 124 South 16th Str.,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Beadle,  Miss  Eliza  A.,  Millfield,  Bexley  Heath,  Kent,

Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  The  School  House,  Brentwood,  Essex.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
*Bedford,  Adeline  Duchess  of,  26  Bruton  Street,  London,  W.

Beebe,  Hon.  George  M.,  Ellenville,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Begbie,  Harold,  Orford,  R.S.O.,  Suffolk.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward,  79  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  London,  S.W.

Belhaven,  The  Master  of,  41  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  5  Gray's  Inn  Square,  London,  W.C.

Bennett,  Ernest  N,  M.P.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.

Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay,  India.
*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.


538


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Bentham,  Mrs.,  30  Lexham  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Berg,  Miss  Helene,  38  Gower  Str.,  London,  W.C.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.
*Bergheim,  John  S.,  Belsize  Court,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Best,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Hake,  9  Park  Mansions,  Arauxhall,  London,
S.W.

Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Hands  worth,  Birmingham.

Bethell,  Mrs.,  57  The  Common,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.

Bharda,  K.  B.  Khursedji,  3  Slater  Road,  Bombay,  India.

Bickersteth,  Miss  E.  F.,  West  Lodge,  Ripon.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bidder,  Mrs.,  10  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19  Ennismore  Gardens,  London,
S.W.

*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Bigley,  M.,  P.O.  Box  280,  Joplin,  Mo,  U.S.A.

Bille,  Torben  de,  24  Pont  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Blackburn,  E.  M,  Little  Thakeham,  Pulborough,  Sussex.

Blackburne,  F.  E.  I,  Hazel  Hall,  Gomshall,  Surrey.

Blacklock,  Miss  Charlotte,  51  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.

Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
*Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Bliss,  William  H,  100  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass,  U.S.A.
Blodgett,  Mrs.  C,  272  Walnut  Street,  Holyoke,  Mass,  U.S.A.
Bloemfontein, The Right Rev. the Bishop of, Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C,  S.  Africa.
Bloxsome,  C.  H,  The  Croft  House,  Fairford,  Gloucestershire.
Boardman,  Hon.  W.  F,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Bodley,  Mrs,  41  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Scpiare,  London,  W.
Boggis-Rolfe,  D.  H,  69  St.  George's  Square,  London,  S.W.
Bois,  H.  G,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co,  Colombo,  Ceylon.
Bonazza,  Carlo,  Hotel  Cavour,  5  Via  Proconsolo,  Florence,  Italy.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


539


*Bond,  Frederick  Bligh,  16  Brook  Street,  Bath.
Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  150  Letferts  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Bott,  Mrs.,  Worton,  Swanage,  Dorset.
Bouwens,  B.  G.,  Eastmoor  House,  Harpenden,  Herts.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y,  U.S.A.
Bower,  James  Garton,  Junior,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  c/o  The  Lancashire  and Yorkshire  Bank,
Huddersfield.

Boys,  Major  R.  H.  H.,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing
Cross,  London,  S.W.

Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.

Brabrook, Sir Edward W., C.B., 178 Bedford Hill,  Balham,
London,  S.W.
*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Bradley,  Arthur  G,  Newport,  New  Hampshire,  U.S.A.

Bramston,  Miss  A.  P.,  Witham  Close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Kingshot,  St.  Cross,  Winchester.
*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  33  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Haddon  House,  Weybridge.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.C.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster, Bertram, Rose Lodge, Coonibe Lane, Kingston  Hill,
Surrey.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.,  6  Pembroke  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Brooke,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Clnb,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brookes-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Lodge,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.
Brooks,  George  L.,  903  West  Copper  Ave.,  Albuquerque,  N.M.,
U.S.A.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.
Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Brown,  Mrs.  Robert,  Priestgate  House,  Barton-on-Humber,  Hull.
Brown,  William,  St.  Paul's  School,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne, J. Stark, The Red House, Mount Avenue,  Ealing,
London,  W.


540


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Browning,  Oscar,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Brownrigg,  Lady,  11  Grand  Parade,  Portsmouth.

Brown rigg,  Lieut.-Colonel  H.  J.  W.,  R.E.,  Fort  St.  George,  Madras.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  16  E.  37th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.

Bryce,  Thomas,  Ardencaple,  Old  Sandgate  Rd.,  Brisbane,  Queens-
land, Australia.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J.P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  46  Clarendon  Road,  Bedford.
*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.

Bullock,  A.  H.,  82  Savernake  Road,  Gospel  Oak,  London,  N.W.
*Bullough,  Edward,  7  Magdalene  Street,  Cambridge.
*Bullough,  Mrs.  Edward,  7  Magdalene  Street,  Cambridge.

Burgess,  Mrs.  Helen  D.,  27  Gardner  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Butcher,  W.  Deane,  M.R.C.S.,  Holyrood,  Cleveland  Road,  Ealing,
London,  W.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Sy.on  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.
*Butt,  Lady,  9  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.

*Butt,  Rev.  Walter,  Kempsford  Vicarage,  Fairford,  Gloucestershire.
Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St."  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  The  Bungalow,  West  Kirby.
Cade,  F.  J.,  Mosborough,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.
Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.
Cadenas,  Delgado  F.,  Caracas,  Venezuela,  S.  America.
Calderon,  George  Leslie,  33  Buckingham  Mansions,  West  End  Lane,
London,  N.W.

*Campbell,  Lady  Archibald,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-Thames,
Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  34  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Capt.  N.  D.  H.,  Cavalry  Club,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  Hill  Lodge,  Enfield,  London,  N.
Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  48  West  Regent

Street,  Glasgow.
Campion,  Rev.  C.  T.,  Aberford  Vicarage,  Leeds.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


541


Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.
Canziani,  Madame,  3  Palace  Green,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Capper,  Thomas,  Kingston,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.

Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  916  Locust  Str.,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Carbutt,  Lady,  19  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Carey, Mrs.  A.  A., 50  Fayerweather  Street, Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.
Carnsew,  Miss  Rosamund,  Bungalow,  Sutton,  Pulborough,  Sussex.
Carpenter,  Miss  A.  C,  1  Perrin  Road,  Brookline,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  LT.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  511  West  147th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Carson,  George  C,  c/o  W.  S.  Carson,  Kalama,  Wash.,  U.S.A.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  26  Denning  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Casey, Hon. J. J.,  C.M.G., K.C.,  Ibrickane,  Acland  Street,  St.
Kilda,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Cautley,  Mrs.  R.  K,  Heaton  Moor  House,  Heaton  Moor  Rd.,  near
Stockport.
*Cave,  Charles,  J.P.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
*Centeno,  Mrs.  A.,  25  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.

Charrington,  Mrs.,  2  Mansfield  Place,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Chase,  G.  N.,  1725  De  La  Vina  Str., Santa  Barbara,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Chattock,  Professor  Arthur  P.,  21  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E., 126 Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.
Cheney,  W.  T.,  P.O.  Box  804,  Rome,  Ga.,  U.S.A.
Cheyne,  C.  A.,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.
Childe-Pemberton,  Miss  A.  H.,  12  Portman  Street,  Portland  Square,

London,  W.

Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Chitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  M.S.  Lond.,  F.R.C.S.,  Brockhill  Park,  Hythe.
Clapham,  Professor  J.  H,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Clapp,  Mrs.  Emma  A.,  3941  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Clapp,  James,  28  Avenue  Villas,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.


542


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Clarke,  Miss  Isabel,  65  Holland  Park  Avenue,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Evershot,  Dorchester.
Clark-Kennedy,  Rev.  A.  E.,  Ewhurst  Rectory,  Guildford,  Surrey.
*Clavering,  Miss,  New  County  Club,  21 Hanover  Square,  London,
W.

*Clawson,  G. W., 9th  and  Baltimore  Streets,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,
U.S.A.

Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road, Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Coates,  C.  J.,  The  Thornton  Woollen  Mill  Co.,  St.  Petersburg.
Cockle, Rev. Francis T., The Rectory, Eiverstown, Co.  Sligo,
Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  96  Chestnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Coghill,  Col. Kendal, C.B., Castle Townshend, nr.  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork.

*Coit,  Stanton,  Ph.D.,  30  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.

*Cole,  Arthur,  West  Dene,  Pendennis  Road,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Collingwood,  Miss  A.  M.,  6  Powis  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
*Collins,  Mis.  Churton.

Collison,  Harry,  1  Temple  Gardens,  London,  E.G.,  and  Windham
Club,  London,  S.W.

Collison,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  13  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.

Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7  Balfour  Place,  London,  W.

Comstock,  D.  F.

Connell,  J.  Harvey,  110  Front  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Connor,  Rev.  David,  1  The  Promenade,  Swansea.
^Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.

Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
*Cooke,  Mrs.,  Hadl^y  House,  North  Finchley,  London,  N.

Cooke,  Miss  Mabel,  Dana  Hall  School,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.

Cooper,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  Woodville,  London  Road,  Gloucester.

Cooper,  Rear-Admiral  P.  U,  Morristovvn,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
*Cooper,  Sir  W.  E.,  CLE,  Hume  Towers,  Bournemouth.
*Corrie,  Mrs.  H.  Valentine,  66  Wilbury  Road,  Hove,  Sussex.

Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  Rosenheim,  Croydon,  Surrey.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


543


Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.
Coupland,  W.  C,  D.Sc,  11  West  Park  Gardens,  Kew,  Surrey.
*Cowan,  W.  H.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  F.  H.,  Lambton,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Coxe,  Mr.  Justice  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Calcutta.
Coxeter,  Harold,  34  Holland  Park  Rd.,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Crandall,  W.  S.,  612  West  115th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Crane, Rev.  W.  M.,  Ph.D.,  Richmond, Berkshire  County,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

*Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2  Cavendish
Square,  London,  W.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edinburgh.
Crook,  Alfred  Herbert,  St.  Helen's,  Howth,  Co.  Dublin.
*Crookes,  Lad}',  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
*Crooks,  Miss  Marianne,  Achintorlie,  Norwood,  South  Australia.
Crouch,  H.  N.,  Additional  Judicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,
Sind,  India.

Cunard,  C3'ril  G.,  95  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Currie, Mrs., Warders, 10  Crescent  Road, Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

Currier,  Mrs.  Moocby  Manchester,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  7  Smith  Square,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.

Curwen,  Mrs.,  Horncop,  Heversham,  Milnethorpe.

Dakin,  W.  R.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  8  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Dale,  Alan,  110  St.  Nicholas  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  North  End,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.

Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.

Daniel],  Mrs.  Averell,  12  Cadogan  Mansions,  London,  S.W.

Danzas,  Mile.  Julie,  26  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.

Darbyshire,  Rev.  H.  S.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Methley,  Leeds.

d'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  St.  Patrick's,  Frank  Street,  Birmingham.

Darrah,  H.  Z.,  Junior  Carlton  Club,  London,  S.W.

Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.
*Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.,  CM.,  76  Portland  Place,  London,  W.


544


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Davie,  Miss,  The  Elms,  Bishops  Tawton,  nr.  Barnstaple.

DavieSj  Benjamin,  150  Palmerston  Road,  Bowes  Park,  London,  1ST.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Forest  Hill,  Hartford,  Cheshire.
*Davis,  Charles,  29  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  Merryn,  Padstovv.
*Davison,  Miss  Annie,  13  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.

Dawes,  Miss  Eliz.  A.  S.,  Heathlands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.

Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Burnsall,  Skipton.

Dawson,  Miles  M.,  1947  Broadway,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Pickwell  Rectory,  Oakham,  Rutland.

Delanne,  Gabriel,  40  Boulevard  Exelmans,  Paris.

Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Rosslare  Harbour,  Kilrane,  Wexford.

Delprat,  T.  D.,  Broken  Hill,  New  South  Wales.

Demming,  Benj.  W.,  1152  Mulberry  Street,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Denovan,  Wm.,  Ventura  Avenue,  Ventura,  Oal.,  U.S.A.

Densham,  William,  c/o  M.  W.  T.  Co.,  Ltd.,  9  Hall  Street,  Chelms-
ford, Essex.

Derby,  Dr.  Hasket,  182  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Despard,  Mrs.,  2  Currie  Street,  Nine  Elms,  London,  S.W.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.

Dewey,  Rev.  Stanley  D.,  The  Rectory,  Moretonhampstead,  Devon.

Dibblie,  G.  B.,  17  Elm  Park  Road,  Chelsea,  Londou,  S.W.

Dickinson,  Miss,  10  Stanhope  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  AV.

Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Dicksee, Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville House, 3 Greville Place,  St.
John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.,  Racketts,  Hythe.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  F.L.S.,  Wickham  House,  23  East  Park  Parade,
Northampton.

Dixon, Professor W.  Macneile, LL.B., Litt.D., 2 South  Park

Terrace,  Glasgow,  W.
Doan,  Professor  F.  C,  911  Grove  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Gawler  Place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Doherty,  J.  J.,  LL.D.,  Vista,  Highfield  Road,  Rathgar,  Dublin.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,
S.W.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  East  Undercliff,  Exmouth.


lvl]


Members  and  Associates.


545


Douglas, Mrs., 51 Palace Gardens Terrace, Campden  Hill,
London,  W.

Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr. G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  Orange County,  New
York,  U.S.A.

*Douglas-Pennant,  Hon.  Violet,  19  Queen  Street,  Mayfair,  London,
W.

Doveton,  F.  B.,  Karsfield,  Torquay.

Dowson, Mrs., L.R.C.P.I.,  L.R.C.S.I., 11 Embankment  Gardens,

Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  10  Mapperley  Road,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Doyle,  Theodore,  M.D.,  1001  East  15th  Street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,

U.S.A.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Auburndale,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Drew,  Professor  Eric,  Sullivan's  Gardens,  Madras.

Drewry, Mrs. George, c/o G. Hicks, J. P., Rostherne,  Upper
Colwyn  Bay,  N.  Wales.
*Dreyer,  R.  H.,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Driscoll, Very Rev. James F., D.D., St. Joseph's  Seminary,
Yonkers,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Duggin,  Mrs.  Chas.,  25  East  38th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  Fairlawn,  Weybridge,  Surrejr.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  Bros.  &  Co.,  London,  E.C.

Dyce,  Capt.  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dyer,  Walter  H.,  South  Portland,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Roseleigh,  Egerton,  Huddersfield.

Eckford, Captain P. J. W., The Grosvenor Club,  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

Edelsten,  Lieut. -Colonel  John  A.,  Norton  Lodge,  Halton,  Cheshire.
Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.

*Elder,  Frederick,  21  Cleveland  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Eldridge, John  R., M.D., 2817 Garber Street, Berkeley,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

Elliot,  Mrs.,  16  Holland  Street,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Elliot,  Gilbert  C,  10  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Elliott,  Captain  W.  R.,  Sherbrooke,  Quebec.


546


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D., Calle  Victoria  714,  Chihuahua,  Chih.,
Mexico.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.

Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.
*Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhavnagar,  India.

Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  The  Tower  House,  Woodchester,  Stroud.

Evison,  Mrs.,  Leyspring,  Cambridge.
*Fabbri,  Alessandro,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Fabbri,  Ernesto  G.,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Farquharson, L. H.,  Timekeeping Office,  Panama Railway  Co.,
Colon,  Republic  of  Panama.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Farrington,  Ernest  A.,  M.D., 2045  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa,,  U.S.A.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  320  St.  James'  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,
London,  S.W.

Field,  Allan  B.,  P.O.  Box  274,  East  Liberty  Station,  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesley,  R.S.O.,  Yorks.
♦Fletcher,  Mrs.,  98  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Foote,  Geo.  W.,  34  Bull  Street,  Newport,  R.I.,  U.S.A.

Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  44  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Forman,  Lieut. -Colonel  R.  H.,  A.M.S.,  P.M.O.  Bombay  Brigade,
Brigade  Staff  Office,  Fort,  Bombay.

Forrest,  Mrs.  L.  W.  R.,  29  Great  St.  Helens,  London,  E.C.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  by  Stirling,  N.B.

Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  Penwarne,  Dawlish.
*Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  24  Teville  Road,  Worthing.

Fournier  dAlbe,  E.  E.,  11  Sunbury  Gardens,  Rathgar,  Dublin.

Francis,  Arthur,  P.  0.  Kelowna,  British  Columbia.
*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis,  Palace  House,  Beaulieu,  Hants.

Franklin,  Hon.  Mrs.  E.  L.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.

Fraser, Col. A. T., R.E., Junior Athenaeum Club,  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

Freas,  W.  R.,  7114  Greenway  Avenue,  Paschal,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor  Gardens,
London,  S.W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


547


*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.

Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  nr.  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfiekl,  Surrey.

Funk,  Dr.  I.  K.,  195  Washington  Park,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Norton-in-Hales,  Market  Drayton.

Gardiner, Professor H. N., 23 Crafts Avenue,  Northampton,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Garth,  Dr.,  4  Little  Russell  Street,  Calcutta.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
*Gayer,  Gustav  A.,  131  West  63rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Gearn,  Dr.  George  C,  2545  Front  Street,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gehring,  J.  G.,  M.D.,  Bethel,  Maine,  U.S.A.
*Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Shepherd's  Down,  Haslemere,
Surrey.

*George,  Mrs.,  Down  End,  Hindhead,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
George,  Walter  C,  Inglenook,  Beaconsfield,  Bucks.
Gibbon,  I.  G.,  Rose  Cottage,  Bradmore  Green,  Caterham,  Surrey.
Giddings,  Miss  H.  M.,  810-11  New  England  Building,  Cleveland,

Ohio,  U.S.A.
Gidney,  A.  R.,  Aylsham,  Norfolk.

Gillard,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  County  Club,  21  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de, 16 Wilton  Street,  Grosvenor  Place,
London,  S.W.

Goldstein,  Dr.  phil.  J.,  Rossdorferstrasse  81,  Darmstadt,  Germany.

Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.

Goodall,  Charles  Henry,  Lucknow  Avenue,  Nottingham.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford,  Essex.

Goore,  Albert,  Rose  Mount,  Meadvale,  Redhill,  Surrey.

Gordon,  George  H.,  19  Old  King  Street,  Bristol.

Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

Govett,  F.  Molyneux,  Chalet  Ketterer,  Clarens,  Switzerland.

Gower,  John  H.,  Mus.  Doc.  (Oxon.), 19 Steele Block,  Denver,

Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Grace,  Cecil  S.,  3  Sloane  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
*Grant-Suttie,  H.  F.,  R.F.A.,  R,A.  Mess,  Bordon  Camp,  Hants.

Graveson,  Miss  O,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.

Gray,  Rev.  Arthur  Romeyn,  Univ.  of  the  South,  Sewanee,  Tenn.,
U.S.A.


548


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.
Greet,  Mrs.,  Caens  Wood,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Greg,  Miss  Mary  S.,  19  Kensington  Gate,  London,  W.
Grenfell,  Mrs.,  62  Holywell,  Oxford.

Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Begent's  Park,  London,
N.W.

Grieveson,  Miss  Ethel,  15  Upper  Cheyne  Bow,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Griffith,  Miss  Mary  F.,  41  Leinster  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Griffith,  B.  G.,  Portishead,  Somerset.
*Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  24  Melrose  Avenue,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.
*Grimshaw,  Mrs.,  109  Cromwell  Boad,  London,  S.W.

Giipper,  Mrs.  Harold,  Burrell  Mead,  West  Wickham,  Kent.

Groff,  Miss  Mary  A.

Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  B.  C,  Morrisburne  House,  Woking,  Surrey.
Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  2de  Adelheid  Straat  153,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Hackett,  James  T.,  95  King  William  Street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
*Haggard,  Miss  S.  E.,  5  Sehvyn  Avenue,  Bichmond,  Surrey.
*Haig, Mrs. G. Ogilvj7, 65 Brook Street, Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Hale,  Balph  T.,  15  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E., 24 Holland Street,  Campden  Hill,
London,  W.
*Hall,  J.  P.,  Gorse  Bank,  Werneth,  Oldham.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Briors  Terrace,  Northumberland.

Hall,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  3  St.  Alban's  Boad,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Hallett,  Henry  Hiram,  Bridge  House,  Taunton.

Halls,  Bobert,  17  Grosvenor  Boad,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Hamilton,  Col.  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.

Hamilton,  James,  34  Granville  Boad,  Blackburn.

Hamilton,  J.  J.,  SO  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.

Hamilton,  W.  Bernard,  The  Dale  House,  Hassocks,  Sussex.

Hankow,  The  Bight  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  China.

Hannay,  Mrs.  Hugh  B.,  Wren's  Nest,  Wellington  Boad,  Bromsgrove,
Worcester.

Hansford,  Charles,  3  Alexandra  Terrace,  Dorchester.

Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  39,  B.F.D.  Boute  No.  5,  Harlan,  Iowa,  U.S.A.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


549


Hardie,  Miss  Mabel,  M.B.,  Candello,  577  Finchley  Ed.,  London,  N.W.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  c/o  Nevett  &  Co.,  21  Park  Road,  Crouch
End,  London,  N.

Hare,  Cyril  Lockhart,  7  Falkland  Avenue,  Church  End,  Finchley,
London,  N.

Hargreaves, Miss, 37 Clarence Gate Gardens, Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Harris,  Alan  Campbell,  Schloss  Reichersbeuren,  Oberbayern,  Bavaria.
Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  90  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
Harris,  Henry  B.,  37  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.
*Harris,  Mrs.  H.  Percy,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.
*H  arris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's

Square,  London,  S.W.
Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Nevvnham  College,  Cambridge.
*Hart, Colonel H. H, R.E., c/o Messrs. King, King &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hart,  Lieut.-General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  35  South  Willow  Street,  Montclair,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Harvey,  Mrs.  P.  E.,  85  Isabella  Street,  Toronto,  Ontario.
Haslam, Mrs. F. W., Sainte Barbe, Christchurch,  Canterbury,
New  Zealand.

Haslehurst,  E.  W.,  72  Burnt  Ash  Hill,  Lee,  London,  S.E.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  W.  Hauxhurst,  The  Calumet  Club,  Fifth

Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Hawkins,  Miss  Madge  P., M.D., 107  North  8th  Street,  Terre

Haute,  Ind.,  U.S.A.
Hawley,  Stanley,  19  Oxford  Mansions,  Oxford  Circus,  London,  W.
Hayes, Frederick W., 12 Westcroft Square, Ravenscourt  Park,

London,  W.

Hayes,  Rev.  Josepb  W.,  AVest  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L,  26  Leinster  Square,  London,  W.
*Heard, George Henry, 7 Grosvenor Gardens, Muswell  Hill,
London,  N.

Heath,  Mrs.,  North  Breach  Manor,  Ewhurst,  Guildford.


550


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Henderson,  J.  J.,  182  Winthrop  Str.,  Flatbush,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Henderson, Miss Lilian, The Sesame Club, "29 Dover  Street,
London,  W.

Hennessey,  J.  B.  N.,  F.R.S.,  Merrimu, 18  Alleyn  Park,  West

Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert-Smith,  Miss  Evelyn  E.,  Raymead,  Park  Road,  Watford,

Herts.

Hermon,  Mrs.,  Doublebois,  Liskeard,  Cornwall.
Herschel,  Colonel  John,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
Hey  singer,  Dr.  Isaac  W., 1521  Poplar  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
Hielle,  Robert,  xix/1  Karl-Ludwig  Str.  62,  Vienna.
Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hildyard,  F.  W.,  Welby,  Market  Deeping,  Lincolnshire.
Hill,  Frank,  The  Manor  House,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Wensley  Bank,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Hill, Mrs. John Howard, 272 State Street, Portland,  Maine,
U.S.A.

*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  Waterbury,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Hinkle,  Beatrice  M.,  M.D.,  110  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Hoare,  F.  H.,  67  Fitzjohn's  Avenue,  London,  N.W.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Hocken, Thomas M., M.R.C.S., Moray Place, Dunedin,  New
Zealand.

Hodding,  Miss,  The  Close,  Salisbury.
Hodgkin,  Robert  Howard,  Queen's  College,  Oxford.
*Hogg, Sir Frederick Russell, Oriental Club, Hanover  Square,
London,  W.

*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  2  Vicarage  Gate,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Holland,  Otho,  Inglenook,  Chatsworth  Road,  Bournemouth.
Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  35a  Welbeck  Street,  Cavendish  Square,
London,  W.

Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  3  Maid's  Causeway,  Cambridge.
*Hollond,  John  R.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Every, 18  Montagu  Street,
Portman  Square,  London,  W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


551


*Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.
♦Holt,  Henry,  29  West  23rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Holt-White,  Mrs.,  Warren  Hill,  Bexley  Heath,  Kent.

Homan,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  B/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,
W.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  304  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hormusji,  B.,  Solikoti  Buildings,  Bombay,  India.
Horn,  W.  J.,  Woldingham,  Surrey.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  c/o  Miss  Pagan,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.
*Hoskins, Edmond J., M.D., Hammam Chambers, 76  Jermyn

Street,  London,  S.W.
♦Hough, Joseph Fairhurst, Lowood Cottage, Moor Park,  Great
Crosby,  Liverpool.
Howe,  G.  B.,  15  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hubbell,  Geo.  Allen,  Ph.D.,  217  West  104th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

Hubbell,  G.  G.,  S.W.  Cor.  Floral  and  Hudson  Avenues,  Norwood,
Ohio,  U.S.A.

♦Hudleston,  R.  W.,  68  Parliament  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Hudson,  Morris,  Aldersey  Croft,  Guildford.

Hughes,  Major  H. M., F.R.G.S.,  Swiss  Cottage,  Birchington-on-
Sea,  Kent.

♦Hull, Mrs. C. G., 112 Academy Street, Poughkeepsie,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Tivoli,  Cheltenham.
Huntingford,  Miss,  Exeter  Lodge,  Bournemouth.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
Hutton,  H.  W.,  509  Golden  Gate  Avenue,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

♦Hyslop, Professor J. H., 519 West 149th Street, New  York
City,  U.S.A.

Infield,  H.  J.,  130  North  Street,  Brighton.

Ingalls,  Mrs.  Joseph  A.,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  Raemoir,  Banchory,  Scotland.

Ireland,  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Ireland,  W.  W.,  M.D.,  Victoria  Terrace,  Musselburgh,  Scotland.
♦Izod,  C.  H.,  7  Malwood  Road,  Balham  Hill,  London  S.W.

Jackson,  Mrs.,  78  Kenilworth  Court,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Jaguaribe,  Dr.  Domingos,  Rua  d.  Viridiana  30,  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil.


552


Members  and  Associates.


[part


James,  Professor  William,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

*  Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Jaye, William P., Springwood Lodge, Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  N.E.

*Jeakes, Rev. Prebendary, 4 Cornwall Terrace, Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  8  Albert  Promenade,  Savile  Park,  Halifax.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  The  Writers'  Club,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk
Street,  Strand,  London,  W.C.

*  Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

*Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Lady,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  164  Summer  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Kal^ta,  Georges,  Griesgasse  27/11,  Salzburg,  Austria.
Kallen,  Horace  Meyer,  28  Lyncle  Str.,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Kaufman, Mrs.  Irene  M., Hamilton  Apartments,  3312  Hamilton

Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Keene,  The Most Rev.  J.  B., D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,

Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
*Kellogg,  Spencer,  Junr.,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St,  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kilroe,  E.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  Parliament  St.,  London,  S.W.

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.D.,  Macra,  Eltham,  Kent.

Kirkwood,  J.  H.  M.,  Yeo  Vale,  Fairy  Cross,  S.O.,  N.  Devon.
*Kittel,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Klein,  Mrs.,  The  Vicarage,  Alberbury,  Salop.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.

Knoller,  Richard,  1  Riemerstrasse  8,  Vienna.

Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgaten,  Helsingfors,  Finland.

Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  845  Hinman  Avenue,  Evanston,  111.,  U.S.A.

Kress,  Miss  Anne,  Lock  Haven,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Kwang,  Sim  Boon,  73  Scott's  Road,  Singapore,  S.S.


I,  VI.]


Members  and  Associates.


553


Labouchere,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Sculthorpe  Rectory,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford,  Essex.
*Lacon,  Mrs.  Sidney,  Ormesby  Hall,  Great  Yarmouth,  Norfolk.
*Lafiin,  Mrs.  Louis  E.,  344  Bellefontaine  Street,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
*Lamarre,  L.  B.  de,  c/o  Messrs.  Wilkinson  &  Caviller,  34  Great
Tower  Street,  London,  E.C.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.

Lambert,  Miss  Ada  R.,  6  G.  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  Marylebone  Road,
London,  N.W.

Lambert,  Jordan  W.,  Lambert  Pharmacal  Co.,  2101  Locust  Street,

St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Lambert,  Mrs.  Helen  C,  Lambert  Pharmacal  Co.,  2101  Locust  Street,

St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Landman,  S.,  9  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C.
Lane,  Miss  E.  Abbott,  131  East  21st  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Lane-Poole,  Professor  Stanley,  M.A.,  Litt.D.,  Dunganstown  Castle,

Wicklow,  Ireland.
*Lang,  Andrew,  1  Marloes  Road,  London,  W.,  and  Alleyne  House,

St.  Andrews,  Scotland.
Larkcom-Jacobs,  Mrs.,  57  Talbot  Road,  Highgate,  London,  N.
Larken,  E.  P.,  19  Victoria  Grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.
*Lawther, R. A., Constitutional Club, Northumberland  Avenue,

London,  W.C.

Layman,  Alfred,  M.D.,  1630  North  18th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.
Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough,  Wilts.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  P.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Blewett,  1  Park  Row,  Chicago,  El.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Rev.  A.  H.  E.,  Fairmount,  Queen's  Drive,  Ilkley.
Lee,  Mrs.  Henry  Thomas,  414  West  Adams  Street,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  L.  G.  H.,  Kingswood,  Raunds,  North  Wellingborough.
Leedham,  Isaac  S.,  1  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.C.


554


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Lees,  Robert  James,  Craigmore,  Ilfracombe.

*Legg,  W.  A.,  P.O.  Box  1621,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa.

*Leigh,  Mrs.  Gerard,  Kidbrooke  Park,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.

Leith,  J.  S.,  Nevada,  Ohio,  U.S.A.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  Kiamara  Estate,  Nairobi,  British  East  Africa.
Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  13  Cleveland  Square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628  N.  22nd  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Leslie-Melville,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  51  Hans  Road,  London,  S.W.
Lewis,  David  J.,  Walsh  Building,  Cumberland,  Ind.,  U.S.A.
Lewis,  Francis  B.,  Box  5,  Maraisburg,  Transvaal,  South  Africa.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  c/o  Messrs.  Kegan  Paul  &  Co.,

Dryden  House,  43  Gerrard  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleveland,

Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.
Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland  Avenue,
London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales,  c/o  Messrs.  Truslove

&  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


555


Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Somerville  Public  Library,  Somerville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  28  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  University  of  Minn.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Univ.  of  Paris,  per  H.  Welter,  4  Rue  Bernard,  Palissy,
Paris.

Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.

Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Dr.  Williams's  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Free  Public  Library,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Lilienthal,  Joseph  L.,  116  West  58th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Lissa,  Mrs.  F.  de,  22  Down  Street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.

Lloyd,  Brig.-General  Francis.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Thomas  Edward,  J.P.,  Coedmore,  Cardigan.
*Lockhart,  Lady,  187  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Loewenstein,  Amtsrichter  Dr.,  43a  MariaJjOuisen  Str.,  Hamburg.

Lomax,  Arthur,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Lombardi,  C,  2331  Leconte  Avenue,  Berkeley,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lonsada,  Duchesse  de,  4  Lancaster  Street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Lucas,  Henry,  Hilver,  St.  Agnes  Road,  Birmingham.

Ludwig,  Professor Dr. Hofrat Alfred, Kramerussgasse 40,  Kgl.
Wemberge,  Prague,  Bohemia.

Luke,  James,  Box  No.  183,  G.P.O.,  Calcutta.

Lumsden,  Miss  K.  M.,  17  Richmondhill  Place,  Aberdeen.

Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Lyell,  D.,  United  Empire  Club,  117  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  Topcroft,  Guildford.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,

London,  S.W.
Macartney,  Dr.  J.  Clyde,  Montevideo.

Macdonald, Prof. Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,
Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.


556


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Macdonald,  Lieut.-Colonel  F.,  Resident  in  Nepal,  India.
Macdonald, Hon. Mrs.  Godfrey, Portree  House,  Portree,  Isle  of
Skye,  N.B.

Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Kennanmore,  Ballybrack,  Co.  Dublin.
MacGregor,  Arthur  C,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.
Mackintosh,  R.  D.,  M.B.,  The  Bungalow,  Mortlake,  Surrey.
Macnaughtan,  Miss,  61  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  la  Ovington  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London,  W.
Mallet, Miss A. V., Anlaby House, 25 Highbury  New  Park,

London,  N.

Mallet,  Louis,  215  King's  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Malusecki,  Rev.  Fr.  Adalbert,  236  S.  12th  Street,  Reading,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mangin,  Marcel,  102  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Temple  Evvell  Vicarage,  Dover.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  Seven  Acres,  New  London,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  6  Shalston  Villas,  Ewell  Road,  Surbiton  Hill,
Surrey.

Manuel,  Alex.,  M.B.,  2  Marlborough  Gate,  London,  W.
Marsh,  Edward  H,  3  Gray's  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  Tweenways,  Hindhead,  Haslemere.
Marston,  Charles,  J.P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  N.,  R.N.,  2  St.  James'  Place,  London,  S.W.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  Trenance,  Catherine  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Delhi,  Punjab,  India.
Maskell,  Miss;E.  M.,  21  Thornsett  Road,  Anerley,  London,  S.E.
Mason,  J.  T.,  1572  Race  Str.,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
Mason, Miss  M. H, 5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Massey,  Hon.  Mary,  80  Royal  Hospital  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Mathews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  London,  W.
Matthews,'F.  H.,  9  Richmond  Road,  Headingley,  Leeds.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


557


Mattiesen,  Emil,  Ph.D., c/o  Prau  Dr.  Stein,  Uhland  Str.  194,

Gh.1',  Charlottenburg,  Berlin.
Mavrogordato,  John  N.,  52  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  48  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Mrs.  Louis  R.  M.,  Lamorna,  Torquay.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  22  Launcestou  Place,  London,  W.
M'Clellan, Mrs. Clara D., Briarcliff  Manor, New York  City,

U.S.A.

M'Clure,  Henry,  M.D.,  36  Weymouth  Street,  London,  W.
M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
M'Cormick,  Alfred,  Sunny  View,  The  Mall,  Lahore,  India.
M'Dougall,  Dugald  W.,  c/o R.  J. Turnbull & Co., 4  Lloyds
Avenue,  London,  E.C.
*M'Dougall,  Isaac  S.,  The  Orchard,  off  Arthog  Road,  Hale,  Cheshire.
M'Dougall,  William,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe  Hill,  nr.
Oxford.

M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
M'Kellar, Miss J. L.,  c/o National Bank of  Australasia,  123

Bishopsgate  Street  Within,  London,  E.C.
M'Laren,  Lady,  43  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
M'Lean,  Mrs.,  186  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,  London,

S.W.

Meek,  Maximilian  de,  Russian  Consulate,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  340  Grand  Road,  Bombay.
Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc,  Hollywood,  Co.  Down.
Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Memorial  Hall,  Farringdon  Street,  London,  E.C.
*Miall,  John  Herbert,  Kilmorey  House,  St.  Margaret's-on-Thames,
London,  S.W.

*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsey  House,  Barnsley,  Yorks.
Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Hollywood  House,  Wimbledon  Common,
London,  S.W.
*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Almira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str.,  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.
Millard,  Charles  Kiliick,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  Gilroes,  Leicester.
Milne,  A.  M.  Lees,  Ribbesford  House,  Bewdley,  Worcestershire.
Mitchell, Sidney  J., c/o D.  Mitchell & Co.,  Box 77  G.P.O.,
Newcastle,  N.S.W.,  Australia.


558


Members  and  Associates.


[part


♦Mitchell,  Thomas  W.,  M.D.,  Hadlow  Park,  Tonbridge.
*Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.
Monteagle, The Lord, K.P., Mount Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Moore,  Lady  Beatrice,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4  Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh,  and  Morison

House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
Monies,  J.  M.,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Morrish,  Harold  G.,  Leonard  House,  Upper  Tulse  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  Calcutta.
Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C,  11  Burstock  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.
Mower,  Mrs.  George,  Winona,  Lovelace  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
Muirhead,  Prof.  J.  H.,  1  York  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Miiller,  Fraulein  A.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Munro, Hugh  F., 1740  Germantown  Avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Murray,  Donald,  3  Lombard  Court,  London,  E.C.
^Murray,  Prof.  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  131  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.

Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Iver  Place,  Iver,  Bucks.

Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  Bradwell  Rectory,  Braintree,  Essex.

Myers,  Prof.  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Galewood  Tower,  Great  Shelford,
Cambs.

*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.  B.  M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda

Anchorage,  China.
Nash,  Joseph,  The  White  House,  Somerleyton,  Lowestoft.
Neate,  P.  J.,  5  Watts  Avenue,  Rochester,  Kent.
Neeld,  A.  D.,  10  Bradford  Avenue,  Grafton,  Pa..  U.S.A.
Neele,  Miss  M.  E.  Kingston,  23  Upper  Addison  Gardens,  Kensing-
ton, London,  W.

Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  3501  Jackson  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

^Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newill,  George  E.,  Guadalupe  Mine,  Inde,  Durango,  Mexico.
*Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Nicholson, Right Hon. Sir Arthur, Bart., G.C.B., etc.,  British
Embassy,  St.  Petersburg.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


559


*Nicoll,  Mrs.  De  Lancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13  Beverley  Terrace,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.
*Noble,  Mrs.  Saxton,  69  Eaton  Place,  London,  S.W.

Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.B.,  Elcove,  Elms  Avenue,  Eastbourne.
*Norris,  Prof.  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  The  Laboratory,  Yardley
Fields,  Yardley,  Birmingham.

Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  Chimere,  Parame,  Ille  et  Vilaine,  France.
*Nugent,  Mrs.  Arthur,  5  Temple  Gardens,  Brighton.

Nunn,  Mrs.  Lindley,  Coddenham,  Ipswich.

Xunn,  T.  Percy,  D.Sc,  London  Day  Training  College,  Southamp-
ton Row,  London,  W.C.

Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  Beechcroft,  The  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Odell,  L.  E.,  2055  Rodriguez  Pena,  Buenos  Ayres,  Argentine
Republic.

O'Donnell,  Elliott,  Clifton  House,  St.  Ives,  Cornwall.
Ogden,  Mrs.,  Heath  Brow,  Hampstead  Heath,  London,  N.W.
Ogden,  William  Edward,  Alexandra  Palace,  Toronto,  Canada.
Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  5  Queen  Street,  Edinburgh.
Ogle,  Nathaniel,  67th  Punjabis,  Kohat,  N.W.F.P.,  India.
O'Gorman,  Lieut.-Colonel  P.  W.,  M.D.,  I.M.S.,  Abbott  Road,  Lahore,
India.

*01iver,  Mrs.,  26  Brunswick  Terrace,  Brighton.
^Olivier,  Sir  Sydney,  K.C.M.G.,  King's  House,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.
Oman,  Prof.  Charles  W.  O,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
O'Reilly,  Miss  B.,  13  Bedford  Street,  Strand,  London,  W.C.
Osborne,  Miss  H,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Pack Beresford, Denis R., Fenagh House, Bagenalstown,  Co.
Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.
Paget,  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.
Parker, Edward W., 168 Brookline Avenue, Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Parker, Sir Gilbert, D.C.L., M.P., 20 Carlton House  Terrace,
London,  S.W.
*Parkin,  John,  M.A.,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.

*Parsons, J. Denham, 58 St. Oswald's Road, West  Brompton,

London,  S.W.
*Passingham,  Mrs.,  Toft  Manor,  Cambridge.


560


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paxton,  Miss  Josephine  E.,  24  N.  College  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Payne,  Ernest,  10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Peacock,  W.  H.,  M.B.,  285  Uxbridge  Road,  London,  W.
Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Hesslewood,  Hessle,  Yorks.
Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Dee  Lodge,  Chester.
Penha,  Paul  de  la,  41  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Pennington, Mrs. Henry, Silverthorne,  King's Ride,  Caraberley,
Surrey.

Penny,  W. R., Office  of  the Chief  Railway Storekeeper,  Cape

Town,  South  Africa.
Percival,  Mrs.,  1  Chesham  Street,  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Perdicaris,  Ion,  Shandon,  Tunbridge  Wells.
*Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.

Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  8  Mansfield  Street,  London,  W.
*PerovskyJ?etrovo-Solovovo,  The  Count,  24  Sergievskaia,  St.  Peters-
burg.

Perry, Sir E. Cooper, M.D., Superintendent's House,  Guy's

Hospital,  London,  S.E.
Perry,  Thos.  S.,  c/o  Perier  &  Cie,  59  rue  de  Province,  Paris.
Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  362  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Philipse,  Miss  Margaret  Gouverneur,  142  West  71st  Street,  New

York  City,  U.S.A.
*Phillimore,  Mrs.,  Battler's  Green,  Letchmore  Heath,  Herts.
Phillips,  John,  Haverford  College,  Haverford,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Phipson, Miss  Florence, 81 Erpingham  Road, Putney,  London,

S.W.

^Pickering,  J.  F.,  Camden  Ridge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Pickering,  J.  W.,  D.Sc,  Sylvadene,  Cumberland  Road,  Bromley,
Kent.

*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  March wiel  Hall,  Wrexham.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treryn,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Pilkington,  Guy  Brabazon,  3  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,  Co.
Dublin.

Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  R.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  4  Herondale  Avenue,  Wandsworth  Common,
London,  S.W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


561


Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  48  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Pitzipios,  G.  D.,  H.B.M.  Consulate,  Chinkiang,  China.
*Platt,  Mrs.  Hartford,  Ingmanthorpe  Hall,  Wetherby,  Yorks.

Plowden,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.

Plowden-Wardlaw,  James,  The  Cottage,  Edenbridge,  Kent.

Plumer-Willson,  Mrs.  W.,  20  Laurence  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
*Podmore,  Frank,  Broughton  Rectory,  Kettering.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.W.

Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Pope,  Dr.  Carlisle,  1950  East  81st  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  U.S.A.

Pope,  George  H.,  60  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
*Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Popoff,  General  James,  Sosnitra,  Gov.  Chernigow,  Russia.

Porter,  Miss  Agatha,  M.D., 18  Kensington  Park  Road,  Notting
Hill,  London,  W.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch.

Post,  Mrs.  William,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.

Priestley,  J.  H.,  B.Sc,  27  Hampton  Park,  Redland,  Bristol.

Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Minster  Acres,  Riding  Mill,  Northumberland.

Puidie,  Mrs.,  27  Palace  Court,  London,  W.

Purgold,  Thomas,  Junior  Reform  Club,  Liverpool.

Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  Bennington,  Vt.,  U.S.A.

Pym,  Mrs.  Guy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Pym,  Miss  Dorothy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Pym,  Leslie  Ruthven,  Silsoe,  Ampthill,  Bedfordshire.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  S2  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Rae,  James,  c/o  S.  Rae  &  Co.,  19  Eastcheap,  London,  E.C.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Barton-le-Street,  Malton,  Yorkshire.
Raines,  Lad}',  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Raj,  Des,  Pasrur,  Dist.  Sialkot,  Punjab,  India.
Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.


562


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Kansom,  Francis,  Chilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.
Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137  Main  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Ransom,  H.  B., 28  Belsize  Park Gardens, Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Ransom,  Mrs.,  22  Dartmouth  Row,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
*Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton.
*Raw,  Miss  E.  K.  N.,  28  Albert  Court,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.

Raynor, Charles, 5211 Catharine Street, W. Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Reade, Herbert V., 32 Palace Gardens Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Reid,  John  P.,  9  Norfolk  Crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
*Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Charterhouse,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall, 2  Wellington Terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Richardson,  Frederick W.,  County  Analyst's Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

Ricketts,  Captain  C.  R.,  71 Cold  Harbour  Road,  Westbury  Park,
Bristol.

Riddel,  Mrs.  D.  M.,  15  Mount  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,
W.

Ridley,  The  Viscountess,  10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,  S.W.
*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.
*Ridley,  Hemy  N.,  F.R.S.,  Singapore,  S.S.

Ritchie,  Thomas,  J.P.,  Overstrand  Lodge,  Cromer,  Norfolk.

Ritter,  Miss,  7  Park  Place,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.

Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  16  York  Place,  London,  W.
*Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  91  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Robeck,  Miss  Geraldine  de,  St.  David's  House,  Naas,  Ireland.
*Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
*Roberts,  R.  Nevill,  29  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  76  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  London,  W.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  5  Lyon  Road,  Harrow.

Robinson,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  1513  Fourth  Avenue,  Louisville,  Ky.,  U.S.A.
Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.
Robinson,  Nelson  L.,  381  Central  Park  West,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.  Foxley  Lodge,  West  Worthing,  Sussex.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.  563


Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  Henleaze  Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,  Gloucester-
shire.

Rohde,  Miss,  79  Upper  Gloucester  Place,  London,  N.W.

Rolleston,  Mrs.,  Glasshouse,  Shinrone,  King's  Co.,  Ireland.

Rolleston,  T.  W.,  Hollywood  House,  Glenealy,  Co.  Wicklow.

Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
♦Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5  Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.

Roy,  Gunga  N,  Deputy  Magistrate,  Barisal,  East  Bengal,  India.
*Riicker,  Sir  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19  Gledhow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Rumsey, Charles Almaric, 33 Hawke Road, Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Rundle,  Miss  M.  G.,  Varese,  Burghley  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

Rushton,  Charles  H.,  8  Billiter  Square,  London,  E.C.
Russell,  Rev.  T.  H,  St.  Martin's  Vicarage,  Gospel  Oak,  London,
N.W.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Clovelly,  Banstead  Road,  Ewell,  Surrey.
Sadgrove, W. Arthur, 69 Bishops Mansions, Putney  Bridge,
London,  S.W.

Salter,  George  F.,  123  N.  16th  Street,  E.  Orange,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sanderson,  W.  R.

Sanger,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  The  Sevillia,  117  West  58th  Street,  New

York  City,  U.S.A.
Saunders,  Miss  E.  R.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  W.  E.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
♦Savage, Rev. M. J., D.D., 1916 East  82nd Street,  Cleveland,
Ohio,  U.S.A.
Savill,  Dr.  Agnes,  66  Harley  Street,  London,  W.
Sawyer,  G.  C,  94  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Schmidt,  Julius,  Cornwall  Cottage,  582  Woolwich  Road,  Charlton,
London,  S.E.

Schreiner,  Miss  Julia,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Schwarz,  Dr.  F.  D.
*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.


564


Members  and  Associates.


[pa  t


Scott-Moncrieff,  W.  G.,  M.A.,  J.P.,  Edgemoor,  Lanark,  Scotland.
Scripps, Thomas Cecil, 32 Biddulph Mansions, Maida  Vale,
London,  W.

Searle, Rev. George M.,  C.S.R, St Paul's Church,  415  West

59th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Sedgwick, Mrs. H.  D.,  Junr., 120  E. 22nd Street,  New  York

City,  U.S.A.

*Sellin, Professor Carl W., Holsteinische Str. 30,  Wilmersdorf,
Berlin.

Seymour,  Admiral  Sir  E.  H.,  G.C.B.,  9  Ovington  Square,  London,

s.w.

Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodwin.

Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Sharpe,  J.  W.,  Woodroffe,  Portarlington  Road,  Bournemouth.
Sharpley,  Rev.  Arthur  E.,  48  Oxford  Road,  Bootle,  Liverpool.
Shaw,  Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Vicarage,  Margate.
Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Sheets,  J.  C. (c/o  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College Hill),  Station

K.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Sheldon, A. F., Vendome Hotel, 62nd and Monroe  Streets,

Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Sherman^  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Box  404,  Riverside,  Cook  Co.,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hongkong,  China.
^Shirley,  Ralph,  164  Aldersgate  Street,  London,  E.G.
*Shove, Miss E., M.B., 30 York Street Chambers,  Bryanston
Square,  London,  W.
Shnttleworth,  Miss  C.  J., 10 Cottesmore Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry, 26 E. 82nd Street,  New York City,  and
Mamaroneck,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Silva,  Miss  Dora  F.,  Itchen  Abbas,  Alresford,  Hampshire.

Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S W.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sivudu,  R.  Venkata,  Maharajah's  College,  Vizianagram  City,  Madras

Presidency,  India.
Skipwith,  Mrs.,  1  Culford  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.
Skipwith,  Mrs.,  23  Manchester  Square,  London,  W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


565


Slater,  Leigh,  Lillicroft,  Disley,  Cheshire.

Sloane,  G.  G.,  Hylham  House,  Snowdon  Road,  Bournemouth  West.

Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

*Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.,  153  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  Laboratory  Lodge,  Roman  Crescent,  Southwick,
Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Lowestoft.

*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,
W.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  General  Post  Office,  London,  E.C.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  J.  Reader,  Bishop's  Croft,  Birmingham.

Smith,  Miss  Julia,  Assisi,  Drayton  Court,  S.  Kensington,  Lundon,

s.w.

Smith,  Rev.  Sydney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.
*Smith, Mrs. W. Easton, 132  Grove  Street, Waterbury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Smith,  Wm.  Hawley.  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Concord,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Smith,  Mrs.  Willis  J.,  4029  Locust  Street,  Phila.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Snape,  Mrs.,  St.  Bees,  Beachy  Head  Road,  Eastbourne.
*Suow,  Chester  A.,  523  Ninth  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Solade-Solomon,  John  E.,  Public  Works  Department,  Warri,  Cent.

Prov.,  Southern  Nigeria.
Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.
Spear,  John  A,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  c/o  Mrs.  Hoffmeister,  Clifton
House,  Cowes,  I.  of  W.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.
Spencer,  Dr. Caroline  E., 3421 Race Street, Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Sproston,  S.,  Junr.,  Elm  House,  Nantwich,  Cheshire.
*Sprostou,  W.  Manning,  Ardingly  College,  Hayward's  Heath,  Sussex.
*Stainforth, Miss Emily, 36 Comeragh  Road, West  Kensington,
London,  W.

Stanton, A. L., c/o Peters, 1217 Venables Street,  Vancouver,

British  Columbia.
Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Clifton  Springs,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Stapleton,  Mrs.,  46  Montague  Square,  London,  \V.
*Stapley,  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.

2  N


566


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Statkowski,  Miss  Tamara,  9  Queen's  Square,  London,  W.C.

Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  44  Westbourne  Park  Villas,  London,  W.

Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stephenson,  Guy,  41  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stewart,  J.,  P.O.  Dept.,  Washington,  D.O.,  U  S.A.

Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stewart,  Miss  G.,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.

Stewart,  Herbert  L.,  Ill  University  Street,  Belfast.

Stokes,  Dr.  Henry  N.,  Bureau  of  Standards,  Wash.,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.

Stocker,  Miss  M.  L,  Dunorlan,  Harrogate.
*Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118  East  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
*Straehan,  Mrs.  C,  Heacham  Hall,  Norfolk.

Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.

Strachey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S  W.

Strachey,  J.  B.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,  Strand,
London,  W.C.

Strain,  Miss  E.  H,  Cassillis  House,  Maybole,  Ayrshire.
Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Strauss,  E.  A.,  M.P.,  49  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Strickler,  0.  C,  M.D.,  Post  Office  Block,  New  Ulm,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Strong, Rev.  Charles, D.D., 67 Avoca  Street, S.Y.,  Melbourne,
Australia.

*Strutt,  Hon.  Kichard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Stuart,  A.  I.,  24  Marlborough  Ed.,  Southport.
Stuart-Prince, Major C, Cantonment Magistrate,  Peshawar,
N.W.F.P.,  India.
*Sturdy,  Edward  T.,  6  St.  John's  Wood  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Sulman,  H.  L.,  31  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Sutton,  Lady,  49  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  W.
Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  7E  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  London,  W.
Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  Buck  Lane, Haverford,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Sweetland,  Mrs.  Gifford,  Fair,  Oak  Vicarage,  Eastleigh.
Swinson,  Miss  G,  26  Upper  Phillimore  Place,  Kensington,  London,
W.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


567


Szentirmay de Oarvasto, Bela Maria  Joseph de, Consulate  for

Austria-Hungary,  Buenos  Ayres,  Argentina.
Tait, Mrs.  W. J., Lismullen, Arthur Road, Wimbledon  Park,

Surrey.

Tanner,  Ernest,  Hotel  Curzon,  Brighton.
♦Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  The  Mount,  York.
♦Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6  College  Lawn,  Cheltenham.
♦Taylor, Miss  E. Waring, 7B Oxford and Cambridge  Mansions,
London,  W.

Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Teichmann,  Max,  M.A.,  33  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.
Temple,  Reginald  W.

Theophilus,  Mrs.,  165  Westbourne  Grove,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.
Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednydd,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.
Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Thomas,  Dr.  George  P.,  2113  North  7th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

♦Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

Thompson,  Edwin,  1  Croxteth  Grove,  Liverpool.

Thompson,  Matthew  William,  Stoke  by  Nayland,  Colchester.

Thompson,  Mrs.  Rosalie,  143-145  Cromwell  Road,  S.  Kensington,
London,  S.W.
♦Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1426  Walnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Thornhill,  Miss  H.,  The  Studios,  42  Linden  C4ardens,  London,  W.

Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.

Thornton,  W.  M.,  D.Sc,  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-on-
Tyne.

Tootal,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  The  Ladies'  Empire  Club,  69  Grosvenor  Street,
London,  W.

Torr,  Miss  D.  R.,  Carlett  Park,  Eastham,  Cheshire.
Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfricl  de,  13  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.
Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
Travers,  Mrs.

Trimborn,  Joseph, 10  Sussex  Place,  South Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Trimnell,  Miss  H.  L.,  3  Talfourd  Terrace,  Hawley  Road,  Dartford.
♦Trotter,  Mrs.,  The  Hill,  Batheaston,  Bath.
Truell,  Robert  Holt  Stuart,  West  Mount,  Dover  College,  Dover.

2  N  2


568


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Tschistiakoff,  P.  A.,  Arbat  50,  (maison  Neidhard),  Moscow.
Tucker,  James  W.,  Cooperstown,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Tuckey, C. Lloyd, M.D., 88 Park Street, Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Turner,  A. Hilgrove, H.M.  Attorney-General  for  Jersey,  Gouray
Lodge,  Jersey.

Turner,  Herbert  B.,  29  Raymond  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Turner,  Sidney,  20  Minster  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,  NW.
*Turpin,  Miss  S.  I.  G.,  Youngrove,  Midleton,  Co.  Cork.
*Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Balquholly,  Turriff,  KB.

Tyler,  Miss  Amelia,  Patent  Office,  Washington,  B.C.,  U.S.A.

Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  The  Oaks,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  Torre  de  S.  Sebastiao-Cascaes,  Lisbon,
Portugal.

Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  5a  Gabino  Barreda  101,  Vivda  1,  Mexico  City.
Unwin,  Mrs.,  Homestead,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.
Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  .U.S.A.

Van Leer, Miss Mary  T.,  East Downington,  Chester Co.,  Pa,,
U.S.A.

*Van  Norden,  Rev.  Charles,  B.D.,  LL.D.,  East  Auburn,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Van Renterghem, A. W.,  M.D., 1 Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam,
Holland.

Venables,  Rev.  Herbert  A.,  Hotel  Baglioni,  Florence,  Italy.

Vermille,  Frederick  W,  Box  1012,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford  on  Avon,  Rugby.
*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26  Gloucester  Place,  Brighton.

Vesme,  Cesar  Baudi  de,  6  rue  Saulnier,  Paris.

Villamarina, Her Excellenc}' the Marchesa di, Palazza  Reale,
Quirinale,  Rome.

*Vincent, W. James, M.B., South Yorkshire Asylum,  Wadsley,
Sheffield.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Professor  R.  B.,  Ocho  Rios,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.
*Ward,  The  Count,  G.C.V.O.,  Fulwell  Park,  Twickenham,  Surrey.

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.


LVI.]


Members  and  Associates.


:,Gi)


*Warndorfer,  A.,  Elisabetstrasse  23,  Baden,  nr.  Vienna.
*Warren,  R.  N.,  The  Brambles,  Langley  Ave.,  Surbiton,  Surrey.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.

Wassell, H. A., Addenbrook Villa, Old Swinford,  Stourbridge,
Worcester.

Wasted,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
*Watson,  Arthur  Alfred,  B.Sc,  586  East  60th  Street,  Chicago,  III,
U.S.A.

Watson,  Mrs.  Clarence,  40  Cadogan  Place,  London,  S.W.
Watson, Prof. Wm., 107 Marlborough Street, Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  39  Eccleston  Sq.,  London,  S.W.
Weaver,  Miss  F.  J.,  c/o  Miss  Walenn,  Roedean  School,  Brighton.
Weaver, Miss  Sarah, 34  Rhode  Island Avenue, Newport,  R.I.,
U.S.A.

Webber,  Mrs.,  25  Tedworth  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Webster,  C.  K.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Welch,  Thomas  G.,  The  Oaks,  Blakebrook,  Kidderminster.
*Wells, E.  P.,  The  Limes, 94 Larkhall  Rise, Clapham,  London,
S.W.

*Westcott, W. AVynn, M.B., J.P., 396 Camden Road,  London,
N.

Western,  F.  J.,  The  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Westropp, A. S. A., East India  United  Service  Club, 16  St.

James's  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wheatley,  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,

London,  S.W.

Wheeler, C. Bickersteth, 7 St. Stephen's Crescent,  Bayswater,
London,  W.

*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Upwater  Lodge,  Cambridge.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  10  East  66th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Vdla  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.

White,  Dr.  Gordon,  G\0h  Church  St.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.

Whitehurst,  Rev.  J. B.  Howes,  Farnborough  Rectory,  Wantage,
Berks.

Whiting,  J.  Markby, 17  Copse  Hill, Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Whiton, Rev. J. M., Ph.D., 287 Fourth Avenue, New  York
City,  U.S.A.


570


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Whitmore,  Mrs.,  28  Milner  St.,  Cadogan  Sq.,  London,  S.W.
*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Wigan,  Rev.  Herbert,  Dunsden  Vicarage,  Reading.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.
*Wigg,  E.  Neale,  11  Lansdowne  Terrace,  Eastbourne.

Wilkins,  Mrs.,  8  Rostrevor  Terrace,  Rathgar,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  c/o  Messrs.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.

Willett,  Mrs.,  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  Seaford,  Sussex.

Williams, A. C. Redshawe, 52 King William Street,  London,
E.C.

Williams,  J.  E.,  Plumb  Opera  House,  Streator,  111.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lorne  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Croft,  Didsbury,  Manchester.
Willis,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Barbar,  New  Street,  Killarney,  Co.  Kerry,
Ireland.

Willis,  Grant  B., 434 North M'Kinley Avenue, Canton,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

*Willock,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  16  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Arthur,  8a  Hanover  Court,  London,  W.
Wilson,  Miss  C.  M.,  Lohengrin,  82  Montpelier  Rd.,  Brighton.
Wilson, Mrs. C. Stuart, c/o  Major  C. S. Wilson, R.E.,  Royal

Engineer  Office,  Alexandria.
Wilson, Miss  E.  M.,  Holland  Lodge,  Addison Rd.,  Kensington,

London,  W.

Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  Cornholme,  Garston,  Liverpool.
Wilson,  Miss  M.  A.,  Holland  Lodge,  Addison  Road,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Winckworth, John G., 3 Laureldene Villas, Waltham  Cross,
London,  N.

Wingate,  D.  C,  Cornborough,  Abbotsham,  North  Devon.
*Wingfield,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  46  Queen  Anne  St.,  Cavendish  Square,
London,  W.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
Witt,  Mrs.  R.  C,  27  Connaught  Square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Wohlgemuth,  Adolf,  44  Church  Crescent,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de,  c/o  Banque  de  Montreux,  Montreux,
Switzerland.

Wood,  John  B.,  346  Jurnpa  Avenue,  Riverside,  Cal.,  U.S.A.


lvl]


Members  and  Associates.


oil


Wood,  Lionel,  20  Edward's  Road,  Whitley  Bay,  Northumberland.
*Wood,  R.  H.,  10  Titchfield  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Wooderson,  George  T.,  20  Peckham  Road,  Camberwell,  London,
S.E.

Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M., Norton  Park,  Bredon's Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Worcestershire.
*Woods,  Miss  Alice, 3  North Mansions, Burton Road,  Kilburn,
London,  N.W.

*  Woods,  Mrs.,  The  Master's  House,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Woodward,  Miss  Mabel,  16  Harborne  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*Wooldridge,  H.  B.,  The  Gresham  Club,  London,  E.C.

Woollett,  Lieut.-Colonel  W.  Charles,  Army  Pay  Office,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Woolley,  V.  J.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil.

Wright,  William,  M.B.,  Middlesex  Hospital,  London,  W.

Wyke,  Mrs.  Wilberforce,  Arundel  House,  Beaumont,  Jersey,  C.I.

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44  Belgrave  Square,  London,  W.

Wyndham-Quin,  The Lady  Emily, 12 William Street,  Lowndes
Square,  London,  S.W.

Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  c/o  Miss  Pepper,  Frankfort,  Ky.,  U.S.A.
*Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  10  Granville  Place,  London,  W.

Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Young,  G.  P.,  Burnside  Cottage,  Colston,  Bishopbriggs,  Glasgow.
*Young,  Sir  William  L.,  Bart.,  35  Lower  Seymour  Street,  Portman
Square,  London,  W.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  The  Residency,  Kashmir,  India.

Zagury,  Leon,  12  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to VOL.  XXI
(PARTS  LIV.-LVI.)

1908 -1909

A.

A.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  -  -  464,465,466
A.,  Mrs.,  Discussion  of  Case  contributed  by  - -  463-467

Adare,  Lord  (now  Earl  of  Dunraven),  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship

of  D.  D.  Home - -  - 443,  450-56,  476,  483,  484,  489-506

Andre,  C.  de  St.  Etieune,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones

of  Remiremont -  -  413,  426

Angot,  A.,  Meteorological  Eeport  on  the  Hailstones  of  Remiremont 434,  435
Apparitions,  Alleged,  of  the  Virgin. See  Remiremont,  the  'Miracu-
lous' Hailstones  of.

Apports,  Alleged  Phenomena  of  -  -  403,  404,  439,  503

Arnold,  Matthew,  Script  reference  to  :  Obermann  Once  More, - -  262
Ashley,  Professor,  Script  references  to  365-367
„  ,,  ,, Note  on,  by  ....  367

Aubel,  F.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of  Pemire-

rnont - -  -  -  413,  425

Automatism  as  a  possible  explanation  of  supposed  Physical  Pheno-
mena ------ 102,  119-121,  124,  128,  132-135

Automatic  Writing  of  "Mrs.  Holland,"  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  -  166-391
„  „  Chronological  List  of  would-be

Evidential  Incidents - -  168


[parts  liv.-lvl] Index  to  Vol.  XXI.  573

Automatic  Writing  of  "Mrs.  Holland,"  Introduction :  Early  Experiences  170
,,  „  Table  of  Contents ...  166

,,  Experimental  Series  :  First  Period

176-218

„  „  Extracts  from  Script - -  184

„  „  First  Cross-Correspondences  219

,,  „  „  Second  Period  to  Sixth  Period

240-368

„  „  „  Theory  of  Cross-Correspondences

369

Ave  Roma,  Immortalis,  Cross-Correspondence -  170,  295,  297-303,  364,  388

B.

B.  ,  Mrs.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena  with  "  Mrs.  Williams  "  -  99
Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F.,  Case  confirmed  by -  -  - -  69

„  ,,  On  Hallucination  as  an  explanation  of  Physical

Phenomena -------  436

Bayfield,  The  Rev.  M.  A.—

Review  of  Incubation,  by  Miss  M.  Hamilton -  162
Beaufort,  The  Duchess  of,  Case  confirmed  by -  -  88

Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  Script  reference  to  :  The  Dead  Host's  Song -  362
Beaunis,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of - - - - - -  3-4

Bjornson,  Bjornstjerne,  Account  of  the  Case  of  Vis-Knut  - - -  136
Blaudelz,  Ch.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of  Remire-

mont -----------  412-422

Bleuler,  Dr.,  Experiences  of,  under  Hypnotism  - - - - 159,  160

Books,  Coincidental  reference  to,  in  Script  -  -  340

Bramwell,  Dr.  Milne,  Experiments  in  Time-Appreciation  by  Som-

nambules ------- 13-15,  33-39,  41-45,  49,  50

Browning,  R.,  Script  references  to —

Any  Wife  to  Any  Husband  --------  356

Colombe's  Birthday ---------  332

Rabbi  Ben  Ezra -  ...  215

Burr,  F.  L.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  -  446-448,

477,  489,  515

Bute,  Marquis  of,  Script  references  to  -  166,  199,  200,  208,  209,  210

C.

C,  Mrs.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  -  9,  10,  32,  33,  51,  52
Cancer  Incident,  Script  reference  to  -  -  -  279-281,  389
Carpaccio's  St.  Ursula,  Coincidental  reference  to,  in  Script  - -  167,

169,  254,  255,  388

Carrington,  Hereward, Physical Phenomena of  Spiritualism,  by,

Review  of ------  392

„  ,,  On  Methods  of  Producing  Spurious  Phenomena

392-400,  439

Cathcart,  Sir  R.,  Case  confirmed  by -  147


574


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


[parts


Child's  Grave,  Script  reference  to  -  - -  173

Clairvoyance,  Indications  of,  in  the  Case  of  Vis-Knut  138,  141-147

Clarke,  J.  T.,  Reference  to  Case  contributed  by  -  -  527

Claude,  M.  de  St.  Etienne,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones

of  Rerniremont -  - -  -  413,  431

Claude,  Mile.  C,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of

Remiremont - -  ------ 413,  425

Claude,  J.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of  Remire-
mont -  - 413,  424
Clouston,  T.  S.,  M.D.

The  Hygiene  of  Mind,  by,  Review  of -  -  160

Collins,  John,  Script  references  to  185,  191,  195,  196,  199

Consciousness,  States  of,  in  connection  with  "  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script.

Dissociations  of -  -  182,  263-65

„  Subliminal  and  Supraliminal,  struggle  between -  177-179

"  Conspiracy  Tree,"  The,  Script  reference  to  332,  333

Constable,  F.  C,  Case  contributed  by  -  - -  - -  510

Controls,  "Mrs.  Holland's,"  General  Account  of  Main  166,  176-184

„ Miscellaneous -  166,  214,  215

See  also  Gurney,  Hodgson,  Myers  and  Oliphant  Controls.
Coventry,  Mrs.  Aubrey,  Case  confirmed  by - -  - -  69,  90

Crookes,  Sir  William,  Experiments  of,  with  D.  D.  Home  400,  401,  436,

440-443,  453-456,  483,  488,  496,  498

Cross-Correspondences,  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  the  Theory  of 168,  369-391
„  ,, Definition  of - - - - - -  369-370

„  ,, Early  attempts  to  obtain - -  370-372

,,  „  Piddington,  J.  G.,  Observations  on  - -  372-373

„  „ Principal,  occurring  in  the  "  Holland  "-Verrall

Script 166-170,  254-256,  293,  295-303,  310-315,
316-327,  334-345,  363,  364,  386-388
„  „ Scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  "Mrs.  Forbes,"

Examination  of,  in  - - -  373,  374,  378-384
„  „  Scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  "Mrs.  Holland,"

Examination  of,  in  - - - -  384-391

,,  ,, used  by  Controls  to  prevent  Telepathy,  Dis-

cussion of  Hypothesis -  376-391
Cruise,  Sir  Francis,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  149,  152

Crystal  (Mirror)  Vision,  A  Collective,  Discussion  of - - -  463-467

D.

D.,  Miss,  Dr.  Milne  Bramvvell's  Experiments  in  Time-Appreciation

with -------- 13-15,  33-39,  41-45,  49,  50

D.,  Miss  F.,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell's  Experiments  in  Time-Appreciation

with - - - -  11,12,15-32,36,38,41-45,48,50-54,58,59

Davey,  S.  J.,  Reference  to  "  Slate-writing"  Experiments  of 393,  508,  509

Delboeuf,  Prof.,  Experiments  in  Post-Hypnotic  Appreciation  of  Time

3,  13,  33-35,  43


LIV.-LVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


575


Disinterested  Fraud,  Possible  Cases  of -  -  402-404,  479-482

Divining  Eod,  Discovery  by,  of  Coins  -  ...  60,  138,  142

of  Water - -  -  -60,138,142

Documentary  Evidence,  Contemporary,  Extant  -  60,  61,  70,  71,  73,  104-106

See  also  Automatic  Scripts.
Dowsing,  by  Miss  C.  Miles,  Preference  to ------  60

See  also  The  Case  of  Vis-Kmit.

Dreams,  Coincidental,  Phenomena  of  -  -  531

Dubois,  Professor,  Suggestion  without  Hypnotism  - - 158,  160

E.

Eheu  Fugaces,  Cross-correspondence -  - - 170,  363,  388

Eidolon,  Script  references  to  -  169,  187,  215,  216,  217,  218

Electra,  "Not  in  the  Electra,"  Cross-correspondence - - 170,  293,

310-315,  386,  387

Electric  Wiring  Incident,  Script  references  to -  - 170,  352-355

Epidemics,  Religious. See  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  at
Remiremont.

Essays,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  references  to-  -  -  -  -  204
Evidential  Incidents,  Would-be,  in  the  "  Holland  "-Verrall  Script,

Chronological  List  of -  -------  168

F.

Faith-Healing,  Instances  of -  -  138,  139,  141,  142,  143,  162,  163

See  also  The  Phenomena  of  Incubation.
Faith,  Hope  and  Charity  Incident,  Script  references  to -  220-230,  234,  384
Fawcett,  Cross-correspondence ------  j7qj  341-345  388

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  Script  references  to  291,  295,  352-354

„  »  Note  on  the  Electric  Wiring  Incident  -  352-354

"  Fire  Test/'  The  Alleged  Phenomena  of  401,  460,  461,  497,  498

"Forbes,  Mr.,"  "Holland "-Script  description  of  - - -  170,349,350
"  Forbes,  Mrs.,"  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall  -  373;  374

„  "Holland  "-Script  references  to  - 271,  328-340,  345-349,  388

j)  ,, Veridical  Statements  concerning,

in  Summary  of  170,  359,  388

"  Forbes,  Talbot,"  "  Holland  "-Script  references  to  347,  361

„  Verrall-Script  references  to - - -  .  374

Forel,  Dr.  August,  Hypnotism  or  Suggestion  and  Psychotherapy,  by,

Review  of - -- -- -- -- --  156

Fox  Family,  reference  to  the  Mediumship  of  134  400

Fragments  of  Prose  and  Verse,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Subliminal  Recol-
lections of,  in  Script  180,  241,  245-247,  256,  262,  264,  267-269,  271
Francis,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of ----- 438,  439

Fraud,  Disinterested,  Possible  Cases  of  402-404,  479-482

Furness,  Prof.  H.  H.,  on  "  Recognised  "  Materialisations - - 470,  507


576


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


[parts


G.

Gale,  Professor  Harlow,  on  "  Spiritistic  Hallucinations,"  reference  to  475
Gower,  Dr.  T.  H.,  on  Recent  Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena

„ American  Experiments-  -  94,  96,  97,  100-110,  110-128

English  „  -  95;  ioi,  102,  108

„ Notes  on  Miss  Alice  Johnson's  Sittings - - - 118,  126
"  Grove,  Mr.,"  and  the  Cancer  Incident,  Script  reference  to 279-281,  389
Gueniot,  M.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of  Reniire-

mont -  - . 413,  426,  427

Gurney,  Edmund,  Hypnotic  Researches  of 3,  4,  6,  12,  37,  38,  49,  52-55,  153
„  „ Script  ("  Mrs.  Holland's ")  Descriptions  of  241,246,264

"  Gurney  Control"  ("  Mrs.  Forbes") -------  271

„ ("Mrs.  Holland ")  177-184,191-194,230-236,241,255,

271,  272-279,  291-295,  327,  365
„  „  ,,  Apparition  connected  with - 286,  287

„  „  „  Development  of -  -  191-194

"  Gur wood  Crest,"  The,  Script  (Mrs.  Verrall's)  reference  to - -  338

H.

H.,  A.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  -  -  506

H.,  Mrs.,  Reference  to  Case  contributed  by  ...  4(35

Hallucination  and  Illusion,  as  an  explanation  of  Physical  Pheno-
mena 130,  134,  135,  393,  396,  397,  401,

436,  483,  512

,,  ,,  Discussion  of —

Miss  Alice  Johnson  on - - -  483
,,  ,,  Count  Petrovo-Solovovo  on

393,  396,  397,  401,  436,  483-512
Hallucinations,  Collective — see  the  alleged  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of
Remiremont.

Negative -  ...  508-9

Subjective  -  - -  138,  139,  141,  436-511

Hamilton,  Miss  Mary,  M.A.,  Incubation,  or  the  Cure  of  Disease  in

Pagan  Temples  and  Christian  Churches,  by,  Review  of  - - -  162
Harford,  Miss  C,  Cases  confirmed  by  -  - 74,  75,  77,  80

Harford,  F.  D.,  Cases  confirmed  by -  -  - 81,  82,  83

Hartmann,  E.  von,  On  Hallucination  as  an  explanation  of  Physical

Phenomena  -------  436

,,  On  the  Subliminal  Consciousness - -  4

Hawksley,  Dr.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  -  -  444
Henry  ivas  not  Mistaken,  Cross-correspondence  170,  293,  310-315,  386,  387
Hodgson,  R.,  Early  Attempts  to  obtain  Cross-correspondences

218-219,  370-372

,,  Description  of,  given  in  "  Holland  "-Script - -  292,309

,,  Veridical  Statements  concerning,  in  Script -  -  283

„  Experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino -  521-524


LIV.-LVI.]


Index  to  Vol,  XXI.


577


"  Hodgson  Control "  ("  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script)  -  292-310,  365,  367

„  Similarity between, and the  Piper-Hodgson

Control  -  -  . 308,  309

Hodgson,  W.  B.,  Case  contributed  by -  474,  506

"  Holland,  Mrs,"  The  Automatic  Script  of,  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  166-391
jj  Assistance  in  Experiments  given  by- - - 175,  176

„  Early  Experiments  - - - - - . -  170

„  Psychological  Aspects  of  -  - - -  176-183

„  Recent  Experiments- .....  176-368

„  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences  in  connection  with  369-391

Home,  D.  D.,  Hallucination  or  Illusion  as  possible  explanation  of  the
alleged  physical  phenomena  produced  by  400,
401, 436,  440-448,  450-456,  460-469,  476,  478,

483-506,  512-515

,,  Script  reference  to ------ .  206

"  Human  Personality,"  Effect  of  Reading,  on  "  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script

171,  177,  180,  188-191
„  Subliminal  Reminiscences  of,  in  Script

168-169,  189,  192-194,  202-219,  231,  265,  276
Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of  (Miscellaneous) -  3.59,  149,  156,  160

„  Advance  made  in  recognition  of  - - 151-154,  156

„  Curative  Effects -------  149-161

„  Hallucinations,  Post-hypnotic  - - - - - -  3  160

„  Memory,  Conditions  of ----- - 2-7,  35-59

„  „ Revivals  of  150,  157

„  Personality,  Problems  of  -  39-40  150

„  Time  Appreciation  during,  Recent  Experiments  in  - -  2-59

■>  „  difference  between,  and  other  Post-

hypnotic suggestions - - - 3,  4
Will,  Power  of  the  Subject's -  150,158,159,160

I.

Illusions. See  Hallucinations  and,  as  an  Explanation  of  Physical
Phenomena.

Impressions  (Crystal  Visions,  etc.)  in  connection  with  "  Mrs.  Holland's  "

Scr'Pt  -171,  249,  286,  287,  290,  291,  333,  335,  336,  339,  346

Incubation,  or  the  Cure  of  Disease  in  Pagan  Temples  and  Christian

Churches,  Miss  M.  Hamilton,  by,  Review  of  - - - - -  162

Indian  Magic,  Instances  of  - - - - - - - 437,  438,  515

Ingelow,  Jean,  Script  reference  to :  Persephone  -----  291
»  ,,  Supper  at  the  Mill, - - 248,  291

Ivor//  Gate,  Coincidental  reference  in  Script  to - - 169,  255,  256,  257

J.

James,  Henry  (Junior),  Note  on  the  Hodgson  Control  ("Holland "-

Script)-  . .  308


578


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


[parts


James,  Prof.  W.,  Note  on  Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  with

"  Mrs.  Williams "  - - - - - ■  - - - - -  108

Janet,  Prof.  Paul,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  3
Jeangeorge,  Mine.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  at

Remiremont- --------- 413,  423

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  On  the  Automatic  Writing  of  "  Mrs.  Holland"  166-391
,,  ,,  The  Theory  of  Cross-Correspon-

dences, and - - -  369
„  Automatism  and  Physical  Phenomena

102,  119-121,  124,  128,  132-135
,,  The  Education  of  the  Sitter,  by  - - -  483-511

„  on  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  as  an  explanation

of  Physical  Phenomenon  - - -  483-511
,,  ,, Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  considered

483,  486-505

,,  „ Negative  Hallucinations -  508-511

,,  „ Quasi-Hypnotic  Effects  - - -  498-505

,,  ,, "  Recognition "  of  Materialisations  -  505-508

,,  ,, Note  on,  by  Count  Petrovo-Solovovo -  513

„  Notes  on  Cases  ----- 456,  465,  472

„  Report  on  some  Recent  Sittings  for  Physical

Phenomena  in  America - -  94-135
,,  .,  General  Discussion  of  the  Evidence  -  128

,,  History  of  the  Early  Sittings  - -  95

„  ,,  Personal  Experiences - - -  110

X.

K.,  Capt.  B.,  Case  contributed  by ------  -  438

K.,  M.,  a  possible  case  of  Disinterested  Fraud -  479-482

Kipling,  Rudyard,  Script  reference  to -----  255,  257

L.

Lamay,  L.  A.,  Evidence as to the '  Miraculous ' Hailstones  of

Remiremont- --------- 413}  425

Landscape,  Coincident  description  in  Verrall-Script  of  258
Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  Account  of  Vis-Knut -----  136

,,  on  the  Evidence  for  Telepathy  from  the  Dead  375,  376

„  on  the  Mediumship  of  Nikolaeff - - 448, 449

Levitation,  Alleged  Phenomena  of 109,  112,  123,  124-125,  126,  127,

134,  135,  401,  439,  455-459,  479-482,  490-497,  523
Liebeault,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Researches  of - - -  149,  151,  154

Liegeois,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Researches  of - - - - - -3,  4

Lindsay,  The  Master  of,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home

455,  456,  460,  461,  476,  490-496
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  "Holland "-Script  references  to 207,  277-279,  292,  365, 388
,,  Description  of,  in  Script  - - -  - -  365

Veridical  Statement  as  to  Illness  of - 277-279,  292,  388


LIV.-LVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


579


Lorberg,  Dr.  Hermann,  Chance  coincidence  in  Script  concerning  -  296-7
"  Lotus  and  Lily,"  Script  references  to  - -  350-351

Lucas,  Miss  M.  L.,  Case  confirmed  by -  - -  68

Luminous  Appearances  connected  with  Psychical  Phenomena  -  139,  141
Lysaght,  Agnes,  Script  references  to  -  - 187,  191,  197

M.

MacNab,  T.,  Confirmation  of  Cases  by 64,  66,  68

Mal-observation,  Possibilities  of,  in  Psychical  Research

129,  130,  134,  135,  475,  477-479
See  also  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  as  an  explanation  of
Physical  Phenomena.
Materialisation,  Alleged  Phenomena  of

397,  401,  440-455,  469-475,  486-490,  505-508
„  "  Recognition "  and -  470,  505-508

Maxel,  Mine.  Lucie,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  at

Remiremont - - -  -  - 412,  422

Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  Metapsychical  Phenomena,  influence  of  Spectator

Review  of,  on  Script -  -  272-9

Meetings  of  the  Society,  General -  -  1,165

Members  and  Associates,  Honorary,  CorrespondingandOi  dinary,  List  of  533-71
Merrifield,  Mr.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home,

reference  to  - -  -  489

Miles,  Miss  Clarissa,  Divining  Rod  Experiments  with -  -  60

„  „  Experiments in Thought-Transference  with

Miss  H.  Ramsden -  -  60

Miles,  Colonel  Napier,  Cases  confirmed  by  - -  - 87,  88

Miller,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  -  - 470,  506

Mind-reading  Performances,  Spurious  - 398, 399

Minod,  M.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miraculous'  Hailstones  of  Remiremont

410,  412,  413,  422,  423

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.

Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules -  -  2-59

„  „  Detailed  Experiments  -  9-12,  16-32

,,  Discussion  of the Processes  of  Sub-

conscious Mentation  - 2-9,  33-59

Monaco,  Princess  of,  Case  confirmed  by -  70
Monitions  -----  -  138-141,  146,  147

More,  W.,  Case  contributed  by -  - 470,  506

Morosoff,  Luba,  Alleged  Mediumship  of -  -  403

Morselli,  Professor  E.,  Psichologia  e  "Sptritismo":  Impressioni  .  .  .

di  Eusapia  Paladino,  by,  Review  of -  -  516

Moses,  Rev.  W.  Stainton,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.

Home  -  -  453,490
Motor  Impulses  to  Write  or  Speak,  in  connection  with  Script

173,  181,  182,  183,  240


580


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


[parts


Mount-Temple,  Lady,  Script  references  to  -  191,  208,  209,  267,  293

Miinsterberg, Prof., Physiological explanation of  Subconscious

Mentation -  -  4  g

Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Confirmation  of  Case  by  -----  65
Music,  Notes  of ,  Cross-correspondence  - - -  169,254-256,387

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Descriptions  of,  in  the  "  Holland  "-Script

191,  246,  249,  264

„  „ Early  attempts  to  obtain  Cross-correspondence  370-372

,,  ,, on  the  Processes  of  Hallucination - -  -  484

,,  ,, Script  references  to  Writings  of,  Miscellaneous

204,  233,  271,  346

See  also  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Verse  and  Human
Personality.

,,  ,, Sealed  envelope  (posthumous),  Script  references  to

169,  221,  223-239,  242-245,  384
,,  ,, on  the  Subliminal  Consciousness -  -  5

"  Myers  Control  "  ("  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script) 166,  177-184,  191-219,
221-223,  224,  230-240,  241,  242,  245-249,  252-

256,  272-283,  291-295,  365-367
„  ,, Comparison  of,  in  Script  of  "Mrs.  Holland"  and

Mrs.  Verrall -  -  221,  222,  239

Development  of  -  191-194,  219-240

N.

"  N.,  Mrs.,"  Script  references  to  -  191,  214,  271-272,  287-289

Nikolaeff,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  448,  449,  476,  489

Nixon,  William,  Script  references  to  -  -  191

JVoel,  Roden,  Cross-correspondence -  - 170,  316-327

Nordgarden,  Knut  Kasmusson  (Vis-Knut),  The  Case  of -  -  136

Notes  of  Music,  Cross-correspondenee  -  169,  254-256,  387

O.

Officers  and  Council  for  1909 -  -  -  533

"  Oliphant,  Laurence,  Control  "  ("  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script)  - 191,  259-263

P.

Paladino,  Eusapia,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 131, 133,  393,  396,  502,510,  516-525
„  „ Cambridge  Experiments  with  502,  510,  517-522

„  „ Coincidental  reference  to,  in  Script  273-279, 327-328

,,  „ Morselli,  Prof.  E.,  on -  -  -  516

„  „ Recent  Experiments  with  -  524-525

Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter,  Alleged  Phenomena  of

393,  396,  404,  442,  443,  468

"  Pelham,  G.,"  Communications,  reference  to  528-531

Personality,  A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness -  -  150


LIV.-LVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


581


Petrovo-Solovovo,  Count  Perovsky.

The  Hallucination  Theory  as  applied  to  certain  cases  of  Physical

Phenomena  -------  436-482

„  Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Discussion  of -  483-516

„  Note  on  Miss  Johnson's  Paper,  by - -  512

Eeviews  by,  The  Naturalisation  of  the  Supernatural,  by  F.  Podmore  525
n  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  by  H.  Carrington  392

Physical  Phenomena,  Coincidental  Eeferences  to,  in  Script 272-279,  327-328
»  „  Script  warnings  concerning  272-279,  281,  282

>!  >,  Some  Recent  Sittings  for,  in  America - -  94

»  »  „ Automatism  as  a  possible  explanation  of

102,  119,  120,  121,  124,  128-131,  132-135
See  also  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  as  an  explanation  of.
Piddington,  J.  G.,  Account  of  "The  Scribe"  Incident - - -  284
i)  on  Cross-correspondence  Experiments - -  372-373

„  Note  on  the  Hodgson  Control  ("Holland  "-Script)  306-308

Piper,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.  Verrall  218,  219,  225,  229

»  „  Mrs.  Thompson - -  370-72

„ Trance  Phenomena  of -  -  218,  219,  225,  229,  526-531

Podmore,  Austin,  Case  contributed  by  508
Podmore,  Frank,  on  Hallucination  and  Physical  Phenomena - -  436
»  » The  Naturalisation  of  the  Supernatural,  by,  Review  of  525

i)  » Review  of  Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion,

by  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey - - - - - ]  49

» on  Slate-writing  Experiments  (S.  T.  Davey) - 509,  525
»  » on  the  Future  Position  of  Telepathy - -  154-156

Posilipo,  Cross-correspondence - - - - - 170,  334-340,  388

Premonition,  Concerning  first  Meeting  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  "Mrs.

Holland"  270  271

Presidents  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  List  of  -  -  -  533
Psychical  and  Physical  Phenomena,  Miss  Alice  Johnson on  the

different  Character  of  the  Evidence  for - - 128-135,  485,  486
Psychometric  Experiments,  Discussion  of  the  Theory - - -  359
„  Experiments  with  inanimate  objects  in  connection  with

"  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script  -  -  328-334,  345-359

R,

Ramsden,  Miss  Hermione  (and  MissC. Miles), Experiments  in  Thought-

Transference  at  a  Distance - - -  60-93
'>  »  Note  on  Telepathic  Processes -  -  92-93

Ramsden,  Lady,  Case  confirmed  by - - - - _ . -  67  68
"Rawson,  Miss,"  Cross-correspondence  Experiments  with  - 37],  372  378
Remiremont,  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  - - - - '  - '  405
"  " Documentary  Evidence -  412,  413,  415-435

»  » Historical  Account  of  Notre  Dame  de 406,  407,  415

Eeviews "  -  149,  156,  160,  162,  392,  516^  525


582


Index  to  Vol.  XXI.


[parts


Eibot,  Prof.,  Physiological  explanation  of  Subconscious  Mentation  - 4,  5

Eossetti,  Christina,  Script  refei'ence  to -----  -  350

Eossetti,  D.  G.,  Script  references  to  :  The  Blessed  Damozel  -  -  262

„ The  Portrait - - -  210, 262

„ „ Staff  and  Scrip  - -  260,263

,, ,, For  a  Venetian  Pastoral -  -  242

Eowton,  Lord,  Coincidental  reference  to  death  of,  in  Script 169,  197,  198

S.

St.  Paul,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  references  to -  233,  271,  346

Sage,  M.,  The  alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Eeniiremont -  405-435
Sambor,  S.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of - - -  396,  403,  404,  468,  475,  476
Schilkine,  D.,  Account  of  a  Case  of  Physical  Phenomena - -  479-481
Scott,  Sir  W.,  Script  reference  to  :  Where  shall  the  lover  rest  -  291

Scribe  Incident,  The -----  -  -281-286,368,388

Sealed  Envelope  (Mr.  Myers'  posthumous),  Script  references  to

169,  221,  223-239,  242-245,  384
Selwyn  Text  Incident,  The  -  -  166,169,219-239,253,268,269,271,386
Sensations,  Physical,  in  connection  with  the  "  Holland  "-Script

173,  174,  181-184,  190,  198,  240
„ Mal-de-Mer,  drowsiness,  etc. -  184,  214,  217,  247,  303

Servia,  Alleged  Prediction  of  Assassination  of  the  King ,  of,  Script

reference  to  ---------- -  202

Shakespeare,  Script  reference  to  passages  in  -  231,  235,  241,  256,  282

Shelley,  Script  reference  to:  Adonais  -  -  208,209

,,  ,,  Sensitive  Plant -  - -  262

Sidgwick,  Dr.  Henry,  Description  of,  given  in  Script  -  246,  264,  367-368
"Sidgwick  Control"  ("Holland  "-Script)  -  177,178,180
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  on  the  Cambridge  Experiments  with  Eusapia

Paladino -  - ■  -  517-522

,, Note  on  two  Cross-correspondences  -  315

,, Eeview  of  Psicologia  e  "  Spiritismo,"  by  Prof.  E.  Morselli  -  516
Signatures  and  Hand-writings  in  Script -  -  180,  181,  271

Simpson,  J.  Hawkins,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  462
Simulacrum,  Script  references  to  ...  ]69,  215,  216,  217,  218

Skar,  Johannes,  on  The  Case  of  Vis-Knut  -  136,  137,  147,  148

Slade,  "  Dr.,"  Eeference  to  the  alleged  Mediumship  of  393
Slate-writing,  Trick  Methods  of  producing  -  -  393,  394,  438-439,  508,  509
Spectator  Eeview  of  Maxwell's  Metapsychical  Phenomena,  influence  of,

on  Script  167,  272

Spiritualism,  Physical  Phenomena  (Miscellaneous) 94-135,  392-404,

436,  483,  512,  516,  525

Stevenson,  E.  L.,  Quotation  from  -  217

,,  „ Script  reference  to -  -  274

Stewart,  Prof.  Balfour,  on  Hallucination  as  an  explanation  of  Physical

Phenomena  -  -  -  436


liv.-lvi.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXI.  583

Subliminal  Consciousness,  The.

See  Time-appreciation  Experiments.
Subliminal  Reminiscences  in  "  Holland  "-Script  -  ...  368

„ „ „ An  Apparition  - -  286

"Annette"-  -  287

Suggestion  without  Hypnotism,  Cures  by  - - -  158,  160,  161

Swinburne,  Script  reference  to  :  Garden  of  Proserpine  -  242,245

Symposium,  Verrall-Script  references  to  -  374

T.

T.,  Mrs.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  -  10

Telepathy,  F.  Podniore  on  the  Future  Position  of  154-156

,, See  also  the  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences.
Telepathy,  Experimental  (at  a  distance) -  60-70,  73-93

„ Analysis  of  Results -  -  70-73

Tennant,  Lady,  Cases  confirmed  by  ....  83,  91

Tennyson,  Script  references  to  :  Love  and  Duty  -----  259

„  „  Maud ------  225

Thompson,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondence  Experiments  with  -  370-373
Time,  Appreciation  of,  by  Sonmambules,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell's  Experi-
ments on-----------  2

Trance,  rudimentary,  obviated  by  Self-suggestion  - 247,  248

Translation  of  Faith,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reference  to  -  -  204
Trollope,  T.  A.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  -  513,  514
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.

Reviews  by,  The  Hygiene  of  Mind,  by  Dr.  T.  S.  Clouston - -  160
„  Hypnotism  or  Suggestion  and  Psychotherapy,  by  Dr.

A.  Forel - - -  156

Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion,  by,  Review  of - -  149

U.

"Uncle  Jerry "  Communications,  reference  to  -  -  526,527


Unger,  M.,  Evidence  as  to  the  'Miracidous'  Hailstones  of  Remiremont

414,  416,  431

Unger,  G.,  Evidence  as  to  the  '  Miraculous '  Hailstones  of  Remiremont

414,  432

V.

Van  Eeden,  Dr.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Thompson  -  - 371,  372

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  Description  of,  in  Script - 169,  185-189,  205,  206,  390
„  Note  on  the  Ave  Roma  Immortalis  Incident

298-9,  301,  302

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  and  the  Script  of  "Mrs.  Holland."

„  Assistance  given  in  Experiments  by  - -  175-176

„  Comparison  of  the  Verrall-Myers  and  Holland-

Myers  Controls - - - - 221,  222,  239


5S4


Index  to  Vol,  XXI. [parts  liv.-lvi.]


Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  Cross-correspondence  Experiments  with  "Mrs.

Forbes " - - 373,  374
„  „  with  "Mrs.  Holland"  215-

218,  219-368  386-388

„  ,,  ,,  „ parallel  passages  237-239

„ Mrs.  Piper -  218-219
,,  Description  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  her  Surroundings

given  in  Script  168,  169,  170,  185,  188,  189,

194,  195,  212,  252-259,  291-294,  296,  340,  389-390
,,  Premonition  as  to  first  Meeting  with  "  Mrs.

Holland" -------  270

Verse,  Specimens  of,  in  Automatic  Scripts  171-173,  192,  193,  205,  210,

241,  247,  260,  262,  317,  318,  321-322,  378,  390
Viel,  Jules,  Account  of  Notre  Dame  de  Remiremont -  -  415

Vis-Knut,  The  Case  of  -  136

„ Clairvoyance,  Telepathic,  Indications  of -  138,  141-147

Healing  by  -  - 138,  139,  141-143

,,  Luminous  Appearances  connected  with  -  -  -  139,  141
„ Water  and  Lost  Property  Traced  by  -  -  138,  142,  145-146

Vuilleniin,  M.,  Enquiry  as  to  the  alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of

Pemiremout .....  . 407-12,  414,  417-22


W.

Warndorfer,  A.,  on  a  Case  of  Physical  Phenomena -  456,  457,  5,02

Wilcox,  Mrs. — see  Miller,  Mrs.

Wilkinson,  Dr.  Garth,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  D.  D.  Home  445
"Williams,  Dr.,"  Account  of  Sitting  for  Physical  Phenomena  -  -  97
"  Williams,  Mrs.,"  Sittings  for  Physical  Phenomena  with  -  95-110,  110-128
Wilson,  Mrs.,  Case  collected  by  ------- -  463

X.

X.,  M.,  a  possible  case  of  Disinterested  Fraud -  - - 403,  404

Y.

Yodenitch,  Mmb.,  Case  contributed  by  - 396,  469

Z.

Zakrzevska,  Mme.,  Account  of  a  Case  of  Physical  Phenomena  -  -  480
Zollner,  Prof.,  Reference  to  the  Experiments  of  - - - - -  393


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.


Part  LVI. Vol.  XXI.  February,  1909.  Price  3s.  net.


CONTENTS.

PAOE

I.  The  Alleged  Miraculous  Hailstones  of  Remireniont.  By  M.  Sage,  .  405
II. The  Hallucination  Theory  as  applied  to  Certain  Cases  of  Physical

Phenomena. By  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  .  436

III. The  Education  of  the  Sitter. By  Alios  Johnson, .  .  .  483

Note  on  Miss  Johnson's  Paper. By  Count  Perovsky-Petroyo-

Solovovo,  . ■  >  r.'--,'  >£.'■-', ^Vv'i^'f^! "C^^^K^^^S^  512
Supplement.
Reviews  :

Professor  Morselli's  "  Psicologia  e  'Spiritismo'  :  Impressioni  e  note
critiche  sui  fenomeni  merlianici  di  Eusapia  Paladino. " By  Mrs.
,  Henry  Sidgwick,  .......  516

Mr. F. Podmore's "Naturalisation  of  the Supernatural."  By

Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo, .  .  .  525

Officers  and  Council  for  1909, ......  533

List  of  Members  and  Associates, ....  534

Index  to  Vol.  XXI. ........  572


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  published
in  the.  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors.


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY
ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED,
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW.

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications :

LONDON :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  S3  Hum  Street,  Marvleeone,  W.
GLASGOW:  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  01  St.  Vincent  Street.
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

All  rights  reserved,
t


The  Society  for  Psychical  Research.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1909.


PRESIDENT.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.  P.,  F.  R.S.  ;  Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  j  Professor  William  James.

Professor  W,  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  !  SirOliver Lodge,  D.Sc.,LL.D., F.R.S.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  ;  Lord  Rayleigh,  P.R.S.

George  B.  Dorr.  I  The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon.

COUNCIL.


W.  W.  Baggally.

The  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

Ernest  N.  Bennett,  M.P.

J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-

carres,  K.T.,  F.R.S..
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  M.Sc,  M.B.


Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.

J,  G.  Piddington.

St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.

Lord  Rayleigh,  P.R.S.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  ,D.  Sc.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

A.  F.  Shand.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

Lieut. -Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.  Taylor.

Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.

Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

V.  J.  WOOLLEY.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick, ------  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  -----  1885-1887.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick, ------  1888-1892.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  - - -  1893.

Professor  William  James,  - - - - - - -  1894-1895.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S., - - - -  1896-1899.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers, ------  1900.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S., -------  1901-1903.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S., - - -  1904.

Professor  Charles  Riciiet,- - - -  .1905.

The  Right  Hon  Gerald  W.  Balfour, -  1906-1907.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick, - ■ - - - - -  1908.


NOTICE.


Any  well-attesfced  information,  bearing  on  the  various  subjects  which
are  being  investigated  by  the  Society,  will  be  gratefully  received,
whether  from  Members,  or  persons  intending  to  join  the  Society,  -or
from  others.  Communications  to  be  addressed  to  the  Secretary,
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

The  Rooms  of  the  Society,  at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  are
open  every  week-day  from  11  a.m.  to.  5  p.m.,  except  on  Saturday,
when  they  close  at  1.30  p.m.
