Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. V (1888-1889)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1888 London: Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XII-XIV) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc05soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  V.
(CONTAINING PARTS XII— XIV.)
1888-89.


London :

TRUBNER AND CO., LUDGATE  HILL.


1889.


London :

National  Press  Agency,  Luiited,
13,  Whitefeiars  Street,  E.G.


CONTENTS.

■O  PAGE

Recent  Experiments  in  HyiDnotism. By  Edmund  Gurkey ...  3
Relation de  Diverses Experiences  sur  la  Transmission  Mentale,  la
Lucidite,  et  Autres  Plienomenes  non  Explicables  par  les  Donnees
J Scientifiques Actuelles. Par  M.  Charles  Richet,  Professeur  de
J Pkijsiulogie  a  la  Faculty  de  Medicine  de  Paris . . . .  .18
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. By  A. Schmoll  and  J.  E.

^ Mabire  1G9

J  '  Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.  B\"  Edmtod  Gfkney  ....  210
5  Critical  Notices. By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

,  (1)  Preliminanj  Report  of  the  Commission,  appointed  hy  the  Uni-

^  versity of  Pennsylvania  to  Investigate  Modern  Spiritnalism

J  in  accordance  with  the  Bequest  of  the  late  Henry  Seybert .  260

2.  (2)  Hystero-epilepsie Masculine : Suggestion, Inhibition,  Trans-

J  position  des  Sens. Par  le  Professeur  Fontan . . .  263

2"^ Note  relating  to  some  of  the  Published  Experiments  in  Thought-Trans-

ference ............  269

^  Opening  Address  at  the  Twenty-eighth  General  Meeting.  By  Professor

^ Henry  Sidgtock  271

o

■s^  The  Connection  of Hypnotism  with  the  Subjective  Phenomena  of

J Spiritualism ...........  279

b On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions. By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  . . .  288
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. By  Max  De.ssoir . . .  355
2  Supplement.

K  I.  Edmund  Gurney's  Work  in Experimental Psychology.  By

^  F.  W.  H.  Myers  359

II.  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality. By  F.  W.  H.

^  My-ers . -  374

^ Opening  Address  at  the  Thirtieth  General  Meeting. By  Professor

°. Henry  Sidgwick  399

I) On  Apparitions  Occurruig  Soon  after  Death. By  the  late  Edmund

■ Gurney,  completed  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  403

M Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal- Vision .......  486

Automatic  Writing. — IV. — The  Dwmon  of  Socrates. By  Frederic
W.  H.  Myers  522

Supplement.

I.  On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro. By  H.  Baeington  Smith  549
II.  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism." By  Max  Dessoir  . . .  566
The  Edmund  Gurney  Library ........  575

List  of  Members  and  Associates ........  590


34089


•  *


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
Jmie  nth,  1887.

The  twenty-fifth  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Rooms  of  the
Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on  June  17th,
1887.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H  Myers  read  a  paper  on  "  Active  and  Passive
Automatism — the  Dfemon  of  Socrates,"  which  it  is  proposed  to  publish
in  the  next  number  of  the  Proceedi^igs.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
January  28th,  1888.

The  twenty-sixth  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Westminster
Town  Hall,  on  January  28th,  1888.

Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  Chair.

The  Chairman,  in  opening  the  Meeting,  spoke  of  the  great  and
irreparable  loss  which  the  Society  had  suffered  through  the  sudden
death  of  their  President,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart.  It  had  been  of
the  greatest  advantage  to  them  that  one  bearing  so  higli  and  un-
disputed a  reputation  as  a  physicist  had  been  willing  to  lead  and  direct
their  endeavours  to  penetrate  the  obscure  region  of  psychical  research.
Of  the  work  that  had  been  done  under  Professor  Balfour  Stewart's
leadership  it  was  not  now  the  time  to  speak  in  detail  :  but  all  who
had  watched  his  management  of  their  affairs  would  agree  that  it  was
marked  by  three  characteristics  : — it  was  thoroughly  fearless,  it  was
uniformly  circumspect,  and  it  was  genuinely  sympathetic.  He  believed
it  was  only  by  this  combination  of  qualities  that  they  could  hope
to  succeed  in  the  difficult  task  that  they  had  undertaken :  and  it
was  because  they  could  hardly  hope  to  find  them  again  combined
in  a  President  of  Professor  Balfour  Stewart's  scientific  eminence
that  he  had  spoken  of  his  loss  as  irreparable.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  communicated  two  remarkable  instances  of
"  Automatic  Messages,"  which  will  be  embodied  in  a  future  paper.

Mr.  Edmund  Gurney  read  part  of  a  paper  on  "  Appearances,  <fec.,

B


2


Proceedings  of  General  Meeting.


closely  following  on  Death,"  which  it  is  proposed  to  publish  in
the  next  number  of  the  Proceedings.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
April  Idth,  1888.

The  twenty-seventh  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Westminster
Town  Hall,  on  April  13th,  1888.

Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  Chair.

Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  gave  an  account  of  "  Some  Experiments  on
Thought-transference  and  Independent  Clairvoyance  at  Munich."  It
is  hoped  that  a  full  record  of  these  experiments  may  shortly  be
communicated  to  us  by  one  of  the  principal  investigators.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  read  part  of  a  paper  on  "  Premonitions,"  which
it  is  proposed  to  publish  in  the  next  number  of  the  Proceedings.


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.  3


I.

RECENT  EXPERIMENTS  IN  HYPNOTISM*
By  Edmund  Gurney.

During  the  past  autumn  and  winter  I  have  carried  out  a  long  course  of
liypnotic  experiments  at  Brighton,  with  the  invaluable  assistance  of  Mr.
G.  A.  Smith  (designated  in  this  paper  as  S.),  who  was  throughout  the
hypnotiser.  The  pi'incipal  classes  of  experiment  have  been  two  :
(1)  that  which  may  be  described  as  intelligent  automatism,  which
occupied  a  large  part  of  my  paper  in  Part  XI.  of  these  Proceedings
on  "  Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States  "  ;  and  (2)  the  pro-
duction of  local  anaesthesia  and  rigidity  by  the  proximity  of  the
operator's  hand,  without  contact,  and  without  conscious  expectation  of
the  effect  on  the  part  of  the  "  subject."

I  will  briefly  describe  the  results  obtained,  drawing  attention  to
novel  or  important  features.

' INTELLIGENT  AUTOMATISM.

Several  more  experiments  were  made  on  the  writing,  in  the  waking
state,  of  words  previously  impressed  upon  the  "subject"  in  the  hypnotic
condition,  and,  as  usual,  he  appeared  totally  ignorant  of  the  word
written,  though  aware  of  the  act  when  hypnotised  again  a  few  minutes
later.  In  this  way  Hull  wrote  the  word  bottle,  and  only  thought  there
might  be  a  6  in  the  writing  as  he  fancied  he  could  trace  the  formation
of  that  letter  in  the  movements  of  the  planchette.  CoUingham,  in
the  hypnotic  condition,  was  told  to  write  a  word  beginning  with  M.
Instantly  wakened,  and  made  to  read  aloud  with  his  hand  upon  plan-
chette, the  words  imick  miick  were  produced.  Offered  ten  shillings  to
say  what  the  writing  was,  he  could  only  feel  certain  about  the  letter  M,
and  only  decided  on  that  letter  after  hesitating  between  it  and  C.  It
was  sometimes  found  that  the  word  impressed  in  the  hypnotic  state
was  remembered  on  waking,  which  of  course  frustrated  the  experiment.
This  difficulty  was  overcome  by  engaging  the  "  subject's "  attention
with  a  little  story  immediately  previous  to  waking  him  ;  then  remem-
brance of  this  story  would  survive,  but  the  word  which  preceded  it
appeared  to  be  obliterated  from  his  mind.  The  planchette  reproduced
it,  however. Thus,  A.  Nye  was  told  to  write  the  word  bread,  and

*  Some  of  these  experiments  were  described  by  Mr.  Gurney  at  an  informal  meeting
of  the  Society  held  on  December  2nd,  1887.


4  Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.

then,  after  a  pause  of  a  few  seconds,  was  told  about  a  very  high  tide
which  had  damaged  the  sea  walL  Awakened  immediately  afterwards,  he
could  recall  the  narration  of  these  incidents,  but  nothing  more.  But  set
to  tlie  planchette,  he  wrote  the  word  bread,  and  declared  that  he  could
not  say  whether  the  instrument  had  produced  more  than  scribble.
Mdlle.  Caron  remembered,  on  awaking,  that  she  had  been  told  to
write,  and  knew  that  she  had  written  the  word  Brighton,  as  directed.
But  on  the  experiment  being  repeated  with  the  word  Far-is,  with  an
injunction  that  the  word  was  to  be  forgotten,  a  perfect  success  was
attained  ;  nor  did  a  money  bribe  induce  a  revival  of  the  idea.  Miss
Cass  was  told  to  write  her  name  backwards.  She  placed  the  letters  in
her  surname  correctly,  but  the  Christian  name,  Edith,  was  somewhat
illegible,  though  it  terminated  with  the  initial  U  clearly  enough.  Tigar
wrote  the  word  Urighton  backwards,  reading  excellently  meanwhile.
Some  "  subjects "  could  not  be  caused  to  write  the  word  itself,  even
though  the  necessary  condition  of  forgetfulness  was  brought  about.
They  simply  made  scrawls  with  tlie  planchette.  But  no  doubt  with
more  hypnotisation  the  more  definite  result  would  have  been  obtained
witli  them.  Thus,  in  an  experiment  with  H.  Nye,  cousin  to  the  former
"subject,"  no  trace  of  the  word  he  had  been  ordei'ed  to  write  seemed
present  to  his  consciousness  when  he  was  awakened,  and  the  application
of  his  hand  to  planchette  only  caused  that  machine  to  make  frantic
dashes  and  wild  scribbles.  A  similar  result  occurred  on  a  second  trial.
But  a  third  one  was  successful,  the  word  Thursday  being  plainly
written,  in  accordance  with  the  hypnotic  suggestion.

On  a  few  occasions  foreign  words  were  used.  They  were  distinctly
pronounced  to  the  subject,  who  was  then  awakened  and  made  to  read  as
usual,  being  left  to  write  the  word  according  to  his  own  ideas  of  spelling.
Hull  wrote  Synatus  for  Senatus,  and  Totam  for  Totem.  The  word
Kerkuare  having  been  slowly  spelt  twice  to  Parsons,  he  wrote  the  word
correctly  ;  and  Kent  wrote  Shanghai  after  the  name  had  been  three
times  said  to  him.  The  Greek  word  APAXMH  was  shown  to  Hull  when
awake,  and  he  was  asked  to  look  at  it  well.  He  was  then  hypnotised
and  told  to  write  the  word.  Immediately  awakened,  and  set  to  the
planchette,  with  a  book  to  read  aloud,  he  correctly  wrote  the  word.
Subsequently  offered  a  sovereign  to  say  what  the  writing  consisted  of
he  was  unable  to  do  so.

A  large  number  of  experiments  were  made  in  the  working  out  of
sums  by  the  "secondary  intelligence" — the  sum  being  given  to  the
"  subject "'  while  he  was  in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  the  answer  being
written  down  by  liim  automatically  with  a  planchette,  while  he  was  in
the  normal  state,  and  wholly  unaware  both  of  the  act  of  reckoning  and
of  what  he  was  writing.  Nine  "  subjects "  in  all  were  employed  :
several  others  who  were  easily  hypnotisable  were  of  no  use  for  this  par-


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.


5


ticular  form  of  experiment,  as  they  remembered  when  awake,  some-
times easily  and  sometimes  with  some  effort,  words  and  sentences
addressed  to  them  when  hypnotised.  The  method  employed  was  for  S.
to  hypnotise  the  "  subject "  by  making  a  few  passes  over  his  eyes,  and
then  to  give  him  a  simple  sum,  usually  in  multiplication,  to  do,  waking
him  suddenly  the  instant  after.  On  waking,  the  "  subject "  never  had
any  recollection  of  the  sum,  or  of  any  order — or,  indeed,  of  having
been  addressed  at  all.  He  was  then  made  to  place  his  right  hand  on
tlie  planchette,  his  attention  being  occupied  by  reading  aloud,  or
occasionally  by  counting  backwards,  leaving  out  alternate  numbers,  or
some  similar  device.  The  planchette  meanwhile  was  writing.  In  most
of  the  cases  where  the  writing  did  not  prove  to  be  the  correct  answer
to  the  sum,  the  figures  were  sufficiently  near  the  mark  to  make  it
apparent  that  an  intelligent  attempt  had  been  made  to  work  out  the
given  problem.  The  jaaper  and  instrument  were  always  kept  concealed
from  the  "  subject's  "  eyes,  and  he  was  never  told  what  the  movements
of  the  plaiichette  produced.  As  a  rule,  he  was  afterwards  offered  a
sovereign  to  say  what  the  writing  was,  but  the  reward  was  never
earned.  On  re-hypnotisation,  he  recalled  the  whole  process — a  clear
indication  that  we  have  had  to  do  with  "  secondary  intelligence,"  not
with  unconscious  cerebration.

The  sums  given  were  simple,  as  most  of  the  "  subjects  "  were  inex-
pert at  mental  arithmetic.

There  were  131  sums  in  which  three  figures  had  to  be  multiplied  by  a
single  one;  of  these  52  were  quite  right,  28  had  three  figures  in  the  answer
right,  18  had  two  figures  right,  and  14  had  one  figure  right  only,  whilst
1 2  were  quite  wrong,  and  seven  were  either  so  illegible  and  muddled  as
to  be  undecipherable,  or  only  a  small  stroke  or  curve  was  made
at  all.  There  were  75  sums  in  which  two  figures  had  to  be
multiplied  by  one  (the  multiplier  never  exceeding  12),  and  of  these
41  were  worked  quite  correctly,  2  liad  three  fi.gures  in  the  answer
right,  9  had  two  figures  right,  4  had  only  one  figure  right,  and  in
1 9  instances  the  pencillings  were  illegible.  In  some  cases  of  this  class
the  sum  itself  was  correctly  written,  but  no  attempt  was  made  to  put
the  answer.

There  were  2  sums  in  which  four  figures  had  to  be  multiplied  by
one  ;  both  were  correctly  done.  A  few  sums  of  other  kinds  were  also
given:  of  14  simple  addition  (of  about  the  following  difficulty  :  i  +  l  +
9  +  11 13)  six  were  done  correctly;  two  were  quite  wrong,  and  the
remaining  six  were  either  not  done  at  all,  or  the  answers  were  illegible
scribbles.  Of  5  multiplication  money  sums  {£,  s.  d.  and  farthings  x
by  a  single  figure)  3  were  worked  correctly, — thus  Wells  correctly
multiplied  12s.  3|d.  by  8,  repeating  "Grod  Save  the  Queen"  meanwhile,
with  every  other  word  left  out — and  the  other  was  indecipherable ;


6


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.


and  one  money  subtraction  sum  (shillings,  pence,  and  farthings)  was
correctly  done.

Another  case  illustrates  the  very  distinct  memory,  on  re-hypnotisa-
tion,  of  what  had  been  written.  Wells  was  told  to  work  out  the  sum,
"13  loaves  at  5d.  each,"  and  instantly  woke  as  usual.  He  wrote,  "  13
loaf  at  5d.  is  5s.  5d."  When  hypnotised  again,  and  asked  to  say  what
he  had  written,  he  replied,  "13  loaf — oh,  I've  put  loaf  instead  of
loaves — at  5d.  is  5s.  5d.  I've  written  the  13  twice — see — but  I
crossed  it  out. "  He  then  proceeded,  by  a  long  roundabout  process,  to
work  the  problem  out,  arriving  at  the  correct  answer  again.

Trials  to  get  drawings  executed  were  not  successful.  Parsons  was
told  to  draw  an  elephant,  (February  18th,)  but  the  lines  and  curves
produced  were  probably  much  less  successful  attempts  to  delineate
that  animal  than  a  normal  blindfolded  boy  would  have  made.

Some  more  experiments  were  made  in  getting  writings  referring
to  real  events.  In  the  hypnotic  state  the  "  subjects  "  were  told  to  write
something  that  had  occurred  during  the  past  week  or  month,
and  then  instantly  awakened — when  they  would  fulfil  the  com-
mand through  planchette.  Thus  Hull  wrote,  Fire  at  Berlin  ;
and  then  asked  for  something  that  had  occurred  at  Brighton
during  the  last  month,  he  wrote  :  Harbour  Lights  has  been
played — and something else indecipherable. The same  evening

Tigar  wrote  Mail  Ro  meaning  to  refer,  as  he  explained  in  his

next  hypnotic  trance,  to  an  alleged  mail  robbery  in  the  town.  Parsons
wrote  (December  10th)  Head  and  Toothache,  in  response  to  the  request
for  something  that  had  happened  in  the  town  during  the  last  two
months.  Curiously  enough,  he  had  been  complaining  of  these  pains
a  minute  or  two  before,  yet  he  had  no  idea  what  he  had  written,  nor
did  the  ofier  of  a  sovereign  assist  him  in  remembering.  The
same  "  subject "  wrote  American  draivs  teeth,,  referring  to  a  quack
dentist  who  was  publicly  performing  at  Brighton.  Parsons  wrote  Fire,
referring  no  doubt  to  a  big  hre  which  had  taken  place  in  the  town  a
few  nights  before.  Another  time  he  wrote  "  Benley  fire,"  which  was
also  correct,  for  a  fire  had  recently  occurred  at  the  shop  of  a  tradesman
named  Bentley.  Miss  Cass,  with  whom  a  trial  of  the  same  sort  was
made,  was  more  communicative,  for  she  wrote,  "  I  went  to  a  ball "  ;
then  there  appears  some  indecipherable  writing,  followed  by  a  fresh
start,  and  the  information,  "  I  went  to  a  ball  and  had  nearly  all  the
dancing  the  young  men."  Upon  inquiry,  these  assertions  were  found
to  be  true ;  and  her  employer,  who  was  present,  told  us  of  a  special
reason  why  she  would  not  have  mentioned  the  fact  in  her  normal  state.
The  same  "  subject "  was  told  to  write  dowii  anything  striking  that
occurred  in  the  room.  She  was  then  woke,  and  made  to  count  the
numbers  from  50  downwards,  alternately,  with  S. After  a  minute


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.  7


or  two  I  turned  out  a  gas  burner.  She  immediately  wrote,  The  gas
went  out.  E.e-hypnotised,  slie  remembered  what  she  had  written,  and
knew  that  I  had  turned  the  gas  out ;  but  wlien  woke  again,  she  did
not  know  what  she  had  written,  though  offered  a  reward,  as  usual,
though  still  awai'e  that  I  had  turned  the  gas  out  during  the  counting.
In  a  similar  way  she  wrote  the  name  of  the  first  person  who  left  the
room,  having  been  told  to  do  so  when  in  the  hypnotic  state.

Hull  was  told  to  write  a  couple  of  lines  from  any  verse  he  knew.
Made  to  read,  and  placed  in  contact  with  the  planchette,  he
wrote  : —

Attend,  all  ye  ivho  list  to  hear  our  noble  England' s  praise

I  tell  of  the  thrice  [illegible]  deeds  she  wrought  in  ancient  [illegible].

The  customary  offer  of  a  sovereign  failed  to  induce  him  to  say  what  he
had  written,  but  when  hypnotised  he  sleepily  gave  the  lines.

Another  form  of  experiment  was  to  tell  the  "  subject  "  to  count  the
number  of  times  a  certain  letter  occuri'ed  in  a  given  verse.  Thus,
Wells  was  told  to  write  down  the  number  of  times  the  letter  E  occurred
in  the  verse —

Mary  had  a  little  lamb,

Its  fleece  was  white  as  snow,
Everywhere  that  Mary  went

The  lamb  was  sure  to  go —

and  then,  after  saying  the  verse  once  quickly  through  to  show  that  he
knew  it,  he  was  instantly  awakened  and  given  Tit  Bits  to  read.  Whilst
thus  engaged  he  wrote.  The  letter  E  comes  11  times  —which  is  right.
The  same  experiment  was  tried  with  Parsons,  who  also  was  kept
occupied  by  being  set  to  read  immediately  upon  waking  ;  but  he  was
not  so  accurate,  and  wrote  down  "  12."  He  was  completely  successful,
however,  when  told  to  write  the  number  of  E's  in

God  save  our  gracious  Queen,

Long  live  our  noble  Queen,
God  save  the  Queen,
and  wrote  11,  having  read  excellently  the  whole  time.

Some  experiments  were  made  in  which  the  subject's  rhyming
faculties  were  put  to  the  test.  Wells,  in  the  hypnotic  state,  was  told
to  make  a  rhyme  to  The  tide  is  very  high  to-night,  and  was  then
instantly  woke  and  made  to  read.  He  wrote.  It  is  a  very  lovely  sight.
A  second  attempt  would  have  been  satisfactory  if  he  had  not  made
a  blunder  in  his  writing.  He  was  told  to  make  a  rhyme  to  The  fishes
are  awake  and  kicking.  Awakened  and  made  to  read  as  usual,  he
wrote,  /  hope  the  sea  a  licking.  He  corrected  himself,  however,  on
being  re-hypnotised,  and  volunteered  the  statement  that  he  had  left
out  some  words,  and  meant  to  write,  /  hope  they'll  give  the  sea  a
licking. Similar  trials  succeeded  with  Miss  Cass. She  had  a  strong


8


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.


objection  to  reading  aloud,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  do  so ;  she
was,  however,  obviously  absolutely  ignorant  of  the  words  formed  by
the  planchette,  though  the  usual  bribes  were  brought  to  bear.  Her
hand  produced  the  following  couplets,  of  which  the  respective  first
lines  had  been  given  her  when  in  the  hypnotic  state  : —

The  sun  is  shining  in  the  west,
And  I  try  to  do  my  best.

The  sun  is  rising  in  the  east,
And,  oh,  you  are  a  little  beast.

I  like  to  go  to  sleep  at  night.
And  dream  about  my  little  kite.

Two  experiments  of  a  slightly  different  sort  were  made  with  this
"  subject."  She  was  told,  when  hypnotised,  that  when  she  woke  up  a
newspaper  would  be  held  in  front  of  hei",  with  a  pencil  mark  against  a
cei'tain  line.  She  was  to  count  the  number  of  letters  in  tliat  line,  and  write
the  information  down.  She  was  woke,  and,  the  newspaper  being  held  before
her,  she  was  seen  to  be  counting.  Upon  my  asking  what  she  was  doing
she  laughed,  and  said,  "Counting."  Asked  "what  for,"  she  said,  "I  don't
know — for  fun."  She  presently  wrote  39 — which  was  the  number  of  letters
contained  in  the  marked  line.  Of  course  the  planchette  was  concealed
from  her  eyes,  as  on  all  other  occasions,  and,  as  usual,  she  could  not  say
what  the  writing  was.  I  offered  her  three  sovereigns  to  try  to  recollect,
and  tried  to  make  her  feel  that  I  really  wanted  her  to  say,  but  though
she  tried  hard,  and  seemed  vexed  with  herself,  the  information  was  not
forthcoming.  This  experiment  was  repeated,  with  another  marked  line
in  the  newspaper.  This  time  she  wrote  Jf.2,  which  was  again  right.
When  the  planchette  was  just  beginning  to  write  the  figures,  and  when  it
was  clear  she  had  just  finished  counting,  I  asked  her  how  many  letters
there  were ;  she  thought  for  a  second,  then  laughed,  and  said,  "  I
forget."  Meanwhile,  the  planchette  was  putting  them  down  on  the
other  side  of  the  interposed  screen.

On  two  occasions  the  orders  given  were  not  carried  out,  something
else  being  written  instead.  This  took  place  each  time  in  connection
with  sums,  when  the  hgures  were  probably  forgotten,  or  the  "subject's"
mind  got  confused — the  impulse  to  write,  however,  still  existing.
Parsons,  told  to  multiply  456  by  7,  wrote  the  first  figure  in
the  answer — 2,  and  then  went  on  with  God  save  the  King — which
phrase  was  in  the  article  he  was  reading  at  the  time.  His  explanation
when  next  hypiaotised  was  that  he  was  "put  out"  by  S.  singing
the  refrain  in  his  ears,  but  upon  being  assured  that  this  had  not  occurred,
he  said,  "  Oli,  I  wrote  God  save  the  King  for  the  sake  of  writing
something."  He  could  give  no  reason  for  writing  these  particular
words,  however,  except  that  he  pitched  on  them  as  one  does  on  any


Recent  Experiments  in  Hyimotism.


9


stray  sentence,  in  "  trying  a  new  pen  "  for  instance.  The  other  case
was  with  Kent,  who  sometimes  recollected,  when  awake,  orders  given
to  him  when  entranced,  and  with  whom,  therefore,  the  device  of
telling  a  story  after  giving  the  sum  was  adopted.  He  was  told  to
multiply  444  x  6,  and  then  informed  that  some  spoi'ts,  polo  matches,
&c.,  had  been  taking  place  at  a  park  in  Brighton.  Woke  immediately
after  this  and  questioned,  he  slowly  and  by  degrees  remembered  about
the  sports,  but  nothing  about  the  sum.  Then  set  to  the  planchette
and  supplied  with  a  book  to  read,  he  wrote.  Have  you  seen  the
sports  ? — declaring  when  questioned  that  he  had  no  idea  what  had  been
written,  though  the  usual  bribe  of  a  sovereign  was  offered  to  him.  He
could  only  say  that  he  thought  the  planchette  commenced  its  work  with
"  a  capital  C."

Other  experiments  showed  the  segregation  of  the  secondary  from
the  primary  intelligence,  even  in  cases  where  they  were  similarly
employed.  Parsons  was  told  to  write  what  he  was  reading
about  when  next  awake.  Woke  and  made  to  read  an  article
on  The  Customs  of  Russian  Clubs,  he  wrote  Russian  chibs — and  was
as  usual  unable,  in  spite  of  the  offer  of  a  reward,  to  say  what  he  had
written.  Re-hypnotised,  he  said  he  had  written  "  Russian  clubs,"  but
could  not  say  why,  and  would  not  admit  that  he  had  been  reading  aloud.
Again,  he  was  told  that,  when  awake  and  reading,  he  was  to  write  how
he  was  feeling  at  the  time.  He  was  woke,  and  was  given  an  article,
Thieves  in  Faris,  to  read.  Whilst  reading,  he  wrote  stealing  my  watch,
and  immediately  clapped  his  hand  to  his  pocket  with  a  look  and  cry  of
alarm.  Re-hypnotised,  lie  denied  reading,  but  remembered  what  he  had
written,  and  gave  an  account  of  a  man  with  a  clay  pipe  and  his
hands  in  his  pockets  standing  near,  who  might,  he  thought,  have  had
designs  upon  his  watch.  He  observed  that  he  wovild  keep  a  sharp  eye
on  him  and  take  precautions.  Similar  experiments  were  made  with
Tigar  the  same  evening  with  somewhat  similar  results.  He  wrote  Hotv  to
ventrilog  when  reading  an  article  on  ventriloquism ;  and  as  a  description
of  his  feelings,  when  reading  at  another  time,  he  put  tvatie  sleejyy —
interpreting  this  when  next  hypnotised  as  "warm  and  sleepy."  Parsons
also  wrote  More  Novelists'  Blunders  whilst  reading  an  article  with  that
heading,  and  Hull  wrote  Broken  Hearts  when  reading  upon  that  sub-
ject, but  he  differed  from  Parsons  in  knowing,  when  next  hypnotised,
what  he  had  been  reading  about,  as  well  as  what  he  had  written.

APPLICATION  OP  THE  MEMORY-TEST  TO  A  STATE THAT  SEEMED
NEARLY  NORMAL.

Parsons  was  hypnotised  and  told  that  he  could  open  his  eyes  and  see
things — though  still  remaining  in  the  same  state.  He  was  helped  and
encouraged  to  bring  his  upturned  eyeballs  down  into  their  natural


10  Recent  Ex2:>eriments  in  Hypnotism.


position.  This  achieved,  he  looked  natural,  but  said  that,  except  for  being
able  to  see,  he  felt  just  the  same  as  before — "living  in  a  dream,"  as  he
expressed  it.  He  had  previously  observed  that  the  two  states — normal
and  hypnotic — were  like  living  on  diflerent  days — Saturday  and  Sunday
(Sunday  the  normal  state).  He  said  it  was  still  Saturday  when  his
pupils  had  come  down,  but  more  like  Sunday.  In  this  condition  he
was  able  to  read,  but  he  performed  the  task  more  slowly  than  usual,
and  said  he  felt  "  not  all  there."  After  reading  a  paragraph,  his  eyes
were  again  closed  as  before,  and  he  was  then  woke  completely  as  usual.
But  only  one  word  of  what  he  had  read  could  be  recalled,  and  he  was
very  uncertain  about  that ;  he  recollected  distinctly,  however,  a  para-
graph that  he  had  recently  read  in  the  normal  state,  and  felt  satisfied
that  that  was  the  last  one  read.  Again  hypnotised,  he  had  full
recollection  of  the  paragraph  read  in  the  hypnotic  state  with  open
eyes.

Similar  experiments  were  made  with  Tigar  with  like  results.
While  in  tlie  hypnotic  state,  he  was  made  to  lift  his  eyelids  and
bring  the  pupils  down,  and  was  then  set  to  read,  which  he  accomplished
as  well  as  when  awake.  He  said  he  could  not  define  any  difierence
between  this  state  and  the  state  he  was  in  when  on  duty  through  the
day,  except  that  he  felt  more  drowsy.  He  was  then  completely
awakened  with  a  clap,  whei'eupon  he  forgot  that  he  had  been  reading.

NEGATIVE  HALLUCINATIONS.

Parsons,  in  the  hypnotic  state,  was  told  that  on  waking  lie  would
not  see  anyone  in  the  room,  though  he  would  see  the  fui'niture  and
everything  else  as  usual.  Four  persons  were  in  the  room,  but,  upon
waking,  Parsons  appeared  to  think  himself  alone,  and  settled  liimself
comfortably  by  the  hre  with  a  book.  Mr.  Myers  coughed  behind  him,
when  he  looked  towards  the  door  and  called  out,  "  Come  in,  Mr.
Smith."  Mr.  Myers  then  made  other  noises,  when  Parsons  began  to
look  frightened  and  get  excited.  He  hunted  about  the  room,  jumped
on  a  chair  and  peeped  over  a  screen,  seized  the  tongs,  and  yelled  for  S.
in  great  alarm.  E,e-hypnotised,  he  asked  where  everybody  had  been
to,  and  upon  being  assured  that  no  one  had  left  the  room,  he  said,  "  I
don't  like  to  contradict  you,  but  you  weren't  here."

Later  in  the  evening,  he  was  told  that  on  waking  he  would  be  deaf.
When  woke  he  paid  no  attention  to  remarks  addressed  to  him,  nor  to
loud  claps,  calls,  ifec.  Mr.  Myers  talked  to  him,  but  he  only  looked
surprised  and  puzzled,  and  then  wagged  his  jaw,  asking  Mr.  Myers  what
he  went  like  tiiat  for.  Told  to  "  sleep  "  (an  order  which  usually  had
effect)  he  only  coughed  and  imitated  the  gesture  accompanying  the
order.  On  repetition  of  the  word,  with  a  pressure  on  the  head  and
over  the  eyes,  he  fell  into  trance.


Recent  Experiments  in  Hyj^notism.


11


Later,  he  was  told  that  on  waking  he  would  hear  but  would  not
see  anyone.  When  woke,  he  answered  questions  and  looked  about  to
see  where  the  voices  came  from.  Mr.  Myers  spoke  to  him,  and  gave
him  his  hand,  upon  which  Parsons  looked  intensely  surprised.  Mr.
Myers  led  him  up  to  S.,  who  also  gave  him  his  hand.  Parsons  still
continued  looking  up  and  around,  with  his  eyes  apparently  focussed  foi
a  long  distance.  He  felt  S.'s  head,  and  showed  astonishment,  saying,
"  I  can  feel  you  and  hear  you,  but  where  are  you  '?  "  He  affirmed  that  he
"  never  had  such  a  feeling,"  and  wandered  about,  moving  his  head  from
side  to  side  with  a  very  peculiar  dazed  look.

POST-HYPNOTIC  HALLUCINATIONS.

Parsons  was  hypnotised,  and  told  that  in  seven  minutes  he  would
be  swimming  in  Brill's  Baths.  It  was  then  8.47.  He  was  instantly
woke,  and  other  "  subjects  "  were  dealt  with.  At  8.53  Parsons  took
a  header  on  to  the  floor  and  swam  vigorously  in  the  dust,  first  on  his
side,  then  making  chest  strokes,  and  finally  kicking  along  the  floor  on
his  back,  loudly  calling  his  friends  by  name  meanwhile.

Far  more  interesting  instances  of  posf>-hypnotic  hallucination  are
the  following,  due  to  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  Ellis,  of  40,  Keppel-street
(an  Associate  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research),  who  permitted  her
maid,  Zillah,  to  be  the  "  subject  "  of  experiment.

In  the  evening  of  June  27th,  1887,  Zillah  was  hypnotised  by  S.,  and
about  a  couple  of  hours  were  spent  over  various  experiments.  At  the
end  of  the  evening  S.  told  Zillah,  when  in  the  trance,  that  she  would
see  him  at  12  o'clock  next  day.  She  was  then  woke,  and  appeared  to
have  no  knowledge  of  what  had  been  said  to  her.  The  result  of  the
experiment  was  not  known  untilJuly  6th,  when  Mrs.  Ellis  told  S.  that
on  Tuesday,  the  28th,  she  and  Zillah  were  out  shopping,  when  a  little
before  12  o'clock  the  latter  remarked  that  a  passer-by  reminded  her  of
S.  Mrs.  Ellis  made  no  special  comment  at  the  time,  but  later  on  referred
to  the  subject  again,  when  Zillah  said,  "  Oh,  I  saw  Mr.  Smith  just  now."
Further  questioned,  she  declared  that  she  had  seen  him  on  the  top  of
an  omnibus ;  that  he  made  no  sign  of  recognition,  but  she  knew  him
by  the  look  in  his  eyes.  For  a  short  time  before  this  description  was
given  Mrs.  Ellis  had  observed  a  strangeness  in  Zillah's  manner,  and
thought  she  had  a  slightly  hypnotic  look  ;  she  took  no  interest  in  the
purchases,  though  they  were  articles  of  dress  for  herself.  And  for  a
little  time  afterwards,  too,  she  seemed  so  odd  that  Mrs.  Ellis  remon-
strated with  her  for  her  want  of  interest.  Soon  after  describing  what
she  had  seen,  however,  she  became  perfectly  natural  again.

The  next  experiment  was  made  on  the  evening  of  July  6th,  with
much  more  pronounced  results.  S.  hypnotised  Zillah  and  told  her  that
she  would  see  him  standing  in  the  room  at  three  o'clock  next  afternoon,


12  Recent  Uxperivients  in  Hypnotism.

and  that  she  would  hear  him  call  her  twice  by  name.  She  was  told
that  he  would  not  stop  many  seconds.  On  waking,  as  on  tlie  former
occasion,  she  had  no  notion  of  the  ideas  impressed  upon  her.  Next  day
the  following  letter  was  received  from  Mrs.  Ellis  : —

"40,  Keppel-street,  Russell-square,  W.C.
"July  7th,  3.15  p.m.
"  Dear  Mr.  Smith, — I  am  sure  you  will  be  pleased  to  know  that  your
experiment  of  giving  Zillah  the  hallucination  has  been  most  successful.  She
has  never  been  told  of  the  former  hallucination  when  she  saw  you  on
Tuesday.  To-day  I  do  not  think  I  have  mentioned  even  your  name  to  her.
In  fact,  I  would  say  1  am  quite  sure  I  have  not  even  distantly  alluded  to  you,
much  less  to  any  hallucination,  if  it  were  not  that  one  must  not  say  one  is
'sure  '  of  anything.  However,  she  came  upstairs  just  now,  about^iiie  minutes
past  three,  looking  ghastly  and  startled,  and  said  '  I  have  seen  a  ghost !  '  I
assumed  intense  amazement,  and  she  said  she  was  in  the  kitchen  cleaning
some  silver,  and  suddenly  she  heard  her  name  called  sharply,  twice  over —
Zillah!  in  Mr.  Smith's  voice.  She  said,  'And  I  dropped  the  spoon  1  was
rubbing  and  turned  and  saw  S.  without  his  hat,  standing  at  the  foot
of  the  kitchen  stairs.  I  saw  him  as  plain  as  I  see  you,'  she  said,  and
looked  very  wild  and  vacant.  So  I  pinched  her  and  said  I  believed  she  was
hypnotised  ;  but  she  was  sensitive.  Don't  you  think  this  is  very
wonderful  ? I  have  not  told  her  a  word  about  your  hallucination  command.

"A.  A.  Ellis."

The  third  and  last  experiment  with  this  "  subject "  was  made  on
Wednesday  evening,  July  13th,  1887.  On  this  occasion  S.  told  her,
when  hypnotised,  that  the  next  afternoon  at  three  o'clock  she  would
see  me  come  into  the  room  to  her.  She  was  further  told  that  I  would
keep  my  hat  on,  and  would  say,  "  Good  afternoon  " ;  that  I  would
further  remark,  "  It  is  very  warm  "  ;  and  would  then  turn  round  and
walk  out.  These  hallucinations  were  suggested  in  another  room,  where
Zillali  was  taken  for  the  purpose,  and  neither  Mrs.  Ellis  nor  any  othe)-
person,  except  S.  and  myself,  knew  their  nature.  Zillah  as  usual
knew  nothing  about  them  on  waking.  On  the  second  day  after,  the
following  letter  was  received  from  Mrs.  Ellis  : —

"  40,  Keppel-street,  Russell-square,  W.C.
"  July  14th.

"  Dear  Mr.  Smith, — Mr.  Gurney  did  not  ask  me  to  write  in  case  there
was  anything  to  communicate  with  respect  to  Zillah,  but  as  I  suppose  you
gave  her  a  post-hypnotic  hallucination,  probably  you  will  wisli  to  hear  of  it.
I  will  give  you  the  stury  in  her  own  words,  as  I  jotted  them  down
immediately  afterwards — saying  nothing  to  lier,  of  course,  of  my  doing  so.
She  said  :  '1  was  in  the  kitchen  washing  up,  and  had  just  looked  at  the
clock,  and  was  startled  to  see  how  late  it  was — five  minutes  to  three — when
I  heard  footsteps  coming  down  the  stairs — rather  a  quick,  light  step— and  I


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.  13

thought  it  was  Mr.  Sleep  '  (the  dentist  whose  rooms  are  in  the  house),  '  but
as  I  turned  around,  with  a  dish  mop  in  one  hand  and  a  plate  in  the  other,  1
saw  some  one  with  a  hat  on,  who  had  to  stoop  as  he  came  down  the  last
step,  and  there  was  Mr.  Gurney  !  He  was  dressed  just  as  I  saw  him  last
night,  black  coat  and  grey  trousers,  his  hat  on,  and  a  roll  of  paper,  like
manuscript,  in  his  hand,  and  he  said,  "Oh,  good  afternoon."  And  then  he
glanced  all  round  the  kitchen,  and  he  glared  at  me  with  an  awful  look,  as  if
he  was  going  to  murder  me,  and  said,  "Warm  afternoon,  isn't  it?"  and
then,  "  Good  afternoon"  or  "  Good  day,"  I'm  not  sure  which,  and  turned
and  went  up  the  stairs  again,  and  after  standing  thunderstruck  a  minute,  I
ran  to  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  and  saw  like  a  boot  just  disappearing  on  the  top
step.'  She  said,  '  I  think  I  must  be  going  crazy.  Why  should  I  always  see
something  at  three  o'clock  each  day  after  the  seance  1  But  I  am  not  nearly
so  frightened  as  I  was  at  seeing  Mr.  Smith.'  She  seemed  particularly
impressed  by  the  '  awful  look  '  Mi'.  Gurney  gave  her.  I  presume  this  was
the  hallucination  you  gave  her.

"  Amelia  A.  Ellls."

Another  case,  though  a  failure,  had  great  interest.  Miss  Cass  was
hypnotised  and  told  that  I  should  call  on  her  at  11  on  a  particular  day.
She  had  no  recollection  of  this  on  being  woke.  On  the  day  named
she  showed  some  uneasiness  as  the  hour  arrived,  but  no  notice  was
taken  of  this,  and  certainly  no  hallucination  took  place.  But  at  about
1 1  on  the  ensuing  night  (the  time  being  ascertained  by  the  fact  of  one
of  her  companions  going  to  her  room  after  she  had  been  some  little
time  in  bed)  she  had  a  very  vivid  dream  of  my  addressing  her  in  the
street,  and  saying  something  about  having  called  on  her,  or  meaning  to
call  on  her.*  Some  evenings  later,  when  her  hand  and  that  of  one  of
her  companions,  was  on  the  planchette,  the  instrument  wrote  :  "  Mr.
Gurney  will  call  to  see  me  at  11."  She  professed,  and  no  doubt
honestly,  complete  ignorance  of what  the  writing  was,  till  she  read  it.

REMOVAL  OF  PAIN  BY  SUGGESTION.

Parsons  one  evening  complained  a  good  deal  towards  the  latter
part  of  the  evening  of  headache  and  toothache.  Before  leaving,  S.
hypnotised  him  and  assured  him  that  they  would  speedily  vanish,  and
that  he  would  in  a  few  minutes  be  free  from  pain.  He  was  then  woke,
and  the  few  upward  passes  and  light  touches,  usually  performed  at  the
end  of  hypnotic  experiments,  were  gone  through.  After  tliis  process
Parsons  volunteered  the  information  that  he  not  only  felt  quite  awake,
but  his  pains  had  gone,  and  he  cheerfully  departed.  Questioned  on  a
subsequent  evening,  he  stated  that  he  had  no  return  of  them.

*  Unfortunately  the  record  of  this  incident,  carefully  made  at  the  time,  has  been
mislaid.  It  gave  a  fuller  account  than  the  above,  which,  however,  is  correct  as  far  as
it  goes.


14


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.


PRODUCTION  OF  LOCAL  EFFECTS  BY  THE  PHOXIMITY  OF  THE  OPERATOR'S

HAND.

Experiments  of  this  most  important  class  have  been  already  described
in  these  Proceedings*  In  outline,  the  'modus  operandi  has  been  asfollows :
The  "  subject "  is  made  to  put  his  arm  through  a  thick  screen,  extend-
ing high  above  his  head,  and  to  spread  his  ten  lingers  on  a  table  in  front
of  him.  The  fingers  are  thus  completely  concealed  from  his  view,  and
the  operator's  hand  is  held,  without  contact,  at  a  distance  varying
from  about  a  third  to  three  quarters  of  an  inch,  over  one  or  another
of  them,  according  to  my  selection — with  the  result  that  in  a  very
large  majority  of  cases  the  finger  so  treated,  and  that  finger  alone,
becomes  rigid,  and  insensible  to  extremely  severe  treatment  in  the  way
of  stabs,  burns,  and  electric  shocks.  From  my  knowledge  of  the
"  subjects,"  and  of  the  circumstances,  I  regard  simulation  as  prac-
tically out  of  the  question.  But  this  is  not  really  important,  for  the
hypothesis  of  simulation  has  no  application  to  the  frequent  cases
where  the  rigidity  was  tested  before  the  anfesthesia.  The  "subject"  is
told  to  double  his  fist ;  and  no  desire  to  deceive  could  have  taught  him
which  particular  one  of  his  ten  digits  was  to  remain  recalcitrant.

In  the  recent  series  tliere  have  been  160  experiments  of  the  de-
scribed type  with  five  "  subjects."  In  all  these  cases  I  held  my  hand,
in  the  same  position  as  S.'s,  over  one  of  the  remaining  nine  fingers.
In  124  cases  S.  alone  produced  the  effect  intended.  In  16  cases  S.
and  I  both  succeeded  ;  and  in  13  cases  I  succeeded,  and  S.  failed.
In  the  remaining  7  cases,  no  efiect  at  all  was  produced.  In  11
of  the  cases  where  I  succeeded  and  S.  failed,  the  effect
was  not  complete — there  was  either  partial  insensitiveness,  or
partial  stifi'ness,  or  comqylete  insensitiveness  but  no  stiffness.  In  6  of
the  cases  where  S.  and  I  both  succeeded,  the  effect  produced  by  me
was  only  slight.  One  of  my  successes  of  this  sort  was  obtained  when
the  subject  had  been  told,  which  finger  was  to  be  operated  on.  As  a
rule,  telling  the  subject  in  this  way  had  no  effect;  for  11  such  experi-
ments were  made,  the  above  instance  being  the  only  successful  one —
though  light  contact  and  stroking  was  frequently  resorted  to  to  en-
courage the  suggested  idea  if  possible.

The  7  experiments  which  were  complete  failures  were  all
carried  out  under  some  exceptional  conditions.  Two  of  them  were  the
first  two  trials  with  a  subject  who  had  not  been  experimented  upon  for
several  months.  In  three  others  S.  was  holding  his  hand  in  an  unusual
position. And  in  the  remaining  two,  S.  held  his  hand  over  one  finger,

*See  Vol.  I.,  pp.  257-60;  Vol.  II.,  pp.  201-5;  Vol.  III.,  pp.  543-9.  For  a
discussion  of  the  subject,  see  the  concluding  portion  of  my  paper  in  this  number,  on
■'  Hypnotism  and  Telepathy."


15


willing  meanwhile  tb'at  "the  ^flfect' should  ippoar  in  'another.  Apart
from  the  "  screen  "'' experlnietits,  td  bfe  "mentiohed' immediately,  these
7  were  the  only  absolute  failures;  but  tliere  Avere  some  cases  where,  on
the  first  application  of  the  test,  the  effect  was  not  very  apparent — the
result  being  brought  out  with  a  little  more  perseverance.

The  finger  operated  upon  was  generally  restored  to  its  normal  con-
dition by  reverse  passes,  made  with  contact — about  20  being  the  average
number  required.  Most  of  the  attempts  to  annul  the  effect  tcithout
contact  were  inconclusive.  Sometimes  the  effort  was  successful,  and  in
a  few  instances  very  distinctly  so,  but  in  other  cases  the  process  took
so  much  time  that  contact  was  eventually  resorted  to.  I  frequently
tried  by  stroking  the  finger,  to  undo  the  effect  which  S.  had  produced  ;
but  I  succeeded  on  only  one  occasion.

On  some  occasions  Dr.  Myers,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  others,
held  their  hands  over  one  of  the  fingers,  without,  however,  effecting
the  usual  results — except  in  one  case,  when  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  pro-
duced marked  insensitiveness  in  the  first  joint  of  the  finger,  while  S.
produced  no  effect.  The  subject,  however,  picked  out  S.'s  finger  as
one  that  "felt  a  little  stiff,"  and  he  was  not  aware  himself  of  any
change  in  the  other.

On  a  few  occasions  it  happened  that,  besides  the  intended  finger
being  affected,  an  adjacent  one,  or  sometimes  two,  also  became
insensitive  or  rigid — or  both.  The  unexpected  results  always  appeared,
however,  in  fingers  adjoining  the  one  operated  upon,  but  the  event
seldom  happened  at  all.  With  some  subjects  it  was  never  possible — at
least  in  the  few  trials  made  with  them — to  affect  one  finger  only.  The
entire  hand  would  become  insensitive  or  stiff,  no  finger  being  more
markedly  affected  than  the  others.  Of  course,  such  "  subjects"  were  not
available  for  the  more  delicate  trials  here  recorded.

With  the  view  of  ascertaining  in  what  way  the  results  would  be
affected  if  the  temperature  of  S.'s  hand  was  reduced,  he  sometimes
buried  it  for  a  few  minutes  in  a  bowl  of  broken  ice,  before  holding  it
over  the  destined  finger.  This  device  is  not  a  very  satis-
factory one  ;  for  when  the  hand  is  removed  from  the  ice  and  quickly
dried,  it  soon  resumes  its  former  temperature,  and  as  it  takes  a  time
varying  from  one  minute  to  three  decidedly  to  affect  the  finger,  the
effect  of  the  ice  has  greatly  diminished  before  the  experiment  is  com-
pleted. Half  a  dozen  trials  of  this  sort  were  made,  and  the  usual
results  were  produced  in  every  case.  Nor  did  the  time  requisite  for
success  seem  to  be  increased  by  the  change  of  temperature.

The  "  subject  "  is  occasionally,  but  not  usually  conscious  of  some
change  in  the  finger  as  the  experiment  progresses.  Asked  to  say
whether  he  felt  anything  unusual,  he  would  sometimes  say  that  he  felt
"  cold," "  pins and  needles," "  numbness, or  "  creepiness,"  in  a


16


Mec'eni'  E¥pefiments'  vii'  iiypnstism.


certain  finger — A^.ltich.'firHger^^svs.'in  Ineaely;  eVery  caae  the  one  under
experiment.  In  Coi'm'eOtiOfi  With't'ilis  poilit,  the  following  experiment
with  Wells  is  of  great  interest.Without  telling  him  specially  to  observe
any  change  in  his  fingers,  one  was  made  insensitive  and  rigid  in  the
usual  way.  It  was  then  "  undone"  by  reverse  strokings  over  the  back
of  his  hand,  and  he  appeared  to  be  in  complete  ignorance  as  to  which
particular  finger  had  been  the  subject  of  experiment,  and  could  not  say
which  one  had  been  afiected.  But  entranced  immediately  afterwards,
and  told  to  write  which  finger  had  been  stiffened,  and  then  woke  and
set  to  the  plancliette,  he  wrote  the  right  one.  The  experiment  was
repeated  several  times — with  the  same  result.  The  planchette
gave  the  information  which  the  "subject"  could  not  consciously  supply.

Besides  the  above,  41  experiments  were  made  in  which  S.,  while
holding  his  hand  as  usual,  willed  that  no  effect  should  be  produced.
Of  these,  36  were  successful  (in  the  sense  that  no  effect  was  produced) ;
and  5  failed.  In  2  of  the  5,  complete  insensibility  and  rigidity  were
produced,  and  in  2  others  a  slight  effect  was  apparent  in  the  selected
finger,  while  in  another  case  the  wrong  finger  altogether  was  affected.
In  9  of  the  successful  negative  experiments,  effects  were  produced  in
the  finger  over  which  /  was  holding  my  hand.  In  2  of  these  cases,  how-
ever, the  effect  was  not  complete,  and  once  three  fingers  were  affected.
In  no  instance  in  these  negative  trials  was  I  successful  when  S.  was
unsuccessful,  i.e.,  I  did  not  produce  an  effect  on  any  of  the  5  occasions
when  S.  produced  effects  in  opposition  to  his  intention.

Seven  experiments  were  made  with  a  small  screen  placed  over  the
finger  to  be  operated  upon.  A  difficulty  occurs  in  keeping  the
"  subject's  "  mind  free  from  knowledge  of  the  selected  finger ;  curiosity
prompts  him  to  explore,  and  a  slight  movement  of  the  fingers  betrays
which  of  them  is  covered  with  the  screen.  Partially  to  meet  this
difficulty,  a  second  screen  was  placed  over  one  of  the  non-selected
fingers.  Small  paper  tunnels  (supported  on  bent  pieces  of  copper  wire)
were  used  at  the  outset.  Two  fingers  being  covered  with  these,  S.
held  his  hand  over  one  of  them.  The  result  was  that  both  fingers
became  stiff'  and  insensitive.  This  experiment  was  repeated  with  two
other  fingers,  with  the  difference  that  S.  did  nothing  at  all.  There
was  no  effect  in  this  case.  Twice  more  the  trial  was  made  with  two
fresh  fingers,  S.  this  time  operating  over  one  of  them  ;  but  there  was
no  effect  in  either  finger.  A  week  later  the  trials  were  resumed,  with
a  small  finger-cover,  made  of  sheet-tin,  placed  over  the  finger  to  be
operated  upon.  The  first  experiment  of  this  sort  was  a  failure.  Two
later  ones  succeeded.  But  in  two  other  cases  some  effect  was  produced.
In  one  of  these,  after  a  prolonged  trial,  the  finger  showed  a  slight  stiffness;
in  the  other  case  the  finger  became  quite  stiff"  and  insensitive  in  a  com-
paratively short  time.


Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.  17

Six  experiments  were  also  made  with  a  paper  screen  large  enough
to  cover  the  whole  of  the  hand,  but  having  a  narrow  opening  through
which  one  finger  could  be  seen.  The  effect  of  this  was  that  the
finger  operated  upon  was  alone  exposed,  and  S.  was  thus  enabled  to
hold  his  hand  over  it  at  a  greater  distance  than  usual.i

The  trials  of  this  sort  with  Parsons  gave  5  failures ;  in  the  6th  case,
when  S.'s  hand  was  about  an  inch  from  the  finger,  it  became  insensitive
and  stiff.

In  some  other  experiments  not  a  finger  but  some  selected  spot  on  the
bare  arm  was  operated  upon.  In  these  cases  S.  held  his  fingers  bunched
somewhat  to  a  point  over  the  selected  spot,  about  an  inch  from  the
skin.  Short  was  the  subject  used.  Botli  arms  were  used  in  the
experiments,  bared  to  the  elbow,  and  of  course  the  usual  screen  was
employed.  Small  tattoo  marks  on  his  arms  served  in  some  instances  for
spots  to  aim  at.  It  was  found  that  insensitiveness  could  always  be
produced,  just  as  in  finger  cases.  The  area  of  insensibility  had  the
chosen  spot  for  its  centre,  and  generally  extended  to  five  or  six  inches
in  length,  and  two  or  thi-ee  in  breadth.  Seven  trials  of  the  sort  were
made,  as  enumerated  below.

Sjyot  selected :  About  6iin.  above  wrist,  back  of  left  forearm.

Hesult :  A  region  became  insensitive  of  about  Gin.  in  length,  and
2in.  in  breadth,  of  which  the  selected  spot  was  the  middle.

SjJot  selected:  Sin.  above  wrist,  back  of  right  forearm.

Result :  Region  of  insensibility  not  quite  so  long  as  before,  and
apparently  a  little  broader.

Spot  selected:  Back  of  right  side  of  left  wrist.

Restdt :  Insensitiveness  over  an  area  much  the  same  as  before.

Sfot  selected :  4in.  above  wrist,  front  right  forearm.

Result :  Area  of  insensitiveness  2^in.  above  and  below  the  spot,
and  l-iin.  each  side.

Spot  selected :  3in.  above  wrist,  right  side  front  left  forearm.

Result :  Insensitiveness  over  an  area  much  the  same  as  before.

Spot  selected :  Centre  of  left  palm.

Result :  Insensitive  over  whole  of  palm  and  a  little  way  up  the
fingers.

Sjjot  selected :  Face  of  left  first  finger.

Result:  Whole  finger  insensitive  and  quite  stiff.  It  could  not  be
closed.

The  effect  was  undone  in  each  case  by  S.  making  reverse  passes
in  gentle  contact  with  the  skin.


^  The  reason  why  the  distance  had  to  be  small  in  the  crdinary  cases  was  that  only
so  did  it  seem  possible  to  limit  the  effect  to  a  single  finger.


C


IS


Relation  de  Biverses  Ex2^eriences,  &c.


II.

RELATION  DE  DIVERSES  EXPERIENCES  SUR  LA
TRANSMISSION  MENTALE,  LA  LUCIDITE,  ET
AUTRES  PHENOMENES  NON  EXPLICABLES  PAR
LES  DONNEES  SCIENTIFIQUES  AOTUELLES.

Par  M.  Charles  Richet,
Professeur  de  Fhysiologie  a  la  Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris.


AVANT  PROPOS.

Le  travail  que  je  viens  soumettre  au  jugement  des  membres  de  la
Society  for  Psychical  Research  represente  le  resultat  de  six  annees  de
perseverance.  Le  temps  assiirement  importe  peu  au  point  de  vue  du
resultat  final,  mais  je  tiens  a  prouver  que  ce  n'est  pas  a  la  legere
que  je  publie  ces  faits  :  c'  est  apres  y  avoir  longuement  r^flechi,
a,pres  avoir  repete  et  varie  les  principales  experiences.  En  un
mot,  mon  opinion,  lentement  et  progressivement  acquise,  sera  peut-etre
de  quelque  poids,  pour  des  juges  non  prevenus  :  car  elle  n'est  pas
I'oeuvre  d'un  enthousiasme  irr^flechi,  mais  le  fruit  d'uue  patiente
discussion  avec  moi-meme.

On  ne  trouvera  aucune  tlieorie,  ni  essai  de  theorie,  mais  seulement
des  faits,  dont  plusieurs  paraitront  insignifiants,  mais  qu'  on  recon-
naitra  au  moins  comme  bien  observes,  quand  je  dirai  qu'  ils  etaient
bien  observes.  II  ne  depend  pas  de  nous  de  faire  toujours  de  bonnes
observations  ;  mais  ce  qui  depend  de  nous,  c'  est  de  juger  si  ces  obser-
vations ont  etc  bien  faites.  Encore  faut-il  etre  prudent,  meme  quand
on  croit  une  experience  bonne.

II  y  a  dcjja  18  ans  que  pour  la  premiere  fois  je  me  suis  interesse  au
somnambulisme.  Depuis  cette  epoque,  je  n'  ai  pas  passti  un  seul  jour
sans  y  r^fl(jchir,  et  peut-etre  pas  une  semaine  sans  faire  une  experience
quelconque,  futile  ou  non,  surces  questions.  On  comprend  que  j'aidu
voir,  chemin  faisant,  quantite  de  faits  de  toute  sorte  ;  mais,  comme  je
ne  fais  pas  ici  un  memoire  sur  le  somnambulisme  ou  1'  hypnotisme,  je
ne  parlerai  que  des  faits  ayant  ce  caractere  special,  de  n'  etre  pas
acceptes  par  les  auteurs  classiques,  qui  s'  occupent  de  physiologie,  de
psychologic,  de  physique  ou  de  medecine.

Je  laisse  done  de  cote,  intentionnellement,  tout  ce  qui  est  connu  et
admis,  la  certitude  du  sommeil  hypnotique,  1'  anesthesie,  1'  amn&ie,
partielle  ou  totale,  la  suggestion  et  son  efficacite  sur  les  phenomenes
psychiques,  la  production  des etats divers  de  catalepsie,  d'  extase,


Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  <&c.


19


r  inconscrence,  totale  ou  parti elle,  1'"  hemi-somnambulisme,  1'  ecriture
automatique,  les  hallucinations  avec  points  de  repere.  Toutes  ces  belles
experiences  sont  maintenant  aussi  classiques  et  certaines  que  les  lois
les  plus  positives  de  la  physique  et  de  la  cliimie.  Je  les  laisse  ;  et  je
veux  parler  d'  autres  phenomenes.  II  s'  agit  de  la  transmission  mentale,
de  la  lucidite,  de  la  diagnose  des  maladies,  de  1'  electivite,  des  relations
magnetiques,  et  de  la  penetration  de  1'  avenir.

Certes  je  n'aurais  pas  ose  me  risquer  a  une  jJ^reille  entreprise,  si
la  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  dirigee  par  mes  savants  amis,
M.  Ed.  Gurney  et  M.  F.  Myers,  n'avait  reussi  a  vaincre  I'epaisse  in-
difference du  public  et  les  aveugles  preventions  des  savants.  lis  n'ont
assurement  pas  conquis  toutes  les  convictions :  mais,  ce  qui  est  un
commencement,  ils  ont  force  I'attention,  ils  ont  entraine,  par  leurs  con-
sciencieuses  etudes,  I'estime  scientifique.  La  conviction  ne  se  manie
pas  comme  une  demonstration  gdometrique.  II  ne  suffit  pas  de  prouver
pour  convaincre.  Je  le  sais  par  ma  propre  experience.  Bien  souvent
j'ai  vu  des  faits  qui  devaient  me  convaincre  de  la  lucidite  ou  de  la
transmission  mentale,  et  pourtant  je  n'ai  pas  ete  convaincu.  II  faut  une
certaine  habitude  d'un  fait  pour  arriver  a  y  croire.  Tant  qu'il  est
impr^vu,  nouveau,  on  ne  peut  pas  I'admettre,  malgre  quatatite  de
bonnes  raisons.

En  tout  cas,  c'  est  un  grand  honneur  que  d'  avoir  devance  1'  opinion.
Le  courage  des  membres  de  la  Society  for  Psychical  Research  m'  a  paru
devoir  etre  imite.  Pourquoi  ne  dirais-je  pas  ce  que  j'  ai  vu  1  je  peux  me
tromper,  mais  ma  bonne  foi  ne  fera  de  doute  pour  personne,  et,  d'  autre
part,  je  puis  attester  que  j'ai  fait  tous  mes  efforts  pour  bien  observer.

Chapitre  I.

DES  PBECAUTIONS  A  PRENDRE  POUR  LES  BONNES  OBSERVATIONS.

Avant  d' entrer  dans  le  recit  des  faits,  je  parlerai  des  precautions
qui  me  paraissent  necessaires.  EUes  sont  multiples,  et  la  discussion
des  garanties  experimentales  est  tres  difficile.

J'  attache  d'  abord  une  importance  primordiale  a  la  bonne  foi  des
sujets  et  individus  sur  qui  se  fait  1'  experience.  Mais  qu'  est-ce  que  la
bonne  foi  ?  et  comment  peut-on  1'  apprecier  1

II  y  a  deux  sortes  de  bonne  foi :  1'  une,  que  1'  on  doit  exiger,  et  sans
laquelle  aucune  experience — ou  a  peu  pres — n'est  valable  ;  1' autre,
qui  est  extremement  rare,  et  qu'  on  doit  toujours  supposer  absente.

Parlous  d'  abord  de  la  bonne  foi  necessaire.

II  y  a  des  individus  qui  trompent  sciemment  et  de  propos  delibere.
Ainsi,  quand  un  prestidigitateur  fait  un  tour  de  cartes,  il  trompe
sciemment.  C  est  son  gagne-pain  que  d'  induire  en  illusion  les
spectateurs  assembles  pour  le  voir. II  a  prepare  de  longue  main  des

c  2


20


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,


jeux  de  cartes,  des  appareils,  des  machinations  de  toute  sorte.  II  sait
comment  il  va  proceder  pour  depister  les  yeux  des  spectateurs.  Ses
tromperies  sont  tout  un  art  qui  a  des  regies,  des  principes,  qu'  il  connait
et  qu'  il  applique  avec  plus  ou  moins  de  dexterite.

L'  adresse  des  prestidigitateurs  est  parfois  surprenante,  et  il  n'  est
personne  qui  ne  puisse  en  citer  quelques  exemples  remarquables.  Aussi,
quand  il  s'  agit  de  phenomenes  dus  a  un  prestidigitateur  ou  a  une
personne  qui  peut  etre  un  prestidigitateur,  faut-il  etre  toujours  tres
r^serv^  dans  ses  conclusions.

Je  suppose,  par  exemple,  que  I'on  m'annonce  comme  authentique  un
fait  de  transmission  mentale,  obtenu  par  Robert  Houdin  ou  Hermann,
ou  tout  autre  magicien  donnant  des  seances  de  magie  amusante  ;  j'aurai
la  plus  grande  difficulte  a  1'  admettre  comme  sincere ;  car  je  sais  que
I'habilete  de  ces  escanioteurs  est  superieure  bien  souvent,  sinon  toujours,
a  ma  sagacity.  C'est  en  vain  que  je  me  serai  entoure  de  precautions
de  toute  sorte  ;  ces  precautions  sont  le  plus  souvent  illusoires,  comme
r  atteste  une  experience  de  chaque  jour,  et  ce  fait  de  transmission
mentale,  si  merveilleux  qu'il  paraisse,  court  grand  risque  d'etre  un  tour
de  passe-passe.

II  ne  suffit  pas,  pour  me  faire  douter  de  I'authenticite  d'une
experience,  qu'  elle  ait  ete  obtenue  par  un  faiseur  de  tours  ;  il  suffit
meme  de  moins  encore.  Pour  peu  que  je  ne  sois  pas  absolument  sur
que  toute  supercherie  a  ete  e'cartee,  je  conserve  des  doutes  qui  otent  au
fait  observe  presque  tout  son  interet.  Par  exemple,  que  Madame
Blavatski,  dont  la  parfaite  sincerite  ne  me  parait  pas  incontestable,  me
rende  temoin  d'un  fait  extraordinaire — comme  elle  1'  a  fait  en  reality — ^je
douterai  encore,  quelque  stupefiant  que  soit  le  phenomene  qui  s'  est
prdsente  a  moi.  Je  ne  pretends  pas  dire  que  Madame  Blavatski
m'ait  trompe.  Je  dis  seulement  qu'il  me  suffit  de  n'etre  pas  absolument
sur  du  contraire  pour  que  le  fait  perde  tout  son  interet.  M.  Eglinton
m'a  rendu  temoin  a  deux  reprises  differentes  de  faits  plus  surprenants
encore  que  les  faits  de  Madame  Blavatski  ;  mais,  sans  soup9onner  la
bonne  foi  de  M.  Eglinton,  elle  me  laisse  un  doute  suffisant  pour  que
ses  expt^riences,  qui  renversent  tout  ce  que  I'humanite  admet  depuis
deux  mille  ans,  ne  determinent  pas  ma  conviction.

Supposons  que  les  faits  dont  m'  ont  rendu  temoin  Madame  Blavatski,
d'  une  part,  d'  autre  part  M.  Eglinton,  aient  ete  produits  devant  moi
dans  les  memos  conditions  par  des  personnes  dont  la  sincerite  absolue
n'  est  pas  1'  objet  du  moindre  doute,  faisant  partie,  pour  ainsi  dire,  de
ma  vie  morale  tout  entiere,  et  de  1'  ensemble  de  tous  mes  actes,  qu'  il
s'  agisse,  par  exemple,  de  M.  H.  Ferrari,  mon  ami  intime,  ou  de  M.
Berthelot,  mon  illustre  maitre,  ou  de  MM.  Gurney  et  Myers.  Alors
ces  faits  extraordinaires  deviendront  absolument  authentiques.

Autrement  dit tant  qu'  il  me  reste  un  doute  quelconque  sur  la


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


21


sinc^rite  des  personnes  qui  font  1'  experience,  je  ne  pourrai  pas  ^raettre
de  conclusions  formelles.

Je  me  deiie  meme  tellement  de  ma  sagacite  a  decouvrir  les  machi-
nations et  les  superclieries — comment  pourrait-on  avoir  contiance  quand
on  a  lu  les  articles  de  Madame  Sidgwick  et  les  relations  donnees  par
M.  Davis  ? — que  je  n'  aborderai  qu'  avec  une  extreme  repugnance  les
experiences  faites  avec  des  personnes  dont  la  sincerite  ne  m'  est  pas
absolument  prouvee.  Je  prefere  des  experiences  moins  brillantes,  mais
faites  avec  des  garanties  de  securite  que  ne  m'  offrent  pas  quantity  de
mediums  gages.

On  me  demandera  comment  je  puis  etre  assured  de  la  bonne  foi  de
telle  ou  telle  personne.  Cela  est  tres  difficile  a  dire  ;  car  la  bonne  foi
se  commande,  et  ne  se  discute  pas.  Si  je  devais  donner  des  preuves
scientitiques,  rigoureuses,  de  la  bonne  foi  de  M.  Ferrari,  de  M.
Bertlielot,  de  M.  Gurney,  je  serais  fort  embarrasse.  De  fait,  je  ne  puis
meme  pas  prouver  ma  propre  bonne  foi;  je  dis  la  verite,  et  j'affirme  que
je  ne  mens  pas,  mais  il  faut  qu'on  me  croie  sur  paroles  ;  carje  ne  puis
donrier  que  ma  parole  d'honneur  comme  preuve  :  et  une  preuve
materielle  n'  est  pas  possible  a  apporter.

Faisant  une  experience  de  cartes,  je  dis  que  trois  fois  de  suite
>  L.  H.,  somnambule,  m'  a  dit  la  carte  exacte,  alors  que  je  cachais  les
cartes  et  qu'elle  ne  pouvait  pas  les  voir.  Qui  pourra  affirmer  que  je
•  ne  mens  pas  ?  Personne,  n'  est-il  pas  vrai  ?  On  est  done  forc^  d'accepter
mon  t^moignage  comme  vrai,  sans  me  demander  d'autre  preuve  que
mon  t^moignage.  H  y  a  necessite  d'  admettre,  comme  une  sorte  de
postulatum,  ma  bonne  foi  absolue.

D'ailleurs,  en  fait  de  science,  il  en  est  toujours  ainsi.  Quand  un
chimiste  annonce  une  reaction  nouvelle,  on  le  croit  sur  parole,  sans
avoir  besoin  de  lui  faire  repeter  son  experience.  De  meme,  quand
j'  annonce  tel  ou  tel  fait  de  somnambulisme,  ma  parole  suffit,  et  on  doit
admettre  que  je  ne  mens  pas.

Ainsi,  quand  j'  affirmerai  la  bonne  foi  de  telle  ou  telle  personne,
il  faudra  me  croire  sur  parole.  Je  n'  en  puis  pas  donner  de  preuves,
^tant  force  de  formuler  des  affirmations  qui  ne  prouvent  rien :  par
exemple,  que,  pendant  deux  ans,  voyant  a  peu  pres  tous  les  jours  X.  et  Z.,
je  ne  les  ai  pas  une  seule  fois  pris  en  flagrant  delit  de  mensonge.
Mais  ce  n'  est  pas  la  une  preuve  scientifique  et  toutes  les  raisons  que  je
pourrais  alleguer  pour  demontrer  leur  bonne  foi  sont  aussi  insuffi-
santes  que  s'il  s'agissait  de  demontrer  la  mienne.

Je  suis  done  contraint  de  ne  pas  demontrer  la  bonne  foi  qui  me
parait  dvidente  et  de  me  contenter  de  cette  evidence.

II  est  indispensable  que  cette  bonne  foi  me  soit  evidente  ;  mais  ce
n'  est  pas  encore  la  toute  la  bonne  foi.  Entre  un  individu  qui  machine
un  appareil  complique  avec  tout  un  attirail  de  ficelles  destine  a  me  me


22


Relation  cle  Biverses  Experiences,  dx.


tromper,  et  un  individu  qui  triclie  un  peu,  presque  involontairement,  il
y  a  une  distance  considerable.  Apporter  un  jeu  de  cartes  prepare  a
r  avance,  ou  se  servir  de  cartes  biseautees,  c'  est  une  action  infame.
Mais  voir  par  inadvertance  le  jeu  de  son  voisin  et  en  profiter,  c'  est  si
peu  une  triclierie  que  1'  on  dit  alors,  "  Cachez  votre  jeu  ;  je  1'  ai  deja
vu  ;  "  sans  negiiger  d'  en  profiter  a  1'  occasion.

Ainsi  il  y  a  une  bonne  foi  complete,  irreprochable,  absolue,  qu'  on
ne  rencontre  presque  jamais,  et  qu'  on  ne  doit  meme  pas  attendre  de  soi-
menie.  Quelques  efforts  qu'  on  fasse,  on  se  laisse  toujours  entrainer
plus  ou  moins  a  donner  ce  qu'  on  appelle  familierement  en  franQais  le
coup  de  police,  c'  est-a-dire  a  renforcer  un  peu  le  resultat  dans  le  sens
qu'  on  desire.  On  a  beau  essayer  de  resister  ;  cela  est  impossible,  sous
peine  d'  aller  en  sens  contraire,  ce  qui  sei'ait  tout  aussi  mauvais  et
dangereux.

S'  il  m'  est  aussi  difficile,  a  moi,  d'  etre  f ranchement  honnete,  combien
plus  difficile  encore  pour  les  personnes  non  averties  de  ce  danger,  plus
passionnees  que  moi,  moins  habituees  aux  experiences  scientifiques,  et
plus  convaincues  de  la  realite  des  phenomenes  dont  je  doute  !  Quoi  de
surprenant  a  ce  que,  malgre  elles,  pour  ainsi  dire,  elles  renforcent  les  bons
resultats  et  diminuent  les  mauvais,  chercliant  a  trouver  des  explications
surnaturelles  ou  extranaturelles  aux  faits  qu'elles  auront  cru  r^v(?ler.

Pour  terminer  cette  discussion,  je  crois  qu'  on  pent  avoir  tres  facile-
ment  des  sujets  qui  ne  ti'ichent  pas  volontairement.  C'est,  a  1'  heure
actuelle,  monnaie  coui'ante  que  des  sujets  sinceres.  Mais  de  la  a  la
bonne  foi  absolue,  il  y  a  une  enorme  distance.  Personne,  ni  moi,  ni
M.  Gurney,  ni  M.  Myers,  n'  ont  de  bonne  foi  absolue,  et  je  me  mefie  de
tout  le  monde.  Le  fait  de  desirer  tel  ou  tel  resultat  niodifie  le  resultat
qu'  on  trouve,  si  bien  qu'  il  faut,  selon  moi,  se  mefier  autant  de  soi-
meme  que  des  auti'es  individus.  De  la  cette  conclusion  qui  s'impose  :
Pour  xme  honne  experience,  il  fcmt  ignorer  le  resultat  qu'on  veut
ohteuir,  car  on  triche  tonjoitrs  plus  ou  moins.

Ainsi  nous  admettrons  d'abord  que  les  seules  experiences  valables
sont  celles  qu'  on  a  faites  sur  des  personnes  dont  la  bonne  foi  volontaire
dtait  certaine  :  et  ensuite  que  toutes  precautions  doivent  etre  prises
contre  tout  le  monde,  precautions  portant  non  sur  des  trues  grossiers,
mais  sur  une  generale  et  involontaire  tendance  a  alterer  legerement  la
vdrite.

C  est  seulement  apres  avoir  procede  ainsi  qu'  on  peut  etre  assure
d'  une  bonne  experience.  II  ne  faut  pas  savoir  ce  qu'  on  doit  trouver  :
car,  si  on  le  salt,  on  est  tente  de  ne  pas  bien  voir.  Malgre  nos  efforts
vers  la  bonne  foi,  si  nous  attendons  un  resultat  quelconque,  nous  ne
pourrons  inscrire  les  phenomenes  avec  une  bonne  foi  absolue.

En  outre,  il  me  parait  indispensable  d'  avoir  des  experiences  plutot


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d'C.


23


irrepi'ochables  comme  experimentation  que  probantes  au  point  de  vue
du  I'esultat.  C'est  la  un  point  qui  me  parait  d'une  extreme  importance
et  que  je  demande  la  permission  de  dtjvelopper.

Je  suppose  que  j'aie  obtenu  un  resultat  tout-a-fait  exti-aordinaire
pour  la  lucidite  ou  la  transmission  mentale,  mais  qu'il  y  a  un  petit  point
defectueux  dans  mon  experience.  En  vain  le  resultat  sera  admirable,
le  cote  defectueux  gatera  tout.  Si  la  probabilite  est  seulement  d'  un
milliardieme  pour  avoir  le  meme  resultat  par  le  hasard  seul,  il  est  clair
que  c'  est  la  certitude  a  peu  pres  complete  que  le  hasard  n'  a  pu  arriver
a  ce  resultat.  Soit.  Mais  le  cote  defectueux  de  I'experience  empeclie
toute  conclusion.  Je  concluerai  peut-etre,  mais  j'aurai  tort,  et  personne
ne  me  croira  ;  car  la  possibilite  d'  une  erreur  enleve  tout  le  se'rieux  de
ma  demonstration.

Supposons,  au  contraire,  que  ce  soit  une  experience  sans  defaut,
sans  un  seul  defaut.  Cela  est  rare  :  mais  enHn,  a  la  rigueur,  cela
existe.  Eli  bien  !  quel  que  soit  le  resultat,  ce  resultat  sera  bien  plus
interessant  que  celui  de  cette  merveilleuse  experience  defectueuse  en  un
point.  Admettons  que  la  probabilite  d'  avoir  par  le  hasard  seul  un
resultat  analogue  soit  d'  un  dixieme.  C  est  encore  une  probabilite
assez  forte ;  mais,  si  forte  qu'  elle  soit,  c'  est  toujours  queique  chose
que  d'avoir  reussi  une  fois  avec  une  probabilite  d'  un  dixieme  seulement,
alors  que  la  lucidite  ou  le  hasard  seuls  ont  pu  intervenir.  Autrement
dit,  j'  aime  mieux  une  experience  peu  probante,  mais  irreprochable,
qu'vme  experience  tres  legerement  reprochable,  et  tres  nuerveilleuse.

Tous  mes  soins  ont  done  porte  sur  le  procede  experimental.  C'est
a  faire  des  experiences  non  pas  etourdissantes,  mais  bien  rigoureuses,
que  je  me  suis  attache.  Souvent  elles  ont  ete  non  rigoureuses,  mais
alors  j'ai  pris  soin  d'indiquer  leur  defectuosite,  de  maniere  a  ce  qu'on
soit  assure,  quand  je  dis,  "  cette  expei'ience  est  irreprochable,"  que
reellement  elle  est  bien  irreprochable.  Certes,  il  m'  est  impossible
d'  affirmer  en  absolue  certitude  que  telle  experience  n'  a  pas  de  defaut :
mais  les  etudes  de  psychologic  ne  different  pas  des  autres  sciences  a
cet  egard.  Quand  un  chimiste  etablit  le  poids  atomique  du
potassium,  il  n'  est  pas  absolument  sur  de  son  fait :  mais  il  a
procede  avec  methode,  et  il  a  fait  tout  ce  qu'  il  pouvait  pour  eviter
toute  illusion  et  toute  erreur.  C  est  ce  que  j'  ai  essaye  de  faire,
et  je  ne  pretends  pas  a  autre  chose.  J'  espere  qu'  on  ne  trouvera
pas  defectueuses  les  experiences  que  je  declare  bonnes.  Qu'  on  les  trouve
peu  probantes,  cela  m'  est  bien  plus  indifferent ;  c'est  affaire  d'  opinion,
d' intei'pretation  ;  mais  je  serais  vraiment  tres  malheureux  si  1' on  y
trouvait  des  defauts  d'experimentation  que  je  n'  ai  pas  apercus.

II  s'  ensuit  qu'  on  trouvera  dans  le  cours  de  ce  long  memoire  bien
des  resultats  qui  paraitront  denues  d'  interet ;  car  ils  seront  peu  pro-
bants.  C  est  un  peu  la  faute,  je  crois,  de  tous  les  recits  extraoi'dinaires


24


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


qii'  on  nous  a  donnes.  En  fait  de  transmission  mentale  ou  de  lucidite,  on
voulait  du  merveilleux,  et  on  a  donne  du  merveilleux,  sans  se  preoccuper
de  la  valeur  de  1'  experimentation.  C  est  pourtant  cette  experimenta-
tion rigoureuse  qui  importait  le  plus.

L'avantage  de  ces  experiences  bien  faites,  meme  quand  elles
prouvent  pen  de  chose,  est  qu'  elles  permettent  de  se  faire  une  opinion.
8i  je  soup^onne  quelque  defaut  cache  a  une  experience,  je  ne  puis,  moi,
lecteur,  me  faire  une  opinion,  tandis  que  si,  moi,  lecteur,  je  lis  la  relation
d'une  experience  sans  defaut,  je  puis  parfaitement  juger  si  le  resultat  est
favorable  ou  non  a  la  theorie  de  la  transmission  mentale.  Ainsi  je
donne  des  exemples  de  dessins  reproduits,  grace  a  la  lucidite  de  tels  ou  tels
sujets.  Pour  diverses  raisons  il  s'  agit  la  d'  experiences  que  je  crois
irreprochables ;  mais  aux  yeux  de  beaucoup  de  personnes,  les  resultats
sont  a  peu  pres  nuls.  Car  on  dira  que  le  hasard  a  pu  faire  les  con-
cordances qu'  on  rencontre  entre  les  dessins  originaux  et  les  dessins
reproduits.

Probantes  ou  non  probantes,  on  doit  indiquer  ces  experiences ;  car
chacun  sera  a  meme  de  se  rendre  compte  de  la  part  qui  pent  revenirau
hasard  dans  la  reproduction  de  tel  ou  tel  dessin.  Tous  les  lecteurs
sauront  que  c'  est  ou  bien  le  hasard  ou  bien  la  lucidite,  et  ils  pourront
porter  un  jugement  motive  ;  tandis  que,  s'  il  leur  reste  quelque  doute
sur  la  sincerity  de  1'  experience,  il  y  aura  un  troisieme  facteur,  facteur
inconnu,  dont  le  role  est  immense  peut-etre,  et  qui  frappera  de  mort
toutes  leurs  experiences.

En  un  mot,  pour  les  experiences  que  je  rapporterai  ici,  il  faudra
choisir  entre  ces  deux  hypotheses,  ou  bien  le  hasard,  ou  bien  une
propriety  quelconque,  mal  definie  encore,  de  V  intelligence  humaine.
Mais  a  coup  sur  ce  n'est  pas  une  supercherie,  consciente  ou  inconsciente,
ni  une  lacune  dans  la  proc^d^  experimental.

Je  suis,  pour  ma  part,  fermement  convaincu  que,  si  1'  on  s'  ^tait
attache  moins  au  merveilleux  qu'  a  la  rigueur  des  demonstrations,  on
aurait  entraine,  dans  ces  questions  delicates,  bien  plus  de  convic-
tions qu'  on  n'  a  pu  le  faire  avec  des  essais  defectueux  souvent,  et  par
cela  meme  peu  probants.

Chapitre  II.

DU  HASARD  DANS  LES  EXPERIENCES.

Reste  alors  la  question  du  hasard  et  du  role  qu'  il  joue.  A  cet
^gard,  je  voudrais,  quoique  etant  en  dtjsaccord  avec  plusieurs  de  mes
amis,  m'  expliquer  formellement.

Le  hasard  pent  s'  exprimer  par  un  chiffre  qui  est,  comnie  on  dit,  la
probabilite.  Ainsi,  si,  tirant  au  hasard  une  carte  d'  ua  jeu  de  cartes
complet,  j'  amene  un  6  de  cceur,  c'  est  le  liasard  qui  m'  a  donne  ce  6  de


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c. '  25


coeur,  et  c'  est  le  hasard  seul ;  car  j'ignorerai  toujours,  si  les  cartes  sont
identiques  et  si  le  jeu  a  ete  bien  meM,  pourquoi  j'  ai  amene  le  6  de  cojur
plutot  que  toute  autre  carte.

Done,  c'  est  le  hasard  qui  m'  a  donn^  le  6  de  coeur ;  mais  ce  hasard
peut  se  chiffrer.  J'  avals,  pour  tirer  le  6  de  cceur,  dans  un  jeu  de  52
cartes,  1  chance  sur  52;  pour  amener  un  6,  1  chance  sur  13;  pour
amener  un  cojur,  1  chance  sur  4,  et  pour  amener  une  carte  rouge  1
chance  sur  2.  Enfin,  j' avals  51  chances  sur  52  pour  ne  pas  amener
une  carte  quelconque  designee  d'avance,  le  roi  de  pique,  par  exemple.

Ainsi,  mathematiquement,  je  puis  assigner  a  tel  ou  tel  evenement
une  probabilite  qui  est  chiffrable.  Mais  la  difficulte  n'  est  pas  dans  le
calcul  des  diverses  probabilites  mathematiques,  quoique  ce  soit  deja,  si
on  le  pousse  un  peu  loin,  un  calcul  tres  difficile,  qui  peut  embarrasser
les  plus  grands  niathematiciens  ;  la  difficulte  veritable  est  dans  1'  appli-
cation de  ces  lois  mathematiques  aux  evenements  reels.

On  demontre  en  mathematiques  que  le  calcul  des  probabilites  n'  est
applicable  que  s'  il  y  a  un  nombre  intini  de  coups,  et  que  c'est  alors
seulement  qu'il  est  vrai.

Ainsi  j' ai  un  jeu  de  cartes  devant  moi ;  je  n' ai  qu'  1  chance  sur
52  pour  amener  le  6  de  coeur,  et  pourtant  il  se  peut  que  j'  amene  un  6  de
coeur.  Rien  ne  s'  y  oppose,  et  c'  est  meme  un  tirage  tout  aussi  probable
que  tel  ou  tel  tirage  donne.  Cependant  cette  petite  probability
est  loin  d'etre  negligeable.  Je  serais  done  deraisonnable  de  conclure  quoi
que  ce  soit  d'  une  experience  ou,  ddsignant  d'  avance  le  G  de  cceur,
j' amene  le  6  de  coeur.

Si  je  prends  un  autre  jeu  de  cartes,  et  si,  apres  1'  avoir  bien  mele,
je  tire  de  nouveau  un  6  de  cceur,  la  probabilite  devient  tres  petite,
2^^.  Mais  nulle  impossibilite.  Cela  peut  se  voir;  cela  s'  est  vu,
et  la  combinaison  d'  un  6  de  eceur  suivi  d'  un  6  de  cceur,  est  tout  aussi
probable  que  n'  importe  C|uelle  autre  combinaison  de  deux  cartes  con-
sdcutives.

Si  je  prends  un  troisieme  jeu  de  cartes,  puis  un  quatrieme,  puis  un
cinquieme,  j'  aural,  pour  tirer  toujours  un  6  de  coeur,  des  probabilites
de  moins  en  moins  grandes ;  car  le  nombre  des  combinaisons  devient
^norme.  Mais,  dans  aucun  cas,  nous  n'  arriverons  a  1'  impossibilite.
II  sera  toujours  possible  que  le  hasard  me  donne  telle  combinaison
donnee,  et  elle  aura  autant  de  chances  que  telle  autre  combinaison
donn^e.

II  faut  ar river  a  I'infini  pour  obtenir  1' impossibilite.  Autrement
dit,  la  certitude  de  ne  pas  toujours  amener  un  6  de  creur  ne  survient
que  si  je  fais  un  nombre  intini  de  tirages.  Jamais  je  n'  arriverai  a  la
certitude  mathematique,  ou  plutot  je  n'  y  arriverai  cjue  si  Ton  me  donne
la  ressource  d'  un  nombre  intini  de  tirades.

Si  done,  pour  conclure,  on  avait  besoiii  de  la  certitude  mathematique,


26


Relation  de  Divzrses  Experiences,  &c.


on  ne  conclurait  jamais  ;  car  on  n'  arrivera  jamais  a  un  nombre  infini
de  coups.

Heureusement  on  pent  conclure  ;  car  la  certitude  mathematique  et
la  certitude  morale  ont  des  exigences  dilferentes.

Je  suppose  qu'il  s'agisse  de  jouer  mon  honneur,  mon  existence,
r  honneur  et  1'  existence  des  miens,  et  tout  ce  qui  m'  est  le  plus  cher.
Certes,  je  n'aurai  pas  la  certitude  mathematique  que,  sur  100  tirages,
le  6  de  cceur  ne  sortira  pas  100  fois  de  suite.  Mathematiquement  et
meme  reellement,  cette  combinaison  est  possible  ;  mais  pourtant  je
consentirais  volontiers  a  jouer  contre  un  sou  ma  vie,  mon  lionneur,  ma
fortune,  ma  patrie,  et  tout  ce  que  j'aime,  si  j'avais  contre  moi  en  ma
faveur  la  probabilite  que  le  6  de  coeur  sur  100  tirages  consecutifs  ne
sortira  pas  100  fois  de  suite.  J'  ai  la  certitude  morale  qu'  il  ne  sortira
pas  100  fois  de  suite,  alors  que  je  n'en  ai  pas  la  certitude  mathe-
matique.

II  n'  est  meme  pas  besoin  de  pousser  jusqu'  a  100  le  nombre  des
tirages.  A  10  tirages,  j'  afFronterais  encore  le  meme  pari,  tellement  il
est  invraisemblable  que  le  6  de  cojur  sortira  10  fois  de  suite.  Meme
avec  5  tii-ages  je  1'  afFronterais  encore,  car  il  est  trfes  invraisemblable  et
impossible,  pratiquement,  que  le  hasard  me  donne,  sur  .5  tirages,  5  fois
de  suite  le  G  de  creur.

Theoriquement  rien  n'  est  plus  simple ;  car  la  probabilite  que  le  6
de  coeur  sortira  5  fois  de  suite  est  de  — . C'est  comme  si  Ton

380,000,000

mettait  dans  une  urne  379,999,999  boules  noires  et  une  boule  blanche.
En  tirant  au  hasard  une  boule  de  1'  urne,  et  en  faisant  un  seul
tirage,  jamais  je  ne  tirerai  la  Ijoule  blanche.

II  arrivera  meme  ceci,  c'  est  que,  malgre  moi,  je  m'imaginerai
d'  autres  conditions  que  le  pur  hasard  intervenant  pour  modifier
r  evenement.  Si  je  tire  -5  fois  de  suite  le  6  de  coeur,  au  lieu  de  dire,
"C'est  un  hasard  extraordinaire,"  je  supposerai  autre  chose  ;  car  le
hasard  ne  donne  pas  ces  etonnantes  successions.  Je  supposerai  qu'  il  y
a  une  cause  quelconque,  que  je  ne  connais  pas,  qui  m'  a  fait  amener
cinq  fois  de  suite  un  6  de  coeur.  J'  en  serai  meme  tellement  convaincu
que  j'  irai  chercher  cette  cause,  regardant  si  toutes  les  cartes  sont  bien
semblables,  si  ce  n' est  pas  une  plaisanterie  que  m'a  faite  un
prestidigitateur,  si  dans  le  jeu  il  y  a  bien  52  cartes  difie rentes,  et
si  chaque  jeu  n'  est  pas  compose  uniquement  de  6  de  cojur.

Prenons  meme  une  probabilite  moindre ;  par  exemple,  la  probability
d'  avoir  deux  fois  de  suite  un  6  de  cceur,  c'  est  une  probability  encore
tres  petite,  de  1  sur  2,704.  Si  les  paris  etaient  proportionnes  mathe-
matiquement, je  devrais  parier  1  franc  contre  2,704  francs  qu'il  n'y
aura  pas,  sortant  du  jeu  et  amends  par  moi  en  deux  tirages  successifs,
deux  6  de  coeur.  Je  suppose  alors  que  j'  aie  une  fortune  de  300,000
francs. Je  consentirai  tres  volontiers  a  jouer  ma  fortune  tout  enti^re


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  <L-c.


27


centre  la  chance  mathematiqueraent  correlative  de  gagner  100  francs.
Car,  en  jouant,  je  snis  a  peu  pres  sur  que  deux  fois  de  suite  je  ne
sortii'ai  pas  un  6  de  coeur,  ou  telle  ou  telle  autre  carte  donnee  d'avance.
J'  accepterais  tres  volontiers  le  pari  dans  des  conditions  semblables  ;
mais  je  ne  ferai  ce  pari  que  si  mon  adversaire  declare  qu'  il  ne  demandera
pas  a  recommencer  ;  car  alors  les  conditions  deviendraient  differentes,
et  je  ne  voudrais  pas  jouer  un  grand  nombre  de  parties  analogues.
Mathematiquement  je  ne  suis  pas  sur  du  tout  que  deux  fois  de  suite  je
n'  amenerai  pas  un  6  de  cceur ;  mais  de  fait  cet  evenenient  ne  va
certainement  pas  se  produire.  Et,  quoique  je  risque  de  perdre  toute
ma  fortune,  je  ne  veux  pas  me  priver  de  ce  risque  de  gagner  100
francs  presque  a  coup  sur.  Quoique  les  conditions  du  pari  soient
equitables,  c'  est  un  billet  de  100  francs  que  j'empocherai  presque  a
coup  sur.

En  realite,  dans  notre  vie  de  chaque  jour,  ce  qui  dirige  notre
conduite,  ce  qui  fait  nos  convictions,  nos  decisions,  ce  sont  des  proba-
bilites  beaucoup  moins  fortes  que  cette  probabilite  de  ^i.  c'  est

presque  la  probabilite,  quand  on  monte  en  chemin  de  fer,  de  perir  dans
un  accident.  Un  homme  de  35  ans,  bien  portant  et  qui  n'  est  expose  a
aucun  danger  particulier,  n'a  qu'une  chance  sur  100  d'atteindre  la  fin
de  r  annee,  et  il  n'  a  guere  qu'  une  chance  sur  3,000  de  vivre  encore  dans
deux  semaines.  Quel  est  cependantcelui  qui  ne  se  considere  pas  comuie  a
peu  pres  certain  de  vivre  encore  dans  deux  semaines  1  En  assimilant  les
chances  de  vie  au  tirage  dans  un  jeu  de  cartes,  on  voit  que  la  probabilite
d'amener  quatre  fois  de  suite  un  6  de  coeur,  c'  est  a  peu  pres  la  proba-
bilite de  vivre  encore  une  heure,  pour  un  homme  de  35  ans,  l^ien
portaut  et  ne  courant  aucun  danger  special.  Mathematiquement  je  ne
suis  pas  sur  que  je  vivrai  encore  dans  une  heure,  mais  moralement  j'  en
ai  la  certitude  presque  complete.

Prenons  encore  I'exemple  des  jures  qui  ont  a  condamner  a  mort  un
individu.  II  me  semble  qu'ils  n'  ont  jamais  la  certitude  que  1'  individu
est  coupable  ;  si  faible  que  soit  la  probabilite  de  1'  innocence,  elle  est
toujours  plus  grande  que  Tant  de  circonstances  accessoires  ont

fausse  le  resultat !  II  s'  est  produit  peut-etre  de  faux  temoignages  ;  les
temoins  ont-ils  bien  vu  %  L'  aveu  du  coupable  est-il  sincere  Qui  sait
s'  il  n'  y  a  pas  quelque  machination  1  Que  sais-je  encore  1  U  y  a  quantite
de  donnees  inconuues  qui  enlevent  toute  certitude  mathematique  et  qvii
ne  laissent  que  la  certitude  morale.

Ainsi  nous  ne  sommes  jamais  guides  par  la  certitude  mathema-
tique ;  c'  est  toujours,  meme  dans  les  cas  les  plus  certains,  la  certitude
morale  qui  nous  guide.  Elle  nous  suffit  et  nous  ne  demandons  pas  plus
pour  agir.  Meme  le  savant  qui  fait  des  experiences  materielles,
d'  appai'ence  irreprochable,  doit  se  rendre  compte  qu'  il  n'  y  a  pas  pour
lui  de  certitude  mathematique  ;  car  des  inconnues  innombrables  viennent


28


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


oter  ce  caractere  d'  absolue  certitude  que  peuvent  seules  donner  les
mathematiques.

II  s'  agit  maintenant  de  savoir  si  nous  avons  tort  ou  si  nous  avons
raison,  lorsque  nous  nous  contentons  de  ces  probabilites  fortes,  mais
bien  eloignees  de  la  certitude.  Sommes-nous  des  imprudents  at  pouvons-
nous  conclure,  comme  nous  le  faisons  sans  cesse,  que  nous  vivrons  plus
d'  une  heure,  que  le  cliemin  de  far  ne  va  pas  nous  ecraser,  que  le  prevenu,
charge  par  tous  les  temoins  les  plus  veridiques,  est  coupable,  que  la
determination  de  trois  mesures  cliimiques  ou  physiques  est  suffisante
pour  avoir  un  chiffre  exact  1

Pour  ma  part,  cela  me  parait  Evident.  II  n'  y  aurait  pas  moyan  de
vivre,  si  1'  on  devait  ne  se  conduire  que  d'  apres  des  certitudes.  Nulle
part  il  n'  y  a  de  certitude;  partout  ce  sont  des  a  peu  pres,  et  nous  avons
raison  de  faire  ainsi ;  car  V  experience  justifie  presque  tou jours  nos
presomptions.

Avec  des  cartes,  1'  evenament  parait  plus  fantasque  ;  mais  ce  n'  est
la  qu'  une  apparance,  et  c'  est  parce  que  nous  n'  y  avons  pas  assez
reflechi  qua  cette  apparence  a  lieu.  Au  fond,  c'  est  la  meme  tixite  dans
le  sens  la  plus  probable.  Bian  entendu,  il  ne  s'  agit  pas  de  faire
d'  innombrables  experiences  :  car  alors  on  retrouverait  assurement,  pour
peu  qu'  on  fasse  une  longue  serie  de  tiragas  1'  ^v6nement  improbable,
mais  possible,  qui  davient  probable  quand  le  nombre  das  tirages
augmente.

Done  il  ne  s'  agit  qua  d'  un  petit  nombre  d'experiences.  Eh  bien !
dans  ca  cas,  si  la  probabilite  est  faible,  par  example  d'  yooo  on  ^1'  g^u,
on  paut  de  confianca  faira  1'  essai ;  c'  est  du  cote  de  la  probabilitt^  tres
forte  que  1'  evenement  se  produit.  Je  priarais  mas  lacteurs  de  faira  par
eux-memas  cette  experience :  par  exemple,  da  prendre  au  liasard,  dans
un  jeu  de  cartes  tres  bien  mele,  six  cartes.  lis  varront  que  ces  cartes
ne  seront  ni  toutes  rouges  ni  toutes  noires,  et  pourtant  la  probabilite
de  n'  avoir  qua  des  rouges  ou  qua  des  noires  est  encore  assez  forte ;
car  on  a  127  chances  de  tirar  des  cartes  de  couleurs  ditierentes  contre
una  de  tirer  six  cartes  de  la  meme  couleur.

Qu'  on  ne  m'  allegue  pas  1'  exemple  da  la  roulette  ou  parfois,  c'  est-
a-dira  une  fois,  la  rouge  est  sortie  21  fois  de  suite  ;  car  precisement  il
y  a  eu  un  tel  nombre  de  series  que  les  nombres  las  plus  improbables
peuvent  se  presenter.  II  ne  s'  agit,  ja  le  repete,  que  de  tirages  en  petit
nombre. Eh  bien  !  dans  ces  tirages  en  petit  nombre,  une  probability  de

OU  da  i  meme  suffit  pour  qu'  on  soit  moralament  sur  qua  1'  evene-
ment improbable  n'aura  pas  lieu,  et  on  a  raison:  car  il  n' a  pas  lieu.
C  est  meme  un  des  faits  les  plus  extraordinaires  et  qui  confondent  le
i^lus  r  intelligence,  que  de  voir  se  verifier  exp^rimentalement  avec  una
telle  precision  le  calcul  des  probabilites,  qui  semblait  devoir  raster  dans
le  domaine  des  sciences  mathematiques  at  de  la  theorie. Eh  bien  !  ce


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  Sc.


29


qui  est  merveilleux,  c'  est  que  ce  calcul  sort  de  la  theorie  pour  entrer
dans  le  fait.  Et  il  est  avere  par  1'  experience  de  chaque  jour  que  ce  calcul
se  verifie  non  pas  seulement  avec  de  grands  chiffres  et  des  series  allant
a  r  infini,  comme  le  disent  les  math^maticiens,  uiais  encore  avec  de
petits  chiffres.

Si  j'  ai  aborde  avec  tant  de  details  cette  question  de  la  probabilite,
c'  est  parce  que  1'  on  fait,  ce  me  semble,  trop  bon  marche  des  experiences
ou  r  on  a  rencontre  une  serie  improbable.  On  dit  que  le  hasard  a  pu
donner  ces  series,  et  on  n'  a  pas  refiechi  que  le  hasard  invoque  par  nous
dans  ce  cas,  nous  ne  1'  invoquons  pas  dans  les  conditions  ordinaii-es  de
la  vie.  Quand  on  est  a  court  d'  arguments,  on  parle  du  hasard ;  mais
au  fond  on  n'  y  croit  pas  ;  car  on  sait  parfaitement,  par  sa  propre
experience,  que  c'est  toujours  1'  evenement  le  plus  probable — quand  il
s'  agit  de  centiemes  et  de  milliemes — qui  arrive.

On  le  sait  si  bien  qu'  on  raisonne  toujours  dans  cette  hypothese.
Ainsi  soient  plusieurs  jeux  de  cartes  etales  devant  moi.  Je  tii'e
au  hasard  six  cartes  et  j'  amene  six  carreaux.  Quelle  est  1'  idee  des
spectateurs  en  voyant  cette  serie— pas  bien  extraordinaire  — puisque  la
probabilite  est  de  ?  Leur  idee  est  que  j'  ai  fait  un  tour  de  cartes,  ou
bien  que  les  jeux  n'  ont  pas  ete  melanges.  On  supposera  peut-etre
quelque  autre  cause,  un  sorte  de  divination  :  mais  on  aura  grand  peine  a
supposer  le  hasard  ;  car  le  hasard,  dans  une  serie,  pent  donner,  mais
ne  donne  pas,  ces  probability  si  faibles.

II  faut  done,  je  crois,  quand  le  nombre  des  experiences  n'  est  pas
tres  considerable,  se  contenter  d'une  certitude  incomplete,  et  ne  pas
etre  plus  exigeant  pour  les  experiences  psychiques  que  pour  les
experiences  de  chimie.

Ou  plutot  la  seule  exigence  qu'  il  soit  necessaire  d'  avoir,  c'  est
r  exigence  experimentale.  Le  jour  ou  toutes  les  causes  d'illusion  auront
ete  ecartees,  le  jour  ou  1'  on  aura  elimine  les  fraudes,  conscientes  ou  non,
des  sujets,  les  imaginations  de  1'  experimentateur,  et  sa  mauvaise  foi
scientifique  involontaire ;  le  jour  ou  1'  on  pourra  faire  enregistrer  les
r^sultats  par  un  individu  impartial  et  ignorant,  une  sorte  d'  automate
qui  n'  a  pas  d'  opinion  et  qui  traduit  servilement  toutes  les  paroles  du
sujet, — ce  jour  la,  si  1'  on  a  une  serie  dont  la  probabilite  est  de  moins
d'un  millieme,  on  peut  regarder  le  phenomene  qu'on  cherche  comme
a  peu  pres  demontre.

Ce  qui  est  necessaire  a  1'  heure  actuelle,  ce  ne  sont  pas  tant  des
faits  extraordinaires  que  des  faits  bien  observes  ;  nous  avons  tous  lu  ou
vu,  les  uns  et  les  auti'es,  des  faits  extraordinaires.  Les  ouvrages  de
magnetisme  sont  remplis  de  ces  histoires  naerveilleuses  qui  sont,  je
r  avoue,  amusantes  a  lire,  mais  qui  n'  entrainent  pas  la  conviction  ;  car,
si  la  bonne  foi  des  narrateurs  est  a  peu  pres  certaine,  leur  credulite
naive  est  plus  certaine  encore,  et  enleve  tant  soit  peu  noti'e  conuance.  Et


so


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  cfcc.


pourtant,  il  est  inadmissible  qu'  il  n'y  ait  pas  quelque  chose  de  vrai  dans
tons  ces  recits.  Pour  ina  part,  je  regarde  comme  impossible  cette  immense
illusion  se  prolongeant  pendant  presque  un  siecle,  sans  quelque  parcelle
de  verite  par  derriere.^  Au  fond  je  ne  sais  pas  quelle  est  cette
verite  ;  mais  il  y  en  a  certainement  une,  et,  qviand  on  parle  de  la
lucidite,  de  la  suggestion  mentale,  de  la  divination  des  maladies,  apres
tout  ce  qui  a  6te  dit,  ce  ne  sont  pas  les  faits  etonnants  qui  font  defaut ;
c'  est  la  preuve  scientifique,  rigoureuse  ;  car  les  allegations  innombrables
qu'on  a  fournies  n'  ont  manque  que  de  rigueur  dans  la  demonstration
pour  entrainer  1'  assentiment  unanime.

Je  crois  pouvoir  resumer  toute  cette  discussion  en  etablissant  les
trois  points  suivants  :

(1)  Les  experiences  ne  sont  valables  que  si  la  bonne  foi  consciente
des  experimentateurs  est  incontestable.

(2)  II  faut  toujours  se  mefier  de  la  mauvaise  foi  inconsciente  de  tous
les  experimentateurs  et  meme  de  soi-meme.

(3)  On  n'  a  pas  le  droit  d'  exiger  pour  les  plit'nomenes  psycliiques
une  probabilite  plus  forte  que  jsour  les  autres  sciences,  et,  avec  des
probabilites  au-dessous  d'  un  millieme,  on  aura  une  demonstration
suffisamment  rigoureuse.

Chapitre  III.

DES  SUJETS  QUI  ONT  SERVI  A  MES  EXPERIENCES.

Je  ne  dirai  que  peu  de  mots  des  sujets  qui  ont  servi  a  mes
experiences ;  car,  ce  qui  est  interessant,  ce  sont  les  resultats  obtenus  et
non  la  maniere  de  les  obtenir.  Certes,  il  serait  bien  utile  et  bien
important  de  pouvoir  determiner  comment  j'ai  eu  tel  ou  tel  r^sultat
impossible  a  prevoir  ;  mais  je  suis  force,  a  cet  egard,  de  reconnaitre  ma
totale  impuissance.  Je  ne  sais  rien  et  absolument  rien  des  conditions
necessaires  pour  reussir  dans  la  suggestion  mentale  ou  dans  la  lucidite.
Un  observateur  plus  perspicace  ou  plus  lieureux  y  arrivera  sans  doute
apres  moi ;  mais  mes  efforts  ont  ete  infructueux.  Quand  j'  ai  re'ussi,  c'  a
ete  une  heureuse  foi'tune,  et  mon  talent  n'  y  est  pour  rien.  Assurt'ment
cela  nous  indique  bien  que  nous  ne  sommes  encore  qu'  a  la  periode
empirique  et  incertaine.  Le  moment  viendra  peut-etre  ou  nous  francbi-
rons  ce  pas  redoutable,  et  ou  nous  affirmerons  par  avance  la  lucidite  ou
la  non-lucidite ;  mais  jusqu' a  present  je  ne  puis  rien  preciser,  ni
meme  rien  soup9onner.  Je  dois  me  contenter  des  donnees  brutes  que
m'  a  fournies  une  longue  et  pers^verante  observation.

1  Comprendrait-on  que  tous  ces  reoueils :  Psychischc  Studicn,  Sphinx,  Light,
Banner  of  Light,  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  etc.,  etc.,  ne
f assent  remplis  que  d'  impostures  et  d'  illusions?


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <L-c.


31


Je  nommerai  surtout  dans  le  cours  de  ces  experiences  quatre  sujets
que  j'  appellerai  Leonie,  Alice,  Eugenie,  et  Helena.

Quelques  autres  faits  ^pars,  plus  ou  moins  interessants,  ont  ete
observes  sur  d' autres  personnes,  mais  j' ai  experimente  surtout  avec  les
quatre  sujets  dont  je  viens  d'  indiquer  les  noms.

Leonie  est  cette  personne  dont  M.  Janet  et  M.  Gibert  ont  entretenu
la  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique.  C  est  une  fenime  de  45  ans
environ,  dont  1'  existence  a  ete  des  le  debut  presque  merveilleuse.
Tout  enfant,  elle  avait  des  crises  de  somnambulisme  naturel,  elle  a  ete
pendant  pres  de  dix  ans  endormie  par  un  medecin  qui  a  obtenu  avec
elle  des  phenomenes  tout-a-fait  surprenants,  parait-il,  mais  dont  la
trace  a  a  peu  pres  completement  disparu.  Leonie  a  ete  ensuite  entre  les
mains  de  M.  Gibert,  puis  de  M.  J anet,  qui  ont  pu  demontrer  le  fait  du
sommeil  a  distance.  Elle  est  d'  un  caractere  tres  doux,  tres  simple,  et
tres  timide.  A  1'  etat  de  veille,  elle  ose  a  jjeine  lever  les  yeux  sur  les
personnes  qui  1'  entourent,  mais,  quand  elle  est  endormie,  elle  a  de  tout
autres  allures.  Elle  est  alors  tres  vive,  gaie,  rieuse,  enfant,  et  assez
liardie.  Elle  est  d'  ailleurs  d'  un  maniement  difficile,  et  on  ne  pent
faire  d'  elle  ce  qu'  on  veut  /  car  elle  passe  a  1'  improviste  par  une  serie
de  phases  de  catalepsie,  d'  extase,  de  lethargie,  qui,  pour  etre  assez
regulieres,  n'en  sont  pas  moins  impossibles  a  arreter  ou  a
diminuer.

Alice  est  une  femme  de  28  ans,  dontj'ai  donne  1' observation  dans
les  Bulletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psychologie.  Elle  est  gaie,  vive,  pas
timide  ;  mais,  etant  endormie,  elle  est  comme  solennelle  et  grave.  Je
r  ai  endormie  il  y  a  deux  ans,  et  depuis  cette  epoque  j'  ai  fait  avec  elle
de  nombreuses  experiences.  Des  le  debut,  j'  ai  declare  que  je  ne  voulais
pas  avoir  de  phenomenes  physiques,  et,  de  fait,  elle  n'  a  jamais  rien  eu
qui  ressemble  a  la  lethargie.  Parfois  je  la  laisse  endormie  du  sommeil
magnetique  pendant  2,  3,  4,  ou  meme  6  heures  :  mais  ce  n'  est  pas  de
la  lethargie,  car,  pendant  tout  ce  temps,  elle  reste  en  etat  de  me  re-
pondre.  Elle  est  anesthesique,  et  n'  entend  pas  les  bruits  exterieurs,
mais  c'  est  a  la  longue  seulement  que  cette  anesth(isie  et  cet  isolement
sont  survenus,  car  au  debut  il  n'  y  avait  rien  de  semblable,  et  elle
pouvait  encore  entendre.

Eugenie  est  une  jeune  fille  de  21  ans,  qui  a  ^te  des  sa  premiere  enfance
prise  de  crises  de  somnambulisme  spontane.  Elle  a,  comme  les  deux
autres  femmes  precedemment  nommees,  les  cheveux  et  les  yeux
tres  noirs.  Elle  est  tres  timide,  leve  a  peine  les  yeux  sur  les  personnes
qui  r  entourent  et  ne  donne  la  main  qu'  avec  quelque  repugnance.
Endormie,  elle  est  bien  moins  timide  et  parle  avec  gaiete  et  assurance.
Elle  a  ete  endormie  par  diverses  personnes,  qui  ont,  parait-il,  obtenu  des
phenomenes  bien  superieurs  a  ce  que  j'  ai  obtenu  avec  elle.  Elle  n'  a
pas  de  crises  spontanees,  comme  Leonie. L'  anesthesia  est  complete,  si


32


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


complete  qu'  en  ete,  a  la  campagne  ou  je  1'  endormais,  les  mouches
venaient  se  promener  sur  ses  levres  et  ses  narines  sans  qu'  elle  s'  en
aper9ut  et  sans  qu'  elle  fit  un  mouvement  pour  s'  en  debarrasser.  Aux
paupieres,  ces  menies  mouches  provoquaient  un  Idger  mouvement
reflexe  des  paupieres,  comme  un  f  remissement  imperceptible.  Eugenie  a
ete  endormie  par  diverses  personnes.  Malheureusement  pour  1'  etude
scientifique,  on  lui  a  persuade  de  donner  des  consultations  dans  un
cabinet  de  medecin  magnetiseur,  et  ce  metier  fatigant  a,  je  crois,
altere  ses  facultes  de  lucidite  qui,  avant  moi — car  je  ne  les  ai  pas  con-
statees  par  moi-merae — auraient  ete  surprenantes.  Sa  bonne  foi  est
tout-a-fait  certaine.

Helena  est  une  femme  de  38  ans,  blonde,  petite,  et  qui  a  ^te
endormie  avant  moi  par  peu  de  personnes.  Elle  s'  etait  occupee  de
spiritisme,  sans  y  croire  d'  ailleurs,  et  elle  s'  est  aperc^^ue  qu'  en  se  niettant
les  mains  sur  la  table  d'  experiences  elle  entrait  dans  des  sortes  de
crises  de  somnambulisme,  qui  duraient  longtemps.  Son  sommeil,  quand
je  r  endors,  est  tres  calme,  sans  crises,  avec  anesthesie,  amnesie,  et
isolement  complet.  Elle  peut — et  c'  est  un  phenomene  sp(^cial  que  je
n'  ai  pas  rencontre  sur  d'  autres — s'  endormir  elle-meme  a  volonte.
Elle  fixe  sa  pensee  sur  tel  ou  tel  objet,  et  alors  elle  tombe  en  somnam-
bulisme. Elle  a  profits  de  cette  etrange  faculte  pour  essayer  de  donner
des  consultations  medicales,  sans  grand  succes  pecuniaire  d'  ailleurs.
Elle  est  de  tres  bonne  foi,  et  en  elle,  comme  dans  les  trois  femmes
precedentes,  on  peut  avoir  entiere  conliance  (pour  la  bonne  foi
volontairo,  bien  entendu).

Chapitre  IV.

EXPERIENCES  SUR  LE  SOMMEIL  A  DISTANCE.

Ces  experiences  n'  ont  ete  faites  m^thodiquement  qu'  avec  L^onie.

Je  m'  imaginais  d'  abord  que,  de  toutes  les  demonstrations  possibles
d'  une  action  extraordinaii'e — ^j'  appelle  de  ce  nom  pour  ab rigger  toutes
les  actions  qui  ne  rentrent  pas  dans  le  cadre  des  faits  adoptes  et
reconnus  par  la  science — le  sommeil  a  distance  etait  la  plus  facile  et  la
plus  claire,  la  moins  soumise  a  la  critique.

Theoriquement  il  en  est  peut-etre  ainsi ;  mais  de  fait  il  est  difficile
de  conclure ;  car  on  rencontre  des  obstacles  s^rieux,  et  il  est  vrairaent
aussi  impossible  que  pour  les  autres  phenomenes  de  lucidite  d'obtenir
quelque  chose  de  caracteristique.

En  outre,  le  norabre  des  sujets  sur  qui  on  peut  agir  a  distance
est  tres  limite.  J'  ai  eu  1'  occasion  jadis  d'  en  signaler  un  cas.  M.  Janet
en  a  rapporte  d'  excellents  exeraples.  M.  Hericourt  a  cite  une  obser-
vation tres  probante,  et  enfin  ]\T.  Gley  a  rappele  la  belle  observation  de
M.  Dusart.


Relatiun  de  Diverses  Experiences,  I'C.  33

Voici  comment  j'  ai  etudie  sur  Leonie  le  sommeil  a  distance.

EUe  demeurait  chez  mon  ami  M.  Ferrari,  a  une  distance  de  500
metres  environ  de  mon  domicile.  Je  ne  prevenais  personne  de  1'  lieure
a  laquelle  je  devais  agir,  et  je  la  faisais  observer  pour  savoir  a  quelle
heure  se  produirait  le  phenomene.

J'  ai  fait  ainsi  neuf  experiences  qui  ont  eu  des  succes  divers.  Sans
m'  arreter  aux  causes  qui,  suivant  moi,  a  tort  ou  a  raison,  ont  fait
r  insucces  de  la  quatrieme,  de  la  cinquieme  et  de  la  neuvieme  experience;
il  ne  nous  en  reste  pas  moins  six,  dont  quatre  sont  mediocres  et  deux
me  paraissent  bonnes.

Premiere  Experience. — J' essayed'  endormir  Leonie  en  allantdechez
moi  chez  M.  Ferrari.  Le  mercredi,  12  Janvier,  de  9  h.  10  du  matin  a
9  h.  30,  Leonie  etait  eveillee.  Le  soir,  a  5  heures,  pendant  qu'  elle  etait
en  sommeil  magnetique,  elle  me  dit,  "  Vous  avez  essaye  de  m'endormir
en  marchant.  J'  ai  commence  a  avoir  envie  de  dormir  20  minutes  avant
4ue  vous  ne  veniez  J'  allais  m'  endormir  a  9  li.  20,  quand  les  enfants
ont  fait  du  bruit  et  m'  ont  empechee  de  m'  endormir."

Assurement  elle  m'  a  dit  cela  spontanement,  sans  que  je  1'  aie
interrogee  ;  mais  je  n'  ai  pas  1'  habitude  de  venir  ainsi  le  matin  chez  M.
Ferrari,  de  sorte  que  cela  a  pu  eveiller  sa  perspicacite.

Deuxieme  ExjKrience. — Je  tire  au  sort  pour  savoir  si  je  dois
r  endormir  le  vendredi,  14,  ou  le  samedi,  15.  Le  sort  designe  vendredi.
Quant  a  1'  heure,  la  latitude  etant  entre  8  heures  du  matin  et  7  heures
du  soir,  le  sort  designe  3  heures.

J'agis  mentalement  de  3  h.  10  a  3  h.  45.  J'arrive  chez  M.  Ferrari
a  3  h.  45.  Leonie  etait  sortie.  Elle  rentre  a  la  maison  a  3  heures  51  ;
son  premier  mot  a  la  domestique  qui  lui  ouvre  est  de  dire  :  "  Je  ne  puis
pas  avancer,  mes  jambes  tremblent."  C  est  alors  seulement  qu' on
lui  apprend  que  j' etais  la.  Endormie,  elle  me  raconte  que  dans  la
boutique  ou  elle  etait  allee  acheter  des  tabliers,  elle  a  senti  tout  d'  un
coup  la  chakur  1'  incommoder ;  elle  a  alors  brusquement  quitte  la
boutique,  sans  meme  savoir  la  couleur  des  tabliers  qu'elle  vient
acheter.  En  chemin  elle  avait  peur  de  rouler  sous  les  roues  des
voitures ;  car  ses  jambes  tremblaient  et  refusaient  d'  avancer.  Elle
me  donne  1'  adresse  de  la  boutique  ou  elle  a  ete  ainsi  prise  de  cet
etourdissement,  et  alors  je  calcule  le  temps  qui  lui  a  ete  nt^cessaire
pour  rentrer.  II  lui  a  fallu  a  peu  pres  20  minutes,  et,  comme  elle  est
rentree  a  3  h.  51,  il  s'ensuit  que  c' est  a  3  h.  31  environ  qu'elle  a
ressenti  1'  efFet  du  sommeil.

Ce  qui  donne  de  la  valeur  a  cette  experience,  c'  est  d'  abord  que  le
jour  et  r  heure  ou  je  devais  agir  avaient  ete  tires  au  sort,  et  que,  dans
I'intervalle,  je  n'  avals  pas  vu  Leonie,  de  sorte  que  rien  ne  pouvait  lui
faire  soup9onner  ni  1'  heure  ni  le  jour.  D'  autre  part  c'  est  la  seule  fois
pendant  son  sejour  a  Paris  qu'  elle  s'  est  trouvee  mal  dans  une  boutique.

D


34


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,


Enfin,  c'  est  en  entrant  clans  la  niaison,  et  avant  de  savoir  que  je  fusse
la,  qu'elle  a  declai'e  qu'  elle  avait  ete  pi'ise  d'  etourdissement.

Troisihne  Experience. — Je  voulais  laisser  un  certain  intervalle
de  temps  entre  deux  essais,  et  alors  j'  etais  a  peu  pres  resolu  a  ne  pas
endormir  L^onie  le  samedi ;  mais,  en  rentrant  chez  moi,  je  change  d'avis,
et  le  samedi  matin,  a  11  lieures,  j' essays  de  I'endormir;  de  plus  je
prends  1'  heure  de  1 1  heures,  qui  diflere  des  heures  liabituelles.  J'  agis
a  distance  de  11  li.  1  a  11  li.  8  niinuteSj  et  j' arrive  chez  M.  Ferrari  a
midi  28  minutes.

Je  trouve  Ldonie  ^veillee  ;  mais  elle  avait  pourtant  ressenti  quelque
action  ;  car  elle  a  et^  prise,  vers  1 1  heures,  de  somnolence  et  d'  amnt^sie
partielle,  comme  1'  indiquent  les  details  suivants.

Etant  endormie,  Leonie  me  raconte  qu'  elle  s'  est  sentie  prise  de
somnolence  all  heures  qu'  ....  Elle  n'  acheve  pas,  de  sorte  que  je  ne
puis  dire  si  c'  est  1 1  heures  quatre  ou  11  heures  quinze.  Je  ne
pousse  pas  1'  examen  plus  loin,  de  peur  de  la  mettre  sur  la  voie
de  la  reponse  que  je  veux  obtenir.  Interrogeant  les  personnes  de  la
maison,  j' apprends  que  vers  11  heures  et  demie  on  est  venu  dans  la
chambre  oii  elle  etait  et  qu'  on  1'  a  trouvee  endormie.  Elle  n'  a  alors
pas  entendu  entrer  dans  sa  chambre  ;  ce  n'est  qu' a  midi  10  minutes
qu'  elle  a  entendu  venir. On  lui  disait  d'  aller  dejeuner.

Ainsi,  sans  que  rien  puisse  1'  avertir  du  jour  et  de  1'  heure,  Leonie,
un  peu  apres  1 1  heures,  a  ete  prise  d'  une  sorte  d'  engourdissement  et
de  stupeur  qui  1'  ont  empechee  de  reagir  et  d'  entendre.  II  est  diilicile  de
dire  si  parfois,  pendant  son  sejour  cliez  M.  Ferrari,  elle  a  eu  des  sortes
d' absence  analogues  a  celle-ci.  Maisje  ne  crois  pourtant  pas  qu' aucune
absence  avec  somnolence  aussi  forte  ait  ^te  constatee.  Toutefois,  comme
il  n'  y  a  pas  eu  de  sommeil  veritable,  il  faut  considerer  cette  experience
comme  un  succes  incomplet,  ou  meme  comme  un  demi-insucces.

Sixieme  Experience. — Je  laisse  les  quatrieme  et  cinquieme  experi-
ences qui  ont  totalement  echoud,  ce  qui  tient  peut-etre  a  ce  que  Leonie
■vait  eprouve,  dans  la  journee  du  dimanche,  16,  une  contrariete  tres
'ive.

Le  mardi  soir,  rentrant  chez  moi,  je  m'  en  rapporte  au  sort  pour
i^cider  de  1'  heure,  avec  une  latitude  allant  de  8  heures  du  matin  a
5  heures  du  soir. Le  sort  designe  9  heures  du  matin.

J'  agis  done  sur  Leonie  de  9  heures  11  a  9  heures  26.  Puis,  afin  de
ne  pas  lui  donner  1'  eveil,  je  reste  chez  moi,  sans  chercher  a  voir  1'  effet
de  cette  action.  Dans  la  journee,  c'  est-a-dire,  a  1  heure  et  demie
environ,  je  raconte  cela  a  un  de  mes  amis  qui  est  venu  me  voir,  et  je
lui  explique  comment  j'essaye  d'  agir  a  distance.

Je  ne  vais  chez  Leonie  quele  soir,  a  5  heures  10  minutes.  Elle  6tait
en  somnambulisme.

Je  lui  demande  ce  qu'  elle  a  eprouve,  et  je  lui  fais  raconter  ses


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  ct-e.


35


impressions,  sans  lui  clonner,  autant  que  cela  m'est  possible,  la  moindre
indication  sur  ce  que  j'  avals  essaye  de  faire.  Le  matin,  me  dit-elle,
en  s'  eveillant,  elle  s'  est  sentie  prise  tout-a-coup  d'  un  grand  mal  de
tete.  Elle  pensait  que  ce  mal  de  tete  se  dissiperait ;  elle  a  continue  a
s'  liabiller.  Elle  est  descendue  10  minutes  environ  apres  le  debut
de  son  mal  de  tete.  Mais,  quelques  minutes  apres  etre  descendue,  le
mal  de  tete  augmentant  toujours,  elle  est  remont^e  dans  sa  chambre,
s'  est  etendue  sur  son  lit  tout  habillee,  n'  ayant  pas  la  force  de  se
deshabiller.  Jamais  pareille  cliose  ne  lui  est  arrivee  pendant  les  30
jours  qu'  elle  a  passes  a  Paris.

L'  heure  exacte  a  laquelle  Leonie  est  descendue  est  tres  importante
a  connaitre.  J'  ai  eu  grand  peine  a  la  determiner  ;  car  personne,
Leonie  pas  plus  que  les  autres,  ne  soupconnait  qu'  il  y  eut  quelque
interet  a  preciser  1'  heure.  Je  fais  alors  une  sorte  d'  enquete  sans  que
rien  puisse  faire  presumer  1'  heure  a  laquelle,  de  chez  moi,  j'  avais  agi.
Leonie  dit  etre  descendue  a  9  h.  10.  Madame  Ferrari  dit  9  heures  5.
La  domestique  dit  9  heures  30,  et  M.  Ferrari  dit  9  heures  30.  La
moyenne  de  ces  quatre  chiffres  tres  difFerents  est  done  de  9  heures  20.  Si
r  on  admet  que  le  mal  de  tete  a  commence  de  5  a  10  minutes  aupara-
vant,  soit  8  minutes,  nous  trouvons  que  le  debut  de  V  action  est  a  9
heui'es  12;  chiffre  qui  concorde  tout-a-fait  avec  Taction  que  j' avais
essaye  de  produire  a  9  heures  11.

II  me  semble  que,  pour  toute  personne  non  prevenue,  il  y  a  la  soit
une  action  a  distance,  soit  une  etonnante  coincidence.  Rien  ne  pouvait
faire  penser  Leonie  a  1' heure  de  9  heures,  puisque  je  1' ignorais  moi-
meme  et  que  je  1'  ai  tiree  au  sort.  Si  elle  avait  voulu  inconsciemment
me  tromper,  elle  eut  ete  bien  imprudente  ;  car  elle  ne  savait  pas  que  je
1' endormirais  ce  mercredi,  19,  et  d' autre  part  elle  ne  pouvait  prevoir
1' heure.  Pendant  tout  son  sejour  a  Paris,  utie  seule  fois  elle  est
remontee  dans  sa  chambre  aussitot  apres  son  lever,  et  c'  est  ce
jour  la  precisement  que  j'  ai  essaye  de  1'  endormir  a  9  heures  du
matin.

Mais  reprenons  le  recit  de  ce  qu'  a  senti  ce  jour  la  Leonie.  Vers
midi,  on  entre  dans  sa  chambre,  et  on  la  trouve  coucliee  tout  habillee
sur  son  lit.  Elle  ne  veut  pas  descendre  dejeuner.  On  la  laisse,  et  on
est  etonne  de  la  voir  a  1  heure  35  minutes — on  a  determine  exactement
r  heure — descendre  en  etat  de  somnambulisme.

II  est  certain  que  je  n'ai  pas  essaye  de  1'  endormir  a  1  heure  et  demie,
et  que  par  consequent  ce  n'  est  pas  la  un  effet  bien  evident.  Mais,  a  1
heure  et  demie,  j'  ai  fait  les  gestes  que  je  fais  d'  ordinaire  quand  je  veux
r  endormir  a.  distance.  J'  ai  raconte  a  mon  ami  E.  comment  je  concen-
trais  ma  volonte,  tantot  en  serrant  les  poings,  tantot  en  etendant  les
bras,  dans  la  direction  ou  est  Leonie.  En  faisant  toute  cette  demon
stration,— assez  ridicule,  je  I'avoue, — il  estpossible  que  je  ne  sois  pasreste

D  2


36


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  X'c.


maitre  de  ne  pas  agir.  H  y  a  done  eu  production  du  somnambulisme
sans  volonte  formelle  de  ma  part,  et  a  ce  point  de  vue  1'  experience  est
defectueuse.  Mais  elle  est  excellente  a  un  autre  point  de  vue,  et  tres
demonstrative.  A  9  lieures  11,  essai  d'action.  A  9  heures  12  Leonie,
nullement  avertie,  ^prouve  une  lassitude  et  une  fatigue  extremes.  Ce
n'  est  pas  tout-a-fait  le  somnambulisme;  c'  est  la  somnolence;  maisune
somnolence  si  profonde  que  pour  la  plus  legere  cause  additionnelle  le
vi'ai  somnambulisme  a  suivi.

Qu'  on  remarque  aussi  que  Leonie  s'  etait  endormie  a  1  heure  35.
A  supposer  que  le  tirage  au  sort  eut  designe  4  heures,  1'  experience
eut  ete  funeste  pour  la  demonstration  d'  une  action  a  distance,
puisque  elle  se  serait  endormie  avant  au  lieu  de  s'endormir  a-pres.

II  est  remarquable  qu'il  n'y  a  jamais  eu  dans  mes  experiences  avec
Leonie  d'  echec  de  ce  genre,  ce  qui  eut  tout  compromis.

Un  autre  fait  est  a  noter,  qui  ne  laisse  pas  que  d'  avoir  une  certaine
importance,  c'  est  que  ce  sommeil  incomplet,  ebauche,  insuffisant,  a  rendu
Leonie  assez  malade.  Dans  la  nuit  du  mercredi  au  jeudi,  elle  a  eu  un
mal  de  tete  tres  violent,  et,  toute  la  journee  de  jeudi,  elle  a  ete  fort
souffranle.  Le  vendredi  meme  elle  etait  encore  moins  bien  portante
que  d'  liabitude.

En  resume,  cette  experience  me  parait  etre  un  succes,  mais  un
succes  incomplet.  Toutefois,  je  prefere,  pour  ma  part,  comme  je  1'  ai
dit  au  debut,  ces  succes  incomplets,  mais  en  des  conditions  scientifiques
irreprochables,  a  des  succes  de  plus  brillante  appai'ance  ;  il  importe
assez  peu  que  le  sommeil  complet,  absolu,  ait  ete  provoque  ;  ce  qui  est
interessant,  c'  est  de  savoir  s'  il  y  a  eu  reellement  une  action  a  distance
quel  qu'  en  soit  I'eff'et.  Or,  dans  ce  cas,  a  moins  de  supposer  une
coincidence — et  nous  avons  vu  que  c'  est  assez  invraisemblable — il  faut
admettre  une  action  a  distance.

Scptieim  Experience} — Pour  Leonie,  lajournee  du  vendredi,  moins
penible  que  celle  du  jeudi,  1'  avait  cependant  laissee  fort  soufFrante
encore.  De  mon  cote,  j'  avals  ete  ce  jour  la  trfes  occupe,  si  bien  que  je
ne  pus  arriver  chez  M.  Ferrari  qu' a  6  heures  10.  Je  devais  aller  au
theatre  le  soir  et  alorsje  dis  a  Leonie  que  je  ne  I'endormirais  pas.
Leonie  rentre  dans  la  cuisine,  et  dit  a  la  domestique  :  "  M.  Richet  n'  a

1  On  excusera  les  details  dans  lesquels  je  suis  force  d'entrer.  Mais  de  pareils
r^cits  ne  valent  que  par  le  detail.  J'  avais  ^crit  une  lettre  k  M.  Gurney  lui  rapportant
mes  experiences.  Cette  lettre  n'  etait  pas  destin^e  a  etre  i^ubliee  ;  et,  en  outre,  comma
j'  avais  voulu  etre  trfes  bref,  j'ai  ^t^,  par  le  fait  meme  de  la  brifevete,  assez  inexact,  de
sorte  que  je  deinande  ace  qu'on  ne  tienne  compte  que  de  ce  que  j'ecrisici,  I'autre
lettre — Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Rescai'ch,  Octobre,  1887,  p.  150— etant  trop
courte  pour  etre  exacte,  et  n'  etant  pas  destinee  a  la  publication,  par  consequent
devant  seulement  indiquer  le  sens  des  experiences,  tandis  que  le  recit  que  je  donne
ici  est  le  resume  exact  de  mes  notes,  piises  le  jour  meme  apres  chaque  experience.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.


37


plus  besoin  de  moi  apparemmeut,  puisque  il  ne  veut  pas  m'  enclormir.
Je  parti rai  dimancbe."

Au  moment  de  partir,  pendant  que  je  causais  sur  le  seuil  de  la
porte  avec  Madame  Ferrari,  I'idee  me  vient  soudain  d'  essayer  ce  jour
meme  le  sommeil  a  distance.  Apres  un  instant  d'  htjsitation  je  dis  tout
haut  a  Madame  Ferrari  :  "  Tant  pis  pour  1'  Opera.  La  science  1'  emporte.
Je  vais  essayer  d'  endormir  Leonie."  Je  ferme  la  porte  avec  bruit,
comme  si  j' etais  parti,  et  je  rentre  doucement  dans  le  salon,  Madame
Ferrari  m'  accompagnant.  Puis  Madame  Ferrari  rentre  dans  sa  chambre,
et  je  lui  recommande  expressement  de  ne  voir  ni  Leonie  ni  la  domes-
tique,  de  peur  de  donner  1'  eveil  par  quelque  attitude  ou  quelques
paroles.

II  etait  alors  6  heures  20  minutes.  J'  essaye  d'  agir  sur  Leonie.  A
6  heures  25  je  1'  entends  qui  traverse  1'  anti-chambre  et  qui  monte  dans
sa  chambre.  Je  continue  Taction  jusqu'  a  6  heures  34.  A  ce  moment
Madame  Ferrari  rentre  dans  le  salon.  Je  lui  dis  de  faire  descendre
Leonie  par  1'  intermediaire  de  la  domestique.  Alors  Madame  Ferrari
dit  a  la  domestique,  "  Priez  Leonie  de  descendre.  Ilfaitfroid,  et  elle
pourrait  se  rendre  malade  dans  sa  chambre  sans  feu."  La  domestique
ne  se  doute,  pas  un  instant  que  je  suis  reste,  et  elle  va  trouver  Leonie
dans  sa  chambre.  A  6  heures  38,  Leonie  redescend.  J' avals  cess^
d'  agir  sur  elle  de  6  heures  34  a  6  heures  42.  A  6  heures  42  je  recom-
mence a  essayer  d'  agir,  jusqu'  a  6  heures  .55.

Leonie  est  alors  dans  la  cuisine,  avec  la  domestique,  qui  me  croit,  ou
plutot  me  sait  parti.  Le  salon  est  assez  eloigne  de  la  cuisine  pour
qu'  on  ne  puisse  savoir  ce  qui  s'  y  passe  ni  rien  entendre.  Madame
Ferrari  est  avec  moi  dans  le  salon.

A  6  heures  45  Leonie,  causant  avec  la  domestique,  lui  dit  qu'  elle  a
fort  envie  de  dormir  et  qu'  elle  est  toute  tremblante.  Pour  eviter  le
sommeil,  elle  essaye  de  se  mettre  les  mains  dans  1'  eau,  moyen  qu'  elle
emploie  d'  habitude  quand  elle  veut  empecher  le  sommeil  a  distance ;
mais  cela  n'a  aucun  efFet.  Alors  la  domestique  lui  conseille  de  se
mouiller  la  tete  et  le  front  avec  de  1'  eau  froide.  Heureusement
Leonie  ne  suit  pas  ce  conseil ;  car  c'  est,  pai-ait-il,  une  cause  de
crise  violente  quand  elle  est  dans  cette  situation.

Alors,  vers  6  heures  49,  elle  s'  asseoit,  s'  accoude  sur  la  table  de
cuisine,  sa  tete  reposant  sur  sa  main  gauche,  et  elle  cesse  de  causer
avec  la  domestique.  A  6  heures  52,  Madame  Ferrari  entre  dans  la
cuisine,  et  elle  trouve  Leonie  dans  cette  position,  la  tete  appuyee
sur  la  main  gauche.  Elle  vient  m'  avertir  de  ce  resultat,  sans  avoir
rien  dit  ni  a  la  domestique  ni  a  L6onie  endorraie.

A  6  heures  55  je  rentre  dans  la  cuisine  et  je  trouve  Leonie
endonxiie,  en  complet  somnambulisme.  Je  lui  dis  de  se  lever  et  de
venir  pres  de  moi  dans  le  salon. Elle  me  dit,  "  Pourquoi  n'avez  vous


38


Relation  cle  Diver ses  Ex'periences,  dec.


pas  attend u  I  J' allais  venir  toute  seule  dans  le  salon,  puisque  vous
m'  appeliez."

Cette  experience  me  parait  ti"es  bonne.  En  effet,  Leonie  n'  a  pas  pu
se  douter  de  ma  presence,  et  la  domestique,  qui  n'  avait  pas  quitte
Leonie,  ne  savait  pas  que  j'  etais  reste.  D'  ailleurs  elle  ne  pouvait  le
savoir,  puisque  absolument  rien — a  ma  connaissance  du  moins — ne
pouvait  trahir  ma  presence.  D'  autre  part  mes  paroles,  quand  j'  ai
quitte  Leonie  a  6  heures  25,  ne  pouvaient  rien  lui  reveler;  car  j' etais
absolument  persuade  que  j' allais  partir  sans  faire  d'essai  d' aucune
sorte.

Si  bonne  qu'  elle  soit,  cette  experience  a  encore  un  cote  defectueux,
c'  est  que  ce  soir  la  Leonie  n'  avait  pas  ete  endormie.  Or  je  1'  endormais
presque  tous  les  soirs.  D'  autre  part,  il  a  pu  se  produire  tel  fait
inconnu  completement  de  moi — mais  cela  importe  peu — qui  a  appris  a
Leonie  inconsciente  que  j'  etais  reste.  De  la  a  supposer  que  je  voulais
r  endonnir,  il  n'  y  a  pas  loin.  Aussi,  quoique  1'  hypothese  d'  une
perspicacite  inconsciente  soit  assez  invraisemblable,  il  ne  faut  pas
1'  ecarter  completement,  et  cette  experience  qui  parait  au  premier  abord
meilleure  que  1'  experience  precedente,  est  plus  bi'illante  ;  mais,  a  nion
sens,  moins  irreprocliable.

J/uitieme  Exjja'ie^ice. — Je  ne  cherclie  a  endormir  Leonie  ni  le  samedi,
ni  le  dimanclie,  et,  chaque  fois  que  j'  arrive,  je  la  trouve  tout-a-fait
eveillee.  Le  lundi  matin,  cliez  moi,  je  tire  au  sort  pour  decider  1'  heure
a  laquelle  je  dois  agir.  Le  sort  designe  2  heures.  C  est  une  heure
aussi  incommode  pour  moi  que  pour  elle.  J'ai  ete  sur  le  point  d'  y
renoncer,  mais,  toute  reflexion  faite,  je  me  dis  que  ce  serait  un  nonsens,
puisque  precis^ment  le  tirage  au  sort  a  pour  efiet  de  designer  des  heures
qui  lie  peu  vent  pas  etre  prevues  d'avance.

Le  lundi,  cliez  moi,  de  1  heure  38  a  1  heure  50,  j'  essaye  d'  endor-
mir Leonie.  J'  arrive  chez  M.  Ferrari  a  2  heures  5.  Coiiime  il  ni'  avait
doiine  la  clef  de  son  api:)artement,  j'  eiitre  sans  faire  de  bruit,  et  je  vais
trouver  Madame  Ferrari  dans  sa  chambre.  Alors  Madame  Ferrari  va
voir  oil  en  est  Leonie.  Leonie  est  en  etat  de  somnanibulisme  incomplet.
Elle  a  les  yeux  feriiies,  et  ne  travaille  plus  a  un  bas  qu'  elle  reprisait ;
mais  elle  repond  encore  aux  questions  que  Madame  Ferrari  lui  adresse.
De  2  heures  5  a  2  heures  15  je  fais  elibrt  pour  rendre  le  sommeil  plus
profond,  et  la  faire  venir  dans  le  salon  ou  je  suis.  Mais  je  n'  y
reussis  pas.  A  2  heures  15,  Madame  Ferrari  va  chercher  Leonie  et
r  amene  dans  le  salon.  Je  m'  etais  cache  dans  une  petite  piece  noire
attenant  au  salon.  Leonie  arrive  en  somnanibulisme,  les  yeux  fermes,
se  lieurtant  centre  les  murs,  disant,  "Ilaisje  suis  eveillee,  je  suis  eveillee  "/
ce  qui  prouve  qu'  elle  ne  1'  etait  pas.  Elle  se  laisse  asseoir  sur  un
fauteuil  et  couvrir  d'un  manteau  pour  ne  pas  avoir  froid.

Je  ill'  etais  cache  pendant  ce  temps  dans  une  petite  salle  absolument


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


39


obscure,  attenant  au  salon,  et  je  ne  faisais  aucun  bruit.  De  1^,  je
pouvais  observer  Leonie,  et  ma  presence  ne  pouvait  etre  soupconnee.
Aloi's  je  fais  effort  pour  la  decider  a  se  lever  et  a  venir  vers  moi  dans
le  petit  cabinet  ou  je  me  trouvais.  Mais  ce  fut  sans  le  moindre  succes.
Leonie  resta  assise  dans  le  fauteuil.  Je  la  voyais  par  la  fente  de  la
porte.  Elle  etait  immobile,  les  yeux  fermes ;  elle  tenait  son  ouvrage
a  la  main,  mais  ne  travaillait  pas.  Au  bout  de  5  minutes,  a  2  heures
20,  je  sors  du  cabinet  ou  j'  etais  cache,  et  je  la  trouve  en  etat  de
somnambulisme.

Alors  je  lui  demande  a  quelle  heure  elle  s'  est  endormie.  Elle  me
dit  que  c'  est  a  1  heure  20.  A  1  heure,  apres  le  dejeuner,  elle  s'  est
retiree  dans  la  lingerie,  et  elle  s'  est  mise,  dit  elle,  a  travailler,  a
repriser  un  bas.  L'  heure  de  1  heure  est  certaine,  d'  apres  les  declara-
tions de  Leonie,  de  la  domestique  et  de  Madame  Ferrari.  Mais  1'  heure
de  1  heure  20  n'  est  pas  certaine ;  puisque  elle  ne  depend  que  du
temoignage  de  Leonie.  Si  cette  heure  etait  exacte,  j'  aurais  la  un  gros
echec,  le  sommeil  etant,  dans  ce  cas,  survenu  avant  que  j'  aie  essay e  de
le  provoquer.

Heureusement  une  circonstance  speciale  m'  a  permis  d'  etablir  avec
une  precision,  relativement  tres  grande,  1'  lieure  a  laquelle  Leonie  a  du
s'  endormir.  Elle  tenait,  comme  je  1'  ai  dit,  un  bas  a  la  main,  et
le  reprisait.  Or  on  pent  admettre  que  pendant  son  somnambulisme
elle  est  a  peine  capable  de  travailler  a  1'  aiguille.  De  fait,  sauf  dans
des  circonstances  exceptionnelles,  elle  ne  travaille  a  1'  aiguille  que  tant
qu'  elle  est  eveillee.  Par  consequent,  la  mesure  du  travail  execute  par
elle  donne  la  mesure  du  temps  pendant  lequel  elle  est  restee  eveillee.
Or  on  savait  1'  endroit  ou  le  bas  a  repriser  etait  reste  non  repr'ise  la
veille.  J'  ai  done  fait  une  sorte  d'  enquete  pour  savoir  combien  il
faut  de  temps  pour  repriser  la  quantite  du  bas  qui  a  ^te  reprisee,
a  partir  de  1  heure.

D'  apres  la  domestique,  qui  travaille,  il  est  vrai,  tres  lentement,  il
faut  1  heure  et  demie.  D'  apres  Madame  Ferrari,  il  faut  plus
longtemps  encore,  presque  trois  heures.  Entin,  d'  api'es  Leonie,  dont  le
temoignage,  en  pareil  cas,  est  le  plus  important,  puisque  il  s'  agit  de
son  propre  travail  et  du  temps  qu'elle  a  mis,  il  faut  trois  quarts
d'  heure.  On  peut  done  supposer  qu'  une  duree  de  45  minutes  environ
s'  est  ecoulee  entre  le  moment  ou  Leonie  est  entree  dans  la  lingerie,  et
le  moment  ou,  cedant  au  sommeil,  elle  a  commence  a  s'  endormir.

II  est  clair  que  dans  cette  enquete,  j'  ai  evite,  autant  que  j'  ai  pu,  de
donner  une  indication  quelconque  sur  1' heure  a  laquelle  j' avals  agi.

Je  reviendrai  tout  a  I'heure  sur  la  discussion  de  cette  experience.  Je
dois  d'  abord  mentionner  un  autre  fait  qui  se  place  entre  la  huitieme  et
la  neuvieme  experience.

Le  mardi,  25  Janvier,  je  n'  avals  fait  aucuiie  tentative  de  sommeil


40


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


a  distance.  Pourtant,  quand  j' arrival,  je  trouvai  Leonie  endormie.
Mais  son  etat  etait  un  peu  different  de  son  etat  ordinaire  de  somnam-
bulisme  ;  elle  ne  repondait  qu'  avec  peine  a  mes  questions,  et  les
yeux,  au  lieu  d'  etre  ferm^s,  n'  etaient  qu'  a  demi-clos.  EUe  tenait  a  la
main  une  montre  en  or  que  je  lui  avais  donnee  la  veille.  Ce  n'  etait  pas
d'  ailleurs  le  cadran  qu'elle  regardait,  mais  la  boite,  qu'  elle  fixait
obstin^ment.  Spontanement  elle  me  dit  :  "  Ce  n'  est  pas  vous  qui
m'  aA'ez  endormie,  c'  est  votre  montre,"  et,  comme  j'  insistais,  elle  a  per-
siste  dans  son  affirmation.  Or,  comme  M.  Janet  et  M.  Gibert  1'  out
remarque  depuis  longtemps,  les  objets  metalliques  brillants  et  notamment
1'  or  et  les  bijoux,  la  font  tomber  en  somnambulisme.  II  est  done
vraisemblable  qu'  il  y  a  eu  la  un  effet  analogue.

Neuvieme  Experience. — Ce  meme  jour,  a  6  heures  50,  je  reveille
Leonie,  et  je  prends  conge  d'  elle  ;  mais,  au  lieu  de  partir,  je  me  cache
dans  le  salon,  et  j'essaye  de  I'endormir,  De  6  heures  55  a  7  heures
10,  jen'ai  obtenu  aucun  effet  appreciable.  C  est  done  un  insucc^s
complet  ;  mais  il  y  avait  la  une  condition  speciale.  Elle  venait  d'  etre
r^veillee,  et  peut-etre,  dans  ce  cas,  le  sommeil  a  distance  ne  peut-il  etre
amen^.  II  est  aussi  interessant  de  constater  que  ma  presence  dans  la
maison  ne  suffit  pas.  Je  ne  m'  etais  pas  mieux  cache  le  jour  de  la
septieme  experience,  et  les  conditions  ont  ete  les  memes,  sauf  le  fait
d'  avoir  ete  recemment  ri^veillee.

Si  maintenant  nous  prenons  les  trois  bonnes  experiences,  c'  est-a-
dire  la  sixieme,  la  septieme  et  la  huitieme,  et  si  nous  leur  appliquons
une  severe  critique  expf^rimentale,  nous  trouverons  qu'  elles  ne  sont
pas  irreprochables  isolement,  mais  que  par  leur  ensemble  elles  con-
stituent une  preuve  trfes  forte  en  faveur  d'  une  action  a  distance.

Dans  la  sixieme  experience,  1'  heure  a  ete  tiree  au  sort,  et  rien  n'  a
pu  mettre  Leonie  sur  la  voie.  Deux  minutes  environ  apres  que  j'  ai
essayc  d' agir,  elle  a  commence  a  ressentir  les  effets  du  sommeil.  Mais
ces  effets  n' ont  pas  ete  un  veritable  sommeil.  C'a  ^te  seulement  de
la  somnolence  et  de  la  cephalalgie.  Cela  ne  signifierait  absolument
rien,  si,  a  d'  autres  jours,  L(jonie  avait  ^prouv(5  pareille  somnolence  et
pareille  cephalalgie,  assez  fortes  pour  1'  empecher  de  descendre  dejeuner.
Mais,  comme  je  1'  ai  dit  deja,  9'  a  ete  le  seul  jour  ou  elle  ne  soit  pas
descendue  ])0\xr  dejeuner.  II  y  a  done  la  une  coincidence  bien
etonnante,  ou  bien  une  action  a  di.stance.

Dans  la  septieme  experience,  1'  heure  n'  a  pas  ete  tiree  au  sort ;  mais
elle  a  ete  decid^e  par  moi  ex  ahricpto,  tout-a-fait  inopin^ment,  sans  que
rien  ait  pu  en  avertir  Leonie,  puisque  je  ne  me  suis  decide  qu'  apres
que  Leonie  a  ete  partie.  La  seule  objection — tres  serieuse — qu'  on
puisse  faire  a  ce  succes,  c' est  que  Leonie,  par  un  moyen  que  j' ignore,
s'  est  doutee  de  ma  prc^sence.  A  couj^  sur  ce  n'  est  pas  Leonie  con-
sciente,  qui  1' ignorait  certainement,  mais  nous  savons  qu'il  faut  se


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  t&c.


41


m^fier  des  notions  inconscientes,  bien  autrement  perspicaces  que  nos
notions  conscientes.  II  est  a  la  rigueur  possible  que  Leonie  inconsciente
se  soit  doutee  de  ma  presence,  qui  a  completeuient  echappe  aussi  bien
a  Leonie  consciente  qu' a  la  domestique.  Mais  cela  meme  est  assez
invraisemblable ;  car  elle  a  clierche  a  se  soustraire  au  sonimeil  par  les
moyens  doiit  elle  dispose.  Enfin,  au  lieu  de  venir  me  trouver  dans
le  salon  ou  j'etais,  elle  est  restee  dans  la  cuisine,  penchee  sur  la  table,
et  n'  est  pas  venue  vers  moi,  comme  elle  1'  eut  fait  certainement  si,  par
un  precede  quelconque,  elle  s'  etait  le  moins  du  monde  doutee  de  ma
presence.

La  huitieme  experience  a  un  autre  d^faut.  II  est  certain  que
r  heure  de  mon  arrivee  a  ete  inopinee  ;  car  1'  lieure  de  2  heures  avait
ete  tiree  au  sort  et  etait  peu  habituelle.  A  1'  extreme  rigueur,  on
peut  admettre  que  Leonie  m'  a  entendu  entrer.  Je  sais  bien  que
c'  est  una  hypothese  peu  vraisemblable  :  Leonie  ne  savait  pas  que  M.
Ferrari  m'  avait  donne  la  clef  de  son  appartement ;  Madame  Ferrari
elle-meme  1'  ignorait,  et  je  n'  ai  pas  fait  le  moindre  bruit  en  entrant.
La  lingerie  est  de  plus  assez  loin  de  la  porte  d'  entree.

II  y  a  un  cote  plus  defectueux  encore.  Le  calcul  de  1'  heure  par
r  etendue  de  la  reprise  faite  au  bas  est  un  calcul  fait  apres  coup,  ce  qui
lui  ote  beaucoup  de  valeur.  Je  ferai  cependant  remarquer  les  deux
faits  suivants  ;  Leonie,  meme  inconsciente,  ne  se  doutait  assurement
pas  de  ma  presence  ;  car,  pendant  qu'  elle  etait  endormie  dans  le  salon,
et  que  je  I'observais,  cache  dans  le  petit  cabinet  attenant  au  salon,
elle  n'  a  pas  un  instant  essaye  de  se  lever  et  de  venir  a  moi  ou  de  me
chercher.  Je  dois  done  admettre  qu'  elle  ne  savait  pas  que  j'etais  la.
Ainsi  ce  qui  est  un  echec  au  point  de  vue  de  la  suggestion  a  distance
est  en  realite  une  preuve  de  plus,  et  une  preuve  excellente,  qu'  il  n'  y  a
pas  eu  connaissance  latente  de  ma  presence.  Entin,  remarquons  que
Leonie,  en  s' endormant  a  1  heure,  se  serait  tout-a-fait  compromise.
L'  heure  etant  tiree  au  sort,  il  etait  possible  que  I'heure  designee  fut  3
ou  4  ou  5  heures,  auquel  cas  1'  echec  eut  ete  complet  et  grave.

Quant  a  1'  heure  de  1.20,  indiquee  par  Leonie,  elle  n'est  pas  en  accord
avec  r  heure  reelle.  Mais  alors  comment  expliquer  qu'  elle  a
travaille  a  son  bas  pendant  trois  quarts  d'  heure  au  moins  1  II  me  jjarait
plus  simple  d'  admettre  qu'  elle  ne  s'  est  pas  rendu  compte  de  1'  heure
et  du  temps,  et  en  fait  de  mesure,  je  prefere  la  mesure  automatique
d'  un  travail  a  1'  aiguille,  a  la  mesure  variable  et  inexacte  que  donne
r  appreciation  approximative  du  temps.

En  resume,  et  comme  resultat  general  de  ces  trois  experiences,
pour  admettre  qu'  il  n'  y  a  pa.s  eu  d'  action  a  distance,  il  faudrait  supposer
d'  abord  cette  etrange  coincidence  d'  une  somnolence  cephalalgique  sur-
venant  a  9  h.  13,  alors  que  j'ai  essaye  de  1' endormir  a  9  h.  11 — heure
tiree  au  sort-  de  plus,  que  Leonie  inconsciente  m'  a  entendu,  alors  que


42


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  <L-c.


Leonie  consciente  et  la  domestique  ne  se  cloutaient  aucunement  de  ma
presence,  puis  que,  m' ayant  entendu,  elle  ait  pousse  I'astuce  jusqu'a
ne  pas  me  chercher,  quoique  sachant  que  je  fusse  la.  Enfin  il
faudrait  que,  le  jour  suivant,  elle  m'  eut  entendu  entrer,  sans  se
demander  comment  j'  entrais  sans  sonner,  et  sans  essayer  de  me  chercher
dans  la  maison  ou  elle  m'  aurait  su  pi-esent.

Ce  sent  la,  on  1'  avouera,  des  hypotheses  bien  invraisemblables,  et
elles  me  paraissent  moins  simples  que  I'hypothese  d'une  action  a
distance  qui  semblait  d'  ailleurs  appuyee  solidement  avant  mes
experiences  par  un  ensemble  satisfaisant  d'  observations  precises.  ^

Quoique  les  faits  que  je  rapporte  soient  moins  nets  a  certains  ^gards
que  ceux  qu'  on  trouvera  dans  les  ouvrages  que  je  cite,  j'  ai  tenu
pourtant  a  les  relater  en  detail,  car  j'  ai  fait  toutes  les  critiques  les  plus
severes  qu'  on  puisse  faire,  et  ce  n'  est  qu  'apres  avoir  suppose  tout  un
ordre  d'  illusions  ou  d'  erreurs  de  ma  part  que  j'  ai  pu  definitivement
conclure  a  une  action  a  distance.  II  faut  en  efFet  non  seulement  se
metier  des  autres,  ce  qui  est  facile,  mais  encore,  ce  qui  est  bien  plus
diiiicile,  se  metier  de  soi-meme,  des  indications  qu'  on  donne,  et  de  cette
tendance  irresistible  a  vouloir  faire  reussir  une  experience.  Mais
malgre  cela,  on  ne  doit  pas  fermer  les  yeux  a  1'  evidence.  Or,  pour
les  faits  que  je  I'apporte,  1'  absurdite  me  parait  etre  de  nier  1'  action  a
distance  et  de  faire  cinq  ou  six  suppositions  ridicules.

Ainsi,  sans  que  j'  aie  pu  avoir  une  experience  decisive,  irreprochablej
j'  ai  trois  experiences  tres  concordantes  qui  rendent  vraisemblable  le
fait  d'  une  action  a  distance.  Probablement  d'  autres  experimentateurs,
a  la  f  ois  plus  liabiles  et  plus  lieureux,  arriveront  a  des  resultats  meilleurs.
Mais,  des  maintenant,  il  me  semble  qu'  on  peut  conclure.

Je  noterai  encore  deux  experiences  faites  par  M.  Paul  Janet  en  ma
presence  pendant  le  mois  de  Septembre,  1886.

Dans  une  premiere  experience,  avant  d'  avoir  vu  Leonie,  je  me
trouve  avec  M.  Janet  le  samedi  a  midi,  a  dejeuner.  Nous  decidons
ensemble  que  M.  Janet  essayera  d'  endormir  Leonie  a  distance,  vers
3  heures  et  demie,  chez  lui,  a  1  kilometre  environ  de  la  maison  ou
demeure  Leonie,  sans  qu'  il  ait  pu  la  voir  depuis  le  moment  ou  nous
avons  pris  cette  resolution  ;  il  fait  effort  pour  1'  endormir  de  3  heures
33  a  3  heures  45.  Puis  nous  arrivons  chez  elle,  a  4  heures  precises.
Elle  est  endormie,  et  en  etat  de  somnambulisme.  Elle  dit  alors  a  M.
Janet,  "  Yous  m'  avez  endormie  a  3  heures  et  demie;  il  ^tait  3  heures  et
demie  passees ;  mais  tres  pres  de  3  heures  et  demie."  L' experience  a
done  tres  bien  reussi.

Je  fis  a  M.  Janet  deux  observations  ;  la  premiere,  c'  est  que  1'  heure

1  Pour  ces  diverses  observations,  je  renvoie  aux  Bulletins  de  la  Socie'te  de  Psi/cho-
logie  Physiologique,  au  livre  de  M.  Ochorovicz,  Sur  la  Suggestion  Mentalc,  et  aux
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  T.  XI.,  p.  682.


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  etc.


43


de  3  heures  et  demie  etait  I'heure  habituelle  ou  on  ]' endormait ;  la
seconde  c'  est  qu'  en  nous  voyant  arriver  a  4  heures  tous  les  deux  elle
pouvait  se  douter  qu'  immediatement  auparavant  on  avait  essaye  d'  agir
sur  elle.  II  conviendrait  done  de  changer  1'  heure  du  somnieil,  sans
changer  1'  heure  de  notre  arrivee.

Je  ne  fis  ces  observations  que  le  lendemain  a  2  heures  et  demie,
quand  j'  allai  voir  M.  Janet.  Alors  il  fait  eflbrt  jjour  endormir
Leonie  un  peu  plus  tot,  c'  est-a-dire,  de  3  heures  a  3  heures  1 2.  Nous
restons  alors  encore  una  demi-heure  chez  M.  Janet,  sans  aller  rue
de  la  Ferme,  ou  denieure  Leonie.  II  est  4  heures  quand  j'y  arrive,  et
j'  arrive  seul,  de  maniere  a  ce  qu'  elle  puisse  supposer  que  c'  est  a  ce
moment  meme  que  M.  Janet  1'  endort,  et  que  je  suis  venu  pour  voir
comment  le  sommeil  survient  pendant  qu'  on  essaye  de  1'  endormir.
Sans  rien  dire  de  1'  heure  a  laquelle  nous  avions  essaye  d'  agir,
j'  apprends  de  Mademoiselle  Gibert,  chez  qui  demeurait  Leonie,  qu'  a  3
heures  elle  etait  reveillee,  mais  que,  vers  3  heures  10,  elle  etait  probable-
ment  endormie ;  car  a  ce  moment  ses  allures  ont  completement  change,
et,  au  lieu  de  rester  dans  le  jardin,  elle  est  entree  dans  le  petit  salon
ou  elle  se  tient  d'  habitude  quand  elle  est  en  somnambulisme.  In-
terrogee  a  son  tour,  Leonie  a  dit  qu'  elle  s'  est  endormie  vers  3
heures  20.  Entre  3  heures  10  et  3  heures  20,  si  Ton  prend  la
moyenne,  on  arrive  a  3  heures  15,  heure  qui  coincide  tres  bien  avec
r  heure  a  laquelle  M.  Janet  a  agi.

Cette  experience  est  done  extremement  satisfaisante,  puisque,  en
eliminant  la  cause  d'  erreur  qui  existait  pour  1'  experience  de  la
veille,  nous  n'  en  avons  pas  moins  obtenu  le  phenomene  de  1'  action  a
distance.

Depuis  la  premiere  publication  de  M.  Janet  dans  les  Bulletins  de
la  Societe  de  Psychulogie,  d'  autres  experiences  ont  ete  faites  par  lui  qui
confirment  ses  premiers  resultats. M.  Janet  ni'  en  a  donne  la  notice  '
succincte,  et  m'  a  autorise  a  la  publier  ici.

En  1886.

8  Septembre,  essai  d'  action  a  3  heures. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4
heures. M.  J.  etait  entre  sans  etre  vu  et  sans  sonner  a  la  porte.

9  Septembre,  3  heui'es. — Echec. Quand  M.  J.  arrive,  elle  se  plaint
d'  un  fort  mal  de  tete  qui  vient  de  la  prendre.

11  Septembre,  9  heures. — Echec,  M.  J.  arrive  a  10  heures,  et  la
trouve  troublee  et  etourdie.  Elle  pent  a  peine  repondre  ;  mais  ne
dort  pas.

14  Septembre,  4  heui'es. — Arrivee  de  M.  J.  a  4  heures  15.  Leonie
pretend  qu'  elle  etait  endormie ;  mais  que  le  coup  de  sonnette  1'  a
reveillee.

18  et  19  Septembre. — Succes. Ce  sont  les  deux  experiences  faites
avec  moi  que  j'  ai  mentionnees  plus  haut.


44


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  (&c.


23  Septembre,  2  heures. — Echec. Elle  i^tait  en  promenade.

24  Septembre,  3  heures  15. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4  heures.  On  1'  a
vue  eveillee  a  3  heures  15.

26  Septembre,  3  heures. — Echec.  Elle  etait  seule  a  garder  la
maison,  et  se  promenait  au  jardin  pour  ne  pas  dormir.

27  Septembi-e,  8  heures  30  du  soir. — C  est  M.  Gibert  qui  1'  a  endor-
mie de  chez  lui,  et  lui  a  commande  de  venir.  Elle  est  sortie  endormie
du  pavilion  qu'  elle  habite,  pour  aller  trouver  M.  Gibert,  a  9  heures  5.

29  Septembre,  3  heures  50. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4  heures  5.  On
r  avait  vue  eveillee  a  3  heures  30.

30  Septembre,  3  heures  30. — Echec.  La  bonne  1'  a  vue  reveill^e  au
moment  ou  elle  allait  s'  endormir.

1  Octobre,  2  heui-es  40. — Echec. Elle  etait  en  promenade.

5  Octobre,  4  heures. — Experience  interessante.  Elle  causait  avec
la  bonne  dans  le  jardin,  et  s'  est  endormie  subitement  a  4  heures  5.
L'  heure  a  ete  exactement  not^e.

6  Octobre,  3  heures. — Echec.

9  Octobre,  3  heures  15. — Echec.

10  Octobre,  3  heures  20. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4  heures  5.

12  Octobre,  3  heures. — Echec.  Echec  aussi  d'  une  suggestion  mentale
ten  tee  a  distance.

13  Octobre,  5  heures. — Trouvt^e  endormie.  Execute  a  I'arrivee  de
M.  Janet  une  suggestion  mentale  faite  a  distance,  celle  de  se  lever  des
que  M.  J.  serait  entre.

14  Octobre,  2  heures  30. — Trouvee  endormie  a  3  heures  20.  Execute
encore  une  petite  siiggestion  (1)

1 6  Octobre,  3  heures.  — Trouvee  endormie  a  3  heures  30.

24  Novembre,  2  heures  30.
3  Decembre,  4  heures  10.

5  Decembre,  4  heures  10. — Ces  trois  experiences  ont  echoue.

6  Decembre,  4  heures  10. — Trouvee  non  endormie,  mais  se  lavant
les  mains,  et  resistant  au  sommeil.

7  Decembre,  2  heures  30. — Trouvee  endormie  a  3  heures  5.
10  Decembre,  4  heures  20. — Echec. En  promenade.

16  Decembre,  4  heures  15. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4  heures.  On  I'a
vue  eveillee  a  3  heures  15.

13  Decembre,  4  heures  5. — Trouvee  endormie  a  4  heures  25.  On
r  a  vue  eveillee  a  4  heures,  et  quelques  minutes.

14  Decembre,  11  heures  30  matin. — Echec.

18  Decembre,  21  Decembre,  et  22  Decembre. — Echecs.
23  Decembre,  3  heures. — Trouvee  endormie  a  3  heures  40.

25  Decembre,  3  heures  1 5. — Experience  interessante.  0'  ^tait  le
jour  de  Noel,  et  elle  ne  s'  attendait  pas  a  etre  endormie.  M.
Janet  alors  a  1'  improviste  se  decide  a  agir. A.  ce  moment  Leonie  se


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  itc.  45


promenait  avec  des  caniarades  sur  la  jetee.  Elle  est  prise  soudain  d'une
grande  migraine  (vers  3  heures  20),  et  elle  rentre  precipitamment  rue
de  la  Ferme  pour  tomber  endormie  dans  le  salon.

Durant  cette  periode,  il  n'  y  a  eu  sommeil  spontane  que  quatre
fois.

Pour  terminer  je  ferai  remarquer  la  Constance  du  retard.  D'  abord,
dans  mes  experiences,  pour  six  experiences  qui  ont  plus  ou  moins
reussi,  il  y  a  eu  un  retard  de  10,  20,  3,  7,  2-5,  7  minutes,  ce  qui  donne
une  moyenne  de  11  minutes  a  peu  pres.  Dans  les  deux  experiences
faites  avec  M.  Janet  il  y  a  eu  un  retard  de  2  et  de  15  minutes.  Dans  les

10  principales  experiences  de  M.  Gibert  et  de  M.  Janet,  il  y  a  eu  10  fois
retard,  avec  une  moyenne  de  9  minutes  environ.  Dans  les  experiences
suivantes  il  y  a  eu  aussi  constamment  retard.

Si  r  on  voulait  appliquer  a  ces  faits  le  calcul  des  probabilites — dans
20  experiences,  20  fois  retard — on  arriverait  a  une  probabilite  si  faible,
d'  un  millionieme,  que  ce  serait  la  certitude  ;  mais,  en  pareil  cas,  le
calcul  des  probabilites  est  un  leurre  ;  car  1'  appreciation  des  heures  est
tellement  subordonnee  a  notre  bonne  foi,  et  si  delicate  a  etablir
impartialement  qu'  il  est  impossible  de  lui  appliquer  le  calcul,  comme  on
pourrait  le  faire  si  le  sommeil  commen9ait  a  un  moment  precis,
determine  fatalement  par  un  enregistrevir  automatique.

Mais,  sans  parler  de  probabilite  mathematique  rigoureuse,  il  est
permis  de  mettre  en  evidence  ce  fait  frappant  que,  sur  20  experiences,
pas  une  seule  fois  il  n'y  a  eu  d'avance  notable — ^je  dis  ?ici<ct5/e  pour
faire  la  part  des  inexactitudes  de  nos  constatations — tandis  que  toujours

11  y  eu  retard.

En  resume,  meme  en  accumulant  les  faits  des  anciens  magnetiseurs
(par  exemple,  celle  de  la  demoiselle  Sanson  endormie  par  Dupotet  en
presence  de  Husson,  et  de  Recamier  en  1827),  les  observations  de  M.
Dusart,  de  M.  Hericourt,  de  M.  Gibert,  de  M.  Janet  et  les  miennes,  nous
ne  tenons  pas  une  demonstration  absolument  inattaquable  de  1'  action
a  distance ;  mais  nous  avons,  je  pense,  rendu  le  fait  extremeraent
probable.  II  faudrait,  pour  renverser  ce  que  nous  avons  etabli,  trouver
quelque  chose  de  nouveau  qui  expliquerait  nos  erreui'S,  nos  illusions,
nos  observations  defectueuses,  et  peut-etre  1'  etonnante  serie  de  coinci-
dences, survenant  chaque  fois  qu'  on  s'  occupe  de  cette  question  avec  des
sujets  aptes  a  subir  1'  action  a  distance.

Trouver  cette  solution,  ce  sera  une  decouverte  veritable,  aussi  im-
portante  et  aussi  nouvelle  que  le  fait  de  1'  action  a  distance.

J'  ai  eu  r  occasion  de  refaire  ces  memes  experiences  sur  Leonie  au
mois  de  Janvier  1888.  Mais  cela  a  ete  dans  d' assez  mauvaises
conditions.  En  effet,  j'  avals  des  preoccupations  graves  qui  me
laissaient  peu  de  liberte  d'  esprit  et  en  outre  tres  peu  de  temps  etait  a
ma  disposition. Quant  a  Leonie,  elle  etait  assez  mal  portante,  et


46


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  cC-c.


toujours  peu  docile,  ce  qui  rend  toutes  les  experiences  faites  avec  elle
longues,  laborieuses,  et  irritantes.

Mon  principal  souci,  dans  cette  seconde  serie,  a  ete  d'  eviter  toute
parole  pouvant  lui  faire  soupgonner  mon  intention.  Je  ne  lui  ai  meme
pas  donne  a  penser  que  j' avals  1' intention  de  faire  sur  elle  d' autre
experience  que  1'  etude  des  aimants.

Leonie  se  trouvait  chez  M.  Ferrari  dans  les  memes  conditions  que
pr^c^demment.

Je  r  ai  endorniie  pour  la  premiere  fois,  dans  cette  serie  d' experiences,
le  17  Decembre.

Le  1  Janvier  (apres  1' avoir  endorniie  10  fois,  du  17  Decembre  au
1  Janvier),  j'  ai  essay^  d'  agir  a  distance,  a  10  heures  20  du  matin.  Je
]ie  r  ai  pas  interrogee  sur  ce  qu'  elle  a  ou  non  ressenti ;  mais,  comme
elle  ne  m'  a  rien  dit,  j'  ai  conclu  qu'  elle  n'  avait  rien  ressenti  d'a  normal.

Le  12  Janvier,  j'essaye  de  1'  endormir  de  8  heures  58  a  9  heures  8
du  matin.  Puis,  a  10  heures  15,  je  vais  chez  elle  ;  elle  ^tait  sortie.
Quand  je  la  revois  le  soir,  spontanement  elle  me  dit  :  "  Ce  matin  je  me
suis  sentie  tout  etourdie.  J'  ai  ete  alors  porter  une  lettre  a  la  poste
pour  me  de^aire"  mais  je  ne  veux  pas  insister  sur  1'  heure  exacte  a
laquelle  elle  a  senti  cette  action,  pour  ne  pas  lui  donner  I'^veil  et  lui  faire
supposer  que  je  voulais  pratiquer  cette  expt^rience.  Je  sais  seulement
qu'  elle  s'  est  levee  a  7  heures  et  demie,  qu'  elle  etait  parfaitement  bien
portante  en  se  levant,  et  qu' elle  est  sortie  vers  10  heures — plutot
avant  10  heures.

Le  15  Janvier,  apres  avoir  tire  au  sort  1' heure  a  laquelle  je
devrais  1' endormir,  j'essaye  d'  agir  sur  elle  de  4  heures  58  a  5  heures
25.  (II  est  possible  que  j'  aie  pense  a  cette  experience  une  demie  heure
avant  de  r  endormir.)  Quand  j' arrive  chez  elle  a  5  heures  25,  je  la
trouve  dans  un  etat  different  de  son  etat  normal.  Elle  vient  a  inoi,
et  me  dit  avec  une  certaine  hardiesse  qui  n'  est  pas  du  tout  dans  ses
habitudes,  "  M.  Richet,  j'aitres  mal  a  I'estomac  depuis  une  heui'e."
Je  cherche  a  lui  faire  croire  que  c'  est  son  dejeuner  qu'  elle  n'  a  pas
diger^  :  mais  elle  me  repond  a  peine,  et  pendant  que  je  lui  parle,  ses
yeux  se  ferment,  et  elle  s'  endort  presque  subitement.  Cela  ne  se  passe
jamais  ainsi.

Endormie,  elle  me  dit  que  j'avais  pense  a  elle  et  qu' alors  elle  a  bu
de  I'eau  froide  pour  se  defaire.  Puis,  comme  je  lui  dis  que  je  ne
pensais  pas  a  elle,  elle  ajoute  qu'  elle  a  bu  parce  qu'  elle  avait  chaud,
ayant  dii  deplacer  les  meubles  de  sa  chambre.

Reveillee,  elle  n'  a  conserve  aucun  souvenir  de  ce  qu'  elle  m'  a  dit  au
moment  ou  je  suis  arrive.  Je  dois  done  admettre  qu'  elle  etait  alors,
comme  je  1'  avais  soup(^onne,  dans  un  ^tat  special,  assez  different  de
r  ^tat  de  veille,  et  proche  de  1'  etat  de  somnambulisme.  Cette  experience
pent  done  etre  consideree  comme  un  demi-succes.  Malheureusement


Relation  de  Biverses  Bxperiencefi,  d-c.


47


cet  etat  de  denii-veille  n'  est  pas  suffisamnient  caracterise,  pour  permettre
una  conclusion  certaine.

La  quatrieme  experience  a  ete  faite  le  18  Janvier,  de  1  heure  10  a
1  heure  25.  Echec  complet.  EUe  ne  m'  a  rien  dit.  EUe  etait  allee
faire  une  visite  dans  la  journee.  EUe  s'  est  sen  tie  tout  etourdie  vers  4
heures  et  demie.

A  pai'tir  de  ce  jour  jusqu'  au  lundi,  23  Janvier,  a  9  heures  du  soir,
je  ne  veux  plus  la  voir  ni  la  parler.  Et  je  me  contente  d'agir  sur  elle
a  distance,  sans  mettre  qui  que  ce  soit  dans  ma  confidence  et  en  tirant
au  sort  les  heures  et  les  jours,  auxquelles  je  dois  faire  1'  expei'ience.  Le
sort  designs  vendredi  4  heures  ;  samedi  1  heure ;  et  lundi  3  heures.

Quand  je  vols  Leonie  le  lundi  soir,  elle  me  dit  qu'  elle  n'  a  eprouve
d'effet  ni  le  jeudi,  ni  le  dimanche,  ni  le  lundi,  mais  seulement  le
vendredi  et  le  samedi,  le  vendredi  a  9  heures  et  demie  du  matin,  et  le
samedi  a  1  heure  et  demie  de  la  journee.

Nous  pouvons  done  considerer  cette  experience  du  samedi  comme
un  succes  ;  mais  malheureusement  accompagne  d'  un  echec  grave,  a  savoir
le  vendredi  matin  a  9  heures,  effet  ressenti,  alors  que  je  n'  avals  ni  agi  ni
■cherche  a  agir.  Quant  a  1' echec  du  lundi,  j' etais  fort  preoccupe  ce
jour  la,  et  j'  ai  ete  derange  a  plusieurs  reprises,  pendant  que  je  cherchais
a  r  endormir.

Cela  nous  fait  en  somme  sur  sept  experiences  cinq  echecs
complets,  assez  graves  les  uns  et  les  autres  pour  divers  motifs,  et  deux
succes.  Ces  deux  succes  seraient  absolument  sufEsants  s'ils  etaient
irreprochables  ;  mais  il  n'  en  est  pas  ainsi ;  et  le  succes  complet,  avec  un
sommeil  profond,  irrecusable,  survenant  exactement  a  1'  heure  de  nion
action,  n'  a  pas  ete  obtenu.

II  est  bon  d'  ajouter,  ainsi  que  je  le  disais  en  commencant,  que  je
n'  ai  pu  donner  a  ces  experiences  tout  le  temps  qu'  il  eut  fallu  y  con-
sacrer ;  des  preoccupations  d'  un  tout  autre  ordre  m'  erapechaient  de
penser  a  Leonie,  comme  il  aurait  fallu  le  faire  pour  reussir.

II  faut  noter  que  du  17  Decembre  au  25  Janvier,  jour  de  son
depart  de  Paris,  pas  une  seule  fois  elle  n'  a  eu  de  sommeil  spontane.

Ainsi  cette  derniere  serie  d'  experiences  n'  apporte  aucun  appui  bien
serieux  aux  prece'dentes  ;  mais  elle  ne  les  infirme  nullement ;  car,  dans
les  deux  expt^riences  qui  ont  reussi,  il  n'  y  avait  pas  de  supercherie,  ou
d' auto-suggestion  possible.  Ce  qui  a  manque,  c' est  le  fait  d' un
sommeil  profond,  caracteristique,  qui  donne  un  signe  irrecusable,  dont
la  valeur  ne  peut  etre  revoquee  en  doute.

Chapitre  V.

EXPERIENCES  d'  ACTION  A  DISTANCE  FAITES  SUR  D'  AUTRES  SUJETS.

J'  ai  essaye  nombre  de  fois  sur  des  sujets  divers  1'  action  a  distance,
et  j'ai  presque  toujours  echoue,  sauf  dans  le  eas  de  Leonie  et  aussi,


48


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  dx.


il  y  a  15  ans,  cliez  une  femme  dont  j'  ai  rapporte  1'  observation  dans  les
Bulletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psycliologie  Ploysiologique.

Ces  ecliecs  sont  iniportants  a  signaler;  car,  s'il  s'agissait  simplement
d'  une  superclierie,  consciente  ou  non,  ou  d'  une  illusion  de  notre  part,
nous  devrions  voir  les  succes  se  multiplier.  II  n'  en  est  rien.  Le
nombre  des  su;ets  sur  lesquels  on  pent  agir  a  distance  reste  tres
limite.

Je  noterai  a  titre  de  documents  quelques  faits  de  ce  genre  obtenus
sur  diverses  personnes.

En  Mai,  1884,  quelques  uns  de  mes  amis  et  moi,  pr^occupes  de  ces
questions,  et  sortant  d'  une  soiree  ou  nous  avions  vu  des  faits  de
spiritisine  extraordinaires  et  probablement  apocryphes,  nous  convenons
d'  agir  a  distance  sur  1'  un  de  nous  (M.  Ferrari),  que  nous  t^loignons  pour
un  instant.  Nous  ne  le  prevenons  aucunement  ni  de  1'  heure  ni  du
jour,  ni  de  Taction  a  exercer.  Nous  etions  trois  a  penser  a  cette
suo-c^estion  a  distance — M.  Louis  Olivier,  M.  Graston  Fournier,  et  moi. —
II  est  convenu  que  le  lendemain,  a  midi,  nous  penserions  a  H.  Ferrari,
et  que  nous  lui  ferions  faire  un  dessin.  Je  suis  absolument  sdr  que  H.
Ferrari  n'  a  pu  deviner  ce  que  nous  avions  dit,  et  que  personne  ne  lui
en  a  parle.

D'  ailleurs,  le  lendemain  a  midi,  il  se  trouva  que  moi  seal  pensais  a
cette  suggestion  a  distance.  A  midi  je  formulai  tres  nettement  la
suggestion  d'  uu  dessin  a  faire.

Le  soir,  causant  avec  H.  Ferrari,  je  lui  demande  s'  il  n'  a  rien  fait
de  remarquable  dans  la  journee.  II  me  dit  que  la  suggestion  annoncee
n'  a  pas  eu  lieu.  J'  insiste  pour  lui  demander  ce  qu'  il  a  fait  a  midi.
II  me  dit  qu'  il  venait  de  dejeuner.  Alors,  impatiente,  je  lui  demande  :
"  As-tu  fait  un  dessin  1 " — "  Au  fait,  c'  est  vrai,"  me  dit-il,  "  j'  ai  fait  un
dessin  pour  mon  tils."  Et  il  me  montre  un  petit  paysage  a  la  plume,
<iu'  il  a  fait  a  midi  apres  son  dejeuner.

Y  a-t-il  la  coincidence  1  Je  n'  ose  le  nier ;  mais  en  general  H.
Ferrari  ne  dessine  pas.  II  ne  fait  peut-etre  pas  trois  fois  dans  1'  annee
un  dessin  aussi  complique  que  ce  paysage.

J'  ai  essaye  encore  trois  fois  sur  H.  Ferrari  cette  suggestion  a
distance,  mais  je  1'  ai  fait  seul,  c'est-a-dire,  sans  qu'  aucune  personne  fut
dans  la  confidence.  Deux  fois  j'  ai  echou(^.  II  s'  agissait  pour  lui
d'  aciieter  un  journal  en  sortant  de  chez  lui  le  matin.  Comme  ce  n'  est
pas  dans  ses  habitudes,  le  fait  aurait  ete  tres  probant.  Mais  1'  echec
a  ete  complet.

L'  autre  experience  a  (^te  faite  au  mois  d'  Aoiit  1884.  Je  lui  donne,
mentalement  et  a  distance,  c'est-a-dire,  sans  que  nous  soyions  en
presence  r  un  de  1'  autre,  la  suggestion  de  parler  d'  une  jeune  fille  qu'  il
avait  connue  jadis,  Clemence  X.,  a  laquelle  certainement  ni  lui  ni  moi
nous  ne  pensons  deux  fois  dans  1'  annee. Or  1'  exp(^rience  a  r(^ussi


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


49


fort  bien,  car,  ce  meme  jour,  il  a  parle  d'e  Mademoiselle  Clemence
avec  un  de  ses  amis.

Je  sais  bien  qn'  on  peut  expliquer  cela  par  une  coincidence  fortuite.
Mais  alors  c'  est  une  bien  etonnante  serie  de  coincidences.

J'ai  peut  etre  fait  sur  d'autres  personnes  5,  6,  7  ou  8  fois  des  expe-
riences d'  action  a  distance,  et  bien  souvent  elles  ont  eclioue  ;  je  vais
cependant  en  rapporter  quelques  unes,  ou  le  succes  a  ete  assez  interes-
sant.  Le  lundi  soir,  16  Fevrier  1885,  je  me  trouve  a  une  soiree  chez
Madame  de  B.  avec  Mademoiselle  de  G.  II  est  convenu  que  je  ferai
sur  Mademoiselle  de  G.  une  experience  de  suggestion  a  distance,  portant
sur  n'  importe  quel  jour,  n'  importe  quelle  heure,  pour  n'  importe  quel
acte.

Ignorant  encore  ce  que  je  veux  faire,  je  dis  a  Madame  de  G.  :  "  II
faut  qu'  il  y  ait  comme  un  symbole  materiel  d'  action  commune.  L'  objet
materiel  servira  au  transfert  de  la  pensee."  Alors  nous  prenons  une
carte  de  vi.site,  et  sur  cette  carte  nous  ecrivons  mon  nom,  puis  nous
partageons  la  carte  en  deux,  et  Mademoiselle  de  G.  et  moi,  nous  en
prenons  chacun  un  fragment.

En  sortant  du  salon,  je  dis  a  Madame  de  B.  et  a  M.  le  Docteur  C.  :
"  Voici  ce  que  j'  ai  voulu  que  demain  fasse  Mademoiselle  de  G.  II  faut
qu'  elle  prenne  cette  carte  et  la  jette  au  feu."  Mais  je  ne  dis  rien
de  r  heure  a  laquelle  il  faut  agir,  et  je  recommande  a  mes  deux  inter-
locuteurs  de  ne  rien  dire  et  de  ne  rien  laisser  soup9onner.  II  va  de  soi
que  je  suis  sur  de  leur  bonne  foi  et  de  leur  sagacite.  Pourtant  j'  eusse
evidemment  mieux  fait  de  ne  leur  rien  dire  du  tout.

Mademoiselle  de  G.,  rentree  chez  elle,  ne  peut  dormir.  Elle  a  toute
la  nuit  des  cauchemars  douloureux  ;  le  matin,  en  se  levant,  vers  10
heures,  elle  voit  sur  sa  table  la  carte  dechiree  qui  lui  a,  pense-t-elle,  fait
passer  une  si  mauvaise  nuit.  Alors,  irritee  contre  cette  carte  inoffensive,
elle  la  prend  et  la  jette  au  feu.  Elle  la  regarde  bruler  dans  le  feu  '
jusqu'  a  ce  que  tout  le  papier  soit  consume.  Puis,  dans  la  journee,  elle
va  voir  Madame  de  M.,  qui  ne  salt  pas  ce  dont  il  s'  agit,  et  elle  lui  dit  .
"  Je  m'  imagine  que  M.  Richet  va  etre  fache  contre  moi ;  car,  au  lieu  de
faire  son  experience,  j'ai  jete  sa  carte  dans  le  feu."

Or  precisement,  le  mardi  matin  17  Fevrier,  a  10  heures  precises,
j'  avais  pris  la  carte,  et  je  1'  avals  jetee-  dans  le  feu.  J'  avals  meme
suivi  des  yeux  le  papier  qui  brulait,  jusqu'  a  ce  que  tout  ait  ete  con-
sume. Le  fait  de  jeter  la  carte  au  feu  etait  1'  acte  que  j'  avais  mentale-
ment  suggere  a  Mademoiselle  de  G.,  et  on  voit  que  le  succes  avait
suivi.

Quelque  interessante  que  soit  cette  experience,  elle  a  un  grave  defaut,
c'est  que  Madame  de  B.  et  M.C.  connaissaient  ce  que  je  voulais  faire.  Or^
si  jenesuis  pas  sur  de  moi,a  plus  forte  raison  ne  suis-je  pas  sur  del
autres. La  bonne  foi  consciente  de  Mad.  de  G.  est  entiere,  mais  de  sa

E


50


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


bonne  foi  inconsciente,  pas  plus  que  pour  toute  autre,  je  ne  suis
pas  certain.

Ces  experiences — les  deux  faites  avec  H.  Ferrari  et  celle  que  j'  ai
faite  avec  Mad.  de  G. — ne  prouvent  done  pas  encore  en  toute
certitude  qu'  il  y  ait  des  suggestions  a  distance.  J'  ai  voulu  cependant
les  rapporter,  ne  fut-ce  que  pour  indiquer  la  voie  a  suivre,  et  les  pre-
cautions extremes  qu'il  faut  toujours  prendre.  Si  on  ne  les  prendpas,
au  moins  faut-il  savoir  qu'  on  ne  les  a  pas  prises.

Le  mercredi  soir,  en  F^vrier  1885,  apres  avoir  endormi  Madame  de
M.,  je  la  reveille,  et  je  lui  dis  :  "  Je  vais  faire  avec  vous  une  experience
d'  action  a  distance.  Je  vais  demain  a  midi  penser  a  un  tableau
quelconque,  et  a  la  meme  heure  vous  m'  ecrirez  pour  me  dire  le  tableau
auquel  vous  pensez  alors."

Je  rentre  chez  moi,  et,  dans  une  assez  nombreuse  collection  de
photographies  de  tableaux  connus,  je  tire  au  sort  le  tableau  auquel  je
vais  penser. Le  sort  designe  le  Mariage  de  la  Vierge,  par  Raphael.

Ce  meme  jour,  a  4  heures,  je  regois  de  Madame  de  M.  une  lettre
ainsi  concue  :  "  En  fait  de  tableau,  je  ne  vois  qu'un  ogre  pret  a  devorer
non  des  petits  eafants,  mais  des  sujets  psychiques. — Midi,  jeudi."

Or,  precisenient  a  midi,  onetait  venu  m'  offrir  a  1'  improviste  une  loge
pour  mener  nies  enfants  au  theatre  voir  dans  la  journee  jouer  Le  Petit
Poucet,  oil,  comme  on  salt,  le  role  principal  est  celui  de  1'  ogre  qui  devore
des  petits  enfants.  Je  suis  ahsohiment  sitr  que  Madame  de  M.  n'  a  pu
savoir  que  j'  allais  voir  Le  Petit  Poucet.

Je  mentionne  le  fait  sans  conclure ;  car  le  hasard  en  peut  etre  la
cause.

Sur  Alice,  Helena,  et  Eugenie,  j'  ai  fait  peut-etre  5  ou  6  fois  des
experiences  d'action  a  distance.  Deux  fois  seulement  j' ai  obtenu  un
resultat,  plus  ou  moins  favorable.

J'  avais  prevenu  Helena  que  je  viendrais  le  samedi  vers  5  heures  et
demie  pour  1'  endormir.  De  fait,  le  samedi,  de  5  heures  35  a  5  heures
45,  je  fais  effort  pour  agir  a  distance  sans  la  prevenir.  Vers  5  heures
35  (il  ni'a  et^  impossible  de  preciser  davantage),  elle  dit  a  sa  domestique:
"  Apportez  la  lampe ;  M.  Richet  va  venir,  vous  me  laisserez  tranquille."
Ce  disant,  elle  s'endort,  et,  quand  j'  arrive,  je  la  trouve  en  somnam-
bulisme.

Au  r^veil,  elle  esc  stupefaite  de  ce  qui  s'  est  passe.  Elle  ne  com-
prend  pas  comment  je  suis  arrive.

Cette  experience  est  ^videmment  defectueuse  :  car  Helena  savait  que
ie  devais  venir,  et  cette  attente  a  pu  amener  a  elle  seule  le  sommeil.
D'  autre  part,  ayant  recommence  2  ou  3  fois  des  tentatives  analogues,
et  ayant  echoue,  je  ne  puis  rien  induire  de  ce  fait  isole,  et  assez
mal  observe.

Le  2  Decembre  1887,  je  dis  a  Eugenie: "  J' essaierai,  un  jour


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <L-c.


51


-quelconque  de  cette  semaine,  d'  agir  sur  vous  a  distance,  non  pas  pour
vous  endormir,  mais  pour  faire  que  vous  penserez  a  moi  avec  plus  de
force."  Rentre  chez  moi,  je  tire  au  sort  1'  heure  et  le  jour,  et  le  sort
designe  le  5  Decembre,  3  heures.  L'  hesitation  portait  entre  le  4  et
le  5  Decembre,  de  8  heures  matin  a  10  heures  soir.

De  fait,  j'ai  ete  le  5  Decembre  a  3  heures  assez  distrait  pour  oublier
•corapletement  cette  experience,  si  bien  que  je  ne  pense  pas  du  tout  a
Eugenie.  Pourtant,  quand  je  la  vois,  le  6  Decembre,  elle  me  dit,  "  Eh
bien  !  vous  avez  pense  a  moi  dimanche  a  3  heures."  (Le  dimanche
etait  le  5  Decembre.)

Une  autre  observation  tout-a-fait  interessante  se  rapporte  a  une
jeune  femme  atteinte  d'  hysteria  grave,  et  ay  ant,  par  le  fait  de  son
hysterie,  de  1'  hemianesthesie,  avec  des  contractures  et  une  paraplegia
intermittente. — Leontine  D.

Je  r  ai  vue  pour  la  premiere  fois  le  31  Decembre  1887.  Elle  a  ete
tres  facilement  endormie,  et,  comme  toutes  les  hysteriques  atteintes  de
grande  hysterie,  elle  a  presente  a  1'  etat  plus  ou  moins  fruste  les  trois
phases  de  catalepsie,  lethargic,  et  somnambulisrae,  phases  que  je  n'  ai
jamais  vues  chez  les  sujets  non  hysteriques.

Pendant  qu' elle  est  en  etat  de  somnambulisrae  je  constate  qu' on
peut  lui  attirer  la  main  par  des  passes,  sans  qu'  elle  ait  conscience,
soit  des  passes,  soit  des  mouvements  qu'  elle-meme  execute.  Cela  m'  a
clonne  1'  idee  d'  essayer  d'agir  sur  elle  a  distance.

Le  17  Janvier,  apres  1' avoir  endormie  quatre  fois  (du  31  Decembre
au  4  Janvier),  je  lui  dis  que  j'essaierai  de  1'  endormir  de  chez  moi  un
certain  jour,  a  une  certaine  heure  de  la  semaine  qui  va  venir,  du  17
au  23  Janvier.

Le  leiidemain  mercredi,  ayant  tire  1' heure  au  sort,  j'  essaye  d'agir
sur  elle,  de  1  heure  10  a  1  heure  25.  J'  ecris  sur  mon  cahier  de  notes
le  jour  et  1'  heure,  et  quand,  le  mardi  23  Janvier,  je  revois  Leontine,  je
n'  ai  qu'  un  souvenir  inexact  et  confus  de  1'  heure  et  du  jour.  Aloi's  je
r  interroge  et  je  lui  demande  :  "  Quand  ai-je  essaye  de  vous  endormir  ?"
Sa  sceur,  qui  etait  presente,  me  dit :  "  Mais  c'  est  mercredi,  a  1  heure,  1
-heure  10.  Au  moment  ou  nous  finissions  de  dejeuner,  Leontine  me  dit  :
''  Les  bras  me  tombent ;  je  vais  m'  endormir.  C  est  comme  si  M.
Richet  voulait  m'  endormir.'  "

En  rentrant  chez  moi,  je  constate  avec  une  vraie  satisfaction  que  le
jour  et  r  heure  etaient  absolument  exacts.

J'  appelle  I'attention  sur  cette  belle  experience  :  agir  a  distance  le
mercredi  a  1  heure  10,  et  constater  une  action  le  mercredi  a  1  heure  10  :
alors  quel' heure  est  tiree  au  sort,  et  que  le  jour  a  ete  determine  par  ma
fantaisie  seule ;  c'  est  une  probabilite  des  plus  faibles,  d'  un  millieme,
tout  au  plus  ;  et  on  experimentei'ait  peut-etre  toute  sa  vie  sans  trouver
line  seule  fois  un  efFet  analogue,  si  c'  etait  le  hasard  qui  le  determinait.

E  2


52


Relation  de  Diverges  Exjperiences,  d'c.


II  faut  ajouter  qu' une  seconde  experience  faite  sur  Leontine  m' a
donne  un  resultat  tout-a-fait  nul.  Je  lui  dis,  "  Du  24  au  31  Janvier  je
vais  essayer  d'  agir  sur  vous  pendant  la  semaine."

J'ai  essaye  d'  agir  sur  elle  le  dimanclie,  29  Janvier,  de  10  heures  20
a  10  heures  30,  1'  heure  etant  tiree  au  sort.

Quand  je  la  revois  le  31  Janvier,  elle  me  dit  que  le  jour  est  le  jeucli
a  10  heures  et  demie.  L'  heure  est  exacte  (niais  il  s'  agit  peut-etre
d  'une  coincidence  fortuite)  et  le  jour  est  errone.

Chapitre  VI.

OBSERVATIONS  d'  ACTION  A  DISTANCE.

II  faut  separer  les  experiences  et  les  observations.  Une  experience
vaut  toujours  mieux  qu'  une  observation :  car  on  a  pu  dans  une
certaine  mesure  preciser  les  conditions  du  phenomena.  On  salt  ce
qu'  on  a  voulu  faire,  et  il  est  tres  peu  rationnel  de  supposer  le  hasard
pour  expliquer  le  succes,  quand  on  a  obtenu  un  succes.  Au  contraire,
quand  il  s'  agit  d'une  observation,  il  faut  tenir  grand  coniptedu  hasard.
Le  hasard  nous  entoure  de  toutes  parts  dans  notre  vie  de  chaque  jour.
Autant  il  est  peu  raisonnable  de  croire  au  hasard  quand  on  experi-
mente,  autant  il  faut  admettre  la  possibilite  d'  un  concours  fortuit  de
circonstances  quand  on  n'  experimente  pas.

Dans  les  Phantasms  of  the  Living  on  trouve  une  telle  quantite  de
faits  impossibles  a  expliquer  autrement  que  par  la  telepathie  qu'  il  faut
admettre  une  action  a  distance.  Peu  impoi'te  la  theorie,  le  fait  me
semble  prouve,  et  absolument  prouve.  Chaque  science  a  ses  precedes
de  certitude.  Lorsque  il  s'  agit  d'  observations  sans  experimentation
possible,  il  faut  avouer  qu'  on  ne  pourrait  pas  accumuler  plus  de
preuves  que  ne  1'  ont  fait  les  savants  auteurs  des  Phantasms  of  the
Livirig.  lis  ne  peuvent  determiner  le  fait  d'  une  action  a  distance  par
les  memes  precedes  qu'  un  chimiste  determine  le  poids  atomique  du
carbone.  Mais  ils  ont  epuise  tous  les  precedes  de  certitude  qu'  il  leur
etait  donne  d'  accumuler  pour  prouver  la  telepathie.

Je  vais  rapporter  ici  un  fait  de  telepathie  qui  m'  est  personnel  et
qui  me  parait  important ;  car  les  conditions  ou  je  1'  ai  observe  etaient,  je
crois,  irreprochables.

Le  rnercredi,  4  Fevrier  1885,  je  sors  de  chez  moi  a  9  heures  du  matin
pour  me  rendre  a  mon  journal  (111,  Boulevard  Saint-Germain).  Au
coin  de  la  rue  du  Four  Saint-Germain  et  du  Boulevard,  sur  le  trottoir
de  droite,  moi  etant  sur  le  trottoir  de  gauche,  je  vois  le  Professeur
Lacassagne  (de  Lyon).  M.  Lacassagne  vient  a  Paris  une  ou  deux  fois
par  an.  II  avait  fait,  il  y  avait  deux  semaines,  un  article  dans  mon
journal  Revue  ticientijique,  et  il  me  1'  avait  envoye  de  Lyon.
Yoyant  M.  Lacassagne,  je  suis  sur  le  point  de  traverser  le  trottoir  et


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


53


d' aller  le  saluer  ;  mais  je  ne  m'arrete  pas  et  je  me  dis,  "  Puisque  M.
Lacassagne  est  a  Paris,  je  vais  sans  doute  le  voir  aux  bureaux  de  la
Revue.  Pourtant  c'  est  curieux  de  voir  comme  M.  Lacassagne  ressemble
a  M.  L  .  .  ." — M.  L  .  .  .  est  un  medecin  opthalmologiste  que  je
connais  un  peu.

J'  arrive  aux  bureaux  de  la  Revue,  et  je  i'e9ois  difFerentes  personnes.
A  10  heures  et  demie,  on  m'  apporte  la  carte  de  M.  Lacassagne.  "  Plus
de  doute,"  me  dis-je,  "  c'  est  lui  que  j'  ai  vu  tout  a  1'  lieure."  A  ce  moment
M.  Lacassagne  entre.  Mais,  a  peine  est  il  entre  que  je  m'  apercois
aussitot  que  ce  n'  etait  pas  lui  que  j'  avals  vu  tout  a  1'  heure.  "  Avant
toutes  choses,"  lui  dis-je,  "  repondez-moi,  etiez-vous  a  9  heures
Boulevard  Saint-G-ermain  ?  "  Ma  question  1'  etonna  beaucoup.  "  Non,
certainetnent,"  me  dit-il,  "j'ai  passe  Boulevard  Saint-Gei-main  un  peu
avant  8  heures  et  demie;  j'  etais  en  voiture  et  je  ne  suis  pas  descendu
de  voiture.  De  la  j'  ai  ete  au  Val-de-G-race,  ou  je  suis  I'este  jusqu'  a  10
heures,  et  me  voici  revenant  directement  du  Val-de-Grace." — "  Saviez-
vous  que  vous  viendriez  a  Paris  ?  L'  avez  vous  dit  a  quelqu'  un  '?  " — "  A
personne. H  y  a  trois  jours,  j'ignorais  absolument  queje  viendrais."

Pourquoi  ai-je  cru  voir  M.  Lacassagne  1  L'  individu  que  j'ai  vu
etait  grand,  blond,  avec  des  moustaches  blondes,  tandis  que  M.
Lacassagne  est  de  taille  moyenne,  avec  de  petites  moustaches  tres
noires.

J'  ai  eu  encore  trois  ou  quatre  coincidences  analogues  :  mais  je  ne  les
rapporte  pas  ici,  non  parce  qu'  elles  ne  sont  pas  probantes,  mais  parce
que  chacun  sans  doute  a  eu  1'  occasion  de  faire  plus  ou  moins  des
observations  analogues,  et  qu'  on  est  plus  convaincu  par  ses  propres
observations  que  par  celles  des  autres.

Toutefois  je  mentionnerai  encore  celle-ci,  qui  a  encore  eu  lieu  entre
mon  ami  H.  Ferrari  et  moi.

Le  vendredi,  10  Decembre  1885,  a  7  heures  du  soir,  sortant  du
bureau  de  mon  journal,  Boulevard  Saint-Germain,  etant  encore  sur  le
pas  de  la  porte,  je  dis  a  brule-pourpoint,  sans  que  rie7i  evoque  ce  souvenir,
"  Tu  sais  que  le  vieux  pere  Durand  vit  encore,  et  que  je  le  rencontre
quelquefois."- — "  Oui,"  me  repond  H.Ferrari,  "  je  le  rencontre,  moi,  aussi,
quelquefois."  Or  M.  Durand  est  un  vieux  professeur  de  Bhetorique
du  Lycee  Bonaparte  ou  nous  etions  ensemble,  Ferrari  et  moi.  (En
chiifrant  tant  bien  que  mal  le  nombre  de  fois  que  je  1'  ai  vu  depuis  le
college,  c'  est-a-dire,  en  16  ans,  de  1869  a  1886,  j'  arriverais  au  plus  a  20
fois,  et  ce  chifFre  est  sans  doute  exagere.  Pour  H.  Ferrari  c'  est  aussi
a  peu  pres  la  meme  frequence.)  Nous  faisons  environ  150  metres.  Le
temps  etait  tres  brumeux,  et  le  gaz  percait  a  peine  1'  obscurite.
Chemin  faisant,  nous  parlous  du  Lycee  et  de  nos  anciens  professeurs.
Tout  d'  un  coup,  nous  apercevons  M.  Durand  qui  venait,  tres  lentement,
en  sens  inverse  de  nous,  et  qui  etait  par  consequent  a  plus  de  200


54  Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.

metres  quand  nous  avions  parle  cle  lui,  c'  est-a-dire,  absolument  invisible.
C'est  probablement  la  premiere  fois  que  nous  ayons  parle  de  M.  Durand
depuis  que  nous  sommes  sortis  du  Lycee.

En  chiffrant  la  probabilite  de  cet  eveneraent,  nous  arrivons  a  una
probabilite  des  plus  faibles.  En  effet,  la  probabilite  de  rencontrer  M
Durand  est  de  a  peu  pres,  et  la  probabilite  d'  en  parler  avec  H.
Ferrari  est,  en  supposant  que  depuis  le  Lycee  j'  ai  vu  mille  fois
Ferrari,  et  que  je  lui  ai  parle  une  fois  de  M.  Durand,  de  loW-
coincidence  de  ces  deux  evenements  est  done  environ  de  T7u-y'uTnj»
c'  est-a-dire  des  plus  minimes.

Quant  a  la  probabilite  de  voir  M.  Lacassagne  et  de  croire  que  je  vais
le  voir,  elle  est  plus  faible  encore ;  puisque  une  fois  en  10  ans,  je
suppose,  j'  ai  cru  le  voir,  c'est  ^ooo  de  chances  de  croire  le  voir.  Comme
je  I'ai  vu  en  tout  cinq  fois,  je  suppose,  en  10  ans  :  la  probabilite  de  le
voir  a  tel  ou  tel  jour  donne  est  de  3-/00  ou  de  7^01  par  consequent  la
probabilite  que  ce  jour  coincide  avec  le  jour  ou  j'ai  cru  le  voir  est
de  ^rjoooou  ;  ce  qui  equivaut  a  la  certitude  morale  que  ce  n'  est  pas  le
hasard  qui  m'a  fait  croire  que  j'allais  le  voir.

II  est  certain  que  le  hasard  peut  donner  ces  coincidences  ;  mais  c'  est
la  une  explication  trop  commode  pour  notre  paresse  intellectuelle.  Elle
me  parait  surtout  servir  a  nous  cacher  a  nous-memes  la  verite.  Est-ce
qu'  un  cliimiste,  qui  trouve  dans  1' air  trois  dix  milliemes  d'acide
carbonique,  dit  que  c'  est  le  hasard  qui  lui  donne  ce  chiffre  ^  Dans  les
circonstances  de  la  vie,  nous  ne  supposons  pas  le  hasard.  Voici  un
individu  dont  le  portefeuille  est  ordinairement  vide.  Un  jour  son  porte-
feuille  contient  une  grosse  somme  d'  argent,  et  ce  jour  la  il  le  perd.
Dira-t-il  que  c'  est  le  hasard  qui  a  fait  ce  concours  malheureux  de
circonstances  1  II  supposera  toute  autre  chose,  qu'  il  a  ete  vole,  qu'  il
a  change  la  poche  ou  il  mettait  son  portefeuille,  et  cetera.  Un  voyageur
passe  la  nuit  dans  une  foret  et  re(j-oit  dans  la  tete  une  balle  qui  lui
fracasse  le  cr;1ne.  Est-ce  le  hasard  ?  Un  braconnier  ne  soutiendrait
pas  qu'  en  tirant  un  chevreuil,  par  hasard  la  balle  a  ete,  a  100  metres  de
la,  casser  la  tete  du  voyageur.  Nous  n'  invoquons  pas  le  hasard,  quand
les  probabilites  sont  des  millioniemes  et  des  cent-millioniemes  ;  car
nous  savons  que  le  hasard  ne  les  donne  pas,  ou  les  donne  une  fois  peut-
etre  dans  la  vie  de  plusieurs  individus.

Si  je  joue  a  I'ecarte  avec  quelqu'  un,  et  si  mon  adversaire  six  foisde
suite  retourne  le  roi,  je  supposerai  que  j' ai  affaire  a  un  fripon  ou  a
un  farceur,  et  je  n'  irai  pas  croire  a  ce  hasard  de  jjj^,  hasard  qui  est
cependant  d'  une  probabilite  plus  forte  que  celle  de  ces  coincidences  que
je  viens  de  mentionner.

D'  ailleurs  chacun  a  observe  des  coincidences  analogues,  et,  si  Ton  n'en
parle  pas  da  vantage,  c'  est  qu'  on  a  peur  de  faire  sourire.  On  craint  de
passer  pour  trop  credule,  tandis  qu'  en  realite  on  se  cache  a  soi-meme  la


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d:c.  55


verite.  La  verite,  c'  est  que  le  luisard  n'  explique  rien.  Nous  avons
des  faits  d'  uue  concordance  telle  qu'  il  y  a  vraisemblablement  un  lien
entre  eux.  Tout  le  monde  1'  adniet  implicitement.  Pourquoi  ne  pas  le
dire  tout  liaut  ?

ClIAPITRE  VII.
EXPERIENCES  AVEC  DES  DESSINS.

Les  experiences  faites  avec  dessins  sont  tout-a-fait  importantes.
D'apres  les  auteurs  des  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  que  je  prends  toujours
comme  guides  dans  ces  questions  diificiles,  c'est  probablement  M.
Malcolm  Guthrie  qui  a  le  premier  pratique  ces  experiences  en  1883. ^

Les  experiences  de  M.  Guthrie  sont  remarquables,  et  elles  entrainent
vraiment  la  conviction.  En  effet,  1'  idee  que  le  hasard  a  pu  donner  de
semblables  coincidences  entre  les  dessins  originaux  et  leurs  representa-
tions est  tellement  absurde  qu'  il  est  impossible  de  discuter  cette  opinion
ridicule.  Les  seules  hypotheses  admissibles  sont  done,  ou  bien  une
fraude  quelconque,  consciente  ou  inconsciente,  ou  bien  une  transmission
de  pensee  (clairvoyance  ou  telepathie).  Or  V  hypothese  de  la  fraude
semble  devoir  etre  absolument  ecartee,  vu  les  precautions  prises  par
M.  Guthrie,  M.  Steel,  M.  Lodge  et  M.  Gurney.  Le  dessin  original  etait
fait  dans  une  piece  voisine.  Aucune  parole  n'  etait  prononcee,
et  la  personne  sensible,  non  hypnotisee  d'  ailleurs,  avait  un  bandeau
sur  les  yeux.  Meme  sans  bandeau  sur  les  yeux,  elle  n'  aurait  pu  voir
le  dessin.

Ces  experiences  ont  ete  reproduites,  d'  une  maniere  assez  imparfaite,
dans  les  Bulletins  de  la  Socie'te  Americaine  des  Recherches  Psychiques.
(Voir  le  compte rendu  par M.  Pickering  dans  /S'cmice,  Juillet  1885.)

Dans  le  journal  allemand  Sjihinx,  il  y  a  aussi  d'assez  curieuses
experiences  de  cet  ordre  par  M.  Anton  Schmoll  {Sphinx,  Fevrier  1887,
p.  120),  et  de  M.  A.  Notzing  (Sphinx,  Fevrier  1888),  mais  elles  sont
loin,  comme  precision  dans  la  methode,  des  belles  experiences  de  M.
Guthrie,  qui  meritent  toute  1'  attention  des  savants.

J'  ai  essay e  nombre  de  fois  des  experiences  analogues,  et  je  vais  en
donner  le  compte  rendu  detaille.  C  est  surtout  avec  Alice,  puis  aussi,
mais  moins  souvent,  avec  Helena  et  avec  Eugenie  que  je  les  ai
essayees  ;  puis  avec  quelques  autres  sujets,  dans  des  conditions  que  je
mentionnerai.  Je  noterai  aussi  la  totalite  des  insucces,  afin  qu'  on
puisse  comparer  les  succes  que  je  donne  a  tous  les  insucces  obtenus.

Ces  experiences  se  divisent  en  deux  classes  ;  celles  ou  je  connaissais
le  dessin  ;  celles  ou  je  ne  connaissais  pas  le  dessin.  II  est  clair  que
c'  est  la  une  condition  tres  dilferente  et  qui  change  la  face  du  probleme.

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  tome  I.,  p.  3G,  et  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  tome
I.,  p.  264,  et  tome  II.,  p.  24.


56


Relation  cle  Diverses  Expiriences,  &c.


En  efFet,  jusque  ici,  dans  les  experiences  de  M.  Guthrie,  de  M.
Pickering,  de  M.  Gurney,  de  M.  Schmoll,  de  M.  Notzing,  1'  liypothese
d'  una  transmission  de  pensee  a  ^te  adopt(^e  de  preference  a  toute  autre.
Or,  dans  nonibre,  de  cas,  j' ai  obtenu  d'assez  exactes  reproductions  du
dessin  enferme  dans  une  enveloppe,  alors  que  les  personnes  presentes  ne
connaissaient  pas  le  dessin  et  ne  pouvaient  le  connaitre.  C  est  done
autre  chose  que  la  transmission  de  pensee,  thouglit  transference^  ou
suggestion  mentale.  C  est  ce  que  les  magnetiseurs  d'  autrefois  appel-
laient  la  lucidite  ou  la  seconde  vue  ou  la  clairvoyance.

D'  ailleurs,  fidele  a  mon  systeme  de  repousser  toute  theorie,  je  ne
fais  la  aucune  theorie ;  je  constate  seulement  qu'  il  est  impossible
d'  expliquer  certains  faits,  dont  on  lira  tout  a  1'  heure  le  recit,  par  la
transmission  de  pensee,  puisque  les  personn'es  presentes  ignoraient
absolument  le  contenu  de  1'  enveloppe.

J'ajoute  que  c'est  aussi  une  condition  excellente  pour  une  experi-
mentation rigoureuse.  II  est  certain  qu'  on  ne  peut  aider  le  sujet
a  faire  telle  ou  telle  reponse, puisque  on  ignore  ce  qui  est  dans  I'enveloppe
opaque.

Etant  d'  abord  convaincu  plutot  de  la  transmission  mentale  que  de
la  lucidite,  j'  avals  cru  necessaire  que  quelqu'  un  connaissant  le  dessin
mis  sous  enveloppe  fut  la  pour  m'  assister.  II  ^tait  d'  ailleurs  bien
entendu  que  la  personne  ayant  fait  le  dessin  ne  disait  pas  un  mot  et  ne
faisait  pas  un  geste.  Moi,  qui  ne  connais  pas  le  dessin,  je  puisparler  et
interroger  a  ma  guise,  et  rectifier  commeje  I'entends  les  propos  incohe-
rents  de  la  somnambule.  J'  ai  parfaitement  le  droit  d'  agir  ainsi ;  car
aucune  indication  ne  m'  est  donnee  sur  la  nature  du  dessin  enferme.

Voici  done  comment  1'  experience  etait  faite.  X.  prepare  dans  une
enveloppe  opaque,  ou  rendue  opaque  par  1'  interposition  de  plusieurs
feuilles  de  papier,  un  dessin  qu'  il  fait  chez  lui  ou  dans  une  autre  piece.
Ce  dessin  enferme  m'  est  donne,  sans  aucune  indication.  Alors  Alice
est  endormie.  X.  et  moi  nous  restons  pres  d'  elle ;  mais  X.  ne  dit
absolument  rien,  ne  lui  touche  pas  la  main,  s'  abstient  de  tout  geste  et
de  toute  appreciation.  Quant  a  moi,  j' interroge  Alice  et  je  fais  moi-
meme  le  dessin  qu'  elle  m'  indique  :  c'  est  quelquefois,  mais  plus  rarement,
elle-meme  qui  le  dessinait  sur  le  papier.  En  tout  cas,  c'  est  toujours
sans  que  X.,  qui  est  present,  manifesto  un  sentiment  quelconque,
approbation  ou  desapprobation.

O'est  ainsi  que  r  experience  etait  realisee  dans  certains  cas  ;  mais,
dans  d'  autres  cas,  le  dessin  4tait  fait  par  moi,  mis  dans  une  enveloppe  com-
pletement  opaque,  et  laiss^  avec  une  vingtaine  d'  enveloppes  semblables,
pendant  un  ou  deux  ou  meme  cinq  et  six  mois  sur  ma  table.  J'oubliais
absolument  le  dessin  fait,  et  je  donnais  ainsi  un  dessin  dont  j' ignorais
le  contenu.  Le  dessin  dans  ce  cas  n'  etait  pas  fait  par  moi,  mais  par
Alice,  et  je  ne  lui  disais  rien  qui  put  la  mettre  sur  la  voie. L'  eusse-je


Relation  de  Diver  sea  Experiences,  <Lr.


57


fait,  cela  n' aurait  pas  rendu  F  experience  fautive  ;  car  j'ignorais  la
natii^i  du  dessin  en  question,  clioisi  jDarmi  un  grand  nombre  de  dessins
semblables,  tous  enfermes,  et  vraisemblablement  oublies.

Enfin,  dans  les  meilleures  conditions  experimentales,  le  dessin
n'  etait  pas  fait  par  moi,  et  la  personne  ayant  fait  le  dessin  n'  etait  pas
presente.  Alors  le  dessin  fait  par  Alice  est  entierernent  du  a  la  lucidite.
S'  il  est  sufEsamment  analogue  au  dessin  mis  dans  1'  enveloppe,  c'  est
qu'  il  s'  agit  bien  la,  non  de  transmission  mentale,  mais  de  lucidite.

Le  nombre  des  experiences  faites  ainsi  a  diverses  epoques  et  sur
diverses  personnes.  est,  d'apres  mes  notes,  de  192.  Mais  il  est  probable
■que  j'  ai  omis  un  certain  nombre  de  tentatives  infructueuses,  de  sorte
■que  je  crois  devoir  porter  a  200,  en  chiffres  ronds,  le  nombre  total
cies  experiences  de  dessins.  J'  ai  eu  dans  le  nombre  beaucoup  d'insucces,
(je  ne  les  mentionnerai  pas)  et  des  demi-succes,  ou  memo  des  succes  en
proportion  assez  notable.

Premiere  Serie  d'  Experiences —

Experiences  oil  le  dessin  enferme  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque  etait
connu  des  personnes  pres-entes.

Expierience  I.,  Juin  1886. — Mon  ami  et  collegue,  le  Docteur  P.
Rondeau,  fait  un  dessin  qu'  il  met  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque.  II  me
<lonne  ce  dessin,  et  je  prie  Alice  de  le  dessiner  sans  ouvrir  1'  enveloppe.
Dans  un  premier  essai  je  montre  le  dessin  a  Alice  sans  que  M.  Rondeau
:soit  present.  EUe  dit  :  "  Un  carre.  Un  tableau  tres  grand  ou  il  y  a
beaucoup  de  choses. Ce  qu'il  y  a  surtout,  c' est  un  cadre. A  droite


Fig.  1.


comme  i^ne  carte  geographique.  Quelque  chose  qui  monte.  Une  allee
au  milieu.  De  petites  allees  a  gauche.  A  di'oite  quelque  chose  de
pointu  comme  un  clocher.  Une  grande  maison  avec  un  clocher  pointu.
L' allee  du  milieu  commence  au  bas  de  la  maison,  et  reuionteau  milieu."
On  verra  par  le  dessin  (Figure  1)  que  nous  reproduisons  ici,  que  la


58


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <L'c.


description  n'  est  pas  du  tout  en  rapport  avec  la  realite  du  dessin.  IE
semble  toutefois  qu'  il  y  ait  au  debut  quelque  ressemblance ;  car  les.
mots  :  un  carre,  un  cadre,  sont  assez  exacts.  Mais,  ainsi  que  je  1'  ai;
souvent  constate,  a  partir  d'  un  certain  moment,  i]  y  a  deviation
complete.  Quand  elle  adit:  "  A  droite,  comma  une  carte  geograpliique,'"
elle  a  tout-a-fait  perdu  1'  analogie  avec  le  dessin  reel.  Si  elle  s'  etait
arretee  apres  avoir  dit :  "  Un  carre,  un  cadre,"  cela  eut  pu  passer  pour-
exact.

Quelques  jours  apres,  en  presence  de  M.  Rondeau,  je  donne  a  Alice
le  meme  dessin.  Bien  entendu,  je  recommande  a  M.  Rondeau  de  ne
faire  aucun  geste,  de  ne  prononcer  aucune  parole  qui  exprime  1'  approba-
tion ou  la  desapprobation.  Je  ne  suis  pas  sur  qu'  il  ait  observe  tout-a-
fait  rigoureusement  cette  recommandation ;  mais,  s'  il  a  laisse  parfois.
voir  ce  qu'  il  pensait,  c'  est  assez  peu  de  chose.


Fig.  2.

Voici  (Figure  2),  reproduit  par  1'  heliogravure,  comme  tous  les  dessins
suivants,  le  dessin  fait  par  elle,  avec  les  mots  que  j'y  ai  ajoutes,  sur
sa  recommandation.  II  est  clair  que,  moi  qui  ignorais  absoluraent  le
contenu  de  1'  enveloppe,  je  pouvais  ecrire  ce  que  je  voulais.  C'est.
rendre  ainsi  I'experience  non  pas  plus  facile,  mais  plus  difficile,  puisque
le  dessin  fait  par  moi  d'  apres  les  indications  d'  Alice  a  de  grandes.
chances  d'  etre  moins  exact  que  celui  qu'  elle  ferait  si  elle  dessinait
elle-meme.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <L'c.


59


Voici  les  paroles  textuelles  d'  Alice  :  "  Je  ne  peux  voir  qu'  une  ligne.
Ce  n'  est  pas  un  tableau.  C  est  ecrit.  J e  ne  vois  pas  de  dessin,  mais
des  lignes  ecrites.  Une  ligne  droite  plus  grande,  et  en  bas  des  lignes
plus  courtes.  Ce  n'est  pas  comme  si  on  ecrivait  une  lettre.  C'est
comme  un  cadre  de  fenetre,  comme  un  escalier,  avec  un  espace  en  haut,
une  ligne  qui  forme  de  petits  dessins.  Ce  que  je  vois  surtout,  c'  est  un
cadran  de  porte,  avec  au-dessus  comme  un  ecusson.  C  est  peut-etre  la
facade  d'  une  maison.  L'  ecusson  est  rond  en  bas,  interrompu  sur  les
cotes."

II  s'  agit  la,  pensons-nous,  d'  une  experience  interessante  ;  car  la
ressemblance  entre  le  dessin  mis  dans  1'  enveloppe  cachetee  et  le  dessin
fait  par  Alice,  est  assez  frappante.


Experience  II.,  9  JuiUet  1886.  Figures  3,  4,  5,  6. — Le  dessin,
mis  dans  des  enveloppes  opaques,  a  ete  fait  par  mon  ami  et
coUegue,  le  docteur  Hericourt. La  boule  a  ete  faite  par  une  serie  de


Fia.  3.


Fig.  4.


60


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


petits  traits,  et  elle  a  ^te  sui'montee  cV  une  serie  de  petites  lignes  faites
par  convergence  en  partant  de  la  boule. (Figure  3.)

M.  Hericourt  est  present.  D'abord  il  ne  dit  rien  ;  puis  peu  a  peu
il  interroge,  mais  sans  donner  d'  indication,  autant  que  cela  Itii  est
possible.  Ce  mode  d'  operer  est  assez  d^fectueux ;  cependant  M.
Hericourt  et  moi,  nous  sonimes  assez  habitues  a  ces  experiences  pour  ne
pas  donner  beaucoup  d'  indications  par  notre  maniere  d'  interroger.
D'  ailleurs,  pour  nia  part,  j'  ignore  completement  ce  qu'  il  y  a  dans  les
enveloppes.

Alice  dit  d'  abord  que  ce  n'  est  pas  un  carre,  qu'  il  y  a  quelque  chose
en  liaut,  et  puis  quelque  chose  en  bas,  probablement  une  facade,  comme
une  fa9ade  de  chalet. On  lui  dit  que  ce  n'  est  pas  cela.


Fig.  5.  Fig.  6.


Alors  elle  fait  avec  la  main  un  geste  indiquant  que  c'  est  un  rond.
Elle  dit :  "  C  est  une  boule."  Puis  elle  trace  un  dessin  comme  celui  de
la  Figure  4  ;  une  boule  avec  de  petits  traits  en  haut,  rapproches  les
uns  des  autres.  A  ce  moment  M.  Hericourt  lui  demande  si  ces  traits
sent  tres  rapproches.  Elle  dit  que  oui,  et  fait  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure
5).  "  En  bas  il  y  a  comme  un  pied."  Alors  je  dessine  d'  apres  ses  indica-
tions le  dessin  de  la  Figure  6,  qui  represente  un  calice  surmonte
d'  une  hostie  entour^e  de  rayons.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  etc.


61


On  remarquera,  je  pense,  d'  abord  une  certaine  analogic  entre  la
Figure  5  et  la  Figure  3,  si  1'  on  renverse  la  Figure  5.  Mais  on  sera
aussi  etonne  de  voir  que  la  figure  faite  par  moi  d'  apres  les  paroles
d'  Alice  est  une  figure  religieuse,  de  meme  que  la  figure  originale  est
aussi  une  figure  religieuse,  la  croix  surmontant  le  monde.

Experience  III.,  15  Juillet  1886. — Afin  d'  eviter  les  plis  de  1'  enve-
loppe  ou  les  traits  iiiipriines  dans  la  pate  du  papier,  M.  Hericourt  fait
d'un  trait  continu  un  dessin  a  la  plume  qu' il  met  entre  plusieurs
couches  de  papier  epais,  tout-a-fait  opaque.  J'  ignore  tout-a-fait  ce
qu'  il  a  dessine.  II  ne  dit  aucune  parole,  ne  fait  aucun  geste,  et  c'  est
moi  seul  qui  interroge  Alice.


Voici  textuellement  ses  paroles  :  "II  y  a  plusieurs  couleurs.  C  est  un
rond  plie  en  deux.  II  y  a  un  portrait  dans  le  rond.  C  est  un
medallion,  un  cadre,  avec  un  ovale  dans  le  cadre,  puis  une  tete  dans
r  ovale,  une  tete  d'  homme.  II  n'  a  pas  le  cou  habille  coiume  d'  habitude.
Ce  ne  sont  pas  des  croix  ou  des  medailles,  mais  des  soutaches
transversales  sur  le  devant.  C  est  montant  et  cela  ferme.  II  y  a  six  ou
sept  soutaches  transversales.  II  n'  a  pas  la  tete  nue,  mais  un  kepi.  Ce  kepi
a  trois  galons  circulaires  ;  mais  il  y  a  plus  de  galons  perpendiculaires.
Aux  manches  il  y  a  quatre  galons  ou  plutot  trois,  qui  sont  au  bas  de  la
manche,  circulaires.  Sur  le  devant,  10  boutons.  C'est  la  figure  de
quelqu'  un  qui  est  maigre  ;  peut-etre  assis.  Mais  je  ne  vols  pas  bien  ce
qui  n'  est  pas  la  tete  et  le  buste.  Je  le  reconnais  ;  mais  je  ne  peux  pas
dire  qui  c'  est."'


Fig.  7.


62  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <kc.

Cette  description  est  la  description  tres  exacte  de  la  photographie  re-
presentant  M.  Hericourt  en  costume  de  mc^decin  major  (Figure  8).
En  apparence,  cette  description  ne  concorde  pas  avec  le  dessin  cache ;
mais  en  realite,  il  y  a  un  fait  tres  remarquable.


Fio.  8.


M.  Hericourt,  clierchant  quel  objet  il  pourrait  bien  dessiner,  objet  qui,
tout  en  restant  tres  simple,  sortit  un  peu  des  rends,  carres,  lignes  droites
et  triangles,  a  pris  comme  type  le  cadre  de  sa  photograpliie.  Cette
photographie  est  chez  lui  dans  son  salon,  et  le  dessin  est  celui  d'  un  de
ces  petits  cadres  tres  communs  dans  lesquels  on  met  une  photographie.
(Figure  7.)

Rien,  ni  dans  notre  conversation  anterieure,  ni  dans  nos  paroles
ne  pouvait  faire  soup^onner  qu' il  s'agissait  d' une  photographie.  On


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  Sc.


63


voit  cependant  que  des  le  debut  Alice  a  pense  a  un  portrait,  a  un
medaillon,  a  un  cadre.  C  est  done  la  en  somme  une  assez  remarquable
■experience.

La  seconde  partie  de  1'  experience  n'  est  pas  moins  interessante.
Pourquoi,  parmi  tous  les  portraits  photographiques  qu'  elle  pouvait
■soupgonner — etant  donne  qu'  elle  avait  devine  qu'  il  s'  agissait  d'  une
photographie — a-t-elle  pr^cisement  parle  de  la  photographie  de  M.
Hericourt  ?  Elle  n'  est  jamais  allee  chez  lui  ;  elle  ne  savait  pas  pro-
bablement  que  M.  Hericourt,  il  y  a  trois  ans,  etait  medecin  major  dans
r  arniee.  Elle  ne  1'  a  pas  d'  ailleurs  reconnu,  et  elle  n'  aurait  pas  pousse
1' astuce  jusqu'a  savoir  qu' il  s' agissait  de  lui,  et  ne  pas  vouloir  le
nornmer,  pour  sembler  sincere.  II  est  vrai  que  M.  Hericourt  m'  avait
donne  jadis  sa  photographie — il  est,  dans  cette  photographie,  debout  et
non  assis.  J'  avals  sans  doute  laisse  quelque  temps  cette  photogi'aphie
sur  ma  table,  au  lieu  de  la  ranger  immediatement  dans  un  album.  Or
Alice  a  tres  bien  pu  la  voir,  quoiqu'  elle  n'  entre  que  rarement  et  tres
rarement  dans  ma  bil^liotheque.  La  description  est  tres  exacte,
beaucoup  plus  exacte  que  je  n'  eusse  pu  la  donner  moi-meme.  II  y  a  sept
soutaches  a  1'  uniforme,  et  trois  galons  au  kepi  et  a  la  manche.  II  est
vraisemblable  qu'  Alice  ignore  la  valeur  des  galons  pour  indiquer  les
grades.

Meme  a  supposer  qu'  elle  ait  vu  cette  photographie — ce  qui  est,
.sinon  vraisemblable,  au  moins  tres  possible — il  n'  en  est  pas  moins  vrai
qu'  elle  a  devine  qu'  il  s'  agissait  d'  abord  d'un  cadre,  puis  d'  une  photo-
graphie de  M.  Hericourt. Rien  ne  pouvait  lui  indiquer  ce  double  fait.

Signalons  aussi  ce  fait  remarquable,  que  M.  Hericoui't  n' avait
dessine  que  le  cadre,  et  que,  d'autre  part,  il  ne  pensait  pas  a  son  portrait.

Certes,  il  y  pensait  quand  il  a  sur  le  dessin  retrace  les  contours  du
cadre  :  mais  il  n'  y  pensait  pas  quand  j'  interrogeais  Alice.  H  y  a  done
la  un  phenomene,  non  pas  de  lucidite  seulement,  mais  encore  de
transmission  mentale,  puisque  1'  image  de  la  photographie  etait,  non  sur
le  dessin,  mais  dans  la  pensee  inconsciente  de  M.  Hericourt.

J'ajouterai  que  cette  experience  a  ete  faite  avec  plus  de  rigueur  que
r  autre,  et  que  pas  une  parole  n'  a  ete  prononcee  par  M.  Hericourt.  Tout
au  plus  a-t-il  pu  par-ci  par-la  laisser  echapper  quelques  signes  d'  approba-
,  ' tion  involontaires,  que  je  reprimais  aussitot.

Experience  IV. — L' experience  suivante  a  ete  faite  en  Juillet  1886,
huit  jours  apres  1'  Experience  III.  M.  Hericourt  fait  un  dessin  dans  la
chambre  ou  se  trouve  Alice  ;  mais  Alice  est  deja  endormie.  Elle  a  les
yeux  fermes,  et  le  dessin  est  fait  a  1'  autre  extremite  de  ma  bibliotheque:
de  plus  je  m' interpose  entre  Alice  et  M.  Hericourt,  de  sorte  qu'il  lui  est
impossible  de  voir  le  dessin  fait  par  M.  Hericourt.  II  n'  y  a  aucun  contact
entre  M.  Hericourt  et  elle.  Je  recommande  meme  d'  eviter  non  seulement
les  paroles,  comme  cela  avait  ete  fait  dans  les  experiences  prec^dentes,


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


64


mais  encore  les  gestes.  Pour  cela,  il  met  la  main  sur  ses  yeux  pendant  tout
le  temps  de  1'  experience,  et  il  se  tient  a  une  distance  de  trois  metres.
Voici  textuellement  les  paroles  d'  Alice  :


"  0'  est  un  rond  avec  d'  autres  raies  plus  petites.  Ces  raies  sont
croisees.  H  y  a  une  grande  raie,  dans  le  rond,  puis  dans  ce  rond
d'  autres  ronds  plus  petits,  et  au  milieu  quelque  chose  que  je  ne  puis
detinir.  Des  raies  qui  traversent  le  rond.  Au  dessus  quelque  chose  qui
forme  une  croix.  Dans  le  milieu  quelque  cliose  comme  une  rosace,  comme
une  rose  avec  des  feuilles.  Le  rond  est  enferme  dans  un  cadre.  Au
dessus  il  y  a  peut-etre  comme  un  triangle.  Les  ronds  sont  croises.  II
y  a  plusieurs  triansjles  au  dessus  du  rond. Je  n'  en  vols  que  trois."


Fig.  10.

Si  nous  ne  tenons  pas  compte  des  descriptions  confuses  donnees  par
Alice  avant  ces  mots  :  "  Le  rond  est  enferme  dans  un  cadre,"  nous  avons
en  quelques  lignes  une  desci'iption  relativement  tres  exacte  des  dessins
contenus  dans  1'  enveloppe.  En  eflet  1'  objet  se  compose  de  deux
enveloppes  blanches  superposees,  sur  chacune  desquelles  est  un  timbre
poste  fran9ais,  non  oblitere,  de  cinq  centimes.  Ces  timbi'es  represen-
tent  chacun  un  rond  enferme  dans  un  cadre, et  les  deux  ronds  etaient


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &g.


65


superposes  par  suite  de  la  superposition  des  deux  eiiveloppes  au  meme
point.  Quant  au  dessin,  il  representait  trois  lignes  droites  (Figure  9).
Mais  M.  Hericourt  avait  plie  le  papier  en  deux,  de  sorte  que  les  trois
lignes  droites  faisaient  1'  efFet  de  trois  triangles,  comnie  Ics  trois
triangles  marques  a  la  Figure  10.  Le  dessin  des  trois  triangles  a  ete
fait  par  Alice  a  la  Figure  1 1 .


Cette  experience  est  d'  autant  plus  interessante  que  d'  abord  M .
Hericourt  s'est  absolument  abstenu  de  toute  appreciation,  et,  de  plus,
qu'  il  ignorait  1'  efFet  de  la  superposition  des  trois  lignes  droites.


Quoique  M.  Hericourt  ne  sut  pas  1'  eflet  du  papier  plie  en  deux,  il
croit  SB  rappeler  1'  avoir  regarde  a  la  lampe  pour  verifier  a  quel  moment

F


66  Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.

il  ^tait  opaque,  dc  sorte  que  1'  image,  qunique  inconsciente,  des  trois
triangles  s'  etait  sans  doute  graves  dans  sons  esprit.


Fig.  13.


Experience  V.,-  Aout  1886.  —  Faite  par  Eugenie.  Dans  cette
experience,  le  dessin  que  j'  avals  fait  n'  etait  connu  que  de  moi,  et  j'  etais


Fig.  14.

seul  avec  Eugenie. EUe  fait  successivement,  sans  que  je  dise  rien,  les


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


67


trois  dessins  13,  14  et  15.  Le  clessin  original  trace  par  moi  est  la
Figure  12.

On  remarquera  cV  abord  que  le  dessin  8,  le  joremier  qu'  elle  ait  fait,
indique  bien  le  mouvement  general  de  la  figure  originale  renversee  :
le  second  dessin  est  un  ecliec  a  peu  pres  complet,  quoique,  dans  les  lignes


Fig.  15.

■"■enerales,  ce  soit  encore  le  meme  mouvement  que  dans  le  dessin  orir>ina]
Le  dernier  dessin  (Figure  15)  est  tres  curieux  ;  car  la  fumee  de  la  pipe  que
j'  avals  essaye  de  ti'acer  est  etonnament  bien  reproduite.  II  me  parait
difficile  d'  adniettre  que  c' est  un  efFet  du  hasard.  Pour  cette  experience,
le  dessin  avait  ete  fait  chez  moi.  Personne  ne  le  connaissait.  Je
m'abstenais  de  toute  parole — ^^i'en  suis  absolument  sur — et  I'enveloppe
•etait  opaque.  Eugenie  ne  disait  presque  rien,  et,  sur  mon  conseil,  elle
se  contentait  de  dessiner  sans  parler.

Experience  VI.,  Aoilt  1886. — M.  Hei'icourt  met  dans  des  enveloppes
une  photographie.  II  s'  agit  de  decrire  cette  photographie.  L'  experi-
ence est  faite  par  Alice.  La  photographie  est  celle  de  M.  Hericourt,
assis  et  jouant  du  violoncelle.  Nulle  parole  n'  est  prononcee  par  M.
Hericourt.  Alice  dit  qu'  elle  voit  quelqu'un  qui  est  debout,  "  qui  a  les
deux  mains  occupees  et  qui  tient  a  la  main  quelque  chose,  legerement,
comme  cela "  (et  elle  fait  avec  la  main  droite  un  mouvement  comme
quelqu'un  qui  touche  un  archet).  Pourtant  je  ne  devine  pas  qu'il
s'  agit  d'  un  archet,  et,  quand  il  s'  agit  de  dire  ce  qu'  il  tient,  d'  apres  les
paroles  d'  Alice,  je  conclus  que  c'  est  quelqu'un  debout,  tenant  legere-


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


68


ment  de  la  main  droite  la  garde  d' une  epee.  (Figure  16.)  Anion
sens,  je  crois  qu'  il  y  a  eu  une  certaine  confusion  avec  la  photographic
precedente.


Fig.  16.


Experience  VII.,  Juin  1886. — Experience  faite  par  Eugenie.  M.
Rondeau  met  dans  une  enveloppe  cachetee  un  dessin  que  je  ne  connais
pas.  Sur  r  enveloppe  est  1'  indication  de  la  date  a  laquelle  a  ete  fait
le  dessin  (Figure  17) ;  cette  enveloppe  cachetee  est  mise  entre  deux
feuilles  epaisses  de  carton.  M.  Rondeau  n'  est  pas  la,  et  aucune  des
personnes  presentes  ne  connait  le  dessin.  Eugenie  dit  qu'  elle  voit  des
photographies,  puis,  comme  je  lui  dis  que  ce  ne  doit  pas  etre  une  photo-
graphie,  elle  ajoute  :  "  Une  substance  comme  du  vernis,  brillante  "- —
c' est  probablement  le  cachet  a  la  aire  rouge — "un  grand  cadre  ovale
avec  des  angles;  une  barre  transversale,"  et,  comme  je  lui  dis  qu'  il  y  a  un
cacliet,  elle  lit  les  lettres,  P.  R.,  qui  soiit  en  effet  leslettres  du  cachet  de
Pierre  Rondeau.


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  dx.  C9

EUe  dit  aussi  qu'  il  y  a  quelque  chose  d'  ^crit,  et  elle  indique  la  forme
generale  de  ce  qui  est  ecrit,  comme  on  le  voit  a  la  Figure  18.


Fig.  17.

Le  dessin  concorde  assez  bien  avec  la  description  donnee ;  car  c'  est
un  cercle  avec  une  barre  transversale  qui  ne  traverse  pas  tout  le  cercle.
II  n  y  a  aucun  angle.


Fig.  18.


Quant  a  1'  indication  des  lettres  du  cachet,  il  est  possible  qu'  elles
aient  ete  vues  pendant  que  je  mettais  1'  enveloppe  de  M.  Rondeau  entre
les  deux  couches  de  papier  epais.  II  en  est  de  meme  pour  les  lettres
ecrites  (Figure  17),  qui  etaient  sur  1' enveloppe  exterieure.  En  effet,
comme  mon  intention  etait  de  faire  deviner  non  pas  ce  qui  etait  sur
1'  enveloppe  exterieure,  mais  dans  1'  interieur  de  1'  enveloppe,  je  n'  avals
pas  pris  specialenient  de  soins  pour  cacher  1'  enveloppe  exterieure.
Pourtant  il  est  invraisemblable,  quoique  possible,  qu'  Eugenie  ait  pu.


70  Relation  cle  Diverses  Ex'periences,  d-c.


pendant  que  je  maniais  1'  enveloppe,  lire  les  lettres  du  cachet,  tres
pen  lisibles,  et  alors  que  nous  etions  dans  una  chambre  peu  eclairee.
Mais  il  suffit  que  ce  soit  a  1' extreme  rigueur  possible,  pour  que
r  exp(jrience  ne  soit  pas  probante.

Pour  le  dessin  mis  dans  1'  enveloppe,  la  description  est  inexacte.

Experience  VIII. — M.  Ribot,  directeur  de  la  Revue  Pliiloso'phique,
apporte  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque  une  photographie  que  je  ne  connais
pas  et  pour  laquelle  il  est  entendu  qu'  il  ne  donnera  aucun  signe
d'  approbation  ou  d'  improbation.  Je  sais  seulement,  et  je  le  dis  a  Alice,
qui  fait  1'  experience,  qu'  il  s'  agit  de  la  photographie  d'  une  ville.

Voici  la  description  qu'  elle  donne  :

"  II  y  a  des  arbres  a  gauche.  Ce  qu'  on  distingue  le  plus,  c'  est  un
pavilion  pointu  avec  un  toit  pointu  comme  une  fleche. Ce  n'est  pas


Fig.  19.

seulement  une  rue  :  c'  est  1'  ensemble  d'  une  ville.  Ce  que  1'  on  voit
le  plus,  c'  est  une  grande  maison.  On  a  voulu  prendre  cette  maison
plutot  que  le  reste.  Elle  domine  le  reste.  II  y  a  d'  autres  maisons  a
droite.  Devant  la  maison  est  une  place.  La  maison  n'  est  pas  carree  " —
c'  est-a-dire,  comme  elle  1'  indique,  en  faisant  un  geste,  qu'on  ne  voit  pas
le  maison  de  face,  mais  suivant  un  angle.  "  II  y  a  en  haut  "  (sans  qu'  elle
puisse  dire  s'  il  s'  agit  de  la  grande  maison  carree  ou  d'  une  autre),  "un
rond  qui  n'  est  pas  une  fenetre.  Cela  monte  au  milieu,  et  c'  est  plus  bas
a  droite  et  a  gauche.  II  faut  monter  pour  aller  a  la  maison  et  passer  a,
gauche  en  faisant  un  tour."

Cette  experience  a  ete  faite  dans  des  conditions  de  precision  qui  me
paraissent  irreprochables  :  mais  le  resultat  n'  est  jias  decisif ;  car  il  y  a


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  <L'c.


71


quelques  erreurs  dans  la  description  donnee,  et  surtout  une
certaine  banalite  qui  interdit  presque  une  conclusion  formelle.  On  notera
pourtant  cette  phrase  curieuse  et  etonnamment  exacte  :  "  Ce  que  1'  on
voit  le  plus,  c'  est  une  grande  maison  qui  domine  le  reste  et  qu'  on  a
voulu  prendre  plutot  que  tout  le  reste."

Nous  donnons  ici  au  trait  la  photographie  en  question.  C  est  une
vue  generale  de  la  ville  de  Tolede. (Figure  19.)

II  est  bon  de  noter  qu'  Alice  est  tres  peu  au  courant  des  vues  de  ville
et  des  photographies  de  paysage.  EUe  ne  connaissait  pas  M.  Ribot,
et  ne  pouvait  soupconner  quoi  que  ce  soit  sur  1'  aspect  general  de  la
photographie,  qu'  on  lui  remettait  enfermee  dans  une  enveloppe.

Experience  IX.,  26  Novenibre  1886. — -Experience  faite  par  Alice
en  presence  de  M.  Gurney,  de  M.  A.  Myers,  de  M.  F.  Myers,  et  de  M.
Ferrari.  Apres  deux  experiences  qui  ont  echoue,  et  quelques  autres  essais
aussi  infructueux,  M.  F.  Myers  met  un  dessin  dans  une  enveloppe.  II
fait  le  dessin  dans  la  chambre  CQeme  ou  nous  nous  trouvons,  mais  a


Fig.  20.


assez  grande  distance.  M.  A.  Myers  et  moi,  qui  ne  connaissons  pas
le  dessin,  nous  interrogeons  Alice,  qui  dit :  "  Deux  o vales.  C  est  un
chifFre  entrelace  dans  un  autre."  C  est  exactement  le  dessin  fait  par
M.  Myers,  et  la  description  est  si  exacte  que  M.  Ferrari  a  cru  que  ces
paroles  avaient  ete  prononcees  apres  qu'  on  avait  regarde  le  dessin
original.  Or  elles  ont  ete  dites  par  Alice,  alors  que  le  dessin  etait
encore  dans  1'  enveloppe.

Malheureusement,  j'  ai  le  jour  meme  egare  le  dessin  original  de  M
Myers,  de  sorte  que  je  ne  puis  faire  juger  de  1' exactitude  de  la  descrip-
tion. Mais  je  puis  garantir  qu'  il  est  difficile  de  donner  de  ce  dessin  de
M.  Myers  en  une  phrase  une  meilleure  description  que  celle-ci :  "  Deux
chitfres  entrelaces."


72  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


Experience  X.,  3  Decemhre  1886. — Experience  faite  par  Alice  en
presence  de  H.  Ferrari  et  de  M.  Hericourt.  M.  Hericourt  a  mis  dans
une  enveloppe  absolument  opaque  un  dessin  fait  chez  lui  et  pour  lequel
il  ne  donne  aucune  indication.  M.  Ferrari  et  moi  nous  ignorons  le
contenu  du  dessin,  et  1'  experience  est  faite  d'  une  maniere  irrepro-
chable. Le  dessin  original  est  la  Figure  20.

Voici  les  paroles  textuelles  d'  Alice  :

"  C  est  une  etoile.  Un  rond  avec  des  pointes.  Une  croix  avec
une  barre  ;  mais  cette  barre  n'  est  pas  la  seule.  Elle  ne  finit  pas  la  et
vient  rejoindre  I'autre  :  il  y  a  une  lignela,  et  une  autre  ici,  et  une  autre
du  meme  cote,  et  toutes  les  quatre  pareilles.  II  y  a  un  rond  tout
autour  ;  des  fers  de  lance  au  bout."


Fig.  21.


D'  apres  cette  description,  qui  est  a  peu  pres  incomprehensible  quand
elle  n'  est  pas  mimee  en  meme  temps  qu'  elle  est  dite,  nous  faisons
chacun  un  dessin,  M.  Ferrari  et  moi,  pour  indiquer  comment  nous
comprenons  la  description  d'  Alice.


La  Figure  21  represente  mon  dessin,  et  la  Figure  22  le  dessin  de
M.  Ferrari. II  est  impossible  de  ne  pas  etre  frappe  de  la  tres  grande


Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  c&c.


73


ressemblance  de  nos  deux  reproductions  avec  1'  original.  On  peut
meme  dire  que  nos  deux  reproductions  different  plus  1'  une  de  1'  autre
qu'  elles  ne  different  de  1'  original.  C  est  la  assurement  une  des
meilleures  experiences  de  cette  premiere  s^rie.


Fig.  23.  Fig.  24.


Experience  XI.,  3  Mai  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.  Jesuis
seul  avec  eile.  Le  dessin  que  j'  ai  fait  il  y  a  longtemps  et  que  j'  ai  tout-
a-fait  oublie,  est  reste  melange  a  d'  autres  dessins,  faits  simultanement,
et  je  le  prends  au  hasard.

Alice  voit  d'  abord  des  lignes  transversales  superposees,  qu'  elle
figure  ainsi. (Figure  25.)


Fig.  25.


Alors  je  regarde  le  dessin  et  je  lui  dis  qu'  il  n'  y  a  aucune  ressem-
blance. Elle  fait  alors  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  24),  qui  ressemble
bien  plus  a  1'  original  (Figure 23). Mais  je ne  suis  pas  siir,  dans


74  Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


cette  seconde  partie  cle  1'  experience,  de  ne  pas  1'  avoir  influencee  d'  une
maniere  quelconque,  ce  qui  ote  presque  toute  valeur  a  cette  experience.

Experience  XII.,  6  Juin  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  Dans  la
ehambre  voisine  je  fais  un  dessin  au  crayon,  et  je  le  garde  a  la  main
sans  lelui  donner.  Le  dessin  que  j'  ai  fait  (Figure  26)  represente  un
triangle  supporte  par  une  sorte  do  pied.  En  le  faisant  je  me  dis  a
moi-meme  qu'  il  ressemljle  beaucoup  aux  arbres  qui  sont  dans  les  boites
de  joujoux  des  enfants.


Fig.  26.


Voici  alors  les  paroles  d' Helena  :  "J'ai  envie  de  faire  des  feuilles,
des  feuiliages  longs,  termines  par  une  pointe.  Ce  sont  des  feuilles
allongees ;  il  y  a  une  marque  dans  le  milieu  qui  tranclie  comme  un  filet
d'  argent,  et  qui  est  sur  un  cote  de  la  feuille.  Un  cote  de  la  feuille
n'  est  pas  de  la  meme  forme que F  autre,  et  du  cote  qui  n'  est  pas


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


75


tout-a-fait  pareil,  il  y  a  comme  de  petites  veines."  J e  lui  dis  alors  de
faire  le  dessin,  et  elle  fait  le  dessin  de  la  Figure  27.  Je  n'  ai  donne
aucune  indicatiou,  consciemment,  ni  par  mes  paroles  ni  par  mes
gestes.


Toutes  les  experiences  dont  je  viens  d'  exposer  avec  quel  que  detail  les
resultats  out  un  vice  comiuun.  EUes  sont  faites  en  presence  de
quelqu'  un  qui  connait  le  resultat  a  obtenir.  Or,  pour  tous  ceux  qui
ont  pu  observer  des  somnambules,  leur  singuliere  perspicacite  ne
fait  pas  r  objet  d'  un  doute.  EUes  ont  1'  esprit  toujours  en  eveil,  et  ne
cherchent  qu'  a  reussir  leurs  experiences. Aussi  toute  parole,  tout


76  Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  cfcc.


geste,  toute  attitude  meme  des  personnes  presentes  deviennent-ils
aussitot  de  precieuses  indications.  EUes  partent  de  la  pour  corriger,
rectifier,  diminuer  ou  augmenter,  selon  les  circonstances,  les  premieres
paroles  qu'  elles  ont  prononcees.

Cela  dit,  on  coniprendra  qu'  il  est  impossible  de  rester  pendant  une
demi-heure  dans  1'  attente  d'  un  resultat,  sans  reveler,  malgre  soi,  par
quelque  signe,  que  le  sujet  est  dans  la  bonne  ou  la  mauvaise  voie.J-

Assurement  je  suis  convaincu  que  le  succes  des  experiences  rap-
portees  plus  haut  n'est  pas  du  a  des  indications  inconscientes  de  la  part
des  experimentateurs.  On  verra  bien  par  ce  qui  suit  que  cette  interpreta-
tion serait  er-ronee,  rnais,  si  convaincu  que  je  sois  de  la  bonne  qualite
de  ces  experiences,  ce  n'  est  pas  la  la  certitude ;  et  ma  conviction
pourrait  n'  etre  pas  partagee  par  mes  lecteurs.  Je  suis  done  d'  avis  que
toutes  ces  experiences,  quelque  soin  que  j'  aie  mis  a  les  bien  faire,  sont
mauvaises  et  ne  peuvent  etre  que  mauvaises.  Pour  la  meme  raison,  je
serais  volontiers  dispose  a  la  meme  severite  pour  les  experiences  des
auteurs  divers  qui  procedaient  de  la  meme  maniere,  c'  est-a-dire  qui
connaissaient  le  resultat  a  obtenir.

Ce  n'  est  pas  que  je  veuille  rayer  d'  un  trait  de  plume  tout  ce  que  je
viens  d'  etablir  laborieusement  et  avec  tant  de  details  ;  je  veux  dire
seulement  que  de  pareils  faits  sont  peu  puissants  a  convaincre  ;  car  il
y  a  dans  1'  experimentation  meme  un  vice  fondamental,  qui  eleve  un
doute  sur  tous  les  resultats.  II  est  clair  que  ce  serait  admettre  ou  bien
une  extraordinaire  perspicacite  de  la  part  du  sujet  ou  bien  de  ma  part
un  etrange  aveuglement.  Mais,  je  le  repete,  cela  ne  suffit  pas  pour
convaincre,  et  il  faut  plus  qu'  une  presomption  pour  donner  la
demonstration  d'  un  fait  qui  jie  concorde  avec  rien  de  ce  que  nous  a
appris  la  science  positive.

Au  contraire,  les  faits  que  je  vais  rapporter  sont,  au  point  de  vue
de  la  methode,  tout-a-fait  irreprochables,  je  crois.  Les  resultats
paraitront  bien  moins  brillants  que  ceux  qu'  ont  obtenu  M.  Guthrie  et
M.  Gurney  :  mais  ils  confirment  avec  force  1'  opinion  de  ces  savants
experimentateurs  :  car  il  n'  y  a  pas  moyen  de  supposer,  comme  dans  la
premiere  partie  de  mes  essais,  quelque  complicite  inconsciente  entre  le
sujet  et  celui  qui  a  fait  le  dessin  original.

De  la,  en  absolue  necessite,  cette  alternative  :  ou  bien  le  hasard  :
ou  bien  une  sorte  de  seconde  vue,  de  lucidite,  d'  hyperesthesie
sensorielle,  qui  difFere  profondement  de  tout  ce  que  nous  savons,  soit
des  sens,  soit  de  1'  intelligence  de  1'  liomme.

On  jugera  laquelle  de  ces  deux  hyjDotheses  est  la  plus  vraisemblable.

1  Cette  critique  ne  porta  pas  du  tout  sur  les  exi^eriences  de  M.  Guthrie,  de  M.
Schmoll  et  de  M.  Notzing,  car  ils  obtenaient  tres  rapidement  des  reponses  a  leurs
dessins,  tandis  que  dans  mes  experiences  la  r^ponse  etait  tres  longue  a  venir.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


77


C  est  la  r  avantage  des  experiences  faites  de  cette  maniere.  Le  lecteur,
debarrasse  de  tout  souci  sur  1'  interpretation  du  manuel  operatoire,  a
devant  les  yeux  le  protocole  des  experiences  et  peut  se  faire  son
opinion.

Pour  donner  une  idee  de  la  variete  des  dessins  qui  etaient  a,
deviuer,  voici  une  enumeration,  encore  bien  incomplete,  de  ceux  qui
ont  ete  enfermes  dans  une  enveloppe,  pour  eti'e  devines.  Une  petite
maison,  un  paysage,  un  croissant  de  lune,  deux  poissons,  un  ceil,  une  croix
avec  un  calvaire,  un  tonneau,  un  nez,  une  urne,  un  livre  ouvert,  une
bouteille,  un  encrier,  un  verre,  une  fourchette,  un  couteau,  une  pipe,  une
fleur,  une  gazelle,  un  lapin,  un  oiseau,  un  cercle  avec  une  tangente  et  son
diametre,  un  compas,  une  f range  de  broderie,  des  lettres,  un  revolver,  une
raquette,  un  entonnoir,  un  eteignoir,  une  clef,  un  de  a  jouer,  un  faisan,
un  chameau,  une  cote,  une  soupiere,  une  eglise,  une  cigogne,  une
montre,  une  pendule,  un  dossier  de  chaise,  un  violon,  un  poisson,  un
coquetier,  une  bougie,  un  moulin,  une  charrette,  une  lefctre,  une
couronne,  un  treillage,  un  cube,  un  chapeau  d'  homme,  une  fleur,  en-
forme  d'  etoile,  un  chalet  avec  un  petit  paysage,  un  dessin  sinueux  avec
deux  piques  au  bout,  deux  triangles  superposes,  une  haie,  deux  triangles
superposes  et  entoures  chacun  d'  un  cercle,  un  losange  perce  de  trous,  etc.,
etc.,  divei'ses  formes  circulaires,  carrees,  losangiques,  triangulaires,
etc.  Quoique  ces  dessins  n'  aient  pas  ete  faits  par  une  seule  personne,
mais  par  trois  ou  quatre  de  mes  amis,  etrangers  1'  un  a  1'  autre,  et  qui  ne
se  communiquaient  pas  leurs  idees  a  cet  egard,  on  voit  que  malgre  cela
la  diversite  est  assez  grande,  et  elle  aurait  ete  aussi  grande  que  je
r  aurais  voulu,  si,  au  lieu  de  prendre  180  dessins,  j'  en  avals  pris  500  :  car
on  s'  imagine  mal  quelle  variete  infinie  on  peut  trouver  dans  la  con-
fection de  dessins  divers.

Deuxieme  Serre  d' Experiences. — -

JExperiences  ou  le  dessin  enferme  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque  etait
inconnu  des  personnes  fresentes.^

Experience  I.,  6  Avril  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Eugenie  chez
moi  en  presence  de  M.  Ochorovitz  et  de  M.  P.

Le  dessin  avait  ete  fait  tres  anciennement  par  moi  et  mis  dans  une

1  Je  ne  donne  pas  ici  toutes  mes  experiences,  mais  seulement  celles  qui  me  par-
aissent  avoir  plus  ou  moins  reussi.  Etant  donne  que  j'en  ai  fait  180  environ  et  qu'  il
y  en  a  eu  environ  30  qui  ont  plusou  moins  reussi,  cela  fait  une  proportion  moyenne  de
1  succfes  sur  6  experiences.  Cela  indique  k  peu  pres  la  moyenne  des  jours  de  lucidite,
soit  pour  Alice,  soit  pour  Eugenie.  Ce  n'est  qu'  un  jour  sur  six  qu'  elles  ont  des  Eclairs
de  lucidite,  et  encore,  ce  jour  Fa  meme,  cette  lucidite  est  des  plus  variables  et  des  plus
incertaines.

Quoique  il  y  ait,  par  ci  par  Ik,  dans  les  dessins  dont  je  ne  parle  point,  d' assez
interessantes  coincidences,  il  me  parait  qu'  on  peut  les  regarder  en  definitive  comme  les
echecs.  Meme  pour  les  dessins  que  je  donne,  il  y  en  a  une  dizaine  qu'on  peut
regarder  comme  ayant  echou^.


78  Relation  de  Dlverses  Experiences,  <&c.

enveloppe  opaque,  consistant,  outre  1'  eiiveloppe,  en  une  feuille  de  papier.


Fig.  29.

J'avais  totalement  oublie  le  contenu  de  cette  enveloppe.  Eugenie  dit
alors,  et  ce  sont  ses  paroles  textuelles  :  "  C  est  la  forme  d'un  coeur.  Je


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  dx.  ^  70


vois  comme  un  carre  avec  une  espece  de  raie  tres  longue,  un  ovale  qui
forme  comme  un  cceur  avec  une  grande  barre.  C  est  la  forme  un  peu
d'un  ocuf.  C'estun  cceur  plutot  que  tout  autre  chose."  En  parlant
ainsi,  elle  fait  les  trois  dessins  (Figures  29,  30,  31).

On  trouvera  peut-etre  une  ressemblance  assez  curieuse  entre  la
Figure  30  et  le  dessin  original. (Figure  28.)


Fig.  30.


Alors  je  regarde  le  dessin  original,  sans  prendre,  malheureusement,
grand  souci  de  le  cacher  completement  a  Eugenie.  Elle  dit  tout  de  suite,


Fig.  31.


"  Cast  une  figure  grima9ante."  A-t-elle  vu  le  papier  qvie  nous  avons
alors  deploye  1 Je  ne  le  crois  pas  ;  mais  je  n'  oserais  1'  affirmer.  La


80


Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  &c.


cliambre  etait  dans  une  demi-obscurite.  Eugenie  avait,  comme  toujours
lorsque  elle  est  en  etat  de  somnambulisme,  les  yeux  convulses  en  haut ;
ses  paupieres  etaient  closes,  et  loin  de  lui  montrer  le  papier  et  le  dessin,
nous  r  avons  regarde  alors  que  nous  etions  assez  loin  d'  elle.  Mais
cependant  rien  ne  nous  affirme  en  toute  certitude  qu'  elle  n'  a  rien  vu.

Meme  en  admettant  comme  non  valable  cette  derniere  partie  de
r  experience,  il  n'  en  reste  pas  moins  la  pi'emiere  partie.  Or,  que  1'  on
compare  le  grossier  dessin  qu'  elle  a  fait  (Figure  30)  avec  les  autres
dessins  donnes  anterieurement,  et  on  verra  que  ce  dessin  ressemble  plus
au  dessin  original  que  tout  ce  que  nous  avions  deja  vu.  Je  n'  ose  pas
dire  que  le  hasard  n'  y  est  pour  rien  ;  mais  ce  que  je  puis  alRrmer,  c'  est


Fig.  32.


que  r  experimentation  a  4te  irr^prochable.  Par  consequent  on  peut
juger  de  la  valeur  du  resultat,  et  conclure  dans  un  sens  ou  dans  1'  autre.

Experience  II.,  Mai  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Le  dessin  a  et^  fait
par  moi  et  melange  a  d'  autres  dessins  faits  depuis  longtemps.  Quand
je  le  donne  a  deviner,  j'  en  ignore  absolument  le  contenu.  L  'original
est  represente  par  la  Figure  32.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.  81

Les  deux  essais  d'  Alice  sont  donnes  par  les  Figures  33  et  34.
Voici  ses  paroles.


Fig.  33.  Fig.  34.


"  C  est  un  objet  qu'  on  suspend — un  carre — pas  un  carre — c'  est
plus  long.  II  y  en  a  plusieurs — un,  deux  de  chaque  cote  et  un  au
milieu.  II  y  en  a  deux  de  chaque  cote — et  puis  la  au  milieu — et  puis
encore  en  bas. Mais  ce  n'  est  pas  rond."

II  se  trouve  que  le  dessin  fait  par  elle  est  beaucoup  nioins  exact  que
ses  paroles.  Si  1'  on  applique  aux  points  marques  sur  le  dessin  ses
expressions  :  "  II  y  en  a  un  et  deux,"  on  verra  que  la  ressemblance  est
grande  entre  le  dessin  qu'  elle  indique  et  le  dessin  reel.  Malheureuse-
ment  je  n'  ai  pas  compris,  et  il  m'  a  ete  impossible,  soit  d'  apres  sa  descrip-
tion orale,  soit  par  son  propre  dessin,  de  refaire  le  dessin  original.
L'  experience  n'  en  reste  pas  moins  assez  curieuse,  encore  qu'  elle  soit
bien  peu  decisive.

Experience///.,  18  Mai  1887. — Ce  jour  la  je  donne  deux  dessins
qui  m'  ont  ete  remis  par  M.  Ferrari.  L'  un  de  ces  dessins  represente
une  fleche  avec  des  barbelures  tres  longues  allant  jusqu'  au  bout  de
la  fleche.  Alice  dit  que  c'  est  raye  comme  du  papier  de  musique.
L'  autre  dessin,  fait  par  M.  Ferrari,  et  dont  j'  ignore  pareillement
le  contenu,  consiste en deux boules,  une  grande et  une  petite,

G


82


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


la  plus  petite  etant  sui'montee  d'  une  toute  petite  boule  avec  line
minuscule  croix  par  dessus.  Elle  dit  :  "  A  coup  sur  c'  est  rond —
c'  est  une  boule  ronde  supportee  par  un  pied."

Ce  qui  rend  cette  experience  int(jressante,  c'  est  le  contraste  absolu
entre  les  deux  dessins  originaux,  contraste  que  rien  ne  pouvait  faire
soup9onner,  puisque  M.  Ferrari  n'  etait  pas  la,  et  qu'  il  ne  m'  avait  rien
laisse  deviner  de  ses  intentions.  De  fait,  dans  1'  un  il  y  a  une  boule,  et
elle  dit  pour  celui  la  "  une  boule  "  ;  dans  1'  autre  il  y  a  des  raies,  et  elle
dit  "  ce  sont  des  raies."


Fig.  .35.

Experience  IV.,  20  Mai  1887. — Parmi  les  dessins  tres  nombreux —
une  vingtaine  en^•iron — que  m'a  donnes  M.  Ferrari,  j'en  prends  un  au
hasard.  (Figure  3.5.)  11  est  evident  que  j' ignore  aussi  bien  le  contenu
de  celui  la  que  des  autres,  et  je  le  donne  a  Alice.  Elle  se  met  a  rire — ce
qui  lui  arrive  rarement — et  dit  :  "  Celui-la  est  tres  drole.  C  est  bien
rond.  Dans  ce  rond,  au  milieu,  il  y  a  un  point,  tout  autour  de  ce  rond
des  petites  lignes,"  et  elle  fait  le  dessin  suivant. (Figure  .36.)

Alors  je  regarde  le  dessin  original,  en  lui  disant  que  sa  reponse  est
bonne,  sauf  quelques  details.  Elle  ne  peut  d'  ailleurs  rien  ajouter  a  sa
description  premiere.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


83


II  est  certain  que  1'  hypothese  est  entre  le  hasard  et  la  lucidite.
Toute  autre  hypothese  est  impossible.  Je  laisse  a  toute  personne
impartiale  le  soin  de  decider  quelle  peut  etre  la  part  du  hasard  pour


Fig.  36.


donner  de  pareilles  analogies.  Pour  ma  part,  il  me  semble  qu'  il  y  a
une  assez  petite  probabilite  pour  que,  deux  dessins  etant  faits  au  hasard,
ils  se  trouvent  etre  aussi  ressemblants  que  ceux  de  la  Figure  35  et  de


la  Figure  36.


Fig.  37.

A  mon  sens,  cette  Experience  IV  peut  compter  parmi  les
leilleures  ;  elle  est,  comme  experimentation,  irreprochable.


84


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


Experience  V.,  24  3Iai  1887.— Le  dessin,  que  j' ignore,  a  ete  fait
par  M.  Ferrari.  (Figure  37.)  Alice  fait  alors  le  dessin  de  la  Figure  38,
en  disant :  "  C  est  un  carre,  grand,  avec  plusieurs  carr^s  1'  un  dans
r  autre,  un  autre,  et  un  autre,  et  un  autre  plus  petit  dedans."


Fig.  38.

Sa  desci'iption  est  lelativement  exacte,  et  elle  serait  meme
excellente  si  le  mot  de  carre  ^tait  remplace  par  le  mot  de  triangle.  II
est  meme  a  remarquer  que  ses  paroles  s'  appliquent  au  dessin  original
mieux  que  son  propre  dessin.


Fig.  39.


Alors  je  regarde — en  prenant  bien  soin  de  ne  pas  le  lui  montrer —
le  dessin  original,  et  je  lui  dis  :  "  C'est  presque  cela." Elle  fait  alors


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.  85


le  clessin  de  la  Figure  39,  en  disant  :  "  Un  carre  avec  deux  lignes  qui
se  croisent  comme  un  X,  et  dans  chacun  des  triangles  il  y  a  trois  raies."

Cette  seconde  partie  de  V  experience  est,  comme  resultat,  preferable  a
la  premiere  partie  ;  mais  il  est  permis  d'  Clever  quelques  doutes  sur  sa
valeur  au  point  de  vue  de  1'  experimentation  ;  car  ce  n'  est  qu'  apres  que
je  r  ai  vu  qu'  Alice  a  pu  en  faire  la  description,  et  je  ne  suis  pas  certain
de  ne  pas  lui  avoir  donne  malgre  moi  quelque  indication.

Experience  VI.,  5  Juin  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Alice  dans  les
memes  conditions  que  les  precedentes.  Dessin  pris  parmi  les  dessins  de
M.  Ferrari,  faits  il  y  a  deux  mois,  et  dont  j'  ignore  absolument  le
contenu. L'  enveloppe  est,  comme  toujours,  tout-a-fait  opaque.


L ■■■■wmmuiwi«wu!ui|ni>  III!  mil  umiiiimu

X

Fig.  40.


Elle  dit  textuellement :  "II  est  petit,  ce  dessin.  II  est  drole.  Ce
sont  deux  boules  reunies  par  une  petite  ligne."  Alors  je  demande  :
"  Qu' y  a-t-il  dans  ces  boules  V'l  Elle  repond  :  "  Dans  I'une  il  n'y  a
rien,  dans  1'  autre  des  raies  comme  une  croix.  C  est  quelque  chose
qu'  on  pourrait  soulever  comme  une  poignee,"  et  elle  fait  avec  la  main
le  geste  de  quelqu'  un  qui  souleverait  une  haltere.  Puis  elle  fait  le
dessin  suivant,  qui  est  reproduit  dans  la  Figure  41,  le  dessin  original
etant  la  Figure  40.

1  Remarquez  combien  j'ai  eu  tort  de  demander  quelque  chose.  II  vant  mieux  la
laisser  parler  toute  seule.


86


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  dx.


On  remarquera,  ie  pense,  cette  etonnante  similitude.  EUe  est
d'  autant  plus  frappante  que,  pour  cette  reproduction  par  la  gravure,


Fig.  41.


comme  pour  toutes  les  autres,  j'ai  conserve  exactement  les  dimensions
tant  du  dessin  original  que  du  dessin  fait  par  Alice.

Cette  experience  peut,  avec  1'  Experience  IV.,  compter  parmi  les
meilleures.

Experience  VII.,  15  Juin  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Un  dessin,
que  j' ignore  absolument,  m' est  donne  par  mon  collegue,  M.  Hanriot.
Le  dessin  est  fait  en  un  trait  tres  leger,  et  le  papier  est  en  triple  dans
une  enveloppe  fermee. (Figure  42.)


Fig.  42.


Voici  les  paroles  d'  Alice  :  "  Une  ligne  droite  terminee  en  haut  par
trois  piques.  C  est  comme  un  porte-plume,  qui  fait  comme  une  fleche  et
qui  en  has  se  termine  comme  une  pique.  II  n'  y  a  pas  de  pied  en  bas.
Les  trois  piques  du  haut  sont  reunies  par  un  rond.  Au  dessous  il  y  a
comme  un  noeud  entrelace.  Ce  sont  des  ronds  entrelaccs,  comme  de
petits  anneaux  le  long  de  la  tige — comme  une  anci'e — en  haut  un  rond
qui  forme  eventail."


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


87


Je  fais  alors  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  43),  qui  au  premier  abord
ne  ressemble  guere  au  dessin  original  (Figure  42)  ;  mais  je  dois
faire  remarquer qu'  en  faisant  ce  dessin  je pense  d'  une  part  au


Fig.  43.


caducee  de  la  Faculte  de  Medecine — une  boule  surmontee  d'  une  tige
autour  de  laquelle  s'  enroule  un  serpent,  le  serpent  d'  Esculape ; — d'  autre
part  a  la  marque  de  libraire  des  editions  d'  Ant.  Aug.  Renouard,  mon
arriere  grand-pere,  dont  je  donne  ici  le  specimen. (Figure  44.)

Ainsi,  parmi  la  multitude  des  objets  possibles,  ce  qui  est  venu  a
ma  pensee,  d'  apres  la  description  d'  Alice,  c'  est  dans  les  deux  cas  un
objet  entoure  d'  un  serpent. Le  dessin  original  etait  un  serpent.


88


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


Dans  le  detail  des  paroles  d'  Alice  je  noterai  encore  ceci,  c'  est  que
pour  elle  la  base  etait  sans  pied,  en  piques  ou  en  pointes,  tandis
que  la  partie  superieure  etait  terminee  en  rond.  C  est  la  une
ressemblance  saisissante  avec  le  dessin  original,  ou  la  tete  du  serpen-t
est  ronde,  et  la  queue  fourcliue,  sans  pied.  Cette  experience  peut
assur^ment  compter  parnii  les  meilleures.

Experience  VII.,  28  Jtiillet  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Le  dessin
original  est  un  coquetier.  Elle  voit  "  Un  rond,  puis  un  autre  rond,
puis  un  troisieme  rond — c'est  plutot  ovale  que  rond — en  bas  il  y  a  un
noeud."


Fig.  45.


Elle  fait  alors  un  dessin  qui  ne  ressemble  pas  beaucoup  au  dessin
original,  parce  qu'  il  y  a  trois  ovales,  alors  qu'  un  seul  ovale  est  dans  le
dessin  original.  En  effet,  presque  toujours  Alice  fait  une  sorte  de
multiplication  d 'images,  et  voit  plus  qu'  il  n'y  a.  Mais,  si  1'  on  elimine
cette  amplification,  on  trouve  dans  ses  paroles  une  definition  qui  peut
s'  appliquer  a  un  coquetier  portant  un  03uf  :  "  Un  rond,  plutot  ovale
que  rond,  avec  un  no3ud  au  dessous."

Experience  VIII.,  29  Jtdllet  1887. — Le  dessin  est  un  de  ceux
que  m'  a  donnes  H.  Ferrari.  Le  dessin  original  est  la  Figure  45.
Alice  dit :  "  C  est  la  forme  d'  un  coeur  allonge,  pointu,  avec  deux  barres
dans  les  deux  ronds  du  haut.  C  est  la  forme  d'  un  ballon  avec  sa
nacelle." (Figure  46.)

Quoique  la  divergence  entre  1'  original  et  le  dessin  fait  par  Alice  soit
considerable,  on  doit  reconnaitre  une  certaine analogic  dans  le  mouvement
general  de  1'  un  et  de  1'  autre,  surtout  pour  les  deux  barres  du  haut


Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  d-c.  89

repondant  aux  deux  sourcils  epais,  qui  sont  une  des  caract^ristiques  de
cette  figure  grimagante.


Fig.  46.

Experience  IX.,  19  Juillet  1887. —  Faite  pai'  Helena.  Ce  sont
toujours  les  memes  conditions  que  dansles  experiences  precedentes.  Le


Fig.  47.

dessin  m'a  ete  donne  par  H.  Ferrari,  et  j' ignore  absolument  ce
qu'  il  contient.  II  est  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque.  Le  dessin  original
se  compose  de  trois  boules  juxtaposees. (Figure  47.) Le  dessin  fait


90


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


par  Helena  est  forme  de  trois  segments  juxtaposes  cle  forme  irreguliere.
EUe  dit  que  ce  sont  trois  feuilles,  mais  laisse  marcher  son  crayon  sans
presque  rien  dire. (Figure  48.)


Fig.  48.

Experience  X.,  28  Juillet  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  Dessin  donne
par  M.  Ferrari  et  que  j' ignore  totalement. (Figure  49.) Helena  dit  :


Fig.  49.

"  Une  sorte  de  feuillage  avec  des  filandres,  une  grande  chose  au  milieu


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <£'C.


91


comme  deux  ailes  de  papillon  avec  le  corps  du  papillon  entre  les  deux."
Elle  fait  le  dessin  de  la  Figui-e  50.


Le  dessin  represente  une  palette.  Assurement  la  ressemblance  est
tres  lointaine,  mais  le  double  corps  de  la  palette  est  bien  indique.

Experience  XI.,  6  Aout  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Eugenie.  Le
dessin  a  ete  fait  par  M.  Hericourt.  Je  1'  ignore  absolument,  et  je  suis
seul  a\ec  Eugenie.

Elle  dit — et  ce  sont  ses  seules  paroles — "  Une  pipe — une  raie  avec
un  rond  coupe  au  bout."


92  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.

Puis  elle  fait  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  52),  qui  ressemble  beau


Fig.  51.  Fig.  52.


coup,  comme  on  voit,  a  la  Figure  51,  qui  est  le  dessin  original.

Cette  experience,  tout-a-fait  irreprochable,comnie  les  precedentes,  au
point  de  vue  de  la  metliode  experimentale,  peut,  avec  les  Experiences
IV.,  VI.,  et  VII.,  compter  parmi  les  meilleures  et  les  plus  decisives.

Experience  XII.,  19  Novembre  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.


Fig.  53.

Le  dessin,  que  j' ignore  completement,  m'a  ete  donne  parM.  Eellier.  II
a  ete  mis  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque. (Figure  53.)


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  93


Alice  clit :  "  C  est  coinme  un  cceur.  En  haut,  il  y  a  des  traits
comme  une  gerbe.  Cela  resseinble  a  une  poire."  EUe  me  fait  faire  le
dessin  suivant  (Figure  54)  ;  elle-meme  fait  le  dessin  de  la  Figure  55.1

En  comparant  les  Figures  54  et  55  avec  le  dessin  original,  on  y
retrouvera  quelque  analogie,  mais  1'  experience  est  loin  d'  etre  aussi
bonne  que  la  precedente.


Fig.  54.


Fig.  55.


Experience  XIII.,  2  Decemhre  1887.— Experience  faite  par  Eugenie.
Le  dessin,  enferme  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque  et  que  je  ne  connais  pas,
m'a  ete  donne  par  M.  Bellier. (Figures  56  et  57.)

Elle  voit  d'  abord  un  arrosoir.  "  Non.  C  est  un  rond  avec  une  tige,
comme  une  fleur  avec  une  tige,"  et  elle  fait  le  dessin  suivant.


Fig.  56.


.  L' original  represente  un  chat.  Mais  il  est  assez  curieux  de
remarquer  que  la  queue  de  ce  chat  ressemblo  beaucoup  a  la  tige.  Le

"^^Ilfautremarquer  que  I'irregularite  marquee  sur  les  contours  lateraux  du  c<pur
est  due  ace  que  le  crayon  tragait  le  dessin  sur  une  enveloppe,  et  que  les  sailliesde
1  enveloppe  avaient  fa,t  devier  le  crayon.  Mais  la  reproduction  du  dessin  par  la
gravure  a  du,  pour  etre  absolument  fidele,  tenir  compte  de  cette  inegalite


94


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


dessin  etait  fait  clans  la  direction  que  nous  donnons  ici,  c'  est-a-dire,
dans  un  sens  tel  qu'  il  y  avait  superposition  des  deux  dessins.  On
fera  aussi  attention  aux  trois  traits  de  la  tige  accessoire,  qui  ont  la
meme  disposition  que  les  trois  polls  de  la  moustache  du  chat.


L'  experience  n'  est  certes  pas  decisive  :  car  le  hasard  a  bien  pu  jouer
un  role  dans  cette  similitude,  mais  on  ne  pent  cependant  la  compter
comme  un  insucces.

Experience  XIV.,  2  Dccembre  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Eugenie.


Fig.  58.


Le  dessin  m'  a  etc  donne  par  M.  Bellier,  et  j'  en  ignore  totalement  le
contenu. (Figure  58.)


Fig.  57.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &g.  95

Eugenie  dit,  "  Un  croissant  de  lune.  Je  ne  vois  qu'  un  croissant  de
lune."  Elle  fait  alors  le  dessin  suivant.  (Figure  59.)  La  super-
position etait  celle  que  1'  on  aurait,  en  supposant  les  deux  figures
juxtaposees  dans  le  sens  que  nous  donnons  ici.


Fig.  59.


On  doit  considerer  cette  experience  comme  un  succes;  car
la  coque  du  navire,  dessin^e  par  M.  Bellier,  a  precis^ment  la  forme  d'  un
croissant,  et  les  dimensions  sont  identiques.

Je  dois  ajouter  que,  deux  jours  apres,  faisant  avec  Alice  une  expe-
rience sur  un  dessin  cj[ue  m'  avait  donn(5  M.  Bellier,  il  y  a  eu  de  la
part  d'  Alice  erreur  complete;  mais  le  dessin  de  Bellier  etait
precisement  un  croissant,  et  tout-a-fait  identique  au  croissant  que  m'  a
dessine  Eugenie  dans  1'  Experience  XIV.

Experience  XV.,  25  Novemhre  1887.— Experience  faite  par  Claire  L.
Cette  experience  est  a  peu  pres  la  seule  experience  de  dessin  que  j'aie  faite
avec  cette  personne.  Le  dessin  m'  a  ete  donne  par  M.  Bellier.  II  est
en  une  enveloppe  opaque.  II  represente  un  double  cercle,  au  dessus
duquel  se  trouve  une  feuille,  comme  la  feuille  d'  une  pomme.

Claire  me  dit,  "Je  vois  une  feuille,  avec  un  rond  au-dessous,
comme  une  carte  geographique.  Ce  n'  est  pas  une  figure.  II  n'  y  a
rien  au  milieu."

En  somme  la  description  est  tres  exacte,  et  on  ne  dirait  guere
mieux  apres  avoir  vu  le  dessin.  Mallieureusement  elle  n'  a  pas  pu  me
faire  de  dessin.

Experience  XVI.,  L3  Decemhre  1887.— Faite  par  Alice.  II  s'agit
d'un  dessin  que  j' ignore  et  que  M.  Bellier  m' a  remis,  enferme  dans
un  papier  triple,  et  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque. (Figure  60.)

Alice  dit  :  "  Un  rond,  comme  une  couronne.  II  y  a  des  feuilles
tout  autour. Ce  n'  est  pas  la  forme  des  feuilles  de  laurier." (C  est  en


06


Relation  de  Biverses  Ex2oeriences,  &g.


eHet  r  idee  qui  s'  etait  presentee  a  moi,  quand  elle  a  dit  une  couronne
avec  des  feuilles.) "  Ce  sont  des  feuilles  qui  ne  sont  pas  pointues  :


Fig.  60.


elles  font  tout  le  tour  II  y  a  des  points  par  ci,  par  la.  Rien  au
milieu."

Alors  je  fais  le  dessin  suivant,  Figure  61,  dessin  qu'elle  ne
semble  pas  bien  comprendre,  et  qui  d'  ailleurs  ne  ressemble  pas  du  tout


Fig.  61.


au  dessin  original.  Mais  que  1'  on  compare  les  paroles  d'  Alice  et
le  dessin  original,  et  on  verra  quelle  etonnante  precision,  (avec,
cependant,  omission  de  1'  arbre  et  du  tronc  de  I'arbre)  dans  la  descrip-
tion orale  qu'  elle  a  donnee,  bien  sup<^rieure  a  son  dessin.

Exjx'rience  XVII. — Faite  par  Alice  le  meme  jour.  Apres  1' avoir
endormie  a  midi  45,  je  la  laisse  ^tendue  sur  son  lit,  et  je  ne  reviens  la


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


97


voir  qu'  a  5  heures  45,  avec  M.  Hericourt.  Elle  est  restee  absolument
dans  la  meme  position.  Pour  le  dire  en  passant,  c'  est  une  excellente
preuve  de  non-simulation ;  car  il  est  bien  impossible  de  rester  cinq
heures  de  suite  sans  deplacer  ses  couvertures,  quand  on  ne  dort  pas
veritablement.

Le  dessin  que  je  donne  alors  est  aussi  inconnu  de  moi  et  de  M.
Hericourt  que  les  autres  dessins.  II  m'  a  et4  donne  par  M.  Bellier,
et  il  est  mis  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque. (Figure  62.)


Fig.  62.

Alice  dit :  "  C  est  par  carres  ;  une  croix  comme  les  carres  d'  une
fenetre,  comme  un  cadre,  avec  une  raie  qui  traverse.  Cela  ressemble  a
des  rideaux  d'  une  fenetre." (Figure  63.)


Fig.  6.3.

Quoique  le  dessin  fait  par  moi  d'  apres  ses  indications  ne  ressemble
qu'  assez  peu  au  des.sin  original,  on  doit  remarquer  cet  etrange  debut  de
r  experience.  Elle  dit,  "  C  est  par  carres,"  tandis  que  dans  1'  expe-
rience precedente  elle  avait  dit,  "  C  est  un  rond."


98  Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


Experiences  XVIII.-XX.,  16  Decembre  1887 . — Faites  par  Eugenie.
Je  vais  chez  Eugenie  avec  M.  Hei'icourt,  et  jelui  apporte  quatre  dessins
identiquement  disposes  dans  des  enveloppes  opaques.  C  est  M.
Bellier  qui  a  fait  ces  dessins  :  M.  Hericourt  et  moi,  nous  ignorons
tout-a-fait  le  contenu  des  quatre  enveloppes.

Eugenie  dit  d'  abord  :  "  Je  vois  une  croix,  comme  une  croix  de
Malte,  avec  des  boules  rondes  au  bout  de  chaque  branche  de  la  croix."


Fig.  64.

Mais  cette  description,  elle  ne  1'  applique  pas  a  tel  ou  tel  dessiu
special.  C  est  a  un  des  quatre  dessins  que  nous  apportons  :  alors  en
causant  avec  nous  elle  prend  un  dessin  (Figure  64),  et  dit,  "  Je  vois  un
rond,  comme  une  couronne,  traversee  par  un  baton.  Ce  rond  est  plutot
un  ovale,  avec  la  forme  d'  un  reuf." Elle  fait  le  dessin  6-5.


Fig.  65.

Le  dessin  represente  une  table.  On  remarquera  que  la  forme  de
cette  table  est  ovalaire,  avec  un  bout  un  peu  plus  allonge  que  1'  autre.


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  (&c.


99


J'  appelle  aussi  1'  attention  sur  le  mot  baton,  qui  s'  applique  assez
hien  a  des  pieds  de  table.

Pour  le  second  dessin,  elle  dit :  "  Je  vois  un  poignard,  une  epee
fonnant  croix,"  et  alors  elle  s'  interrompt  pour  dire  :  "Ne  marquez  pas
ce  que  je  vais  dire.  J'  ai  pense  a  une  bouteille,  et  cela  a  passe."  Alors
je  dessine  une  epee  avec  une  croix  pour  faire  la  garde  (Figure  66  bis).
Le  dessin  original  (Figure  66)  represente  une  ancre  ;  mais  le  sommet
de  r  ancre  est  une  croix,  de  sorte  que  1'  analogic  est  assez  grande  entre
les  deux  dessins.


Fig.  66.  FiG-  66  bis.


Pour  le  troisierae  dessin,  Eugenie  dit :  "  C  est  un  oiseau.  Je  vois
une  tete  avec  un  long  cou,  corame  une  cigogne,  ou  un  cygne,  ou  une  oie.
Un  dos,  des  pattes— c'  est  une  bete,  et  un  oiseau."  Or  le  dessin  repre-
sente une  bouteille.

Cette  bouteille,  que  je  n'  ai  pas  cru  devoir  faire  figurer  ici,  a  une
tete,  et  un  cou  allonge.  On  salt  qu'  en  franqais  on  se  sert  pour  le
sommet  de  la  bouteille  des  mots  tete  et  cou.  Mais  ce  n'  est  pas  cela
qui  est  interessant.

En  effet,  quelques  minutes  auparavant,  Eugenie,  ayant  ce  dessin  sur
ses  genoux,  et  tenant  entre  ses  mains  le  deuxieme  dessin,  avant  de
dire  :  "  C  est  une  epee,"  a  dit,  "  Je  vois  une  bouteille."  Elle  a  dit  cela
avec  timidite,  craignant  une  erreur,  et  1'  image  de  la  bouteille  a,  parait-il,
tout-de-suite  disparu.

Le  quatrieme  dessin  n'  etait  pas  en  realite  un  dessin.  C  etait  une
carte  de  jeu,  et  je  1'  avals,  par  suite  d'  une  erreur  involontaire,  confondue
avec  les  enveloppes  ou  etaient  les  dessins. Eugenie  dit  que  ce  dessin  est  la

H  2


100


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  <L-c.


croix  de  Malte,  qu'  elle  avait  dit  voir  au  debut  de  1'  experience  ;  c'  etait
uii  valet  de  coeur.

En  resume,  ces  deux  experiences,  avec  Alice,  du  16  Decembre,  et
avec  Eugenie,  du  17  Decembre,  sont  tout-a-fait  probantes.  D'abord,  au
point  de  vue  experimental,  il  n'  y  a,  je  crois  pouvoir  le  dire  sans  pre-
somption,  aucun  defaut ;  le  dessin  etait  inconnu  de  moi  et  des
assistants,  et  1'  enveloppe  etait  absolument  opaque.

II  y  a  d'  abord  deux  dessins  pour  Alice,  un  arbre  et  un  drapeau.
Pour  r  arbre,  elle  dit  des  feuilles ;  pour  le  drapeau  elle  dit  des
Carres.  Avec  Eugenie,  il  y  a  trois  dessins,  tine  table,  une
ancre  en  forme  de  croix,  et  une  bouteille.  Pour  la  table  elle
dit  un  ovale  avec  un  baton ;  pour  1'  ancre  elle  dit  une  epee  en
croix  et  une  bouteille  ;  pour  la  bouteille  elle  dit  un  oiseau  avec  une
tete  et  un  cou.

Experiences  XXI.-XXIII.,  24  Janvier  1888. — Faites  par  Alice.
Pour  la  premiere  enveloppe,  elle  fait  un  dessin  qui  represente  deux
fleurets  croises  ensemble,  comme  il  y  en  a  a  la  porte  des  professeurs
d' Escrirae.  (Eugenie,  dans  une  experience  faite  le  18  Decembre,
m'avait  aussi  dessine  quelque  chose  de  tout-a-fait  analogue  a  ces  fleurets
croises.)

Apres  avoir  fait  le  dessin  Alice  ajoute,  "  II  y  a  un  fil  apres,  comme
une  paire  de  lunettes  avec  un  cordon."


Fig.  67.


On  verra  par  le  dessin  original,  que  je  donne  ici,  (Figure  67)  la
similitude  du  dessin  original  avec  ce  que  m'  a  dit  Alice.  Ce  ne  sont
pas  des  fleurets,  mais  une  epee ;  d'  ailleurs  Alice  n'  a  pas  dit  fleuret.
C  est  moi  qui  avals  pense  a  des  fleurets  par  suite  du  dessin  fait  par  elle.
II  y  a  en  outre],la  dragonne  du  sabre,  auquel  sou  vent  pend  une  torsade,
qui  represente  assez  bien  le  fil  dont  parlait  Alice.

Pour  la  seconde  enveloppe,  elle  dit  textuellement — et  je  reproduis
toutes  ses  paroles — "  Ce  n'est  pas  une  coupe.  C'est  un  carre,  avec  deux
angles  ici  et  la."  Alors,  je  fais  le  dessin  suivant.  (Figure  69.)  Alice,
continuant,  dit  :  "  II  y  a  un  rond  au  milieu,  et,  dans  ce  rond,  un  rond
plus  petit."  J'  ecris  le  mot  chapeau  et  le  mot  bonnet  phrygien  qui  me
viennent  a  1'  esprit,  mots  eveilles  par  sa  description.  Elle  ajoute  :  "  C'est
comme  une  cible."  Je  fais  le  dessin  70.

Le  dessin  original  represente  un  tambour  (Figure  68),  et,  si  1'  on
admet  que  le  cercle  superieur  du  tambour  ait  ete  par  erreur  porte  au


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  £c.  101
milieu  et  de  champ,  au  lieu  d'  etre  au  dessus  de  la  caisse,  on  trouvera


Fig.  68.

entre  le  dessin  original  et  sa  reproduction  par  Alice  une  certaine
analogie.


Fig.  69.


II  faut  ajouter  qu'  avant  de  faire  ce  dessin  je  lui  en  avals  donne  un
autre,  qu'  elle  m'  avait  declare  ne  pas  voir,  ainsi  qu'  elle  dit  presque
toujours.  De  fait,  ce  dessin  etait  reste  sur  ses  genoux.  Je  1'  ouvre,  et
je  constate  qu'il  s'agissait  d' un  cliapeau,  de  forme,  il  est  vrai,  assez
differente  de  la  forme  figuree  par  moi  (Figure  71);  mais  c'  etait  un
chapeau. (Figure  102.)


Fig.  70.

II  me  parait  que,  dans  1'  ensemble,  cette  triple  experience  du  24
Janvier  est  tout-a-fait  remarquable.  H  y  a  trois  dessins  representant  :
r  un  un  sabre,  1'  autre  un  chapeau,  le  troisieme  un  tambour. Pour  le


102


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


sabre,  elle  dit  deux  ronds  avec  un  fil  comine  des  lunettes:  mais  le
dessin  qu'  elle  fait  eveille  aussitot  en  moi  1'  idee  de  fleurets.  Elle  ne  dit
rien  pour  le  deuxieme  dessin ;  mais,  pour  le  troisieme,  elle  fait  un


Fig.  71.


dessin  qui  eveille  en  moi  1'  idee  de  chapeau,  assez  nettement  pour  que
j'  ecrive  sur  mes  notes  :  "  Chapeau,  bonnet  jjhrygien  et  le  dessin  fait
par  elle  est  comme  surajoute  au  deuxieme,  c'  est-a-dire,  que  le  rond  du
tambour  est  superpose  au  dessin  carre  du  tambour.


Fig.  72.

Experience  XXIV.,  28  Janvier  1888. — Faite  par  Alice.  Elle
dessine  un  croissant  avec  un  rond  au  milieu.


Relation  de  Diverse^  Experiences,  Sc.


103


Ce  dessin  ressemble  un  peu  a  1'  original ;  mais  cette  ressemblance
n'  est  guere  au-dessus  de  ce  que  peut  donner  une  coincidence  fortuite.
L'  original  est  un  encrier  avec  deux  plumes  lichees  aux  bords  de  cet
encrier.  De  fait,  1'  encrier,  de  forme  ronde,  avec  I'encre  qu'  il  contient,
est  assez  analogue  a  un  ci'oissant  dont  le  centre  est  tres  obscur.  Malgr^
cela,  je  compte  cette  experience  comme  un  echec.

Experience  XX  v.,  2^  Janvier  1888.— Faite  par  Alice.  Cette  experi-
ence me  parait  particulierement  interessante  par  suite  de  la  complication
croissante  des  dessins  faits  par  Alice,  dessins  qui  graduellement,  sans
qu'  il  y  ait  d'  erreur  dans  les  premiers,  ont  fini  par  ressembler  d'une
maniere  inattendue  comme  contours  generaux  au  dessin  original.

Elle  commence  par  dire  :  "  Une  coupe  avec  un  jet  d'  eau  au
inilieu,"  et  elle  fait  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  73). Je  pense  a  une


Fig.  73.


lyre,  a  un  coquetier.  "Au  centre,"  dit  elle,  "  il  y  a  comme  un  cornet  pour
mettre  des  fleurs. C  est  droit  comme  un  baton."

Alors  successivement  elle  fait  les  dessins  suivants  que  je  reproduis
ici  (Figures  74  et  75).


Fig.  74.  Fig.  75.


L' original  represente  une  ecrevisse  (Figure  72).  A  premiere  vue  on


104


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


ne  d^couvre  aucune  analogic  entre  1'  original  et  les  dessins  donnas  par
Alice,  mais,  pour  peu  qu'  on  dessine  les  contours  d'  une  ecrevisse,  on
retrouvera  la  tvje  faisant  le  corps  meme  de  1'  animal ;  les  deux  bords
^vas^s  de  la  coupe  qui  indiquent  les  grandes  pinces,  avec  leur  crochet
terminal,  et  enfin  les  antennes  recourbees,  droites  comme  un  baton,  et  en
forme  de  jet  d'  eau.  Cette  derniere  description  est  bien  curieuse  :  car
pr^cisement  les  antennes  ainsi  disposees  ressemblent  beaucoup  a  deux
jets  d'eau.  Avec  les  experiences  IV.,  VI.,  VII.  et  XV.,  cette  experience
peut  compter  parmi  les  meilleures.

Experience  XXVI.,  2  Fevrier  1888. — Faite  par  Alice.  Son  premier
mot  est  de  dire  :  "  C'est  une  echelle — c'est  une  echelle  qui  est  adaptee  a
quelque  chose."  Alors  je  lui  demande  :  "  Est-ceune  maison  ?  "  Elle  me
dit  non,  et  pourtant  elle  fait  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  77),  ou  il  y  a


Fig.  76.

comme  une  echelle  appliquee  a  une  petite  maison.  Si  1'  on  compare  le
dessin  fait  par  Alice  avec  le  dessin  original  (Figure  76),  on  ne
trouvera  peut-etre  aucune  ressemblance. Neanmoins,  j'  ai  tenu  a  en


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


105


donner  la  gravure,  pour  moiitrer  que,  meme  en  cas  d'  echec,  il  y  a  une
analogic  generals  qui  est  assez  curieuse ;  surtout  le  mot  du  debut —
dans  ce  cas  le  mot  echelle — qui,  je  crois,  est  souvent  le  plus  exact,  et
qui,  pour  cette  experience,  s'  adaptant  a  1'  ^ventail  du  dessin  original,
est  bien  significatif.


Fig.  77.


Experience  XXVII.,  29  Decembre  1887. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  Le
dessin  represente  une  casseroUe. EUe  voit  une  roue,  un  grand  rond


Fig.  78.

avec  de  petites  barres  dans  le  milieu,  comme  un  crochet  qui  le  suspend,


lOG


Relation  de  Diverges  Experiences,  dx.


signaler  un


comme  une  decoration  suspendue  a  un  fil. Le  fait  de
crochet  ne  laisse  pas  que  d'  etre  assez  interessant.

Experience XXVIIL, 29 Janvier  1888.-Faite par  Leontine
Ji^lle  voit  une  croix,  et  elle  fait  le  dessin  d'une  croix  (Fic^re  79)  dont
la  ressemblance  est  tres  grande  avec  1'  original,  qui  est  aussi  une' croix
quelque  peu  compliqude. (Figure  78.)

Je  ne  pense  cependant  pas  qu'  il  soit  perniis  de  faire  rentrer  cette
analogie  dans  la  classe  des  excellentes  experiences  ;  car  d'une  part
Leontnie  a  des  tendances  a  repeter  toujour s  ce  qu'elle  a  dit  a  la  seance


Fig.  79.


precedents  et,  d'  autre  part,  elle  avait  eu  a  deviner  1-5  jours  auparavant
une  croix  avec  un  calvaire.  C  est  la  ce  qui  lue  fait '  croire  au  hasard
pour  cette  experience  de  Leontine.

E^erieru^e  XXX.,  17  Fevrier  1888.-Faite  par  Eugenie.  Le
dessin  reprdsente  une  fleur  de  lis,  comme  on  en  figure  ptrfois  sur
les  rosaces  des  edifices  gothiques.  Eugenie  dit:  "  C'est  un  carre,  et
dedans  il  y  a  un  carre  inscrit,  coninie  une  rosace,  comme  la  rose  des

Encore  que  cette  description  ne  s'applique  pas  tres  bien  a  une  fleur
de  hs,  il  est  interessant  de  retrouver  la  le  mot  de  rosace

Experience  Xm_Faite  le  meme  iour  par  Eugenie.  L'autre


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.


107


aessin  represente  un  canon,  sans  affut,  avec  les  deux  supports  lateraux
qui  font  reposer  le  canon  sur  I'affut  (tourillons).  Chacun  de  ces
supports,  I'un  en  bas,  I'autre  en  haut,  a  la  forme  d'un  petit  carre.
Eugenie  dit  :  "  Une  raie  et  un  petit  carre  en  haut."  Or  le  petit  carre
qu'elle  decrit  et  dessine  est  exactement  identique  au  petit  carre  du  haut
du  canon.

Ce  qu 'il  y  a  d'interessant  dans  cette  double  experience,  c'est  precise-
ment  cette  distinction  qui  lui  fait  dire  :  une  rosace  pour  la  fleur  de  lis,
et  une  raie  avec  un  petit  carre  en  haut  pour  le  canon.

I;x2]erie7ice  XXXII.,  26  i^eVier  1888.— Faite  par  Alice.  Le  dessin
original  represente  une  libellule.  Alice  dit:  "Deux  ovales  tres
rapproches,  comme  deux  lunettes."  Je  ne  donne  pas  ici  le  dessin  de  la
libellule,  mais  assurement  tous  les  lecteurs  se  rendront  bien  compte  que
ce  qui  parait  caracteristique  chez  cet  animal,  ce  sont  ses  deux  enormes
yeux  ovalaires,  a  facettes,  qui  font  saillie  tres  pres  Tun  de  I'autre  de
chaque  cote  de  la  tete.

Apres  avoir  regarde,  je  dis  a  Alice  :  "  Ce  n'est  pas  tout-a-fait  exact.
C'est  un  animal.  Quel  animal  T'  Elle  dit  alors  :"  C'est  allonge.  Ce
qui  est  en  bas,  ce  n'est  pas  des  pattes.  En  bas  il  y  a  de  petites  raies.
II  n'y  a  pas  de  cou  allonge."

On  remarquera,  je  pense,  que  cette  description,  tres  vague  d'  ailleurs,

est  assez  exacte.

Experience  XXXIII. ,  2  Mars  1888.— Faite  par  Eugenie.  Elle  dit :
"  C  est  un  demi  cercle,  avec  une  petite  boule  au  bout."  Or  le  dessin
represente  une  montre,  et  la  petite  boule  du  haut,  figuree  par  Eugenie,
repondtres  bien  a  I'anneau  avec  remontoir,  dessine  au  haut  de  la
montre.

Experience  ZXX/F.— Faite  par  Eugenie  le  meme  jour.  Cette  ex-
perience estun  vrai  succes,  et  assurement  une  des  meilleures  experiences
que  j' aie  eues,  quoique  Eugenie  n'ait  pas  fait  de  dessin.  Le  dessin
original  represente  en  silhouette  une  gazelle.  Eugenie  dit :  "  Une  tete
de  cheval,"  puis,  se  reprenant,  "  Une  petite  tete  de  mouton,  ou  de
boeuf."  II  est  evident  qu'  une  petite  tete  de  mouton,  et  une  silhouette
de  gazelle  ont  une  tres  proche  parente.  Le  hasard  ne  donne  de
pareilles  analogies  ;  qu'  apres  de  longues  series  de  tirages.

Experience  XXXV. — Faite  par  Eugenie  le  meme  jour.  Sur
r  enveloppe  qu'  elle  tient  a  la  main,  elle  fait  des  raies  et  des  barres,
longitudinales  et  transversales,  mais  ne  dit  rien.  Rentre  chez  moi
j'  examine  le  dessin,  qui  se  trouve  etre  un  damier,  par  consequent  tres
analogue  a  un  dessin  qui  represente  un  damier.

Experience  XXXV I. ,  13  Mars  1888. — Faite  par  Alice.  Le  dessin
original  (Figure  80)  represente  une  grappe  de  raisin.  Alors  succes-
sivement  et  assez  lentement,  presque  sans  rien  dire,  Alice  fait  les  dessins
suivants  (Figures  81,  82,  83,  81  et  8-5).


FiCt.  Si.


110


Relation  de  Diverses  Exjoeriences,  &c.


Fig.  85.


II  est  assez  interessant  de  suivre  le  developpement  progressif  de  I'idee.
D'abord  quelque  chose  de  tout-a-fait  informe,  qui  peu  a  peu  se  precise
et  finit  par  devenir  une  feuille.  On  remarquera  I'analogie  de  cette  pro-
gression avec  une  progression  analogue,  lorsque  il  s'est  agi  de  I'ecrevisse.

Experience  XXXVII.-,  12  Mars  1888. — Faite  par  Leontine.  Le


Fig.  86.


dessin  (Figure  86)  represente  un  ballon. Leontine  dit  :  "  Je  vois  une


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  Ill

grosse  tete  avec  de  petites  jambes."  Elle  fait  alors  le  dessin  suivant
(Figure  87),  qui  est  tres  analogue  au  ballon,  avec  les  deux  cordes
qui  pendent  de  chaque  cote.


Fig.  87.


Experience  XXXVIII.,  16  Mars  1888. — Faite  par  Claire.  Le
dessin  original  (Figure  88)  represente  une  hirondelle.  Claire  dit:
"  C  est  une  tete.  Au  milieu  il  y  a  une  tete,  et  puis  a  gauche  cela  se
termine  en  pointe,  comme  une  queue.  En  av.ant  il  y  a  une  petite  barre
comme  un  carre."  (II  est  possible  que  ce  carre  represente  la  mouche
qui  vole  en  avant.) "  Dansle  bas  c'  est  noir,  et  tres  epais." Je  pense


112


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


Fig.  88.

a  une  tete  de  perroquet,  et  je  fais  le  dessin  suivant  (Figure  89),  qui
ressemble  a  1'  hirondelle  aussi  peu  que  possible. Mais  la  description


Fig.  89.


verbale  que  Claire  a  donnee  est  bien  meilleure.  Elle  a  parle  de  tete  et
de  queue. Noter  qu  'il  s'  agissait  aussi  d'  un  oiseau.

Exjyerience  XXXIX.,  2'2  Avril  1888. — Faite  par  Alice.  Le  dessin
original  represente  une  locomotive.  Alice  voit  un  rond  avec  des  ronds
circulaires  et  des  triangles  dans  le  rond,  qui  figurent  relativement  bien
les  rayons  d'  une  roue.  Or  la  locomotive,  dessinee  en  silhouette,  a  deux
roues  dont  on  voit  les  rayons.

Experience.  XL.,  29  Mars  1888. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  En  presence
de  M.  A.  Myers,  de  M.  et  de  Madame  Sidgwick.  Le  dessin  original  repre-
sente un  damier. Eugenie  dit : "  Ce  sont  des triangles  : ils  ont


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


113


1'  air  de  se  retenir  entre  eux  ;  c'  est  comme  un  damier.  lis  sont  unis
par  leurs  sommets,  et  le  tout  forme  un  carre."

Experience  XLl.,  Juillet  1885. — Oette  experience  est  plutot  une
observation  qu'  une  experience.  Jusque  ici  tous  les  faits  que  je  viens
de  rapporter  proviennent  d'  experiences  faites  dans  1'  etat  somnambu-
lique.  Mais  le  fait  suivant,  qui  m'  est  personnel,  a  ete  observe  en
dehors  de  tout  somnambulisme.  •

Pour  faire  des  experiences  de  lucidite  ou  de  transmission  mentale,
je  venais  le  matin  meme  d'  acheter  un  jeu  de  cartes,  dites  tarots,
I'epresentant  des  personnages  divers,  des  triangles,  des  coupes,  des
epees,  servant  aux  prestidigitateurs,  et  aux  magiciens  faisant  de  la
magie  amusante.  Je  regarde  quelques  uns  de  ces  dessins,  et  je  les  laisse
ensuite  sur  ma  table.

A  ce  moment  mon  ami  M.  Ferrari  vient  me  voir.  Je  lui  parle  de
mon  nouvel  achat,  et  je  lui  dis,  moitie  en  plaisantant,  moitie  s6rieuse-
ment :  "  Faisons  une  experience."

Alors  il  prend  le  jeu  de  dessins,  et  me  dit,  "  Qu'  est-ce  que  je  regarde  ?"
J'  ^tais  a  peu  pres  a  deux  metres  de  lui,  et  il  tenait  le  jeu  tres  pres  de
ses  yeux,  de  maniere  que,  meme  si  je  1'  eusse  voulu,  je  ne  pouvais  rien
voir.  Je  suis  sur  d'  ailleurs  de  n'  avoir  ni  vu,  ni  cherche  a  voir.  Je  ne  sais
pourquoi  je  lui  ai  dit  :  "  Un  moissonneur,  un  champ  de  ble,  des
paysans  qui  fauchent,  qui  moissonnent."

Or  le  dessin  que  M.  Ferrai-i  regardait  alors  par  hasard  repr^sentait
la  Mort  habillee  d'  une  grande  draperie  et  tenant  a  la  main  une  immense
faux.  Je  suis  sur  que  je  n'  avais  pas  vu  cette  image  dans  le  jeu  ;
d'  ailleurs  il  n'  y  en  avait  qu'  une  dans  le  jeu.  Peut-etre  inconsciemment
mes  yeux  avaient-ils  vu  la  mort  avec  sa  faux :  en  tout  cas  consciemment
j'  affirme  que  je  n'  avais  pas  vu  cette  image.  Au  reste,  ce  n'  est  pas  la
mort-squelette  que  j' ai  pensee,  c'est  un  moissonneur,  un  paysan,  des
paysans  fauchant  et  faisant  la  moisson  dans  les  bles.

Ce  qui  est  curieux,  c'est  que  j'aie  pense  a  la  moisson,  alors
que  je  n'  y  pense  pas  une  fois  1'  an,  au  moment  meme  oii  H.  Ferrari
avait  sous  les  yeux  la  mort  tenant  une  faux.

Je  dois  ajouter  que  nous  avons  essaye  de  refaire  cette  experience.
Nous  avons  fait  cinq  ou  six,  peut-etre  meme  10  ou  12  essais — ^j'ai  eu  le
tort  de  ne  pas  les  compter  exactement — et  cela  sans  le  moindre  succes.

Tels  sont  les  faits  que  j'ai  pu  recueillir  relativement  aux  dessins;  il
est  evident  que  je  continue  a  experimenter  encore,  cherchant  des  faits
plus  probants,  plus  demonstratifs.  Assurement  mes  experiences  sont
une  confirmation  des  belles  experiences  de  M.  Guthrie  ;  mais  je  ne  me
dissimule  pas  que  les  reproductions  que  je  donne  ici  n'  enti-aineront  pas
toutes  les  convictions.

Comme  on  ne  pent,  dans  1'  espece,  incriminer  le  mode  experimental,
puisque  il  n'  y  a  pas,  je  m'  imagine,  dans  le  precede  experimental,

I


114  Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


d'  erreui'  possible  pour  les  faits  de  la  seconde  serie,  il  faut  admettre  que
c'  est,  soit  le  hasard,  soit  la  lucidite  ou  clairvoyance  qui  m'  a  fourni  les
dessins  que  je  donne.

Je  ne  reviens  pas  sur  le  fait  de  cette  objection  du  hasard.  Oe  n'est
pas  que  je  la  neglige  ;  je  la  crois  au  contraire  fort  stuieuse,  d'  autant
plus  que  dans  aucun  dessin  il  n'  y  a  eu  une  identite  rigoureuse  entre  le
dessin  original  et  sa  reproduction  ;  mais,  apres  mure  reflexion,  je  me
decide  en  definitive  a  ne  pas  accepter  le  hasard  comme  la  cause  de  ces
phenomenes.i  On  ne  compte  pas  avec  le  hasard  dans  les  conditions
ordinaires  de  la  vie  ;  pourquoi  irait-on  1'  invoquer  dans  le  cas  actuel  %
J'  ai  donn^  les  faits,  et  je  laisse  au  lecteur  le  soin  de  juger.

Ainsi  je  ne  crois  pas  le  hasard  soit  la  cause  de  ces  ressemblances.
Je  suis  persuade  qu'  il  y  a  quelque  chose  de  plus. Mais  quoi  ?

Evidemment  1'  hypothese  de  la  transmission  mentale  ne  peut  suffire.
Dans  les  experiences  de  la  deuxieme  serie,  il  n'  y  avait  pas  de  transmis-
sion mentale  possible ;  ou  alors  il  faudrait  admettre  uiie  transmission
mentale  a  distance,  M.  Ferrari,  M.  Hericourt,  M.  Bellier,  M.  Hanriot,  qui
m'  avaient  donne  des  dessins,  etant  les  uns  et  les  autres  tres  loin  de  nous
quand  je  faisais  1'  experience,  c'  est-a-dire,  quand  je  donnais  a  deviner
le  dessin  fait  par  eux,  dessin  que  je  ne  connaissais  absolument  pas.

'  Voici  les  exp&iences  que  j'ai  faites  pour  determiner  1' influence  du  hasard.  J'  ai
pi'is,  parmi  les  dessins  que  j'avais  donnes  deviner,  60  dessins  au  hasard.  Je  les  ai
enferm(^s  dans  des  enveloppes  opaques,  et  j'ai  prie  differentes  personnes  que  je  nom-
merai  E,  B,  G,  R,  M  et  V,  de  me  f aire  des  dessins  en  leur  montrant,  aprfes  chaque  ten-
tative, r  original  qui  correspondait.  Par  une  s^rie  de  combinaisons  que  me  donnait  le
hasard,  j'ai  pu  arriver  h,  un  total  de  5,408  experiences,  chiffre  considerable,  qui  r^pond
k  peu  pres  k  30  fois  le  nombre  des  experiences  faites  sur  mes  somnambules.  En  com-
parant  les  dessins  obtenus  avec  les  dessins  originaux,  j'ai  eu  la  proportion  suivante,
qui  indique  le  jjIus  ou  moins  de  ressemblance  du  dessin  fait  avec  le  dessin  original.

98  trfes  bons.

94  bons.

173  assez  bons.

Ce  qui,  en  rapijortant 100  lo  nombre  des  succes,  me  donne  sur  100  experiences  :

1.8  tres  bon.

1.7  bon.

3.2  assez  bon.

En  laissant  de  cote  ceux  qui  sont  assez  bons,  et  en  ne  prenant  que  ceux  qui  sont
bons  et  trfes  bons,  je  trouve  pour  100  expt^riences  3.5  :  ce  qui  repond  pour  mes  200  ex-
pc^riences  \x  7  succes.  On  voit  qu'  il  y  a  Ik  une  difference  considerable  ;  puisque  sur
mes  200  experiences  je  suis  arrive  k  plus  de  20  succfes.  II  ne  faut  pourtant  pas  negliger
cette  ijroportion,  relativement  considerable,  de  3.5  succfes  sur  100  experiences.
Plusieurs  de  ces  succfes  donnes  par  le  hasard,  ont  ete  tres  remarquables,  et  aussi  re-
marquables  que  ceux  que  je  donne.  Quelques  uns  meme  Font  ete  beaucoup  plus  ;  une
dizaine  \  peu  jares  sont  dans  ce  cas.

Aussi  r  hypothfese  du  hasard,  qui,  au  debut  de  mes  recherches,  me  paraissait  tout-k-
fait  negligeable,  me  paralt-elle  devenir,  par  le  fait  meme  de  180  experiences,  plus
serieuse  que  je  1' avals  pense  d',abord.  En  vertu  meme  des  chiffres  que  je  rapporte  et
du  controle  que  j'ai  institue,  je  ne  la  crois  pas  fondee  ;  mais  elle  meritait  d'etre  ex-
aminee de  trfes  prfes.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.


115


D'  ailleurs  eux-memes  ignoraient  quel  ^tait  parmi  les  nombreux  dessins
fournis  par  eux  celui  que  je  doimais  a  deviner.

En  dehors  de  toute  liypothese,  il  me  semble  plus  rationnel  de
supposer  qu'  il  y  a  dans  certains  etats  psychiques  des  somnambules  une
facuUe  de  connaissance  dont  nous  ne  pouvons  soupgonner  la  nature.
Ce  n'  est  pas  de  1'  hyperesthesie  sensorielle  ;  ce  n'  est  pas  la  perspicacite
normale,  naturelle.  C  est  quelque  chose  de  profondement  mystdrieux,
qui  differe  radicalement  de  ce  que  nous  connaissons,

II  est  possible  que  cette  faculte  de  connaissance  repose  sur  la
perception  d'  un  plienomene  materiel  quelconque.  La  matiere  a
des  forces  que  nous  ne  soupcjonnons  pas,  tout  simplement,  parce
que  nos  sens  ne  nous  en  avertissent  pas.  Pourquoi  certaines
proprietes  de  la  matiere,  inconnues  de  nous,  ne  seraient-elles  pas
appreciables  par  les  somnambules  ?  Ne  voyons-nous  pas  dans  la  nature
des  faits  qui  nous  paraissent  presque  inexplicables  ?  Qu'  un  lievre  passe
dans  une  prairie,  et  un  chien  retrouvera  sa  trace  pas  a  pas  une  heure
apres  ?  Certaines  bacteries  apprecient  des  quantites  d'  oxygene  qui
sont  moindres  que  la  millionieme  partie  d'  un  milligramme.  II  faut
avoir  le  courage  de  notre  ignorance.  Nous  ne  savons  rien  de  la  nature
qui  nous  entoure  que  ce  que  nos  sens  nous  apprennent,  et  il  est  possible
que  des  sens  nouveaux  se  developpent  dans  certains  etats  physiolo-
giques  speciaux.

Dire  qu'  il  y  a  chez  les  sujets  endormis,  non  chez  tous,  mais  au  moins
chez  quelques  uns  d'  entre  eux,  une  faculte  de  connaissance  differente
de  nos  moyens  de  connaissance  normaux,  ce  n'  est  pas  beaucoup  avancer
la  question.  Cependant  c'  est  d^ja  quelque  chose  que  de  poser  le  prob-
leme  de  oette  maniere.  Le  fait  de  la  transmission  mentale  parait
maintenant  a  peu  pres  prouve,  mais  je  crois  que  cette  telepathic  n'  est
qu'  un  cas  particulier  d'  un  fait  bien  plus  general — la  faculte  de  connais-
sance des  somnambules.

Cette  puissance  s'  exerce  non  seulement  sur  les  pensees  humaines  ;
transmission  des  sentiments,  des  idees,  des  images — mais  encore  sur  les
notions  relatives  a  des  objets  materiels.  Quoique  maintes  fois  on  en  ait
cite  des  cas  isoles  plus  ou  moins  bien  observes,  je  ne  crois  pasqu'on
ait  amasse  avec  autant  de  methode  que  j'  ai  essaye  de  le  faire  des  faits
aussi  nombreux  que  ceux  que  je  viens  de  rapporter.

Toutefois,  pour  un  phenomfene  aussi  etrange,  il  ne  soffit  pas  de
donner  quelques  preuves,  il  faut  en  donner  beaucoup.  Je  comprends
tres  bien  que  mes  graphiques  ne  sont  pas  encore  suffisament  demon-
stratifs.  Si  je  me  suis  decide  a  les  publier,  c'  est  plutot  pour  indiquer
la  methode  a  suivre  que  pour  apporter  les  resultats.  Ce  que  j'ai  voulu,
c'est  bien  moins  entrainer  les  convictions  que  faire  reflechir,  et  engager  a
tenter  de  nouvelles  recherches.  Si,  de  part  et  d'  autre,  eix  France,  en
Angleterre,  en  Italie,  en  AUemagne,  on  reunissait  les  faits  soigneuse-


116


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  a&c.


ment  observes,  on  reussirait,  je  crois,  beaucoup  mieux  que  je  n'  ai  pu  le
fairs,  a  etablir  quelques  conditions  du  phenomene.

Pour  me  resumer,  je  pense  avoir  etabli,  par  des  preuves  qui,  pour  la
raethode  au  raoins,  sent  tout-a-fait  rigoureuses,  qu'  il  n'  y  a  pas
seulenient  transmission  mentals,  mais  aussi  lucidite.

Je  le  repete  :  par  suite  des  precautions  que  j'  ai  prises  dans  le
modus  operandi,  il  n'  y  a  qus  dsux  hypotheses  possibles  :  ou  bien  le
hasard,  ou  bien  la  lucidite.  Quand  d'  autres  observateurs,  je  ne  dirai
pas  plus  patients,  mais  plus  perspicaces  ou  mieux  favorises  que  moi,
auront  mieux  etudie  le  phenomene,  il  sera  temps  de  songer  a  en  donner
r  explication.  A  present  il  faut  se  resoudre,  se  resigner,  a  un  grossier
empirisine,  c'  est-a-dire,  a  constater  que,  dans  certaines  conditions
speciales,  il  y  a  connaissance  des  choses  par  d'  autres  precedes  que  nos
precedes  physiologiques  normaux.

ClIAPITRE  VIII.
EXPERIENCES  RELATIVES  AU  DIAGNOSTIC  DES  MALADIES.

C  est  assurement  une  des  questions  que  les  somnambules  et  les
magnetiseurs  de  profession  ont  le  plus  souvent  traitees.  On  salt  que,
des  les  premiers  moments  du  magnetisme  animal,  le  marquis  de
Puysegur  a  fait  faire  par  ses  sujsts  endormis  des  diagnostics  de
maladies.  Actuellement,  dans  tous  les  i>ays  de  I'Europe,  nombre  ds
cabinets  de  somnambules  sont  ouverts,  et  les  sujets  endormis—
reellement  endormis,  cela  va  sans  dire — y  donnent  des  consultations
medicales.  Ces  consultations  sont  assez  detaillees  ;  et  je  suis  tente  de
croire,  sans  grandes  preuves  a  I'appui  d'ailleurs,  que  parfois  il  s'y  fait  des
diagnostics  remarquables.  Malheureusement,  la  credulite  du  public  fait
qus  toutes  les  paroles  de  la  somnambule  sont  interpr^tees  dans  un  sens
favorable  au  diagnostic  reel.  EUes  passent  en  revue  tous  les  appareils
organiques  qui  peuvent  etre  atteints,  et,  quand  elles  arrivent  au  point
soufFrant,  le  consultant  est  enchante,  et  conclut  a  un  succes.

La  somnambule  arrive  done  bien  vite  a  savoir  approximativement  a.
quoi  s'  en  tenir  sur  la  maladie  de  celui  qui  la  consulte.  Une  fois  qu'  ells
tisnt  le  diagnostic,  le  reste  vient  naturellement,  et  elle  decrit  la  maladie
d'  apres  une  sorte  de  schema  qu'  elle  s'  est  fait  assez  facilsment,  grace
aux  livres  de  medecine  et  a  la  pratique  des  malades.

J'  ai  experimsnte  au  point  ds  vus  du  diagnostic  des  maladies
avec  Alice,  Helena,  et  Eugenie.  Alice  n'  a  aucune  habitude  des
consultations  medicales.  En  effet,  c'  est  moi  qui  1'  ai  endormie  pour  la
premiere  fois,  et  elle  n'  a  ete  endormie  que  par  moi.  Helena  a  fort  peu
r  habitude  des  consultations;  cependant  elle  a  ete  magnetisee  par  un
medecin  qui  s'  occupait  aussi  de  diagnostics  medicaux  dans  le
soranambulisme,  et  elle  a  essay e,  en  s'  endormant  elle-meme,  de  donner


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  d-c.


117


quelques  consultations.  Quant  a  Eugenie,  elle  a  pratique,  et  elle
pratique  encore,  dans  un  cabinet  de  consultations  ;  ce  qui  lui  donne  une
grande  habitude  des  malades.

Experience  I.,  1  Octohre  1886. — Faite  par  Alice.  Mon  confrere  et
ami,  le  Professeur  Fontan,  apporte  les  cheveux  d'  un  malade,  et  il  ne  dit
absolument  rien  de  la  nature  de  la  nialadie.

Voici  textuellement  les  paroles  d'  Alice.

"  C  est  un  homme  tres  brun,  pale  :  il  est  poitrinaire.  II  a  mal
a  la  poitrine,  et  puis  encore "—  (ici  elle  s'  arrete  et  porte  la  main  en
arriere  vers  la  fesse  gauche.)  "  11  a  plus  de  40  ans.  II  ne  garde  pas  le
lit,  mais  il  est  pourtant  tres  malade."  (Elle  montre  le  bassin  a  gauche,
le  flanc  gauche,  le  cote  gauche.)  "  II  souffre  par  la.  II  ne  tousse  pas
beaucoup."

Cette  experience,  la  premiere  que  j'  aie  faite  avec  Alice  sur  le
diagnostic  des  maladies,  est  fort  interessante  ;  car  le  malade  dont  M.
Fontan  avait  apporte  les  cheveux  est  un  homme  de  25  ans,  ouvrier  du
port  de  Toulon,  poitrinaire,  toussant  peu  d'  ailleurs,  et  se  levant.  II  est
entre  a  1'  hOpital  pour  une  fistule  a  1'  anus,  qui  le  fait  soufTrir  plus  que
sa  tuberculose.

Experience  II.,  1  Octohre  1886. — Faite  par  Alice  le  meme  jour
et  dans  les  memes  conditions.  Le  Professeur  Fontan  a  apporte  des
cheveux  d'  un  de  ses  malades ;  mais,  par  erreur,  M.  Fontan  me  met  sous
enveloppe  non  pas  les  cheveux,  mais  le  papier  ou  il  a  inscrit  a  1'  avance
le  diagnostic.

Alice  dit :  "II  n'  est  pas  malade.  Je  vols  une  plaie  a  la  jambe"
(elle  montre  le  genou  gauche).  "  Je  ne  vols  pas  autre  chose.  C  est  du
a  un  accident;  une  voiture  renversee."

En  realite,  il  s'  agit  d'  un  individu  tuberculeux,  atteint  d'abces
f roids  multiples,  un  entre  autres  au  dos  du  poignet.  II  faut  noter  qu'  il
y  a  un  an  cet  homme  a  eu  une  synovite  fongueuse  de  nature  tuber-
culeuse,  ouverte  et  tres  douloureuse,  au  genou  gauche.  Cette  plaie  est
a  peu  pres  cicatrisee  au  moment  ou  est  faite  1'  experience  avec  Alice.

Experience  III,  2  Octohre  1886. — Echec.  Alice  diagnostique  une
fifevre,  alors  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  une  keratite  ulcereuse.

Experience  IV.,  3  Octohre  1886. — Faite  par  Alice.  Un  de  mes
amis,  M.P.,  lui  demande  ou  il  est  malade.  Elle  dit,  "  II  n'  a  mal  ni  a  la
tete,  ni  au  cosur,  ni  a  la  poitrine,  mais  seulement  la  "  (elle  montre  le
bas  ventre,  et  les  flancs  de  chaque  cote  de  1'  aine).  "  La  marche  lui  fait
grand  mal."

Or  M.P.  est  atteint  de  coliques  nephretiques.

Experience  V.,  4  Octohre  1886. — Faite  par  Alice.  Cheveux
envoyes  par  le  Professeur  Fontan.^ Echec  complet.  Alice  diagnostique

^  On  ne  s' (^tonnera  pas  des  mots  techniques  que  je  mets  ici  pour  expliquer  les  dia^-


118  Relation  de  Diver ses  Experiences,  &g.

une  sorte  de  peritonite  avec  fievre.  II  s'  agit  en  realite  d'  un  homme
ayant  une  fracture  du  bras.

Experience  VI. — Cheveux  envoy es  par  le  Professeur  Fontan.
Experience  faite  par  Alice,  le  4  Octobre  1886.

"  C  est  une  femme.  Elle  est  au  lit.  EUe  a  quelque  chose  comma
un  cancer.  Elle  souffre  la  "  :  (elle  montre  la  poitrine  du  c6t6  droit).
"II  y  a  une  plaie  a  1'  exterieur.  Ce  n'  est  pas  au  sein.  C  est  au
dessous  du  sein ;  elle  soufire  beaucoup.  Elle  ira  encore  loin.  Elle
n'  est  pas  vieille.  La  plaie  est  grande,  a  peu  pres  comme  la  paume  de  la
main  ;  elle  souflFrira  encore  longtemps.  Elle  ne  gu^rira  pas.  C  est  la
tout  son  mal  ;  mais  il  est  grand.  La  plaie  est  en  dehors.  C  est  au-
dessous  du  sein."  (Elle  indique  le  flanc  droit  et  le  cote  epigastrique
droit. )  Cette  description,  erronee  en  bien  des  points,  ecrite  d'  ailleurs  par
moi  textuellement  avantque  j'  eusse  le  diagnostic  reel,  est  parfois  assez
exacte  et  curieuse.  II  s'  agit  d'  un  tuberculeux,  tres  malade,  avec  phleg-
mon iliaque  ouvert.

Uxperience  VII.,  18  Septembre  188Q. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.
M.  Hericourt  m'  a  envoye  des  cheveux  portant  les  numeros  1  et  2.

Pour  les  cheveux  du  numero  1,  elle  me  dit  qu'  il  s'agit  de  quelqu'
un  qui  n'  est  pas  malade,  de  M.  Hericourt  lui-meme  ou  de  sa  femme.
Cela  est  exact.  II  s'  agissait  des  cheveux  de  M.  Hericourt,  et  je
1'  ignorais.

Experience  VIII. — Le  meme  jour.  Experience  faite  avec  les
cheveux  portant  le  numero  2.  Voici  les  paroles  d' Alice  :  "  Ces  cheveux
me  font  mal.  0'  est  un  effet  strange  que  je  n'  avais  jamais  ressenti  encore.
J'  etouffe.  Ce  sont  les  cheveux  de  quelqu'  un  des  siens.  Quand  je  les
touclie,  je  me  sens  toute  saisie,  tout  le  corps  et  toute  la  tete.  C'est
une  femme  qui  est  dans  son  lit,  qui  soulfre  "  (elle  montre  la  ceinture)
"  avec  des  frissons  pai'tout.  Elle  est  bien  malade.  Elle  a  des  crises,
des  etoufFements.  Elle  souffre  dans  les  reins."  (Elle  montre  les
iiancs,  les  reins  et  la  region  epigastrique  inferieure.)  "  Elle  ne  pent
pas  se  lever :  mais  elle  n'  a  pas  de  plaie.  Elle  est  encore  tres  jeune.
Des  que  je  touohe  ses  cheveux,  cela  me  donne  des  crampes,  des  spasmes
et  une  boule  a  la  gorge.  Puis  tout  se  passe,  et  il  me  reste  un  grand
mal  de  tete.  Elle  n'  a  ni  fievre,  ni  maladie  intdrieure,  ni  plaie,  rien
que  des  crises  nerveuses."

Telles  sont  les  pai'oles  que  j'  ai  recueillies  et  notees  avant  de  savoir
quel  etait  le  diagnostic  du  malade  dont  les  cheveux  m'avaient  ete  envoyes.
Je  n'  ai  su  le  resultatque  Imit  jours  apres.  II  s' agissait  des  cheveux
de  Madame  H.,  bien  portante.  Je  crus  qu'  il  y  avait  la  un  6chec ;
mais  r  echec  etait  plutot  un  succes  :  car  Madame  H.  venait  d'  accoucher

nostics  qui  mo  sont  donnes.  Comme  j '  i^ore  la  nature  de  la  maladie  h,  diagnostiquer,
je  fais  moi-meme  le  diagnostic  d'  apres  les  paroles  d'  Alice,  et  je  1'  ecris  par  avance,  pour
ne  pas  me  laisser  influencer.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.  119


10  jours  auparavant,  en  sorte  que  la  description  donnee  par  Alice  peut
etre  presque  regardee  cornine  une  description  des  douleurs  de
r  accouchement.

Uxperience  IX.,  22  Septembre  1886. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.
Mon  confrere  et  ami,  M.  Ch.  Segard,  1'  interroge  sur  un  de  ses  malades  ;

11  ne  donne  absolument  aucune  indication  verbale.

Alice  dit  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  une  jeune  fille  :  "  EUe  est  couchee  ;  elle  n'  a
pas  grand  fievre  en  ce  moment,  mais  elle  en  a  eu  beaucoup  plus.  Elle  est
pale,  maigre,  souifre  dans  le  ventre,  mais  a  soufFert  plus.  Elle  n'  est
pas  tres  malade,mais  ne  peut  se  lever.  Elle  a  mal  a  la  gorge,  au  cou  ;  elle
etouffe,  et,  quand  elle  respire,  c'  est  comme  du  feu  ;  elle  n'  a  pas  de  plaie,
rien  aux  jambes,  ni  aux  mains,  et  presque  pas  de  fievre."

Get  ensemble  de  symptomes  est  tres  exact.  II  s'  agit  en  effet  d'  une
jeune  fille  convalescente  de  fievre  typhoide.  Tout  est  exact,  sauf
qu'  elle  n'  est  ni  pale,  ni  maigre,  et  que  la  douleur  et  1'  etoufl'ement  a  la
gorge,  symptomes  reels,  ont  ete  par  Alice  quelque  peu  exageres.

Experience  X.,  25  Novemhre  1886. — M.  Hericourt  apporte  des
cheveux  dont  je  ne  connais  pas  la  provenance.  Voici  les  paroles
d'Alice  :  "  C  est  une  femme,  ce  n'  est  pas  une  grave  maladie.  Elle  souffre
beaucoup."  (Elle  montre  le  bas  de  la  poitrine,  1'  abdomen  et  le  cote  droit.)
"  Pas  de  fievre.  Rien  a  la  tete,  rien  aux  bras,  ni  aux  jambes.  Tout  le
mal  est  la."  (Elle  montre  le  ventre.)  "Elle  tient  le  lit,  et  souifre
beaucoup  dans  le  ventre."  En  disant  cela,  Alice  a  une  grande  anxiete
respiratoire.

C  etaient  les  cheveux  d'  une  femme  morte  de  peritonite.  L'  erreur
est  done  manifesto  lorsqu'  elle  dit  que  la  maladie  n'  est  pas  grave,  et
qu'  il  n'  y  a  pas  de  fievre.  Mais  la  localisation  dans  le  ventre,  avec
vivos  douleurs,  est  nettement  indiquee.

Experience  XI.,  3  Decembre  1886. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.
Mon  ami  M.  P.  Langlois  me  donne  deux  meches  de  cheveux
sans  me  fouruir  aucune  autre  indication.  Pour  une  de  ces  meches  de
cheveux,  Alice  ne  peut  rien  me  dire ;  mais,  pour  1'  autre,  elle  dit, "  La  tete
est  prise.  Elle  est  chaude.  0'  est  une  femme,  pas  tres  agee,  qui  n'  a  rien
aux  jambes,  ni  au  corps.  La  tete  me  fait  mal.  Elle  est  brulante,
lourde.  La  tete  est  completement  prise."  Elle  montre  le  front,  le  tour
de  la  tete  et  le  cote  parietal  gauche.  Je  fais,  d'  apres  ces  indications,
le  diagnostic  de  meningite.

Or  les  cheveux  en  question  provenaient  d'  un  enfant  atteint  de  mal
de  Pott ;  mais  les  autres  cheveux,  ceux  pour  lesquels  Alice  n'  avait  rien
su  dire,  etaient  ceux  d'  un  homme  de  30  ans  atteint  d'  une  meningite,
dont  le  seul  symptome  etait  une  cephalalgie  intense.

Dans  r  ignorance  totale  ou  nous  sommes  des  conditions  qui  president,
chez  les  sujets  magnetises,  a  la  connaissance  des  choses,  il  faut  se
garder  de  conclure  a  la  legere  qu'  il  y  a  la  simple  coincidence  fortuite.


120


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


Les  deux  papiers  ont  ete  places  1'  un  a  cote  cle  1'  autre  :  cela  permet
d'  admettre  une  sorte  de  banality  dans  les  contacts  de  ces  deux  papiers.
D'  ailleurs  je  me  contente  de  rapporter  1'  experience  sans  oser  en
conclure  quoi  que  ce  soit.

Experience  XII.,  22  Decemhre  1886. — Experience  faite  par  Alice.
Mon  collegue,  M.  Landouzy,  me  donne  un  flacon  contenant  de  1'  urine
d'  un  de  ses  malades.  D'  apres  ce  qu'Alice  me  dit,  je  fais  le  diagnostic  de
pleurfeie,  ou  de  nephrite  aigiie,  mais  plutot  de  pleuresie  tuberculeuse
aigiie.  Malheureusement  j'  ai  oublie  de  noter  ensuite  quel  etait  le
diagnostic  veritable — je  crois  pourtant  que  1'  erreur  etait  complete.

Experieyice  XIII.,  27  Fevrier  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Helena.
M.  Hericourt  est  avec  moi.  II  vient  de  voir  un  malade,  et  il  demande
a  Helt^na  quelle  est  cette  maladie.  Dans  le  cours  de  cette  experience,
il  ne  dit  pas  une  seule  parole,  et  c'  est  moi  seul  qui  interroge  Helena.

Voici  les  paroles  textuelles  d'  Helena.

"  Angoisse,  etoufFement,  vive  douleur  ici  a  gauche."  (Elle  montre
le  creux  epigastrique  et  la  region  cardio-stomacale  inferieure  gauche.)
"  C"  est  la  ce  qui  est  malade.  C  est  comme  une  poche  qu'  il  faudrait
vider  ;  cela  m'  ^toulfe  et  me  monte  la."  (Elle  montre  le  sternum.)  "  II
y  a  aussi  mal  de  tete  ;  mais  c'est  1'  accessoire ;  ce  qui  est  essentiel,
c'  est  cette  poche  la,  sous  le  coeur,  qui  me  donne  de  1'  angoisse.  II  y  a
de  la  fievre,  c'  est  au-dessous  du  coeur ;  cela  fait  le  rond.  On  dirait
une  poche.  11  faut  vider  cela.  Cela  me  fait  mal  a  la  tete  par
repercussion."

Or  r  experience  a  tres  bien  r^ussi.  En  effet,  il  s'  agit  d'  un  malade
tuberculeux,  ayant  une  caverne  tuberculeuse,  remplie  de  pus,  a  la  base
du  poumon  gauche,  avec  suffocation,  dyspn^e,  oesophagisme.  Cette
experience  est  vraiment  tres  bonne ;  car  je  crois  etre  sur  que  M.
Hericourt  n'  a  eu  ni  un  mot  ni  un  geste  d'  approbation  ou  de  disappro-
bation.

Experience  XIV.,  1  Mars  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Helena.
D'  abord  je  lui  demande  ce  que  je  pense.  Elle  fait  trois  ou  quatre
erreurs.  Alors  je  precise  et  lui  dis,  "  II  s'  agit  de  ma  petite  fille  qui  est
malade."  II  va  sans  dire  qu'  Helena  ne  pent  savoir  la  maladie  de  ma
petite  fille,  et  qu'  elle  ne  connait  aucune  personne  qui  puisse  la  mettre
au  courant  de  ce  qui  se  passe  chez  moi.

"  Elle  a  mal  la."  (Elle  monti'e  la  region  costale  laterale  gauche
inferieure,  tout-a-fait  au  niveau  de  la  rate.)  "C'est  la  qu'elle  a  mal.
Elle  a  mal  aussi  plus  bas  et  plus  haut "  (et  elle  etend  cette  region
douloureuse  en  bas,  du  c6t6  de  1'  intestin  et  en  haut,  du  c6te  du  poumon).
"  Elle  souffre  la  et  la "  (elle  montre  alors  la  region  iliaque  droite).
"  Sous  r  omoplate  il  y  a  de  la  congestion,  comme  j'  en  ai  actuellement  au
foie.  Elle  soufFre  a  1'  intestin  et  au  poumon.  C  est  la  le  mal  principal.
Elle  a  aussi  mal  a  la  tete  ;  mais  c'est  accessoire,  et  elle  porte  sou  vent


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <£-c.  121


la  main  du  cote  de  la  nuque.  Ses  petites  jambes  sont  bien  faibles,  et
alors  cela  lui  donne  de  la  fievre.  C'est  surtout  quand  elle  mange  que  les
digestions  sont  difficiles.  Cela  lui  donne  des  brulures  tout  le  long  de
r  oesophage."

En  realite,  ma  petite  fiUe,  agee  de  sept  ans,  a  depuis  neuf  jours  une
fievre  typhoide  caracterisee  par  un  peu  de  cephalalgie,  mais  tres  legere,
une  grande  faiblesse  des  membi-es,  une  fievre  assez  forte,  et  peu  de
douleurs  abdominales.  Le  principal  symptome  est  une  congestion
pulmonaire  tres  forte,  presque  une  pneumonie,  au  poumon  gauche.
Elle  porte  incessament  la  main,  non  a  la  nuque,  mais  au  nez,  ou  elle  a
des  demangeaisons  intolerables.  Elle  ne  mange  d'  ailleurs  rien,  ou
presque  rien.

Experience  XV.,  17  Mars  1887.— Experience  faite  par  Helena.  Je
lui  dis,  "  A  quoi  est-ce  que  je  pense  ? "  Alors  elle  divague  et  fait  des
reponses  insignifiantes.  Je  lui  dis,  "  J' ai  un  enfant  malade."  Elle
r^pond  :  "  J'aUais  vous  le  dire."  "  Eh  bien,  qu'  est-ce  qu'  il  a  ■?  "  "  II
a  tres  mal  a  la  tete."  Puis,  apres  une  dizaine  de  secondes,  elle  ajoute  :
"  II  a  la  rougeole."  Or  c'  etait  vrai,  et  je  suis  sur  qu'  elle  ne  pouvait  le
savoir,  car  la  rougeole  de  mon  petit  gargon  datait  seulement  de  1'  avant
veille,  et  il  n'  y  avait  guere  que  moi  et  trois  ou  quatre  personnes,  tout-
a-fait  inconnues  d'  Helena,  a  le  savoir.

Alors  je  lui  demande,  "  Pourquoi  avez-vous  dit  la  rougeole  V  Elle
me  dit :  "  C  est  que  j'  ai  vu  sa  figure  toute  rouge,  et  puis  tout  de  suite
cela  a  disparu."

Cette  experience  me  parait  une  des  plus  nettes,  sinon  la  plus  nette
de  toutes  celles  que  j'  ai  faites  sur  le  diagnostic  des  maladies.  II  n'  y  a
pas  eu  d'  hesitation.  Elle  a  dit  le  mot  de  rougeole  a  voix  basse,  comme
les  sujets  magnetises  prononcent  toujours,  lorsque  la  reponse  est  exacte.
Dans  ce  cas  elles  disent  vite  et  a  demi-voix,  comme  si  c'  etait  une  force
etrangere  qui  leur  dictat  la  reponse.

Experience  XVI.,  26  Mars  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Helena.  Je
venais  de  voir  une  femme  atteinte  d'  une  nevralgie  faciale  tres  doulour-
euse.  Helena  me  dit,  "  Une  douleur  a  1'  estomac,  qui  remonte  ;  tres
grand  mal  de  cojur.  C  est  tres  amer  a  la  bouche.  Nausee  comme  le
mal  de  mer,  avec  de  grandes  sueurs  froides,  de  grandes  faiblesses;
douleur  dans  le  dos  en  arriere. C  est  un  homme."

On  voit  que  1'  echec  est  complet.

Experience  XVII.,  i  Avril  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Helena,  a  6
heures  30.  Je  lui  demande  la  maladie  de  0.,  mon  domestique,  atteint
d'une  nevralgie  sciatique  gauche,  tres  intense  et  tres  douloureuse.  Helena
me  dit,  "Ha  mal  a  la  tete.  La  tete  est  tres  grosse,  tres  pesante,  tres
douloureuse,  et  puis  un  commencement  de  fievre  et  de  mal  a
I'intestin."

Le  diagnostic  etait  tout-a-fait  errone.  Maisje  dois  ajouter  que  dans


122


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


la  nuit  du  4  au  5  Avi-il,  et  le  lendemain  matin,  5  Avril,  C.  est  pris
de  sueurs  tres  abondantes,  avec  un  leger  6tat  febrile,  et  surtout  une
cephalalgie  extreinement  violente.  Alors,  accompagne  de  M.  F.  Myers,
qui  est  en  ce  moment  a  Paris,  je  retourne  chez  Helena,  ce  meme  jour,
5  Avril.  A  peine  ai-je  endormi  Helena  qu'  elle  me  dit,  "  Attendez,  je
vais  vous  donner  de  ses  nouvelles.  II  a  to uj  ours  tres  mal  a  la  tete.
C  est  un  commencement  de  fievre.  La  tete  est  tres  douloureuse,  et
r  intestin  est  pris.  La  lievre  n'  est  pas  deelaree  encore.  C  est  un  com-
mencement probablement  de  fievre  muqueuse  ou  typhoide  ;  mais  je  ne
peux  rien  dire ;  ce  qui  domine,  c'  est  le  mal  de  tete."

J e  suis  sur  de  n'  avoir  donne  aucune  indication.  D'  ailleurs  il  n'y
a  pas  eu  chez  C.  de  lievre  typhoide,  quoique  il  eut  tout-a-fait  les
symptomes  d'une  fievre  typhoide  commen5ante  ;  au  bout  de  trois  ou
quatre  jours,  il  etait  gu^ri.  II  n'en  est  pas  moins  vrai  qu' Helena  a
diagnostique  la  cephalalgie  et  la  diarrhee.

Experience  XVIII.,  5  Avril  1887. — Exj^erience  faite  par  Helena.
M.  F.  Myers  lui  demande  la  maladie  d'  un  de  ses  enfants.  II  s'  agit
d'  un  eczema  infantile.  L'  echec  est  complet.  Elle  parle  d'une  tumeur
du  foie,  de  cavernes,  de  douleurs  abdominales  avec  syncopes.

Experience  XIX.,  6  Avril  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Eugenie.
Eugenie  vient  chez  moi,  et  je  fais  venir  C,  dont  j'ai  parle  plus  haut,
qui  est  encore  atteint  de  sa  violente  nevralgie  sciatique.  Le  mal  de
tete  a  disparu.  Eugenie  ne  peut  faire  le  diagnostic.  Elle  parle  de
douleurs  abdominales  et  de  douleurs  thoraciques.

Expe'rie7ice  XX.,  2  Mai  1887. — Faite  par  H(51(^na.  Je  lui  dis
qu'  un  de  mes  enfants  est  malade.  Elle  ne  peut  pas  dire  ce  qu'  il  a.  Or
il  s'  agit  de  la  rougeole,  et  elle  pouvait  vraisemblablement,  d'  apres  ce
qu'  elle  savait  de  la  maladie  d'  un  autre  de  mes  enfants,  il  y  a  un  mois
et  demi,  supposer  qu'  il  etait  de  nouveau  question  de  rougeole.  Elle
ne  r  a  pas  fait  cependant.

Experience  XXI.,  3  Mai  1887. — Experience  faite  par  Helena.  Je
lui  parle  d'un  malade  que  je  viens  de  voir.  Elle  me  dit,  "  C  est  un
homme  ;  il  n'  a  rien  aux  jambes.  C  est  une  maladie  g^n^rale."  Elle
montre  le  ventre  et  le  thorax.  "  II  y  a  uii  aneantissement  profond,  de
r  atonie.  La  circulation  n'  existe  pas.  H  y  a  des  souffrances  generales
dans  le  ventre  et  dans  les  intestins.  Mais  je  ne  puis  preciser.  C  est
un  manque  de  circulation  g^n^rale  qui  amene  les  ^vanouissements.  J e
sens  que  je  defaille  et  que  je  vais  m'  evanouir.  II  y  a  le  coeur  qui  ne
fonctionne  pas.  0'  est  un  organe  qui  a  perdu  la  vie.  C  est  le  coeur,
et,  dans  1'  estomac,  il  y  a  de  la  gastralgie."

Cette  description  est  a  certains  egards  assez  exacte.  II  s'agissait
d'une  jeune  fenune  que  je  venais  de  voir  le  matin  meme,  et  qui  venait
d'  avoir  une  metrorrhagie  intense,  avec  des  syncopes  dues  a  la  grande
quantite  de  sang  perdue. Pendant  une  heure  elle  etait  restee  presque


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  (£-c.


123


en  syncope.  Elle  avait  eu  aussi  quelques  douleurs  abdominales  assez
fortes,  plus  fortes  probablement  qu'  elle  ne  me  1'  avait  avoue,  car  il
s'  agissait  d'  une  fausse  couche  qu'  elle  avait  voulu  dissimuler.

Experiences  XXII.,  XXIII.,  et  XXIV.,  9  3Iai  1887.— Faites  avec
Helena.  Je  vais  avec  Helena  chez  Madame  de  M.,  qui  1'  interroge
sur  divers  malades.  II  va  de  soi  que  je  recommande  a  Madame  de  M.
de  ne  rien  dire  dans  le  cours  de  cet  interrogatoire,  et  elle  se  conforme
rigoureusement  a  ma  recommandation,  de  sorte  que  c'  est  moi  seul  qui
parle  a  Helena,  et  j' ignore  absolument  quels  sont  les  malades  dont  il
est  question.

Pour  le  premier  malade,  Helena  dit,  "  J'  ai  mal  aux  nerfs.  Je  suis
tres  agitee.  II  n'y  a  pas  moyen  de  respirer."  (Elle  montre  le  sternum
et  le  bas  du  stei-num.)  "  J'  ai  la  un  poids  qui  m'  etoufle.  Surtout  j'  ai
les  nerfs  tres  agites.  Je  ne  peux  me  retenir.  J'  ai  mal  a  la  tete  et
dans  le  derriere  de  la  tete,  mais  moins  qu'  a  la  poitrine.  Les  jambes
faibles. Je  suis  presque  sans  connaissance."

Ce  diagnostic  est  relativement  exact.  II  s'agitd'  une  jeune  femme
atteinte  d'une  grande  irritation  bronchique  chronique.  Depuis  plusieurs
annees  elle  tousse  sans  pouvoir  guerir  de  cette  opiniatre  bronchite.  En
outre  elle  a  un  peu  d'  hysterie,  et  un  etat  de  spleen  et  de  tristesse
presque  insurmontable,  avec  une  grande  agitation  nerveuse.

Pour  le  second  malade,  Helena  dit,  "  Fievre,  mal  dans  les  reins  ;
j'  ai  chaud  et  je  souffre  dans  les  reins."  Elle  montre  le  cote  droit  et  le
foie,  et  elle  dit,  "La  douleur  fait  le  tour."  Alors  elle  indique  tres
exactement  la  region  hepatique :  "  La  douleur  part  des  reins.  Elle
fait  le  tour.  Le  cote  enfle,  avec  des  douleurs  tres  vives.  Une  fievre
brulante  avec  des  douleurs  dans  les  reins."  En  disant  les  reins,  elle
montre  uniquement  le  foie.

Le  diagnostic  est  exact.  II  s'  agissait  de  M.  B.,  qui  n'  a  a  la  verite
aucune  fievre,  mais  qui  soufi're  depuis  deux  ans  d'  une  affection  hepatique
rebelle,  avec  un  teint  bilieux  et  des  douleurs  vives  dans  la  region
hepatique.

Pour  le  troisieme  malade  Helena  dit,  "J'ai  mal  a  la  tete.  Je  ne
puis  definir  ma  sensation.  Je  suis  a  bout  de  forces,  sur  le  point  de
m'  evanouir,  minee  par  la  fievre.  Ce  n'  est  pas  un  mal  violent,  c'  est  un
mal  languissant,  un  malaise  indescriptible ;  j'ai  mal  partout  et  mal
nulle  part."

Ici  encore,  le  diagnostic  est  exact.  II  s'agitdeM.  C,  jeune  liomme,
qui,  apres  un  sejour  de  quelques  mois  dans  les  pays  chauds,  a  un  etat
febrile  vague,  sans  localisation  precise,  une  fatigue  permanente,  et  un
affaiblissement  general  des  forces.

Experience  i&itQ  par  Alice,  20  Mai  1886. — Je  viens  de  voir  un
enfant  qui  a  au  genou  une  periostite  rhumatismale  douloureuse.  Alice  ne
peut  rien  me  dire :  je  remarque  qu'  elle  ne  se  tate  pas  la  poitrine


124


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


et  le  ventre,  ou  la  tete,  comme  elle  fait  d'  habitude,  mais  les  deux
genoux.

Experience  XXVI.,  22  Mai  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  J'ai  une
gingivite  determinee  par  de  la  potasse  que  j'  ai,  dans  le  cours  d'  une
experience  de  chimie,  aspiree  par  megarde. Alice  ne  peut  rien  me  dire.

Experience  XXVII.,  24  Mai  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Je  viens  de  voir
une  dame  atteinte  d'  une  nevralgie  faciale  extremement  douloureuse.
Alice  ne  peut  rien  me  dire  de  precis.  Elle  dit,"  Douleurs  avec  des  crises  "
(et  elle  montre  le  cote  droit  du  thorax).  "  J'  etouffe  ;  je  ne  puis  respirer.
C  est  dans  le  ventre.  C  est  a  la  ceinture."  Elle  montre  aussi  les
reins. En  somme  echec  complet.

Experience  XXVIII. ,  1  Juin  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  J'  aieu  une
legere  angine  avec  forte  cephalalgie  au  debut,  il  y  a  trois  jours.  Elle
dit :  "  Mai  au  creux  de  1'  estomac,  avec  une  chaleur  qui  monte  a  la
poitrine  et  a  la  tete.  C  est  la  poitrine,  la  tete  et  F  estomac,  mais
surtout  la  tete." Indications  nulles,  en  somme.

Experience  XXIX.,  2  Jtiin  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Mon  coUegue,
M.  Hanriot,  lui  demande  le  diagnostic  relatif  a  quelqu'  un  qu'  il  vient
desoigner;  il  ne  donne  aucune  indication.  Alice  dit:  "Je  vols  un
homme,  couche,  dans  son  lit,  ti'tis  malade,  tres  malade.  C  est  une  forte
tievre.  La  tete  est  prise,  mais  c'  est  surtout  la  qu'  il  souffre,"  et  elle
montre  les  deux  plis  de  1'  aine  a  droite  et  a  gauche.

En  realite  il  s'  agit  d'  une  petite  fille  de  12  ans,  qui  vient  de  mourir.
Au  moment  de  I'etablissement  de  ses  regies,  elle  a  c^te  prise  de  douleurs
abdominales  tres  violentes,  portant  au  bas  du  ventre,  et  d'  une  lievre
tres  forte,  ce  qui  a  fait  admettre  une  peritonite.

Experience  XXX.,  15  Alai  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  Jeluidis  que
je  pense  a  un  malade,  et  je  lui  demande  quelle  est  la  maladie  de  cette
personne.  Je  venais  de  voir  M.  C,  dont  il  avait  ete  question  dans
r  Experience  XXIV.,  mais  assurement  rien  ne  pouvait  faire  deviner
qu'  il  s'  agissait  d'  un  malade  dont  il  avait  ete  deja  question,  et  que  ce
malade  fut  le  meme  que  celui  de  1'  Experience  XXIV.

Les  paroles  d'  H(51ena  sont  a  peu  pres  exactement  les  memes  que  pour
r  Experience  XXIV.  :  "  0'  est  un  aneantissement  general.  Je  souffre
partout.  Je  n'  ai  plus  de  forces.  Je  n'  ai  mal  nulle  part,  et  j'  ai  mal
partout."

Experience  XXXI. — Faite  par  Helena.  Je  lui  demande  ce  que  je
pense.  Elle  me  dit  que  je  veux  1'  interroger  sur  un  malade,  ce  qu'  il  est
assez  facile  de  deviner.  Elle  me  dit,  "Douleurs  du  ventre,  de  I'estomac,
de  la  tete."  Or  il  s' agit  d' un  enfant  ayant  une  legere  blessure  a  la
jambe. Echec  complet.

Experience  XXXII. ,  22  Mai  1887.— Faite  par  Helena.  Elle  nepeut
pas  deviner  que  j'  ai  une  gingivite.  Voir  plus  haut  1'  echec  d'  Alice
sur  cette  meme  question. (Experience  XXVI.)


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  i:c.  125


Experience  XXXIII.,  Mai  1887. — Faite  j^ar  Helena.  (Comparer
cette  experience  a  1' Experience  XVII.)  Je  viens  de  voir  Madame  F.,
atteinte  de  nevralgie  faciale.  Alice  ne  m'  avait  rien  dit  de  precis.  II  en  est
de  meme  d'  Helena.  Voici  ses  paroles  :  "  J'  ai  nial  dans  cette  partie  du
corps  "  (elle  montre  le  ventre  et  le  bas  ventre  du  cote  du  pubis).  "  C  est
la  que  je  soufFre.  Ca  monte  jusque  a  la  tete,  mais  dans  la  tete  ce  n'  est
que  de  la  repercussion  ;  la  source  du  mal  est  dans  le  ventre.  C  est
comme  si  j'  etouftais  "  (elle  a  alors  une  sorte  de  crampe  generale).  "  Le
mal  a  monte  a  m'  etouffer,  il  m'  a  monte  au  coeur,  et  j'  ai  eu  comme  une
attaque  de  nerfs,  avec  un  manque  de  vie  et  de  circulation.  Je  me  suis
raidie,  et  cela  m'  a  donnu  mal  a  la  tete  ;  mais  le  principal  est  toujoui's
dans  le  ventre."

La  description  ne  se  rapporte  pas  du  tout  a  Madame  F.,  mais  il
faut  noter  que,  le  matin  et  la  veille,  je  venais  de  voir  un  individu  sur
lequel,  bien  portant,  pour  faire  une  experience  de  physiologie,
j'  avals  fait  avec  mon  collegue  Hanriot  une  injection  de  trois  centi-
grammes de  morphine.  II  avait  mal  tolere  cette  assez  faible  dose  de
morphine,  et  avait  eu  pendant  deux  jours  (1'  injection  avait  ete  faite  le
23  Mai)  une  forte  cephalalgie  avec  des  douleurs  vives  dans  les  reins,
de  la  difticulte  pour  uriner,  et  meme  de  la  retention  d'  urine.  Les
douleurs,  tres  fortes,  portaient  sur  le  bas  du  ventre.

La  description  s'  applique  done  plutot  a  ce  malade  qu'  a  Madame
F.  J'  en  dirai  autant  de  la  description  donnee  le  meme  jour  par
Alice  (voir  Experience  XXVII.),  mais  il  faut  se  mefier  de  ces
arrangements  faits  apres  coup  ;  qui  rapportent  la  reponse  a  autre  chose
qu'a  la  question  faite.  Pour  ma  part  j'estime  qu'il  faut  les  mentionner  ;
mais  n'en  pas  tenir  compte.

Experience  XXXIV.,  3  Jui7i  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  II  s' agit
de  la  meme  malade,  au  sujet  de  laquelle  j'  avals  la  veille  interroge
Alice.  Je  dis  a  Helena  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  une  petite  fille  de  1 2  ans.
Helena  me  dit,  "  Je  ne  peux  pas  parler  ;  j' ai  de  la  peine  a  respirer  ;
cependant  le  mal  n'  est  pas  dans  la  gorge.  Les  membres  s'  engourdis-
sent,  comme  s'  ils  mouraient  dans  mon  coi-ps "  (elle  montre  le  ventre
avec  force,  en  appuyant  de  toutes  ses  forces  sur  les  aines  et  le  bas
ventre).  "  II  me  passe  comme  des  courants  froids  dans  le  ventre.  J'  ai
mal  a  la  tete  et  froid  aux  pieds.  J'  ai  un  frisson  general,  et  besoin  de
me  rechauffer."

Quoique  il  y  ait  dans  la  description  une  grande  banalite,  il  faut
comparer  les  termes  d'  Alice  et  ceux  d'  Helena.  On  y  trouvera  quelque
ressemblance.  (Voir  Experience  XXIX.)

Experience  XXXV.,  lundi,  6  Jiiin. — Faite  par  Helena.  J' avals
ete  avec  M.  Langlois,  le  4  J uin,  pour  voir  Helena,  et  lui  demander
le  diagnostic  de  deux  malades  soignes  par  lui.  Xous  ne  1'  avions  pas
trouvee. Le 6 Juin, au matin,  M.  Langlois ne m'ayant  rien


126  Relation  cle  Diver ses  Experiences,  &c.


dit  et  n'  etant  pas  venu  avec  moi,  j'  intei'roge  Helena  sur  ces
malades.

Aloi's  elle  s'  etend,  semble  s'  endormir,  puis  elle  geinit,  se  raidit,  porte
la  tete  en  arriere,  et  se  courbe  en  arc  de  cercle,  avec  les  poings  ferra^s
et  les  jambes  contractur^es.  Elle  pousse  des  oris  en  gemissant,  dit
qu'  elle  a  des  frissons,  et  que  la  tete  lui  manque.  Je  porte  le  diagnostic
de  meningite.  II  est  vrai  que  je  suis  tente  de  faire  ce  diagnostic  ;  car
M.  Langlois  est  attache  a  un  hopital  d'  enfants  ou  la  meningite  est,
comme  on  sait,  tres  frequente.

Les  deux  malades  de  M.  Langlois  etaient  atteints,  1'  un  d'  un
hydropneumo-thorax  ;  V  autre  d'  une  meningite.  Cette  meningite  ^tait
tout-a-fait  au  debut,  avec  ralentissement  du  pouls,  et  cephalalgie,  mais
sans  cris,  ni  contractures.

Experiences  XXXVI.  et  XXXVII.,  15  Juin  1887. — Faites  par
Helena  et  Alice.  Le  meme  jour,  je  demande  a  des  heures  differentes  a
Alice  et  a  Helena,  ou  je  souffre.  J'  ai  une  foi'te  courbature  dans  les
bras  pour  avoir,  dans  des  experiences  de  physiologie,  essaye  de  soulever
des  poids  trop  lourds.  Or  ni  1'  une  ni  1'  autre  ne  peuvent  rien  me  dire
de  precis.  J'  avais  aussi  eu  la  veille  un  peu  de  conjonctivite,  par  suite
d'  un  corps  etranger  dans  1'  ceil. Rien  de  precis  ni  d'  interessant.

Experience  XXXVIII.,  5  Juillet  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  Dans
ia  journee  du  4  J uillet  Helena  a  eu  une  crise  nerveuse  tres  violente.
Je  ne  puis  la  voir  que  le  5  au  matin.  La  nuit  a  ete  tres  agit^e,  et  a  ce
inoment  meme,  elle  semble  encore  sous  le  coup  d'  une  agitation  presque
delirante.  Je  la  calme  en  la  magnetisant.  Magnetisee,  elle  redevient
presque  aussitot  raisonnable.  A  un  moment  donne,  sans  rien  dire,  je
pense  a  1'  interroger  sur  la  sante  d'  un  de  mes  enfants.  Elle  me  dit
(contrairement  a  ses  habitudes),  "Comment  vont  vos  enfants?  II  y
en  a  un  qui  est  tombe  et  s'  est  fait  du  mal."  De  fait,  1'  avant-veille,  un
de  mes  fils  etait  tomb^  dans  1'  escalier  et  s'  etait  fait  une  grosse  bosse  au
front.  Mais  je  ne  pensais  pas  a  lui.  Je  pensais  a  un  autre  de  mes  fils,
qui,  en  jouant  dans  le  jardin,  s'  etait  blesse  avec  une  faux.

Experience  XXXIX,  8  Jtdllet  1887. — Faite  par  Alice.  Je  lui
demande  de  me  dire  comment  un  de  mes  enfants  s'  est  fait  mal.  Elle
dit :  "  Rien  aux  mains,  ni  aux  genoux,  ni  aux  jambes."  Elle  montre  le
flanc  droit. C  est  done  un  echec  complet.

Experience  XL.,  7  Aout  1887. — Faite  par  Helena.  J'ai  vu  dans  la
matinee  M.  F.  A.,  age  de  75  ans,  qui  a  ete  atteint  dans  la  nuit  de
coliques  nephretiques  atrocement  douloureuses,  avec  une  crise  d'  asthme,
et  un  affaiblissement  general.  Mon  ami,  M.  P.  Janet,  m'  accompagne
chez  Helena.  II  ne  sait  absolument  rien  de  la  maladie  de  la  personne
pour  laquelle  je  consulte  Helena.  Pour  rendre  1'  expi^rience  plus
concluante,  c'est  lui  qui  interroge  Helena,  et  je  le  prie  de  faire  un
diagnostic  precis  d'  apres  ces  paroles  memes.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  127


Elle  dit  :  "  II  y  a  de  la  fievre.  Le  cceur  me  manque.  Je  me  sens
usee,  afFaiblie  ;  ce  qui  domine,  ce  sont  des  douleurs  dans  les  reins ;  une
sensation  de  cuisson,  com  me  du  feu,  avec  une  suppression  de  la  respira-
tion. Mai  de  tete,  mais  rien  a  1'  estomac  et  au  ventre.  Les  jambes
sont  faibles.  Tout  le  cot^  gauche  est  malade,  mais,  ce  qui  domine,  c'  est
la  forte  douleur  dans  les  reins  a  gauche."^

M.  Janet  fait  le  diagnostic  :  2}leuresie  douloureuse  ct  gauche.  Ce
diagnostic  est  assez  interessant;  car  sou  vent  les  medecins  out  quelque
peine  a  distinguer  la  pleuresie  de  la  colique  nepliretique.

Experie7ice  XLL,  6  Aodt  1887. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  Je  lui  dis
qu'  un  de  mes  enfants  s'est  fait  mal.  Elle  dit  qu'  il  s'  est  coupe,  pinc6  a
V  index  de  la  main  gauche,  ce  qui  n'  est  pas  exact  ou  du  moins  est  tres
ancien  ;  car  il  y  a  plus  de  trois  semaines  qu'  il  s'  est  pince  tres  legerement
a  r  index  de  la  main  gauche.  Elle  me  dit  qu'  un  autre  enfant  s'  est
fait  une  bosse  au  front.  Le  fait  m'  etait  inconnu  ;  mais,  en  rentrant
chez  moi,  i'  apprends  qu'  en  effet  un  de  mes  fils,  celui  la  meme  a  qui
pareil  accident  etait  arrive  il  y  a  un  mois,  est  tombe  dans  1'  escalier
et  s'  est  fait  une  grosse  bosse  au  front.

Experience  XLII. — ^Faite  par  Eugenie.  J'ai  re9u  il  y  a  12  ans  a
la  chasse  un  grain  de  plomb,  qui  est  rest^  sous  la  peau  et  que  j'  ai
encore.  Ce  grain  de  plomb  est  a  la  peau  du  bras,  au  niveau  du  coude
droit.  Eugenie,  apres  norabre  d'  essais  infructeux,  ne  peut  me  dire  ou
il  est  loge.

Experience  XLIII.,  18  Aoilt  1887. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  Mon
cocher  avait  ete  pris  le  matin  de  coliques  tres  fortes  avec  diarrhee,
pour  laquelle  je  1'  avals  soign6.  C  est  lui,  neanmoins,  qui  peut  me
conduire  en  voiture  chez  Eugenie.  Au  moment  de  descendre  de
voiture,  je  lui  demande  un  objet  quelconque  qui  peut  servir  a  Eugenie
pour  faire  le  diagnostic — en  effet  Eugenie  ne  peut  faire  de  diagnostics,
que  si  elle  a  un  objet  appartenant  a  la  personne  malade. — Je  suis  sur
de  m  etre  abstenu  de  toute  indication. Voici  ce  qu'  elle  dit.

"  Mais  il  a  une  inflammation  de  1'  intestin.  II  a  le  sang  tres  acre
avec  des  douleurs  dans  le  cote  gauche.  L'  intestin  est  enflamme.  II
aura  de  la  constipation,  puis  de  la  colique,  avec  une  faiblesse  g^n^rale,
mais  pas  de  fievre."

L'  experience  a  done  tres  bien  r^ussi.

Experieyice  XLIV.,  19  Aoiit  1887. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  J'ai  ap-
porte  un  objet  ayant  appai'tenu  a  un  de  mes  amis  qui  vient  d'  etrf^  pris
d'une  h^moptysie,  avec  congestion  pulmonaire,  probablement  tuber-
culeuse.  Eugenie  fait  une  erreur  complete.  Elle  dit  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'un
homme  de  .55  a  60  ans,  atteint  d'une  maladie  du  foie.

Experiences  XLV.,  XL  VI.,  et  XLVII.,  27  Aodt  1887.— Faites  par

1  La  colique  nephretique  de  M.  A.,  quoique  bilat^rale,  a  porte  surtout  sur  le  cot(5
gaucha.


128


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


Eugenie.  J e  conduis  Eugenie  a  1'  Hopital  Tenon,  dans  le  service  de
mon  collegue  et  ami,  M.  Landouzy.  Elle  est  alors  amenee  endormie  de-
vant  le  lit  de  divers  malades.  Pour  ces  malades,  dont  le  diagnostic,  fait
par  Landouzy,  a  ete  ecrit  a  1'  avance,  nulle  indication  ne  m'  est  donnee,
et  je  dois  faire  le  diagnostic  d'  apres  les  paroles  d'  Eugenie.  II  est
entendu  que  le  diagnostic  est  impossible  a  faire  pour  moi  comme  pour
tout  autre  d'  apres  1'  habitus  exterieur  du  malade.  Le  malade  n'  est
pas  interroge  par  Eugenie,  et  elle  doit  diagnostiquer  sans  interroger.

Pour  le  premier  malade,  une  femme,  elle  dit :  "  Le  mal  est
etendu  partout,  mal  a  la  poitrine  surtout.  Grande  fievre,  etat  de
faiblesse,  d'  anemie  ;  estomac  fatigue,  supportant  mal  la  nourriture.  Le
mal  principal  est  dans  1'  estomac  et  le  foie.  La  poitrine  delicate  ;  la
bile  mal  secretes  ;  bouche  seche.  Ce  qui  domine,  c'  est  la  maladie  de
r  intestin  et  du  foie."

D'  apres  ces  paroles,  je  diagnostique — tuberculose  avec  phenomenes
gastro-hepatiques. — Le  diagnostic  reel  est — ataxie  locomotrice  sans
fievre,  avec  douleurs  fulgurantes  ;  integrite  viscerale  ;  pas  de  troubles
gastro-intestinaux. — C  est  done  un  echec  complet.

Pour  la  deuxieme  malade,  Eugenie  dit,  "  Fievre,  anemie.  Les
bronches  et  la  poitrine  sont  prises."  (Je  dois  noter  que  pendant
r  examen  fait  par  Eugenie  la  malade  a  tousse  deux  ou  trois  fois.)
"Du  cote  des  poumons  grande  masse  d'  eau,  des  glaires,  avec  etouifements,
faiblesse,  bronchite  aigiie  ;  bouche  seche.  Les  nerfs  sont  delicats.  II  y
a  aussi  de  la  delicatesse  de  la  matrice  et  de  1'  inflammation.  Vous
guerirez  tres  bien,  et,  dans  un  mois,  cela  sera  lini."
Je  fais  le  diagnostic — pleuresie  et  tuberculose. —
Le  diagnostic  reel  est — fievre  typhoide,  avec  tracheo-bronchite  ;
et  tuberculose ;  grossesse  de  quatre  mois.

Pour  la  troisieme  malade,  Eugenie  dit,  "  Du  cote  du  ventre,  une
tumeur."  Eugenie  a  tate  le  ventre  de  la  malade,  et  a  pu  constater
qu'  il  y  a  une  tumeur  abdominale.  A  travers  la  couverture  tres  legere,
j'  ai  pu  voir  le  ventre  tres  ballonne.  "II  y  a  une  grande  masse  d'  eau
dans  le  ventre,  un  kyste,  une  poche  enorme.  L'  aorte  est  dilatee.  Le
sang  afflue  au  coeur.  La  gorge  est  prise,  et  la  poitrine  est  malade,  mais
moins  que  chez  les  deux  malades  precedentes.  Les  urines  sont  difliciles,
rares  et  rouges.  Glaires  dans  les  bronches."
Je  fais  le  diagnostic — affection  cardiaque.

Le  diagnostic  reel  est — insuffisance  mitrale,  ascite,  dilatation  du  cceur
droit,  cedeme  pulmonaire.

On  voit  que  cette  derniere  experience  est  accompagnee  de  succes.
On  peut  cependant  faire  une  objection.  Dans  quelle  mesure  la  tumeur
abdominale  a-t-elle  servi  a  Eugenie  et  a  moi-meme  pour  faii'e  le  diag-
nostic exact  %  II  est  presque  impossible  de  le  savoir.  Quoique
Eugenie  ait  1'  habitude  de  donner  des  consultations,  je  doute  qu'  elle


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


129


sache  assez  de  m^decine  pour  conclure  de  1'  ascite  a  une  affection
cardiaque,  d'  autant  plus  qu'  il  n'  y  avait  chez  cette  malade  aucun  autre
signe  de  lesion  du  coeur.  De  plus,  elle  a  parle  de  kyste  et  de  bronchite,
ce  qui  est  au  moins  contradictoire  avec  1'  hypothese  que  le  diagnostic
d'  une  lesion  du  coeur  a  ete  fait  par  elle  parce  qu'  elle  a  vu  une  tumeur
du  ventre.  Quant  a  moi,  j' avals  vu  la  tumeur,  mais  je  ne  savais  si
c'  etait  une  grossesse,  un  kyste  ovarique,  ou  une  tumeur  ascitique  due
a  de  la  cirrhose,  comme  c'  etait  le  cas  le  plus  probable  ;  mon  diagnostic
n'a  ete  fait  que  lorsque  Eugenie  a  dit,  "  L' aorte  est  dilatee."  Alors
seulement  j' ai  pense  a  une  affection  cardiaque.  Je  crois  bien  que  la
tumeur  du  ventre  m'  a  confirme  dans  cette  opinion,  mais  elle  ne  me  1'  a
pas  donnee.  C  est  Eugenie  qui  m'  en  a  donne  1'  idee  en  disant,
^' Aorte  dilatee,  sang  affiuant  au  cmur."

Nous  faisons  voir  encore  a  Eugenie  un  quatrieme  malade  :  mais
elle  est  fatiguee,  et  ne  s'  y  prete  qu'  a  contre-coeur.  Elle  dit :  "  Dans
r  intestin  grele  ;  ulcerations.  Elle  ne  digere  pas.  Tout  1'  intestin  est
enflamme."

Je  fais  le  diagnostic — fievre  typhoide — alors  qu'  en  reality  il  s'  agit
d'  un  goitre  exophthalmique.

Je  dois  faire  reraarquer  que,  le  matin  de  cette  experience,  que  nous
avions  projetee  depuis  longtemps,  Eugenie  me  prevint  qu'  elle  etait
indisposee  et  qu'  elle  ne  verrait  rien.  J e  n'  ai  pas  cru  pourtant  devoir
remettre  a  un  autre  jour  cette  tentative.

Experience  XLVIII.,  2  Novemhre  1887. — Faite  par  Eugenie.  Je
lui  demande  qui  j'  ai  ete  voir.  0'  est  un  de  mes  amis  malade,  M.  G.,
atteint  de  fievre  tuberculeuse.  Elle  me  dit  qu'  elle  ne  pourra  rien  dire  ;
car  je  n'  ai  pas  apporte  les  cheveux  de  M.  G.  Cependant  elle  ajoute  :
"  II  est  tres  nerveux,  avec  une  forte  fievre,  et  surtout  une  maladie
nerveuse.  II  a  presque  la  danse  de  St. -Guy  (choree)."  En  realite  M.  G.
a  une  forte  fievre,  mais,  quoique  il  soit  extremement  nerveux,  il  n'  est
rien  moins  que  menace  de  la  choree.  C  est  son  etat  pulnionaire  que
domine  tout.

Experience  XLIX.,  6  Novemhre  1887.  —Faite  par  Eugenie.  Je
lui  apporte  des  cheveux  de  M.  G.,  sans  lui  dire  natui'ellement  qu' il
s'  agit  de  la  meme  personne  que  1'  avant-veille.  De  plus,  1'  avant
veille,  je  ne  lui  avals  pas  dit  le  diagnostic  vrai.  Elle  me  dit :  "  C  est
un  etat  de  fievre.  C  est  une  fievre  d'  inflammation.  Tout  est  rouge  a
r  interieur ;  surtout  1'  estomac.  II  y  a  uiie  inflammation  generale,
surtout  des  reins  et  de  1'  estomac.  C  est  une  maladie  inflammatoii-e  de
r  estomac  et  des  reins,  avec  courbature.  La  tete  est  lourde,  la  bouche
pateuse  ;  il  y  a  des  coliques.  II  est  assez  malade."  Tout  ce  diagnostic
est  fort  inexact,  et  ne  se  rapporte  pas  du  tout  a  M.  G.,  qui  a  une
dyspepsie,  de  moyenne  intensite,  et  une  forte  fievre,  mais  aucune
lesion  renale.


130  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


Experience  L.,  27  Octohre  1887.— Faite  par  Alice.  Je  lui  demande
ce  qu'  elle  pense  de  M.  G.,  que  je  nomme.  EUe  1'  a  vu  auti'efois,  il  y  a
plus  d'  un  an.  Elle  me  dit  :  "  II  n'  a  pas  ^te  souvent  malade  ;  il  n'  est
pas  gravement  malade,  cependant.  Oe  qui  me  preoccupe  le  plus,  c'  est
sa  poitrine.  II  tousse.  II  a  quelque  chose  a  la  poiti'ine.  Est-ce  une
fluxion  de  poitrine  ?  II  a  confiance  en  vous.  II  vous  6coutera  plus  que
tout  autre.  Ce  qu'  il  a  de  bon,  c'  est  qu'  il  ne  s'  inquiete  pas.  II  y  a  deja
qufilque  temps  qu'  il  est  malade,  et  il  est  un  peu  mieux  maintenant."

Le  surlendemain,  comme  je  lui  demande  si  M.  G.  va  mieux,  elle
dit  qu'  il  va  mieux,  ce  qui  est  malheureusement  inexact.

II  est  tres  difficile  de  dire  si  ce  diagnostic  exact  d'  Alice  est  du  a  ce
qu'  elle  avait  vu  autrefois  M.  G.,  qui  toussait  peut-etre  un  peu  ;  mais
a  peine.  Ce  qui  me  fait  croire  qu'  il  n'  en  est  pas  ainsi,  c'  est  qu'  elle  a
parl6  de  fluxion  de  poitrine,  maladie  aigiie.  Le  diagnostic  est  assez  bon  ;
car  la  congestion  tuberculeuse  de  M.  G.  ressemblait  beaucoup  clinique-
ment  a  une  pneumonie.

Experiences  LI .  et  LII.,  28  Novemhre  1887. — Faites,  1' une  par  Alice,
1'  autre  par  Eugenie.  J'  ai  eu  depuis  trois  jours  des  battements  de  cceur
assez  douloureux,  avec  un  peu  d'  angoisse  cardiaque.  Interrogees  separ^-
ment  sur  ce  que  j'  ai  ressenti,  ni  Alice,  ni  Eugenie  ne  peuvent  rien  me
dire.  Elles  ne  peuvent  pas  dire  non  plus  que  j'  ai  eu  de  tres  vives
douleurs  n^vralgiques  a  la  jambe.

Experience  LIII. — Faite  par  Alice.  M.  Hericoui't  lui  demande  ce
qu'  elle  pense  de  la  sante  de  Madame  X.,  qu'  il  soigne,  et  qui  est  atteinte
de  m^trorrhagies.

Alice  dit :  "  Elle  n'a  pas  de  fievre.  Elle  n'  est  pas  bien  malade  ;  par
moments  elle  est  agitee,  nerveuse,  et  a  d'  autres  moments  elle  est  abattue,
sans  fievre.  Rien  d'inquietant ;  seulement"  (ici  se  place  une  longue  hesita-
tion) "elle  est  comme  une  femme  qui  est  dans  une  position  interessante."

II  faut  remarquer  qu'  elle  ne  dit  pas  textuellement  grossesse  ;  mais
qu'  elle  ^tablit  seulement  une  sorte  de  comparaison  entre  1'  etat  de
Madame  X.  et  1'  etat  des  femmes  enceintes,  ce  qui  est  assez  curieux,
au  moins  pour  la  similitude  des  troubles  fonctionnels  de  I'utt^rus.i

J'  ai  tenu  a  donner  les  resultats  de  mes  nombreuses  experiences  en
leur  COD  servant  le  caractere  d'  un  registre  d'  experiences  fidelement  et
exactement  tenu.  Je  n'  ai  omis  aucune  des  experiences  faites,  et  je
crois  avoir,  autant  que  possible,  donn^  les  paroles  memes  que  les  sujets
avaient  prononcees,  sans  me  permettre  d'  y  rien  changer.  En  effet,
r  interpretation  est  si  delicate  que  toute  modification  du  texte  primitif
peut  induire  en  erreur. II  ne  faut  done  ni  ajouter,  ni  retrancher.

L'  (5tude  de  ces  53  experiences  peut  etre  divis^e  en  deux  parts.  II
faut  examiner  d'  abord  les  proc^des  de  connaissance  et  les  phenomenes
^  Mdme.  X.  est  devenue  enceinte  le  mois  suivant.


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


131


subjectifs  des  sujets  ;  en  second  lieu,  le  I'apport  entre  les  sensations
qui  les  amenent  a  un  diagnostic  et  la  realite  des  choses.

II  est  certain  que,  quand  on  parle  a  un  sujet  somnambulique,  non
eduque,  ni  prevenu,  d'  un  malade  quelconque,  son  premier  sentiment
est  une  sorte  de  sentiment  de  douleur.  Peu  a  peu  la  douleur
s'  exaspere,  et  il  y  a  presque  une  scene  de  larmes,  soit  par  commiseration
morale,  soit  plutot  par  une  sorte  de  contagion  psychique  qui  leur  inflige
reellement  les  maux  dont  on  parle.

On  peut  regarder  ce  phenomene  comme  au-dessus  de  toute  contesta-
tion. Une  somnambule  non  eduqu^e  souflFrira  quand  on  lui  parlera
d'  un  malade.  Si  on  lui  annonce  que  telle  personne  dont  on  lui  donne
la  main  est  malade,  elle  va  eprouver  des  sensations  maladives.  C  est  la
le  fait  brut,  indiscutable,  qui  s'  observe  sans  exception.

Ainsi,  en  dehors  de  toute  education,  il  y  a  un  retentissement  tel  de
r  idee  sur  la  sensation  que  1'  idee  d'  un  etouffement,  par  exemple,  va
chez  un  suiet  sensible  amener  la  sensation  d'  etouffement.  II  suffit  de
parler  de  douleurs  dans  la  tete  pour  qu'  un  somnambule  ressente  des
douleurs  dans  la  tete.  Je  n'  examine  pas  la  question  de  savoir  si  cette
repercussion  du  malade  au  sujet  est  veridique  ou  erronee  ;  je  me  con-
tente  de  montrer  que  1'  idee  d'  une  douleur  amene  cette  douleur.

De  la,  chez  Alice  et  Helena,  qui  ne  sont  pas  eduquees  par
r  exercice  quotidien  de  consultations  a  des  malades,  cette  sorte  d'  etat
de  souffrance  qui  accompagne  chez  elles  le  diagnostic.  Aulieu  dedire  :
"  II  y  a  de  la  cephalalgie,"  elles  disent :  "  Ma  tete  est  atrocement
douloureuse.  J'  ai  le  ventre  tellement  sensible  que  1'  on  ne  peut  y
toucher  ;  j'  etouiie  :  je  ne  puis  respirer."

Quant  a  Eugenie,  elle  ressent  bien  aussi  quelque  chose  d'  assez
analogue.  Elle  per9oit  les  douleurs  de  ces  malades  :  mais  tres  peu,  et
legerement.  L'  habitude  a  emousse  cette  repercussion  du  malade  a  la
somnambule,  et  cela  etait  necessaire  :  car,  avec  10  ou  15  consultations
par  jour,  elle  serait  a  la  fin  de  la  journee  cruellement  fatiguee.  Elle  a
done,  pour  ainsi  dire,  d'  autres  precedes  de  connaissance  qui  correspon-
dent peut-etre  a  d'  autres  facultes,  mais  qui  en  tout  cas  different
profondement  des  precedes  d'  Alice  et  d'  Helena.  Elle  voit  les  organes
malades  ;  dit :  "tel  organe  est  rouge,  tel  autre  est  gonfle,  etc."  Je  ne
saurais  dire  si  c'  est  la  le  developpement  d'  une  faculte  normale,  mais,  en
matiere  de  somnambulisme,  je  suis  tellement  convaincu  de  1'  influence
souveraine  de  1'  education  et  de  1'  habitude,  que  je  croirais  volontiers
qu'  a  r  etat  normal,  sans  education,  cette  faculte  n'  existe  pas,  et
qu'  elle  est  la  consequence  fatale  de  1'  education  donnee.

Done,  ce  qu'  il  y  a  de  naturel,  c'est  la  sympathie  qui  s'exerce
entre  un  malade  quelconque  et  le  sujet  endormi.  C"  est  la  un  fait
qui  me  parait  bien  prouve,  et  sans  contestation  possible.


132  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


II  ne  s'  agit  pas  ici,  je  le  repete,  de  savoir  si  cette  syrapathie  est
justifiee  ou  non,  mais  seulement  si  elle  exists.  Or  elle  existe  ;  cela
n' est  pas  douteux  un  seul  instant.  Queje  dise  a  une  somnambule  .
"  J'ai  une  migraine  violente,"  elle  croira  aussitot  avoir  les  symptdmes
de  la  migraine.  Or  croire  souffrir  ou  souffrir,  c'est  a  peu  pres  la  meme
chose,  et  je  defie  qui  que  ce  soit  d'  etablir  une  difference  entre  une
douleur  reelle  et  une  douleur  imaginaire.

Quant  au  precede  de  connaissance  qu'elles  emploient,  il  est  aussi,  de
par  les  differences  d'eduoation,  tout-a-fait  different.  Alice  et  Helena
n'  ont  besoin  de  rien.  II  leur  suf&t  que  je  parle  de  tel  ou  tel
malade ;  elles  vont  le  chercher,  comme  elles  disent,  et  decrivent  aloi's
tant  bien  que  mal  ce  qu'elles  croient  ressentir.  Eugenie  a  besoin,
parait-il,  d'  un  objet  ayant  appartenu  au  malade.  Mais,  quoique  elle
soit  evidemment  beaucoup  mieux  douee,  je  n'ai  pas  trouve  qu'  elle  r^ssisse
mieux  qu'  Alice  et  Helena.  Aussi  serais-je  tente  de  croire  que  cette
necessite  d'  un  objet  ou  de  la  presence  d'un  malade  est  encore  un  fait
d'^ducation.

Je  ne  voudrais  pas  nier  1'  influence  que,  pour  un  diagnostic  exact,
exerce  le  contact,  soit  du  malade,  soit  d'  un  objet  quelconque  lui  ayant
appartenu.  Nous  sommes  trop  profondement  ignorants  des  precedes
de  connaissance  que  les  somnambules  emploient  pour  conclure.  Je
dis  seulement  que  ce  contact  ne  me  parait  pas  indispensable.  Cela
ne  veut  pas  dire  qu'  il  ne  jeue  aucun  role.  II  me  semble  que  nous  devrions
admettre,  pour  les  diagnostics  de  maladies  comme  pour  la  nohon  des
dessins,  quelque  faculte  de  connaissance  superieure,  s'  exer^ant  par  des
moyens  que  nous  ignorons  totalement.  Que  ce  soit  une  sorte  de  lucidity
speciale,  ou  de  lucidite  s'  exer9ant  par  le  contact,  1'  effet  est  le  meme  ;
c'  est  une  sympathie  telle  que  les  douleurs  du  malade  se  repercutent
plus  ou  moins  sur  le  somnambule.  C  est  peut-etre  meme  cette
sympathie  qui  est  leur  precede  de  connaissance.

Le  point  le  plus  interessant,  c'  est  de  savoir  jusqu'  a  quel  degre  de
precision  elles  peuvent  ari'iver  dans  ce  diagnostic.  J'  ai  fait,  comme  on
1'  a  vu,  5.3  experiences.  Le  succes  complet,  net,  sans  tergiversations
possibles,  c'  est  1'  Experience  XV.,  dans  laquelle  Helena  me  dit,  en
parlant  d'  un  de  mes  enfants  qui  a  la  rougeole  depuis  deux  jours,  "  II
a  la  rougeole."  A  part  ce  diagnostic  tres  precis,  tous  les  autres  sont
incomplets.  Cependant  on  se  tromperait  en  concluant  que  les  autres
sont  des  erreurs.  Pour  cela  nous  aliens  les  s^parer  en  treis  groupes.
II  y  aura  le  groupe  des  erreurs — le  groupe  des  hanalites  telles  que,
tous  les  appareils  etant  passes  en  revue,  1'  appareil  atteint  se  trouve
compris  dans  la  description  merbide  ; — et  enfin  le  groupe  des  demi-
succfes,  ou  les  indications  sent  plus  precises  que  ne  pourrait
vraisemblablement  les  donner  quelqu'  un  parlant  au  hasard.

Voici  les  maladies  pour  lesquelles  1'  erreur  a  et^  complete.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &g.


133


Keratite  ulcereuse,  fracture  clu  bras,  nevralgie  faciale,  nevralgie
thoracique,  eczema  infantile,  nevi^algie  sciatique,  rougeole,  gingivite,
(deux  fois),  angine,  nevralgie  faciale,  blessure  a  la  jambe,  courbature,
grain  de  plomb  au  bras,  hemoptysie,  blessure  a  la  jambe,  ataxie  loco-
motrice,  fievre  typlioide,  goitre  exophthalmique,  angoisse  cardiaque
(deux  fois). Cela  fait  en  somme  20  echoes  complets.

II  est  a  remarquer  que  dans  ce  nombre  sent  surtout  compris  les
petits  accidents  morbides  que  j '  ai  eprouves  depuis  deux  ans,  et  sur
lesquels  je  demandais  quelques  details.  Alice,  Helena  et  Eugenie  ont
ete  ^galement  impuissantes  a  me  donner  quoi  que  ce  soit  de  precis.
Peut-etre  cela  tient-il  a  la  legerete  memo  de  1'  affection  dont  j'  avais  ete
atteint,  mais  je  croirais  plutot  qu'  elles  ne  peuvent  presque  jamais  faii-e
une  localisation  exacte,  restant  toujours  dans  le  vague,  et  se  conten-
tant  d'  indications  confuses  sur  1'  etat  des  visceres  abdominaux  ou
thoraciques.

II  faut  faire  une  place  a  part  pour  les  observations  XI.,  XVII.,
XXXIII.  et  XXXV.  Dans  ces  quatre  observations  le  diagnostic
demande  est  totalement  erron^  ;  mais  les  paroles  prononcees  peuvent  se
rapporter  a  d'  autres  malades  connus  de  raoi  a  ce  moment  meme.

Dans  r  Experience  XI.,  M.  Langlois  me  donne  les  clieveux  d'  un
homme  atteint  de  meningite,  et  les  cheveux  d'  un  enfant  atteint  de
tuberculose  vertebrale.  Je  donne  a  diagnostiquer  les  cheveux  de
r  enfant,  et  elle  dit  "  Meningite."

Dans  r  Experience  XXXVII.,  M.  Langlois  me  donne  des  cheveux
d'  un  enfant  atteint  de  meningite  et  les  cheveux  d'  un  enfant  atteint
d'  hydropneumothorax.  J e  donne  les  cheveux  de  1'  enfant  qui  a  un
hydropneumothorax,  et  Helena  me  dit  "  Meningite."

Dans  r  Experience  XVII.,  Helena  fait  un  diagnostic  tout-a-fait
faux.  Au  lieu  d'  une  nevralgie,  elle  dit  c^phalalgie  et  fievre.  Mais  le
malade  a,  le  soir  du  jour  ou  Helena  avait  dit  cephalalgie  et  fievre,  une
hevre  assez  forte  avec  une  cephalalgie  intense.

Dans  r  experience  ou  j'  interroge  Helena  sur  Madame  X.,  atteinte
de  nevralgie  faciale  (sans  d'  ailleurs  lui  dire  le  nom  et  le  sexe),  elle
decrit  les  symptomes  de  Sauvage,  que  j'  avais  vu  le  matin,  et  qui  avait
ete  legerement  empoisonne  par  une  dose  trop  forte  de  morphine.

II  me  semble  qu'  en  1'  etat  actuel  des  choses,  vu  notre  ignorance  des
points  de  repere  pris  par  les  somnambules  pour  faire  les  diagnostics,
nous  devons  considerer  ces  experiences  comme  des  demi-succes,  ou
plutot  comme  des  demi-insucces.

Ce  qui  rend  les  reponses  tres  banales,  c'  est  que  les  somnambules
passent  en  revue  successivement  tous  les  appareils  organiques.  Aussi
proposerais-je,  non  pas  d'  etablir  des  diagnostics  de  maladies,  mais
de  regions  malades.

Nous  aurons  alors,  en  ne  faisant  que  le  sommaire  des  indications


134  Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  <&c.


donnees,  la  liste  guivante  des  experiences  qui  ont  plus  ou  moins
reussi.

I.  — Tuberculose pulmonaire  et  fistule  anale.  Malade  poitri-

naire  et  douleur  au  bassin.

II.  — Tuberculose  et  abces. Vieille  synovite  au  genou  gauche.

Plaie  au  genou  gauche.
IV. — Coliques  nephretiques.  Ventre  et  aines.

VI.  — Tuberculose. Phlegmon iliaque.  Plaie au bas  du

thorax.

VII.  — Pas  de  maladie.  Pas  de  maladie.

VIII.  — Pas  de  maladie. Accouchement  il  y  a  10  jours.  Pas

de  fievre,  crises  nerveuses,  ventre  et  reins.

IX.  — Fievre  typhoide  en  convalescence.  Ventre  et  thorax.  Pas

de  fievre,  ni  de  plaie.

X.  — Peritonite.  Ventre  et  thorax.

XI.  — Tuberculose,  caverne  pulmonaire.  Thorax. Une  poche

qu'  il  faut  vider.

XIV.  — Fievre  typhoide  et  congestion  pulmonaire.  Intestin  et

poumon.

XV.  — Rougeole.  Rougeole.

XXI.  — Metrorrhagie  et  syncope.  Ventre,  thorax,  et  estomac.

Le  coeur  ne  fonctionne  pas.

XXII.  — Bronchite  chronique. Agitation  nerveuse.  Agitation

nerveuse  et  thorax,

XXIII.  — Affection  hepatique.  Foie  et  reins.

XXIV.  — Faiblesse  generale.  Faiblesse  generale.

XXIX.  — Peritonite.  Les  deux  aines.

XXX.  — -Faiblesse  generale.  Aneantissement  general.

XXXIV. — Peritonite.  Ventre  et  aines.  Frissons.

XXXVIII. — Chute  et  bosse  au  front.  Bosse  au  front.

XL. — Coliques  nephretiques.  Douleurs  dans  les  reins.

XLI. — Bosse  au  front.  Bosse  au  front.

XLIII. — Coliques  et  diarrhee.  Inflammation  de  1'  intestin.

XL VII. — Affection  cardiaque.  Aorte  dilatee. Sang  affluant

au  cceur.

L. — Hemoptysie. Congestion tuberculeuse.  Fluxion  de

poitrine.
LII. — Metrorrhagie. — Grossesse.
Ce  resume  est  evidemment  des  plus  imparfaits,  et  il  ne  peut  dispenser
de  lire  le  compte  rendu  detaille  des  diverses  experiences.  En  effet,  en
resumant  ainsi  les  experiences,  d'  une  part  on  omet  les  erreurs  qui  ont
ete  faites,  d'  autre  part  on  ne  tient  pas  compte  des  faits  exactement
diagnostiques.

Si  1'  on  voulait,  ce  qui  est  absolument  impossible,  tenir  compte  du


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  135


calcul  des  probabilites,  il  faudrait  etablir  a  peu  pres  huit  regions — la
tete,  le  thorax,  le  coeur,  1'  estomac,  le  foie,  les  reins,  le  ventre,  et  les
membres. — On  aurait  alors,  je  suppose,  un  huiti^me  de  chance  pour
dire  exactement.  On  voit  que,  sur  52  experiences,  j'  ai  obtenu  a  peu
pres  moitie  des  reponses  justes,  ce  qui  est  plus  que  1'  indiquerait  le
calcul,  puisque,  si  mon  appreciation  des  probabilites  etait  exacte,  je
n'  aurais  du  avoir  que  six  ou  sept  reponses  exactes.

Mais  c'  est  une  etrange  illusion  que  de  vouloir  traduire  par  des
chiffres  ces  donnees  mouvantes,  incertaines.  II  vaut  mieux  constater
que,  dans  un  certain  nombre  de  cas,  il  y  a  eu  des  reponses  vraiment
etonnantes.

Dans  la  premiere  observation,  d^s  le  debut  Alice  a  dit,  "  II  est
poitrinaire,  et  puis  la,"  et  elle  indiquait  le  bassin.  Or  il  s' agissait
d'  un  tuberculeux  atteint  de  fistule  a  1'  anus.

Dans  1'  Experience  VI,  alors  que  tres  rarement  elle  parle  de  plaie,
elle  a  vu  une  plaie  au-dessous  du  sein.  II  s'  agissait,  il  est  vrai,  d'  un
phlegmon  iliaque,  par  consequent  assez  loin  du  sein.  Mais  le  fait  de
diagnostiquer  une  plaie  me  parait  plus  important  que  de  localiser  exacte-
ment le  siege  de  cette  plaie.

L'  Experience  XIII  est  assurement  des  plus  remarquables.  Est-ce
que  le  hasard  peut  faire  dire  quand  on  parle  d'  un  malade  quelconque,
'■  II  y  a  une  poche  sous  le  cojur  qu' il  faut  vider,"  alors  qu' il  s' agit
d'  un  tuberculeux  avec  une  vaste  caverne  pulmonaire  a  gauche  ?

Dans  r  Experience  XIV,  Helena  indique  deux  points  douloureux
qui  correspondent  precisement  aux  douleurs  de  la  petite  malade.  Celle-
ci  a  une  fievre  typhoide  avec  une  congestion  pulmonaire  intense,  presque
une  hepatisation  de  tout  le  poumon  gauche.  Helena  dit,  "  Sous
r  omoplate  il  y  a  de  la  congestion."  Elle  dit  aussi  qu'  elle  porte  la  main
a  la  nuque,  alors  que  1'  enfant  porte  constamment  la  main,  non  a  la
nuque,  comme  le  dit  Helena,  mais  au  nez.

L'  Experience  XV  est  la  meilleure  sans  contredit.  D'  abord
Helena  fait  immediatement  et  sans  hesiter  le  diagnostic  de  rougeole.
Elle  sait,  il  est  vrai,  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  un  de  raes  enfants ;  mais  cela  ne
suffit  pas  pour  faire  un  diagnostic  aussi  net,  le  seul  net  et  irreprochable
qui  ait  ete  fait  dans  les  52  experiences,  bonnes  ou  mauvaises,  que  je
rapporte  ici.

Dans  I'Experience  XXI,  la  malade,  dont  je  m'  occupe,  a  eu  une
syncope.  Helena,  apres  des  hesitations,  des  assertions  vagues,  non
erronees,  mais  sans  precision,  dit,  "  C'est  un  manque  de  circulation
generale  qui  amene  des  evanouissements.  II  y  a  le  ca3ur  qui  ne  fonc
tionne  pas. C  est  le  ccEur  qui  a  perdu  la  vie."

Les  trois  Experiences  XXII,  XXIII,  et  XXIV  sont  toutes  trois
tres  bonnes.  Qu'  on  les  relise,  et  on  verra  que  pour  les  trois  le  diagnostic
est  bien  precis. — -Bronchite  clironique  et  etat  de spleen.  Helena


I


136  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.

clit,  nerfs  tres  agites,  pas  moyen  de  respirer,  et  elle  montre  le  point
douloureux  au  sternum. — Pour  une  affection  hepatique  ancienne,  doul-
eurs  dans  les  reins,  le  cote  enlle,  et  elle  montre  le  foie. — Pour  un  etat  de
depression  generale, Helena  dit :  "  languissement  general,"  sans  localiser
une  douleur  quelconque.  II  est  bien  remarquable  que  pour  ce  meme
malade,  dont  je  demandai  quelque  temps  apres  le  diagnostic,  Helena
s'  est  servie  des  meme  termes  sans  savoir  qu'  il  s'  agissait  de  lui.
(Experience  XXX.)

Les  Experiences  XXXVIII  et  XLI  paraissent  excellentes  ;  mais
je  crois  que  c'  est  une  apparence  plutot  qu'  une  realite.  Je  dis  :  "  Un
de  mes  enfants  s'est  fait  mal."  II  est  assez  naturel  qu'Eugenie  d'  une
part  et  Helena  de  1'  autre  me  disent :  une  bosse  au  front.  Le  resultat
est  d'  autant  moins  bon  que  je  pensais  a  un  autre  accident.  Toutefois
les  bosses  au  front  chez  mes  enfants  sont  relativement  rares,  et  je  ne
crois  pas  que  pareil  accident  leur  soit  arriv^  a  chacun  plus  d'  une  ou
deuxfois,  et  meme  jamais  avec  autant  d'intensite  que  ces  deux  jours  la.

L'  Experience  XLII  est  tres  bonne,  puisque  M.  Janet,  qui  ne
connaissait  pas  le  malade,  fait  le  diagnostic  de  pleuresie  avec  fievre,  et
que  la  colique  nt^phretique,  accompagnee  de  lievre,  est  assez  facilement,
meme  par  les  meilleurs  medecins,  confondue  avec  la  pleuresie  com-
men9ante.

L'  Experience  XLIII  peut  compter  aussi  parmi  les  meilleures.  II
s'  agit  d'  un  homme  ayant  une  diarrhee  tres  forte.  Des  qu'  Eugenie
touche  r  objet — un  couteau — qui  vientde  lui,  elle  dit :  "  C  est  une  in-
flammation de  I'intestin."

L'  Experience  XLVII  est  assez  bonne  aussi,  puisque  moi,  qui  ne
pouvais  faire  le  diagnostic  que  d'  aprfes  les  paroles  d'  Eugenie,  je  dis  :
affection  cardiaque  ;  ce  qui  est  vrai.

Dans  r  Experience  L,  nous  avons  encore  une  localisation  tres
exacte.  Pour  mon  ami  G.,  atteint  de  congestion  pulmonaire  tuber-
culeuse  avec  hemoptysie,  Alice  dit :  "  Ce  qui  me  preoccupe,  c'  est  sa
poitrine  ;  est-ce  qu  'il  a  une  fluxion  de  poitrine  ?  "

Enfin,  pour  1'  Experience  LIII,  alors  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  une  femme
atteinte  de  metrorrhagie,  Alice  dit,  en  localisant  par  consequent  le
mal  :  "  Elle  est  comme  une  femrae  qui  est  dans  une  position
interessante."

Voila  done  a  peu  pres  15  experiences  pour  lesquelles  la  probabilite
de  bien  dire,  tres  difficile  a  apprecier,  n'  est  guere  que  d'  un  vingtieme
a  peine,  et  cependant  je  n'  ai  fait  que  53  experiences.

On  peut  done  conclure  qu'  il  y  a  dans  1'  etat  somnambulique  de
lucidite  quelque  chose  de  special,  une  faculte  de  connaissance  qui  nous
echappe,  et  qu'  il  me  parait  difficile  de  nier.  Peut-etre  faudra-t-il
rapprocher  cette  sympathie  des  etats  pathologiques  des  somnambules  et
de  ces  sympathies  pathologiques  que  M.  Babinski  a  bien  etudiees  chez


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


137


les  hysteriques.  On  sait  qu'  il  a  donne  des  exemples  de  deux
hysteriques  dont  1'  une  est  atteinte  de  contracture,  et  qui  communique
sa  contracture  a  1'  autre.

En  outi'e — et  c'  est  une  preuve  d'  un  autre  ordre — ^j'  ai  quelque  peine  a
admettre  que  les  consultations  innombrables,  donn^es  depuis  pres  d'  un
siecle  dans  tous  les  pays  du  monde  par  des  soranambules,  eussent  pu
prendre  pareille  extension  et  se  generaliser  avec  autant  de  force  et  de
promptitude,  s'  il  n'  y  avait  pas  quelque  chose  de  v^ridique  derrifere  leurs
paroles.  On  peut  admettre  qu'  elles  se  trompent  parfois  completement,
que  le  plus  souvent  elles  donnent  des  indications  vagues  dans  lesquelles
le  malade  credule  croit  retrouver  sa  nialadie  ;  mais  il  faut  bien  que
quelquefois  elles  disent  juste.  Sans  cela  elles  ne  pourraient  continuer
a  excercer  leur  metier,  et  elles  seraient  bien  vite  abandonnees.  D'  ailleurs,
entre  elles,  elles  disent  volontiers  :  "  X.  a  beaucoup  de  lucidite.  Y.  en
avait  beaucoup  autrefois,  mais  elle  n'  en  a  plus  maintenant.  Z.  en  a
rarement ;  mais,  a  de  certains  jours,  elle  est  tout-a-fait  lucide."

Ici  encore  je  ne  pretends  pas  entrainer  la  conviction,  je  tiens
surtout  a  faire  naitre  des  doutes.  II  est  temps  qu'  on  cesse  de  dedaigner
cette  mysterieuse  puissance  de  connaissance  que  possedent  certains
sujets  magnetiques.  C  est  trop  facile  de  sourire,  et  de  ne  pas  chercher.
II  n'  y  a  pas  lieu  d'  etre  si  fier  de  1'  etendue  de  notre  savoir  humain  ;
et  je  crois  etre  plus  sage  que  ces  sceptiques,  en  disant  qu'  il  faut
etudier  avec  patience  la  lucidite  des  somnambules  pour  le  diagnostic
des  maladies.  II  est  temps  que  les  hommes  desinteresses  et  vaillants
s'  occupent  de  cette  question  abandonnee  a  des  magnetisevirs  de
profession.

Je  ne  voudrais  pas  dire  de  mal  des  magnetiseurs.  Les  m^decins  et
les  savants  ont  6te  si  injustes  pour  eux  qu'  on  a  quelque  honte  a  les
charger  encore  ;  mais  enhn,  malgre  les  moyens  dont  ils  disposaient,  ils
n'  ont  pas  pu  donner,  ou  ils  n'  ont  pas  voulu  donner,  la  serie  complete
des  consultations  d'  un  de  leurs  sujets.  lis  parlent  de  la  sagacite,  de  la
lucidite,  de  la  double  vue.  Mais,  pour  ce  qui  est  des  exemples  precis,
et,  a  plus  forte  raison,  d'  une  longue  serie,  bonne  ou  mauvaise,
d' exemples  precis,  ils  sont  avares  de  details  ;  et  la  litterature  mag-
netique,  si  riche  en  phraseologie  creuse,  est  absolument  pauvre  en  in-
dications de  cette  sorte.

C  est  pourtant  cette  serie  complete,  impartiale,  sans  nulle  omission
ou  complaisance,  consistant  dans  un  diagnostic  fait  par  la  somnambule,
alors  que  le  malade  ne  dit  rien,  et  que  les  personnes  presentes  ne
fournissent  nulle  indication,  qu'  il  faudrait  donner.  Sans  cela,  on
n'  aboutit  pas.

II  semble  que,  de  toutes  les  formes  de  lucidite,  celle-ci  soit  la  plus
frequente,  et  la  plus  facile  a  experimenter.  Aussi  suis-je  bien
con^"aincu  que  mon  exemple  sera  suivi,  et  qu'  il  se  trouvera  des  medecins


138


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


qui  etudieront  de  pres,  sans  crainte  du  ridicule,  cette  faculty  qu  'ont  les
somnambules  pour  la  diagnose  des  maladies.

Chapitke  IX.

EXPERIENCES  SPIRITIQUES.

Pour  ce  qui  concerne  les  experiences  que  j'appellerai  spiritiques,
je  renverrai  aux deux memoires que  j'ai  publies.i


Fig.  90.

Je  ne  reviendrai  done  pas  sur  les  details  experimentaux  de
la  m^thode  que  j'ai  appelee  I'alphabet  cache.  On  salt  que  cette
methode  consiste  a  faire  repondre  le  medium,  de  maniere  a  ce  qu'il  ne
connaisse  pas  la  r^ponse  qu'il  donne.  Nous  avons  ainsi  obtenu  quelques
rdponses  tout-a-fait  curieuses,  qu  m'  ont  fait  admettre  qu'  il  y  a  chez  les
mediums  une  double  conscience.  C  est-a-dire,  d'  une  part ;  la  con-
science reguliere,  normale,  qu'  ils  ont  tous,  que  tout  le  monde  possede  ;
d'  autre  part  une  sorte  de  conscience  surajoutee,  qui  agit  independam-
ment  de  la  conscience  principale. (Figure  90.)

Cette  theorie  de  la  double  conscience,  ou  de  F  hemi-inconscience,  ou
de  r  hemi  somnambulisme,  etait  plus  ou  moins  vaguement  indiquee
dans  les  travaux  de  M.  Chevreul ;  je  crois  1'  avoir  precisee  davantage
dans  les  memoires  que  je  viens  de  citer.  II  me  semble  que  depuis  mon
travail  elle  est  aujourd'  hui  acceptee  completement ;  car  elle  a  ete  con-
firmee par  les  importants  travaux  de  M.  F.  JMyers,^  de  M.  P.  Janet,^  et  de
MM.  Binet  et  Fere.*  Elle  me  parait  maintenant  etre  devenue  a  peu
pres  classique.

Mais  le  seul  point  sur  lequel  je  veuille  ici  insister,  c'  est  la  lucidity

1  Dc  la  Suggestion  Mcntale.  [Revue  PhilosojMque,  Octobre  1883,  p.  609);  etDes
Mouvements  Inconscicnts,  in  Homraape  d  M.  Chevreul,  Aoftt  1886 ;  et  Revue  de
V  Hypnotisme,  1886,  pp.  170  et  209.  Voyez  aussi  I'analyse  trfes  exacte  qui  en  a  ^t^
donnee  dans  les  Proceedhvjs  of  the  S.P.R. 1884  fasc.  vii.,  p.  239.

'-  Automatic  Writing. Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  1887,  p.  209.

3  Revue  Philosophiquc.  Mai  1887  et  Mars  1888,  p.  238.

*  Archives  de  Physiologic.  1887,  p.  320.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


139


de  cet  hemi-inconscient,  lucidite  qui  lui  fait  dire  telle  ou  telle  chose,  lui
fait  trouver  telle  ou  telle  phrase  plus  ou  moins  exacte,  et  aussi,  quoique
tres  rarement,  revele  des  faits  que  la  persomie  consciente  ne  peut
savoir  et  n'  a  jamais  sus.

J'  en  ai  cite  quelques  exemples.  J'  ai  donne  entre  autres  1'  exemple
du  mot  Chevalon,  des  mots  Pierre  et  Elcceuf,  des  mots  Danet  et
Doremiod.  Ce  sont,  je  crois,  des  exemples  tres  demonstratifs,  et  je
m'  imagine  qu'  on  ne  croira  pas  que  le  hasard  puisse  produire  ces
assemblages.

Cependant  mon  eminent  collegue,  le  Professeur  Preyer,  d'  lena,  m'  a
objecte  que  le  hasard  est  bien  capable  de  fournir  ces  groupements.^
Pour  apppuyer  cette  opinion,  il  se  fonde  sur  ce  que  la  loterie  de  Leipzig
a  donne  des  series  plus  heureuses  que  les  series  oii  j'  ai  cru  trouver
comme  une  probabilite  en  faveur  de  la  suggestion  mentale.  Mais  son
raisonnement  ne  me  parait  pas  absolument  juste  ;  car  il  choisit  dans  les
series  de  tirages  de  la  loterie  precisement  ceux  qui  ont  une  probabilite
s'  ecartant  de  la  moyenne,  tandis  que  j'ai  rapporte  toutes  mes  experi-
ences. II  est  clair  que  si,  dans  une  serie  de  tillages,  on  choisit  les  series
divergentes,  on  obtiendra  des  chifFres  invraisemblables.

Ainsi,  on  a  constate,  a  Monaco,  que  la  rouge  etait  sortie  21  fois  de
suite.  La  probabilite  de  cet  evenement  est  tres  faible.  On  ne  doit
r  observer  theoriquement  que  sur  deux  millions  de  series.  Si  pourtant,
faisant  10  experiences  seulement,  je  trouve  10  fois  de  suite  un  succes,
alors  que  la  probabilite  est  a  chaque  tirage  de  ^,  j'  ai  presque  le  droit  de
conclure  que  le  hasard  n' y  est  pour  rien ;  car  je  n' ai  fait  que  10
experiences,  et  on  n'  aura  pas  le  droit  de  m'  objecter  qu'  a  Monaco  la
rouge  est  sortie  2 1  fois  de  suite  ;  car  on  choisit  la  un  cas  extraordinaire
au  milieu  d'  un  tres  grand  nombre  de  tirages ;  et  on  prouve  par  la
seulement  que  le  tirage  de  21  rouges  consecutives  est  possible,  ce  qui
etait  par  avance  tout-a-fait  evident.

De  meme  encore,  M.  Preyer,  pointant  au  hasard  dans  un  livre
fran9ais,  trouve  au  bout  de  43  pointages  faits  au  hasard  le  nom  de
Cheval.  II  en  conclut  que  le  hasard  peut  bien,  si  je  cherche  le  mot  de
Chevalon,  me  donner  la  premiere  fois  le  nom  de  Cheval.  Mais  ce
raisonnement  est  defectueux,  ou  plutot  il  prouve  seulement  ceci :  c'  est
que  le  hasard  peut  donner  Cheval.  Aussi  bien  pourrait-il  me  donner
r  Iliade  toute  entiere.  Ce  n'  est  pas  douteux  ;  mais,  quand  on  arrive  a
ces  faibles  probabilites,  si  la  certitude  morale  ne  peut  etre  mathema-
tique,  au  moins  il  y  a  une  certitude  morale.  Malgre,  done,  le  heureux
hasard  qui  a  fait  en  43  tirages  donner  a  M.  Preyer  le  mot  de  Cheval,

1  Voyez  Preyer,  Die  Erklcirung  des  Gedankenlesens,  1  vol.  in  8,  chez  Grieben,
Leipzig,  1886;  et  specialement  Chapitre  IV.,  "Tiber  Experimente  welche  eine
umnittelbare  Gedankenubertragung  beweisen  soUen,"  pp.  50-G7.  II  a  4U  refute
en  termes  excellents  par  M.  Gui-ney  -.—Telepathie  (Friedrich,  Leipzig),  pp.  54-5,  60-2.


140


Relation  de  Diverses  Exioeriences,  &c.


en  cherchant  Chevalon,  je  certifie  que  par  un  assemblage  de  lettres
dues  au  hasard  la  combinaison  Cheval  ne  se  rencontrera  pas  au  bout  de
43  essais,  et  a  plus  forte  raison  apres  un  seul  essai.  Je  tiens  le  pari
de  10  francs  contre  300,000  francs  avec  celui  qui  voudra  le  tenir,  avec
M.  Preyer,  par  exemple.

Puisque  jeparle  des  experiences  spiritiques  que  j'  ai  publiees,  il  faut
rectifier  quelques  erreurs  que  j'  ai  commises.  Ainsi  le  mot  Jean
Racine  qui  m'  a  ete  indique  par  la  table,  ne  prouve  pas  du  tout  qu'  il
J  ait  eu  suggestion  meiitale. En  elFet,  le  vers  que  j'  avals  prononce —

'•^  Et  je  charge  im  amant  du  soin  de  mon  injitre  " —
quoique  ^tant  inconnu  a  1'  etat  conscient  du  medium,  pouvait  tres  bien
etre  connu  de  lui  a  1'  etat  inconscient.  II  est  vraisemblable  qu'  il  avait
jadis  lu  ce  vers  d'  Andromaque,  de  sorte  que  c'  est  un  simple  souvenir,
ignore  de  lui-meme,  qui  a  pu  lui  revenir  en  m^moire.  i)e  meme  encore,
quand  je  parle  de  deux  vers  de  Legouv^,  tir^s  d'  une  piece  intitulde
Upicharis  et  Neron,  on  peut,  par  le  style  meme  des  vers,  par  le  titre  de
la  tragedie,  conclure,  sans  aucune  autre  phenomene  qu'  un  peu  de
perspicacity  litt^raire,  qu'  elle  date  de  la  lin  du  dix-huitieme  siecle,
de  Joseph  Chenier,  par  exemple,  ou  de  Lemercier.

Restent  done  sept  experiences  pour  lesquelles  je  main  tiens
r  exactitude  de  mes  calculs  ;  et  je  n'  accepte  pas  la  critique  de  M.
Preyer,  qui  a  de  la  peine  a  comprendre  que  je  prenne  la  lettre  voisine.
S'  il  avait  etudie  sans  parti  pris  mon  procede  d'  experimentation,  il
aurait  bien  compris  que  1'  hesitation  a  repondre  est  toujours  enti'e  trois
ou  meme  quatre  et  cinq  lettres.  Les  mathematiques  s'  appliquent
aussi  bien  a  une  probabilite  de  ^  qu'  a  une  probability  de  }y

Celles  de  mes  experiences  qui  sont  tres  defectueuses,  ce  sont  celles
qui  ont  ete  faites  avec  la  baguette.  Celles-la,  je  dois  les  considerer
comme  non  avenues.  Quoique  je  fusse  dans  ces  cas  le  sujet  recepteur,
il  est  certain  que  je  me  laissais  influencer  par  des  signes  ext^rieurs,  le
silence  plus  ou  moins  complet,  la  respiration  plus  ou  moins  frequente,
et  d'  autres  symptumes  encore,  reveles  par  les  personnes  presentes  et
qui  connaissaient  ce  que  je  devais  deviner.

D'  un  autre  cote,  j'  ai  considerableinent  att^nuy  dans  mon  memoire
la  diiiiculte  de  comprendre  comment  notre  alphabet  cache  pouvait  etre
connu  de  celui  c|ui  est  a  la  table.  J'  ai  suppose  qu'  il  y  avait  une  per-
ception confuse  du  mouvement  rythmique  execute  par  celui  qui
parcourt  1'  alphabet  avec  la  plume,  du  bruit  qu'  il  fait,  etc.  Mais  cette
explication  ne  me  satisfait  guere  ;  car  nous  yvitions  de  faire  le  moindre
bruit  quand  nous  ^tions  a  1'  alphabet.  Nous  nous  cachions  derriere  un
grand  carton,  et  je  ne  puis  pas  encoi'e  tres  bien  comprendre  comment
notre  medium  pouvait  suivre  ces  mouvements.

Certes,  il  eut  ete  tres  interessant  de  continuer  :  mais  j'  ai  du  sus-
pendre  ces  experiences  :  car  notre  ami  s'  est  lasse,  et  a  aucun  prix  il


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <i:c.


141


ne  veut  recommencer  ces  exercices  qui  1'  eiinuyaient,  et — ^je  ne  sais
trop  pourquoi — 1'  humiliaient.

Outre  les  experiences  publiees  deja  par  moi,  je  puis  en  donner
quelques  autres,  qui  indiqueront  tres  nettement  combien  il  y  a,  dans
r  inconscience  du  medium,  une  intelligence  apte  a  des  operations  intel-
lectuelles  passablemeut  compliquees.

19  Mai  1884. — Presents,  P.  P.,  G.  P.  (medium),  et  moi.  C  est
moi  qui  tiens  1'  alphabet.  Je  demande  un  vers  francais  retourne,  et  je
tiens  r  alphabet  soigneusement  cache. La  reponse  est —

ERDNATRIODUTMEUQVAEXES.

C  est  alors  seulement  que  je  comprends  le  sens  du  vers  indique.  En
continuant,  j '  ob tiens —

ECEDSDEIPXUACBMO.

Alors  je  demande  :  "  Qu'  est-ce  qu'  il  y  a  eu  de  dicte  ?  "  P.  et  G.  se
moquent  de  moi,  en  disant  qu'  ils  n'  en  savent  absolument  rien.  Puis
je  demande  qu'  il  me  soit  indique  par  les  mouvements  de  la  table
combien  il  manque  de  lettres.  La  reponse  est  1 .  Je  le  redemande  une
seconde  fois. La  reponse  est  encore  1.

L'  experience  suivante  a  ete  faite  avec  quelqu'un  qui  ne  faisait  pas
partiti  de  nos  reunions  habituelles.  Elle  est  irreprochable  comme
experience.  Reste  a  savoir  si  le  resultat  est  au-dessus  de  ce  que  peut
donner  le  hasard.  Mais  ici,  comme  precedemment,  c'  est  toujours  le
lecteur  que  je  laisse  juge.

Je  dis  a  un  de  mes  amis,  M.  D.,  qui  ne  connait  aucune  des  personnes
qui  font  avec  moi  ces  experiences  de  spiritism e,  "  Pensez  a  un  nom
quelconque,  que  ce  soit  un  personnage  historique,  ou  un  inconnu,  et
nous  le  trouverons  par  la  table.  Le  lendemain  je  viendrai  vous  dire  le
resultat,  et  alors  seulement  vous  me  direz  ce  nom  pense  par  vous."
L'  experience  est  faite  par  nous  le  1 7  Octobre ;  les  lettres  donnent —

F.N.T.B.T.

Or  nous  pouvons  admettre  que  la  table  a  repondu  avec  un  certain
retard.  Certes  la  combinaison  des  cinq  lettres  qui  precedent  les  lettres
P  N  T  B  T  sera  due  a  la  table  aussi  bien  que  la  combinaison  susdite.
En  prenant  alors  les  lettres  qui  precedent,  nous  avons  la  combinaison —

E.M.S.A.S.

Le  nom  a  chercher  etait  Cesar.  On  voit  qu'  en  admettant  un  petit
retard  pour  la  derniere  lettre,  et  un  retard  encore  plus  grand  pour  la
premiere,  nous  avons —

C.M.S.A.R

Ce  qui  se  rapproche  passablement  de  Cesar  ou  plutot  Coesar.

Dans  I'experience  du  31  Octobre  1884,  nous  avons  pris  plus  de  precau-
tions que  d'  ordinaire  pour  cacher  completement  1'  alphabet.  D'  apres
la  situation  que  nous  avons  prise,  il  me  parait  impossible  que  G.,  le
medium,  ait  pu  voir  les  mouvements  que  fait  P.  en  suivant  1'  alphabet.


142


Relation  de  Diverses  Expdriences,  Sc.


En  outre,  cet  alphabet  est  masque  par  un  grand  carton.  De  plus  nous
faisons  du  bruit,  et  nous  parlons  avec  tant  de  force  qu'  il  est  presque
impossible  a  P.  d'  entendre  la  sonnerie.  Alors  la  premiere  reponse
est —

A.L.N.I.A.B.E.V.

Qu'  on  peut  lire —

A.L.O.H.A.B.E.T.

De  qui  est  cette  reponse  1  demandons-nous  alors.  Nous  sommes
quatre  a  la  table  :  elle  est  a  un  metre  et  demi  de  nous.  F.  et  G.  (le
medium)  ont  les  yeux  fermes,  et  nous  continuons  a  faire  en  parlant  un
bruit  assourdissant. La  reponse  est —

HNPOTOHALDOUBTUEZSFQKEVY.

C  est-a-dire,  en  admettant  la  correction  de  la  lettre  voisine —

IMPOSOIBLEOUASTEZSERJEUX.

Et  tinalement  nous  interpretons  cette  reponse —

Impossible  restez  sei'ieux.

Dans  r  experience  du  5  Novembre  1884,  nous  nous  servons  d'un
alphabet  circulaire ;  c' est-a-dire,  dispose  de  telle  sorte  qu'  il  est  impossible
de  savoir,  quand  je  commence  a  epeler,  par  ou  je  commence.  De  plus,  je
le  parcours  avec  une  vitesse  tres  differente,  et  sans  faire  le  moindre
bruit,  de  maniere  a  ce  qu'  il  n'  y  ait  aucune  indication  perceptible.  La
reponse  est —

F  A  Z  O  L  D  O.

Cela  est  tout-a-fait  insignifiant :  mais  il  est  int^ressant  de  con-
stater  qu'  en  prenant  toutes  les  precautions  pour  ^viter  que  1'  alphabet
soit  connu  du  medium,  il  y  a  cependant  un  assemblage  de  lettres  qui  ne
parait  pas  du  au  hasard — .

FA SOL  DO.

Le  9  Novembre,  en  prenant  toujours  les  menies  precautions,  mais
en  nous  servant  d'  un  alphabet  ordinaire,  non  circulaire,  le  nom  du  soi-
disant  esprit  venu  a  la  table  est  V  I  L  L  O  N.  Alors  nous  faisons
beaucoup  de  bruit,  nous  recitons  des  vers,  nous  chantons,  nous  comp-
tons,  si  bien  que  P.,  qui  est  a  1'  alphabet,  a  peine  a  suivre  la  sonnerie.
Nous  demandons  un  vers  fran9ais. La  reponse  est —

QUSNNTKFSNEIGDRDAMSAM.

Ousontlesneigesdantan.

C  est-a-dire  "  Ovi  sont  les  neiges  d'  Antan  1 "  ce  qui  est  un  vers  de
Villon,  connu  evidemment  de  chacun  de  nous.

Quels  ont  6t^,  demandons-nous  alors,  les  rapports  de  Villon  avec  les
Rois  de  France  1

KOUHTLECRUEL.
'Louis  le  Cruel.

Quel  livre  devons-nous  lire  1

ESSAYSURDADMONINMANHP.


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  143


Essay  sur  daemoniomanie.

On  comprendra  que,  si  je  mentionne  ces  experiences,  ce  n'  est  pas
que  les  paroles  dites  soient  interessantes,  mais  c'  est  parce  que  les
dispositions  semblaient  assez  bien  prises  pour  empecher  le  medium  de
connaitre  ce  que  fait  celui  qui  epelle  1'  alphabet.  Je  dis  assez  bien
prises ;  car  je  n'  oserais  affirmer  qu'  il  y  avait  pour  notre  medium
impossibilite  absolue  de  voir  ou  d'  entendre.

Autrement  dit  il  y  a  difficulte  extreme,  pour  nos  sens  habituels  :
mais  il  n'  y  a  pas  une  impossibilite  radicale,  comme  dans  le  cas  des
dessins  enfermes  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque.

Je  noterai  encore  quelques  reponses  ;  mais  le  nombre  et  la  valeur
des  reponses  impoi'te  assez  peu.

FESTINALENTE.

LOFAMDTMREIINAJUBRRENOV
AREDOLOREM.

Infandum,  rejina,  juhes  renovate  dolorem.

On  remarquera  la  vieille  ortliographe  du  mot :  Rejina.

Par  suite  de  differentes  causes,  et  en  particulier  par  la  difficulte
meme  de  trouver  des  mediums  de  bonne  foi  certaine,  je  n'  ai  pas  pu
renouveler  ces  experiences  avec  1'  alphabet  cache.  J'  espere  qu'  on  ne
laissera  pas,  sans  la  poursuivre,  cette  curieuse  manifestation  de
r  inconscience,  qui  indique  peut-etre  quelque  chose  de  plus  que  des
mouvements  musculaires,  intelligents,  et  inconscients.

J'  ai  eu  r  occasion  une  fois  de  verifier  que  ce  n'  est  pas  la  un
phenomene  exclusivement  propre  a  mon  ami  G.^  En  efFet,  a  Londres,
il  y  a  deux  ans,  je  fus  conduit  par  M.  F.  Myers  chez  Madame  L.,  qui
presente  les  phenomenes  de  1'  ecriture  inconsciente.  Nous  essayames
alors  de  voir  si,  en  cachant  1'  alphabet,  on  pourrait  aussi  obtenir  quel-
ques reponses  par  des  mouvements  du  crayon,  mouvements  se
produisant  a  la  lettre  voulue,  au  moment  ou  1'  on  epelle  la  lettre  qui
doit  etre  donn^e  comme  reponse.

Madame  L.  salt  un  peu  de  francais.  Nous  demandons  une  reponse
en  fran9ais,  et  M.  Myers  suit  avec  le  doigt  1'  alphabet,  qu'  il  tient  tout-
a-fait  cache  pour  Madame  L.  Je  ne  crois  pas  qu'  on  puisse  cependant
dire  tout-a-fait  cache.  En  disant  tres  difficile  a  voir,  je  crois  que
nous  serons  exactement  dans  la  verity.

Madame  L.  fait  un  petit  mouvement  involontaire  du  crayon,  quand
M.  Myers  passe  sur  la  lettre  convenable.  Alors  nous  avons  la  reponse
suivante —

WO  USATROVVERIEZC  ELAJT  RA
ENDIFEICIJ.

1  Dans  Light  une  observation  analogue  a  ^te  publiee.  II  y  a  en  aussi  d'  ingenieux
essais  de  M.  Gesmann  sur  le  meme  sujet.  Psychische  Studiev,  1886  p.  397,  4?8,
500,  etc.


144


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  dx.


Ce  qu'  on  peut  sans  peine  interpreter —
Vous  trouveriez  cela  tres  diiiicile.

Je  le  repete,  il  serait  bien  interessant  de  reprendre  ces  etudes  avec
r  alphabet  cache  ;  mais  il  faudrait  commencer  par  faire  sur  les  sujets
une  sorte  d'  education,  sans  quoi  on  n'  arriverait  a  rien.

Les  experiences,  en  tres  petit  nombre  d'  ailleurs,  que  je  vais  main-
tenant  rapporter,  ont  ete  faites  sur  differentes  personnes :  leur  int^ret
ne  consiste  pas  dans  1'  alphabet  cache,  mais  dans  la  reponse  meme.

Comme  pour  toutes  les  experiences  precedentes,  je  m'  abstiendrai
de  tout  commentaire  autre  qu'  un  commentaire  experimental,  et  je
raconterai,  aussi  servilement  que  possible,  dans  quelles  conditions
precises  1'  experience  a  ete  £aite.

Le  premier  cas  se  rapporte  a  Madame  L.,  dont  j'  ai  parl^  plus  liaut.
Etant  alle  chez  cette  dame,  d'  une  honorabilite  irreprochable,  avec  M.  F.
Myers,  je  lui  demande  de  me  donner  par  1'  ecriture  automatique  une
reponse  quelconque.^

Le  mot  indique  est  L  E  M  I  G  jST  E.  Je  crois  qu'  il  s'  agit  du
mot  fran9ais /' eVii(/?)ie,  maistout  aussitot  nous  avons  E  N  G-  I  M  E  L,
avec  cette  addition.  "  Mon  nom  renverse."  Ces  reponses  ont  ^te
obtenues  avec  1'  alphabet  cache.  Alors  le  crayon  ^crit  :  "  Place  aux
lignes."  A  partir  de  ce  moment  il  n'  y  a  plus  de  reponse  pari'  alphabet
cache,  et  tout  ce  que  je  vais  exposer  se  rapporte  a  1'  ecriture
automatique.

Je  demande  alors  ou  a  vecu  Lemigne.  Reponse:  "Saint  Louis."  Je
cherche  alors  mentalement  ce  que  peut  etre  ce  Saint  Louis,  et  le  seul
souvenir  qu'  evoque  ce  mot  est  la  ville  de  Saint  Louis,  au  Senegal.

Alors,  continuant,  le  crayon  ecrit :  "  Petit  Pont — 17  rue  du  Petit
Pont — rue  Baptiste — rue  Sainte  Marie — a  dix  leagues  de  la  capitale,
jamais  plus  loin  j'  avals  ete — les  trois  sceurs."

ISTous  deniandons  quand  Lemigne  est  mort,  et  ce  qu'  il  etait.
Reponse  :  "  1884  ouvrier  en  souliers."

Or  le  mot  de  Saint  Louis,  associe  avec  le  mot  de  Petit  Pont,  me
fait  pen.ser  a  1'  ile  Saint  Louis  a  Paris.  II  est  probable  que  Madame
L.,  qui  n'  a  jamais  ete  a  Paris  et  qui  n'  a  pas  lu  de  romans  francjais,
connait  a  peine  1'  ile  Saint  Louis  de  nom,  si  elle  la  connait,  et  n'  a  jamais
entendu  parler  de  la  rue  clu  Petit  Pout.  Aussi,  en  rentrant  a  Paris,
ai-je  fait  une  sorte  d'  enquete  pour  savoir  a  quoi  m'  en  tenir  sur  la
reality  des  reponses  donnees  par  Madame  L.  avec  1'  ecriture
automatique.

Le  10  Juillet  1884,  il  est  mort  au  numero  17  de  la  rue  du  Petit
Pont,  un  ouvrier  vitrier  nomme  Gemini.  (J'ecris  Gemini,  quoique  je
ne  sois  pas  absolument  sur  de  1'  orthographe  correcte  de  ce  nom.)  Dans

1  Voir  r  important  article  de  M.  Myers  sur  Automatic  Writing.


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.  145


la  meme  rue,  la  meme  annee,  il  est  mort  un  ouvrier  cordonnier  noname
Imbenit ;  qui  demeurait  avec  ses  trois  soeurs  dans  un  hotel  de  la  rue
du  Petit  Pont.

Peut-etre  trouvera-t-on  quelque  ressemblance  entre  le  mot  Lemigne
et  le  mot  Gemini.

Je  noterai  enfin  sur  la  meme  personne  un  fait  assez  curieux.  Le
soir,  faisant,  en  compagnie  de  M.  F.  Myers  et  de  deux  autres  personnes,
une  experience  avec  elle,  comme  nous  nous  trouvions  tous  dans
I'obscurite  (il  faisait  tres  f roid),  elle  dec rit  difFerentes  formes  animees
qu'  elle  voit  passer  devant  elle.  Je  n'  avals  pas,  comme  on  le  pense  bien,
peur  le  moins  du  monde;  mais,  a  un  moment,  j'ai  ressenti
un  3ffet  bizarre,  que  je  ne  crois  pas  avoir  jamais  eprouve.  J'  ai  senti
mes  cheveux,  ou,  pour  etre  plus  exact,  quelques  cheveux,  se  dresser  sur
ma  tete  ;  et  je  me  fais  mentalement  cette  remarque,  que  je  suis  comme
electrise.  Alors  Madame  L.,  quietait  a  cote  de  moi,  dit :  "  M.  Richetest
comme  electrise."

Au  point  de  vue  de  la  suggestion  mentale  par  la  table  spiritique  je
noterai  deux  experiences,  faites,  1'  une  avec  Marie  B.,  1' autre  avec
Madeleine  <i.

Dans  r  experience  avec  Marie  B.  elle  est  seule  a  la  table,  qui  donne
des  repouses  par  le  moyen  des  soulevements  obtenus  quand  une  troi-
sieme  personne  epelle  1'  alphabet.  Je  demande  de  citer  le  noni  d'  un
des  auteurs  de  la  bibliotheque  ou  nous  nous  trouvons.  Marie  B.  est
tres  myope,  et  pent  a  peine  distinguer  ce  qui  est  a  un  metre  d'  elle.  La
reponse  est  THEIRS.  Or  j'  avals  precisement  pense  a  1'  ouvrage
de  M.  Thiers  sur  la  Revolution  et  le  Oonsulat.  Mais,  ce  qu'  il  y  a
d'  assez  interessant,  c'  est  que  precisement  cet  ouvrage  n'  existe  pas  dans
cette  bibliotheque,  et  que  ce  que  j' avals  pris  pour  \  ouvrage  de  M.
Thiers,  ce  sont  les  oeuvres  completes  de  Goethe.

Cette  experience  ne  prouve  pas  grand  chose ;  car  la  meme  raison
qui  m'  avait  fait  penser  a  1'  ouvrage  de  M.  Thiers  a  pu  aussi  pousser
Marie  B.  a  penser  au  meme  auteur.

Dans  r  experience  faite  avec  Madeleine  G.  il  y  eu  un  resultat
plus  frappant.  II  s'  agissait  de  penser  a  un  nom  quelconque,  d'  homme
ou  de  femme,  personnage  mort  ou  vivant.  Nous  etions  quatre  a  la
table,  Madeleine  G.  etant  evidemment  le  medium.  La  personne  pen-
sant  a  tel  ou  tel  nom  etait  a  trois  metres  environ  de  nous,  sur  un
canap4,  et  dans  une  obscurite  presque  complete.

La  reponse  se  fait  par  1'  intermediaire  de  la  table,  qui  se  souleve  a
la  lettre  convenable,  et,  par  un  systeme  de  signes  convenus  a  1'  avance,
nous  demandons  si  c'  est  un  nom  de  vivant.  Reponse  :  "  Oui."  Un
nom  d' homme  ou  de  femme  1 — "  Un  homme."  Alors  les  lettres  indi-
quees  sont :  LOIS.  Cette  reponse  est  un  succes  assez  curieux  ;  car  le
nom  pense  etait  precisement  Louis. Ce  nom  n'  etait  pas  venu  dans

L


146


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


notre  conversation,  et  rien  dans  la  demande  n'  indiquait  qu'  il  fut  ques-
tion d'  un  prenom  plutot  que  d'  un  nom  de  famille.

Je  dois  mentionner  aussi  une  experience  faite  avec  mon  ami  G.,  et
qui  a  eu  lieu  en  presence  de  1'  illustre  savant  anglais,  M.  W.  Crookes.
M.  Crookes  ayant  temoigne  le  desir  d'  assister  a  une  des  experiences  que
nous  faisions  avec  1'  alphabet  cache,  je  reunis  mes  amis  dans  la  journee
chez  moi,  et  nous  essayames  de  la  faire  dans  les  conditions  oixlinaires.
D'  abord  1'  experience  ne  reussit  pas.  Quelqu'  un  fit  alors  observer
qu'  il  fallait  fermer  les  persiennes  et  operer  a  la  lumiere  d'  une  lampe,
ce  qui  fut  fait.  M.  Crookes  6tait  pres  de  moi.  Je  parcourais  1'  alphabet.
G.  etait  a  la  table,  avec  A.,  P.,  et  F.  Devant  1' alphabet  nous
avions  mis  un  grand  carton  qui  le  cachait  presque  completement.
L'  alphabet  n'  etait  eclairc  que  par  une  petite  lampe  qui  permettait  a
peine  de  voir  les  lettres,  meme  en  s'  approchant  de  tres  pres.  Alors,
aprfes  diverses  phrases  insignifiantes,  M.  W.  Crookes  fit  une  question
rnentale.  II  demandait  le  nom  d'  un  de  ses  fils.  Personne  ne  pouvait
SB  douter  de  la  nature  de  la  question.

La  reponse,  tres  nette,  fut —

IKNOWONLYTHESLANG.

J e  dois  remarquer  que  G.  sait  a  peine  assez  d'  anglais  pour  epeler
quelques  mots,  et  que  le  mot  de  slang  lui  etait  completement  inconnu.
II  est  vrai  qu'  il  a  pu  le  savoir  et  1'  oublier.

L'  experience  aurait  ete  plus  interessante  encore,  si  la  phrase  ainsi
dite  par  1'  alphabet  cache,  au  lieu  de  s'  appliquer  a  peu  pres  a  toutes  les
demandes,  eut  ^t6  uniquement  applicable  a  la  question  mentale  de  M.
Crookes.  Mais  il  n'  en  est  pas  moins  vrai  que  la  reponse  s'  applique
bien  a  la  question  faite.

Pour  ce  qui  concerne  les  phenomenes  physiques  du  spiritisme,  j'  ai
le  regret  de  dire  que,  malgre  bien  des  tentatives,  je  n'  ai  rien  obtenu  de
decisif.  J'  ai  assists  deux  fois  a  des  seances  que  donnait  M.  Eglinton,
et  j'  ai  fidelement  transcrit  sur  mon  registre  de  notes  le  recit  de  ses
experiences  :  mais  je  m'  abstiens  d'  en  parler  et  de  conclure  quoi  que
ce  soit;  jusqu'  a  ce  que  sa  bonne  foi  soit,  comme  je  1'  espere,  absolument
prouv^e.  A  1'  heure  presente  elle  ne  me  parait  pas  encore  en  dehors
de  touts  contestation.  Aussi  faut-il  regarder  comme  non  avenues  les
experiences,  si  ^tonnantes  qu'  elles  soient,  ou  1'  absolue  bonne  foi  de
r  operateur  n'  est  pas  au-dessus  de  la  discussion.

Restent  les  experiences  faites  dans  des  conditions  de  sinc^rite  incon-
testable et  incontestee.  Elles  sont  peu  nombreuses,  et  assez  peu
concluantes.

D'  abord,  pour  ce  qui  concerne  les  coups,  ou  raps,  G.,  qui  nous  avait
donn6  des  I'^sultats  si  curieux  avec  1'  alphabet  cache,  ne  peut  produire
de  raps.  J'ai  eu  I'occasion  de  voir  quatre  ou  cinq  fois  Madame  V., personne
intelligente,  et  d'  une  sante  delicate,  qui,  lorsque  elle  met  les  mains  sur


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  c&c.


147


une  table,  dans  les  conditions  de  silence  et  de  recueillement  suffisantes,
obtient  des  coups.  J'  ai  parfaitement  entendu  ces  coups.  Nous  etions
en  pleine  lumiere,  et  je  suis  sur  qu'  il  n'  y  avait  aucune  supercherie.
Mais  il  ne  m'  est  pas  prouve  que  ces  coups  soient  tout-a-fait  differents
des  craquements  que  produit  dans  une  table,  composee  d'  ais  divers,  une
pression  plus  ou  moins  forte.  Si  Madame  V.,  en  appuyant  involon-
tairement  a  tel  ou  tel  moment,  fait  entendre  un  craquement,  et  que  ce
craquement  ressemble  a  un  coup,  ce  n'  est  pas  plus  etonnant  que  les
mouvements  d'  une  table  soulevee,  mouvements  que  nous  expliquons
maintenant  si  bien  par  les  mouvements  musculaires  inconscients.

Je  ne  me  dissimule  pas  que  cette  hypothese  est  peu  satisfaisante,
aussi  peu  satisfaisante  que  quand  j'  explique  les  reponses  avec
r  alphabet  cach^  par  une  perception  sensible  et  inconsciente  des  mouve-
ments de  la  personne  qui  epelle  1'  alphabet.  Mais,  quand  on  n'  a  pas
de  preuves  irrecusables  qu'  un  phenomene  ne  s'  explique  pas  par  les  lois
connues  de  la  matiere,  il  faut  recourir  a  celles-ci  plutot  qu'  a  des
hypotheses  qui  bouleversent  1'  etat  actuel  de  la  science.  J'  aurais  bien
voulu  reprendre  ces  experiences  avec  Madame  V.,  mais  sa  sante  ne  lui
a  pas  permis  de  continuer.  II  y  a,  comme  on  salt  sans  doute,  quand  on
s'  est  un  peu  occupe  de  ces  phenomenes  spiritiques,  tan  tot  des  mediums
a  gage,  dont  la  bonne  foi  est  par  cela  meme  problematique,  tantot  des
mediums  qu'  il  est  impossible  de  retribuer,  des  personnes  du  monde,  qui
considerent  cela  comme  une  sorte  de  passe-temps  ou  de  jeu,  et  qui  ne  se
resignent  pas  a  de  longues  et  fastidieuses  etudes.

Une  fois,  avec  G.,  nous  avons  eu  le  fait  suivant.  Je  le  mentionne,
quoique  je  ne  1'  aie  observe  qu'  une  seule  fois,  et  qu'  il  nous  ait  ete
impossible  de  le  reproduire.  Le  5  Novembre  1884,  apres  une  assez
longue  seance  nous  essayons  de  faire  quelques  experiences  dans
r  obscurite.  Nous  etions  quatre  presents,  G.,  P.,  O.,  et  moi.  O.  est  a
demi  endormi,  et  incapable  de  parler.  P.  et  moi  nous  demandons  a
I'esprit  soi-disant  present  s'  il  peut  nous  faire  entendre  le  son  du  violon,
question  bizarre,  resultant  de  diverses  communications  anterieures.  La
reponse  est :  "  Oui,  dans  une  minute."  Cette  reponse  nous  est  donnee
par  les  soulevements  de  la  table,  suivant  un  systeme  de  signes  convenus.
Au  bout  d'  une  minute  environ  nous  entendons  trois  ou  quatre  petits
coups  de  timbre  tres  faibles,  mais  bien  nets  cependant,  et  argentins.
0.,  qui  continue  a  dormir,  n'a  rien  entendu.  G.,  qui  est  sourd  ou  du
moins  qui  a  1'  oreille  tres  dure,  n'  a  rien  entendu.  Mais  P.  et  moi  nous
avons  tres  distinctement  entendu  ce  leger  tintement  qui  semblait  partir
de  la  table.  Aussi  notre  impression,  que  nous  exprimons  aussitot
simultanement,  est  que  G.,  qui  a  une  montre  a  repetition,  a  tire  sa
montre  de  sa  poche  pour  savoir  1'  heure.

Cette  explication  si  simple  est  inadmissible  ;  car  G.  n'  avait  pas  ce
jour-la  apporte  sa  montre  a  repetition.


148


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


Je  rapporte  le  fait  sans  commentaire.  Je  ne  crois  pas  que  ce  pW-
nomene  isole,  peut-etre  explicable  par  des  raisons  tres  simples,ait  grande
valeur.  En  fait  d'  experiences  on  peut  dire  ce  qu'on  dit  des  t^moig-
nages — Uxperienlia  una,  experientia  nulla.

La  derniere  observation  que  j'  aie  a  rapporter  se  refere  a  des  ph^-
nomenes  plus  inexplicables  encore.  Au  chateau  de  S.,  avec  quelques
parents  et  des  amis,  nous  avions  fait  diverses  experiences  avec  la  table.
Le  medium  etait  Madeleine  G.,  et  constamment  le  nom  qui  revenait
par  la  table  etait  le  nom  de  mon  grand-p^re,  Charles  Renouard,  mort
dans  ce  chateau,  environ  huit  ans  auparavant.  Nous  avons,  entre
autres,  comme  reponse,  une  promesse  de  1'  esprit,  qui  nous  dit  qu'  il
nous  apparaitra. De  fait  nous  ne  vimes  rien,  ni  les  uns  ni  les  autres.

Le  lendemain  matin.  Miss  Mary  X.,  institutrice  anglaise  de  I'enfant  de
Madame  G.,  prevint  Madame  G.  qu'  elle  n'  oserait  plus  aller  toute  seule
dans  le  corridor.  II  s'  agit  d'  un  grand  corridor  qui  reunit  1'  une  a
r  autre  toutes  les  pieces  du  premier  etage.  En  effet,  elle  racoiite  qu'  elle
a  eu  une  peur  terrible  le  soir  precedent,  sa  frayeur  coincidant  avec  le
moment  ou  nous  faisions  nos  experiences.  Dans  le  corridor  elle  avait
vu  r  ombre  ou  le  fantome  de  M.  Charles  Renouard.

D'apres  les  affirmations  de  Miss  Mary  X.,  personne  fort  intelligente
et  veridique,  elle  ignorait  que  nous  eussions  fait  une  experience  ce  meme
jour,  et  que  surtout  il  eut  ete  question  de  1'  apparition  possible  de  M.
Charles  Renouard.  Mais  il  ne  me  parait  pas  prouve  absolument
qu'  elle  ignorait  cela.  Ce  n'  etait  pas  la  premiere  fois  que  nous  faisions
r  experience,  et,  dans  une  de  nos  seances  ant^rieures,  datant  de  huit
jours  a  peu  pres,  nous  avions  deja  eu  des  communications  analogues,
soi-disant  de  M.  Charles  Renouard.

II  me  jDarait  que,  de  toutes  ces  experiences,  resultat  d'  une  longue  et
peut-etre  inutile  patience,  on  ne  peut  rien  conclure  de  formel.  Je  crois
cependant  qu'  on  est  autorise  a  regretter  que  les  savants  n'  osent  pas
etudier  sans  parti  pris  les  faits  du  spiritisme.  Pourquoi  cette  reserve  1
N'  est-ce  pas  indigne  d'  eux  que  de  fuir  la  luniiere  1


Chapitre  X.

EXPERIENCES  DE  LUCIDITE  AVEC DES  CARTES.

II  semble  que  la  question  de  la  lucidite  puisse  se  juger  avec  des
cartes  de  jf^n  plus  facilement  que  par  quelque  autre  precede.  En  effet
les  cartes  se  pretent  sans  peine  a  des  calculs  de  probabilite  d'une
rigueur  scientitique  irreprochable.  Etant  donne  un  jeu  de  52  cartes,  si
r  on  fait  un  certaiii  nombre  de  tirages,  pourvu  que  ces  tirages  soient
pratiques  sans  que  le  sujet  ait  connaissance  de  la  carte,  on  trouvera  un


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


149


nombre  de  succes  qui  indiquera  avec  precision  si  le  sujet  dit  mieux  que
le  hasard,  ou  comme  le  hasard.

Mais  de  fait  il  m'  a  paru  que  ce  mode  d'  operer  ne  se  prete  pas  du
tout  a  r  examen  de  la  lucidite.  Je  ne  saurais  dire  pour  quelle  cause.
Peut-etre  y  a-t-il  dans  1'  esprit  du  sujet  la  representation  simultanee  de
toutes  les  cartes  qui  sent  dans  le  jeu.  Peut-etre  aussi  est-on  tent^  de
pratiquer  un  trop  grand  nombre  d'  experiences,  et  les  premieres  sont-
elles  les  seules  bonnes.  Peut-etre  des  conditions  inconnues  de  nous
moditient-elles  les  donnees  de  1'  experience.  Toujours  est-il  qu'  en
procedant  avec  rigueur,  mais  non  avec  plus  de  rigueur  qu'  avec  les  dessins
mis  dans  des  enveloppes,  je  n'  ai  obtenu  aucun  resultat  dans  le  sens  de
la  lucidite  ou  de  la  suggestion  mentale.

Voici  comment  je  procedais.  La  carte  etait  par  quelqu'  un  plac^e
dans  une  enveloppe  opaque.  Elle  etait  prise  dans  huit  jeux  de  cartes  de
52  cartes.  Par  consequent  la  meme  carte  pouvait  se  retrouver  plusieurs
fois  de  suite  dans  la  meme  experience.  Quelquefois  c'  ^tait  moi-meme
qui  avals  mis,  chez  moi,  la  carte  dans  1'  enveloppe.  Mais  j'avais  soin
de  ne  pas  la  regarder,  et  j'  ignorais  absolument  quelle  carte  j'  avals  ainsi
enfermee  dans  1'  enveloppe  opaque.

Alors  1'  enveloppe  etait  donnee  soit  a  Alice,  soit  a  Eugenie,  soit
a  d'  autres  sujets.  Le  resultat,  qui  m'  etait  donne  verbalement,  6tait
inscrit  sur  1' enveloppe,  et,  une  fois  la  carte  indiquee  par  le  sujet,
j'  ouvrais  1'  enveloppe,  et  je  comparais.

J'  ai  fait  ainsi  312  experiences.  Elles  sont,  quant  a  la  methode,
irr^prochables,  mais  le  resultat  est  tout-a-fait  defavorable  a  mes
provisions  ;  c'  est-a-dire,  que  je  n'  ai  rien  trouve  qui  confirmat  1'  hypothese
de  la  lucidite.  Au  contraire,  les  cliiffres  obtenus  prouvent  bien  que  la
lucidite  ne  s'  exerce  pas  sur  les  cartes  mises  sous  enveloppes  et  invisibles
par  nos  precedes  ordinaires  de  vision.

C  est  done  la  un  resultat  absolument  negatif,  et  fait  pour  jeter
quelque  doute  sur  les  experiences  de  dessin.  Mais,  en  pareille  matiere,
vu  notre  ignorance  absolue  des  precedes  de  lucidite,  nous  ne  devons  rien
conclure  d'  une  sOrie,  meme  trfes  longue,  d'  experiences  negatives.  Le
fait  que  de  nombreuses  experiences  avec  les  cartes  nous  ont  donne  un
resultat  nul,  prouve  simplement  qu'  on  echoue  avec  les  cartes,  et  ne
prouve  pas  qu'il  n'  y  a  pas  de  lucidite  pour  les  dessins,  ou  pour  les
maladies,  ou  pour  d'  autres  phenomenes.

Quoique  j'  aie  absolument  echoue  avec  les  cartes,  il  est  possible  que
d'  autres  experimentateurs,  agissant  sur  des  sujets  plus  sensibles,  aient
de  meilleurs  resultats.  Je  ne  parle  pas  de  la  suggestion  mentale,  qui,
d'  apres  les  experiences  des  divers  correspondants  de  la  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  semble  prouvee  pour  les  cartes ;  mais  de  la  lucidity
portant  sur  des  cartes  inconnues  du  sujet  aussi  bien  que  de  I'operateur.  Je
me  permets  de  recommander  cette  Opreuve  faite  comme  je  1'  indique  :


150


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


cartes  prises  dans  un  grand  nombre  de  jeux,  mises  dans  des  enveloppes
opaques,  sans  que  personne  les  connaisse,  et  resultat  ecrit  avant
qu'  on  ait  vu  la  carte,  sans  qu'  on  puisse  revenir  sur  une  experience
faite,  et  en  tenant  corapte  de  tous  les  resultats,  sans  une  seule
exception.

Au  point  de  vue  de  la  probabilite,  voici  comment  je  1'  ai  calculee.
II  y  a  d'  abord  une  probabilite  de  J  ;  c'  est  la  probabilite  d'  amener  une
carte  rouge  ou  une  carte  noire.  Secondement,  il  y  a  la  probability
de  ^ ;  c'  est  la  probabilite  d'  amener  un  cceur,  un  carreau,  un  pique,  ou
un  trefle.  Troisiemement,  la  probabilite  de  ;  soit  la  probabilite
d'  amener  un  as,  un  deux,  un  trois,  et  cetera.  Quatriemement,  la  proba-
bilite de  52 ;  c'  est  la  probabilite  d'  amener  exactement  telle  ou  telle
carte.

Entin,  la  probabilite  d'  amener,  non  pas  la  carte  exacte,  mais  la  carte
voisine,  celle  qui  est  immddiatement  superieure  ou  inferieure,  est
evidemment  de  5I.

II  fallait  s'  attendi'e  a  trouver,  pour  les  experiences  portant  sur  la
designation  totale  des  cartes,  des  chiifres  un  peu  inferieurs  aux  chiffres
probables,  car,  dans  bon  nombre  d'  experiences,  peut-etre  \  du  nombre
total,  Eugenie  ou  Alice  se  refusaient  a  dire  autre  chose  que  la  valeur
de  la  carte,  affirmant  qu'  elles  ne  voyaient  rien,  et  qu'  il  etait  par
consequent  inutile  de  leur  faire  dire  plus.

Je  donne  ici  la  somme  totale  des  experiences  de  cartes  faites  de
cette  maniere.  J'ai  dispose  les  chifires  par  series  de  24.  C'est-a-dire,
que  chaque  colonne  indique  le  resultat  de  24  experiences  con-
secutives.


Experiences  d'Eugbnie.


le

2e

3e

4e

5e

Total.

Nombre  probable

serie.

siirie.

SL'i'ie

serie.

serie.

Pr.  le  totl.

Pr.  24  Ex.

Rouge  ou  noire,

Prob.  \

15

15

11

6

10

57

60

12

Valeur  de  la  carte,

Prob.  :}

9

9

8

2

5

3.3

30

6

D^signat.  du  ijoint.

Prob.

2

.>

0

1

1

6

9

2

D^signat.  totale,

Prob.  ,V

2

1

0

0

0

.3

2

0.5

Designat.  totale  et  des

2  cartes  voisines,

Prob.

2

1

0

0

1

4

7

1.5

Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  <&'a
Experiences  d' Alice.


151


Experiences  de  Leontine,
d'Hblena  et  d'autres.


le
serie


Piob.
Prob.
Prob.
Piob.
Prob.


e

serie


12
7
2
0
0


3e
serie


12
4
2
0
1


4e
serie


10
4
0
0
0


08

serie


11

6
0
0
1


6e
serie


12
5
0
0
1


11
7
1
1

1


Totl.


68
33
5
1
4


Nbr.
Prb.


72
36
11

3

8


Totl.

Nbr.
Prb.

Total
general

Nombre
Probable.

22

24

147

156

16

/o

3

4

16

24

2

1

6

6

7

3

15

18

i


Si  Ton  ne  tient  compte  que  des  probabilites  a  ^  et  a  | — et  il  n'est
guere  possible  de  faire  autrement,  puisque  bien  souvent  Eugenie  ou
Alice  ne  designaient  que  la  couleur  de  la  carte— on  voit  que,  les  chiffres
obtenus  sont  tout-a-fait  ceux  que  peut  donner  le  hasard.i  et  que,  si  une

1  Depuis  que  ce  travail  a  eti  ecrit,  j'ai  refait  de  nouveUes  experiences,  qui  m'ont
donne  des  resultats  plus  satisfaisants,  quoique  a  vrai  dire  ils  ne  depaissent  pas  encore
assez  le  nombre  probable.  Mes  experiences  ont  iti  faites  avec  Alice,  Eugenie  et
Leontine. Sur  37  experiences  Alice  m'a  donne  —

J  17  bons  ;  20  mauvais.
J  7  bons  ;  30  mauvais.
Jj 5  bons  ;  32  mauvais.

2  bons  ;  35  mauvais.

3  bons  ;  34  mauvais.

Sur  25  experiences,  Eugenie  m'a  donnt^ : —
i  17  bons  ;  8  mauvais.
9  bons  ;  16  mauvais.
2  bons  ;  23  mauvais.
29  mauvais.
-f^  29  mauvais.

Mais  je  dois  dire  qu'  Eugenie  ne  me  designe  que  rarement  le  point  de  la  carte
dent  elle  a indique  la  couleur,  de  sorte  que  ce  chiffre  de  29  experiences  ne  repond
en  realite  qu'  a  une  dizaine  d'  experiences  k  peine. Leontine  a  mieux  reussi  peut-
etre. Sur  59  experiences  j  'ai  eu —
h  30  bons  ;  29  mauvais.
I  20  bons  ;  39  mauvais.

8  bons ;  61  mauvais.
>7r 2  bons  ;  57  mauvais.

4  bons  ;  55  mauvais.

Cela  fait  121  experiences,  lesquelles,  ajout^s  aux  312  experiences  precedentes,  me
donnent  un  total  de  433  ;  sur  433  experiences  il  y  a  eu  en  definitive—
A  i  211  succes  ;  222  echecs.

A  i  118  succfes  ;  315  echecs,  le  nombre  probable  des  succfes  etant  108.

On  voit  que  o'est  Ik  tout-a-fait  le  hasard  ;  mais  il  me  parait  vraisemblable
qu'Alice,  par  exemple,  n'a  absolument  pas  de  lucidite  pour  les  cartes.  Aussi  faudrait-il
separer  toutes  les  experiences  qu'elles  a  faites.  On  arriverait  alors  k  un  chififre  meil-
leur  ;  c'est-k-dire,  pour  la  probabilite  k  J,  celle  qui  me  parait  devoir  surtout  etre
recherchee,  sur  292  experiences,  78  succes,  alors  que  le  nombre  probable  est  63.  En
assimilant  cela  a  une  sorte  de  jeu,  on  verrait  qu' alors  le  jeu,  avec  une  personne  ayant
cet  avantage,  ne  serait  pas  equitable.


152  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  <&c.


influence  perturbatrice  quelconque  a  modifi^  le  hasard,  cette  influence
ne  peut  etre  appreciee.


Chapitre  XI.

EXPERIENCES  AVEC  DES  NOMS.

J'  ai  essaye  de  faire  a  peu  pres  la  meme  experience  qu'  avec  des
cartes,  en  la  variant  l^gerement.  Pour  cela,  au  lieu  de  prendre  des
cartes  de  jeu,  j'ai  pris  des  pr^noms  d'homme  ou  de  femme.  J'ai
ainsi  dress^  una  liste  de  90  noms  masculins  et  feminins,  puis  j'ai  prie
quelqu'  un  de  tirer  au  sort  et  de  mettre  un  de  ces  noms  tir^s  au  sort
dans  une  enveloppe  opaque,  apres  1'  avoir  ^crit  bien  lisiblement.
Naturellement,  aprfes  chaque  tirage,  le  nom  ^tait  reinis  dans  1'  urne,
pour  que  la  probabilite  restat  toujours  (^gale  a  -i.  Ainsi,  j' ignorais
absolument  le  nom  que  je  donnais  a  deviner.

Je  n'  ai  fait  jusqu'  a  present  qu'  un  tout  petit  nombre  d'  experiences,
et  elles  n'  ont  pas  reussi,  comme  on  va  le  voir  par  le  tableau  qui  suit.
Mais  je  crois  que  la  methode  est  bonne,  et  qu'  elle  pourra  etre  employee
avec  avantage  par  ceux  qui  auront  ou  croiront  avoir  des  sujets  plus  ou
moins  lucides.

NOM  REEL.  NOM  DIT.  NOJI  DU  SUJET.

Catherine Henri Alice.

Justin Lucien „

Gustave Marguerite ,,

Angele Pauline ,,


Julie  1 Juliette ,,

Nicolas Ursule ,,

Marie Jeanne ,,

Sara Rosa Eugenie.

Michel Julie „

Jacqueline Josephine „

Madeleine Jeannette ,,

Julienne Amelie Claire.

Claire Eugene ,,

Agnes Lucien Leontine.

Rose Anna „

II  n'y  a  evidemment  rien  a  conclure  de  ces  15  experiences.  II  est
certain  que  la  ressemblance  est  assez  grande  entre  Julie  et  Juliette,  Sara
et  Rosa,  Jacqueline  et  Josephine.  Mais  cela  ne  sufiit  pas  pour  constituer
meme  une  presomption  en  faveur  de  la  lucidite.  Car  le  hasard  pourrait


i.J'avais  regarde  le  nom  contenu  dans  I'enveloppe,  et  je  lui  avais  dit :  "  C'est  un
nom  de  femme."


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


153


donner  des  assemblages  plus  curieux  encore,  meme  quand  la  probabilite
est  tres  faible,  rk,  comme  elle  Test  dans  cette  serie  d'experiences.

Ces  experiences  sont  des  experiences  faites  pour  etudier  non  la
suggestion  mentale,  mais  la  lucidite.  Dans  le  cas  de  suggestion
mentale,  il  semble  qu'  on  reussisse  mieux.  J e  laisse  de  cote  les  belles
experiences  qu' ont  faites  a  cet  egard  quelques  correspondants  de  la
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  et  je  ne  parle  que  de  mes  propres
^tades.

J'  ai  racont(5  qu'il  y  a  bien  longtemps,  tout-a-fait  au  debut  de  mes
experiences,  j'  avals  demande  a  une  jeune  somnambule  le  nom  d'  un  de
mes  camarades  d'  etudes  venu  avec  moi  a  1'  Hotel  Dieu.  II  s'  appelait
Hearn,  et  la  jeune  fiUe  me  dit  sans  se  tromper,  "  He(')rn."  L'  ex-
perience, citee  plus  haut,  dans  laquelle  Alice,  sans  avoir  vu  le  nom  qui
etait  enferme  dans  1'  enveloppe,  me  dit,  apres  que  je  1'  eusse  lu  et  que
je  lui  eusse  dit  que  c'  (5tait  un  nom  de  femme,  "  Juliette,"  alors  que  le
vrai  nom  etait  Julie,  peut  passer  aussi  pour  de  la  suggestion  mentale.

Dans  une  expc^rience  faite  avec  Eugenie,  j'  ecris  L  u  c  i  e  n,  et  je
mets  le  papier  dans  une  enveloppe  que  je  lui  donne.  Elle  lit  d'  abord,
"  Marie."  Je  lui  dis  que  c'  est  une  erreur  ;  et  je  lui  demande  la
premiere  lettre.  Elle  dit  qu'  elle  ne  voit  pas.  La  seconde  lettre,  dit-
elle,  est  u  ;  la  troisieme  n'  est  pas  vue  ;  puis  elle  dit,  i  e  n.  II  semble-
rait,  d'apres  cela,  qu'  elle  dut  conclure  a  L  u  c  i  e  n.  Nullement,  elle  lit
E  u  g  i  e  n  i  e,  soit  Eugenie.  On  remarquera,  je  pense,  la  similitude
du  g  et  du  c.

Chapitre  XII.

EXPERIENCES  DE  VOYAGE.

J'  ai  fait  avec  Alice  une  serie  d'  experiences  d'  un  caractere  special.
II  s'  agissait  de  decrire  un  edifice  ou  une  maison  quelconque,  inconnue
de  moi,  mais  eonnue  de  la  personne  qui  etait  avec  moi.  C'etait  moi
qui  interrogeais  Alice,  de  sorte  que  mes  questions  ne  pouvaient  la
mettre  sur  la  voie,  puisque  j'  ignorais  quelles  etaient  les  reponses  qui
devaient  etre  donnees.  Nous  appellerons  voyages,  ces  descriptions
faites  ainsi  a  distance.

J'  ai  eu  alors  a  diverses  reprises  des  resultats  vraiment  tres  re-
marquables.  Je  ne  veux  pourtant  pas  les  rapporter  ici  en  detail ;  car
il  ne  faut  pas  abuser  de  la  patience  du  lecteur,  et  ces  details,  si
interessants  qu'  ils  soient,  ne  me  paraissent  guere  prop  re  a  faire  naitre
la  conviction.  On  peut  to uj  ours  en  efiet  supposer  qu'  il  y  a
comme  des  indications  inconscientes  donnees  par  la  personne  pr^sente,  si
silencieuse  qu'  elle  soit.  D'  autre  part  il  est  facile  de  dire  que  la  diver-
sity des  jardins,  maisons,  batiments,  edifices,  salons,  et  cetera,  n'  est
pas  suffisante,  pour  qu'  une  description  quelconque  qui  est  n^cessaire-


154


Relation  cle  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


ment  vague,  et  pleine  d'  erreurs,  ne  s'  applique  pas  a  presque  tous  les
edifices,  jardins,  batiments,  et  salons  connus.

Aussi  me  contenterai-je  d'  indiquer  quelques  faits  choisis  parmi
ceux  qui  sont,  non  les  plus  frappants,  peut-etre,  mais  les  plus  aptes  a
etre  brieveinent  exposes.

Experience  /.,  8  AoAt  1886. — Cette  experience  a  ^te  faite  avecmon
ami  M.  Manuel  Tolosa  Latour,  qu'  Alice  ne  connait  pas.  II  s'  agit
d'  aller  dans  la  maison  d'  un  m^decin  de  ses  amis,  le  Docteur  E.  Je  crois
deviner,  d'  apres  les  paroles  de  M.  Tolosa,  dites  avant  que  nous  ayions
ete  en  presence  d'  Alice,  qu'  il  s'  agit  d'  une  maison  d'  alienes.  Mais  je
n'  en  suis  par  sur  ;  d'  ailleurs  je  n'  en  laisse  rien  voir  a  Alice,  et  M.  Tolosa
ne  lui  dit  pas  une  parole.

Alice  voit  "  des  hommes  qui  vont  et  viennent  avec  une  casquette  sur
la  tete  (detail  qui  est  absolument  exact  et  que  j'  ignorais  entierement).
Les  femmes  sont  dans  un  salon.  Ellas  sont  tres  droles  et  doivent
etre  en  fete ;  tellenient  elles  remuent  ;  il  y  en  a  qui  ont  des  eventails.
II  y  en  a  une  qui  est  au  piano.  Elles  ont  des  costumes  avec  des
manches  trop  larges."  (Tous  ces  details  sont  tres  exacts,  et  ils  etaient
a  peu  pres  inconnus  de  moi.  Jamais  Alice  n'  a  ete  dans  un  asile
d'  alienes,  et  elle  ne  salt  pas  ce  qui  s'  y  passe.)

Experience  II. — -Faite  par  Alice.  Madame  A.  est  avec  moi.  II
s'  agit  de  decrire  la  maison  que  Madame  A.  habite  en  province,  et  que
ni  moi  ni  Alice  ne  connaissent.  Madame  A.  ne  dit  rien,  et  c'  est  moi
qui  interroge  Alice.  Je  ne  reviendrai  plus  d'  ailleurs  sur  cette  maniere
de  proceder,  puisque,  dans  aucune  des  experiences  que  je  vais
mentionner,  je  ne  laissais  interroger  par  la  personne  connaissant  la
reponse  qu'  il  fallait  donner.

Alice  dit  :  "  Un  jardin  avec  une  grille.  Devant  la  maison,  pas
d'  arbres  ;  mais  des  massifs.  Par  devant  il  y  a  des  marches,  un  perron
avec  un  escalier  en  pierre  et  quatre  marches.  Dans  le  salon  une
table ;  sur  la  clieminee  une  pendule,  et,  de  chaque  cote  de  la  pendule,  en
haut,  a  droite  et  a  gauche,  deux  motifs  faisant  saillie  au-dessus  du
cadran :  ce  sont  deux  anges."  Tous  ces  details  sont  parfaitement
exacts,  sauf  pour  un  point  special.  Le  cadran  de  la  pendule  porte  en
haut,  a  droite  et  a  gauche,  deux  chevres  qui  semblent  grimper  sur  le
cadran.

Experience  I  [I. — II  s'  agit  de  la  maison  de  M.  C.  que  M.  Ph.
Renouard,  present  a  1'  experience,  connait  trfes  bien,  mais  que  ni  moi  ni
Alice  ne  connaissons.

Bien  entendu,  pour  cette  experience,  comme  pour  les  precedentes  et
celles  qui  suivront,  je  ne  donne  pas  les  details  plus  ou  moins  banaux
que  nous  a  indiques  Alice.  Je  ne  mentionne  que  les  particularites
interessantes  qu'  elle  nous  a  precisees,  et  qui  sont  exactes.  Je  laisse
aussi  de  cote  les  erreurs  qu'  elle  a  commises.


Relation  tie  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


155


"  L'  entree  de  la  maison  est  sur  la  cour  dans  la  cuisine.  II  n'  y  a
pas  de  sortie  sur  la  rue.  Dans  le  jardin,  au  bout  de  la  terrasse,  il  y  a
un  mur  avec  des  bancs  pour  s'  asseoir  et  une  balan9oire."  Ces  details
sont  exacts;  mais  M.  Renouard  ignorait  qu'  on  avait  mis  recemment  une
balan9oire  au  bout  du  jardin.  "  Au  milieu  de  la  cheminee  il  y  a  une
pendule  a  colonnes,  grande,  carree,  avec  un  dome  ou  il  y  a  des  sculp-
tures. Les  colonnes  laterales  font  saillie,  le  sommet  est  un  dome  avec
ornements. II  y  a  quatre  colonnes."


Fig.  91.

Pendule  dessinee  par  moi  d'  apres  les  paroles  d'  Alice


Fig.  92.

Pendule  r^elle  de  la  maison  de  M.  C.


156


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


Je  donne  ici  la  figure  de  la  pendule  (Figure  91),  telle  que  je  I'ai
dessin(^e  d'  apres  les  indications  d'  Alice,  et  telle  qu'  elle  est  reellement.
(Figure  92.)

"  Dans  le  salon  il  y  a  au  milieu  une  grande  table  avec  des  livres  poses
a  plat,  de  grands  livres  avec  de  belles  reliures.  Les  fauteuils  sont  en
etoflfe  rouge.  La  porte  de  droite  du  salon  conduit  dans  un  petit  corri-
dor qui  mene  a  la  cuisine.  Dans  la  salle-a-manger  il  y  a  un  dressoir
qui  est  constitue  en  bas  par  une  armoire  a  deux  battants  se  fermant  a
clef.  II  n'  y  a  pas  de  tableaux,  mais  des  assiettes  suspendues  au  mur
et  rangees  de  chaque  cote  du  buffet.  II  y  a  deux  rangees  de  ces
assiettes."

Tous  ces  details  sonfc  tres  exacts,  et  on  ne  pourrait  en  donner  une
meilleure  description,  meme  si  1'  on  avait  sous  les  yeux  les  pieces  et  les
objets  en  question,

E.qyerience  /F.— Faite  par  Alice.  Dans  une  premiere  experience  je
lui  avals  demande  de  me  decrire  la  maison  de  mon  ami  M.  Ferrari,  a  la
campagne,  en  province,  maison  que  je  ne  connais  pas.  Le  resultat  avait
ete  a  peu  pres  nul.  Une  seconde  fois,  M.  Ferrari  6tant  present,  elle
decrit  beaucoup  mieux  cette  maison,  quoique  naturellement  M.  Ferrari
s'  abstienne  de  toute  parole  impliquant  assentiment  ou  dissentiment.

A  coup  sur,  ce  n'  est  pas  un  pays  plat ;  la  maison  est  plutdt  dans
un  fond.  Dans  le  jardin  il  y  a  une  allee  qui  monte  et  qui  conduit  a  un
plateau  tres  eleve.  Ce  plateau  aboutit  a  une  grande  avenue  avec  de
grands  arbres,  a  feuillage  epais.  Dans  cette  allee  il  y  a  un  petit  mur
lateral,  pas  tres  haut,  sur  lequel  se  trouvent  des  pots  de  fleurs.  La
maison  est  recouverte  par  des  ardoises  tr^s  petites,  tres  fines,  qui  ne  sont
pas  noires."

Experience  V. — Faite  par  Alice.  Dans  une  premiere  experience  je
lui  avals  demande  de  me  decrire  la  maison  de  mon  ami  IVI.  Rondeau.
Le  resultat  avait  ete  a  peu  pres  nul.  Une  seconde  fois,  M.  Rondeau
etant  present,  elle  fait  une  description  dont  plusieurs  details  sont
fort  exacts.  M.  Rondeau  s'abstient  de  toute  indication.  "Sur
la  cheminee  il  y  a  quelque  chose,  qui  est  large  en  bas  et  pointu  en
haut.  U  y  a  des  draperies.  Au-dessous  est  un  cad  ran.  La  partie
superieure  de  la  statue  est  une  epaule.  Le  personnage  n'est  pas  tout-
a-fait  de  face.  II  est  appuye  sur  le  bras,  et  regarde  le  cadran.  II  y  a
de  chaque  cote  de  la  pendule  deux  cand(51abres,  dont  la  tige  est  etroite,
et  qui  supportent  des  bougies.  Dans  le  salon  il  y  a  encore  un  grand
tableau,  de  80  centimetres  de  long,  sur  .50  centimetres  de  large,  qui
reprdsente  un  paysage.  A  droite  un  amas  de  maisons,  une  ville  un  peu
en  colline,  comme  un  amphitheatre.  Par  devant,  une  route,  des  champs
au  premier  plan.  A  gauche  une  etendue  de  plaine  avec  la  mer  bleue.
Entre  la  ville  et  la  mer,  formant  un  arriere-plan  plus  eloigne,  quelque
chose  de  pointu,  comme  une  tourelle  ou  le  toit  d'  une  eglise."


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.  157


Telles  sont  textuellement  les  pai'oles  d'  Alice.  Or  la  pendule  repre-
sente  Penelope,  qui  a  en  effet  V  epaule  faisant  saillie,  at  dont  la  tete  est
tournee  vers  le  cadran.  Quant  au  tableau,  c'  est  un  tres  grand  tableau,
de  Canaletti,  qui  represente  une  vue  de  Venise.  Au  premier  plan  le
canal.  Au  second  plan  les  maisons,  et  surtout  1'  eglise  St.  Georges
Majeur,  dont  se  detache  la  haute  coupole  pointue.

Alice,  continuant,  dit  encore  :  "  Dans  le  jardin  il  y  a  un  jet  d'eau.
Sur  les  bords  du  jet  d'  eau  une  petite  bordure  en  pierre  avec
des  fleurs.  Tout  autour  du  bassin  il  y  a  une  grille.  Au  fond  du
jardin  une  table  et  des  chaises." Tous  ces  details  sont  bien  exacts.

Je  ne  veux  pas  pousser  plus  loin  le  recit  de  ces  experiences,  qui  ont
ete  fort  lon^ues  et  laborieuses.  EUes  ont  abouti  en  somme  a  un  assez
faible  resultat,  non  parce  que  les  reponses  etaient  mauvaises,  car  dans
quelques  cas  elles  etaient  excellentes,  inais  parce  que  la  mt^thode  ne
parait  pas  devoir  conduire  a  une  conclusion  tant  soit  peu  certaine.  Que
r  on  essaye  d'  appliquer  a  telle  ou  telle  reponse  le  calcul  des  probabilites,
et  on  verra  que  c'  est  absolument  impossible.  II  est  peu  probable
assurement  qu'  en  decrivant  au  hasard  une  pendule  quelconque,  je  lui
donne  un  dome  sculpte,  et  des  colonnes  laterales  depassant  leg^rement
le  dome,  alors  qu'  en  realite  la  pendule  qu'on  doit  decrire  a  precise-
ment  cette  forme.  Mais  je  ne  puis  chiffrer  la  part  de  vraisemblance
qu'  a  cette  reponse.  Cela  est  d'  autant  plus  diiiicile  a  chiffrer  qu'  il
faut  tenir  compte  de  la  personne  qui  est  presente,  qui  ecoute,  et  qui
est  au  courant  des  reponses  a  faire.  Pourra-t-on  jamais  affirmer  qu'elle
ne  se  laisse  pas  aller  a  des  signes  involontaires,  si  faibles  qu'  ils  soient,
d'  assentiment  ou  de  desapprobation  1

Chapitre  XIII.

OBSERVATIONS  DIVERSES  DE LUCIDITE  OU DE  SUGGESTION  MENTALE.

Pour  tei'miner,  il  me  reste  a  mentionner  quelques  faits  epars,  impos-
sibles a  classer  dans  tel  ou  tel  chapitre,  et  qui  me  paraissent  relever,
tantot  de  la  suggestion  mentale,  tantot  de  la  lucidite.

Observation  I. — Leonie  B.,  qui  a  donne  a  M.  Gibert  et  a  M.  Janet
de  si  beaux  cas  de  transmission  mentale  et  de  lucidite,  ne  m'en  a  donne
que  deux  exemples,  quoique  j'  aie  fait  avec  elle  de  nombreuses
tentatives  (voir  1'  Appendice).

Etant  au  Havre  et  1'  interrogeant,  je  lui  demande  si  elle  pent  aller
a  Paris  voir  mes  enfants.  Elle  dit  que  oui,  et  elle  s'  imagine  les  voir.
Elle  entend,  dit-elle,  qu'  on  appelle,  "  Amelie,  Amelie."  Aucun  de  mes
enfants  ne  s'  appelle  Amelie ;  mais  ma  niece,  qui  se  trouvait  alors  avec
eux,  a  la  campagne,  s'  appelle  Amelie.  II  est  vrai  qu'  Amelie  est  aussi
le  prenom  de  ma  femme,  et  que  Leonie  pouvait  savoir  ce  prenom.


158


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


I


Leonie  dit  ensuite,  "  Oh  !  oh  !  voila  la  petite  fiUe  qui  se  coupe  avec
un  couteau.  Oh!  oh!  ne  te  fais  pas  de  chagrin,  ma  petite;  ce  ne
sera  rien."

C  etait  un  samedi,  a  4  heui'es  du  soir.  Je  telegraphie  a  Paris,  non
povir  etre  rassure,  mais  pour  savoir  a  quoi  m'en  tenir  sur  le  succes  de
cette  vue  a  distance.  La  r^ponse  est  que  ma  fiUe  ne  s'  est  pas  couple ;
mais,  trois  jours  apres,  rentre  a  Paris,  j'apprends  que  ce  meme  samedi
mon  fils,  Jacques,  age  alors  de  trois  ans,  s'  est  fait  una  assez  forte
coupure  au  doigt,  le  matin  a  7  heures,  en  jouant  dans  son  lit  avec  un
morceau  de  verre  ^breche.

Experience  C  est  plutot  une  observation  qu'une  experience ;

car  je  ne  cherchais  rien  de  semblable,  et  en  general  c'  est  ainsi  que  1'  on
obtient  les  meilleurs  resultats.  Moins  on  fait  d'  experimentation
proprement  dite,  plus  on  a  de  chances  d'  avoir  quelque  succes.

Je  vais  chez  M.  Ferrari  pour  voir  Leonie,  et  j'amene  avec  moi
mon  ami  Rondeau.  Je  fais  alors  diverses  questions  a  Leonie,  qui  me
repond  par  des  paroles  insignifiantes.  Soudain  Leonie  me  dit,
"Pourquoi  avez-vous  ainsi  pass^  devant  M.  Rondeau  ?  vous  avez  au  bas
de  r  escalier  passe  devant  lui. Ce  n'  est  pas  poli."

Or  il  y  a  la  un  fait  tres  exact.  Au  bas  de  1'  escalier,  comme  le  jour
tombait,  et  que  1'  escalier  est  fort  sombre,  j 'avals  dit  a  M.  Rondeau,
qui  ne  connaissait  pas  1'  escalier,  "Attendez,  marchez  derrifere  moi.  Moi,
je  passe  devant."

Experience  III. — Je  vais  chez  Alice  avec  mon  ami  T.  J' avals  pr^-
venu  T.  que  je  ne  ferais  pas  les  experiences  amusantes  qu'  on  fait
volontiers,dans  les  salons,sur  1'  hypnotisme.  "Cela,"  lui  dis-je,"  ne  m'  inte-
resse  plus  d'  ^tudier  les  faits,  bien  connus  aujourd'  hui,  de  I'hypnotisme
ordinaire  ;  nous  ferons  des  experiences  serieuses  et  ennuyeuses."  Je  com-
mence par  donner  a  Alice  des  cartes  enfermees  dans  une  enveloppe
opaque.  A  peine  ai-je  remis  ces  cartes  a  Alice  qu'  elle  les  repousse
brusquement,  ce  qui  est  contraire  a  toutes  ses  habitudes,  et  qu'  elle  me
dit :  "  Oe  n'  est  pas  pour  les  cartes  qu'  il  est  venu.  "  (Elle  n'  avait
jamais  vu  T.,  et  ne  connaissait  rien  de  lui,  ni  son  age,  ni  sa  profession,
ni  son  etat  social.)  "II  est  venu  parce  qu'il  est  occupe  d'  autre  chose.
Ce  n'est  pas  a  Paris  ce  qui  1'  occupe."  Alors  elle  donne,avec  une  grande
precision,  des  details  sur  I'etat  d'  esprit  de  T.,  qui  etait  alors — ce  que
i'  ignorais  absolument  et  ce  que  personne  assur^ment,  meme  parmi  ses
intimes  amis,  ne  savait — tres  amoureux  d'une  jeune  personne  demeu-
rant  loin  de  Paris  et  qu'  il  desirait  epouser.

Je  n'  ai  pas  a  raconter  ici  dans  ses  details  cette  curieuse  observa-
tion, car  ce  sont  des  faits  qui  n'  ont  gu^re  de  pouvoir  de  conviction  que
sur  une  seule  personne.  T.,  qui  n' avait  jamais  cru  a  rien  d' analogue,
a  ete  tout-a-fait  persuade  de  la  realite  de  la  transmission  mentale,  ou  de
la  lucidity. Peut-etre  cette  impression  s'  efFacera-t-elle  quelque  jour  de


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  Sc.


159


son  esprit,  mais  alors  il  etait  pleinement  convaincu  ;  et  cependant  c'  est
un  homme  de  science  qui  est  tres  froid  et  reflechi.

Le  defaut  de  cette  etonnante  observation,  c'  est  que  T.  ne  savait
pas  contenir  son  enthousiasme,  et  qu'  il  poussait,  malgre  lui  et  malgre
moi,  de  petites  exclamations  qui  mettaient  Alice  sur  la  voie  des  reponses
a  faire  ;  quand  il  se  taisait,  son  silence  prouvait  a  Alice  qu'  elle  etait
sur  une  raauvaise  piste,  et  elle  1'  abandonnait  aussitot.  En  depit  de
cette  defectuosite,  la  perspicacite,  si  vive  qu'  on  la  suppose,  aurait
quelque  peine  a  expliquer  la  precision  des  reponses  d'  Alice.

Experience  IV.,  7  Aodt  1887. — J' arrive  chez  Alice  a  10  heures
du  matin.  Elle  me  dit :  "  Je  suis  tres  triste  ;  il  va  se  passer  quelque
chose  de  grave.  II  y  aura  beaucoup  de  chagrin  chez  vous.  Je  vols
qu'  on  pleure."

Or  pr^cisement,  dans  la  nuit  du  6  au  7,  une  personne  de  ma  famille
a  ete  prise  subitement  d'  une  attaque  tres  douloureuse  de  colique
nephretique.  Tout  le  monde  a  ete  fort  inquiet.  J'  ai  du  passer  la
nuit  a  cote  de  lui,  et  cette  maladie,  a  partir  de  ce  jour,  n'  a  fait
qu'  empirer.

Je  suis  absolument  sur  que  rien  dans  mes  gestes  ou  mes  paroles  n'a
pu  amener  Alice  a  parler  ainsi ;  d'  autant  plus  qu'  en  1'  interrogeant  je
ne  pensais  pas,  consciemment  au  moins,  a  la  maladie  de  M.  A.

Observation  V. — Ni  Eugenie,  ni  Alice  ne  se  connaissent — j'  en  suis
absolument  certain — et  pourtant  il  y  a  eu  parfois  de  curieuses  coinci-
dences dans  leurs  paroles.

Le  17  Novembre  1887,  Alice  me  dit:  "Un de  vos  enfants sera  malade;
ce  n'  est  ni  demain  ni  apres  demain,  mais  d'  ici  a  liuit  jours  a  peu  pres,
en  tous  cas  avant  15  jours.  Ce  sera  le  plus  petit  de  vos  enfants.  Je
vols  une  douleur  a  1'  epaule  droite  et  au  cou."

Le  20  Novembre,  je  vais  voir  a  5  heures  du  soir  Eugenie,  qui  est
bien  portante;  mais  Madame  G.,  la  mere  d'  Eugenie,  est  au  lit.  Elle
a  un  torticolis,  et  une  douleur  rhumatismale  tres  vive  a  /'  epaule  droite
et  au  cou,  qui  la  force  a  garder  le  lit  et  qui  lui  a  fait  mettre  un
vesicatoire.  <

A  peine  alors  ai-je  endormi  Eugenie  qu'  elle  me  dit,  "  Vous  aurez
un  de  vos  enfants  malade  d'  ici  a  huit  jours  a  peu  pres.  Ce  sera  le  plus
petit.  II  aura  comme  le  croup  ;  mais  pas  le  croup  ;  une  bronchite  et
de  la  diarrhee."

J e  dois  dire  que  les  previsions  d'  Alice  et  d'  Eugenie  ne  se  sont  pas
verifi^es,  et  que,  pendant  les  trois  mois  qui  ont  suivi,  aucun  de  mes
enfants  n'  a  6te  malade.  Mais  ce  qu'  il  y  a  d'  interessant,  c'est  moins
ce  pressentiment  errone  que  la  coincidence  de  ces  deux  pressentiments
semblables.

Ce  meme  jour  Eugenie,  pendant  que  je  1'  endors,  tate  mon  pouce
gauche  ou  il  y  a  une  toute  petite  cicatrice ;  puis,  des  qu'  elle  est  endormie,


160


Belation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


elle  me  dit:  "  Vous  avez  mal  au  pouce.  V'ous  vous  etes  fait  cela  avec
une  aiguille,  ou  plutot  un  couteau,  en  voulant  couper  quelque  chose."

Or  cette  cicatrice  minime  date  de  sept  aiis,  et,  depuis  trois  ans  que
je  connais  Eugenie,  elle  ne  m'  en  avait  jamais  parle.  Je  me  suis  en  effet
coupe  maladroitement  avec  un  couteau,  durant  un  voyage  que  j'  avals
fait  dans  le  Sahara  Algerien,  en  coupant  une  tablette  de  chocolat.  II  s'  est
trouve  que  le  matin  merae  j'  en  avals  parle,  et  que  j'  avals  raconte  cette
histoire  insignifiante,  dont  je  ne  me  soucie  pas  une  fois  par  an,  a  un  de
mes  amis  qui  revenait  de  Syrie,  et  qui  avait  ete  fortement  mordu  au
pouce  par  un  cheval.  II  est  evident  qu'  en  endormant  Eugenie  je  ne
pensais  a  rien  moins  qu'a  cette  conversation  insignihante.  Pourquoi
m'a-t-elle  dit  que  j' avals  mal  au  pouce?  Est-ce  parce  que  j' en  avals
parl^  quelque  heures  auparavant  1

Bien  souvent  Eugenie  m'  a  indique  ainsi  des  faits  curieux  se
rapportant  a  ce  que  j'  avais  dit  ou  entendu  ;  mais  je  n'  en  ai  pas  tenu
compte,  et  je  ne  les  rapporte  pas  ici ;  car  elle  a  pu  connaitre  tel  ou  tel
de  ces  faits  par  des  personnes  qui  les  savaient.  La  preuve  formelle
qu'  elle  les  a  devines  par  lucidite  et  non  appris  de  telle  ou  telle  personne,
ne  pent  pas  etre  donnee  ;  par  consequent  je  n'  en  parle  pas.  Mais,
dans  r  espece,  11  lui  etait  impossible  de  savoir  que  j'  avais  le  matin
parle  des  blessures  au  pouce  faites  en  Syrie  ou  dans  le  Sahara.

Une  autre  fois  11  y  a  eu  encore  entre  Alice  et  Eugenie  une  assez
notable  coincidence  de  sentiments.  Par  suite  d'  une  sorte  de  suscepti-
bilite,  Eugenie,  froissee  d'  une  parole  que  je  lui  avais  dite,  ne  veut
plus  faire  avec  moi  d'  experiences  portant  sur  le  diagnostic  des
maladies.  Elle  consent  a  faire  des  expt^riences  sur  les  cartes,  sur  les
dessins,  et  sur  toute  autre  chose,  mais  sur  les  maladies,  jamais.  De
fait,  elle  est  assez  persev^rante  dans  son  opinion,  et  elle  m'  a  tenu
parole.  Quelques  jours  apres  je  vols  Alice,  et,  apres  1'  avoir  endormie,
je  lui  exprime  1'  espoir  qu'  elle  verra  mieux  que  les  autres  sujets.  A
ce  propos  je  lui  parle  d'  Eugenie.  Alors  Alice  me  dit :  "  Elle  ne  vous
dira  plus  rien  sur  les  maladies."  Je  lui  demande  pourquoi.  Elle  dit
alors,  "  C  est  qu'  elle  ne  veut  plus.  C  est  une  resolution  qu'  elle
a  prise."

Je  dels  ajouter— car  je  ne  veux  pas  dissimuler  un  seul  de  mes
doutes — que  je  ne  suis  pas  absolument  sur  que  dans  une  seance
prec^dente  je  ne  lui  avais  pas  raconte  cette  resolution  d'  Eugenie.  Je
ne  le  crois  pas  ;  mais  je  n'  en  ai  pas  la  certitude  absolue.

Observations  VI  et  VII. — Helena  m'  a  donn^  a  deux  reprises  quel-
ques  faits  de  transmission  mentale  ou  de  luciditt^.  On  a  vu  plus  haut
que  je  n'  ai  presque  rien  obtenu  avec  elle  pour  les  cartes,  les  dessins,  et
le  sommeil  a  distance,  tandis  que,  pour  les  maladies,  deux  ou  trois  fois
elle  a  ete  vraiment  tres  remarquable.

Un  soir  je  lui  demande  ce  que  j'  ai  fait  dans  la  journ^e. Elle  me


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


161


dit  :  "  Vous  avez  magnetise  une  vieille  dame,"  ce  qui  etait  vrai,  et  ce
qu'  elle  ne  pouvait  pas  savoir.

L' observation  suivante  est  plus  curieuse.  Dans  la  journee  j' avals
fait  une  experience  qui  n'  est  assurement  pas  habituelle.  J e  faisais  des
experiences  de  physiologie  sur  un  individu  dont  j'etudiais  la  respira-
tion au  point  de  vue  de  la  composition  chimique  des  gaz  expires,  et  ce
jour  la  je  1'  avals  mis  dans  un  bain  tres  chaud,  pour  voir  1'  influence  des
bains  chauds  sur  les  echanges  respiratoires.  Alors,  sans  que  rien  dans
mes  paroles  puisse  faire  soupconner  ce  que  j'  avals  fait,  Helena  me  dit  :
"Vous  avez  ete  dans  votre  laboratoire,  et  vous  avez  echaude  un
membre  !  "  Elle  ne  peut  en  dire  plus,  et  je  ne  veux  pas  1'  interroger
davantage,  de  peur  de  lui  faire  dire  ce  que  je  sals,  par  la  forme  de  mes
demandes.  II  y  a  la  assurement  plus  qu'  une  coincidence  :  car  9'  a  ete
la  seule  fois  que  j'  ale  fait  prendre  un  bain  chaud  a  mon  patient.  Et
c'  est  la  seule  fois,  comme  bien  on  peut  croire,  qu'  Helena  m'  ait  parl*^  de
membres  echaudes.

Observation  F///.— Faite  par  Alice  le  lundi  3  Octobre  1886.  Un
de  mes  amis,  M.P.,  demande  a  Alice  qui  est  chez  lui  dans  sa  maison  de
campagne.  Elle  pretend  voir  une  jeune  fille  de  14  ans,  qui  n'  est  pas
dans  la  maison,  mais  dans  le  jardin,  aupres  d'  une  table :  a  cote  d'  elle
une  autre  personne  un  peu  plus  agee,  qui  est  en  visite.  M.P.  me  dit
qu'  Alice  se  trompe  evidemment :  car  sa  fille,  agee  en  efiet  de  15  ans,
setient  a  cette  heure  toujours  dans  la  maison,  non  au  jardin,  et  qu'elle
ne  recoit  jamais  de  visite  en  1'  absence  de  ses  parents.  Cependant,  en
rentrant  chez  lui,  il  apprend,  non  sans  etonnement,  qu'  en  efiet,  a
r  heure  ou  nous  interrogions  Alice,  sa  fille  avait  re9U  une  visite,  et
qu'elle  avait  ete  dans  le  jardin  pour  recevoir  cette  personne.

Observation  IX.,  18  Decembre  1887.— Faite  par  Eugenie.  Je  lui
demande  ce  que  j'  ai  dans  ma  poche.  Elle  me  dit  alors— et  je  cite  ses
paroles  textuellement— "  C  est  un  objet  rond,  plutot  ovale,  metallique,
brillant,  comme  du  metal  argente.  II  y  a  quelque  chose  de  pointu,  un
petit  bee  comme  une  petite  pince.  Ce  n'  est  cependant  pas  une  pince,
avec  deux  cornes  qui  out  1'  air  de  serrer."  Cette  description  est  tres
exacte.  J'  avals  dans  ma  poche,  pour  la  premiere  fois  de  ma  vie,  un
podometre,  c'  est-a-dire,  un  objet  rond,  metallique,  nickele,  qui  porte  en
haut  une  petite  agrafe  recourbee  en  forme  de  pince,  de  maniere  a
pouvoir  par  ce  bee  etre  accrochee  a  la  ceinture.

Observation  X.,  10  Decembre.— Fa,ite  par  Alice.  Elle  me  parle  de
quelqu'  un  qui  sera  malade  avant  peu  et  gravement  malade  (et  elle
ajoute  que  cela  me  donnera  beaucoup  d'  ennuis).  "  Ce  n'  est  ni  un  de
mes  enfants,  ni  un  de  mes  proches  ou  de  mes  parents,  ni  un  de  mes
amis  intimes.  C'est  un  homme,  c'  est-a-dire,  une  grande  personne,  ni
une  femme,  ni  un  enfant." — Elle  ne  peut  pas  preciser  davantage.—"  II
aura  des  frissons,  une  fievre  assez  forte  avec  des  tremblements,  des

M


162


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


etoufFements,  des  fr^missements  de  flevre,  comme  des  coliques  dans  le
ventre.  La  fievre  se  d^clarera  sans  grandes  souffrances.  II  y  aura  un
abattement,  une  lassitude  extremes ;  la  tete  sera  prise."

Telles  sont  les  paroles  quem'  a  dites  Alice  le  10  Decembre.  Le  soir,
en  rentrant  chez  moi,  j'  inscris  cela  sur  raon  cahier  d'  experiences,  et  je
n'  en  prends  pas  souci ;  car,  outre  que  je  ne  crois  gueres  a  ces  pres-
sentiments,  s'  il  n'  y  a,  me  dis-je,  ni  dans  ma  famille,  ni  parmi  mes
amis,  quelqu'  un  de  malade,  cela  m'  inquiete  moins.  Cependant
j'  inscris  les  paroles  d'  Alice  dans  mes  notes,  fidele  a  mon  habitude  de
tout  uoter,  merae  ce  qui  ne  parait  pas  d'  abord  avoir  quelque  interet,  et
ce  que  je  viens  de  rappoi'ter  est  la  copie  textuelle — textuelle
(sauf  le  mot  "  beaucoup  d'  ennuis  "  qu'  elle  a  dit,  et  que  je  n'  avals  pas
ecrit  dans  mes  notes,  mais  que  je  me  rappelle  parfaitement).

Huit  jours  apres,  vers  le  18  Decembre,  mon  collegue,  M.  Y.,
qu'  Alice  ne  connait  absolument  pas,  est  pris  de  fievre  assez  forte,  de
frissons,  et  de  coliques  nephretiques,  dues  a  un  abces  des  reins.  La
maladie  fait  de  rapides  progres.  Les  douleurs  sont  nulles ;  car  ti'es
rapidement  1'  infection  urineuse  survient,  et  le  coma,  si  bien  que
le  26  Decembre  M.  Y.  meurt.

Je  n'  ai  pas  a  entrer  ici  dans  le  detail  des  evenements  qui  ont  suivi
la  mort  de  M.  Y.,  mort  tout-a-fait  impossible  a  pr^voir  pour  n'  importe
qui.  II  me  sufSra  de  dire  que,  pendant  un  mois,  j'  aieu  de  tres  graves
soucis,  dus  a  la  mort  prematuree  de  mon  regrette  collegue.  Ma
position  comme  directeur  de  la  Revue  Scientijique  a  ete  sur  le  point
d'  etre  compromise.

J'  avals,  je  dois  le  dire,  totalement  oublie  le  pressentiment  d'  Alice,
quand  celle-ci,  apprenant  par  les  journaux  la  mort  de  M.  Y.,  et  sachant
meme  par  les  journaux  les  difficultes  qui  suivaient  sa  mort,  me  I'appela
qu'  elle  avait  pr^vu  quelque  chose  d'  analogue.

Assur^ment  je  ne  pretends  rien  en  conclure.  Ce  n'  est  pas  sur  un
fait,  si  bien  observe  qu'  il  soit — et  celui  la  me  parait  irreprochable  au
point  de  vue  de  1'  exactitude  de  1'  observation — qu'  on  peut  edifier  quoi
que  ce  soit ;  car  le  hasard  est  fecond,  lui  aussi,  en  surprises  :  mais  enfin
il  est  bon  de  le  rapporter  et  de  le  constater.

Observations  XII.  et  XIII. — Relativement  aux  reves  et  aux  pressen-
timents,  je  raconterai  les  deux  faits  suivants.

Au  commencement  du  mois  d' Aout  1878,  mon  grand-pere,  M.
Charles  Renouard,  ag^  de  84  ans,  est  legerement  souifrant ;  mais,  comme
sa  sante  ^tait  excellente,  cette  petite  indisposition  ne  1'  empeche  pas
de  rester  leve,  d'  aller,  et  de  marcher  comme  d'  habitude.  II
demeurait  alors  a  la  campagne,  au  chateau  de  S.  Le  dimanche,  1 1
Aout,  desireux  de  le  voir,  je  vais  au  chateau  de  S.,  et  je  trouve  mon
grand-pere  fort  bien  portant.  II  est  convenu  que  ma  femme  et  moi,
nous  irons  la  semaine  suivante,  le  samedi  17  Aout,  a  S.,  pour  passer


Relation  cle  Diver ses  Experiences,  i:c.  163


quelques  jours  avec  lui.  Nous  etions  alors  a  la  campagne  aux  environs
cle  Paris.

Le  samedi  matin,  17  Aout,  a  7  heures  du  matin,  commej'etais  deja
leve,  et  que  j'  achevaisde  m'  habiller,  ma  femme  se  reveille  en  pleurant,
et  me  dit :  "  C  est  affreux,  je  viens  de  voir  ton  grand-pere  tres,  tr^s
malade. II  etait  dans  son  lit,  et  ta  m^re  etaitdebout  a  cote  de  lui."

Je  ne  tiens  pas  compte  de  ce  reve  ;  jerassure  ma  femme  tres  facile-
ment,  et  nous  partons  pour  Paris  en  voiture.  Je  me  rappelle  tres  bien
que  nous  avons  ete  extremement  gais  pendant  le  voyage.  En  arrivant  a
Paris,  nous  trouvons  un  telegramme  nous  annon^ant  que,  dans  cette
nuit  du  1 6  au  1 7  Aout,  mon  grand-pere  etait  mort  subitement,  en
quelques  minutes,  d'  une  lesion  du  coeur,  vers  3  heures  du  matin.

Je  dois  ajouter  que  nous  ne  savions  pas  que  ma  mere  etait  alors  au
chateau  de  S.  ;  c'  est  presque  par  hasard  qu'  elle  y  avait  ete  ce  jour  la.

II  ne  me  parait  pas  que  la  valeur  de  ce  reve,  si  analogue  a  ceux  qui
sont  I'apportes  par  MM.  Podmore,  Gurney  et  Myers,  soit  diminuee  par
le  faitde  la  maladie  legere  de  mon  grand-pere  aux  premiers  jours  d'Aout.
II  est  certain  que  je  le  considerais  comme  tout-a-fait  bien  portant,  et
que  ni  nioi  ni  ma  femme  nous  n'  etions  tant  soit  peu  inquiets.

Enfin,  je  dois  dire  que,  malgr^  bien  des  nialheurs,  prevus  ou  imprevus,
qui  nous  ont  frappe,  jamais  je  n'  ai  eu  de  pressentiment  analogue,  et
jamais  ma  femme  n'  a  eu  quoi  que  ce  soit  qui  ressemblat,  meme  de  loin,  a
ce  pressentiment  si  form  el  du  17  Aout  1878.

Pour  le  second  fait,  il  s'  agit  d'  un  de  ces  reves  que  les  auteurs  des
Phantasms  pourraient  ranger  dans  leurs  Collective  Cases.  Ce  serait
un  exemple  excellent,  si  la  telepathie  eut  ete  plus  nettement
formulee.

Parmi  mes  amis,  je  n'  en  ai  pas  qui  soient  plus  etroitement  lies  avec
moi  que  Henri  Ferrari  et  Jules  Hericourt.  lis  sont  a  peu  pres  dans
toutes  mes  joies  et  toutes  mes  peines.  Or,  dans  la  nuit  du  14  au  15
Novembre,  1887,  a  3  heures  du  matin,  mon  laboratoire  de  physiologie,
situe  rue  Vauquelin,  est  detruit  par  un  incendie,  qui,  partant  d'  une
etuve,  consume  deux  salles  avant  que  les  secours  aient  eu  le  temps
d'  arriver.

Dans  cette  meme  nuit  M.  Hericourt,  qui  ne  reve  jamais  d'  habitude,
voit  de  grandes  flammes.  II  ne  sait  pas  s'  il  4tait  a  demi  eveille  ou
tout-a-fait  endormi.  Malgr^  la  nettete  de  son  reve,  il  n'  en  parle
cependant  a  personne.

De  son  cote,  dans  la  meme  nuit,  et  vers  la  meme  heure,  M.  Ferrari,
qui  ne  reve  presque  jamais,  reve  qu'  on  1'  appelle  dans  la  chambre  voisine,,
qu'  il  se  leve,  qu'  il  va  voir,  et  qu'  il  aper9oit  dans  sa  cheminee  un  grand
feu  eclatant  qui  j  etait  une  vive  lueur  dans  toute  la  piece.  L'  impression
a  ete  assez  nette  pour  qu'  il  1'  ait  attribuee  au  souvenir  d'  un  feu  de  gaz  ;
car  il  avait,  la  veille,  cause  assez  longuement  avec  moi.  devant  une,

M  2


164


Relation  cle  Diverses  Exi')eTiences,  &c.


cheminee  a  gaz.  Quoique  1'  impression  de  ce  reve  ait  ete  assez  forte,  il
n'  en  a  pai'le  a  personne  avant  de  savoir  1'  incendie.

Ce  n'  est  d'  ailleurs  pas  a  mes  deux  amis  que  se  borne  cette  telepathie.
L'  incendie  a  eu  lieu  dans  la  nuit  qui  precedait  un  banquet  que  mes
amis  devaient  m'ofFrir  le  15  Novembre.  Mon  ami  et  confrere
M.  Gibert,  du  Havre,  devai^^.  y  assister.  A  ce  moment,  Ldonie
etait  au  Havre.  D'  habitude  elle  etait  endormie,  tantot  par  M.  Janet,
tantot,  mais  plus  rarement,  par  M.  Gibert.  Le  15  Novembre,  k
5  heures  du  soir,  elle  est  endormie  par  M.  Janet.  Elle  fait  alors  ce
qu'  elle  appelle  un  voyage,  c'  e  st-a-dire  qu'  elle  va  a  Paris,  en  imagina-
tion, pour  me  voir  et  voir  M.  Gibert.  Puis  elle  tombe  dans  un  de  ces
^tats  de  letliargie  incomplete  qui  lui  surviennent  si  frequemment.  Tout
d'  un  coup  elle  se  reveille,  presque  en  criant,  et  dit  tres  emue  :  "  Ca
brule  ;  9a  brule  !  "  M.  Janet  essaye  de  la  rassurer  en  lui  disant  :  "  Ce
n'  est  rien."  Alors  elle  se  rendort  de  nouveau  ;  mais  de  nouveau  elle  se
reveille,  en  disant,  "  Mais,  M.  Janet,  je  vous  assure  que  (^a  brule."
M.  Janet,  mallieureusement,  croyant  a  une  illusion,  dissipe  ses  craintes,
et  la  calme.

Elle  n'  a  pas  alors  precis^  autrement.  Ce  n'  est  que  le  lendemain,
quand  elle  a  su  par  M.  Janet  que  mon  laboratoire  avait  brule,  qu'  elle
lui  a  dit,  "  Mais  pourquoi  m' avez-vous  arretee  1  J' avals  bien  vu  que
c'  4tait  le  laboratoire  de  M.  Richet  qui  brulait."  ^

Or  il  est  certain  que,  le  15  Novembre,  a  5  heures  du  soir,  au  Havre,
personne  ne  pouvait  savoir  que  mon  laboratoire  avait  brule.  II  n'  y  a
que  les  journaux  du  soir  de  Paris  qui  en  aient  parl^  a  5  heures.

Je  rapporte  ces  trois  hallucinations  collectives,  malheureusement
trfes  vagues,  sans  conclure.  II  me  parait  pourtant  que  ni  le  hasard  ni
d'  autres  causes  qu'  une  singuliere  lucidite,  commune  a  trois  personnes,
ne  peuvent  les  avoir  amenees.

Quant  a  moi,  qui  etais  le  plus  directement  int^ress^  dans  cet  incendie,
je  dois  dire  que  je  n'  ai  eu  absolument  aucun  avertissement,  et  que  je
dormais  d'  un  profond  et  paisible  sommeil  quand  on  est  venu,  le
matin  a  7  lieures  et  demie,  m'  annoncer  cette  terrible  nouvelle.

Observation  XIV. — Le  28  Fevrier,  ayant  endormi  Alice  vers  midi,  je
la  laisse  endormie  tout  la  journ^e  ^  et  je  retourne  chez  elle  vers  6
heures  du  soir  avec  mon  ami,  M.  Hericourt.  A  peine  sommes-nous
arrives  qu'  elle  se  met  a  mes  genoux,  pleurant,  se  d^battant,  me
suppliant  de  veiller  sur  moi-meme,  et  m'assurant  que  Ton  voulait  se
venger  de  moi,  que  chez  moi  il  y  avait  des  personnes  int^ressees
a  me  faire  du  mal  et  resolues  a  ma  perte.  Son  agitation  etait
vraiment  effrayante,  et  jamais  je  ne  I'avais  vu  dans  un  pareil  ^tat.

1  Noter  que  presque  jamais  L(^onie  n'  a  en  de  semblables  liallucinations.

2  II  m' est  arrive  souvent  de  la  laisser  ainsi  endormie  pendant  plusieurs  heures  de
suite.  Elle  reste  alors  ^tendue  sur  son  lit,  ct  tellement  immobile  que,  pendant  ces  cinq


Relation  cle  Liverses  Experiences,  &c.


165


Elle  me  prie  de  la  reveiller  pour  faire  cesser  son  inquietude  et  ses
souffrances.  De  fait,  eveillee,  elle  ne  se  doute  de  rien  et  elle  est  gaie
et  caloie  comme  d'  habitude.  Quoique  n'  attachant  pas  graiade  valeur
a  ses  pressentimentsje  ne  laissais  pas,  en  rentrant  chez  moi,  que  d'etre  un
peu  inquiet  a  mon  tour,  ne  devinant  pas  ce  qui  signitiait  cette  hostilite
dont  elle  me  mena^-ait.  D'abord  je  ne  trouvai  rien  d'anormal,  mais  le  soir,
travaillant  tout  seul  dans  ma  bibliotheque,  j'  avisai  tout-a-coup  un
papier  que  je  n'  avals  pas  vu  d'  abord,  et  qui  etait  en  vedette  sur  ma
table,  place  sous  mon  encrier,  de  maniere  a  ce  qu'  il  ne  put
pas  echapper  a  mes  regards.  C  etait  un  papier  tres  im-
portant, et  qui  ne  devait  etre  absolument  connu  de
personne.  Je  ne  sais  comment  il  se  trouvait  la.  C  'etait  assure-
ment  un  de  mes  gens  qui  1  'avait  derobe  ou  trouve,  et  place  la
pour  me  montrer  qu  'il  1  'avait  lu.  Je  me  suis  hate  de  le  faire
disparaitre,  etant,  d  'un  cote  fort  ennuye  de  cette  indiscretion  assez
grave  ;  d  'un  autre  cote,  au  point  de  vue  de  1  'observation,  satisfait
d  'avoir  constate  une  fois  de  plus  la  lucidite  d  'Alice.

Ces  diverges  observations,  dont  quelques  unes  sont  peu  importantes,
quelques  autres,au  contraire,  assez  remarquables,  je  crois,  auraient  pu  etre
quatre  a  cinq  fois  plus  nombreuses,  si  j'  avals  mentionne  les  observa-
tions incompletes,  inexactes,  me  laissa,nt  un  doute  dans  1'  esprit  par
suite  d'  un  defaut  experimental.  On  trouvera  sans  doute  celles-ci  bien
insignihantes,  et  je  reconnais  que  c'  est  en  efiet  peu  de  chose  pour  un
aussi  long  effort.  Mais,  si  d'  autres  observateurs  faisaient  comme  moi,
c'  est-a-dire,  s'  attachaient  specialement  a  1'  exactitude  experimentale,
et  a  un  deierminisme  rigoureux,  dans  le  sens  que  Claude  Bernard
attachait  a  ce  mot;  je  suis  sur  qu' ils  tiniraient  par  reunir  des  faits  bien
curieux.  Je  ne  tiens  pas  a  ce  qu'  on  trouve  toutes  mes  observations
concluantes.  Je  reconnais  que,  pour  nombre  d'  entre  elles,  le  hasard
peut  donner  de  pareils  assemblages.  Je  tiens  seulement  a  ce  qu'  on
reflechisse  a  ces  questions  et  a  ce  qu'  on  s'  attache,  non  pas  au
merveilleux,  mais  a  la  precision  des  experiences.

Chapitre  XIV.

CONCLUSION.

Les  problenies  que  j'ai  abordes  dans  le  cours  de  ce  long
rnemoire  ont  ete  agites  depuis  longtemps. Je  n'  ai  done  pas  la  preten-

ou  six  ou  huit  heures  de  sommeil,  elle  ne  displace  pas  d'  un  millimetre  sa  figure  de
V  oreiller  oti  elle  repose,  si  bien  que  le  tissu  en  pique  de  drap  laisse  des  traces  sur  la  peau,
et  ces  traces  ne  disparaissent  qu' au  bout  de  plusieurs  jours.  Un  jour  j' avals  oublie
la  clef  de  son  appartement,  si  bien  qu'  aprfes  avoir  referm^  la  porte,  il  me  fut  impossible
de  me  faire  ouvrir.  La  sonnette  ne  la  r^veillait  pas,  II  fallut  faire  forcer  la  serrure  par
un  serrurier  specialement  mande  a  cet  effet.  Ce  sont  Ik  des  preuves  que,  s'  il  en  ^tait
besoin,  on  pourrait  invoquer  contre  la  simulation.


166


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


tion  d'innover.  II  y  a  un  point  cepeiidant  sur  lequel  iiies  experiences
sont,  je  crois,  nouvelles ;  c'  est  sur  le  fait  de  la  lucidite  pour  les  dessins,
fait  qui  n'  avait  pas  encore  ete  observe,  aussi  souvent,  et  avec  autant
de  rigueur.

M.  Guthrie,  dans  ses  belles  experiences,  semble  bien  avoir  prouve  la
transmission  mentale.  Mais  iiies  experiences  prouvent  quelque
chose  de  plus.  Outre  la  transmission  mentale  il  semble  y  avoir  une
sorte  de  connaissance  des  choses.  Ainsi,  il  y  a  une  vague  notion  d'un
dessin  enferme  dans  une  enveloppe  opaque,  meme  quand  ce  dessin  est
totalement  ignore  des  personnes  pr^sentes.  Est-ce  la  tine  vision  a
travers  les  corps  opaques  1  Je  ne  le  pense  pas.  J e  crois  que  cette
vision  a  travers  les  corps  ne  ressemble  en  rien  a  la  vision  retinienne.
Ni  la  retine,  ni  le  nerf  optique,  n'  y  sont  pour  quoi  que  ce  soit.  C  est
une  A'ision  interieure,  comme  dans  le  cas  de  suggestion  mentale.

Comment  done  expliquer  cette  vision  interieure?  Comment
expliquer  1'  action  du  sommeil  a  distance  1  Comment  comprendre  cette
connaissance  des  maladies  ?  Comment  se  rendre  compte  de  cette  per-
spicacite  extraordinaire  qui  porte  sur  des  faits  loin  tains  et  inconnus  ?  Si
j' en  donnais  1' explication,  il  faudrait  me  dresser  des  autels.  Mais
cette  explication,  je  ne  V  ai  pas,  helas  !  et  je  ne  puis  donner  qu'  un  mot,
qui  revelera  la  profondeur  de  mon  ignorance.

Je  dirai  que  dans  certains  etats  psychiques,  chez  un  petit  nombre  de
sujets,  il  existe  une  faculte  de  connaisscmce  qui  difFere  absolument  de
nos  facultes  de  connaissance  ordinaires.  Alors  il  n'  y  a  pas  d'espace,  ni
de  temps,  ni  d'  objet  materiel  interpose.  L'  aimant  attire  le  fer  a
travers  une  cloison  opaque.  De  meme  le  sujet  lucide  discerns  le
grossier  contour  d'  un  dessin  a  travers  une  enveloppe  opaque.

Cette  faculte  de  connaissance  suppose  deux  hypotheses  qui  ne  sont
absurdes  ni  1'  une  ni  1'  autre.

La  premiere,  c'  est  qu'  il  y  a  dans  la  matiere  des  forces  que  nos  sens,
et  par  consequent  notre  intelligence,  ne  connaissent  pas.  Nous  con-
naissons  1'  attraction,  la  chaleur,  1'  electricitt^,  mais  il  y  a  sans  doute
d'  autres  forces,  qui  nous  echappent,  parce  que  nous  n'  avons  pas  de  sens
pour  les  percevoir.

Non  seulement  cette  liypothese  n  est  pas  absurde ;  mais  c'  est
r  liypothese  inverse  qui  serait  absurde.  Pretendre  que  nous,  hommes,
avec  quelques  sens  grossiers,  imparfaits,  errones,  et  bornes  de  toutes
parts,  nous  connaissons  tout  ce  qui  existe  dans  la  matiere,  ce  serait,
a  raon  gre,  aljsolument  absurde.

C  est  done  la  une  liypothese  necessaire.  Car  il  me  parait  necessaire
d'  admettre  que  la  matiere  a  d'  autres  propri^t^s  que  celles  que  nous
connaissons  a  1'  aide  de  nos  sens  rudimentaires.

La  seconde  hypotliese,  au  coiitraire,  n'  est  pas  necessaire.  Elle  ne
s'  impose  pas. II  faut  la  demontrer,  et  c'  est  a  cette  demonstration  que


Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences,  &c.


167


je  me  suis  applique  depuis  le  commencement  jusqu'  a  la  fin  de  ce
memoire.  C  est  que  certaines  proprietes  de  la  matiere,  vivante  ou
inerte,  pensante  ou  non  pensante,  inaccessibles  a  nos  sens  normaux,
deviennent  accessibles  a  certains  moments,  pour  certaines  personnes.
Cela  revient  en  somme  a  dire  que  les  sujets  lucides  ont  un  sens  qui  nous
echappe,  dont  nous  ne  connaissons  rien,  et  que  nous  devons  nous
borner  a  constater.  J'  estime  quant  a  present  que  toute  discussion  sur
ce  sens,  sur  cette  faculte  de  connaissance,  est  oiseuse,  ridicule  et  sterile.
Les  faits  qui  prouvent  sa  reality  ne  sont  pas  encoi'e  assez  bien  etablis
pour  que  j'  aie  le  courage  de  discuter  sur  la  nature  de  ce  qui  est  encore
sujet  a  contestation.

Je  crois  que  nous  devons  d'  abord  ^tablir  le  fait,  puis  1'  interpreter.
Or  nous  sommes  encore  a  la  periode  empirique,  qui  consiste  a  etablir  le
fait  lui-meme  sur  des  bases  solides,  inattaquables.  Un  moment  viendra
sans  doute  qu'  on  clierchera  a  le  determiner  avec  precision.  On  saura
quand  un  sujet  devient  lucide,  pourquoi  et  comment  il  cesse  de  1'  etre.  On
saura  la  cause  de  ses  innombrables  et  fatigantes  erreurs.  On  donnera  la
limite  de  sa  lucidite.  On  fera  d'  autres  determinations  exactes.  Mais
aujourd'  hui  notre  tache  doit  etre  plus  modeste.  Nous  devons,  je  crois,
nous  contenter  de  la  demonstration  suivante  : —

//  existe  chez  certaines  personnes,  a  certains  moments,  une  faculte  de
connaissance  qui  n'  a  jyas  de  rapport  avec  nos  facultes  de  connaissance
normales.

A  poser  le  probleme  sous  cette  forme,  on  a  le  grand  avantage  de  ne
rien  prejuger,  et  de  faire  rentrer  dans  cette  definition  les  belles
observations  recueillies  dans  les  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  Ainsi,
pour  moi,  les  hallucinations  veridiques  et  les  phenomenes  de  thought-
transference  ne  sont-ils  qu'  un  cas  special  d'  un  phenomene  plus  general,
que  j'  appellerai  du  vieux  mot  de  lucidite.

Je  reconnais  que  mes  demonstrations  sont  insuffisantes.  O'est  un
recueil  de  documents,  de  notes,  plutot  qu'une  oeuvre  d 'ensemble  ;  c'est
une  simple  ebauche  qui  me  parait,  a  moi  peut-etre  plus  qu'  a  tout  autre,
informe  et  incomplete.  Mais  mon  travail  n'  aura  pas  ete  inutile  si  j'  ai
eveille  la  curiosite  de  quelques  investigateurs,  et  persuade  les  savants
qu'  ils  ne  doivent  pas  s'  endormir  sur  les  resultats  acquis  par  la  science
positive.  Certes  la  physique,  la  chimie,  la  biologie  ont  fait  de  grandes
decouvertes  ;  mais  c'  est  bien  peu  de  chose,  a  cote  de  tout  ce  que  nous
ignorons  encore.

II  y  a,  sans  doute,  autour  de  nous,  cachees  par  notre  profonde  igno-
rance, des  sciences  nouvelles  qui  sont  a  creer.  Pour  ma  part,  je  suis  con-
vaincu  que  dans  trois  siecles  on  se  moquera  de  notre  science
d'  aujourd'  hui.  Nous  trouvons  grotesques  les  aflirmations  naives  des
savants  d'  il  y  a  trois  siecles.  Pense-t-on  que  nous  serons  a  1'  abri  des
memes  jugements  de  la  part  de nos  arriere-petits-neveux  ? II  faut


168


Relation  de  Biverses  Experiences,  &c.


nous  degager  de  1'  illusion  que  la  science  s'  arrete  la  ou  nous  1'  arretons,
et  que  les  bornes  du  savoir  humain  sont  les  bornes  qu'  ont  placees  les
savants  de  1888.

II  faut  done  chercher  dans  le  domaine  de  ces  facultes  mysterieuses,
obscures,  mais  possibles,  et  meme,  dans  une  certaine  mesure,  probables.
Malheureusement  je  n'  ai  pas  pu  demontrer  avec  certitude  cette  faculte
de  lucidite  :  je  n'ai  meme  pas  pu  m'en  convaincre  moi-meme  de  maniere
a  me  donner  une  de  ces  croyances  d'apotres,  qui  soulevent  des
montagnes.  Mais  il  viendra  des  observateurs  plus  sagaces,  plus  heureux,
qui  feront  ce  que  je  n'  ai  pas  pu  faire.

Qu'  ils  sachent  seulement  que  la  premiere  I'egle,  ce  n'est  pas
r  accumulation  d'  experiences  etourdissantes,  mais  la  precision  dans
les  details.  C  est  ainsi  que  la  chimie  s'  est  degagee  de  1'  alchimie  ;  la
physique  de  1'  astrologie.  C'est  seulement  par  une  rigueur  experi-
mentale  irreprochable  que  les  sciences  dites  occultes  se  degageront
enfin  de  cette  douloureuse  p^riode  d'  obscurite  et  d'  incertitude  ou
elles  sont  plong^es  aujourd'  hui.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  169


III.

EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
By  a.  Schmoll  and  J.  E.  Mabiee.

(Translated  from  the Original  French.)

In  publishing  our  first  experiments  in  the  transference  of  thoughts
or  pictures,  without  the  intervention  of  the  recognised  organs  of
sensation  and  without  physical  contact  {Proceedings,  XI.,  May,  1887),
we  remarked  how  desirable  it  was  that  other  amateurs  of  psychological
science  should  devote  themselves  to  trials  of  the  same  sort.  For,  if
amongst  these  experiments  there  are  some  which  are  not  absolutely
satisfactory,  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that  the  bulk  of  the  results
attained  tend  to  demonstrate  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon, — which
was  the  aim  in  view.  That  this  phenomenon  should  usually  be  denied
or  declared  illusory  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  In  all  times  new  dis-
coveries, apparently  at  variance  with  the  known  data  of  science,  have
been  received  with  distrust ;  before  they  have  been  looked  into,  a
theory  has  been  demanded,  which  should  explain  them  and  from  which
they  should  logically  follow.

This  error  of  method  cannot  be  successfully  combated  otherwise
than  by  the  accumulation  of  facts.  It  would  be  well  if  all  those  who
interested  themselves  sincerely  in  the  progress  of  science  would
endeavour  to  convince  themselves  by  means  of  a  series  of  experiments,
methodically  conducted  and  undertaken  without  prejudice,  and  that
they  should  profit  by  the  examples  furnished  by  those  who  have  pre-
ceded them  in  this  branch  of  research  :  they  would  then  not  be  long
in  perceiving  that  the  field  of  investigation  in  which  they  were
engaged  was  rich  in  surprises,  and  worthy  of  their  interest  from  all
points  of  view.

One  cannot,  however,  proclaim  the  reality  of  thought-transference
without  at  the  same  time  making  some  reservation  as  to  its  modality.
The  fact  exists  ;  but  it  does  not  necessarily  force  itself  upon  one  on  the
first  trial.  To  verify  it,  we  are  often  obliged  to  grope  about,  and
always  to  take  into  consideration  certain  conditions,  necessary  to
its  discovery.  One  must  not  expect  that  all  the  experiments  will
succeed;  and  again,  one  must  not  imagine  that  mental  perception  has
the  spontaneity  and  clearness  of  normal  vision.  The  pictures,  on
the  contrary,  are  sometimes  slow  of  production,  vague,  incomplete,
often  modified  in  form,  and  nearly  always  difiicult  to  grasp.  In  some
cases  one  must  have  recourse  to  a  calculation  of  probabilities  to  dis-
entangle the  true  character  of  the  occurrence,  and  to  get  a  proof  that  it


170


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


is  not  due  to  chance.  We  dwell  on  these  diiiiculties  because  they  are
of  a  nature  to  discourage  fresh,  impatient  investigators  ;  but  not  at  all
of  a  nature  to  destroy  the  evidence  of  the  fact.  One  must  never  forget
that  if  thought-transference  were  altogether  an  ordinary  phenomenon,
the  proof  of  its  existence  would  be  superfluous,  and  there  would  be
no  mei-it  in  bringing  forward  the  facts  which  tend  to  support  it.

The  experiments  (of  which  we  add  a  description)  took  place  in  the
dining-room  of  the  flat,  occupied  by  one  of  the  undersigned,  M.  A.
SchmoU,  111,  Avenue  de  Villiers  in  Paris.

The  following  is  a  plan  of  the  rooms  used  : —

A,A,A  -  J5-ei^fs

0  s oirjatL'  to  it^  ?'c^roc2uee<t  ^


The  following  are  a  few  remarks  on  the  persons  who  formed  our
little  circle : —

Madame  D.,  aged  45  ; was present at the majority of  the


Experiments  in  Thought-Trcmsference.


171


expei'iments,  buc  was  not  generally  successful  in  tlie  reproduction  of
drawings  ;  she  is  said  to  have  been  hypnotised  once  in  her  youth.

Mile.  Mai'the  T>.,  aged  22  ;  was  present  at  only  a  limited
number  of  experiments ;  in  these,  moreover,  she  showed  little  interest ;
she  has  never  been  hypnotised.

Mile.  Jane  D.,  aged  20  ;  very  regular  at  the  meetings ;  of
delicate  constitution,  but  healthy  ;  has  shown  very  decided  faculty  for
the  mental  perception  of  objects,  in  guessing  and  reproducing  them  ;
has  never  been  hypnotised,  but  appears  as  though  she  might  be
susceptible  to  the  influence.

Mile.  Eugenie  P.  ;  an  artist,  aged  30,  fairly  strong ;  subject  to
headache ;  has  provided  a  good  number  of  satisfactory  results.  M.
Schmoll  has  hypnotised  her  several  times  in  less  than  two  minutes ;  so
far  he  has  not  observed  that  she  is  more  lucid  in  the  hypnotic  state  than
when  awake.

Mile.  Louise  M.,  aged  26  (vide  Proceedings,  XE.,  p.  325),  has  given
very  good  results  {vide  Nos.  51,  66),  but  on  account  of  ill-health  has
not  been  able  to  attend  -our  meetings  since  May,  1887.  She  is  said
to  have  been  hypnotised  several  times.  M.  Schmoll  has  twice
attempted  to  put  her  to  sleep,  but  without  success.

M.  E.  S.,  aged  30 ;  a  political  writer,  strong,  vigorous ;  has
only  joined  us  on  the  26th  of  November,  1887  ;  has  never  been
employed  as  percipient.

M.  Eugene  Hugo,  M.  Pierre  Levis,  and  M.  Isidore  Bonvier  have
only  beeii  present  incidentally  ;  they  came  more  out  of  curiosity  than
in  the  capacity  of  colleagues.

As  to  Madame  Schmoll  and  the  two  present  writers,  it  is  only
necessary  to  refer  to  our  former  notices. {Proceedings,  XL,  p.  325.)

Our  mode  of  procedure  has  not  always  been  the  same  ;  that  is  to  say,
since  the  first  experiments  (1-26),  published  in  the  Proceediyigs,  it  has
been  modified,  as  we  recognised  the  advantages  offered  by  certain  condi-
tions, with  respect  to  experimental  certitude  and  the  probabilities  of
success.  Thus,  instead  of  the  percipient  remaining  in  a  corner  of  the
room  during  the  drawing  of  the  object,  latterly  he  has  waited  in  the
drawing-room  or  the  bedroom  till  the  design  was  completed  ;  the  match
which  was  formerly  used  to  draw  the  pictui'es  was  replaced  by  a  soft
brush  ;  instead  of  a  single  picture  being  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  table,
several  copies  were  taken  and  distributed  among  the  agents,  in  order
that  they  might  obtain  a  more  direct  view ;  instead  of  placing  the
percipient  in  the  corner  P,  he  was  placed  at  Pi,  in  order  to  be  as
much  as  possible  in  our  line  of  vision,  &c.  We  shall  take  care  to
mention  these  modifications  as  they  occur ;  for  the  present  we  confine
ourselves  to  calling  attention  to  the  general  character  of  our  arrange-
ments.


172


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


Our  meetings  always  took  place  in  the  evening.  The  experiments
were  not  generally  commenced  until  all  those  who  were  expected  had
arrived — that  is  to  say,  about  nine  or  half-past.  All  the  investigators
were  aware  of  the  scientific  scope  of  the  attempts,  and  vied  with  each
other  in  their  zeal  in  excluding  all  source  of  error  and  in  obtaining
conclusive  results.^

EXPERIMENTS  WITH  DRAWINGS.

The  following  is  what  took  place  when  (as  in  the  great  majority  of
cases)  it  was  required  to  produce  a  mental  vision  of  a  drawing.

The  objects  to  be  guessed  were  thought  of  and  drawn  at  once  by
one  of  the  two  present  writers  ;  during  this  time,  those  present  (with
the  exception  of  the  percipient,  who  was  apart  from  the  company,
with  eyes  blindfolded)  talked  together  or  watched  the  drawer.  It  was
expressly  forbidden  to  make  the  least  allusion,  by  word  or  by  action,
to  the  object  which  was  being  drawn.

When  all  pi-eparations  were  concluded,  and  note  had  been  taken  of
the  time,  everyone  went  to  his  post  :  the  percipient,  seated  in  the
arm-chair  P  (or  or  P-),  which  had  its  back  turned  towards  us,
waited,  and  the  agents  took  their  places  at  A,  in  such  a  manner  that
their  Vjacks  were  turned  to  the  window  and  their  looks  directed  towards
the  drawing  (O),  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  The  agents  then
gazed  at  this  drawing  with  the  earnest  wish,  the  firm  desire,  that  an
image  of  it  should  reproduce  itself  in  the  brain  of  the  percipient.
Moreover,  if  the  drawing  represented  a  well-defined  object,  or  one  of
familiar  form  (such  as  a  mark  of  interrogation,  an  M,  a  cross,  a  nose,
a  glass,  a  leaf,  ifec),  tliey  repeated  to  themselves  the  nmne  of  this
object.  Thus,  to  gaze,  to  desire,  to  determine  is  the  department  of  the
agents.  As  to  the  percipient,  he  must  as  far  as  possible  prevent  his
ideas  and  his  imagination  from  taking  any  definite  direction  ;  his  duty
consists  in  thinking  of  notliing,  in  searching  for  nothing,  in  desiring
nothing,  but  in  waiting  patiently  for  a  more  or  less  well-defined  picture
to  present  itself  to  his  mental  vision.

Since  the  commencement  of  our  work,  it  has  been  the  rule  that  no
talking  should  take  place  during  the  experiments,  and  that  everything
should  be  avoided  which  could  furnish  the  slightest  liint  to  the  percipient.
This  rule  has  been  observed  with  increased  stringency  since  Mr.  Myers'
urgent  requests  on  the  subject.  It  was  decided  that  no  notice
should  be  taken  of  any  observations  that  the  percipient  might  make,
that  his  questions  should  receive  no  reply,  in  short,  that  the  agents

^  Of  the  121  experiments  made,  91  are  reported  in  this  paper.  Tiie  remaining  30
were  all  failures  :  27  were  exijerinients  with  drawings,  one  with  a  real  object  (a
bracelet),  one  with  loto,  and  one  with  dominoes.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  173


should  refrain  from  all  words,  gestures,  or  movements  which  might  in
any  way  be  interpreted  as  signs  of  approbation  or  disapprobation.  Thus
there  has  been  absolute  silence  during  the  course  of  the  experiments.

The  mass  of  our  trials  may  be  divided  into  several  series,  similar
in  general  arrangement,  but  each  characterised  by  certain  modifi-
cations.

Nos.  27  to  50  (inclusive),

(with  the  exception  of  Nos.  31-36,  48  and  49,  which  wer3  not  experi-
ments with  drawings).

The  percipient  remained  in  the  dining-room  while  the  original
design  was  drawn.  He,  therefore,  kept  himself  apart  from  the  others,
seating  himself,  blindfolded,  in  the  armchair  P,  which  had  its  back
towards  us ;  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  the  experiment  commenced
at  that  moment.  He  was  informed  as  soon  as  the  drawing  was
completed,  and  the  agents  had  taken  their  places  at  A,  in  front
of  it.

The  percipient  drew  nothing  while  seated  in  the  armchair.  If  at
the  end  of  10  or  15  minutes  he  announced  that  he  saw  a  figure,  the
original  was  hidden  and  he  was  requested  to  come  to  the  table  and
draw  what  he  had  seen.  He  then  did  so  under  our  eyes,  but  in  the
midst  of  perfect  silence.  If  the  reproduction  thus  obtained  bore  more
or  less  resemblance  to  the  original,  the  percipient  was  replaced  in  the
armchair  and  the  experiment  was  continued  ;  only  in  the  most
successful  cases  did  this  repetition  not  take  place.  If,  on  the  contrary,
the  figure  produced  by  the  percipient  was  without  any  resemblance  to
the  original,  it  was  passed  by,  and  the  trial  regarded  as  a  failure.

The  percipient  first  made  his  drawing  in  pencil,  and  then  went
over  it  in  ink,  using  a  match  specially  prepared  for  the  purpose.  The
drawing  thus  obtained  was  very  exactly  copied  (generally  on  the
following  day)  by  M.  Schmoll,  on  the  same  sheet  of  paper  as  the
original,  and  marked  round  with  blue,  to  distinguish  it.^

The  original  was  never  shown  to  the  percipient  until  his  drawing
was  completely  finished.  It  often  happened  that  then,  after  having
looked  at  it,  he  declared  that  his  did  not  represent  so  faithfully  what
he  had  seen,  and  that  he  regi'etted  having  unconsciously  omitted
or  altered  such  and  such  detail.  But  no  attention  was  paid  to  his
observations  ;  in  no  case  was  he  permitted  to  retouch  his  drawing  after
the  original  had  been  seen.

1  In  thus  doing,  M.  Schmoll  had  wished  to  avoid  an  accumulation  of  stray  sheets.
For  the  whole  of  this  series,  (27-50)  he  has,  unfortunately,  not  preserved  the  drawin
made  by  the  hand  of  the  percipient.


17-i  Experiments  in  Thougkt-T ransference.


March  4,  1S87.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

27

M.  Mal)iie

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mile.  Jane.
Mnie.Sclimoll
M.  Schmoll.

I

"I  see  a  Y,"  .said  M.
Mabiie  at  first.  To-
wards the  end  of  the
e.xperiment  the  image
had  changed  a  little,
and  M.  Mabire  drew
the  following  figure  : —

Duration  of  experiment,
10  minutes.

28

Mile.  Jane.

5.

M.  Mal_)ire  in
place  of
Mile.  Jane.

"  I  see  a  triangle,  with
its  base  below.  The
triangle  appears  to  me
to  be  filled  up  ;  but  the
darkness,  very  pro-
nounced at  the  angle,
disappears  at  the  base
— which  is  itself  not
represented  at  all."

Then  Mile.  Jane  drew
this  figure  : —

Duration,  12  minutes.

29

Mme.  D.

5.

Mile.  Jane  in
])  1  a  c  e  of
Mme.  D.

P

"  I  see  something  like
a  flower  with  four  ex-
tended leaves."

"  Now,  there  are  two
ellipses  placed  together
horizontally,  like  an  8
lying  down  ;  a  descend-
ing stroke  separates
them."

T

Duration,  12  minutes.

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  175


March  4,  1887  {continued).


NO.  OF

TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

30

Mile.  Marthe.

5.

Mme.  D.  in
place  of
Mile.

Marthe.

o

1.  "An  extended  curve,
convex  upwards. "

"2.  "Three  curves,  hori-
zontally united,  and  a
white  spot  above. "

The  following  are  the
two  drawings  made  one
after  the  other  : —

14  minutes.

March  11,  1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DR.iWING.

RESULT.

38

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

M

The angles were  first
seen  fitted  into  each
other,  afterwards  side
by  side. There  were
four  of  them.
15  minutes.

39

Mile.  Eugenie.

6.

Mile.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

?  .9  y

In  the  third  attempt.
Mile. Eugenie  saw
"  two  circles  open  on
one  side, and  joined
laterally  hy  a  stroke."
10  minutes.

It  should  be  well  understood  that  it  is  always  the  percipient  who  draws  the
objects  seen.


176  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


March  11,  1887  [continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING

RESULT.

411

Mme.  D.

6.

Mile.  Eugenie
in  place  of
Mme.  D.

1  By  exception,  a  material  objeot  was  chosen  this  time,  a  glass  salt-cellar  (of
which  we  give  a  representation)  being  placed  on  the  table.

March  16,  1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

42

M.  Mabire.

2.

Mnie.Sclimoll
M.  Schmoll.

@ <g  ®

e

"  A  capital  letter  F,
leaninsj  towards  the
right."

"  An  X  ;  at  the  point  of
junction  of  the  two
branches,  I  see  irregu-
larities."

"Very  little  distinctness. "

/"XX

March  25,  1887


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

43

Mile.  Jane.

5.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mine.  Schmoll
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

a

"  I  see  a  large  black  spot
on  a  white  space  ;  it  is
surrounded  by  a  circle,
or  rather  by  an  ellipse
placed  horizontally."

o

Mile. Jane,  the  whole
time, had above  all
insisted  on  the  large
black  spot  on  white.
15  minutes.

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  177


March  25,  1887  (continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING

RESULT.

44

Mile.  Eugenie.

5.

Mile.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

17  minutes.

45

Mme.  D.

5.

Mile.  Eugenie
in  place  of
Mme.  D.

A number of  objects
without  any  connection
with the original  :  a
table,  pincers,  a  pick-
axe, a  T,  a  square,  &c.

1  *  y

(The  T presents  some
analogy. )_

15  minutes.

March  28,  1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

46

M.  Mabire.

4.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  Schmoll.

V

T

And  a  number  of  other
objects without  any
connection.

*  (A  certain  resemblance,
though  rather  vague. )
15  minutes.

47

M.  Mabire.

4.

Same  as  No.
46.

During  20  minutes  no
result ;  M.  Mabire  saw
very badly  defined
things. At  the  end  of
25  minutes  he  took  off
the  bandage  and  drew —

After  having  seen  the  original,  he  said  that  he  had  certainly  seen  a  centre
throwing  oft'  rays,  like  a  sun  or  a  star ;  but  as  that  was  an  image  which  often

N


178  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


presented  itself  on  its  own  account,  he  had  not  believed  it  to  have  been  occasioned
by  us,  and  had  made  no  mention  of  it. Altogether  the  result  is  doubtful.


April  2,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

50

Mile.  Jane.

3.

Mme.  D.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  Schnioll.

M

Nos.  51  to  84  (inclusive),

(with  the  exception  of  Nos.  6.5  and  70,  which  were  not  experiments
with  dra^vings).

The  percipient  now  no  longer  remained  in  the  dining-room,  but
was  taken  into  the  drawing-i'oom,  before  the  original  drawing  was  pre-
pared ;  when  it  was  finished,  he  was  recalled  and  placed  in  the  arm-
chair P,  after  which  the  experiment  began.

From  the  commencement  of  this  series  onwards,  instead  of  a  single
drawing,  several  copies  were  made  and  distributed  among  the  agents,
so  that  each  copy  served  for  only  one  or  two  persons.  This  plan  was
adopted  in  order  tliat  each  agent  might  be  able  to  see  the  drawing  in
an  upright  position,  and  that  he  might  be  able  to  place  it  at  the  most
favourable  point  of  view.  We  ought  to  add  that  in  the  58th' and
70th  trials  exception  was  made  to  tliis  rule,  and  that  later  on  (on
and  after  the  87th)  it  was  not  regularly  adhered  to.

The  percipients  having  remarked  that  in  many  cases  they  did  not
see  one  single  form,  but  two,  three,  or  more  in  succession,  the  arrange-
ments of  the  preceding  series  were  modified,  in  so  far  that  the  percipient,
on  taking  his  place  in  the  armchair,  received  a  pencil  and  a  sheet  of
paper,  on  wliich  he  sketched  (raising  the  covering  of  his  eyes)  all
the  figures  which  successively  presented  themselves  to  his  mental  vision.
^Yhen  one  or  more  figures  had  been  drawn  under  these  conditions,  one
of  the  agents  took  a  glance  at  them,  in  order  to  see  whether  the  experi-
ment should  be  continued  or  terminated  at  this  point.  In  the  first
case,  whatever  might  be  liis  opinion,  he  remained  silent  on  his  return
to  his  place,  at  the  most  making  known,  by  the  play  of  his  features,
whether  he  was  satisiied  with  his  examination  or  not.  In  the  second
case,  the  percipient  was  asked  to  come  to  the  table  and  sho\v  his
drawing  or  drawings.  He  was  absolutely  forbidden  to  retouch  what
lie  liad  already  drawn  ;  but  at  his  request  lie  was  sometimes  permitted


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


179


to  add,  from  memory,  other  figures  which  he  said  he  liad  seen.  It  is
unnecessary  to  repeat  that  the  original  remained  hidden  while  he  drew
these  figures,  and  that  a  rigorous  silence  was  observed.

Finally,  the  figures  obtained  were  no  longer  copied,  but  those
drawn  by  the  percipient  were  kept  along  with  the  originals.  This  plan
has  since  been  followed,  except  in  the  77th  experiment,  when  a  co^?/
of  the  drawing  made  by  the  percipient  has  been  placed  by  the  side
of  the  original.

April  5,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.


PERCIPIENT.


AGENTS.


ORIGINAL  DRAWING.


51


52


Mile.  Louise
M.


Mile.  Jane.


53


54


Mme.  Schmoll


Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.  Schmoll
M.  Schmoll.


Mile.  Louise
in  jjlace  of
Mile.  Jane.


3.


Mile.  Jane.


Mme.  Schmoll
in  place  of
Mile.  Jane.


Each  agent  had
a  copy  of  the
orioinal.


Four  copies  of
the  original
were  used  by
the  agents.


Three  copies
ufed.


Three  copies
used.


Before  drawing  the  above
figure, Mile.  Louise
said, "  a  terrestrial
globe  on  a  support."
10  minutes.


/


10  minutes.


A


During  the  experiment
Mme.  Schmoll  said  that
she  saw  "  a  little  roof."
10  minutes.


15  minutes.


Mile.  Jane,  aftei'  having  seen  the
that  of  a  glass.


original,  said  that  her  first  idea  had  hetn


180  Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


April  5,  1887  (continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

55

Mme.  D.

4.

Four  copies
used.

10  minutes.

56

M.  Schmoll.

4.

Mme.  D.  in
place  of  M.
Schmoll.

Four  copies
used.

10  minutes.

58

Mile.  Jane.

6.

This  was  the
first  time  that
an  animal  had
heen  drawn.

After  five  minutes  Mile.
Jane  said,  "  I  see  a
cat's  head."

On  being  asked  to  draw
wliat  she  saw,  she  pro-
duced the  following
figure : —

59

Mile.  Jane.

6.

This  was  the
first  time  that
a  head  had
been  drawn.

At  the  end  of  five  minutes.
Mile.  Jane  having  said,
' '  it  is  a  head  in  x>rofile, "
a  cry  of  joy  unfortu-
nately escaped  one  of
those  present.  This  cry
having  betrayed  to
Mile.  Jane  that  she  had
guessed  rightly,  no
drawing  was  made.  In
order  to  repair  the
wrong  as  much  as  pos-
sible, Mile.  Jane  was
asked  which  way  the
head  was  turned.  "  To
the  left,"  she  replied.

.Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  181


April  8,  1887.


NO.OP
TRIAL

PERCI-
PIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

66

69

Mile.
Louise

Mile.
Louise

5.

(plus
Mr.
Myers)

5.

(plus
Mr.

Myers)

At  the  end  of  a  few  minutes,
Mile.  Louise  said,  ' '  I  see
tliree  fish  on  a  skewer."
Not  being  well  understood,
she  explained,  "Three  fish
held  by  a  skewer,  that  is  as
they  are  sold  in  the  fish
markets ;  but  everybody
knows  that ! "  Then  she
took  off  her  bandage  and
drew —

f

?his  figure  was  drawn  by
Mr.  Myers.

r

April  22,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

72

Mile.  Eugenie.

6.

Mme.  D.
xMlle.  Marthe.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.SchmoU
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schiiioll.

After  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
Mile.  Eugenie  succes-
sively made  several
drawings  in  the  order
in  which  she  saw  them.

1  J»

182  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


April  22,  1887  (continued).


TiO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

.\GENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

74

Mme.Sclimoll

3.

Mile.  Jane.
M.  Mabire.
M.  SchmoU.

Three  copies
u.secl.

5"

1.  "A  star  with  a  very
large spot in  the
centi-e. "

2.  "A  corkscrew-shaped
figure,  with  three  !32:)irals
well marked, and  a
fourth  vague  "  (v.  draw-
ing No.  2).

3.  The  same  figure  in
the  position  of  No.  3.

15  minutes.

As  in  No.  72,  these  figures  were  seen  successively.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

75

Mile.  Jane.

3.

Mme.  SchmoU
in  place  of
Mile.  Jane.

"A  zigzag,  like  a  stair-
case, descending  to  the
right."

■3

76

M.  Schmoll.

3.

Mile.  Jane  in
place  of  M.
Schmoll.

Three  copies
used.

0

20  minutes.

At  the  end  of  the  experiment  M.  Schmoll  made  the  following  remark : —
"  I  saw  the  four  figures  separately.  A  strange  thing  :  at  one  moment  when  I
was  trying  to  seize  the  exact  shape  of  a  figure  that  I  perceived,  M.  Mabire
coughed  loudly  ;  at  once  the  figure,  of  which  I  had  caught  a  glimpse,  shook,
became  clouded  over,  and  disappeared — only  to  reappear  when  M.  Mabire  has
ceased  coughing."


Experiments  in  Thougkt-Transference.

April  22,  1887  (continued).


183


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

77

M.  Mabire.

3.

M.  SchmoU  in
place  of  M.
Mabire.

Three  copies
used.

"  Something  like  a  leaf
or  an  oar  :  the  lower
part  is  solid  and  very
black."

1

Also  vaguely  seen  :  —

(

20  minutes.

April  29,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

78

Mile.  Jane.

r

4.

Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.  SchmoU
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

Seen  separately.
20  minutes.

79

Mile.  Eugenie.

4.

Mile.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

Three  copies
used.

Seen  veiy  vaguely.
20  minutes.

Mile.  Eugenie  saw  the  figures  1—6  successively ;  some  bear  a  certain
resemblance  to  the  original.


184  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


April  29,  1887  (continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

80

Mme.SchmoU

3.

Three  copies
used.

i

"Bright,  like  glass."

*  "Bright— whitish."
+  "  Bright— whitish."
Nos.  4  and  5  were  seen

slanting,  as  drawn,  not

upright.

15  minutes.

May  4,  1S87.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

81

Al
the  b

Mile.  Jane.

though  this  exj
a,ck  of  a  chair  m

3.

Mme.Schmoll
M.  Mabire.
M.Schmoll.

)eriment  is  con
ay  be  granted  t

Two  copies
used.

sidered  a  failure,
0  drawing  No.  4.

"Several  crosses:  various
figures  like  the  above."

a  certain  resemblance  to

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

82

Mme.SchmoU

3.

Mile.  Jane  in
place  of  Mme.
Schmoll.

Three  copies
used.

\2'

if

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.

May  5,  1887.


185


NO.  OK
TRIAL.


PERCIPIENT.


AGENTS.


ORIGINAL  DRAWING.


RESULT.


84


Mile.  Jane.


Four  of  the

ladies.
Dr.  Hericourt.
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.


7.


Four  copies
used.


u

o  u


18  minutes.


Nos.  88  to  119  (inclusive),


(with  the  exception  of  Nos.  89,  90,  93,  94,  99-108,  120-125,  which


were  not  experiments  with  drawings).

The  percipient  was  now  sent  into  the  bedroom  before  the  drawing-
was  commenced,  and  remained  there  with  Madame  Schmoll.  When
the  drawings  were  finished  both  the  ladies  were  recalled.  Of  course,
Madame  Schmoll  knew  no  more  of  what  was  being  drawn  than  the
percipient  herself.  All  the  time  that  the  ladies  were  in  the  bedroom
they  talked  on  indifierent  subjects ;  the  doors  separating  the  dining-
room  from  the  bedroom  and  the  drawing-room  were  always  carefully
shut.

The  match  used  up  to  this  point  for  sketching  the  original  designs
had  made  no  appreciable  noise ;  and  it  was  precisely  for  this  reason  that
it  had  been  chosen  in  preference  to  a  pen,  the  scratching  of  which
might,  to  a  certain  extent,  have  betrayed  to  the  percipient  the
character,  number,  direction,  or  form  of  the  strokes.  But  on  and  after
the  92nd  experiment,  although  the  percipient  was  sent  into  an
adjoining  room  before  the  drawing  was  commenced,  the  match  was
replaced  by  a  sable-hair  brush,  the  employment  of  which  cut  off  all
possibility  of  any  noise  being  made  during  drawing.

After  the  commencement  of  this  series  (counting  from  No.  87),  the
percipient's  armchair  was  no  longer  invariably  placed  at  P ;  it  was
sometimes  at  Pi,  at  other  times  at  P^,  a  detail  to  which  no  importance
was  attached.


186  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


November  19,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

I'lCKCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

88

Mile.  Eugenie.

3.

Mme.  Schmoll
M.  Mabiie.
M.  Schmoll.

Only  one  copy
of  the  original
made.

3

12  minutes.

The  following  exiieiiment  took  place  at  the  house  of  Mile.  Eugenie.

November  22,  1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

91

Mile.  Eugenie.

5.

Mme.  M.i
Mme.  Schmoll
M.  M.I
M.  Mabii-e.
M.  Schmoll.

f

15  minutes.

1  Mme.  M.  only  appears  as  agent  on  this  one  occasion,  M.  M.  once  again  when
an  experiment  was  made  at  Mile.  Eugi^nie's  residence.


November  26,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

92

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mme.  Schmoll
M.  S.

M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

10  minutes.

Mile.  Jane  expressly  de-
clared that  the  hull  of
the  boat  was  black.  But
I  did  not  wish  the  pencil
drawings  to  be  touched.
—A.  S.

While  the  original  was  being  drawn.  Mile.  Jane  was  (as  was  the  percipient
during  the  whole  of  this  series  of  experiments)  in  an  adjoining  room.  All  the
time  of  the  experiment,  while  she  was  drawing  the  reproduction,  the  silence
was  complete. It  was  as  though  she  had  been  altogether  alone.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  187


The  first  row,  1  —  1,  was  drawn  by  Mile.  Jane  while  seated  in  the  armchair  ;
five  minutes  later,  after  we  had  carefully  hidden  the  original,  she  came  nearer
to  the  light  in  order  to  see  better,  and  drew  the  second  row,  2 — 2,  and  then  the
third,  3 — 3,  adding,  "  I  have  always  seen  the  bottom  of  the  figure  black."

During  all  this  time,  complete  silence ;  no  sign  of  encouragement,  nor  of
joy.  rt  was  not  until  the  drawing  (reproduction)  was  altogether  finished,  as  I
now  give  it,  that  the  original  was  brought  out.  Then  we  all  cried  out,  "  What
a  pity  that  Mr.  Myers  was  not  present  at  tliis  experiment  !  "

One  has  but  to  blacken  the  drawing  (with  ink),  enlarge  it  to  the  dimensions
of  the  original,  and  blacken  the  hull  of  the  boat,  and  one  will  have  very  nearly
a  faithful  reproduction  of  the  original.

Some  minutes  after  being  seated  Mile.  Jane  had  said, "  I  see  a  large  triangle,  "
then  succeessively : —

' '  There  are  triangles . . . . "

"  Several  straight  lines . . .  ."

"  A  dark  object."

Thereupon  she  began  to  draw  the  row  1 — 1.  She  does  not  seem  to  have  once
had  the  idea  of  a  boat,  although  our  thoughts  were  strongly  concentrated  on
this  idea.

I  have  given  more  details  of  this  experiment  than  of  any  of  the  preceding,
because  it  is  the  best  and  the  most  conclusive  that  we  have  ever  made.


December  3,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

95

Mile.  Jane.

7.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  S.

M.  Schmoll.

After  a  few  minutes,  "  I
see  a  strange  object,"
and  Mile.  Jane  drew
successively  the  four
figures  given  above.
Returning  to  the  first,
which  had  impressed
her  imagination  most
strongly,  she  said,
"  There  is  a  tail  which
trembles."

The  experiment  lasted  a
quarter  of  an  hour
without  giving  any  fur-
ther result.

96

Mile.  Eugenie.

7.

>i  1 1  e.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

Y

188  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.

December  9,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIE.N'T.

AGE.NTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

97

Mile.  Jane.

4.

Mine.  D.
Mme.Schnioll
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

At  the  end  of  10  minutes
Mile.  Jane  drew  as
above.  She  said  that
she  had  seen  an  object
resembling  a  flower-pot.
While  drawing,  she
added,  "I  see  some-
thing like  a  stalk  bent
over  coming  out  of  it. "

She  also  faintly  per-
ceived a  triangle.  (This
triangle  is  abundantly
represented  in  the  cross-
bars of  the  original.)

December  10,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

109

Mile.  Jane.

6

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mlle.Eug(5nie.
Mme.  Schmoll
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

^

After  two  minutes  Mile.
Jane  said  :  "  It  is  some-
thing that  has  a  handle
— I  see  two  handles."

After  12  minutes  she
drew —

Aft

Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference.  189


December  10,  1887  [continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

^ERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

110

Mile.  Eugenie.

6.

Mile.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eug(5nie.

After  12  minutes,  Mile.
Eugenie  drew  the  fol-
lowing : —

Figures  3,  4,  7  present
certain  resemblances.

December  1.3,  1887.


The  following  experiment  took  place  at  the  residence  of  Mile.  Eugenie.


NO.  01'
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

Ill

Mile.  Eugenie.

4.

Mme.  Schmoll
M.  M.i
M.  Mahire.
M.  Schmoll.

m

At  the  end  of  15  minute.s
Mile.  Eugenie  drew  the
following : —

it  4^

Mme.  Schmoll  (one  of  the
agents)  had  gazed  at  the
lamp  for  a  certain  time
during  the  experiment.
Her  eyes  were  tired
from  looking  fixedly  at
the  black  spots  of  the
die.

iM.  M.  has  only  taken  part  in  the  experiments  made  at  the  residence  of  Mile.
Eugenie.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


December  17,  1887.


NO  OF
TRIAL

PF.UCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING

RESULT.

113

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.  Schmoll
Mile.  Marthe.
M.  Mahiie.
M.  Schmoll.

i

After  two  niinute-s  Mile.
Jane  said  :  "I  have  got
the  notion  of  a  flute—
or  of  some  musical  in-
strument or  other."  (A
little  later),  "Iseemany
lines.  It  resembles  a
vase,  but  it  is  not  a
vase. "

Mile.  Jane  then  drew,
and  said:  "Now  it  is
like  a  harp ;  there  are
several  strings— like  a
little  gridiron."

At  tlie  end  of  the  experi-
ment, which  lasted  15
minutes.  Mile.  Jane
gave  us  the  above  live
drawings,  which  bear
great  resemblance  to
the  original.  While
she  was  drawing  the.se
figures  (seated  in  the
armchair),  no  one  was
looking  at  her,  and  all
was  done  in  the  greatest
silence.

115

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Same as  in
No.  113.

J

P'ailuie,  but  partial  re-
semblance.

r

Mile.  Jane  had  had  the
idea  of  "  M.  Schmoll's
pipe,"  "A  cat."  After-
wards she  saw  "a  black
mass,  longer  than  it  is
liroad,  on  a  white
ground"  .  .  "always
black."  Mile.  Jane  said
that  she  was  quite  un-
able to  spiyp  tlie  out,-

• '  ■ \J\J I flic  VJi4U

lines.  "  This  is  not  a
regular  form. "  "  I  give
up  the  drawing  of
what  this  may  be."  >

1  The  above  angle  had  been  drawn  at  the  commenoement  of  the  experiment
by  Mile  Jane,  after  two  or  three  minute.s. The  experiment  lasted  1.5  minutes.


Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  191


December  24,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

116
119

Mlie.  Eugenie.
Mile.  Eugenie.

7.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.Schinoll
M.  Mabiie.
M .  Pierre

Levis.
M.  Isidore

Bonvier.
M.  Schmoll.

8.

Same as  in
No.  116,  plus
M.  S.

X

t

After  three  or  four
minutes  Mile.  Eugenie
(seated  in  the  armchair)
drew  successively  the
three  figures.  Having
at  once  showed  them  to
us,  and  being  asked
what  it  was  that  she
had  first  wished  to
draw,  she  replied,  "A
pair  of  scissors."

The  experiment  laste  I
seven  minutes.

1 ^  3

Seven  minutes.
Figures  1  and  3  present
certain  faint  similarity
to  the  original.

Nos.  127  to  132  (inclusive).

A  final  modification  was  introduced  into  the  arrangements  :  the
original  design  was  made  by  M.  Mabire  in  the  bedroom,  while  the
percipient  remained  with  the  agents  in  the  dining  room.

This  series  produced  only  failures,  partly  perhaps  owing  to
the  retirement  of  the  drawer,  and  to  the  survival  of  the  varied
impressions  that  the  percipient  had  received  during  his  conversation
with  the  agents.  We  believe,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  image  is  more
strongly  impressed  on  the  memory  of  the  agents,  when  they  see  the
way  in  which  it  is  formed  and  developed  under  the  hand  of  the  drawer  ;
and  on  the  other  hand,  tliat  the  percipient  should  in  some  measure
prepare  himself  for  the  experiment  by  banishing  from  his  mind  all
distracting  subjects.


192  Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


December  30,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

127

Mile.  Jane.

9.

Mnie.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  Charles

H.i
M.  Eugene

Hugo.
M.  Pierre

Levis.
M.  S.

M.  MaLire.
M.  Schmoll.

w

"I  have  the  idea  of  a
carafe,  now  of  a  sugar
basin ;  I  seem  to  see
an  object  of  this  de-
scrii^tion,  but  I  cannot
define  it  exactly." —
J.  D.  (This  was  not
spoken  by  Mile.  Jane,
but  written  underneath
the  reproductions).

1  The  only  mention  of  M.  Charles  H.  in  this  report.


January  6,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

129

Mile.  Jane.

5.

Mme.  D.
Mme.Schmoll

M.  s;

M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

10  minutes.

1.30

Mile.  Jane.

5.

Same as  in
No.  129.

1

Mile. Jane had  con-
stantly seen  "arrows,"
' '  the  point  of  an  arrow. ' '
12  minutes.

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  193


Januartj  31,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

132

Mile.  Jane.

Mine.°b.

Mme.  Sclimoll

M.  S.

r

M.  Mabire.

M.  Schuioll.

Nos.  133  to  148,

(with  the  exception  of  Nos.  139  to  142,  which  were  not  experiments
with  drawings).

In  this  series  we  re-adopted  the  conditions  of  the  series  87  to  126.

February  4,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

133

Mile.
Jane.

4.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.Schmoll
M.  Schmoll.

/

After  five  minutes,  "I

i^niTT  coo  ct"i*rk  L'iicj A  f  ^' V

10  minutes,  Mile.  Jane
asked  if  we  were  men-
tally telling  her  the
name  of  the  object.  I
replied,  "We  will  call  it
out  for  you  (mentally)
all  together  at  the
moment  when  I  strike
the  third  stroke."  (I
struck  one,  two,  three.)
Here  we  all  called  out
mentally.

"  Ladder  !  "  (Echelle)
"  Scarf  !  "  (Echarpe)
said  Mile.  Jane.  No
whisper  had  escaped
our  mouths.

(At  a  second  trial  of  this
sort  Mile.  Jane  heard
nothing. )

135

Mile.
Jane.

4.

Same as  in
No.  133.

1  S  ^

o


194  Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


February  4,  1888  (continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

137

Mile.
Jane.

5.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Eugenie.
Mme.Sclimoll
M.  Mabire.
M.  Scliinoll.

X

13  minutes.

138

Mile.
Eugenie.

5.

Mile.  Jane
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

Drawing  No.  1  was  made
at  the  end  of  four
minutes.

The  whole  experiment
lasted  eight  minutes  ;
the  three  objects  were
seen  successively,  and
were  drawn  without  the
percipient's  leaving  the
armchair.

After  having  seen  the  original,  she  declared  that  she  had  thought  of  an
arrow.

Fchrncrry  15,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

143

Mile.  Eugenie.

4.

Mine.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.Schiiioll
M.  Schmoll.

12  minutes.

144

Mile.  Jane.

4.

Mile.  Eugenie
in  place  of
Mile.  Jane.

®^

MB  C\

1'2  minutes.

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  195


Fchruarij  18,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

-\GENTS.

ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

RESULT.

146

M.  Sclimoll.

3.

Mile.  Eugenie.
Mine.  Sehmoll
M.  Sehmoll.

12  minutes.

148

Mile.  Eugenie.

3.

M.  Sehmoll
in  place
of  Mile.
Eugenie.

1

11

IT

IS'  vcrv
^  4-

12  iiiinute.s.

It  will  be  granted  that,  with  such  minute  precautions,  we  were  not
likely  to  be  deluded.  It  is  true  that  all  our  trials  have  not  been
successful ;  but  at  least  we  are  entitled  to  state  that  all  our  successes
are  real  successes,  and  that  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them
rest  on  a  solid  basis.

Mr.  Myers  was  present  at  experiments  Nos.  50,  61,  62,  64,  66,  67,
68,  and  69,  of  which  only  three  (those  in  italics)  are  reported  here,  the
others  having  failed.

Out  of  four  trials  (83,  84,  85,  and  86)  made  in  the  presence  of
M.  le  Dr.  Hericourt,  only  one  presented  any  similarity  to  the  original.

We  are  thus  inclined  to  believe  that  the  presence  of  fresh  elements
is  apt  to  preoccupy  the  minds  of  the  agents  and  percipients  in  a
manner  prejudicial  to  success.

EXPERIMENTS WITH  CARDS.

We  have  made  only  a  few  experiments  of  this  kind  (2-5  in  all),  and,
on  the  whole,  they  have  not  produced  the  results  that  we  had  hoped
from  them.

Our  manner  of  proceeding  was  as  follows  : —

The  percipient  was  iirst  taken  into  the  bedroom  ;  then  one  of  the
agents  (who  were  assembled  in  the  dining-room)  took  a  pack  of  32
cards,  chose  one  of  them,  and,  without  speaking,  showed  it  to  the  other
agents.  When  they  had  all  seen  it  well,  the  pack  was  hidden,  after
the  chosen  card  had  been  rescored  to  it.  Then  the  percipient  was
called,  placed  himself  in  the  armchair  (with  its  back  towards  the
agents),  and  covered  his  eyes. The  chosen  card  was  then  again  taken


196  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


from  the  jDack,  and  placed  under  the  eyes  of  the  agents.  They  were
expressly  ordered  to  remain  absolutely  silent  and  unmoved,  whatever
might  be  the  guesses  of  the  percipient ;  and  this  rule  has  been
always  rigorously  observed.

The  following  are  the  results  obtained  in  this  series  : —


Blarch  9,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

31

MUe.  Jane.
■

4.

Mme.  D.
M.  Mabire.
Mme.  Schmoll.
M.  Schmoll.

The  king  of
hearts  had  lirst
been  chosen,
but  hardly  was
Mile,  jane
seated  when  it
was  changed  to
the  a  cc  oj
spaihs.

After  four  minutes,
Mile.  Jane  said,
"  I  see  something
like  a  heart,  the
J)  0  i  n  t  d  0  w  n-
wards  ;  just  by
the  side  of  it  I
see  a  crown."
Five  minutes
later,  she  sudden-
ly cried  :  ' '  Now
I  know ;  is  it
not  the  ace  of
spades?"  (The
object  had  been
seen  black  on  a
white  ground.)

32

Mile.  Jane.  ^

5.

Same as  No.
31, plus  M.
Pierre  Levis.

Eigld  of  hearts.

After  eight
minutes :  "I  see
a  number  of
hearts."

33

M.  Pierre  Levi.s.

5.

Mile.  Jane  in
the  place  of
M .  Pierre
Levis  ;  others
as  before.

Queen  of  Jiearts.

After  10  minutes,
M.  Pierre  had
seen  nothing ;
but  he  had  had
the  idea  of  the
qiieen  of  spades,
and  the  ace  of
clubs.

34

M.  Mabire.

5.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.  Schmoll.
M.  Schmoll.
M.  Pierre  Levis.

At first  Mile.
Jane  had  pro-
posed that  he
shouldguessthe
ace of  clubs,
but by  com-
mon accord
the ace  of
diamonds  was
chosen.

(After20  minutes.)  2
"I  see  clubs."
Four  minutes
later  :  "It,  is
diamonds."  After
four  m  ore
minutes :  "I  see
something  like
the  crown  of  the
king  of  dia-
monds."

1  In  another  record  of  these  experiments,  the  percipient  in  No.  32  is  said  to  have
been  Mme.  D.,  and  the  time  that  elapsed  before  the  response  was  made,  a  quarter  of
an  hour.

-  Five  minutes  is  the  time  given  in  the  second  record.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  197


March  9,  1887  [continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

prruPTPiirvT

1  liltLli,  1  ilil>  1 .

Iv  r^o  U  Li  1  .

35

Mme.  Schmoll.

5.

M. Mabire  in
place  of  Mme.
Sclimoll.

Nine  of  hearts.

^ After  10  minutes.)
"Clubs";  "King
of  spades."

36

M.  Schmoll.

5.

iMiiie.  ociiiiioii
in  place  of  M.
Schmoll.

Kg.  of  diamonds.

(After  10  minutes.)

V  ^  11  c  (3  11 U  I

clubs";  "Still
clubs."

April  2,

1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

48

Mile.  Jane.

5.

Mr.  Myers.
Mme.  b.
iviiie.  iviamie.
Mme.  Schmoll.
M.  Schmoll.

Ten  of  hearts.

(After  12  minutes. )
"  I  see  hearts."

49

Mile.  Jane.

Same  as  No.  48

Nine  of  hearts.

Nothing  seen.

Thus,  out  of  the  preceding  eight  trials,

One  succeeded  (No.  31) ;

Four  gave  partial  coincidences  ;  and

Three  failed.

The  success  of  No.  31  has  undoubtedly  been  somewhat  weakened  by  the
incorrect  expressions  which  preceded  the  exact  reply  ;  but  it  is  only  just  to  add
that  this  last  was  given  out  in  a  perfectly  spontaneous  manner,  and  that  the
sUence  had  been  comijlete  during  the  whole  of  the  trial.

Deeemher  3,  1887.

We  wished  this  time  to  attempt  the  transference  of  a  mental  suggestion,
and  this  is  how  we  carried  it  out.

M.  Mabire  wrote  the  name  of  a  card  on  a  scrap  of  paper,  took  M.  Syffert
aside  and  let  him  read  the  name.  Then  M.  S.  placed  himself  opposite  Mile.
Eugenie  (both  were  standing),  and  asked  her  to  guess  the  card  in  question.
During  the  trial,  Mile.  Eugenie  turned  away  her  eyes  and  closed  them.


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENT.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

(Almost
immediately.)

S4  a

Mile.  Eugenie.

M.  S.

Ten  of  clubs.

"  It  is  clubs."
"It  is  the  eight."
"  No,  it  is  the  ten
of  elubs."

198  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


December  3,  1887  {continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL.

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

b

do.

do.

Ace  of  diamonds.

"  It  is  diamonds. "
"  The  seven."
"  The  knave."

C

do.

do.

King  of  sjyadcs.

"  It  is  spades."
"  It  is  the  ace."
"  There  is  a  iignre

in  it."
"  Is  it  the  queen?"

The  following  ex2:)erinients  were  carried  out  under  different  conditions  to
those  which  we  had  previously  adopted.

The  percipient,  without  having  beforehand  quitted  the  dining-room,  sat
down  in  the  armchair  P  (or  P-),  and  covered  his  eyes.  Then,  in  the  midst  of
the  greatest  silence,  one  of  the  agents  took  a  pack  of  (32)  cards,  shufHed  it,  cut
it,  and  turned  up  one  portion  so  as  to  expose  the  bottom  card ;  this  card  was
then  placed  well  in  view  of  the  agents,  and  the  experiment  commenced.

It  was  decided  that  at  each  trial  three  cards  were  to  be  guessed  successively ;
and  that  the  percipient,  unless  he  guessed  correctly  at  once  (in  which  case  we
passed  on),  might  have  three  guesses  for  each  card  ((mly  occasionally  did  he
have  two  or  four).

The  following  is  the  Table  of  Results  obtained  under  these  conditions.


December  9,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

Kna.  ofd'ninds

^ (Reply  almost
1 immediate. )

1  "  It  is  diamonds."
{"  The  knave."

99

Mile.  Jane.

4.

Mme.  D.
Mme.  Schmoll.
M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

Eight  of  clubs
Kna.  of  spades

V

Ten  of  clubs

f  "  Hearts."

"Spades."
t"  Ace  of  clubs."

/"Clubs."

\,"  Knave  of  hearts."

(""Diamonds."
J.  "  Te/i  of  spades."
["King  of  hearts."

100

Mme.  D.

4.

Mile.  Jane  in
place  of
Mme.  D.

King  of  hearts
Queen  of  spades

f"  Knave  of  hearts."
I  "  It  is  always  red."
j  "  Ki/ir/  of  diamonds."
["The  eight."

f"  Queen  of  clubs."

"Picture  card, clubs."
["  King  of  spades."

Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


199


December  10,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

Queen  of  clubs

^(  After  three  minutes. )

'  'A  king  of  some  sort. "
"  "  King  of  spades."

"  Knave  of  clubs."
I,"  Hearts."

101

Mile.  Jane.

5.

Mile.  Eugenie.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mine.  Schiin>l].
M.  Mabire.
M.  Sclimoll.

Seven  of  spades
Kiia.  of  spades

K
(

Ring  of  clubs

^"  Diamonds."
' '  King  of  diamonds. "
-  "  It  is  spades."
"It  is  the ten  of

spades.

T"  Hearts."

\  "  Knave  of  hearts."

["The  eight."

f"  Diamonds."
]  "The  nine."
["Spades."

102

Mile.  Eugenie.

5.

Mile.  Jane  in
place  of  Mile.
Eugenie.

Seven  of  d'mds
^ight  of  d'mds

Seven  of  clubs

f"  Knave  of  hearts."
J,  "  Eight  of  hearts."
["  Seven  of  hearts."

f"  King  of  spades."

\  "  Clubs."

["  Nine  of  clubs."

C"An  ace."

]  "  Ace  of  hearts."

["Of  diamonds. "

103

Mile.  Marthe.

5.

Mile.  Eugenie
in place  of
Mile.  Marthe.

Queen  of  spades
Eight  of  hearts

<

(-"Clubs."

}  "  Eight  of  spades."
["  King  of  spades."

f"  I  have  the  idea  of
spades."
"  Ten  of  spades  or  of
1  hearts."

1  "  It  is  hearts — I  stick
to  it."

200  Experiments  in  TJwught-Transference.


December  10,  1887  [continued).


NO.  01
TKIAI

PERCIPIENT.

•AGENTS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

104

M.  Schmoll.

6.1

Mme.  D.  in
addition  to
above,  and
afterwards
M.  Pierre
Levis.

f

Ace  of  hearts
<  Nine  of  hearts
Seven  of  spades

Eight  of  cVmds

T"  King  of  spades."
\  "  Nine  of  hearts."
t"Ten  of  clubs."

"  Nine  of  hearts. "

-  "Clubs."
("Ace  of  clubs."

f"  Clubs."

■  "Knave  of  clubs."

["Clubs."

105

M.  Pierre.

6.

-  Nine  of  clubs

Oijp.pf).  of  clt/hi

\
/

Seven  of  hearts

(''Nine  of  hearts."
i  "Ten  of  spades."
I"  Seven  of  clubs."

f"  King  of  spades."
-  "  Ei'dit  of  rliibt  "
["  Ace  of  hearts."

C"  Diamonds."
J  "The  ten."
j  "Hearts."
I "  It  is  the  seven."

106

M.  Mabire.

6.

Nine  of  clubs
Seven  of  d'mds

r

Nine  of  clubs

("Clubs."

-  "The  ten."

i  "  Ace  of  spades."

["Diamonds."
\"  It  is  the  seven."

T"  Knave  of  hearts."
J.  "  Hearts."
{  "  The  queen."

107

Mme.  D.

6.

Seven  of  clubs

King  of  d'mds
^ Queen  of  hearts

["  Ten  of  spades."
-  "  On  ecu  of  si"tfidps  "
.( "  Spades."

/"Ace  of  diamonds."
\"King  of  diamonds."

"  Queen  of  hearts."

108

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Seven  of  clvbs
Ten  of  d'mds

f"  Knave  of  spades."
\  "  Queen  of  spades."
["Spades."

f"  Hearts."

"  Some  ten."

"  Ten  of  spades."

1  The  fact  that  the  arrival  of  M.  Pierre  should  have  raised  the  number  of  agents  to
seven  seems  to  have  escaped  attention. Neither  record  mentions  anyone  as  leaving.

—Ed.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  201


December  24,  1887.


Note. — All  the  experiments  with  cards  (see  Nos.  120 — 125)  failed  this
evening  ;  the  preceding  series,  on  the  contrary  (94  and  9J— 108),  was  fairly
good.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGEN'TS.

CARD  CHOSEN.

RESULT.

120

Mme.  Schmoll.

M.  Schmoll.
Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mile.  Eugenie.
M.  Mabire.
M.  Isidore

Bonvier.
M.  Pierre

Levis.
M.  S.

■<

/

Ace  of  hearts
Nine  of  spades
King  of  d'mds

Ace  of  d'mds

{"Ace  of  spades."
i  OUins.
["  Clubs."

T"  Knave  of  spades."
i  "  Ace  of  hearts."
["  Hearts."

C"  Diamonds."

J.  "  Hearts."

["  Always  red."

j  "  Hearts. "
-  "  The  seven."
1  "  The  nine."

121

Mile.  Jane.

8.

Mme.  Schmoll
in place  of
Mile.  Jane.

Kna.  of  S2xides
Eight  of  clubs

Ace  of  clubs

p'Chibs."

"  It  is  spades."
["Isitnot  the  queen?"

/"  Hearts."
\, ' '  Spades. "

f"  Hearts."
J. tifueen  of  hearts.
["Red."

122

M.  Isidore  Bon-
vier.

S.

Mile.  Jane  in
place  of  M.
Isidore.

Nine  of  d'mds
Eight  of  hearts

r

Ten  of  spades

r'Ecd."

J  "Kn^veofdicmwads."
[  "Queen  of  diamonds. "

(-"Black."
J  "Spades."
["  Queen  of  spades."

r  "Queen  of  diamonds. "
-  "  Diamonds."
["The  ten."

123

Mme.  D.

8.

M.  Isidore  in
place  of
Mme.  D.

King  of  d'mds
Ace  of  hearts

\

('"Knave  of  hearts."
J  "Ten  of  clubs. "^^
["  Always  clubs."

i-"  Clubs."

1  "Al  w  ay  s  black,
"j spades,  or  clubs."
["  Nine  of  spades."

202


Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


December  24,  1887  {continued).


NO.  OF
TRIAL


PERCIPIENT.


AGENTS.


CARD  CHOSEN.


124


M.  Schnioll.


8.

Mme.  D.

place  of
Schnioll.


in
M.


125


Mile.  Eugenie.


M.  S  c  h  m  o  1 1
in  place  of
Mile.  Eugenie


King  of  clubs


Queen  of  spades


King  of  clubs


Queen  of  clubs


Seven  of  d'mds


Ace  of  spades


V


"Knave  of  spades."
"Itisdt<6s."
"The  ace."

' '  Queen  of  clubs. "
"Nine  of  hearts."
"  Ten  of  diamonds."

"Seven  of  hearts."
'■  Knave  of  clubs.''
■  It  is  the  knave  of
clubs."


(""King  of  hearts."

"Kiiaveof diamonds."
\ ' '  Seven  of  diamonds. "

"  Spades."
"Seven  of  spades."
' '  Queen  of  spades. "

["Clubs."

J  "  Eight  of  spades."
["  Nine  of  hearts."


Thus  it  is  seen  that  there  were  48  experiments  in  this  series.  But  as  each
one  allowed  of  several  responses,  independent  of  one  another,  each  of  these
responses  is  regarded  as  having  been  made  to  a  separate  order  or  appeal,  and  it
is  evident  that  to  render  an  exact  account  of  the  results,  one  must  presuppose
an  equal  number  of  orders  or  appeals  and  responses,  and  compare  to  this
number  that  of  the  coincidences  obtained.  Looked  upon  in  this  manner,  the
following  is  the  result : —

139  Orders.

2 Successes  compiletc  in  one  response,  not  preceded
by  mistakes  (Nos.  104-  and  lOSi)

1  Success  complete  in  one  rcsp)onsc,  preceded  by  a

mistake  (No,  107^)

2  Successes  complete  in  tivo  responses,  not  preceded

by  mistakes  (Nos.  99i  and  106^)

I Success  complete  in  two  responses,  preceded  by
two  mi.stakes  (No.  1061)


139  Responses.
= 2  Responses.
=  1


Total  6 Successes  complete  in  .


Partial  Coincidences
Failures


9
40
90

139


MENTAL  COMMANDS.

We  have  made  several  trials  of  this  description,  but  only  live  of  them  have
been  recorded.

The  experiment consisted  in  causing  the  percipient  to  execute  an  order,


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  203


given  to  him  mentally  by  the  agents.  For  this  purpose,  the  agents  (while  the
percipient  was  in  the  bedroom)  had  a  previous  consultation  as  to  the  order  to
be  given.  When  this  was  conckided  the  percipient  was  recalled  and  sat  down
in  a  chair.  The  agents  ranged  themselves,  standing,  behind  the  chair,  and
willed  with  all  their  might  that  this  order,  mentally  given  to  the  percipient,
should  be  executed.


November  19,  1887.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

COMMAND.

RESULT.

89
90

Mile.  Eugenie.

Mile.  Eugenie
(blindfolded).

3.

M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmull.
Mme.  Schmoll.

3.

Same  as  No.  89.

To  raise  both
arms,  and  to
join  her  liands
above  her  head
in  the  attitude
of  prayer.

To  throw  away
her  handker-
chief.

(After  10  minutes.)

Movement  of  the
right arm  ;  ten-
dency to  clench  the
fist  ; right  arm
several  times
slightly  raised.

(After  10  minutes.)
Movement  of  the
arms,  without  any
resemldance  to  the
given  order.

Mile.  Eugenie,  ivhcn  she  knew  what  the  order  had  been,  said  that  for  an
instant  she  had  had  an  idea  of  throwing  away  her  handkerchief,  but  as  she  had
covered  her  eyes  with  it,  she  had  not  follovvetl  up  the  impulse,  for  fear  of
making  a  mistake.

Nocemher  26,  1887.

NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

COMMMAND.

RESULT.

93

Mile.  Jane.

6.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Marthe.
Mme.  Schmoll.
M.  S.

M.  Mabire.
M.  Schmoll.

To  give  her
h  a  n  d  to  all
present.

(After  seven  or  eight
minutes. )

"  I  know  that  I  have
to  do  something
with  my  hands — "

"  What  have  I  got
to  do  with  my
hands  ? "

"  I  feel  inclined  to
clap  my  hands."

"  Ought  I  to  join
my  hands  ?  "

Mile.  Jane  had  not  perceived  that  she  was  to  give  us  her  hand.

(At  the  beginning  of  the  experiment,  she  asked  if  she  were  not  to  lift  the
candles  oft' the  piano  ;  this  was  doubtless  the  reminiscence  of  a  former  experi-
ment, which  had  just  been  spoken  of.)


204  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


Februartj  15,  1888.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

COMMAND.

RESULT.

139

Mile.  Eugi^nie.

4.

Mme.  D.
Mile.  Jane.
Mme.  Sclimoll.
M.  Sclimoll.
(M.  Mabire  ab-
sent. )

To  go  and  open
the  door  of  the
dining-room.

At  the  end  of  six
minutes.  Mile.
Eugenie  rose  and
asked,  "  Am  I  to
go  and  play  the
piano?  '

During  this  experiment,  M.  SchmoU  made  the  mistake  of  thinking
about  the  next  one,  and  deciding  that  he  would  command  the  percipient  to  go
and  play  the  piano  ;  but  this  thought  at  the  most  only  occupied  him  a  minute.


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

COMMAND.

RESULT.

140

Mile.  Jane.

4.

Mile.  Eugenie
in place  of
Mile.  Jane.

To  take  a  match
and  light  it.

(After  five  minutes.)

Indecision  ;  Mile.
Jane  did  not  know
what  she  was  in-
tended to  do,  and
made  several  move-
ments without  any
connection  with  the
given  order.  One
moment,  she
turned  on  her  chair
to  look  at  the  fire,
then  she  looked  at
the  chimney-piece
(on  which  was  a
box  of  matches),
but  she  did  not
decide  upon  any
definite  action;
at  last  she  said,
"  No,  decidedly  I
do  not  know  what
I  am  to  do."

Afterwards,  when  she  knew  the  order,  she  said,  "  What  a  pity  !  I  had  the
idea  of  that,  but  did  not  think  that  it  was  it."


NO.  OF
TRIAL

PERCIPIENT.

AGENTS.

COMM  VND.

RESULT.

(Six  minutes.)

141

Mile.  Jane.

4.

Same as  No.
140.

To  "0  and
p  u  11  M  m  e .
Schmoll's  ear.

Failed.

(Si.x  minutes.)

142

Mile.  Eugenie.

4.

Mile. Jane  in
place  of  Mile.
Eugenie.

To  wind  up  the
lamp.

Failed.

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


205


Several  attempts  that  we  made  with  loto  and  dominoes  did  not
succeed  at  all ;  the  results  were  not  above  what  might  have  been
obtained  by  chance.  We  failed  equally  in  some  attempts  at  transmitting
sensations  (touch,  taste,  smell) ;  but  it  is  only  fair  to  add  that  this  class
of  experiment  was  a  little  outside  our  pi'Ogramme,  and  we  did  not
persevere  much  ;  still  we  propose  to  return  to  it  later  on,  and  to  devote
special  attention  to  it,  and  see  whether,  by  modifying  our  method,  we
may  not  obtain  more  satisfactory  results.

We  would  name  three  conditions  as  essential  to  satisfactory
experiments  : —

1.  Absolute  silence.

2.  On  the  part  of  the  agents  :  concentration  of  thoughts  and  looks
on  the  object  to  be  guessed,  and  firm  determination  that  it  shall  impress
itself  upon  the  percipient's  mental  vision.

3.  On  the  part  of  the  percipient  :  complete  covering  of  the  eyes,
but  on  no  account  pressure  upon  them  ;  pei'fect  calm  and  an  easy
position.

Thus  the  agents  have  to  aim,  with  all  the  persistence  of  which
they  are  capable,  at  the  accomplishment  of  their  task,  and  to  guard
against  extraneous  thoughts  which  would  distract  them  from  their
mental  labour  ;  while  the  percipient,  on  his  side,  cannot  sufficiently
guard  against  all  cerebral  activity  ;  he  must  carefully  deny  all  free
range  to  his  ideas  and  imagination,  and  concentrate  his  endeavours
on  seizing  the  impressions  or  completing  the  rudiments  of  those  which
present  themselves  to  his  mental  vision.

These  conditions  are  essential — fundamental,  and  should  never  be
lost  sight  of  :  but  they  are  not  of  themselves  sufficient,  and  alone  will
not  guarantee  success.  It  is  also  indispensable  that  those  who  take
part  in  the  experiments  should  not  be  predisposed  towards  any  plan  or
theory  (no  secret  hope  of  failure,  for  example) ;  that  they  should
interpret  the  results  without  bias,  but  also  without  exaggerated
scepticism ;  that  they  should  be  animated  by  a  sincere  desire  to
discover  the  truth,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  resolved  to  throw  into  the
work  the  energy  that  does  not  recoil  in  the  face  of  difficulty,  the
perspicacity  that  appreciates  the  force  of  the  smallest  incident,  and  the
patience  that  is  not  discouraged  by  a  failure,  or  a  whole  series  of
failures.  If  these  conditions  be  united  with  those  already  mentioned,
success  will  be  approximately  certain.  ^

We  think  we  to  have  shown  that  certain  natures  are  endowed
•with  a  very  marked predisposition  to thought-transference,  while

1  Our  experience  in  England  iis  very  far  indeed  from  bearing  out  this  statement,
and  tends  rather  to  show  that  the  possession  in  any  high  degree  of  the  gift  of  "  agency  "
and  of  "  percipience  "  is  decidedly  rare. — Ed.


206  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


in  others  the  accomplishment  of  it  is  only  attained  with  difficulty.
Nevertheless,  it  appears  possible  that  in  the  latter  case  it  is  rather  the  want
of  sympathy  with  this  class  of  facts  than  the  absence  of  natural
disposition  that  prevents  success.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know
wliether  the  percipient's  faculty  for  receiving  images  and  ideas  emitted
by  the  agents  is  capable  of  progressive  development ;  but  our
experiments  so  far  do  not  justify  us  in  pronouncing  on  that  point.

A.  SCHMOLL.

Paris,  February  18th.  J.  E.  Mabire.

Note. — I  did  not  take  part  in  the  experiments  numbered  133,  134,  135,  139,
140,  141,  142,  143,  and  144.— J.  E.  M.


STATEMENT  FROM  MLLE. EUGENIE  P.

The  following  are  my  impressions,  when  I  take  the  part  of
percipient  in  thought-transference: —

T  do  my  best  to  banish  any  thought  that  might  distract  me,  and  I
watch  for  the  appearance.  It  is  not  always  possible  for  me  quite  to
renounce  thought  and  volition.  The  least  ray  of  light  being  sufficient
to  interfere  with  my  perception,  I  cover  my  eyes  with  a  handkerchief,
over  which  I  put  my  hands ;  in  this  position  I  perceive  better  if  I  keep
my  eyes  open  under  the  cover.

After  about  a  minute  there  appears  a  circle,  lit  up  as  though  by
magnesium,  in  whicli  are  to  be  seen  figures  of  more  or  less  distinctness  ;
sometimes  there  are  so  many  of  them  that  I  do  not  know  which  to
sketch.  It  has  happened  in  unsuccessful  cases  (I  cannot  explain  how),
that  having  once  seen  the  right  figure,  I  have  been  deceived  by  others
which  have  followed,  and  appeared  with  greater  distinctness.

These  experiments  render  me  very  nervous  ;  my  arms  are  agitated
by  a  trembling  like  that  produced  by  electricity  or  magnetic  passes.

My  hearing  becomes  extremely  sensitive,  and  the  least  sound  is  in-
supportable. In  order  to  be  certain  that  my  imagination  and  my  eyes
played  no  part  in  the  perception  of  the  images,  I  made  an  experiment
alone,  in  the  same  way  as  though  the  agents  had  been  present.  I  then
saw  absolutely  nothing.

Eugenie  P.

Paris,  February  18th,  1888.


STATEMENT FROM  MLLE.  JANE  D.

Whenever  I  have  taken  part  in  the  experiments  as  percipient,  I
have  endeavoured  to  expel  from  my  mind  all  thoughts  and  images,  and


Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  207


have  remained  inactive,  with  my  hands  over  my  eyes,  waiting  for  the
production  of  an  impression  ;  sometimes  I  have  tied  up  my  eyes,  but  this
plan  has  not  always  been  successful.  At  other  times  the  idea  of  an
object  has  presented  itself  to  me  before  I  have  seized  its  form,  but
most  frequently  I  seemed  to  see  the  picture  either  black  on  a  white
ground,  or  white  on  a  black  ground.  In  general,  the  objects  present
themselves  in  an  undecided  manner,  and  pass  away  very  rapidly ;
usually  I  only  grasp  a  portion  of  them.

Whenever  I  have  been  most  siiccessful,  I  have  remarked  that  the
picture  has  presented  itself  to  my  imagination  almost  instantaneously.
Sometimes  also  I  have  been  led  to  draw  an  object  of  which  the  name
was  forced  on  me,  as  if  by  some  external  influence.

Jane  D.

Paris,  February  17th,  1888.


208  Experiments  in  Thought-Transfer ence.

Appended  are  a  few  facsimiles  of  the  most  successful  of  the  above
results,  reproduced  in  the  original  size.  .


No.  53.— Original.


No.  53.— Repeoduction


Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference.


No.  56.— Oeiginal.


No.  56.— Reproduction.


210  Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference.


Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference.  211


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


No.  95. — Repeodhction.


No.  113.— Repeodqction.


214


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


No.  IIG.— Original.


No.  116. — Reproduction.


ExperiTnents  in  Thought-Transference.


215


No.  138.— Original.


216


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


!


IV.

HYPNOTISM AND  TELEPATHY.
By  Edmund  Gurney.

definition  op  hypnotic  trance.

§  1.  It  is  difficult  to  get  a  satisfactory  definition  of  what  constitutes
"  hypnotic  trance."  If  we  begin  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale — with
animals  that  have  been  subjected  to  certain  processes  of  fixation  and
manipulation — the  only  phenomena  open  to  observation  are  immobility
and  ansesthesia ;  animals  present  nothing  corresponding  to  what  I  have
called  the  "alert  stage  — less  accurately,  I  think,  described  as  the
somnambulic  stage — of  hypnotism.  It  would  be  pedantic,  perhaps,  to
refuse  to  call  their  state  one  of  hypnotisation,  when  it  has  been
produced  by  means  similar  to  those  employed  to  hypnotise  human
beings,  and  when  their  condition  appears  analogous  to  the  deeper  or
comatose  stage  of  human  trance  ;  still  it  would  obviously  be  impossible
to  accept  immobility  and  anajsthesia  as  affording  a  sufficient  definition
of  a  hypnotic  condition,  for  at  that  rate  a  deeply  chloroformed  patient
would  be  "  hypnotised."  And  when  we  turn  to  human  beings,  there
seem  to  be  strong  reasons  against  taking  the  ground  of  definition  from
any  jjh.ysical  symptoms.  Analgesia,  diminished  sensibility  of  the  con-
junctiva, (fee,  are  not  distinctive,  and  are  not  constant.  Increased
muscular  irritability  and  catalepsy  are  frequently  absent  in  "  subjects  "
who  manifest  the  most  interesting  psychical  phenomena  ;  moreover,
these  muscular  peculiarities  are  common  to  certain  aflJections  generally
called  hypnotic  and  to  certain  affections  generally  called  hysterical,  and
for  no  purpose  is  a  definition  of  hypnotism  more  needed  than  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  morbid  afiections — to  preserve  a  state  whose  most
interesting  features  may  be  observed  at  a  minute's  notice  in  strong  and
healthy  young  men,  from  any  necessary  association  with  the  idea  of
lesion  or  chronic  instability.  "Inhibition  of  inhibitory  functions  "is
the  sufficient,  though  clumsy,  description  of  the  immediate  ground  of
many  hypnotic  phenomena,  including  mechanical  imitations  of  gesture,
mechanical  continuance  of  particular  muscular  movements,  and
diminished  reaction-time  ;  but  this  ground  is  clearly  too  general  to
found  a  definition  upon — the  same  sort  of  inhibition  being  involved  in  a


1  See  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  62.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


217


minor  degree  in  all  manner  of  circumstances  of  absorbed  attention  or
sudden  shock.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  only  serviceable  definition
must  depend  on  the  idea  of  what  I  have  ventured  in  a  former  paper
{Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  268)  to  call  "psychical  reflex  action."  That
is  to  say,  I  should  confine  the  term  "  hypnotic  trance  "  to  a  state  in
which  (or  in  some  stage  of  which)  inhibition  reaches  the  higher  inhibi-
tory and  co-ordinating  faculties ;  and  particular  ideas,  or  group.s  of
ideas,  readily  dissociating  themselves  from  their  normal  relation  to
other  groups  and  to  general  controlling  conceptions,  and  throwing  off
the  restraint  proper  to  elements  in  a  sane  scheme,  respond  with
abnormal  vigour  and  certainty  to  any  excitations  that  may  be  addressed
to  them.  Such  response  may  be  shown  (1)  in  the  inhibition,  by
command,  of  ordinary  muscular  movements  or  control  of  movements  ;
(2)  in  the  ease  with  which  the  "  subject's  "  mind  can  be  steered,  so  to
speak,  in  the  course  of  conversation  or  narration  ;  but  chiefly  (3)  in  the
ready  imposition,  by  external  suggestion,  of  sensory  hallucinations,  or  (4)
of  abnormal  lines  of  conduct.  This  psychical  characteristic  (educible,  if
not  actually  educed,  in  the  "subject" — see  Proceedings,  Vol.  TI.,pp.  62-3)
has  belonged  to  nearly  all  the  cases  which  have  been  described  as
hypnotic,  and,  in  a  marked  degree,  scarcely  to  any  others  ;  for  only  by
the  rarest  exception  does  it  occur  spontaneously  in  morbid  cases.  As
thus  defined,  moreover,  hypnotism  is  conveniently  marked  off  from  the
natural  condition — somnambulism — to  which  it  is  most  akin.  And  the
definition  has  the  further  advantage  of  emphasising  what  are  not  only
the  most  constant  but  also  decidedly  the  most  important  and  instructive
of  the  hypnotic  phenomena.^  For  in  every  branch  of  mental  and
moral  science — psychology,  ethics,  jurisprudence  and,  we  may  add,  the
extraordinary  therapeutical  applications  of  "  suggestion  " — the  interest
of  hypnotism,  of  which  every  year  mtnesses  a  marked  advance,  has
centred  in  the  various  forms  of  mono-ideism  embraced  under  the  con-
ception of  "  psychical  reflex  action."

THE  MODES  OF  GENESIS  OF  HYPNOTIC  TRANCE —
USUALLY  PHYSICAL.

§  2.  Now  all  this  interest  has  to  do,  of  course,  with  the  state  itself,
not  with  its  genesis.  The  facts  studied  are  peculiarities  of  mental
condition  which  appear  after  the  induction,  by  whatever  means,  of  a
certain  stage  of  hypnotic  trance.  Questions  connected  with  the  means
by  which  the  trance  may  be  induced  have  held  for  the  psychologist  a
subordinate  position  :  he  has  at  most  attempted  to  supplement  the

1  Such  a  definition  of  the  trance  proper  need  not,  of  course,  prevent  us  from
applying  hypnotic  terms  to  local  affections — such  as  the  rigidity  or  anaesthesia  of  a
single  limb — which  are  brought  about  by  means  similar  to  those  used  in  the  production
of  trance.


218


Hypriotism  and  Telepathy.


ordinary  physiological  doctrines  as  to  the  effect  of  "fixation"  and
"monotonous  stimulation"  by  the  conception  of  "attention" — an
attempt  which  has  been  misleading,  in  so  far  as  it  has  implied  that
attention  on  the  part  of  the  "subject"  (wlio  may  be  an  infant  or  a
cray-fish)  is  a  general  condition  of  hypnotisation.  Certain  recent
events,  however,  have  given  special  importance  to  this  topic  of  trance-
induction  or  "  hypnogeny,"  i  and  liave  raised  in  a  startling  form  the
question  of  the  efficacy  of  psychical  influence  as  a  hypnogenetic  agent.
And  this  question  naturally  connects  itself  with  a  more  general  inquiry
respecting  "specific  influence"  and  "mesmeric  rapjmrt"  —  topics
which  in  a  former  paper  I  noticed  only  to  avoid,  as  not  at  that  time
coming  within  the  most  extended  limits  of  scientific  recognition,  but
which  analysis  may  perhaps  rob  of  some  of  their  mystery,  and  which
I  am  now  at  least  justified  in  having  described  as  lying  "in  the  direct
path  of  orthodox  hypnotic  experiment."

In  the  paper  just  referred  to  I  dwelt  on  the  fact  that  the  various
processes  by  which  hypnotic  trance  may  be  induced — whether  regarded
in  their  physical  aspects,  as  fixation  of  the  eyes  or  gentle  peripheral
stimulation,  or  in  their  psychical  aspects,  as  expectation  or  attention —
do  little  or  nothing  to  explain  the  condition  which  ensues,  inasmuch  as
nothing  that  we  know,  outside  hypnotism,  would  have  led  us  to  predict
that  the  results  would  follow  the  processes ;  so  that  the  "  profound
nervous  change,"  which  Braid  proclaimed  as  the  immediate  cause  of
the  results,  has  still  to  be  accepted  as  an  ultimate  fact.  And  I  further
drew  attention  to  the  peculiarity  that  the  production  of  this  profound
nervous  change  seems,  in  the  first  instance,  always  to  require  some
distinct  physical  stimulation  f  though,  after  it  has  once  been  induced
the  mere  idea  of  it,  associated  with  that  of  the  original  hypnotiser — e.g.,
if  he  gives  the  command  "  Dormez  /" — may  be  enough  to  cause  its  re-
currence. So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  distinctly  hypnotic  condition  has
ever  been  originally  induced  by  a  mere  idea  or  a  merely  emotional
stimulus.  No  doubt  a  favourable  attitude  of  mind  on  the  part  of  an
exceptionally  sensitive  "subject"  may  so  prepare  the  organism,  and
the  physical  stimulus  that  supervenes  may  be  of  so  simple  and  ordinary
a  kind,  that  its  essential  part  in  the  result  is  liable  to  be  overlooked.
Thus  it  is  said  of  certain  French  "  subjects  "  that  a  moment's  fixation
of  attention,  followed  by  a  command  to  sleep,  has  proved  effective

^  This  term  is  not  a  happy  one,  as  it  contains  no  indication  of  the  fundamental
difference  between  hypnotic  trance  and  ordinary  sleep  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  think  of
a  tolerable  substitute.

-  An  example  recorded  by  Esdaile,  who  professes  to  have  hypnotised  a  blind  man
or  the  first  time  by  steadily  gazing  at  him  from  a  distance  of  20  yards,  would  apisear
to  be  an  exception.  I  admit  the  force  of  Esdaile's  testimony  ;  but  the  account  was
not  written  till  after  he  had  frequently  hypnotised  the  man,  and  it  seems  possible  that
his  memory  betrayed  him  as  to  the  circumstances  of  the  first  experiment.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


219


even  on  a  first  occasion ;  and  it  may  then  seem  reasonable  to  refer
the  change  of  state  to  the  mere  idea  of  sleep,  or  to  the  expectancy
of  a  sudden  change  as  soon  as  the  command  was  given.  But  the  idea
of  sleep  had  been  present  for  some  time,  without  the  effect  being  pro-
duced ;  I,  at  any  rate,  know  of  no  instance  where  precautions  were
taken  to  keep  the  "  subject  "  entirely  ignorant  of  the  intended  trial  up
to  the  moment  that  it  was  made.  And  if  it  were  enough  to  be
expectant  of  a  sudden  change  when  the  command  came,  the  change
ought  equally  to  supervene  if  the  operator  gave  his  command
silently,  e.g.,  by  means  of  the  "  dumb  alphabet."  Till  some  such  case
is  recorded,  we  seem  justified  in  attributing  this  sudden  change  to  the
sudderily  presented  new  element — i.e.,  the  arresting  sound  of  the
operator's  voice.  When  the  "  subject "  is  of  a  specially  unstable
constitution,  the  condition  of  expectancy  may  be  wholly  dispensed
with,  and  a  rather  stronger  stimulus — a  distinct  shock — will  then  be
necessary ;  but  always  of  a  physical  sort.  The  mental  shock  of
surprise  or  terror  may,  as  we  all  know,  produce  temporary  paralysis
of  motor  power  and  other  physical  effects  ;  but  the  only  shocks  which
have  been  followed  by  the  characteristic  phenomena  of  hypnotic
trance  have  been  those  due  to  a  sudden  loud  sound  or  sudden  bright
light.  It  is  worth  remarking,  by  the  way,  that  the  state  produced
in  this  way  is  always  that  of  catalepsy,  not  that  of  lethargy,  which  is  the
more  common  first  stage  of  hypnotism.  The  difference  between
these  two  states  has,  I  believe,  been  considerably  exaggerated  by  the
school  of  the  Salpetriere  ;  but  so  far  as  they  really  differ,  it  is  of
interest  that  the  direct  production  of  either  should  equally  lead  on
to  that  unbalanced  but  potentially  active  mental  condition  in  which
the  characteristic  somnambulic  phenomena  present  themselves.  For
this  suggests  that  the  unbalancing  depends  not  so  much  on  the
special  nature  as  on  the  suddenness  of  the  change  ;  and  that  the
somnambulic  phenomena  may  be  liable  to  appear  after  any  very  rapid
shifting  of  the  level  of  consciousness,  which  does  not,  like  ordinary
sleep,  sink  the  reason  below  the  point  where  attention  can  be
attracted  to  imposed  hallucinations  and  commands,  and  which  is  not,
like  the  passage  into  ordinary  sleep,  checked  and  transformed  at
once  to  normal  wakefulness  by  external  solicitations.  It  would,  at
any  rate,  be  worth  inquiry  whether  there  is  any  stage  in  the  path
to  unconsciousness,  as  produced  by  ordinary  anaesthetic  agents,  during
which  the  well-known  phenomena  of  hypnotic  suggestion  could  be  in
some  degree  produced.

ANOTHER  MODE  OF  GENESIS — THE  PSYCHICAL  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
"  SOMMEIL  A  DISTANCE."

§  3.  But  however  that  may  be,  the  hypnotism  which  we  know — where


220


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


the  change  is  independent  of  toxic  substances  and  is  comparatively
stable  when  once  induced — will  always  retain  its  peculiar  character.
And  the  tendency  of  recent  inquiry  has  been,  on  the  whole,  to  give
further  emphasis  and  precision  to  the  view  which  would  confine  original
hypnogenetic  efficacy  to  special  peripheral  excitations,  either  of  the
organs  of  special  sense  or  applied  in  the  way  of  pressure  to  special
points  or  tracts  on  the  body.  The  reason  of  the  specific  cerebral
change,  the  course  of  the  nervous  discharges  which  issue  in  the  inhibi-
tion of  central  control,  or  in  the  various  muscular  peculiarities  which
hypnotised  persons  present, — these  are  as  unknown  as  ever ;  but  the
known  points  of  attack  by  which  the  central  citadel  can  be  reached
have  multiplied ;  and  where  sensitiveness  reaches  a  certain  point,  the
operator  can  bring  about  a  series  of  well-marked  modifications  of  the
trance-condition  by  physical  manipulation,  with  almost  as  much
certainty  as  the  organist  can  manipulate  his  stops. ^  *  The  very  latest
advance,  however,  would  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  have  been  in  exactly
the  opposite  direction,  and  to  suggest  a  mode  of  affection  in  which  no
part  is  played  either  by  peripheral  stimulus,  or  by  suggestion  and
expectancy  tending,  through  association,  to  re-induce  a  state  induced
in  the  first  instance  by  peripheral  stimulus.  I  refer  to  the  recently
recorded  French  successes  in  the  production  of  sommeil  a  distance —
hypnotic  trance  due  to  the  concentration  of  the  hypnotiser's  will  with-
out the  "  subject's  "  knowledge,  and  altogether  beyond  the  range  of
the  "  subject's  "  senses.  Not  that  this  form  of  experiment  is  by  any
means  new :  the  history  of  hypnotism — or  mesmerism,  as  in  this  con-
nection it  has  been  more  often  called — has  presented  a  good  many
sporadic  instances  of  such  distant  efi'ects.-  But  even  had  the  earlier
reports  been  given  with  complete  detail  and  with  ample  corroboration
(which  has  rarely  been  the  case),  it  is  inevitable  that  facts  so  startling,
and  so  alien  to  scientific  preconceptions,  should  depend  for  their  accept-
ance almost  entirely  on  conteynjjorary  evidence  ;  and  this  being  so,  the
recent  well-attested  cases  are  of  extreme  importance.  They  have  in-
deed an  importance  over  and  above  that  which  attaches  to  them  in
their  hypnotic  character.  For  they  form  a  species  in  a  general  class  of
afiections  extending  far  beyond  the  limits  of  hypnotism,  and  embracing
every  sort  of  impression  made  by  one  person  on  another  otherwise  than
tlirough  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  To  such  impressions  the
convenient  term  telepathy  has  been  aj^propriated.  And  inasmuch  as
hypnotism,  being  a  physiological  and  in  some  respects  a  medical
curiosity,  has  a  specially  good  chance  of  attracting  the  notice  of  trained

1  See  especially  Dr.  A.  Pitre's  Dcs  Zones  Hiisterogencs  etHypnogencs  (Bordeaux,1885).

■-  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  88  ;  Vol.  II.,  pp.  xxvi.  and  679-87.  For
another  discussion  of  the  subject  see  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  paper  on  "Telepathic
Hypnotism,"  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


221


observers  to  its  various  phases,  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  the
phenomena  of  distant  trance-induction  were  the  first  branch  of  tele-
pathy to  win  the  confident  and  general  adliesion  of  scientific  men  ;  as
indeed  they  might  have  done  many  years  ago,  but  for  their  association
with  the  wild  theories  and  grotesque  pretensions  of  "  mesmerists."  It
is  probable  also  that  France  will  continue  to  be  the  principal  scene  of
these  interesting  observations  ;  partly  owing  to  a  spirit  of  disengaged-
ness  and  openness  to  new  ideas,  which  seems  specially  to  characterise
the  medical  faculty  of  that  country,  but  chiefly  because  the  French
temperament  appears  to  be  on  the  whole  decidedly  more  susceptible
than  the  English  to  hypnotic  aflections,  just  as  Esdaile  found  the
Hindoo  to  be ;  and  there  being  a  larger  percentage  of  good  "  subjects  "
to  work  with,  it  may  naturally  be  expected  that  among  them  will  be
found  the  rarce  aves  on  whom  the  demonstration  of  the  more  delicate
hypnotic  phenomena  must  depend.

The  first  three  cases,  originally  published  in  the  Revue  PhilosopMque,
for  February  and  April,  1886,  have  been  already  described  in  these
Proceedings  (Vol.  IV.,  pp.  28-38)  ;  but  it  may  be  convenient  to
supply  here  a  short  abstract  of  them.

(1)  The  first  case  is  from  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  of  Havre,  who  observed
it  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Gibert,  the  leading  physician  of  that  town.  The
"  subject,"  Madame  B.,  was  an  honest  and  simple  peasant-woman,  enjoying
good  health,  though  liable,  from  childhood,  to  fits  of  somnambulism.  Dur-
ing a  stay  at  Havre,  in  the  autumn  of  1885,  she  proved  easy  to  hypnotise,
and  at  once  showed  in  various  ways  a  marked  rapport  with  the  person  who
had  hypnotised  her.  For  instance,  while  she  was  in  the  "  deep  state,"  in-
sensible to  all  ordinary  stimuli,  the  contact  or  proximity  of  the  hypnotiser's
hand  would  induce  in  her  partial  or  general  contractures,  which  a  light  touch
from  him  could  again  remove — no  one  else  being  able  to  produce  either
effect  in  the  slightest  degree.  After  about  ten  minutes  of  deep  trance  she
would  pass  into  the  "alert"  or  somnambulic  state,  from  which  she  could
be  wakened  into  the  normal  state  by  the  operator,  and  by  him  alone.  It
was  further  noted  that  the  hypnotisation  was  difiicult  or  impossible  unless
the  operator  concentrated  his  thoughts  on  the  desired  result.  Various  ex-
periments in  thought-transference  were  completely  successful :  they  took
the  form  of  strongly  willing,  during  Madame  B.'s  trance,  that  she  should  do
some  quite  unlikely  thing  at  a  particular  hour,  the  mental  command  being
as  punctually  obeyed  as  if  it  had  been  expressed  in  words.

The  attempts  at  producing  sommeil  a  distance  were  suggested  by  the
discovery  already  mentioned  of  the  need  that  the  operator's  will  should
co-operate  in  the  hypnotic  process.  It  was  then  found  that  the  will  alone
was  sufficient.  "  Pressure  of  Madame  B.'s  hand,  without  the  idea  of  entranc-
ing her,  was  ineffectual  :  but  the  idea  without  the  pressure  succeeded  per-
fectly." The.  next  step  was  for  Dr.  Gibert  to  make  the  attempt  when  in
another  part  of  the  town,  and  at  a  moment  selected  not  by  himself  but  by
M.  Janet  or  another  friend. On  two  of  these  occasions  M.  Janet  found


222


Hypnotism  and  Telejyathy.


Madame  B.  in  a  deep  trance,  from  which  only  Dr.  Gibert  could  wake  her  ;
on  a  third  occasion  she  had  felt  the  strong  impulse  to  sleep,  but  had  opposed
it  by  putting  her  hands  into  cold  water.

A  series  of  successes  of  the  same  kind  were  obtained  in  the  spring  of
1886  ;  three  of  which,  witnessed  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  and  Dr.  A.  T.
Myers,  are  described  in  the  paper  of  the  former  referred  to  in
last  footnote.  On  one  of  these  occasions  Dr.  Gibert,  on  the  other
two  M.  Janet,  was  the  hypnotiser  ;  and  on  each  of  the  three  the
"subject"  seemed  clearly  to  recognise  to  which  influence  she  had  been
exposed.  Of  this  second  series  M.  Janet  writes  that,  putting  aside  mental
suggestions  of  trance  made  in  the  presence  of  the  "subject"  in  an  adjoin-
ing room,  "  the  trials  made  at  a  distance  of  at  least  500  metres  from  Madame
B. 's  abode  amount  to  21.  I  do  not  count  a  trial  made  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  under  unfortunate  conditions  ;  and  I  count  as  failures  all  experi-
ments where  the  'subject'  was  not  found  entranced  on  our  entering  her
abode,  or  where  the  trance  did  not  follow  the  mental  suggestion  within  a
quartei  of  an  hour.  These  failures  (each  of  which  may  admit  of  a  complete
explanation)  were  six  in  number.  There  remain,  then,  15  precise  and
complete  successes — extraordinary  coincidences,  whatever  interpretation  of
them  we  choose  to  adopt."  During  this  period,  Madame  B.  did  not  fall  into
a  trance  on  any  other  occasion  than  those  mentioned.

(2)  The  next  account  is  from  Dr.  J.  Hericourt,  one  of  M.  Richet's  ablest
assistants  in  the  editing  of  the  Revue.  Scientijiqn.e.  The  observations  were
made  and  recorded  in  1878,  though  not  published  till  last  year,  pmir  den
raisuns facile s  a  comprendre.  The  "subject" — Madame  D. — was  a  young
widow,  in  whom  no  trace  of  hysteria  could  be  discovered.  M.  Hericourt
found  her  exceedingly  easy  to  hypnotise,  and  after  about  a  fortnight  could
entrance  her  by  his  will  alone,  exercised  without  any  word  or  gesture,  and
sometimes  while  Madame  D.  was  in  the  midst  of  an  animated  conversation
with  other  persons.  On  the  other  hand,  he  found  that  all  the  ordinary
physical  processes  remained  comjiletely  ineffectual  if  his  will  was  not  that
the  trance  should  ensue.  He  soon  began  to  extend  the  distance  between
himself  and  his  "subject,"  and  instead  of  producing  the  effect  from  one
corner  of  a  room  to  another,  he  could  produce  it  from  one  house  or  one
street  to  another.  The  first  trial  from  a  distant  street  was  specially  in-
teresting. While  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  the  desired  effect,  at  three
p.m..  Dr.  Hericourt  was  summoned  to  see  some  patients,  and  for  a  time
forgot  all  about  Madame  D.  He  then  remembered  that  he  was  engaged
to  meet  her  on  the  promenade  at  4.30,  but  not  finding  her,  he  be-
thought him  that  possibly  his  experiment  had  succeeded,  and  towards
five  o'clock  he  vigorously  willed  that  she  should  wake.  In  the
evening  Madame  D.,  spontaneously,  and  without  his  having  made  the
slightest  allusion  to  her  absence  from  the  promenade,  informed  him
that  about  three  o'clock  she  had  been  suddenly  seized  by  an  irresisti-
ble inclination  to  go  to  sleep,  though  she  never  slept  in  the  day-
time. It  was  all  she  could  do  to  walk  into  another  room,  where  she  fell  on
a  sofa,  and  was  afterwards  found  by  a  servant  cold  and  motionless,  coinme
morte.  The  servant  shook  Madame  D.  vigorously,  but  could  not  make  her  do
more  than  open  her  eyes. All  that  Madame  D.  remembered  experiencing  at


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


223


this  time  was  a  \dolent  headache,  which  disappeared  towards  five  o'clock,  the
hour  when  M.  Hericourt  willed  the  undoing  of  his  work.

This  experiment  was  the  first  of  a  series,  during  which  a  number  of  per-
sons had  the  opportunity  of  arranging  the  conditions  and  testing  the  re-
sults. The  hypothesis  of  expectant  attention  was  doubly  excluded  ;  for  if
M.  Hericourt  gave  Madame  D.  notice  of  his  intention  to  entrance  her,  but
actually  willed  that  she  should  remain  awake,  she  retained  her  normal  con-
dition, and  imagined  that  he  had  failed.

(3)  The  next  case,  contributed  by  Dr.  E.  Gley,  of  37,  Rue  Claude  Bernard,
Paris,  is  a  record  of  some  observations  of  his  friend.  Dr.  Dusart,  published
in  the  Tribune  Meclicale,  in  May,  1875.  The  "subject"  was  a  hysterical
girl  of  14,  whom  Dr.  Dusart  found  very  susceptible  to  hypnotism.
He  early  remarked  that  his  passes  were  ineflfective  if  his  attention  was
not  strongly  directed  to  the  desired  result ;  and  this  suggested  to  him  to  try
the  effect  of  purely  mental  suggestion.  One  day,  before  the  usual  hour  for
waking  the  patient  had  arrived,  he  gave  her  the  mental  command  to  awake.
The  effect  was  instantaneous  :  the  patient  woke,  and  again,  in  accordance
with  his  will,  began  her  hysterical  screaming.  He  took  a  seat  with  his  back
to  her,  and  conversed  with  other  persons,  without  appearing  to  pay  any
attention  to  her  ;  but  on  his  silently  giving  her  the  mental  suggestion  to  fall
again  into  the  trance,  his  will  was  again  obeyed.  More  than  100  ex-
periments of  the  sort  were  made  under  various  conditions,  and  with  uniform
success.  On  one  occasion  Dr.  Dusart  left  without  giving  his  usual  order  to
the  patient  to  sleep  till  a  particular  hour  next  morning.  Remembering  the
omission,  he  gave  the  order  mentally,  when  at  a  distance  of  700  metres  from
the  house.  On  arriving  next  morning  at  7.30,  he  fi^und  the  patient  asleep,
and  asked  her  the  reason.  She  replied  that  she  was  obeying  his  order.  He
said  :  "  You  are  wrong  ;  I  left  without  giving  you  any  order."  "True,"
she  said,  "  but  five  minutes  afterwards  I  clearly  heard  you  tell  me  to  sleep
till  eight  o'clock."  Dr.  Dusart  then  told  the  patient  to  sleep  till  she  re-
ceived the  command  to  wake,  and  directed  her  parents  to  mark  the  exact
hour  of  her  waking.  At  2  p.m.  he  gave  the  order  mentally,  at  a  distance
of  seven  kilometres,  and  found  that  it  had  been  punctually  obeyed.  This
experiment  was  successfully  repeated  several  times,  at  different  hours.

After  a  time  Dr.  Dusart  discontinued  his  visits,  and  the  girl's  father  used
to  hypnotise  her  instead.  Nearly  a  fortnight  after  this  change,  it  occurred
to  Dr.  Dusart,  when  at  a  distance  of  10  kilometres,  to  try  whether  he  still  re-
tained his  power,  and  he  willed  that  the  patient  should  not  allow  herself  to
be  entranced  ;  then  after  half-an-hour,  thinking  that  the  effect  might  be  bad
for  her,  he  removed  the  prohibition.  Early  next  morning  he  was  surprised
to  receive  a  letter  from  the  father,  stating  that  on  the  previous  day  he  had
only  succeeded  in  hypnotising  his  daughter  after  a  prolonged  and  painful
struggle  ;  and  that,  when  entranced,  she  had  declared  that  her  resistance
had  been  due  to  Dr.  Dusart's  command,  and  that  she  had  only  succumbed
when  he  permitted  her.

(4)  The  fourth  case  consists  of  the  experiments  described  by  Professor
Richet  in  the  paper  printed  above  (j)p.  32-43).


224


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


THE  PSYCHICAL  GENESIS  A  FORM  OP  "SUGGESTION."

§  4.  In  regarding  such  distant  effects  as  these,  it  was  of  course  in-
evitable, from  the  first,  that  an  effort  should  be  made  to  connect  them
with  the  similar  effects  produced  by  the  hypnotiser  in  the  presence  of
his  "  subject  "  ;  and  in  the  pre-scientific  days  of  hypnotism  this  was
easy  enough.  The  prevalent  view  of  hypnotic  effects,  among  those
who  believed  them  to  be  genuine,  was  that  they  were  produced  by  a
specific  "  magnetic  "  or  "  mesmeric  "  force  or  effluence,  which  radiated
from  the  person  of  the  operator  in  obedience  to  his  will  ;  and  as  it  is
easy  to  credit  unknown  agencies  with  incomprehensible  attributes,  the
idea  of  this  one  as  able  to  act  at  a  distance  without  any  loss  of  in-
tensity was  accepted  as  needing  no  particular  justification.  If  such  a
peculiarity  prevented  the  mesmeric  force  from  being  correlated  in  any
way  with  the  forces  known  to  physicists,  that  would  appear  to  its
champions  as  so  much  to  its  credit.  Not  that  I  regard  the  idea  of  a
specific  hypnogenetic  influence  of  a  physical  sort  as  absurd — I  shall
recur  later  to  the  question  of  such  an  influence  acting  within  narrow
limits  of  space  ;  and  even  as  regards  its  operation  at  any  distance
and  across  any  obstacles,  something  might  be  said  for  a  hypothesis
which  at  least  had  the  merit  of  recognising  the  telepathic  facts,  as  long
as  no  alternative  was  possible.  This,  however,  is  no  longer  the  case.
A  conception  which,  in  its  simple  and  comprehensive  form,  is  of  very
recent  date,  and  which  could  never  have  been  educed,  free  of  all  con-
fusing elements,  from  the  facts  of  hypnotism  alone — the  conception  of
thought-transference — has  opened  the  way  for  another  theory.  Not  one,
indeed — I  should  most  fully  admit — for  which  any  certainty  or  finality
can  be  claimed ;  it  requires  assumptions,  and  depends  largely  on
analogies ;  but  one  whicli,  as  an  attempt  at  generalisation,  reaches,  I
think,  a  considerable  degree  of  probability  in  a  region  of  facts  so  new
and  baffling  that  no  generalisation  can  as  yet  well  aspire  to  more.

To  state  my  view  in  the  shortest  way,  I  believe  that  hypnotisation
at  a  distance  is  truly  analogous  to  hypnotisation  in  the  presence
of  the  "  subject,"  but  to  one  particular  form  only  of  such  hypno-
tisation— to  wit,  that  exercised  on  a  "  subject "  who  has  been
entranced  on  previous  occasions,  by  the  suggestion  (either  verbal
or  conveyed  by  the  mere  physical  proximity  of  the  operator)
of  the  idea  of  trance.  On  this  view,  what  happens  is  that
the  idea  of  the  intended  effect  is  transferred  from  the  operator
to  the  "subject,"  just  as  any  other  idea  is  transferred  when  the
mind  of  A  affects  the  mind  of  B  otherwise  than  through  the  recog-
nised sensory  channels;  and  that  it  then  works  on  tlie  "subject,"
whom  previous  entrancements  have  rendered  hyper-susceptible  to  its
influence,  precisely  in  the  same  way  as  the  word  Dormez  works  on


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


225


him  when  addressed  by  the  operator  to  his  ears.  That  is  to  say,  the
trance  supervenes  owing  to  the  peculiar  liability  of  the  "  subject "
to  react  on  a  particular  idea,  in  whatever  luay  that  idea  may  have
gained  an  entrance  to  his  mind,  and  not  owing  to  any  particular
magnetic  force  or  compulsion  exercised  by  the  operator.  I  hold,
therefore,  that  the  French  experimenters  have  hit  on  the  right  word,
suggestion,  to  describe  the  mode  of  influence — suggestion  mentale  in
contrast  to  suggestion  verhale  ;  the  two  sorts  of  suggestion  being  in
their  hypnogenetic  power  identical,  but  differing  radically  in  the
earlier  stage — in  the  mode  in  which  the  suggestion  obtains  access  to
the  "  subject."  The  difference  is  not  then  (as  formerly  conceived)
between  two  modes  of  propagating  "  mesmeric "  force,  by  passes
near  at  hand  or  "will"  at  a  distance.  It  lies  quite  outside  hypno-
tism and  the  particular  effect  of  hypnotic  trance.  It  is  a  difference
more  radical  than  those  who  have  believed  in  mesmeric  action  at  a
distance  have  hitherto  imagined,  but  also  less  mysterious  ;  inasmuch  as
this  distant  influence  can  now  be  referred  to  a  large  general  class  of
phenomena,  fundamentally  alike  through  all  varieties  of  circum-
stance, and  in  this  way  confirmatory  of  one  another.-^  In  a  word  the
difference  between  verbal  suggestion  and  mental  suggestion  in
hypnotic  cases  is  simply  fJie  difference  between  the  two  broad  classes
of  communication  which  exhaust  all  possibilities  of  thought-conveyance
between  man  and  man,  and  which  may  be  conveniently  distinguished
as  the  jjliysical  and  the  j)sychical.

MEANING  OF "PSYCHICAL"  COMMUNICATION.

§  5.  I  hasten  to  explain  what  I  mean  by  this  distinction,  which  is
very  liable  to  be  misunderstood,  though  it  would  be  difficult  to  express
it  shortly  in  any  other  terms.  It  is  by  no  means  to  be  taken  to  imply
the  absence  of  a  physical  basis  for  the  "  psychical "  transferences.
The  word  "  psychical  "  does  not  involve  any  hypothesis  as  to  the
manner  of  transference,  whether  as  connected  or  as  unconnected  with
physical  events  ;  it  implies  simply  the  fact  that  particular  ideas  in  two
minds  have  corresponded  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lead  to  the  conclu-
sion that  they  were  connected  as  cause  and  effect,  though  the  recog-

1  There  is  at  present  this  difficulty  in  discussing  any  special  topic  wliere  the  ideas
of  telepathy  and  thought-transference  have  to  be  introduced — that  to  many  readers
the  terms  may  convey  no  meaning,  or  may  appear  simply  as  symbols  of  what  is
ridiculous  and  impossible  ;  while  yet  it  would  be  hopeless  to  attempt  to  demonstrate
the  realities  which  they  represent  in  the  course  of  a  paper  like  the  present.  The
largest  collection  of  evidence  on  the  subject  which  has  so  far  been  published  will
be  found  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  I  am  here  treating  the  central  positions
of  that  book  as  if  they  were  solidly  established.  Feeling,  as  I  do,  such  confidence
to  be  justifiable,  I  refrain  from  encumbering  these  pages  with  apologies  for  it ;
but  I  am  very  far  indeed  from  assuming  that  every  candid  mind  is  bound  to  share  it.

Q


226


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


nised  channels  of  sense  have  not  been  employed,  and  there  has  been
no  peripheral  stimulation  passing  from  one  organism  to  the  other.
Now  the  condition  from  which  we  should  most  readily  conclude  that
there  was  such  a  causal  connection  between  the  two  ideas  is  clearly  that
they  should  resemble  one  another.  When  one  organism  acts  peripher-
ally on  another — when  A  hits  B  for  instance — we  connect  A's  anger
with  B's  pain  without  requiring  to  perceive  any  resemWance  between
the  two  affections ;  but  apart  from  ascertainable  physical  communica-
tion, it  would  not  occur  to  us  to  regard  a  particular  idea  of  B's  as  due
to  a  particular  idea  of  A's,  unless  they  presented  at  least  some  point
of  identity.  And  the  facts  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  afibrd,  I
think,  strong  grounds  for  supposing  such  resemblance  to  be  the  general
law  of  telepathic  action.  In  cases  of  experimental  thought-transfer-
ence the  resemblance  is  obvious  and  often  complete;  and  the  same  is
true  of  those  "  transitional  "  cases  where  the  agent  sets  himself  to
impress  some  idea  or  percept  on  some  one  at  a  distance ;  while  in  the
"  spontaneous "  cases  it  is  rarely  tliat  there  is  a  difficulty  in  tracing
the  effect  on  the  percipient's  senses  or  emotions  to  an  idea  reproduced
(though  it  may  be  below  the  level  of  consciousness)  from  the  agent's
mind.  This  at  once  suggests  the  particular  character  which,  suppos-
ing the  psychical  transference  to  be  dependent  on  a  physical  effect  of
one  organism  on  the  other,  that  physical  effect  would  naturally  be  held
to  possess ;  it  must  apparently  be  of  the  nature  of  vibratory  energy
transmitted  through  a  medium — that  being  the  only  means  by
which  changes  in  one  piece  of  matter  are  found  to  reproduce
themselves  in  a  distant  piece  of  matter  ;  and  its  place  of
origination  in  one  organism  and  place  of  operation  in  the
other  must  be  the  brain.  Whether  such  a  mode  of  physical
affection  exists  or  not  is  an  open  question.  The  negative  answer  in-
volves the  difficulty  that,  whenever  the  psychical  transferences  occur,  a
certain  nervous  process,  correlated  with  the  impressed  idea  in  the
brain  of  the  recipient,  presents  a  close  similarity  to  a  certain  nervoas
process  correlated  with  the  impressing  idea  in  the  brain  of  the  trans-
mitter, and  would  not  have  presented  that  similarity  but  for  the
transmission,  while  yet  the  twin  processes  are  united  by  no  physical
nexus.  The  affirmative  answer  involves  the  difficulty  that  distance  is
not  known  to  have  any  effect  on  the  transmission,  which  is  contrary  to
what  obtains  in  all  known  exhibitions  of  vibratory  energy.  (Both
horns  of  the  dilemma  can  of  course  be  avoided  on  the  supposition  that
the  accepted  view  as  to  the  necessary  correlation  of  psychical  with
nervous  events  is  only  a  rough  approximation  to  a  more  complete
truth,  which  the  limitations  of  our  view  of  matter  and  physical  forces
keep  out  of  our  sight.)  But  if  it  exists,  this  mode  of  physical  afTection
is  at  any  rate  something  per  se  ;  it  is  remote  from  any  of  the  recog-


Hypnotism  and  Teleimthy.


227


nised  modes,  to  which  eyes  and  ears  and  nerve-endings  are  indis-
pensable instruments,  and  in  which  the  effect  on  the  impressed
organism  (to  wit,  certain  chemical  explosions  of  nerve  and  brain-
matter)  bears  no  resemblance  whatever,  but  only  a  correspondence,  to
the  physical  facts — visible  or  audible,  or  tactile  or  olfactory — in  the  im-
p>ressing  organism.  And  this  difference  is  so  I'adical  that,  for  purposes
of  terminology,  the  neglect  of  the  hypothetical  physical  basis,  and  the
appropriation  of  the  word  "  psychical "  to  transferences  where  the
psychical  facts  are  patent,  while  no  physical  fact  of  any  sort  is
cognisable  by  our  senses  or  our  instruments,  seems  as  defensible  as
it  is  convenient.

THE  RIVAL  HYPOTHESIS  OP "  PSYCHIC  FORCE " OR  WILL-POWER.

§  6.  The  above  theory  has  been  stated  in  general  outline  only,  and
needs  guarding  and  amplifying  in  several  ways.  But  I  must  first
pause  to  consider  an  objection  that  may  be  made  to  it  in  limine.  It
may  be  said  that,  in  opposing  the  conception  of  thought-transference,
pure  and  simple,  to  that  of  a  physical  effluence  or  current  of  force,
operating  across  indefinite  spaces,  and  neither  nullified  nor  confused  by
other  physical  effluences  or  currents  proceeding  from  other  human
beings  on  its  route,  I  have  simplified  the  issue  overmuch,  and  that
there  is  a  third  possible  hypothesis  : — namely,  that  a  force  is  set  in
operation  which  is  truly  psychical,  in  the  sense  that  it  originates  in  the
operator's  mind,  while  its  medium  of  transmission,  if  it  has  one,
remains  unknown  and  unguessed,  but  which  is  diflerent  from  and
independent  of  any  known  psychical  or  physical  agency  ;  the  ultimate
facts  being  simply  that  the  distant  operator  ivills  that  the  "  subject "
shall  be  entranced,  and  that  in  consequence  he  is  entranced,  without
any  middle  term  of  mental  suggestion  or  anything  else.  This  hypo-
thesis underlies  much  that  has  been  written  about  the  relation  of  will-
power to  mesmerism ;  and  has  been  strongly  suggested  in  our  own
day  in  much  of  the  language  used  about  "  psychic  force."  It  is  what
Schopenhauer  advocated  in  his  description  of  the  magnetic  or
generally  magical  influence  proceeding  from  intentional  willing  "  ;  ^  for
he  speaks  of  this  will-influence  as  "  toto  genere  diflerent  from  every
other " ;  and  this  although  he  seems  to  have  encountered  and  fully
admitted  certain  facts  of  mental  suggestion  proper,  having  in  the
preceding  sentence  spoken  of  communicated  (telepathic)  dreams,  and
of  community  of  thought  between  mesmeriser  and  "  subject."  The
view  clearly  involves  nothing  less  than  a  complete  breach  in  the
physical  order.  The  psychical  cause  and  the  physical  effect  on  the
organism  of  another  person  are  as  completely  disparate  as  my  resolve  to

1  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea  (Haldane  and  Kemp's  translation),  Vol.  III.,  p.  76.

Q  2


228


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


kick  a  chair  over  and  the  fallen  chair,  while  no  physical  nexus,
parallel  to  the  kick,  exists  between  them.  Or  rather,  since  the
changes  in  B's  organism,  being  matters  of  intimate  physiology,  are
changes  which  A,  who  is  supposed  to  cause  them,  knows  and  thinks
nothing  about,  what  he  is  supposed  to  do  is  precisely  analogous  to
building  a  stone  wall  at  a  distance  from  where  one  is  standing  by  an
exercise  of  the  will  which  involves  no  idea  of  moving  the  stones.
Schopenhauer,  indeed,  might  be  able  to  conceive  this  as  "  an  actio  in
distans  which  the  will,  certainly  proceeding  from  the  individual,  yet
performs  in  its  metaphysical  quality  as  the  omnipresent  substratum  of
the  whole  of  nature."  But  we  are  not  all  Schopenhauers  ;  and  those
who  are  unable  to  reach  the  substratum  of  nature  with  his  clue,  and  to
whom  even  his  "  will  of  the  world  "  appears  something  of  a  will-o'-the-
wisp,  may  feel  the  difficulty  here  propounded  in  relation  to  the
individual  will  to  be  a  serious  one.  At  any  rate  the  hypothesis  of
a  transferred  idea  which  I  have  advanced,  accords,  as  completely  as
Schopenhauer's  theory  conflicts,  Avith  the  modern  psychological  doctrine
of  will ;  according  to  which,  will  holds  no  separate  or  exceptional  re-
lation to  those  physical  events  which  it  habitually  initiates  and
controls — the  movements  of  one's  own  body — but  is  in  essence  nothing
else  than  ideation,  and  has  its  physical  seat  wholly  in  ideational
centres.  "When  we  exert  our  will  "  (to  quote  Professor  W.  James)
"  we  simply  fill  our  mind  with  an  idea  which  but  for  our  efforts  would
slip  away."  And  telepathic  "  suggestion  "  is  simply  the  transference
of  such  an  idea.

§  7.  I  do  not  pretend,  however,  that  the  theory  of  "  psychic  force,"
as  opposed  to  that  of  mental  suggestion,  need  be  held  in  this  extreme
metaphysical  form.  The  distant  effect  might  be  referred  to  A's
volition  in  virtue,  not  of  its  "  magical  influence,"  but  of  the  cerebration
which  accompanies  it ;  and  either  ( 1 )  the  cerebral  events  involved
in  B's  trance  might  be  held  to  be  directly  due,  though  dissimilar,
to  the  cerebral  events  in  A,  or  (2)  some  prior  and  equally  dissimilar
cerebral  event  in  B,  accompanied  by  some  unknown  psychosis  dissimilar
to  A's  {e.g.,  some  mood  or  mode  of  feeling  presenting  nothing  of  the
nature  of  idea),  might  be  assumed  as  an  intervening  link. ^  As  regards
this  notion  of  an  unknown  psychosis,  if  a  priori  likelihoods  had  any
application  to  modes  of  psychical  interaction,  one  might  at  any  rate
feel  it  unlikely  that  terminal  events  so  closely  related  as  B's  trance

1  A  third  alternative  is  possible — that  some  cerebral  condition  in  A  (e.g.,  a  certain
initiatory  tendency  towards  trance  in  himself)  is  reproduced  in  B,  without  psychosis.
This  would  still  leave  clear  my  fundamental  distinction  (depending  on  similarity  of
primary  effect  in  recipient  to  cause  in  agent)  between  telepathic  communications  and
all  others.  But  the  reasons  for  regarding  psychosis  in  B  as  probable  are  given
a  little  later.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


-  229


and  A's  desire  for  B's  trance  should  be  causally  connected  by  an
unknown  psychical  state  resembling  neither  ;  but  I  should  be  content
to  urge  that  the  hypothesis  is  gratuitous,  when  we  remember  that
there  is  one  known  psychical  state  which  is  known  also  to  lead  on
naturally  to  trance — namely,  that  idea  of  trance,  the  unique  effect  of
which  can  be  so  completely  tested  by  verbal  suggestion.  But  a  graver
objection — and  one  which  applies  to  both  the  above  hypotheses  alike —
lies  in  the  nature  of  the  physical  assumption.  No  doubt,  it  may  be
said  that  anyone  who  can  entertain  for  a  moment  the  idea  of  brain
acting  on  brain  at  a  distance  has  no  business  with  speculative  scruples
— that,  finding  himself  upon  such  unknown  ground,  he  need  not
hesitate  to  go  further,  and  imagine  a  complete  difference  between  the
physical  cause  and  the  physical  effect.  But  even  if  a  needless  step
were  justified  merely  by  being  taken  in  the  dark,  we  should  at  least
observe  that  this  particular  step  breaks  away,  not  only  from  the  analogy
of  verbal  suggestion,  but  from  the  only  conception  of  a  physical  nexus
which  has  in  any  degree  commended  the  hypothesis  of  physical  com-
munication between  bi'ain  and  brain  to  scientific  minds — the  conception
suggested  by  the  analogies  of  tuning-forks,  communicated  light-vibra-
tions, induced  magnetism,  and  induced  electric  currents.-'  If  that
conception  have  any  validity,  to  conceive  that  the  brain-changes
correlated  with  the  desire  of  A,  who  remains  normally  awake,  to
entrance  B  at  a  distance,  could  directly  cause  the  quite  different
changes  which  B's  brain  undergoes  during  entrancement,  would  be
like  conceiving  a  struck  tuning-fork  as  able  to  set  into  vibration  a
fork  of  a  different  pitch,  or  the  proximity  of  magnetised  iron  as  able
to  convert  a  piece  of  wood  into  a  magnet.  And  indeed  it  is  hard  to
conceive  how,  if  sympathetic  action  be  excluded,  one  brain  should  ever
get  touch  or  jyrise  of  the  other  :  it  is  just  the  sympathetic  response
which  is  the  condition  of  response  at  all.  Why,  again,  should  A's
cerebration  have  more  virtue  than  anyone  else's,  no  idea  of  him
ex  hypothesi  being  conveyed  ?  His  peculiar  influence  has  been
established  entirely  by  a  particular  association  of  ideas  in  the
"subject's"  mind;  that  is  the  only  part  of  the  hypnogenetic  process  with
which  his  personality  is  identified  ;  and  if  such  a  thing  existed  as  a
specific  physical  power  which  would  enable  that  part  of  the  process  to
be  skipped,  and  the  "subject's"  brain  to  be  attacked  in  a  new  way  at

1  There  are,  of  course,  cases  where  vibratory  energy  does  not  reproduce,  at  the
place  where  it  takes  effect,  the  exact  form  of  its  source  :  as  where  liglit  produces
chemical  changes.  But  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  place  of  origin  and  place  of
action  of  the  nervous  force  now  in  question  are  similar  pieces  of  matter — the  same  in
their  composition,  in  their  form,  and  in  the  energies  normally  connected  with  them —
the  other  analogies  seem  paramount ;  especially  when  we  remember  the  electrical
character  now  generally  attributed  to  nerve-currents.


230


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


some  new  or  lower  point,  no  ground  appears  why  A  and  A  alone  should
possess  it.

It  must  be  clear,  I  think,  how  different  in  kind  these  objections
are  from  those  which  were  admitted  as  applying,  on  the  physical
side,  to  the  conception  of  mental  suggestion  or  thought-transference.
For  there,  even  if  we  rejected  (on  account  of  the  distance
between  the  two  brains)  the  notion  of  a  direct  physical  nexus
— even  if  we  felt  di'iven  to  regard  the  changes  in  B's  brain  as
immediately  conditioned,  not  by  the  changes  in  A's  brain,  but  by  the
psychical  appearance  of  the  idea  transferred  to  B's  mind — such  con-
ditioning in  B  would  involve  only  the  world-old  correlation  of
psychical  with  nervous  changes  in  the  individual ;  a  correlation  which,
however  variously  interpreted,  is  recognised  as  universal,  or  at  any  rate
as  the  rough  expression  of  some  deeper  reality  which  is  universal.

THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF "  SUGGESTION  "  FURTHER  SUPPORTED.

§  8.  So  far,  then,  there  appears  no  very  plausible  alternative  to  the
view  which  finds  the  key  of  telepathic  hypnotism  in  actual  sugges-
tion, conveyed  as  a  transferred  idea  from  A's  mind  to  B's.  But  this
view  can  be  reinforced  by  a  further  consideration.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  there  is  no  instance  on  record  (except  Esdaile's  mentioned  before)
of  a  person's  being  hypnotised  from  a  distance  whom  the  operator  has
not  previously  hypnotised  by  some  ordinary  process.  On  the
theory  of  mental  suggestion,  this  is  of  course  just  what  we  might
expect.  Since  a  person  new  to  hypnotism  has  never  been  hyp-
notised for  the  first  time  by  the  mere  idea  of  the  trance  ver-
bally suggested  or  read  of  in  a  book,  it  would  be  remarkable  if  the
idea  when  telepathically  suggested  were  able  to  take  effect  on  him.
But  on  any  theory  which  excludes  mental  suggestion,  it  is  difficult  to
see  how  the  fact  of  the  "  subject's "  previous  hypnotisation  could
make  a  difference ;  for  apart  from  mental  suggestion,  he  would  not  be
attacked  at  any  special  vulnerable  poiiit.  Such  a  point  consists
simply  in  the  idea  of  entrancement  by  A  (localised  in  particular  brajn-
changes),  which  has  been  specialised  and  sensitised  by  association  with
the  actual  fact  of  such  entrancement  on  previous  occasions ;  and  in
the  supposed  case,  ex  hypothesi,  no  idea  of  entrancement  makes  its
appearance.  Now,  except  when  attacked  at  tlie  vulnerable  point,
there  is  no  reason  why  previously-hypnotised  persons  should  be  more
liable  to  be  entranced  than  anyone  else — the  existence  of  the  vulner-
able point  being  simply  an  explanation  of  the  fact  that  they  are  so
liable.  Thus,  to  take  another  case,  if  a  strong  man  has  felt  giddy
and  has  tottered  when  standing  over  the  brink  of  precipices,  the  idea
of  standing  over  a  precipice  may  afterwards  make  him  feel  giddy  and
totter  ;  but  he  is  not  more  given  than  other  people  to  tottei'ing  when


Hypnotism  and  Teleioatliy.


231


walking  across  the  room,  and  would  oppose  as  much  resistance  as  other
people  to  an  external  push.  Just  so,  apparently,  should  previously-
hypnotised  persons  ojapose  as  much  resistance  as  their  neighbours  to  the
supposed  push  or  compulsion  of  an  external  will,  or  to  other  telepathic  in-
iiuences  which  differed  in  character  from  any  to  which  they  had  previously
yielded  ;  so  that  the  confinement  of  the  hypnotising  effect  of  such
influences  to  that  particular  class  of  persons  would  need  fresh  assump-
tions to  explain  it.

THE  TRANSFERRED  "  SUGGESTION  "  INCLUDES  THE  IDEA
OF  THE  OPERATOR.

§  9.  We  may  now  proceed  to  examine  the  hypothesis  of  mental  sug-
gestion at  a  distance  a  little  more  in  detail.  First,  Avhat  are  we  to
suppose  the  contents  of  the  transferred  idea  to  be  1  The  answer  will
naturally  be  found  by  examining  the  contents  of  the  idea  which  is
found  to  be  hypnogenetically  effective  when  suggested  through  the
recognised  channels  of  sense,  in  the  presence  of  the  "subject."  And
it  at  once  becomes  evident  that  something  more  than  the  mere  idea  of
trance  is  included.  That  idea  might  be  suggested  by  reading  a  de-
scription of  a  hypnotic  experiment  in  a  book  ;  it  has  often  been  sug-
gested when  hypnotic  phenomena  have  been  described  and  discussed  by
persons  in  the  same  room  with  the  "  subject " ;  but  in  such  circum-
stances it  has  not  been  found  to  produce  any  effect.  Is  the  additional
condition,  then,  that  the  idea  shall  be  suggested  with  some  show  of
authority  or  insistance,  as  in  the  tone  of  the  word  Dormez  1  But  let
someone  who  has  not  previously  hypnotised  the  "  subject,"  and
who  is  in  no  way  connected  in  the  "  subject's "  mind  with  the
previous  hypnotiser,  pronounce  such  a  command  as  authoritatively
as  he  likes,  and  no  hypnotic  result  will  follow.  I  would  not
indeed  venture  to  assert  that  it  is  impossible  that  trance  should
be  thus  induced  in  an  extremely  sensitive  "  subject ";  but  I
cannot  discover  that  it  ever  has  been  so  induced.  The  necessary
condition  then  seems  to  be  that  the  suggestion  or  command  shall  come
from  the  original  operator  ;  that  is  to  say,  ra-pport  is  involved — at
any  rate  to  the  extent  of  memory  of  a  past  relation  between  the  two
parties.  But  here  there  seems  at  first  sight,  a  certain  difficulty  in
connecting  the  near  (or  physical)  with  the  distant  (or  psychical)  sug-
gestion. In  the  former  case  the  idea  of  the  operator  in  the  "  sub-
ject's "  mind,  and  a  sense  of  the  past  relation  with  him,  is  practically
ensured  by  his  actual  presence  and  voice  ;  the  "  subject  "  cannot  help
associating  the  command,  when  it  comes,  with  the  person  who  gives  it.
But  when  the  two  parties  are  separated,  and  the  command  is  tele-
patliically  conveyed,  there  is  nothing  to  connect  it  in  the  "  subject's  "
mind  with  the  person  who  ti'ansmits  it,  unless  an  idea  suggestive  of  that


232


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


person  is  simultaneously  transmitted.  Now  among  the  recorded
examples  of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance  we  do  undoubtedly  find  a  cei'-
tain  number  where  such  an  idea  seems  clearly  to  have  been  trans-
mitted, since  it  unmistakably  appears  in  the  "  subject's  "  consciousness.
This  was  the  case  with  Madame  B.,  who  was  able  to  distinguish
whether  it  was  Dr.  Gibert  or  Professor  Janet  who  was  affecting  her  ;
and  the  occasion  when  Dr.  Dusart's  "  subject "  was  conscious  of  his
inhibitory  influence  may  fairly  be  referred  to  the  same  class.  But  in
other  cases  the  trance-condition  supervenes  without  any  conscious
occupation  of  the  "  subject's  "  mind  with  the  person  who  is  influen-
cing him.  We  might  even  go  further  and  say  that  it  supervenes
without  even  tlie  idea  of  itself  being  presented  as  an  obviously  separate
and  prior  condition.  "We  cannot,  as  in  cases  of  verbal  suggestion,
point  to  the  moment  when  the  idea  obtains  lodgment  in  the  mind,  and
trace  its  effects  from  that  moment.  The  consciousness  of  the  idea,  so
far  as  it  exists,  is  indistinguishable  from  the  general  mental  condition
of  on-coming  trance.

THE  IDEA  MAY  AFFECT  AN  "  UNCONSCIOUS  "  PART  OF  THE  RECIPIENT'S
MIND,  AND  NEED  NOT  EVEN  OCCUPY  A  PROMINENT  POSITION  IN
THE  transmitter's  CONSCIOUSNESS.

§  10.  Now  as  regards  the  mere  fact  that  the  mental  suggestion  is  truly
transferred,  even  in  the  cases  where  the  recipient  is  not  conscious  of
it,  a  proof  of  the  strongest  kind  is  aflPorded  by  the  cases  where  he  is  con-
scious of  it.  It  seems  almost  inconceivable  that  experiments  in  telepathic
hypnotisation,  which  agree  in  every  point  except  this  of  the  "  subject's  "
consciousness,  should  involve  radically  different  processes.  But  if  we
look  a  little  deeper,  this  special  point — the  effectiveness  of  an  idea
which  does  not  make  any  separate  and  distinct  impression  in  con-
sciousness— will  probably  not  be  felt  as  an  objection  to  the  theory  of
telepathic  suggestion  by  anyone  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of  tele-
pathy in  branches  unconnected  with  hypnotism ;  I  might  almost  say,
by  anyone  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of  mere  automatism — since
the  production  by  automatic  writing  of  words  and  intelligent  sentences,
which  the  writer  himself  has  afterwards  to  read  in  order  to  learn  what
they  are,  is  a  sufficiently  well-recognised  phenomenon.  But  in  such
cases  it  can  scarcely  ever  be  proved  that  what  is  written  is  originated,
at  the  moment,  by  any  specially  directed  mental  activity  ;  the  ideas
belong,  perhaps,  to  the  vast  crowd  which  have  had  a  previous  exist-
ence in  the  mind,  and  have  left  their  impression  on  the  brain,  and  it  is
merely  owing  to  some  accident  of  cerebral  circulation  or  chemistry
that  the  impressions  belonging  to  the  particular  ideas  which  appear  in
the  writing  were  revivified  at  that  particular  minute  ;  a  minute  later.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


233


and  it  might  be  the  turn  of  others  to  be  similarly  re^^vified.  "We
must  have  recourse,  thez'efore,  to  telepathic  experiments — where  the
idea  is  then  and  there  transferred  from  another  mind — for  the  requisite
proof  that  a  new  idea,  conditioned  by  something  other  than  the  spon-
taneous workings  of  the  brain,  may  produce  marked  effects  without
making  any  appearance  in  its  receiver's  consciousness.  Experiments
yielding  this  proof  have  not,  so  far,  been  numerous — it  must  be  remem-
bered that  deliberate  telepathic  experimentation  is  in  its  veriest
infancy  ;  but  I  am  content  to  rely  on  those  recorded  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living;^  and  especially  on  the  remarkable  series  carried  out  by  the
Rev.  P.  H.  ISTewnham  and  his  wife,  where  a  very  large  number  of
questions  mentally  put  by  him  were  relevantly  answered  in  writing,
produced  by  a  planchette  on  which  Mrs.  jSTewnham's  hand  was  laid,
without  her  having  herself  any  idea  wliat  the  question  or  the  answer
was.  The  production  of  hypnotic  trance  by  an  unconscious  idea  -  can
scarcely  be  held  to  be  a  more  extreme  instance  of  "  underground  "
mental  activity  than  this.

§11.  This  argument  naturally  applies  equally  to  both  the  ideas  which
we  have  supposed  to  obtain  a  lodgment  in  the  "subject's"  mind — the  idea
of  trance,  and  the  idea  of  the  distant  hypnotiser.  But  as  regards  this
latter  idea,  there  is  a  further  difficulty.  For  it  may  be  said,  and  pro-
bably with  justice  in  most  cases,  that  the  mind  of  the  hypnotiser  him-
self is  not  consciously  occupied  with  the  idea  of  himself ;  he  is
concentrating  his  thoughts  on  the  "  subject "  and  on  the  effect  which
he  desires  to  produce,  not  on  his  own  personality,  or  his  own  unique
relation  to  tlie  "subject"  as  the  source  of  the  effect.  And  we  cannot
at  once  answer  this  objection  by  the  assumption  that  ideas  may  be
telepathically  propagated  from  an  unconscious  part  of  the  transmitter's
mind,  just  as  they  may  take  effect  in  an  unconscious  part  of  the
recipient's  mind.  For  supposing  the  transmitter's  mind  to  include  an
"  unconscious  part "  which  is  more  than  a  mere  general  name  for  the
legion  of  past  ideas  that  are  now  all  alike  latent  and  revivable — an
"  unconscious  part  '  where  positive  activities  are  possible,  and  one  idea

1  See  A^ol.  I.,  pix  63-79,  84,  and  Vol.  II.,  pp.  670-1.

-  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  this  expression,  but  I  of  coiu-se  do  not  mean  by  it  mere
"unconscious  cerebration."  My  whole  view  of  telepathic  transference  is  that  it  is  a
psychical  event— -srith  a  physical  side  possibly,  but  psychical  certainly  ;  consequently
the  idea  transferred,  in  this  as  in  every  other  case,  must  have  complete  psychical
reality.  In  calling  it  unconscious,  therefore,  I  am,  for  convenience,  confining  the
meaning  of  "conscious"  to  the  mode  or  plane  of  ordinary  human  experience — in  which
we  may  surmise  the  true  consciousness  of  the  individual  to  be  only  partially  mani-
fested. The  facts  of  telepathy  drive  us,  I  think,  to  conceive  a  segregation  of  conscious
states  more  pronounced  than  that  which  examples  of  double  or  alternating  "conscious-
ness" had  previously  suggested  ;  and  before  long  philosophy  may  probably  find  one  of
its  chief  battle-grounds  in  questions  as  to  the  existence  and  nature  their  underlying
unity.


234


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


can  take  precedence  of  others,  just  as  in  the  conscious  part, — we  still
need  some  reason  for  the  activity  and  prominence  assumed,  seemingly,
by  this  particular  idea  of  himself,  just  at  the  moment  when'  it  suits  our
theory  that  it  should  come  to  the  front.  Readers  of  Phantasms  of  the
Living  may  recall  that  the  same  problem  presented  itself  in  respect  of
a  large  number  of  the  cases  of  "  spontaneous  telepathy  "  there  recorded,
where  an  idea  of  the  "  agent  "  was  most  vividly  presented  to  the
"  percipient "  (often  even  externalising  itself  as  a  hallucination  of  the
senses),  while  yet  the  "  agent's  "  mind  at  the  time  was  pi'esumably
not  dwelling  on  himself  or  his  appearance,  and  indeed  was  some-
times not  ostensibly  dwelling  on  anything  at  all,  being  in  a  state
of  lethargy  or  coma.

This  fact  may  seem  cleai'ly  to  separate  such  spontaneous  cases
from  the  other  class,  including  the  majority  of  cases  of  ex-
perimental thought-transference,  where  the  definite  idea  on  which
one  mind  is  concentrated  is  reproduced  in  the  other ;  and  in  a
criticism  of  the  telepathic  theory  which  appeared  in  Mind,  Yol,  IX.,
p.  607,  it  was  not  unreasonably  suggested  that  the  difi'erence  was
so  radical  as  to  make  the  inclusion  of  the  two  sets  of  facts  under
a  common  conception  decidedly  difficult.  I  fully  admit  this,  if  the
conception  is  to  be  a  -physical  one  :  I  admit,  that  is,  the  difficulty
(which  better  knowledge  might  overcome)  of  formulating  a  theory  of
"  brain-waves  "  which  should  make  it  seem  as  natural  that  B  should
receive  a  telepathic  impression  of  A,  who  is  thinking  of  other  things  or
not  thinking  at  all,  as  that  B  should  receive  a  telepathic  impression  of
a  card  on  which  A  is  painfully  concentrating  his  attention,  or  of  a
scene  which  engages  A's  eyes  at  the  moment  when  he  is  passing
through  a  crisis  of  emotional  excitement.  But  until  physics  and
physiology  can  offer  some  explanation  of  the  former  fact  on  its  own
account,  I  do  not  tliink  that  their  failure  to  supply  an  obvious  ground
of  connection  between  the  former  fact  and  the  latter  is  a  reason  for
doubting  the  reality  of  a  connection  which  on  psychical  grounds  is
strongly  suggested.  And  keeping  to  the  psychical  aspect,  we  may  say
that  the  idea  of  self  is  an  altogether  exceptional  one,  occupying,  even
when  it  is  not  prominent,  a  permanent  place  in  the  background  or
middle  distance  of  consciousness  ;  and  that  the  idea  of  its  corpoi'al
embodiment — i.e.,  of  that  expression  of  it  which  is  almost  inevitably
represented  in  other  people's  ideas  of  it — is  associated  more  or  less
closely  with  a  vast  number  of  the  items  of  thought  and  feeling  which
make  up  everyone's  daily  experience.  Nor  does  the  hypothesis  of  a
wider  self,  embracing  planes  or  stages  of  consciousness  beyond  the
consciousness  of  normal  experience,  involve  anything  which  would
affect  this  exceptional  position  of  the  idea  of  self ;  for  the  segregation
of  conscious  states  which  that  hypothesis  supposes,  in  no  way  involves


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


235


a  disruption  of  individuality  ;  and  the  pervading  sense  of  association
with  an  objective  organism  may  perfectly  well  be  common  to  all  the
states.  It  cannot  then,  I  think,  seem  very  surprising  if  those  special
mental  activities  which  at  special  seasons  condition  a  telepathic  transfer
— whether  at  the  approach  of  death,  or  in  tlie  shock  of  sudden  danger
or  excitement,  or  in  the  concentration  of  attention  and  will  necessary
for  an  experiment  in  distant  hypnotising — are  accompanied  by  a  special
self-realisation,  a  true  quickening  of  the  idea  of  self,  even  though  that
idea  does  not  detach  itself  on  the  plane  of  consciousness  which  limits
our  ordinary  conception  of  personality.

§  12.  I  am  aware  of  the  risk  of  paying  one's  self  with  words  in  such
speculations;  and  I  specially  recognise  the  danger  of  physical  analogies,
such  as  I  have  just  used  in  the  word  playie.  Modes  of  expression
derived  from  a  known  order  of  facts  can  never  really  seem  explanatory
of  a  novel  order  till  their  connotation  has  grown — that  is,  till  the  novel
order  has  ceased  to  be  novel ;  and  meanwhile  pseudo-explanation  is
only  too  easy.  But  the  phenomena  of  telepathy  are  there,  and,  how-
ever much  hidden  from  our  sight,  the  process  of  causation  must  be
there  also  ;  and  some  indulgence  may  be  claimed  for  a  hypothetical
picture  of  that  process  which  is  confessedly  crude,  as  long  as  its  crude-
ness  is  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  make  its  elements  distinct.  Now,
the  notion  of  segregated  departments  of  mental  life,  of  which  a  more
complete  intelligence  can  perceive  the  unity,  is  not  an  indistinct  notion,
though  probably  it  very  imperfectly  represents  the  facts ;  and  if  it  has
any  truth  at  all,  then  "  plane  of  consciousness  "  has  a  true  psychical
meaning,  and  is  more  than  a  slippery  metaphorical  phrase.  And  if
the  plea  of  necessity  will  excuse  the  use  of  Tpliysical  terms,  so,  I  think,
will  it  excuse  the  use  of  metaphysical,  in  spite  of  a  certain  awkward-
ness in  the  actuality  suddenly  given  to  somewhat  recondite  notions.
For  in  truth  the  problems  which  telepathy  presents  lie  on  the  border-
land of  psychology  and  metaphysics  ;  and  in  attacking  them  psychology
has  to  trespass,  or  rather  to  make  distinct  claims,  on  the  metaphysical
territory.  It  hnds  itself  driven,  by  the  facts  under  observation,  to  tie
down  to  actual  individual  cases  ideas — like  those  of  unconscious  mind
and  of  a  transcendental  self — which  have  dwelt  so  continuously  in  the
misty  heights  of  purely  abstract  reasonings  that  they  present  an  odd,
incongruous  appearance  when  brought  to  earth.  The  "  philosophy  of
the  unconscious "  is  shy  of  adapting  itself  to  the  unconscious  part  of
Mr.  A.  ;  it  seems  hardly  worth  while  for  the  "  self  "  to  be  transcendent,
if  all  that  it  is  to  transcend  is  the  ordinary  phenomenal  consciousness
of  Madame  B.  Yet,  Mr.  A.  and  Madame  B.  are  types  of  humanity ;
and  in  examining  the  bond  which  unites  them,  we  are  really  on  the
traces  of  an  idealism  which  is  metaphysical  enough  in  all  conscience,
as  pointing  to  a  potential  unity  of  all  similarly  constructed  minds,  but


236


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


which  is  nothing  if  not  concrete,  and  a  key  to  nothing  except  imme-
diate facts  of  individual  experience.

SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRECEDING  ARGUMENT.

§  13.  To  sum  up  the  argument,  as  so  far  developed,  we  have  been
considering  the  subject  of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance,  as  one  which
certain  recent  cases  had  made  it  as  impossible  for  students  of  Hypnotism
as  it  must  in  any  case  have  been  for  students  of  Telepathy  to  over-
look. I  have  advanced  the  view  that  these  telepathic  entrancements
necessitated  no  hypothesis  of  will-power  or  "  psychic  force  "  capable
of  producing  effects  in  external  matter — viz.,  the  organism  of  B,  the
"  subject  " — which  differed  from  their  cause  in  A,  the  hypnotiser  ;  that
the  phenomenon  might  be  perfectly  well  regarded  as  a  genuine  instance
of  thought-transference  or  mental  suggestion — certain  mental  move-
ments of  A 's,  and  certain  brain-movements  correlated  therewith,  being
sympathetically  7'e;)?-od''?(cerf  in  the  mind  and  brain  of  B,  who  was  entranced
by  the  idea  of  trance  in  association  with  the  idea  of  A,  just  as  he  might  be
entranced  by  those  ideas  when  suggested  by  A.'s  voice  and  presence.  I  have
further  pointed  out  that  it  is  quite  in  accordance  with  what  we  know  of
telepathy  in  other  directions  that  these  ideas,  when  transferred,  should
take  effect  in  some  secondary  plane  of  the  "  subject's  "  mind — a  plane
segregated  off  from  the  conscious  self  as  ordinarily  understood.^  And
I  must  now  pursue  the  discussion  by  recurring  for  a  brief  space  to  the
connection  between  telepathic  hypnotism  and  other  forms  of  telepathy,
which  occupy  the  greater  portion  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  I  may
begin  by  showing  how,  on  the  view  which  I  have  advanced  as  to  the
former,  a  certain  difficulty,  or  rather  a  certain  lacuna,  which  the  latter
present,  seems  to  be  removed.

THE  CASES  OF  TELEPATHIC  HYPNOTISM  FORM  A  LINK  BETWEEN  THE
ORDINARY  EXPERIMENTAL  AND  THE  ORDINARY  SPONTANEOUS  CASES
OF  TELEPATHY.

§  14.  To  state  the  position  briefly — the  principal  telepathic  phenomena
dealt  with  in  that  book  are  (1)  experiments  in  thought-transference,
where  "  agent  "  and  "  percipient  "  are  near  one  another,  and  where
some  prominent  idea  in  the  "  agent's  "  mind  is  reproduced  in  the
"  percipient's  "  mind  as  an  idea  simply  ;  and  (2)  cases  of  spontaneous
occurrence  (i.e.,  not,  as  in  experiments,  deliberately  sought)  where  the
"  agent  "  and  "  percipient  "  as  a  rule  are  far  apart,  and  where  an
impression  representative  of  the  "  agent  "  is  made  on  one  or  more  of

1  For  further  proofs  of  the  reality  of  mental  processes  carried  on  apart  from  the
normal  stream  of  the  individual's  consciousness,  and  in  that  sense  without  his  know-
ledge, see  Mr.  Myers's  paper  on  "  Automatic  Writing,  "and  my  own  on  "Peculiarities
of  certain  Post-hypnotic  States,"  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


237


the  "  percipient's"  senses.  These  two  sorts  of  occurrence  seem,  on  the
face  of  them,  very  different ;  if  they  are  fundamentally  akin,  they
seem  to  need  a  connecting  link  ;  and  we  can  imagine  various  inter-
mediate phenomena  which  would  serve  the  purpose.  The  link  might
consist  in  experiments  similar  to  the  ordinary  experiments  in  thought-
transference,  except  in  the  point  that  the  two  persons  concerned  are
far  apart  instead  of  near  together.  I  have  to  admit  the  absence,  and
also  the  urgent  need,  of  such  experiments.  They  would,  however,  be
dithcult  and  tedious  to  carry  out ;  and  a  long  series  of  results,  such
as  would  be  required,  could  hardly  be  obtained  except  by  the  aid  of
telegraph  or  telephone.^  Another  sort  of  link  would  be  if  the
"  agent's  "  conscious  idea  spontaneously  reproduced  itself  (without  the
coincidence  being  fairly  attributable  to  chance)  in  the  mind  of  a  distant
percipient.  Now  of  this  Phantasms  of  the  Living  contains  a  good  many
well-attested  specimens.  It  is  true  that  the  idea  reproduced  has  not  been
exactly  of  the  same  order  as  those  reproduced  in  thought-trans-
ference experiments ;  that  is,  it  has  not  been  of  anything  quite
so  simple  and  unemotional  as  a  card,  number  or  diagram ;  but
as  a  rule  has  represented  sights  or  sounds  which  have  been  occu-
pying the  "  agent's  "  senses  at  some  moment  of  crisis  or  excitement.
This  difference,  however,  can  hardly  surprise  us.  For  in  the  hrst  place
we  should  expect  some  exceptional  affection  of  the  "  agent  "  to  be  a
necessary  condition  of  the  spontaneous  transference,  just  as  an  excep-
tional and  often  painful  concentration  of  attention  is  necessary  in  the
card  and  diagram  experiments. And  in  the  second  place,  spontaneous

An  excellent  form  of  experiment  for  the  purpose  would  be  the  guessing  of
numbers,  in  the  way  exemplified  in  Phantasms  of  the  I/iving,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  653-4.  If
the  two  persons  concerned  in  that  series  would  try  a  similar  series  at  a  distance,  the
necessary  information  as  to  when  each  guess  had  been  made  and  a  fresh  number
might  be  taken  being  conveyed  by  telephone,  and  if  successful  results  were  obtained,
the  fact  would  be  of  the  very  highest  interest  and  importance.  "  Why  then,"  I  may
be  asked,  "  do  you  not  get  the  trial  made?"  The  reason  is  typical  of  difficulties
which  only  those  actively  engaged  in  "psychical  research"  can  appreciate.  The
material  for  study  consists  in  human  beings  with  occupations  and  wills  of  their  own,
and  as  a  rule  vsdth  no  independent  interest  in  the  subject.  Even  supposing  two  quiet
rooms  connected  by  the  necessary  apparatus  to  be  secured  at  the  necessary  hours,  the
plan  proposed  would  demand  a  considei-able  amount  of  trouble,  and  perhaps  in  all
(counting  time  for  going  and  coming  back)  an  hour  and  a-half  of  time,  on  each  of
about  15  days.  Now  to  any  hornl  fide  psychical  researcher,  this  expenditure  of  time
and  trouble  would  of  course  seem  the  merest  trifle.  But  I  would  ask
each  of  my  readers  whether  he  feels  able  confidently  to  make  such  a  demand
of  any  couple,  taken  at  random,  among  his  female  acquaintance,  in  the  interest
of  an  inquiry  of  which  they  do  not  understand  the  bearings,  and  of  which
their  only  idea  is  that  it  is  bothersome  and  scientific.  At  present  the  persons  who
would  be  willing  to  take  the  trouble  are  probably  nearly  as  rare  as  the  persons  suiii-
ciently  endowed  with  the  necessary  faculty  to  give  the  experiment  a  chance  ;  and
assistants  in  whom  both  conditions  are  realised  are  clearly  not  likely  to  be  found  every
day,  or  even  every  year.  But  of  course  the  desirability  of  finding  them  will  be
steadily  kept  in  view.


238


Hypnotism  and  Teleixdhy.


transferences  of  ideas  unconnected  with  any  specially-marked  moment
might  occur  between  the  same  persons  every  day,  without  ever  having
a  chance  of  exciting  attention  or  being  recorded.  In  the  mind  of  a
"percipient"  who  was  not  (as  in  the  experiments)  deliberately  putting
himself  into  a  passive  and  receptive  attitude,  a  transferred  idea  would
probably  at  most  reach  the  bare  threshold  of  consciousness,  where  it
would  meet  and  jostle  with  a  hundred  others,  while  bearing  in  itself  no
sign  of  its  origin  :  what,  then,  is  the  likelihood  that  the  "percipient"
would  pick  it  out,  note  it,  and  ask  all  his  absent  acquaintance  whether
their  minds  were  fixed  on  a  similar  one  at  that  particular  time  ^  And
even  if  some  sporadic  correspondences  of  the  sort  were  noted,  they
could  scarcely  be  presented  as  "ostensive  instances"  of  telepathy,  con-
sidering the  immense  range  for  accidental  coincidence  that  the  world
of  ideas  common  to  all  of  us  contains.  I  think  therefore  that  the
ostensive  instances  which  I  have  mentioned  present  in  their  content  as
much  affinity  to  the  experimental  transference  as  could  reasonably  be
expected.

But  yet  a  third  link  of  connection  between  the  experimental  and
the  spontaneous  cases  would  be  of  this  sort — if  an  impression  represen-
tative of  the  "  agent  "  were  made  on  the  "  percipient's  "  mind,  without
any  affection  of  his  senses.  Such  a  case  would  resemble  the  majority
of  the  spontaneous  transferences  in  the  nature  of  the  idea  transferred
and  the  majority  of  the  experimental  transferences  in  the  absence  of
sensory  afiection  on  the  "percipient's"  side;  and  the  type  would  indirectly
afford  a  strong  indication  that  the  sensory  affections — phantasms  of  forms
and  voices — which  characterise  so  many  of  the  impressions  that  have
coincided  with  the  death  or  danger  of  friends  at  a  distance,  are  really
mental  creations  of  the  "  percipient's  "  own  (or,  as  I  have  never  hesitated
to  call  them,  hallucinations),  in  which  he. invests  the  idea  of  the  "  agent "
that  has  telepathically  reached  him.  Now  the  cases  of  distant  hypno-
tisation,  explained  as  I  have  here  endeavoured  to  explain  them,  supply
exactly  this  transitional  type.  They  are  truly  experimental,  inasmuch
as  the  attempt  to  exercise  the  distant  influence  is  deliberately  and
consciously  made  by  the  "agent "  ;  and  the  idea  of  him  which  reaches
the  "  subject's "  mind,  sometimes  above  and  sometimes  below  the
threshold  of  consciousness  as  we  understand  it,  does  not  in  either  case
emerge  into  sensory  form.  I  may  add  that  cases  are  on  record  where
yet  further  links  or  gradations  appear  ;  for  instance,  a  person  noted  for
his  mesmeric  powers  succeeded  in  producing  a  strong  impression  of  his
presence,  which  nevertheless  contained  no  sensory  element,  on  two
friends  at  a  distance,  who  were  not  in  any  degree  hypnotised  by  the
impression.!

^Phantasms  of  the  Living, Yol.l.,  p. 09.  It  should  be  noted  that  it  is  by  nomeans  in-
variable, in  the  spontaneous  cases,  for  the  idea  of  the  "  agent "  to  be  externalised  in  the


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


239


THE  IMPULSIVE  QUALITY  OF  THE  TELEPATHIC  IMPRESSION.

§  15.  One  further  point  remains,  in  which  a  comparison  of  the  phe-
nomena of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance  with  those  of  non-hypnotic  tele-
pathy seems  to  throw  light  on  both.  In  Fliantasms  of  the  Living  I  have
drawn  attention  to  the  impulsive  quality  which  seems  often  to  charac-
terise a  telepathic  impression ;  and  which  seems  to  be  shown  equally  in
the  forms  of  expei'iment  where  a  motor-impulse  is  produced,  as,  e.g.,  in
the  palmary  instance  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham  referred  to  above ;  in
one  or  two  spontaneous  cases  where  the  impulse  similarly  was  to  write,
and  the  transferred  idea  appeared  in  the  writing ;  and  in  other  spon-
taneous cases  where  a  definite  and  peculiar  impulse  to  movement  or
action  was  conveyed ;  but  also  more  generally,  I  venture  to  think,  in
that  very  fact  of  the  frequent  externalisation  of  the  impression  as  a
sensory  percept,  which  has  been  mentioned  in  the  preceding  paragraph. ^
Ordinarily,  of  course,  our  ideas  of  our  friends,  when  they  occur  to  us,
do  not  project  themselves  outwards  as  hallucinations  representing  the
friends'  forms  or  voices ;  how  is  it  that  telepathic  ideas  so  constantly
do  so  ?  The  fact  cannot,  I  think,  be  disputed  by  anyone  who  accepts
the  telepathic  evidence,  unless  on  the  hypothesis — not  likely  to
be  entertained  by  many  of  my  readers — that  what  is  perceived  is  a
material  body,  capable  of  emitting  or  reflecting  light  and  of  setting
sound-waves  in  motion.  I  at  any  rate  see  no  escape  from
the  alternative  that  it  affects  the  percipient's  senses  either  by
stimulation  from  without  or  by  projection  from  within.  Now  if  we
accept  this  forceful  quality,  this  tendency  to  push  on  into  an  extreme
form,  in  one  class  of  telepathic  effects,  we  shall  naturally  look  out
for  it  in  another  class ;  and  the  recognition  of  it  as  a  tolerably  general
characteristic  is  pei'haps  the  only  sort  of  explanation  that  it  at  present
admits  of.  What  sign  then  do  we  find  of  it  in  the  hypnotic  cases  1
No  conclusive  sign,  at  first  sight,  it  must  be  admitted.  For  the  mere
idea,  the  mental  suggestion,  of  the  trance-condition,  in  association  with
that  of  the  hypnotiser's  personality,  has  been  already  represented  as  an
adequate  ground  for  the  supervention  of  the  trance,  alike  whether  the
idea  be  suggested  by  the  hypnotiser's  words  and  presence  or  by  telepathic
transference — the  exceptional  effect  being  accounted  for  by  the  excep-
tional sensitiveness  of  the  previously-hypnotised  "  subject,"  who  is  in  a
state,  so  to  speak,  of  highly  unstable  equilibrium.  It  would  clearly
then be  illegitimate to supplement  this  view  by attributing  an

senses.  Sometimes  the  simple  idea  of  his  death  is  conveyed  (e.g.,  in  the  cases  numbered
45,  87,  401)  ;  but  inasmuch  as  that  idea  may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  been
present  in  his  mind  during  the  approach  of  death,  such  cases  may  as  fitly  be  referred
to  the  class  where  the  "  agent's  "  idea  is  literally  reproduced  as  to  the  class  where  the
idea  o/ fern,  rather  than  few  idea,  is  the  subject  of  transfer.

Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.1.,  537-8.  ■  .


240


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


exceptional  impulsive  quality,  or  vigour  of  impact,  to  the  telepathically-
transferred  idea,  unless  we  were  able  to  suppose  some  similar  condition
in  the  cases  where  the  hypnotiser's  words  and  presence  are  ostensibly
the  only  cause  that  works  on  the  "subject."  Well,  the  point  is  now
reached  at  which  this  very  supposition  can  not  only  be  intelligibly
made,  but  sliown  to  be  in  some  instances  at  any  rate  indispensable.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  speaking  of  verbal  or  physical
suggestion  of  the  idea  of  trance,  I  pointed  out  that  this  alone  was  not
enough  to  induce  the  state  even  in  a  sensitised  "  subject,"  who  might
meet  with  the  idea  in  a  book  without  undergoing  any  effect  whatever ;
and  that  the  idea  of  the  original  hypnotiser's  personality  was  at  any
rate  an  indispensable  element.  But  it  may  be  urged  with  equal  reason
that  something  more  still  is  needed ;  for  this  other  idea  might  also  be
met  with  in  a  book — e.g.,  the  "  subject "  might  read  a  printed  account
of  his  previous  entrancements  by  his  special  hypnotiser  without  a  fresh
en trancement  ensuing.  What,  then,  makes  the  difference?  Is  it  the
sense  of  the  operator's  authority,  which  the  "  subject "  is  made  to  feel
either  by  his  tone  and  manner  or  by  a  general  belief  in  his  power  1
Very  often,  probably,  this  is  enough  ;  but  the  French  cases  epitomised
above  clearly  show  that  it  is  not  always  enough,  and  no  single  point
in  them  is  more  instructive  than  this.  Professor  Pierre  Janet,'
Dr.  Hericourt,  and  Dr.  Dusart  all  observed  that  the  "  subject's  "  belie/
that  the  entrancement  was  being  then  and  there  attempted  and
willed  by  the  special  hypnotiser  was  ineffective,  if  the  hypnotiser  was
not  really  concentrating  his  mind  in  the  manner  supposed.  This  fact
seems  explicable  only  on  the  hypothesis  that,  when  the  effect  is
produced,  some  cause  is  at  work  beyond  the  ostensible  cause  of  verbal
and  physical  suggestion  ;  and  the  cause  which,  on  the  grounds  of.
analogy  and  of  parsimony  of  assumptions,  at  once  presents  itself  is
surely  no  other  than  mental  suggestion — telepathic,  even  though  the
two  persons  are  in  the  same  room,  as  being  transferred  otherwise  than
through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense,  and  carrying  with  it  the
impulsive  quality,  which  now  involves  the  further  development  into
trance,  as  in  other  cases  it  involves  the  further  development  into
hallucination.  In  this  way  that  inscrutable  something  which  has  been
described  as  specific  "  mesmeric  "  power  would  reduce  itself  (for  the
cases  in  question)  to  identity  with  the  more  comprehensible  and  general
sort  of  telepathic  "  agency  "  ;  and  its  peculiar  effect  on  the  "subject  "
is  simply  a  pushing  on  into  an  extreme  form  in  the  direction  of  least
resistance,  wJiich  is  here  determined  as  that  of  hypnotic  trance  by  the
pre-established  sensitiveness  to  this  particular  idea.  Such  an  agency  is
no  longer  specific  in  the  sense  of  being  an  occult  mode  of  influence
which  a  few  specially  endowed  persons  have  always  at  command,  and
can  bring  to  bear  at  a  moment's  notice  on  any  favourable  "  subject  "  ;


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


241


it  receives  its  specialisation  at  the  receiving,  not  at  the  transmitting
terminus.

THE  NATURE  OF  HYPNOTIC "  RAPPORT."

§  16.  "  But,"  the  "mesmerists"  might  object,  "  does  not  this  view
of  the  hypnotic  cases  ignore  the  palpable  fact  of  the  rapport  ?  Is  it
not  mere  juggling  with  words  to  deny  any  specific  quality  to  '  mesmeric  '
agency,  if  the  rapport  which  puts  the  '  agent '  in  connection  with  the
'  subject,'  and  which  has  been  mesmerically  established,  remains  specific  ?
And  how  can  that  description  be  denied  to  it  if,  as  usually  happens,
each  of  the  two  persons  concerned  is  indispensable  to  the  other — if  A
can  at  that  particular  time  be  entranced  by  the  suggestion  of  no  one
in  the  world  except  B,  and  B's  suggestion  can  at  that  particular  time
entrance  no  one  in  the  world  except  A  ? "

Now,  in  the  first  place,  a  certain  ambiguity  lies  in  the  word  rapport.
When  A's  thought  or  sensation  has  been  transferred  to  B,  we  may  say,
if  we  like,  that  A  and  B  were  in  rapport ;  but  this  is  merely  to  coin  a
useless  definition,  and  to  throw  away  a  useful  word,  ui-iless  we  mean
by  rapport  something  which  is  different  from  the  transference,  and
which  has  conditioned  the  transference.  Taking  this  latter  sense,
I  have  no  doubt  that  such  a  thing  as  hypnotic  rapport  exists,
and  I  have  no  objection  to  the  word  specific  as  applied  to
it;  but  I  believe  the  true  application  to  be  quite  remote  from
any  theory  of  occult  or  "mesmeric"  influence.  Tor  why  need  we
assume  the  parties  to  be  connected  by  any  more  mysterious  bond  than
the  one  above  defined  (p.  225)  in  connection  with  hypnotisation
at  a  distance — the  permanent  impression  of  their  past  relations  to
one  another  ?  On  the  \iew  of  psychical  transference  (as  opposed  to
physical  effluence)  which  I  have  founded  on  the  distant  cases,  it  is  hard
to  see  that  any  further  condition  is  either  possible  or  required.  That
this  permanent  impression  in  the  hypnotic  cases  is  peculiar,  I  should
fully  admit ;  but  only,I  conceive,  in  so  far  as  the  relations  themselves  are
peculiar.  Now,  their  peculiarity  is  sufficiently  patent :  the  "subject's  "
mental  abandonment  to  the  idea  of  his  hypnotiser,  with  all  the  oddities
of  conduct  to  which  this  one-sided  engrossment  leads,are  phenomena
quite  special  to  the  hypnotic  state. ^ And  inasmuch  as  rare  causes  may

1  This  engrossment  is  implied,  of  course,  in  that  abnormal  responsiveness  to  the
hypnotisers  suggestions  which  I  regard  as  the  most  distinctive  mark  of  the  hypnotic
state.  But  it  is  shown  also  in  other  vs'ays.  The  "  subject"  will  often  seem  blind  and
deaf  to  the  presence  and  voice  of  everyone  else,  and  can  only  be  made  to  see  and  hear
some  other  person  by  the  hypnotiser 's  pointedly  bringing  such  person  to  his  notice,
so  that  the  two  become  associated  in  his  mind.  A  sensitive  "subject "  ^vill  frequently
follow  the  hypnotiser  about  the  room  or  the  house,  will  show  uneasiness  when  he
disappears,  and  will  even  feel  a  strong  impulse  to  rejoin  him  after  an  interval  of  a  day
or  of  several  days. The  same  peculiarity  seems  to  be  shown  in  a  fact  which  has  not,  I


242


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


naturally  have  rare  consequences,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing
that  a  consequence  of  this  special  relation  is  a  special  subsequent
penetrability  (so  to  speak)  of  one  mind  by  the  other — a  partial  weaken-
ing, in  a  single  direction,  of  the  barrier  which  normally  isolates
individuals,  and  confines  the  experience  of  each  to  sensations  received
through  the  recognised  channels  or  ideas  originated  by  his  own
activities.  Not,  of  course,  that  we  should  have  had  any  right  to  pre-
dict such  a  consequence  :  telepathy  could  never  be  deduced  a  priori
from  anything  else.  But  when,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  psychical
transferences  taking  place  between  certain  persons  after,  and  not  before,
their  minds  liave  been  in  a  certain  peculiar  relation  to  one  another,it  is
impossible  not  to  suspect  that  this  relation  is  a  vital  condition  of  the
transference  ;  and  if  this  relation  has  ceased  to  show  itself  in  any  re-
cognisable form  at  the  time  when  the  transferences  are  observed,  we
can  but  seek  the  immediate  condition  in  the  permanent  impression
which  it  has  left.  This  permanent  impression,  then,  and  nothing  else,
is  the  rapport ;  and  it  will  be  seen  how  everything  exceptional  and
mysterious  has  now  disappeared  out  of  it.  In  the  line  of  conditions
the  only  exceptional  part  was  found  to  lie  elsewhere — in  the  well-re-
cognised psychological  peculiarities  of  the  hypnotic  state ;  and  the
rapport  itself,  as  the  abiding  latent  sense  of  past  relations,  proves  to  be

think,  been  enough  noticed,  but  as  to  the  reality  of  which  I  would  appeal  with  con-
fidence to  anyone  who  has  assisted  at  hypnotic  experiments  conducted  by  a  good  many
different  operators  at  a  good  many  different  places.  I  mean  the  readiness  with  which
what  may  be  called  hypnotic  fashions  are  established.  A  grovip  of  "subjects  "  in  one
place,  who  have  been  a  good  deal  under  the  influence  of  the  same  operator,  will  develop
a  quite  different  set  of  habits  from  another  group  in  another  place.  A  rough  instance
of  this  is  where  one  group  prove  more  or  less  unamenable  to  inethods  of  entrancement
or  of  awakening  which  are  specially  successful  with  the  other  ;  as,  e.g.,  I  have  found
the  "subjects  "  of  one  operator  wake  with  certainty  at  a  smart  blow  or  sudden  com-
mand, while  those  of  another  seemed  recalcitrant  to  everything  except  the  flicks  of  a
towel  or  large  handkerchief  to  which  they  were  accustomed.  But  their  behaviour
during  the  trance  often  shows  a  far  more  subtle  conformity  to  what  the  operator
expects  ;  so  that  there  come  to  be  veritable  schools  of  hypnotism — the  phenomena
taking  the  course -marked  out  for  them  by  the  operator's  general  view  of  the  "subject" —
a  view  which  may  really  have  originated  to  a  considerable  extent  in  accidental
peculiarities  of  individual  "  subjects."  I  should  be  inclined,  for  example,  to  account  in
this  way  for  much  of  the  difference  between  the  observations  of  Nancy  and  of  the
Salpetrifere,  and,  in  consequence,  for  much  of  the  difference  in  the  theories  associated
respectively  with  the  two  localities.  But  I  cannot  pursue  this  subject  in  a  footnote.
What  I  wish  to  point  out  is  simply  that  these  facts  seem  to  imply  a  far  more  con-
tinuous and  minute  attention, on  the  part  of  the  "  subjects,"  to  the  substance  and  tone
of  remarks  made  by  the  operator  in  their  presence,and  a  far  stronger  impulse  to  satisfy
him,  than  would  be  exhibited  by  persons  of  the  same  degree  of  intelligence  and
education  in  ordinary  life,  or  than  would  be  guessed  from  the  appearance  of  dulness
and  apathy  which  is  usual  to  a  hypnotised  person  when  no  direct  apjDeal  is  made  to
him  from  outside.  I  am  glad  of  this  opportunity  of  modifying  some  expressions  in  a
former  paper  (Procp(rfi»<;s,  Vol.  II..  pp.  275-G)  where  a  too  large  concession  wasmadeto
the  idea  that  psychical  functions  are  abolished,  or  nearly  abolished,  in  the  lethargic
stage  of  hypnotism.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


243


fundamentally  the  same  in  kind  as  that  which  has  pre-existed  in  a  large
majority  of  the  spontaneous  telepathic  cases — where  the  "  agent"  and
"  percipient"  have  been  connected  by  ties  of  affection  or  acquaintance,
which  we  may  equally  call  specific,  in  the  sense  of  being  personal  to
each  pair,  but  not  with  any  more  occult  reference.

COMPARISON  OF  HYPNOTIC  RAPPORT  WITH  THE  RAPPORT  BETWEEN  AGENT
AND  PERCIPIENT  IN  OTHER  TELEPATHIC  CASES.

§  17.  And  if  rapjmrt,  as  a  hypnogenetic  condition,  is  not  excep-
tional in  kind,  neither  does  it  seem  necessary  to  suppose  it
exceptional  in  strength — to  suppose,  that  is,  that  it  facilitates
the  telepathic  transference  in  a  higher  degree  than  is  pos-
sible or  common  in  cases  unconnected  with  hypnotism.  For
we  must  distinguish  the  transference  as  such  from  its  further
effect  on  the  "  subject."  It  may  very  likely  be  the  case  that  the
hypnotisers  and  "  subjects  "  who,  if  the  necessary  trial  were  made,
would  yield  us  examples  of  telepathic  hypnotisation,  are  more  numerous
in  proportion  to  the  total  number  of  hypnotisers  and  "  subjects,"  than
are  the  persons  who  at  death  produce  a  marked  telepathic  impression
on  some  friend  or  relative,  in  proportion  to  the  total  number  of  persons
possessing  friends  and  relatives.  But  this  seems  quite  sufficiently
accounted  for  by  the  fact,  already  noticed,  that  the  hypnotic  "  subjects  "
are  hit  (so  to  speak)  at  a  specially  explosive  spot.  The  idea  that
reaches  them  has  been  associated  on  former  occasions  with  precisely
the  marked  consequence  that  now  again  ensues  ;  whereas  the  idea  of  a
friend,  or  even  of  a  friend's  death,  has  not  on  former  occasions  been
associated  with  any  marked  consequence,  such  as  a  hallucination
suggestive  of  his  presence.  The  hypnotic  "subjects,"  in  short,  have
been  adapted  by  artificial  means  to  respond  strongly  to  the  telepathic
stimulus ;  while  of  people  at  large  it  is  only  a  small  minority  in  whom
the  natural  condition  for  such  strong  response  exists.  And  here  let  it
be  specially  observed  that  it  is  by  absence  of  response,  not  absence  of
stimulus,  that  we  shall  most  readily  and  reasonably  account  for  the
rarity,  in  comparison  with  the  numbers  who  die,  of  telepathic  affections
of  the  friends  and  relatives  of  dying  persons.  That  rarity  has  been
felt  as  an  initial  obstacle  to  the  whole  telepathic  theory  ;  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  telepathic  action  becomes  more  comprehensible  the  more
universal  we  can  consider  it.  Now  if,  as  analogy  would  indicate,  the
marked  cases  of  telepathic  phantasms  are  only  the  "  ostensive  instances"
of  a  class  of  events  which  may  occur  with  all  degrees  of  diminishing
intensity,  we  may  fairly  suppose  some  of  the  degrees  to  be  suh-liminal  ;
and  if  so,  numbers  of  spontaneous  transferences  might  naturally  take
place,  conditioned  by  the  normal  bonds  of  affection  or  acquaintance,
which  fail  to  produce  any  recognisable  efiect — fail,  that  is,  to  make

R  2


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


their  way  into  normal  consciousness  as  clear  ideas  or  sensory  hallucina-
tions— through  a  lack  of  some  necessary  condition  in  the  recipient
mind.^

This  may,  perhaps,  be  made  clearer  by  an  illustration  drawn  from
certain  further  facts  of  hypnotism,  which  are  also  worth  noting  on
their  own  account  in  connection  with  the  subject  of  7-appo7-t.  A
hypnotised  person  will  sometimes  be  able  to  detect  the  faint  whisper  of
his  hypnotiser,  amid  a  babel  of  sound  which  makes  it  absolutely  in-
distinguishable to  anyone  else.-  How  is  this  fact  to  be  accounted  for '?
Certainly  not  by  hypertesthesia  of  the  sense  of  hearing ;  for  no  such
condition  is  observed  in  relation  to  any  other  sound.  We  must  again
fall  back  on  rapport — but  again  on  7'appo7't  of  a  quite  comprehensible
kind.  It  will  consist,  not  now  (as  in  the  case  of  hypnotisation  by
suggestion)  of  the  "  subject's  "  memory  of  his  past  relations  to  his
hypnotiser,  but  in  his  sense  of  the  present  relation — the  pervading
dominance  of  the  idea  of  that  one  particular  person  in  a  mind  whose
reflective  and  discursive  powers  are  in  abeyance,  and  whose  passive
absorption  is  undisturbed  by  competing  images.  This  dominant  idea
is  now  the  vulnerable  spot ;  and  consequently  a  stimulus  which  strikes
that  spot — in  other  words  which  impresses  the  sensorium  in  a  manner
previously  associated  with  impressions  of  the  hypnotiser — wakes  a  re-
verberation which  detaches  itself  in  consciousness.  But  for  the  purpose
of  my  illustration  the  point  to  observe  is  that  the  stimulus  acts  equally
on  the  other  persons  present ;  for  in  the  midst  of  perfect  stillness  they
would  hear  the  whisper,  and,  as  an  element  in  the  total  of  sound  that  is
being  produced  around  them,  it  must  undoubtedly  affect  their  sensorium  ;
only,  not  falling  on  any  vulnerable  spot,  it  is  totally  unobserved.  Just
so,  I  conceive,  the  psychical  stimulus  in  the  cases  of  telepathic  trans-
ference :  the  transference  may  take  place,  and  produce  a  certain
psychical  result ;  but,  without  the  appropriate  condition,  that  result
will  not  reach  any  appreciable  strength.  The  condition  of  response
might  be  compared  to  a  sounding-board  :  a  number  of  strings  may  be
faintly  stirred  by  the  telepathic  wave ;  but  only  those  which  are  backed
by  a  sounding-board  will  reverberate  audibly.  That  only  a  small
minority  of  minds  should  naturally  present  this  condition  is  not  a  point
of  any  difficulty — or  at  any  rate  is  one  admitting  of  just  as  much  and
just  as  little  explanation  as  that  a  small  minority  of  persons  should  be
hyper-sensitive  in  any  other  direction.  But  where  the  condition  exists,
the  rapprochement  of the  rare  natural hyper-sensitiveness of  the

1  On  this  view,  it  will  be  seen,  telepathic  phantasms  (and  possibly  telepathic  affec-
tions of  every  sort)  can  be  represented — no  less  than  the  special  classes  above-
mentioned — as  emergences  or  developments  of  ideas  which  have  in  the  first  instance
affected  an  unconscious  part  of  the  percipient's  mind.

2  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.H.,  Vol.  I.,  255-6.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


245


ordinary  telepathic  percipient  to  the  rare  artificial  hyper-sensitiveness  ,
of  the  hypnotic  "  subject "  appears  to  be  both  legitimate  and  instruc-
tive ;  while  the  rejection  which  it  involves  of  the  idea  of  "  mesmeric  "
rapport,  as  anything  per  se  and  exceptional,  tends  still  further  to  the
simplification  of  the  telepathic  theory.

§  18.  Before  leaving  the  subject  of  hypnotic  ra2)port  and  its  efi:ect  on
the  telepathic  transference  of  ideas,  I  must  point  out  that  I  have  been
speaking  exclusively  of  hypnogenetic  ideas.  In  respect  of  other  '
phenomena  of  thought-transference,  exhibited  during  the  actual
duration  of  the  trance,  it  would  be  rash,  I  think,  to  assert  that  the
rapport  with  the  operator  is  not  a  condition  of  transference  more
favourable  than  any  that  spontaneously  presents  itself.  I  at  any  rate
do  not  know  of  any  results  of  experiments  conducted  with  persons  in
a  normal  state  which  can  be  compared,  for  scope  and  complexity,  with
some  of  the  hypnotic  cases — e.g.,  with  the  important  set  of  observa-
tions recorded  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  3-36-43  ;  where  an
exceptional  facility  of  communication  seems  to  be  shown  in  two  ways,  —
(1)  by  the  great  frequency  and  certainty  of  the  effects ;  and  (2)  by  the
idea  communicated  being  often  one  which  passed  through  the  hypno-
tiser's  head  when  she  was  not  in  the  least  thinking  of  her  patient  or
of  attempting  a  transference,  and  upon  which  therefore  she  was  not
concentrating  any  special  energy  of  attention.  The  very  fact,  more-
over, that  the  phenomena  of  "  community  of  sensation  "  were  observed
with  hypnotised  persons  many  years  before  they  were  obtained  with
others  may  seem  to  point  in  the  same  direction  ;  and  in  most  of  these
cases  it  looks  as  if  the  results  were  directly  dependent  on  the  establish-
ment of  the  hypnotic  relation.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  remem-
bered that  "  community  of  sensation  "  is  a  very  rare  phenomenon  even
with  hypnotised  "  subjects  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  yet
at  all  in  a  position  to  decide  what  proportion  of  unliypnotised  persons
might  show  high  susceptibility  to  this  and  other  forms  of  thought-
transference,  if  only  the  necessary  experiments  were  widely  made.
It  should  be  noted,  moreover,  that  quite  as  striking  results  have  been
obtained  in  the  particular  line  of  "  community  of  sensation  "  with  non-
hypnotised  as  with  hypnotised  "subjects  "  {Pliantasms,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  52-8);
and  that  several  forms  of  transference  have  been  obtained  exclusively
with  persons  in  a  normal  state.  On  the  whole,  the  conclusion  seems
to  be  that  the  eflfect  of  the  hypnotic  state  in  facilitating  and
strengthening  telepathic  impulses,  though  occasionally  very  decisive,  is
very  far  from  constant.  We  should  probably  gain  a  clearer  view  on
the  subject  if  persons  who  have  shown  themselves  to  be  susceptible
when  in  one  state  were  subjected  to  experiments  when  in  the  other  ;
and  if  hypnotisers  who  have  obtained  community  of  sensation  with
their  "  subjects "  would  experiment  with  other  persons  who  have


246


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


proved  to  be  sensitive  "  percipients."  But  such  suggestions  would  be
totally  unpractical  unless  we  might  hope  that,  as  psychical  research
gradually  becomes  legitimised,  the  human  material  available  for  study
will  become  less  rare.

IN  ORDINARY  CASES  OF  HYPNOTISATION  IS  THERE  A  TRANSFERENCE  OR
INFLUENCE  OF  ANY  SORT  BEYOND  THE  OSTENSIBLE  MECHANICAL
PROCESS  1

§  19.  To  return  now  to  the  special  hypnogenetic  problems  :  I  have
showngrounds  for  believing  that  in  some  cases  of  hypnogenetic  suggestion
— where  the  parties  are  together  and  the  suggestion  is  conveyed  by  phy-
sical means,  no  less  than  where  they  are  separated  and  the  suggestion
is  psychical — a  true  psychical  or  telepathic  agency  is  exercised,  of  a  sort
foreign  indeed  to  the  hitherto-accepted  theories  of  hypnotism,  but
equally  remote  from  "  odic  "  or  "  mesmeric  "  effluences.  But  if  in
these  cases  the  first  indispensable  conditions  of  the  effect  present
themselves  as  mental  phenomena,  the  question  naturally  arises  what
relation,  if  any,  do  mental  phenomena  hold  to  the  other  hypnogenetic
methods,  where  the  entrancement  takes  place  (as  with  fresh  "sub-
jects "  it  almost  always  does  take  place)  after  the  application  of  dis-
tinct physical  processes?  I  have  purposely  deferred  these  cases  of
primary  hypnotisation  till  those  of  the  secondary  (or  suggestional)  class
had  been  discussed,  as  being  at  the  very  outset  harder  to  discriminate
— for  this  obvious  reason  :  that  while  we  can  be  sure  that  there  is  no
effective  exercise  of  bodily  energy,  when  the  "subject"  is  sitting
apart  or  alone  and  the  mode  of  influence  is  ostensibly  mental,  we
cannot  similarly  be  sure  that  there  is  no  effective  exercise  of  menial
energy,  when  the  operator  takes  him  in  hand  and  the  mode  of  influence
is  ostensibly  bodily.  In  the  latter  case,  therefore,  the  actual  or  possible
complication  of  causes  makes  analysis  very  difficult.  The  question  is
really  a  triple  one;  for  we  may  ask  (1)  whether  the  hypnotiser's
mind  has  some  direct  sliare  in  the  effect,  originating  a  psychical
transference  in  the  sense  of  "  psychical  "  above  explained,
(pp.  219-21);  or,  supposing  liis  body  alone  to  act  directly,  by  touch,
passes,  ifec,  whether  (2)  the  effect  is  purely  mechanical  and  due  simply
to  the  pressure  or  the  gentle  stimulation  which  his  muscles  bring  to
bear,  or  (3)  is  of  a  more  inscrutable  and  nervous  sort ;  in  which  last
case,  we  must  observe,  his  mind  may  condition  it,  as  in  the  first  case,
though  less  directly — since  from  whatever  part  of  the  body  the  nerve-
force  be  supposed  to  act,  the  total  of  energy  evolved  may  include
certain  cerebral  changes  of  which  certain  mental  facts,  such  as  con-
centration, may  be  the  necessary  correlates.  The  second  of  these
hypotheses  is,  of  course,  the  one  in  favour  of  which  physiologists
have  unhesitatingly  pronounced. This  has  been  almost  inevitable ;  for


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


247


the  first  of  the  three  was  not  likely  to  occur  to  them,  until  the  reality
of  "  psychical  "  or  telepathic  transferences  was  proved  irrespectively  of
hypnotism,  and  by  examples  where  the  possibility  of  bodily  influence
■was  excluded,  either  by  the  form  of  the  experiment,  or  by  distance ;
while  the  last  of  the  three,  though  not  equally  outside  the  range  of
physiological  conceptions,  and  though  nowhere  so  strongly  suggested  as
(l'  in  the  immediate  facts  of  hypnotism,  is  so  indefinite  as  to  seem  more
like  a  phrase  than  an  explanation  ; — what  can  science  have  to  say  about
inscrutable  nervous  influences'?  The  second  hypothesis,  moreover,
undoubtedly  ofi^ers  a  satisfactory  account  of  many  of  the  ordinary
cases  ;  while  its  adequacy  has  seemed  almost  guaranteed  by  the  fact
that  not  infrequently  a  person  has  succeeded  in  hypnotising  himself  hy
the  purely  mechanical  process  of  fixing  his  eyes  immovably  on  some
near  object.

As  to  the  first  hypothesis — that  of  direct  "psychical"  agency —
there  is  not  much  to  detain  us ;  simply  because  where  physical  pro-
cesses are  simultaneously  brought  to  bear,  psychical  agency  could  never
be  proved  to  be  the  really  efl'ective  element ;  while  the  fact  that  only
one  case  ^  is  on  record  of  silent  concentration,  unaccompanied  by  any
■  physical  processes,  producing  hypnotisation  in  a  person  never  previously
entranced,  leads  us  to  suspect  that  its  influence  would  at  most  be  sup-
plementary to  that  of  the  other  means  adopted.  That  it  sometimes
has  an  influence  of  this  supplementary  sort  seems  likely  enough ;  for
though  with  a  fresh  "  subject  "  there  is  no  specially  "  explosive  spot  "
— the  result  of  previous  hypnotisation — to  be  aflfected,  yet,  if  the
working  of  the  transferred  idea  be  of  the  sort  above  suggested,  we  can
readily  conceive  that  a  soporific  impulse,  strong  enough  at  any  rate  to
facilitate  the  passage  into  trance,  might  be  "  psychically  "  conveyed  to
a  sensitive  recipient.  It  must  be  remembered  that,  in  discussions  of
that  part  of  the  hypnotic  process  which  is  peculiar  to  the  "  subject,"  it
has  been  the  almost  invariable  rule  to  attach  some  distinct  importance
to  mental  elements — to  eke  out  the  supposed  influence  of  physical  im-
mobility, or  of  an  inward  and  upward  squint,  by  that  of  attention  or
willingness  to  yield  to  the  novel  impulse ;  and  for  a  believer  in
telepathy  it  is  impossible  to  assume  such  mental  elements  as  these
without  admitting  the  possibility  at  least  that  they  may  be  reinforced,
if  not  actually  initiated,  by  a  psychical  transference.  And  that  is  all,  I
think,  that  can  at  present  be  said.

INDICATIONS  OF  A  SPECIFIC  PHYSICAL  INFLUENCE  IN
NON-HYPNOTIC  CASES.

§  20.  But  as  regards  the  second  and  the  third  hypothesis,  the  issue
can  be  made  more  definite  ;  and  it  is  really  possible,  I  think,  to  fight  it

1  See  above,  p.  218,  second  note.


248


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


out  to  a  conclusion.  Tn  any  particular  case,  there  either  is  or  is  not
some  specific  physical  influence  at  work,  beyond  the  merely  mechanical
effect  of  the  muscular  processes  involved.  Now,  obviously  the  question
of  the  possibility  of  a  specific  physical  influence  of  one  organism  on
another  is  not  necessarily  confined  to  cases  of  hypnotism  ;  but  if  in
any  shape  whatever  the  reality  of  such  an  influence  were  made
apparent,  the  difficulty  of  supposing  it  to  be  operative  in  hypnotism
would  practically  vanish — just  as  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  hypnoti-
sation  at  a  distance  vanishes  when  the  reality  of  telepathy  is  recognised
in  other  ranges  of  phenomena.  I  have  a  purpose  in  this  remark  ;  for,
as  it  happens,  some  of  the  cases  which  to  my  mind  have  seemed  the
most  suggestive  of  a  specific  physical  influence  of  one  human
organism  on  another  have  not  been  connected  with  attempts  to
hypnotise,  though  the  results  have  to  a  certain  extent  resembled  those
of  hypnotism ;  and  I  am  glad  to  have  an  opportunity  of  directing
attention  to  these  facts.  They  have  all  occurred  in  the  course  of  what
is  known  as  the  "willing-game  " — i.e.,  under  conditions  which  involved
not  only  contact  but  concentrated  desire  on  the  "  willer's  "  part.  The
following  are  specimens  of  what  the  accounts  that  have  reached  me
lead  me  to  conclude  has  happened,  in  a  more  or  less  marked  form,  on
many  occasions  when  this  game  has  been  played.  The  Lancet,  October
11,  1884,  thus  reports  a  case  related  by  Mr.  Wherry,  F.R.C.S.,  to  the
Cambridge  Medical  Society  : —

Mr.  Wherry  was  sent  for  one  evening  to  see  an  undergraduate  who  had
become  suddenly  ill  during  the  willing-game.  It  appeared  that  his  friends
had  blindfolded  him  in  the  usual  manner  and  were  willing  him  to  do  some
simple  action,  when  suddenly  he  became  weak  in  the  knees  and  had  to  be
helped  to  a  seat.  The  handkerchief  was  removed  at  once,  but  the  patient
did  not  seem  at  all  himself.  He  found  him  leaning  against  the  mantelshelf,
looking  fixedly  downwards  in  a  dogged  and  morose  attitude  ;  he  answered
questions  in  monosyllables  in  a  hesitating  way,  not  stammering,  but  with  a
jerk  and  without  expression.  Usually,  his  friends  said,  his  manners  were
natural  and  polite.  The  jjupils  were  dilated,  with  no  action  to  light,  and  his
memory  was  a  blank  as  to  the  details  of  the  game.  He  was  sent  to  bed,  and
when  seen  the  next  morning  he  was  better  ;  his  pupils  were  normal  and
active  to  light,  but  his  manner  was  still  odd  and  his  speech  remarkable.
When  advised  to  leave  Cambridge  for  a  few  days'  change,  he  refused  rudely,
but  was  afterwards  persuaded  by  his  friends,  and  returned  quite  well.

On  the  same  evening  another  medical  witness,  Mr.  Deighton,  reported
that  in  November,  1883,  he  was  summoned  in  urgent  haste  to  see  an
undergraduate.  He  found  him  surrounded  by  his  friends,  who  said  they
had  been  playing  the  willing-game,  and  that  he  had  been  blindfolded  and
willed  ;  soon  afterwards  he  became  tottering  on  his  legs  and  went  into  a
state  of  convulsions.  When  seen  he  was  tossing  about  on  a  sofa,  with  face
slightly  flushed,  the  movements  of  the  arms  and  legs  being  most  irregular,
almost  equally  exaggerated  on  both  sides. The  muscles  of  the  face  and  neck


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


249


were  least  affected,  but  he  spoke  in  a  jerky  way,  and  on  putting  out  his
tongue  it  was  protruded  and  withdrawn  suddenly.  He  was  quite  conscious,
clear  and  collected,  and  said  that  he  tried  to  prevent  himself  tossing  about,
but  could  not  help  it.  The  pupils  acted  to  light,  and  were  natural  in  size.
He  was  ordered  a  bromide  draught  and  told  to  go  to  bed.  The  next  morning
he  was  quite  well.  He  said  he  had  spent  a  bad  night,  tossing  about  until
five  a.m.  before  he  went  to  sleep,  but  there  was  now  only  an  occasional
twitching  in  the  legs.  He  was  of  a  nervous  and  excitable  disposition,  but
never  had  fits,  rheumatism,  or  chorea.

About  the  same  time  the  Master  of  Sehvyn  College  told  me  of  a
very  similar  incident  which  had  happened  among  his  own  under-
graduates. I  will  add  one  more  case  which  I  owe  to  Mr.  F.  H.
Matthews,  of  Ivy  Villa,  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood.  The  narrator
is  his  sister,  and  the  narrative  has  been  fully  confirmed  by  the  lady  in
whose  house  the  incident  occurred,  and  also  by  Mr.  Matthews's  in-
dependent recollections  of  what  his  sister  had  told  him.

"  February  H,  1886.
"On the  evening  of  Tuesday,  December  8,  1885,  we  were  playing  the
willing-game,  and  upon  being  asked  to  try,  I  left  the  room,  whilst  something
was  thought  of.  When  I  returned  1  was  blindfolded,  gave  my  right  hand  to
Miss  S.,  who  was  to  lead  me.  Almost  immediately  I  started  forward,  and
went  straight  towards  a  young  lady,  and  fell  on  my  knees  before  her.  Then,
unfortunately,  my  thoughts  returned  to  me,  and  I  was  conscious  that  I  should
kiss  her.  The  knowledge,  it  seems,  prevented  my  performing  the  action,
and  the  next  moment  1  fell  on  the  floor  with  the  full  consciousness  of  what
had  happened  to  me."  She  lay  for  some  minutes,  unable  to  speak  or  move,
and  breathing  with  great  difiiculty.  "  When  my  dress  was  unfastened,  the
relief  was  so  great  that  I  broke  into  crying,  and  I  could  hear  myself  how
loudly  I  sobbed,  feeling  even  ashamed,  yet  not  able  to  check  myself."  Re-
vived with  brandy,  &c. ,  she  had  a  violent  fit  of  trembling,  which  left  her
with  an  inclination  to  sleep.  This,  however,  was  resisted  ;  and  after  forcing
herself  to  walk  upstairs,  which  she  did  with  assistance,  she  returned  to  a
normal  state.

While  this  paper  is  passing  through  the  press,  a  friend  tells  me
that,  on  the  only  occasion  when  she  was  ever  "  willed  "  in  this  way,
she  fainted  and  fell  almost  immediately  on  being  touched.

Such  results  as  these  seem  at  any  rate  to  deserve  attention.  Nothing
like  them  has  ever  occurred  in  experiments  in  thought-transference
proper,  without  contact  ;  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  believe  that  what
was  regarded  as  a  mere  pastime  should  have  produced  a  psychical
state  of  tension  and  emotion  sufficiently  sui  generis  to  account  for  the
occurrence  of  such  unique  effects  in  healthy  persons.  May  not  some-
thing be  said  for  seeking  the  cause  of  the  unusual  effect,  or  some  part
of  it,  in  that  part  of  the  prior  conditions  which  was  itself  unusual —
that  is  to  say,  the  continued  physical  contact  of  the  "  subject  "  with  a
person  who  was  in  a  state  of  concentrated  expectancy  % The  cases  are


250


Hypnotism  and  Tele^xtthy.


ill  one  way  more  suggestive  of  specific  influence  than  some  of  those  of
hypnogeny  proper,  just  because  the  character  of  the  attouchements  in
their  mechanical  aspect  was  so  entirely  simple  and  wnspecial.  When  a
person  is  seen  pressing  his  "  subject's  "  head  or  body  at  carefully  de-
fined spots,!  Qj.  making  passes  over  him  in  a  methodical  or  elaborate
fashion  which  professors  of  the  art  get  money  for  teaching  to  others,
one  naturally  concludes,  if  remarkable  results  follow,  that  the  special
place  or  mode  of  the  manipulation  has  something  to  do  with  it ;  but
the  casual  mode  and  variable  place  of  the  touch  in  these  amateur
diversions  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  contact,  if  specialised  at
all,  is  specialised  by  the  will-force  which  accompanies  it,  and  in
something  other  than  its  mechanical  aspect.

INDICATIONS  OP  A  SPECIFIC  INFLUENCE  IN  ORDINARY
HYPNOTIC  MANIPULATION.

§  21.  But  it  is  naturally  in  connection  with  professedly  hypnotic
cases  that  the  more  conclusive  proof  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  mechanical
explanation  must  be  sought — and  may,  I  believe,  be  found,  though  to
find  it  may  require  a  somewhat  wider  outlook  over  the  hypnotic  field
than  has  been  always  easy  or  possible  for  persons  who  have  been  chiefly
occupied  with  their  own  experiments.  This  at  any  rate  applies  to  a
general  argument  which  I  have  used  before  {Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  289-90),  but  which  is  worth  repeating,  if  only  that  it  may,  if  possible,
be  refuted.  There  clearly  could  not  be  a  better  a  fortiori  proof  of  a
specific  influence  pertaining  to  the  human  organism  than  if  it  were  shown
to  be  specific  in  the  further  sense  of  pei'taining  to  some  organisms  and
not  others.  Now  the  mechanical  hypnotic  processes,  by  which  it
is  customary  to  supplement  the  effect  of  immobility  and  a  fixed
gaze,  should  apparently  be  equally  effective  whoever  ajjplies  them  ;
whereas,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  different  persons  exhibit  in  this
matter  very  different  degrees  of  efficiency.  The  processes  themselves,
however,  need  to  be  carefully  distinguished.  They  consist  for  the  most
part  of  passes  over  the  upper  part  of  the  person,  and  of  pressure  on
the  globe  of  the  eye,  or  between  the  eyes,  or  on  the  vertex.  It  is  common
for  the  hypnotiser  to  combine  the  2Msses  and  the  pressures  ;  but  the
grounds  of  their  efficacy  are  very  different. The  pressures  seem

1  There  are,  liowever,  professedly  hypnotic  cases  which  may  very  likely  be  entirely
parallel  in  character  to  tliose  just  cited.  Such  a  case  was  sujiplied  to  me  by  Mr.
James  Gudgeon,  of  Stowniarket,  and  comijletely  confirmed  in  writing  by  two  gentle-
men who  witnessed  it.  Mr.  M.,  a  tall  and  robust  man,  who  had  been  ridiculing
mesmerism  and  had  defied  Mr.  Gudgeon  to  mesmerise  him,  in  less  than  ten  seconds
after  Mr.  Gudgeon  placed  his  liands  i>u  his  head,  "fell  on  the  floor  in  a  state  of  perfect
and  complete  coma."  This  was  followed  by  an  attack  of  violent  convulsions  when
water  was  thrown  over  him,  and  medical  aid  had  to  be  sought.


Hypnotism  and  Telei^athy,


251


undoubtedly  to  be  mechanical  in  their  action  :  they  are  applied  to
certain  particular  spots,  and  stimulate  certain  particular  nervous  foci,
which  presumably  are  intimately  connected  with  the  effect,  and  which
physiologists  therefore  can  label  as  "  liypnogenetic,"  and  then  leave ;
for  physiology  does  not  profess  to  do  more  than  assign  to  special
localities  and  special  tissues  their  proper  functions.  But  the  virtue  of
passes  cannot  be  accounted  for  in  any  such  fashion  ;  for  they  touch  no
specialised  springs  in  the  organism.  Yet  passes  were  a  mode  of
operation  which  physiologists  found  in  possession  of  the  field,  identified,
for  many  years  before  they  took  up  the  subject,  with  "mesmerism"
and  theories  of  occult  influence  ;  and  which  therefore  they  could  not
avoid  recognising  and  attempting  to  explain  in  some  other  way.  The
attempt  has  not  been  fortunate.  It  has  consisted  simply  in  treating
passes  as  one  of  the  forms  of  "  monotonous  stimulation,"  and  in  assuming
the  power  of  monotonous  stimulation  to  produce  hypnotic  trance  as  an
ultimate  fact.  I  am  inclined  to  question  both  the  ultimate  fact  ^  and  its
application.  Out  of  many  possible  forms  of  monotonous  stimulation,
only  two,  seemingly  quite  arbitrarily  selected,  have  ever  seemed  to
have  any  hypuogenetic  etficacy — namely,  passes,  a  form  which  has  very
frequently  been  employed,  and  the  ticking  of  a  watch,  a  form  which
has  comparatively  rarely  been  employed.  So  far,  then,  from  passes  being
explained  by  being  called  a  form  of  monotonous  stimulation,  the
burden  of  supporting  the  credit  of  monotonous  stimulation,  as  a
hypnogenetic  agency,  seems  to  fall  almost  entirely  upon  them.  Yet  an
unprejudiced  inspection  of  the  ordinary  procedure  of  passes  will  really
make  it  seem  absurd  to  find  the  peculiarity  of  their  influence  in  the
cause  assigned — for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  often  next  to  no
monotony,  and  next  to  no  stimulation,  about  them.

There  seems  in  this  matter  to  have  been  a  confusion  of  things
which  are  only  superficially  alike.  Where  contact  is  employed,  as  in
gentle  strokings  and  rubbings,  the  unaccustomed  peripheral  stimulation,
produced  by  purely  mechanical  means,  has  at  any  rate  a  first  claim  to
be  considered  the  suflicient  cause  of  the  result  that  follows,  whether
that  result  be  hypnotic  trance  or  local  anaesthesia  or  rigidity.  Here,
then  (as  in  cases  where  actual  pressure  is  applied  to  the  supposed
hypnogenetic  spots),  the  rival  or  supplementary  hypothesis  of  a  more
specific  influence  must  depend  mainly  on  the  difference  (above  referred
to)  between  the  capacities  of  different  manipulators,  or  of  the  same
operator  when  working  with  concentration  and  attention  and
when working indifferently and mechanically.^ But passes  are

1  On  this  question  see  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Myers,  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,Vol.
IV.,  pp.  145-8,  with  which  I  heartily  concur.

-  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  88;  and  the  experience  of  the  French
hypnotists  whose  accounts  are  epitomised  above.


252


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


very  frequently  made  without  any  contact  at  all,  or  with  very  slight
and  irregular  contact ;  so  that  the  "  subject,"  if  he  shut  his  eyes,  might
be  unconscious  that  they  were  going  on  or  that  they  were  going  on
with  any  regularity.  The  stimulation,  therefore,  if  anything,  must  be
opticel.  But  as  the  "subject's"  eyes  are  frequently  fixed  on  something
else,i  and  not  on  the  operator,  the  fact  that  the  arms  of  the  latter  are
moving  more  or  less  rhythmically  within  his  field  of  vision  could  hardly
overpower  his  organs  in  any  specific  manner,  even  if  the  movement
were  uninterrupted  and  long  continued.  This,  however,  is  rarely  the
case :  as  a  rule  the  procedure  conforms  rather  to  the  practice  of  Dr.
Liebeault,  who  has  probably  hypnotised  more  persons  in  the  course  of
his  life  than  any  other  operator,  and  with  whom  (as  Mr.  Myers  has
justly  observed)  "  the  passes  and  touches  made  are  brief  and  variable."
On  the  whole,  then,  so  far  as  mere  passes  without  contact  can  be  held
to  be  efiective,  the  fact  is  a  positive  and  direct  argument  in  favour  of  a
specific  physical  influence.

INDICATIONS  OF  A  SPECIFIC  INFLUENCE  IN  THERAPEUTICAL  CASES.

§  22.  So  far,  however,  we  have  not  got  beyond  cases  where  the
"subject's"  own  mental  state  is, or  may  be,  one  of  the  conditions  involved.
We  may  suspect  that  the  importance  of  this  condition  has  been  sometimes
exaggerated.  It  is  very  difiicult,  for  instance,  sweepingly  to  attribute
the  difierent  degrees  of  success  or  unsuccess  of  difierent  operators  in
entrancing,  stifi'ening,  anjesthetising,  &c.,  to  the  "subject's"  varying
moods  of  belief  or  distrust ;  for  it  is  not  a  monopoly  of  those  who
succeed  as  hypnotists  to  inspire  the  emotions  of  faith  and  expectation,
which,  before  their  success,  they  tliemselves  are  often  far  from
feeling ;  while  those  very  emotions  have  often  been  brought  to
bear  on  other  operators,  or  other  proposed  means  of  alleviation,  without
having  any  result.  Still,  complete  exclusion  of  the  subjective  factor
will  no  doubt  add  indefinitely  to  the  force  of  the  evidence.  The
exclusion  will  tie  us  down  to  experiments  of  very  special  types.
As  a  rule,  of  course,  contact  must  be  wholly  avoided  ;  for  it  could
hardly  fail  to  reveal  to  the  "subject"  what  is  being  attempted.
There  is,  however,  one  class  of  persons  with  whom  this  objection  does
not  apply — namely,  very  young  children  ;  and  I  will  begin  with  evidence
drawn  from  that  class.

1  This  fixation  of  the  eyes  cannot  itself  be  classed  as  one  of  the  efficacious  modes  of
monotonous  stimulation,  since  the  sjieciality  of  it,  as  Braid  observed  and  taught,  is  the
strain  caused  by  the  particular  position  of  the  eyeballs ;  and  the  concurrent  stimula-
tion of  the  retina  by  light  is,  for  hypnogenetic  purposes,  a  mere  accident.  It  is  worth
noting  that,  as  regards  actual  entrancement,  the  fact  that  the  "subject,"  by  his
fixation  of  his  eyes,  may  be  distinctly  contributing  to  his  own  hypnotisation,  tends  to
mask  the  difference  in  the  capacities  of  different  operators,  which  (as  we  shall  see  a
little  later)  is  better  displayed  in  local  and  therapeutical  effects.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


253


As  usual,  one  has  to  deplore  the  lack  of  exhaustive  experiments.
The  very  last  quality  that  competent  persons  can  be  expected  to  bring
to  bear  on  any  hypothesis  connected  in  their  eyes  with  the  mesmeric
heresy  is  patience ;  and  patience  is  undoubtedly  required  to  devote
ten  minutes  of  laying-on  of  hands  to  each  of  a  long  series  of  suffering
infants.  As  far  as  I  know,  Dr.  Liebeault,  of  Nancy,  is  the  only  well-
known  practitioner  who  has  taken  this  amount  of  painsj^  and  his  con-
clusions are  the  more  valuable  in  that  they  are  opposed  to  the  view
maintained  by  him  previously  for  many  years — that  the  therapeutical
influence  of  hypnotism  is  always  and  wholly  a  matter  of  suggestion
and  imagination.  In  his  Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnetisme  (Paris,  Masson,
1883),  he  describes  experiments  with  46  sick  children  of  four  years  old
and  under  (the  large  majority  being  under  three),  in  all  of  which
some  amelioration,  and  in  most  very  distinct  amelioration,  followed  his
manipulation.  The  cases  are  not  all  of  a  crucial  kind,  the  ailment  having
sometimes  simply  been  diarrhoea  or  failure  of  appetite,  which  might  have
been  about  to  mend  in  any  case.  But  the  cumulative  force  of  the  record
cannot  be  denied  ;  and  some  of  the  individual  cases  are  striking  enough.
One  interesting  feature  was  the  frequent  pi'oduction  of  sleep, either  during
the  contact  or  after  it  at  unusual  times,  or  for  an  unusual  length  of  time.
Thus,  one  child  aged  three  and  a-half,  on  returning  home,  slept  for
17  hours  consecutively,  and  even  then  did  not  wake  spontaneously.
Another,  aged  one  year,  had  been  crying  day  and  night  for  four  weeks,
with  snatches  of  sleep  of  only  five  or  six  minutes,  owing  to  obstinate
colic  and  constipation.  "  During  one  of  her  short  sleeps,  and  conse-
quently without  her  consciousness,  I  prolonged  this  condition,  keeping
my  hands  on  her  for  20  minutes,  till  she  showed  signs  of  waking.
From  that  moment  the  crying  stopped,  as  if  by  magic ;  she  slept  during
a  great  part  of  the  night,  and  when  she  was  brought  next  day  she
was  quiet,  and  the  constipation  had  been  relieved."  I  have  not  space
for  further  citations  ;  but  as  to  the  results,  it  will  be  noted  that  they  at
least  sufficed  to  bring  a  man  whom  none  that  know  him  will  accuse  of
pretension  or  exaggeration,  and  who  had  long  pursued  tiie  path  of
orthodoxy,  to  a  candid  confession  of  the  belief  that  "  the  organic
changes  produced  must  have  been  due  to  a  transmitted  nervous
influence."  He  considers  the  altei^native  hypothesis,  that  the
effects  were  due  to  the  heat  of  his  hands ;  but  not  only  had
the children been kept warm — and were probably as  warm

i  Dr.  Liebeault  attributes  the  idea  of  his  ovm  experiments  to  information  of
similar  successes  which  he  received  from  a  M.  Longpretz  of  Lifege  ;  and  in  part  also  to
the  account  given  long  ago  by  Dupotet  (without  sufficient  detail  for  scientific  purposes)
of  movements  and  contractions  which  he  induced  in  sleeping  children  by  movements
of  his  own  hand  in  proximity  to  their  bodies,  in  spite  often  of  the  intervention  of  the
bed-clothes.


254


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


as  his  hands  when  he  touched  them  — but,  as  he  remarks,
they  "  had  often  remained  for  long  hours  in  their  mothers'  hands,
without  any  amelioration."  Thus  the  results,  if  they  prove  specific
influence  at  all,  would  go  to  prove  an  influence  which  is  specific  not
only  in  the  sense  of  being  peculiar  to  living  organisms,  but  in  the
further  sense  of  appertaining  to  particular  individuals.

INDICATIONS  OP  A  SPECIFIC  INFLUENCE  IN  THE  PRODUCTION
OF  LOCAL  EFFECTS.

§  23.  To  pass  now  to  experiments  with  older  persons,  where  contact
must  be  avoided.  These  could  hardly  ever  take  the  ordinary  form  of
entrancement ;  for  it  would  be  difficult  so  to  arrange  conditions  that
passes  should  be  continuously  made  near  a  person's  face  without  his
knowledge  and  consent.  The  waking  from  trance  can,  no  doubt,  be
carried  out  in  this  manner  ;  aiad  I  have  myself  on  a  good  many
occasions  seen  a  "  subject "  awakened  by  gentle  upward  passes,
not  near  enough  to  his  face  or  head,  one  would  have  thought,
to  produce  any  sensible  current  of  air.^  But  by  far  the  most
crucial  cases  known  to  me  have  been  of  the  local  sort — specific
effects  produced,  without  entrancement,  in  some  special  part  of  the  body,
which  the  "  subject "  did  not  know  was  going  to  be  operated  on.
Experiments  of  this  sort  have  been  already  described  in  these  Pro-
ceedings ;  and  a  further  account  of  them  is  given  at  the  end  of  my
other  paper  in  the  present  number  (pp.  14-17).

There  seem  to  be  only  two  possible  ways  in  which  the  "  subject's  "
finger  could  have  felt  the  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand — (1)  by
currents  of  air  due  to  the  passes  ;  and  (2)  by  a  sense  of  warmth — Mr.
Smith's  hand  being  warmer  than  the  surrounding  air.  Such  perception
would  have  involved  very  decided  hyperesthesia  in  persons  with
tolerably  pachydermatous  hands,  who  (it  must  be  remembered)  were  in
a  normal  not  a  hypnotic  state.  I  made  trials  once  with  three  co-ex-
perimenters, and  none  of  us  could  in  the  slightest  degree  detect  similar
passes  made  over  our  own  fingers  :  and  the  "  subjects  "  professed  a
similar  ignorance. Still,  the  possibility  of  hypersesthesia  needed  to  be

^  Berger  and  Gscheidlen  have  described  the  transformation  of  natural  into
hypnotic  sleep  by  the  holding  the  hand  near  the  sleeper's  head.  Gscheidlen  pro-
fesses to  have  succeeded  in  8  cases  out  of  15- -the  test  of  the  change  of  state  being
that  the  sleeper  no  longer  reacted  to  the  tickling  of  the  soles  of  his  feet  (see  the
Deutsche  Medicinische  Wochenschri.ft  for  1880,  pp.  92-3,  and  Malten's  Dcr  Maiinetische
Schlaf,  p.  13).  Berger,  however,  says  that  warm  metal  plates  produced  the  same
effect — one  of  the  startling  statements,  too  numerous  in  the  history  of  hypnotism,
which  seem  never  to  have  been  confirmed  by  other  observers.  Berger's  account  of  the
stiffening  of  a  sleeping  person's  arm  by  passes  closely  resembles  a  case  which  I  have
observed  {Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  259-60;  but  in  Berger's  case  the
effect  was  produced  through  the  clothes).


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


255


faced.  In  many  of  the  earlier  trials,  to  prevent  the  detection  of  Mr.
Smith's  passes  by  currents  of  air,  someone  else  made  similar  and
simultaneous  passes  over  another  finger.  But  it  might  still  be  objected
that  some  imperceptible  difference  in  the  manner  of  making  the  passes
produced  differences  in  the  currents  of  air,  and  a  far  better  method
which  I  have  employed  in  all  the  later  trials  (as  well  as  in  a  few  of  the
earlier  ones)  is  to  dispense  with  passes  altogether.  Mr.  Smith  has  held
his  hand  perfectly  still,  at  a  distance  varying  from  a  third  of
an  inch  to  two  inches,  over  the  selected  finger  ;  and  the
diminution  of  sensibility,  though  less  in  degree  than  when
passes  were  made,  has  in  nearly  every  case  been  quite  unmistakable,
while  in  nearly  all  the  cases  the  rigidity  has  been  sufficient  to  prevent
the  finger  from  being  quickly  flexed.^-  Here,  then,  the  only  means
of  direct  perception  left  open  seems  to  be  warmth.  Perception  by  this
means  would  involve  hyperresthesia  in  an  extreme  degree  ;  and  in  this
connection  I  may  mention  that  a  scientific  fi'iend  at  Cambridge  (whose
results  will  in  time,  I  trust,  be  published)  tells  me  that  he  has  produced
similar  eflects,  under  similar  conditions,  with  two  sheets  of  glass
between  his  hand  and  that  of  the  "  subject."  But  I  believe  that  I  have
sufficiently  guarded  against  the  conveyance  of  information  through
warmth  by  holding  my  own  hand,  at  the  same  distance  as  Mr.  Smith's,
over  another  of  the  "  subject's  "  fingers.  After  we  have  been  for  some
time  together  in  a  warm  room,  Mr.  Smith's  hand  and  mine  do  not
perceptibly  differ  in  temperature  ;  yet  mine  rarely  produced  any  effect
on  the  "  subject."  But  perhaps  the  best  proof  that  the  result  is  not
connected  with  perception  of  temperature  is  the  fact  described  in  my
other  paper  (p.  16),  that  the  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand
produced  no  effect  if  he  willed  that  no  effect  should  be  produced.
Another  fact  of  great  significance  is  that  I  have  now  got  two  of  the
"  subjects "  on  whom  these  recent  experiments  have  been  made  to
attend  to  their  sensations  during  the  process.  They  used  to  profess  un-
consciousness of  any  change  whatever;  but  they  are  now  sometimes  able
to  detect  which  finger  has  been  the  subject  of  experiment  by  what  they
describe  as  a  slight  feeling  of  cold.  That  this  should  be  the  direct
effect  of  the  proximity  of  someone  else's  warm  hand  seems  inconceiv-
able, especially  since  the  feeling  lasts  after  the  hand  is  removed  ;  but
it  is  perfectly  easy  to  account  for  as  a  secondary  result  of  the  increas-
ing numbness  and  loss  of  normal  sensibility.  It  should  be  noted
further  that  the  efi'ect  was  removed  in  just  the  same  manner — that  is
to  say,  the  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hands  was  effective  on  a  finger
which  had  just  proved  insensitive  to  pretty  vigorous  pricks,  and  would
not  therefore  be  likely  to  be  extraordinarily  hypersensitive  to  warmth.

1  In  two  cases  the  corresponding  finger  on  the  other  hand,  and  in  a  third  case  an
adjacent  finger,  was  also  slightly  affected.


256


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


§  24.  Now  here  what  hypotheses  are  left  as  alternatives  to  that  of
direct  influence?  May  the  idea  of  the  selected  finger  be  conveyed  to  some
"  unconscious  "  part  of  the  "  subject's  "  mind  by  thought-transference,
and  there  produce  an  expectation  of  ansesthesia  and  rigidity  which
works  out  the  appropriate  results  1 This  seems  excluded  by  the  fact
that  the  physical  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand  (no  less  than  his
concentration of will on the desired result) proves  to be  a
necessary  condition  :  the  efiects  do  not  follow  if  he  simply  stands  and
wills  their  occurrence. Consequently  the  "  unconscious  "  perception
will  have  to  include  the  discerning  of  the  approach  or  proximity  of
Mr. Smith's  hand ; and  this,  combined  with  the  certainty  of  the
results  and  the  fact  that  the  "  subjects  "  have  shown  little  or  no  apti-
tude for  thought-transference  in  other  ■  forms,  is  a  strong  reason  for
supposing  the  mode  of  communication  to  be  physical,  not  psychical.  ^
The  alternative,  then,  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  direct  influence  seems  to
be  that  an  "  unconscious  "  discernment  through  the  finger's  ordinary
sensory apparatus is followed by "unconscious" expectation  of
particular  physiological  results,  which  in  turn  is  followed  by  those
results. Of  this  hypothesis  I  can  only  say  that  it  seems  to  me  ex-
travagantly improbable,  for  four  reasons. (1) It  attributes  to  "  un-
conscious "  expectation  an  effect  which  conscious  expectation  cannot
bring  about. I  have  on  a  good  many  occasions  led  the  "  subjects  "  to
believe  that  a  particular  finger  was  being  operated  on,  when  it  was
not ;  but  no  change  in  its  condition  ever  ensued. Still,  I  would  not
press  this  particular  point  too  far  ;  as  we  are  not  justified  in  assuming
an  exact  similarity  between  the  capacities  of  the  conscious  and  "  un-
conscious" divisions  of  the  mind. A  more  serious  objection  is  (2)  that
even  in  the  "  unconscious "  mind  expectations  cannot  form  without
some  grounds ;  and  before  confidence  was  established  by  experience,
the  "  subjects  "  were  much  more  likely  to  expect  that  they  ivotdd  feel
the  very  sharp  infiictions  to  which  their  fingers  were  submitted  than
that  they  would  not. This  specially  applies  to  a  female  "  subject "  of
very  nervous  temperament,  who  had  no  acquaintance  with  the  physical
phenomena  of  hypnotism,  and  who  was  ready  to  shriek  at  the  very
idea  of  a  prick  on  her  fingers." (3) The  initial  supposition,  that  a
person  whose  conscious  self is unaware of  certain  faint  stimuli
is "  unconsciously "  hypersesthetic to  those very  stimuli,  seems  to
me  wholly  unsupported  and  extremely dubious. And (4) the  in-
effectiveness of  Mr.  Smith's  hand  unless  his  will  was  also  engaged

1  The  particular  sense  in  which  I  use  these  words,  and  the  word  "  unconscious,"
was  explained  above  (pp.  225  and  233).

2 1 -vvas  only  able  to  have  half  a  dozen  trials  with  this  "  subject,"  as  her  fingers,
when  stabbed,  bled  to  an  extent  which  made  me  fear  that  they  would  cause  her  sub-
sequent pain  or  annoyance.


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


257


seems  alone  fatal  to  the  hypothesis.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that
the  balance  of  probability  is  greatly  in  favour  of  a  direct  physical
influence  in  which  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  are  not  con-
cerned. "Whether  this  conclusion  be  right  or  wrong,  I  earnestly  hope
that  the  experiments  may  be  widely  repeated  by  persons  who  have
proved  themselves  effective  hypnotisers ;  for  no  conceivable  explanation
of  the  facts  could  deprive  them  of  their  exceptional  interest.

ALLEGED  TRANSFERENCE  OF  HYSTERICAL  AFFECTIONS.

§  25.  There  is  one  other  alleged  type  of  effect  produced  by  physical
proximity,  without  sensory  communication,  which  deserves  mention,
though  it  has  not  yet,  I  think,  been  quite  conclusively  tested.  Dr.
Babinski,  of  the  Salpetriere,  believes  himself,  and  is  believed  by  Dr.
Charcot  and  other  authorities,  to  have  established  the  fact  that  a
hysterical  affection,  produced  in  one  "  subject "  by  hypnotic  suggestion,
can  be  transferred  to  another  "  subject,"  not  in  contact  with  the  first,
under  the  influence  of  a  neighbouring  magnet.  The  French  savants  do
not  seem  completely  aware  how  absolutely  different  such  a  phenomenon
would  be  from  those  to  which  they  compare  it — the  widely-alleged  effect
of  a  magnet  in  transferring  hysterical  affections  from  one  side  of  the
body  to  the  other  ;  but  this  is  unimportant  provided  only  tliey  prove
their  facts.  The  objection  to  some,  at  any  rate,  of  their  experiments
is  that  sufficient  account  does  not  seem  to  have  been  taken  of  the  acute-
mess  and  cunning  which  hysterical  women  may  bring  to  bear  in  some
well-defined  channel,  while  ostensibly  in  a  state  of  hypnotic  lethargy
and  inattention ;  without  intending  to  deceive  in  any  way  involving
real  responsibility,  such  persons  may  still  be  quite  capable  of  detecting
what  the  expected  effects  are,  and  of  producing  them  by  clever
collusion  and  simulation.  This,  however,  is  now  becoming  better
realised  ;  and  I  can  vouch  for  the  striking  result  of  one  trial,  in  wliicli
Dr.  Babinski  was  good  enough  to  allow  Mr.  Myers  and  myself  to
arrange  the  conditions.  The  two  "  subjects "  were  placed  in  two
rooms  sepai'ated  by  a  thick  door  ;  and  a  strong  contracture  of  the  foot
pi'oduced  in  one  of  them  certainly  reappeared  in  the  other.  The  only
flaw  was  that  the  woman  first  affected  made  an  exclamation  in  which
the  word  pied  occurred  ;  but  she  did  not  speak  loud,  and  the  remark
was  quite  inaudible  to  normal  ears  on  tlie  other  side  of  the  door,  where
a  good  deal  of  noise  was  going  on.

NERVOUS  INDUCTION.

§  26.  And  now  a  final  word  as  to  what  the  nature  of  the  specific
influence  in  these  various  results  can  be  supposed  to  be.  If  it  exists,
as  a  property  of  living  tissue,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the

S


258


Hypnotism  and  Telepathy.


tissue  concerned  is  that  of  the  nerves.  This  would  be  a  probable
surmise  from  the  analogy  of  electrical  induction,  and  from  the  affinity
supposed  to  exist  between  nervous  and  electric  currents — an  affinity
which  would  be  manifest,  even  apart  from  the  electrical  properties  of
nervous  currents,  in  the  mere  fact  that  the  nerves  are  the  only  part  of
the  body  through  which  anything  of  at  all  the  nature  of  a  current  (in
the  physical  sense)  passes.  But  a  stronger  argument  is  that  immediate
dependence  of  the  influence  on  the  brain,  which  is  strongly  suggested
by  nearly  all  the  cases.  As  I  have  said,  the  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's
hand  to  the  "subject's"  finger  proved  as  ineffective,  unless  his  attention
was  likewise  concentrated,  as  his  attention  and  "  will  "  had  been  without
the  aid  of  his  hand  ;  and  exactly  the  same  proximity  of  the  hand  which
produced  the  effect  also  in  some  cases  removed  it — the  only  change
being  in  the  operator's  intention.  Similarly  in  the  "willing-game"
cases,  the  agent's  concentration  seemed  to  be  the  express  condition  of
the  curious  effect ;  and  whether  or  not  the  same  can  be  stated  of  Dr.
Liebeault's  therapeutical  successes,  it  has  at  any  rate  been  widely
observed  by  other  hypnotisers.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the
nerve-currents  must  receive  their  specific  character,  in  part  at  any  rate,
from  the  character  of  the  cerebration  which  accompanies  this  concen-
tration ;  and,  if  so,  then  the  influence  is  clearly  physiological  in  cha-
racter, not  merely  in  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a  living  tissue  as  such,
but  in  the  sense  of  being  evoked  at  special  moments  by  a  special  form
of  vital  action.  It  has  no  analogy,  for  instance,  to  the  alleged  effects
of  particular  substances,  such  as  metals,  applied  to  the  human  body  ;
nor  is  it  due  to  a  material  emanation  with  peculiar  properties,  such  as
would  come  into  play  if  the  effect  were  produced  through  the  organ  -of
smell.  Though  finding  its  nearest  analogue  in  induced  electric  currents,
and  though  best,  perhaps,  described  as  nervous  induction,  it  is  essen-
tially vital  and  sui  generis.

§  27.  This  very  general  statement  is  all,  I  think,  that  can  be
advanced  with  any  positiveness.  As  soon  as  we  try  to  analyse  the
processes  further,  our  means  fail.  The  cases  described,though  they  agree
in  pointing  to  the  power  of  one  organism  specifically  to  affect  another,  are
puzzlingly  different  in  their  details.  Dr.  Liebeault  considered  that  the
nervous  influence  which  he  brought  to  bear  "  re-established  the  physio-
logical functioning "  of  his  "  subject's "  organs.  But  how  little
apparent  relation  such  a  result  has  to  the  hysterical  disturbances  of
the  willing-game,  or  to  the  stiffening  and  ansesthetising  of  a  young  man's
fingers  !  As  to  all  difficulties  of  this  sort,  it  seems  enough  for  the
present  to  remark  that  they  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  affecting  in
the  slightest  degree  the  general  question  as  to  cause  and  effect.  Inas-
much as  our  ignorance  concerning  the  details  of  the  nervous  governance
of  the  human  organism  is  very  nearly  complete  in  respect  of  processes


Hypnotism  aud  Telepathy.


259


■where  the  fact  of  the  governance  is  universally  admitted,  the  absence
of  a  satisfactory  physiological  account  of  the  intermediate  stages  ought
not  to  weigh  a  feather  in  the  decision  whether  the  ostensible  affection  of
one  organism  in  some  unknown  way  by  the  proximity  of  another  is
demonstrated  or  demonstrable  by  evidence.  That,  even  if  the  general
fact  were  incontrovertibly  established,  its  various  modes  of  manifesta-
tion and  their  complete  physiological  history  should  remain  obscure  is
exactly  what  we  should  a  jjriori  expect.  I  will  only  add  that  cases  of
the  Salpetriere  type,  and  cases  of  a  sanative  influence  produced  by  an
operator  who  is  himself  in  vigorous  health,  would  accord  with  the  view
advanced  above  as  to  the  transmission  (supposing  it  to  have  any
physical  basis)  of  telepathic  impressions, — namely,  that  the  process
resembles  those  where  a  physical  force,  acting  by  vibrations  through  a
medium,  rejwoduces  itself  at  a  distance  in  its  original  form,  as  in  the
case  of  sympathetic  tuning-forks  or  induced  magnetism.  The  resem-
blance does  not  hold,  however,  in  the  other  results — e.g.,  in  the  finger
experiments,  where  the  hand  operated  on  assumes  a  quite  different
condition  from  that  of  the  hand  that  operates ;  and  so  far  as  the
evidence  supports  a  definite  view,  it  points  to  another  or  a  further
process  than  the  sympathetic  or  simply  reproductive,  as  involved  in
many  of  the  cases  of  supersensory  transference  where  the  organisms
concerned  are  in  close  proximity  to  one  another.  I  cannot  forecast
whether  science  will  ever  address  itself  with  success  to  such  problems
as  these.  I  should  be  content  if  any  of  my  readers  were  led  to  regard
as  within  the  possibility  of  scientific  acceptance  the  broad  fact  that
certain  supersensory  and  non-mechanical  transferences  take  place
which  belong  to  the  domain  of  physical  and  physiological,  and  not
merely  of  psychical,  research.  In  the  scientific  world,  such  trans-
ferences probably  stand  a  better  chance  of  consideration  as  examples
of  "  nervous  induction  "  than  as  a  branch  of  telepathy.


260


Critical  Notices.


V.

CRITICAL  NOTICES.

Preliminary  Report  of  the  Commission  apj^ointed  by  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  to  Investigate  Modern  Spiritualism,  in  accordance
with  the  Bequest  of  the  late  Henry  Seyhert. (Philadelphia,  1887.)

"  The  late  Mr.  Henry  Seybert,"  we  are  here  told,  "  during  his  life-
time was  known  as  an  enthusiastic  believer  in  Modern  Spiritualism,  and
shortly  before  his  death  presented  to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  a
sum  of  money  sufficient  to  found  a  chair  of  Philosophy,  and  to  the  gift
added  a  condition  that  the  University  should  appoint  a  commission  to
investigate  '  all  systems  of  morals,  religion,  or  philosophy  which  assume
to  represent  the  truth,  and  particularly  of  Modern  Spiritualism.'  The
amount  of  the  bequest  is  not  here  mentioned ;  but  it  has  elsewhere
been  stated  as  60,000  dollars, — by  far  the  largest  sum  of  money  which
has  as  yet  been  destined  by  a  testator  to  support  an  inquiry  into
Spiritualism  and  cognate  topics.  A  commission  was  established  in
1884,  and  we  have  here  its  preliminary  Report,  consisting  mainly  of
accounts  of  seances  with  professional  mediums  who  responded  to  the
Commission's  advertisement.  As  the  book  is  not  provided  with  index
or  table  of  contents,  the  following  abstract  may  be  of  service  : —

Pages  27-29  and  31,  32. — Sittings  with  Mrs.  Patterson. — Nothing
that  could  not  easily  be  explained  by  fraud.  She  managed  to  work  a
piece  of  slate-pencil  out  from  between  loosely-fastened  slates  in  her
own  control.  Dr.  Knerr,  by  the  adroit  use  of  a  small  pocket-mirror,
saw  her  writing  on  a  slate  under  the  table.  It  would  seem  tliat  she
then  had  both  hands  under  the  table, (p.  121.)

Pages  29-31  and  93,  94. — Mr.  Fred  Briggs  as  medium. — Possibly  the
ordinary  trick  of  the  one-handed  grip,  simulating  a  grasp  of  both
hands  ;  but  this  is  not  made  clear.

Pages  33-48. — Mrs.  Kane  (one  of  the  Fox  sisters). — Raps  heard
close  to  the  medium  ;  could  easily  have  been  produced.

Pages  49-51. — Mrs.  Patterson. — Alleged  slate-writing  ;  slates
obviously  opened  by  medium.

Pages  51-77. — Dr.  Slade.— Substitution  of  slates  and  fraudulent
writing  on  slates.  Easily  detected.  Mr.  Truesdell's  book,  Bottom  Facts
of  Spiritualism,  should  be  read  in  connection  with  Shade's
performances.  Dr.  Slade  appears  (p.  70)  to  have  practically  ad-
mitted to  Dr. Furness  that  his  "  manifestations  "  were  fraudulent.


American  Report  on  Spiritualism.


261


"  I  said  to  him,  '  Well,  and  how  are  the  old  spirits  coming  on  ? '
Whereupon  he  laughed  and  replied,  '  Oh,  pshaw  !  you  never  believed
in  them,  did  you  1 '  "  See  also  Mr.  Truesdell's  book,as  to  Slade's  voluntary
and  involuntary  admissions.  After  all  this,  few  will  be  inclined  to
attach  much  weight  to  Slade's  performances  with  Zollner.  As  to  these
experiments.  Professor  Fullerton  has  collected  various  testimonies
(pp.  104-115)  which  (though  Mr.  Massey,  in  an  "  Open  Letter  to  Pro-
fessor Fullerton,"  has  pointed  out  some  strainings  of  the  evidence)  do
undoubtedly  much  diminish  the  weight  ^wwia  facie  attaching  to  the
names  of  the  German  savants  who  conducted  the  investigation.

Pages  79-82. — Mrs.  Maud  Lord. — The  sitters  were  touched  in  the
dark,  &c.,  but  the  medium's  hands  were  free.

Pages  82-87. — Mr.  Keeler. — This  was,  perhaps,  a  case  of  the  ordinary
one-handed  grip  ;  though  the  medium  cannot  be  said  to  have  been
detected.  Mr.  Massey  has  dwelt  on  the  imperfection  in  the  proof ;  and
this,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  is  the  only  definite  criticism  on  the  Com-
mission's negative  conclusions  which  has  proceeded  from  the  Spiritual-
istic camp.

Pages  87-90. — Rothermel  and  Powell. — Tapes  on  wrists  apparently
cut  by  medium  during  seance.

Page  95  — Mrs.  Best. — Alleged  materialisation  with  no  test;  medium
not  secured.

Pages  96-101. — Mrs.  Thayer. — Flowers  fall  in  the  dark  in  premises
over  which  the  medium  has  control,  and  which  no  one  examines.

Pages  101-2.— Mrs.  Wells.— Materialisation— no  tests.  [This
medium  has  since  been  caught  personating  a  spirit,  as  the  Beligio-
PMlosophical  Journal  informs  us.]

Pages  124-7. — Caffray  pretends  to  magnetise  blotting-paper  (at  a
dollar  a  sheet)  which  will  make  Dr.  Furness  a  medium.  Dr.  Furness
wears  it  next  to  his  skin  for  six  months,  whilst  sitting  daily  with  a
view  to  development  as  a  medium,  but  without  result.  "  I  had  used
enough  blotting-paper,  it  seemed  to  me,  to  absorb  a  spot  in  the  sun."

Pages  128-147. — Mansfield  and  other  answerers  of  sealed  letters. —
The  letters  are  opened  before  they  are  answered  ;  if  they  cannot  be
opened  they  are  not  answered.

These  are  the  main  experiments  described,  and  few  readers  will
dispute  the  conclusion  arrived  at,  namely,  that  thus  far  the  Commission
have  witnessed  nothing  that  was  not  easily  explicable  by  fraud.  The
amount  of  work  thus  far  done  may  seem  to  have  spread  over  a  some-
what dispropoi-tionate  time  (three  years),  but  those  who  have  had
practical  experience  of  inquiries  of  this  sort  will  recognise  their  tedious
and  time-wasting  character.  This  Report  is  avowedly  preliminary,  and
it  may  be  hoped  that  the  Commission  will  now  see  their  way  to  a  some-
what wider  construction  of  their  duties  under  the  Seybert  bequest.  It


262  Critical  Notices.

is  to  be  wished  that  they  should  take  in  hand  certain  perplexing
phenomena  which  do  admittedly  occur,  but  which  need  not  be  inter-
preted in  the  Spiritualistic  sense.  Automatic  writing  is  one  of  the  best-
marked  of  these  ;  and  a  systematic  investigation  of  the  mechanism  and
content  of  automatic  messages  would  fall,  I  think,  fairly  within  the
limits  of  the  stipulated  inquiry,  and  could  hardly  fail  to  yield  important
psychological  lessons.  It  is  not  so  much  upon  the  crude  imposture  of
hirelings,  as  upon  the  delicate  and  perplexing — but  not  necessarily
Spiritualistic — phenomena  which  patience  and  care  will  elicit  in  many
trustworthy  quarters  that  the  attention  of  the  Commission  might  now,
I  venture  to  think,  be  profitably  turned.  With  so  ample  a  bequest  to
work  upon,  it  would  probably  be  possible  to  visit  places  even  at  a
distance  from  Philadelphia  from  which  unusual  phenomena  of  this  kind
might  be  reported.

For  the  present,  however,  we  must  take  the  book  as  it  stands,  and
consider  what  practical  conclusions  are  to  be  drawn  from  it.  In  the
first  place,  and  speaking  from  the  point  of  view  of  those  who,  like  our-
selves, continue  anxious  that  "the  phenomeni  called  Spiritualistic"
should  be  patiently  and  carefully  examined,  the  effect  of  this  book
will  certainly  be  to  emphasise  the  conclusion  to  which  various  papers
published  in  our  Proceedings  have  already  pointed,  namely,  that
investigation  with  paid  professional  mediums  can  seldom  offer  a  prospect
of  real  instruction  sufficient  to  compensate  for  the  time  expended,  and
the  danger  of  countenancing  folly,  and  subsidising  fraud.  Private
experiment  there  should  certainly  be, — more  careful  and  systematic
than  has  yet  been  managed, — but,  as  a  general  rule  at  least,  paid
mediums,  both  in  England  and  America,  should  be  given  a  wide  berth.

On  Spiritualists,  again,  this  little  book  should  have  a  powerful
effect.  Here  are  several  revelations  of  vulgar,  unblushing  fraud,  such
as  must  make  the  ears  of  honest  believers  to  tingle.  Surely  their  first
aim  should  be  to  denounce  such  fraud,  to  disgrace  the  guilty  persons,  to
purge  the  Spiritualistic  faith  of  all  complicity  with  this  base  and
crawling  imposture.  Surely  those  who  believe  that  they  have  genuine
phenomena  to  which  they  can  point,  communications  from  departed
spirits  whose  intrinsic  contents  prove  them  beyond  the  power
of  trickery  to  produce,  should  now  be  doubly  anxious  to  put  this
evidence  carefully  and  straightforwardly  before  the  world.

It  cannot  be  said  that  evidence  of  this  kind,  if  offered,  will  now  be
ignored,  although  it  may  be  analysed  with  more  strictness  than  in  days
when  Spiritualistic  phenomena  interested  the  group  of  convinced
Spiritualists  alone.  In  America,  besides  the  Seybert  Commission,
there  is  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  of  which  Mr.
Richard  Hodgson  is  now  the  secretary.  And  in  our  English  Society
for  Psychical  Research  we  have  a  committee,  nominated  by  our  late


HysUro-epileiosie  Masculine.


263


deeply-regretted  President,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  formed  for  the
express  purpose  of  receiving  and  considering  evidence  of  this  nature.
That  committee  includes  such  names  as  those  of  Mr.  Crookes  and
Professor  Barrett  (its  secretary),  who  will  not  be  suspected  of  hostile
bias ;  and  we  may  surely  hope  that  should  any  "  Spiritualistic "
phenomena,  physical  or  psychical,  be  observed  under  good  conditions  by
persons  anxious  that  such  phenomena  should  be  fully  and  fairly
investigated,  they  will  give  us  the  opportunity  if  possible  of  witnessing,
or  at  any  rate  of  recording  and  discussing  them.

F.  W.  H.  M.


Ilystero-epilepsie  Masculine:  Suggestion,  Inhibition,  Transposition  des
Sens.  Prof.  Fontan,  of  Toulon,  in  Revue  FhilosojMque,  August,
1887.

The  paper  whose  title  is  given  above  was  communicated  to  the
Soci^t^  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  in  1886,  but  is  now  printed,  I
believe,  for  the  first  time.  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  for  our  in-
quiries ;  and  I  propose,  therefore,  to  analyse  it  pretty  fully,  and  to  add
a  few  comments  and  suggestions.

The  subject,  B.,  is  a  sailor,  aged  22,  apparently  robust,  but  suffering
from  hysteria,  with  attacks  of  catalepsy, — the  result,  apparently,  of  a
sojourn  in  Madagascar.  When  he  came  under  Dr.  Fontan's  care  his
left  side  was  wholly  devoid  of  feeling,  and  the  sense  of  smell  was
absent  on  that  side  ;  sight  and  hearing  diminished  ;  taste  normal.  A
hysterogenous  zone  on  the  right  side  remained  unaffected  by  any
treatment.  Hypnotic  suggestion  suspended  the  anaesthesia  for  a  few
hours  at  a  time,  but  the  magnet,  and  the  magnet  only,  removed  it  per
manently,  and  practically  cured  the  patient.  It  is  hard  from  Dr,
Fontan's  account  (p.  214)  to  suppose  that  the  magnet's  influence  in  this
case  can  have  been  merely  imaginary.

Metals  do  not  seem  to  have  specifically  affected  the  patient.  One
curious  experiment,  tried  with  gold,  belongs  properly  to  the  category  of
post-hypnotic  suggestions.  B.  was  told  in  the  hypnotic  state  that  gold
would  burn  him  after  he  awoke.  He  was  then  awoke  and  touched
with  various  metals,  which  he  could  not  see.  When  touched  with  gold
he  complained  that  it  burnt  him,  but  he  did  not  in  his  waking  state
recognise  what  the  metal  touching  him  was.  We  must  suppose  that
his  hypnotic  personality  (so  to  say),  persisting  through  his  waking  per-
sonality, recognised  the  gold ;  but  it  would  be  hard  to  say  whether  the
gold  was  recognised  by  a  hypersesthetic  perception  of  its  ordinary  qualities
of  weight  and  temperature  (and  thus  distinguished  from  iron,  nickel,


264


Critical  Notices.


tin,  silver,  and  aluminium,  which  were  also  applied),  or  whether  some
still  deeper  potentiality  of  sensation  was  reached  by  the  hypnotic  sug-
gestion, and  the  gold  was  recognised,  not  by  its  ordinary  qualities,
but  by  a  direct  susceptibility  to  gold  as  gold.

The  effect  of  medicaments  at  a  distance  was  tried  with  results  which
Professor  Fontan  considers  conclusive  :  though  the  number  of  experi-
ments was  rather  small,  on  account  of  the  rapid  fatigue  of  the  subject
after  two  or  three  substances  had  been  tried  on  each  occasion.  Verbal
suggestions  and  even  thought-transference,  seem  to  have  been  carefully
avoided.  In  some  of  the  cases,  but  not  in  all,  it  seems  as  though
the  subject  might  possibly  have  smelt  the  substance  employed.

We  now  come  to  the  so-called  "  transposition  of  the
senses."  And  here  a  few  preliminary  remarks  are  needed.  Pro-
fessor Fontan  apologises  for  the  detail  in  which  his  observations
are  given,  and  adds,  "  Ceux  qui  lisont  nos  experiences  penseront
sans  doute,  comme  ceux  qui  y  ont  assiste,  qu'elles  ont  ete  suffisaniment
rigoureuses."  I  think,  however,  that  many  English  readers  will  feel
that  even  more  detail  would  have  been  welcome,  and  that  it  would
have  been  well  to  record  and  number  each  experiment  separately,  and
to  add  independent  accounts  from  the  several  observers.^  For  if  these
phenomena  actually  occurred, — aiid  assuredly  the  testimony  as  it  stands
is  definite  and  clear, — we  have  here  an  epoch-making  case  ;  a  revival,
under  modern  scientific  scrutiny,  of  a  class  of  marvels  which  half  a
century  ago  seemed  well  attested,  but  which  have  gradually  faded  from
belief  on  account  of  the  impossibility  of  renewing  them.  And  thus  we
shall  find  ourselves  embarked  on  a  current  where  it  is  hard  to  stop.
There  is  no  clear  line  of  demarcation  between  the  so-called  "  trans-
position of  senses  "  which  Dr.  Fontan  records  and  some  of  the  most
advanced  wonders  of  "  clairvoyance."

Nor  is  it  the  importance  of  the  experiments  alone  which  thus  calls
for  full  detail  in  recounting  them.  Their  extreme  and  ill-understood
complexity  equally  demands  that  every  scrap  of  information  possible
should  be  given.  We  do  not  know  in  such  cases  what  to  observe;  for
we  do  not  know  how  to  attach  these  supernormal  sensations  to  any
ordinary  operation  of  the  senses.  We  know  not  how  many  different
causes  may  be  im'olved  ;  we  can  observe,  but  as  yet  we  cannot  interpret.
Our  res%ime  of  Dr.  Fontan's  experiments  will  illustrate  these  difficulties.

Transposition  of  hearing. — B.  was  placed  in  somnambulic  trance  ;
it  was  suggested  to  him  not  to  hear  with  his  ears,  but  to  hear  witli  the
fingers  of  his  right  hand.  Now  if  a  real  psychical  deafness  were  im-
posed, but  the  ears  were  not  stopped,  the  subject  might  hear  only  when

1  Dr.  Fontan  has  kindly  sent  me  the  names  of  most  of  the  witnesses,  which  I  am
at  liberty  to  communicate,  if  desired.


HysUro-epilepsie  M asculine.


265


the  hand  was  spoken  to,  but  yet  hear  with  his  ears  in  the  ordinary  way,
the  psychical  deafness  (which  is  all  that  suggestion  can  inspire)  being
removed  for  the  time  by  the  suggestion  that  he  could,  in  fact,  hear
when  his  hand  was  addressed.  This  would,  of  course,  be  in  no  way
marvellous.  Dr.  Fontan,  however,  securely  stopped  the  ears,  besides
imposing  by  suggestion  a  psychical  deafness  which  appeared  complete.  He
then  drew  together  the  fingers  of  B.'s  right  hand,  placed  them  near  his
own  lips  (out  of  the  subject's  sight),  and  said  (so  low  that  no  one
present  heard  it),  "  Sens-tu  I'odeur  de  la  pipe  1"  B.  seemed  attentive;
looked  with  curiosity  at  his  five  fingers,  and  after  a  moment's  reflection
murmured,  as  though  speaking  to  each  finger  in  turn,  "  Sens-tu  I'odeur
de  " — then  stopped,  and  indicated  that  since  only  five  fingers  had  been
afiected,  only  five  syllables  could  be  heard.  Dr.  Fontan  thereupon  drew
B.'s  ten  fingers  together,  and  murmured  a  phrase  of  ten  syllables,  which
B.  repeated  correctly.  The  experiment  was  repeated  several  times,  and  it
sometimes  happened  that  B.  failed  to  perceive  the  words  distinctly.
He  would  then  murmur  the  supposed  syllable  at  the  end  of  the  refrac-
tory finger  ;  if  he  said  it  rightly  he  seemed  satisfied,  if  wrongly  he
would  bite  his  finger-ends  and  get  so  excited  that  it  was  necessary  to
hypnotise  him  into  tranquillity.  Sometimes,  again,  he  made  a  sign  that
he  understood  what  was  said  to  his  fingers,  but  would  not  repeat  it.
To  meet  this  refusal  B.  was  called  upon  to  touch  on  a  printed  alphabet
individual  letters  which  were  whispered  (or  muttered,  it  is  not  clear
which)  to  his  fingers.  "  He  looked  for  the  letter  which  answered  to
each  of  his  fingers,  observing  the  order  in  which  it  had  been  pronounced,
and  found  it  with  the  end  (pulpe)  of  the  finger  aflected.  If  he  was
uncertain,  he  hesitated,  tried  the  letter  with  his  finger  as  though  to
confirm  the  auditory  by  the  tactile  impression,  and  ended  by  finding  the
right  letter."

These  details,  though  inexplicable,  are  plainly  important.  Of
course,  when  we  are  first  told  that  a  man  hears  with  his  fingers,  we
think  of  the  analogy  of  the  partially-deaf  man  who  may  be  said  to  hear
with  his  teeth  ;  who  uses  his  teeth,  that  is  to  say,  to  collect  (by  a  rod
held  in  the  mouth)  the  sonorous  vibrations  around  him,  which  are  then
transmitted  by  the  skull  to  the  internal  ear.  It  is  not,  however,  at  all
clear  that  supernormal  audition  such  as  B.'s  is  efi"ected  in  an  analogous
way.  As  we  proceed  we  shall  see  that  here,  too  (as  in  so  many  of  the
older  cases),  what  is  suggested  is  no  true  hyjjercesthesia — no  mere
exaggeration  of  the  normal  functions  of  peripheral  nerve-endings — but
rather  some  rudimentary  pancesthesia,  some  inexplicable  capacity  of
nerve-endings  to  recognise  vibrations  which  they  are  not  apparently
contiived  to  interpret.  Dr.  Fontan  uses  the  term  "fusion  of  impres-
sions," and  it  will  be  seen  from  what  follows  that  we  cannot  be  sure
that  the  touch  of  the  fingers  upon  the  printed  letters  was  not  a  quasi-


266


Critical  Notices.


visual  rather  than  a  tactile  aid  to  the  recognition  of  the  transmitted
sound.

Note,  however,  tliat  thus  far  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference
would  cover  the  ground.  The  words  and  letters  were  known  to  Dr.
Fontan,  and  might  conceivably  have  been  telepathically  transiTiitted  to
B.,  whose  fumbling  with  the  printed  letters  would  then  only  represent
a  confused  internal  grasp  of  the  transposed  image.  It  will  be  seen  that
subsequent  experiments  make  this  view  improbable  :  but,  nevertheless,
it  would  be  desirable  in  every  case  of  supernormal  sensation  to  try
whether  a  mere  telepathic  transfer  of  thought  or  feeling  can  be  effected.
For  just  as  hypertesthesia  is  one  of  our  starting-points  from  which  to
approach  the  problems  of  clairvoyance,  so  is  telepathy  another.

Transposition  of  taste  and  smell. — It  was  suggested  to  B.  that  he
could  not  smell  with  his  nose,  but  only  with  the  palms  of  his  hands.
He  was  awoke,  and  it  was  found  that  ammonia  did  not  affect  his
nostrils.  (This  psychical  anosmia  is  of  course  easily  tested  by  the
absence  of  manifest  irritation,  watering  of  eyes.  Arc.)  The  subject's
nose,  moreover,  was  pinched  by  an  assistant,  while  the  smelling
power  of  the  palms  was  tested.  Drops  of  odorous  liquids  were
then  placed  on  the  palms,  outside  the  subject's  field  of  vision,  and
duly  recognised.  Dr.  Fontan  informs  me  that  the  sense  of  smell  was
apparently  referred  to  the  nose,  and  the  sense  of  taste  to  the  mouth,  the
subject  making  grimaces  which  indicated  this  ;  but  "  he  felt  also  very
vivid,  perhaps  specific,  sensations  in  his  hands,  which  he  showed  by
wiping  or  scratching  them,  or  wishing  to  wash  them  "  (after  the  drops
of  odorous  liquid  or  pinches  of  sapid  powder  liad  been  applied).

A  similar  suggestion  was  made  as  to  taste ;  and  powders  of  bis-
muth, chalk,  flour,  quinine,  alum,  sugar,  salt  were  placed  in  his  palm
out  of  his  siglit.  He  recognised  the  tastes, — felt  no  taste  when  the
powder  was  insipid.  He  said  that  alum  was  "  apre  et  sec,"  and  stuck
his  lips  to  his  gums ;  so  that  here  too  (as  already  implied)  he  seems
to  some  extent  to  have  referred  the  taste  to  the  appropriate  organ.
Note,  however,  that  lips  and  gums  have  no  true  sense  of  taste,  and
that  the  "  picotement  dans  le  nez  "  (which  he  felt  after  ammonia  in
the  hand)  is  not  truly  smell.

It  is  interesting  to  compare  these  results  with  those  obtained  tele-
pathically by  some  of  ourselves  {Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  3,  &c.),  the
agent  holding  the  substance  in  liis  mouth,  and  the  percipient  describing
it  (of  course  without  seeing  the  agent's  face).  Thus  we  have  alum
ti',sted  by  Mr.  Guthrie,  and  telepathically  felt  by  Miss  R.  as  follows  : —
"  A  taste  of  ink,  of  iron,  of  vinegar.  I  felt  it  on  my  lips — it  is  as  if
I  had  been  eating  alum."  ^

1  See  also  Proceedings,  III.,  p.  434,  &c.


Hystero-epilepsie  Masculine.


267


Transposition  of  sight  is  of  course  the  most  bewildering  of  these
supernornialities.  We  seem  here  to  be  overriding  the  lack  not  only  of
physiological  but  of  physical  adaptation,  dispensing  not  only  with  the
specially  percipient  retina  but  with  the  le^is,  indispensable  for  the  mere
purpose  of  refracting  the  incident  rays,  so  that  they  may  meet  in  a
focus  and  give  a  distinct  image.  Dr.  Fontan,  indeed,  says  that  be
would  not  have  thought  of  trying  these  visual  experiments  at  all,  had
it  not  been  for  the  fumbling  of  B.'s  fingers  on  the  printed  letters,  as
already  described.  It  was  suggested  to  the  subject  that  he  could  only
see  with  his  fingers,  and  the  psychical  blindness  was  reinforced  by
placing  a  screen  close  to  the  subject's  face,  so  that  he  could  not  see
his  own  hands,  nor  the  objects  ofi'ered,  nor  the  faces  or  gestures  of  the
bystanders.

Printed  letters  were  first  tried  ;  and  the  subject,  who  could  scarcely
read  in  his  normal  state,  deciphered  a  few  of  these  with  difliculty.  A
number  of  skeins  of  coloured  wool,  which  he  had  never  seen,  were  then
placed  before  him,  and  he  was  told  to  choose  the  red  ones.  He  felt  the
wools,  rejected  unhesitatingly  the  colours  not  asked  for,  and  arranged
the  red  in  a  series.  He  did  this  also  with  the  green  and  with  the  blue
wools.  The  wools  were  again  mixed,  and  he  was  told  to  put  the  red
ones  on  the  right,  the  green  on  the  left.  But  he  was  now  exhausted
and  recognised  nothing.

The  same  experiments  were  repeated  next  day,  with  fresh  speci-
mens of  wool.  And  next  the  room  was  completely  darkened,  B.'s
hand  was  placed  in  a  box  containing  various  patterns  of  wool,  which
he  had  never  either  seen  or  touched,  and  he  was  told  to  choose  the
blue  ones.  "  He  seized  them,"  says  Dr.  Fontan,  in  a  letter  rather
more  detailed  than  the  printed  account,  "  with  such  rapidity,  such
force,  tossing  aside  all  those  which  he  did  not  want,  that  we  sup-
posed that  the  experiment  had  failed.  Shut  up  in  a  dark  room,
where  we  could  not  see  each  other,  we  did  not  know  what  was
going  on,  and  fearing  some  access  of  frenzy,  I  precipitated  myself
on  the  subject  and  hypnotised  him  strongly,  by  pressing  the  globes
of  his  eyes.  He  had  had  time  enough  during  this  scene,  which  did
not  last  five  seconds,  to  choose  the  wools,  and  to  hide  them  in  his
bosom.  At  no  other  time  did  he  show  such  eagerness  for  the  sug-
gested colour."  He  had,  in  fact,  selected  four  blue  skeins,  which  he
clutched  so  closely  that  he  had  to  be  altogether  inhibited  before
they  could  be  taken  from  him.

The  next  experiment  was  perhaps  the  best  of  all.  The  wools  were
placed  on  a  table  under  a  strong  sheet  of  glass.  B.  (psychically  blinded
and  with  the  screen  interposed)  placed  his  hand  on  the  glass,  and  was
ordered  to  indicate  the  red  wool.  He  resisted  for  a  time,  but  "  ended  by
consenting  to  search  for  the  red  wools,  whose  position  he  indicated  by


268


Critical  Notices.


a  tap  on  the  glass  which  left  no  room  for  doubt."  He  repeated  this
process  several  times  with  the  green,  the  blue,  and  the  yellow  wools,
and  always  with  complete  success.

Once  more.  Five  photographs,  of  which  one  only  was  of  a  child,
were  placed  on  the  table,  and  he  was  told  to  find  the  child's  photograph.
"He  felt  the  faces,  turned  them  with  head  upwards,  felt  over  the  child's
figure  carefully,  and  gave  the  photograph  to  me  correctly."

The  experiments  had  reached  this  point,  when  they  were  put  an  end
to  by  the  patient's  recovery  of  health,  and  consequent  loss  of  sensi-
tiveness. As  already  mentioned,  it  was  the  magnet  which  seems  to
have  cured  him.  After  observing  transfers  of  anaesthesia,  induced  on
the  patient  by  a  bar  magnet,  "  we  placed  on  his  breast,"  says  Dr.
Fontan,  "  a  steel  spring,  taken  from  a  crinoline,  and  previously  mag-
netised. The  little  apparatus  was  completed  by  a  lace  which  held  it  on
like  a  girdle  ;  and  the  anaesthesia  was  suppressed.  A  similar  spring  not
magnetised  produced  no  effect.  From  the  moment  that  this  plan  was
tried  B.  declared  himself  cured,  and  became,  in  fact,  impracticable  for
any  experiment.  He  was  no  longer  susceptible  of  hypnotism,
suggestion,  &c.,  and,  wishing  to  repeat  some  of  our  experiments,  we
were  obliged  to  take  his  talisman  from  him  by  force.  Deprived  of  the
magnet,  he  became  a  hypnotic  subject  again."  He  had,  of  course,  to
be  discharged  as  cured.  "Sombre  and  taciturn  when  our  experiments
first  began,  he  has  become  cheerful,  noisy,  pleased  with  everything,  and
more  intelligent  than  before."

Thus  ended  a  series  of  observations,  in  themselves  of  the  highest
interest,  and  rendered  more  important  still  by  their  connection  with  a
considerable  mass  of  old  experiments  in  Germany,  France,  and  England,
undertaken  for  the  most  part  in  the  first  half  of  this  century,  during  what
may  be  called  the  first  vogue  of  mesmerism.  These  were  often  recorded
in  considerable  detail,  though  rarely  or  never  with  a  full  consciousness
of  the  sources  of  possible  error, — which,  abounding  as  they  do  in  all
forms  of  "psychical"  investigation,  are,  perhaps,  nowhere  more  rife  than
in  cases  of  alleged  clairvoyance.  The  time  may  come  when  it  will  be
desirable  to  analyse  and  compare  these  somewhat  antiquated  records ;
which,  although  they  can  hardly  carry  much  independent  weight,  may
strongly  support  by  analogy  such  newer  and  better  observations  as
those  which  have  just  been  described.

F.  W.  H.  M.


FiMislied  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  269


VI.

NOTE  RELATING  TO  SOME  OF  THE  PUBLISHED  EXPERI-
MENTS IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  earliest  experiments  in  Thought-
transference  described  in  the  Society's  Proceedings  were  made  with
some  sisters  of  the  name  of  Creery.  The  important  experiments  were,
of  course,  those  in  which  the  "  agency  "  was  confined  to  one  or  more  of
the  investigating  Committee.  (See  the  Table  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
"Vol.  I.,  p.  25.)  But  though  stress  was  never  laid  on  any  trials  where
a  chance  of  collusion  was  aftbrded  by  one  or  more  of  the  sisters  sharing
in  the  "  agency,"  nevertheless  some  results  contained  under  such  con-
ditions were  included  in  the  records.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to
state  that  in  a  series  of  experiments  with  cards,  recently  made  at
Cambridge,  two  of  the  sisters,  acting  as  "agent"  and  "percipient,"
were  detected  in  the  use  of  a  code  of  signals;  and  a  third  has  confessed
to  a  certain  amount  of  signalling  in  the  earlier  series  to  which  reference
has  been  made.

The  code  was  as  follows: — When  the  two  sisters  were  in  sight  of
one  another,  the  signals  used  were  a  slight  upward  look  for  hearts,
downwards  for  diamonds,  to  the  right  for  spades,  and  to  the  left  for
clubs.  Further,  the  right  hand  put  up  to  the  face  meant  king,  the  left
hand  to  the  face  meant  queen,  and  knave  was  indicated  by  crossing  the
arms.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there  were  any  signs  for  other  cards.  We
failed  to  make  any  out  clearly.  A  table  showing  the  degree  of  success
in  guessing  each  card  suggests  that  there  were  signs  for  10  and  ace,
but  that  they  were  either  only  used  occasionally  or  used  with  poor
success.

In  experiments  in  which  a  screen  was  placed  between  the  two
sisters,  so  that  they  could  not  see  each  other,  auditory  signs  were  used
to  indicate  suits.  A  scraping  with  the  feet  on  the  carpet  meant
hearts,  and  sighing,  coughing,  sneezing  or  yawning  meant  diamonds.
If  there  were  signs  to  distinguish  between  the  black  suits  they  were —
like  the  signs  for  10  and  ace  in  the  visual  code — sparingly  used  or  often
unsuccessful.

The  sisters  are  naturally  very  restless,  which  made  the  move
ments  above  described  less  obvious  than  they  would  otherwise  have
been.  As  soon  as  some  clue  to  the  code  used  had  been  obtained,
Mr.  Gurney  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  sometimes  Professor  Sidgwick,  set


270 Published  Experiments  in  Thought-Transferenee.


themselves  to  guess  the  card  (which  they  took  care  should  be  unknown
to  them)  from  the  signals,  secretly  recording  their  guesses.  Their
success  afforded  a  complete  proof  of  tlie  use  of  the  signals.

The  use  of  the  visual  code  was  very  gratuitous  on  the  part  of
the  sisters,  since  it  had  been  explained  to  them  that  we  did
not  attach  any  scientific  value  to  the  experiments  in  which  they
acted  as  agent  and  percipient  in  sight  of  each  other,  the  possibility  of
success  under  these  conditions  having  been  abundantly  proved.  The
object  of  our  experiments  at  Cambridge  on  this  occasion  was,  if  possible,
to  strengthen  the  evidence  for  Thought-transference  (1)  when  no
members  of  the  family  were  aware  of  the  thing  to  be  guessed,  and  (2)
when  the  sister  acting  as  agent  was  in  a  different  room  from  the  one
acting  as  percipient.  The  experiments  in  which  the  codes  were  used
were  intended  merely  as  amusement  and  encouragement  with  a  view  to
increase  the  chance  of  success  in  the  more  difficult  ones — which  were  all
complete  failures.

The  account  which  was  given  as  to  the  earlier  experiments,  con-
ducted under  similar  conditions,  is  that  signals  were  very  rarely  used ;
and  not  on  specially  successful  occasions,  but  on  occasions  of  failure,
when  it  was  feared  that  visitors  would  be  disappointed.  But  of  course
the  recent  detection  must  throw  discredit  on  the  results  of  all  previous
trials  in  which  one  or  more  of  the  sisters  shared  in  the  agency.  How
far  the  proved  willingness  to  deceive  can  be  held  to  affect  the  experi-
ments on  which  we  relied,  where  collusion  was  excluded,  must  of  course
depend  on  the  degree  of  stringency  of  the  precautions  taken  against
trickery  of  other  sorts — as  to  which  every  reader  will  form  his  own
opinion.  '

E.  G.


Circular  No.  III.


To  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Researcli.


CIRCULAR No.  III.


19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  W.C.

April,  1888.

The  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  desire  to  express  their
gratitude  to  such  of  the  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  as  ha%'e  up
to  the  present  date  contributed  evidence,  attempted  experiments,  or  other-
wise aided  in  the  several  branches  of  work.  At  the  same  time  they  must
express  a  strong  desire  that  such  help  should  be  offered  by  a  greater  number
of  persons.  The  success  of  the  Society's  work  must  largely  depend  on  the
amount  of  collaboration  received — on  the  number  of  centres  of  observation
and  experiment  which  can  be  established  in  this  and  other  countries.

The  Council  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  persons,  possessing  evidence
which  would  be  of  value  to  the  Society,  have  lately  thought  it  needless  to
proffer  such  evidence,  supposing  that  the  reality  of  thought-transference,  for
instance,  or  of  apparitions  at  death,  was  now  sufficiently  proved,  and  that  no
further  cases  were  wanted.  The  Council  wish  distinctly  to  state  that  their
view  is  altogether  different.  In  the  first  place,  they  hold  that  the  value  to
be  attached  to  the  evidence  already  collected  must  largely  depend  on  its
continuous  reinforcement  by  fresh  cases  of  like  kind, — observed  with  care
and  recorded  without  delay.  In  the  second  place,  supposing  that  the
general /acis,  say,  of  telepathy  or  of  veridical  apparitions,  were  even  univer-
sally admitted,  it  would  still  be  a  matter  of  prime  interest  and  importance  to
discover  as  much  as  possible  of  the  laus  which  govern  these  strange  phenomena,
and  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  assign  any  limit  to  the  number  and  variety
of  cases  which  should  be  collected  and  registered  with  this  end  in  view.

It  appears  to  the  Council  that  on  the  one  hand  certain  needful  canons
of  evidence  in  these  novel  inquiries  have  now  been  so  far  laid  down  that  it  is
now  more  easy  than  at  first  for  informants  to  present  their  testimony  with


11


Circular  No.  III.


the  proper  safeguards  of  accuracy,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  the  personnel
of  the  Society  now  includes  a  large  number  both  of  men  and  women  well
fitted  to  render  intelligent  aid.

The  experiments  in  thought-transference  given  in  the  Journal  for
December,  1887,  and  the  experiments  in  automatic  ivriting  frequently  pub-
lished of  late,  may  serve  to  show  with  how  little  of  preparation  or  trouble
(provided  the  work  be  done  with  complete  good  faith  and  care)
results  of  value  may  be  attained.  Experiments  in  hyiynotism  require  more
caution  ;  but  here  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  an  experienced  hypnotist,  with  whose
name  readers  of  the  Proceedings  have  long  been  familiar,  will  be  glad  to  give
advice  or  instruction.  Persons  willing  to  experiment  in  any  of  these  direc-
tions should  communicate  with  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Society,  Mr.  E.
Gurney,  2G,  Montpelier  Square,  S.  W.  Mr.  Gurney  will  also  be  happy  to  call
on  members  or  their  friends  who  may  desire  to  communicate  information
by  word  of  mouth  on  any  of  the  subjects  with  which  the  Society  deals.
Written  communications  may  also  be  addressed  to  the  co-secretary  of  the
Literary  Committee,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
The  Council  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  understood  that  they  solicit  information
not  only  on  those  points  (such  as  apparitions  at  death)  on  which  much
evidence  has  already  been  forthcoming,  but  also  on  other  points  included
within  the  range  of  their  investigations',  especially  the  so-called  physical
phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  On  this  subject  Professor  Barrett,  G,  De  Vesci
Terrace,  Kingstown,  Dublin,  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Committee  established
by  the  late  President,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  will  be  glad  to  receive
communications,  or  accounts  of  cases  in  or  near  London  may  be  sent  to  Mr.
Gurney  for  immediate  investigation.  In  conclusion,  the  Council  would  remind
the  members  of  the  Society  that  they  have  from  its  first  inception,  foreseen
and  announced  that  an  inquiry  so  novel,  complex,  and  important  must  of
necessity  be  a  prolonged  one,  needing  the  combined  efforts  of  many  persons
over  a  space  of  many  years.  While  attaching  great  value  to  the  results
already  published,  the  Council  feel  that  those  who  sympathise  with  their
object  must  be  invited  to  fresh  exertions,  if  a  progress  at  once  rapid  and
durable  is  to  be  made  in  a  research  whose  very  importance  and  interest
increase  the  difficulty  of  conducting  it  with  adequate  circumsj)ection,  and
with  due  minuteness  of  care.


July  16,  1888.]


President's  Address.


271


I.

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
Jidy  16th,  1888.

The  twenty-eighth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at
the  Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  July  16th,  1888.

The  President,  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

The  President  delivered  the  following  address : —

It  had  for  some  time  been  my  intention  to  take  this  opportunity —
this  being  my  first  formal  address  to  the  Society  since  I  became
President  a  second  time — to  survey  briefly  the  course  that  our  Society
has  travelled  since  its  foundation  in  1882  ;  to  recall  what  we  proposed
to  do  and  compare  it  with  what  we  have  done  ;  to  ask  if  we  have
realised  our  aims,  and  so  far  as  we  have  not  realised  them,  why  we  have
failed  : — and  then,  turning  from  the  past  to  the  future,  to  consider  the
work  that  now  lies  before  us,  and  our  prospects  of  accomplishing  it
satisfactorily.  To  me  it  appears  that  we  have  reached  a  crisis  in  our
history — not  perhaps  a  very  critical  crisis,  rather  one  likely  to  be
prolonged  and  mild  —  but  yet  a  crisis  of  which  it  is  important  that  we
should  thoroughly  understand  the  nature,  in  order  that  we  may  guard
against  the  dangers  it  involves.

This  I  had  intended,  and  this  I  still  propose  to  do,  though  I  find
that  the  subject  is  too  large  to  be  included  within  the  limits  of  a  single
address ;  and  I  shall  therefore  reserve  an  important  part  of  what  I  pro-
posed to  say  for  another  occasion.  But  I  little  thought  when  I  formed
my  plan,  that  the  past  I  proposed  to  survey  would  be  divided  from  the
future  by  such  a  chasm  as  now  divides  it  in  the  minds  of  us  all-
through  the  calamity  that  has  deprived  us  of  the  colleague  and  friend
who  had  so  large  a  part  in  shaping  the  lines  of  this  past.  Of  the
irreparable  nature  of  this  loss  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  say  what
I  feel,  without  tending  to  spread  a  discouragement  which  I  would
rather  wish  to  overcome — since  our  cause  was  never  more  in  need  of
hopeful  and  vigorous  exertion.  Nor  do  I  propose  now  to  characterise
more  particularly  Edmund  Gurney's  share  in  the  work  of  the  last  six
years.  A  cai-eful  and  full  estimate  of  that  will  be  given  in  the  next
number  of  our  Proceedings,  by  the  colleague  who  is  of  all  the  best

T


'272


Ttventy -eighth  General  Meeting.


[July  16,


qualified  to  give  it.  In  my  survey  this  evening  I  shall  speak  generally
of  "  our  "  work  ;  but  it  will  be  present  throughout  to  your  minds  as
to  mine  how  largely  this  is  the  work  of  a  vanished  hand, — a  hand
whose  combined  vigour  and  delicacy,  and  trained  skill  and  indefatigable
industry,  we  must  miss  at  every  turn  of  the  further  labour  that  lies
before  us  if  we  are  to  complete  our  task.
To  pass,  then,  to  my  survey.

When  we — that  is,  tlae  group  of  inquirers  to  wliich  I  belong,  for  I
do  not  of  coui'se  presume  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  whole  Society —
when  we  took  up  seriously  the  obscure  and  perplexing  investigation
which  we  call  Psychical  Research',  we  were  mainly  moved  to  do  so  by  the
profound  and  painful  division  and  conflict,  as  regards  the  nature  and
destiny  of  the  human  soul,  which  we  found  in  the  thought  of  our  age.
On  the  one  hand,  under  the  influence  of  Christian  teaching,  still  dominant
over  the  minds  of  the  majority  of  educated  persons,  and  powerfully
influencing  many  even  of  those  who  have  discarded  its  dogmatic  system,
the  soul  is  conceived  as  independent  of  the  bodily  organism  and  destined
to  survive  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  preponderant  tendency  of  modern
physiology  has  been  more  and  more  to  exclude  this  conception,  and  to
treat  tlie  life  and  processes  of  any  individual  mind  as  inseparably
connected  with  the  life  and  processes  of  the  shortlived  body  that  it  here
animates.

I  do  not,  of  course,  say  that  all  scientific  men  affirm  the  non-survival
of  the  soul :  I  speak  only  of  general  tendencies,  and  that  it  is  the
general  tendency  of  modern  science  to  exclude  the  thought  of  this
survival,  I  cannot  doubt.

Well,  the  division  and  conflict  thus  established  between  religion  and
science  has  long  given  serious  concern  to  thoughtful  minds  ;  and  many
intellectual  methods  of  reconciling  the  conflict  have  been  tried  ;  but  still,
speaking  broadly,  it  remains,  a  great  and  prominent  social  fact  of  the
present  age.

Now  our  own  position  was  this.  We  believed  unreservedly  in  the
methods  of  modern  science,  and  were  prepared  to  accept  submissively
her  reasoned  conclusions,  when  sustained  by  the  agreement  of  experts ;
but  we  were  not  prepared  to  bow  with  equal  docility  to  the  mere
prejudices  of  scientific  men.  And  it  appeai'ed  to  us  that  there  was  an
important  body  of  evidence — tending  p7-imd  facie  to  establish  the
independence  of  soul  or  spirit — which  modern  science  had  simply  left
on  one  side  with  ignorant  contempt ;  and  that  in  so  leaving  it  she  had
heen  untrue  to  her  professed  method,  and  had  arrived  prematurely  at
her  negative  conclusions.

Observe  that  we  did  not  affirm  that  these  negative  conclusions
were  scientifically  erroneous.  To  have  said  that  would  have  been  to
fall  into  the  very  error  that  we  were  trying  to  avoid. We  only


1888.]


President's  Address.


273


said  that  they  liacl  been  arrived  at  prematurely,  withovit  due  considera-
tion of  the  recorded  testimony  of  many  apparently  "  competent
witnesses,  past  and  present," — to  quote  from  our  original  statement  of
objects.

This  testimony,  then,  we  proposed  to  examine,  to  the  best  of  our
ability,  according  to  the  rules  of  scientific  method.  Here  I  must  pause
to  say  a  word  in  explanation  of  the  meaning  we  attached  to  this  term
"  scientific,"  on  which  some  emphasis  was  certainly  laid  in  our
programme,  as  it  has  exposed  us  to  attacks  from  two  opposite
dii-ections.  On  the  one  hand  we  were  told  somewhat  roughly  from  the
materialistic  side  that  being  just  like  all  other  fools  who  collected  old
women's  stories  and  solemnly  recorded  the  tricks  of  impostors,  we  only
made  ourselves  more  ridiculous  by  assuming  the  airs  of  a  scientific
society,  and  varnishing  this  wi-etched  nonsense  with  semi-technical
jargon.  On  the  other  hand,  Spiritualists  have  more  politely  indicated  a
certain  offence  at  what  has  seemed  to  them  a  pretension  of  intellectual
superiority  to  the  many  educated  persons — some  of  them  of  scientific
repute — who  had  already  been  convinced  by  the  evidence  we  were
preparing  to  examine.

But,  in  truth,  in  using  such  words  as  "  scientific"  and  "research,"
we  had  no  idea  of  claiming  special  qualifications  ;  our  only  wish  was
to  characterise  precisely  the  ideal  of  procedure  that  we  set  before  us.
Our  point  was  not  that  we  tvere  scientific,  but  that  we  meant  to  be  as
scientific  as  we  could.  We  meant  to  collect  as  systematically,  carefully,
and  completely  as  possible  evidence  tending  to  throw  light  on  the
question  of  the  action  of  mind  either  apart  from  the  body  or  otherwise
than  through  known  bodily  organs  ;  we  meant  to  collect  and  consider
it  without  prejudice  or  prepossession,  giving  the  fullest  and  most
impartial  attention  to  facts  that  appear  to  make  against  the  hypothesis
that  the  evidence  at  first  sight  suggested  ;  and  in  particular  we  meant
to  examine  with  special  care,  in  each  department  of  the  inquii-y,  the
action  of  the  causes  known  to  science  that  presented  themselves  as
possible  alternatives  to  our  hypothesis  : — since  only  a  rigorous  exclusion
of  such  known  causes  could  justify  us  in  regarding  as  scientifically
established  the  novel  agency  of  mind  acting  or  perceiving  apart  from
the  body,  or  otherwise  than  through  the  known  organs  of  sense  or
muscular  motion.  "Science,"  as  an  eminent  man  has  said,  "  is  only
organised  common-sense "  ;  and  it  appeared  to  us  that  the  rules  of
procedure  that  I  have  described  were  the  obvious  dictates  of  plain
common-sense,  assuming  our  object  to  be  simply  tliat  of  arriving  at  the
trutli.

This,  then,  was  the  general  conception  of  our  work.  Let  us  now
consider  how  far  we  carried  out  our  ideal,  and  to  what  extent
experience  led  us  to  modify  our  original  view  of  the  subject.

T  2


274  Twenty -eighth  General  Meeting.  [Ji-ily  16,


First,  it  will  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  our  original  distribution  of
the  subjects  of  inquiry,  that  the  different  parts  of  it,  in  our  first  view
of  them,  grouped  themselves  in  a  manner  quite  different  from  the
arrangement  that  further  investigation  led  us  to  adopt.  We  had
already  recognised  the  importance  of  that  "  influence  which  may  be
exerted  by  one  mind  upon  another,  apart  from  any  generally  recognised
mode  of  perception,"  which  was  afterwards  called  "  telepathy  "  ;  and
we  had  formed  a  separate  committee  to  investigate  hypnotism.  But
we  had  not  yet  recognised  in  the  hypnotic  trance  a  specially  important
source  of  telepathic  phenomena — as  we  afterwards  came  to  regard  it ;
and  we  still  kept  to  the  popular  view  that  classifies  apparitions  at  the
moment  of  death  with  ordinary  ghost  stories.

It  was  only  by  degrees — chiefly  from  the  accumulating  evidence  of
similar  apparitions  occurring  in  illnesses  or  other  critical  times  of  life,
besides  the  great  crisis  of  death — that  we  were  led  to  view  these  death-
wraiths  as  a  special  case  of  telepathic  impressions  : — and  in  so  doing
we  were  strongly  influenced  by  the  remarkable  evidence  which  we
obtained  of  such  apparitions  being  produced  by  design  and
experimentally.  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  force  of  this  experimental
evidence  for  telepathic  hallucinations — which,  though  limited  in  amount,
is  good  in  quality — has  been  overlooked  by  some  of  our  critics.  Thus,
then,  was  formed  that  notion  of  one  complex  group  of  telepathic
phenomena  which  we  called  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  The  advantage
of  this  grouping  was  that  evidence  of  various  kinds, — partly
experimental,  partly  spontaneous,  partly  obtained  in  a  normal  state  of
consciousness,  and  partly  in  the  hypnotic  trance — was  made  to  converge
on  one  general  conclusion  ;  the  novelty  of  which,  from  a  scientific
point  of  view,  appeared  to  be  conveniently  suggested  by  the  novel
word  "telepathy."  This  conclusion  involved  the  view  that  death-
wraiths  are  hallucinations  telepathically  caused  ;  and  on  this  point  we
have  been  charged  with  violently  forcing  the  facts  collected  into  the
mould  of  a  preconceived  theory.  I  venture,  however,  to  think  that
this  charge  is  unfounded,  and  that  the  amount  of  theory  introduced  by
us  is  the  minimum  required  to  enable  the  facts  which  we  regard  as
established  to  be  conceived  apart  from  assumptions  which  we  regard  as
unwarrantable — at  least  at  this  stage  of  our  investigation.  We  must
regard  a  death-wraith  as  a  hallucination,  so  long  as  we  have  no  reason
for  supposing  its  appearance  to  be  caused  by  the  action  on  the  retina
of  some  kind  of  matter  filling  the  space  which  the  apparition  seems  to
occupy  ;  and  this  supposition  would  be  clearly  extravagant.  On  the
other  hand,  if  we  regard  the  hallucination  as  causally  connected  with
the  death,  we  must  attribute  it  to  some  occult  action  of  the  embodied
mind,  until  we  have  obtained  adequate  evidence  that  disembodied
minds  are  possible  agents ;  and  we  do  not  yet  think  that  we  have


1888.]


President's  Address.


275-


obtained  such  evidence.  And  this  and  no  more  is  the  amount  of  theory
implied  in  our  term  telepathy.

The  statement  of  the  case  for  telepathy  is,  as  you  know,  the  chief
positive  result  of  our  six  years'  work,  so  far  as  the  central  problems  are
concerned  which  it  was  the  primaiy  object  of  the  Society  to  deal  with.
And  I  would  now  point  out  that  throughout  the  investigation  which
led  to  this  statement  it  was  our  endeavour  to  apply  thoroughly  our
principle  of  carefully  studying  the  possible  known  causes  of  the  pheno-
mena which  we  were  inclined  to  attribute  to  an  unknown  cause ;
so  that  we  might  only  accept  as  evidence  experiences  in  which  the
operation  of  such  known  causes  appeared  either  impossible  or  highly
improbable.  The  application  of  tliis  principle  was,  of  course,  different
in  different  parts  of  the  evidence.  Putting  deliberate  fraud  aside,  what
we  had  to  guard  against  in  the  experimental  thought-transference  was
unconscious  signalling ;  and  it  soon  became  clear  that,  where  contact
of  hands  was  allowed  between  percipient  and  agent,  genuine  thought-
transference  could  be  simulated  to  a  striking  extent  by  delicate  muscu-
lar or  tactile  sensibility  in  the  percipient,  interpreting  indications  given
unconsciously  by  the  supposed  agent.  It  is  to  this  process  that
professional  performers,  like  Mr.  Stuart  Cumberland,  have  for  their
own  pm'poses  given  the  name  of  "  thought-reading " ;  and  it  appears
from  a  popular  novel  of  the  present  season  that  educated  persons  still
exist  who  suppose  this  muscle-reading  to  be  what  we  call  telepathy  : —
whereas  the  special  point  of  our  investigation  was  the  care  with  which
this  unconscious  signalling  was  excluded.

In  dealing  with  the  spontaneous  cases — especially  the  apparitions  of
distant  persons  corresponding  to  deaths  or  other  crises — the  problem
of  exclusion  of  known  causes  was  fundamentally  different.  There
could  be  no  question  as  to  whether  the  correspondence  was  due  to
such  causes  in  any  regular  way ;  the  only  question — assuming  the
accuracy  of  the  narratives — was  whether  it  was  due  to  accidental
coincidence.  We  had,  in  fact,  to  deal  with  a  problem  in  the  theory  of
probabilities :  and  to  solve  this  it  was  necessary  to  know  approximately
the  frequency  of  hallucinations  similar  to  those  that  are  pri7nd  facie
telepathic,  and  not  due  to  recognised  disease.

This  was  a  point  which  the  scientific  discussion  of  hallucinations
had  hitherto  left  quite  obscure  ;  we  had  to  determine  it  entirely  by  our
own  statistical  investigations,  before  proceeding  to  calculate  our
chances.  Now  I  understand  that  to  some  persons  interested  in  our
general  inquiry  all  this  calculation  of  chances  seems  pedantic  and
superfluous :  they  think  that  once  it  is  granted  that  we  have  well-
attested  first-hand  cases  in  which  A  sees  an  apparition  of  B  precisely
when  B  dies — having  never  seen  any  other  apparition — no  man  of
common-sense  can  doubt  that  the  correspondence  cannot  be  due  to


276  Twenty-eighth  General  Meeting.  [J^^ly  16,


mere  chance.  And  if  caused  hallucinations  of  sane  persons  not
apparently  ill  had  been  as  rare  as  I,  at  least,  supposed  when  we  began
our  investigation,  I  think  this  would  be  true.  But,  unfortunately  for
our  argument,  statistical  inquiry  showed  them  to  be  comparatively
numerous — probably  some  thousands  occur  in  England  every  year — far
more  numerous  than  the  hallucinations  which  there  is  any  ground  for
attributing  to  telepathy.  This  being  so,  it  seemed  to  us  that  the
question  wliether  the  latter  could  be  chance  coincidences  went  beyond
the  range  of  common-sense,  and  rendered  careful  calculation  necessary
— especially  considering  the  inevitably  unscientific  character  of  most  of
the  observations  collected — I  mean  that  they  were  not  made  at  the
time  of  the  occurrence  with  careful  attention  by  persons  aware  of  the
fundamental  importance  of  exact  and  full  statements.

And  this  view  was  confirmed  by  tlie  reception  of  Pltantasms  of
the  Living.  For  though  we  have  secured  respectful  attention  to  our
case,  and  I  believe  persuaded  several  thoughtful  persons  to  accept
telepathy  as  a  working  hypothesis,  there  are  others,  who  at  least  desire
to  be  impartial,  who  consider  that  our  evidence  is  inadequate  to
sustain  tlie  conclusion.  I  do  not  myself  agree  with  these  critics.  I
adhere  to  the  general  conclusion  of  the  authors  of  Phantasms  ;  but  I
admit  that,  in  the  present  state  of  the  evidence,  the  question  is  one
that  requires  a  careful  estimate  of  considerations  difficult  to  determine
with  any  exactness.

And  this  leads  me  to  what  I  spoke  of  at  the  outset  as  a  crisis  in  the
history  of  the  Society.  I  always  hoped,  as  one  of  the  most  valuable
results  of  the  publication  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  that — by  gaining
for  our  sul)ject  the  serious  attention  of  a  much  larger  number  of
persons — we  might  secure  that  a  good  proportion  of  tlie  fresh  cases  of
spontaneous  telepathy  would  be  carefully  noted  with  full  detail  at  the
time,  and  brought  to  the  notice  of  our  Committee  ;  so  that  in  the  course
of  a  few  years  more  we  might  get  together  a  body  of  fresh  first-hand
evidence  in  every  way  superior  in  quality  to  most  of  what  we  have  yet
published.  And  I  am  somewhat  disappointed  that  this  expectation  has
not  yet  been  realised.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this  may  be  partly
because  our  own  members,  and  the  friends  of  our  movement,  are  under
the  impression  that  the  business  of  collection  in  this  department  was
considered  to  be  completed  when  Phantasms  of  the  Living  was  pub-
lished ;  and  that  if  the  sceptics  are  still  unconvinced  after  the  heap  of
cases  that  we  have  laid  before  them,  thei'e  is  no  use  offering  them  any
more — for  in  fact  they  will  simply  not  look  at  it.  And  T  should  quite
agree  with  this,  so  far  as  evidence  of  an  inferior  quality  is  concerned ;
I  think  myself  that  there  is  little  use  in  adding  to  our  stock  of  second-
hand or  remote  cases.  But  my  point  is  that  if  our  hypothesis  is  true,
we  ought  to  be  able  to  get  evidence  first-rate  in  quality  of  the  telepathic


1888.]


President's  Address.


277


cases  that  are  continually  occurring  ;  and  that  if  we  do  not  get  it,  then,
as  time  goes  on,  the  absence  of  such  evidence  will  constitute  an
argument  of  continually  increasing  strength  against  our  conclusions  ;
it  will  be  said  that  if  the  fresh  cases  had  really  occurred — as  according
to  our  hypothesis  they  must  be  supposed  to  occur — we  should  certainly
have  been  able  to  ascertain  their  occurrence.  I  therefore  venture  to
urge,  with  all  the  emphasis  at  my  command,  that  a  combined  effort
should  be  made  by  all  who  are  interested  in  our  inquiry  to  stimulate
the  observation  and  recording  of  these  fresh  experiences ;  I  cannot
doubt  that  they  are  to  be  found,  and  I  hope  that  whenever  they  are
found  they  will  be  sent  to  me  as  Editor  of  the  Journal — or  to
Mr.  Myers  or  Mr.  Podmore  as  Secretaries  of  the  Literary  Committee.
I  give  again  the  assurance  which  we  have  always  given,  that,  so  far
as  may  be  desired  by  those  who  communicate  with  us,  the  names  of
persons  and  places  and  any  other  details  that  may  be  wished,  will  be
kept  strictly  private.

And  I  may  say  that  the  view  I  am  urging — of  the  need  of  renewed
and  sustained  energy  in  the  collection  of  fresh  telepathic  cases — was
fully  shared  by  the  colleague  whom  we  have  lost  :  to  whose  rare
intellectual  gifts  and  uniiagging  zeal  the  respectful  attention  that  we
have  gained  for  our  positive  conclusions  is,  as  we  all  feel,  mainly  due.
It  was  Mr.  Gurney's  intention,  in  the  course  of  the  autumn,  to  prepare
an  abridged  popular  edition  of  the  argument  and  evidence  set  forth  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  in  the  hope  of  thus  widening  the  area  of
serious  interest  in  our  inquiry,  and  proportionately  increasing  our
prospect  of  obtaining  careful  records  of  new  experiences.  And  I  hope
that  this,  as  well  as  other  parts  of  his  scheme  of  future  work,  will  still
be  carried  out — though  they  must  now  be  carried  out  by  other  hands.

One  word  in  conclusion  as  to  the  remainder  of  my  survey  which  I
am  obliged  to  reserve  for  a  subsequent  meeting ;  I  had  hoped  to  say
something  of  our — especially  Mr.  Gurney's — researches  in  the  region  of
what  I  may  call  orthodox  hypnotism  :  I  mean  such  phenomena  of  the
hypnotic  trance  as  are  admitted  even  by  unpsychical  physiologists ;  and
I  had  designed  also  to  explain  and  justify  our  method  of  dealing  with
other  departments  of  our  inquiry,  in  which  we  have  not  arrived  at  a
final  conclusion  on  the  main  issues,  though  I  venture  to  think  that  we
have  produced  results  of  real  value,  and  indispensable  as  a  basis  for
further  investigation.  But  all  this  must  be  for  another  time.  I  will
only  say  now  that  our  interest  in  these  other  departments  of  inquiry
is  unabated  ;  and  if  I  have  put  prominently  before  you,  as  a  subject  for
combined  and  concentrated  effort,  the  completion  of  the  telepathic
investigation,  it  is  largely  because  I  feel  sure  that  it  is  in  this  department,
if  any,  that  we  shall  first  win  the  acceptance  of  the  scientific  world
generally. And  I  desire  to  obtain  their  adhesion,  not  from  any  concern


278  Twenty -eighth  General  Meeting.  [July  16,


for  fame,  or  because  I  care  for  the  opinion  of  men,  however  eminent,
who  have  never  given  serious  attention  to  our  subject,  but  because  we
are  in  pressing  need  of  additional  workers  possessing  scientific  ardour
and  trained  scientific  faculty.  If  we  could  once  get  the  conclusions
of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  accepted — I  do  not  say  universally,  but
by  the  younger  and  more  open-minded  part  of  the  scientific  world^
we  miglit  fairly  expect  a  rush  of  ardent  investigators  into  the  whole
subject  which  will  leave  no  department  unexplored.  And,  believing
what  I  do,  I  cannot  see  why  this  should  not  be  achieved.  It  may  be
too  sanguine  to  say  that  it  will  be  achieved  ;  there  may  be  unknown
invincible  obstacles ;  but  we  may  at  least  hope  for  this  consummation
and  work  for  it.


1888.]  The  Connection  of  Hypnotism  with  Spiritualism.  279


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

Friday,  November  16th,  1888.

The  twenty-ninth  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  Westminster
Town  Hall,  on  November  16th,  1888.

The  President  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  a  paper  contributed  by  Professor  Charles
Richet  describing  some  experiments  in  lucidity  or  clairvoyance,  which
it  is  proposed  to  publish,  with  an  account  of  further  experiments,  in  a
future  number  of  the  Proceedings.

The  following  paper  was  then  read  : —

II.

THE CONNECTION OF HYPNOTISM WITH THE  SUB-
JECTIVE PHENOMENA  OF  SPIRITUALISM.

[The  following  paper  is  contributed  by  a  medical  gentleman,  well
known  to  the  Editor,  who  prefers  for  the  present  to  remain  anony-
mous,]

Of  all  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  those  which  may  be  termed
the  subjective  phenomena  are  perhaps — regarded  as  evidence  of  the
truth  of  Spiritualism — the  most  important.  It  is  upon  them  that  the
Spiritualist  in  most  cases  founds  his  belief.  The  physical  manifesta-
tions, such  as  extraordinary  appearances,  slate-writing,  the  movements
of  inanimate  objects,  and  allied  phenomena,  are  always  subject  to  sus-
picion. But  in  the  subjective  phenomena  we  have  a  class  of  manifesta-
tions which,  in  most  cases  at  any  rate,  are  quite  above  all  suspicion  of
intentional  fraud.  The  man  who  actually  sees  visions  in  crystals,
writes  automatically,  or  is  perhaps  himself  a  trance  or  inspirational
medium,  naturally  feels  his  doubts  as  to  the  reality  of  Spiritualism
at  an  end.  He  believes  in  it  on  the  strengtlr  of  manifestations
occurring  in  himself,  and  having  once  become  a  believer,  he  will  see
nothing  improbable  in  the  more  extraordinary  phenomena  presented
by  materialisation  and  the  like.

The  idea  that  the  subjective  phenomena  are  closely  allied,  or  even
identical  with,  some  of  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  is  by  no  means  a
new  one.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this  paper  to  give  a  definite  shape  to
this  idea,  and  to  point  out  the  more  obvious  connections  between  the
two  sets  of  phenomena.


280  Twenty -ninth  General  Meeting. ■ [Nov.  16,


Before  considering  the  subjective  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  it  will
be  necessary  to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  particular  class  of  hypnotic
phenomena  which  bear  on  tliem.  I  refer  to  the  power  possessed  by
many  hypnotic  subjects  of  giving  suggestions  to  themselves,  which  act
as  powerfully,  or  in  many  cases  more  powerfully,  than  suggestions
given  them  by  the  hypnotiser.

The  facts  of  self-suggestion  adduced  in  this  paper  were  not,  I  would
expressly  state,  the  subject  of  a  series  of  experiments.  The  cases
occurred  quite  unexpectedly  during  a  series  of  experiments  on  other
points,  but  owing  to  the  possible  danger  of  such  phenomena  if  carried
too  far,  I  did  not  feel  justified  in  attempting  to  work  out  the  subject.
Hence  the  chain  of  experiments  is  necessarily  very  incomplete.

The  first  subject  in  whom  I  noticed  self-suggestion  was  E.  I
had  only  hypnotised  him  once  and  then  failed  to  send  him  to  sleep.  He
was,  however,  completely  amenable  to  command  and  suggestions  in  the
waking  state,  but  no  delusions  could  be  produced.

Among  other  things  his  hand  and  arm  had  been  made  rigid  by
passes.  He  discovered  for  himself  when  quite  alone  that  he  could
make  either  hand  or  arm  rigid  by  stroking  it  with  the  other  hand.
This  is  apparently  one  of  the  easiest  efiects  to  produce  by  self-
suggestion.  Since  then  many  other  subjects  have  proved  capable
of  self-suggestion.

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  all  hypnotic  subjects  are
susceptible  to  self-suggestion.  The  majority  are  perhaps  more  or  less
susceptible  to  it.  Some  certainly  ai'e  not.  Nor  must  we  suppose  that
it  is  only  the  hypnotic  subject  who  is  susceptible  to  self-suggestion.
In  one  instance  which  I  met  with  the  subject  was  susceptible  to  self-
suggestion,  but  he  had  never  been  hypnotised,  and  I  failed  to  hypnotise
him  when  I  afterwards  tried.

The  experiments  adduced  were  all  made  on  subjects  in  the  waking
state.  Muscular  rigidity,  thougli  the  most  general  form  of  phenomenon
produced  by  self-suggestion,  was  not  by  any  means  the  only  one  met
with.  Inhibition  of  voluntary  movements,  local  ansesthesia,  even
delusions  were  produced  by  it  in  some  cases.  No  subject,  however,  in
whom  I  could  produce  delusions  was  allowed  to  experiment  on  himself,
as  it  was  considered  unsafe,  so  tliat  the  most  interesting  field  of
experiment  in  this  direction  had  to  be  left  untouched.

It  would  be  beside  the  purpose  of  this  paper  to  give  a  large  number
of  experiments  :  a  few  merely  will  be  given  as  samples  of  the  rest.
All  the  subjects  referred  to  were  men  between  the  ages  of  18  and  24,
and  all  healthy.  In  no  case,  except  when  specially  mentioned,  had
the  hypnotic  sleep  ever  been  induced,  but  merely  waking  phenomena,
e.g.,  susceptibility  to  inhibitory  and  imperative  suggestions;  muscular
rigidity  ;  and,  in  some  cases,  local  anaesthesia.


1888.]  The  Connection  of  Hy'pnotism  with  Spiritualism.  281


We  will  first  take  the  case  of  muscular  rigidity  and  ana;stliesia.

N.,  by  means  of  stroking  his  arm  and  looking  at  it,  could  render  it
rigid. He  could  not  do  so,  however,  if  unable  to  see  his  arm.

Fi.  could  make  his  arm  rigid  by  stroking  only  :  this  he  could  do
whether  he  could  see  his  arm  or  not.

F.  could  also  make  his  arm  rigid  by  merely  looking  at  it.

E.  could  make  his  arm  rigid  by  an  effort  of  mind  without  seeing  it
or  stroking  it.

In  all  cases  they  were  able  at  once  to  remove  the  rigidity  by  reverse
strokes.  These  instances  serve  to  show  how  the  degree  in  which  sub-
jects possess  tliis  power  varies.

F.  when  he  rendered  his  arm  rigid  also  made  it  anesthetic  :  the
ansesthesia  was  removed  at  the  same  time  as  the  rigidity.

In  N.  (who  had  afterwards  been  sent  to  sleep),  I  succeeded
eventually  in  producing  ansesthesia. He  could  then  do  it  himself.

The  case  of  E.  was  very  striking  :  his  power  of  producing  muscular
rigidity  was  astonishing.  He  was  able  by  an  effort  of  mind  to  throw
his  whole  body  into  a  state  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  so  that  he  could  rest
with  his  heels  on  one  chair  and  head  on  another,  and  remain  supported
in  that  condition.  When  he  made  his  hand  rigid  and  attempted  to
relax  it  again  by  an  efibrt  of  will,  he  was  unable  to  do  so  as  long  as  he
attempted  to  bend  his  hand.  If,  however,  he  did  not  attempt  to  bend
it,  he  was  able  gradually  to  relax  the  muscles.  Those  who  could
produce  rigidity  of  the  arm  and  who  tried  to  produce  rigidity  of  the
leg  were,  at  any  rate  in  most  instances,  successful.  Unfortunately,  the
notes  which  were  made  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  on  this  point
were  mislaid,  so  I  cannot  give  the  percentage  of  successes.

Other  phenomena  of  the  waking  state  were  also  produced  by  self-
suggestion.  T.  and  L.  could  both  close  their  own  eyes  so  that  they  were
unable  to  open  them.  T.  used  to  shut  his  eyes  and  stroke  the  lids
downwards.  He  was  then  unable  to  open  them.  Several  other  subjects
showed  the  same  phenomenon.  T.  could  fix  his  hand  to  the  table
by  a  few  passes  :  this  also  was  done  by  several  others.

Other  subjects  could  fix  their  hands  together.  The  following-
experiment  was  tried  :  Five  subjects  wei'e  taken,  two  of  whom  had
been  previously  hypnotised  ;  none  had  been  sent  to  sleep.  They  were
asked  to  put  their  hands  together,  and  imagine  that  they  could  not
part  them.  They  closed  their  eyes,  put  their  hands  together,  and
tried.  One  could  not  part  his  hands,  the  others  could.  They  were
then  told  to  shut  their  eyes  and  imagine  the  operator  gazing  at  them,
and  saying,  "  You  cannot  part  your  hands."  Not  one  was  able  to  do
so.  They  were  able  after  this  to  produce  the  same  phenomena  in
themselves,  quite  apart  from  the  operator,  in  their  own  rooms.  They
found  at  first  that  they  were  obliged  to  imagine  the  operator  giving


282  Twenty-ninth  General  Meeting.  [Nov.  16,


the  suggestion,  but  afterwards  were  able  to  do  it  without  imagining
him  at  all.

T.,  who  was  one  of  the  five,  presents  one  interesting  feature.  He
gave  up  experimenting  with  himself  very  soon  after  this.  I  did  not  see
him  again  for  nearly  three  months,  and  then  asked  him  to  close  his  eyes
as  he  used  to.  He  tried  but  could  not.  I  then  closed  his  eyes  myself
so  that  he  could  not  open  them.  He  then  found  that  he  could  close
them  himself

The  case  of  G.,  who  could  fix  his  hands  together,  close  his  own
eyes,  &c.,  was  also  iiiteresting  as  showing  that  suggestions  given  to  the
subject  by  himself  may  act  more  powerfully  than  those  given  him  by
the  operator.  I  could  only  fix  his  hands  together  with  some  difficulty
and  then  not  for  long.  He  could  do  so  himself  for  a  considerable  time,
and  the  muscular  power  exerted  to  keep  them  together,  if  an  attempt
was  made  by  someone  else  to  part  them,  was  far  greater  if  he  fixed
them  together  himself  than  if  1  did  so  for  him,  and  certainly  far
greater  than  he  could  exert  by  his  own  will.

The  case  of  P.  will  serve  to  show  that  it  is  not  only  the  hypnotic
subject  who  is  susceptible  to  self-suggestion.  P.  had  never  been  hypno-
tised, or  even  tried  by  anyone.  He  was  able  to  fix  his  hand  on  his  knee
by  simply  stroking  it,  and  it  took  him  about  half  a  minute  or  so  to  get
it  ofl'  again,  if  he  simply  tried  to  do  so.  If,  however,  he  made  upward
strokes  he  was  able  at  once  to  remove  it.  I  afterwards  tried  to  hypno-
tise him  and  failed.  Doubtless  had  I  gone  on  long  enough  I  might
have  succeeded,  but  he  was  obviously  not  a  good  subject.

As  regards  delusions  I  can  only  give  one  instance.  Doubtless  many
subjects  could  23i'oduce  them  in  themselves  if  they  tried,  but  I  have
never  allowed  thern  to  do  so.  In  the  case  of  C,  however,  we  have
proof  that  they  can  be  produced  by  self-suggestion.  He  could  by  a
simple  effort  of  mind  make  himself  believe  almost  any  delusion,  e.g.,
that  lie  was  riding  on  horseback,  that  he  was  a  dog,  or  anything  else,
or  that  he  saw  snakes,  &c.  If  left  to  himself  the  delusion  vanished
slowly.  Anyone  else  could  remove  it  at  once  by  a  counter-suggestion.
He  made  these  experiments  without  my  consent,  as  I  consider  them
unsafe.

It  is  not  tlie  purpose  to  multiply  instances.  I  wish  simply  to  show
that  self-suggestion  is  a  real  psychological  factor,  and  also  a  very
powerful  one.  Numbers  of  instances  are  recorded  in  the  work  of
W.  B.  Fahnestock,  M.D.,  entitled  Statuvolism,  and  many  readers  of
these  Proceedings  have  doubtless  witnessed  similar  phenomena.  All
my  experiments  on  this  point  were  limited  to  the  phenomena  of  the
waking  state.  So  far  as  I  have  seen,  a  self-suggestive  subject  can  do
for  himself  exactly  what  I  can  do  with  him,  i.e.,  in  the  waking  state.
Almost  all  the  phenomena  of  the  light  state  which  my  self-suggestive


1888.]  The  Connection  of  Hy'pnotism  with  Spiritualism.  283


subjects  have  tried  have  been  produced  by  one  or  another.  Some
can  suggest  to  themselves  certain  things  more  easily  than  others,  but
apparently  all  the  phenomena  can  be  produced  by  self-suggestion.

It  seems  probable  that  the  following  holds  good.  All  phenomena
capable  of  being  produced  by  the  suggestion  of  the  hypnotiser  can  also
be  produced  by  self-suggestion  in  a  self-suggestive  subject.

This  is  probably  true  of  the  phenomena  of  all  the  states.  It  is  true
that  but  few  experiments  have  been  made  in  tlie  deeper  states,  so  this
hypothesis  must  be  received  with  caution  until  such  experiments  are
forthcoming.

If  we  assume  the  truth  of  the  above  hypothesis,  the  following
proposition  is  also  true.  If  by  suggestion  we  can  produce  in  a  subject
phenomena  identical  with  the  subjective  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,
then  these  phenomena  can  be  produced  by  self-suggestion.

We  will  consider,  then,  how  far  we  are  able  to  produce  these
phenomena  by  suggestion.

First,  as  to  automatic  writing.  What  are  its  most  obvious  charac-
teristics 1  We  may,  I  believe,  divide  automatic  writers  into  three
main  classes,  each  having  different  characteristics.  In  the  first  class
we  may  place  those  who  know  what  they  write.  In  the  second,  those
who  do  not  know  what  they  write,  but  who,  if  interrupted  and  com-
pelled to  join  in  conversation  while  writing,  cease  to  write  while  they
are  speaking.  In  the  third,  those  who  do  not  know  what  they  write
and  who  can  speak  and  join  in  conversation  while  actually  writing.

Our  object  is  to  show  that  these  phenomena  can  be  produced  by
simple  suggestion.  The  experiment  is  easily  made.  The  simplest
method  is  to  give  the  subject  pencil  and  paper,  to  gaze  in  his  eyes  and
simply  to  give  the  suggestion  "write."

In  all  cases  where  I  have  tried  this  experiment  I  have  succeeded.
AH  but  one  subject  on  whom  I  have  tried  it  have  been  at  one  time  or
another  sent  to  sleep.  The  effect  was  different  in  different  subjects.
Some  in  fact  present  the  characteristics  of  class  1,  some  of  class  2,  and
a  few  those  of  class  3.  A  few  instances  will  suffice.  I  tried
first  with  L.,  whom  I  had  never  sent  to  sleep.  I  simply  gazed  a  couple
of  seconds  or  so  at  him  and  said  "  Write,"  and  then  removed  my  gaze.
He  wrote  at  once,  and  was  unable  to  stop  writing ; — in  fact,  he  covered
two  sheets  of  foolscap  with  close  writing  before  he  was  allowed  to  stop.
He  had  no  notion  what  he  had  written  about :  the  writing  was  i/i
many  languages,  with  all  of  which,  however,  he  was  acquainted.  It
referred  mainly  to  incidents  of  his  life,  so  lie  was  asked  to  look  it  over
before  I  read  it.  He  did  so,  and  found  that  some  of  it  referred  to
private  affairs  ;  so  I  could  not  read  all  of  it.  The  part  I  read  con-
sisted of  short  sections,  complete  in  themselves,  but  perfectly  discon-
nected from  the  other,  referring  to  or  mentioning  different  incidents.


284  Twenty -ninth  General  Meeting.  [Nov.  16,


Interspersed  among  these  were  short  quotations  from  various  books
which  had  no  reference  to  anything  else  which  he  had  written.  If
compelled  to  speak,  he  ceased  writing  until  he  had  finished  speaking.
Hence  he  belongs  to  class  2.

A.  is  also  a  member  of  class  2.  I  told  him  to  write  a  message  from
the  spirits,  and  he  instantly  wrote  down  a  message  respecting  a  sick
relation  in  India  about  whom  he  had  been  anxious,  saying  that
recovery  had  begun.  He  did  not  know  what  he  had  written.  He
afterwards  told  me  that  he  had  been  thinking  of  his  sick  cousin,  and  he
believed  that  she  was  getting  better  as  he  had  had  no  letter  about  lier.
It  so  happened  that  she  was  recovering.  This  experiment  shows  how  a
suggestion  can  influence  the  kind  of  matter  which  a  subject  writes.  Just
before  this  I  had  tried  the  effect  of  simply  saying  to  him  "  Write."  He
wrote  his  name  and  address,  and  then  a  few  sentences  of  which  I  could
make  very  little.  When,  however,  the  idea  of  a  spirit  message  was
suggested  to  him,  the  nature  of  the  writing  was  moulded  accordingly.
He  ceased  writing  if  compelled  to  speak,  and  is  therefore  a  member  of
■class  2.

J.  was  the  only  case  I  met  with  which  belonged  to  class  3.  Pro-
bably many  others  if  tried  would  be  found  to  belong  to  this  class,  but
I  have  made  the  experiment  with  only  a  few  subjects.  J.  could  write
and  talk  at  the  same  time.  His  writing  was  of  a  very  varied  descrip-
tion ;  sometimes  original ;  sometimes  quotations  from  books  which  he
had  read.  For  instance,  on  one  occasion  he  wrote  the  well-known
nursery  rhyme  about  the  little  man  who  had  the  little  gun.  Belonging
to  class  1  there  were  various  subjects,  but  it  would  not  be  worth  while
to  give  particulars  of  experiments  with  this  class.

It  is  noticeable  that  the  suggestion  "  write  "  gives  a  different  result
from  the  suggestion  to  write  a  particular  message  in  one  other  way
also.  If  we  suggest  simply  "  write  "  the  subject  writes  for  an  indefi-
nite period,  and  does  not  stop  until  told  to.  If  we  suggest  writing
a  message,  he  writes  the  message  and  then  ceases  to  write  of  his  own
accord.

So  far,  then,  automatic  writing  can  be  produced  by  the  suggestion
of  the  hypnotiser,  and  therefore  probably  can  be  produced  by  self-
suggestion.

The  next  class  of  phenomena  we  will  take  ai-e  those  of  trance-
speaking  and  inspirational  mediumsliip.  In  these  cases  we  have
obviously  states  very  nearly  and  probably  quite  identical  with  the
hypnotic  sleep.  But  the  medium  goes  into  ti-ance  first,  and  then  speaks
afterwards  whilst  in  the  trance.  If  this  be  really  due  to  self-sugges-
tion, the  suggestion  of  speaking  would  probably  be  made  before  the
medium  is  actually  in  the  trance.  That  is  to  say,  the  medium  would
.suggest  to  himself  that  he  is  going  to  sleep,  and  is  going  to  speak


1888.]  The  Connection  of  Hypnotism  with  Spiritualism.  285


when  he  is  asleep.  Hence  to  produce  identical  phenomena  by
suggestion,  I  must  suggest  to  the  subject  what  he  is  to  do  when  asleep
before  he  is  sent  to  sleep.  I  tried  it  as  follows  :  I  told  M.  that  I
should  send  him  to  sleep,  and  that  when  he  was  asleep  he  would  get
up  and  write  his  name  and  address  on  a  piece  of  paper.  I  then
sent  him  to  sleep.  I  may  mention  that  I  usually  send  my  subjects
to  sleep  by  a  simple  command  to  "  sleep,"  and  the  effect  is  generally
practically  instantaneous.  I  did  nothing  else.  Twelve  or  fifteen
seconds  after  he  went  to  sleep  he  got  up,  wrote  his  name  and  address
on  the  paper,  and  then  sat  down  again.  I  repeated  this  form  of
experiment  several  times,  making  him  perform  various  actions  •  for
instance,  I  have  several  times  made  him  give  me  spoken  messages  from
my  spirit-brother.

These  messages  were  very  similar  to  those  which  I  have  heard  from
trance  mediums.  I  may  mention  that  I  do  not  possess  a  spirit-brother.
Hence  by  suggestions  given  in  the  waking  state  a  subject  may  be  sent
to  sleep  and  made  to  speak  on  a  given  subject  while  actually  asleep.
This,  therefore,  can  probably  be  done  by  self-suggestion.  There  are
also  certain  other  facts  which  point  to  self-suggestion  as  the  explana-
tion of  trance-speaking  mediumship.  I  have  met  many  ti'ance-speaking
mediums,  only  one  of  them  being  a  professional.  The  most  striking
fact  about  them  was  that  they  seemed  to  have  different  ways  of  going
into  a  trance.  Some  seem  to  go  off  always  with  violent  convulsions,
others  quite  quietly.  The  explanation  seems  to  have  been  this.  Six
who  went  off  in  convulsions  had,  I  found,  seen  others  go  off  in  a  similar
way  before  they  became  mediums  themselves.  The  others  who  went
off  quietly  had  seen  mediums  go  off  quietly  before.  I  did  not  see  all
of  these  persons  in  the  trance  myself  ;  I  only  saw  eight  of  them  ;  and
from  the  rest  I  had  only  what  they  told  me  to  depend  on.  Here
self-suggestion  seems  to  have  been  a  powerful  factor.  In  fact,  they
imitated  the  mediums  whom  they  had  seen.

One  case  was  a  curious  one.  He  was  a  lad  of  about  18 ;  he
could  be  sent  into  convulsions  or  into  the  quiet  state  before  goino-  into
the  speaking  state.  If  he  wished  to  go  into  the  convulsive  state  he
asked  some  one  to  hold  his  hand.  In  a  few  seconds  he  would  be  seized
with  violent  epileptiform  convulsions,  which  gradually  passed  off,  and
then  he  would  speak,  and  eventually  slowly  recover  himself.  If  he
wished  to  go  off  quietly  he  simply  shut  his  eyes  and  sat  still  and
quietly  went  to  sleep  ;  then  he  would  speak  and  gradually  come  round
again.

It  is  instructive  to  notice  how  he  first  went  into  a  trance.  Some
friends  of  his  had  seen  a  medium  go  off  in  convulsions  and  were
telling  him  about  it  and  describing  it,  when  he  was  suddenly  seized
himself  with  a  similar  attack. He  afterwards  saw  a  medium  who  went


286  Twenty -ninth  General  Meeting.  [Nov.  16,


off  in  convulsions  when  his  hands  were  held  by  another  person,  and  he
also  saw  another  who  sent  himself  to  sleep  quietly  in  the  way  I  have
described.  These  facts  lend  additional  support  to  the  theory  of  self-
suggestion.

Next  as  regards  crystal-gazing.  In  itself  it  strongly  resembles  the
ordinary  method  of  producing  hypnotism  by  means  of  gazing  fixedly  at
a  point.  Almost  all  public  mesmerists  use  this  method  on  the  stage.
It  seems  probable  that  what  really  occurs  may  be  tliis.  The  gaze  is
fixed  on  the  crystal  or  mirror  in  the  expectation  of  seeing  visions  in
it.  It  is  only  after  gazing  until  the  stage  of  hypnosis  in  which
hallucinations  can  be  produced  is  reached  that  visions  occur.  This
explains  why  subjects  have  to  gaze  for  such  a  long  time  before  the
visions  appear.

This  phenomenon  can  easily  be  produced  by  suggestion.  I  told  M.
to  look  at  the  back  of  my  watch  and  asked  him  what  visions  he  saw.
He  saw  a  lady  walking  along  a  road  singing.  A  man  came  up  and
walked  past  her  and  was  soon  joined  by  another.  Here  I  stopped
him.  I  made  him  look  again.  He  then  saw  a  man  acting  on  a  stage.
If,  however,  we  use  this  simple  method  we  shall  find  that  the  muscular
state  is  altei'ed,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the  true  crystal-gazer.  I
tried  the  following  experiment  with  M.  I  told  him  that  when  he
looked  into  a  glass  of  water  which  I  showed  him,  he  would  see
visions,  but  tliat  he  could  not  go  to  sleep.  He  looked  into  the  glass
and  saw  a  wedding,  which  he  described  minutely.  I  have  repeated  the
experiment  successfully  about  half-a-dozen  times.  By  this  method  the
subject  remained  in  a  perfectly  normal  condition,  as  far  as  one  can  see,
the  muscular  state  remaining  quite  unaltered,  nor  could  any  abnor-
mality be  detected  excepting  that  when  he  looked  into  the  glass  he  saw
visions.

Certain  other  phenomena  not  generally  regarded  as  subjective
are  apparently  often  really  produced  by  self-suggestion.  I  have
seen  cases  where  table-rapping  has  been  produced  by  unconscious
movement  on  the  part  of  the  medium.  In  fact,  until  I  drew  the
mediums'  attention  to  the  movement  they  were  perfectly  unaware  of  it.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  ordinary  mediumship  self-suggestion  takes
the  form  of  expectancy.  Probably  such  a  form  of  self-suggestion  can  do
more  than  any  suggestion  given  by  the  mesmerist,  since  the  mesmerist
is  obliged  to  put  his  suggestions  into  words,  which  is  not  the  case
with  this  form  of  self-suggestion.  It  is  impossible  in  this  paper  to
enter  into  the  details  of  the  various  cases.  The  readers  of  these
Proceedings  can  doubtless  recollect  many  such  cases  themselves.  To
those  who  try  experiments  on  self-suggestion  it  will  be  well  to  give  one
word  of  warning.  As  a  general  rule  the  more  self-suggestive  a  subject
becomes  the  less  power  can  the  mesmerist  exert  over  him. In  the


1888.]  The  Connection  of  Hypnotism  with  Spiritualism.  287

case  of  E.,  for  instance,  we  have  a  subject  completely  under  the
control  of  the  mesmerist.  He  became  after  w^ards  very  self-suggestive,
and  was  completely  beyond  the  control  of  the  operator.  These  facts
have  probably  an  interesting  bearing  on  many  forms  of  hysteria  and
insanity  ;  but  this  would  be  beyond  the  purposes  of  this  paper.

If  those  who  have  opportunities  of  observing  the  various  states
produced  by  the  subjective  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  could  record
their  experiences  collectively,  we  should  have  valuable  data  on  which
to  base  conclusions  as  to  the  nature  of  these  states.  The  Psychical
Society  appears  to  offer  the  best  possible  opportunities  for  such  collec-
tive investigation,  which,  if  carried  out,  would  add  very  materially  to
an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  subject.


V


■288


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


III.

ON  THE  EVIDENCE  FOR  PREMONITIONS.
By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


INTRODUCTION.

My  object  in  this  paper  is  to  give  the  result  of  a  careful  study  of
the  evidence  for  premonitions  collected  by  the  Society,  and  to  set
before  the  reader,  for  his  own  judgment,  what  appear  to  me  to  be  the
strongest  cases,  and  some  which,  though  perhaps  not  evidentially  the
strongest,  are  otherwise  interesting.

The  word  Premonition  would  perhaps  naturally  suggest  super-
natural communication  of  knowledge  of  the  future,  with  a  view  to
influence  action.  Few  of  our  cases,  however,  can  be  conceived  as
having  this  character,  and  we  have  found  it  convenient  to  use  the  word
in  a  more  extended  sense  to  include  all  cases  of  apparent  knowledge
of  future  events.  In  many  of  these  cases  the  event  foreknown  is  so
trivial  that  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  apply  to  it  the  idea  of  a  super-
natural monition  or  warning.  Such  trivial  instances  are,  of  course,
not  less  interesting  from  our  point  of  view,  since  we  are  studying  them
as  natural  phenomena — not  supernatural  interferences.  Only  it
requires  a  perhaps  somewhat  unusual  extension  of  the  term  to  include
them.

By  Premonition,  then,  I  mean  predictions  or  foreshadowings  or
warnings  of  coming  events  which  afford,  if  believed,  a  knowledge  of
the  future  greater  than  that  which  human  beings  could  obtain  by  exer-
cising their  normal  faculties  on  the  facts  before  them.  Of  course  pure
accident  will  bring  about  some  coincidences  which  would  have  the
appearance  of  premonitions.  The  question  we  have  to  consider  is
whether  the  improbability  that  the  cases  before  us  are  purely
fortuitous  is  sufiicient  to  warrant  us  in  assuming  a  supernormal
explanation.

I  ought  to  say  at  once  that  the  evidence  at  present  collected  by  the
Society,  and  of  which  I  am  about  to  give  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the
cream,  does  not  seem  to  me  sufficient  to  warrant  a  conclusion  in  favour
of  the  reality  of  premonitions.  Some  of  the  cases  are  certainly  very
striking,  but  on  the  whole,  both  in  quantity  and  in  quality,  the  evidence


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


289


falls  far  short  of  that  for  telepathy.  ^  There  are  comparatively  few  cases
which  attain  an  evidential  standard  which  would  have  entitled  them  to
a  place  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  of  these  cases  the  larger  number
are  dreams — a  branch  of  evidence  which,  in  discussing  telepathy,  was
considered  to  be  in  itself  inconclusive.  And  while  less  evidence
is  apparently  forthcoming  for  premonitions  than  for  telepathy,
decidedly  more  is,  I  think,  required  owing  to  the  still  greater
remoteness  from  the  analogy  of  our  established  sciences  which  the
intuitive  knowledge  of  detailed  future  events  involves.  This  will
be  seen  at  once,  if  we  consider  that  the  acceptance  of  the  possibility  of
clairvoyance, — i.e.,  knowledge  of  present  or  past  facts  not  obtained
through  sense  or  by  inference  from  other  knowledge  or  transferred
from  some  other  mind  in  relation  with  the  knower's — would  carry  us
considerably  beyond  the  admission  of  telepathy ;  while,  again,  a
clairvoyant  knowledge  of  the  future  involves  all  the  difficulties
attaching  to  clairvoyant  knowledge  of  the  present  and  past,  together
with  new  and  vast  difficulties  peculiar  to  itself.

This  leads  me  to  observe  that  not  a  few  cases  which  are  commonly
spoken  of  as  premonitions  or  presentiments  may  be  explained  without
assuming  more  than  clairvoyance  of  the  present.  This  is  true  of  more
than  a  fifth  of  the  cases  which  have  been  provisionally  classed  as
premonitions  and  printed  or  type-written  by  the  Literary  Committee.
There  can,  for  instance,  be  no  question  of  future  knowledge  in  such  a
case  as  that  of  a  lady  being  saved  from  stepping  into  an  unseen  canal
in  the  dark  by  an  imaginary  hand  on  her  shoulder.  In  other  cases,
though  a  future  element  is  undoubtedly  included,  it  is  such  as  might
naturally  be  inferred  from  the  present,  if  known.  Thus  we  have  a
not  inconsiderable  class — some  of  them  striking — of  dreams  and
impressions  of  letters  which  at  the  moment  of  the  experience  are
actually  travelling  through  the  post.  A  dream  of  this  kind  is  not  a
premonition,  as  I  have  defined  the  word,  even  when  it  includes  the
arrival  of  the  letter  in  the  usual  way.  But  something  marked  and
unusual — not  in  the  appearance  of  the  letter  but  in  the  mode  of  its
receipt— occurring  both  in  the  dream  and  in  reality  would  give  the
dream  a  premonitory  character.  Similarly  dreams  of  the  whereabouts
of  lost  articles — however  we  explain  them,  and  no  doubt  latent  memory

1  The  following  figures  make  this  evident.  In  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  excluding
the  Supplement,  there  are  359  cases  of  spontaneous  telepathy,  of  which  about  18  per
cent,  are  dreams.  These  359  cases  are  all  at  first-hand,  and  are  selected  from  a  much
larger  number  as  the  best  of  their  various  classes.  I  have  selected  for  this  paper  some
38  first-hand  cases  of  premonitions,  of  which  24  are  dreams.  But  as  I  do  not  wish  to
lay  stress  on  my  own  selection,  let  us  take  the  whole  of  the  first-hand  cases,  good,
bad,  and  indifferent.  These  amount  to  some  240,  or  about  two-thirds  only  of  tlie
number  of  selected  cases  of  spontaneous  telepathy,  and  of  these  240  about  6G  per  cent,
are  dreams.

u  2


290


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


often  plays  a  part  here — do  not  exhibit  a  premonitory  knowledge  of  the
future  even  if  they  include  the  finding  of  the  lost  article  ;  for  finding  it
is  the  natural  result  of  knowing  where  it  is.  There  are  of  course  some
cases  in  which  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  whether  the  future  element  is
a  natural  inference  from  the  present  or  not,  but  I  think  that  on
the  whole  there  would  be  no  substantial  disagreement  as  to  the
non-premonitory  character  of  the  great  majority  of  the  cases  which  I
am  leaving  out  of  the  discussion  on  this  ground.  Some  of  these  seem  to
involve  clairvoyance  of  the  present,  and  others  may  perhaps  be
explained  as  cases  of  telepathy.

In  the  remaining  cases  it  is,  I  think,  in  the  main  desirable  to
consider  only  those  which  are  at  first-hand,  of  which  we  have  about
240.  Of  these  about  two-thirds  are  dreams,  and  the  remaining  third
(omitting  two  or  three  miscellaneous  cases)  may  be  divided  into
(1)  visual  hallucinations — persons  or  objects  seen  when  nothing  was
really  there;  (2)  auditory  hallucinations — voices  or  other  sounds
heard  when,  according  to  the  belief  of  the  percipient,  there  was  no
real  natural  sound;  (3)  verbal  predictions,  as  by  fortune  tellers;
(4)  non-externalised  impressions  of  various  kinds,  namely,  ideas  of
more  or  less  definiteness,  mental  visions,  mental  voices,  and  motor
impulses — impulses,  that  is,  which  at  the  time  seem  unaccountable,
to  do  or  abstain  from  doing  certain  actions,  but  which  appear  to  be
explained  by  subsequent  events.  I  have  included  with  the  visual  and
auditory  hallucinations  what  are  called  in  Phantasms  o/  the  Livingr
"  Borderland"  cases — cases  between  dreams  and  hallucinations — which
occur  under  circumstances  which  suggest  that  they  may  have  been
dreams,  but  from  which  the  percipient  has  at  any  rate  no  recollection
of  waking.

GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  EVIDENCE  FOR  PREMONITIONS.

Before  discussing  any  cases  in  detail,  I  have  a  few  general  remarks
to  make  on  evidence  for  premonitions.  We  have  here,  as  in  evidence
for  spontaneous  telepathy,  to  show  reason  for  believing  in  a
causal  connection  between  two  apparently  independent  facts ;  and
one  of  the  most  obvious  things  in  the  evidence  before  us  is  the
genera!l  resemblance  both  between  what  I  may  call  the  future  facts  of
the  premonitions  and  the  agents'  experiences  in  spontaneous  telepathy,
and  also  between  the  percipients'  experiences  in  the  two  cases.  In
consequence  of  this,  a  great  deal  of  the  general  criticism  of  the  evidence
for  spontaneous  telepathy  in  Chapter  IV.  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living
applies  to  the  evidence  for  premonitions,  and  therefore,  though  exceed-
ingly important  in  estimating  that  evidence,  need  not  be  repeated  here.
But  there  are  certain  dangers  and  sources  of  weakness  peculiar  to
premonitory  evidence.  One  of  these  lies  in  the  possibility  that,  in
certain  cases,  prophecies  may  bring  their  own  fulfilment. This  is


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


291


obviously  possible  when  the  result  may  be  brought  about  by  voluntary
action  on  the  part  of  anyone  who  knows  the  prophecy.  But  I  think
it  must  also  be  assumed  to  be  possible  when  the  result  may  follow
from  an  involuntary  action  of  the  nerves  ;  as,  for  instance,  death
on  a  date  foretold  and  known  to  the  person  who  dies.  The
following  (P.  344)1  ^  remarkable  case  of  this  kind.  The  first
account  is  taken  from  the  Sun,  Baltimore,  of  December  8th,  1883.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Christopher  C.  Brooks,  of  this  city,  lost  their  youngest  son,
Christopher  C.  Brooks,  aged  17  years  and  five  months,  by  death  from
paralysis  of  the  heart,  in  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  on  Wednesday  afternoon,  under
peculiar  circumstances.

The  following  account  was  obtained  from  the  parents  of  the  deceased  :
Mrs.  Brooks  was  travelling  in  Europe  and  had  written  her  son,  who  was
employed  in  New  York  and  lived  in  Brooklyn,  to  join  her.  He  responded,
naming  the  time  of  his  starting.  In  the  interim  he  was  taken  ill,  and  on  the
day  Mrs.  Brooks  received  his  letter,  she  received  a  cablegram  summoning  her
home  on  account  of  his  sickness.  On  her  arrival  she  found  him  able  to  go
about,  and  his  physician  had  no  fears  as  to  his  perfect  recovery.  The  youth
stated,  however,  that  a  former  teacher  and  friend  of  his,  a  Mr.  Hall,  who
died  about  five  months  ago,  had  appeared  to  him  in  a  vision  and  told  him  he
would  die  of  heart  trouble  on  Wednesday,  December  5th,  at  3  o'clock  p.m.
Young  Brooks  had  never  had  any  trouble  with  his  heart,  and  his  friends  to
whom  he  made  the  statement  were  in  no  way  concerned  about  it.  Dr.  Mann,
his  physician,  laughed  at  it,  and  said  he  was  certain,  on  the  contrary,  he
would  get  well.  The  young  man  was,  however,  thoroughly  impressed  with
the  belief  that  he  would  die  at  the  time  indicated.  A  few  days  before  that
time  he  sent  flowers  to  some  friends,  with  a  note  saying  :  "I  shall  never
again  be  able  to  express  my  appreciation  of  your  kindness. "  He  accompanied
a  lady  friend  to  an  entertainment  the  afternoon  of  December  4th,  spent  the
evening  in  her  company,  and  received  a  promise  that  if  he  wrote  for  her  the
next  afternoon  she  would  come  to  say  good-bye.  His  physician  told  the
brother  and  mother  of  the  youth  that  he  would  divert  his  mind  from  the
subject  by  physical  means,  and  on  Tuesday  night  put  a  fly  blister  on  his
neck.

Wednesday  morning  young  Brooks  rose  as  usual,  ate  an  unusually  hearty
breakfast,  and  to  all  appearances  was  good  for  a  long  life.  The  physician
left  him  without  a  trace  of  uneasiness  as  to  his  condition.  The  young  man
insisted  that  his  mother  should  not  stay  with  him,  telling  her  ' '  It  would  kill
you  to  see  me  die."  That  he  might  not  take  the  matter  too  much  to  heart
she  did  not  oppose  him,  but  consented  to  leave  him,  intending  to  return  to
him  in  the  latter  part  of  the  afternoon.

While  taking  lunch  with  the  family  as  usual  at  two  o'clock  he  complained
of  feeling  faint,  and  asked  to  be  assisted  to  his  room.  After  resting  in  the
bed  a  few  moments  he  wrote  to  the  young  lady,  and  in  about  20  minutes  she
arrived. He  died  in  the  presence  of  the  family  at  3.10  o'clock.  His

1  The  numbers  given  in  brackets  are  those  attached  to  the  cases  by  the  Literary
Committee  for  identification,  P.  standing  for  premonition.  They  are  given  here  for
convenience  of  reference.


292


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


physician  and  his  mother  arrived  but  two  or  three  moments  later,  and  were
shocked  to  find  his  prediction  fulfilled.  His  father  had  returned  to  Baltimore
from  visiting  him  some  weeks  ago.  On  Wednesday,  at  breakfast,  his  father
remarked  it  was  the  day  which  his  son  had  af)pointed  to  die,  but  with  no
thought  that  the  prophecy  would  be  fulfilled,  and  was  astounded  w^hen
intelligence  of  the  death  arrived.  He  was  a  young  man  of  strong  character,
exceptionally  good  mind,  and  splendid  physique.

Mr.  Gurney  wrote  to  Professor  Brooks,  and  received  the  following
reply  :—

Baltimore  Female  College,  Baltimore.

April  5th,  1884.

The  article  from  the  Baltimore  ^S^m  gives  a  quite  correct  account  of  the
affair.

To  give  him  {i.e..  young  Christopher)  the  best  possible  treatment,  his
mother  prevailed  on  Dr.  Mann  to  take  him  into  his  family  as  a  boarder.  Dr.
Marian  Simms,  the  eminent  gynoecologist,  had  recommended  Dr.  Mann  to
her.  He  said  to  his  mother,  on  placing  him  with  the  doctor,  "  I  will  aid  the
doctor  all  I  can,  and  take  all  he  gives  me,  should  it  be  God's  will  that  I  shall
recover  ;  but  I  feel  sure  that  I  will  die  on  December  5th."  When  she  told
him  that  she  had  paid  the  doctor  for  a  month  in  advance,  he  told  her  that  she
would  lose  her  money,  for  he  would  die  on  December  5th.  This  was  so
firmly  impressed  on  his  mind  that  neither  reasoning  nor  ridicule  could  remove
the  impression.  As  the  time  approached  he  asked  for  some  money  that  he
might  make  some  parting  gifts  to  friends.  His  mother  gave  him  lOdoL,  and
afterwards,  at  his  request  for  more,  5dol.  additional.  He  exjjended  in
flowers  and  little  presents  to  friends  all  with  the  exception  of  50  cents.

His  father,  in  coming  to  Baltimore  a  few  days  before  Christopher  s  death,
first  called  on  Dr.  Mann  to  learn  the  exact  condition  of  his  son's  health,  when
the  doctor  used  the  following  strong  language  of  assurance,  "I  will  pledge
my  diploma  that  at  the  end  of  a  few  weeks  he  will  be  perfectly  well."  He
had  been  at  Dr.  Mann's  about  two  weeks  when  he  died.

Christopher  Covington  Brooks,  who  was  thus  early  called  away,  and  in  so
peculiar  a  way,  was  a  youth  of  earnest  piety,  knew  nothing  of  Spiritualism,
and  neither  desired  nor  feared  death,  but  with  Christian  philosophy  sub-
mitted everything  to  the  will  of  God.

N.  C.  Brooks.

Even  accidents  may  be  brought  about  by  nervousness — a  person  is
more  likely,  for  instance,  to  lose  his  footing  in  a  dangerous  place  if  he
thinks  he  is  going  to  do  so —  ;  and  practically  most  cases  of  death,  or
of  accidents  in  causing  which  the  sufferer's  own  state  of  mind  may
have  been  an  important  factor,  occurring  within  a  predicted  time
to  a  person  aware  of  the  prophecy,  must,  I  think,  be  excluded  from
the  evidence  in  favour  of  premonitions.  In  many  of  these  cases
we  have  also  to  consider  the  strong  probability  that  similar  presenti-
ments very  frequently  occur  without  being  fulfilled.  Of  course,  again,
prophecies  of  calamity  may  bring  their  own  fulfilment  through  the
action — or  inaction — of  persons  other  than  the  sufferer. We  have


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


293


one  very  pathetic  case  (P.  915)  in  which  this  explanation  is
suggested,  where  a  father's  dream  is  interpreted  to  mean  that
a  favourite  child  would  die.  The  gentleman  who  sent  us  the
case  says  of  the  father  : — "  The  tears  always  stand  in  his  eyes  when
he  speaks  of  it.  He  has  always,  since  the  death  of  his  little  boy,  felt
that  his  dream  made  his  wife  and  him  more  anxious  and  flurried  than
they  should  have  been,  and  in  consequence  unfitted  them  for  properly
attending  him  during  his  illness.  He  thinks  the  mere  idea  that  death
was  inevitable  prevented  them  from  doing  all  they  might  have  done."
In  this  case,  however,  I  hardly  think  the  parents  would  have  felt  the
self-reproach  had  they  deserved  it,  and  scarlet  fever  in  the  family  so
easily  accounts  for  both  dream  and  death  that  we  need  not  go  further
for  an  explanation.

There  is  another  weakness  in  premonitory  evidence  as  compared
with  telepathic,  which  is  of  a  more  general  kind.  A  telepathic  phan-
tasm carries  with  it  implicitly  the  date  of  fulfilment — because  if  this
does  not  coincide  with  that  of  the  phantasm  there  is  no  telepathy.  A
premonitory  phantasm,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  necessarily  imply
any  date,  and  it  must,  therefore,  be  more  complex  than  a  telepathic
one  in  order  to  have  the  same  cogency.  For  example,  a  premonitory
apparition  of  A.  accompanied  by  a  statement  of  a  future  date  which
afterwards  proved  to  be  the  date  of  A.'s  death,  will  only  be  evidentially
equivalent  to  a  simple  telepathic  apparition  of  A.  at  the  time  of  A.'s
death.  One  consequence  of  this  need  for  greater  complexity  is  that  the
evidence  generally  depends  more  on  accurate  recollection  of  the  details
of  the  dream  or  hallucination  than  telepathic  evidence  does ; — and
abundant  evidence  exists  to  show  how  little  the  memory  can  be  trusted
as  regards  details.  It  is,  therefore,  even  more  important  here  than  in
the  telepathic  evidence  that  the  experience  should  be  fully  described  and,
if  possible,  written  down  before  the  fulfilment ;  and  among  the  cases
before  us  where  the  correspondence  between  the  phantasm  and  the
event  is  sufficiently  marked  to  be  regarded  in  my  view  as  evidential,
there  is  only  one  in  which  any  record  written  before  the  event  seems  to
have  been  preserved.

Turning  now  from  general  considerations  to  particular  cases,  I  will
give  those  which  appear  to  me  to  tell  most  strongly  in  favour  of  the
reality  of  premonitions,  with  some  criticisms  on  them.

RECOGNISED  APPARITIONS.

I  will  begin  with  recognised  apparitions,  and  give  first  a  case  such
as  I  have  just  described,  where  a  date  is  named.  (P.  392.)  It  is  from
Mrs.  Alger,  who  at  the  time  she  wrote,  in  January,  1883,  lived  at
Hedsor  Lodge,  Belmont,  Twickenham,  S.W. She  writes  : —

Some  years  ago  in  March,  my  husband,  who  is  an  army  tutor,  asked


294


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


.  me  to  call  at  the  Civil  Service  offices  for  some  papers.  I  had  come  from
Victoria  Station,  walking  towards  the  Abbey,  when,  just  before  crossing  over
to  Canon  Row,  I  felt  some  one  touch  me  on  the  shoulder.  I  turned  round
and  saw  my  husband's  mother,  looking  very  death-like.  I  said,  "Oh,
mother,  what  a  start  you  gave  me  !  "  but  she  had  gone.  A  feeling  of  great
depression  came  over  me,  and  I  was  quite  unable  to  go  on  my  husband's
errand,  but  went  home.  All  the  way  home  I  thought  of  what  had  happened,
and  as  I  got  indoors  I  made  up  my  mind  to  tell  my  husband  and  then  at
once  go  to  Brixton,  where  his  mother  lived.  However,  I  fainted  before  I
saw  Mr.  Alger,  and  after  recovering,  I  felt  unwell,  so  that  I  had  to  go  to  bed.
After  thinking  the  matter  over  I  said  nothing  of  what  I  had  seen,  but  early
in  the  evening,  when  my  husband  came  into  my  room,  I  asked  him  to  go  and
see  his  mother.  We  were  talking  it  over  as  to  whether  it  would  be  right  to
leave  the  boys  by  themselves,  when  I  heard  a  voice  say,  ' '  Come  both  of  you
on  the  22nd "  (the  22nd  of  March  is  my  birthday).  I  at  once  told  my
husband  my  day's  experience,  and  added,  "My  birthday  will -be  your
mother's  death-day."  Mr.  Alger  went  at  once  to  Brixton,  and  on  his  return
told  me  his  mother  had  a  cold,  but  was,  on  the  whole,  as  well  as  ever  ;  but
on  the  22nd  of  March,  that  is,  four  days  after,  we  stood  at  her  death  bed.

I  have  no  doubt  my  husband  will  remember  the  above  and  confirm  what
I  have  written,  any  time  you  wish  him  to  do  so.

L.  Alger.

Mr.  Alger  corroborated  as  follows  : —

Hedsor  Lodge,  Belmont,  Twickenham,  S.W.

January  ISth,  1883.
Dear  Sir, — I  have  seen  your  letter  of  yesterday's  date,  written  to  my
wife,  and  with  regard  to  the  subject  of  the  correspondence,  I  remember  very
well  her  telling  me  of  what  she  supposed  she  had  seen,  and  also  her  urging
me  to  go  and  see  my  mother,  who,  as  far  as  I  knew  at  the  time,  was  in  very
good  health.  I  also  remember  that  very  soon  following  upon  this,  my  poor
mother  was  taken  ill,  and  that  the  day  of  her  death  was  not  long  after  the
circumstances  alluded  to,  and  took  place  on  the  birthday  of  my  wife,  the
22nd  March.  It  is  that  coincidence  which  has  stamped  the  facts  indelibly  on
my  memory. — I  am,  dear  sir,  yours  very  truly, — T.  L.  Alger.

It  seems  from  the  general  form  of  this  corroboration  that
Mr.  Alger  has  no  independent  recollection  of  tlie  most  important
point  in  the  narrative,  namely,  that  his  wife  foretold  the  day  of  his
mother's  death,  but  I  think  that  even  without  this  it  will  be  admitted
that  the  case  is  a  remarkable  one.

It  is  worth  noting,  apropos  to  this  case  and  others,  that  marked
dates  like  birthdays,  Christmas  Day,  ifcc,  have,  if  they  occur  in  dreams
or  waking  phantasms,  the  advantage  of  being  easily  remembered,
but  they  have  a  compensating  disadvantage  in  being  more  likely  to
occur  spontaneously  to  the  mind  and  thus  making  it  more  probable
that  the  coincidence  is  due  to  accident.

We  have  only  one  other  apparition  with  date,  if  we  exclude  one
(P.  326),  as  I  think  we  must,  where  the  percipient  was  a  child  of


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


295


eight  and  can  produce  no  corroboration.  It  is  from  Mrs.  Barclay
O'Gorman,  who,  when  she  wrote  in  October,  1885,  resided  at
39,  Wilbury-road,  Brighton  (P.  f )  :—

On  the  night  of  Tuesday,  October  24th,  1882,  a  few  moments  before  the
stroke  of  midnight,  I  saw  my  uncle  Carleton  Crawford  standing  by  my  bedside.
He  looked  as  usual,  and  said  to  me,  ' '  Margaret,  I  am  come  to  bid  you  good-
bye, for  I  shall  die  this  day  week."  1  then  heard  the  clock  of  the  Town
Hall  strike  12,  and  first  realised  the  strangeness  of  what  had  taken  place.  I
was  awake  at  the  time  of  seeing  my  uncle,  though  his  ajDpearing  so  suddenly,
and  in  so  unusual  a  manner,  seemed  at  the  time  to  me  to  be  quite  natural.  The
next  morning  I  told  my  husband  and  my  sister  (Mrs.  E.  Raymond  Barker)
of  this  apparition,  and  then  forgot  all  about  it.  On  the  Saturday  following,  I
heard  accidentally  that  my  uncle  had  been  taken  suddenly  very  ill,  and  was
become  almost  unconscious.  (He  was  80  years  of  age.)  He  remained  in
a  state  of  unconsciousness  until  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  October  31st,  when
he  expired.  This  is  the  only  time  in  my  life  that  anything  of  the  kind
happened  to  me,  being  awake.

Maegaret  E.  Babclay  O'Gorman.

Mr.  O'Gorman's  confirmation  cannot  be  obtained  to  this  account,  as
he  has  a  dislike  to  the  subject,  and  Mrs.  E.  Raymond  Barker  has
recently  been  applied  to  for  hers,  but  no  reply  has  been  received  from
her.

This  case  is  less  striking  than  the  former  one — not  only  because  no
corroboration  is  obtainable,  but  because  whether  it  was  a  waking
experience  as  Mrs.  O'Gorman  believes,  or  only  a  dream,  it  at  any
rate  does  not  seem  to  have  made  the  strong  impression  on  the  mind
which  so  rare  an  experience  as  a  waking  hallucination  usually  does.
She  tells  us  that,  after  telling  her  husband  and  sister  of  her  experience,
"  she  forgot  all  about  it,"  and  we  must  allow  for  the  possibility  that
when  her  uncle's  death  recalled  it  to  her  mind,  the  exact  date  may
have  been  read  back  into  it  in  the  way  that  details  certainly  do  some-
times get  read  back  into  dreams.  It  must  also  be  admitted  that  the
advanced  age  of  Mr.  Crawford  somewhat  diminishes  the  force  of  the
coincidence  by  making  his  speedy  death  more  likely.

In  the  next  case — a  borderland  one  (P.  379) — the  phantasm,
though  giving  no  date,  is  nevertheless  something  more  than  a  mere
apparition,  because,  as  will  be  seen,  the  upward  motion  of  the  figure  as
in  the  conventional  idea  of  a  departing  spirit  distinctly  conveyed
the  idea  of  death.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  "W.  T.  Catleugh,  who  wrote
from  15,  Lincoln-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.  : —

December  IWi,  1883.
Sir, — Having  seen  your  letter  in  the  Standard,  it  brings  to  my  memory
an  event  that  took  place  six  weeks  before  my  elder  daughter  died  (five  years
ago  come  next  March). The  child  had  never  been  strong,  and  to  make  sure


296


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


she  was  well  looked  after  when  she  went  to  rest,  she  used  to  sleep  in  a  little
bed  by  my  side  so  that  I  could  attend  to  her  easily  if  slie  wanted  looking  to.

My  wife  at  that  time,  being  an  invalid,  kept  a  lamp  constantly  alight.  I
was  sleeping  with  my  back  to  the  child  when  I  was  suddenly  roused  by  a
touch  on  the  shoulder.  I  turned  at  once,  thinking  that  the  child  required
something,  when  I  distinctly  saw  the  spirit-form  of  the  child  with  her  hands
clasped  and  in  a  kneeling  attitude  rise  from  the  bed.  This  made  me  feel  that
the  child  was  dead,  and  I  at  once  put  my  hand  on  her  forehead,  but
found  it  warm  and  her  breathing  regular.  I  also  noticed  that  her  arms  were
not  outside  the  counterpane,  but  that  the  child  was  well  covered  up.

These,  sir,  are  stubborn  facts  :  I  made  a  memo,  in  my  pocket-book  the
following  morning  of  being  touched  in  this  mysterious  manner,  and  seeing
the  apparition  of  the  child.  It  was  to  me  a  warning  of  the  approaching
departure  of  my  little  one,  although,  as  far  as  we  could  see,  nothing  ailed  the
child  for  five  following  weeks,  yet  on  the  sixth  week  my  little  darling  died  of
meningitis  tuberculosis. — I  am,  sir,  yours  faithfully,

W.  T.  Catleugh.

Mr.  Catleugh  subsequently  wrote  : —

December  2mh,  1883.

Dear  Sib, — In  reply  to  yours  of  yesterday.

Neither  before  nor  since  the  time  that  I  saw  my  little  girl's  spirit-form
have  I  seen  any  ajiparition,  or  been  unaccountably  touched.

I  have  a  slight  correction  to  make  with  regard  to  the  time  that  intervened
between  the  incident  that  I  wrote  to  you  about  and  the  child's  death.
I  looked  in  my  pocket-book  for  1879,  and  saw  under  date  1st  February
that  it  was  just  1.30  in  the  morning  when  this  unaccountable  touching  and
vision  occurred.  This  would  make  six  weeks  before  the  child  took  to  her
bed  instead  of  five.

Had  this  incident  been  a  dream  I  should  not  have  troubled  you  with  the
narration  of  it.  But  I  enifihatically  declare  that  I  was  roused  from  sleep  by
a  mysterious  touch  ;  that  the  room  was  light  from  the  lamp,  and  that  when  I
turned  round  I  saw  tlie  spirit-form  of  the  child  rise  from  the  bed  and  dis-
appear out  of  sight  as  distinctly  as  if  it  had  been  the  child  herself. — I  am,
dear  sir,  yours  faithfully,

W.  T.  Catleugh.

P.S. — At  that  time  I  had  no  anxiety  preying  on  my  mind  with  regard  to
the  child's  health.  She  had  always  been  nervous  and  delicate,  but  had  never
had  a  serious  illness,  or  any  of  the  ailments  common  to  children,  and  she
seemed  as  well  in  health  as  she  had  ever  been.

Mrs.  Catleugh  writes  : —

December  28th,  1883.
Sir, — My  husband  has  just  shown  me  your  letter.  I  well  recollect  the
night,  or  rather  early  morning,  when  my  husband  woke  me  by  starting  up  in
bed.  He  was  greatly  disturbed  in  manner,  but  would  not  tell  me  what  he
had  seen  until  three  days  had  passed,  as  I  was  at  that  time  an  invalid,  and  he
was  afraid  of  alarming  me  ;  but  he  told  my  cousin.  Miss  Archer,  the  next
morning,  and  it  has  been  a  subject  of  conversation  whenever  she  afterwards
came  from  the  country  on  a  visit  to  us. She  would,  I  know,  willingly  have


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


297


verified  my  husband's  statement  had  she  been  alive,  but  I  grieve  to  say  she
died  of  rapid  consumption  early  this  year. — Yours  truly,

Henrietta  A.  Catleugh.

The  known  delicacy  of  the  child,  although  not  enough  to  cause
painful  anxiety,  and  the  length  of  time — over  six  weeks — allowed  for
fulfilment,  have  to  be  noted,  in  considering  the  evidential  force  of  the
coincidence  in  this  case  ;  but  the  experience  is  certainly  an  impressive
one.

It  is  sometimes  thought  that  the  mere  apparition  of  a  living  person
is  a  warning  of  his  death.  I  mean,  it  is  thought  not  only  that  there  is
a  considerable  probability  of  the  appearance  coinciding  with  the  death,
but  that  if  it  does  not  do  this  it  is  an  omen  or  warning  showing  that
his  death  is  likely  to  follow  shortly.  But  so  far  as  I  know,  facts  do
not  support  this  idea.  I  have  abstracts,  mostly  furnished  to  me  by
Mr.  Gurney,  of  92  recognised  hallucinations  of  living  persons  not
apparently  coinciding  with  any  marked  crisis  in  their  lives,  or  with  any
known  attempt  to  communicate  with  the  percipient  (I  do  not  include
in  the  92  those  just  quoted,  as  they  contain  what  may  be  called  a
prophetic  element  apart  from  the  apparition  itself).  Among  these  92
only  14  are  stated  to  liave  been  followed  by  the  death — the  interval
varying  from  a  few  hours  to  a  year ;  and  such  a  proportion  seems  to
me  quite  insufficient  to  form  a  basis  for  any  conclusions  favourable  to
the  premonitory  character  of  apparitions.  But  further,  two  of  these  14
cases  must  be  excluded  because  the  percipient  was  in  grave  anxiety  about
the  person  whose  apparition  was  seen — in  one  case,  moreover,  suffering
from  loss  of  sleep  owing  to  the  anxiety,  and  in  the  other  case  fatigued
with  nursing.  And  in  another  of  the  14  cases  the  percipient  was  expect-
ing to  see  her  husband  in  the  direction  in  which  she  saw  the  apparition
of  him.  There  is  a  further  argument  against  there  being  any  premoni-
tory significance  in  the  apparition  of  living  persons.  Among  the  14
which  are  stated  to  have  preceded  death  10  represented  people  living
in  the  same  house  as  the  percipient,  and  an  11th  represented
a  person  in  the  place  and  attitude  he  had  been  seen  in  a  few  hours
before.  Now  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  why  a  genuine  premonitory
hallucination — if  there  be  such — should  specially  occur  as  regards
persons  living  in  the  same  house  as  the  percipient ;  while  there  is  reason
to  think  that  when  a  casual  hallucination  takes  the  form  of  a  recog-
nised person  at  all,  it  has  a  tendency  to  take  that  of  a  person  under  the
same  roof  and,  therefore  presumably,  frequently  and  recently  seen.
For  among  the  92  cases,  this  is  true  of  48  at  least,  or  over  half,  and  in
two  others,  at  least,  the  original  of  the  apparition  had  been  seen  during
the  day  ;  while  in  three  more  cases  tlie  apparition  v/as  of  the  percipient's
self.

One  more  case  of  a  visual  hallucination  representing  a  man  who


298


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


died  soon  after  must  be  mentioned.  He  appeared  as  dead,  so  that  the
idea  of  death  was  distinctly  conveyed  ;  but  the  hallucination  was  of  a
different  kind  from  those  hitherto  discussed.  It  was  a  vision  in  a
crystal.  Gazing  into  a  glass  or  crystal  ball,  or  a  mirror,  or  a  few  drops
of  ink  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  is  a  method  of  seeking  for  occult
information  which  has  been  practised  for  many  ages,  and  it
undoubtedly  is,  with  some  people,  a  way  of  producing  hallucinations
more  or  less  at  will.  These  visions — like  other  hallucinations  and  like
automatic  writing — doubtless  reproduce  only  what  is  already  in  the
percipient's  mind,  and  probably  in  most  cases  only  what  has  come
into  his  mind  in  a  perfectly  normal  way,  though  the  idea  or
memory  may  be  latent.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  sometimes — as
appears  to  be  the  case  in  automatic  writing^ — these  voluntarily  sought
hallucinations  may  be  a  mode  in  which  supernormally  acquired  ideas
rise  into  consciousness.  The  following  case  is  from  Mrs.  Bickford-
Smith (P.  396):—

My  visit  to  the  woman  who  owned  a  crystal  is  nearly  18  years  ago,  and
I  have  almost  forgotten  it.

A  relative  of  mine,  rather  a  believer  in  witchcraft,  had  been  to  see  a
woman  who  professed  to  tell  fortunes  by  cards,  and  after  one  visit,  told  me
that  the  woman  had  come  into  possession  of  a  strange  crystal,  in  which  some
people  could  see  things  that  would  happen  to  them  or  to  others  with  whom
they  were  connected,  and  asked  me  to  go  and  see  it.

The  "crystal"  was  about  the  size  of  a  billiard  ball,  and  looked  like  a
ball  of  well-used  glass,  not  cut  or  very  brilliant.  After  looking  into  it  for  a
few  minutes  it  seemed  to  expand,  and  I  saw  the  interior  of  a  church  I  knew
well.  A  coffin  stood  in  the  aisle,  having  no  lid  on  it.  I  distinctly  saw  the
face  of  the  corjDse.  It  was  that  of  an  old  friend  of  my  father's,  who  was  then
in  good  health.  As  the  chinch  faded  from  my  view,  I  seemed  to  see  many
things  passing  by,  but  cannot  recall  them  distinctly,  for  I  felt  rather  glad  to
get  rid  of  the  crystal.  In  a  few  days  I  stood  by  the  death-bed  of  the  gentle-
man, Mrs.  J.  and  I  being  the  only  two  people  in  the  room  when  he  died.
His  death  was  the  cause  of  a  great  change  in  our  lives.

Annie  W.  Bickford-Smith.

P.S. — Perhaps  a  better  description  of  the  appearance  of  the  crystal  would
be  "  glass  that  had  been  breathed  on."

The  amount  of  weight  as  evidence  for  premonition  to  be  attached
to  the  coincidence  in  this  case,  would  depend  on  the  number  and
accuracy  of  the  other  and  now  forgotten  images  which  presented
themselves ;  but  still  more  on  whether  it  was  known  at  the  time  of
the  vision  that  the  gentleman's  death,  whenever  it  occurred,  would
be  the  cause  of  a  great  change  in  the  percipient's  life  ;  because  if  so,
an  attempt to  look  into  the  future  might  naturally  carry  with  it

1  Compare,  e.y.,  Mr.  Newnham's  experiments  recorded  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  63-70,  and  a  case  (87),  Vol.  I.,  p.  293.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


299


an  idea  of  his  death,  and  start  this  particular  hallucination.
Mrs.  Bickford-Smith  does  not  remember  that  she  had  means  of
knowing  that  the  death  of  the  gentleman  would  affect  her  affairs,  but
she  cannot  at  this  distance  of  time  feel  certain  on  this  point.

In  the  recognised  apparitions  I  have  so  far  spoken  of,  the  future
information,  such  as  it  is,  has  been  in  the  form  of  an  idea.  But  it
is  possible  also  to  have  a  pictorial  representation  of  the  future, — to
see  a  phantom  person  or  group  of  persons  in  the  attitudes  or  dress,  &c.,
in  which  they  afterwards  are  really  seen.  But  for  such  a  vision  to
have  any  value  as  evidence  for  premonition  the  attitude,  or  whatever
it  may  be  that  is  foreseen,  must  of  course  be  unusual  and  unlikely,
and  it  seems  at  least  doubtful  whether  this  is  the  case  in  the  one  or
two  narratives  of  the  kind  sent  to  us.

We  may  even  have  action  added  to  the  picture.  I  will  give  as  an
illustration  the  only  case  of  the  sort  which  we  have  (P.  10),  but  it
happened  40  years  ago,  and  admits,  I  think,  of  a  plausible  explanation.
We  received  it  from  the  percipient,  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Bridport,  in  1884.

In  January,  1842,  I  was  living  in  Dorchester,  Dorset,  and  I  was  at  that
time  anxious  about  a  dear  little  boy  (the  son  of  my  brother-in-law,  the  Rev.
George  Stone,  Vicar  of  Long  Burton),  who  was  lying  dangerously  ill  in
fever.

Long  Burton  is  about  16  miles  from  Dorchester,  but  I  heard  from  his
father  almost  every  day  how  the  child  was.  The  31st  of  January  I  had  a
much  better  account  ;  the  chUd  had  rallied,  the  medical  man  hoped  the  crisis
had  passed  and  he  would  recover.  I  went  to  bed  quite  relieved  and  hopeful  ;
but  in  the  early  morning  of  February  1st  I  seemed  to  be  awakened  by  loud
knocking  and  ringing  at  the  street  door.  I  heard  the  servant  open  it,  run
quickly  up  the  stairs,  knock  at  the  bedroom  door,  and  then  saw  her  open  it
and  place  a  letter  on  the  counterpane,  saying  ' '  I  fear,  ma'am,  this  is  bad
news. "  On  the  fold  of  the  letter  I  seemed  to  see  that  the  child  was  dead.  I
immediately  sat  up  in  the  bed,  and  put  out  my  hand  for  the  letter,  could  find
none,  and  saw  no  maid  standing  by  the  bedside.  I  was  much  startled,  but
had  hardly  time  to  think  it  over  when  the  vision  was  realised  to  the  most
minute  particulars,  the  ringing,  knocking,  running  upstairs,  the  words  the
servant  used,  and  those  which  I  read  on  the  fold  of  the  letter.

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Sidgwick,  in  1884,  Mrs.  Stone  stated
tliat : —

The  premonition  was  not  in  sleep,  so  far  as  she  knew  ;  she  had  no
consciousness  of  waking  after  it.

But  though  no  doubt  we  are  usually  conscious  of  waking  from
dreams,  I  think  that  in  this  particular  case  the  sudden  sitting  up,
begun  in  sleep,  may  have  obscured  the  transition  ;  and  I  am  the  more
inclined  to  suspect  that  the  experience  was  a  dream,  since  I  cannot
recall  any  other  instance  of  so  complicated  a  hallucination. It  is  not


300


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


unlikely  that  the  messenger  knocked  twice  before  he  was  attended  to,
and  his  tirst  knock  may  have  started  what  under  the  circumstances
would  be  a  very  natural  dream.

UNRECOGNISED  APPARITIONS.

There  are  a  few  cases  where  a  distinct,  but  w^irecognised  apparition
is  seen,  and  subsequently  identified  with  some  person  seen  for  the  first
time.  A  resemblance  of  this  kind  such  as  would  lead  to  a  real  recogni-
tion would  perhaps  be  as  extraordinary  a  coincidence  as  we  could
possibly  have,  owing  to  the  amount  of  detail  involved.  But  I  doubt
whether  we  ought  ever  to  feel  complete  confidence  in  such  recognitions.
I  have  made  some  remarks  on  recognitions  in  former  papers,  but  I  feel
bound  to  say  that  my  estimate  of  their  evidential  value  has  even
diminished  since  I  wrote  my  paper  on  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  What  I
think  isliable  to  happen  in  such  cases  is  a  sudden  memory-illusion,  alter-
ing or  giving  fallacious  definiteness  to  the  recollection  of  an  apparition.^

This  hypothesis  is,  I  think,  supported  by  the  two  following  cases,
in  each  of  which  there  is  a  semi-identification  of  the  phantasm
before  its  counterpart  is  finally  fixed  upon,  which  would  hardly
have  been  the  case,  I  think,  had  the  resemblance  ultimately  dis-
covered been  real  and  complete.  (P.  ^.)  A  gentleman  tells  us
that  he  woke  suddenly  in  the  middle  of  the  night  "  and  saw  the  form
of  a  man,  apparently  dressed  in  a  black  frock  coat  of  clerical  cut,
tightly  buttoned  up,  standing  motionless  and  silent  at  the  foot  of  the
bed,  when  after  a  short  pause  he  moved  slowly  and  silently  towards  the
door  and  disappeared.  Could  not  next  day  remember  who  the  figure
was  like  but  have  thought  since  that  it  was  more  like  that  of  Mr.  Holt,
(sometime  curate  of  the  parish)  than  of  anyone  else."  After  this  was
written,  on  a  second  visit  some  two  months  after,  he  tells  us,  "As  I  was
strolling  in  the  garden  I  met  and  instantly  recognised  as  an  old
acquaintance  my  spiritual  visitor  at  Easter.  I  shook  hands  with  him
and  was  on  the  point  of  saying,  'When  did  we  meet  last?'  but  checked
myself  in  time,  as  it  instantly  flashed  across  my  mind  that  it  was  my
spiritual  visitor  at  Easter  who  now  stood  before  me  in  the  flesh.
In  course  of  conversation  T  soon  ascertained  that  he  was  coming  to
dine  at  the  Rectory,  and  from  my  sister  I  learnt  his  name  and  the
position  he  held  with  reference  to  my  father,  viz.,  his  being  at  present

^  The  case  is  of  course  evidentially  entirely  different  if  an  apparition,  at  the  time  it  is
seen,  produces  the  impression  of  being  that  of  a  definite  person  unknown  by  sight.  I
know  at  first  hand  of  an  instance  of  this, where  the  apparition  coincided  with  the  death
of  the  person  seen,  and  was  connected  with  that  person  by  the  percipient  before
hearing  of  the  death.  She  had  doubtless  seen  her,  as  they  had  attended  the  same
church,  but  she  did  not  know  her.  Subsequently  she  picked  out  her  photograph
among  a  number  of  other  unknown  ones,  thus  confirming  the  recognition.  I  am  not
.allowed  to  give  this  case  in  more  detail.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


301


his  curate,  but  with  the  right  of  presentation  to  the  Rectory  on  the
next  vacancy. . . . I  never  saw  him  before  or  since. "i

My  second  case  (P.  ~)  was  regarded  by  the  percipient  as  a
premonition.  It  perhaps  supports  my  hypothesis  more  strongly  than
the  last  because  the  unrecognised  phantasm  was  ultimately  identified
as  an  acquaintance,  and  might,  therefore,  have  been  recognised  from
the  beginning.

A  lady  writes  : —

One  evening,  about  10  years  ago,  I  lay  on  the  sofa  dozing.  My  husband,
and  a  friend  who  was  staying  with  us,  were  sitting  in  two  armchairs,  on
either  side  of  the  fire.  Suddenly  I  wakened  and  opened  my  eyes,  saw
opposite  me,  behind  my  friend's  chair,  the  figure  of  a  dead  man,  the  eyes
closed,  head  drooping,  grey  hair  straight  down  the  forehead,  nose  prominent,
mouth  fallen  in,  face  drawn.  The  figure  is  plainly  before  my  eyes  even  now.
I  stared  at  it  mute  and  motionless,  for  fully  a  moment  or  more.  I  faintly
remember  thinking  it  was  an  optical  delusion.  I  was  perfectly  composed,  I
withdrew  my  eyes,  and  when  I  looked  back  the  figure  had  gone.  I  told  my
friend  in  a  day  or  two  about  what  I  had  seen,  and  mentioned  a  person  whom
I  fancied  the  face  resembled,  but  I  vainly  tried  to  make  sure  of  any  real
likeness.  About  five  weeks  afterwards,  my  husband  was  one  evening  called
out  of  the  room,  when  he  returned  he  told  us  Mr.  De  Gernon  had  never
returned  home  since  he  had  dined  with  a  friend,  after  the  day's  hunt,  two
days  previously.  That  week,  his  body  was  found  in  the  river  ;  he  had  been
dro-svned  crossing  a  swollen  ford.

I  then  recognised  the  face  and  figure  I  had  seen,  it  was  a  perfect  portrait
of  De  Gernon,  fixed,  and  drawn  in  death.

I  must  admit  that  it  requires  some  straining  of  this  hypothesis —
that  the  recollection  of  unrecognised  apparitions  is  not  a  very  definite
one — to  extend  it  to  the  rare  cases  where  the  apparition  is  gazed  at
for  minutes  instead  of  seconds,  and  it  is  therefore  with  some  hesitation
that  I  apply  it  to  a  curious  case,  (P.  '^-^,)  where  a  lady  sits  opposite  to
3,  phantom  gentleman,  for — as  she  believes — several  minutes,  in  a
Metropolitan  Railway  carriage,  and  that  evening  identifies  him
at  the  theatre  as  one  of  the  actors.  But  the  case  is  so  isolated  that,
provisionally  at  any  rate,  we  are,  I  think,  justified  in  viewing  the
recognition  with  some  scepticism.  In  any  case  this  experience  hardly
comes  under  the  head  of  premonitions  as  I  have  defined  them.

It  may  be  worth  remarking  that  a  description  written  befoi'ehand
of  an  unrecognised  phantasm  can  hardly  ever  prove  the  reality  of  a
subsequent  recognition  ;  for  it  is  practically  impossible  to  describe  any
one  so  that  they  should  be  unmistakably  recognised,  unless  they  have
some  peculiar  deformity  or  scar. The  best  possible  description  of  a

1  It  is  interesting,  though  not  belonging  to  the  subject  of  the  present  paper,  to  note
that  this  apparition  occurred  in  a  room  which,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  had  the
reputation  ef  being  haunted,  but  it  did  not  resemble  the  traditional  ghost  of  the  room.


302


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


person  must  be  equally  like  many  others,  whereas  that  person's  appear-
ance in  reality  is  probably  unique.

SYMBOLIC  VISUAL  HALLUCINATIONS.

We  have  next  to  consider  a  class  of  symbolic  hallucinations.  The
following  case,  which  is  the  best  visual  case  of  the  kind  we  have,  will
explain  what  I  mean.  It  is  from  Mrs.  Welman,  now  dead,  and  was
written  in  1884. (P.  478.)

There  is  a  tradition  in  my  mother's  family  that  before  a  death  a  large
black  dog  often  appears  to  some  of  the  relations.  I  was  going  down  stairs,
about  dinner  time,  one  winter's  evening  in  1877.  The  lamps  were  lighted,
and  as  I  turned  into  one  of  the  passages  leading  to  the  staircase,  I  saw  a  large
black  dog  walking  noiselessly  before  me.  I  thought,  in  the  dim  light,  it
might  be  one  of  our  collie  dogs,  and  called  "Laddie,"  but  it  did  not  turn  or
make  any  sign.  I  followed  it,  feeling  uncomfortable,  and  was  still  more
startled  when,  on  getting  downstairs,  every  trace  of  the  dog  had  disappeared,
and  yet  every  door  was  shut.

I  said  nothing  about  it  to  any  one,  but  often  thought  of  it.  Two  or  three
days  later  I  heard  from  Ireland  of  the  unexpected  death  of  an  aunt,  my
mother's  sister,  in  consequence  of  an  accident.

Mrs.  Welman's  sister  who  sent  us  this  case  says  it  may  be  depended
upon  as  "  Mrs.  Welman  is  not  at  all  a  fanciful  person  about  such
things,  and  also  anyone  who  knew  the  gallery,  stairs  and  hall  at  Norton
Manor,  with  heavy  swing  doors  shutting  off  the  other  part  of  the  house,
would  see  how  quite  impossible  it  would  be  for  a  real  dog  to  disappear
in  the  way  this  one  did."

A  single  case  of  this  kind  can  have  little  evidential  weight,  from
the  absence  of  any  manifest  relation  between  the  hallucination  and  the
event  which  it  is  supposed  to  prefigure.  But  it  would  be  quite  possible
that  such  cases  might  become  evidentially  important  through  frequency
of  recurrence.  For  this  they  should  be  recorded  with  their  date  before
fulfilment :  if  they  really  recur  in  the  experience  of  particular  individuals
and  families,  the  keeping  of  such  records  ought  to  be  easy,  and  were
they  kept  it  would  soon  be  settled  beyond  a  doubt  how  far  the  time-
relation  between  the  phantasm  and  the  death  is  definite  and  invariable.
What  has  to  be  proved  is  (1)  that  the  particular  phantasm  is  not  met
with  in  the  family  except  in  connection  with  a  death  ;  (2)  that  the
interval  allowed  between  it  and  the  death  is  sufficiently  short  in  relation
to  the  number  of  people  whose  deaths  may  be  foreshadowed  to  make  it
decidedly  unlikely  that  one  of  these  would  die  in  that  interval ;  (3)
that  it  is  not  experienced  only  when  there  is  expectation  of  death.
It  is  important  to  record  the  experience  before  fulfilment  to  avoid
all  unconscious  bias  in  deciding  after  the  event  whether  the  previous
experience  was  the  real  symbol  or  not.  For  instance,  if  the  symbol
is  a  black  dog,  it  is  important  to  decide  before  the  event  symbolised


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


303


has  had  time  to  occur  whether  what  is  seen  is  the  black  dog  or  only  a
shadow.

These  remarks  apply  not  only  to  visual  symbols — black  dogs,
phantom  carriages,  &c. — but  to  auditory  ones,  shrieks,  knocks,  &c.,  of
which  two  or  three  cases  will  be  found  further  on,  and  to  recurrent
symbolic  dreams.

Death  is  not  the  only  event  that  may  be  symbolically  foreshadowed,
but  among  the  visual  and  auditory  hallucinations  we  have  collected,
the  only  other  event  thus  indicated  is  almost  the  same  as  death,  namely,
funerals — and  as  a  transition  from  one  to  the  other  I  may  quote  a  case
which  at  least  seems  to  have  been  a  curious  coincidence.  (P.  55.)  It
was  sent  to  us  by  the  Rev.  P.  A.  L.  Wood,  Rector  of  Newent,
Gloucestershire,  an  Associate  of  the  Society.  The  writer,  Miss  H.,  does
not  wish  her  name  to  be  mentioned.

My  mother  and  I  were  once  driving  in  Somersetshire  with  an  old  lady  of
nearly  80  years  of  age.  She  suddenly  called  to  the  servants  to  stop  the
carriage  and  draw  up  to  the  side  of  the  road,  which  was  done,  though  we
wondered  at  such  an  unaccountable  order.  "Now  you  can  go  on,"  she  said
presently,  and  added,  turning  to  my  mother,  "  I  always  like  to  stoj)  while  a
funeral  passes."  The  road  was  a  long,  straight  one,  and  quite  emf)ty  of  even
a  foot-passenger,  so  we  laughed  at  the  old  lady  and  told  her  so  ;  and  she
repeated,  ' '  Well,  it  is  very  odd,  I  certainly  tliought  I  saw  one.  How
foolish  the  servants  must  have  thought  me."  The  next  day  occurred  the
■perfectly  sudden  death  of  her  most  intimate  friend  and  nearest  neighbour —
an  old  gentleman  who  used  to  read  to  her  every  day.

In  answer  to  questions.  Miss  H.  writes  : —

The  drive  took  place  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  on  a  fine  bright
day.  We  were  staying  at  Weston-super-Mare,  where  the  old  lady  and
gentleman  lived,  so  I  heard  of  his  death  myself  from  the  old  lady's  daughter,
the  day  after  it  haj^pened.  She  reminded  me  Jand  my  mother  then  of  the
old  lady's  idea  of  two  days  before.

The  foreshadowing  of  funerals  belongs  mainly  to  a  curious  set  of
Welsh  stories,  collected  by  Miss  Mary  Curtis,  an  Associate  of  the
Society,  and  which  seem  to  me  to  form  an  interesting  contribution  to
folk-lore.  In  Wales,  as  is  well  known,  funerals  excite  more  interest  in
neighbours  and  mere  acquaintances  than  they  do  here,  and  are  often
accompanied  by  more  uncontrolled  signs  of  emotion,  and  we  must
account  thus,  I  suppose,  for  the  premonitory  interest  centering  in  the
funeral  rather  than  in  the  death.  It  appears  to  be  a  common  belief  —
at  any  rate  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Laugharne  where  these  stories
were  collected — that  phantasmal  lights  are  often  seen  passing  along
the  path  to  be  afterwards  taken  by  a  coffin  ;  that  sounds  of  the  funeral
— weeping,  singing,  trampling — are  phantasmally  rehearsed  beforehand,
and  that  sometimes — but  we  have  no  first-hand  accounts  of  this — an
apparition  of  the  person  about  to  die  is  seen  pacing  his  coffin's  future

X


304


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


course.  We  have  even  one  first-hand  account  of  how  five-and-twenty
years  ago  a  phantom  funeral  was  seen  with  the  same  mourners,  tkc,  as
afterwards  took  part  in  the  real  one ;  but  as  the  seers  were  two  little
boys  of  eight  and  nine,  we  can  hardly  rely  on  the  identification.  In
second  and  third-hand  accounts  these  phantom  funerals  sometimes
Jsnock  down  and  bruise  the  unfortunate  and  involuntary  witnesses.
Extravagances  like  this  last  find  no  place  in  first-hand  stories,  but  it  is
curious  that  we  have  five  first-hand  accounts  of  the  lights,  four  of  which
are  Welsh,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  moving  lights  are  a  common  form
of  hallucination  elsewhere.

Regarded  as  evidence  for  the  reality  of  premonitions  these  narratives
■do  not  seem  to  me  to  come  to  much.  Funerals  are  likely  to  pass  along
most  roads  sooner  or  later,  especially  when,  as  seems  to  be  the  case  in
Wales,  people  are  frequently  not  buried  in  the  nearest  burial  ground,
but  taken  to  considerable  distances.  Indefinite  time  seems  to  be
allowed  for  tlie  fulfilment,  and,  as  the  French  proverb  says  :  Tout  vient
■a  qui  sait  attendre.  The  individual  who  is  to  die  is  not  indicated,  and
only  in  one  case  his  residence  ;  and  in  that  one  case,  where  the  seer  one
evening  observes  lights  coming  out  of  two  houses  in  which  deaths  occur
at  different  intervals  of  some  weeks  afterwards,  we  have  no  reason  to
think  that  the  deaths  were  at  all  unlikely.

I  sliould  hardly  have  discussed  these  unsatisfactory  premonitions
here  were  it  not  for  the  curious  prevalence  of  this  particular  kind
in  one  locality,  and  for  the  fact  that  there  is  one  case — not,  however,
from  Wales — where  there  does  seem  to  have  been  a  striking  coinci-
dence. (P.  484.)  It  is  from  Mr.  Archibald  Maclachlan,  Wemyss  Bay
Steamboat  Company  : —

When  living  in  a  farmhouse  above  Glendaruel,  Argyleshire,  one  night,
about  11  p.m.,  I  went  out  of  doors  just  before  going  to  bed.  The  house
stood  on  a  hillside,  the  road  going  straight  down.  I  saw  a  bluish  kind  of  light
coming  up  the  road.  I  wondered  who  could  be  there.  The  light  came
straight  up  and  I  saw  there  was  nobody  there.  A  little  alarmed,  I  entered  a
gate  leading  from  the  road  to  the  house  ;  the  light  followed.  I  entered  the
porcli  ;  it  passed  along  the  front  of  the  house  before  me,  and  was  hidden  by
the  side  of  the  porch.  I  had  tapped  at  the  window  for  those  inside  to  come
out,  but  none  were  quick  enough  to  see  it  distinctly.

Next  day  a  coffin  containing  the  body  of  an  uncle  who  had  died  suddenly
and  of  whose  death  we  were  not  aware,  came  up  the  road,  through  the  gate,
past  the  porch,  and  was  taken  into  the  house  through  the  window  on  the
■other  side  of  the  porch. I  have  seen  fire-balls,  but  never  a  light  like  this.

(Signed) Archibald  Maclachlan.

I  think  we  ought  to  allow  here  for  a  certain  probability  that  if  a
coffin  did  enter  or  leave  the  liouse  it  would  be  taken  that  way,  so  that
if  the  connection  between  lights  and  coffins  occurred  to  Mr.  Maclachlan
when  he  saw  the  light  his  imagination  might  be  influenced  accordingly.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


305


If  this  were  so,  the  premonitory  element  of  the  vision  may  be
explained  away ;  but  the  coincidence  of  a  death-suggesting  appearance
with  an  unexpected  death  would  remain.

AUDITORY  HALLUCINATIONS  WHERE  DISTINCT  IDEAS  ARE  CONVEYED

IN  WORDS.

These  are  all  the  visual  cases,  which  appear  to  me  noteworthy  in
the  way  of  evidence.  The  purely  auditory  hallucinations  fall  into  very
similar  classes  ;  namely  ( 1 )  cases  where  distinct  ideas  are  conveyed  in
words  ;  (2)  cases  where  sounds  to  be  afterwards  heard  in  reality  are
phantasmally  heard  ;  (3)  symbolic  sounds.

Of  the  tirst  and  best  class  we  have,  I  think,  only  four  specimens,  and
these  not  very  strong  ones.  The  following  is  perhaps  the  strongest.
It  is  from  Mrs.  Morrison,  of  131,  Cornwall-road,  Westbourne  Park,  W.,
with  whom  Mr.  Grurney  thoroughly  discussed  the  case.  She  has  besides
had  some  dreams  which  may  have  been  veridical,  but  hardly,  I  think,
premonitory.  The  following  incident  occurred  in  Province  Wellesley,
Straits  Settlements,  in  the  East  Indies,  in  May,  1878  (P.  377),  and  the
account  was  sent  to  us  in  1882.  After  mentioning  several  bereave-
ments, Mrs.  Morrison  continues  : —

And  last  of  all  a  sweet  little  girl,  tlie  pride  of  its  parents'  hearts,  was
taken.  Some  days  prior  to  the  child  s  illness,  I  was  lying  awake  one  morning
when  I  distinctly  heard  a  voice  say,  ' '  If  there  is  darkness  at  the  11th  hour
there  will  be  death."  In  alarm  I  started  up  in  bed  and  the  same  words  were
slowly  and  deliberately  repeated.

Naturally  enough,  when,  about  a  week  after,  the  child  was  taken  seriously
ill,  I  watched  with  perturbed  feelings  and  grave  anxiety  the  aspect  of  the  sky
day  and  night,  the  moon  being  at  the  full  just  then.  Two  or  three  days  passed ;
the  little  one  hovered  between  life  and  death  ;  above,  the  sun  blazed  with
unmitigated  fervour,  relentless  heat,  no  sign  of  cloud  or  disturbance  of  the
atmosphere  in  any  way.  Twice  in  the  course  of  every  24  hours  was  11  o'clock
looked  for  with  trembling  ai^prehension.  At  last,  after  more  than  a  week  of
this  cloudless  weather,  a  few  minutes  before  11  in  the  morning  a  squall  arose
with  extraordmary  suddenness  ;  servants  flew  to  close  the  Venetian  shutters,
making  the  inside  of  the  liouse  extremely  dark.  The  sky  became  black  with
clouds,  and  my  heart  sank.  That  day,  soon  after  one  o'clock,  the  child's  spirit
quitted  its  little  mortal  frame  to  enter  a  life  of  never-ending  joy.  I  cannot  be
mistaken  as  to  the  time  when  the  darkness  came,  as  I  had  to  consult  my
watch  a  little  time  before  in  order  to  give  the  child  medicine.

The  fact  that  "the  11th  hour"  is  a  quasi-proverbial  phrase,  and
likely  perhaps  to  occur  casually  to  the  mind,  detracts  somewhat  from
the  evidential  value  of  this  story,  but  it  remains  a  striking  one,  and
perhaps  not  the  less  so  from  the  somewhat  bizarre  character  of  the
prophecy.

SOUNDS, AFTERWARDS  HEARD  IN  REALITY, PHANTASMALLY  HEARD.

I  pass  on  to  a  specimen  of  class  (2) — a  rehearsal  of  future  sounds.

X  2


306


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


It  was  sent  to  us  by  Mrs.  Bettany,  of  2  Eckington-villas.  Asli-
bourne-grove,  Dulwich,  who  has  had  several  experiences  apparently
exhibiting  spontaneous  telepathy,  of  which  one  or  two  are  given  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living.  It  is  conceivable  that  this  case  may  also
have  been  telepathic,  the  traveller  being  the  agent. (P.  489.)

October,  1885.

On  the  night  of  October  26tli,  1876,  I  was  aroused  from  sleep  by  a  sound
like  stones  thrown  at  my  bedroom  window.  I  got  up,  opened  my  window,
and  thought  I  heard  the  voice  of  a  friend  who  was  many  miles  away  ;  no  one
was  there.  The  next  night  the  same  sound  occurred  at  the  same  hour.  I  did
not  go  to  the  window  till  the  sound  was  twice  repeated.  Then  I  opened  the
window,  and  found  that  very  friend  had  arrived  late  and  quite  unexpected
from  abroad.  He  used  the  exact  words  I  had  thought  I  lieard  the  night
before,  at  which  time  he  had  not  reached  England.

Jeanie  Gwynn  Bettant.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bettany  says  : —

The  house  where  the  circumstance  occurred  stands  in  its  own  grounds  at
a  considerable  distance  from  the  high  road,  in  the  country,  of  course.

The  words  sjjoken  were  three  in  number  :  they  were  spoken  in  French,
and  merely  explained  who  the  person  was.

I  mentioned  it  to  the  housemaid,  whose  room  was  next  to  mine,  and
asked  her  if  she  had  heard  it ;  she  said  "  No,"  and  was  much  surprised  when
the  thing  repeated  itself  in  reality  next  night.

In  few,  if  any,  of  the  remaining  auditory  cases  are  the  sounds  and
the  description  of  them  of  such  a  character  as  to  warrant  us  in
assuming  that  they  were  not  real  sounds  misinterpreted.  [See  on  this
subject,  Phantasms,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  12-5-127.]  Knocks,  sounds  of  sawing
of  timber,  cries  and  screams,  rustlings,  sounds  of  carriage  wheels,  even
funeral  sounds  such  as  I  mentioned  above,  lamentations,  and  cries  for
help!  help  !  help  !  if  sufficiently  distant,  may  all  possibly  be  misinterpre-
tations of  real  sounds,  whether  they  be  regarded  by  the  percipients
as  a  rehearsal  of  a  sound  subsequently  heard,  or  as  symbolic  of  an
approaching  death.

SYMBOLIC  SOUNDS.

There  are,  however,  two  striking  cases  of  a  shriek  recurring
before  several  deaths.  The  first  (P.  416)  was  sent  in  1883  by  Mrs.
Levey,  7,  Castle  Terrace,  Haverfordwest.

On  the  night  of  27th  November,  1836,  my  mother  lay  dying,  at  9  o'clock,
on  a  night  of  great  rain.  There  came  a  fearful  wail  of  a  woman's  voice,  as  if
swaying  to  and  fro  past  the  windows.  I  ran  to  the  window,  but  no  human
being  could  be  there,  as  the  room  was  two-pair  stairs  up,  and  no  houses  near.
She  died  at  half-past  10.

On  the  evening  of  the  9th  August,  1844,  my  two  sisters  and  self  were
sitting  together,  when  a  fearful  cry  came  from  the  street.  We  ran  to  the
window — no  one  to  be  seen — no  house  near — a  moonlight  night.  Our  eldest
brother,  a  doctor,  died  very  suddenly  on  the  10th.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


307


My  father  and  family  sat  at  dinner  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  February,
1848.  The  same  fearful  cry  or  wail  filled  our  house.  I  mentally  said,  "If
that  happened  in  the  country,  they  would  say  someone  at  the  table  would
die."  My  youngest  brother,  23,  died  quite  suddenly  at  8  o'clock,  on  the
morning  of  the  5th.  Same  occurrence  upon  my  father's  death  in  1867.
Same  at  the  death  of  sister  in  1869.  Same  at  death  of  next  brother,  a  doctor
of  medicine,  in  1870.

I  had  just  awoke,  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  in  month  of  June,
1877.  I  was  horrified  to  hear  my  four  young  nieces  on  the  stairs  crying  in
the  most  fearful  manner.  I  got  up  to  light  a  candle,  as  the  room  was  dark,
but  opened  my  door,  and,  to  my  surprise,  no  person  was  there,  and  it  was
broad  daylight.  All  the  inmates  of  the  house  were  asleep.  Soon  after,  on
the  20th  June,  a  letter  came  from  the  captain  of  the  ship  my  young  nephew
was  coming  from  Canada  in,  to  say  that  three  young  men  fell  overboard  in  a
storm  ;  two  were  saved,  but  he  was  lost.

Upon  this  occasion  the  house  dog  howled  in  a  most  fearful  manner.  The
house-mother  went  down  and  found  him  crouched  down,  hair  all  on  end,  in
the  coal-cellar.  She  took  him  in  her  arms  and  kept  him  at  the  fire,  he
shivering  to  death.

The  matter  did  not  occur  to  me  as  supernatural  until  the  inquest  upon
my  youngest  brother,  when  a  lady  of  the  house  said,  "  Oh,  did  you  hear  that
most  awful  cry  of  a  woman  last  evening  ?  "  I  made  no  remark,  but  felt  that,
having  so  many  times  heard  it,  it  must  be  what  we  call  in  Ireland  "The
Banshee."  I  had  often  in  my  young  days  heard  people  speak  of  it,  but  did
not  believe  it.

I  may  remark  that  upon  the  deaths  of  the  three  wlio  died  suddenly,  it  was
more  fearful  than  any.

Frajtces  Levey.

In  the  last  instance  given  by  Mrs.  Levey,  it  might  be  suggested
that  the  house  dog  was  suddenly  taken  ill  and  himself  made  all  the
noise,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  account  for  the  series.

Another  striking  "  Banshee "  case  (P.  634),  though  with  longer
intervals  between  the  shrieks  and  the  death  than  in  the  one  just
quoted,  comes  to  us  from  Mrs.  Treloar,  of  River,  Dover,  and  her  sister,
Mrs.  Gardiner.  The  following  account  was  taken  down  by  Mr.  Myers,
from  a  conversation  with  the  two  ladies  in  April,  1888,  and  afterwards
revised  and  signed  as  correct  by  them.  Parts  of  a  previous  letter  of
Mrs.  Treloar's  are  introduced  into  the  account.

In  June,  1863,  we  both  were  awoke  from  sleep  at  home  at  Weeford
Rectory,  Staffordshire,  by  a  wailing  sound.  We  went  all  over  the  house,
which  stands  quite  alone  in  open  country,  i  but  could  discover  nothing.  On
this  occasion  neither  our  mother  nor  any  servants  were  woke  by  the  noise.
But  we  found  a  favourite  bulldog,  a  very  courageous  animal,  trembling  with
terror,  with  his  nose  thrust  into  some  billets  of  firewood  which  were  kept
under  the  stairs. On  June  28th,  1863,  our  mother  died.

1  Mr.  Myers  was  shown  a  photograph  of  the  house  with  garden  and  fields  round  it,
which  accords  with  this  description.


308


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


The  next  occasion  was  by  far  the  most  startling.  About  the  end  of
August,  1879,  we  were  at  our  father's  rectory.  He  had  been  an  invalid  for
some  time,  but  was  not  worse  than  usual,  and,  in  fact,  performed  service  on
Sunday,  31st  August,  though  he  died  on  Sejitember  9th.  On  a  night,  then,
towards  the  end  of  August,  we  had  all  gone  to  bed,  viz. ,  our  father,  we  two
daughters  in  sejijarate  rooms,  our  brother  F.  H.  Cowjiland,  since  deceased,
a  groom,  a  cook,  and  a  young  housemaid,  sleeping  m  different  parts  of  the
house,  which  was  large  for  a  country  rectory.  The  night  was  calm  ;  there
were  no  trains  anywhere  near,  no  other  houses,  no  screech-owls,  no  possibility
of  passers-by,  and  ordinarily,  all  was  perfectly  still.  But  on  that  night
between  12  and  1  o'clock  every  person  in  the  house,  except  our  father,  was
awoke  by  a  terrible  sound  of  shrieking  or  wailing,  unlike  anything  which  we
have  ever  heard,  except  on  the  other  occasions  here  mentioned,  but  louder
than  at  any  other  time.  It  seemed  to  come  from  the  passage  leading  past
our  father's  door.  My  sister  and  I  leapt  out  of  bed — no  one  could  have
slept  through  such  a  sound — struck  matches  and  lit  candles,  and  rushed  out
without  even  waiting  to  put  dressing-go"VTOS  on.  We  met  in  the  passage,  and
there,  too,  met  my  brother  and  the  three  servants,  all  equally  terrified  with
ourselves.  The  wail  or  shriek  seemed  borne  on  a  wind  (though  the  night
was  still)  ;  it  seemed  inside  the  house,  among  the  rafters,  and  after  a  time,
which  might  perhaps  be  a  minute  or  more,  it  seemed  to  pass  out  at  a  window
and  died  away.  The  bulldog  ran  under  a  bed.  In  great  alarm,  we  went
into  our  father's  room,  but  he  was  sleeping  peacefully — not  heavily,  but  quite
undisturbed  by  the  noise.  Next  morning  we  cautiously  alluded  to  it,  but  he
had  heard  nothing.  We  think  it  absolutely  impossible  that  anyone  in
ordinary  sleep  could  have  slept  through  that  noise,  and  can  only  supj)ose
that  the  noise  in  some  way  did  not  sound  to  him.  He  died  about  a  fortnight
afterwards,  September  9th,  1879.  With  regard  to  the  gloomy  character  of
the  noise  heard,  we  may  add  that  our  father,  though  personally  happy  to
depart,  and  full  of  faith,  was  for  our  sakes  very  reluctant  to  die  just  then,
knowing  that  his  death  would  leave  us  in  much  trouble  of  various  kinds.  ^

In  1885  I  (Mrs.  Treloar)  was  married  and  living  in  my  husband's  house,
The  Firs,  Bromyard.  Mrs.  Gardiner  was  staying  with  us.  My  brother,
F.  H.  Cowpland,  was  living  five  miles  off  at  the  Upper  House,  Bishop's
Frome,  Staffordshire.  He  was  not  ill  in  the  middle  of  May.  But  we  two
sisters,  Emily  Corbett,  and  other  servants  (Mr.  Treloar  was  away  from  home)

1  In  a  letter  written  in  March,  188S,  Mr.s.  Treloar  thus  describes  the  incident :
"  At  between  1  and  2  o'clock  we  wei-e  all  asleep,  when  the  most  extraordinary
sound  awoke  the  household.  I  got  up,  lit  my  candle,  went  into  my  sister's  room  and
found  her  up  also.  The  sound  as  I  went  there  seemed  to  rush  past  me  and  was  like  an
awful  howling  followed  by  shriek  upon  shriek,  accompanied  by  what  seemed  to  be  a
strong  wind,  although  everything  out  of  doors  was  perfectly  still.  My  sister  and  I
ran  to  my  brother's  room  and  there  found  him  up  ;  the  three  servants  also  were  coming
down  the  stairs  from  the  top  of  the  house.  The  cook  burst  into  tears  and  said,  '  Oh,
the  master  !  the  master  !  That  is  his  warning.'  The  sound  was  still  continuing.  We
went  into  my  father's  room  and  there  found  him  sleeping  most  peacefully. . .  .

A  curious  circumstance  connected  with  it  was,  we  had  three  dogs  sleeping  in  my
sister's  and  my  bedrooms  and  they  were  all  cowering  down  with  affright,  their  bristles
standing  straight  up  ;  one— a  bulldog — was  under  the  bed  and  refused  to  come  out,
and  when  removed  was  found  to  be  trembling  all  over. "


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions ■  309'


again  heard  the  wail  at  night,  though  not  so  loudly  as  before.  We  got  up
from  bed  and  looked  about,  but  could  find  nothing.  On  May  26th,  1885,
our  brother  died.

Again,  at  the  end  of  August,  1885,  I  (Mrs.  Treloar),  Emily  Corbett,  and
other  servants  not  now  traceable,  heard  the  same  sound.  The  Firs,  however,
was  not  so  solitary  a  house  as  Weeford  Rectory,  and  the  noise  was  not  so
overwhelming  as  before  my  father's  death.  I  endeavoured  to  persuade  myself
that  it  might  have  been  caused  by  men  in  the  road  ;  but  I  felt  very  uneasy
about  Mrs.  Gardiner,  who  had  gone  to  stay  at  Bettws-y-Coed,  being  rather
out  of  health.  Mi's.  Gardiner  is  still  alive  and  well,  but  another  sister,  Miss
Annie  Cowpland,  who  was  perfectly  well  when  the  waUing  was  heard,  died
about  a  week  later  from  diphtheria.

Emily  Corbett,  the  servant  above  mentioned,  cannot  write,  but  the
part  containing  particulars  of  what  she  heard  was  read  over  to  her
and  she  stated  they  were  cori-ect,  and  affixed  her  mark.

Mrs.  Treloar  saw  an  apparition  of  this  same  sister  at  the  time,  so
far  as  can  be  ascertained,  of  her  sickening  with  the  virulent  form  of
diphtheria,  of  which,  in  a  very  few  days  she  died  ;  and  an  apparition
of  her  was  seen,  apparently  simultaneously,  or  almost  simultaneously,  in
another  room,  by  a  niece  of  hers.  It  is  also  interesting  to  note,  as  appar-
ently showing  a  family  tendency,  that  Mrs.  Treloar's  mother  three
times  saw  apparitions  of  people  at  the  time  of  their  death.  Accounts
of  all  these  cases  are  printed  in  the  Journal  for  December,  1888.

The  following  case  deserves  consideration  in  connection  with  the
two  just  given.  The  narrator  does  not  ^vish  her  name  to  be  published,
nor  does  her  sister,  who,  however,  confirms  the  account. ^  (P.  63.)

The  incident  here  narrated  by  one  of  the  witnesses,  occurred  in  a  country
house  on  the  northern  coast  of  Cornwall,  where  dwelt  (and  still  dwells)  one
of  those  old  Cornish  families  whose  name  bespeaks  their  Celtic  origia.
Though  it  happened  long  ago,  many  are  now  living  who  would  not  hke  to  see
their  name  in  print  in  comiection  with  so  strange  a  story,  therefore  it  cannot
be  made  public.

At  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  one  of  the  sons,  a  boy  11  years  of  age,  was
iU  of  scarlet  fever,  but  his  condition  had  so  much  improved  that  his  father
and  sisters  confidently  expected  his  recovery  ;  an  opinion  which  was  not
shared  by  one  at  least  of  the  doctors,  nor  by  his  mother  and  aunt,  who  were
his  devoted  nurses.  John  himself  had,  from  the  first,  looked  Death  in  the
face,  and  prepared  to  meet  him.

On  a  bright  afternoon  in  the  end  of  March,  the  setting  sun  was  lightmg  up
the  west  room,  in  which  three  of  John's  sisters  and  his  next  brother,  young
people  between  the  ages  of  10  and  20,  were  indulging  in  an  animated  discus-
sion. They  had  just  come  wp  from  dinner,  at  which  their  father  had  spoken
with  some  scorn  of  the  unwillingness  of  the  young  doctor,  who  had  been  there
that  morning,  to  admit  decided  improvement  in  his  patient  ;  although  he

1  Another  curious  instance  of  a  violent  and  unexplained  noise  disturbing  a  whole
household  is  described  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Case  302),  Vol.  II.,  p.  149,  and  is
worth  referring  to.


310


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


allowed  that  both  strengtli  and  appetite  had  increased.  Their  mother  had
made  no  rej)ly  to  their  father's  sanguine  expectations,  but  sat  silent  with  tears
in  her  eyes.  The  young  peojile  took  their  father's  view,  and  were  indignant
that  any  one  sliould  doubt  John's  recovery.  One  of  them  made  a  satirical
remark,  at  which  they  all  laughed.

Before  that  laugh  ceased,  there  rang  through  the  room,  as  if  uttered  by  a
person  standing  on  the  landing  at  the  open  door,  a  loud  and  piercing  shriek;
then  a  pause,  and  another  shriek  ;  after  another  pause,  a  third,  louder,
deeper,  and  ending  in  a  gurgling  rattle,  like  the  last  efibrt  of  expiring  nature.
Horrified  indeed  they  all  were  ;  time  can  never  efface  the  remembrance  of
those  awful  sounds.

Their  father,  who  was  alone  in  the  drawing-room  on  the  other  side  of  the
hall,  came  hastily  across  to  the  foot  of  the  staircase,  and  calling  to  one  of  his
daughters,  who  he  knew  was  in  the  west  room,  asked,  ' '  What  was  the
matter;  who  was  screaming  in  that  dreadful  manner  ?  "  Immediate  inquiries
were  made  by  his  orders,  for  he  would  not  allow  for  a  moment  there  could  be
any  but  a  natural  cause.  The  servants  were  at  tea  in  a  distant  part  of  the
house,  and  they  all  gave  the  same  account.  They  had  heard  three  shrieks,
uttered  by  a  woman's  voice,  which  appeared  to  come  from  the  hall  or  west
room  ;  certainly  not  from  their  part  of  the  liouse.

The  youngest  child,  two  and  a-half  years  old,  was  with  her  nurse  in  a
room  not  far  from  the  west  room.  She  asked  in  great  astonishment,  ' '  Who
screams,  Ellen  ? I  didn't  scream."

Tlie  strangest  part  remains  to  be  told.  The  sick-room  was  so  situated  that
sounds  in  the  hall  and  staircase  were  audible  there  ;  and  soon  after,  the
short,  single  bark  with  which  an  old  spaniel  always  announced  the  arrival  of
the  doctors,  was  heard  there.  But  tlie  awful  shrieks  which  ran  through
every  other  part  of  the  house  were  not  heard.  John,  and  his  mother  and
aunt  who  were  with  him,  were  quite  uncrmscious  that  anything  had  happened.
Three  weeks  after,  John  died,  strong  in  faith  and  hope  ;  for  him,  no  warning
was  needed.

Every  attempt  to  discover  a  natural  cause  was  made,  but  in  vain,  by  those
most  anxious  to  deprive  the  circumstance  of  significance.  No  other
interpretation  could  be  given  but  that  it  was  a  warning  specially  sent  to  those
who  needed  it  ;  and  its  inmiediate  effect  was  to  produce  a  state  of  mind  in
tliose  who  heard  it,  which  prepared  them  for  the  event  that  was  to  follow.

Fifteen  years  after,  when  the  beloved  youngest  daughter  lay  in  the  sleep
from  which  she  never  awoke,  sounds  of  hysterical  wailing  and  sobbing  went
about  the  house,  but  she  heard  them  not.  Two  of  the  sons  died  abroad,  but
no  warning  sound  was  heard  ;  nor,  when  the  aged  father  and  mother
departed.

Such  are  the  facts  ;  who  shall  interpret  them  1

It  will  be  observed  that  most  of  these  "  Banshees  "  were  heard  by
several  people,  so  that,  if  not  real  natural  sounds,  they  must  have  been
collective  hallucinations,  on  which  see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Chapter  XVIII. This  concludes  the  class  of  auditory  hallucinations.

VERBAL  PROPHECIES.

From  my  third  class  of  cases — that  of  verbal  prophecies  by  persons


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


311


professing  to  see  into  the  future — evidence  of  a  definite  and  unam-
biguous kind  might  be  expected  ;  but  we  have  only  three  cases  at
first-hand,  of  which  the  following  (P.  7)  appears  to  me  to  be  the
strongest.  The  lady  who  communicated  it  to  us  (in  1882),  and  who
desired  that  her  name  should  not  be  given,  says  that  when  in  America
she  was  taken  by  a  Spiritualist  friend  to  a  medium's  house.  She  then
continues  : —

Though  I  had  only  arrived  in  Boston  the  day  before,  her  guides  instantly
recognised  that  I  came  over  the  water,  and  opened  up,  not  only  my  past  life,
but  a  great  deal  of  the  future.  They  said  I  had  a  picture  of  my  family  with
me,  and  on  producing  it,  the  medium  told  me  (in  trance)  that  two  of  my
children  were  in  the  spirit  world,  and,  pointing  to  one  son  in  the  group,  she
said,  "  You  will  soon  have  this  one  there;  he  will  die  suddenly, — but  you
must  not  weep  for  him  ;  he  will  be  taken  from  the  evil  to  come.  It  is  not
often  permitted  to  tell  these  things,  but  we  see  it  is  best  for  you,  that  you
may  know  it  is  no  accident."

I  had  not  been  home  many  weeks,  before  my  son,  a  brave  boy  of  17,  was
kUled  at  a  game  of  football.

Mr.  Podmore  was  shown  a  copy  of  the  photograph  in  question,
which  represented  a  group  of  eight  or  ten  children.

This  case  seems  to  me  remarkable,  but  we  find  in  it  again  the
want  of  detail  which  lessens  the  value  of  so  many  of  the  cases  I
am  quoting,  and  I  fear  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  more  information
about  it.  It  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  the  probability  that  this  true
statement  was  purely  accidental  without  knowing  whether  it  is  picked
out  of  many  things  said  by  the  medium,  of  which  the  larger  part
were  either  easy  to  guess  or  false,  and  have  very  likely  been  forgotten.
It  is  clear  that  if  enough  things  are  said  some  will  in  the  long  run  be
true,  and  my  experience  with  a  medium  of  this  kind^  is  that  a  great
many  guesses  are  made  and  attempts  to  draw  information  from  oneself.
Still  the  pi'ophecy  is  undeniably  a  bold  one,  nor  is  it  the  kind  of
prophecy  which  one  would  suppose  likely  to  be  good  for  the  trade.

The  fourth  class — non-externalised  impressions  of  vai'ious  kinds —
is  not  a  large  one  in  our  collection,  and  as  it  happens  contains  no
case  which  seems  to  me  to  be  worth  quoting  at  the  present  stage  of
the  investigation.

GENERAL  DISCUSSIOX  OF  DREAM-EVIDENCE.

There  remains  to  be  considered  the  e%ddence  from  dreams.  As
already  stated,  about  two-thirds  of  our  first-hand  cases  are  dreams,
and  it  is  on  them  that  the  argument  for  premonitions  mainly  rests,
which  in  itself  puts  the  premonitory  evidence  in  a  lower  rank  than  the

^  Probably  the  medium  concerned in  the  narrative,  but  our  informant  is  not
certain  about  this.


312


07?  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


telepathic.  For  there  are  special  sources  of  weakness  in  dream-
evidence,  which  have  been  so  fully  discussed  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  Chapter  VIII.  (see  especially  pp.  298-300),  that  I  need
not  do  more  than  briefly  indicate  them  here.  The  tirst  is  one  that
occurs  at  once  to  every  educated  person  who  hears  of  premonitory
dreams  : — that  there  are  so  many  dreams  dreamt  every  night  that  some
of  them  must  come  true.  This  objection  does  not  apply — at  least  in
any  obvious  way — to  the  waking  hallucinations  with  which  we  have
hitherto  been  chiefly  concerned.  Such  a  hallucination  is  for  most  persons
who  have  one — including  most  of  our  informants — either  a  singular  or  a
very  rare  experience  :  and  it  is  an  experience  which  is  not  likely  to
be  forgotten.  Hence,  if  any  one  has  a  wa,king  hallucinatory  vision,
suggesting  the  idea  of  death,  of  a  near  relative  then  in  good  health,
and  the  relative  dies  very  soon  after,  the  coincidence  is  at  any  rate  a
remarkable  one  ;  but,  considering  the  immense  number  of  dreams  which
we  must  suppose  to  have  occurred  within  the  period  from  which  our
records  are  taken,  the  mere  fact  that  the  dream  of  a  relative's  death
has  been  soon  followed  by  the  event  is  hardly  worth  noting.

But  this  general  objection  to  the  evidential  value  of  dreams  is  not
insuperable  ;  it  can  be  overcome  if  the  correspondence  between  the
dream  and  the  event  is  sufliciently  definite  and  detailed  :  since  the
probability  that  such  a  correspondence  could  occur  by  accident
diminishes  very  rapidly  with  each  detail  that  is  added.  Here,  however,
we  have  to  notice  a  special  source  of  weakness  in  the  quality  of  dream-
evidence,  which  is  independent  of  the  frequency  of  dreams,  viz.  :  that
our  memory  for  dreams  being  less  vivid  and  less  trustworthy  than  our
memory  for  waking  experiences,  details  are  more  apt  to  be
unconsciously  read  back  into  dreams,  so  that  the  dreams  assume  a
definiteness  and  precision  and  fulness  of  detail  wliich  do  not  really
belong  to  them.  This  source  of  weakness  is  excluded,  if  the  dream
lias  been  told  to  some  one  else  before  the  fulfilment  arrives, — as  is  the
case  in  most  of  the  instances  which  I  am  about  to  give — so  far  as  we
can  rely  on  the  memory  of  the  person  to  whom  it  was  told.  But  this
confirmatory  memory — especially  if  it  has  to  recall  events  some  years
old — must  be  supposed  to  have  not  only  the  average  liability  to  error
which  attaches  to  human  memories  generally,  but  also  a  further
special  liability  to  error  due  to  (1)  the  tendency  we  all  have  to
exaggerate  the  marvellous,  (2)  the  tendency  to  yield  unconsciously  to
the  dreamer's  strong  conviction  that  he  mentioned  before  the  event
what  he  has  only  mentioned  afterwards,  (3)  the  tendency  to  ante-date
the  impression  produced  by  these  subsequent  repetitions.  I  dwell  on  this
liability  to  error  in  the  confirmatory  memory — of  the  effect  of  which
we  had  one  undoubted  and  striking  example  in  collecting  the  evidence
for  Phantasms  of  the  Living — not  because  I  wish  to  exaggerate  it,  but


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


313


in  order  to  emphasise  the  great  advantage,  from  an  investigator's  point
of  view,  of  a  written  record,  in  any  case  of  this  kind,  where  exactness,
in  details  is  fundamentally  important.

There  are  other  ways,  besides  correspondence  of  definite  details,  in
which  the  evidential  weakness  of  dream-evidence  due  to  the  frequency
of  dreams  may  be  at  least  diminished  Thus  if  the  dream  that  appears
premonitory  was  of  a  unique  or  peculiarly  impressive  kind,  it  immedi-
ately falls  into  a  special  class  of  dreams,  much  smaller  than  the
whole  genus  :  so  that  the  probability  of  its  coincidence  with  the  event
being  due  to  accident  is  proportionately  diminished.  But  it  is  important
that  this  unique  or  impressive  character  should  be  noted  before  fulfil-
ment ;  since  we  so  frequently  forget  oui-  dreams  altogether  that  it
is  difficult  to  feel  sure  that  any  particular  fulfilled  dream  is  really
uniq\ie  because  it  seems  so  after  fulfilment.  To  take  an  extreme  case  :
If  I  dreamt  once  a  week  that  the  house  would  catch  fire  the  next  day,
I  should  clearly  not  be  justified  in  regarding  it  as  even  a  curious
coincidence  if  the  fire  actually  occurred.  But  supposing  I  always
forgot  the  dreams  except  on  the  particular  occasion  when  the  actual
fire  recalled  it,  it  would  have  the  false  appearance  of  a  striking
premonition.  And  dreams  may  be  remembered  for  a  time  after
waking,  but  make  no  permanent  impression  when  not  fulfilled,  such  as
an  exactly  similar  dream  would  do if  it  were  strikingly  fulfilled.

The  following  case  shows  how  quite  impressive  dreams  may  be
forgotten  if  not  recalled  by  their  apparent  fulfilment.  It  is  curious
that  it  is  one  of  the  very  few  dreams  in  our  collection  which  have
conveyed  a  useful  warning.  (P.  487.)  It  is  from  Mrs.  Reay,  99,  Holland-
road,  Kensington.

September  17th,  1884.

I  was  going  to  sjiend  the  day  with  my  sister  at  Roehampton,  and  the  night
previous,  just  as  I  was  going  to  sleep,  I  was  startled  by  a  vision  before  me  of
the  carriage,  which  was  to  meet  me  at  Mortlake  Station,  bemg  upset  in
the  road  close  by  her  house.  This  quite  woke  me  up,  and  I  tried  to  forget  it,
but  on  going  off  to  sleep  again  the  same  vision  returned,  exactly  as  at  the
first,  and  I  then  began  to  feel  very  nervous  about  my  \'isit  of  the  next  day  ;
but  eventually  I  went  to  sleep,  and  it  did  not  come  back  to  my  mmd.  When
I  woke  in  the  morning  it  was  as  a  dream,  quite  gone.

I  went  by  train  to  Mortlake,  and  had  to  wait  at  the  station  for  a  few
minutes.  Then  the  groom  drove  up  quickly  with  a  pony  carriage,  and
apologised  for  the  carriage  not  being  there,  but  the  order  had  not  been  given
in  time  to  get  it  ready.

Everythmg  went  on  smoothly  till  we  were  driving  up  the  lane  to  my
sister's  house,  when  the  horse  became  very  restive,  the  groom  got  down,  but
could  find  nothing  wrong,  so  we  went  on  ;  this  hapjiened  a  second  and  a  third
time,  but  when  he  was  examining  the  horse  for  the  third  time  my  vision  of
the  night  before  suddenly  came  back  to  me,  and  I  told  the  groom  I  would
get  out  and  walk  to  the  house  ;  he  tried  to  dissuade  me,  but  I  felt  nervous


314


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


and  insisted  upon  walking,  so  he  drove  off  by  himself,  and  liad  only  got  a
very  short  distance  from  nie  when  the  horse  became  quite  unmanageable.  I
hurried  on  some  men  in  the  road  to  help  him,  but  before  they  reached  him  the
carriage,  horse  and  groom  were  all  in  a  confused  broken  heap  in  the  hedge,
just  as  I  had  seen  it  the  night  before,  though  not  exactly  in  the  same  spot.
The  groom  managed  to  extricate  himself,  but  when  I  got  up  to  him  he  said  he
was  so  thankful  I  insisted  upon  getting  out,  for  he  could  not  possibly  have
saved  me  from  a  dreadful  accident.

I  had  no  fear  of  horses.  I  should  certainly  not  have  left  the  carriage  but
for  the  forewarning  of  the  previous  night.

Emily  Reay.

If  my  husband  was  awake  I  possibly  should  mention  the  circumstance  to
him  before  going  to  sleep,  but  it  is  some  time  since  and  I  forget.  I  could
not  have  mentioned  it  to  him  afterwards,  as  it  had  quite  gone  from  my  mind
till  the  accident  took  place.

Mr.  Reay  writes  : —

T  also  recollect  about  a  dream  my  wife  had,  and  the  carriage  accident.
In  the  evening  of  the  accident  I  well  remember  her,  when  recounting  the
incident  to  me,  telling  me  it  was  the  sudden  recurrence  to  her  mind  of  a
dream  she  had  had  the  previous  night  that  induced  her,  contrary  to  the  wish
of  the  groom,  who  was  driving,  to  insist  upon  quitting  the  carriage,  after  the
third  time  the  horse  became  so  restive.

S.  Reay.

Mr.  Gurney  adds  a  note  that  Mrs.  Reay  had  told  him  this  story  in
a  personal  interview,  and  that  he  feels  sure  that  it  is  accurate.

RECOGNITION  OF  DREAM-SCENERY.

What  has  been  said  above  of  the  unconscious  reading  back  of
details  into  dreams  after  the  supposed  fultilment,  will  explain  why  I
cannot  regard  the  mere  recognition  of  dream-scenery  as  satisfactory
evidence  of  any  supernormal  character  in  a  dream.  But  there  is  one
class  of  cases  in  which  such  recognition  has  a  special  evidential  value,
that  is,  when,  ujaon  recognising  the  place,  the  percipient  is  able,  owing
to  his  dream,  to  make  some  assertion  as  regards  present  or  future,  which
he  would  have  been  unable  to  make  had  lie  not  dreamt  it ;  if,  for
instance,  he  can  say  in  a  place  quite  unknown  to  him,  "  Round  the
next  corner  there  is  such  and  sucli  a  shop";  or,  "In  a  few  minutes  I
shall  meet  so  and  so."  First  to  recognise  the  place  and  thence  to
predict  the  incident  is  evidently  a  very  different  thing  from  first  recog-
nising the  incident  and  then  the  place,  provided  the  incident  is  of  a
sufficiently  definite  and  improbable  kind.  We  have  some  cases  of  this
kind,  but  not,  I  tliink,  any  quite  conclusive  ones.  The  following  is,
perhaps,  the  strongest.  (P.  9.5.)  It  appeared  in  the  Spectator  in
1881  :—

I  was  staying  with  a  friend,  a  clergyman,  in  South  Carnarvonshire,  in
March,  1877,  I  think,  and  dreamt  that  I  was  one  of  a  shooting  party.  One


1


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.  315

of  the  party  shot  a  woodcock.  When  I  awoke  I  was  impressed  with  a  very
vivid  recollection  of  my  dream,  and  its  locality,  which,  as  it  appeared  to  me,
I  had  never  seen  before.

I  had  no  occasion  to  mention  the  dream  until  the  afternoon,  when  the
following  circumstances  occurred.  Returning  with  my  friend  from  a  long
walk  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Madym  Park,  we  chanced  to  fall  in  with  the
Squire's  gamekeeper  carrying  liis  gun  on  his  shoulder.  My  friend  and  the
keejjer  walked  on  some  50  or  60  yards  in  advance  of  me.

They  presently  turned  oS  the  road  at  right  angles,  and  disappeared  from
my  view.  When  I  came  to  the  spot  wliere  they  had  left  the  road,  I  saw  them
following  a  path  through  a  dingle.  Though  I  had  never  been  in  the
neighbourhood  before,  I  felt  the  scene  was  familiar  to  me.  I  stojiped  to
collect  my  thoughts  and  reconcile  the  inconsistency.  In  a  moment  it  flashed
upon  me  that  this  was  the  scene  of  my  last  night's  dream.  I  had  a  strange
feeling  of  expectation  ;  the  identity  of  the  scene  became  eveiy  moment
clearer  and  clearer  ;  my  eyes  fell  on  the  exact  spot  where  the  woodcock  of
my  dream  had  risen  ;  I  was  certain  the  event  of  my  dream  would  be  inevit-
ably re-enacted.  I  felt  I  must  speak,  and  that  there  was  not  a  moment  to
lose.  I  shouted  to  my  friend,  ' '  Look  out !  I  dreamt  I  shot  a  woodcock  here
last  night." My  friend  turned  and  replied,  "  Did  you  ?  "

The  words  were  hardly  out  of  his  mouth  and  the  gun  oft"  the  keeper's
shoulder  (I  was  still  intently  gazing  on  the  very  foot  of  ground),  when  up
gets  a  woodcock — the  woodcock  of  my  dream,  and  falls  to  the  keeper's  gun —
a  capital  snap  shot.  We  were  all  not  a  little  astonished,  the  keeper,
moreover,  remarking  that  he  thought  all  the  woodcocks  had  left  the  country
some  weeks  before. — I  am,  sir,  &c.,

Thomas  Warren  Trevor.

The  Vicarage,  Penmon,  Beaumaris.
October  8th,  1881.

In  reply  to  questions,  Mr.  Trevor  wrote  on  June  9th,  1884  : —

1.  I  have  no  recollection  of  having  ever  liad  a  prevision  or  any  other
psychical  experience  at  any  other  time.

2.  Woodcocks  are  not  rare  in  the  district  during  the  season,  but  none  had
been  seen  by  the  keeper  for  some  weeks  before,  and  the  season  was  con-
sidered to  be  over  ;  this  alone  constitutes  the  unusualness  of  killing  a
woodcock  in  that  particular  place.

Appended  is  a  letter  from  the  Rev.  Canon  Johnson  to  Mr.  Trevor,
written,  as  Mr.  Trevor  tells  us,  "quite  independently  of  my  narrative,
which  he  did  not  see  before  he  wrote."

Leaniestyn  Rectory,  Carnarvonshire.

Jv.tie  nth,  1884.

Dear  Trevor, — I  have  a  perfect  recollection  of  what  you  allude  to.
You  were  spending  a  couple  of  days  with  me  in  March,  when  one  morning
I  took  you  to  see  a  place  in  the  neighbourhood,  where  you  had  never
previously  been.  On  our  arrival  there,  the  day  being  fine,  and  having  fallen
in  with  the  keeper  (poor  fellow  !  since  dead),  I  proposed  going  down  to  the
marsh  to  take  a  farewell  shot  at  the  snipe,  the  present  close  season  not


316


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


having  been  then  fixed.  This  we  did,  and  after  a  time  returned  towards  the
house,  skirting  the  covers  as  we  went,  when  all  at  once,  after  crossing  a  lane
into  a  glade  between  two  woods,  you  caught  hold  of  me  with  a  scared  look  on
your  face,  and  exclaimed,  "Good  Heavens!  I  dreamt  last  night  I  saw  this
place,  and  a  woodcock  got  up  just  there,"  pointing  to  the  edge  of  one  of  the
■covers  towards  which  the  keeper  was  approaching  with  the  gun  ;  and  whilst
I,  half  surprised,  half  amused,  was  beginning  to  question  you  on  the  matter,
much  to  our  joint  surprise  a  woodcock  actually  did  rise  from  the  very  spot
you  had  pointed  out,and  was  immediately  shot  by  the  keeper. — W.Johnson.

The  coincidence  is  certainly  striking.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  to
be  admitted  that  tlie  evidential  value  of  this  case,  regarded  as
a  prediction  of  an  unexpected  event  after  recognition  of  the  scene
depends  on  the  possibility  of  accurately  discriminating  which  was  the
first  of  two  very  nearly  simultaneous  mental  acts — the  idea  that  thewood-
coek  would  rise  and  the  perception  that  it  was  rising.  Woodcocks  do  not,
I  presume,  rise  absolutely  without  warning.  There  is  doubtless  some
slight  sound,  some  slight  movement  of  the  herbage  as  the  bird  begins
to  move  and  before  it  is  visible,  which  would  instinctively  suggest  a
woodcock  to  a  practised  sportsman.  And  we  should,  I  think,  be
attributing  to  Mr.  Trevor  exceptional  power  of  observing  the  sequence
of  his  own  ideas  if  we  assumed  that  he  had  not  had  any  such  instinctive
perception  of  the  woodcock  before  he  felt  the  conviction  that  it  would
rise.  The  whole  thing,  it  will  be  observed,  passed  in  a  few  seconds.  In
another  case — in  which  the  coincidence,  apart  from  illusion  of  memory,
would  be  also  striking — I  tliink  there  is  special  reason  for  supposing
such  illusion  to  have  occurred.  Mr.  A.  writes  in  February,  1883
(P.  385)  :—

In  the  spring  of  1878  I  had  an  extraordinarily  vivid  dream,  so  vivid  that
it  made  a  great  impression  on  me,  and  the  leading  facts  of  it  remained
indelibly  fixed  upon  my  mind.  When  the  dream  took  place  I  was  residing  in
London.

In  the  autumn  of  1878  I  paid  a  visit  to  the  United  States,  and  while  there
went  to  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  a  place  I  had  never  been  to  before.  I
arrived  at  Pittsburgh  at  11.30  p.m.,  and  went  straight  to  my  hotel,  which
was  situated  close  to  the  railway  station.  The  following  morning  I  made  my
way  into  the  town  to  find  the  offices  of  a  man  whose  acquaintance  I  had  made
in  Paris  during  the  summer  of  1878.  As  I  advanced  up  the  main  street,
everything  seemed  strangely  familiar  to  me,  and  then  it  suddenly  flashed
upon  me,  "Why,  this  is  the  place  I  saw  in  that  dream."  As  this  startling
fact  dawned  upon  me,  I  found  I  had  reached  the  street  I  required  (which
intersected  the  one  I  was  in),  and,  not  knowing  how  the  numbers  ran,  I  was
about  to  ask  for  information,  when  I  remembered  that  in  my  dream  the  office
I  had  visited  was  on  a  hill,  with  shops  on  either  side  of  it.  Looking  to  the
rio-ht  I  noticed  that  there  was  a  considerable  elevation  to  the  street,  and
determined  to  test  my  dream.  I  walked  direct  to  the  group  of  houses,  and,
stopping  in  front  of  the  centre  house,  said  to  myself,  ' '  If  this  is  not  some


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


317


wonderful  coincidence,  P. 's  offices  ought  to  be  here."  There  on  the  side  of
the  doorway,  amongst  numerous  other  names,  was  the  name  of  my  friend,
and  I  walked  through  the  dark  entrance  passage,  up  a  narrow  flight  of  stairs,
and  straight  into  my  friend's  office.

There  was  a  second  incident  in  this  remarkable  dream  that  was  also
fulfilled  in  every  particular  : — I  dreamt  that  I  was  in  what  appeared  to  me
to  be  a  library,  and  that  there  I  had  a  struggle  with  a  very  powerful  man,  and
succeeded  in  getting  the  best  of  the  encounter.  I  then  (in  my  dream)  left
the  room,  and  passing  down  a  narrow  staircase  mth  a  man  in  front  of  me,
who  appeared  to  be  an  intimate  friend,  was  struck  by  the  curious  manner  in
which  his  hair  grew  at  the  back  of  his  neck,  and  made  some  laughing  remark
with  regard  to  it.

Now  this  second  portion  of  my  dream  was  fulfilled  in  every  particular.  In
my  friend's  office  (he  was  a  lawyer,  and  his  room  was  filled  with  books)  I  had
a  wrestling  match  (quite  a  friendly  one  h'wn  entciiclu)  with  another  American
lawyer,  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  strongest  man  in  the  town,  and  got  the
best  of  it.  My  dream  never  came  into  my  head  at  this  time,  but  later  on  in
the  afternoon  I  was  following  my  friend  down  the  stairs  when  I  was  struck
by  the  curious  growth  of  his  hair,  and  said,  laughingly,  ' '  Why,  P. ,  you  have
got  a  regular  duck's  tail."  Leaning  forward  I  seized  hold  of  it,  meaning  to
give  him  a  hearty  pull,  but  as  I  did  so  the  recollection  of  my  dream  suddenly
flashed  upon  me,  and  I  sat  right  dowTi  upon  the  stairs,  utterly  astounded  for
the  moment.  Now  you  must  bear  in  mind  that  at  the  time  of  my  dream  1
had  never  seen  this  friend.

The  reason  why  this  dream  made  such  a  very  extraordinary  imjjression
upon  me  was  that  I  could  in  no  way  account  for  the  incidents  in  it  being  so
impressed  upon  me,  as  there  was  really  nothing  in  them  to  account  for  it.  I
have  no  recollection  of  mentioning  the  dream  to  anyone  before  its  fulfilment,
and  have  only  related  it  to  two  people  since — viz.,  to  my  friend  on  the  spot,
as  an  explanation  of  my  sitting  on  the  stairs  like  a  stuck  pig,  and  some  two
or  three  years  ago  to  my  mother.

I  may,  perhaps,  add  that  in  1878  I  was  26  years  of  age,  in  robust  health,
and  one  of  the  last  men  in  the  world  to  indulge  in  any  superstitious  non-
sense.

It  is  the  second  part  of  this  dream  which  makes  me  think  that  Mr.
A.  was  the  victim  of  a  memory-illusion,  because  it  seems  to  me  difficult
to  believe  that,  after  he  had  recalled  his  dreara,  the  wrestling  matcli
should  occur  without  his  at  once  remembering  that  it  also  occurred
in  the  dream,  if  it  really  had  done  so.  I  think,  therefore,  that  we  have
here  a  case  where  the  supposition  that  incidents  were  read  back  into
the  dream  is  more  than  a  mere  conjecture.  If  I  am  riglit,  it  is  worth
noting  how  very  strong  the  memory-illusion  was  when  it  came.

DREAMS  FORESHADOWING  DEATHS.

The  dreams  I  have  now  to  relate  have  almost  all  been  either  told  or
acted  on  before  fulfilment.  I  will  begin  with  death  cases.  Of  course,
as  we  must  all  die,  a  mere  dream  of  death  has  no  value  in  itself.  It
must  include  the  date  of  death  or  some  unlikely  circumstance  connected


318


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


with  the  death.  In  the  case  I  will  first  give  (P.  88)  nothing  is  remem-
bered of  the  dream  except  a  date  associated  with  the  idea  of  misfortune.

Mr.  Edisbuiy,  Belgrave  House,  Wrexham,  writes  :  —

February  4th,  1884.

In  the  year  1859,  I  was  with  a  medical  man  here  as  student.  On  the
night  of  June  9th,  in  that  year,  I  dreamed  a  dream,  and  when  I  awoke  in
the  morning  I  could  not  recollect  the  details,  but  the  date,  June  9th,  1864,
was  forcibly  impressed  on  my  memory.

I  went  to  the  surgery  and  told  the  assistant  surgeon  of  my  dream,  and  I
said,  "  Look  here,  I  will  write  the  date  on  the  underf)art  of  this  mantel-
piece, '  June  9th,  1864,  J.  F.  E.,'  and  if  you  are  liere  you  will  see  that  on
tliat  day  T  shall  die,  or  a  calamity  will  overtake  me."  I  wrote  as  above  ;
time  went  on.  I  left  the  profession,  went  into  a  business.  In  1863,  June
9th,  I  married,  and  on  June  9th,  1864,  my  wife  died,  and  only  on  the  even-
ing of  tliat  day  did  the  recollection  of  my  dream  (five  years  before)  come
back  to  me.

The  end  of  that  month  I  took  two  friends  up  to  the  old  surgery,  and  there
was  my  memo  :  "  June  9th,  1864,  J.  F.  E."
Strange  !  is  it  not  ?

J.  F.  Edisbury.

In  answer  to  questions,  Mr.  Edisbury  wrote  in  February,  1884  : —
Did  I  think  the  dream  betokened  calamity  '?

Yes — so  much  so  that  I  told  those  in  the  surgery  (where  I  noted  the  date
on  the  mantel-shelf)  that  something  terrible  would  happen  to  me  on  that
date  (June  9th,  1864),  and  the  impression  remained  many  weeks,  but  as  time
went  on  it  escaped  my  thoughts  until  the  evening  before  my  wife's  death —
when  it  came  like  a  "  flash  of  lightning  "  on  my  mind,  as  the  doctor  came
downstairs  and  said,  "  There  is  no  hope  for  your  wife."

Have  I  ever  had  other  dreams  making  equally  strong  impressions  ?

No — not  sucli  strong  impressions — but  have  very  frequently  had  trivial
circumstances  verified,  of  which  I  had  previously  dreamed.

Did  I  note  d(iwn  any  other  dream  ?

No — not  in  writing.

Recently  (1888)  we  wrote  to  Mr.  Edisbury,  asking  whether  the
memorandum  was  made  in  pencil  or  in  ink.  In  reply  he  states  that  he
wrote  it  with  a  pen.  In  this  letter  he  gives  substantially  the  same
account  of  the  experience,  but  refers  to  the  dream  as  a  "  thrice  dreamt
dream."  Also  he  gives  1858  as  its  date  instead  of  1859,  so  that  there
seems  to  be  a  slight  uncertainty  as  to  when  it  occurred.

All  the  persons  mentioned  in  this  narrative,  except  Mr.  Edisbury
himself,  are  now  dead,  so  that  no  corroboration  is  possible.  The  surgery
also  no  longer  exists,  having  been  altered  and  turned  into  a  painter's
workshop.  And  there  is  no  contemporary  record  of  the  event,  so  that
we  are  dependent  on  Mr.  Edisbury's  unaided  memory.  It  is  a  memory,
Jiowever,  not  only  of  the  dream,  but  of  a  very  peculiar  record  of  it  which
marks  it  oif  from  other  dreams.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


319


In  the  next  case  (P.  96)  the  date  of  death  is  again  the  important
feature. It  is  from  Mrs.  M.  Smith,  32,  Beaumont-square,  W.C.

Some  12  years  ago  my  husband  was  in  Scotland,  where  he  had  a  staff
appointment.  His  mother  was  an  old  woman  ;  she  lived  in  Ireland.  I
dreamed  three  nights  running  she  was  dying.  The  third  time,  I  jumped  up
and  said  to  Major  Smith,  "  Oh  that  horrid  dream  again,  and  some  one  has
just  whispered  in  my  ear,  '  She  will  last  but  five  weeks.'  "  He  laughed  at
me.  This  was  5  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  winter,  and  dark.  When
daylight  came,  I  rose  and  wrote  do-vvn  the  dream.  In  it  I  saw  her  on  a  bed,
high-pdlowed  up.  The  place  was  strange  to  me.  Each  time  I  dreamt,  I
tried  to  get  to  her,  as  she  wanted  me  ;  but,  as  in  nightmare,  I  could  nf)t
move  a  step.

I  received  a  letter  that  or  next  day  to  say  she  was  very  well,  had,  indeed,
"  taken  a  new  lease  of  life. "  My  letter  crossed  this.  About  four  days  later,
I  got  one  to  say  she  had  been  "  taken  for  death  "—struck  by  paralysis,  and
had  asked  for  me.  Small-pox  was  in  Dublin  very  bad,  her  coachman  was  ill
of  it,  and  one  of  her  sons.  My  husband  refused  to  allow  me  to  go.  In  a
day  or  two  came  another  letter  urging  me  to  go,  and  sending  me  money  for
my  journey.  Major  Smith  still  refused,  saying,  if  I  should  go  it  would  be
without  his  sanction  :  he  feared  the  infection  for  me.  However,  I  packed  a
portmanteau  ready  to  start  should  he  say  yes.  She  lasted  exactly  five  weeks
to  the  very  hour,  dying  at  (making  allowance  for  the  difference  of  time)  the
hour  and  moment  of  the  five  weeks'  end.  Almost  her  last  words  were,
"  Why  did  not  Jane  come  to  me  ?"

Here  was  my  dream  in  full.  I  tried  to  get  to  her  but  failed.  She  died
in  Dublin  in  strange  lodgings.

Major  Smith  writes  September  12th,  1884  : —

All  the  particulars  of  my  wife's  dream  as  narrated  by  her  are  strictly
correct.  I  remember  her  waking  me  and  stating  that  for  the  third  time  she
had  dreamt  of  my  mother's  death,  and  that  someone  had  said  in  her  ears
that  she,  my  mother,  would  last  but  five  weeks.  This  my  mother  did,  to
the  very  hour,  I  believe.  She  was  in  her  usual  health  at  the  time  of  the
dream.

M.  E.  Smith,  Major.

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Smith  explained  that  at  the  time  of  the  dream  her
mother-in-law  was  actually  in  the  strange  lodgings,  so  that  the  only  prophetic
part  of  the  dream  was  the  prevision  of  the  date  of  death.  Mrs.  Smith  has
had  no  other  prophetic  dream  ;  but  has  frequently  had  obscure  presentiments
of  misfortune.  She  has  also  seen  an  apparition  which  may  have  been
veridical. (L.  1018.)

Here  again  no  contemporary  documentary  evidence  can  now  be
procured.

A  third  case  of  date  foreseen  is  older  than  either  of  these. It  was


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


sent  to  us  by  Mr.  John  Holmes,  of  Morden  College,  Blackheath.
.(P.  426.)

January  16th,  1883.

Having  been  connected  with  certain  speculative  transactions,  which
terminated  unfortunately,  it  was  considered  incumbent  upon  me,  in  the
spring  of  1853,  to  settle  with  numei  ous  creditors,  which  two  brothers  of  mine
undertook  to  arrange.  I  may  mention  that  at  the  time  referred  to  it  was
assumed  that  I  should  come  into  possession,  on  the  decease  of  two  uncles,  of
considerable  property  and  money  ;  consequently  the  basis  of  the  settlement
was  the  conveyance  of  my  interest  in  the  said  reversion  on  the  death  of  the
parties  referred  to.  My  brothers,  without  my  privity  or  consent,  agreed
with  creditors  to  become  sureties  for  the  payment  of  their  claims,  and  in
■certain  exceptional  cases  to  pay  interest  until  the  projjerty  was  realised-
Well,  in  the  course  of  a  week  or  two,  I  met,  by  special  appointment,  my
brotliers  and  different  solicitors  repjresenting  creditors,  and  various  deeds
weie  jjlaced  before  me  for  my  signature,  but  upon  discovering  that  my
br(3thers  had  rendered  themselves  personally  liable  in  every  case  for  payment
of  principal,  and  in  some  instances  for  payment  of  interest,  I  declined
■executing  any  of  tlie  documents  then,  but  at  the  entreaty  of  my  brothers,
who  declared  their  perfect  willingness  to  sign,  and  undertake  their  respon-
sibility by  so  doing,  I  consented  to  think  the  matter  seriously  over,  and  to
give  a  final  answer  at  noon  of  the  following  day.  I  retired  to  rest,  no  doubt
with  my  thoughts  much  absorbed  with  the  subject  of  the  proposed  settlement
with  my  creditors,  and,  as  it  seemed  before  awakening,  a  gentlemanly
individual  addressed  me,  or  appeared  so  to  do,  observing,  ' '  You  will  be

■surprised  to  hear  that  was  taken  ill  on  Thursday,  the  13th,  and  is  dead,

and  his  surviving  brother  is  not  exjiected  to  live  many  weeks.  "  I  replied,
•or  as  I  seemed  to  reply,  "Thursday  was  not  the  13th,  but  the  16th.  How
is  that  ?  there  must  be  some  mistake."  Then  came  the  remark,  "What  I
have  stated  is  absolutely  true,"  at  the  same  time  reiterating  the  assertion
as  to  the  day  and  date.

After  breakfast,  the  extraordinary  information  having  made  a  forcible
impression  on  my  mind,  I  referred  to  an  almanack  at  a  friend's  chambers,
and  ascertained  that  Thursday  the  13th  only  occurred  once  during  the  year
of  1853,  and  that  it  was  in  the  month  of  October.  When  my  brothers  called
upon  me  at  noon,  I  declared  my  unalterable  determination  to  do  nothing
further  in  the  settlement  of  my  affairs,  on  the  basis  before  indicated,  until
November,  being  ridiculed  for  my  refusal,  when  I  stated  my  reason.  Months
went  by,  and  with  the  exception,  probably,  of  myself,  the  occurrence  of  my
ghostly  visitor  had  been  forgotten,  when  I  received  a  letter  from  one  of
my  brothers,  who  resided  in  the  North  of  England,  on  Saturday,  the  15th  of

October,  to  the  effect  that  had  been  taken  ill  on  Thursday,  and  was  dead,

and  tliat  his  brother  was  not  expected  to  survive  many  weeks  ;  he  died,  in
fact,  on  the  5th  November  following.

I  was  unable  to  induce  certain  influential  parties  to  intervene,  in  the
interval  between  spring  and  November,  so  as  to  induce  the  old  gentlemen  to
put  their  respective  houses  in  good  order,  so  that  in  case  of  death  their
worldly  matters  would  be  free  from  dispute  or  entanglement,  the  consequence


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


321


of  which  was  that  instead  of  succeeding  to  estates  and  property  of  considerable
value,  I  became  a  party  to  13  Chancery  suits,  so  that  no  wise  end  was
answered  by  the  visitation  I  was  favoured  with,  excepting  the  absence  of  any
involvement  on  the  part  of  my  brothers  in  the  settlement  of  my  accounts.

John  Holmes.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Holmes  says  : —

January  25th,  1883.

My  uncles,  at  the  time  of  my  unexpected  visitor,  were  old  men,  but  not
considered  to  be  in  failing  health,  and  the  family  was  regarded  as  long-lived
which  you  will  believe  to  be  the  case  when  I  inform  you  that  no  death
occurred  amongst  my  father's  nine  brothers  and  sisters  for  47  years.  My
father  and  grandfather  died  at  the  age  of  90  or  thereabouts.

I  did  not  recognise  the  man  whom  I  saw  in  my  vision  as  a  friend,  but  I
was  under  the  impression  that  I  had  seen  him  before,  but  any  inquiry  on
that  point  was  checked  by  the  individual  at  once  entering  upon  the  aj^parent
object  of  his  mission.

The  three  brothers,  as  well  as  my  father,  to  whom  I  related  the  occur-
rence, have  died  since,  but  a  brother  who  resides  in  the  North  may  recollect
having  heard  me  relate  the  narrative.

Later,  he  writes  : —

I  wrote  to  a  brother  of  mine,  residing  at  Liverpool,  as  to  his  recollection
of  the  narrative  of  my  dream  in  the  spring  of  1853,  in  connection  with  the
death  of  our  surviving  uncles. He  replied  on  May  25th  as  follows  : —

"I  well  remember  the  account  of  your  dream  or  vision  which  you  refer
to,  but  where  is  the  double-walled  room  in  which  the  money  or  title  deeds
are  to  be  found  ?  I  only  hope  you  will  yet  find  some  clue  or  traces,  as  I  know
there  was  at  least  £100,000  not  accounted  for."

I  cannot  recall  to  mind  anything  in  relation  to  the  inquiry  concerning
the  double- walled  room,  &c.,  &c.

John  Holmes.

May  28th,  1883.

The  following  corroVioration  is  from  Mr.  AV.  Bingham,  161,  Sloane-
street,  S.W.

July  21st,  1884.

In  reply  to  your  questions,  I  am  glad  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  corroborate
my  friend  Mr.  Holmes's  statement  to  you,  of  his  having  communicated  to  me
his  extraordinary  premonitory  dream,  as  I  considered  it  to  be,  and  told  him
so  at  the  time — the  next  morning  I  believe — many  months  previous  to  its
apparent  fulfilment  in  a  manner  so  remarkably  circumstantial.

W.  Bingham.

In  the  next  case  the  circumstance  dreamt  of  in  addition  to  the
death  is  of  a  different  character.  (P.  384.)  The  case  seems  to  me  to  be
a  very  remarkable  one,  and  none  the  less  so  from  the  somewhat
grotesque  character  of  the  dream,  which  was  communicated  to  us  about
three  months  after  it  occurred.  For  clearness  I  will  begin  with  the
account  of  the  death  taken  from  tlie  York  Herald.

Y  2


322


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


York  Herald,  Friday,  July  28,  1882.  "  Scarbro'.  Sad  Death  of  a
Gentleman  Visitor. — An  accident  of  a  melancholy  character,  and  which
unfortunately  has  been  attended  with  fatal  results,  occurred  on  Wednesday
evening  to  a  London  gentleman  named  Frederick  Schweizer,  who  for  the
past  few  days  has  been  staying  at  the  Grand  Hotel.  It  appears  that  on  the
afternoon  of  that  day  the  deceased,  along  with  a  casual  acquaintance  named
Deverell,  who  is  staying  at  the  Castle  Hotel,  went  for  a  ride  on  horseback
along  the  beautiful  Forge  Valley  rides.  When  near  Ayton  the  deceased  was
Somewhat  in  advance  of  his  companion,  and  it  is  surmised  that  his  steed
shied  at  a  white  gate  ;  anyhow  he  was  thrown  on  to  the  road,  and  the  horse
galloped  away.  His  friend  on  getting  up  to  him  dismounted,  and  a  passing
carriage  was  utilised  to  convey  him  to  his  hotel.  This  was  at  six  o'clock,  and
three  hours  subsequently  the  deceased  expired,  it  is  supf)osed  from  concussion
of  the  brain."

The  accident  occurred  on  July  26th.

Mr.  Schweizer's  mother,  Mrs.  Schweizer,  now  of  6,  Addison-road
North,  wrote  on  October  28th,  1882  :—

I  send  you  the  particulars  of  the  dream  I  had  just  eight  days  before  it
was  realised,  though  why  I  could  not  be  told  of  the  unfortunate  accident  as
it  occurred  I  can't  understand,  nor  why  Henry  Irving's  name  should  be
mentioned. — J.  Schweizer.

On  the  18th  of  July  I  had  the  following  dream  or  vision  (I  can't  say
which)  : — I  was  walking  on  the  edge  of  a  high  cliff,  the  open  sea  in  front,  dear
Fred  and  a  stranger  a  little  in  advance,  when  Fred  slipped  suddenly  down
the  side  of  the  cliff,  and  in  doing  so  gazed  with  the  most  intense  anguish
into  my  very  soul.  I  shall  never  forget  that  look.  I  turned  to  the  stranger
and  said,  "  May  I  ask  who  you  are  and  what  is  your  name  1  "  He  rejjlied,
"  My  name  is  Henry  Irvin."  I  said,  "Do  you  mean  Irving  the  actor?''
He  said,  "  No,  not  exactly  :  but  something  after  that  style."  I  said,  in  reply,
' '  Now  that  I  look  at  you,  you  have  the  same  agonised  expression  in  your
face  that  I  have  so  often  noticed  in  Irving's  photographs  in  the  sho})
windows."  So  I  awoke  in  a  miserable  state  of  mind.  It  was  between  5  and
6  a.m.  The  servants  came  down  soon  after.  The  dream  seemed  to  haunt
me  ;  I  could  think  of  nothing  else.  When  I  met  my  eldest  son  John,  at
breakfast,  I  asked  at  once,  where  was  Fred  ?  (I  must  state  here  that  Fred
was  the  travelling  partner  of  three  brothers,  and  then  in  the  North  of
England  on  a  journey.)  His  brother,  after  hearing  the  dream,  said,  "Oh,
Fred  is  all  right  ;  he  is  in  Manchester."  He  saw  how  miserable  this  dream
made  me  feel,  and  he  promised  at  my  request  to  "wire"  to  me  when  he  got
to  his  counting-house  in  case  there  was  no  letter  from  Fred,  who  was  in  the
habit  of  writing  to  the  firm  daily.  There  was,  however,  a  letter  as  usual,
and  when  I  received  no  telegram  as  arranged,  I  judged  that  dear  Fred  was
all  right.  Still  the  dream  was  present  to  my  mind,  and  I  thought  of  it  con-
tinually. I  begged  of  his  brother  to  tell  him  to  come  home.  In  a  day  or
two  I  heard  he  was  at  Leeds,  and  next  day  after  that,  John  the  eldest
brother  said, "  Fred  says  he  is  going  to  take  a  week's  holiday  at  Scarborough,"
when  T  at  once  exclaimed,  ' '  I  wish  he  were  at  home  ; do  write  to  him


1

I

I

On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.  323

to  come  back  ;  he  has  had  holidays  enough  this  year.  I  shall  write  to  him
myself."  John  said,  "Oh,  don't;  let  him  enjoy  himself."  On  this  day,
before  I  got  out  of  bed  at  the  same  hour,  between  5  and  6  a.m.,  a  person
seemed  to  pass  the  side  of  my  bed,  and  said  into  my  ear  in  an  audible  voice,
"  You  are  not  done  with  trouble  yet."  I  started  up  and  awoke,  and  related
the  matter  at  breakfast  while  talking  of  Fred  to  John,  and  said,  "  I  think  it
was  your  father."  He  said,  "  Oh,  nonsense,  that  is  like  the  dream  you
bothered  me  about  a  few  days  ago. "  This  was  on  the  23rd.  On  the  24th  John
mentioned  that  he  had  a  telegram  from  Fred  to  send  on  £10,  that  he  was
enjoying  himself  immensely,  that  the  weather  was  glorious.  I  again  wished
he  were  at  home,  and  John  said,  "  He  will  be  here  on  Friday  next."  In  the
morning  on  the  26th  I  went  to  the  letter-box,  and  found  a  telegram  for
John,  which  announced  an  accident  to  Fred.  John,  however,  did  not  like  to
tell  me,  and  hurried  off  to  the  ofSce.  I  asked  J ohn  the  nature  of  the  telegram,
but  he  said,  "  Business."  On  arriving  at  his  office,  there  was  a  telegram  of  a
similar  kind  from  the  hotel  proprietor  at  Scarborough.  Poor  Fred  was  dead
at  the  time,  as  he  only  survived  the  accident  three  hours.  John  and  I  set  off
at  once,  and  found  all  over,  and  next  day  it  was  proposed  that  we  should  visit
the  fatal  spot.  His  companion  in  that  unfortunate  excursion  accompanied  us.
He  sat  opposite  to  me  in  the  carriage,  and  when  I  looked  at  him  I  remembered
the  dream  of  the  18th,  and  recognised  the  stranger  who  had  the  agonised
expression,  and  asked  him  at  once  if  his  name  were  "Henry.  "  He  said,
"Yes,  my  name  is  Henry,"  when  I  told  the  dream.  He  then  said,  "The
most  extraordinary  part  is,  I  am  connected  with  the  Volunteers,  and  we  have
private  theatricals,  and  I  recite,  and  am  always  on  those  occasions  introduced
as  Henry  Irvin,  jun. "

Mrs.  Schweizer  says  that  an  account  written  by  her,  and  sub-
stantially the  same  as  the  above,  was  signed  by  her  son  and  by  Mr.
Deverell.

In  answer  to  inquiries  Mrs.  Schweizer  said  (April,  1888) :  "My  son
Frederick  was  not  acquainted  with  Mr.  Deverell  at  all,  nor  was  Mr.
Deverell  known  directly  or  indirectly  to  me  or  to  any  member  of  my
family.  .  .  .  We  knew  nothing  about  liis  private  theatricals."  He
was  an  acquaintance  of  a  friend  of  Mr.  F.  Schweizer's  and  was  only
introduced  to  him  by  his  friend  on  the  afternoon  of  the  accident,  as  a
companion  for  the  ride  in  which  the  friend  could  not  join.  Mr.
Deverell  was  drowned  while  bathing  the  following  year.  Mr.  Gurney
had  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Schweizer  about  this  experience  only  a  day
or  two  before  his  death,  and  was  favourably  impressed  with  her  as  a
witness.  The  dream,  he  says,  "  certainly  made  a  very  powerful  im-
pression on  her,  as  she  told  one  of  her  sons  next  morning  to  send  her  a
telegram  if  there  was  no  letter  from  Fred  at  the  office  proving  him  to
be  all  right.  He  was  away  purely  on  business,  and  as  he  had  already
had  a  holiday,  shortly  before,  she  was  not  in  the  least  expecting  him  to
have  another,  and  had  not  the  least  idea,  therefore,  of  his  visiting  the
seaside . . . Mrs.  Schweizer  did  not  see  horses  in  her  vision.  When


324


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


she  recognised  Deverell  as  the  '  Henry  Irving '  of  her  vision  (feeling
herself  the  absurdity  of  this  detail),  and  told  him  of  it,  he  was  extremely
impressed — 'The  blood  left  his  lips,'  she  said."

There  is  one  well-known  dream  of  death,  with  detail  of  a  certainly
unlikely  kind,  which  will  probably  occur  to  every  one  in  this  connection;
I  mean  JVIr.  Williams'  dream  of  Mr.  Perceval's  murder  in  1812.  This
dream  was  not  recorded  before  its  fultilment,  nor  even  immediately
after  it,  but  we  have  a  printed  account  dated  1832 — 20  years  later —
purporting  to  be  in  Mr.  Williams'  own  words,  and  signed  by  him.  It
was  sent  to  us  by  a  great  niece  of  Mr.  Perceval's,  who  had  received  it
from  a  grandson  of  Mr.  Williams. ^ (P.  607.)

Sundhill,  December,  1832.
Some  account  of  a  dream  which  occurred  to  John  Williams,  Esq.,
of  Scorrier  House,  in  the  County  of  Cornwall,  in  the  year  1812.
Taken  from  his  own  mouth,  and  narra  ted  by  him  at  various  times  to
several  of  his  friends.

Being  desired  to  write  out  tlie  jjarticulars  of  a  remarkable  dream  which  I
had  in  the  year  1812,  before  I  do  so  I  think  it  may  be  jjroper  for  me  to  say
that  at  that  time  my  attention  was  fully  occupied  with  aifairs  of  my  own —
the  superintendence  of  some  very  extensive  mines  in  Cornwall  being
entrusted  to  me.  Thus  I  had  no  leisure  to  pay  any  attention  to  political
matters,  and  hardly  knew  at  that  time  who  formed  the  Administration  of  the
country.  It  was,  therefore,  scarcely  possible  that  my  own  interest  in  the
subject  should  have  had  any  share  in  suggesting  the  circumstances  which
presented  themselves  to  my  imagination.  It  was,  in  trutli,  a  subject  which
never  occurred  to  my  waking  thoughts.

My  dream  was  as  follows  : —

About  the  second  or  third  day  of  May,  1812,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  in  the
lobby  of  the  House  of  Commons  (a  place  well  known  to  me).  A  small  man,
dressed  in  a  blue  coat  and  white  waistcoat,  entered,  and  immediately  I  saw
a  person  whom  I  had  observed  on  my  first  entrance,  dressed  in  a  snufF-
coloured  coat  with  metal  buttons,  take  a  pistol  from  under  his  coat,  and
present  it  at  the  little  man  above  mentioned.  The  pistol  was  discharged,
and  the  ball  entered  under  the  left  breast  of  the  person  at  whom  it  was
directed.  I  saw  the  blood  issue  from  the  place  where  the  ball  had  struck
him,  his  countenance  instantly  altered,  and  lie  fell  to  the  ground.  Upon
inquiry  who  the  sufferer  might  be  I  was  informed  that  he  was  tlie  Chancellor,
I  understood  him  to  be  Mr.  Perceval,  who  was  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.
I  further  saw  the  murderer  laid  hold  of  by  several  of  the  gentlemen  in  the
room.  Upon  waking,  I  told  the  particulars  above  related  to  my  wife  ;  she
treated  the  matter  lightly,  and  desired  me  to  go  to  sleep,  saying  it  was  only

^  The  same  account,  with  only  verbal  differences,  is  printed  in  a  footnote  at  the  end
of  Walpole's  life  of  Perceval  (1874).  Mr.  Walpole  says  that  it  is  "taken  from  an
attested  statement  drawn  up  and  signed  by  Mr.  Williams,  in  the  presence  of  the  Rev.
Thomas  Fisher  and  Mr.  Charles  Prideaux  Brune.  It  was  given  by  the  latter  of  these
gentlemen  to  the  author  of  this  memoir."


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


325


a  dream.  I  soon  fell  asleep  again,  and  again  the  dream  presented  itself
with  precisely  the  same  circumstances.  After  waking  a  second  time,  and
stating  the  matter  again  to  my  wife,  she  only  repeated  her  request  that  I
would  compose  myself,  and  dismiss  the  subject  from  my  mind.  Upon  my
falling  asleep  the  third  time,  the  same  dream,  without  any  alteration,  was
repeated,  and  I  awoke  as  on  the  former  occasions  in  great  agitation.  So  much
alarmed  and  impressed  was  I  with  the  circumstances  above  related  that  I
felt  much  doubt  whether  it  was  not  my  duty  to  take  a  journey  to  London,
and  communicate  upon  the  subject  with  the  party  principally  concerned.
Upon  this  point  I  consulted  with  some  friends  whom  I  met  on  business  at  the
Godolphin  mine  on  the  following  day.  After  having  stated  to  them  the  particu-
lars of  the  dream  itself  and  what  were  my  own  feelings  in  relation  to  it,  they
dissuaded  me  from  my  purpose,  saying  I  might  expose  myself  to  contempt  and
vexation,  or  be  taken  up  as  a  fanatic.  Upon  this  I  said  no  more,  but  anxiously
watched  the  newspapers  every  evening  as  the  post  arrived.

On  the  evening  of  the  13th  of  May  (as  far  as  I  recollect)  no  account
of  Mr.  Perceval's  death  was  in  the  newspaper,  but  my  second  son,  returning
from  Truro,  came  in  a  hurried  manner  into  the  room  where  I  was  sitting  and
exclaimed,  "  Oh  !  father,  your  dream  has  come  true.  Mr.  Perceval  has  been
shot  in  the  lobby  of  the  House  i:>f  Commons  ;  there  is  an  account  come  from
London  to  Truro  written  after  the  newspapers  were  printed."

The  fact  was  Mr.  Perceval  was  assassinated  on  the  evening  of  the  11th.

Some  business  soon  after  called  me  to  London,  and  in  one  of  the  print-
shops  I  saw  a  drawing  for  sale,  representing  the  place  and  the  circumstances
which  attended  Mr.  Perceval's  death.  I  purchased  it,  and  upon  a  careful
examination,  I  found  it  to  coincide  in  all  respects  with  the  scene  which  had
passed  through  my  imagination  in  the  dream.  The  colours  of  the  dresses,
the  buttons  of  the  assassin's  coat,  the  white  waistcoat  of  Mr.  Perceval,  the
spot  of  blood  upon  it,  the  countenances  and  attitudes  of  the  parties  present
were  exactly  what  I  had  dreamed.

The  singularity  of  the  case,  when  mentioned  among  my  friends  and
acquaintances,  naturally  made  it  the  subject  of  conversation  in  L(mdon,  and,
in  coiasequence,  my  friend,  the  late  Mr.  Rennie,  was  requested  by  some  of
the  Commissioners  of  the  Navy  that  they  might  be  permitted  to  hear  the
circumstances  from  myself.  Two  of  them  accordingly  met  me  at  Mr.  Rennie's
house,  and  to  them  I  detailed  at  the  time  the  particulars,  then  fresh  in
my  memory,  which  form  the  subject  of  the  above  statement.

I  forbear  to  make  any  comment  on  the  above  narrative,  further  than  to
declare  solemnly  that  it  is  a  faithful  account  of  facts  as  they  actually
occurred.

(Signed) John  Williams.

The  close  correspondence  of  the  supposed  dream  scene  with  the
picture  may  well  have  been  a  trick  of  memory,  but  it  is  dithcult  to  see
how  Mr.  Williams'  memory  can  have  deceived  him  as  to  his  having
dreamt  of  a  man  being  shot  in  the  lobby  of  the  House  of  Commons,
before  he  heard  of  the  murder,  and  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  C.  Pt.  Fox  to
Mr.  Hensleigli  Wedgvi^ood  in  1876  affords  some  corroboration.  Mr.  Fox
was  the  son  of  one  of  the  friends  to  whom  Mr.  Williams  told  the  dream


326


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


on  the  next  day,  and  was,  Mr.  Wedgwood  tells  us,  14  at  the  time.  He
says  :  "I  have  now  no  certainty  as  to  the  day  on  which  J.  W.  related
his  dream,  but  it  is  indubitable  that  lie  did  so  before  the  Chancellor's
death."  Taking  it  all  together,  and  allowing  for  the  natural  rounding
off  of  an  oft-told  tale,  we  cannot,  I  think,  deny  that  it  is  a  remarkable
case.

I  have  had  some  hesitation  about  including  the  next  case  (P.  490)
because  it  also  is  recorded  20  years  after  the  event  and  it  depends  entirely
on  the  memory  of  one  man  for  details.  It  is  at  any  rate  interesting.  It
was  given  to  us  by  the  narrator,  Mr.  0.  F.  Fleet,  of  26,  Grosvenor-road,
Gunnersbury,  in  April,  1888,  when  Mr.  Gurney  had  an  interview  with
him.  In  a  letter  Mr.  Fleet  says  he  can  swear  to  the  authenticity  of
the  story,  and  also  that  it  has  been  in  no  way  "  cooked  up  "  or  em-
bellished.

In  the  year  1868  I  was  the  third  mate  of  the  sailing  ship  Persian
Empire,  of  London,  homeward  bound  from  Adelaide  to  London  with  a  full
cargo  of  wood,  &c.

We  had  lost  two  men  who  had  deserted  the  ship  and  gone  up  to  the  Gold
Fields  ;  hands  were  scarce  in  that  city,  and  we  thought  the  ship  would  have  to
make  the  passage  home  sliort  of  two  men,  but  luckily,  the  day  before  we
meant  to  sail,  a  man  came  on  board  saying  he  was  most  anxious  to  ship  and
get  home.

The  captain  was  struck  with  his  appearance,  which  was  fine,  respectable,
and  indicative  of  bravery  ;  he  also  could  show  a  V.  G. ,  very  good,  discharge
from  his  last  ship,  so  the  captain  agreed  to  put  him  on  our  articles.  The
man  (who  gave  the  name  of  Cleary)  went  ashore  with  the  captain  to  the
shipping  office,  where  he  was  jiut  on  the  articles,  being  told  to  join  the  next
day  at  six  a.m.

He,  however,  failed  to  put  in  an  api^earance,  so  the  captain  sent  me
ashore  to  look  him  up.  After  searching  in  vain  for  a  long  time,  I  turned  to
go  on  board,  and  when  nearly  reaching  the  sliip,  I  found  him  walking  about
in  a  most  dejected  manner  and  looking  very  miserable.  I  asked  him  why  he
had  not  joined  the  ship,  and  I  could  see  from  his  countenance  that  something
was  troubling  him.

By  a  little  persuasion,  however,  I  induced  him  to  come  on  board.  On  the
way  down  to  the  ship  we  chatted  freely  and  pleasantly  on  different  topics,
and  after  awhile  his  look  of  dejection  entirely  jjassed  away  and  the  man
seemed  himself  again.

Once,  mention  was  made  concerning  the  qualities  of  our  ship,  the
Persian  Empire,  by  Cleary  asking  me  if  she  was  staunch  and  a  good  sea
boat,  at  the  same  time  adding  in  a  peculiar  tone  of  voice  that  he  hoped  she
would  carry  him  safely  home.  I  said  she  was  everything  that  could  be
expected,  was  only  five  years  old,  and  on  the  "  first"  letter  at  Lloyd's  (A  1).
This  seemed  to  satisfy  him,  and  as  we  had  by  this  time  arrived  alongside  the
ship,  we  jumped  on  board.  The  pilot  then  gave  the  order  to  "  unmoor
ship  "  and  pass  the  tow  rope  to  the  tugboat  which  was  in  waiting  to  take  us
down  the  river.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


327


Cleary  went  to  his  work  cheerfully,  we  got  down  to  the  lightship  where
we  cast  off  the  tug,  discharged  our  pilot  and  got  away  to  sea,  making  a  good
start,  the  weather  being  fine.

One  night  about  a  week  after  sailing  we  had  a  slight  spell  of  "  dirty
weather,"  for  it  blew  a  hard  gale  from  the  westward,  with  a  high  following
sea.  I  had  the  middle  watch  (12  to  4),  and  Cleary,  who  was  in  my  watch,  was
taking  his  turn  at  the  wheel,  and  as  I  chanced  to  be  standing  near  the
compass  at  one  time,  he  thus  spoke  to  me  : —

"Mr.  Fleet."

"  Well,"  said  I,  "  what  is  it,  Cleary  ?  "

"  Why,  sir,  I  would  like  to  explain  to  you  how  it  was  I  failed  to  join  the
ship  on  the  morning  I  should  have  done  so."
"What  was  the  reason  ? "  I  answered.

"  Well,  sir,  after  I  left  the  captain,  I  went  to  my  lodgings  to  put  my
things  together  and  settle  a  few  matters  of  business,  but  was  kept  so  late  that
I  had  to  turn  in  before  finishing  what  I  had  in  hand,  and  so  had  to  leave  it
till  the  morning.  Do  you  know,  sir  " — here  he  lowered  his  voice  and  became
quite  mysterious — "  I  had  a  dream  that  night  and  a  very  ugly  and  extra-
ordinary one  it  was  too. Do  you  believe  in  dreams,  sir  ?"

"Well,"  I  answered,  "I  cannot  say  that  I  do,  or  do  not.  I  have  known
some  astounding  ones  come  true."

"Ah,  sir,  that's  just  what's  troubling  me,"  he  said,  and  his  face  grew  pale
and  great  beads  of  i:(erspiration  came  on  his  forehead,  "but  I'll  just  tell  you
what  1  dreamt,  sir,  and  then  you'll  see.  On  my  way  to  my  lodgings  I  could
think  of  nothing  but  the  ship  I  had  just  joined,  and  which  was  going  to  take
me  home.  As  was  quite  natural,  I  fell  asleep,  thinking  of  her,  and  at  last
dreamt  that  the  Persi'aii  Empire  was  oft'  the  'p)itch,'  or  exact  vicinity,  of
Cape  Horn,  South  America,  and  that  she,  on  Christmas  morning,  was  in  a
very  heavy  gale  and  high  sea.  Well,  sir,  I,  with  the  rest  of  my  watch,  were
ordered  to  secure  a  boat  hanging  in  davits  over  the  side.  I  got  into  the  boat,
the  rest  of  the  watch  remaining  on  deck,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  work  a
most  fearful  sea  broke  over  us,  washing  overboard  me  and  another  hand,  and
we  were  both  drowned.  I  remember  no  more,  sir,  and  I  woke  but  I  cannot
get  that  dream  out  of  my  head."

I  told  him  not  to  allow  his  mind  to  be  troubled  by  such  nonsense,  and
tried  my  best  to  laugh  him  out  of  his  fears,  but  he  seemed  so  deeply  impressed
with  the  vividness  of  the  dream  that  I  utterly  failed  in  my  object.

He  also  told  me  that,  during  a  cyclone  which  blew  in  Madras,  in  1864,  he
had  swum  off  with  a  small  line  to  a  barque  that  was  dragging  her  anchors  and
fast  driving  ashore.  By  so  doing  he  had  been  the  means  of  saving  nine  hands
out  of  her  by  the  aid  of  the  life  saving  apparatus,  for  whicli  act  of
gallantry  the  Humane  Society  had  awarded  him  their  gold  medal  witli  a
piece  of  vellum  giving  an  account  of  the  occurrence.  These,  together  with  a
small  bag  of  gold,  were  safely  locked  up  in  his  chest  down  in  the  forecastle
and  intended  for  some  near  relative.

Soon  after  this,  the  weather  cleared  up,  but  only  for  a  short  time,  as  we
fell  in  with  another  gale  with  violent  snow  and  hail-squalls.  One  night
when  not  far  from  Cape  Horn,  it  was  my  first  watch  (8  to  12),  Mr.
Douglas,  the  chief  officer,  being  in  charge  of  the  deck.  The  rest  of  the  watch  j


328 ■ On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.

with  two  exceptions,  tliose  being  the  man  at  the  wheel  and  the  hand  on  the
"  look  out,"  were  either  asleep:!  aft,  or  "  standing  by"  for  orders.  Amongst
the  former  was  Cleary.  I  heard  a  loud  cry  and  on  my  going  down  to  the  main
deck  to  ascertain  the  cause,  I  found  Cleary  looking  very  pale  and  evidently
much  upset  about  something.  I  learnt  that  it  was  he  who  had  called  out,  and  on
my  asking  him  the  cause  he  told  me  he  had  had  a  repetition  of  the  dream.
We  had  great  difficulty  in  calming  him  as  he  had  worked  himself  up  into  a
state  of  nervous  excitement  almost  terrible  to  behold,  but  at  last  he  got  a
little  quieter  yet  kept  muttering,  "  I  know  it  will  come  true."

The  next  morning  was  Christmas  Day.  The  wind  was  still  blowing  very
hard,  and  although  it  was  our  "watch  below  "  from  8  a.m.  until  12  noon,  yet
the  chief  officer  and  I  had  to  remain  on  deck,  as  the  second  officer  was  too
unwell  to  leave  his  berth.  This  came  rather  hard  upon  us  as  we  had  already
"stood"  8  hours  watch  that  night.  However,  at  8  bells  (8  o'clock)  Mr.
Douglas  went  below  to  the  captain  and  reported  the  weather  as  still  being
bad  and  the  barometer  on  the  "  fall."

After  awhile  he  came  on  deck  again,  and  told  me  that  the  captain  had  given
him  orders  to  secure  the  boat  hanging  in  the  davits  over  the  port  quarter,
in  tlie  event  of  the  sea  increasing.  When  I  heard  this  order  I  could  not  help
thinking  of  Cleary  and  his  dream,  at  the  same  time  feeling  a  presentiment
that  something  might  happen  ;  however,  duty  is  duty  and  must  be  performed
sometimes  un.der  most  trying  circumstances.  The  sea  increased  considerably
and  beg;in  to  break  on  board  with  great  force,  so  I  went  forward  to  turn  the
hands  out ;  they  one  and  all  obeyed  me  with  the  exception  of  Cleary,  who  hung
back.  I  called  and  asked  him  why  he  did  not  come  out  with  the  rest  of
the  hands.  On  my  receiving  no  reply  I  went  right  into  the  forecastle  and
found  him  seated  on  his  chest,  his  face  bui-ied  in  his  hands,  to  all
appearances  completely  overcome.

I  took  a  seat  beside  him  inquiring  what  was  the  matter.  At  first  he
would  not  answer,  but  after  a  little  while  he  again  referred  to  the  dream,
saying,  with  a  miserable  tone,  his  face  still  buried  in  his  hands,  "  Oh,  sir,  I
fear  it  is  about  to  come  true  now,"  giving  this  as  his  reason  for  not  coming  on
deck  with  the  other  men.  In  answer  to  my  question  as  to  whether  he  would  go
to  his  duty  he  replied  he  would  not.  Then  I  said  at  any  rate  he  must  go  with
me  to  the  captain  and  be  put  in  the  "  Official  Log"  for  "Refusal  of  duty,"
unless  he  changed  his  mind.  This  he  said  he  had  determined  not  to  do,  so
we  went  to  the  caj)tain  who,  after  gently  persuading  him  to  do  that  which  was
required  of  him  like  a  man,  but  all  to  no  purpose,  produced  the  log-
book, and  I  was  told  to  call  Mr.  Douglas  to  witness  and  sign  the  entry.
After  the  captain  had  made  the  entry  and  had  read  it  over  to  Cleary,  who
had  answered  to  its  being  correct,  the  chief  officer  took  the  pen  to  sign  his
name.  Whilst  doing  so,  Cleary,  in  an  excited  tone  of  voice  said,  "I  will  go  to
my  duty,  for  noiv  I  know  the  other  man  relating  to  my  dream,"  at  the  same
time  looking  at  Mr.  Douglas,  who  looked  at  Cleary  and  then  at  me,  as  much
as  to  say  what  does  it  all  mean  ?  Whilst  going  on  deck  I  briefly  told  the  chief
(jfficer  of  the  dream.  He  laughed  at  the  idea  of  his  being  the  man  meant  in  it.
I  had  a  strange  foreboding,  and  it  was  with  no  cheerful  heart  that  I  went  on  deck.
On  our  arrival  there  we  found  the  rest  of  the  hands  waiting  for  orders  about
the  boat. The  duty  that  lay  before  us  was  to  turn  her  up  clear  of  the  seas

I  .


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


32&


with  her  keel  outwards,  and  to  do  this  we  had  to  pass  a  pair  of  gripes,  or'
broad  rope  bands,  around  her,  then  to  hook  on  a  tackle,  made  fast  in  the  mizen
rigging,  which,  when  hauled  taut,  would  turn  her  up.  Cleary  jumped  into
the  boat  to  pass  the  gripes  around  her,  and  Mr.  Douglas  got  over  the  side  for
the  purpose  of  handing  me  tlie  gripes  from  Cleary,  also  to  overhaul  the  davit
falls,  which  have  to  be  eased  up  a  little.  The  chief  officer  was  holding  on  with
one  hand  to  an  iron  rail  running  around  the  quarter-deck,  and  was  in  the  act
of  passing  the  gripes  to  me,  when  the  man  at  the  wheel,  by  his  bad  steering,
"  luffed  "  the  shijj  into  the  wind,  and  on  my  looking  to  windward  I  saw  a
\'ery  heavy  sea  coming  along,  which,  for  the  moment,  I  thought  would
capsize  the  ship  and,  as  a  warning  to  all  hands,  I  sang  out,  "  Look  out  men,
here  it  coines."  We,  who  were  able  to  do  so,  rushed  to  the  mizenmast  and
there  held  on  for  dear  life,  but  unfortunately  both  Mr.  Douglas  and  Cleary
were  unable  to  do  so  in  time.  The  sea  struck  the  ship  on  the  stai'board  side
with  very  great  force,  nearly  throwing  her  on  her  beam  ends,  flooding  the
decks  and  doing  much  damage,  besides  washing  overboard  both  those  two
men.  The  sea  then  caught  the  boat,  turning  her  completely  over,  breaking
the  stout  iron  davits  as  one  W(5uld  a  match,  and  she,  with  Cleary  clinging  to
her,  was  swept  away.  Mr.  Douglas  held  on  to  the  iron  rail,  trying  in  vain
to  get  on  board,  but  the  rush  of  watei'  was  too  powerful  for  him,  and  with  a  cry
for  help  and  a  look  of  agony,  which  I  shall  never  forget,  the  i^oor  fellow
droi>i3ed  overboard.  We  dared  not  let  go  our  hold  of  the  mast  to  try  and  save
him  for  fear  of  being  washed  overboard  ourselves,  so  we  had  the  sad  spectacle
of  seeing  our  poor  shipmate  drown  witliout  being  able  to  save  him.  As  for
Cleary,  he  was  swept  away  at  once,  therefore  there  was  no  chance  of  saving
him.  This  was  not  the  only  disaster,  for  the  man  at  the  wheel  had  his  right
shoulder  dislocated  by  being  jammed  up  under  the  grating,  and  the  boatswain
had  his  left  leg  broken  in  two  places.

After  the  sea  had  somewhat  gone  off  the  quarter-deck,  I  ran  up  into  the
mizentop  to  see  what  had  become  of  the  poor  fellows  who  I  feared  had  met
with  a  watery  grave.  Mr.  Douglas  was  vainly  trying  to  get  on  a  hencoop,
which  had  been  washed  overboard  from  the  quarter-deck,  full  of  fowls.  A
lifebuoy  was  also  close  to  him,  we  having  thrown  them  two.  Cleary  was  taking
off  his  oilskin  coat,  keeping  himself  up  by  "treading  water"  meanwhile,
and  then  tried  to  reach  Mr.  Douglas,  who  could  not  swim,  and  was  moreover
iuipeded  by  too  much  clothing,  it  being  bitterly  cold  weather.  Cleary  must
have  been  a  very  jiowerful  swimmer  to  have  swum  in  such  a  sea,  for  he
managed  to  reach  Mr.  Douglas,  and  then  try  to  help  him  toget  on  the  hencoop.
Shortly  after  they  met,  a  heavy  sea  came  sweeping  along  which  overwhelmed
them,  for  after  it  had  passed  away  I  saw  them  no  more.  So,  poor  fellows,
they  died  together.  It  was  with  a  sad  heart  that  1  went  down  on  deck,  as  Mr.
Douglas  and  I  had  been  great  friends.

We  had  tried  to  get  out  another  boat  to  save  them,  but  in  lowering  her
into  the  water  she,  too,  got  smashed  up  by  a  sea,  and  we  lost  our  Christmas
dinner  as  a  sea  broke  into  the  galley,  washing  out  its  contents  and  the  cook
along  the  deck.  But  this  trouble  was  as  nothing  compared  witli  the  loss  of
the  two  men,  which  was  all  we  could  think  of  for  some  time  ;  in  fact  we
had  a  very  miserable  Christmas,  and  one  long  to  be  remembered  by  me.

We  arrived  in  London  two  months  after  the  accident,  and  three  months
after  leaving  Adelaide.


330


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


Standing  on  the  pierliead,  amongst  the  crowd  of  peojjle  watching  the  ship
come  into  dock,  was  Mr.  Douglas's  fiancee  anxiously  expecting  to  see  him.
When  the  captain  saw  her  he  went  ashore  and,  in  the  best  way  he  could,
broke  the  sad  news  to  her.  The  poor  girl  was  utterly  prostrate  with  grief  on
hearing  what  had  befallen  her  lover.  After  she  had  recovered  somewhat  she
begged  to  be  allowed  to  visit  his  cabin.  The  captain  handed  her  on  board,  and
then,  after  awhile,  she  went  ashore  again.  Whilst  the  captain  was  breaking
the  news  to  the  poor  girl,  a  wild  and  piercing  shriek  was  heard.  We  were  told
that  it  came  from  the  girl  to  whom  Cleary  was  to  have  been  married  on  his
arrival  home.  The  scene  with  her  was  truly  distressing.  Learning  that
Cleary  had  also  been  drowned,  she  fainted,  and  was  taken  away  by  her
friends,  perfectly  helpless  and  heart-broken.

In  this  case  it  will  be  noticed  tliat,  washing  overboard.  Cape  Horn,
and  Christmas  Day  are  all  likely  enough  ideas  to  occur  to  a  dreamer
about  to  take  that  particular  voyage.  It  is  in  their  combination  that
the  strength  of  the  coincidence  lies,  and  the  knowledge  Cleary  must
have  had  of  the  dangers  of  Cape  Horn,  and  of  the  prospect  of  their
reaching  it  about  the  time  they  did  of  course  considerably  reduces  the
improbability  of  such  a  combination  of  ideas.  The  identification  of
Mr.  Douglas  as  his  fellow-sufferer  must  either  have  been  an  indepen-
dent impression  at  the  moment,  or  an  instance  of  the  memory-illusion
already  discussed,  for  it  is  impossible  that  he  should  have  been  for
a  month  in  the  company  of  the  dreamer  without  being  recognised,  if  he
had  been  vividly  presented  in  the  dream.

There  are  other  death-dreams  where  the  improbability  of  the  com-
bination of  circumstances  dreamt  of  is  hard  to  estimate.  I  cannot,  for
instance,  feel  sure  that  a  Consul  at  Salonica  would  be  unlikely  to
dream  that  he  was  murdered  by  a  mob  (P.  108) ;  or  a  railway  porter
that  the  station-master's  legs  were  cut  off  by  a  train  (P.  368);  or,  that
a  man  having  an  acquaintance  known  to  be  insane  and  under  restraint,
and  staying  in  the  same  house  as  his  wife,  would  be  unlikely  to  dream
of  his  cutting  his  throat  with  a  dinner  knife  (P.  620).  And  on  the
ground  of  too  great  probability  I  have  also  omitted  a  case  (P,  68)
where  the  date  of  the  death  was  dreamt  a  fortnight  before  it  occurred,
that  death,  however,  having  been  almost  daily  expected  for  two  or
three  months.

A  dream  of  a  death  very  shortly  before  its  quite  sudden  occurrence
seems  to  have  some  claim  to  consideration  as  evidence  for  pi'emonition.
We  have  two  or  three  cases  of  this,  of  which  the  two  following  are  the
strongest.  The  first  (P.  317)  is  from  Mr.  James  Cox,  Admiralty
House,  Queenstown,  Ireland  (Secretary  Ret.  to  the  Admiral  Commanding
in  Ireland).

December  18th,  1883.
On Sunday, 11th September, 1881, while proceeding in  H.M.S.
Phoenix,  from  Newfoundland  to  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  I  dreamt  that  one  of


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.  331

my  brother  officers  was  lying  dead  in  a  house  at  Portsmouth.  The  dream
was  so  vivid  that  it  quite  disturbed  my  mind  the  following  morning,  and  it
was  with  difficidty  that  I  could  shake  off  the  uncomfortable  feeling.  At
breakfast  I  sat  opposite  the  officer,  and  looking  round  the  table,  I  remarked  :
"  I  dreamt  last  night  that  I  saw  one  of  you  fellows  lying  dead,  but  I  won't
say  which,  as  I  don't  want  to  spoil  your  appetite."  In  the  course  of  the
afternoon,  as  we  were  steaming  into  Halifax  harbour,  the  officer  was  sitting
at  the  stove  in  the  wardroom  joining  in  an  animated  conversation  about  the
speed  of  the  ship,  &c.  A  few  minutes  after  we  anchored,  I  went  on  shore,
and  returned  again  on  board  at  10  p.m.,  and  as  I  was  about  to  go  below  to
my  cabin,  the  officer  of  the  watch  motioned  me  to  be  silent,  and  ajiproaching
me,  said  "  Poor  S.  is  dead,  he  has  just  died  suddenly  ";  and  as  I  passed
across  the  mess-room  I  beheld  the  officer  of  my  dream  lying  dead  in  his
cabin.

I  am  certain  that  two  or  three  officers  who  wore  with  me  in  that  ship  will
remember  the  circumstances.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Cox  adds  : —

I  never  before  or  since  had  any  similar  vivid  dream  of  death.  The  case
of  the  chief  engineer  of  the  Phcenix  was  so  vivid  and  distressed  me  so
much  that  I  am  not  likely  ever  to  forget  it.

The  following  is  from  one  of  Mr.  Cox's  brother  officers,  at  the
time  of  the  dream  and  at  the  time  of  writing,  an  engineer  on  the
Superb  : —

H.M.S.  Superh,  Malta.

Janvary  oth,  1883  (a  mistake  for  1884).

My  Dear  Cox, — I  think  I  can  fully  corroborate  the  story  that  you  ask  me
about,  as  it  made  a  great  impression  on  my  mind  at  the  time,  which  has  never
left  it.  In  fact,  I  have  frequently  spoken  of  it  to  persons  who  have  been
speaking  of  similar  affiiirs,  and  now  I  will  tell  it  as  nearly  as  I  can.  On  the
morning  of  the  12th  September,  1881,  you  told  me  that  you  had  dreamed  the
night  before  that  you  saw  Mr.  Sharp  lying  dead  in  the  back  room  of  a
printer's  shop  in  Commercial-road,  Landjiort  (as  far  as  I  recollect  it  was
Trivers'),  whither  you  had  been  called  by  some  one  for  the  purjtose.  You
said  that  he  had  fallen  down  dead  very  suddenly,  and  that  when  you  told  the
captain  of  the  circumstances,  he  requested  you  to  make  all  necessary
arrangements  with  regard  to  the  funeral,  &c.  You  then,  in  your  dream,
found  yovirself  in  an  undertaker's  shop,  with  some  one  else,  engaged  in
superintending  the  funeral  matters  and  selecting  things,  &c.  ;  and  then,  as
far  as  I  recollect,  your  dream  ended.

All  this  you  told  me,  and  at  the  same  time  remarked  that  we  had  better
not  tell  Mr.  S.,  as  he  was  rather  a  nervous  man.  We  laughed  over  the
affair,  and  thought  no  more  about  it.  That  same  evening  the  subject  of  your
dream  actually  died  suddenly  from  lieart  disease,  and  I  think  on  the
following  day  yourself  and  Hill  went  ashore,  and  selected  some  coffin
fittings,  &c. ,  and  you  told  me  when  you  came  back  how  the  whole  thing
Hashed  through  your  mind  again  on  finding  yourself  in  the  undertaker's
shop.


332


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


It  was  the  strangest  thing  that  ever  came  under  my  actual  notice,  and  I
am  pleased  to  be  able  to  corroborate  it. — Yours  sincerely,

M.  Hawkins.

The  next  (P.  316)  is  from  a  lady  who  unfortunately  does  not
allow  us  to  print  her  name,  though  it  may  be  mentioned  to  anyone
wishing  to  know  it.

My  mother  died  very  suddenly  on  December  14th,  1876,  and  in  the
•absence  of  my  husband  our  vicar  came  to  break  it  to  me.  I  (juickly
suspected  his  errand  and  then  told  him  it  was  no  shock  to  me,  I  had  been  so
fully  prepared  by  dreams.  I  had  seen  her  funeral,  and  gone  through  all
the  last  scenes  more  than  once,  and  so  vividly  that  when  I  awoke  it  was  a
few  moments  before  I  could  realise  that  she  was  still  alive.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  our  informant  adds  : —

If  I  had  been  anxious  about  my  mother  at  the  time,  I  should  not  have
thought  my  dreams  worth  mentioning.  I  was  expecting  to  pay  her  a  visit  in
six  weeks'  time,  and  she  was  just  as  usual  when  the  breaking  of  a  blood
vessel  on  the  brain  ended  her  life  in  a  few  minutes.  I  do  not  remember  ever
to  have  had  what  I  call  a  "  warning  dream  "  except  on  this  occasion.

I  think  for  about  10  nights  previous  to  her  death,  I  had  vivid  repre-
sentations of  her  being  ill,  dying,  being  buried.  I  could  see  her  dead,  see  her
funeral.

DREAMS  OF  ACCIDENTS.

Analogous  to  death-dreams  are  dreams  of  serious  accidents.  The
following  (P.  310)  is  from  Miss  R.  F.  Curtis,  37,  Springfield-road,  St.
John's  Wood.

On  a  Saturday  night  in  the  autumn  of  1882,  I  dreamt  the  following : — I  was
walking  down  a  street  in  London  when  a  lady  in  black  passed  me,  who
turned  round  to  look  at  me.  I  saw  she  was  in  tears.  The  lady  hurried  on  ;
I  hurried  after  her  to  see  who  she  was.  When  I  came  up  to  her  I  found  her
lying  in  the  road.  A  number  of  people  had  collected.  I  said, "  Is  she  hurt  ?  "
Some  said,  "  She  is  dead,"  some  that  she  was  not  dead.  I  asked  who  it  was
that  was  lying  in  the  road.  They  said,  "Mrs.  C."  There  was  some  con-
fusion, and  I  awoke  from  my  dream.  As  I  had  not  heard  of  my  friend,  Mrs.
C,  of  Clapham  Common,  for  so  long,  I  made  inquiries  about  her  among  my
friends,  about  a  week  after  I  had  the  dream,  and  was  told  Mrs.  C.  had  fallen
over  a  kerb-stone  that  was  very  high,  and  had  fallen  into  the  road,  much
hurt.  She  had  the  accident  on  the  Sunday  evening  following  the  Saturday
night  when  I  had  the  dream.  The  dream  was  remarkably  clear,  and  I  do  not
often  dream  of  my  acquaintances.  I  related  it  to  my  sister  Jessie,  a  shoi-t
time  before  the  accident  occurred  to  Mrs.  C.  My  sister  Jessie  signs  her
name  in  proof  that  the  account  above  is  correct,  and  that  I  related  the  dream
to  her  before  the  event  happened.

Rosamond  F.  Curtis.
.Tessie  Kate  Curtis.

Miss  Curtis  wrote  on  December  2nd,  1884  : —

I  can  safely  state  that  I  had  no  cause  of  anxiety  about  Mrs.  C.  before  I
•dreamt  of  her.


I


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.  333

The  next  case  (P.  336)  was  sent  to  us,  in  1885,  by  the  Rev.  E.  N.
Pochin,  of  Barkby,  Leicester.  The  dreamer.  Miss  E.  N.,  is  a  parishioner
•of  his.

About  the  year  1876,  I  had  a  dream  in  which  I  saw  H.  B. ,  the  wife  of  the
parish  clerk,  slip  down  on  the  causeway  opposite  to  the  house  of  Mr.  C.  I
then  saw  her  carried  into  Mr.  C.'s  house,  when  it  aj^peared  that  she  had
sustained  some  injury  from  the  falh  Nothing  that  I  know  of  led  up  to  this
dream.  H.  B.  was  in  no  wise  more  likely  to  slip  down,  certainly  not  when  I
dreamt  she  did,  than  anyone  else  in  the  jjarish.  I  told  this  dream  to  several
different  persons,  and  amongst  others  to  the  vicar.  Rev.  E.  N.  Pochin,  in
the  presence  of  several  of  my  companions,  before  the  facts  occurred,  which
all  happened  after  I  had  told  my  dream,  exactly  as  I  had  dreamt.

Then  follows  an  account  of  another  premonitory  dream  where  the
future  event  was  perhaps  less  unexpected  ;  and  of  impressions  that
certain  visitors  will  call  that  day. The  document  proceeds  : —

All  this  I  declare  to  be  faithful  and  true,  in  token  of  which  I  sign  this
statement,  as  also  my  mother,  who  confirms  it  in  its  several  particulars  ;  and
the  vicar  also  in  those  parts  where  his  name  is  mentioned,  and  my  brother,
who  knows  these  facts.

This  document  is  signed  by  Mr.  Pochin,  Miss  E.  N.,  and  her
mother  and  brother.

The  following  two  dreams  occurred  to  Mr.  J.  W.  Skilton,  formerly
an  engine  driver  in  Ohio,  and  now  living  in  Florida.  They  appeared
in  1886,  in  Mind  in  Nature,  a  periodical  published  in  Chicago.  He
says  : —

Six  times  has  my  locomotive  been  overturned,  while  running  at  high
speed  ;  and  each  time  I  have  dreamt  of  it  two  nights  before,  each  time  in  the
dream  I  saw  the  exact  place — direction  in  which  the  engine  was  going,  and
the  side  on  which  the  engine  turned  over.

(P.  491)  [In  1853]  I  was  firing  a  locomotive,  a  line  new  passenger  engine,
built  for  speed,  and  just  from  the  shop.  I  thought  myself  lucky  to  be  on  sucli
a  fine  engine,  and  was  proud  of  my  position.  One  night.  May  29th,  1853,  I
dreamed  that  the  train  ran  through  a  shallow  cut,  and  came  out  on  a  high
stone  bridge,  over  which  the  train  passed,  and  then  the  engine  turned  over
down  the  bank  some  70ft. ,  into  the  river.  I  mentioned  my  dream  the  next
morning  to  the  family  with  wh(3m  I  was  living.  The  lady  [now  dead]  told  me
I  was  going  to  be  killed,  but  I  told  her  that  in  my  dream,  I  had  assurance  that
I  should  not  be  hurt.  On  the  second  morning  after  my  dream,  we  were  sent
over  a  part  of  the  road  with  which  I  was  not  familiar,  and  presently  came  to
a  shallow  cut,  and  I  saw  a  number  of  men  ahead  on  the  track.  The  engineer
was  near-sighted,  and  did  not  see  them.  I  called  to  him  to  stop  the  engine
he  tried  to  do  so,  but  the  track  was  wet,  and  seeing  that  part  of  the  track
ahead  had  been  taken  up,  he  jumped  from  the  engine.  I  remained  on  it,
and  tried  to  stop  it.  Before  this  could  be  done,  we  were  on  a  stone  bridge,
and  I  could  not  get  off.  The  engine  left  the  track,  and  at  the  other  end  nf
the  bridge  turned  over  twice  before  it  reached  the  bott(jm,  and  1  with  its
receiving  but  a  small  scratch  how,  I  do  not  know. I  climbed  the  bank,  and


334


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


looking  back,  saw  just  what  I  had  seen  in  my  dream.  The  bridge  was  200ft.
long,  with  five  stone  arches,  54ft.  high,  and  the  bank  down  which  the  engine
rolled,  70ft.

(P.  493)  One  more  instance  I  very  clearly  remember,  although  it  occurred
many  years  ago,  when  I  was  engineer  on  a  Western  road.  About  12  o'clock
Saturday  [night  September  5th],  1859,  I  arrived  at  the  west  end  of  my  run,
and  retired.  I  dreamed  I  was  coming  west  with  my  train,  running  at  full
speed,  trying  to  make  up  about  one  hour  lost  time.  About  half  way  between
two  stations,  8  miles  apart,  on  the  smoothest  track  on  the  whole  road,
the  engine  jumped  the  track,  and  turned  over  on  the  north  side,  and  when  it
stopped  I  was  sitting  on  one  of  the  driving  wheels,  with  my  legs  between
the  spokes  ;  and  a  person  in  white  came  down  from  the  sky,  with  a  span  of
white  horses  and  a  black  carriage,  picked  me  off  the  engine,  placed  me  in  the
carriage,  and  drove  up  toward  the  sky  in  a  south-easterly  direction.  I
awoke,  but  the  dream  distressed  me  so  that  I  slept  very  little  more  that
night.  I  did  not  mention  it  to  anyone,  but  I  could  not  get  rid  of  the
impression  all  through  the  Sabbath.  Monday  morning  I  took  my  train  back
to  the  other  end  of  my  run,  where  I  lived,  arriving  there  at  1  p.m.  At
9.40  p.m.  my  time  came  to  go  west  again.  The  train  was  54  minutes  late  ;
as  usual,  the  conductor  said  to  me  "Make  up  all  you  can,"  equivalent  to
saying  :  Run  as  fast  as  you  dare.  When  about  40  miles  out,  running  as  fast
as  I  ever  ran, — something  more  than  a  mile  a  minute, — just  at  the  point  I
had  seen  in  my  dream,  the  engine  struck  a  horse,  which  threw  the  forward
truck  ofi'  the  track.  It  was  one  of  the  darkest  nights  I  ever  saw.  I
instinctively  reversed  the  engine,  but  did  not  shut  off  steam.  The  engine
soon  turned  over  on  the  north  side  of  the  track,  and  slid  over  50ft.  on  the
level  ground  before  it  could  be  stopped,  when  I  found  myself  sitting  on  the
driving  wheel,  with  my  feet  between  the  spokes,  my  under  jaw,  and  three  ribs
broken,  and  a  deep  gash  on  each  side  of  my  face^  with  18  inches  of  the
throttle  lever  broken  off  in  my  hand,  which  I  had  not  let  go  of  all  the  time  ;
but  the  person  with  the  horses  and  carriage  was  not  there.  I  had  not
mentioned  my  dream  to  my  wife —  ;  they  telegraphed  her  tliat  I  was
killed,  but  she  would  not  believe  it.  I  reached  home  the  next  day  at  5  p.m.,
fully  persuaded  there  was  something  in  my  dreams,  but  the  mystery  to  me
was  that  it  should  come  so  true  to  tlie  letter,  to  the  point  where  I  should
see  tlie  man  with  tlie  liorses,  and  they  not  appear.

The  dream  had  so  impressed  me  that  at  one  time  on  Monday,  I  made  up
my  mind  not  to  go  out  that  night,  but  at  the  same  moment  came  the
impression,  more  distinctly  than  if  uttered  by  an  audible  voice,  giving  me  the
assurance  that  I  should  not  be  killed  ;  that  He  to  Whom  I  always  committed
my  life  when  starting,  and  Who  has  never  failed  me  in  all  times  of  need,  and
Who  had  always  brouglit  me  safely  out  of  all  accidents,  would  keejj  me  this
time,  and  not  allow  me  to  be  seriously  injured.

J. W.  Skilton,
Shell-road,  near  Jacksonville,  Florida,  U.S.A.

A  third  dream  (P.  492)  is  given  in  Alind  in  Nature,  but  the  collision
vividly  dreamed  of  did  not  actually  occur. It  was  just  prevented

1  I  have  seen  the  scars  on  the  under  jaw,  and  on  each  side  of  the  face.  — G.  A.  S.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions. ■  385

by  Mr.  Skilton's  own  exertions  and  he  thinks  he  might  not  have
prevented  it  had  he  not  been  doubly  on  the  alert  on  account  of  the
dream.

Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  called  on  Mr.  Skilton  when  in  America  in
November,  1886,  and  writes  : —

I  found  Skilton  yesterday,  and  he  proves  to  be  a  very  pleasant  and
apparently  most  reliable  man.  He  has  now  retired  from  railway  life,  and  has
an  orange  grove  and  beautiful  residence  on  the  St.  John's  River,  two  miles
from  Jacksonville.  There  is  no  confirmation  obtainable  for  his  narratives,  as
he  only  spoke  of  his  imi^ressions  to  his  wife,  who  is  dead  ;  and  there  does  not
seem  to  be  any  one  who  could  give  her  second-hand  testimony.  Skilton  is  an
engineer  and  railway  man  every  mch  of  hun,  and  the  very  embodiment  of
practical  good  sense.  He  has  had  other  similar  experiences,  which  will  soon
appear  in  Mind  in  Nature,  and  has  outlined  them  to  me,  as  well  as  going
through  the  enclosed  [the  article  in  Mind  in  Nature  from  which  the
above  has  been  taken].  I  never  met  a  man  with  a  more  accurate  memory  for
facts  and  dates;  he  is  a  walking  railway  guide  and  time-table  and  I  frequently
verified  his  memory  by  reference  to  old  time-bills  in  his  possession.  One  has
no  reason  to  doubt  his  narratives  in  any  way  ;  as  he  relates  them  in  simple
and  earnest  language,  the  details  never  vary  ;  and  he  prefers  to  have  you
regard  them  as  coincidences  rather  than  as  evidence  of  anything  else.  But
he  himself  regards  his  experiences  as  an  indication  of  some  sort  of  protection.
He  has  put  dates  against  each  case,  which  is  about  all  that  can  be  done  ;  and
he  also  was  anxious  to  give  the  two  references  [to  gentlemen  in  America]
which  I  have  written  on  the  margin.  I  regard  him  as  an  excellent  witness,
whose  testimony  would  be  faithfully  relied  upon  in  any  other  matter.

(Signed) G.  A.  Smith.

Mr.  Smith  tells  us  also  that  Mr.  Skilton  assured  him  that  he  had
never  had  similar  premonitions  which  were  not  realised.

The  next  recent  and  very  well  authenticated  one,  was

contributed  by  the  secretary  of  the  Munich  Psychologische  Gesellschaft
to  Sphinx  for  March,  1887  (P.  187).  The  following  is  a  translation
of  part  of  his  article  : —

.  .  Intercourse  with  a  "  sensitive  "  lady  friend  has  given  the  writer
of  these  lines  many  opportunities  of  observing  transcendental  impulses,  which
exhibited  themselves  in  her  case  as  "presentiments"  and  "  truth -telling  "
dreams.  The  following  characteristic  dream  appears  to  be  worth  publication,
because  it  is  so  especially  well  authenticated.  ^  Frau  K.  describes  her
experience  as  follows  : —

"  In  a  night  early  in  August  1886, 1  was  witness,  in  a  dream,  to  the  outbreak
of  a  rapidly  spreading  conflagration,  which  through  its  terrifying  grandeur
had  a  paralysing  eflsct  on  me. When  I  woke  I  remained  so  much  under  the

1  The  editor  of  Sphinx  &t-aXeB  that  the  persons  concerned  have  authorised  him  to
allow  to  those  who  should  exhibit  a  special  interest  in  the  occurrence,  a  perusal  of  the
signed  evidence.

z  ■


336


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


influence  of  what  I  had  dreamed,  that  the  reality  of  such  a  misfortune  could
not  have  distressed  me  more.  Strange  to  say,  soon  after  waking  the
thought  pressed  upon  me,  that  our  securities,  which  the  brewery-^jroprietor
B.  kept  in  his  fire-proof  safe,  were  in  danger.  Although  I  cannot
remember  having  dreamed  of  any  danger  to  the  bonds,  and  though  there  was
no  external  reason  for  connecting  the  papers  with  the  fire,  to  my  astonishment
despite  all  the  reasons  with  which  I  endeavoured  to  talk  myself  out  of
this  apparently  motiveless  feeling,  the  idea  increased  to  such  a  point,  that
I  at  once  told  those  around  me  about  my  dream.  As  though  my  mis-
giving was  to  be  confirmed  as  correct,  three  days  later  I  had  exactly  the  same
dream,  only  with  still  greater  distinctness.  The  unaccountable  uneasiness
increased  still  more,  and  I  had  the  sensation  as  though  an  internal  voice  called
to  me,  to  put  the  bonds  in  safety.  As  the  loss  of  them  would  have  meant  a
great  misfortune  for  us,  I  tried  (following  the  warning)  to  induce  my
husband  to  put  the  papers  in  some  other  place.

"As  the  majority  of  persons  in  his  place  would  probably  have  done,  he
looked  upon  my  fears  as  groundless  and  could  not  attribute  any  imjiortance
to  a  dream.  At  first  he  flatly  refused  to  grant  my  request.  But  in  the
meanwhile  the  inexplicable  feeling  of  anxiety  so  thoroughly  took  possession
of  me,  that  I  made  him  continually  more  urgent  representations.  At  last,
after  about  10  days,  he  gave  in,  less  on  account  of  the  dream  than  for  the
sake  of  my  comfort.  From  the  moment  that  I  knew  that  the  bonds  had
been  jjlaced  in  security,  in  the  Munich  Mortgage  and  Exchange  Bank,
my  equanimity  was  restored.  Soon  afterwards  I  went  into  the
country,  to  the  Tyrol,  and  should  hardly  have  thought  more  of  this
occurrence,  had  I  not  suddenly,  during  the  night  of  the  14th -15th  of
September,  again  been  the  dreaming  witness  of  a  tremendous  fire.  But
instead  of,  as  before,  being  frightened  by  the  exciting  scene,  there  came
over  me  a  feeling  of  relief  as  of  being  saved  from  a  great  calamity,  by  the
timely  saving  of  the  papers.  On  the  morning  of  the  15th  I  made  known  my
dream  experience  to  those  around  me.  Sadly  enough  the  warning  was
fulfilled  ;  for  already,  the  following  day,  I  received  written  information
that  the  brewery,  in  which  was  the  above  mentioned  safe,  had  been  reduced
to  ashes  by  a  destructive  fire,  which  had  broken  out  on  the  14th  of
September.  As  I  afterwards  heard,  the  building  was  burnt  to  the  ground  ;
tlie  fire-proof  safe  was  exposed  to  flames  and  heat  for  36  hours,  so  that  the
proprietor's  papei's  which  were  preserved  in  it  were  completely  charred.
These  dreams  thereftire  (as  has  happened  to  me  before  ^)  saved  me  from  a
great  misfortune."

The  correctness  and  precision  of  this  communication  is  confirmed  by  the
signature  of  five  witnesses.  The  husband  of  the  lady  testifies  in  his  protocol
that  he  really  had  been  led  to  the  removal  of  the  papers  by  her  request,  as
above  described;  he  was  also  a  witness  of  the  breaking  out  of  the  fire  on  the
14th  of  September.  Three  friends  of  the  family,  Frau  von  O. ,  Herr  von  M. ,
and  Baron  von  E.,  state  in  their  evidence  that  the  above  dream  had  been
fully  related  to  them  during  the  first  days  of  Avigust,  and  that  they  them-

1  Only  a  few  months  before  this  event,  Frau  K.  owed  to  a  similar  transcendental
warning  the  saving  of  her  life,  which  was  threatened  by  an  escape  of  gas.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


337


selves  had  taken  part  in  the  discussion  respecting  the  danger  of  the  bonds.
Further,  Herr  von  M.  states  that  before  the  arrival  of  the  letter  on  the
morning  of  the  15th  of  September,  in  the  Tyrol,  the  dream  of  the  previous
night  (also  given  above)  had  been  related  to  him.  According  to  the
statement  of  the  thus  heavily  visited  proprietor  of  the  brewery,  the  fire
broke  out  on  the  14th  of  September,  thus  some  four  weeks  after  the
delivering-up  of  the  bonds,  and  raged  three  days  ;  the  36  hours  of  heat  which
the  safe  had  sustained  had  destroyed  all  the  papers  that  were  in  it.  More-
over, several  newspapers  lie  before  me  which  give  an  account  of  this  great
conflagration.

This  case  offers  several  special  points  for  consideration.  In  the  first
place,  the  feeling  of  anxiety  about  the  papers,  which  was  the  only  thing  to
connect  the  dream  fire  with  the  building  afterwards  burnt,  did  not,  so
far  as  the  percipient  was  aware,  arise  out  of  the  dream  itself.  It  may
have  formed  a  part  of  the  dream  and  have  been  forgotten  as  such,  but
it  almost  looks  as  if  both  dream  and  anxiety  were  the  result  of  a
subconscious  impression  of  danger  to  the  papers  from  fire.  Another
interesting  point  is  the  occurrence  of  the  final  dream  simultaneously
with  the  fire,  a  coincidence  which  certainly  adds  great  weight  to  the
reasons  for  regarding  the  whole  set  of  experiences  as  supernormal.
This  last  dream  was,  if  supernormal,  clairvoyant  or  telepathic,- — not  of
course  premonitory ;  and  it  seems  possible  that  all  three  dreams
were  of  this  character  and  not  premonitory  at  all,  for  the  danger  of
fire  may  have  existed  all  the  time  and  not  only  when  it  actually
occurred.  As  this  is,  however,  a  conjecture,  not  a  certainty  (as  would
be,  e.g.,  the  present  existence  of  a  letter  whose  arrival  next  day  was
dreamt  of),  I  have  thought  it  best  to  include  the  case  among
premonitions.

With  it  we  may  group  the  following,  where  also  we  seem  to  have
a  supernormal  perception  of  what  may  have  been  existing  danger
(P.  322).  It  is  from  Mrs.  Stella,  of  Chieri,  Italy.

The  following  occurred  to  my  mother,  the  most  matter-of-fact  person  and
not  one  to  be  easily  impressed.  About  three  years  ago,  I  received  a  telegram
from  her,  from  London,  saying,  ' '  Take  care  of  the  plate  ;  will  write  and
explain."  I  did  not  understand  what  she  meant,  but  nevertheless,  I  took
extra  precautions  in  shutting  up  the  house  at  night,  and  awaited  my  mother's
letter.  It  appears  she  had  dreamed  that  she  had  been  aroused  from  her  sleep
by  a  noise,  that  she  got  up  to  see  what  it  was,  and  went  out  on  to  the  stair-
case, and  on  looking  down  she  saw  our  dining-room  here  in  Italy,  and  a  man
was  filling  a  bag  with  the  plate,  which  another  man  was  handing  to  him  from
the  sideboard.  She  heard  one  man  say  to  the  other,  in  Italian,  ' '  To-morrow
we  will  go  to  Genoa  and  spend  Sunday  "  (that  making  it  Friday  that  they
were  robbing  us). ,  One  of  the  men,  looking  up  suddenly,  saw  my  mother,
and  began  mounting  the  stairs  with  a  long  knife  in  his  hand,  and  the  fright
woke  my  mother.  But  the  impression  was  so  vivid  that  she  sent  me  a
telegram  the  next  morning  (Thursday),  being  quite  sure  that  our  house


338


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


would  be  robbed  on  the  Friday  niglit.  It  was  not,  however  ;  but  the
following  Wednesday  a  band  of  robbers  broke  into  the  house  nearest  to  us
and  carried  off  everything,  but  they  were  taken  the  next  day,  when  they
confessed  tliat  they  intended  on  the  Friday  to  rob  our  house,  and  then  go  to
Genoa.  Among  the  things  taken  with  them  were  a  bag  and  a  long  knife
answering  to  the  ones  my  mother  described.  My  mother  has  great  common-
sense,  and  held  until  then  all  superstitious  presentiments  and  belief  in
dreams  as  really  wrong,  yet  on  this  occasion  her  dream  was  so  clear  that  she
not  only  acted  in  contradiction  to  all  her  previous  opinions,  but  even  thought
it  sufficiently  urgent  to  necessitate  a  telegram.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Stella  adds  : —

With  regard  to  the  plate  robbery,  the  man's  confession  was  made  to  one
of  our  peasants  (since  unfortunately  dead).  As  they  were  being  handcuffed,
our  man  was  there,  and,  I  believe,  even  assisted  to  secure  the  thieves,  who
were  personally  known  to  him  ;  and  one  of  them  said  to  him,  "If  it  had  not
been  for  our  bad  luck,  we  should  have  cleaned  out  your  padrone's  jjlace  to-
morrow night  and  then  got  off  to  Genoa."  This  is  the  exact  translation  of
his  words  as  well  as  I  can  remember,  and  of  course  our  man  came  to  tell  us
of  our  escape.  Under  other  circumstances  I  might  not  have  attached  any
great  importance  to  an  Italian  peasant's  story,  but  it  quite  confirmed  my
mother's  dream.

The  weakest  point  in  the  evidence  here  is  the  testimony  to  the
supposed  fulfilment  of  the  dream,  the  intention  of  the  men  to  rob  Mrs.
Stella's  house,  for  it  is  at  second-hand  from  a  peasant.  Still,  it  is  of
course  very  probable  that  they  did  intend  it,  and  they  may  quite  well
have  intended  it  at  the  time  of  the  dream.

We  have  another  case  with  some  analogy  to  the  two  last,  though
less  well  evidenced,  being  remote  in  time  and  uncorroboi"ated.  (P.  485.)
It  is  from  Mrs.  Hunter,  Silverwood,  Skelmorlie,  N.B.

I  lived  in  Ayr.  My  sister,  who  lived  out  of  town,  came  to  stay  a  night
with  me  before  leaving  tlie  locality,  and  sent  a  trunk  to  the  railway  station  to
be  left  till  called  for.  That  night  my  sister  and  I  slept  together.  I  dreamt
of  running  up  and  down  the  streets  of  Ayr  in  distress,  looking  for  a  jjolice-
man,  and  not  one  could  I  find.  I  awoke,  and  ■  falling  asleej)  again  dreamt
exactly  the  same  dream.  I  woke  my  sister  and  told  her  about  it,  adding
that  I  was  afraid  some  trouble  was  brewing,  but  she  just  laughed  at  me.
Again  falling  asleep,  the  tliird  time  the  dream  repeated  itself.  Being  now
rather  alarmed,  I  got  up,  at  6  a.  m. ,  and  asked  my  sister  to  go  ofl"  with  the
earliest  train,  8  a.m.,  and  leave  me.  She  did  so,  and,  on  reaching  the  station,
the  first  thing  she  noticed  was  her  trunk  with  the  feet  knocked  off,  and
otherwise  disfigured,  and  standing  by  it  a  woman  dressed  in  her  own  shawl
and  other  wearables.  My  sister  became  greatly  agitated,  and  the  woman,  on
seeing  her  thus,  ran  away.  And  for  more  than  an  hour  my  sister  ran  up  and
down  the  streets  seeking  for  a  policeman,  and  not  one  could  be  found.  She
afterwards  came  back  to  me  and  told  her  story.  It  was  afterwards  found  that
this  woman  had  claimed  the  trunk  on  the  previous  evening,  taken  it  to  her
lodgings,  abstracted  the  valuables,  and  was  trying  to  make  off  with  the


On  the  Evidence  for  Premoriitions.  339


earliest  train.  She  was  apprehended,  and  having  been  previously  convicted,
was  transported.

Sarah  Huxter.

Mr.  Gurney  remarks  on  this  case: —

Aufjust  29th,  1884.
I  have  had  a  long  inter^dew  with  Mrs.  Hunter,  who  is  a  sensible  woman,
with  no  inclination  to  the  marvellous.  The  case  was  more  striking  as  told
viva  voce.  The  sister  was  angry  and  offended  at  IVIrs.  Hunter's  insistence
that  she  should  start  by  the  early  train.  The  event  happened  quite  30  years
ago. Mrs.  H.  does  not  know  her  sister's  present  address.

Here  the  dream,  it  must  be  admitted,  represented  a  future  event —
the  search  for  the  policeman — but  the  theft  which  made  that  search
necessary  had  already  occurred.  There  seems  to  have  been  here,  as  in
the  German  lady's  dream  of  fire,  a  waking  impression  not  apparently
derived  from  the  dream.  In  this  case  it  caused  Mrs.  Hunter  rightly
to  connect  the  idea  of  impending  misfortune  ^^dth  her  sister,  and  in
fact  led  to  the  partial  averting  of  the  mischief.  It  is  difficult  to  say
how  far,  given  an  idea  of  theft,  the  idea  of  vainly  looking  for  a  police-
man was  likely  to  occur  spontaneously  in  a  dream.

Returning  to  accident-dreams,  we  may  group  with  them  the  follow-
ing dream  of  an  averted  accident.  It  was  recorded  by  Mrs.  De  Morgan,
wife  of  the  late  Professor  De  Morgan,  in  the  Spiritualist  newspaper
for  October  11th,  1878,  and  corroborated  by  her  daughter-in-law,  at
our  request,  in  1883. (P.  60.)

I  took  my  family,  consisting  of  my  daughter,  my  daughter-in-law,  the
four  young  children  of  the  latter,  and  a  servant,  mto  Dorsetshire  five  weeks
ago.  Four  days  before  we  left  London,  I  awoke  from  a  sleep,  or  doze,  with
an  image  vividly  depicted  on  my  mind.  I  was  sitting  on  a  bank  reading.
My  daughter-in-law  started  up  suddenly  and  ran  to  a  spot  grown  over  with
weeds,  briars,  and  dank  grass.  Then  I  saw  her  catch  up  one  of  the  little
children,  who  was  running  to  the  same  spot.  She  looked  at  the  place  and
called  out  to  me  that  there  was  a  deep  well  there.  I  felt  a  sense  of  relief
that  the  child  was  safe,  but  was  so  impressed  with  the  dream,  or  vision,  that
I  described  it  at  once  to  her,  and  it  was  mentioned  afterwards  to  others.

Ar\lien  we  arrived  at  the  railway  station  we  were  met  by  the  landlord  of
our  lodgings,  who  was  to  drive  us  m  a  waggonette  to  the  village.  On  the
way  I  asked  him  if  he  had  a  well  on  his  ground,  as  we  had  little  children
with  us.  He  replied  that  there  was  a  well  m  the  house,  but  it  was  covered
and  had  a  pump  over  it.  Three  or  four  days  after  our  arrival,  we  were  sitting
reading  on  a  green  ridge  in  a  field  belonging  to  our  landlord.  The  children
were  playing  a  little  way  from  us  and  their  mother  was  beside  me.  All  at  once
she  started  up  and  ran  to  a  spot  at  a  little  distance  where  rough  coarse  grass
and  weeds  hid  what  was  du-ectly  behind.  The  youngest  child,  a  baby  of  two
years  old,  was  running  to  this  place,  and  as  he  approached  it  his  mother
caught  him  up,  turning  round  to  me  and  exclaiming,  '  Oil  1  here  is  a  deep
well. ' We  then  remembered  my  dream  and  our  intended  precautions.


340


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


But  the  dream  was  really  of  no  use  as  a  ivarning  for  we  had  quite  forgotten
it,  having  been  made  easy  by  our  landlord's  assurance  that  all  was  safe.

Bedford  Park.

I  perfectly  remember  my  mother-in-law  waking  up  and  telling  me  that
she  had  just  had  a  dream  about  a  well  hidden  by  a  bramble  bush  and  over-
grown with  rank  grass,  in  a  field  in  which  we  were  all  together,  and  she
cautioned  me  to  be  on  my  guard  about  it  at  Chideock,  on  account  of  the
children.

And  all  liappened  exactly  as  she  has  here  narrated  it.

A.  M.  De  Mokgan.

The  next  three  dreams  are  not  of  the  accident  itself,  but  of  the
appearance  of  the  sufferer  as  first  seen  by  the  dreamer  afterwards.
(P.  354.)

Mrs.  Donaldson,  Devereux  House,  Daleham  gardens,  Fitzjolin's-
avenue,  N.W.,  writes,  I  think,  in  1883  : —

On  Sunday  morning,  the  29th  Sej)tember,  1878,  I  roused  my  husband  by
speaking  in  my  sleep  in  a  moaning  and  distressed  manner.  I  said,  ' '  Oh,  B. ,
what  is  the  matter  with  your  face  1  "  and  then  began  to  sob.  My  husband
woke  me  and  inquired  the  cause  of  my  distress.  I  said,  "I  saw  B."
(mentioning  the  name  of  my  nurse)  ' '  standing  in  the  nursery  with  her  back
turned  to  me,  and  when  I  spoke  to  her,  and  she  half  turned  round,  I  saw  the
side  of  her  face  terribly  cut  and  bruised."  Hence  my  distressed  inquiry  as
to  the  cause  of  the  injury.

That  Sunday  evening  she  did  not  appear  as  usual  at  family  prayers,  and
upon  inquiring  the  reason  of  her  absence,  the  cook  I'eplied,  "  B.  has  met
with  an  accident,  ma'am,  and  has  fallen  out  of  the  Metropolitan  train."  1
rushed  ujDstairs,  and  there,  in  precisely  the  same  position  as  I  had  seen  her  in
my  dream,  stood  B.,  with  the  side  of  her  face  cut  and  bruised  as  I  had  seen  it,
and  without  thinking  of  the  coincidence  at  the  moment,  I  said,  "Oh,
B.,  what  is  the  matter  with  your  face  ? "  and  as  I  said  the  words  the  whole
dream  flashed  vividly  across  my  memory.

Agnes  E.  Donaldson.

On  the  Sunday  morning  I  heai'd  my  wife  distinctly  say  in  her  sleej),  "Oh,
B. ,  what  is  the  matter  with  your  face?"  and  then  I  roused  her.  We  thought
no  more  of  this  until  after  the  accident  in  the  following  evening. — A.  B.
Donaldson.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Donaldson  adds  : —

Mrs.  Donaldson  is  not  accustomed  to  have  distressing  dreams,  and  she  is
by  no  means  of  a  fanciful  or  morbid  turn  of  mind.

No  exact  account  of  the  dream  was  written  at  the  time,  but  the  fact  was
noted  in  a  journal.  We  have  both  the  clearest  remembrance  of  the  dream
and  its  fulfilment.

In  the  next  case  (P.  345)  the  evidence  that  the  dream  preceded  the
accident  is  less  decisive.  It  is  from  Mrs  Medwell,  Fulbrook-road,
Junction- road,  N.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


341


February,  1884.

About  11  years  ago  my  husband  was  a  fireman  on  the  Great  Northern,
going  out  very  early  in  the  morning.  I  expected  him  home  about  2  o'clock
in  the  day.  A  few  hours  after  he  left  me  I  had  a  dream.  I  fancied  I  saw
my  husband  brought  home  with  his  head  all  over  blood,  and  very  much  cut.
It  so  startled  me  that  I  could  not  keep  in  bed,  but  I  got  up  and  told  my
landlady  my  dream,  and  told  her  I  felt  sure  something  would  happen  to  my
husband.

I  was  looking  out  of  the  window,  when  I  saw  a  man  bring  him  home  to
the  gate.  I  was  quite  ready  for  him,  and  he  was  surprised  to  see  I  knew  all
about  it. This  is  quite  true.

Mart  Medwell.

Mr.  Gurney  applied  to  Mrs.  Crellin,  of  62,  Hilldrop-crescent,  N.,
who  employs  Mrs.  Medwell,  and  through  whom  the  account  was
obtained,  to  discover  the  relation  of  time  between  the  di'eam  and  the
accident.  She  has  been  informed  that  "  the  dream  preceded  the  accident
by  an  hour  or  so."  Mrs.  Crellin  has  also  ascertained  from  Mrs.
Matthews,  of  59,  Pratt-street,  N.W.,  who  was  Mrs.  Medwell's  landlady
at  the  time,  that  "  Mrs.  Medwell  narrated  her  dream  in  the  morning  ;
and  Mrs.  Matthews  afterwards  saw  the  husband  led  home,  with  a
wound  in  his  head,  caused  by  a  stone  thrown  on  the  railway  by  some
boys."  Mrs.  Medwell  had  another  vivid  dream  about  an  accident  to
her  husband,  but  it  seems  to  have  occurred  simultaneously  with  or
soon  after  the  accident.

The  third  case  of  the  kind  is  from  Mr.  Rowland  Rowlands,  of
Bryncethin,  Bridgend,  who  has  had  a  considerable  number  of  impres-
sions and  dreams  corresponding  with  real  facts  (see,  for  some  of  his
experiences.  Phantasms  of  the  Liinng,Yol.  I.,  pp.  252,  291,  and  Vol.
II.,  p.  443),  in  two  or  three  cases  these  real  facts  being  in  the  future.
The  one  about  to  be  related  has  the  defect  of  being  remote  and
uncorroborated,  but  it  was  apparently  acted  on,  which  is  of  course
important  as  diminishing  the  danger  of  memory  deception. (P.  81.)

About  25  or  30  years  ago,  when  I  was  livmg  at  Pontyeats,  and  before  I
was  manager  at  Pen-y-graig,  my  son  was  at  a  school  in  Kidwelly,  kept  by  a
Mr.  Nicholas.  One  morning,  when  I  had  come  back  to  my  house  from  work,
I  sat  do\m  in  a  chair  as  soon  as  I  got  home,  and  then,  when  just  between
sleeping  and  waking,  I  saw  my  son  standing  before  me  with  the  blood
running  out  of  his  eye.  It  was  not  a  regular  dream,  and  yet  I  wasn't  quite
awake.

I  was  so  sure  that  something  had  happened  to  the  boy  that  I  went  off  at
once  to  Kidwelly,  five  or  six  miles  off,  and  asked  Mr.  Nicholas  where  the
boy  was  and  how  he  was.  Mr.  Nicholas  said  the  boy  was  all  right,  and  he
had  seen  him  only  a  few  minutes  before.  Whilst  we  still  were  talking,  my  boy
came  in,  bleeding  from  a  cut  just  over  the  eye. He  had  gone  to  fetch  his


342


On  tlte  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


cap,  and  a  nail,  which  was  sticking  out  frum  the  wall,  had  struck  him  just
beneath  the  eyebrow. He  still  bears  the  scar  of  it.

DREAMS  OF  WINNERS  OF  RACES.

Passing  on  to  a  different  kind  of  event  dreamt  of,  it  is  perhaps
wort!)  noting  that  we  have  five  or  six  first-hand  accounts  of  dreams
foretelling  correctly  the  unexpected  winners  of  races,  (P.  404  [two  cases],
405,  406,  '4'  and  one  of  Lord  Vivian's  in  the  Spiritualist),  but  we  have
to  bear  in  mind  that  races  are  probably  a  very  frequent  subject  of
dreams  among  persons  interested  in  tliem,  as  all  our  informants  were ;
and  if  so  it  is  of  course  to  be  expected  that  the  dreams  will  sometimes
come  right.  In  confirmation  of  this  view  we  may  note  tliat  when  one
of  our  informants  mentioned  his  dream  to  a  friend,  the  friend  remarked,
"  Oh,  I  am  always  dreaming  about  horses,  but  they  never  come  off.''

Somewhat  analogous  to  racing  dreams  would  be  dreams  about
examination  lists,  and  these  are  probably  also  frequent,  though  we
have  only  one  in  our  collection.  This  was  recorded  soon  after
the  event  and  is  well  attested,  and  it  has  some  rather  curious  points
about  it.  (P.  101.)  It  is  from  Miss  K.  D.  Ellis,  Cranborne  Vicarage,
Windsor.

Augvst  21st,  1884.

I  have  lately  been  very  anxious  about  the  success  of  a  young  friend  who
had  been  examined  for  a  Sandhurst  cadetshij).  The  list  of  successful
candidates  was  due  on  the  15th  August.  About  10  days  before  that  date  I
dreamed  that  I  saw  the  list,  and  that  a  boy  of  the  same  name  as  my  friend
(Johnson)  was  two  places  from  the  bottom.  I  mentioned  this  to  my  sisters
in  the  morning.  About  three  days  after  I  dreamed  exactly  the  same  thing,
with  the  addition  that  I  noticed  tliatthe  initials  of  the  Cliristian.  names  were
not  those  of  my  friend.  I  did  not  see  clearly  what  they  were,  but  only  that
they  were  wrong.  I  mentioned  this  second  dream  to  my  family,  saying  that
I  now  believed  our  friend  would  pass,  although  it  was  considered  very  unlikely
that  he  should  do  so.  When  the  Sandhurst  list  appeared  in  the  Times  of
August  15th,  we  looked  first  at  the  bottom  of  the  list,  and  there,  second  from
the  end,  was  the  name  of  Johnson,  but  it  was  that  of  a  stranger,  as  I  had
dreamed.  Our  friend  (of  the  same  name,  but  other  initials)  was  71st  on  the
same  list.

Katharine  Diana  Ellis.

A  newspaper  extract  was  sent  with  the  narrative,  showing  the  list
of  successful  candidates  for  cadetships.  The  name  of  Hugh  W.  B.
Johnson  is  71st,  and  that  of  Rupert  M.  R..  Johnson  98th,  the  number
on  the  list  being  100.

In  answer  to  the  question.  Was  this  dream  marked  by  exceptional
vividness,  or  was  it  unusual  in  any  way ']  Miss  Ellis  says  it  was
unusually  vivid,  and  repeated  twice.  She  also  informs  us  that  she
lias  had  other  seemingly  veridical  dreams.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


343


Miss  D.  Ellis  writes  : —

I  remember  that  my  sister  Katherine  told  me  that  slie  had  dreamed  that
the  name  Johnson  was  two  from  the  bottom  of  the  Sandhurst  list,  and  that
the  initials  were  wrong.  I  do  not  recollect  for  certain  whether  she  told  me
of  each  dream  as  it  happened,  or  if  she  told  me  of  both  dreams  after  both
were  over.

In  a  later  letter  Miss  D.  Ellis  adds  : —

I  intended  to  say  in  my  account  of  the  Sandhurst  dreams  that  I  tyastoldof
them  before  their  fulfilment.

Miss  B.  Ellis  writes  : —

I  have  a  strong  impression  that  my  sister  Katherine  told  me  of  each  dream
as  it  happened.  I  remember  she  mentioned  the  exact  place  on  the  list.  I
do  not  remember  hearing  the  initials  were  different.

DREAMS OP  TRIVIAL  INCIDENTS.

From  this  we  may  appropriately  pass  to  dreams  of  trivial  incidents
fulfilled.  The  first  (P.  462)  is  from  Mrs.  Mackenzie,  Lamington
House,  Tain,  Ross-shire.

Jidy  lUli.,  1884.

One  morning  last  spring,  when  at  breakfast,  I  suddenly  remembered  a
dream  I  had  had  the  night  before,  and  told  it  to  my  liouse  party,  who
numbered  10  individuals.  I  should  say  that  it  was  rather  a  joke  against  me
that  I  believed  in  dreams  and  that  very  often  my  dreams  came  true  ;  so  when
I  mentioned  having  had  a  curious  dream,  I  was  greeted  with  the  usual  joking
remarks.  "  Well,"  said  I,  "  this  is  what  I  dreamt.  I  thought  there  were
several  people  in  our  drawing-room,  among  others  Mr.  J. ,  and  I  left  the
room  for  a  few  minutes  to  see  if  supper  was  ready,  and  when  I  came  back  to
the  drawing-room  I  found  the  carpet,  which  was  a  new  one,  all  covered  with
black  spots.  I  was  very  angry,  and  when  Mr.  J.  said  it  was  ink  stains,  I
retorted, '  Don't  say  so,  I  know  it  has  been  burnt,  and  I  counted  five  patches. '
So  ends  the  dream."  Well,  we  all  went  to  church,  it  being  Sunday,  and  on
our  return  Mr.  J.  came  with  us  to  luncheon,  a  thing  he  had  never  done
before,  and  some  others  joined  our  party.  I  went  into  the  dining-room  to
see  if  things  were  ready,  and  then  going  back  into  the  drawing-room  I
noticed  a  spot  near  the  door  and  asked  who  had  been  in  with  dirty  feet ;
being  a  new  carpet  I  was  particular.  Mr.  J. ,  as  in  my  dream,  said  it  was
surely  ink,  and  then  pointed  out  some  more  spots,  when  I  called  out,  "  Oh  !
my  dream  !  my  new  carpet  !  burnt  !  "  As  we  afterwards  discovered,  the
housemaid  had  allowed  the  fire  to  go  out,  and  had  carried  in  live  coal
from  another  room  in  a  shovel,  which  she  had  tilted  against  the  door  and
spUt  the  coals  on  the  carpet,  burning  ^ice  holes.  Of  course  next  Sunday  I
had  several  offers  from  my  party  to  remain  at  home  and  watch  the  other
carpets,  but  I  don't  think  that  housemaid  will  burn  any  more  carpets.

J.  W.  Mackenzie.

Miss  Mackenzie  writes  : —

I  certify  the  above  to  be  correct. — Gertude  Agnes  Mackenzie.


344


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


Miss  Mackenzie — her  mother  says — "  was  present  when  I  related  the
dream,  and  was  present  also  when  the  denouement  occurred."

Mr.  Gurney  remarks  about  this  case  : — "  Mrs.  and  Miss  Mac-
kenzie are  known  to  me,  and  are  intelligent  and  trustworthy  witnesses.
I  have  had  the  whole  account  from  them  vivd  voce,  and  have  no  doubt
that  what  is  written  above  is  accurate.  Mrs.  Mackenzie  says  that  Mr.
J.'s  coming  to  luncli  was  the  merest  chance,  and  that  she  could  have  had
no  idea  of  it  the  previous  day."

I  told  this  story  to  a  lady  a  little  while  ago,  who  remarked,  "  But
then  the  question  is  of  what  use  was  it  1 "  meaning  that  if  it  was  of  no
use  it  cannot  have  been  a  premonition.  Now  this  consideration  seems
to  me  irrelevant.  I  do  not  deny  that  the  coincidence  I  have  just
related  may  have  been  purely  accidental,  with  nothing  supernormal
about  it  at  all,  but  the  fact  that  it  was  of  no  use  does  not  make  it  more
probable  that  it  was  so.  For  we  have  no  sufficient  reason  to  suppose
that  premonitions,  if  they  exist,  are  a  species  of  petty  private  miracles
intended  to  help  us  in  conducting  our  aiiiiirs — temporal  or  spiritual.
We  must  regard  them  as  peculiar  manifestations  of  unknown  or
imperfectly  known  laws.  I  do  not  think,  therefore,  that  the  triviality
of  a  foreseen  event  detracts  from  the  evidential  value  of  a  case,  provided
the  event  is  sufficiently  definite  and  unlikely.

The  next  case  (P.  13)  is  from  the  Rev.  Walter  Smith  and  Mrs.
Smith,  friends  of  Mr.  Podmore's.

Harpenden,  St.  Alban's.

March  7th,  1883.

I  write  to  tell  you  of  a  thing  that  has  just  happened,  and  which  may
interest  yuu.  It  is  at  least  a  curious  coincidence.  I  think  it  was  about  a
month  ago  that  my  wife  woke  up  in  a  fright  and  told  me  that  she  had  been
dreaming  that  she  was  in  her  old  room  at  the  rectory,  and  that  the  clothes
basket  was  mysteriously  on  fire.  I  perfectly  remember  tlie  circumstances  of
the  dream  as  she  told  tlieni  to  me,  and  we  laughed  at  it,  as  the  thing  seemed
so  wildly  improbable.

However,  this  morning,  not  long  after  the  nursery  fire  was  lighted,  the
baby's  clothes  basket  was  found  in  flames,  and  was  burnt  to  cinders,  the
floor  and  walls  of  the  room  being  also  a  good  deal  burnt.  The  basket  was  so
far  away  from  the  fire,  and  it  was  so  obvious  that  the  fire  had  proceeded
from  it,  that  the  origin  of  the  fire  was  at  first  almost  as  mysterious  as  iir  the
dream,  and  the  thought  of  spontaneous  combustion  passed  through  my
mind.  I  have  little  doubt  now  that  it  really  arose  through  some  fragments
of  burning  paper  being  blown  out  from  the  grate  and  against  the  basket.

It  is  a  curious  case  of  a  dream  i3artially  prophetic.  You  may  easily  set  it
down  to  mere  coincidence,  but  if  many  cases  like  it  were  multiplied,  one
would  ask  whether  it  is  possible  that  dreams  can  grow  out  of  a  reminiscence
of  the  future  as  well  as  of  the  past.  It  was  a  common-place  dream  enough,
and  just  such  an  one  as  in  future  times  might  grow  out  of  the  events  of  this


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


345


morning,  and  the  strong  shock  which  thej'  gave  her  nerves  ;  but  it  was  a
curious  dream  to  arise  quite  spontaneously.

Walter  Smith.

Mrs.  Smith  gives  the  following  fuller  account  of  the  dream.

About  the  end  of  January  of  this  year  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream.  I
thought  that  I  was  in  my  room  in  my  old  home.  I  saw  all  the  furniture
most  vividly  just  as  it  used  to  be.  Suddenly  and  mysteriously  I  saw  flames
burst  up  from  the  clothes  basket,  which  was  standing,  as  usual,  in  a  corner
quite  away  from  the  fireplace.  I  thought  that  two  or  three  other  people
were  in  the  room,  and  that  tliey  tried  to  put  out  the  flames,  but  I  was  so
frightened  that  I  woke  up  before  they  had  done  so.  I  think  that  I  woke  my
husband  in  my  fright,  but  I  cannot  be  sure  whether  I  told  him  the  dream
then  or  in  the  morning.  I  remember  we  laughed  at  the  improbability  of  the
thing,  and  of  course  thought  no  more  of  it.  On  the  7th  of  March,  as  we
were  going  down  to  breakfast,  one  of  the  maids  met  us  in  a  great  state  of
alarm.  The  nurseiy  had  been  on  fire,  she  said,  and  they  had  only  just
managed  to  put  it  out.  We  rushed  to  the  room,  and  found  that  all  one
corner  had  been  on  fire,  and  the  beams  of  the  wall  and  floor  were  still
smoking.  How  had  it  happened  1  The  nurse  had  been  down  at  breakfast,
taking  the  baby  with  her,  but  she  was  quite  sure  she  had  left  nothing
near  the  fire.  The  housemaid  had  smelt  smoke,  and  had  rushed  up  to  find
the  clothes  hasket,which  stood  quite  away  and  hehind  the  fire,  had  mysteriously
burst  into  flames  and  was  blazing  furiously.  She  called  for  help  and  all  was
soon  put  out,  but  the  origin  of  the  fire  seemed  as  mysterious  as  the  fire  in
the  clothes  basket  of  my  dream.  (We  afterwards  conjectured  that,  as  it  was
a  day  of  high  wind,  some  piece  of  jjaper  must  have  been  blown  out  of  the
fire,  and  then  by  another  blast  blown  against  the  basket. )

When  we  had  got  over  our  first  alarm,  my  dream  flashed  into  my  mind,,
and  my  husband  perfectly  remembered  my  having  told  it  to  him.

Margaret  Smith.

The  dream  here  is  not  exact,  but  the  coincidence,  so  far  as  it  goes,
is  certainly  very  remarkable  owing  to  the  great  improbability  of  the
event,  and  the  difficulty  of  imagining  what  can  have  accidentally  sug-
gested it  to  the  dreamer's  iniiid.

The  young  lady  from  whom  we  have  the  next  case  does  not  wish
her  name  to  be  printed. (P.  110.)

August  31st,  1884.

About  a  year  ago,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  I  had  a  remarkably  vivid
dream — that  I  went  to  Richmond  Park  (from  London)  with  my  sisters,  and
that  uf)on  a  seat  I  found  a  brooch,  which  I  gave  to  the  maid.  I  mentioned
this  dream  to  the  maid  as  she  was  doing  my  hair  next  morning,  also  to  one  of
my  sisters.  I  did  not  at  the  time  of  the  dream  know  that  we  were  going  to
Richmond  on  the  following  afternoon.

However,  we  did  so,  and  as  I  was  walking  towards  a  bench  with  one  of  my
sisters,  we  saw  upon  it  a  large  common  black  brooch.  My  sister  claimed  it,
as  being  the  elder,  but  in  a  few  days  she  gave  it  to  me,  and  I  gave  it  to  the
maid.


346


O'li  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


I  may  add  that  I  dream  a  great  deal,  and  sometimes  prophetically.  For
instance,  I  dreamed  one  night  last  week  that  I  received  a  letter  from  one  of
my  cousins.  In  the  morning  I  told  my  sister,  who  went  downstairs  and
found  on  the  table  this  particular  letter,  which  I  had  no  especial  reason  for
expecting  on  that  morning.

Her  sister  says  in  corroboration  : —

This  is  to  certify  that  I  remember  that  my  sister  told  me  that  she  dreamed
she  had  found  a  brooch  in  Richmond  Park  on  the  morning  after  the  dream,
and  before  its  fulfilment.

Any  other  prophetic  dreams  she  has  had  are,  we  are  informed,  too
trifling  to  be  written  down.

The  next  two  cases  are  from  Miss  Barr,  of  Apsley  Town,
East  Grinstead,  who,  like  Mr.  Rowlands,  mentioned  above,  has
had  frequent  apparently  veridical  dreams,  of  which  two  or  three
corresponded  to  distinctly  future  events.  Some  of  her  experiences  are
quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  94,  342;  Vol.  II.,  p.  431.
Miss  Barr  informs  us  that  she  is  not  as  a  rule  in  the  habit  of  dreaming
much — or  at  least  of  remembering  her  dreams  ;  and  her  sister,  Mrs.
Jeddere-Fisher,  says  :  "I  think  nearly  all  the  dreams  my  sister  told  me
about  came  true,  but  I  fancy  there  was  perhaps  one  occasion,  and
perhaps  two,  when  they  did  not  come  true.  Certainly  this  did  not
happen  often,  or  we  should  have  lost  faith  altogether  in  her  dreams,
and  this  we  have  never  done."

The  cases  were  written  by  Mr.  Podniore  from  Miss  Barr's  dictation
in  1884,  and  this  summer  he  went  carefully  through  them  with  her
again.

(P.  73. )  Some  time  in  18(58,  when  in  Poonah,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  in  the
Government  Gardens,  which  are  ordinarily  very  deserted,  and  found  them
crowded  with  tables  laid  out  near  the  band-stand,  at  which  children  were
seated  at  tea.  I  was  serving  at  one  of  these  tables,  when  I  heard  a  voice
behind  me  saying,  "  May  I  be  allowed  to  help  you.  Miss  Barr?"  I  turned
round  and  saw  a  jjerfect  stranger,  an  officer,  in  a  uniform  which  was  also
strange  to  me.  In  my  dream  I  accepted  his  help,  and  later  on  was  escorted
by  him  through  the  grounds,  which  then  appeared  to  be  brilliantly  lighted
and  very  crowded,  in  seai'ch  of  my  father  and  mother.  ...  I  told  my
dream  in  the  morning,  and  also  described  the  man  and  his  uniform  to  my
father  and  mother,  and  also  to  a  cousin,  who  happened  to  be  staying  with  us.
About  a  month  after  this,  on  the  eve  of  the  Abyssinian  campaign,  the
cavalry  regiment  then  quartered  in  Poonah  was  replaced  by  a  Madras
regiment,  and,  riding  out  with  my  cousin,  a  few  days  after  the  change,  we
met  an  officer,  in  a  uniform  which  I  recognised,  even  at  a  distance,  as  that  of
my  dream,  and  pointed  him  out  to  my  cousin  on  his  nearmg  us.  I  also
recognised  his  face  as  that  of  the  officer  of  my  dream,  and  in  the  evening  of
the  same  day  pointed  him  out  to  my  father  near  the  Ghowpoorie  band-stand.
Perhaps as much as three weeks  after  this  a  fete  was  given  in  the


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


347


Government  Gardens,  ■^^•hen  tables  were  laid  for  a  tea,  to  be  given  to  the
soldiers'  children,  and  I  was  requested  by  a  friend  to  helj)  her  at  one  of  the
tables.  Whilst  so  engaged,  I  heard  a  voice  behind  me  saying,  "Will  you
allow  me  to  help  you,  Miss  Barr  1 "  and  on  turning  round  I  recognised  the
man  whom  I  had  seen  in  my  dream.  I  was  afterwards  obliged  to  accept  his
escort  in  searching  for  my  father  and  mother  through  the  gardens,  brilliantly
lighted  by  fireworks.  ...  I  have  absolutely  no  interest  in  the  hero  of
my  dream,  though  we  knew  him  tolerably  well  afterwards.  The  acquaintance
has  not  continued.

This  is  attested  by  Miss  Barr's  mother.

Extract  from  Miss  Barr's  diary,  copied  by  Mr.  Podmore,  June  13th,
1888  :—

' '  September  25,  [1868  apparently]  Children's  fete  at  the  Govenmient
Gardens.  I  assisted  at  Mrs.  K's  tea-table.  I  had  a  curious  dream  some
time  back  about  a  gentleman  I  did  not  know.  I  met  him  at  the  fete.  He
is . .  ."

Mr.  Podmore  adds  :

Miss  Barr  told  me  that  she  had  never  before  heard  of  festivities  in  the
Government  Gardens,  and  had  no  idea  of  the  approach  of  the  fete.  .  .  She
searched  for  the  diary  at  my  instigation  during  my  interview  ^vith  Mrs.
Fisher,  and  found  it,  locked.  It  was  opened  with  a  key  of  my  own  and  the
above  passage  discovered.

(P.  74.)  Some  time  in  the  summer  of  1875  or  1876,  when  living  at  Culter,
Aberdeenshire,  I  dreamt  that  we  were  invited  out  to  dinner,  and  that  I  was
taken  in  to  dimier  by  a  stranger,  whose  face  was  strongly  impressed  upon  mj'
recollection.  After  dinner  I  was  asked  to  sing,  and  was  aware  of  the  fact
that,  whilst  I  was  suiging,  the  man  was  leaning  against  a  prie-dieu  chair
behind  me;  and  that  when  I  had  finished  singing  he  said,  "Thank  you,  that  is
very  pretty  ;  but  do  you  happen  to  know  a  song  called  '  Douglas,  Douglas  '  ? "
There  my  dream  ended.  I  told  it  in  the  morning  to  my  sisters.  The  next  day's
l>ost  brought  the  invitation  to  dinner,  and  when  we  arrived  at  the  house  I
vecogixised  the  man  ;  everything  took  place  exactly  as  in  my  dream.  I  did
not  feel  then,  and  have  never  felt  since  the  slightest  interest  in  the  man,
^^■hom  I  have  only  met  tliree  times  in  my  life.

Mrs.  Jeddere-Fisher,  says  : —

My  sister  told  me  before  we  went  to  the  dmner  party.

Mr.  Podmore,  after  seeing  Miss  Barr  in  June,  1888,  says  : —

Miss  Barr  told  me  that  she  knew  the  song  "Douglas,  Douglas,"  and
could  sing  it  ;  but  was  not  in  the  habit  of  doing  so.  She  is  positive  that  she
mentioned  the  name  of  the  song  in  telling  the  dream  to  her  sister.

And  Mrs.  Jeddere-Pisher  adds  : —

I  thuik,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  my  sister  told  me  the  man  would  ask
her  to  sing  "Douglas,  Douglas,"  but  I  have  heard  the  story  so  often  since
that  I  may  be  incorrect.

The  next  case  (P.  30)  is  trivial  enough,  but  differs  from  those  so


348


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


far  quoted  in  foreshadowing  a  more  prolonged  series  of  trifling  events.
It  is  from  Mr.  R.  Castle,  of  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford,  known  to  Mr.
Podmore.  Mr.  Castle  also  repeatedly  experienced  impressions  about
visits  from  his  brother,  which  are  described  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Vol.  I.,  p.  253.

From  Mr.  E,.  Castle,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.

May  27th,  1883.

The  dream  in  question  occurred  about  20  years  ago,  at  a  time  of  the  yeai'
when  the  days  were  very  short,  and  the  circumstances,  as  briefly  as  I  can
state  them,  were  as  follows  : —

I  had  made  an  appointment  to  go  to  London  by  the  first  train,  which  left
Oxford  at  7.15  o'clock  in  the  morning,  to  meet  a  gentleman  I  was  then
intimately  associated  with  in  our  professional  work,  and  on  a  business  matter
-of  some  imj)ortance  to  us  ;  and  being  very  anxious  not  to  miss  my  appoint-
ment, I  retired  to  bed  the  night  before  with  a  strong  impression  on  my  mind
of  the  necessity  of  not  being  late  in  the  morning.

It  is  usual  with  me  in  such  cases  to  wake  at,  or  very  near  the  time  when
it  is  necessary  I  should  get  up,  even  if  the  hour  is  quite  an  unusual  one.

On  this  occasion  I  wished  to  wake  about  5.30  o'clock  in  order  to  give  myself
time  to  dress  and  have  breakfast  and  get  to  the  station,  more  than  a  mile
distant  from  my  house,  in  time  for  the  train.

I  actually  woke,  and  struck  a  light  and  looked  at  my  watch,  about  4.30
o'clock,  and  this  being  an  liour  f)r  so  before  it  was  time  for  me  to  get  up  I
dropped  ofl' to  sleep  again,  and  it  was  in  the  interval  between  this  and  5.30
o'clock,  when  I  did  get  up,  that  the  dream  in  question,  which  was  an  excep-
tionally clear  and  vivid  one,  took  place.  It  appeared  to  me  that  I  woke,  and
got  u^),  and  dressed  myself  by  candle  light,  in  the  ordinary  way  when
leaving  home  by  an  early  train  in  tlie  winter,  but  that  my  brushes  and  some
other  toilet  articles  had  been  moved  since  the  morning  before,  and  had  laot
been  put  back  in  their  usual  places,  and  I  had  to  look  for  them  and  found
them  in  different  positions,  which  I  noticed  more  particularly  as  not  being
their  usual  places.  I  appeared  then  to  go  downstairs  and  have  my  break-
fast in  the  usual  way,  and  go  off  to  the  railway  station,  walking  there  from
my  house  ;  but  I  seemed  to  be  able  to  look  about  the  district,  and  see  all
that  was  going  on  in  a  curious  manner,  much  as  I  could  have  done  if  I  had
been  looking  from  a  balloon,  or  very  high  tower,  so  as  to  have  a  sort  of
bird's-eye  view  of  the  country  all  round,  and  see  other  roads  and  places,
which  from  the  road  I  was  actually  walking  upon  would  not  ordinarily  have
been  visible  ;  but,  as  is  often  the  case  with  one  in  dreams,  this  abnormal
state  seemed  to  be  perfectly  natural,  and  did  not  strike  me  as  being  peculiar
in  any  way.

On  arriving  at  the  railway  station,  I  dreamed  that  I  quite  unexpectedly
met  a  Mr.  H.,  the  senior  partner  in  a  well-known  firm  of  photographers,
carrying  on  business  in  several  different  towns.  I  had  formerly  knowii  Mr.
H.  and  his  partner,  Mr.  S.,  very  well  indeed,  but  as  they  had  ceased  to
reside  personally  in  Oxford,  and  I  had  nothapijened  to  meet  Mr.  H.  for  some
four  or  five  years,  and  had  not  seen  his  partner,  who  left  Oxford  before  him,
for  seven  or  eight  years,  they  had  passed  quite  out  of  my  mind,  and  nothing  had


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


349


occurred,  even  in  the  most  remote  manner,  to  bring  them  to  my  recollection.
I  thought  that  I  began  talking  to  Mr.  H. ,  and  that  upon  one  of  the  roads
leading  to  the  station,  at  a  considerable  distance  away,  I  could  see  his  partner,
Mr.  S.,  walking  to  the  station,  with  the  square  box -like  toj)  of  a  photo-
graphic apparatus,  neatly  wrapped  up  in  a  green  baize  covering,  and  carried
under  his  left  arm.

I  seemed  also  to  be  quite  aware  of  the  other  ordinary  incidents  of  the
journey,  and  that  I  got  to  London,  and  met  the  gentleman  with  whom  I  had
the  appointment,  who,  somewhat  to  my  surprise,  instead  of  referring  to  the
business  on  which  we  met,  began,  rather  more  earnestly  than  usual,  to  tell  me
of  something  of  an  entirely  different  character,  which  had  occurred  to  him
since  we  had  last  parted,  and  of  which  I  had  previously  known  nothing.  At  this
point  I  woke  up  rather  in  a  flurry,  thinking  I  had  overslept  myself,  but  found,
on  looking  at  my  watch,  that  it  was  only  just  past  5.30  o'clock.  I  proceeded
to  dress  at  once,  and  the  first  thing  which  occurred  to  me  as  peculiar  was  to
find  that  my  brushes  and  other  things  on  the  toilet-table  had  been  moved  out
of  their  ordinary  positions,  and  placed  as  I  had  seen  them  in  my  dream,  and
that  I  was  over  again  going  exactly  through  all  the  same  movements  in  dress-
ing which  I  had  dreamed  of  before.  I  could  not  help  laughing  to  myseK  at  the
coincidence,  and  mj'  wife,  who  was  in  the  room,  asked  me  what  it  was  that
amused  me,  upon  which  I  told  her  that  I  was  dressing  for  the  second  time
that  morning,  and  related  to  her  my  dream,  saying  that  in  it  I  had  been  to  the
station,  and  met  there  Mr.  H.  and  Mr.  S.,  &c.,  as  above  recorded,  upon
which  she  remarked,  "  I  wonder  what  can  have  made  you  think  of  them,  I
have  not  seen  or  thought  of  them  for  years."  I  then  had  niy  breakfast  just
in  the  usual  manner,  and  walked  to  the  railway  station,  when,  to  my  great
surprise,  there,  standing  on  the  platform,  was  Mr.  H.,  just  as  I  had  seen  him
in  my  dream.  I  went  up  to  him  at  once,  and  after  the  ordinary  greeting,
proceeded  in  a  laughing  manner  to  say  that  I  had  seen  him  once  before,  that
same  morning,  and  related  to  him  my  dream,  asking  him  after  Mr.  S.,  and
saying  that  he  ought  properly  to  be  on  his  way  to  the  station,  and  that  we
should  soon  see  him,  carrying  part  of  a  photographic  apparatus,  neatly
wrapped  up  in  a  green  baize  cover,  under  his  left  arm.  Mr.  H.  seemed  very
much  astonished  at  this,  and  asked  me  how  I  knew  that  Mr.  S.  had  been  in
Oxford  that  night.  I  said,  of  course  that  I  did  not  know  it,  upon  which  he
replied,  "  Well,  this  is  certainly  very  curious ;  he  is  here,  and  I  expect  him  to
come  and  meet  me,  to  go  by  this  very  train."  We  then  walked  along  the
platform  together,  and  upon  getting  nearly  to  the  end  of  it,  at  a  point  where
we  could  see  some  distance  along  the  road  leading  to  the  station,  we  both
stopped  suddenly,  for  there  in  the  distance  was  Mr.  S.,  coming  to  the  station,
and  just  turning  a  corner  of  the  road,  with  the  square  box-like  parcel  neatly
wrapped  in  green  baize,  and  carried  under  his  left  arm,  which  proved  to  be
the  photographic  apparatus,  just  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my  dream,  and  as  I  had
described  it  to  both  my  wife  and  Mr.  H.  The  latter  seemed  quite  startled
and  alarmed,  and  said  there  was  something  supernatural  about  it,  and  that
most  people  would  say  something  extraordinary  was  going  to  haj)pen,  and
that  he  had  a  great  mind  not  to  go  by  that  train.

T  pointed  out,  however,  to  him,  that  if  there  was  anything  in  the  dream,
the  train  ought  to  get  to  its  journey's  end  safely  enough,  because  I  had  to  meet


350


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


my  friend  in  London  over  again,  and  hear  froni  him  something  I  had  not  ex-
l^ected,  whicli  seemed  to  allay  Mr.  H.  's  fears  ;  but  the  circumstance  seemed
to  make  a  great  impression  on  him,  and  he  said  he  thought  that  very  few
people  would  care  to  go  by  the  train  after  such  an  unusual  occurrence.

We  performed  the  journey  safely,  and  I  met  my  friend  as  arranged,  who,
curiously  enough,  began  at  once,  just  as  I  liad  dreamed,  to  tell  me  of  some
unexpected  occurrences  which  had  taken  place  with  liim  after  we  last  parted,
and  which  had  no  reference  to  the  object  of  our  present  meeting.

The  circumstance  was  altogether  so  strange  that  it  naturally  made  a  great
impression  on  my  mind,  and  I  at  once  told  my  friend  of  the  dream,  and  all
that  had  happened  since.

I  may  add  that  this  gentleman  had  foi-merly  studied  medicine,  and
qualified  himself  to  practise  as  a  surgeon,  but  had  not  done  so,  and  I  asked
him  if  he  could  possibly  give  me  any  explanation  of  so  strange  an  occurrence.
He  reijlied  that  he  thought  he  could,  and  that  he  well  remembered  attending
some  lectures  on  subjects  of  the  kind,  when  he  was  a  medical  student,
which  greatly  interested  him.  Medical  men,  he  thought,  would  tell  me  at
once  that  it  was  a  case,  by  no  means  rare,  of  double  consciousness,  in  which
all  that  is  happening  to  a  person  appears  to  him  or  her  to  have  occurred
before,  but  has  not  really  done  so,  the  cause  not  being  quite  understood,  but
supposed  to  arise  probably  from  some  more  or  less  independent  action  of  the  two
lobes  of  the  brain,  acting  separately  from  each  other  ;  but  however  that
might  be  and  however  real  the  circumstances  mightappear  to  myself,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  he  supposed  the  dream  did  not  occur  at  all,  but  only  seemed  to  me  to
have  done  so,  at  the  time  when  the  real  events  took  place.

This,  as  I  pointed  out  to  him,  might  liave  been  a  very  good  explanation,
but  for  the  fact  that  while  dressing  I  had  told  the  dream  to  my  wife,  and
also  had  told  to  Mr.  H.  the  circumstances  with  reference  to  Mr.  S. ,  before
they  took  place.

This,  my  friend  admitted,  made  a  difficulty,  and  he  asked  me  to  let  him
know  what  my  wife  remembered  of  the  matter,  which  I  afterwards  told  him.
I  also  was  anxious  to  ascertain  this,  and,  on  reaching  home,  I  asked  her  at
once  if  she  remembered  any  conversation  we  had  while  I  was  dressing  in  the
morning  before  I  left  home,  and  she  replied  at  once,  ' '  What,  about  the
strange  dream  you  had  as  to  getting  up  and  dressing  yourself,  and  going  to
the  railway  station,  and  your  having  met  Mr.  H.  and  Mr.  S.,  before  you
really  got  out  of  bed  ?  I  remember  that  quite  well. "  And  she  then  rei^eated
what  I  had  told  her,  and  was  very  much  surprised  to  learn  what  had  after-
wards occurred.

The  friend  to  whom  I  have  above  referred,  upon  learning  this,  said,
"  Well,  I  must  give  it  up  ;  the  theory  I  gave  will  not  do  in  this  case,  and  I
am  quite  unable  to  offer  any  explanation."

This  is  simply  a  statement  of  the  dream  and  of  the  occurrences  just  as
they  took  place.  The  extreme  vividness  of  the  dream  made  a  great  im-
pression on  me  at  the  time.  I  related  it  then  to  a  good  many  friends,  and
have  often  done  so  from  time  to  time  since,  and  this  has  caused  me  to  keep
it  fresh  in  my  memory,  but  I  can  suggest  no  theory  to  account  for  it,  nor
have  I  ever  met  anyone,  to  whom  I  have  related  it,  who  could.

The  whole  matter,  as  you  will  notice,  so  far  as  the  incidents  themselves


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


351


are  concerned,  was  entirely  common-place  ;  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  nothing
whatever  of  a  special  nature  has  occurred  in  connection  with  it  to  confirm
Mr.  H.'s  fears.  R.  C.

From  Mrs.  Castle.

I  read  the  account  that  Mr.  Castle  sent  to  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  and  I  fully  corroborate  it.  I  distinctly  remember  my  husband
relating  to  me  his  dream,  as  set  forth  in  the  account  he  has  written,  whilst  he
was  dressing  himseK. — Elizabeth  Castle.

SYMBOLIC  DREAMS.

The  not  inconsiderable  class  of  symbolic  dreams  remains  to  be
discussed.  Two  kinds  of  dreams  may  be  called  symbolic  :  firstly,  those
where  the  dream  is  unlike  the  real  fact  but  yet  has  in  it  an  underlying
idea  which  suggests  the  fact.  Mrs.  Schweizer's  dream  quoted  above  is  a
case  in  point.  Such  dreams  may  vary  to  any  extent  in  the  degree  of
their  correspondence  with  the  supposed  fulfilment,  and  in  some  cases
might  perhaps  be  more  properly  called  grotesque  or  distorted  dreams
rather  than  symbolic  ones.  In  the  other  kind  of  symbolic  dreams  the
symbol  has  no  resemblance  to  the  fact  supposed  to  be  indicated.  The
interpretation  is,  so  to  speak,  purely  conventional.  They  resemble  the
symbolic  visual  and  auditory  cases  already  considered.  There  is  no
difficulty  in  supposing  that  the  mind  might  clothe  a  premonitory  (or
telepathic)  idea  in  a  symbolic  form  once  the  "convention"  is  started,  and
this  might  be  done  either  by  tradition,  or  by  the  first  coincidence  of
the  dream  and  event  in  the  dreamer's  experience,  the  same  dream
afterwards  recurring  in  apparent  connection  with  similar  events.
Evidentially  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  dream  that  conveys  the
idea  of  the  future  event  is  symbolic  or  not,  provided  the  idea  is  quite
definitely  conveyed  before  the  event  occurs.  But  as  the  event  supposed
to  be  foretold  is  usually  a  simple  and  not  uncommon  one, — e.g.,  the
death  (without  detail)  of  some  relative  unspecified, — great  care  must  be
taken  in  estimating  the  evidence,  to  ascertain  that  the  dream  never
occurs  except  closely  enough  to  the  event  in  time  to  make  it  improbable
that  the  event  would  happen  within  that  time  by  chance.  None  of  the
recurring  symbolic  dreams  which  we  have  are  evidentially  thoroughly
satisfactory  in  this  way,  and  the  following  specimen  is  selected  as  an
illustration,  more  for  its  brevity  than  for  any  other  reason.

It  is  from  a  former  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  who  does  not  wish  her
name  to  be  given.  (P.  92.)

MarcK  1884.

Several  times  in  my  life,  before  the  death  of  a  near  relative,  I  have
dreamed  the  same  dream,  that  I  am  riding  a  white  or  grey  pony  through
mud  and  muddy  water.

The  bridle  of  the  pony  is  held  by  a  dead  man,  either  by  my  dear  father,
who  died  in  my  infancy,  or  by  a  young  friend,  Mr.  A.,  who  died  a  few  yeais
since,  and  with  whom  I  was  much  when  we  were  children.

2  A


352  On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


(a.)

The  first  occasion  I  especially  noted  this  dream  was  in  J uly,  1875,  when
it  was  followed  by  the  death  of  an  uncle  I  loved  very  much.  We  had  been
expecting  his  death  for  some  months.

(b.)

The  next  was  in  September,  1875.  We  had  an  unmarried  sister  of  my
mother's  then  on  a  visit  to  us,  my  aunt.  I  mentioned  the  dream  to  her.
She  said  she  had  heard  of  such  dreams  before,  and  that  in  her  experience
they  foretold  the  death  of  a  relation.  About  the  day  after  she  herself  died,
all  in  a  moment,  of  heart  complaint.

(c.)

In  November,  1879,  I  again  had  the  dream  ;  it  was  followed  by  the  death
of  my  only  child.

(d.)

In  March,  1880,  I  again  dreamed  the  same  dream  ;  it  was  not  followed  by
anyone's  death,  but  my  mother  was  struck  down  by  paralysis,  and  has
remained  an  invalid  ever  since.

The  following  are  questions  addressed  to  our  informant  and
her  answers  : —

1.  Have  you  had  the  dream  on  any  other  occasion  besides  the  four
mentioned  ?

I  do  not  remember  distinctly,  but  I  believe  I  had,  before  1875.

2.  Can  you  give,  in  each  case,  the  interval  between  the  dream  and  the
occurrence  of  the  death  which  it  preceded  ?

Two  or  three  days.

3.  Have  any  near  relations  of  yours  died  since  J  uly,  1875,  whose  deaths
have  not  been  heralded  to  you  by  this  dream  ?

I  have  lost  no  other  relation  except  these  since  July,  1875.

4.  Did  you  make  any  note  of  these  dreams  in  a  diary,  or  elsewhere,
before  their  fulfilment  ?

No,  I  attached  so  little  importance  to  them.  ,

5.  Did  you  mention  them  on  any  occasion  before  their  fulfilment  to  any
person  now  living  from  whom  we  could  obtain  corroboration  of  the  facts  ?

I  mentioned  the  dream  I  had  before  my  chUd's  death  in  November,  1879,
to  my  nurse,  Mrs.  K. ,  before  he  died,  and  again  the  dream  I  had  at  the  time
my  mother  was  struck  down  by  paralysis,  in  March,  1880,  to  the  same
person,  saying  to  her  that  I  was  sure  that  my  mother  would  die.  Mrs.  K.
has  married  again,  and  I  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  her  for  many  months
past. I  do  not  know  where  she  is.

We  have  five  or  six  cases  of  recurring  symbolic  dreams  besides  this
one.  One  lady  dreams  of  a  baby  in  a  bath  before  deaths  (P.  23) ;
another  tells  us  that  in  her  case  dreams  of  weddings  portend  deaths
(P.  609)  ;  another  lady  dreams  in  the  same  way  of  thunderstorms
(P.  627)  ;  another  used  to  have  singularly  disagreeable  dreams  of  the
presence  of  an  offensive  parasite  (P.  386) ;  in  another  case  waves  of
water  is  the  symbol  (P.  107). In  fact  the  symbol  may  be  anything;.


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


353


but  in  all  the  cases  hitherto  sent  to  us,  either  the  record,  or  the
constancy  of  the  time-relation  between  dream  and  event,  appears  to
me  to  be  defective.

CONCLUSION.

This  concludes  my  review  of  the  evidence  for  premonitions.  I  think
that  no  one  will  deny  that  some  at  least  of  the  dreams  are,  as  reported,
if  not  premonitory,  at  least  very  remarkable  coincidences,  and  if  a
sufficient  number  of  such  dreams  could  be  observed  and  recorded  before
fulfilment,  the  most  sceptical  would  admit  that  some  explanation,  other
than  chance,  of  the  correspondence  between  dream  and  fact  was
required.

But  when  we  consider  the  weakness  of  human  memories,  and
the  extent  to  which  the  evidence  depends  on  unrecorded  details ;
when  we  reflect  on  the  sources  of  error  above  noticed  in  dream-
evidence,  and  on  the  difficulty  of  tracing  the  origin  of  dream  ideas  in
many  dreams  which  no  one  would  suppose  to  be  supernormally  prompted
(in  other  words,  the  very  odd  things  we  do  dream),  and  observe
how  many  so-called  premonitions  occur  in  dreams  ;  and  when  especially
we  consider  the  small  amount  of  apparently  good  evidence  for  premoni-
tions compared  with  that  for  telepathy ; — we  cannot,  I  think,  demand
that  the  possibility  of  supernormal  prevision  should  be  accepted  even
as  a  "  working  hypothesis  "  by  the  scientific  world,  as  I  myself  consider
that  telepathy  ought  to  be  accepted.  Still  there  is  enough  evidence  to
make  us  think  about  it ;  and  one  advantage  of  having  a  society  like
ours  is  to  bring  home  to  people  the  importance  of  observing  and  *
recording  at  once  facts  bearing  on  such  subjects,  and  to  supply  a
centre  where  such  records  can  be  kept.

It  may,  however,  be  said  by  a  reader  disinclined  to  suspense  of
judgment,  "  what  can  be  the  use  of  collecting  more  cases  ?  If  these  do
not  lead  you  to  a  conclusion  why  should  any  more  of  the  same  kind
produce  the  effect  1  Will  you  not  always  go  on  publishing  striking
narratives  to  gratify  marvel-loving  readers,  and  then  stating  that  they
are  inconclusive  to  appease  the  scientific  world  1 "

I  should  admit  that  there  was  much  force  in  this  objection,  if  the
new  cases  were  to  be  evidentially  like  the  old  ones.  But  my  point  is  •
that  an  eflibrt  should  be  made  to  raise  them — if  they  are  really  trust-
worthy— to  a  higher  evidential  level.  If,  in  all  the  cases  here  recorded
the  evidence  had  been  made  as  complete  as  it  might  conceivably  have
been  made — for  instance,  by  the  apparitions  and  dreams  being  care-
fully recorded  before  the  fulfilment — my  conclusion  with  regard  to
them  might  have  been  difierent.  It  may  be  said  that  people  cannot
be  expected  to  write  down  gravely  that  they  have  dreamt  of  five  spots
burnt  in  the  carpet,  on  the  chance  that  a  careless  housemaid  may
fulfil  the  prevision. I  entirely  agree,  and  so  far  as  what  I  may  call

2  A  2


354


On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions.


sporadic  premonitions  are  concerned,  I  could  not  expect  or  desire
more  than  that  special  care  should  be  taken  to  record  at  the  time
dreams  or  other  experiences  regarded  as  premonitory  which  produce
a  serious  and  strong  impression.

But  our  cases  are  not  all  of  the  sporadic  kind,  so  far,  at  least,  as
our  information  goes.  It  is  clear  from  our  evidence  that  many  people,
rightly  or  wrongly,  believe  themselves  to  have  tolerably  frequent
premonitions.  Here  perhaps  lies  our  best  hope  of  obtaining  certainty,
one  way  or  another,  on  this  at  present  perplexing  question.  These
persons  have  it  in  their  power  to  make  a  quasi-experimental  investiga-
tion of  the  subject.  If  they  would  make  a  point  of  recording  before
fulfilment  all  dreams  or  other  experiences  wliich  appear  to  them  to  be
premonitory,  recording  conscientiously  their  fulfilment  (or  non-fulfil-
ment) and  the  interval  elapsing  before  it,  their  records  would,  in  a
few  years,  go  far  towards  settling  the  question  whether  genuine
premonitions  exist  or  no.

NOTE.

There  is,  of  course,  no  sharp  line  between  the  best  cases  evidentially  and
others,  and  the  judgment  of  different  people  as  to  which  cases  should
be  placed  in  the  first  class  are  sure  to  differ  to  some  extent.  I  propose  at
some  future  time  to  put  together  for  the  Journal  some  of  those  cases
about  which  I  have  hesitated  whether  to  include  them  in  this  paper
or  not — finally  deciding  against  them  ;  and  it  would,  I  think,  be  of
real  service  to  the  investigation  if  before  then  other  members  of  the
Society  would  study  the  evidence — almost  all  of  which  has  been  printed
on  slips  or  cyclostyled,  and  can  be  seen  at  the  Society's  rooms — and  let
me  know  of  any  cases  which  they  think  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted,
or  of  any  other  points  in  which  they  disagree  with  me.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transfer ence.  355


IV.

EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT  TRANSFERENCE.

Being  a  Supplement  to  the  Paper  on  '■^Muscle  Reading  and  Thought  Trans-
ference," by  Herr  Max  Dessoir,  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.


Herr  Dessoir  has  sent  us  the  originals  of  the  three  drawings  and
reproductions  below,  with  the  notes  made  on  the  same  evening  as  the
experiments— namely,  July  16th,  1886.  They  had  been  laid  aside  and
forgotten,  and  have  only  lately  been  found  again.

Herr  Dessoir  would  not,  he  says,  attach  scientific  importance  to  three
experiments  in  thought-transference  alone,  but  these  should  be  regarded
as  an  addition  to  the  experiments  made  not  long  before  with  the  same
lady,  Baroness  von  Goeler-Ravensburg,  and  described  at  the  end  of
his  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  124.

Unfortunately  the  delicate  health  of  the  percipient  has  prevented
any  continuance  of  the  experiments,  but  Herr  Dessoir  hopes  it  may  be
possible  to  make  a  fresh  attempt  before  long.


I.


OEIG.


EEP.


356


Experiments  in  ThougJd-Transference.
II.


ORIG.


REP.


III.


KEP.


Herr  Dessoir  writes  : —

In  more  complete  explanation  I  may  add  the  following.  [A
diagram  which  we  have  not  printed]  shows  the  position  of  the  experi-
menters. I  sat  at  one  table  ;  1 J  metres  from  me  sat  Frau  von  Goeler-
Ravensburg  at  a  second  table,  and  at  this  stood  also  at  the  place
indicated  Herr  Dr.  von  Goeler.  The  remarks  attached  to  this  diagram
described  the  modus  operandi  :  "  Herr  Baron  made  the  drawings  in  the
next  room,  or  behind  his  wife's  back  but  in  the  same  room,  and  gave
them  to  M.D  to  look  at."  i

As  regards  I.  the  percipient  said  :  "  At  other  times  I  see  it  dark  on
light :  this  time  light  on  dark."

1  The  sentences  in  inverted  commas  are  translations  of  the  notes  written  at  the
side  of  the  drawings  at  the  time  of  the  experiments.


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  357


In  II.  the  proceedings  were  as  follows  :  ''  First  Frau  Baronin  drew
the  two  long  parallel  lines  (  ),  and  said : '  I  see  two  long

horizontal  lines,  but  there  is  something  else  there.'  Thereupon  M.D.
concentrated  his  will  chiefly  on  the  left-hand  cross  line  (  |  ),  which  was
then  drawn,  the  percipient  remarking,  '  Now  I  see  a  line  to  the  left ' ;
and  then  similarly  with  the  right-hand  line."

The  note  attached  to  III.  runs  :  "  Frau  Baronin  added  emphatically,
that,  '  it  was  only  by  mistake  that  the  cross  stroke  was  crooked,  and
that  she  saw  the  cross  thicker.'  "

I  must  observe  that  on  that  evening  and  in  fact  during  the  whole
time  till  now,  no  further  experiments  have  been  made  in  the
transference  of  diagrams.  On  that  evening,  however,  a  few  experiments
were  made  with  numbers,  the  notes  of  which  cannot  be  found.

21st  July,  1888.  (Signed)  M.  D.

Baron  Dr.  von  Goeler-Ravensburg  certifies  the  correctness  of  the
above. The  following  is  a  translation  of  what  he  says.

"  I  confirm  the  correctness  of  the  accompanying  drawings  and
notes,  and  consent  to  their  publication."

(Signed)  Dr.  Freiherr  Goeler  von  Ravensburg.

Berlin,  19th  June,  1888.


Supplement.]  The  Work  of  Edmund  Ourney.


359


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

It  is  proposed  to  append  to  each  Part  of  these  Proceedings  a  Supple-
ment, consisting  of  papers  not  strictly  included  within  the
transactions  of  the  Society.  The  number  of  books  and  articles  in
foreign  countries  which  bear  upon  our  subject  is  steadily
increasing,  and  we  hope  to  give  in  the  Supplement  reviews  or
abstracts  of  this  contemporary  work.  The  Editor  will  be  glad  to
receive  suggestions  from  correspondents  as  to  publications
deserving  notice.  Papers  of  certain  other  kinds,  moreover,  such
as  that  which  immediately  follows  here,  may  find  place  in  the
Supplement,  though  not  forming  part  of  the  definite  work  of  the
Society.


THE  WORK  OF  EDMUND  GURNEY  IN  EXPERIMENTAL

PSYCHOLOGY.


How  great  a  loss  the  work  of  our  Society,  and  all  cognate  work
throughout  the  world,  has  sustained  in  the  death  of  Edmund  Gurney
it  would  be  difiicult  adequately  to  express.  We  can  best  discern  it  by
reviewing  what  he  had  already  done, — the  six  years'  work  of  a  man  in
the  prime  of  life,  from  whom  some  score  of  further  years  of  undiminished
energy  might  not  have  seemed  too  much  to  hope.  And  some  such
brief  account  must  clearly  be  attempted  in  these  Proceedings  of  which
he  was  the  Editor  ; — for  the  hearing  at  least  of  this  Society  of  which  he
was  the  indefatigable  mainspring.  The  task,  however,  has  difficulties
of  its  own.  Much  of  his  work  lies  in  a  field  still  so  subject  to  con-
troversy that,  while  awaiting  with  confidence  the  world's  ultimate
verdict,  we  must  beware  of  claiming  as  decisive  achievement  what
many  critics  may  still  depreciate  as  mere  mistaken  endeavour.  Much
of  his  labour,  too,  was  carried  on  in  such  close  conjunction  with
other  colleagues, — in  a  spirit  of  such  entire  postponement  of  any
claims  of  his  own  to  the  interests  of  the  common  search  for  truth,
— that  it  is  not  easy  to disentangle  the  precise  share  of  thought


360


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


or  discovery  to  which  his  mind  has  an  exclusive  title.  Much
work,  however,  remains  which  is  indisputably  valuable,  indisputably
his ; — much  work,  and  that  of  a  quite  other  kind  than  an  outside
observer  of  his  earlier  years  would  have  expected  him  to  choose  for  the
prime  task  of  his  maturity.

This  is  no  place  for  a  detailed  account  of  his  chai'acter,  or  for  review
of  his  literary  achievements  in  other  directions ;  but  it  would  be
impossible  to  explain  either  how  he  came  to  take  up  this  special  line  of
research,  or  how  he  came  to  succeed  in  it,  without  indicating  in  some
few  words  in  what  sense  his  previous  life  had  trained  him  for  the  task
on  which  he  entered  at  thirty- five  years  of  age,  in  1882.

Edmund  Gurney's  intellectual  nature  offered  one  of  those  cases,  so
to  say,  of  double  foci,  of  juxtaposed  but  scai'cely  reconciled  impulses,
which  seem  destined  to  become  commoner  as  civilisation  becomes  more
complex,  and  which,  at  whatever  cost  to  the  individual,  are  none  the
less  essential  for  the  progress,  the  unification  of  knowledge,  if  ever
the  emotions  of  the  one  half  of  the  world  are  to  become  the  science  of
the  other.  I  mean  that  while  his  instincts  were  mainly  aesthetic,  his
powers  were  mainly  analytic.  His  dominant  capacity  lay  in
intellectual  insight,  penetrating  criticism,  dialectic  subtlety.  His
dominant  passion  was  for  artistic,  and  especially  for  musical
sensation.  For  a  long  time  it  seemed  as  though,  by  some  strange
irony.  Nature  had  heaped  upon  him  gifts  which  he  did  not
care  to  use,  only  to  deny  him  the  one  gift  of  musical  inven-
tiveness— or  even  of  executive  facility — which  would  have  satisfied  his
inborn,  ineradicable  desire.  During  all  his  boyhood,  during  all  his
college  days,  music  was  his  strong  preoccupation.  Called  upon  to
choose  between  classical  and  mathematical  studies,  he  chose  classics
almost  at  hazard,  and  worked  at  them,  one  may  say,  in  the  intervals  of
his  practice  on  the  piano.  In  spite  of  this  divided  interest,  and  of  a  late
beginning — for  he  came  up  to  Cambridge  ill-prepared — his  singular  acute-
ness  in  the  analysis  of  language,  his  singular  thoroughness  in  leaving
no  difliculty  unsolved,  secured  him  high  honours  and  a  Trinity  Fellow-
ship. Few  men  have  attained  that  position  by  dint  of  studies  which
formed  so  mere  an  episode  in  their  intellectual  life.  He  quickly
returned  to  music,  and  for  years  continued  a  struggle  for  executive
skill  which  at  last  became  obviously  hopeless.  Yet  his  devotion  to
music  was  not  wasted  ;  rather  it  bore  fruit  far  more  valuable  to  the
world,  though  less  satisfying  to  himself,  than  the  manual  dexterity
which  he  had  craved  in  vain.  He  wrote  The  Poiver  of  Sound,  a  treatise
which  judges  more  competent  than  I,  abroad  and  at  home,  have
accepted  as  a  work  of  serious — even  of  unique — value  on  the
philosophy  of  music.  And  even  the  unmusical  reader  can  discern  in
the  book  the  combination  of  its  author's  characteristic  qualities  ; — on


Supplement.] The  Work  of  Edmund  Ourney.


361


the  one  hand  the  depth,  the  force,  the  refinement  of  emotion  ;  on  the
other  hand  the  trenchant  dialectic,  the  logic  which  pierces  like  a
dividing  sword  through  the  tangle  of  sentimental  fallacies  with  which
all  {esthetic  criticism  is  still  painfully  encumbered.

When  music  failed  him  he  had  to  consider  his  next  step.  And
here  it  should  be  said  that,  although  he  possessed  a  competence,  he
was  far  from  rich ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  had  he  been  brought  up  with
the  tastes  and  habits  of  a  poor  man.  Again,  in  spite  of  the  command-
ing stature  and  noble  presence  which  gave  the  impression  of  so  much
force  and  fire, — in  spite,  too,  of  much  actual  muscular  and  athletic
power, — he  was  not  really  robust ;  and,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  with
very  tall  men,  he  suflered  from  a  constitutional  lassitude  which
often  made  all  efibrt  distasteful.  It  might  have  been  expected,  then,
that  either  he  would  live  a  quiet  dilettante  life,  or  that  if  he
worked  hard  it  would  be  with  the  object  of  increasing  his
income.  But,  in  fact,  neither  of  these  alternatives  would  have  been
tolerable  to  him.  He  could  not  bear  to  live  without  hard  work  ;  yet  toil
was  so  irksome  that  he  could  not  willingly  undertake  it  for  a  merely  per-
sonal end.  Since,  then,  artistic  delight  had  failed  him,  he  had  to  appeal
to  a  still  deeper,  a  still  more  potent  stimulus.  That  stimulus  he  drew  from
his  moral  nature,  on  which  I  have  not  yet  touched; — from  the  profound
sympathy  for  human  pain,  the  imaginative  grasp  of  sorrows  not  his
own,  which  made  the  very  basis  and  groundwork  of  his  spiritual  being.
As  yet  this  power  of  sympathy  had  expended  itself  mainly  in  private
friendships,  and  had  given  to  his  afi"ections,  to  his  consolations,  a
unique  quality  on  which  I  cannot  now  dwell.  And  it  had  also
interwoven  itself  with  his  craving  for  the  power  of  musical  expression,
in  which  his  goal  defined  itself  to  him  as  the  capacity  so  to  render  the
best  music  as  to  make  "  the  poorest  dwellers  in  the  dingiest  cities"
enter  with  him  into  "the  rarer  air  of  pure  artistic  exaltation,"  and  thus
to  infuse  "the  isolation  of  inward  experience"  with  "  the  living  intei'est
of  human  sympathy. "^

And  now,  in  the  ruin  of  artistic  hopes,  this  human  sympathy,  this
deep  desire  to  better  the  lot  of  suff'ering  men,  became  and  remained  his
dominant,  almost  his  only  motive.  But  the  right  mode  of  altruistic
action  was  not  easy  to  find.  He  felt  himself  too  sceptical — perhaps
also  too  fastidious — for  many  of  the  forms  of  practical  philanthropy.
He  took  no  sanguine  view  of  his  power  to  influence  mankind  by  any
purely  literary  production.  He  felt  that  the  field  in  which  his  mind
could  work  most  efiectively  was  the  field  of  exact  logic,  of  cogent
argument,  in  science  or  metaphysics.  And  he  turned  to  medicine,  not
as  a  pursuit in which he would be likely to attain  practical

1  The  Power  of  Sound,  p.  422.


362


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


success,  but  as  a  branch  of  science  which,  if  grasped  aright,
might  open  at  least  some  indirect  avenues  to  usefulness.  In  the
preliminary  studies  for  the  medical  degree — physics,  physiology,
chemistry — he  showed  unusual  thoroughness,  unusual  penetration ;  and
passing  the  second  M.B.  Cantab,  examination  (1880),  he  accomplished
the  scientific,  as  opposed  to  the  clinical  part,  of  a  physician's  training.
But  he  soon  found,  as  he  had  expected,  that  for  clinical  work  he  had
no  special  aptitude  ;  that  he  would  do  well  to  leave  the  bandaging  of
the  actual  physical  wounds  of  poor  humanity  to  men  who  perhaps
sympathised  with  the  sufferer  less,  but  who  fastened  the  bandages
better.  He  had  not,  therefore,  definitely  adopted  any  profession,  when
in  1882  a  possibility  presented  itself  of  serving  both  science  and
humanity  in  an  unlooked-for  and  adventurous  way.

In  order  to  understand  the  manner  in  which  this  new  appeal
aflfected  him,  we  must  consider  for  a  moment  the  nature  of  his  deep
realisation  of  the  sorrows  of  mankind.  This  sympathetic  pain,  though
it  prompted  him  to  share  in  various  benevolent  movements,  was
essentially  not  of  a  kind  which  any  specific  philanthropies,  any  social
readjustment,  could  assuage  or  satisfy.  Rather — like  the  melancholy
of  Marcus  Aurelius,  or  of  those  fragments  of  early  Greek  philosophy
which  enter,  as  it  were,  at  the  first  onset  into  the  very  core  of  human
fates — Edmund  Gurney's  compassion  for  his  neighbours'  sufiering  was
based,  not  so  much  on  removable,  as  on  irremovable  things  ;  on  that
endless  disproportion  between  man's  desire  and  his  attainment  which
evolution  can  only  intensify  ;  on  that  sudden  snapping  of  man's  deepest
affections  which  evolution  can  only  teach  him  to  feel  as  a  still  crueller
wound ;  on  that  wail  of  anguish  which,  though  it  should  arise  but
from  one  hopeless,  helpless  creature  amid  the  whole  planet's  broad
content,  must  still  prevent  us  from  regarding  with  enthusiasm,  with
worship,  a  universe  in  which  a  single  sentient  being  is  born  to
unmerited  and  unrequited  woe.

In  his  essay  on  "  The  Human  Ideal,"i  the  most  deeply-felt
chapter,  perhaps,  in  all  that  he  wrote,  he  used  his  penetrative
imagination,  his  unshrinking  reason,  to  tear  aside  the  fallacies  of  those
who  speak  to  us  of  earthly  life  without  a  future  as  of  a  satisfying  and
glorious  thing ;  who  would  fain  gild  with  enthusiasm  that  outlook
before  which  the  wisest  men  have  been  the  most  sternly  silent,  or  the
most  courageously  resigned.

"The  Positivist  religion,"  he  says,  "is  'to  explain  man  to  himself.'
The  Positivist,  then,  is  able  to  imagine  that  the  time  will  come  when  a
man  will  never,  in  sudden  flashes,  see  himself,  and  his  brief  hold  on
life,  and  his  relations  to  existence  outside  him,  as  an  inscrutable  riddle  ;


1  Tertmm  Quid,  Vol.  I.


Supplement.] The  Wovk  of  Eclmuncl  Gurney.


363


a  time  when  '  the  abysmal  deeps  of  personality  '  will  be  wholly  filled
up  ;  a  time  when  men  will  be  insensible  to  the  irony  of  affections  and
devotions  spreading  and  deepening  up  to  the  blighting  and  clipping
point ;  of  '  Humanity  overflowing  the  individual  as  the  ocean  does  a
cup,'  till  the  cup  happens  one  day  to  turn  upside  down  ;  of  the  voice
of  conscience  speaking  in  tones  whose  depth  and  urgency  seem  often  a
mockery  of  their  contents;  of  the  Goddess  in  whose  paths  'flowers  laugh'
and  '  fragrance  treads  '  crushing  worshippers  beneath  her  chariot  wheels  ;
of  the  sense  of  infinite  import  in  life,  to  be  found  (we  are  told)  by
each  in  the  mere  multitude  of  lives  stunted  and  limited  like  his  own."

The  practical  lesson  which  he  draws  is  virtually  identical  with  that
taught  by  J.  S.  Mill  in  his  celebrated  posthumous  essay,  namely,  that
it  is  helpful,  not  injurious,  to  the  moral  welfare  of  mankind,  that  they
should  indulge  in  the  hope — or  speculate  on  the  possibility — that  our
life  may  not  be  truly  ended  by  the  death  we  know.

"  I  simply  state,  as  a  psychological  fact,  that  the  sense  of  possi-
bilities that  can  never  be  disproved  is  capable  of  exercising  pervading
eflect  on  the human  mind  which  is  absolutely  irrelevant  to  any
numerical  estimate  of  odds ; and  that  human  spirits,  oppressed  in
the  manner  described  in  this  paper,  find  the  sense  of  these  possibilities
an  ineradicable  fact  in  their  lives.  On  paper,  in  a  scheme  of  philosophy,
the  '  grand  Perhaps  '  may  look  as  feeble  as  '  Humanity  '  looks  imposing.
But  there  is  another  arena. In  the  hearts  of  countless  individuals  the
former  expands  into  a  pervading  influence,  where  the  latter  shrinks  into
a  mere  noun  of  multitude. To  tell  them  that  '  nebular  hypotheses  '  are
'  the  religion  of  scholars,  and  not  of  men  and  women  with  work  to  do,'
has  no  force  unless  it  can  be  proved  that  the  work  remains  undone  ;
that  the  hypotheses  interfere  with  the  human  creed  and  the  ideal  of
self-renouncing  duty  ;  that  they  have  some  anti-social  tendency  which
contains  the  germs  of  their  own  decay.  No  such  proof  has  been  given.  As
the  spread  of  science  supplies  no  direct,  so  the  spread  of  social  morality
supplies  no  indirect  argument  for  the  probable  cessation  of  an  attitude
of  mind  which  is  equally  compatible  with  both."

Whatever  may  be  said  of  such  utterances  as  these,  they  will  scarcely
be  held  to  indicate  either  conceited  fanaticism  or  eager  credulity.  I
have  thought  it  important  to  quote  them,  because  the  primd  facie
presumption  in  scientific  minds  against  any  research  which  bears  even
indirectly  on  the  problem  of  man's  immortality,  assumes  that  such
research  is  only  undertaken  either  by  men  whose  feeling  for  evidence  on
all  subjects  is  weak,  or  by  men  whose  personal  craving  for  a  future  life
is  vivid  enough  to  blind  them  to  the  slightness  of  the  evidence  for  that
special  belief.  Neither  of  these  categories  can  be  stretched  to  include
Edmund  Gurney.  It  has  already  been  shown — and  all  his  writings
prove  it — that  the  type  of  his  intellect  was  not  rhetorical,  imaginative,


364


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


mystical,  but  sceptical,  analytical,  and — to  use  again  the  old  Platonic
word  which  best  describes  him — dialectical.  And  as  regards  personal
pre-occiipation  with  a  future  life  he  was  again  far  removed  from  the
character  which  a  jyriori  critics  might  have  assigned  to  him.  For  my
part,  indeed,  I  assuredly  cannot  admit  that  a  preoccupation,  with
the  unseen  world,  to  whatever  pitch  it  may  be  carried, — that  a  laying
up  of  our  treasure  in  things  above,  however  ardently  our  eyes  may  turn
to  where  tliat  treasure  lies, — need  either  diminish  a  man's  terrene
energy,  or  blunt  his  eagerness  to  know  the  very  truth — the  truth  on
which  he  has  staked  his  all.  I  leave  it  to  those  who  condemn  such  a
temper  of  mind  to  consider  how  much  of  high  religion,  of  high
philosophy  they  must  strike  out,  a.s  noxious  surplusage,  from  the  upward
strivings  of  mankind.

But  I  am  not  here  imagining  an  ideal  character,  but  describing  a
real  one  ;  and  I  merely  state  it  as  a  fact  that  Edmund  Gurney  had  7iot
a  strong  personal  ci'aving  for  a  future  life — had  not  even  that  kind  of
confidence  in  Providence,  or  in  evolution,  which  leads  most  of  us  to
take  for  granted  that  if  that  life  exists,  then  for  us  and  for  the  universe
all  must  in  the  end  be  well.

When,  therefore,  he  entered  upon  that  class  of  inquiries  behind
which  the  great  hope  obscurely  hangs,  this  was  not  with  any  personal
flutter,  with  any  stimulus  from  inward  longings  or  inward  terror.
Reason  had  convinced  him,  not  that  if  there  were  a  future  life  the
universe  must  be  good,  but  that  if  there  were  a  future  life  the  universe
might  be  good ;  and  that  without  such  a  life  the  universe  could  not  be
good  in  any  sense  in  which  a  man  moved  with  the  sorrows  of  humanity
ought  to  be  called  upon  to  use  that  word.  And  thus  his  attitude  in
the  inquiry  reconciled,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  lessons  of  two  opposing
aphorisms, — the  saying  of  Spinoza,  "  De  nulla  re  minus  liber  homo,
quam  de  morte,  cogitat"  and  that  older  saying,  and  weightier  still  :
"  Vita  jjhilosophi  commentatio  mortis."  For  his  meditation  on  death,
and  on  what  might  follow  death,  was  begotten,  I  say,  neither  by
cravings  nor  by  fears ;  it  was  the  deliberate  outcome  of  a  penetrating
survey  of  the  possibilities  of  weal  for  men.

His  practical  concern  with  such  matters  was  of  gradual  growth.  It
began  with  a  form  of  research — if  research  it  could  be  called — strangely
at  variance  with  his  previous  companionships  or  habits  of  thought.
He  attended  (and  here  I  must  confess  to  some  persuasion  on  my  own
part),  he  attended,  during  the  years  1874-8,  a  great  number  of  Spiritual-
istic seances.  He  sat  in  the  cenacles  of  those  happy  believers,  an  alien,
formidable  figure,  courteous  indeed  to  all,  but  uncomprehended  and
incomprehensible  by  any.  What  knowledge,  what  opinions  he
gained  in  this  long  ordeal  he  never  made  known  to  the  world,  nor
shall I here  attempt  to say. But thus much I may  affirm,


Supplement.] The  Work  of  Edmund  Ourney.


865


I  think,  for  all  of  us  who  seriously  pursued  that  quest,  that  in
the  first  place — in  spite  of  much  of  failure — we  could  never  persuade
ourselves  that  we  had  a  right  to  abandon  it ;  and  that  in  the  second
place  we  perceived  that  the  seances  with  paid  mediums,  which  formed
the  ordinary  method  of  Spiritualism,  were  ill-calculated  to  lead  us  to  any
solid  results ;  nay,  that,  in  beginning  our  inquiry  with  the  so-called
Spiritualistic  phenomena  at  all,  we  were  somehow  beginning  it  at  the
wrong  end.  I  will  not  here  repeat  the  account  given  in  the  Introduction
to  Phantasms  of  the  Living  of  the  gropings  and  the  tcitonnements,
the  disappointments  and  the  successes,  which  ultimately  taught  us,
in  1882,  to  discern  a  less  hazardous  line  of  approach  to  the  cloud-
capt  citadel.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  was  founded,  with
the  establishment  of  thought-transference — already  rising  within
measurable  distance  of  proof — as  its  primary  aim,  with  hypnotism
as  its  second  study,  and  with  many  another  problem  ranged  along
its  dimmer  horizon.  Here,  at  length  there  was  sea-way  for  a
definite  adventure ;  with  wide  possibilities,  indeed,  of  failure — with
the  bones,  so  to  say,  of  ship-wrecked  precursors  bleaching  along  all
the  shore, — but  yet  with  chances  also  of  an  achievement  which,
though  in  our  lifetime  it  might  remain  obscure  and  inchoate,  should
grow  and  broaden  to  unguessed  issues  in  generations  yet  to  be.  But
there  was  urgent  need  of  someone  to  give  the  coup  de  collier  to
the  new  enterprise ; — of  an  Honorary  Secretary — as  far  removed  as
possible  from  fool  or  fanatic — who  should  devote  his  whole  time
and  energy  gratuitously  to  the  task.

The  previous  pages  will  have  enabled  the  reader  to  judge  how  far
by  gifts,  by  training,  by  various  experience,  by  deep-seated  thirst  for
knowledge,  Edmund  Gurney  was  fitted  for  such  a  post  as  this.  He
undertook  it ;  and  in  all  the  work — whatever  be  its  final  appraisement —
which  our  Society  has  thus  far  accomplished,  his  part  is  closely  inter-
woven. That  work  has  been  in  great  measure  conjoint  and  consultative  ;
but  his  was  ever  a  leading  voice  in  the  consultation.  And  there  is  much
also  which  practically  belongs  to  him  alone.  On  two  such  points  I  may
dwell ;  two  points  on  which  his  services  to  human  knowledge  cannot,
I  think,  be  controverted  even  by  those  who  take  a  wholly  adverse  view
as  to  the  value  of  those  further  inquiries  which  would  fain  launch  the
bark  of  science  upon  a  strange,  an  unvoyaged  sea.

The  two  points  of  which  I  speak  are  his  work  in  psychological
hypnotism,  and  his  work  on  the  theory  of  hallucinations.

I  claim  that  he  was  the  first  Englishman  who  studied  with  any  kind
of  adequate  skill  the  psychological  side  of  hypnotism,  making  therein
experiments, — cut  short,  of  course,  by  his  premature  death,  but  already
of  the  highest  value  ; — experiments  which,  though  sometimes  concur-
rent with  those  of  the  French  school,  were  yet  independently  executed ;


366 '  The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


and  which  mark,  as  it  seems  to  me,  an  epoch  in  the  study  of  hypnotism
in  England.

Three  names  before  Edmund  Gurney's  are  associated  with  three
successive  stages  of  the  history  of  mesmerism  or  hypnotism  in  the
British  Empire.  The  first  is  that  of  EUiotson, — a  man  who,  partly
through  his  own  lack  of  tact  and  temper,  but  mainly  through  the  sheer
ignorance,  the  sheer  bigotry  of  his  medical  contemporaries,  has  never
yet  received  the  honour  which  was  justly  his  due.  He  practically
introduced  curative  mesmerism  into  England  ;  he  made  a  vast  number
of  experiments  and  threw  out  a  vast  number  of  ideas ;  and  although
many  of  his  experiments  were  loose,  and  many  of  his  conclusions  hasty,
yet  if  he  could  look  down  on  the  great  centres  of  hypnotic  activity
to-day, — on  the  Salpetriere  and  the  Charity,  on  Nancy,  on  Bordeaux,  on
Toulon, — he  might  fairly  claim  that  the  great  mass  of  the  phenomena
which  he  spent  his  later  life  in  demonstrating, — to  be  met  only
with  calumnies,  sneers,  or  silence, — have  now  become  the  common-
places of  the  lecture-room,  and  the  routine  of  clinical  practice.

The  second  name  isEsdaile's.  Esdaile  had  persistence  like  EUiotson's,
with  better  tact,  or  better  fortune  ;  and  the  long  series  of  carefully-
noted,  cai-efully-figured  operations  which  he  performed  under  mesmeric
ansesthesia  upon  Hindoos  in  the  Calcutta  Hospital  made  it  impossible
for  any  candid  inquirer  to  doubt  longer  that  the  mesmeric  trance  was  a
real,  a  valuable  discovery.

The  third  name,  of  course,  is  that  of  Braid,  whose  discovery  that  a
similar  condition  of  trance  or  "  hypnotism  "  can  be  sometimes  induced
without  gaze  or  "  passes," — without  any  intervention  of  a  second  per-
son at  all, — by  mere  fixation  of  the  eyes  on  a  bright  object  with  an
inward  and  upward  squint,  was  a  most  important  contribution  to  our
knowledge  of  abnormal  states.  Braid's  work  became  gradually  known,
and  hypnotism  met  with  readier  acceptance  than  mesmerism  had  found.
•  Yet  Braid's  work — such  was  the  animus  of  the  time — was  welcomed
much  less  for  its  own  positive  value  than  because  it  was  supposed  to
supply  a  kind  of  refutation  to  the  mesmerists  who  had  preceded  him.
It  is  needless — or  it  should  be  needless — now  to  say  that  Braid's  work
was  in  reality  a  developmeyit  of  their  previous  work,  superseding  or
modifying,  indeed,  certain  premature  or  too  exclusive  theories,  but
unmistakably  indicating  that  the  whole  problem  of  the  induction  of
trance,  or  of  somnambulic  states,  was  an  even  wider  one,  and  even  more
important  to  science,  than  a  Puysegur  or  a  Petetin,  an  EUiotson  or  an
Esdaile,  had  ever  ventured  to  imagine.  This  narrow  polemical  spirit
had  its  usual  retribution  in  the  retardation  of  further  discovery.
Braid's  experiments — valued  only  as  confounding  EUiotson's — were  not
tliemselves  repeated  or  pursued.  Incredible  as  it  may  seem,  in  all  the
long  interval  from  (say)  1855  till  1883 — the  date  of  publication  of


Supplement.] The  Wovh  of  Edmund  Gurney.  367

Edmund  Gurney's  first  experiments — there  was  scarcely  an  experiment
performed in England which added anything further to  our
knowledge. About  1875  a  great revival of  hypnotism  began  in
France — began with Charcot and Richet in Paris, and  spread
from another focus — the persistent labours of Dr. Liebeault —
to  the  Professors  at  Nancy. Since  that  date  a  whole  literature  of
hypnotism  has  grown  up  in  France ;  experiment  outstrips  experiment,
and  memoir  supersedes  memoir  with  bewildering  rapidity. But  to  all
this  movement  there  was  in  England  for  some  years  no  response  what-
ever. Nay,  there  was  no  apparent  knowledge  that  such  a  movement
was  going  on  ; and  when  some  of  us  in  1883-4  began  to  report  from
personal  observation  what  was  being  done  in  France,  and  to  add  some
experiments  and  reflections  of  our  own,  our  papers  were  received  with
astonishment  bordering  on  incredulity. Even  yet,  the  savants  on  this
side  of  the  Channel  are  strangely  indifferent  to  what  is  being  done  in
this  subject  by  savants  on  the  other  ;  but  nevertheless  there  has  been
progress  enough  in  the  past  five  years  to  convert  a  good  many  of  our
quondam  paradoxes  into  truisms. To  recount  the  experiments  of
others,  however,  is  not  a  difficult  task. Edmund  Gurney  did  much
more  than  this. He  devised  and  carried  through  (1885-8)  a  complex
series  of  experiments,  surpassed  by  no  other  hypnotist  in  exactness,
either  of  observation  or  of  record,  with  a  definite  view  to  the  investiga-
tion of  two  great  problems  which  lie  on  the borderland  between
physiology  and  psychology,  and  which  are  apt  to  seem  not  less  but
more  perplexing  the  wider  our  induction  extends. The  first  question
may  be  phrased  as  follows  : "  Is  the  hypnotic  state  ever  induced  by
some  yet  unrecognised  agency — some specific  influence  of  operator
on subject?" To this  question Edmund Gurney and I  were,
so  far  as  I  can  discover,  for  some  years  the  only  writers  who  maintained
the  afiirmative  answer. But  it  is  not,  of course, to the  mere
maintenance  of  a  view  then  altogether  scouted,  but  now  gradually
gaining  ground,  that  credit  is  due;  but  rather  to  the  invention  and
execution  of  definite  experiments  testing  the  matter  in  a  rigorous  way.
I  must  claim  then — for  in  the  vast  preponderance  of  French  work  in
hypnotism  a  piece  of English  work,  unless  clearly  put  forward,  is
likely to be  overlooked — that Edmund Gurney's  long series  of
experiments  on  the  anesthetization  of single  fingers  of  a  healthy
waking  subject,  witliout  his  seeing  the  finger  selected  or  receiving  any
suggestion  as  to  which  finger  it  was  to  be, — are  not  only  the  best
experiments  that  have  yet  been  made  on  this  branch  of  the  subject,  but
are  about  the  only  experiments  where  the  conditions  have  for  any  long
time  been  kept  sufficiently  rigorous  to  give  the  record  of  what  occurred
a  permanent  and  objective  value. The  excellence,  that  is  to  say,  of
these  experiments  did  not  depend  (as  so  often  in  hypnotism)  merely  on

2  b


368  The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


the  susceptibility  of  tlie  subjects  employed  (for  the  subjects,  judged  by
a  French  standard,  were  not  remarkable) ;  but  it  depended  on  the
inventiveness  with  which  the  experiments  were  planned,  the  caution
with  which  they  were  executed,  and  the  acumen  with  which  the
operator  interpreted  their  I'esults.  Those  results^  though  in  some  ways
perplexing,  are  surely  of  very  high  importance.  For  they  prove — so
far  as  any  one  operator's  experience  in  this  protean  subject  can  be  held
to  prove  anything — they  prove  that  there  is  sometimes  in  the  induction
of  hypnotic  phenomena  some  agency  at  work  which  is  neither  ordinary
nervous  stimulation  (monotonous  or  sudden),  nor  suggestion  conveyed
by  any  ordinary  channel  to  the  subject's  mind.  I  do  not  say  that  these
experiments,  or  any  one  man's  experiments  with  living  organisms
under  such  delicate  conditions,  can  in  themselves  be  called  conclusive.
If  not  repeated,  they  must  fall  to  the  ground.  But,  on  the  one  hand,
we  still  otfer  to  repeat  them,  and  to  exhibit  them,  on  the  person  of  a
perfectly  healthy  and  normal  man,  to  any  medical  or  otherwise  well-
qualified  observer.  And,  in  the  second  place,  the  conclusion  to  which
they  point,  so  absolutely  heterodox  a  few  years  ago,  is  now  receiving
adhesions  from  very  different  quarters.  That  conclusion  is  involved  in
the  experiments  in  sommeil  a  distance  of  Gibert,  Janet,  Richet,
Hericourt,  &c.  It  is  involved  in  the  transferences  of  hysterical
symptoms  vouched  for  by  Babinski.  It  is  involved — in  one  of  its  forms
— in  the  belief  to  which  the  veteran  Liebeault,  with  characteristic
openmindedness,  has — after  combating  it  for  20  years — avowed  his  con-
version, as  to  the  efficacy  in  the  treatment  of  sleeping  infants  of
certain  hypnotic  methods  which  he  previously  supposed  to  be  operative
by  dint  of  suggestion  alone.  What  the  precise  nature  of  tliis  influence,
or  of  these  influences,  may  be  is  a  further  question.  Edmund  Gurney
discussed  that  point  in  his  last  published  paper  on  "  Hypnotism  and
Telepathy,"  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  but  he  did  not  suppose  that  the
last  word,  or  his  own  last  word,  had  yet  been  said  on  the  subject.

The  second  hypnotic  problem  at  which  he  worked  with  marked
success  was  the  profoundly  important  one  of  hypnotic  memory — "What
is  the  relation  of  the  memory  in  one  hypnotic  state  to  the  memory  in
another  hypnotic  state,  and  of  both  to  the  normal  or  waking  memory  1"
This  is  at  the  very  root  of  the  psychology  of  hypnotism ;  and  yet,  so
far  as  I  can  discover,  before  Edmund  Gurney's  time  there  had  in
England  been  absolutely  no  experiments  (unless  some  scattered  obsevra-
tions  of  EUiotson's  are  to  be  so  counted,)  which  threw  light  on  this
fundamental  question.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  even  now  there
are  many  English  readers  who  can  comprehend  the  full  value  of  the
papers  on  "The  Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory,"  "Stages  of  Hypnotism,"
tfcc,  which  practically  opened  up  in  England  a  whole  department
of  experimental  psychology. Still  fewer,  perhaps,  are  those  who  will


Supplement.]


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.


369


be  prepared  for  my  next  remark, — that,  from  the  point  of  view
of  a  technical  estimate  of  Edmund  Gurney's  claims  as  a  savant,  the
question  is  not  as  to  the  value  of  these  papers,  but  as  to  their  priority.
The  publication  of  his  first  paper  of  importance  in  this  line  was
preceded  by  a  few  months  by  the  publication  of  the  first  of  the
remarkable  papers  of  a  cognate  kind  by  which  Professor  Pierre  Janet
has  so  rapidly  made  for  himself  so  distinguished  a  place  in  contemporary
psychology.  But  I  know  for  a  fact — nor  will  our  courteous  friend  at
Havre  be  disposed  to  question  it — that  Edmund  Gurney's  experiments
were  thought  out,  and  in  great  part  performed,  before  he  so  much  as
heard  (I  was  myself  his  informant)  of  the  brilliant  results  attained  by
the  French  Professor.  He  of  course  instantly  recognised  the  value  of
those  results  ;  but,  as  will  be  seen  by  comparing  the  two  series  of
experiments,  he  continued  to  the  end  to  work  on  his  own  original
lines.

I  do  not  wish  to  exaggerate  my  friend's  performances,  or  to  show
any  insular  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  achievements  of  foreign  savants.
But  taking  the  history  of  hypnotism  in  England,  the  history,  that  is,
of  one  of  the  main  branches  of  experimental  psychology  in  a  country
which  has  long  boasted  of  her  psychologists,  it  seems  to  me  that  beside
the  epoch-making  names  of  EUiotson,  Esdaile,  and  Braid,  the  critical
historian  must  place  the  name  of  Edmund  Gurney.

Leaving  now  the  subject  of  hypnotism,  the  next  important
piece  of  work  which  I  claim  for  my  friend  is  the  revision  and  large
extension  of  our  previous  knowledge  as  to  hallucinatiojis.  To  this
important,  but  little  explored,  topic  he  was  led  by  a  somewhat
unexpected  road.

I  have  spoken  of  the  discovery  (as  I  regard  it)  of  thought-trans-
ference, or  telepathy,  as  the  determining  incident  which  led  Edmund
Gurney  to  devote  himself  to  what,  for  want  of  a  more  distinctive
appellation,  we  have  entitled  Psychical  Research.  In  the  slow  experi-
mental establishment  of  this  discovery  he  took  a  leading  share.
And  at  the  same  time  he  saw  that  this  principle,  once  admitted,
must  have  a  wider  than  its  merely  experimental  scope, — must
be  invoked  as  the  nearest  approach  to  an  explanation  of  certain
spontaneous  phenomena,  in  all  times  loosely  alleged  to  occur,
and  now  confirmed  by  first-hand  testimony  which  flowed  in  upon  us  in
an  amount  far  exceeding  any  previous  harvest  of  that  kind.  If  there
be  (and  we  soon  became  convinced  that  there  veritably  are)  cases,  too
numerous  for  chance  to  explain,  where  an  apparition  or  other  hallucina-
tion has  been  truth-telling,  or  veridical, — has  corresponded,  that  is  to
say,  with  the  moment  of  death  or  crisis  of  the  person  whose  aspect  or
voice  (at  a  distance  transcending  the  ordinary  operation  of  the  senses),
is  phantasmally  discerned, — then  here  surely — whatever  else  we  have —


370


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.  [Supplement.


we  have  at  any  rate  a  communication  between  mind  and  mind,  effected
through  no  ordinary,  no  recognised  channel.  It  was  plainly  our
business  to  deal  with  all  obtainable  narratives  of  this  kind, — to  show
how  far  these  phantasms  could  be  called  into  court  as  witnesses  on  the
side  of  telepathy.

But  yet  to  attempt  to  introduce  hallucinations  of  any  kind  whatever
as  sources  of  trustworthy  knowledge — nay,  as  the  very  basis  and
starting-point  of  deductions  of  the  highest  moment— this  was  an
adventurous,  a  difficult  matter.  Plainly  there  was  an  indispensable
pre-requisite — that  some  one  at  least  of  those  who  undertook  thus  to
treat  hallucinations  from  so  new  an  aspect  should  show  that  he  had
mastered  all  that  could  be  known  of  them  from  the  old,  the  ordinary
stand-point. This  task  Edmund  Gurney  undertook.

Of  his  treatise  on  hallucinations — for  it  is  veritably  a  treatise,
though  compressed  and  packed  almost  beyond  the  limits  of  lucidity — of
his  treatise  on  hallucinations  included  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  it
must  be  said,  as  of  his  essays  on  the  psychological  side  of  hypnotism,  that
it  is  not  only  the  best  discussion  in  our  language,  but  actually  the  only
one  in  our  language  ;  the  only  connected  review  of  foreign  work  on  the
subject,  the  only  serious  attempt  at  scientific  determination  of  the
genesis  of  hallucinations,  their  concomitant  phenomena,  their  relative
frequency.  Previous  essays  in  English  with  a  similar  title  had  been
little  more  than  mere  groups  of  anecdotes  ;  they  had  still  belonged  to
the  pre-scientific  ei'a.  Nay,  there  Avere  not  even  any  statistics
available  on  the  matter  at  all  until  Edmund  Gurney  took  the  trouble —
the  tedious  trouble — to  get  census-papers  filled  up  by  over  5,000  per-
sons taken  at  random,  and  thus  to  gain,  though  not  all  the  information
desirable,  at  least  so  much  more  information  than  anyone  had  possessed
before  him  that  his  conclusions  inust  serve  as  the  point  of  departure
for  any  further  inquiry  through  this  channel  into  the  mechanism  of
the  mind  of  man.

Thus  far,  then,  I  have  claimed  for  Edmund  Gurney  certain
psychological  successes  of  an  ordinary  kind  —  pieces  of  work
independent  of  that  more  advanced,  more  hazardous  line  of  inquiry
which  leads  without  a  serious  break  from  telepathic  experiments  to  the
appraisement  of  phantasms  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead.  For  my  own
part,  however,  (I  need  hardly  say,)  I  look  upon  his  work  in  this  direction
as  the  main  achievement  of  his  brief  career.  But  since  that  work  was
done  under  conditions  somewhat  unusual, — conditions  in  which  he
himself  took  deep  delight — done  in  consultation  by  a  small  group
united  both  in  personal  friendship  and  in  intellectual  interests, — it  is
impossible  to  state  with  accuracy  the  part  taken  by  any  member  of  that
group,  however  active  and  indispensable.  It  will  be  more  to  the
purpose  to  ti-y  to  define  the  temper  of  mind  which  Edmund  Gurney


Supplement.]  The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.


371


brought  to  this  difficult  task — a  temper  of  which  the  three  leading
notes  were  disinterestedness,  precision,  sympathy.

By  disinterestedness  I  mean  more  than  that  disregard  for  the
chances  of  personal  fame  or  fortune  which  was  implied  by  his  devoting
himself  unreservedly  to  this  unpopular,  this  almost  derided,  quest.  I
mean  an  intellectual  disengagement  from  prejudice  on  his  own  side —
a  readiness,  in  Plato's  words,  "  to  follow  the  argument  whithersoever  it
leadeth  " — a  genuine,  instinctive  delight  in  the  mere  process  of  getting
at  truth,  apart  from  any  consideration  of  the  way  in  which  that  truth
might  affect  his  own  argument.  In  controversy  he  showed — if  I  may
make  a  perhaps  fanciful  appeal  to  fashionable  doctrines  of  heredity — a
combination  of  the  acumen  belonging  to  a  descendant  of  the  late  Baron
Grurney's,  with  the  chivalrous,  tigliting  quality  of  the  Greys,  from
whom  on  the  mother's  side  he  sprang.  He  delighted  in  the  fray- — ■
delighted  in  acknowledging  a  fair  stroke  or  rebutting  a  foul  one ;
delighted  in  replying  with  easy  courtesy  to  attacks  envenomed  with
that  odium  plus  quam  theologicum  which  the  very  allusion  to  a  ghost  or
the  human  soul  seems  in  some  philosophers  to  inspire.

His  precision  of  thought  again,  was  of  course  essential  in  an  enter-
prise the  very  object  of  which  was  to  import,  so  far  as  possible,  the
scientific  spirit  into  a  region  hitherto  abandoned  to  loose  reports  and
chimerical  fancies.  But  to  his  mind  precision,  thoroughness,  minute
attention,  were  not  duties  so  much  as  necessities.  He  had,  indeed,  too
much  of  these  qualities  for  complete  effectiveness  in  common  life.  His
fastidious  exactness  was  incompatible  with  that  "  breadth  of  style  "
which  creates  a  strong  popular  impression.  He  pointed  out  too  many
difficulties  ever  to  give  the  air  of  having  arrived  at  an  incontrovertible
solution.  Yet  for  the  particular  work  which  he  was  called  upon  to  do
these  qualities  were  above  all  things  needful.  But  for  them,  that
congeries  of  widely-gathered  evidence  which,  under  his  shaping  hand,
assumed  corporate  being  as  Phantasms  of  the  Living  would  assuredly
have  presented  many  more  vulnerable  points  to  the  searching
criticism  to  which  it  has  very  rightly  been  subjected.

The  strict  canons  of  written  and  oral  investigation  on  which
Edmund  Gurney — taking  the  lion's  share  of  the  joint  work — with
ever-growing  scrupulousness  insisted,  involved,  of  course,  an  arduous
and  a  continually  increasing  labour.  For  some  three  years  (1883-5),
his  life  was  largely  spent  in  letter-writing  and  in  interviews,
bearing  on  the  cases  to  be  cited  in  the  book.  Many  of  these
letters  were  on  topics  requiring  careful  handling  ;  most  of
them  needed  to  be  in  autograph  ;  although,  as  the  work  went  on,  Mr.
G.  A.  Smith's  competent  help  as  secretary  was  of  essential  service.
But  he  often  wrote  fifty  autograph  letters  in  a  day,  sometimes  as  many
as  sixty — involving  some  eight  or  nine  hours  of  close  application.


372


The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.


[Supplement.


These  letters,  again,  needed  to  be  supplemented  by  the  still  more
important  work  of  personal  interviews.  Almost  every  living  witness  of
importance  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (and  many  persons  whose  names
do  not  appear  in  that  book)  had  before  the  book  was  published  been
personally  visited  by  one  of  ourselves ;  and  the  chief,  the  most
successful  part  of  this  delicate  work  was  performed  by  Edmund  Gurney.
Here  it  was  that  his  power  of  sympathy  showed  itself  so  rare,  so  in-
dispensable. For  the  intimate  narratives  which  form  the  bulk  of
Phantasms  of  the  Living  were  not  (as  critics  have  sometimes  assumed)
pressed  eagerly  upon  us  by  vain  or  imaginative  informants.  Rather
they  were  for  the  most  part  won  with  difficulty  from  opposing  reserve  ;
they  seldom  depended  upon  one  witness  alone  ;  and  even  when  the
principal  witness  understood  the  importance  of  the  inquiry,  and  was
willing  to  help  us,  there  were  generally  subsidiary  witnesses  whose
testimony  was  hard  to  come  at.  And  there  was  perpetual  need  to  steer  /
between  the  conflicting  prepossessions  of  two  classes — the  mystics
(or  would-be  mystics),  and  the  savants  (or  would-be  savants),  who  were
ready  on  each  hand  to  denounce  the  inquirer  either  as  weakly  credulous
in  accepting,  or  as  coarsely  sceptical  in  rejecting,  accounts  which  no
narrator  till  now  had  seriously  endeavoured  either  to  invalidate  or  to
confirm.  To  these  problems,  half  social,  half  scientific,  Edmund  Gurney
brought  more  than  the  mere  instinct  of  courtesy,  more  than  the
mere  lawyer-like  acumen.  He  brouglit  a  heart  touched  with  the
sense  of  human  fates— an  eye  which  grew  steadier  as  it  gazed  on
issues  of  deeper  import ;  his  presence  held  with  a  gentle  sway ;  and
I  believe  that  after  all  his  hundreds  of  interviews  he  never  left  a
true  mystic  disgusted  with  his  hardness,  or  a  true  savant  with  his
credulity.

What  this  power  of  sympathy  was  to  his  intimate  friends  I  must
leave  my  readers  to  imagine.  Yet  no  sketch  of  Edmund  Gurney  as
colleague  or  associate  could  be  complete  without  some  mention  of  one
faculty  which,  though  it  scarcely  appears  in  his  published  works,  was
to  his  friends  a  constant,  a  characteristic  charm.  I  mean  his  humour,
— a  spring  fed  from  the  deepest  sense  of  life's  incongruities — an  arrowy
satire  winged  with  tenderness — a  laughter  nigh  to  tears.  His  complex
nature,  with  all  its  conflicting  gifts  and  impulses,  bloomed  at  its  freest
in  this  intimate,  this  fugitive  flower.  All  this  has  perished  ;  no  trace
is  left,  save  in  the  memories  of  those  for  whom  life  has  lost  its
rarest  savour.

We  work  on  at  a  task  grown  harder,  with  heavy  hearts.  Yet  we
have  a  fresh,  a  powerful  motive  to  pursue  it  with  what  strength  we
may.  Our  friend's  ultimate  fame  must  follow  the  fortunes  of  a  yet
undecided  adventure.  It  is  only  by  pressing  to  ever  larger  issues  that
enterprise  of  which  he  was  so  bold  a  pioneer  that  we  may  win  for  him


Supplement.]  The  Work  of  Edmund  Gurney.


373


that  honour  which  was  not  what  he  worked  for,  but  which  we  none  the
less  account  his  due.

And  meantime  there  are  one  or  two  at  least  for  whom,  as  no  living
man  was  dearer  than  Edmund  Gurney,  so  also  few  men,  dead  or  living,
have  done  work  more  vital  than  he.  Not  by  emotion,  but  by  evidence,
by  facts  and  not  by  rhetoric, — himself  not  greatly  hoping, — he  has
helped  us  towards  the  eternal  hope.  He  is  gone  ;  but  he  has  already
done  what  he  could  to  console  us.  Not  all  in  vain  did  his  heart
grieve  for  human  woe.  He  beat  against  the  bars  of  our  earthly  prison-
house,  and  he  has  forced  a  narrow  opening  through  which  we  seem  to
breathe  immortal  air.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


374 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


FRENCH  EXPERIMENTS  ON  STRATA  OF  PERSONALITY.!


It  is  hoped  that,  in  the  form  of  Supplements  to  these  Proceedings,  some
more  or  less  continuous  account  may  be  given  of  work  done  in  our  own
or  other  countries  upon  the  subjects  with  which  our  Society  is  con-
cerned. In  an  early  number  of  the  Proceedings  it  is  proposed  to  give
a  brief  conspectus  of  the  present  position  of  hypnotism  in  France.  The
paper  which  here  follows  is  based  mainly  on  a  remarkable  essay  of
Professor  Pierre  J anet's,  which  should  be  studied  in  the  original  by  all
who  are  interested  in  the  problems  of  personality.  I  have  analysed
that  essay  in  part  only  ;  and  I  have  inserted  many  reflections  for  which
Professor  Janet  is  not  responsible.  For  the  experiments  described  in
his  article,  and  carried  out,  as  it  seems  to  me,  with  admirable  skill,  bear
so  closely  upon  certain  views  which  I  have  already  ventured  to  set  forth
in  these  Proceedings, — illustrate  with  such  striking  appositeness  the
theory  of  personality  which  I  have  here  repeatedly  advanced, — that  it
was  impossible  for  me  to  let  them  pass  without  hinting  at  other
lessons  even  beyond  those  drawn  byM.  Janet,  which  his  results,  when
carefully  studied,  do  most  significantly  convey.

The  heroine  of  the  story  is  the  same  Mme.  B.  of  whom  our
readers  have  already  often  heard ; — a  timid  elderly  peasant  Avoman,
the  wife  of  a  charcoal-burner  near  Cherbourg, — and  whom  at  first  sight
one  would  think  as  unlikely  a  person  as  could  well  be  found  to  extend
one's  idea  of  the  capacities  of  the  human  intelligence.  Yet  nature
has  in  some  way  fitted  this  ignoi'ant  woman  to  become  the  best
known  living  exemplar  of  a  whole  series  of  strange  psychical  pheno-
mena; and  there  is  perhaps  no  one  in  France  whose  personal  history  is
watched  with  so  keen  an  interest  by  such  a  group  of  scientific  men.
Her  shyness  and  illiteracy, — her  stolid  absence  of  curiosity  and  her
submissive  acceptance  of  whatever  her  kind  physician  (Dr.  Gibert  of
Havre)  in  the  first  place,  and  Professors  Janet  and  Richet  in  the  second
place,  may  choose  to  ordain, — these  qualities,  though  rendering  her  in
some  ways  less  interesting  as  a  subject,  are  in  reality  an  advantage  in
such  an  inquiry, — when  contrasted,  for  instance,  with  the  alert
intelligence  of  some  of  the  habitual  subjects  at  the  Salpetriere.  She

1  I.  Les  Actes  Inconscients  dans  le  Somnambulisme.  Professor  Pierre  Janet,
Revue  PhilosojMque,  March,  1888.

II.,  Un  Nouvel  Etat  Psychologique.  Professor  Jules  Li^geois,  Revue  de  V  Hypno-
tisme,  August,  1888.


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  375


has  now  been  under  close  observation  for  several  years  ;  and  physio-
logical  phenomena  have  been  noted,  and  tests  applied,  which  have
amply  satisfied  every  observer,  lay  or  medical,  that  in  this  case  the
hypnotic  states  are  of  a  genuine  character.

In  this  same  subject,  we  have  the  best- modern  case  of  hypno-
tisation  at  a  distance — as  already  recounted  in  our  Proceedings — and
also  the  best  modern  instance  of  hypnotic  severance  of  personalities, —
as  now  to  be  recounted — and  apparently  also  the  best  modern  instance
of  lucidity  or  clairvoyance,  as  recounted  by  Professor  Richet,  of  whose
experiments  it  is  hoped  that  an  account  may  appear  in  these  Proceedings.

It  is  interesting  thus  to  realise  the  inter-connection  of  these  various
supernormal  phenomena.  It  would  almost  seem  as  though  some  slight
modification  of  ordinary  conditions — slight,  I  mean,  as  regards  its
influence  on  the  common  processes  of  life — were  enough  to  give  outlet
to  very  various  capacities  or  susceptibilities  which  in  our  ordinary
existence  find  no  opportunity  of  manifestation.

In  these  extremely  complex  observations  there  is  occasion  for
much  tact  and  skill  in  selecting  some  special  phenomenon  and  tracing
its  development  and  modification  under  various  psychological  con-
ditions. It  is  well  to  have  some  clue  which  we  can  hold,  as  we  track
personality  to  its  recesses.  Professor  Janet's  present  paper  is  mainly
concerned  with  the  relation  of  unconscious  actions  to  the  somnambulic
state.  In  other  words,  it  contains  hints  for  an  answer  to  the  per-
plexing question  :  Supposing  that  in  ordinary  life  I  pei'form  some
action  involving  apparent  intelligence,  but  am  not  aware  that  I  per-
form it,  is  there  nevertheless  within  me  anything  which  can  be  called
a  knowledge  of  that  unconscious  act  ?  Is  there  any  mode  of  evoking
within  me,  by  hypnotic  agency,  a  memory  which  may  include  that
unconscious  act  1  This  is  the  simplest  form  of  the  question,  but,  as
will  be  seen,  it  branches  out  into  many  ramifications.

Professor  Janet  begins  by  distributing  unconscious  waking  actions
into  four  classes,  viz.,  (1)  Acts  unconscious  by  reason  of  post-hypnotic
suggestion  ;  (2)  Acts  unconscious  by  reason  of  the  ansestliesia  of  the
limb  which  performs  them ;  (3)  Acts  unconscious  by  reason  of  mere
absence  or  distraction  of  mind ;  (4)  Spontaneous  unconscious  acts, — a
perplexing  phrase,  which  signifies  acts  initiated  by  a  subconscious  per-
sonality without  the  knowledge  or  participation  of  the  ordinary  or
superficial  personality.

I.  Let  us  take  first  the  case  of  acts  which  are  rendered  more  or  less
unconscious  to  the  waking  subject  by  having  been  suggested  to  him
when  he  was  in  the  hypnotic  state.  Now  the  degrees  of  unconsciousness
with  which  the  subject  executes  the  command  are  veiy  various,  and
can  only  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the  conception  which  we  have
now  gained  of  the  hypnotic  self  as  a  kind  of  permanent  entity,  persisting


376 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


and  watchful  within  the  subject  after  the  hypnotic  trance  has  been
cleared  away.  When,  therefore,  a  subject  in  hypnotic  trance  is  told  to
perform  a  certain  act — say  to  open  his  umbrella  indoors  after  the
trance  is  over — his  state  during  the  fulfilment  of  that  command  is  a
variable  combination  of  the  dominions  of  the  primary  and  the  hyp-
notic self.  One  man,  for  instance,  will  execute  the  suggestion  con-
sciously, will  open  his  umbrella  saying,  "  I  like  to  carry  my  umbrella
open,  even  indoors," — and  will  suppose  that  if  he  liked  lie  could  have
left  the  umbrella  shut.  In  this  case  the  invasion  of  the  primary  by  the
hypnotic  self  is  very  slight,  and  barely  sufficient,  sometimes  insufficient,
to  get  the  suggestion  fultilled.  But  in  other  cases  the  hypnotic  self
reoccupies  the  domain  of  the  primary  self  in  a  complete  manner.  This
may  happen  in  two  ways.  Sometimes  the  subject  when  executing  the
suggestion  falls  back  into  the  hypnotic  ti-ance.  This  is  a  condition
which  has  led  some  observers,  as  Professor  Delboeuf,  to  maintain  that
the  subject  is  always  virtually  asleep  until  the  suggestion  has  been
executed,  although  he  may  seem  to  have  been  fully  awakened  from  the
trance.  But  there  is  yet  another  mode  in  which  the  hypnotic  self
controls  the  primary  to  the  performance  of  the  suggested  acts.  Some-
times it  simply  causes  the  primary  self  to  perform  the  act  uncon-
sciously. To  take  the  trifling  instance  which  I  have  given  above,  the
man  will  open  his  umbrella  and  continue  talking  on  other  matters  and
quite  unaware  that  he  has  opened  it.  We  may  call  this,  I  think,  the
most  advanced  instance  of  the  dominion  of  the  hypnotic  self,  exercised
in  the  waking  state.  For  it  thus  accomplishes  what  seems  to  be  its
object,  the  fulfilment  of  the  suggestion,  without  the  needless  accompani-
ment of  a  renewal  of  the  trance.  It  has  got  the  brain  so  well  under  its
control  that  it  can  set  going  the  machinery  needed  for  its  desired  act
without  stopping  or  interfering  with  the  machinery  which  carries  on  the
coramoii  business  of  life.

It  is  with  the  relation  of  these  selves  to  each  other  that  we  are  at
present  mainly  concerned,  and  I  may  begin  with  a  trivial  incident,
containing  nothing  new  to  students  of  hypnotism,  but  well  illustrating
the  concurrent  action  of  the  primary  and  the  hypnotic  personality, —
the  hidden  criticism  which  the  subjacent  self  seems  to  be  ever  exercising
upon  the  words  and  actions  which  our  primary  selves  fondly  suppose
to  be  the  full  expression  of  what  we  are.

In  these  researches  Mme.  B.  in  her  every-day  condition  is  known
by  the  name  of  Leonie.  In  the  hypnotic  trance  she  has  chosen  for
herself  the  name  of  Leontine,  which  thus  represents  her  secondary
personality.  Behind  these  two,  this  triple  personality  is  com-
pleted by  a  mysterious  Leonore, — of  whom  we  shall  liereafter  have
much  to  say,  but  who  may  for  the  present  be  taken  as  non-existent.
Well  then,  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  was  given  to  Leontine,  that  is  to


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  377


say,  L^onie  was  hypnotised  and  straightway  became  L^ontine,  and
Leontine  was  told  by  Professor  Janet  that  after  the  trance  was  over
and  Leonie  had  resumed  her  ordinary  life,  she,  Leontine,  was  to  take
off  her  apron — the  joint  apron  of  Leonie  and  Leontine — and  then  to
tie  it  on  again.  The  trance  was  stopped,  Leonie  was  awakened,  and
conducted  Professor  J anet  to  the  door,  talking  with  her  usual  respectful
gravity  on  ordinary  topics.  Meantime  her  hands — the  joint  hands  of
Leonie  and  Leontine — untied  her  apron — the  joint  apron — and  took  it
off.  Professor  Janet  called  Leonie's  attention  to  the  loosened  apron.
"  Why,  my  apron  is  coming  off !  "  Leonie  exclaimed,  and  with  full
consciousness  and  intention  she  tied  it  on  again.  She  then  continued
to  talk,  and  for  her — for  Leonie — the  incident  was  over.  The  apron,
she  supposed,  had  somehow  come  untied,  and  she  had  retied  it.  This,
however,  was  not  enough  for  Leontine.  At  Leontine's  prompting,  the
joint  hands  again  began  their  work,  and  the  apron  was  taken  off  again
and  again  replaced,  this  time  Avithout  Leonie's  attention  having  been
directed  to  the  matter  at  all.

Next  day  Pi-ofessor  Richet  hypnotised  Leonie  again,  and  presently
Leontine,  as  usual,  assumed  control  of  the  joint  personality.  "  Well,"
she  said,  "  I  did  what  you  told  me  yesterday  !  How  stupid  the  other  one
looked  " — Leontine  always  calls  Leonie  "  the  other  one  " — "  while  I  took
her  apron  off!  Why  did  you  tell  her  that  her  apron  was  falling  off?  I
was  obliged  to  begin  the  job  over  again."

This  trifling  incident  well  illustrates  the  important  point  which  M.
Janet  in  Prance  and  Mr.  Grurney  in  England  have  largely  helped  to
establish, — namely,  the  persistence  of  the  hypnotic  self,  as  a  remembering
and  reasoning  entity,  during  the  reign  of  the  primary  self.  When  a  post-
hypnotic suggestion  works  itself  out  during  the  waking  state  which  follows
the  hypnotic  trance,  we  seem  at  first  to  see  a  mere  isolated  idea  which  has
been  implanted  in  the  mind  proceeding  to  fructify  ;  or  it  is  as  though  we
had  set  the  mental  clockwork  to  release  an  alarum  at  a  given  hour.
The  suggested  idea  fulfils  itself,  in  isolation,  more  or  less  complete,  from
the  stream  of  normal  memory  ;  and  there,  it  seems,  is  an  end  of  it.
And  this  is,  no  doubt,  the  safest  way  in  which  to  regard  the  trivial
experimental  suggestions  with  which  any  hypnotic  subject  must  needs
begin.  But  if  we  proceed,  and  especially  if  we  give  suggestions  which
are  to  be  fulfilled  at  a  date  still  remote,  we  begin  to  find  that  what
goes  on  can  hardly  be  described  as  the  mere  automatic  self-realisation
of  the  hypnotically-suggested  idea.  There  must  be  something  like  an
effort  to  keep  the  idea  alive, — to  jog  the  hypnotic  memory — to  mark  ofl'
the  number  of  days  which  still  remain  before  the  accomplishment  of  the
suggestions  falls  due.  In  some  of  Mr.  Gurney's  cases  we  get  this
jogging  of  memory  in  the  simplest  form.  It  appears  as  a  kind  of  self-
suggestion  repeating  and  enforcing  the  original  hypnotic  suggestion,


378 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


but  without  modifying  it  in  any  way.  And  so  long  as  there  is  no
modification,  we  may  still  say  that  these  self-reminders  are  a  part  of
the  original  suggestion.  If  I  set  the  great  clock  of  Strasburg  to  show
the  new  moon  when  the  new  moon  is  due — say  at  six  p.m.  ten  days
hence — then  at  six  p.m.  during  each  intervening  day,  there  is,  or  may
be,  some  little  self -adjustment  of  the  clockwork,  which  carries  on  the
notification  to  the  next  evening,  and  marks  off  another  of  the  inter-
vening days.  But  we  do  not  on  this  account  think  it  necessary  to
credit  the  clock  with  a  watchful  personality,  which  remembers  the
suggestion  to  strike  and  counts  the  hours  till  the  time  comes  to
do  it.

But  compare  the  apron  case  which  we  have  just  cited.  Here  the
hypnotic  self  begins  the  suggested  act,  but  the  primary  self  intervenes
and  completes  it.  The  hypnotic  self,  however,  is  not  satisfied  with
this,  and  begins  to  act  again  and  completes  the  act  itself.  Here,
surely,  we  have  got  beyond  anything  like  juechanism,  and  into  something
like  instinct.  Leontine,  refusing  to  acquiesce  in  the  apron-tying  of
Leonie  as  an  adequate  fulfilment  of  her  own  impulse  to  tie  it,  resembles
the  insect  which  must  needs  bore  its  hole  or  build  its  nest  in  its  own
way,  and  will  not  make  use  of  any  assistance  oflfered  to  it.  Leontine's
act,  I  say,  resembles  the  instinctive  act  of  the  insect ;  but  her  recital  of
her  act,  her  comment  on  Leonie's  perplexed  discomfiture  when  the
apron  fell  oflf  without  apparent  cause,  these  already  indicate  something
more  even  than  instinct  at  work.  We  see  in  them  a  parallel  rather  to
the  mental  operations  of  the  child, — the  unquestioning  acceptance  of
the  act  ordered,  however  meaningless,  and  at  the  same  time  the  power
of  seeing  the  absurdity  of  the  intrusion  of  that  act  into  ordinary
waking  life.

Observe,  moreover,  that  if  we  wish  the  hypnotic  self  to  cease  doing
something  which  it  has  been  told  to  do,  but  which  has  now  become  in-
convenient, we  must  give  our  reversing  order  to  that  self  directly,  or  no
notice  is  taken  of  any  remonstrance  or  appeal.  Like  Casabianca  on
the  burning  deck,  the  hypnotic  self  will  go  on  obeying  the  order  once
given  until  it  is  cancelled  by  the  same  voice  with  equal  authority.
For  instance,  M.  Janet  told  N.,  an  entranced  subject,  that  she  was  to
say  her  prayers  as  soon  as  she  awoke  from  her  trance.  In  this  case  the
susfffestion  was  able  to  influence  the  ceremonial  act,  but  not  the  con-
scious  intention.  N.  was  awakened,  and  showed  no  real  disposition  to
pray.  But  her  hands  clasped  themselves  together,  without  her  con-
sciousness,— the  hypnotic  self  doing,  so  to  say,  what  it  could  to  pray  in
spite  of  her.  After  a  time  one  of  the  bystanders,  and  then  M.  Janet
himself,  tried  to  unclasp  her  hands,  but  they  were  unable  to  do  so.  She
then  perceived  that  her  hands  were  clasped,  tried  in  vain  to  unclasp
them,  and  became  greatly  alarmed. The  muscles  continued  in  strong


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  379


contracture  and  she  could  do  nothing  with  them.  Professor  Janet  was
oblised  to  re-entrance  her,  and  then  a  word  or  touch  of  command  was
enough.

Observe,  however,  that  a  collision  of  this  kind  can  generally  be
easily  guarded  against.  The  operator  has  only  to  add,  in  giving  the
suggestion,  "  You  are  to  do  this  until  I  tell  you  to  cease  doing  it,
and  even  after  the  primary  self  has  been  awakened  you  are  to  continue
on  the  alert  for  any  command  of  mine."  It  would  probably  in  all  cases
be  easy  to  educate  the  hypnotic  self  up  to  this  point  of  common-sense.

I  am  assuming  of  course  that  there  is  no  antagonism  to  be  overcome,
— that  the  hypnotic  self  is  merely  anxious  to  obey  the  operator,  so  soon
as  it  recognises  an  authentic  command.  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  impos-
sible that  the  hypnotic  self  should  take  the  bit,  so  to  say,  between  its
teeth,  and  defy  the  operator  and  the  primary  self  alike.  What  might
happen  in  such  a  case  we  can  at  present  only  conjecture.

There  is  another  point  with  regard  to  this  contracture  of  the  hands
in  the  attitude  of  prayer  which  deserves  careful  attention.

A  contracture,  or  persistent  contraction  of  a  limb,  may  be  of  three
main  kinds — (1)  All  the  muscles  may  be  contracted  to  their  utmost
capacity.  The  attitude  which  the  limb  assumes  in  such  a  case  is
invariable ;  being  the  resultant  of  the  several  opposing  muscular  forces
at  work.  Such  a  condition  is  rarely  obtained  in  a  perfect  form,  as  the
nervous  energy  is  rarely  equally  distributed,  but  it  may,  perhaps,  be
seen  sometimes  in  tetanus.  (2)  Or  the  contraction  may  be  confined  to
a  single  muscle,  or  more  commonly  to  a  single  group  of  muscles  whose
nervous  supplies  are  intimately  associated  together  by  long  habit.
Without  going  further  into  details,  we  may  say  that  contractures  of
these  two  classes  are  anatomically  defined, — that  their  limits  correspond
to  nerve-provinces,  and  that  they  are  thus  distinctly  referable  to  some
organic  lesion.

(3)  But  there  is  a  third  class  of  contractures  sometimes  seen  in
hysterical  cases,  where  the  distribution  of  the  contracture  does  not
correspond  with  the  results  which  ought  to  follow  from  any  known
organic  lesion,  i  That  is  to  say  that  certain  muscles  innervated  by
different  nerves  may  be  contractured  in  diffei'ent  degrees,  in  such  a
manner  as  to  keep  the  limb  in  a  ligid  attitude,  simulating  a  special  act
or  emotion,  as  menace,  supplication,  &c.  In  these  cases,  as  in  certain
troubles  of  speaking  and  writing  (aphasia,  agraphy),  the  area  of  trouble
corresponds  to  a  complex  idea,  which  works  itself  out  in  a  group  of
associated  movements.  And  these  contractures,  consequent  on  hypnotic
suggestion,  while  affording  an  excellent  means  of  studying  such
coordinations  of  movements,  throw  light  also  (as  M.  Janet  remarks)  on

1  See  Charcot's  Lemons  sur  Ics  Maladies  Ncrveuse?,  Lemons  xx.,  xxi.,  xxv.


380 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


the  cause  and  treatment  of  certain  complex  contractures  which
occasionally  arise  in  hysterical  or  insane  subjects.  Professor  Janet
liimself  effected  a  vei-y  singular  cure  of  a  trouble  of  this  kind.  A
woman  quarrelled  with  her  husband,  and  raised  her  arm  to  strike  him.
"As  if  by  a  punishment  from  heaven  the  right  arm  remained  con-
tractured  in  the  attitude  of  a  menaced  blow."  This  contracture  lasted
for  three  days,  and  she  consulted  Dr.  Gibert,  who  showed  the  case  to
Professor  Janet.  She  refused  to  be  hypnotised  ;  but^  as  it  turned  out,
no  actual  hypnotisation  was  necessary.  A  single  command  given  to
her  by  Professor  Janet  in  the  waking  state  caused  the  contracture  first
to  oscillate  between  the  right  and  left  arm,  and  then  to  disappear
altogether.  Thus  the  contracture,  the  forced  and  permanent  attitude
which  the  limb  had  assumed  under  a  strong  psychical  stimulus,  in  the
access  of  rage,  was  abolished  by  another  psychical  stimulus, — the  com-
mand confidently  uttered  by  an  operator  in  whose  power  this  susceptible
subject  probably  already  believed.

This  hysterical  delimitation  of  a  fantastic  area  of  injury  is
observable  also  in  anffistliesiaa  and  dysresthesiee,  and  seems  precisely
parallel  to  the  results  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

I  will  mention  yet  one  more  experiment  to  illustrate  the  partition
of  powers  between  the  normal  and  the  hypnotic  selves.  It  shows  what
may  happen  wlien  the  two  controls  are  pretty  equally  balanced,  and  the
kind  of  deadlock  which  may  result.  The  subject  N.  was  once  more
ordered  in  the  trance  to  ^Ji-ay  after  being  awakened.  Her  hands
accordingly  drew  together  to  execute  the  command,  but  this  time  the
order  had  not  taken  such  a  strong  hold  as  usual,  and  the  hands  were
easily  separated,  and  the  effect  of  the  suggestion  seemed  to  be  at  an
end.  And  now  the  waking  and  conscious  N.  was  requested  to  put  her
hands  in  the  attitude  of  prayer.  She  tried  to  do  so,  but  she  found  that
it  was  impossible.  She  could  only  clench  her  fists,  or  interlock  her
fingers  ;  she  could  not  remember  how  to  hold  her  hands  with  palm
pressed  to  palm.  That  position  had  for  the  time  been  appropriated  by
the  hypnotic  self,  and  although  the  hypnotic  self  had  not  power  to
maintain  the  position,  it  still  retained  control  (so  to  say)  over  the
brain-cells  which  governed  the  position  ;  so  that  the  normal  self  was  left
in  a  state  something  like  that  of  the  aphasic  patient  who  knows  quite
well  what  he  wants  to  say  but  cannot  control  his  vocal  organs  to  utter
the  sound.  And  similarly  with  the  same  subject,  if  an  order  were
given  to  the  hypnotic  self  to  write  down  the  even  numbers,  the  normal
self  was  only  able  to  write  down  the  odd  numbers.  In  like  manner,
in  the  troubles  of  verbal  memory,  we  come  upon  cases  where  definite
individual  words  cannot  be  recollected.  And  thus  the  experimental
cases  confirm  the  lessons  already  drawn  from  the  morbid  cases,  and
indicate that each  several  word  or  number  must  in  some  sense


Supplement.]  Fvenck  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  381


correspond  to  a  separate  nervous  process,  isolahle  from  all  other  pro-
cesses, however  closely  some  of  them  may  resemble  it.

Let  us  now  pass  on  to  consider  the  second  class  of  unconscious  acts,
viz.,

II.  Acts  unconscious  hy  reason  of  the  ancesthesia  of  the  limb  which
performs  them. And  here  let  us  consider  whether  some  part  of  the  pro-
cess thus  far  described  is  capable  of  reversal. We  have  seen  that  by
su"-o-estins  an  unconscious  action  we  can  sometimes  induce  a  partial  or
systematised  ansesthesia,  an  unconsciousness  on  the  subject's  part  which
extends  to  the  suggested  act,  and  to  that  act  only.  Now  supposing  that
antesthesia  already  exists,  as  the  result  of  nervous  malady,  can  we  in-
duce an  unconscious  action  without  the  aid  of  hypnotism  ? "With  some
subjects  this  can  in  fact  be  done.  Let  us  take  the  case  of  an  arm  which
has  no  sensation. Place  a  screen  between  the  subject's  eyes  and  his
arm  ; — (this  is  better  than  closing  his  eyes,  which  may  to  some  extent
hypnotise  him), — and  raise  the  insensible  arm  in  the  air. It  will  remain
in  that  position  for  a  long  time, — sometimes  for  more  than  an  hour,
— thus  showing  (just  as  the  rigidity  consequent  on  hypnotic  sugges-
tion also  shows)  that  our  failure  under  ordinary  circumstances  to  keep
the  arm  extended  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  is  due  to  nervous  and  not
to  muscular  exhaustion. Moreover,  if  we  communicate  some  movement
to  this  insensible  arm  it  will  repeat  the  movement  many  times  ;  even
continuing  to  write  a  sentence  which  has  been  suggested  to  it.

Mme.  B.  is  completely  anaesthetic  on  the  left  side.  Professor  Janet
put  an  opera-glass  into  her  left  hand,  a  screen  being  interposed  between
hand  and  face,  so  that  Mme.  B.  could  not  tell  what  had  been  done.
But  the  left  hand  opened  the  glass  and  raised  it  towards  the  face,  thus
bringing  it  into  Mme.  B's.  visual  field.  Mme.  B.  exclaimed  with  astonish-
ment, "  Why,  it  is  an  opera-glass  that  I  have  in  my  left  hand."  We  thus
see  that  the  unconscious  self  which  controlled  tlie  anaesthetic  hand  con-
trolled also  a  certain  amount  of  intelligence.  The  hand  was  made  to
execute  the  complex  movement  which  the  touch  of  the  opera-glass  sug-
gested. Thus  although  Mme.  B.  (Leonie)  could  not  feel  what  was
happening  to  that  arm  and  hand,  someone  or  something  must  have  felt
the  touch  ;  some  nervous  centres  must  have  responded  which  were
capable  of  executing  much  more  than  an  ordinary  reflex  movement,
centres  which  had  at  their  command  the  experience  of  life,  even  the
experience  of  writing  a  sentence,  which  in  Mme.  B's.  case  is  an  accom-
plishment quite  recently  acquired.

Once  more.  The  self,  or  whatever  we  call  it,  which  dominates  the
anaesthetic  limb,  is  capable  of  exerting  a  choice,  or  recognising  a  dis-
tinction between  various  operators,  as  decidedly  as  the  normal  self  can
do  so.  Thus  if  M.  Janet  (out  of  sight  of  Mme.  B.)  extends  her  anaes-
thetic arm  in  the  air,  he  finds  that  he  can  himself  easily  move  it  in  any


382 French  ExiJeriments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.

direction,  but  tliat  others  cannot  do  this.  A  friend  tried  to  move  it,
but  failed ;  or  if  he  pushed  it  forcibly  out  of  its  position  it  recoiled
into  position  again.  Thus,  whatever  the  electivity  between  different
operators,  the  obedience  to  one  rather  than  to  another,  may  mean,  the
anaesthetic  self  exercises  this  electivity,  or  power  of  choice,  as  discrimi-
natingly as  the  normal  self.

Experiments  like  tliese,  with  anaesthetic  limbs,  ought  to  be  repeated
as  often  as  possible.  Thus  far  they  seem  to  show  that  there  is  a  close
analogy  between  the  psychical  conditions  governing  the  an;esthetic  limb
and  the  psychical  conditions  governing  the  subject  when  in  the  state
of  hypnotic  trance.  We  shall  next  reach  an  analogous  conclusion  by
a  still  more  curious  train  of  experiments.

III.  Let  us  now  deal  with  acts  rendered  unconscious  by  distrac-
tion of  mind.  This  class  of  actions,  of  covirse,  is  no  longer  the  sign  of
any  kind  of  abnormality,  but  is  common  to  the  whole  human  race.
There  is  no  one  who  does  not  many  times  a  day  perform  some  trifling
action,  which,  nevertheless,  is  not  a  reflex  action,  but  needs,  or  has  once
needed,  something  of  intelligent  consideration.  It  may  be  remembered
that  in  introducing  the  subject  of  automatic  writing  I  pointed-  out
that  the  flrst  indication  of  writing  not  immediately  governed  by  the
waking  intelligence  was  to  be  found  in  the  words  often  unconsciously
scrawled  on  examination-papers,  &c.,  by  persons  wliose  mind  was  con-
centrated on  some  train  of  argument.  Such  unconscious  Tjuriting  is,  of
course,  only  one  variety  (though  the  most  interesting  variety)  of  the
unconscious  gestures  or  actions  with  which  we  have  now  to  deal.  And
the  study  of  these  unconscious  actions  brings  out  in  a  curious  way
their  analogy  to  the  acts  of  the  hypnotic  self.  Just  as  our  scattered
dreams  may  consolidate,  so  to  say,  into  successive  periods  of  somnam-
bulism, connected  by  a  chain  of  memory,  so  also  our  acts  of  distraction
in  waking  hours  may  be  educed  and  fostered  in  such  a  way  as  to
become  a  more  or  less  continuous  manifestation  of  an  underlying  per-
sonality. M.  Janet's  good  fortune  in  finding  "  subjects,"  and  skill  in
using  them,  has  afforded  a  curious  instance  of  what  may  be  done  by
mere  suggestion  in  the  waking  state, — suggestion  not  loud  and  dominant,
but  insinuated  so  gently  that  the  acts  which  follow  upon  it  never
obtrude  themselves  upon  the  svibject's  attention,  which  continues
occupied  in  some  other  way.

P.,  a  man  of  40,  was  received  into  the  hospital  at  Havi'e  for
delirium  tremens.  He  improved,  and  became  quite  rational  during  the
day  time,  though  still  delirious  at  night.  The  hospital  doctor  observed
that  he  was  highly  suggestible,  and  invited  Professor  Janet,  whose
words  I  now  quote: — "While  the  doctor  was  talking  to  him  [on  a
subject  which  interested  him]  I  placed  myself  behind  him  and  told  him
to  raise  his  arm. On  the  first  trial  I  had  to  touch  his  arm  in  order  to


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  383


provoke  the  desired  act,  afterwards  his  unconscious  obedience  followed
my  order  without  difficulty.  I  made  him  -walk,  sit  down,  kneel, — all
without  knowing  it.  I  even  told  him  to  lie  down  on  his  stomach,  and
he  fell  down  at  once,  but  his  head  still  raised  itself  to  answer  the
doctor's  questions.  The  doctor  asked  him,  '  In  what  position  are  you
while  I  am  talking  to  you  'Why,  I  am  standing  by  my  bed,  I  am
not  moving.'  '  Don't  you  see  how  small  you  have  become  ? '  'I
am  shorter  than  you  are,  but  I  am  not  shorter  than  usual.'  I  could
scarcely  believe  that  a  man  awake  and  in  possession  of  his  faculties
(for  there  was  no  delirium),  could  imagine  that  he  was  standing  up
when  he  was  really  lying  on  his  stomach  on  the  ground.  But  in  fact
a  kind  of  hallucination  united  with  the  '  systematised  anaesthesia '  in
producing  this  strange  state  of  things."  This  subject  was  never  hyp-
notised at  all,  and  the  sensibility  to  suggestion  seems  to  have  been  the
mere  temporary  result  of  the  state  of  alcoholism.  It  would  appear,
indeed,  that  any  relaxation  of  mental  unity,  any  slackening  of  the
centralising  energy  which,  so  to  say,  keeps  a  man's  personality  together,
may  afford  opportunity  for  the  setting  up  of  a  secondary  series  of
actions,  not  included  in  the  primary  consciousness.  The  man  recover-
ing from  delirium  treinens  was  suggestible  in  much  the  same  manner
as  a  healthy  man  in  a  hypnotic  trance,  or  in  an  ordinary  doze  or
dream.

And  here  I  shall  for  the  time  desert  M.  Janet,  in  order  to  relate  a
recent  experiment  of  Professor  Liegeois,  of  Nancy.  Professor  Liegeois
seems  not  to  have  seen  Professor  Janet's  article,  and  discusses  the
phenomena  from  a  different  point  of  view.^  It  is  the  more  interesting
therefore,  to  note  their  complete  concordance  with  Professor  Janet's
results.

My  readers  are  probably  aware  that  it  is  a  common  experiment  to
say  to  an  entranced  subject,  say  Camille,  "When  you  wake.  Professor
Liegeois  [or  any  given  person  present]  Avill  have  left  the  room ; — he
will  be  no  longer  present,  you  will  not  hear  him  or  see  him."  Camille
wakes,  and  experiences  what  the  school  of  ISTancy  term  a  "  negative  hal-
lucination." She  no  longer  perceives  Professor  Liegeois,  though  in  all
other  ways  she  is  apparently  perfectly  normal.  Now  in  the  experi-
ment to  be  recounted  Professor  Liegeois,  thus  banished  by  suggestion
from  the  purview  of  the  apparently  waking  Camille,  succeeds  in  getting
stealthily  back  into  communication  with  some  consciousness  of  Camille's,
but  not  with  that  same  consciousness  from  which  he  has  been  expressly
banished.  I  abbreviate  Professor  Liegeois'  account  of  one  of  these
cases.

1  The  article  in  the  Revue  de  V  Hypnotisrae  is  taken,  we  are  told,  from  a  forthcoming
book  of  Prof.  Liegeois' on  Suggestion  and  Somnambulism,  in  their  Connection  with  Juris-
prudence and  Legal  3Iedicine.


384 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


"M.  Li^beault  entranced  Camille,  and,  at  my  request,  suggested  to  her
that  she  would  neither  see  nor  hear  me  any  longer.  Awakened,  the  subject
is  en  rap-port  with  everyone  else  ;  I  alone  exist  for  her  no  longer  ;  but,  as  I
shall  show,  this  is  not  strictly  true  ;  there  are  in  her,  as  it  were,  two  per-
sonalities, one  of  which  sees  me,  while  the  other  does  not  see  me,  and  hears
me,  while  the  other  pays  no  attention  to  my  words.

' '  I  began  by  satisfying  myself  as  to  the  state  of  her  sensibility  ;  oddly
enough  she  was  still  sensitive  to  pain  inflicted  by  other  persons  present,  but
not  by  me  ;  if  they  pricked  her  she  quickly  withdrew  her  arm  ;  if  I  pricked
her  she  felt  nothing  ;  even  if  I  left  a  pin  sticking  in  her  she  neither  felt  nor
saw  it.  [Professor  Liegeois  supposes  this  elective  anaesthesia  to  be  a  quite  novel
phenomenon  ;  but  it  is  surely  only  an  extension  of  the  difficulty  which  the
subject  of  a  negative  hallucination  habitually  has  in  perceiving  any  manifes-
tation of  the  personage  temporarily  abolished.  The  degree  of  the  difficulty
varies  in  different  cases,  and  no  doubt  in  the  present  case  the  negative
hallucination  was  very  complete.]  Having  found  that  a  direct  appeal  from
me  produced  no  reply,  I  proceeded  as  impersonally  as  possible  :  speaking,  not
in  my  own  name,  but  as  though  I  were  an  inward  voice  of  the  subject's  own,
expressing  thoughts  which  emanated  from  her  own  mind.  I  said,  '  Camille
is  thirsty  ;  she  will  go  to  the  kitchen  and  ask  for  a  glass  of  water,  which  she
will  place  on  this  table. '  She  seemed  to  have  heard  nothing,  and  yet  after  a
few  moments  she  executed  the  prescribed  action,  with  the  quick  impetuous
movements  often  observed  in  the  somnambulic  state.  She  was  asked  why
she  had  brought  the  glass  and  put  it  on  the  table  ;  she  could  not  understand
what  was  meant;  'she  had  not  moved;  there  was  no  glass  on  the  table.'
Similarly  she  uttered  whatever  words  I  suggested  to  her,  and  immediately
afterwards  was  unaware  of  having  uttered  them.  At  the  same  time,  when
M.  Liebeault  addressed  me  she  was  astonished,  and  thought  that  he  was
talking  to  the  wall.  Wishing  to  assure  myself  that  she  did  actually  see  me,
though  not  conscious  of  doing  so,  I  said,  '  Camille  will  take  from  the  pocket
of  M.  Liegeois  a  bottle  which  contains  eau  de  Cologne ;  she  will  uncork
it  and  smell  the  delicious  scent.'  She  got  up,  came  straight  to  me,  found  in
my  pocket  a  bottle  of  ammonia,  uncorked  it  and  smelt  the  odour  with
delight.'

I  need  not  prolong  the  account  of  the  experiment.  Its  point  is
plain.  While  Camille  was  under  the  spell  of  the  negative  hallucination,
— while,  so  far  as  her  conscious  self  was  concerned,  she  could  not  dis-
cern Professor  Liegeois'  presence, — Professor  Liegeois,  speaking  imper-
sonally but  authoritatively,  succeeded  in  gaining  control  over  some
unconscious  stratum  in  Camille,  and  in  prompting  acts  of  which  the
active,  speaking  Camille  continued  unaware  even  while  she  executed
them.

"It  has  been  believed  till  now,"  adds  Professor  Liegeois,  speaking
perhaps  in  somewhat  too  general'terms,  "  that  the  negative  hallucination
completely  annulled  the  visual  or  auditory  sensations,  preventing  their
being  perceived  by  the  brain.  Well,  we  believe  that  this  is  an  error  ;
there  is  visual,  there  is  auditory  perception ;  these  perceptions  do  not


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  385


reach  the  conscious  ego,  but  they  realise  themselves  in  the  unconscious
ego ;  and  the  person  banished  by  the  negative  hallucination  can  enter
into  communication  with  the  subject,  from  whose  eyes  it  was  believed
that  he  had  entirely  disappeared."

It  will  be  seen  how  closely  concordant  is  all  this  with  Professor
Janet's  results.  I  forbear  to  insist  here  on  another  point  which  Pro-
fessor Liegeois'  experiment  with  the  ammonia  suggests, — namely,  that
if  we  assume,  as  is  on  other  grounds  probable,  that  no  sensation  of
Camille's  can  have  been  misinterpreted  by  the  whole  of  her  personality,
there  was  probably  a  self  profounder  still  which  recognised,  both
that  M.  Liegeois  was  in  the  room  all  the  time,  and  that  the  flask  con-
tained ammonia,  and  not  eau  de  Cologne.  But  this  point  may  recur
to  the  reader's  mind  at  a  later  stage  of  Professor  Janet's  experiments,
— to  which  experiments  we  must  now  return.

Thus  far  we  have  dealt  with  a  secondary  personality  summoned  into
being,  so  to  say,  by  our  own  experiments,  and  taking  its  orders  entirely
from  us.  It  seems,  however,  that,  when  once  set  up,  this  new  person-
ality can  occasionally  assume  the  initiative  and  can  say  what  it  wants
to  say  without  any  prompting.  This  is  cui-iously  illustrated  by  what
may  be  termed  a  conjoint  epistle  addressed  to  Professor  Janet  by  Mme.
B,,  and  her  secondary  personality,  Leontine.  "She  had  left  Havre
more  than  two  months  when  I  received  from  her  a  very  curious  letter.
On  the  first  page  was  a  short  note,  written  in  a  serious  and  respectful
style. — She  was  unwell,  she  said, — worse  on  some  days  than  on  others,
— and  she  signed  her  true  name,  Mme.  B.  But  over  the  page  began
another  letter  in  a  quite  difi'erent  style,  and  which  I  may  quote  as  a
curiosity.  '  My  dear  good  sir,  I  must  tell  you  that  B.  really  really  makes
me  sufier  very  much  ;  she  cannot  sleep,  she  spits  blood,  she  hurts  me  ;
I  am  going  to  demolish  her,  she  bores  me,  I  am  ill  also,  this  is  from
your  devoted  Leontine.'  When  Mme.  B.  returned  to  Havre  I
naturally  questioned  her  about  this  singular  missive.  She  remembered
the  first  letter  very  distinctly  .  .  .  but  had  not  the  slightest  recollec-
tion of  the  second.  ...  I  at  first  thought  that  there  must  have  been
an  attack  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  between  the  moment  when
she  finished  the  first  letter  and  the  moment  when  she  closed  the  enve-
lope. .  .  .  But  afterwards  these  unconscious,  spontaneous  letters
became  common,  and  I  was  better  able  to  study  their  mode  of  produc-
tion. I  was  fortunately  able  to  watch  Mme.  B.  on  one  occasion  while
she  went  through  this  curious  performance.  She  was  seated  at  a
table,  and  held  in  her  left  hand  the  piece  of  knitting  at  which
she  had  been  working.  Her  face  was  calm,  her  eyes  looked  into
space  with  a  certain  fixity,  but  she  was  not  cataleptic,  for  she  was
humming  a  ru.stic  air ;  her  right  hand  wrote  quickly  and  as  it  were
surreptitiously. — I  removed  the  paper  without  her  noticing  me  and  then

2  c  2


386 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


spoke  to  her ;  she  turned  round,  wide  awake,  but  surprised  to  see  me,
for  in  her  state  of  distraction  she  had  not  noticed  my  approach.  Of
the  letter  which  she  was  writing  she  knew  nothing  whatever."

Leontine's  independent  action  is  not  entirely  confined  to  writing
letters.  She  observed  (apparently)  that  when  her  primary  self,  Leonie,
discovei'ed  these  letters,  she  (Leonie)  tore  them  up.  So  Leontine  hit
on  the  plan  of  placing  them  in  a  photographic  album  into  which  Leonie
could  not  look  without  falling  into  catalepsy  (on  account  of  an
association  of  ideas  with  Dr.  Gibert,  whose  portrait  had  been  in  the
album).  In  order  to  accomplish  an  act  like  this  Leontine  has  to  wait
for  a  moment  when  Leonie  is  distracted,  or,  as  we  say,  absent-minded.
If  she  can  catch  her  in  this  state  Leontine  can  direct  L^onie's  walks,
for  instance,  or  make  her  start  on  a  railway  journey  without  luggage,  in
order  to  get  to  Havre  as  quickly  as  possible.

It  will  be  observed  that  Leontine  has  now  arrived  at  a  point  mid-
way between  the  mere  stages — which  cannot  be  called  personalities
—through  which  Mr.  Gurney's  hypnotic  subjects  could  be  led  back-
wards and  forwards  at  pleasure, — and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fully
developed  alternating  personalities  of  such  a  case  as  Felida  X.  If
Leontine  were  habitually  encouraged, ^if  a  large  part  of  Mme.  B.'s
life  were  passed  in  that  hypnotic  stage  in  which  Leontine  holds
unchecked  dominion, — we  must  suppose  that  Leontine  would  acquire
more  and  more  power  of  intervening  in  Mme.  B.'s  waking  state — her
Leonie  state — also  ;  until  perhaps  the  relapses  from  Leontine  into
Leonie, — from  the  secondary  into  the  primary  personality, — might
become  as  brief  and  rare  as  they  have  become  in  the  often-cited  case  of
Felida  X.  And  thus  the  whole  personage  might  undergo  profound
alteration  by  gradual  steps  leading  on  from  what  was  at  first  a
mere  momentary  experiment.

V.  We  have  thus  very  briefly  traced  the  analogy  between  four  classes
of  unconscious  or  automatic  actions, — actions  not  forming  a  part  of
the  primary  chain  of  memories.  We  have  considered  the  automatic
actions  which  are  the  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  and  those  which
accompany  local  ansesthesise  ;  and  those  which  occur  during  mental
distraction  (or  negative  hallucination) ;  and  those  which  present  them-
selves spontaneously, — which  make  an  irruption  into  normal  life  as
though  for  some  definite  purpose,  to  fulfil  the  wishes  of  some  sub-
conscious personality.  I  think  that  Professor  Janet's  comparison  of
these  various  forms  of  automatic  action  is  highly  instructive,  and  I
observe  with  interest  that  they  have  led  him  to  a  view  of  the  essence
of  the  hypnotic  state  which  resembles  the  old  view  of  Deleuze,  and
comes  nearer  than  anyone  else's  that  I  can  quote  to  the  view  which  I
have  myself  several  times  endeavoured  to  express,  but  which  has
hitherto  attracted  little  notice.


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  387

"  I  shall  be  tempted,"  says  M.  Janet  (p.  258),  "  to  say  with  Deleuze
that  the  forgetfulness  of  all  that  has  passed  during  the  somnambulic
state  is  the  principal  psychological  character  of  somnambulism.  This
is  its  only  constant  character."  Now  it  is  perhaps  too  much  to  say
that  any  character  of  the  hypnotic  trance  is  absolutely  constant  in  all
cases.  But  it  seems  to  me  most  important  that  this  formation  of  a
secondary  chain  of  memory  should  be  insisted  on  as  a  fundamental
point,  rather  than  the  susceptibility  to  suggestion  which  recent  savants
have  more  usually  singled  out,  or  the  transmission  of  a  specific
effluence  on  which  most  of  the  early  mesmerists  insisted.  I  do  not,
of  course,  deny  the  suggestibility,  and  I  continue  to  believe  in  some-
thing like  the  specific  effluence,  now  so  generally  discredited,  but  which
Mr.  Gurney's  experiments  seem  to  me  to  confirm.  But  neither  of  these
characteristics,  I  think,  goes  so  deep  as  the  division  of  memory.
There  is  nothing  else  which  shows  us  so  instructively  the  true  relation
of  hypnotism  to  other  states.

And  here  I  may  repeat  my  own  contention,  ^  which  is  briefly  this  : —
T  hold  that  hypnotism  (itself  a  word  covering  a  vast  variety  of
difierent  states)  may  be  regarded  as  constituting  one  special  case
which  falls  under  a  far  wider  category, — the  category,  namely,  of
developments  of  a  secondayy  2)ersonality.  I  hold  that  we  each  of  us  con-
tain the  potentialities  of  many  different  arrangements  of  the  elements
of  our  personality,  each  arrangement  being  distinguishable  from  the
rest  by  differences  in  the  chain  of  memories  which  pertains  to  it.  The
arrangement  with  which  we  habitually  identify  ourselves, — what  we  call
the  normal  or  primary  self, — consists,  in  my  view,  of  elements  selected  for
us  in  the  struggle  for  existence  with  special  reference  to  the  maintenance
of  ordinary  physical  needs,  and  is  not  necessarily  superior  in  any
other  respect  to  the  latent  personalities  which  lie  alongside  it, — the
fresh  combinations  of  our  personal  elements  which  may  be  evoked,  by
accident  or  design,  in  a  variety  to  which  we  can  at  present  assign  no
limit.  I  consider  that  dreams,  with  natural  somnambulism,  automatic
writing,  with  so-called  mediumistic  trance,  as  well  as  certain  intoxica-
tions, epilepsies,  hysterias,  and  recurrent  insanities,  afford  examples  of
the  development  of  what  I  have  called  secondary  mnemonic  chains, —
fresh  personalities,  more  or  less  complete,  alongside  the  normal  state.
And  I  would  add  that  hypnotism  is  only  the  name  given  to  a  group  of
empirical  methods  of  inducing  these  fresh  personalities, — of  shifting
the  centres  of  maximum  energy,  and  starting  a  new  mnemonic  chain.

And  observe  that  this  is  no  mere  matter  of  verbal  definition ;  it
involves  in  the  first  place  a  principle  of  classification,  and  in  the
second  place  a  novel  criterion  for  the  discussions  so  frequently  raised


1  See  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  163-6,  224-232,  503-5.


388 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


as  to  the  consciousness  or  unconsciousness  of  any  given  act.  In  the
first  place,  the  classification  of  hypnotic  stages  must  not  be  determined,
as  the  Salpetrifere  school  determine  it,  by  somatic  indications  alone, — by
states  of  the  muscles  or  of  the  refiexes.  The  true,  the  central  indica-
tion of  a  change  of  hypnotic  state  will  be  a  change  of  the  scope  of
memory.

And  conversely  every  somatic  change — even  the  stiffening  of  a  limb
during  apparently  normal  waking  life — will  on  this  view  bear  some
relation  to  the  change  of  memory.  Thus  suppose  that  my  arm  is
rendered  anesthetic  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  and  is  then  pricked  with-
out my  seeing  it,  I  shall  be  unconscious  of  the  pricks.  My  normal  self,
that  is  to  say,  will  be  unconscious  of  them,  and  on  the  ordinary  view
my  whole  self  will  be  unconscious  of  them.  But  in  the  view  which  I
am  now  advocating  I  shall  consider  it  as  practically  certain  a  jyriori
that  some  phase  of  personality  of  mine  must  have  been  conscious  of  the
pricks,  and  must  have  registered  them  on  some  latent  mnemonic  chain.
Thus,  in  a  word,  nothing  which  my  organism  does  or  suffers  is  un-
conscious, but  the  consciousness  of  any  given  act  or  endurance  may
form  a  part  of  a  chain  of  memories  which  never  happens  to  obtrude
itself  into  my  waking  life.

The  subject  needs  as  much  illustration  as  possible  ;  and  here  I  will
give  two  examples  of  the  mode  in  which  a  transition  from  one  form  of
incipient  secondary  personality  to  another  may  be  eflfected.  Both  are
taken  from  Professor  Janet.  The  first  shows  the  transition  from  acts
of  distraction  to  the  hypnotic  state ;  the  second  shows  the  transition
from  the  hypnotic  state  to  an  independent  alternative  personality,
sharing  in  the  concerns  of  ordinary  active  life.

First  I  quote  the  words  in  which  M.  Janet  describes  how  by
merely  educing  and  fostering  acts  of  distraction  the  hypnotic  state  was
ultimately  induced ; — as  though  it  were  the  hypnotic  self  which  per-
formed the  acts  of  distraction,  and  when  these  acts  became  numerous
and  complex  the  hypnotic  self  was  obliged  to  assume  full  control  of  the
personality  in  order  to  fulfil  its  task.

"  M.  Binet  had  been  kind  enough  to  show  me  one  of  the  subjects  on
whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  studying  acts  rendered  unconscious  by
anaesthesia,  and  I  had  asked  his  permission  to  produce  on  this  subject
the  phenomenon  of  suggestiori  by  distraction.  Everything  took  place
just  as  I  expected.  The  subject  (Hab.),  fully  awake,  talked  to  M.
Binet.  Placing  myself  behind  her  I  caused  her  to  move  her  hand
unconsciously,  to  write  a  few  words,  to  answer  my  questions  by
signs,  &c.  Suddenly  Hab.  ceased  to  speak  to  M.  Binet,  and,  turning
towards  me,  continued  correctly  by  the  voice  the  conversation  which
she  had  begun  with  me  by  unconscious  signs.  On  the  other  hand,  she
no  longer  spoke  to  M.  Binet,  and  could  no  longer  hear  him  speak  ;  in  a


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.


38


word,  she  liad  fallen  into  elective  somnambulism.  It  was  necessary  to
wake  her  up  ;  and  when  awakened  she  had  naturally  forgotten  every-
thing. Now  Hab.  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  me  at  all ;  it  was  not,
therefore,  my  presence  which  had  sent  her  to  sleep.  The  sleep  was
therefore  in  this  case  manifestly  the  result  of  the  development  of
unconscious  actions,  which  had  invaded,  and  finally  eflfaced,  the  normal
consciousness.  This  explanation,  indeed,  is  easily  verified.  My  sub-
ject, Mme.  B.,  remains  wide  awake  in  my  neighbourhood  so  long  as  I
do  not  provoke  unconscious  phenomena ;  but  when  the  unconscious
phenomena  become  too  numerous  and  too  complicated,  she  goes  to
sleep.  We  may  similarly  explain  a  peculiarity  in  the  execution
of  the  post-hypnotic  suggestions.  So  long  as  these  are  simple,
the  subject  executes  them  unconsciously  while  she  talks  of  some-
thing else.  But  when  they  are  long  and  complicated,  the  subject
talks  less  and  less  while  she  executes  them,  ends  by  going  to  sleep,  and
executes  them  rapidly  in  the  somnambulic  state."  M.  Janet  goes  on
to  suggest  (as  had  already  been  suggested  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  Vol.
IV.,  pp.  235,  254,  ifec),  that  the  trance  which  often  comes  upon  the
"  writing  medium  "  in  the  middle  of  the  seance  is  a  phenomenon  of
this  same  kind.  When  the  tension  of  the  automatic  script  which
the  "  medium  "  is  producing  becomes  too  great,  the  normal  self  sinks
for  the  time  being  below  the  level  of  consciousness,  and  the  secondary
self,  from  which  the  writing  proceeds,  becomes  dominant  in  its  turn.

It  must  be  observed  that  this  explanation  of  that  very  singular
phenomenon — the  trance  of  the  automatist — is  a  new  one,  and  by
no  means  identical  with  the  phrase  commonly  used  by  Spiritualists,
who  say  that  the  writing  medium  is  "mesmerised  by  the  con-
trolling spirit."  In  putting  forward  this  new  explanation,  which
refers  the  trance  to  a  mere  change  of  cerebral  equilibrium — a
mere  shifting  of  the  psychical  centre  of  energy  within  the  personality
of  the  automatist  himself, — I  do  not  mean  to  deny  the  possibility
that  some  influence  external  to  the  writer's  may  at  times  be
operative.  On  the  contrary,  if  Mrs.  Newnham,  for  example,  (when
writing  automatically  answers  to  questions  put  by  Mr.  Newn-
ham,  but  unseen  by  her),  had  fallen  into  a  trance  when  ovei'taxed
(instead  of  merely  feeling  headache  and  exhaustion),  this  might  cer-
tainly have  been  classed  as  a  kind  of  mesmerisation  by  an  influence
coming  primarily  from  outside  the  automatist's  personality,  though
exercised — not  by  external  "  passes  "  or  words  or  looks — but  as  it  were
from  a  base  of  operations  within  the  automatist  herself.  And  if  there
be  any  intelligences,  other  than  those  of  living  men,  which  can  in  any
way  act  upon  us,  then  assuredly  this  mode  of  action  would  for  them
also  be  in  accordance  with  analogy  ; — namely,  to  influence  the  subject
to  write,  and  occasionally  to  send  him  to  sleep, — to  submerge  his


390 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


normal  personality, — when  their  controlling  influence  reached  a  certain
degree  of  intensity.  But  it  is  in  ordinary  cases  quite  unnecessary  to
assume  any  external  influence  at  all.  Unless  the  matter  of  the  written
message  be  provably  such  as  the  writer's  mind,  in  a  state  of  exalted
dream,  could  not  have  originated,  we  cannot  possibly  assume,  in  the
face  of  all  these  hypnotic  analogies,  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  writing
comes  automatically, — appears  to  him  as  external  to  his  normal  con-
sciousness,— in  any  way  proves  that  it  has  in  truth  originated  outside
himself.

And  next  as  to  the  transition  from  the  hypnotic  trance  to  an  in-
dependent secondary  personality.  M.  Janet  justly  remarks, — and
here  he  is  following,  probably  without  ever  having  seen  the  Zoist,  the
observations  wliich  Elliotson  made  long  ago, — how  very  different,
in  diflerent  cases,  is  the  amount  of  personality  which  the  hyp-
notised subject  is  able  to  manifest.  For  it  must  be  observed  that  the
hypnotic  self  by  no  means  closely  follows  the  characteristics  of  the
waking  self.  A  person  who  is  lively  and  clever  in  common  life  may
make  a  dull  and  torpid  hypnotic  subject ;  and  on  the  other  hand  a
person  who  in  common  life  is  shy  or  stupid  may  develop,  when  hyp-
notised, a  surprising  boldness  and  vivacity.  This  was  eminently  the
case  with  Dr.  Elliotson's  patients,  the  Okeys.  "  I  used  first  to  send
them  to  sleep,"  he  says  {Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  58);  "  on  their  opening  their
eyes,  and  becoming  active  again,  they  were  in  a  wild,  merry,  and  mad
state,  most  waggish,  and  full  of  ungovernable  fun,  caring  for  nobody."
This  fact,  like  many  other  points  which  are  now  matter  of  daily  obser-
vation, roused  suspicion  as  to  the  genuineness  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  phe-
nomena. It  is  to  be  wished  that  those  who  scoffed  at  the  Okeys  could
have  seen  Professor  Janet's  undeniably  genuine  subject  Mme.  B.,  whose
hypnotic  character  (as  I  have  myself  seen)  undergoes  an  even  grotesque
change  of  the  same  kind.  "  This  poor  peasant,"  says  Professor  Janet,
"  is  in  her  normal  state  a  serious  and  somewhat  melancholy  woman,  calm
and  slow,  very  gentle  and  extremely  timid.  No  one  would  suspect  the
existence  of  the  personage  whom  she  includes  within  her.  Hardly  is
she  entranced  when  she  is  metamorphosed  ;  her  face  is  no  longer  the
same  ;  her  eyes  indeed  remain  closed,  but  the  acuteness  of  her  other
senses  compensates  for  the  absence  of  sight.  She  becomes  gay,  noisy,
and  restless  to  an  insupportable  degree  ;  she  continues  goodnatured,
but  she  has  acquired  a  singular  tendency  to  irony  and  bitter  jests.

In  this  state  she  does  not  recognise  her  identity  with  her
waking  self.  '  That  good  woman  is  not  I,'  she  says,  '  she  is  too
stupid  !  "

Once  more.  We  have  seen  that  Leontine  (Mme.  B.'s  hypnotic  self)
carries  to  a  high  point  the  difference  of  character  which  is  in  different
degrees  observable  in  the  majority  of  similar  cases. But  Leontine  is


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  391


in  another  way  also  a  remarkable  hypnotic  personality.  Mme.  B.  has
been  so  often  hypnotised,  and  during  so  many  years,  (for  she  was
hypnotised  by  other  physicians  as  long  ago  as  1860),  that  Leontine  has
by  this  time  acquired  a  very  considerable  stock  of  memories  which
Mme.  B.  does  not  share.  Leontine  therefore  counts,  as  properly  belong-
ing to  her  own  history  and  not  to  Mme.  B.'s,  all  the  events  which  have
taken  place  while  Mme.  B.'s  normal  self  was  hypnotised  into  uncon-
sciousness. It  was  not  always  easy  at  first  to  understand  this  parti-
tion of  past  experiences.

"  Mme.  B.,  in  the  normal  state,"  says  Professor  Janet,  "  has  a
husband  and  children.  Leontine,  speaking  in  the  somnambulic  trance,
attributes  the  husband  to  '  the  other '  (Mme.  B.),  but  attributes  the
children  to  herself.  .  .  .  At  last  I  learnt  that  her  former  mes-
merisers, — as  bold  in  their  practice  as  certain  hypnotisers  of  to-day, —
had  induced  somnambulism  at  the  time  of  her  accouchements  ;  Leontine,
therefore,  was  quite  right  in  attributing  the  children  to  herself ;  the
rule  of  partition  was  unbroken,  and  the  somnambulism  was  char-
acterised by  a  duplication  of  the  subject's  existence."  There  surely
could  hardly  be  a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  remark  made
(Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  225)  that  "when  once  a  second  mnemonic
chain  is  woven,  the  emergence  of  a  second  personality  is  only  a  matter
of  degree."

Hypnotise  a  man  once ;  go  through  a  few  expeiiments,  and  wake
him  up.  The  memory  of  what  has  been  done  will  (in  oixlinary  cases)
have  passed  away,  and  you  may  plausibly  maintain  that  he  was  not
conscious  during  the  trance.  Hypnotise  him  again  and  you  find  that
he  recollects  what  happened  in  the  first  trance  ; — that  there  is  now  a
little  scrap  of  memory  in  which  his  waking  self  has  no  share.  But  it
would  be  absurd  to  dignify  these  fragmentary  interludes  with  the
name  of  a  secondary  personality.  Repeat  the  process,  however,
many  hundred  times,  and  at  last  the  time  spent  in  the  hypnotic
trance,  the  experience  gained  therein,  will  become  comparable  with  the
time  spent  in  normal  existence,  and  the  experience  gained  in  the
common  routine  of  life.  And  if,  as  in  Mme.  B.'s  case,  the  faculties  are
quickened  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  we  shall  have  a  secondary  personality
like  Leontine, — less  capable,  probably,  than  the  primary  personality
of  managing  the  practical  business  of  life,  but  yet  claiming
with  plausibility  a  kind  of  intellectual  leadership  in  the  joint
concern.

And  here,  I  repeat,  the  induced  somnambulism  of  the  hypnotic
trance  is  precisely  paralleled  by  the  spontaneous  somnambulism,  which,  as
we  know,  sometimes  appears  in  the  first  instance  as  little  more  than  an
occasional  vivid  dream,  but  may  develop  by  repetition  into  a  nearly
complete  scission  of  personality,  with  perhaps  (as  in  Felida  X.'s  case)


392 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement,

an  ultimate  triumph  of  the  new  or  somnambulic  personality  over  the
old  or  normal  one.

Thus  far,  then,  we  have  been  tracing  various  ways  in  which  a
hypnotic  or  secondary  self  may  be  discovered  or  developed,  without
asking  further  whether  or  no  that  new  personality  is  itself  to  be
accepted  as  a  permanent  or  homogeneous  thing.  Of  course  we  have  no
right  to  make  any  such  assumption  about  it.  On  the  contrary,  when
once  our  habitual  centre  of  personality  has  been  displaced,  we  seem  to
be  in  a  position  of  unstable  equilibrium,  and  readily  susceptible  of
further  psychical  displacement.

So  soon,  therefore,  as  we  have  developed  a  secondary  personality  in
our  subject,  we  ought  to  try  whether  this  personality  in  its  turn
can  be  split  into  two  parts,  or  rather  whether  it  affords  faults  or
interruptions  through  which  some  underlying  stratum  can  now  be
discerned.  Now  Mr.  Gurney  has  shown  that  even  in  the  most  ordinary
hypnotic  trance  of  healthy  persons  two  stages  can  in  many  cases  be
evoked,  a  ligliter  and  a  deeper  stage,  each  with  a  separate  chain  of
memory  ;  although,  as  might  have  been  expected,  considering  the  very
slight  difference  between  the  two  stages,  these  separate  chains  of
memory  tend  ultimately  to  coalesce  into  one.  And  these  experiments
of  Mr.  Gurney's  gain  additional  importance  from  the  fact  that,  with
exceptional,  hysterical  subjects.  Professor  Janet  has  been  able  to  carry
this  fragmentation  of  the  hypnotic  state,  as  we  shall  see,  to  a  surprising
point.  For  it  is  by  small  experiments  with  average  subjects  that  we
can  best  assure  ourselves  that  the  advanced  experiments  with  ex-
ceptional subjects  present  us  not  with  a  mere  anomaly  but  rather  with
salient  examples  of  a  general  law.

Let  us  see,  then,  if  we  can  use  the  clue  which  the  observation  of  un-
conscious actions  affords  us  to  penetrate  yet  deeper  into  the  strata  of
human  personality.  And  one  of  the  first  questions  which  must  be  met, —
it  is  M.  Janet  who  has  formulated  it  distinctly, — is  this  :  Do  the  acts
of  distraction  performed  in  waking  life  form  part  of  the  somnambulic
chain  of  memory  1  Do  the  strata  (as  I  may  say)  lie  superposed  in  this
regular  fashion,  so  that  the  acts  of  distraction  of  one  stratum  form  part
of  the  conscious  acts  of  the  stratum  immediately  below  if?  If  I  divert
the  attention  of  a  waking  friend  so  that  he  scribbles  some  word  with-
out being  aware  of  what  he  is  doing,  will  he,  if  hypnotised,  remember
the  scribbled  word  1

This  is  a  question  which  experiment  alone  can  solve  ;  and  it  is  pro-
bable that  in  different  cases  we  shall  have  different  results.  In  the
first  place,  all  those  acts  of  distraction  which,  though  performed  in  the
waking  state,  have  special  reference  to  an  already-evoked  hypnotic
personality,  are  likely  to  be  remembered  in  the  hypnotic  state.  Thus
L^ontine,  as  we  have  seen,  remembers  Leonie's  acts  of  distraction,  so


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  393


far  as  those  were  prompted  by  Leontine  herself, — she  remembers,  for
instance,  the  Leontinian  postscripts  to  L^onie's  letters.  But  these  post-
scripts, though  M.  Janet  here  cites  them  as  spontaneous  acts  of  distrac-
tion, were  not  spontaneous  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  scribbled  on
an  examination-paper  is  spontaneous.  They  were  prompted  by  a
personality  which  we  know  to  be  readily  evocable,  and  which  we
naturally  imagine  as  lying  near  the  surface  even  in  its  periods  of
latency.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  I  do  not  see  that  we  have  yet  any
definite  proof  that  acts  of  distraction  in  no  way  connected  with
hypnotism  are  ever  recollected  in  the  hypnotic  state.  They  may  be  so  ;
and,  looking  to  the  great  variety  of  these  phenomena,  I  should  suppose
that  they  sometimes  are  so.  But  the  question  is  not  to  be  settled  in
this  simple  way.  Sometimes,  at  any  rate,  the  waking  person's  acts  of
distraction  are  not  included  in  his  hypnotic  memory ;  and  we  have  then
to  look  for  some  memory  in  which  they  are  included.

"Certain  somnambules,"  says  M.  Janet,  "as  L.,hardly  ever  recover  in
somnambulism  the  memory  of  their  unconscious  acts  ;  others  remember
only  a  portion  of  them.  Leontine  "  (who,  it  must  always  be  remem-
bered, is  simply  the  hypnotic  personality  of  Mme.  B.)  "  remembers
perfectly  Mme.  B.'s  unconscious  acts  when  these  are  spontaneous,"
{i.e.,  initiated  by  Leontine  herself)  "  or  due  to  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tion ;  but  she  never  remembers  Mme.  B.'s  unconscious  acts,  when  the
unconsciousness  is  due  to  anaesthesia  or  to  distraction."  M.  Janet's
analysis  of  this  difference  (pp.  266-272)  seems  to  me  a  model  of  delicate
psychological  investigation.

The  clue  to  the  inquiry  lies  in  the  observation  that  when  a  subject,
already  partially  ansesthetic  through  hysteria,  is  tlirown  into  the
somnambulic  state,  the  ansesthesia  may  continue  unmodified,  and
consequently  such  acts  as  in  her  normal  state  lie  outside  of  her  con-
sciousness by  reason  of  their  affecting  the  ansesthetic  limb,  may  still
lie  outside  her  hypnotic  consciousness,  for  the  same  reason.  But  we
have  reason  to  believe  that  the  sensation  of  limbs  hysterically  anses-
thetic is  never  really  abolished  ;  that  it  exists  potentially  in  all  cases,
and  may  in  some  cases  be  evoked  in  certain  phases  of  trance.  A
hypnotic  consciousness,  therefore,  which  does  not  include  the  con-
sciousness pertaining  to  such  limbs,  cannot  be  regarded  as  embracing
the  whole  of  the  possibilities  of  consciousness  which  lie  beneath  the
normal  threshold.

Again,  the  same  view  is  confirmed  by  the  observation  of  the  acts
of  distraction  performed  in  somnambulism  itself.  For  when  the  som-
nambulic life  reaches  a  point  sufficiently  alert  and  varied  to  be  capable
of  distraction, — when  it  has  attained,  so  to  say,  a  sufficient  bulk  to
make  it  experimentally  divisible, — we  find  that  the  somnambule  is
liable  to  acts  of  distraction  in  an  even  greater  degree  than  the  normal


394 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


subject.  It  is  possible,  by  watching  an  opportunity  when  Ldontine  is
vividly  talking,  to  induce  her — or  rather  some  other  personality  in  the
same  skin — to  hold  a  conversation  by  signs,  without  Leontine's  con-
sciousness, precisely  as,  when  Leonie  is  in  her  normal  state,  Leontine
can  be  induced  to  hold  a  conversation  by  signs,  without  L^onie's
consciousness.

The  two  experiments,  however,  are  not  reciprocal.  That  is  to  say
that  although  Leonie's  unconscious  acts  are  sometimes  (not  always)
coincident  with  Ldontine's  conscious  ones, Leontine's  unconscious  acts  are
never  included  in  Leonie's  memory,  any  more  than  in  Leontine's  own.
They  belong  to  some  other,  to  some  profounder  manifestation  of  per-
sonality, to  which  M.  Janet  has  given  the  name  of  Leonore.  And
observe  that  just  as  Leontine  can  sometimes  by  her  own  motion
and  without  suggestion  write  a  letter  during  Leonie's  waking  state
and  give  advice  which  Leonie  might  do  well  to  follow, — so  also  Leonore
can  occasionally  intervene  of  her  own  motion  during  Leontine's  domi-
nance and  give  advice  which  Leontine  might  with  advantage  obey.
But  in  what  manner  does  Leonore  intervene  1  What  organ  or  instru-
ment is  left  for  her  to  employ  in  this  doubly  pre-occupied  complex  of
psychical  and  physical  manifestation?  What  actually  occurs, — as
briefly  narrated  by  M.  Janet  (p.  267), — is  an  experimental  con-
firmation of  the  view  which  will  be  found  suggested  in  the  Journal
for  July,  1887,  as  to  the  virtual  equivalence  of  hallucination
and  automatism, — the  interchangeability  of  these  two  phenomena,
hallucination  being  a  kind  of  passive  automatism,  or  automatism  an
active  hallucination.  I  then  urged  that  the  "  Dsemon  of  Socrates," —
the  series  of  monitions,  intercurrent  with  ordinary  life,  which  Socrates
received  in  some  fashion  midway  between  internal  impression  and
externalised  voice, — was  in  reality  a  form  of  automatism, — a  message
emanating  from  sub-conscious  (or  super-conscious)  strata  of  his  own
being,  and  finding  access  into  his  normal  consciousness  in  the  form  of
a  hallucination,  just  as  it  might  have  found  access  in  the  form  of  an
automatically  written  message,  had  he  trained  himself  to  the  use  of
a  pencil.  I  maintained  that  difi'erences  in  the  mode  of  percolation
from  one  stratum  of  consciousness  to  another  were  not  in  themselves
of  primary  importance, — that  the  primarily  significant  fact  was  rather
that  in  one  way  or  another  such  percolation  was  established,  and  that
moreover,  in  Socrates'  case,  the  message  emerging  from  the  profounder
region  was  an  expression,  apparently,  of  a  wisdom  which  the  normal
consciousness  took  willingly  for  the  inspiration  of  a  god.  Further,
I  suggested  that  the  special  mode  of  transmission  of  the  message —
whether,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  active  automatism  of  gesture,  voice,
or  script,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  passive  automatism  of  halluci-
natory vision,  audition,  or  touch, — might  depend  on  the  line  of  least


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  395


resistance  which  the  emergent  message  might  discover, — according  (for
example)  as  visualising  or  -motor  habits  of  thought  might  be  predomi-
nant in  one  or  another  brain.  The  impulse  which  in  the  motor  subject
might  prompt  to  automatic  writing,  might  in  the  visualising  subject
become  the  basis  of  a  visual  hallucination.

To  come,  then,  to  the  actual  fact  now  to  be  noted.  "  The  spon-
taneous acts  of  the  unconscious  self,"  says  M.  Janet,  here  meaning  by
I'inconscient  the  entity  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Leonora,
"  may  also  assume  a  very  reasonable  form,  a  form  which,  were  it  better
understood,  might  perhaps  serve  to  explain  certain  cases  of  insanity.
Mme.  B.,  during  her  somnambulism  (i.e.,  Leontine),  had  had  a  sort  of
hysterical  crisis  ;  she  was  restless  and  noisy  and  I  could  not  calm  her.
Suddenly  she  stopped  and  said  to  me  with  terror,  '  Oh,  who  is  talking
to  me  like  that  1  it  frightens  me.'  'No  one  is  talking  to  you.'
'  Yes  !  there  on  the  left ! '  And  she  got  up  and  tried  to  open  a  ward-
robe on  her  left  hand,  to  see  if  some  one  was  hidden  there.  'What
is  it  that  you  hear  ? '  I  asked.  '  I  hear  on  the  left  a  voice  which  repeats,
"  Enough  !  enough  !  be  quiet;  you  are  a  nuisance."  '  Assuredly  the  voice
which  thus  spoke  was  a  reasonable  one,  for  Leontine  was  insupport-
able ;  but  I  had  suggested  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  had  had  no  idea
of  inspiring  a  hallucination  of  hearing.  Another  day  Leontine  was
quite  calm,  but  obstinately  refused  to  answer  a  question  which  I  asked.
Again  she  heard  with  terror  the  same  voice  to  her  left,  saying,  '  Come,
be  sensible,  you  must  answer.'  Thus  the  unconscious  sometimes  gave
her  excellent  advice."

And  in  effect,  so  soon  as  Leonore,  in  her  turn,  was  summoned  into
communication,  she  accepted  the  responsibility  of  this  counsel.  "What
was  it  that  happened,"  asked  M.  Janet,  "  when  Leontine  was  so
frightened  ?  "  "  Oh,  nothing  ;  it  was  I  who  told  her  to  keep  quiet ;  I
saw  that  she  was  annoying  you ;  I  don't  know  why  she  was  so
frightened."

Note  the  significance  of  this  incident.  Here  we  have  got  at  the
root  of  a  hallucination.  We  have  not  merely  inferential  but  direct
evidence  that  the  imaginary  voice  which  terrified  Leontine  proceeded
from  a  profounder  stratum  of  consciousness  in  the  same  individual.
In  what  way,  by  the  aid  of  what  nervous  mechanism,  was  the  startling
monition  conveyed  ?  What  are  the  laws  of  interrelation  of  these
psychical  strata  ?  Who  shall  say  what  might  be  the  lessons  derivable
from  another  subject,  with  a  psychical  cleavage  as  facile  as  Mme.  B's.,
and  with  intelligence  enough  for  a  self-analysis  in  which  several
"  selves  "  must  combine  1

I  have  spoken  of  Leonore  as  "summoned  into  communication."
The  way  in  which  this  is  effected  is  again  an  instructive  point.  This
second  somnambulic  life  is  reached  by  a  transition  from  the  first  som-


396 French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  [Supplement.


nambulic  life  closely  resembling  the  transition  by  which  the  first
somnambulic  life  is  reached  from  the  life  of  every  day.  Just  as  Mme.
B.  was  sent  by  passes  into  a  state  of  lethargy  from  which  she  emerged
as  Lf^ontine,  so  also  L^ontine  in  her  turn  was  reduced  by  renewed
passes  to  a  state  of  lethargy  from  which  she  emerged  no  longer  as  Leon-
tine,  but  as  Leonore.  This  second  awakening  is  slow  and  gradual,  but
the  personality  which  emerges  is  in  one  most  important  point  superior
to  either  Leonie  or  Leontine.  Alone  among  the  subject's  phases  this
phase  possesses  the  memory  of  every  phase.  Leonore,  like  Leontine,
knows  the  normal  life  of  Leonie  but  distinguishes  herself  from  Leonie,  in
whom,  it  must  be  said,  these  subjacent  personalities  appear  to  take  little
interest.  But  Leonore  also  remembers  the  life  of  Leontine, — condemns
her  as  noisy  and  frivolous,  and  is  anxious  not  to  be  confounded  with
her  either.  "  Vous  voyez  bien  que  je  ne  suis  pas  cette  bavarde,  cette
foUe ; — nous  ne  nous  ressemblons  pas  du  tout."  And  in  fact  L^ontine's
own  character,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  been  manifested,  is  worthy  of
that  profounder  place  in  the  personality  which  she  seems  to  occupy.

Yet  one  further  variation,  and  I  end  my  bi'ief  resume  of  this  com-
plex history.  Leonore  is  liable  to  pass  into  a  state  which  does  not,
indeed,  interrupt  her  chain  of  memory,  but  which  removes  her  for  a
time  from  the  possibility  of  communication  with  other  minds.  She
grows  pale,  she  ceases  to  speak  or  to  hear,  her  eyes,  though  still  shut,
are  turned  heavenwards,  her  mouth  smiles,  and  her  face  takes  an
expression  of  beatitude.

This  is  plainly  a  state  of  so-called  ecstasy ;  but  it  differs  from  the
ecstasy  common  in  hysterical  attacks  in  one  capital  point.  Not  only
is  it  remembered — indistinctly,  perhaps — by  Leonore,  who  describes
herself  as  having  been  dazzled  by  a  light  on  the  left  side — but  also  it
brings  with  it  the  most  complex  of  all  the  chains  of  memory, —  supple-
mentinsr  even  Leonore's  recollection  on  certain  acts  which  have  been
accomplished  unconsciously  by  Leonore  herself.

Here  again  there  seems  a  confirmation  of  a  thesis  already  hinted
at  {Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  32,  &c.)  to  the  effect  that  the  state
of  ecstasy,  although  generally  associated  with  hysteria,  or  even  occur-
ring as  a  stage  in  an  epileptiform  attack,  must  not  therefore  be  assumed
to  be  in  itself  a  morbid  or  degenerative  condition.  It  is  just  as  possible
that  it  may  be  in  itself  an  elevated  condition,  but  that  the  possibility
of  entering  it  may  be  purchased  by  a  perilous  degree  of  nervous
instability.

Ecstasy  is  an  extreme  case  of  "  hypertrophy  of  the  attention."
It  has  been  compared  by  Esquirol  to  a  mental  catalepsy,  by  Ribot  to
a  mental  contracture.  The  second  seems  the  truer  analogy.  To  catalepsy
we  might  rather  compare  the  somnambulic  state  of  maximum  sug-
gestibility, when  the  mind  adopts  and  prolongs  any  idea  which  the


Supplement.]  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality.  397


operator  suggests,  just  as  in  catalepsy  the  limbs  maintain  the  attitude
in  which  the  operator  places  them,  or  continue  the  action  which  he
imposes  upon  them.  On  the  other  hand,  ecstasy,  which  carries  its
subject  into  a  region  where  suggestion  from  without  is  no  longer
attended  to,  resembles  the  strong  contracture  of  a  limb  which  no
manipulation  of  the  bystanders  can  resolve  or  modify.

This,  however,  is  a  comparison  and  nothing  more.  It  is  not  at
present  plain  what  connection  exists  between  the  mental  state  of
ecstasy  and  the  muscular  condition  at  the  time.  Ecstasy  is  sometimes
accompanied  by  catalepsy,  but  sometimes  it  seems  to  determine  the
attitude  of  the  limbs  in  a  position  not  necessarily  rigid,  but  to  which,
if  disturbed,  they  tend  to  recur.  This  point  needs  further  inquiry ;
forming,  in  fact,  one  case  of  the  more  general  problem  as  to  the  relation,
in  abnormal  or  hypnotic  conditions,  of  muscular  to  mental  phenomena.

But  these  are  topics  which  would  lead  us  too  far  afield.  It
is  the  merit  of  experiments  like  those  of  Professor  Janet  that  the
lessons  to  be  drawn  from  them  are  not  exhausted  at  the  first  scrutiny.
We  shall  have  to  return  again  and  again  to  his  fertile  researches ;  and
we  may  feel  with  satisfaction  that  there  is  no  reason  to  fear  that  their
prolongation  is  proving  in  any  way  injurious  to  the  "  subject "  who
varies  so  instructively  from  the  ordinary  constitution  of  mankind.

1  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


The  subjoined  scheme, — simplified  from  that  given  by  Professor
J anet, — may  enable  the  reader  to  follow  the  above  paper  with  greater
ease. The  shaded  spaces  indicate  absence  of  consciousness.


■

Leonie

Ordinary
waking
life

Ordinary
waking-
life

Diagram

of  the  J
joint  life
of

Leontine

Knowledge
of  Leonie :
latent

Emergence
in  somnam-
bulic life

Emergence
in  somnam-
bulic life

Knowledge
of  Leonie :
latent

L^onore

Knowledge
of  Leonie  &
Leontine  :
latent

Knowledge
of

Leontine  :
latent

Emergence
and
ecstasy

Knowledge

of_  "
Leontine  :
latent

Knowledge
of  Leonie  &
Leontine  :
latent

Jan.  25,  1889.]  President's  Address.


399


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
January  2oth,  1889.

The  tliirtieth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Westminster  To^vn  Hall,  on  January  25th,  1889.

The  President,  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  T.  Barkworth  read  a  paper  on  "The  Analogy  between
Hypnotic  Phenomena  and  Certain  Experiences  of  the  Normal
Consciousness."

The  President  delivered  the  following  address  : —

I.

In  an  address  which  I  delivered  six  months  ago  I  endeavoured  to
give  a  brief  survey  of  the  work  done  by  the  Society  during  the  six
years  of  its  existence.  But  time  did  not  allow  me  to  deal  adequately
with  the  whole  subject,  and  one  branch  of  our  inquiry  in  particular,
wlrich  occupied  an  important  place  in  the  original  view  of  the  objects
for  which  the  Society  was  formed,  I  reserved  for  separate  treatment.
I  mean  the  investigation  of  the  physical  phenomena  attributed  by
Spiritualists  to  the  agency  of  intelligences  other  than  human.  In
reserving  this  for  separate  treatment,  I  was  influenced  by  the  fact  that
our  action  in  this  department  has  been  subjected  to  a  good  deal  of
criticism,  public  and  private,  in  which,  as  I  understand,  some  members
of  our  Society  have  taken  part.

In  noticing  this  criticism,  my  chief  object  is  to  explain  the  course
that  we  have  adopted,  not  to  refute  any  opponents.  I  have  always
held  that  in  so  novel  and  difficult  an  investigation  as  that  in  which  we
are  engaged,  our  object  should  be  to  obtain  as  much  criticism  as  possible,
and  to  extract  from  it  thankfully  all  the  instruction  that  we  can,  even
though  a  good  deal  of  it  may  seem  to  us  to  go  wide  of  the  mark.

The  only  criticism  against  which  I  am  disposed  to  protest,  is  the
judgment  that,  as  we  have  now  had  this  question  before  us  for  nearly
seven  years,  we  ought  to  have  come  to  a  conclusion  about  it  one  way  or
the  other.  I  think  that  such  a  proposition  is  hasty  and  unreasonable,
whether  the  critic  really  means  that  we  ought  to  have  come
to  a  positive  conclusion,  or  that  we  ought  to  have  come  to  a  negative
one.  Taken  in  the  former  sense,  I  must  be  allowed  to  say  that  such  a
demand  implies  a  remarkable  ignorance  of  the  ordinary  rate  and  manner
of  progress  of  scientific  knowledge  in  any  department.  Considering  the
enormous  importance  of  the  conclusion  that  a  definite  and  measurable

2  D


400


Thirtieth  General  Meeting.


[Jan.  25,


part  of  the  changes  that  take  place  in  the  world  of  our  sensible  experi-
ence is  referaljle  to  tlie  action  of  unembodied  intelligences, — considerino-
the  revolution  that  the  scientific  establishment  of  this  conclusion  would
make  in  the  view  of  the  universe  which  the  progress  of  modern  science
has  hitherto  tended  to  make  prevalent — it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that
if  the  undivided  labour  of  the  best  scientific  intellects  in  the  world  were
employed  for  a  generation  in  the  investigation  that  established  this  as  a
scientific  truth,  their  labours  might  be  regarded  as  unusually  fruitful.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  critics'  real  meaning  is  that  we  ought  before
this  to  have  arrived  at  a  negative  conclusion,  I  should  reply  that  we
may  have  been  rash  in  commencing  our  enterpi-ise,  and  endeavouring
to  bring  under  orderly  scientific  cultivation  this  wild  region,  in  which
vulgar  credulity  and  superstition  are  so  rampant ;  but  that,  having  once
undertaken  the  task,  it  would  show  deplorable  levity  in  us  to  abandon  it,
until  the  strong  reasons  that  induced  us  to  undertake  it — reasons  set
forth  in  our  original  statement  of  objects — have  been  shown  by  further
experience  to  be  invalid.  And  this,  in  my  opinion  at  least,  is  by  no
means  the  case.  My  view  of  the  evidence  for  the  physical  phenomena  of
Spiritualism  has,  indeed,  been  importantly  modified  during  the  last  six
years ;  but  the  weightiest  part  of  the  reasons  that  induced  me  to
undertake  the  investigation  of  them  still  remain  weighty.

In  short,  holding  as  I  do  that  we  had  good  ground  for  declaring  the
question  of  the  genuineness  of  so-called  Spiritualistic  phenomena  an  open
one,  and  worthy  of  serious  and  systematic  investigation,  I  think  we
should  be  very  slow  to  close  the  question,  until  we  have  obtained
decisive  arguments,  either  for  a  positive,  or  for  a  negative  conclusion.

At  any  rate  I  think  we  can  fairly  claim  that  our  prolonged  suspense
of  judgment  on  this  question  is  not  due  to  any  inert  shrinking  from  the
laljour  of  investigation,  or  any  timid  avoidance  of  the  responsibility  of
the  decision  and  of  tlie  attacks  to  which  it  might  subject  us.  I  remember
that  in  one  of  the  satirical  references  to  our  proceedings  that  occur
from  time  to  time  in  the  novels  of  the  day,  the  President  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research  was  introduced  as  saying  only  two  words,  "  I
doubt."  The  satire  seems  plausible  enough,  when  attention  is  directed
only  to  our  dealings  with  Spiritualism  :  but  it  should  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  time  of  our  investigators  has  been  largely  occupied  with
other  inquiries  which  have  not  ended  in  doubt.  During  the  six  years
of  our  existence,  while  one  committee  has  pronounced  decisively  in
favour  of  telepathy,  on  the  basis  of  evidence  requiring  1,200  octavo
pages  to  set  it  forth,  another  committee  has  pronounced  no  less
decisively  against  the  claim  of  marvellous  powers  for  Madame  Blavatsky,
which  the  Theosophists  urged  on  our  attention.  Against  the  charge
of  feebleness  and  indecision,  therefore,  we  have  both  a  positive  ar  ]  :
negative  instance  to  bring  forward. And  I  venture  to  think  that


1889.]


President's  Address.


401


whoever  will  examine  the  work  of  our  investigators  in  either  case —
whether  or  not  he  may  agree  with  the  conclusions  arrived  at — will
admit  that  they  entered  on  the  inquiries  with  the  utmost  attainable
openness  of  mind,  spared  no  pains  in  studying  closely  and  carefully  the
evidence  offered,  and  having  arrived  at  a  conclusion,  positive  in  one
case,  negative  in  the  other,  declared  such  conclusions  without  hesita-
tion or  reserve.

This  comparison  reminds  me  of  another  misunderstanding  which  I
should  like  to  remove.  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  those  of  us  who
declared  in  favour  of  telepathy  thereby  became  hostile  to  the  Spiritual-
istic hypothesis  ;  that  having  once  identified  ourselves  with  telepathy,
we  have  a  morbid  attachment  to  the  idea,  and  are  disposed  to  force  it
on  phenomena  that  more  naturally  suggest  a  Spiritualistic  explanation.
In  truth,  there  is  not  one  of  us  who  would  not  feel  ten  times  more
interest  in  proving  the  action  of  intelligences  other  than  those  of  living
men,  than  in  proving  communication  of  human  minds  in  an  abnormal
way,  if  only  we  had  as  decisive  grounds  for  the  former  conclusion  as
we  believe  ourselves  to  have  for  the  latter.  But  before  we  introduce,
in  explanation  of  any  phenomena,  a  cause  unknown  to  science,  we  hold
ourselves  bound  to  try  all  that  can  be  done  in  the  way  of  explaining  the
phenomena  by  known  causes  ;  and  as  we  regard  telepathy  as  established,
we  are  bound  to  treat  it  for  this  purpose  like  anyother  known  cause.

It  is  not,  however,  with  telepathy  that  we  are  chiefly  concerned,  in
considering  how  far  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  are
explicable  by  known  causes  ;  but  with  an  agency  of  a  more  familiar
kind  :  the  deception  conscious  or  unconscious  of  human  beings.  In
the  original  statement  of  the  objects  of  this  Society  the  widespread
operation  of  this  cause  was  expressly  recognised ;  and  it  is  to  the
peculiarly  elusive  quality  of  this  agency,  and  the  indefinite  variety  of
the  forms  it  is  capable  of  assuming,  that  the  special  difliculty  of  the
investigation  and  the  characteristics  of  the  scientific  method  appropriate
to  it  are  mainly  due.  In  view  of  this,  I  recommended  in  my  first
address  to  the  Society,  as  the  result  not  of  a  2}'>'io7-i  reasoning  but
of  long  experience,  that  we  should  as  much  as  possible  keep  aloof  from
paid  mediums.  This  rule  has  been,  in  the  main,  adhered  to  by  our
investigators.  An  exception  was  made,  under  strong  pressure,  in  the
case  of  Eglinton ;  but  the  experience  obtained  in  this  exceptional
case  was  not  such  as  to  encourage  any  further  deviation  from  the  rule.

But  even  when  we  confine  our  attention  to  phenomena  where  no
pecuniary  motives  to  fraud  can  come  in,  the  necessity  of  a  methodical
and  rigorous  exclusion  of  fraud  is  not  lessened.  For  even  where
personal  knowledge  renders  it  impossible  for  us  to  attribute  conscious
fni-r[  to  a  supposed  medium,  it  cannot  exclude  the  possibiHty  of
unconscious  deception. I  have  evidence  of  such  deception  having

2  D  2


402


Thirtieth  General  Meeting. [Jan.  25,  1889.


actually  occurred  in  cases  in  which  the  moral  character  of  the  medium
rendered  it  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  it  was  conscious,  and
we  have  evidence  of  a  different  kind  to  show  that  supposed  mediums
are  often  in  an  abnormal  physiological  condition,  which  may  not  im-
probably be  accompanied — we  have  positive  reason  for  thinking  that  it
is  sometimes  accompanied — with  a  tendency  to  unconscious  deception.
Apart  from  this,  the  value  of  an  investigator's  testimony  to  the
genuineness  of  such  marvels  stands  or  falls  with  the  completeness  of  his
exclusion  of  possible  deception.  If  he  has  not  accomplished  this  the
investigator  has  done  nothing,  however  high  the  medium's  character
may  be,  however  morally  improbable  that  he  should  deceive;  if  the
experimenter  cannot  show  us  that  the  conditions  of  his  experiment
exclude  deception,  deception  may  be  still  an  improbable  explanation,
but  he  has  added  nothing  to  its  improbability  ;  he  has  simply  left  it
where  it  was,  depending  entirely  on  the  chai-acter  of  the  medium ;  his
experimental  apparatus  is,  therefore,  without  result,  and  might  as  well
have  been  dispensed  with.

I  lay  stress  on  this,  because  the  main  difficulty  of  our  investigators
has  been  to  find  private  mediums,  manifesting  phenomena  2^'>'i>nd  facie
inexplicable,  who  are  willing  to  submit  to  the  rigorous  conditions
and  repeated  experiments  which  are  absolutely  required,  if  the  experi-
ments are  to  be  worth  anything  at  all.  This  unwillingness  is  very
natural,  and  we  entirely  understand  it.  The  conditions  inevitably
suggest  suspicion  ;  the  repetition  of  the  experiments  suggests  that  the
suspicion  is  of  an  obstinate  kind  :  the  private  medium,  being  of  un-
blemished character  and  honourable  life,  accustomed  to  receive  full  and
ungrudging  confidence  from  all  persons  with  whom  he  or  she  associates,
naturally  dislikes  and  resents  being  treated  as  a  suspicious  character.
The  difficulty  thus  caused  is  great,  but  we  still  hope  that  it  may  not  be
found  insuperable.  I  fully  admit — indeed  I  would  earnestly  contend —
that  it  is  the  investigator's  duty  to  use  his  utmost  efforts  to  minimise
the  difficulty  by  courtesy  and  tact,  and  by  avoiding  anything  in  language
or  manner  that  can  aggravate  the  suggestion  of  suspiciousness  which
his  method  of  investigation  inevitably  involves.

But  something  may  be  done  to  remove  the  difficulty  on  the  other
side,  if  it  can  only  be  generally  understood  that  whatever  seems  offen-
sive in  the  conditions  imposed  by  our  investigators  is  due  not  to  any
quality  of  their  individual  disposition,  moral  or  intellectual,  but  to  the
method  which  they  think  the  scientific  aim  of  the  inquiry  renders
necessary.  And  the  main  desire  that  has  prompted  these  remarks  has
been  by  making  this  point  clear,  to  diminish,  if  possible,  the  obstacles
to  this  part  of  our  investigation  ;  in  which  I  personally  take  a  strong
interest.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
March  2oth,  1889.

The  thirty-first  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  "Westminster
Town  Hall,  on  March  18th,  1889.

Mr.  Myers  read  the  latter  part  of  the  following  paper  :—

II.

ON  APPARITIONS  OCCURRING  SOON  AFTER  DEATH.
By  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  ;  completed  by  F.  W.  H.  Myees.^

Those  who  have  followed  the  records  and  discussions  printed  in  the
Proceedings  and  the  Journal  of  this  Society  will  not  need  to  be
informed  how  little  the  evidence  which  has  not  infrequently  led  even
educated  persons  to  believe  in  the  actual  reappearance  of  dead  friends
really  justifies  any  such  belief.  The  reason  can  be  given  in  a  single
sentence.  In  most  of  the  cases  where  persons  have  professed  to  have
seen  or  to  have  held  communication  with  deceased  friends  and  relatives,
there  is  nothing  to  distinguish  the  phenomenon  which  their  senses  have
encountered  from  purely  subjective  hallucination.  Simple  as  this
statement  seems,  the  truth  which  it  embodies  remained  for  centuries
unguessed.  It  is  only  in  comparatively  modern  days  that  the  facts  of
sensory  hallucination  have  been  at  all  uiiderstood,  and  that  the  extreme
definiteness  which  the  delusive  object  may  take  has  been  recognised ;
and  even  now  the  truth  of  the  matter  has  not  had  time  to  penetrate  to
the  popular  mind.  The  reply  of  average  common-sense  to  any  account
of  an  apparition  is  usually  either  that  the  witness  is  lying  or  grossly
exaggerating,  or  that  he  was  mad  or  drunk  or  emotionally  excited  at
the  time ;  or  at  the  very  most  that  his  exj^erience  was  an  illusion — a
misinterpretation  of  some  sight  or  sound  which  was  of  an  entirely
objective  kind.  A  very  little  careful  study  of  the  subject  will,  however,
show  that  all  these  hypotheses  must  often  be  rejected  ;  that  the  witness

1  The  first  part  of  the  following  paper  —  to  p.  426 — was  read  by  the  late  Mr.
Edmund  Gurney,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  January  28th,
1888.  As  it  would  doubtless  have  received  further  corrections,  as  well  as  additions,
from  the  author's  hand  before  publication,  it  ovight  not  to  be  taken  as  containing  the
final  and  deliberate  statement  of  his  opinion  on  the  subject  to  which  it  relates.  It
should  also  be  explained  that  his  object  in  writing  the  paper  was  not  to  exj^ress  any
conclusion  on  the  momentous  question  whether  the  dead  survive  in  such  a  state  as  to
be  able,  under  favourable  conditions,  to  affect  the  (physically)  living  :  his  wish  was
rather  to  remove  the  impression  that  the  authors  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  were
unwilling  to  face,  or  to  treat  fairly,  the  evidence  that  they  had  collected  tending  to
support  a  positive  answer  to  this  question.  I  have  thought  it  right  to  complete  Mr.
Gumey's  paper  by  adding  some  further  cases  and  remarks ;  but  the  reader  must
understand  that  these  remarks  are  made  entirely  from  my  own  point  of  view,  and
that  the  resx^onsibility  for  them  is  not  in  any  way  shared  by  Mr.  Gurney, — nor,  I  may
add,  by  my  colleagues  on  the  Literary  Committee. — F.W.H.M.


404  On  Ajp-paritions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


may  be  in  good  health,  and  in  no  exceptional  state  of  nervousness  or
excitement,  and  that  what  he  sees  or  hears  may  still  be  of  purely
subjective  origin — the  projection  of  his  own  brain.  And  among  the
objects  thus  fictitiously  presented,  it  is  only  natural  to  expect  that  a
certain  percentage  will  take  the  form  of  a  human  figure  or  voice  which
the  percipient  recognises  as  that  of  a  deceased  person ;  for  the  memory
of  such  figures  and  voices  is  part  of  his  mental  store,  and  the  latent
images  are  ready  to  supply  the  material  of  waking  hallucination,  just
as  they  are  ready  to  supply  the  material  of  dream.

It  is  further  evident  that  in  alleged  cases  of  apparitions  of  the  dead,
the  point  which  we  have  held  to  distinguish  certain  apparitions  of
living  persons  from  purely  subjective  hallucinations  is  necessarily
lacking.  That  point  is  coincidence  between  the  apparition  and  some
critical  or  exceptional  condition  of  the  person  who  seems  to  appear  ;
but  with  regard  to  the  dead,  we  have  no  independent  knowledge  of
their  condition,  and  therefore  never  have  the  opportunity  of  observing
any  such  coincidences.

There  remain  three,  and  I  think  only  three,  conditions  which  might
establish  a  presumption  that  an  apparition  or  other  immediate  mani-
festation^  of  a  dead  person  is  something  more  than  a  mere  subjective
hallucination  of  the  percipient's  senses.  Either  (1)  more  persons  than
one  might  be  independently  afi^ected  by  the  phenomenon ;  or  (2)  the
phantasm  might  convey  information,  afterwards  discovered  to  be  true,
of  something  which  the  percipient  had  never  known  ;  or  (3)  the
appearance  might  be  that  of  a  person  whom  the  percipient  himself  had
never  seen,  and  of  whose  aspect  he  was  ignorant,  and  yet  his  description
of  it  might  be  sufficiently  definite  for  identification.  But  though  one  or
more  of  these  conditions  would  have  to  be  fully  satisfied  before  we  could
be  convinced  that  any  particular  apparition  of  the  dead  had  some
cause  external  to  the  percipient's  own  mind,  there  is  one  more  general
characteristic  of  the  class  which  is  sufiiciently  suggestive  of  such  a  cause
to  be  worth  considering.  I  mean  the  disproportionate  number  of  cases
which  occur  shortly  after  the  death  of  the  person  represented.  Such  a
time-relation,  if  frequently  enough  encountered,  might  enable  us  to
argue  for  the  objective  origin  of  the  phenomenon  in  a  manner  analogous
to  that  which  leads  us  to  conclude  that  many  phantasms  of  the  living
have  an  objective  (a  telepathic)  origin.  For,  according  to  the  doctrines
of  probabilities,  a  hallucination  representing  a  known  person  would  not
hy  chance  present  a  definite  time-relation  to  a  special  cognate  event —
viz.,  the  death  of  that  person — in  more  than  a  certain  percentage  of  the
whole  number of similar  hallucinations  that  occur ; and if  that

1 1  am  not  here  considering  mediate  manifestations,  as  where  evidence  of  "  spirit
identity  "  is  alleged  to  have  been  given  through,  e.g.,  the  writing  of  a  medium  under
"control."


1889.] On  Ai^paritions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  405


percentage  is  decidedly  exceeded,  there  is  reason  to  surmise  that  some
other  cause  than  chance — in  other  words,  some  objective  origin  for  the
phantasm — is  present.

Supposing  tlie  peculiarity  which  I  have  mentioned  to  h&  estab-
lished, the  significance  of  the  time-relation  would  of  course  be  quite  a
different  question.  The  popular  mind  naturally  leaps  to  explanations
of  an  exciting  fact,  before  the  fact  itself  is  at  all  established.  Thus
it  is  said  that  the  deceased  pei'son  comes  to  say  farewell,  or  to  cheer
the  hearts  of  mourners  while  their  grief  is  fresh;  or  that  his  "spirit"
is  "earth-bound,"  and  can  only  gradually  free  itself.  Or,  again,  there
is  the  elaborate  theory  of  "  shells  "  propounded  by  M.  D'Assier,  who
holds  that,  though  consciousness  and  individuality  have  died,  some
basis  of  physical  manifestation  is  still  left,  which  fades  away  by  slow
degrees.  I  do  not  propose  now  to  discuss  any  of  these  hypotheses.
Our  business  at  present  is  wholly  with  the  facts  of  j^ost-mortem  appear-
ances. The  question  for  science  is  simply  whether  those  facts  point
to  any  external  cause  at  all ;  and  it  is  as  bearing  on  this  great  primary
question  that  the  inquiry  as  to  the  relative  frequency  of  the  phenomena
near  the  time  of  death  assumes  importance.

It  was  in  the  formation  of  a  large  collection  of  first-hand  testimony
on  the  subject  of  sensory  hallucination,  that  I  was  first  struck  by  the
large  proportion  of  cases  where  the  phantasm  represented  a  friend  or
relative  recently  dead.  Out  of  231  hallucinations  representing
recognised  human  beings,  28,  or  nearly  an  eighth  part,  occurred  within
a  few  weeks  of  the  death  of  the  person  represented.  There  are  two
reasons,  however,  why  little  weight  can  be  allowed  to  this  fact.  In
the  first  place  a  phantasm  representing  a  person  whose  death  is  recent
is  specially  likely  to  excite  interest,  and  so  to  be  noted  and  remembered ;
and  this  might  easily  swell  the  percentage  of  this  class  of  cases  in  such
a  collection  as  mine.  And  in  the  second  place,  the  fact  of  the  death
was  in  eveiy  instance  known  to  the  percipient.  It  is,  therefore,
natural  to  conclude  that  the  emotional  state  of  the  percipient  was  the
sufiicient  cause  of  the  hallucination ;  and  that  is  the  explanation  which
the  large  majority  of  psychological  and  medical  experts  would  at  once
adopt.  I  should  myself  feel  more  completely  satisfied  with  it  if  we  had
any  record  of  the  phantasmal  appearance  of  a  person  whom  the  friend
who  saw  the  appearance  believed  to  be  dead,  but  who  was  really  safe
and  sound.  Still,  false  alarms  of  death  are  not  so  common  as  to  make
it  certain,  or  perhaps  even  likely,  tliat  we  sliould  have  encountered
such  a  case.  And  meanwhile  I  think  that  grief,  and  the  sense  of  awe
commonly  connected  with  death,  ought  to  be  held  as  the  sufiicient  cause
of  abnormal  sensory  experiences  connected  with  persons  whose  recent
death  is  being  mourned,  until  the  objective  reality  of  phantasms  of  the
dead  in  certain  cases  is  established  by  some  independent  line  of  proof.


406  On  Ai')paritions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


If,  then,  we  are  to  draw  any  probable  conclusion  as  to  the  objective
nature  of  'post-viortein  appearances  and  communications  (or  of  some  of
them)  from  the  fact  of  their  special  frequency  soon  after  death,  we
must  confine  ourselves  to  cases  where  the  fact  of  death  has  been
unknown  to  the  percipient  at  the  time  of  his  experience.  Now,  in  these
days  of  letters  and  telegrams,  people  for  the  most  part  hear  of  the
deaths  of  friends  and  relatives  within  a  very  few  days,  sometimes  within
a  very  few  hours,  after  the  death  occurs ;  so  that  appearances  of  the
sort  required  would,  as  a  rule,  have  to  follow  very  closely  indeed  on
the  death.  Have  we  evidence  of  any  considerable  number  of  such
cases  1

Readers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  will  know  that  we  have.  In  a
number  of  cases  which  were  treated  in  that  book  as  examples  of  tele-
pathic transference  from  a  dying  person,  the  person  was  actually  dead
at  the  time  that  the  percipient's  experience  occurred ;  and  the  inclusion
of  such  cases  under  the  title  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  naturally
occasioned  a  certain  amount  of  adverse  criticism.  Their  inclusion,  it
will  be  remembered,  required  an  assumption  which  cannot  by  any
means  be  regarded  as  certain.  We  had  to  suppose  that  the  telepathic
transfer  took  place  just  before,  or  exactly  at,  the  moment  of  death ;  but
that  the  impression  remained  latent  in  the  percipient's  mind,  and  only
after  an  interval  emerged  into  his  consciousness,  whether  as  waking-
vision  or  as  dream  or  in  some  other  form.  Now,  as  a  provisional
hypothesis,  I  think  that  this  assumption  was  justified.  For,  in  the  first
place,  the  moment  of  death  is,  in  time,  the  central  point  of  a  cluster  of
abnormal  experiences  occurring  to  percipients  at  a  distance,  of  which
some  'precede,  Avhile  others  follow,  the  death  ;  it  is  natural  therefore  to
surmise  that  the  same  explanation  will  cover  the  whole  group,  and  that
the  motive  force  in  each  of  its  divisions  lies  in  a  state  of  the  "  agent  "
prior  to  bodily  death.  In  the  second  place,  some  of  the  facts  of  experi-
mental thought-transference  countenance  the  view  that  "  transferred
impressions "  may  be  latent  for  a  time  before  the  recipient  becomes
aware  of  them  ;  and  recent  discoveries  with  respect  to  the  whole  subject
of  automatism  and  "  secondary  intelligence "  make  it  seem  far  less
improbable  than  it  would  otlierwise  have  seemed  that  telepathy  may
take  efi'ect  first  on  the  "  unconscious  "  part  of  the  mind.i  And  in  the
third  place,  the  period  of  sujjposed  latency  has  in  a  good  many  instances
been  a  period  when  the  person  affected  was  in  activity,  and  when
his  mind  and  senses  were  being  solicited  by  other  things  ;  and  in
such  cases  it  is  specially  easy  to  suppose  that  the  telepathic  impres-
sion did  not  get  the  right  conditions for  rising  into  consciousness

1  In  some  experimental  cases,  it  will  be  remembered,  the  impression  takes  effect
through  the  tnotoi\  not  the  sensori/,  system  of  the  recipient,  as  by  automatic  writing,
so  that  he  is  never  directly  aware  of  it  at  all.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  407


until  a  season  of  silence  and  recueillemeni  arrived.^  But  though  the
theory  of  latency  has  thus  a  good  deal  to  be  said  for  it,  my  colleagues
and  I  are  most  anxious  not  to  be  supposed  to  be  putting  forward  as  a
dogma  what  must  be  regarded  at  present  merely  as  a  working  hypothesis.
Psychical  research  is  of  all  subjects  the  one  where  it  is  most  important
to  avoid  this  error,  and  to  keep  the  mind  open  for  new  interpretations
of  the  facts.  And  in  the  present  instance  there  are  certain  definite
objections  which  may  fairly  be  made  to  the  hypothesis  that  a  telepathic
impression  derived  from  a  dying  person  may  emerge  after  hours  of
latency.  The  experimental  cases  to  which  I  have  referred  as  analogous
are  few  and  uncertain,  and  moreover  in  them  the  period  of  latency  has
been  measured  by  seconds  or  minutes,  not  by  hours.  And  though,  as
I  have  said,  some  of  the  instances  of  apparent  delay  among  the  death-
cases  might  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  percipient's  mind  or
senses  needed  to  be  withdrawn  from  other  occupations  before  the
manifestation  could  take  place,  there  are  other  instances  where  this
is  not  so,  and  where  no  ground  at  all  appears  for  connecting  the  delay
with  the  percipient's  condition.  On  the  whole,  then,  the  alternative
hypothesis — that  the  condition  of  the  phenomenon  on  the  "  agent's  "
side  (be  it  psychical  or  be  it  physical)  is  one  which  only  comes  into
existence  at  a  distinct  interval  after  death,  and  that  the  percipient
really  is  impressed  at  the  moment,  and  not  before  the  moment,  when  he
is  conscious  of  the  impression — is  one  which  must  be  steadily  kept  in
view.

So  far  I  have  been  speaking  of  cases  where  the  interval  between
the  death  and  the  manifestation  was  so  short  as  to  make  the  theory
of  latency  possible.  The  rule  adopted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  was
that  this  interval  must  not  exceed  12  hours.  But  we  have  records  of
a  few  cases  where  this  interval  has  been  greatly  exceeded,  and  yet
where  the  fact  of  the  death  was  still  unknown  to  the  percipient  at  the
time  of  his  expeiience.  The  theory  of  latency  cannot  reasonably  be
applied  to  cases  where  weeks  or  months  divide  the  vision  (or  whatever
it  may  be)  from  the  moment  of  death,  which  is  the  latest  at  which  an
ordinary  ^  telepathically  transferred  idea  could  have  obtained  access  to
the  percipient.  And  the  existence  of  such  cases — so  far  as  it  tends  to
establish  the  reality  of  objectively-caused  aj)paritions  of  the  dead —
diminishes  the  objection  to  conceiving  that  the  appearances,  &c.,  which

1  See  for  instance,  case  500,  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  462.

2  I  mean  by  "ordinary"  the  classes  which  are  recognised  and  treated  of  in
Phantasms  of  the  Livinr/.  But  if  the  departed  survive,  the  possibility  of  thought-
transference  between  them  and  those  who  remain  is  of  course  a  perfectly  tenable
hypothesis.  "  As  our  telepathic  theory  is  a  psychical  one,  and  makes  no  physical
assumptions,  it  would  be  perfectly  applicable  (though  the  name  perhaps  would  be
inappropriate)  to  the  conditions  of  disembodied  existence." — Phantasms,  Vol.  I.,
p.  512.


408  On  Airparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


have  very  shortly  folloived  death  have  had  a  different  causation  from
those  wliich  have  coincided  with  or  very  shortly  ■pi'^c^d^d  it.  For
we  shall  not  be  inventing  a  wholly  new  class  for  the  former  cases,  but
only  provisionally  shifting  them  from  one  class  to  another — to  a  much
smaller  and  much  less  well-evidenced  class,  it  is  true,  but  one  neverthe-.
less  for  which  we  have  evidence  enough  to  justify  us  in  expecting  more.

The  statistics  drawn  from  the  first-hand  records  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  as  to  the  time-relation  of  appearances,  &c.,  occurring  in  close
proximity  to  deaths,  are  as  follows.  In  134  cases  the  coincidence  is
represented  as  having  been  exact,  or,  when  times  are  specifically  stated,
close  to  within  an  hour.  In  104  cases  it  is  not  known  whether  the
pei'cipient's  experience  preceded  or  followed  the  death ;  such  cases
cannot  be  taken  account  of  for  our  present  purpose.  There  remain
78  cases  where  it  appears  that  there  was  an  interval  of  more  than  an
hour  ;  and  of  these  38  preceded  and  40  followed  the  death.  Of  the  38
cases  where  the  percipient's  experience  preceded  the  death  (all  of  which,
of  course,  took  place  during  a  time  when  the  "agent"  was  seriously
ill),  19  fell  within  24  hours  of  the  death.  Of  the  40  cases  where  the
percipient's  experience  followed  the  death,  all  followed  within  an
interval  of  24  hours,  and  in  only  one  (included  by  mistake)  was  the
12  hours'  interval  certainly  exceeded,  though  there  are  one  or  two
others  wliere  it  is  possible  that  it  was  slightly  exceeded.^

The  cases  wliere  the  appearance  or  impression  shortly  followed  the
death  (like  all  other  cases  where  the  percipient  of  a  phantasm  has
recognised  in  it  some  dead  person)  fall  under  two  heads,  which  we  may
distinguish  as  the  personal  and  the  local.  That  is  to  say,  this  experience
eitlier  befalls  some  person  who  has  been  linked  with  the  deceased  by
close  ties,  or  it  befalls  someone  in  a  place  in  which  the  deceased,  when
alive,  was  strongly  interested.  Sometimes,  as  might  be  expected,  the
two  characteristics  are  combined.  An  excellent  specimen  of  the
personal  class  was  given  at  length  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  in  her  paper  "  On
tlie  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society,  for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,"
{Froceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  95),  where  a  young  man  who  had  died  at
Glasgow,  through  accidentally  taking  poison,  appeared  in  a  dream  to
his  employer  in  London,  before  the  neAvs  of  the  catastrophe  arrived,  and
cautioned  him  against  supposing  that  the  suicide  was  intentional.

Some  other  specimens  of  this  class  are  given  here.

I. — From  the  Rev.  G.  M.  Tandy,  Vicar  of  West-Ward,  near  Wigton,
Cumberland,  formerly  of  Loweswater.

[We  owe  this  case  to  the  kindness  of  our  Vice-President,  the  Bishop
of  Carlisle.]

1  For  example,  in  case  500  the  experience  probably  followed  the  death  by  IG  hours,
but  possibly  preceded  it  by  four  hours.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  409


When  at  Loweswater,  I  one  day  called  upon  a  friend,  who  said,  "You
do  not  see  many  newspapers  ;  take  one  of  those  lying  there."  I  accordingly
took  up  a  newsjjaper,  bound  with  a  wrapper,  put  it  into  my  pocket  and
walked  home.

In  the  evening  I  was  writing,  and,  wanting  to  refer  to  a  book,  went  into
another  room  where  my  books  were.  I  placed  the  candle  on  a  ledge  of  the
bookcase,  took  down  a  book  and  found  the  passage  I  wanted,  when,  haj^pen-
ing  to  look  towards  the  window,  which  was  opposite  to  the  bookcase,  I  saw
through  the  window  the  face  of  an  old  friend  whom  I  had  known  well  at
Cambridge,  but  had  not  seen  for  10  years  or  more.  Canon  Robinson  (of  the
Charity  and  School  Commission).  I  was  so  sure  I  saw  him  that  I  went  out
to  look  for  him,  but  could  find  no  trace  of  him.

I  went  back  into  the  house  and  thouglit  I  would  take  a  look  at  my  news-
paper. I  tore  off  the  wrapper,  unfolded  the  paper,  and  the  first  piece  of  news
that  I  saw  was  the  death  of  Canon  Robinson  !  ^

Mr.  Tandy  further  writes  : —

In  reply  to  your  note  October  6th,  I  may  state,  with  regard  to  the
narrative  I  detailed  to  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  that  I  saw  the  face  looking
through  the  window,  by  the  light  of  a  single  Ozokerit  candle,  placed  on  a
ledge  of  the  bookcase,  which  stood  oj^posite  the  window  ;  that  I  was  stand-
ing, with  the  candle  by  my  side,  reading  from  a  book  to  which  I  had  occasion
to  refer,  and  raising  my  eyes  as  I  read,  I  saw  the  face  clearly  and  distinctly,
ghastly  pale,  but  with  the  features  so  marked  and  so  distinct  that  I  recognised
it  at  once  as  the  face  of  my  most  dear  and  intimate  friend,  the  late  Canon
Robinson,  who  was  with  me  at  school  and  college,  and  whom  I  had  not  seen
for  many  years  past  (10  or  11  at  the  very  least).  Almost  immediately  after,
fully  persuaded  that  my  old  friend  had  come  to  pay  me  a  surprise  visit,  I
rushed  to  the  door,  but  seeing  nothing  I  called  aloud,  searched  the  premises
most  carefully,  and  made  inquiry  as  to  whether  any  stranger  had  been  seen
near  my  house,  but  no  one  had  been  heard  of  or  seen.  When  last  I  saw
Canon  Robinson  he  was  apparently  in  perfect  health,  much  more  likely  to
out-live  me  than  I  him,  and  before  I  opened  the  newspaper  announcing  his
death  (which  I  did  about  an  hour  or  so  after  seeing  the  face)  I  had  not  heard
or  read  of  his  illness,  or  death,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  passage  of  the
book  I  was  reading  to  lead  me  to  think  of  him.

The  time  at  which  I  saw  the  face  was  between  10  and  11  o'clock  p.m.,  the
night  dark,  and  while  I  was  reading  in  a  room  where  no  shutter  was  closed
or  blind  drawn.

I  may  answer  in  reply  to  your  question  "  whether  I  have  ever  had  any
other  vision  or  hallucination  of  any  kind  ?  "  that  thougli  I  never  saw  any
apparition,  I  have  heard  mysterious  noises  which  neither  my  friends  nor  I
were  able  satisfactorily  to  account  for.

II. — From  Mrs.  Clark,  8,  South  View,  Forest  Hall,  Newcastle-on
Tyne.

January  6th,  1885.
I  send  you  a  short  account,  describing  what  I  experienced  at  the  time

1  As  we  do  not  know  what  newspaper  this  was,  it  is  not  possible  to  ascertain  the
precise  interval  which  had  elapsed  since  the  death. — F.W.H.M.


410  On  A'pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


of  the  apparition  of  my  friend,  who  was  a  young  gentleman  much  attached  to
myself,  and  who  would  willingly  (had  I  loved  him  well  enough)  have  made
me  his  wife.  I  became  engaged  to  be  married,  and  did  not  see  my  friend
(Mr.  Akhurst)  for  some  months,  until  within  a  week  of  my  marriage  (June,
1878),  when  in  the  presence  of  my  husband  he  wished  me  every  happiness,
and  regretted  he  had  not  been  able  to  win  me.

Time  passed  on.  I  had  been  married  about  two  years  and  had  never  seen
Mr.  Akhurst,  when  one  day  my  husband  told  nie  he  (Mr.  Akhurst)  was  in
Newcastle  and  was  coming  to  supj)er  and  was  going  to  stay  the  night.  When
my  husband  and  he  were  talking,  he  said  my  husband  had  been  the  more
fortunate  of  the  two,  but  he  added  if  anything  happened  to  my  husband  he
could  leave  his  money  to  whom  he  liked  and  his  widow  to  him,  and  he  would
be  quite  content. I  mention  this  to  show  he  was  still  interested  in  me.

Three  months  passed  and  baby  was  born.  When  she  was  about  a  week
old,  very  early  one  morning  I  was  feeding  her,  when  I  felt  a  cold  waft  of  air
through  tlie  room  and  a  feeling  as  though  some  one  touched  my  shoulder  ;  my
hair  seemed  to  bristle  all  over  my  head  and  I  shuddered.  Raising  my  eyes
to  the  door  (which  faced  me),  I  saw  Akhurst  standing  in  his  shirt  and  trousers
looking  at  me,  when  he  seemed  to  pass  through  the  door.  In  the  morning  I
mentioned  it  to  my  husband.  I  did  not  hear  of  Mr.  Akhurst's  death  for  some
weeks  after,  when  I  found  it  corresponded  with  that  of  the  apparition,  and
though  my  father  knew  of  it  before,  he  thought  in  my  weak  state  of  health
it  were  better  I  should  not  be  told.

He  was  found  lying  on  the  bed  with  his  shirt  and  trousers  on,  just  as  he
had  thrown  himself  down  after  taking  a  sleeping  draught,  i

I  myself  am  quite  convinced  that  Mr.  Akhurst's  thoughts  had  been  so
concentrated  upon  me,  before  the  draught  proved  fatal,  that  his  spirit  visited
me  on  its  way  to  that  glorious  land  where  it  shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of
Him  Who  said  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden  and  I
will  give  you  rest."

To  me  the  memory  of  Mr.  Akhurst  will  always  be  as  of  a  dear  brother,
greatly  esteemed  and  deeply  regretted.

Emily  Clark.
May  13th,  1885.

My  husband  will  certify  as  to  my  mentioning  to  him  seeing  the  apparition
before  I  heard  of  Mr.  Akhurst's  death,  but  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  tell  you  where
it  happened,  nor  the  exact  date  of  the  death,  but  I  remember  when  we  heard
about  it  my  husband  and  I  traced  it  to  about  the  time  of  my  "  vision.  "

I  will  ask  my  husband  to  write  you  a  few  lines,  and  I  am  sorry  I  cannot
give  the  time  and  place  of  death  :  it  is  nearly  five  years  ago,  and  on  account
of  my  not  knowing  personally  any  of  his  family  I  am  not  in  a  position  to
ascertain.

July  23r(l,  1885.

I  never  experienced  anything  of  the  kind  before. I  think  Mr.  Akhurst's

1  This,  as  will  be  seen,  was  probably  a  mistake,  and  it  seems  possible  that  the
reminiscence  of  the  Corsican  Brothers  may  have  helped  to  shape  the  hallucination.—
F.W.H.M.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  411

death  happened  somewhere  in  Yorkshire.  What  makes  me  think  the  time
corresponded  with  his  death,  was,  my  asking  how  long  ago  it  was  from  my
hearing  of  his  death,  and  the  actual  occurrence  ;  and  then  knowing  the  time
of  my  little  girl's  birth,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  it  was  about  the  same  time.
I  think  this  is  all  the  information  I  can  give  you.  I  shall  ask  my  husband
to  send  you  a  few  lines  to-morrow.

From  Edward  Clark,  Solicitor,  County  Chambers,  Newcastle-on-
Tyne. ;.  .

July  2Uh,  1885.

At  the  request  of  my  wife,  Mrs.  Clark,  of  9,  South  View,  Forest  Hall,
I  beg  to  inform  you  of  my  knowledge  of  the  supposed  apparition  of  Mr.
Akhurst.  Shortly  after  my  wife  liad  been  confined  of  my  second  daughter,
about  the  end  of  September,  1880,  my  wife  one  morning  informed  me  she
had  seen  Akhurst  about  one  o'clock  that  morning.  I  of  course  told  her  it
was  nonsense,  but  she  persisted,  and  said  he  ajjpeared  to  her  with  only  his
trousers  and  a  shirt  on,  and  the  remark  she  made  was  that  he  was  dressed  just
as  she  had  seen  him  in  the  Gorsican  Brothers  (he  was  an  actor).  She  also
described  her  feelings  at  the  time.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  it  was  a  dream,
but  she  insisted  that  it  was  an  apparition.

As  near  as  I  can  remember,  about  six  months  after,  I  met  a  mutual  friend
of  Akhurst's  and  my  own,  and  in  conversation  I  inquired  after  Akhurst.  He
said,  "Don't  you  know  he  is  dead";  "  I  said,  "No,  when  did  he  die?  "  He  said,
"I  don't  know  the  exact  date,  but  it  was  about  six  months  ago"  ;  and  further
informed  me  tliat  he  died  about  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  in  the  dress  as
my  wife  described  him,  from  an  overdose  of  chloral.  I  have  endeavoured  to-
see  my  friend  to  find  out  the  place  (Bradford,  I  think),  but  he  is  now  in
America.  His  name  is  J ohn  Brown,  and  he  is  the  son  of  the  leader  writer  to
the  Chronicle  here.  If  I  meet  him  again  I  will  try  to  get  accurate  particulars
and  forward  them  to  you.

AwjxU  21st,  1885.

.  .  .  .  My  wife  has,  I  find,  no  reason  to  think  she  has  been  mistaken
as  to  the  time  when  she  supposed  she  saw  W.  J.  Akhurst,  as  the  date  is  fixed
by  the  birth  of  my  second  little  girl,  which  took  place  in  September,  1880.

*****

Era  Almanac  for  1881. Obituary  for  1880,  p.  93.

"Akhurst,  Walter  James,  Actor,  aged  24,  July  12th."

The  Era  newspaper  of  July  18th,  1880,  gives  an  account  of  the  inquest.
Mr.  H.  W.  Akhurst  gave  evidence  to  the  efi'ect  that  he  and  his  deceased
brother  went  to  the  chemist's  on  Saturday  (i.e.,  10th),  and  procured  a  sleeping
draught.  Deceased  complained  of  pains  in  his  body,  and  of  feeling  lonely.
The  next  day,  Sunday,  he  only  got  up  to  have  his  bed  made  ;  Monday  he
died.  W.  H.  Cope,  Surgeon,  attributed  death  to  suffocation  caused  by  heart
disease. The  verdict  returned  was  "  Death  from  natural  causes."

Ill- — The  following,  obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Miss  Porter,
is  from  a  lady  who  does  not  wish  her  name  mentioned.


412


On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


A%(.gust  8th,  1885.

On  the  2ncl  November,  1876,  I  arrived  at  my  brother's  house.  My
journey  had  been  a  long  one — from  8  a.m.  to  8  p.m.  I  sat  up  late  talking
to  my  sister-in-law,  and  about  12  o'clock  went  to  my  room.  There  I  spent
some  time  arranging  my  belongings.  I  found  I  had  left  something  I  wanted
down  in  the  hall,  and  feeling  restless,  I  suppose,  thought  I  must  get  it  then,
and  not  wait  until  the  morning.  So  downstairs  I  went.  The  house  is  a
large  one  ;  the  j)assages  long.  My  room  was  in  the  third  story,  and  I  had
to  go  to  the  entrance  hall.  It  took  me  some  time.  On  returning  and
entering  the  corridor  in  which  my  room  was,  I  saw,  standing  beyond  my
doorway,  a  figure.  It  looked  misty,  as  if,  had  there  been  a  light  behind  it,
I  should  have  seen  through  the  mist.  This  misty  figure  was  the  likeness  of  a
friend  of  ours  whom  I  knew  to  have  been  on  a  voyage  to  Australia.  I  stood
and  looked  at  "  It."  I  put  my  hand  over  my  eyes  and  looked  again.  Still
it  was  there.  Then  it  seemed  to  pass  away,  how  I  cannot  say.  I  went  on
and  into  my  room.  I  said  to  myself.  My  braiii  was  tired  out ;  and  I  hurried
to  bed  so  as  to  get  rest.

Next  day  I  told  my  sister-in-law  what  I  had  seen.  We  laughed  about
my  ghost.

I  was  away  from  my  home  three  weeks.  On  my  return,  my  mother
showed  me  the  account  in  a  newspaper  of  our  poor  friend's  body  having  been
cast  on  shore  at  Orfordness  and  buried  as  an  unknown  castaway  the  very  time
that  I  saw  this  figure.  We  were  the  only  friends  he  had  in  England,  but
why  I  saw  him  I  cannot  tell.  It  did  no  good  to  anyone.  One  thing  I  should
tell  you,  I  had  not  been  thinking  or  speaking  of  him.

The  following  is  from  the  Parish  Clerk  of  Orford,  near  Wickham,
Suffolk.

January  2Zrd,  1886.
SiK, — In  reply  to  your  inquiries  I  send  you  a  copy  of  the  head-stone  : —
"  In  memory  of  Fredrick  Gluyas  Le  Maistre,  2nd  Officer  of  the  barque
Gauntlet,  of  London,  native  of  Jersey,  Channel  Islands,  aged  24  years  and
5  months,  whose  body  was  found  near  Orfordness  Harbour,  October  the
22nd,  1876,  his  death  having  been  occasioned  by  falling  from  on  board  the
above-named  vessel  in  the  Downs  on  the  27th  of  September  of  the  same
year."

James  Ling.

[I  have  seen  the  percipient  (January  21st,  1886),  and  she  tells  me  she  has
never  had  any  other  hallucination  whatever.  She  is  a  sensible  and  practical
person. — E.  G.]

IV.— From  Colonel  H.  (known  to  E.  G.)

February  13th,  1886.
I  am  not  a  believer  in  ghosts,  spirit  manifestations,  or  Esoteric
Buddhism.  It  has  been  my  lot — a  lot  sought  by  myself  over  and  over  again,
and  never  falling  to  me  by  chance — to  sleep  in  well-known,  or  rather  well-
believed-to-be  haunted  rooms.  I  have  endeavoured  to  encounter  ghosts,
sjjirits,  or  beings  (if  you  like)  from  another  world,  but  like  other  good  things
that  one  seeks  for  in  life,  without  sixccess.  When  I  least  expected  it,  how-
ever, I  experienced  a  visitation  so  remarkable  in  its  i^henomena,  so  realistic


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  413

in  its  nature,  so  supported  by  actual  facts,  that  I  am  constrained,  at  the
request  of  my  friends,  to  put  my  experience  into  writing.

The  narrator  tlien  describes  how,  nearly  2-3  yeai's  before,  he  had
formed  a  friendship  with  two  brother  subalterns,  J. P.  and  J.S.,  and
how  his  intercourse  with  J. P.  had  been  continued  at  intervals  up  to  the
time  of  the  Transvaal  war,  when  J. P.  was  ordered  out  on  the  staff.
J.S.  was  already  on  the  scene  of  action.  Both  had  now  attained
major's  rank  ;  the  narrator  himself  had  left  the  service  some  years
previously.

On  the  morning  that  J.  P.  was  leaving  London,  to  embark  for  the
Cape,  he  invited  the  narrator  to  breakfast  with  him  at  the  club,  and
they  jGnally  parted  at  the  club-door.

"Good-bye,  old  fellow,"  I  said,  "  we  shall  meet  again,  I  hope."
"Yes,"  he  said,  "  we  shall  meet  again."

I  can  see  him  now,  as  he  stood,  smart  and  erect,  with  his  bright  black
eyes  looking  intently  into  mine.  A  wave  of  the  hand,  as  the  hansom  whirled
him  off,  and  he  was  gone.

The  Transvaal  war  was  at  its  height.  One  night,  after  reading  for  some
time  in  the  library  of  the  club,  I  had  gone  to  my  rooms  late.  It  must  have
been  nearly  one  o'clock  before  I  turned  into  bed.  I  had  slept,  perhaps,  some
three  hours  or  so  when  I  awoke  with  a  start.  The  grey  dawn  was  stealing
in  through  the  windows,  and  the  light  fell  sharply  and  distinctly  on  the
military  chest  of  drawers  wliich  stood  at  the  further  end  of  the  room,  and
which  I  had  carried  about  with  me  everywhere  during  my  service.  Standing
by  my  bed,  between  me  and  the  chest  of  drawers,  I  saw  a  figure,  which,  in
spite  of  the  unwonted  dress — unwonted,  at  least,  to  me — and  of  a  full  black
beard,  I  at  once  recognised  as  that  of  my  old  brother-officer.  He  had  on  the
usual  kharki  coat,  worn  by  officers  on  active  service  in  eastern  climates.  A
brown  leather  strap,  which  might  have  been  the  strap  of  his  field  service  glass,
crossed  his  breast.  A  brown  leather  girdle,  with  sword  attached  on  the  left
side,  and  revolver  case  on  the  right,  passed  round  his  waist.  On  his  head  he
wore  the  ordinary  white  pith  helmet  of  service.  I  noted  all  these  particulars
in  the  moment  that  I  started  from  sleep,  and  sat  up  in  bed  looking  at  him.
His  face  was  pale,  but  his  bright  black  eyes  shone  as  keenly  as  when,  a  year
and  a-half  before,  they  had  looked  upon  me  as  he  stood  with  one  foot  on  the
hansom,  bidding  me  adieu.

Fully  impressed  for  the  brief  moment  that  we  were  stationed  together  at

0  in  Ireland  or  somewhere,  and  thinking  I  was  in  my  barrack-room,  I

said,  "Hallo!  P. ,  am  I  late  for  parade  V  P.  looked  at  me  steadily,  and
replied,  "I'm  shot."

"  Shot !  "  I  exclaimed.  "  Good  God!  how  and  where  ?  "

"  Through  the  lungs,"  replied  P.,  and  as  he  spoke  his  right  hand  moved
slowly  up  the  breast,  until  the  fingers  rested  over  the  right  lung.

"  What  were  you  doing  V  1  asked.

"The  General  sent  me  forward,"  he  answered,  and  the  right  hand  left
the  breast  to  move  slowly  to  the  front,  pointing  over  my  head  to  the  window,
and  at  the  same  moment  the  figure  melted  away. I  rubbed  my  eyes,  to


414  0  n  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


make  sure  I  was  not  dreaming,  and  sprang  out  of  bed.  It  was  then  4.10
a.m.  by  the  clock  on  my  mantelpiece.

I  felt  sure  that  my  old  friend  was  no  more,  and  what  I  had  seen  was  only
an  apparition.  But  yet  how  account  for  the  voice  1  the  ready  and  distinct
answers  ?  That  I  had  seen  a  spirit,  certainly  something  that  was  not  flesh
and  blood,  and  that  I  had  conversed  with  it,  were  alike  indisputable  facts.
But  how  to  reconcile  these  apparent  impossibilities  1  The  thought  disquieted
me,  and  I  longed  for  the  hour  when  the  club  would  open,  and  I  could  get  a
chance  of  learning  from  the  papers  any  news  from  the  seat  of  war  in  the
Transvaal.  The  hours  passed  feverishly.  I  was  first  at  the  club  that
morning,  and  snatched  greedily  at  the  first  paper.  No  news  of  the  war
whatever.

I  passed  the  day  in  a  more  or  less  unquiet  mood,  and  talked  over  the
whole  circumstance  to  an  old  brother  officer.  Colonel  W.*  He  was  as  fully
impressed  as  I  was  with  the  story  of  the  appearance.  The  following  morning
I  was  again  a  solitary  member  at  the  club,  and  seized  with  avidity  the  first
j)aper  that  came  to  hand.  This  time  my  anxiety  was  painfully  set  at  rest,
for  my  eye  fell  at  once  on  the  brief  lines  that  told  of  the  battle  of  Lang's
Neck,  and  on  the  list  of  killed,  foremost  among  them  all  being  poor  J. P.
,  I  noted  the  time  the  battle  was  fought,  calculated  it  with  the  hour  at  which
I  had  seen  the  figure,  and  found  that  it  almost  coincided.  From  this  simple
fact  I  could  only  surmise  that  the  figure  had  appeared  to  me  in  London
almost  at  the  very  moment  that  the  fatal  bullet  had  done  its  work  in  the
Transvaal.

Two  questions  now  arose  to  my  mind,  First,  as  to  proof  that  poor
P.  happened  to  wear  that  particular  uniform  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and
whether  he  carried  a  beard — which  I  myself  had  never  seen  him  wear.
Second,  whether  he  met  his  death  in  the  manner  indicated,  viz.,  by  a  bullet
through  the  right  lung.  The  first  facts  I  established  beyond  dispute  about
six  months  afterwards,  through  an  oflicer  who  was  at  the  battle  of  Lang's
Neck,  and  who  had  been  invalided  home.  He  confirmed  every  detail.
The  second  fact,  strangely  enough,  was  confirmed  by  no  less  a  person  than
J.S.,  more  than  a  year  after  the  occurrence,  he  having  also  left  the  Cape,
the  war  being  over.  On  my  asking  J.S.  if  he  had  heard  how  poor  P.,  our
old  brother-officer,  was  shot,  he  replied,  "Just  here,"  and  his  fingers
travelled  up  his  breast,  exactly  as  the  fingers  of  the  figure  had  done,  until
they  rested  on  the  very  spot  over  the  right  lung.

I  have  set  down  the  foregoing,  without  any  attempt  at  embellishment,
exactly  as  everything  occurred.

"We  find  from  the  London  Gazette  tliat  the  battle  in  which  Major
P.  was  killed  began  (according  to  General  Elley's  despatch)  at
9.30  a.m.  on  January  28th,  1881.  Major  P.  was  probably  killed
between  11  and  12  a.m.,  which  would  be  between  9  and  10  a.m.  in
London,  the  difference  of  time  being  a  little  under  two  hours.  I  drew
Colonel  H.'s  attention  to  tliis  point,  and  to  the  impossibility  that  the


1  We  have  endeavoured  in  vain  to  trace  tliis  officer.


1889.] Oil  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  415


dawn  should  be  beginning  at  4.10  a.m.  at  that  time  of  yeai',  and  he
sent  the  following  reply.

Februanj  20th,  1886.

It  may  have  been  7.10  and  not  4.10  a.m.  The  impression,  writing  now
after  some  years'  interval,  is  that  it  was  4.10  a.m.,  but  I  may  be  wrong.

All  I  know  is  that  I  calculated  the  time  at  the  time,  with  the  hour  at
which  the  battle  was  fought,  and  it  was  to  all  practical  purposes  the  same
time.

It  was  a  winter  morning  ;  and  the  blinds  were  down  over  the  window.
The  morning  light  at  7  a.m.  in  a  winter  month,  coming  through  the  blinds,
would  not  be  much  stronger  than  the  morning  light  at  4  a.m.  in  a  summer
month  under  the  same  circumstances.  Hence  I  may  have  been  mistaken  in
the  hour,  or  the  cl(3ck  might  have  stopped,  unknown  to  me,  at  4.10  a.m.  that
day  or  even  the  day  before.

The  first  account  of  the  battle  of  Lang's  Neck  appeared  in  the
Times,  Telegraph,  and  Daily  News,  of  Saturday,  January  29th,  1881.
"  No  list  of  casualties."  The  first  announcement  of  Major  Poole's
death  was  in  a  telegraphic  dispatch  from  the  Transvaal,  dated  January
28th,  and  received  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War  in  London  on
the  29th.  "  Killed  : — Major  Poole,  Royal  Artillery,"  and  it  appeared
in  the  Observer  of  Sunday,  January  30th,  and  in  the  three  above-named
morning  papers  on  the  31st  (Monday).

[The  precise  date  of  this  vision  is  now  irrecoverable ;  but  Mr.
Gurney,  who  discussed  the  matter  with  Colonel  H.,  concluded  that  the
apparition  probably  occurred  after  the  death,  and  certainly  occurred
before  the  death  was  announced  in  England.]

Of  the  local  class  a  very  interesting  specimen  occurs  in  Phantasms
of  the  Liviiig  (Case  29,  Vol.  I.,  p.  212),  where  an  Essex  gardener,  return-
ing from  work,  saw  a  lady,  wliom  he  recognised,  standing  by  a  tomb  or
mausoleum  which  belonged  to  her,  and  which  he  imagined  that  she  had
come  to  visit.  The  lady  had  died  on  that  day  in  London.  In  the  printed
account  the  death  is  represented  as  having  preceded  the  appearance
by  less  than  two  hours,  but  I  have  recently  found  that  this  is  incorrect ;
the  lady  was  found  dead  at  about  2  p.m.,  and  the  appearance  was  seen
at  9.20.  Fortunately,  the  percipient  at  once  mentioned  his  experience,
and  the  news  of  the  death  did  not  arrive  in  the  place  till  next  morning,
so  that  the  case  is  evidentially  a  strong  one.  And  it  certainly  tells,  as
far  as  a  single  case  can  tell,  in  favour  of  the  theory  of  independent  |Josi
mortem  appearance  as  opposed  to  that  of  telepathy,  or  tliought-trans-
ference,  in  the  ordinary  sense.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  the  hypothesis  of
a  transferred  impression  fi'om  the  nund  of  a  dying  person  seems  strained
to  the  uttermost  when  (as  in  this  case)  the  dying  person  and  the


416


On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


percipient  have  Ijeen  connected  by  no  tie  of  bloocl  or  friendsliip ;  and,
moreover,  it  would  have  been  an  extremely  odd  coincidence  that  an
impression,  which  we  should  have  to  suppose  to  have  lain  latent  for  seven
hours  in  the  percipient's  mind,  should  suddenly  externalise  itself  in  bodily
form  at  the  very  moment  when  he  was  approaching  a  spot  in  which  the
deceased  was  specially  interested.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  s^ot  in
which  the  phantasm  appeared  is  specially  suggestive  of  a  local  cause  for
it ;  for  the  deceased  lady,  as  we  learn  from  the  vicar  of  the  parish,  was
"  specially  morbid  on  the  suly'ect  of  tombs,"  and  she  Avas  in  the  habit
of  sometimes  having  the  mausoleum  opened  and  entering  it.

In  the  following  cases  the  interval  after  death  was  longer,  and  the
percipient  was  an  absolute  stranger  to  the  deceased.  This  condition
must,  of  course,  usually  involve  the  disadvantage  that  the  identification
of  the  appearance  with  a  particular  person  can  be  based  only  on  the
percipient's  subsequent  description  of  what  he  had  seen.  But  in  the
first  case  which  I  shall  quote,  this  sort  of  identification  was  reinforced
by  the  percipient's  recognition  of  a  photograph  of  the  deceased.

V. — From  Mr.  John  E.  Husbands,  of  Melbourne  House,  Town  Hall-
square,  Grimsl)y.

September  15th,  1886.

Dear  Sir. — The  facts  are  simply  these.  I  was  sleeping  in  a  hotel  in
Madeira  in  January,  188.5.  It  was  a  bright  moonlight  night.  The  windows
were  open  and  the  Winds  up.  I  felt  some  one  was  in  my  room.  On  opening
my  eyes,  1  saw  a  young  fellow  about  25,  dressed  in  flannels,  standing  at  the
side  of  my  bed  and  pointing  with  the  first  finger  of  his  right  hand  to  the
place  I  was  lying.  I  lay  for  some  seconds  to  convince  myself  of  some  one
being  really  there.  I  then  sat  up  and  looked  at  him.  I  saw  his  features
so  plainly  that  I  rec(.ignised  them  in  a  phot()gra])h  which  was  shown  me  some
days  after.  I  asked  him  what  he  wanted  ;  he  did  not  speak,  but  his  eyes  and
hand  seemed  to  tell  me  I  was  in  his  ])lace.  As  he  did  not  answer,  I  struck
out  at  him  with  my  fist  as  I  sat  up,  but  did  not  reach  him,  and  as  I  was
going  to  spring  out  of  bed  he  slowly  vanished  through  the  door,  which  was
shut,  keeping  his  eyes  upon  me  all  the  time.

Upon  inquiry  I  found  that  tlie  young  fellow  who  appeared  to  me  died  in
that  room  I  was  occupying.

If  I  can  tell  you  anything  more  I  shall  be  glad  to,  if  it  interests  you.

John  E.  Husbands.

The  following  letters  are  from  Miss  Falkner,  of  Church-terrace,
Wisbech,  who  was  resident  at  the  hotel  when  the  above  incident
happened.

October  8th,  1886.-

The  figure  that  Mr.  Husbands  saw  while  in  Madeira  was  that  of  a  young
fellow  who  died  unexpectedly  months  previously,  in  the  room  which  Mr.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  417


Husbands  was  occupying.  Curiously  enough,  Mr.  H.  had  never  heard  of  him
or  his  death.  He  told  me  the  story  the  morning  after  he  had  seen  the  figure,
and  I  recognised  the  young  fellow  from  the  description.  It  impressed  me
very  much,  but  I  did  not  mention  it  to  him  or  anyone.  I  loitered  about
until  I  heard  Mr.  Husbands  tell  the  same  tale  to  my  brother  ;  we  left  Mr.  H.
and  said  simultaneously  ' '  He  has  seen'  Mr.  D. "

No  more  was  said  on  the  subject  for  days  ;  then  I  abruptly  showed  the
photograph.

Mr.  Husbands  said  at  once,  ' '  That  is  the  young  fellow  who  appeared  to
me  the  other  night,  but  he  was  dressed  dilTerently  " — describing  a  dress  he
often  wore — "  cricket  suit  (or  tennis)  fastened  at  the  neck  with  sailor  knot."
I  must  say  that  that  Mr.  Husbands  is  a  most  practical  man,  and  the  very  last
one  would  expect  "  a  spirit  "  to  visit.

K.  FalejS'ee.
October  20th,  1886.

I  enclose  you  photograph  and  an  extract  from  my  sister-in-law's  letter,
which  I  received  this  morning,  as  it  will  verify  my  statement.  Mr.  Husbands
saw  the  figure  either  the  3rd  or  4tli  of  February,  1885.

The  people  who  had  occupied  the  rooms  had  never  told  us  if  they  had
seen  anything,  so  we  may  conclude  they  had  not.

K.  Faikner.

The  following  is  Miss  Falkner's  copy  of  tlie  passage  in  the  letter  : —

"Ton  will  see  at  back  of  Mr.  du  F  's  photo  the  date  of  his  decease

[January  29th,  1884]  ;  and  if  you  recollect  '  the  Motta  Marques  '  had  his
rooms  from  the  February  till  the  May  or  June  of  1884,  then  Major
Money  at  the  commencement  of  1885  season.  Mr.  Husbands  had  to  take
the  room  on  February  2nd,  1885,  as  his  was  wanted.

"  I  am  clear  on  all  this,  and  remember  his  telling  me  the  incident  when
he  came  to  see  my  baby."

I  have  received  a  full  account  of  this  case,  viva  voce,  from  botli  Mr.
Husbands  and  Miss  Falkner.  They  are  both  thoroughly  practical,  and
as  far  removed  as  possible  from  a  superstitious  love  of  marvels ;  nor
had  they  any  previous  interest  in  this  or  any  other  class  of  abnormal
experiences.  So  far  as  I  could  judge,  Mr.  Husbands'  view  of  himself
is  entirely  correct — that  he  is  the  last  person  to  give  a  spurious
importance  to  anything  tliat  might  befall  him,  or  to  allow  facts  to  be
distorted  by  imagination.  As  will  be  seen,  his  account  of  his  vision
preceded  any  knowledge  on  his  part  of  the  death  which  had  occurred  in
the  room. He  has  never  had  any  other  liallucination  of  the  senses.

The  next  case  is  remarkable  for  the  frequent  repetition  of  the
percipient's  experience.  It  is  a  specially  baffling  case ;  suggesting  not  so
much  anything  associated  with  the  popular  idea  of  "  haunting,"  or  any
continuing  local  interest  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  person,  as  the
survival  of  a  mere  image,  impressed,  we  cannot  guess  how,  on  we  cannot

2  E  2


418  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


guess  what,  by  that  person's  jjhysical  organism,  and  perceptible  at  times
to  those  endowed  with  some  cognate  form  of  sensitiveness.

VI.— From  Mr.  D.  M.  Tyre,  157,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Pollokshields,
Glasgow.

October  9th,  1885.

In  the  summer  of  1874,  my  sister  and  I  went  during  our  holidays  to  stay
with  a  gardener  and  his  wife,  in  a  house  which  was  built  far  up,  fully  three-
quarters  of  a  mile,  on  the  face  of  a  hill  overlooking  one  of  the  most  beautiful
lochs  in  Dumbart(jnshire,  just  on  the  boundary  of  the  Highlands.  A  charming
spot  indeed,  although  far  off  the  main  roadway.  We  never  wearied,  and  so
delighted  were  we  with  the  place  that  my  people  took  a  lease  of  the  house  for
the  following  three  years.  From  this  point  my  narrative  begins.  Being
connected  in  business  with  the  city,  we  could  not  get  down  to  Glen  M.
altogether,  so  that  my  two  sisters  and  myself  were  sent  away  early  in  May  to
have  the  house  put  in  order,  and  attend  to  the  garden,  &c.,  &c.,  for  the
coming  holidays,  when  we  would  be  all  down  together.  We  had  lots  of  work
to  do,  and  as  the  nearest  village  was  live  miles  distant,  and  our  nearest
neighbours,  the  people  at  the  shore,  nearly  a  mile  away,  we  were  pretty
quiet  on  the  hill  and  left  to  our  own  resources.

One  day,  my  elder  sister  J.  required  to  go  to  the  village  for  something  or
other,  leaving  us  alone  ;  and  as  the  afternoon  came  on,  I  went  part  of  the
way  to  nreet  her,  leaving  my  other  sister  L.  all  alone.  When  we  returned,
about  6  p.m.,  we  found  L.  down  the  hill  to  meet  us  in  a  rather  excited  state,
saying  that  an  old  woman  had  taken  up  her  quarters  in  the  kitchen,  and  was
lying  in  the  bed.  We  asked  if  she  knew  who  she  was.  She  said  no,  that  the
old  wife  was  lying  on  the  bed  with  her  clothes  on,  and  tliat  possibly  she  was
a  tinker  body  (a  gipsy),  therefore  she  was  afraid  to  go  in  without  us.  We
went  up  to  the  house  with  L.  ;  my  younger  sister  L.  going  in  first  said,  on
going  into  the  kitchen,  "There  she  is,"  pointing  to  the  bed,  and  turning  to
us  expecting  that  we  would  wake  her  up  and  ask  what  she  was  there  for.  I
looked  in  the  bed  and  so  did  my  elder  sister,  but  the  clothes  were  flat  and
unruffled,  and  when  we  said  that  there  was  nothing  there  she  was  quite  sur-
prised, and  pointing  with  her  finger  said,  "Look,  why  there's  the  old  wife  with
her  clothes  on  and  lying  with  her  head  towards  the  window"  ;  but  we  could  '
not  see  anything.  Then  for  the  first  time  it  seemed  to  dawn  upon  her  that  she
was  seeing  something  that  was  not  natural  to  us  all,  and  she  became  very  much
afraid,  and  we  took  her  to  the  other  room  and  tried  to  soothe  her,  for  she  was
trembling  all  over.  Ghost !  why  the  thought  never  entered  our  minds  for  a
second  ;  but  we  started  chopping  wood  and  making  a  fire  for  the  evening
meal.  The  very  idea  of  anyone  being  in  the  bed  was  ridiculous,  so  we
attributed  it  to  imagination,  and  life  at  tlie  house  went  on  as  usual  for  about
two  days,  when  one  afternoon,  as  we  were  sitting  in  the  kitchen  round  the
fire,  it  being  a  cold,  wet  day  outside,  L.  startled  us  by  exclaiming,  ' '  There  is
the  old  woman  again,  and  lying  the  same  way."  L.  did  not  seem  to  be  so
much  afraid  this  time,  so  we  asked  her  to  describe  the  figure  ;  and  with  her
eyes  fixed  on  the  bed  and  with  motion  of  the  finger,  she  went  on  to  tell  us
how  that  the  old  wife  was  not  lying  under  the  blankets,  but  on  top,  with  her
clothes  and  boots  on,  and  her  legs  drawn  up  as  though  she  were  cold  ;  her


1889.] On  A'pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  419


face  was  tm'ned  to  the  wall,  and  she  had  on  what  is  kno\\Ti  in  the  Highlands
as  a  "  sow-backed  mutch,"  that  is,  a  white  cap  which  only  old  women  wear  ;
it  has  a  friU  round  the  front,  and  sticks  out  at  the  back,  tlius.^  She  also  wore
a  drab  coloured  petticoat,  and  a  checked  shawl  round  her  shoulders  drawn
tight.  Such  was  the  description  given  ;  she  could  not  see  her  face,  but  her
right  hand  was  hugging  her  left  arm,  and  she  saw  that  the  hand  was  yeUow
and  thin,  and  wrinkled  like  the  hands  of  old  people  who  have  done  a  lot  of
bard  work  in  their  day.

We  sat  looking  at  the  bed  for  a  long  time,  with  an  occasional  bit  of
information  from  L. ,  who  was  the  only  one  who  saw  the  figure.

This  happened  often — very  often,  indeed  so  frequently  that  we  got  used
to  it,  and  used  to  talk  about  it  among  ourselves  as  "  L'.s  old  woman."

IMidsummer  came,  and  the  rest  of  our  jteople  from  the  city,  and  then
for  the  first  time  we  became  intimate  with  our  neighbours,  and  two  or  three
families  at  the  shore.  One  one  occasion  my  elder  sister  brought  up  the  subject
before  a  Mrs.  M'P.,  our  nearest  neighbour,  and  when  she  described  the
figure  to  her,  Mrs.  M'P.  well-nigh  swooned  away,  and  said  that  it  really  was
the  case  ;  the  description  was  the  same  as  the  first  wife  of  the  man,  who  lived
in  the  house  before  us,  and  that  he  cruelly  ill-used  his  wife,  to  the  extent
that  the  last  beating  she  never  recovered  from.  The  story  Mrs.  M'P.  told
runs  somewhat  like  this,  of  which  I  can  only  give  you  the  gist  : —

Malcolm,  the  man  of  the  house,  and  his  wife  Kate  (the  old  woman),
lived  a  cat  and  dog  life  ;  she  was  hard-working,  and  he  got  tipsy  whenever
he  could.  They  went  one  day  to  market  with  some  fowls  and  pigs,  &c. ,  and
on  their  way  back  he  purchased  a  half-gallon  of  whisky.  He  carried  it  f)art
of  the  way,  and  when  he  got  tired  gave  it  to  her  ;  while  he  took  frequent
rests  by  the  wayside,  she  managed  to  get  home  before  him,  and  when  he
came  home  late  he  accused  her  of  drinking  the  contents  of  the  jar.  He  gave
her  such  a  beating  that  he  was  afraid,  and  went  down  to  this  Mrs.  M'P.,
saying  that  liis  viiie  was  very  ill.  When  ]Mrs.  M'P.  went  uj)  to  the  house  she
found  Kate,  as  my  sister  described,  with  her  clothes  on,  and  lying  with  her
face  to  the  wall  for  the  purpose,  as  Mrs.  M'P.  said,  of  concealing  her  face,
wiiich  was  very  badly  coloured  by  the  ill-treatment  of  her  husband.  The
finish-up  was  her  death,  she  having  never  recovered.

The  foregoing  is  as  neaiiy  a  complete  compendium  of  the  facts  as  I,  with
the  help  of  my  sister  J. ,  can  remember.

My  sister  L.  is  now  dead,  but  we  often  go  back  to  the  house,  when  we
are  any  way  near  the  locality,  because  it  is  a  bright  spot  in  our  memory.

(Signed),  D.  M.  Tyre.

Mr.  Tyre  adds,  in  a  letter  to  ]Mr.  David  Stewart,  of  Kincaid  House,
Milton  of  Campsie,  N.B.,  who  procured  this  account  for  us  : —

1  was  at  the  house  last  month  ;  there  is  no  one  in  it  just  now  ;  the  last
tenant  has  gone  abroad,  and  the  house  is  somewhat  dilapidated,  and  the
garden  a  ruin.  We  had  a  look  through  the  window  at  the  old  kitchen,  and
saw  our  own  grate  still  remaining.

^  A  sketch  of  the  profile  was  here  given.


1


420


On  Aiyparltions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


Mr.  Stewart  wrote  to  us  on  August  13tli,  1885  : —

I  know  how  valuable  the  actual  names  and  localities  would  l)e,  as  well  as
Mrs.  M'P. 's  indejiendent  account,  but  I  have  asked  so  repeatedly,  and  been
told  that  Mrs.  M'P.  had  great  objections  to  publicity,  in  case  it  would  rake
up  old  stories  connected  with  the  case,  that  I  do  not  like  to  ask  again.

In  this  connection  I  may  cite  a  case  which  was  admitted  to
Phantasms  of  tJie  Livvm/  by  mistake.  (Case  138,  Vol.  I.,  p.  375.)
The  death  took  place  at  tlie  Antipodes,  and  the  coincidence  between  it
and  the  percipient's  experience  was  represented  by  the  narrator  as  exact,
through  tlie  not  very  uncommon  eri'or  of  reckoning  tlie  difference  of
time  made  by  difference  of  longitude  the  wrong  way.  I  did  not  discover
this  error  till  the  first  edition  of  the  book  had  been  published.  In  fact,
the  percipient's  experience  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12  hours,
and  the  case  falls  properly  in  our  present  class.  But  the  nature  of  the
experience  was  remarkable.

VII. — From  Miss  Richardson,  47,  Bedford-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

The  writer  is  a  very  wtirtliy  wife  of  a  shopkeeper,  who  told  me  the
occurrence  some  years  ago,  then  witli  more  detail,  as  it  was  fresh  in  her
memory,  and  her  husband  can  vouch  for  the  facts  told  him  at  the  time,
and  the  strange  "  uncanny  "  efi'ect  of  the  dream  on  her  mind  for  some
time  after.

From  Mrs.  Green  to  Miss  Ptichardson.

Newry,  21d  Fird  Month,  1885.

Dear  Friend, — In  compliance  with  fcliy  request,  I  give  thee  the
particulars  of  my  dream.

I  saw  two  respectably-dressed  females  driving  alone  in  a  vehicle  like  a
mineral  water  cart.  Their  laorse  stopped  at  a  water  to  drink  ;  but  as  there
was  no  footing,  he  lost  his  balance,  and  in  trying  to  recover  it  he  plunged
right  in.  With  the  shock,  tlie  women  stood  up  and  shouted  for  help,  and
their  hats  rose  off  their  heads,  and  as  all  were  going  down  I  turned  away
crying,  and  saying,  "Was  there  no  one  at  all  to  help  them  ? "  upon  which  I
awoke,  and  my  husband  asked  me  what  was  the  matter.  I  related  the  above
dream  to  him,  and  he  asked  me  if  I  knew  them.  I  said  I  did  not,  and
thought  I  had  never  seen  either  of  them.  The  impression  of  the  dream  and
the  trouble  it  brought  was  over  me  all  day.  I  remarked  to  my  son  it  was  the
anniversary  of  his  birthday  and  my  own  also — the  10th  of  First  Month,  and
this  is  why  I  remember  the  date.

The  f oll(5wing  Third  Month  I  got  a  letter  and  newspaper  from  my  brother
in  Australia,  named  Allen,  letting  me  know  the  sad  trouble  which  had  befallen
him  in  the  loss,  by  drowning,  of  one  of  his  daughters  and  her  comjianion.
Thou  will  see  by  the  description  given  of  it  in  the  paper  how  the  event
corresponded  with  my  dream.  My  niece  was  hovn  in  Australia,  and  I  never
saw  her.

Please  return  the  paper  at  tliy  convenience.  Considering  that  our  night
is  their  day,  I  must  have  been  in  sympathy  with  the  sufferers  at  the  time  of
the  accident,  on  the  Tenth  of  First  Month,  1878.

It  is  referred  to  in  two  sejjarate  places  in  the  newspaper.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  421


From  the  Incjlewood  Advertiser.

Friday  evening,  January  IWi,  1878.
A  dreadful  accident  occurred  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wedderburn,  on
Wednesday  last,  resulting  in  the  death  of  two  women,  named  Lehey  and
Allen.  It  appears  that  the  deceased  were  driving  into  Wedderburn  in  a
spring  cart  from  the  direction  of  Kinypanial,  when  they  attempted  to  water
thei?  horse  at  a  dam  on  the  boundaiy  of  Torpichen  Station.  The  dam  was
10  or  12  feet  deep  in  one  spot,  and  into  this  deep  hole  they  must  have  inad-
vertently driven,  for  Mr.  W.  McKeehnie,  manager  of  Torpichen  Station,  upon
going  to  the  dam  some  hours  afterwards,  discovered  the  spring  cart  and  horse

under  the  water,  and  two  women's  hats  floating  on  the  surface

The  dam  was  searched,  and  the  bodies  of  the  two  women,  clasped  in  each
other's  arms,  recovered.

Extract  from  Evidence  given  at  the  Inquest.
Joseph  John  Allen,  farmer,  deposed  :  I  identify  one  of  the  bodies  as  that
of  my  sister.  I  saw  her  about  11  a.m.  yesterday  .  .  .  The  horse  had
broken  away  and  I  caught  it  for  her.  Mrs.  Lehey  and  my  sister  met  me
when  I  caught  the  horse  .  .  .  They  then  took  the  horse  and  went  to  Mr.
Clarke's.  I  did  not  see  them  afterwards  alive.  William  McKeehnie
deposed  .  .  .  About  4  p.  m.  yesterday,  I  was  riding  by  the  dam  when  I
observed  the  legs  of  a  horse  and  the  chest  above  the  water.

From  Mr.  Green,  Newry.

lUh  Second  Mov,th,  1885.

Dear  Friend,  Edith  Richardson, — In  reference  to  the  dream  that
my  wife  had  of  seeing  two  women  thrown  out  of  a  spring  cart  by  their  horse
stopping  to  drink  out  of  some  deep  water,  I  remember  she  was  greatly  dis-
tressed about  it,  and  seemed  to  feel  great  sympathy  for  them.  It  occurred
on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  January.

The  reason  I  can  remember  the  date  so  well  is  that  the  10th  was  the
anniversary  of  my  wife  and  our  son's  birthday.  As  the  day  advanced  she
seemed  to  get  worse,  and  I  advised  her  to  go  out  for  a  drive  ;  when  she
returned  she  told  me  she  was  no  better,  and  also  said  she  had  told  the  driver
not  to  go  near  water,  lest  some  accident  should  happen,  as  she  had  had  such
a  dreadful  dream  the  night  before,  at  the  same  time  telling  him  the  nature  of
it.  As  my  wife's  niece  did  not  live  with  her  father,  he  was  not  told  of  it
until  the  next  morning,  which  would  be  our  evening  of  the  10th,  and  which
we  think  accounted  for  the  increased  trouble  she  felt  in  sympathy  with  him.

Thos.  Green.

Mrs.  Green  has  had  no  otlier  experience  of  the  sort.

Inglewood  is  in  Queensland,  on  the  border  of  New  Soutli  Wales.

Here  tlie  correspondence,  if  faithfully  recorded,  as  we  may  fairly
suppose  that  it  is,  seems  too  close  to  be  accidental ;  yet  I  am  totally  at
a  loss  how  to  account  for  it.  Had  the  coincidence  been  exact,  we
might  have  taken  refuge  in  the  convenient  word  clairvoyance — though


422 On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


it  must  never  be  forgotten  tliat  the  hypotheses  which  that  term  covers
involve  diiiiculties  as  great  as  they  can  ever  be  called  on  to  solve.  But
a  clairvoyant  vision  of  a  scene,  following  that  scene  by  many  hours  !
Here,  again,  the  most  natural  analogy  seems  to  be  that  of  a  picture  or
reflection  which  survives  after  the  reality  has  vanished.  But  of  course
such  a  description  brings  us  not  one  whit  nearer  to  an  explanation.^

I  have  kept  to  the  last  a  very  abnormal  case  which  belongs  tc  the
personal  class,  but  where  the  person  in  whom  the  original  of  the
phantasm  which  appeared  might  be  supposed  to  be  interested  was  not
the  percipient,  but  someone  else  in  the  same  house.

VIII. — From  Mrs.  Bacchus,  of  Sherbourne  Villa,  Leamington.

August,  1886.

On  Saturday,  October  18th  [really  24th],  1868,  we  left  some  friends  (tlie
Marquis  and  Madame  de  Lys)  with  whom  we  had  been  staying  at  Malvern
Wells,  and  went  to  Cheltenham.  The  reason  for  going  to  Cheltenham  was
that  a  brother-in-law  of  my  husband,  Mr.  George  Copeland,  was  living  there  ;
lie  was  a  great  invalid,  suffering  from  paralysis  and  quite  unable  to  move,,
but  in  full  mental  vigour,  so  his  friends  were  anxious  to  see  him  as  often  as
possible  to  relieve  the  dreariness  of  his  long  illness,  and  we  did  not  like  to
be  so  near  without  paying  him  a  visit.  We  knew  that  he  had  friends  staying
in  the  house  at  the  time,  so  determined  to  go  to  Cheltenham  without  letting
him  know,  to  take  lodgings  near,  and  then  tell  him  we  had  done  so,  that  he
might  not  feel  he  ought  to  invite  us  to  his  house.  We  soon  found  some
rooms  in  York-terrace,  close  to  Bay's  Hill,  Mr.  Copeland's  house.  After  we
had  taken  the  rooms — the  usual  lodging-house  kind — drawing-room  and
bedroom  at  the  back,  and  were  going  out,  we  noticed  some  medicine  bottles
on  the  hall  table,  asked  if  any  one  were  ill  in  the  house,  and  were  told  that
an  old  lady,  a  Mrs.  R.,  and  her  daughter  were  in  the  dining-room,  that
Mrs.  R.  had  been  ill  for  some  time,  that  her  illness  was  not  serious
and  that  there  was  no  immediate  danger  of  her  dying,  in  fact  it  was  made
quite  light  of,  and  we  thought  no  more  about  it.  We  just  mentioned  in  the
course  of  the  evening  the  name  of  the  people  lodging  in  the  same  house,  and
Mr.  Copeland  said  he  knew  who  Mrs.  R.  was  ;  she  was  the  widow  of  a
physician  who  formerly  practised  in  Cheltenham,  that  one  of  her  daughters
was  married  to  a  master  of  the  College,  a  Mr.  N.  Then  I  remembered
having  seen  Mrs.  N.  at  a  garden-party  at  Dr.  Barry's  the  year  before,  and
had  noticed  her  talking  to  Mrs.  Barry,  and  thought  her  very  pretty.  This
was  all  I  knew  or  ever  heard  of  the  peojile.  On  Sunday  morning,  when  I
came  into  the  drawing-rcjom  for  breakfast,  I  thought  my  husband  looked  a
little  uncomfortable  ;  however,  he  said  nothing  till  I  had  finished  breakfast,
then  asked,  ' '  Did  you  hear  a  noise  of  a  chair  in  the  hall  a  little  while  ago  1
The  old  lady  downst;iirs  died  in  her  chair  last  night,  and  they  were  wheeling

1  It  may  be  observed  that  it  was  not  till  the  evening  of  the  9th  that  Mr.  Allen,
the  percipient's  brother,  knew  of  liis  daughter's  death.  His  mind  may  have  supplied
the  link  Isetween  the  actual  scene  and  the  dream  in  England,  and  the  scene  would  be
vividly  present  to  him  at  the  time  when  the  dream  occurred. — F.  W.  H.  M.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  423


her  into  the  bedroom  at  the  back."  I  was  very  uncomfortable  and  frightened,
I  had  never  been  in  a  house  with  anyone  dead  before,  and  wanted  to  go,  and
several  friends  who  heard  of  it  asked  me  t(j  stay  with  them,  but  my  husband
did  not  wish  to  move  ;  he  said  it  was  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  was  really  foolish
of  me  to  wish  it,  that  he  did  not  like  moving  on  Sunday,  also  that  he  did  not
think  it  right  or  kind  to  go  away  because  someone  had  died,  that  we  should
think  it  unkind  if  the  case  had  been  our  own,  and  other  people  had  rushed
olf  in  a  hurry  ;  so  we  decided  to  stay.  I  spent  the  day  with  my  brother-in-law
and  nieces,  and  only  returned  to  the  lodgings  in  time  to  go  to  bed.  I  went
to  sleep  quickly  as  usual,  but  woke,  I  suppose,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,
not  frightened  by  any  noise,  and  for  no  reason,  and  saw  distinctly  at  the
foot  of  the  bed  an  old  gentleman  with  a  round  rosy  face,  smiling,  his  hat  in
his  hand,  dressed  in  an  old-fashioned  coat  (blue)  with  brass  buttons,  light
waistcoat,  and  trousers.  The  longer  I  looked  at  him,  the  more  distinctly  I
saw  every  feature  and  particular  of  his  dress,  &c.  I  did  not  feel  much
frightened,  and  after  a  time  shut  my  eyes  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  when  I
looked  again,  the  old  gentleman  was  gone.  After  a  time  I  went  to  sleep,
and  in  the  morning,  while  dressing,  made  up  my  mind  tliat  I  would  say
nothing  of  what  I  had  seen  till  I  saw  one  of  my  nieces,  and  would  then
describe  the  old  gentleman,  and  ask  if  Dr.  R.  could  be  like  him,
although  the  idea  seemed  absurd.  I  met  my  niece,  Mary  C(_ipeland  (now
Mrs.  Brandling),  coming  out  of  cliurch,  and  said,  ' '  Was  Dr.  R.  like  an
old  gentleman  with  a  round  rosy  face,"  &c. ,  &c.,  describing  what  I  had  seen.
She  stopped  at  once  on  the  pavement,  looking  astonished.  "  Who  could  have
told  you,  aunt  1  We  always  said  he  looked  more  like  a  country  farmer  than
a  doctor,  and  how  odd  it  was  that  such  a  common  looking  man  should  liave
had  such  pretty  daughters."

This  is  an  exact  account  of  what  I  saw.  I  am  quite  sure  I  sliould  know
the  old  gentleman  again,  his  face  is  clearly  before  me  when  I  think  of  it
now,  as  at  tlie  time  Miss  de  Lys  had  a  letter  from  me  with  the  story,  and
sent  it  to  a  relation  in  France  ;  she  heard  me  tell  it  again  some  years  after,
and  said  there  was  no  variation  whatever  in  it.  My  two  nieces  are  still  living,
and  can  remember  exactly  everything  that  happened  as  I  told  it  to  them.
Of  course  I  cannot  explain  it  in  any  way  ;  the  old  lady  who  was  dead  was  in
the  room  directly  under  the  one  I  was  sleeping  in.  The  part  of  the  whole
thing  that  surprised  me  the  most  was,  that  I  was  so  very  little  frightened  as
to  be  able  to  sleep  afterwards,  and  did  not  wish  to  disturb  anyone  else.

Mr.  Bacchus  writes  : —

Leamington,  September  27f/i.,  1886.
I  have  read  my  wife's  account  of  what  happened  at  Cheltenham  when  we
were  staying  there  in  October,  1868  ;  it  is  exactly  what  she  told  me  at  the
time,  and  I  remember  it  all  perfectly,  also  her  telling  my  niece  about  it  in  the
morning.

Henuy  Bacchus.

In  answer  to  further  questions,  Mrs.  Bacchus  replied  as  follows  : —

September  Uh,  1886.

1.  I  have  never  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  since.

2.  I  gave  the  date  from  memory.  The  day  was  Saturday,  and  it  was
Sunday  night,  or  early  on  Mond;iy  morning,  that  I  saw  Dr.  R.


424  On  Aiyparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,.


3.  I  do  not  remember  the  number  in  York-terrace  ;  probably  the  Times
of  October,  1868,  would  give  Mrs.  R.  's  death  and  where  it  took  place.  [The
Times  gives  the  death  at  7,  York-terrace,  Sunday,  October  25th,  1868.]

4.  The  letter  to  Miss  de  Lys  cannot  be  found  ;  all  my  letters  to  her  were
burnt  after  she  died  in  1883.

5.  Mr.  Bacchus  and  Mrs.  Henry  Berkeley  have  given  their  account.
Mrs.  Brandling  has  not  yet  written.

6.  I  am  quite  sure  I  never  saw  any  picture  of  any  kind  of  Dr.  R.

7.  I  do  not  know  when  he  died  :  probably  three  or  four  years  before
I  saw  him.  His  death  was  spoken  of  in  that  way.  I  can  find  out  if
necessary  from  an  old  servant  of  Mr.  Copeland's,  who  lives  at  Cheltenham,
and  who  would  remember  him,  and  be  able  to  inquire.

8.  I  d(  1  not  remember  anything  about  the  light,  if  there  was  a  night-light
in  the  ro(jni  or  not  ;  I  think  not.  When  I  say,  "  do  not  remember,"  I  mean
that  being  asked  puzzles  me  ;  my  impression  of  the  whole  thing  is  that  it
was  like  a  magic  lantern,  all  dark  round,  and  the  figure,  colour,  and,  clothes,
quite  light  and  bright. I  always  see  the  whole  thing  when  I  speak  of  it.

IsABBLLE  Bacchus.

Mrs.  Bacclius  adds  : —

I  enclose  Mrs.  Brandling's  paper,  signed.  As  you  say,  her  account  is
different  from  mine.  My  decided  impression  is  that  I  first  described
Dr.  R.  to  her,  and  Mrs.  Berkeley  says  she  is  sure  of  this  too.  I  have
always  been  convinced  it  was  so  for  several  reasons,  one  in  particular,  that  T
remember  the  exclamation  of  surprise,  and  the  question,  ' '  Who  could  have
told  you  1  "  which  would  have  meant  nothing  if  I  had  been  first  told  myself,
and  in  an  odd  way  Mrs.  Brandling  has  a  sort  of  recollection  of  that  too.
Still  she  wrote  the  account  as  well  as  she  could,  without  seeing  mine  or
talking  to  me,  and  it  would  be  worthless  in  any  other  way.  Dr.  R.
died  some  years  before  I  saw  him  ;  he  lived  in  a  house  of  his  own,  and  in
another  part  of  Cheltenham.  I  shall  have  the  exact  date  of  his  death  soon,,
and  will  send  it  to  you.

IsABELLE  Bacchus.

From  Mrs.  Berkeley,  of  Nortlicote  Villa,  Torrs  Park,  Ilfracombe.

I  remember  well  your  staying  in  Cheltenham  at  Queen's-parade,  and  that
after  sleeping  one  night  you  told  us  that  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  you
were  lying  awake,  and  Uncle  Henry  asleep  (I  think),  you  saw  a  light,  and  a
little  old  man,  whom  you  described  as  very  rosy  and  very  smiling,  seemed  to
come  up  through  the  floor  and  pass  on  through  the  ceiling ;  and  next  day  you
found  someone  had  lately  died  there.  You  told  us  about  it,  and  we  said  a
Dr.  R.  had  died  there,  and  that,  strangely  enough,  he  was  a  jjarticu-
larly  rosy,  smiling-looking,  little  old  man.  We  asked  you  how  he  was
dressed,  and  I  believe  you  said  in  ordinary  clothes  witli  brass  buttons,  and
that  we  said  that  was  how  he  dressed  too,  in  dark  blue  cloth,  with  brass
buttons.  We  knew  him  very  well  by  sight,  and  knew  one  of  his  daughters
to  speak  to.  He  had  two.  This  is  all  I  really  recollect  myself  about  it  ;  you
know  my  memory  is  not  good  now. I  somehow  think  Missie  was  the  first  to


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


425


go  up  to  see  you  the  next  morning,  and.  I  feel  quite  sure  that  you  described
the  little  old  man's  face  to  her  first.  As  to  his  dress,  I  do  not  know  whether
she  described  it  to  you  or  you  to  her  afterwards.

M.  Cathekine  Berkeley.

Mrs.  Berkeley  further  writes  to  Mrs.  Bacchus  : —

I  have  done  what  you  wished  at  last  ;  that  is,  I  have  written  a  very
short  account  of  the  occurrence  you  refer  to  myself  before  reading  yours  at
all. Now  I  have  Just  read  yours,  and  I  remember,  of  course,  more.

1,  York-terrace  and  not  Queen's-parade  was  the  place  most  certainly.
I  meant  that  row  of  houses,  but  put  the  wrong  name.  I  had  forgotten
Mrs.  R.s'  death  altogether,  as  you  will  see.  I  thought  it  was  he  who
had  died  there.  He  had  given  up  practice  a  long  time,  I  think.  We  used  to
see  him  about  Lansdowne  perpetually.  He  lived  there.  His  daughter
certainly  is  Mrs.  N. ,  and  that  is  the  one  we  knew  a  little  of,  and  we  did
often  remark  on  the  contrast  between  father  and  daughters.  So  much  f(.)r
that  part  of  your  letter.  Missie,  I  think,  has  not  lost  her  memory  at  all,  and
she  would  tell  you  correctly,  and  most  likely  confirm  more  of  your  story.
I  have  not  corrected  anything  in  my  account,  so  tliat  you  should  see  it  exactly
as  I  first  wrote  it.

Mrs.  Bacchus  further  Avrites  : —

October  5th,  1886.

Here  is  Mrs.  Brandling's  account.  Like  her  sister,  she  wi^ote  as  she
remembered  before  reading  what  I  had  said.

from  Mrs.  Brandling  (niece  of  Mrs.  Bacchus).

October,  1886.

Once,  when  you  and  Uncle  Henry  came  to  Cheltenham  you  took  rooms  at
York  or  Bay's-terrace,  I  forget  which.  In  the  same  house  were  Mrs.
R.  and  her  daughter.  She  was  a  widow.  I  think  she  died  a  day  or
two  after  you  came  to  the  house.  The  morning  after  she  died,  I  met  you
coming  from  early  Mass,  and  I  think  I  asked  you  how  you  had  passed  the
night.  I  know  ycju  said  that  in  the  night  Mr.  R.  had  come  to  see  his
wife,  and  that  you  had  seen  him,  and  you  asked  me  what  he  was  like.  (He
died  some  time  before.)  I  told  you  he  had  cheeks  like  rosy  apples,  and  was
always  smiling.  I  think  I  said  a  little  more  about  him,  but  I  cannot
remember.  You  said  "  Yes,  that  was  he,  and  that  he  was  just  what  I  said."
I  think  you  said  that  he  stood  at  the  foot  of  your  bed,  and  that  he  had  come
to  the  wrong  room.  I  know  you  rather  laughed  over  it ;  I  asked  you  if  you
were  frightened,  and  you  said  "  No."  I  asked  you  if  Uncle  Henry  had  seen
Mr.  R.  also,  and  I  am  almost  sure  you  said  yes.  You  spoke  quite
quietly,  but  I  was  sure  you  had  been  frightened,  and  I  thought  it  frightened
you  to  be  in  the  house  where  she  had  died,  and  I  thought  you  ought  not  to
stay  in  the  house.  I  told  Uncle  Henry  I  thought  it  was  very  uncomfortable
for  you  to  be  there,  and  I  asked  if  you  might  not  sleep  at  our  house,  but  I
don't  think  Uncle  Henry  answered  anything,  and  you  stayed  at  least  one
night  more  there — 1  think  longer.

Mary  E.  Brankling.


426 On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,

Mr.  R.  died  (as  Mrs.  Bacchus  has  ascertained  for  us),  August  30th,
1865.

*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

Thus  far  Mr.  G-urney  had  written  when  lie  read  the  above  paper  at
the  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  January,
1888.  The  paper  was  not  yet,  in  his  eyes,  complete;  and  two  of  the
■cases  which  he  quotes  (the  Tyre  case  and  Mrs.  Bacchus'  case)  will
suggest  to  the  reader  that  he  had  not  as  yet  decided  over  hoiv  long  a
feriod  after  death  he  should  allow  his  examples  to  range.  For  in  Mrs.
Bacchus'  case  the  decedent  had  been  dead  for  three  years  when  an
apparition  resembling  him  was  seen,  and  in  the  Scotch  case  the  precise
date  of  death  is  unknown.  In  editing  and  supplementing  this  paper,
therefore,  it  has  been  necessary  to  consider  what  limit  of  time  we  should
adopt  in  defining  an  apparition  "  occurring  soon  after  death."  It  is,
indeed,  manifest  that  if  once  we  face  the  supposition  that  an  apparition
may  be  the  result  of  some  kind  of  energy  exercised  by  a  decedent  whose
body  is  unquestionably  dead,  we  have  no  logical  ground  for  denying
that  he  may  exert  a  similar  energy  many  years  after  death.  We
might  therefore  include  in  one  and  the  same  class  all  cases  where  the
proof  that  a  hallucination  was  not  merely  subjective  depends  in  some
way  or  other  upon  the  recognition  of  the  figure  seen;  when  such
recognition  satisfies  at  least  one  of  the  three  conditions  given  by  Mr.
Gurney  on  page  404.  And  we  might  broadly  distinguish  this  class
from  another  main  class  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  where  there  is  no
recognition  of  the  figure  seen,  and  where,  therefore,  its  evidential
quality  depends  not  on  its  own  characteristics,  but  on  the  fact  of  its
being  seen  by  several  persons,  simultaneously  or  successively  (or  on
certain  cognate  arguments  which  need  not  be  here  discussed).  But  if
we  were  in  this  way  to  expand  the  above  paper,  we  should  run  the  risk
of  losing  sight  of  one  of  its  principal  contentions,  namely,  that  "  the
moment  of  death  is,  in  time,  the  central  point  of  a  cluster  of  abnormal
experiences  occurring  at  a  distance,  of  which  some  precede,  while  others
follow  the  death."  And  this  observation  is  so  important  that  it  seems
best  to  dwell  on  it  here  almost  exclusively,  and  to  avoid  the  danger  of
obscuring  it  with  other  matter.

It  misht  conduce  to  a  clearer  view  of  the  facts  if  we  could  draw  a
curve,  showing  the  proportionate  number  of  apparitions  observed  at
various  periods  before  and  after  death.  It  would  then  be  seen  that
they  increase  very  rapidly  for  the  few  liours  which  precede  death,  and
decrease  gradually  during  the  hours  and  days  which  follow.  In  the
present  state  of  our  evidence,  however,  and  considering  all  the  problems
involved,  there  would  perhaps  be  an  aflectation  of  more  exactness  than
we  can  actually  attain,  were  we  to  set  forth  such  a  curve,  embodying
the  dates,  in  reference  to  death,  of  all  the  cases  as  yet  received  by  us.


1889.] On  A-pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  427

It  may  be  enough  to  say,  generally,  that  if  the  length  of  the  base-line
represents  a  year,  and  the  point  with  the  highest  ordinate  the  moment
of  death,  the  comparative  frequency  of  veridical  apparitions  might  be
somewhat  as  follows  : —


That  is  to  say,  the  recognised  apparitions  decrease  rapidly  in  the
few  days  after  death,  then  more  slowly ;  and  after  about  a  year's
time  they  become  so  sporadic  that  we  can  no  longer  include  them  in  a
steadily  descending  line.  It  may  l^e  convenient,  therefore,  to  restrict
our  additional  examples  to  cases  occurring  less  than  a  year  after  death;
and  we  may  arrange  them,  as  far  as  possible,  in  an  order  determined
by  the  progressive  length  of  the  interval  between  the  death  and  the
apparition.

Yet  one  more  point  must  first  lie  touched  on,  to  avoid  misconception
of  the  phrase  just  cited,  that  "  the  moment  of  death  is  the  centre  of  a
cluster  of  abnormal  experiences,  of  which  some  precede,  while  others
follow  the  death."  Mr.  Gurney,  of  course,  did  not  mean  to  assume  that
tlie  act  of  death  itself  was  the  cause  of  all  these  experiences.  Those
which  occur  before  death  may  be  caused  or  conditioned,  not  by  the
death  itself,  but  by  the  abnormal  state,  as  of  coma,  delirium,  ifec,  which
preceded  the  death.  This  we  say  because  we  have  many  instances
where  veridical  phantasms  have  coincided  with  moments  of  crisis, —
carriage-accidents  and  the  like, — occurring  to  distant  agents,  but  not
followed  by  death.  Accordingly  we  find  that  in  almost  all  cases  where
a  phantasm,  apparently  veridical,  has  preceded  the  agent's  death,  that
death  was  the  result  of  disease  and  not  of  accident.  To  this  rule  there
are  very  few  exceptions.  There  is  a  case  given  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  [Vol.  II.  p.  52]  where  the  phantasm  seems  on  the  evidence  to
have  preceded  by  about  half  an  hour  (longitude  allowed  for)  a  sudden
death  by  drowning. In  this  case  the  percipient  was  in  a  Norfolk  farm-


428


On  Aijparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


liouse,  tlie  drowning  man — or  agent — was  in  a  storm  off  the  island  of
Tristan  d'Acunlia  ;  and  we  liave  suggested  that  an  error  of  clocks  or
of  observation  may  account  for  the  discrepancy.  In  anotlier  case  the
death  was  in  a  sense  a  violent  one,  for  it  was  a  suicide  ;  but  the  morbidly
excited  state  of  the  girl  a  few  hours  before  death — when  her  phantasm
was  seen — was  in  itself  a  state  of  crisis.  But  there  are  also  a  few
recorded  cases  (none  of  which  were  cited  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living),
where  a  phantasm  or  double  of  some  person  has  been  observed  some
days  previous  to  that  person's  accidental  death.  The  cases  of  this  sort
as  yet  received  have  been  too  few  to  enable  me  to  deal  with  them  here  ;
but  if  such  "  doubles  "  should  be  held  to  bear  any  real  relation  to  the
impending  death,  an  alteration  would  have  to  be  made  in  the  curve
above  suggested.

Thus  much  it  has  seemed  needful  to  say  in  order  to  explain  the
difficulty  of  representing  by  any  one  curved  line  the  true  time-
relations  involved  in  this  complex  matter.  We  now  proceed  briefly
to  review  some  of  tlie  cases  where  the  interval  between  death  and
phantasm  has  been  measurable  by  minutes  or  hours.

It  is  not  easy  to  get  definite  cases  where  the  interval  has  been
measurable  by  minutes  ;  for  if  the  percipient  is  at  a  distance  from  the
agent  we  can  seldom  be  sure  that  the  clocks  at  both  places  have  been
correct,  and  correctly  observed ;  while  if  he  is  present  with  the  agent
we  can  rarely  be  sure  tliat  the  pliantasm  observed  is  more  than  a  mere
subjective  hallucination.  Thus  we  have  several  accounts  of  a  rushing
sound  heard  hj  tlie  watclier  of  a  dying  man  just  after  his  apparent
death,  or  of  some  kind  of  luminosity  observed  near  his  person ;  but  this
is  just  the  moment  wlien  we  may  suppose  some  subjective  liallucination
likely  to  occur,  and  if  one  person's  senses  alone  are  affected  we  cannot
allow  much  evidential  weiglit  to  the  occurrence.  I  may  add  that
one  of  our  cases  [II.,  p.  639]  is  remarkable  in  that  the  auditory
hallucination — a  sound  as  of  female  voices  gently  singing — was
heard  by  five  persons, — by  four  of  them,  as  it  seems,  independently, —
and  in  two  places,  on  different  sides  of  the  house.  At  the  same  time,
one  person, — the  Eton  master  whose  mother  had  just  died,  and
who  was  therefore  presumably  in  a  frame  of  mind  more  prone  to
hallucination  than  the  physician,  matron,  friend,  or  servants  who
actually  did  hear  the  singing, — himself  heard  nothing  at  all.  In  this
case  the  physician  felt  no  doulit  that  Mrs.  L.  was  actually  dead ;  and
in  fact  it  was  during  the  laying  out  of  the  body  that  the  sounds  occurred.
In  including  this  case  and  similar  ones  in  Fhantasms  of  the  Living,
Mr.  Gurney  expressly  stated  [II.,  pp.  190-2],  that  he  did  so  because  in
his  view  they  involved  at  least  an  element  of  thought-transference
between  the  living  minds  of  the  percipients,  whatever  other  influence
may  or  may  not  have  proceeded  from  the  deceased  person. But  if


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  429


we  are  finding  reason  to  suppose  that  the  decedent's  power  o£
influencing  other  minds  may  persist  after  death,  it  seems  reasonable  to
dwell  on  that  aspect  of  such  an  incident  as  this.^

There  are  some  other  circumstances  also  in  which,  in  spite  of  the
fact  that  the  death  is  already  known,  a  hallucination  occurring  shortly
afterwards  may  have  some  slight  evidential  value.  Thus  we  have  a
case  where  a  lady  who  knew  that  her  sister  had  died  a  few  hours
previously,  but  who  was  not  herself  in  any  morbidly  excited  condition,
seemed  to  see  someone  enter  her  own  dining-room,  opening  and  shutting
the  door.  The  percipient  (who  had  never  had  any  other  liallucination)
was  much  astonished  when  she  found  no  one  in  the  dining-room,  but  it
did  not  till  some  time  afterwards  occur  to  her  that  the  incident  could
be  in  any  way  connected  with  her  recent  loss.  This  reminds  us  of  a
case  [II.,  p.  694],  wliere  the  Rev.  R.  M.  Hill  sees  a  tall  figure  rush
into  the  room,  which  alarms  and  surprises  him,  then  vanishes  before
he  has  time  to  recognise  it.  An  uncle,  a  tall  man,  dies  about  that
moment,  and  it  is  remarked  that  although  Mr.  Hill  knew  his  uncle  to

^The  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Reseai-ch  (Part  IV.,  p.  405)
contain  a  case  where  a  physician  and  his  wife,  sleeping  in  separate  but  adjoining  rooms,
are  both  of  them  awakened  by  a  bright  light.  The  physician  sees  a  figiu-e  standing  in
the  light ;  his  wife,  who  gets  up  to  see  what  the  light  in  her  husband's  room  may  be,
does  not  reach  that  room  till  the  figure  has  disappeared.  The  figure  is  not  clearly
identified,  but  lias  some  resemblance  to  a  patient  of  the  physician's,  who  has  died  sud-
denly (from  hemorrhage)  about  3  hours,  before  calling  for  her  doctor,  who  did  not
anticipate  this  sudden  end.  Even  this  resemblance  did  not  strike  the  percipient  until
after  he  knew  of  the  death,  and  the  defect  in  recognition  has  prevented  me  from  quoting
this  case  at  length.

In  the  same  volume  (p.  443)  is  another  case,  which,  although  remote  and  un-
corroborated, possesses  considerable  interest.  I  will  summarise  it  here  ;  but  readers
interested  in  the  subject  should  read  the  Report  cm  Phantasms  and  Presentiments  and
Appendix,  a  gi-oup  of  narratives  which  abundantly  testify  to  the  zeal  of  Mr.  Hodgson
and  his  coadjutors  in  the  task  of  collection  : —

Mr.  IraSayles,  of  Washington,  D.C.,  Geologist  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  states  that
one  day  in  the  spring  of  1857  his  near  neighbour  and  intimate  friend,  Mrs.  Stewart  (now
dead)  told  him  that  on  the  night  previoiis  she  had  awoke  her  husband  (now  dead)  with
a  scream.  "  What  is  the  matter  ?"  said  he.  "  Why  don't  you  see  Johnny  there  ?  He
says  to  me,  '  Mother,  thcy\>e  shot  me.  The  bullet  entered  right  here ; '  and  he  pointed  to
a  hole  right  over  his  right  eye."  Mr.  Stewart  replied,  "I  don't  see  anything — you've
been  dreaming."  "  No,  I  have  not  been  dreaming.  I  was  as  wideawake  as  I  am  now."
This  Johnny  was  a  son  who  had  gone  with  a  friend  to  Kansas — "then  in  a  state  of
belligerent  excitement  over  the  status  of  the  incipient  State  on  the  Slavery  and  Free-
soil  issue. "  The  mother  was  consequently  very  anxious  about  him,  but  the  young  man
himself  wrote  in  a  sanguine  tone.  A  fortnight  after  the  vision  Johnny's  friend  re-,
turned  from  Kansas,  and  told  Mrs.  Stewart  "that  on  a  certain  day,  at  4  p.m.,  a
Missourian  shot  .Johnny,  the  ball  entering  his  head  just  above  his  right  eye.  More-
over, the  day  of  the  shooting  proved  to  be  the  very  day  on  which  Mrs.  Ste\vart  had
her  vision,  at  night,  about  six  hours  after  the  shooting."

Mr.  Sayles'  evidence,  it  will  be  seen,  is  equal  to  first-hand  ;  but  an  independent
corroboration  of  the  date  and  manner  of  death  is  much  to  be  desired.


430  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


be  ill,  the  anxiety  whicli  he  may  have  felt  would  hardly  have  given  rise
to  an  unrecognised  and  formidable  apparition.

There  are  cases  also  where  a  percipient  who  has  had  an  apparition
of  a  friend  shortly  after  that  friend's  known  death  has  had  veridical
hallucinations  at  other  times,  and  has  never  had  any  hallucination  of
purely  subjective  origin.  Such  a  percipient  may  naturally  suppose
that  his  apparition  of  the  departed  friend  possessed  the  same  veridical
character  which  was  common  to  the  rest — although  it  was  not  per  se
evidential,  since  the  fact  of  the  death  was  already  known.

For  the  present,  however,  it  will  be  better  to  return  to  the  cases
which  are  free  from  this  important  p7'imd  facie  drawback — cases  where
the  percipient  was  at  any  rate  unaware  that  the  death,  which  the
phantasm  seemed  to  indicate,  had  in  fact  taken  place.

In  the  first  place,  there  are  a  few  cases  Avhere  a  percipient  is
informed  of  a  death  by  a  veridical  phantasm,  and  then,  some  hours
afterwards,  a  similar  phantasm — diflFering  perhaps  in  detail — recurs.

Such  was  the  case  of  Archdeacon  Farler  [I.,  p.  414],  who  twice
during  one  night  saw  the  dripping  figure  of  a  friend  who,  as  it  turned
out,  had  been  drowned  during  the  previotis  day.  Even  the  first
appearance  was  several  hours  after  the  death,  but  this  we  might
explain  by  the  latency  of  the  impression  till  a  season  of  quiet.  The
second  appearance  may  have  been  a  kind  of  recrudescence  of  the  first ;
but  if  the  theory  of  latency  be  discarded,  so  that  the  first  appearance
(if  more  than  a  mere  chance-coincidence)  is  held  to  depend  upon  some
energy  excited  by  the  decedent  after  death,  it  would  afford  some  ground
for  regarding  the  second  appearance  as  also  veridical.  The  figure  in
this  case  was  once  more  seen,  a  fortnight  later ;  and  on  this  occasion,
as  Archdeacon  Farler  informs  me,  in  ordinary  garb,  with  no  special
trace  of  accident.

A  similar  repetition  occurs  (as  noted  by  Mr.  Gurney,  Vol.  I.,  p.  237,.
note)  in  the  cases  of  Major  Moncriefi"  [I.,  p.  414]  ;  of  Mr.  Keulemans
[I.,  p.  444]  (where  the  second  phantasm  was  held  by  the  percipient
to  convey  a  fresh  veridical  picture)  ;  of  Mr.  Hernaman  [I.,  p.  561],
where,  however,  the  agent  is  alive,  though  dying,  at  the  time  of  each
appearance  ;  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Ellis,  [II.,  p.  59]  ;  in  the  case  of  Mrs.
D.,  [II.,  p.  467];  of  Mrs.  Fairman,  [II.,  p.  482],  and  of  Mr.  F.  J.  Jones,
[II.,  p.  500],  where  the  death  was  again  due  to  drowning,  and  the  act  of
dying  cannot,  therefore,  have  been  very  prolonged.  We  may  note  also
Mrs.  Reed's  case,  [II.,  p.  237],  where  a  phantom  is  seen  three  times,
the  first  two  visions  being  apparently  about  the  time  of  death,  the  third,
(occurring  to  a  different  percipient,  whether  independently  or  not  is  not
clear,)  a  few  hours  later.  And  in  Captain  Ayre's  case,  [II.,  p.  256],  a
phantom  seen  by  one  percipient  at  about  the  time  of  tlie  agent's  death^


1889.] On  A'pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


431


is  followed  by  hallucinatory  sounds  heard  by  the  same  and  by  another
percipient  for  some  three  hours  longer,  till  the  news  of  the  death  arrives.
In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Cox,  again,  [II.,  p.  23-5],  a  child  sees  a  phantom  at
about  9  p.m.  and  Mrs.  Cox  sees  the  same  figure,  but  in  a  different
attitude,  at  about  midnight ;  the  exact  hour  of  the  corresponding  death
beiiag  unknown.  In  the  case  of  Miss  Harriss,  [II.,  p.  117],  a  hallucina-
tory voice,  about  the  time  of  the  death,  but  not  suggesting  the  decedent,
is  followed  by  a  dream  the  next  night,  which  presents  the  dead  person
as  in  the  act  of  dying.  One  or  two  other  cases  might  be  added  to  this
list;  and  it  is  plain  that  the  matter  is  one  towards  which  observation
should  be  specially  directed. •  .  -  '

Turning  now  to  the  cases  where  the  phantasm  is  not  repeated,  but
occurs  some  hours  after  death,  let  us  take  a  few  narratives  where  the
interval  of  time  is  pretty  certain,  and  consider  how  far  the  hypothesis
of  latency  looks  probable  in  each  instance.

Where  there  is  no  actual  hallucination,  but  only  a  feeling  of  unique
malaise  or  distress,  following  at  a  few  hours'  interval  on  a  friend's  death
at  a  distance, — as  in  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Wilson's  case,  [I.,  p.  280] — it  is  very
hard  to  picture  to  ourselves  what  has  taken  place.  Some  injurious  shock
communicated  to  the  percijDient's  brain  at  the  moment  of  the  agent's
death  may  conceivably  have  slowly  worked  itself  into  consciousness.
The  delay  may  have  been  due  (so  to  say)  to  physiological  rather  than
to  psychical  causes.

Next  take  a  case  like  that  of  Captain  Wheatcroft,  [I.,  p.  420],  or  of
Mrs.  Evens,  [II.,  p.  690],  or  Mr.  Wingfield  Baker,  [I.,  p.  199],  or  Sister
Bertha,  [I., p.  522, note],  where  a  definite  hallucination  of  sight  or  sound
occurs  some  hours  after  the  death,  but  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  It
is  in  a  case  of  this  sort  that  we  can  most  readily  suppose  that  a
"  telepathic  impact "  received  during  the  day  has  lain  dormant  until
other  excitations  were  hushed,  and  has  externalised  itself  as  a  halluci-
nation after  the  first  sleep,  just  as  when  we  wake  from  a  first  sleep  some
subject  of  interest  or  anxiety,  which  has  been  thrust  out  of  our  thoughts
during  the  day,  will  often  well  upwards  into  consciousness  with  quite  a
new  distinctness  and  force.  But  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  (for
instance)  of  Mrs.  Teale,  [II.  p.  693],  there  is  a  deferment  of  some  eight
hours,  and  then  the  hallucination  occurs  while  the  percipient  is  sitting
wide  awake,  in  the  middle  of  her  family.  And  in  one  of  the  most
remarkable  dream-cases  in  our  collection,  [I.,  p.  370],  Mrs.  Storie's
experience  does  not  resemble  the  mere  emergence  of  a  latent  impression.
It  is  long  and  complex,  and  suggests  some  sort  of  clairvoyance ; — but  if  it
be  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  " — that  is,  a  picture  transferred  from  the
decedent's  mind, — then  it  almost  requires  us  to  suppose  that  &  post-mortem
picture  was  thus  transferred  ; — a  view  of  the  accident  and  its  con-
sequences fuller  than  any  which  could  have  flashed  through  the  dying


432 On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


mans  mind  during  his  moment  of  sudden  and  violent  death  from  "the
striking  off  of  the  top  of  the  skull  "  by  a  railway-train.

If  once  we  assume  that  the  decedent's  mind  could  continue  to  act  on
living  persons  after  his  bodily  death,  then  the  confused  horror  of  the
series  of  pictures  which  were  presented  to  Mrs.  Storie's  view, — mixed,  it
should  be  said,  with  an  element  of  fresli  departure  which  there  was  nothing
in  the  accident  itself  to  suggest, — would  correspond  well  enough  to  what
one  can  imagine  a  man's  feelings  a  few  houi's  after  such  a  death  to  be.
This  is  trespassing,  no  doubt,  on  hazardous  ground ;  but  if  once  we  admit
communication  from  the  other  side  of  death  as  a  working  hypothesis,
we  must  allow  ourselves  to  imagine  something  as  to  the  attitude  of  the
communicating  mind  ;  and  the  least  violent  supposition  will  be  that
that  mind  is  still  in  part  at  least  occupied  with  the  same  thoughts  which
last  occupied  it  on  earth.  The  case,  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney,  of  the  gar-
dener Bard  and  Mrs.  de  Freville  well  illustrates  this  view.  And  it
is  possible  that  there  may  be  some  interpretation  of  this  kind  for  some
of  the  cases  where  a  funeral  scene,  or  a  dead  body,  is  what  the
phantasm  presents.  In  the  remarkable  case  [I.,  p.  265]  where  a  lady
— about  ten  hours  after  the  deatli — sees  the  body  of  a  well-known
London  physician  lying  in  a  bare  unfurnished  room  (a  cottage-hospital
abroad),  the  description,  as  we  have  it,  would  certainly  fit  best  with
some  kind  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,  prolonged  after  deatli ; — some
power  on  the  decedent's  part  to  cause  the  percipient  to  share  the
picture  which  might  at  that  moment  be  occupying  his  own  mind.

This  view  will  sometimes  be  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  view
taken  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living — that  the  coffin  and  other  signs  of
death  form  a  symljolism,  in  which  the  percipient's  mind  may  embody
the  obscure  and  painful  shock.  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  in  any  of
our  cases  a  coffin  was  seen  before  the  body  can  possibly  have  been
placed  in  a  coffin.  In  Colonel  Jones's  incident,  however  [I.,  p.  551],
this  probably  happened.  I  subjoin  a  narrative,  which  we  owe  to  the
kindness  of  Colonel  Crealock,  C.B.,  in  which  the  origin  of  the  phantom's
dramatic  action — whether  in  the  agent's  or  in  the  percipient's  mind —
may  be  fairly  debated.

IX. — The  following  account  is  extracted  from  Vol.  I.,  No.  4  (April,
1885),  of  I'm  Ninety-Five,  the  Regimental  newspaper  of  the  2nd
Battalion,  Derbyshire  Regiment.  The  account  is  by  Colonel  J.  N.
Crealock,  C.B.,  who  has  supplemented  it  by  letters  cited  below.

The  incident  occurred  on  the  night  after  the  battle  of  Ulundi,  July,
1879:—

As  we  approached  the  river  (Umvobosi)  the  two  Zulu  servants  of  Mr.  D.
came  to  ask  me  where  their  master  was.  I  told  them  I  had  not  seen  him
since  the  close  of  the  battle,  but  that  he  would  no  doubt  soon  turn  up.  I


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  433


imagined  then  that  he  was  seeking  for  information  from  the  wounded  Zulus.
That  evening  I  dined  with  Sir  Evelyn  Wood,  and  about  10  retired  to  our
part  of  the  bivouac.

Light  were  my  slumbers  in  those  days.  About  midniglit  something
wakened  me  up.  From  habit,  one  used  to  wake  up  with  every  sense  alive,  so
I  am.  convinced  I  was  not  in  any  half-sleeping  state.  Rising,  I  looked
towards  figures  near  me,  and  fifth  in  the  row  of  sleeping  forms  I  saw  Mr.  D.
stooping  down  and  rolling  up  his  bedding,  which  his  two  native  servants
then  removed.  I  thought  it  odd  his  taking  his  bed  away,  but  I  lay  down
again  and  slept  undisturbed  until  daybreak.

As  we  were  starting  the  next  morning  the  Adjutant-General  asked  me  if
I  knew  that  Mr.  D.  had  passed  the  previous  night  in  Colonel  Buller's  camp.
[This,  as  it  turned  out,  was  a  mere  mistake.]  1  said  I  had  heard  nothing  of
him  or  his  doings,  but  had  seen  him  during  the  night  come  and  take  his  bed
away  from  our  resting-place.

On  arriving  at  our  camping  ground,  Mr.  D.  's  servants  came  to  ask  where
their  master's  tent  was  to  be  pitched  ;  they  also  inquired  if  I  knew  where  he
was.  I  felt  rather  astonished  at  this,  and  said,  "Why  ask  me?  I  have
not  seen  him  to  speak  to  for  24  hours,  and  you  were  with  him  when  he  took
his  bed  away."  Longeast,  our  interpreter,  here  explained  that  tliey  had  not
seen  him  since  the  battle,  and  had  never  touched  his  bed  or  visited  his  usual
sleeping-place  as  I  had  described.  I  now  wrote  to  Colonel  Buller  to  ask  him
if  he  had  been  in  his  lines,  as  believed  by  the  Adjutant-General.  The  answer
came,  "  He  has  not  been  seen  since  the  battle."

I  was  now  fairly  puzzled,  and  went  to  report  the  matter  to  Lord
Chelmsford.  His  servants,  with  some  Basutos,  were  now  sent  back  to  the
scene  of  the  fight  to  search  for  any  traces  of  him.  Nothing  was  heard  of  him,
until  a  few  days  later  the  natives  in  one  or  two  kraals,  some  50  miles  away  from
Ulundi,  told  Lord  Chelmsford  that  a  fair  white  man  without  hair  on  his  face,
and  in  a  blue  coat,  had  been  killed  beyond  the  kraal  of  Ulundi,  and  that  he
had  ridden  a  chestnut  horse.  His  lordship  now  recalled  to  me  that  I  had
reported  to  him  I  had  seen  a  white  man,  on  a  chestnut  horse,  riding  in  that
direction.  We  felt  sure  this  must  be  D.,  and  six  weeks  later,  when  Sir
Garnet  Wolseley  visited  Ulundi,  his  body  was  found  as  described.  There
cannot  be  any  sort  of  doubt  but  that  he  met  his  death  about  noon  the  day  of
Ulundi,  and  that  he  had  been  dead  12  hours  when  I  saw  hiiu  come  to  his
visual  resting-place  at  headquarters.  The  absolute  belief  I  had  in  having  seen
him  that  night  prevented  his  being  searched  for  for  18  hours.

Colonel  Crealock  adds: —

A.  Q.  M.  General's  Hut,  North  Camp,  Aldershot.

July  2lst,  1888.

I  had  gone  through  20  months  of  dangers  and  hard  work,  and  was  not  by
any  means  an  overstrung  or  over-excited  person,  and  the  poor  fellow  who

was  killed  (a  son  of  Lord  )  was  no  friend  of  mine,  although,  I  verily

believe,  he  had  more  feeling  for  me  than  for  any  other  man  in  South  Africa,
excepting  Lord  Chelmsford.


434 On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


And  again,  November  6th,  1888,  in  answer  to  inquiries  : —

The  camp  was  moved  at  daybreak.  I  know  nothing  of  the  bedding.
There  was  not  the  least  reason  why  I  sliould  notice  it,  and  no  trace  of
a  suspicion  that  there  was  trouble  about  this  gentleman.  I  have  no  sort  of
reason  to  think  the  bedding  was  removed.  I  have  never  had  any  sort  of
hallucination,  and  am  rather  a  sceptic  in  such  matters.

I  have  no  proof  that  he  died  at  any  particular  time.  I  have  ocular  proof
he  was  riding  into  danger  at  noon  ;  we  know  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Zulus,  and  we  know  his  body  was  found  not  above  a  mile  from  where  I  saw
him,  but  whether  he  lived  up  to  midnight — tortured  or  not — we  have  no
proof.

The  introduction  of  the  subordinate  figures  here  does  not,  I  think,
tell  strongly  for  one  interpretation  rather  than  another.  They  form  part
of  a  dream-imagery  which  may  liave  originated  either  with  Colonel
Crealock  or  with  the  decedent  himself.  There  is  nothing  improbable  in
the  supposition  that  after  so  sudden  a  change  of  condition  as  death  must
involve  the  thoughts  of  the  departed  may  long  remain  confused  ;  or,  on
the  other  hand,  his  communications  with  tlie  woi^ld  which  he  has  quitted
may  perhaps  themselves  be  necessarily  of  a  dream-like  chai-acter.

X. — It  may  be  remembered  that  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  a  case  of
Dr.  Liebeault's  was  given  where  planchette-writing  announced  a  death
which  seems  to  have  occurred  almost  at  the  moment  of  the  writing.  As
a  parallel  to  that  case  I  here  introduce  OJie  where  the  message — as  we
are  told — was  written  some  five  hours  after  the  death.  The  message,
no  doubt,  comes  ostensibly  from  an  intelligence  other  than  that  of  the
decedent ;  but  I  need  hardly  here  repeat  that  the  authorship  which
automatic  messages  claim  for  themselves  is  by  no  means  to  be  taken  for
granted.  Our  best  means  of  judging  whence  such  messages  come  is  by
scrutinising  the  infoi'mation  which  they  contain.

PsYCHiscHE  Studien,  February,  1889. Pp.  67-69.
Under  the  heading  of  "  Communications  of  Pacts  unknown  to  the
Medium  and  to  the  Sitters,"  the  Editor  (M.  Alexander  Aksakow,  well
known  to  me)  gives  the  following  case,  which  he  has  recommended  to
me  as  carefully  established.

On  January  19th,  1887, 1  received  a  visit  from  the  engineer  officer  Kaigoro-
dow,  who  resides  in  Wilna.  He  narrated  to  me  the  following  circumstances.
He  had  as  governess  for  his  children.  Mademoiselle  Emma  Stramm,  a  Swiss,
from  the  town  of  Neufchatel,  who  possessed  the  gift  of  automatic  writing.
At  a  seance  held  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  January  15th  at  the  house
of  Colonel  Kaigorodow  at  Wilna,  the  following  communication  was  given  in
French  in  his  presence.  I  have  been  shown  the  original,  and  quote  this  from
a  copy  of  it. The  medium,  who  was  in  her  normal  state,  asked  : —

"  Is  Lydia  here  ?  "  (This  was  a  personality  which  had  manifested  itself
at  previous  sittings. )


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  435


"No,  Louis  is  here,  and  wishes  to  impart  a  piece  of  news  (Neuigkeit)  to
his  sister." [Louis  was  the  name  of  a  deceased  brother.]
"What  is  it?"

"  A  jjerson  of  thy  acquaintance  passed  away  (?'si/or<)  about  three  o'clock
to-day."

"  What  am  I  to  understand  by  this  ?"
"  That  is  to  say, — he  is  dead."
"Who?"

"August  Duvanel."

"  What  was  his  ilhiess  ?"

"  The  formation  of  a  clot  of  hlood  {BhUdochmg).  Pray  for  the  redemp-
tion of  his  soul."

Two  weeks  later,  Colonel  Kaigorodow,  who  was  again  in  Petersburg,
showed  me  a  letter  from  David  Stramm,  the  father  of  the  medium,  dated
from  Neufchatel,  on  January  18th,  1887  (new  style)  ;  thus  written  three  days
after  the  death  of  Duvanel.  This  letter  was  received  at  Wilna  on  January
23rd.  In  it  her  father  informs  her  of  the  event  in  the  following  words.  I
copy  them  literally  from  the  original  : —

' '  My  much  loved  daughter.  ...  I  will  now  tell  thee  a  great  piece
of  news  (Neuigkeit).  August  Duvanel  died  on  January  15th,  about  three  o'clock
in  the  afternoon.  It  was,  so  to  speak,  a  sudden  death,  for  he  had  only  been
ill  a  few  hours.  He  was  attacked  by  bhjod-clotting  when  he  was  at  the
bank.  He  spoke  very  little,  and  everything  that  he  said  was  for  thee.
He  commended  himself  to  thy  prayers. These  were  his  last  words."

The  difference  in  time  between  Wilna  and  Switzerland  is  about  an  hour.
It  would  thus  be  four  o'clock  in  Wilna  when  Duvanel's  death  occurred,  and
tive  hours  later  this  piece  of  news  was  communicated  by  automatic  writing.

But  who  was  Duvanel  ?  And  why  should  his  death  be  "a  great  piece  of
news  "  for  Mademoiselle  Emma  Stramm  ?  In  reply  to  questions  which  I  put
to  him  in  writing,  Colonel  Kaigorodow  gave  me  the  following  explanation  : —
"  When  Mademoiselle  Emma  Stramm  lived  with  her  parents  in  Neufchatel,
this  Herr  Duvanel  wanted  to  marry  her.  But  he  was  met  with  a  decided
refusal  on  the  part  of  the  young  lady.  As  her  parents,  on  the  other  hand,
were  in  favour  of  the  marriage,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  her  to  consent
to  it,  she  resolved  to  leave  her  fatherland  and  take  a  situation  as  a  governess.
The  last  communication  she  had  with  Duvanel  was  some  time  before  her
departure  in  the  year  1881.  She  did  not  keep  up  any  correspondence  with
him.  She  had  seen  Duvanel's  family  only  two  or  three  times  in  all.  A  year
after  her  departure  he  left  Neufchatel,  and  remained  in  Canton  Zurich  until
his  death." i

We  may  now  pass  on  to  cases  where  tlie  interval  between  the  death
and  the  phantasms  seems  gradually  extended  beyond  what  the  possible
latency  of  the  impression  could  explain.

In  Mr.  Grant's  case  [II.,  p.  688],  we  get  an  interval  after  death
probably  of  some  1 8  liours,  and  after  that  interval  not  a  phantom  but  a
mere  impression  of  presence,  though  a  very  definite  impression. In  Mr.

1  As  we  go  to  press,  we  receive  further  particulars  corroborating  tliis  case,  but
introducing  fresh  perplexity  into  its  interjiretation.


436  On  Ap'paritions  occtirring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


H.  E.  M.'s  case  [II.,  p.  702],  a  dream  which  comes  a  few  hours  after  the
deatli  is  followed  some  20  hours  later  by  a  phantom  seen  with  waking
eyes.  The  reinforcement  of  the  impression  here  is  a  notable  feature,  and
would  be  at  least  consistent  with  continued  activity  on  the  decedent's
part.

We  next  find  one  or  two  cases  where  a  figure  has  appeared  shortly
after  death  to  some  person  who  did  not  know  the  decedent  when  alive.
In  sucli  cases  there  can  seldom  be  anything  approaching  certainty  as  to
the  recognition  ;  biit  when  the  hallucination  is  a  unique  event  in  the
percipient's  experience,  and  the  figure  is  described  by  him  without
suggestion  from  persons  who  knew  the  decedent,  the  coincidence  seems
strong.  In  the  following  case  (though  it  is  somewhat  remote,  and
corroboration  is  not  now  attainable),  there  is  a  coincidence  sufiiciently
marked  to  deserve  recoixl.  The  writer  (who  wishes  his  name  reserved)
is  a  friend  of  Mr.  Howe,  a  barrister,  of  Devereux-court,  Strand,  to
whom  we  owe  this  case  : —

22nd  February,  1882.

XI. — My  Dear  Howe, — Here  are  the  facts.  They  are  quite  at  your
service. I  should,  however,  prefer  that  my  name  was  not  mentioned.

It  is  now  15  years  or  more  ago  I  went  to  visit  a  friend  living  witli  his
sisters  near  Kilburn.  Being  very  hot  weather,  I  went  in  a  hansom,  without
top  coat.  The  young  ladies  went  early  to  bed,  and  I  and  my  friend,  a  young
barrister,  since  dead,  sat  up  till  about  midnight.  We  then  found  it  was
raining  terrifically.  As  no  cab  could  be  got  I  reluctantly  availed  myself  of
the  invitation  to  stay  all  night.  A  bed,  I  was  told,  was  ready.  This  I  took,
and  went  to  bed,  and  leaving  alight  a  small  bead  of  gas,  and,  having  locked
my  door,  went  to  sleep.  Shortly  afterwards  I  awoke,  and  saw  in  the  dim
light  a  girl  brushing  her  hair.  I  coughed — no  result.  I  jumped  out  in  a
little  of  a  fright,  and  caught  nothing. Turning  up  the  gas,  I  tossed  about

until  daylight. In  the  morning  I  told  F  ,  expecting  to  be  laughed  at.

He,  however,  whistled  low,  and  said,  "  For  God's  sake  don't  tell  my  sisters.
Their  governess  and  companion  slept  in  that  room,  and  her  body  was  removed
by  her  friends  the  day  of  your  arrival.  They,  of  course,  will  assume  you
have  seen  her."  My  description,  of  course,  seemed  to  fit.  An  optical
illusion  probably.  Still  it  is  curious  that  my  only  optical  delusion  should
occur  on  the  only  occasion  when  I  slept  under  such  conditions.  I  had  drunk
one  or  two  glasses  of  slierry,  nothing  mc)re,  and  I  was  absolutely  ignorant  of
the  existence  of  a  governess  or  compani(jn.  I  knew  nothing  whatever
concerning  the  young  ladies  to  whom  I  was  that  night  introduced.  Here  is
all  the  story. It  impressed  me  a  good  deal.

We  cannot,  of  course,  insist  on  the  details  in  an  uncorroborated
account  like  this.  It  is  possible,  for  instance,  that  the  death  may  not
have  been  quite  so  recent  as  represented.

The  case  of  the  Rev.  G.  Lewis  (quoted  in  Proceedings  III.,  p.  93)
somewhat  resembles  this;  but  presents  the  new  feature  that,  although


1889.]


On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


437


the  percipient  was  not  acquainted  with  the  decedent,  the  decedent  on
his  part  had  died  in  a  state  of  anxiety  to  see  the  percipient.

Curiously  similar  is  the  case  of  the  Rev.  A.  Bellamy  [II.,  p.  216,
note],  where  again  the  percipient  was  not  acquainted  with  the  decedent,
but  the  decedent  on  her  part  had  made  a  "  compact "  to  appear  if
possible  to  the  percipient's  wife,  who  was,  in  fact,  in  the  same  room
with  the  percipient,  but  asleep.

Again,  there  are  a  few  cases  where  a  vision  of  a  person  known
to  be  dead  has  been  shared  by  more  than  one  percipient.  A  singular
case  of  this  kind  is  that  of  Captain  Towns  [I.,  p.  213],  where  seven
persons  perceived  the  same  phantasmal  figure.  A  similar  one  may  be
added  here,  where  there  were  two  percipients.  It  must  be  remembered,
however,  that  in  such  cases  Mr.  Gurney  thought  it  possible  that  a
merely  subjective  hallucination  might  be  communicated,  by  a  species  of
infection,  from  one  percipient  to  another.

XII. — From  Mrs.  Judd,  sister  to  Miss  Harris,  Associate  S.  P.  R.,
through  whose  kindness  the  account  is  obtained.

August  6th,  1885.

My  grandmother  was  a  tall,  stately,  and  handsome  woman,  even  at  an
advanced  age.  She  was  one  of  the  Gastrells,  an  old  and  aristocratic  family.
Her  latter  years  were  spent  with  my  mother  (her  daughter),  and  m  her  84th
year  she  died.  She  had  suffered  long  ;  she  had  attained  a  great  age  ;  there-
fore, though  we  missed  her,  our  grief  was  not  of  that  poignant  and  excessive
kmd  which  produces  hallucination.

My  sister  and  myself  had  always  slept  in  a  room  adjoining  hers,  and — for
want  of  siDace  m  her  apartment — there  stood  by  our  bedside  a  large  old-
fashioned  clock,  which  had  been  presented  to  our  grandmother  on  her
wedding-day.  More  precious  than  gold  was  this  old  clock  to  her  heart ;  "by
it,"  she  often  said,  "  have  I  hundreds  of  times  watched  the  slow  hours  pass
in  my  early  married  days  when  my  husband  had  to  leave  me  ;  by  it  have  I
timed  the  children's  return  from  school "  ;  and  she  begged  us,  her  grand-
children, to  leave  our  bedroom  door  unlocked  at  night  that  she  might
consult  the  old  clock  when  she  rose  each  morning.  We  have  often  opened
our  sleepy  eyes  at  four  on  a  summer  morning  and  smiled  to  see  the  stately
figure  already  there.  For  up  to  the  last  illness  she  retained  the  habits  of  her
youth,  and  rose  at  what  we  deemed  fearfully  primitive  hours.

About  three  weeks  after  her  death  I  awoke  one  morning  in'  October,  and
saw  distinctly  the  well-known  taU  figure,  the  calm  old  face,  the  large  dark
eyes  uplifted  as  usual  to  the  face  of  the  old  clock.  I  closed  my  eyes  for  some
seconds,  and  then  slowly  reopened  them.  She  stood  there  still.  A  second
time  I  closed  my  eyes,  a  second  time  opened  them. She  was  gone.

I  was  looked  upon  by  my  family  in  those  days,  and  particularly  by  the
sister  who  shared  my  room,  as  romantic.  Therefore  I  carefully  kept  to
myself  the  vision  of  the  morning  and  pondered  over  it  alone.

At  night,  however,  when  we  were  once  more  preparing  for  rest,  my
sister — my  eminently  practical  and  unromantic  sister — spoke  to  me. ' '  I


438 On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


cannot  go  to  bed  without  telling  you  something,  only  don't  laugh,  for  I  am
really  frightened  ;  I  saw  grandmamma  this  morning  !  "  I  was  amazed.  I
inquired  of  her  the  hour,  what  the  vision  was  like,  where  it  stood,  what  it
was  doing,  &c.,  and  I  found  that  in  every  respect  her  experience  was
similar  to  mine. She  had  preserved  silence  all  day  for  fear  of  ridicule.

I  may  add  that  we  even  now  speak  of  this  incident  with  awe,  though
20  long  years  have  sinced  passed  over  our  heads,  and  we  invariably  end  by
saying,  each  of  us,  "It  was  very  strange  ;  it  is  impossible  to  understand  it."

Caroline  Judd.

In  reply  to  our  request  for  an  account  of  the  incident  from  the
other  percipient,  Mrs.  Judd  wrote  : —

72,  Upper  Gloucester-place,  Dorset-square.
I  send  you  herewith  all  that  my  sister,  Mrs.  Dear,  recalls  of  the  vision,
doubly  seen,  of  our  late  grandmother. She  objects  to  the  weariness  of  com-
position, therefore  I  took  down  her  reminiscences,  and  she  signed  it  as  true.

Caroline  Judd.

Some  years  ago,  a  few  months  after  the  death  of  my  grandmother,  I
awoke  in  the  dim  light  just  before  dawn,  to  see  an  appearance  exactly  like
her  standing  in  the  old  accustomed  place  from  whence,  when  alive,  she  was
wont  to  consult  an  old  clock,  her  own  property,  at  very  early  hours.  I  said
nothing  to  anyone  till  we  retired  again  for  the  night,  when  I  found  to  my
surprise,  my  sister,  who  slept  with  me,  had  seen  the  same  appearance  at  the
same  time.

Mary  Dear.

Miss  Harris  confirms  the  above  account  as  follows  : —

Bewel,  Alfrick,  near  Worcester.

Augud  20th  [1885].
Both  sisters  mentioned  seeing  my  grandmother  the  day  of  the  apparition
before  father  and  mother,  then  alive,  and  myself. I  think  she  must  have
died  about  1866,  but  I  was  then  very  young,  and  can't  remember  exactly.
I  will  find  out  if  it  is  important,  but  my  sisters  have  often  mentioned  it  since.

Annie  Harris.

Somewhat  similar  is  the  following  case,  where  a  dream  of  one
percipient's  seems  to  liave  coincided  with  a  hallucination  seen  by  the
other  in  a  waking  state.  The  recognition,  however,  by  the  waking
percipient  was  rather  one  of  impression  than  of  actual  vision.

XIIT. — This  case  was  received  on  Api'il  10th,  1889,  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  from  a  lady  known  to  her,  and  who  liad  previously  given  her
the  same  account  vivci  voce.

The  following  circumstance  happened  in  the  autumn  of  1874  : —

A  near  relation  of  mine  had  been  engaged  to  an  officer,  who  died  abroad
in  the  summer  of  that  year  under  rather  painful  circumstances,  and  the
lady  in  question  was  for  long  afterwards  in  a  very  low  state  of  health  and


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  439


spirits.  That  winter  especially  her  nervousness  and  depression  caused
much  anxiety  to  her  friends,  and  was  the  reason  why  the  incident  which  I
am  about  to  relate  was  never  mentioned  to  her,  and  therefore  makes  it  impos-
sible for  me  to  give  the  names  of  the  persons  concerned  in  it  now.

I  was  sharing  her  room,  and  one  night  we  had  gone  to  bed  as  usual.  Her
bed  was  beside  mine  and  opposite  both  was  the  fireplace.  She  had  been
asleep  some  time,  but  I  was  still  lying  awake,  the  room  being  lighted  by  the
fire  only,  when  I  became  conscious  of  a  figure  standing  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.
I  am  very  short-sighted,  and  do  not  see  well  even  at  a  short  distance,  but  I
received  at  the  time  the  distinct  impression  that  this  was  the  figure  of  her
fiance,  dressed  in  uniform.

1  have  no  remembrance  of  being  startled  or  surprised,  only  of  the  distinct
impression  that  this  figure  stood  there,  and  was  that  of  this  gentleman.  It
seemed  to  fade  away,  and  I  should  have  thought  no  more  of  the  occurrence
except  as  a  half-dream  or  fancy,  when  my  companion  suddenly  woke  up,
crying  bitterly,  and  said,  "Oh,  A.,  I  thought  I  saw  M.  standing  at
the  foot  of  my  bed."  I  endeavoured  to  soothe  her,  and  carefuUy  refrained
from  telling  her  what  I  had  myself  seen,  fearing  the  effect  upon  her  in  her
nervous  state,  but  the  impression  at  the  time  and  since  has  always  been  most
distinct,  that  I  saw  exactly  what  I  have  described.

The  narrative  next  to  be  given  is  curious  in  more  than  one  respect.
In  the  iarst  place,  it  shows  on  what  a  mere  chance  tlie  evidential  quality
of  any  case  may  depend.  Here  we  have  a  child  of  eight,  who,  in  the
midst  of  her  grief  for  her  mother's  death,  sees  that  mother's  form  standing
by  her  bedside.  Had  this  been  all,  we  should,  of  course,  have  classed
tlie  hallucination  as  purely  subjective.  But  it  chanced  that  the  child's
scream  was  heard  by  two  other  persons,  and  that  those  persons,  rushing
to  the  room,  shared,  as  it  appears,  in  the  \asion.  And  the  evidence  of
one  of  these  witnesses — coming  to  us  at  second-hand,  indeed,  but
through  a  second  channel,  as  well  as  through  the  child  herself — gives
to  the  child's  first-hand  evidence  a  value  which  it  could  never  have
possessed  but  for  the  accident  that  the  scream  was  so  quickly  heard  and
answered.

In  the  second  place,  we  have  here  another  case  where  a  compact  was
made  by  the  decedent  to  appear,  if  possible,  to  a  friend  (Lady  E.)  who
is  still  living.  1  That  compact  was  not,  strictly  speaking,  fulfilled  (though
Lady  E.  eagerly  expected  it)  ;  but  the  decedent  appeared  to  others,  two
of  whom  at  least  where  wholly  unaware  that  any  such  compact  had
been  made.  This  resembles  the  case  already  mentioned  in  the  present
paper,  where  the  decedent,  who  appeared  to  the  Rev.  A.  Bellamy,  had
made  a  compact, — not  with  himself,  to  whom  she  was  a  stranger,  but
with  liis  wife.

We  have  already  remarked  several  times  that  cases  where  an
apparition  follows  on  a  compact  (the  death  not  being  known  to  the
percipient)  are  commoner  than  mere  chance  (so  far  as  we  can  judge)

1  It  is  not  certain  whether  the  decedent  made  a  similar  promise  to  her  husband.


440 On  Airparitions  occvbrving  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


could  account  f oi' ;  and  it  seems  possible  that  such  a  compact,  suggesting
to  the  decedent  the  wish  to  cause  some  apparition,  may  sometimes
induce  an  apparition  seen  by  some  percipient  other  than  the  friend
with  whom  the  compact  was  made.

XIV. — The  following  account  comes  from  a  lady  known  to  me,  who
prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  given.

March,  1889.

My  mother  died  on  on  the  24th  of  June,  1874,  at  a  house  called  The
Hunter's  Palace,  Silinia,  Malta,  where  we  were  then  residing  for  her  health.
She  had  always  a  great  fear  of  being  buried  alive,  and  extracted  a  promise
from  my  father  that  wherever  she  died  he  should  not  allow  her  to  be  buried
for  a  week,  and  I  remember  we  had  to  get  special  permission,  as  it  is  the
custom  to  bury  within  three  days  in  a  hot  climate.  The  third  day  after
death  was  the  last  time  I  saw  her,  and  I  then  went  into  the  room  with  my
father,  and  we  cut  off  all  her  hair,  which  was  very  long  and  curly.  I  have
no  remembrance  of  being  at  all  nervous  or  in  the  least  frightened.  On  the
seventh  day  after  death  she  was  buried,  and  it  was  on  that  night  she  appeared
to  me.  I  slept  in  a  little  dressing-room  opening  out  of  the  larger  nursery,
which,  like  many  old  houses,  had  two  steps  leading  into  it.  The  smoking-room,
where  my  father  generally  spent  his  evenings,  was  across  the  hall,  and  my
little  room  also  had  a  door  opening  on  to  the  hall,  so  that  it  was  not  necessary
for  me  to  go  through  the  nursery,  where  my  two  little  brothers  slept,  to  get
out.  On  this  particular  evening  the  weather  was  stiflingly  hot,  and  intensely
still.  I  had  been  put  to  bed  earlier  than  usual,  and  had  no  light  in  the  room ;
the  Venetian  shutters  were  open  as  far  as  they  would  go,  and  the  night  was  so
beautiful  that  the  room  was  quite  light.  The  door  into  the  nursery  was  only
partially  closed,  and  I  could  see  the  nurse's  shadow  as  she  leaned  over  her  work,
and  I  gazed  at  the  shadow  of  her  hand  moving  up  and  down  with  an  irritating-
regularity  until  I  fell  asleep.  I  seemed  to  have  been  sleeping  some  time
when  I  woke,  and  turning  over  on  the  other  side  towards  the  window  saw
my  mother  standing  by  my  bedside  crying  and  wringing  her  hands.  I  had  not
been  awake  long  enough  to  remember  that  she  was  dead  and  exclaimed  quite
naturally  (for  she  often  came  in  when  I  was  asleep)  "  Why,  dear,  what's  the
matter  ? "  and  then  suddenly  remembering  I  screamed.  The  nurse  sprang  up
from  the  next  room,  but  on  the  top  step  flung  herself  on  her  knees,  and  began
to  tell  her  beads  and  cry.  My  father  at  the  same  moment  arrived  at  the
opposite  door,  and  I  heard  his  sudden  exclamation  of  "Julia,  darling  !  "  My
mother  turned  towards  him,  and  then  to  me,  and  wringing  her  hands  again
retreated  towards  the  nursery  and  was  lost.  The  nurse  afterwards  declared
that  she  distinctly  felt  something  pass  her,  but  she  was  in  such  a  state  of
abject  terror  that  her  testimony  is  quite  wortliless.  My  father  then  ordered
her  out  of  the  room,  and  telling  me  that  I  had  only  been  dreaming  stayed
until  I  fell  asleep.  The  next  day,  however,  he  told  me  that  he  too  had  seen
the  vision,  and  that  he  hoiked  to  do  so  again,  and  that  if  ever  she  came  to  see
me  again  I  was  not  to  be  frightened,  but  to  tell  her  that  "paj^a  wanted  to
speak  to  her,"  which  I  faithfully  promised  to  do,  but  I  need  scarcely  say  that
she  never  appeared  again.


1889.]  _ On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  441


What  has  struck  me  as  curious  since  then  is  that  I  saw  her  as  she  usually
came  to  see  me  the  last  thing  at  night,  dressed  in  a  white  flannel  dressing-
gown  trimmed  with  a  band  of  scarlet  braid  and  her  long  hair  loose  and  flowing.
She  was  not  buried  in  that  dressing-gown,  and  we  had  cut  ofi^  all  her  hair.
Tears  afterwards,  when  we  were  speaking  of  it,  my  father  told  me  that  she  had
always  promised  to  come  back  after  death  if  such  a  thing  were  j)ossible.  That
being  the  case  it  is  curious  that  she  should  have  appeared  to  me.  The  nurse
from  that  time  forward  refused  to  sit  alone  in  the  nursery,  and  predicted  no
end  of  dreadful  things  as  likely  to  happen,  but  when  a  few  weeks  afterwards
I  sickened  for  a  long  and  serious  illness  she  was  quite  satisfied.  She  was  a
Maltese  and  when  we  left  the  island  we  quite  lost  sight  of  her.  My  father
died  just  three  years  ago,  so  that  I  am  now  the  only  eye-witness  left.  My
father's  second  wife  has,  however,  heard  the  story  from  him,  and  will  sign
this.  L.H.

M.S.H.

In  reply  to  further  inquiries,  Miss  H.  adds  : —

March  IWi,  1889.

1.  I  have  no  newspaper  cutting  which  has  the  notice  of  my  mother's
death  in  it,  or  a  memorial  card.  I  have  a  photograph  of  her  tomb,  which
bears  the  date  of  death,  June  24th,  1874,  and  I  enclose  you  an  envelope
containing  some  of  her  hair,  which  my  father  fastened  up  on  the  morning
of  the  funeral,  and  which  I  found  among  his  papers  after  his  death,  and  have
never  opened. ^

2.  I  was  eight  years  old  on  the  13th  of  June,  1874.

3.  I  have  never  had  any  hallucination  of  any  kind,  nor  am  I  in  the  very
least  nervous.  My  fatlier  never  had  any  other  hallucination  that  I  know  of,
that  is,  I  never  heard  hinr  mention  any.

4.  Neither  my  father  nor  nurse  ever  hinted  at  such  an  idea  [as  that  of  a
possible  re-api^earance  of  the  dead].  My  nurse  indeed  was  a  Roman  Catholic,
uneducated,  and  very  superstitious.  But,  of  course,  any  mention  of  my
mother  at  that  time  residted  in  tears,  which  both  my  nurse  and  father
naturally  wished  to  avoid,  so  that  I  am  quite  sure  such  an  idea  was  never
suggested  to  me.

5.  I  have  no  contemporary  evidence  of  any  kind.  My  father  never
mentioned  the  story  to  anyone  out  of  the  family,  and  quite  his  favourite
motto  was  :  "If  no  one  would  keep  a  diaiy,  and  if  every  one  would  burn
their  letters,  there  would  be  nothing  for  the  lawyers  to  do."

Lady  E.  (also  known  to  me)  writes  as  follows  : —

March,  1889.

Mrs.  H.  was  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends  for  many  years,  and  she  and
I  made  a  compact  that  whoever  died  first  slKJuld,  if  possible,  aj^jjear  to  the
survivor.  When  I  heard  of  her  death  (by  telegraph  on  the  very  day)  I  sat
up  all  night  hoping  to  see  her,  but  saw  and  heard  nothing.  Years  afterwards
her  daughter  told  me  that  she  and  a  Maltese  nurse  and  her  father  had  all
three  seen  my  departed  friend,  in  the  child's  bedroom, — she  seeing  the  figure
first,  then  the  nurse  and  father  rushing  in  at  her  scream  and  seeing  it  also.

1  This  packet  is  dated  June  30th  187-1.


442  On  Apparitions  occivrrlng  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


XV. — The  following  case  has  reached  me  since  the  rest  of  this  paper
Avas  in  print,  and  is  as  yet  somewhat  incomplete.  The  initials  given
are  not  the  true  ones.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  evidential  value  of  the  case  depends  on  the
fact  that  there  were  at  least  four  independent  percipients,  as  well  as
certain  phenomena  observed  by  more  than  one  person  simultaneously.
The  experience  of  each  percipient  severally  might  have  been  explained
as  a  merely  subjective  hallucination, — the  view  very  naturally  taken  by
Miss  A.,  whose  account  is  placed  first  below.  But  such  a  collection  of
independent  subjective  hallucinations,  all  suggesting  the  same  decedent
(partly  by  aspect  and  partly  by  locality),  would  be,  so  far  as  I  know,
an  unparalleled  group  of  coincidences.  The  first  appearance  was  a  few
weeks  after  the  death  ;  the  others  followed  at  more  than  a  year's
interval.  Mrs.  X.  died  in  the  town  of  Z.,  at  4  p.m.,  September
18th,  1886.

The  first  person  to  observe  any  unusual  appearance  was  Miss  A.
a  cousin  of  the  decedent's),  who  writes  as  follows,  under  date  March
4th,  1889  :—

I  have  always  put  down  what  I  saw  to  shaken  nerves  and  debility
[induced  partly  by  the  shock  of  being  present  at  her  cousin's  sudden  death].
It  was  about  six  weeks  after  her  death  that  I  woke  up  with  a  feeling  of
some  one  being  in  the  room  witli  me,  and  looking  across  the  room  I  saw
[Mrs.  X.]  sitting  upon  the  rocking-chair  in  tlie  window,  in  a  white  dressing
gown,  with  ruffles  round  the  neck.  She  had  her  face  turned  towards  me
and  I  saw  her  distinctly  ;  the  fright  made  me  close  my  eyes,  and  when  I
opened  them  again  she  was  gone.  About  a  fortnight  after  tliat  I  again  woke
at  4  a.m.  with  the  same  feeling,  and  there  was  [Mrs.  X.]  sitting  in  the
same  chair.  I  looked  hard  at  her  tliis  time,  and  she  rose,  crossed  the  room
to  the  side  of  the  bed,  and  with  one  hand  (the  left)  drew  back  the  curtain.
I  sat  up  in  bed  in  terror,  and  cried  out,  "  Oh — !  what  iJo  you  want  ?  "  She
bent  down  and  said  (juite  distinctly,  "Three  days,  only  three  days."  And
then  she  vanished.  I  rose  in  terror  and  lighted  the  gas  and  searched  all  round,
but  found  nothing.  It  made  me  quite  ill  and  hysterical,  and,  at  last,  I  got
the  doctor,  but  I  have  never  seen  her  since.  Of  course,  I  have  heard  all  the
talk  in  the  family  about  her  being  constantly  seen  lately,  but  I  have  never
said  a  word.

These  apparitions — the  only  ones  where  the  figure  has  been  recog-
nised— occurred  in  a  house  at  a  little  distance  from  that  where  Mrs.
X.  died. The  other  manifestations  have  all  been  in  Mr.  X.'s  house.

The  next  percipient  was  Mr.  X.  himself,  who  writes  under  date
March  6th,  1889  :—

About  12  months  ago  [March,  1888]  I  retired  to  rest  as  customary
about  11  to  11.30.  I  sleep  next  to  the  door,  and  with  my  son,  four  years  old,
I  locked  my  door,  which  is  my  custom  to  do,  and  extinguished  my  light.  I
was  awakened  by  an  unusual  knocking,  which  appeared  not  very  far  distant
from  me.  I  opened  my  eyes,  which  were  turned  towards  tlie  door,  and  to  my


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  noon  after  Death.


443


surprise  saw  distinctly  a  figure  which  appeared  to  be  a  woman  in  night  attire
(I  could  not  distinguish  anything  like  features) ;  it  was  standing  erect  close  to
the  bedside,  when  I  saw  it.  I  appeared  to  be  quite  paralysed,  and  quite  cold.
I  closed  my  eyes  and  opened  them  several  times,  seeing  the  same  apparition
in  the  same  position,  without  any  alteration,  again  closing  my  eyes  and  when
opening  saw  the  apparition  had  vanished.  I  remained  still  very  cold  (whicli
appeared  to  me  a  few  minutes)  before  I  felt  a  glow  of  warmth,  which  gave  me
strength  and  confidence  to  move  myself  on  my  back  to  think  over  what  I  had
seen,  when  my  clock  struck  three.  I  then  got  out  of  bed  and  lit  my  gas,
keeping  it  low  (which  ever  since  I  always  make  a  practice  of  doing),  and  have
not  seen  any  such  apparition  since  myself,  and  it  was  about  three  months
after  this  that  Miss  X.  was  surprised.  Again  about  five  months  ago  I
was  awakened  out  of  a  sound  sleep,  by  a  terrible  smashing  noise  in  my  room,
which  sounded  as  if  the  globe  had  fallen  ofi'  the  gas  bracket  on' to  the  marble-
top  washstand,  and  broken  to  pieces,  but  as  the  gas  was  lit  I  could  see  it  was
not  the  globe.  My  little  son  sleeping  with  me  was  also  awakened  by  the  same
noise,  and  he  inquired  from  me,  "  What  was  that  noise,  papa  ?"  After  a  few
minutes'  lying  in  silence  to  consider  what  it  could  be,  I  got  out  of  bed  to  try
and  discover  what  had  been  broken,  turned  up  the  gas,  but  could  not  discover
anything  ;  the  clock  showed  it  was  2.27.  I  then  retired  to  rest  again.  The
first  thing  I  inquired  from  Miss  B.,  who  occupied  the  adjoining  room,  was
if  she  heard  any  noise  in  the  night,  or  if  anything  was  broken  in  her  room,  and
she  said  no,  and  I  have  never  yet  discovered  the  cause.

Since  this  we  hear  continually  footsteps  going  up  and'down-stairs,  creaking
stairs,  dining-room  door  opening  slowly  from  closed  to  half-way,  without
any  apparitions.

Asked  whether  the  opening  of  the  dining-room  door  might  not  be
explained  by  wind  or  defective  fastening,  Mr.  X.  replies  :

"We  have  never  seen  such  [opening  of  the  door]  before  or  since,  and  I
don't  think  the  wind  could  effect  it  in  such  a  manner."  "  The  door  was
closed  'close  to,'  but  not  fastened,  and  Miss  B.  and  myself,  with  a  lady
friend,  were  sitting  in  the  room,  and  we  were  attracted  by  the  door  creaking,
and  we  watched  it  open  slowly  to  about  one-third,  and  it  remained  so."

There  was  no  light  in  the  room  when  the  figure  appeared  to  Mr.  X.

The  crashing  of  glass  occurred  at  2.27  a.m.  on  a  night  in  November,
1888.  [In  this  same  month  Mr.  X's  elder  son,  aged  ten,  who  sleeps  in
a  room  alone,  said  that  he  "  had  been  visited  by  a  figure  all  in  black,
which  disappeared."  This,  however,  may  have  been  a  purely  subjective
hallucination,  as  the  appearances  had  probably  by  this  time  been  much
discussed.]

Mr.  X.  has  had  no  other  hallucination  of  tlie  senses.

The  next  percipient  after  Mr.  X.  was  Miss  X.,  sister  of  the  widower,
who  gives  her  account  as  follows  : —

February,  1889.

My  sister-in-law  died  in  September  1886,  and  a  week  after  I  went  to  keep
house  for  my  brother.  I  occupied  the  room  she  died  in,  and  continued  to  do
so  for  13  months,  when  I  returned  to  my  home  in  Clifton  for  four  months.


44-i  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Deatli.  [Mar.  18,


During  my  absence  my  place  was  filled  by  a  young  lady  friend.  She  left
and  I  returned  to  my  brother's  house,  and  had  been  there  three  months.
One  evening  we  had  been  sitting  talking  downstairs  for  a  long  time  when  I
wished  good  night,  and  went  to  bed  ;  sleeping  in  the  room  alone.  T  had  just
gone  to  bed,  12.15  o'clock,  when  a  few  minutes  after  I  heard  a  sudden  noise
which  made  me  open  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  standing  by  my  bed  a  figure
enveloped  in  white  ;  the  hand  was  put  forward,  as  if  attempting  to  move  back
the  bed-clothes.

In  my  fright  I  screamed  and  threw  out  my  arm  towards  it,  and  said,  "Who
is  it  ?  what  is  it  ? "  It  moved  back  about  half  a  yard  ;  it  was  then  advancing
again,  when  my  loud  screams  brought  my  brother  (who  was  in  the  next  room)
to  me.  Upon  his  opening  the  door  and  entering  the  room  it  disappeared,
and  I  never  saw  it  any  more.

My  brother  then  told  me  he  had  (during  my  absence  at  home)  been
awakened  one  night  with  a  cold  feeling,  and  there  was  a  white  figure  stand-
ing by.  his  side  which  remained  some  time,  then  disappeared,  and  he  was  very
much  frightened.

Miss  X.  has  never  experienced  any  other  hallucination.

The  next  person  to  see  the  figure  was  Miss  B.,  who  succeeded
Miss  X.  in  keeping  house  for  Mr.  X.  in  the  spring  o£  1888.-  Miss  B.'s
experiences  were  in  tlie  summer  of  1888,  but  she  has  not  preserved
accurate  dates.

March  m,  1889.

I  shall  feel  happy  in  giving  a  full  account  of  the  apparition  1  have  seen
three  times  in  my  bedroom,  but  am  afraid  it  will  not  be  very  well  explained.
The  first  time  the  figure,  dressed  in  white,  came  to  the  bottom  of  my  bed  and
stood  for  a  short  time  ;  it  seemed  to  me  like  a  woman,  rather  tall,  but  was  so
covered  in  this  white  dress  that  I  could  not  see  the  head,  and  during  the
time  it  stayed  I  never  took  my  eyes  oft",  but  at  last  could  not  tell  where  it  had
gone  ;  it  went  quite  quickly.  The  three  times  it  has  appeared  to  me  it  has
always  looked  the  same,  only  the  last  time  it  came  and  stood  by  my
side,  and  altlKjugh  I  looked  at  this  figure,  and  never  moved,  I  could  not
explain  to  anyone  what  it  was  like.  It  is  now  many  weeks  since  I  saw
it.  The  other  night  at  the  usual  time,  about  12  o'clock,  I  heard  my
door  make  a  noise,  but  saw  nothing.  I  am  not  in  the  least  nervous  about
these  things,  and  should  much  like  to  know  what  it  wants.

A  figure  (it  will  be  perceived)  has  appeared  seven  times,  to  four
different  persons,  excluding  the  boy  of  ten.  And  most  of  these
ajDpearances  were  so  long  after  the  death  that  it  would  scarcely  be
possible  to  attribute  them  to  the  pre-occupation  of  recent  grief.  The
crashing  noise  may  be  compared  with  General  Campbell's  experiences,
given  in  the  appendix.

XYl. — In  another  case  (where  two  somewhat  similar  incidents
occurred  to  the  same  percipient)  her  experience  on  one  occasion  was  to  a
certain  extent  shared — though  with  differences — by  a  second  percipient.

We  received  the  narrative  from  Miss  Lister,  whose  address  is


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  445


suppressed  only  because  its  publication  in  the  present  connection  might
lead  to  difficulties,  should  she  ever  desire  to  let  her  house.

March  8th,  1888.

Some  time  ago  a  friend  of  mine  liad  the  misfortune  to  lose  her  husband,  i
They  had  only  been  married  about  five  years,  and  she  expressed  great  grief

at  his  loss,  and  asked  me  to  go  and  reside  with  her  I  went  to

lier,  and  stayed  six  months.  One  evening,  towards  the  end  of  that  summer,
I  remarked  that  I  would  go  upstairs  and  have  a  bath.  "Do,"  she  replied]
"but  first  I  wish  you  would  fetch  me  that  little  book  I  left  on  the  drawing-
room  table  last  night."  I  started  without  alight  (having  been  naturaUy
fearless  all  my  life,  I  am  accustomed  to  go  about  in  the  dark),  opened  the
drawmg-room  door,  and  stood  for  a  minute,  thinking  where  she  had  placed  it,
when  I  saw,  to  my  amazement,  her  husband,  sitting  by  the  table  ;  his  elbow
was  resting  on  the  table  close  to  the  book.  My  first  thought  was  to  pretend
forgetfulness,  my  second  to  tell  her  what  I  had  seen  and  return  without
the  book.  However,  having  boasted  that  I  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  fear,
I  determined  to  get  it,  and  advanced  to  the  table.  He  seemed  to  be  smiling,
as  if  he  knew  my  thoughts.  I  picked  up  the  book  and  took  it  to  her  without
saying  anything  about  it ;  then,  going  into  the  bathroom,  I  soon  forgot  it.
But  after  being  there  about  20  minutes  I  heard  my  friend  go  up  and  open
the  drawing-room  door.  I  laughed,  and  listened  to  hear  if  he  was  still
there,  and  very  soon  heard  her  run  out  of  the  room,  and  downstairs  about
four  at  a  time,  and  ring  the  dining-room  bell  furiously.  One  of  the  maids
came  running  up.  I  dressed  as  quickly  as  possible  and  went  down  to  her,
and  found  her  looking  very  white  and  trembling.  "Whatever  is  the
matter?"  I  said.  "I  have  seen  my  husband,"  she  replied.  "  What
nonsense,"  I  answered.  "Oh,  but  I  have,"  she  continued,— "  at  least,
I  didn't  actually  see  him,  but  he  spoke  twice  to  me  ;  I  ran  out  of  the  room,
and  he  followed  and  put  his  cold  hand  on  my  shoulder. "

Xow  this  seems  to  me  a  very  strange  thing,  because  I  had  only  seen  the
gentleman  about  two  or  three  times,  therefore  cannot  understand  his
appearing  to  me,  and  I  certainly  was  not  thinking  of  him  at  the  time.

The  other  apparition  was  of  an  old  lady  whom  I  liad  never  seen,  and  I
only  discovered  for  whom  it  was  intended  by  describing  her  to  someone  who
knew  her.  She  appeared  to  me  on  several  occasions,  and  I  happened  to
relate  this  to  the  gentleman  alluded  to,  who  informed  me  that  it  was  my
imagination,  and  added  that  if  it  had  been  a  spirit  I  should  have  been  too
frightened  to  look  long  enough  to  describe  its  appearance.  I  told  him  in
reply  that  I  wished  someone  who  had  heard  the  tale  would  appear  to  me
after  their  death  and  see  if  they  could  frighten  me  ;  and  I  thought  of  it  when
he  appeared,  and  wondered  if  it  had  anything  to  do  with  my  seeing  him.

L.  A.  Lister.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : —

March  ISth,  1888.
My  reasons  for  not  mentionuig  the  gentleman's  name  were  two-fold.

1  I  have  seen  his  memorial  card. His  age  was  53,  and  he  died  April  17th,  1881.—


446  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


First,  because  I  wrote  without  the  sanction,  or,  indeed,  knowledge,  of  his

wife  ;  secondly,  because  a  family of  the  name  of  now  reside  there,  ^

and  they  are  a  very  nervous  family  ;  if  they  heard  about  the  apparition  they

would  probably  remove. Mr.  died  in  April,  1884. His  appearance

was  not  before  the  beginning  of  October.  I  took  no  notice  of  the  date,  but  I
had  been  with  his  wife  to  Lowestoft  for  six  weeks.  We  went  on  the  19th  of
August,  and  returned  after  Michaelmas  Day.  This  occurred  soon  after  our
return.

The  old  lady's  appearance  was  here. My  father  purchased  the  house

in  June,  1883,  fronr  Mrs.  ,  whose  aunt  had  died  here — being  found

dead  in  bed  one  day,  having  died  tlie  night  before,  all  alone.  The  lodger
forced  the  door,  fearing  something  was  the  matter  ;  but  I  was  not  aware  of
this  till  a  long  time  after.  This  appearance  occurred  on  a  special  fete  day  at
the  "Fisheries  " — the  proceeds  of  which  were,  I  believe,  intended  to  build  a
church.  Some  friends  of  mine  were  going,  and  had  tried  to  persuade  me  to
accompany  them,  but  the  house  would  have  been  left  with  no  one  in  it  if  I
had  gone.  In  the  afternoon  I  had  been  sewing,  and  drawing  my  chair  close
to  the  window  overlooking  the  garden  at  the  back,  I  intended  working  as
long  as  I  could  see.  I  sat  for  a  few  minutes  looking  out,  and  trying  to
imagine  how  the  exhibition  looked,  and,  upon  turning,  saw  the  old  lady
standing  looking  at  me.  "Who  can  that  be  ?  "  I  thought  (and  looked  out
again)  ;  "  some  one  must  have  come  here  by  mistake — possibly  a  neighbour."
I  looked  at  her  again,  long  enough  to  take  in  all  the  details  of  her  costume.
Again  I  turned  to  the  window,  wcjndering  whether  I  had  left  any
of  the  doors  open,  and  how  it  was  I  had  not  heard  her  come  in.
Then  thinking  how  stupid  not  to  ask  her,  I  got  up  to  put  the  question — but
she  had  gone,  as  noiselessly  as  she  came.  I  looked  all  over  the  house — in
cupboards,  under  bedsteads,  &c.,  but  not  a  trace  of  anyone  or  anything
could  be  found.

The  servant  I  had  at  that  time  had  been  a  servant  at  the  house  before,
I  knew  ;  so  I  resolved  (of  course  without  telling  her  why)  to  describe  the
old  lady.  I  made  several  casual  remarks  about  her,  then  I  said,  "  I  fancy
I  saw  her  one  day,  Phcebe,  let  me  describe  her.  She  was  rather  short,  thin,
had  brown  eyes,  a  long  nose,  and  wore  a  black  cap  with  a  flower  or  red  bow
at  the  side,  a  black  dress,  black  mittens,  and  a  white  neckerchief,  edged
with  lace,  folded  cornerways  and  fastened  with  a  brooch."  Phcebe  inter-
rupted me  several  times  by  saying  '  That  was  her,  miss  !  '  and  ended  by  say-
ing she  always  wore  one  of  those  kerchiefs.

About  three  weeks  after,  I  happened  to  be  again  alone,  and  was  Iiurry-
ing  out  of  the  breakfast-room  into  the  room  where  I  had  seen  her,  when,
glancing  up  the  staircase,  I  beheld  my  old  lady  coming  down.  This  time  she
was  attired  in  a  lavender  dress.  I  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  thinking
as  she  passed  I  would  take  hold  of  her.  We  seemed  to  be  looking  at  one
another  for  10  minutes,  when  she  went  backwards  up  the  stairs  like  a
human  being.  I  now  felt  certain  someone  was  playing  me  a  trick  (though  I
had  heard  no  sound)  ;  I  ran  up  quickly,  but  at  the  turn  in  the  stairs,  she
vanished.  I  searched  the  house  as  before,  with  the  same  result.  When
Phoebe  returned,  I  said,  "Did  Miss  S  ever  wear  a  lavender-coloured

1  The  name  and  address  were  given.  — E.  0-.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  ciftev  Death.  447


dress  1  "  "  Yes,  niiss,  she  did  ;  she  never  wore  the  same  twice  running,"  said
Phoebe.  I  have  never  seen  the  old  lady  since.  I  was  enjoying  perfect
health  at  the  time.

Lauka  Lister.

The  next  three  paragx'aphs  are  by  Mr.  Gurney,  who  investigated
this  case.

"  Miss  Lister,  with  whom  I  have  had  a  long  interview,  is,  as  far  as  I
can  judge,  an  accurate  -witness.  She  is  cei'tainly  the  very  opposite  of  a
nervous  or  superstitious  person.  She  has  had  no  other  hallucinations.
She  felt  some  dread  at  the  appearance  of  Mr.  — — ,  but  this  did  not
prevent  her  from  advancing  to  the  table  where  he  seemed  to  be  sitting.
He  was  dressed  in  black.  The  light  on  tliis  occasion  was  bright  moon-
light, and  he  was  clearly  seen.  Miss  Lister's  conversation  with  him  had
been  some  months  before  his  sudden  death,  at  a  time  when  he  was  quite
well.  Unfortunately,  we  have  so  far  been  unable  to  discover  the  present
address  of  Mr.  — 's  widow,  who  has  married  again.

As  regards  the  first  appearance  of  the  old  lady,  Miss  Lister  holds  that
it  is  quite  impossible  that  it  could  have  been  a  real  person  who  got  back
into  the  street.  The  hall  door  makes  a  considerable  noise  in  opening
and  shutting,  which  she  must  have  heard ;  and  moreover  it  could  not
be  opened  from  the  outside.  She  was  struck  by  the  absence  of  foot-
steps. She  went  in  search  of  the  visitor  immediately  on  looking  up,  and
finding  that  the  figure  had  disappeared.

Phcebe  has  married,  and  Miss  Lister  does  not  know  her  address.

The  niece  of  Miss  ,  who  was  requested  to  supply  a  'description  of

her  aunt's  personal  appearance  and  dress,  has  not  replied."

Mr.  Cowley's  case  [II.,  p.  213]  and  Mr.  Jupp's  [L,  p.  322]  belong  to
this  category.  Somewhat  similar  is  a  case  communicated  by  the  late
General  Campbell,  where  noises  and  other  phenomena  were  observed  by
several  persons,  but  one  percipient  only — a  child,  who  had  not  known
the  decedent — witnessed  an  apparition  which  others  recognised  from
her  description.  His  account,  which  is  long  and  minute,  is  printed  as
an  appendix  to  this  paper.

To  this  category  also  may  perhaps  belong  a  case  summarised  in  a
note  to  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  but  which  may  be  given  at  length
here.

XVII. — From  the  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Charles  Matthews,  by
Mrs.  Mathews, (pp.  94,  9-5.)

At  the  close  of  the  summer  a  very  remarkable  instance  occurred  of  a
coincidence  of  dreams,  befalling  Mr.  Mathews  and  myself,  a  circumstance
which  I  am  induced  to  relate,  since  it  was  attested  by  witnesses  who
severally  and  apart  were  informed  of  it,  before  the  dreamers  had  power  to


448  071  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


communicate  with  each  other,  or  their  mutual  friends. '  Mr.  Mathews'
account  of  his  impressions  was  as  follows  : — He  had  gone  to  rest,  after  a
very  late  night's  iierformanee  at  the  theatre,  finding  liiniself  too  fatigued  to
sit  up  to  his  usual  hour  to  read  ;  but  after  he  was  in  bed  he  discovered — as
will  happen  when  persons  attempt  to  sleep  before  their  accustomed  time —
that  to  close  his  eyes  was  an  impossibility.  He  had  no  light,  nor  the  means
of  getting  one,  all  the  family  being  in  bed  ;  but  the  night  was  not  absolutely
dark — it  was  only  too  dark  for  the  puri^ose  of  reading  ;  indeed,  every  object
was  visible.  Still  he  endeavoured  to  go  to  sleep,  but  his  eyes  refused  to
close,  and  in  this  state  of  restlessness  he  remained,  when  suddenly  a  slight
rustling,  as  if  of  a  hasty  approach  of  something,  induced  him  to  turn  his  head
to  that  side  oi  the  bed  wlience  the  noise  seemed  to  proceed  ;  and  there  he
clearly  beheld  the  figure  of  his  late  wife,  "in  her  habit  as  she  lived,"  who,
smiling  sweetly  upon  him,  put  forth  her  hand  as  if  to  take  his,  as  slie  bent
forward.  This  was  all  he  could  relate  ;  for,  in  shrinking  from  the  contact
with  the  figure  he  belield,  he  threw  himself  out  of  bed  upon  the  floor,  where
{the  fall  having  alarmed  his  landlord)  he  was  found  in  one  of  those  dreadful
fits  to  which  I  have  alluded.  On  his  recovery  from  it  he  related  the  cause  of
the  accident,  and  the  whole  of  the  following  day  he  remained  extremely  ill,
and  unable  to  quit  his  room.

There  is  nothing  sur])rising  in  all  this ;  for,  admitting  it  not  to  be  a  dream,
but  one  of  those  cases  called  nightmare,  so  freipiently  experienced  (when  the
sufferer  always  believes  himself  under  real  influences),  it  was  not  a  case  to
excite  astonishment.  The  circumstance  whicli  rendered  it  remarkable  was
that  at  the  exact  hour  when  this  scene  was  taking  place  at  a  remote  distance,
a  vision  of  the  same  kind  caused  me  to  be  discovered  precisely  in  the  same
situation.  The  same  sleej^less  effect,  the  same  cause  of  terror,  had  occasioned
me  to  seize  the  bell-rope,  in  order  to  summon  the  jieople  of  the  house,  which,
giving  way  at.  the  moment  with  it  I  fell,  my  hand  ujion  the  ground.  My
impression  of  this  visitation  (as  I  persisted  it  was)  were  exactly  similar  to
those  of  Mr.  Mathews.  The  parties  with  whom  we  resided  at  the  time  were
perfect  strangers  to  each  other,  and  living  widely  apart,  and  they  recounted
severally  to  those  about  them  the  extraordinary  dream,  for  such  I  must  call
it,  though  my  entire  belief  will  never  be  shaken  that  I  was  as  perfectly  awake
as  at  this  moment.  These  persons  repeated  the  story  to  many,  before  they
were  requested  to  meet  and  compare  accounts  ;  there  could  consequently  be
no  doubt  of  the  facts,  and  the  circumstance  became  a  matter  of  much
general  interest  amcjngst  all  those  who  knew  us.

That  the  scene  at  the  bedside  ( )f  the  dying  woman  simultaneously  recurred
to  the  dreamers  when  awake  was  natural  enough,  and  was  afterwards  con-
fessed. How  far  the  facts  which  I  have  here  related  tended  to  the  serious
result  of  our  continued  intimacy  I  will  not  determine  ;  but  it  is  certain  that
neither  of  us  regarded  it  as  an  imjiediment  at  a  future  period,  or  a  just
reason  why  we  should  not  at  last  fulfil  tlie  desii'e  of  her  whose  wishes  were
made  known  to  us  at  a  time  when  it  would  liave  been  discreditable  to  both,

1  Many  of  our  familiar  friends  in  London  will  remember  with  what  earnestness  and
solemnity  my  husband  related  this  account  lung  after  the  period  of  its  occurrence,
when  he  thought  his  listeners  were  not  disposed  to  scoflf  at  such  details,  or  be  sceptical
of  their  truth.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  449


had  we  supjjosed  ourselves  able  to  comply  with  it  at  any  futui'e  period  of  our
lives.  1

It  will  be  seen  tliat  in  tliis  case  there  is  assumed  to  liave  been  an
important  motive  for  the  appearance,  and  a  motive  indicating  some
continued  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  decedent  of  tlie  condition  of
her  friends  on  earth.  It  will  perhaps  have  been  already  observed  that
in  the  best-attested  cases  evidence  of  definite  motive  is  I'ai'ely  found  ;
our  cases  presenting  in  this  respect  a  mai-ked  difference  from  the
traditional  type  of  ghost-story,  where  the  discovery  of  wills  or  of  other
secrets,  and  the  working  out  of  poetical  justice  by  "  supernatural
agency,"  is  wont  to  be  a  prominent  feature.  Tliere  is,  however,  a  small
sind  puzzling  group  of  cases,  where  the  pliantom  is  pei-ceived  just
before  news  of  the  death  reaches  the  percipient,  which  may  possibly
indicate  a  continued  knowledge  on  the  decedent's  part  of  what  is  going
on  among  his  friends  on  earth.  Such  was  the  case  of  Mr.  Tandy,
iind  the  case  of  Mackenzie,  cited  above  by  Mr.  Gurney. Such  was  the

1  In  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  Procccdimjs  (IV.,  p.  44(5),  will
be  found  a  somewhat  similar  case  of  two  ajiparently  synchron<3us  "visions  of
consolation,"  representing  the  same  decedent.  In  this  case  the  two  percipients
were  the  mother  and  the  husband  of  a  lady  who  had  been  dead  five  months.
The  widower  dreamt  that  his  wife  came  to  him  in  his  bedroom — a  dream  so
vivid  that  he  wrote  in  the  morning  to  describe  its  incidents  to  his  mother-in-
law.  A  letter  fi-om  her  crossed  his  letter  (so  we  are  told,  both  letters  having
unfortunately  been  destroyed),  in  which  she  on  her  part  recounted  a  "  clair-
voyant vision  "  in  which  she  had  entered  her  son-in-law's  room,  and  witnessed
a  visit  to  him  from  his  deceased  wife.  "After  lying  down  to  rest,"  writes  Mrs.
Crans,  "  I  remember  feeling  a  drifting  sensation,  of  seeming  almost  as  if  I  was
going  out  of  the  body.  My  eyes  were  closed  ;  soon  I  I'ealised  that  I  was,  or  seemed
to  be,  going  fast  somewhere.  All  seemed  dark  to  me  ;  suddenly  I  realised  that  I  was
in  a  room  ;  then  I  saw  Charlie  lying  in  a  bed  asleep  ;  then  I  took  a  look  at  the  furni-
ture of  the  room,  and  distinctly  saw  every  article — even  to  a  chair  at  the  head  of  the
bed,  which  had  one  of  the  pieces  broken  in  the  back.  In  a  moment  the  door  opened
and  my  spirit-daughter  Allie  came  into  the  room  and  stooped  down  and  kissed
Charlie.  He  seemed  to  at  once  realise  her  jiresence,  and  tried  to  hold  her,  but  she
passed  right  out  of  the  room  about  like  a  feather  blown  hy  the  wind  ;  and  then,  aftei
a  moment,  she  came  back  again  [several  further  incidents  are  here  described].  Then  I
thought  I  would  open  my  eyes,  and  with  difficulty  I  got  my  eyes  open.  They  seemed  so
heavy  to  me,  but  when  I  succeeded  in  opening  them  I  received  a  sudden  shock,  such  as
if  I  had  fallen  from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor.  It  frightened  and  woke  up  both  Mrs.  B.
and  my  daughter,  [but  Mrs.  B.  has  been  lost  sight  of,  and  the  daughter  was  a  child
at  the  time],  who  asked  what  was  the  matter.  Of  course  I  told  them  my  experience,
and  the  following  Sunday  I  wrote,  as  was  always  my  custom,  to  my  son-in-law,
Charlie,  [who  remembers  the  letter,  but  has  destroyed  it],  telling  him  of  all  my
experience,  describing  the  room  as  I  saw  it  furnished.  [This  letter  was  crossed  by  one
from  the  son-in-law,  Mr.  C.  A.  Kernochan,  written  on  the  same  morning  as  Mrs.
Crans'  letter,  and  describing  a  \ision  of  his  late  wife  on  the  same  Friday  night,  with
details  which  the  two  correspondents  now  believe  to  have  been  identical.  Mrs.  Crans
gives  a  number  of  details  of  the  vision,  and  Mr.  Kernochan  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson,
July  4th,  1888,  "  The  facts  written  you  this  day  by  Mrs.  Crans  in  regard  to  a  letter
written  to  me  one  Sunday  morning  in  the  year  1880,  and  one  written  by  me  on  the
-same  date  to  her,  are  correct  in  every  particular."]

2  G  2


450


On  Apjoaritions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


case  of  Mrs.  ITaly  (cited  P^-oceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  91),  where  a
very  long  coffin  and  a  phantasmal  ligui'e  of  an  absent  nephew  were  seen
an  hour  or  two  before  the  percipient  received  a  letter  from  Australia,
announcing  her  nephew's  death.

XVIII. — The  next  case — I  have  given  the  percipients  the  name  of
Adie — is  a  curiously  complicated  one  ;  but  its  evidential  value  rests
mainly  on  the  similarity  between  a  recognised  phantom  seen  by  a
mourner  (and  therefore  not  in  itself  evidential)  and  an  uni-ecognisable
appearance  observed  by  a  near  relation,  also  aware  of  the  death.

This  latter  phenomenon — a  segment  of  illumination  in  a  room  other-
wise dark,  and  closed  against  light — is,  I  think,  unique  in  our  collec-
tion. Retinal  hyperajsthesia  will  sometimes  make  a  room  look  light
for  a  moment  or  two  when  the  eyes  are  first  opened,  but  the  limitation
of  area  seems  to  make  this  explanation  improbable  here.

Miss  C.  A.  writes  : —

July  12th,  1888.

About  two  months  before  the  death  of  my  dear  father,  which  occurred  on
December  10th,  1887,  one  night  about  from  12  to  1a.m.,  when  I  was  in
bed  in  a  perfectly  waking  condition,  ho  came  to  my  bedside,  and  led  me
right  through  the  cemetery  at  Kensal  Green,  stopping  at  the  spot  where  his
grave  was  afterwards  made.

He  was  very  ill  at  that  time  and  in  a  helpless  condition — so  far  as  his
ability  to  walk  up  three  flights  of  stairs  to  my  room  was  concerned.  I
had  at  that  time  never  been  in  that  cemetery,  but  when  I  went  there  after
his  interment  the  scene  was  perfectly  familiar  to  me.

He  led  me  beyond  his  grave  to  a  large  iron  gate,  but  my  recollection  of
this  part  is  confused. I  there  lost  sight  of  him.

In  a  later  letter  Miss  C.  A.  adds  : —

It  was  just  like  a  panorama. I  cannot  say  if  my  eyes  were  closed  or  open.

Again,  a  day  or  two  before  his  death,  somewhere  between  the  4th  and
the  10th  of  December  (the  day  of  his  decease),  when  he  was  lying  in  an
unconscious  state  in  a  ro(im  nn  the  ground  floor,  and  I  sleeping  on  the  second
floor,  I  was  awoke  suddenly  by  seeing  a  bright  light  in  my  bedroom — the
whole  room  was  flooded  with  a  radiance  quite  indescribable — and  my  father
was  standing  by  my  bedside,  an  etherealised  semi-transparent  figure,  but  yet
his  voice  and  his  aspect  were  normal.  His  voice  seemed  a  far-oft'  sound,  and
yet  it  was  his  same  voice  as  in  life.  All  he  said  was,  "  Take  care  of  mother."
He  then  disappeared,  floating  in  the  air  as  it  were,  and  the  light  also
vanished.

About  a  week  afterwards,  that  is  to  say,  between  the  12th  and  the  17th  of
December,  the  same  apparition  came  to  me  again,  and  repeated  the  same
words.  An  aunt,  to  whom  I  related  these  three  experiences,  suggested  to
me  that  possibly  something  was  troubling  his  spirit,  and  I  then  promised  her
that  should  my  dear  father  visit  me  again  I  would  answer  him.  This  occurred
a  short  time  afterwards. On  this,  the  fourth,  occasion  he  repeated  the  same


1889.] On  Airparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  451


words,  and  I  replied,  "Yes,  father."  He  then  added,  "I  am  in  perfect
peace."

Apparently  he  was  satisfied  with  this  my  assurance.  Since  that  time  I
liave  neither  seen  nor  heard  any  more.

I  have  never  before  or  since  had  any  such  experience.

(Signed)  C.  A.

Mrs.  Adie  wi-ites  : —

March,  1889.

'  Towards  the  middle  of  the  month  of  October,  1887  [since  fixed  by
letters  of  that  year  as  Sunday,  October  23rd,  1887],  in  fact,  as  nearly  as  I  can
recall,  about  the  time  when  C.'s  father  iirst  appeared  to  her  in  a  spiritualised
form,  I  had  a  singular  and  most  vivid  impression  that  the  post  would  bring
me  bad  news.  We  were  then  in  Switzerland.  I  could  daily  from  my  window,
at  11.20  a.m.  to  a  moment,  see  the  train  arrive  which  brought  our  English
letters.  These  were  taken  to  the  post-office  close  by  and  sorted  ;  and  about
20  minutes  after  the  train  came  in  my  letters  (if  any)  were  placed  upon  my
table.  On  Sunday  mornings  the  English  Church  service  began  at  10.30,  so
that  by  11.40  the  chaplain  was  well  advanced  in  his  sermon.  On  that  one
particular  Sunday  it  was,  as  nearly  as  I  can  tell,  exactly  at  that
moment  of  time  I  suddenly  felt  much  distressed  and  mentally  disturbed,
feeling  convinced  that  bad  news  was  awaiting  me  on  my  return  to  the  hotel.
I  had  to  put  considerable  force  upon  myself  to  refrain  from  rising  from  my
.seat  and  leaving  the  church.

My  presentiment  was  only  too  true  ;  on  my  writing-table  I  found  a  most
agonising  letter  fromT.  (C.  's  elder  sister)  telling  me  that  their  father  had  had  a
most  alarming  attack  of  illness  (this  was  the  first  of  the  three  seizures  which
resulted  in  his  decease  on  December  10th).  One  point  I  would  especially
notice — apparently  this  letter  conveyed  no  impression  to  my  mind  so  long  as
it  was  in  the  train  or  at  the  post-office,  but  took  effect  upon  me  so  soon  as
it  was  put  upon  my  writing-table — came  within  my  surroundings,  as  it  were.

We  returned  to  England  on  December  1st.  After  C.'s  father's  death —
during  the  night  of  December  12th-13th — I  was  sleeping  in  a  small  back  room
on  the  ground  floor  of  a  lodging  in  London,  a  room  which  had  only  one  window,
closed  by  shutters  and  a  thick  curtain.  The  gas  in  the  passage  was  put  out
when  I  went  to  bed,  so  that,  after  I  had  extinguished  my  candle,  the  room  was
shrouded  in  impenetrable  darkness — darkness  that  could  be  felt.  About
3  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  I  awoke  en  sursaut,  as  the  French  expres-
sion has  it  (that  is  to  say,  I  was  wide  awake,  not  in  a  half  dreamy  condition),
to  see  the  room  up  to  the  ceiling,  for  about  the  width  of  my  bed,  and  ex-
tending to  the  fireplace  opposite,  flooded  with  a  pale  golden  radiance,  an
unearthly  light — quite  unlike  any  we  are  acquainted  with  ;  it  seemed  to
come  from  behind  the  bed  ;  so  bright  was  it  that  I  could  distinctly  see  the
design  on  the  wall-paper  opposite  me,  and  over  the  fireplace.  This  paper
was  a  very  pale  French  grey,  of  two  tints,  outlined  here  and  there  with  a
thin  line  of  colour.  This  effect  lasted,  as  nearly  as  I  can  tell,  about  five
minutes,  duruig  which  I  opened  and  shut  my  eyes  several  times,  clasped  and
unclasped  my  hands,  and  hit  myself  to  be  certain  that  I  was  not  dreammg.
When  the  light  went  I  was  in  total  darkness  as  before.

That same day  I  coiofided  the  circumstance to  T.  (Clara's  sister),


452  071  A'lrparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


begging  her  not  to  tell  her  about  it,  since  C.  was  feeling  her  father's  death
most  acutely  ;  but  when  a  day  or  two  later  C.  told  me  of  his  three
appearances  to  lior,  and  of  this  same  remarkable  golden  light  which
accompanied  them,  I  related  to  her  what  I  had  myself  seen,
expressing  my  regret  that  awe  or  astonishment  had  prevented  me  from
speaking  or  making  some  sign ;  though,  unlike  herself,  I  had  seen  no  shadowy
form  approach  me.  The  thought  then  occurred  to  me  that  there  might  be
something  regarding  which  the  deceased  wished  to  be  satisfied — something
wliich  prevented  his  spirit  from  obtaining  perfect  rest,  and  I  suggested  to
her  that  should  this  experience  be  repeated  to  either  of  us  we  should  answer
him. The  result  is  stated  in  C.'s  account.

My  own  impression  is  that  his  spirit  tried  to  c(jmmunicate  with  me, but  in
my  great  amazement  at  the  vision  I  was  unable  to  receive  his  message.
C.  was  prepared.

Later  on — viz.,  in  a  letter,  dated  Feliruary  27th,  1888,  C,  when
writing  to  me,  says  :  "When  I  told  you  in  my  last  letter,  dear  auntie,  that
I  had  spoken,  it  was  from  your  advice,  for  you  told  me  to  do  so.  Now,  I
must  try  and  explain  to  you  j  ust  what  happened.  It  was  about  4  (j'clock  in  the
morning,  or  even  earlier.  A  bright  light  suddenly  came  into  my  room — not
a  light  like  from  a  fire  or  a  candle,  but  a  glow  of  (jolilcn  Ihjld.  Then  I  saw
a  form,  quite  white,  bend  over  me,  and  in  my  darling  father's  voice  I  heard
these  words  :  "Take  care  of  jnother — I  am  in  perfect  peace.'  I  said  :  '  Yes,
father.'  And  then  the  light  by  degrees  disappeared.  Since  this,  I  have  not
seen  or  heard  anything  more,  and  I  have  a  fcdhu]  that  I  shall  never  again,  as
I  feel  sure  that  all  he  wanted  to  say  he  has  said,  and  is  at  rest  since  I  answered
him.  What  you  tell  me  as  having  happened  to  you  on  the  night  of  December
12th  is,  indeed,  passing  strange.  I  should  so  like  to  know  what  was  meant
to  tell  you.  Have  you  any  idea  ?  It  is  strange  that  both  you  and  I  should
see  the  same  light.  You  see  I  told  you  first,  so  it  could  not  have  been  a
dream,  as  I  might  possibly  have  fancied  if  you  had  told  of  your  strange
light  (for  I  do  sometimes  dream  of  things  which  I  hear  and  read  of).
If  anything  should  happen  agaiii  I  will  write  it  down,  and  let  you  know  at
once  ;  but,  somehow,  I  feel  I  shall  not."

In  further  letters  Mrs.  Adie  says  : —  '

April  1st,  1889.

I  must  now  add  to  my  statement  in  my  last  (so  positively  put),  as  to  only
a  segment  of  my  room  being  illumined,  what  I  then  omitted,  viz.,  that

1  Curiously  enough,  Mrs.  Adie  lias  had  another  experience  connected  with  the
same  family — an  experience  recalling  Mr.  Goodall's  in  type  (see  Case  XIX.,  below).

"  Probably,  in  1862,"  she  writes,  "  I  was  staying  with  my  mother  in  a  lodging  in
London.  One  morning,  about  3  a.m.  (I  looked  at  the  clock  directly  afterwards),
I  found  myself  suddenly  wide  awake,  and  heard  a  voice  say,  '  One  of  your  name  is
dead.'  My  hu.sband  was  away — staying  with  his  parents  in  the  country  ;  you  may
imagine  my  anxiety  for  the  post  to  arrive.  I  went  many  times  into  my  little  sitting-
room,  next  door  to  my  bedroom,  hoping  to  find  a  letter.  When  the  post  did  arrive  it
brought  me  one  from  my  husband,  saying  that  a  little  neijliew  of  his  had  died  quite
suddenly  of  croup,  when  on  the  mai'ch  in  India.  The  father  was  a  military  man —
in  fact,  C.'s  father  also. We  had  only  heard  of  this  child  as  a  fine,  healthy  boy."

I  give  this  case  only  in  a  note,  for  it  is  remote,  and  depends  on  an  uncorroborated
memory.


1889.] On  A'pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


453


what  made  me  so  certain  of  this  fact  was — that  neither  the  white  muslin-
covered  dressing-table  on  my  right  hand,  nor  the  wardrobe  standing  against
the  wall  on  my  left  hand,  were  visible  to  me  on  that  occasion  !  No  ;  when
I  saw  this  luminosity  I  had  heard  nothing  of  my  niece's  experiences  up  to
that  date.

I  have  occupied  the  same  room  again  in  the  interval  which  has  since
elapsed,  and  found  that  the  room  was  so  obscure  that  even  in  winter  day-
light (no  fog)  when  lying  on  the  bed  I  could  not  make  out  the  design  on  the
wall-paper  opposite  me,  although  on  the  occasion  I  there  mention  every
little  detail  of  form  and  colour  was  sharply  defined.

My  husband  had  to  pass  through  my  room  to  get  to  his,  and  when  he  left
our  sitting-room  the  whole  house  was  in  bed.  It  was  his  business  to
extinguish  the  feeble  little  gas-jet  which  was  left  burning.  Had  he  forgotten
to  do  this,  the  light  from  the  burner  could  not  have  resembled  what  I  saw.
My  niece  has  more  than  once  assured  me  positively  ' '  that  she  at  no  other  time
has  ever  had  any  hallucination  of  the  senses."  I  cannot  recall  ever  having
had  any  hallucinations  which  did  not  mean  anything,  or  rather  wliich  have
not  come  true,—  if  I  except  [a  vision  which  may  or  may  not  have  corresponded
to  reality,  but  which  cannot  at  present  be  tested.  ]

XIX. — In  our  next  case  the  form  which  the  impression  took  was  an
auditory  one, — mixed,  perhaps,  v^^ith  an  impulse  to  utterance.  The
following  narrative  was  communicated  by  Mr.  Edward  A.  Goodall,
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Painters  in  Water  Colours,  London.

May,  1888.

At  Midsummer,  1869,  I  left  London  for  Naples.  The  heat  being-
excessive,  people  were  leaving  for  Ischia,  and  I  thought  it  best  to  go  there
myself.

Crossing  by  steamer,  I  slept  one  night  at  Casamicciola,  on  the  coast,  and
walked  next  morning  into  the  town  of  Ischia.

Liking  the  hotel  there  better  than  my  quarters  of  the  previous  night,  I
fetched  my  small  amount  of  luggage  by  help  of  a  man,  who  returned  with  me
on  foot  beside  an  animal  which  I  rode — one  of  the  fine,  sure-footed,  big
donkeys  of  the  country.  Arrived  at  the  hotel,  and  while  sitting  perfectly
stUl  in  my  saddle  talking  to  the  landlady,  the  donkey  went  down  upon  his
knees  as  if  he  had  been  shot  or  struck  by  lightning,  throwing  me  over  his
head  upon  the  lava  pavement.

In  endeavouring  to  save  myself  my  right  hand  was  badly  injured.  It
soon  became  much  swollen  and  very  painful.  A  Neajjolitan  doctor  on  the
spot  said  no  bones  were  broken,  but  perfect  rest  would  be  needful,  with  my
arm  in  a  sling.

Sketching,  of  course,  was  impossible,  and  with  neither  books,  newspapers,
nor  letters  I  felt  my  inactivity  keenly.

It  must  have  been  on  my  third  or  fourth  night,  and  about  the  middle  of
it,  when  I  awoke,  as  it  seemed,  at  the  sound  of  my  own  voice,  saying :  "I
know  I  have  lost  my  dearest  little  May."  Another  voice,  which  I  in  no  way
recognised,  answered  :  "iVo,  not  May,  but  your  yov/ngcst  boy."

The  distinctness  and  solenmity  of  the  voice  made  such  a  distressing


454  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


impression  ujjun  me  that  I  slept  no  more.  I  g(jt  up  at  daybreak,  and  went
out,  noticing  for  the  first  time  telegraph-poles  and  wires.

Without  delay  I  communicated  with  the  postmaster  at  Naples,  and  by
next  boat  received  two  letters  from  home.  I  opened  them  according  to  dates
outside.  The  first  told  me  that  my  youngest  boy  was  taken  suddenly  ill  ;  the
second,  that  he  was  dead.

Neither  on  liis  account  nor  on  that  of  any  of  my  family  had  I  any  cause
for  uneasiness.  All  were  quite  well  on  my  taking  leave  of  them  so  lately.
My  impression  ever  since  has  been  that  the  time  of  the  death  coincided  as
nearly  as  we  could  judge  with  the  time  of  my  accident.

In  writing  to  Mrs.  Goodall,  I  called  the  incident  of  the  voice  a  dream,  as
less  likely  jierhaps  to  disturb  her  than  the  details  which  I  gave  on  reaching
home,  and  which  I  have  now  repeated.

My  letters  happen  to  have  been  preserved.

I  have  never  had  any  hallucination  of  any  kind,  nor  am  I  in  the  liabit  of
talking  in  my  sleep.  I  df)  remember  once  waking  with  some  words  of  mere
nonsense  upon  my  lips,  but  the  experience  of  the  voice  speaking  to  me  was
absolutely  unique.  Edward  A.  Goodall.

Extract.^  from  letters  to  Mrs.  E.  A.  Goodall  from  Ischia  : —

Wednesday,  A^lgust  11th,  1869.
The  postman  brought  me  two  letters  containing  sad  news  indeed.  Poor
little  Percy  ! I  dreamt  some  nights  since  the  poor  little  fellow  was  taken
from  us.  .

1  Mr.  Goodall  thinks  that  the  mule's  sudden  fall — otherwise  inexplicable — may
have  been  due  to  terror  at  some  apparition  of  the  dying  child.  When  tliis  paper  was
read  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  gave  the  following
apparently  parallel  instance  : —

Mr.  R.  Pear.sall  Smith  said  that  among  the  illustrations  of  the  claim  that
animals  have  a  perception  of  these  extraordinary  alleged  apparitions  after  death,
might  be  mentioned  one  occurring  to  a  neighbour  of  his  own,  a  prominent  barris-
ter at  Philadelphia.  He  had  parted,  under  painful  circumstances  of  controversy,
with  a  friend  who  had  later  gone  to  Italy  for  his  health.  Afterwards,  while  camping
out  in  the  wilds  of  the  Adirondacks,  one  day  his  horse  became  excited  and  refused  to
advance  when  urged.  While  engaged  in  the  contest  witli  the  horse,  the  barrister  saw
before  him  the  apparition  of  his  friend  with  blood  pouring  from  his  mouth,  and  in  an
interval  of  the  effusion  he  heard  him  say,  '  I  have  noth  ing  against  you.'  Sooji  after-
wards he  heard  that  his  friend  had  at  that  time  died  during  a  discharge  of  blood  from
the  lungs.  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  was  prevented  from  procuring  a  statement  directly
from  the  barrister,  by  the  fact  that,  after  relating  it  to  his  friends,  the  recollection  of
the  incident  had  become  so  painful  to  liim  that  he  declined  to  converse  again  on  the
subject.  He  added  that  it  may  be  easily  conceived  tliat  the  barrister,  under  painful
recollections  of  the  parting  interview  with  his  friend,  and  with  the  knowledge  of  his
ill-health,  might  picture  his  friend  forgiving  any  supposed  injury,  and  also  his  dying
scene.  The  extraordinary  features  are  the  coincidence  of  time  and  manner  between
the  vision  and  the  death,  with  the  added  circumstance  of  the  alarm  of  the  horse
previous  to  the  apparition.

We  have  an  odd  case  where  a  horse,  standing  in  a  carriage  at  the  door  of  a  house
where  a  lady  was  dying,  screamed  at  the  moment  of  death.  But  see  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
remarks  on  the  supposed  "  psychical "'  terrors  of  horses.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  85.)


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  455


August  nth.

I  did  not  tell  you,  dear,  the  particulars  of  my  dream  about  poor  little  Percy.

I  had  been  for  several  days  very  fidgety  and  wretched  at  getting  no
letters  from  home,  and  had  gone  to  bed  in  worse  spirits  than  usual,  and  in
my  dream  I  fancied  I  said  :  "I  have  lost  my  dearest  little  May."  A  strange
voice  seemed  to  say:  "No,  not  May,  but  your  youngest  boy,"  not  mentioning
his  name."  .

Mr.  Goodall  has  given  me  verbally  a  concordant  account  of  the
affair,  and  several  members  of  his  family,  who  were  present  at  our
interview,  recollected  the  strong  impression  made  on  him  and  them  at
the  time.

In  a  case  already  published,  (Proceedings  III.,  p.  90),  Mr.  Wambey
heard  the  friend's  voice  as  though  in  colloquy  with  his  own  thought.
He  was  planning  a  congratulatory  letter  to  a  friend,  when  the  words
"  What !  write  to  a  dead  man  1  write  to  a  dead  man  1 "  sounded  clearly
in  his  ears.  The  friend  had  been  dead  for  some  days.  Here  also
we  may  add  a  case  where  a  message  seemed  to  be  given  by  the  decedent's
voice  in  a  dream.

XX. — From  Mr.  George  King,  of  12,  Sunderland-terrace,  West-
bourne  Park,  W.  : —

November  8th,  1885.
The  following  is  a  brief  account  of  an  occurrence  that  took  place  11  years
ago. I  repeat  the  facts  exactly  as  they  happened,  and  make  no  attempt  at
comment  or  explanation. It  is  necessaiy  to  give  a  few  words  of  prefatory
narrative.

My  brother  D. ,  a  few  years  my  junior,  was  a  handsome,  powerful  young
man,  21  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  he  was  an  unusually
vigorous  swimmer.  He  had  greatly  distinguished  himself  at  school  and
college,  and  he  was  enthusiastically  devoted  to  scientific  pursuits.  On
leaving  the  Scottish  University  where  he  had  studied,  he  adopted  tele-
graphic engineering  for  a  profession,  and  as  all  his  tastes  were  in  that
direction  his  progress  was  rapid.  His  more  especial  department  was  the
construction  and  laying  of  deep  sea  cables,  and  when  only  20  years  of  age  he
was  appointed  to  the  responsible  post  of  superintendent  of  the  scientific
department  in  laying  a  cable  for  the  Brazilian  Government.  In  the  per-
formance of  his  duties  on  the  stormy  Atlantic  coast  of  South  America  he
had  to  encounter  many  perils ;  and  finally  the  steamer  Gornos,  on  which  he
was,  was  totally  wrecked,  and  the  cable  was  lost.  All  lives  were  saved,
though  for  many  hours  the  danger  had  been  extreme.  My  brother  returned
immediately  by  mail  to  London,  and  throughout  the  summer  months  of  1874
was  engaged  in  superintending  the  manufacture  of  fresh  cable  to  replace  that
which  had  become  lost  in  the  Gornos.  During  these  few  months  D.  and  I  had
much  afi'ectionate  intercourse,  and  the  bonds  between  us  (he  was  my  only
brother)  were  drawn  even  closer  than  before.

In  November,  1874,  the  cable  was  finished  and  shipped  on  board  the
La  Plata,  a  magnificent  steamship,  carrying  with  her  every  appliance  that
could  be  required  to  render  the  expedition  safe. By  the  wreck  of  the


456  On  Ajrparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18„


Gornos  much  valuable  time  had  been  lost,  and  for  six  months  a  huge  sum
of  capital  had  been  lying  idle.  Only  a  small  section  of  cable  was  required  to
complete  tlie  line,  and  the  contractors,  Siemens  Brothers,  spared  no  exjjense
to  make  certain  of  success  on  the  second  attemjit.  While,  therefore,  we
might  fear  for  my  brother  the  unhealthy  climate  of  some  parts  of  the  coast  of
Brazil,  we  had  no  anxiety  as  regards  the  perils  of  the  sea.

I  bid  D.  farewell  on  Wednesday,  November  2nd,  1874.  I  had  a  lecture
to  deliver  that  afternoon,  and  I  could  not  go  to  see  him  off,  and  we  parted  at
the  door  of  my  office.  He  was  the  picture  of  health  and  strength,  and  we
spoke  cheerfully  of  meeting  again  in  a  few  montlis'  time,  when  his  work
should  be  completed.  The  next  morning  I  liad  a  line  from  him,  written  at
tlie  docks,  and  on  Saturday  a  liappy  little  letter,  wliich  was  posted  by  the
Ijilot  wlien  he  landed  at  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Everything  tended  to  reassure
me,  and  I  had  no  sense  of  impending  calamity.

Next  Wednesday  evening,  December  2nd,  I  attended  a  conversazione  at
King's  College,  given  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  President  of  the  Society  of
Telegraphic  Engineers,  and,  taking  myself  a  keen  interest  in  science,  my
mind  was  intensely  occupied  with  all  that  I  saw  and  heard.  While  examining
tlie  beautiful  instruments  exhibited,  I  often  wished  that  my  brother  had  been
there  to  explain  them  to  me,  and  the  many  friends  that  I  met  spoke  to  me  of
him.  He  was  thus  pleasantly  in  my  thoughts,  but  my  mind  was  not  brooding
or  concentrated  on  him.  On  the  cimtrary,  it  was  disturljed  by  the  multitude
of  objects,  and  only  casual  glances  were  cast  towards  D.  Rather  excited,  I
went  home  to  my  solitary  chambers,  and  retired  to  bed  shortly  after  mid-
night. I  was  soon  asleep,  but  how  long  I  remained  so  I  know  not.  So  far
as  recollection  goes,  I  had  not  been  dreaming,  but  suddenly  I  found  myself
in  the  midst  of  a  brilliant  assembly,  such  as  that  I  had  recently  left  at  King's
College.  I  stood  in  evening  dress  on  the  steps  at  the  entrance  to  a  great  and
crowded  hall.  I  was  looking  towards  the  garden,  brightly  lighted  with  a
multitude  of  lamps.  Illuminated  fountains  were  playing  in  front  of  me,  and
groups  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  sauntered  up  and  down  the  paths.  The  cool
night  air  was  blowing  on  my  face,  and  I  had  a  delicious  feeling  of  pleasure
and  peace.  Two  gentlemen,  strangers  to  me,  stood  talking  on  the  gravel  a
few  paces  from  me.  I  heard  their  voices,  and  could  almost  catch  their  conver-
sation. Suddenly  my  brother  stepped  out  from  behind  them,  and  advanced
towards  me.  He  was  in  evening  diess,  like  all  the  rest,  and  was  the  very
image  of  buoyant  health.  I  was  much  surprised  to  see  him,  and,  going
forward  to  meet  him,  I  said  :  "  Hallo  !  D.,  how  are  you  here  ?  "  He  shook
me  warmly  by  the  hand,  and  replied  :  ' '  Did  you  not  know  I  have  been
wrecked  again?"  At  these  words  a  deadly  faintness  came  over  me.  I  seemed
to  swim  away  and  sink  to  the  ground.  After  momentary  uncoiisciousness
I  awoke,  and  found  myself  in  my  bod.  I  was  in  a  cold  persi^iration,  and  had
paroxysms  of  trembling,  which  would  not  be  controlled.  I  argued  with
myself  on  the  absurdity  (_)f  getting  into  a  panic  over  a  dream,  but  all  to  no
purpose,  and  for  long  I  ct.iuld  not  sleep.  Towards  morning  I  again  slumliered,
and  the  fear  passed  off  from  me.  On  Thursday,  December  3rd,  I  was  tO'
breakfast  with  a  friend,  at  his  hotel,  before  he  started  for  Scotland,  and  I
went  to  Euston  by  tlie  Metropolitan  Railway.  The  bookstalls  on  my  side  of
the  station  were  not  yet  opened,  but  across  the  line  the  boys  were  arranging
the  papers,  and  they  spread  out  the  placard  of  the  Daily  Telegraph. In  large


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  457


letters  on  it  were  the  words  :  "  Terrible  disaster  at  sea.  Loss  of  a  steamship
and  60  lives."  I  felt  as  if  iced  water  had  been  poured  over  me,  and  the
dread  of  the  night  before  returned  ;  but  my  train  glided  up  to  the  platform,
and  I  could  not  get  a  paper.  The  gentleman  next  me  in  the  carriage  was
reading  the  Daily  Telegrcqjh,  and  I  looked  over  his  shoulder,  and  saw,  under
a  sensational  heading,  the  words  :  "  By  the  arrival  in  the  Thames,  yesterday,
of  the  Anterior,  &c.  "  ;  but  the  motion  of  the  train  prevented  me  from
reading  properly,  and  I  thought  the  sentence  ran  :  "  By  the  arrival  of  the
Thames,  news  of  the  Antenor,  &c.,  &c."  I  therefore  gathered  that  the
Aidenor  had  been  lost.  On  arriving  at  my  destination  I  got  the  Times,
and  looked  it  over  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  but  it  contained  no  mention
of  the  shipwreck.  Later  on  I  went  to  my  ofhce  and  began  my  work,  but
presently  one  of  the  messengers,  with  a  strange  look  in  his  face,  came  to  me
and  said  :  "  Is  it  true,  sir,  that  your  brother  has  been  lost  in  the  La  Plata  ?  "
I  started  up  and  ran  to  the  Marine  Company  next  door,  and  there  the
very  worst  fears  were  confirmed.  The  La  Flatoj  foundered  in  the  Bay  of
Biscay  at  about  noon  on  Sunday,  November  24th,  1874,  after  being  exposed
for  only  a  few  hours  to  a  terrific  gale.  No  satisfactory  reason  for  the
catastrophe  was  ever  forthcoming.  Why  a  well-found  and  powerful  steamer
should  have  gone  down  in  open  sea,  when  a  common  I'owing  boat  should
have  survived,  is  a  mystery  which  remains  unsolved.  The  event  created  a
great  sensation  at  the  time,  and  a  long  Board  of  Trade  inquiry  was  held,  but
the  riddle  was  never  answered.

I  saw  some  of  the  survivors  of  the  crew,  and  learned  from  them  about  my
brother.  Although  the  weather  had  been  rough,  danger  was  not  feared
until  Sunday  mornhig,  when  water  began  to  rush  into  the  engine-room,  and
quickly  put  out  the  fires.  My  brother  toiled  with  the  sailors  to  get  steam  up
in  the  donkey  engine  on  deck  so  as  to  work  the  pumps,  and  he  nobly  en-
couraged the  men.  This,  however,  proved  useless,  and  when  the  boat  jjushed
off  from  the  shij),  the  last  seen  of  my  brother  was  that  he  was  helping  to
launch  the  life-raft.

The  La  Plata  foundered  at  about  noon  on  Sunday,  November  29th,  and
possibly  D.  perished  then  and  there.  But  he  may  have  possiljly  survived  for
several  days.  He  was  of  strong  constitution  ;  he  was  a  powerful  swinniier  ;
he  had  on  an  air-belt,  and  he  was  beside  the  life-raft  when  the  ship  went
down.  On  December  2nd,  two  sailors  were  picked  up  alive.  Half -immersed
in  the  ice-cold  water,  they  had  clung  to  the  life-raft  and  drifted  about  tlie
Atlantic  for  three  whole  days.  I  add  this  last  note  to  show  that  it  is  just
possible  that  I  had  the  vision  of  my  brother  near  the  morning  of  liis  death,
although  more  probably  he  died  three  days  before.

In  conclusion  I  must  say  that  I  speak  of  a  "vision  "  because  the  whole
of  my  sensations  while  the  scene  was  passing  before  me,  and  subsequently,
were  quite  different  from  tliose  that  accompany  an  ordinary  dream.  Also  I
can  see  everything  now  in  my  mind  as  clearly  as  at  the  moment  when  I
awoke,  whereas  with  me  even  the  most  vivid  dreams  always  gradually  fade
away,

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  King  says  : —

November  loth,  1885.
The  vision  of  my  brother  was  quite  unique. I  never  before  or  since  had


458  On  A2'>paritions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


a  visiun  of  a  person  whom  I  believed  to  be  in  the  flesh,  and  never  had  an
external  event  such  as  the  shipwreck  thus  conveyed  to  nie.  Much  less  have
I  ever  had  a  vision  which  was  falsified  by  the  event.  Also  never  before  or
since  have  I  had  sensations  similar  to  those  that  accompanied  the  vision  of
my  brother.

George  King,

The  first  announcement  of  the  wreck  of  the  La  Plata  appeared  in  the
Daily  Telegraph,  December  3rd,  1874,  and  in  the  same  issue  an  account
■appears  of  a  conversazione  given  the  night  before  at  King's  College,  Strand,
by  Sir  Wm.  Thomson,  President  of  the  Society  of  Telegrajjh  Engineers.

On  December  10th,  in  the  same  paper,  a  telegram  is  printed  giving  an
account  of  the  rescue  of  the  boatswain  and  quartermaster  of  the  La  Plata,
who  were  found  clinging  to  some  wreckage  by  a  Dutch  cutter.  It  is  stated
that  the  steamer  foundered  on  November  29th,  and  that  those  two  men  clung
to  the  wreckage  until  jjicked  up  at  10  a.  ni.  on  December  2nd.

The  La  Plata  left  Gravesend  for  Rio  Janeiro  on  November  26th,  1874,  and
foundered  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  as  we  learn  from  the  Marine  Dex^artment,
Board  of  Trade,  on  the  29th.  The  survivors  were  picked  up  by  the  Gare
LocJi.,  and  transferred  to  the  homeward-bound  ss.  Antenor,  which  arrived
with  them  and  the  first  news  in  the  Thames  on  December  2nd.  ^


1  I  may  give  here  in  a  note  the  following  narrative,  which  was  amongst  Mr.
Gnrney's  papei's,  though,  as  the  coincidence  depends  only  on  a  dream,  without  details,
he  had  not  included  it  in  liis  selected  cases.

From  Lady  Sudeley,  Toddington,  Winchcombe,  Cheltenham.

January  6th,  1887.

"For  about  four  years  before  my  marriage  C.  \V.  was  a  friend  of  mine,  though
never  a  very  intimate  one.  I  married  early,  and  a  few  years  afterwards  she  became
.a  Clewer  Sister.  Thovigh  it  was  always  a  pleasure  to  us  to  be  together,  we  very
rarely  met  during  the  fourteen  and  a  half  years  that  elapsed  between  my  marriage
and  her  death.  I  think  I  only  saw  her  once  in  her  sister's  dress.  In  July,
1882,  I  heard  she  was  ill,  but  I  had  many  things  to  occupy  me  just  then,  and
she  was  never  in  my  tlioughts.  On  the  night  of  September  27th,  1882,  I  dreamt  that
she  stood  by  my  bedside  in  her  sister's  dress,  and  said,  "Why  do  you  never  come  to  see
me?"  I  answered,  "  You  are  such  a  way  off . "  She  replied,  "  I  am  much  nearer  to
you  than  you  think. "  This  dream  made  such  an  impression  on  me  that  I  told  my  eldest
girl  in  the  morning,  and  wrote  the  same  day  to  C.  W.'s  sister  to  inquire  about  her.  I
enclose  the  reply.  I  ought  jjerhaps  to  mention  that  I  did  not  in  the  least  share  her
religious  f)pinions,  and  the  only  link  between  us  was  the  friendship  of  our  girlhood.

Ada  Sudeley."

With  this  account  Lady  Sudeley  enclosed  a  letter  from  her  friend  (dated  Sep-
tember 30th,  Middleton  Lodge,  Bournemouth),  beginning  : — "I  got  your  letter
yesterday  afternoon,  and  wonder  if  now  you  have  heard  that  C.  was  taken
from  us  last  Monday  (25th).  It  seems  so  strange  your  dreaming  of  her
Wednesday  night."  The  letter  proceeds  to  say  that  the  death  "  came  so  very  quickly
and  unexpectedly  that  they  were  unable  to  write,  and  we  only  had  a  telegram  when
all  was  over,"  though  C.  W.  was  known  to  be  ill.  Miss  Hanbury  Tracy  (Lady
Sudeley's  eldest  daughter)  told  me  [E.G.]  (December  17th,  1887)  that  she  perfectly
remembers  her  mother  describing  the  dream  to  her  on  the  morning  after  it  occurred.

I  remember  my  mother  telling  me,  when  she  awoke  in  the  morning,  that  she  had


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death..


459


And  here,  perhaps,  is  the  fittest  place  to  mention  tlie  appearance  of
Mrs.  Webley,  (printed  ProceeclingsTYl.,  p.  92),  where  it  seems  as  though
the  percipient's  own  nearness  to  death  had  brought  her  into  some  closer
relation  with  a  friend  who  some  days  before  had  passed  away.i

been  dreaming  so  much  about  her  friend  Miss  W.,  she  felt  she  must  write  and  inquire
how  she  was.  Eva  H.  Tracy."

Fchruan,  18th,  1887.

Another  somewhat  similar  case  may  be  added,  also  from  Mr.  Gurney's  papers.

Mail  Uth.  1888.

"  A  somewhat  curious  case  of  thought-travelling-  occurred  to  me  a  few  ^veeks  since.
Early  one  morning  I  seemed  to  be  present  amongst  a  large  party  sorting  quantities  of
pure  white  flowers,  whilst  near  to  me,  shadowy,  yet  quite  distinct,  a  tall  young  man
watched  us.  At  once  I  recognised  him  as  an  old  friend,  though  much  altered.  He
was  only  a  boy  when  I  last  saw  him,  ten  years  ago.

The  same  morning  I  told  some  members  of  my  family  that  H.S.*  was  dead  ;  and
that  I  had  been  arranging  flowers  for  his  funeral.

The  next  week  I  heard  from  his  sister  that  H.S.  was  dead,  and  was  buried  the  day
that  I  had  seen  him.  I  had  heard  six  weeks  before  that  he  had  returned  from  India,
and  they  feared  liis  lungs  were  affected.

I  mention  this  case  as  it  is  very  recent,  and  also  one  of  my  sons,  and  my  sister-in-
law,  who  was  staying  with  me  at  the  time,  can  corroborate  my  statement.

M.C.B.

I  enclose  a  letter  from  my  son.  Another  son  also  distinctly  remembers  the
incident,  though  none  of  us  can  give  the  exact  date.  The  letter  announcing  the  death
and  funeral  was  read  at  the  bi-eakfast  table,  and  we  all  commented  on  the  curious
coincidence."

June  'Mil,  1888.

"De.ie  Sir, — I  quite  remember  my  mother  one  morning  at  breakfast  mentioning
a  dream  she  had  had  about  H.S.,  and  two  or  three  days  after  receiving  news  of  his
death,  when  we  found  that  the  funeral  took  place  on  the  day  of  the  dream.

C.H.B."

From  Mrs.  Alexander  Thompson  (Post  Office,  Sidcup,  Kent).

June  loth,  1888.

"I  remember  during  my  stay  at  B  in  March,  1888,  M.  C.  B.  saying  at  break-
fast she  had  had  a  sort  of  dream.  I  do  not  recollect  all  the  particulars,  but  they
all  appeared  very  vivid  to  her  in  this  dream.  She  was  in  a  room  witli  a  great  quantity
of  white  flowers,  which  she  was  tying'  in  bunches,  when  she  saw  a  young  friend  of  hers,
H.  S.,  but  only  as  a  shadowy  figure,  in  the  room.  She  said  she  was  afraid  he  was
dead.  A  few  days  later  a  letter  came  telling  her  of  his  death  ;  and  comparing  dates
M.  C.  B.  found  her  dream  had  occurred  on  the  day  of  the  funeral  of  H.  S.

M.  T."

^Miss  Cobbe  has  collected  two  or  three  cases  of  this  type  in  a  little  work  entitled
The  Peak  of  Darien.

I  add  two  instances.  The  first,  from  a  clergyman,  who  does  not  wish  his  name
published,  was  received  through  the  Rev.  C.  J.  Taylor,  a  member  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.

November  2nd,  1885.

"On  November  2nd  and  3rd,  1870,  I  lost  my  two  eldest  boys,  David  Edward  and
Harry,  in  scarlet  fever,  they  being  then  three  and  four  years  old  respectively.

Harry  died  at  Abbot's  Langley  on  November  2nd,  14  miles  from  my  vicarage  at
Apsley  ;  David  the  following  day  at  Apsley.  About  an  hour  before  the  death  of  this
latter  child,  he  sat  up  in  bed,  and  pointing  to  the  bottom  of  the  bed.  said  distinctly,
'  There  is  little  Harry  calling  to  me. ' It  has  been  said  that  the  child  said,  '  He  has

*  The  name  and  address  have  been  given  in  contidence.


4G0


On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


XXI. — The  following  case  is  from  a  lady  who  does  not  at  present
wish  her  name  to  be  published.  She  hopes  to  revisit  the  convent,  and
to  obtain  corroborative  evidence.  Her  recollection,  however,  is  very
distinct,  and  she  adds  : —

' '  You  may  safely  vouch  for  the  truth  to  the  letter  of  the  statement.  I
could  never  in  my  life  forget  one  incident  of  this  visitation."

February,  1889.

During  my  visit  to  the  convent  at  St.  Quay,  Pontrieux  (August,  1882)
with  my  two  daughters  and  son,  the  good  sisters  had  only  one  good  room  for
me  and  my  two  girls.  It  was  the  room  set  apart  for  the  Bishop  of  St.  Brieuc
when  he  visited  the  convent,  and  was  in  the  priest's  house.  On  the  morning
after  our  arrival  I  did  not  go  out  with  my  children,  but  being  very  tired  I  lay
down  on  a  little  bed.  The  sun  was  shining,  and  it  was  very  hot,  but  before
I  lay  down  I  jilaced  a  chair  against  the  bedroom  door,  as  there  was  only  a
latch  on  the  door,  and  no  bolt  or  key.  I  went  to  sleep  only  for  a  few
minutes,  and  was  suddenly  awakened  by  a  soft  touch  on  my  chest.  On
opening  my  eyes,  I  saw  a  venerable  old  man,  with  something  of  a  white  and
black  dress  on,  kneeling  by  the  side  of  the  bed  on  which  I  lay,  with  hands
clasped  in  prayer,  and  looking  up  to  the  wall  over  the  bed.  I  looked  at  him
silently,  and  he  rose,  and  when  going  to  the  door  he  raised  his  two  hands  and
.said  "  Te  beni  "  [je  te  benis  ?]  three  times  quite  distinctly,  and  I  lost  him.  I  got
up  instantly  and  went  to  the  door,  thinking  he  was  some  old  priest  who  had
come  to  pray  before  the  crucifix  which  I  then  saw  for  the  first  time  on  the
wall  over  the  bed  ;  but  to  my  surprise  I  found  the  door  shut,  and  the  chair

a  crtiwn  on  his  liead,'  but  I  do  not  remember  this  myself  ;  but  I  was  so  overcome  with
grief  and  Aveariness  from  long  watching  that  I  may  have  let  it  escape  me.  But  of  the
truth  of  this  first  fact  I  am  sure,  and  it  was  heard  also  by  the  nurse.

Signed  X.  Z.,  Vicar  of  H."
In  letters  and  conversation  with  Mr.  Podmore,  Mr.  Taylor  adds  the  following
details  : —

"Mr.  Z.  tells  me  that  care  was  taken  to  keep  David  from  knowing  that  Harry
was  dead,  and  that  he  feels  sure  that  David  did  not  know  it.  Mr.  Z.  was  himself
present,  and  heard  what  the  boy  said. The  boy  was  not  delirious  at  the  time.

Charles  Tayloh."

The  next  case  was  received  from  Miss  Ogle,  through  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,
who  has  for  some  years  been  our  cai-eful  helper  in  the  collection  of  evidence.

Manchester,  November  9th,  1884.

"  My  brother,  .John  Alkin  Ogle,  died  at  Leeds,  July  17th,  1879.  About  an  hour
before  he  expired  he  saw  his  brother,  who  had  died  about  16  years  before,  and  looking
up  with  fixed  interest,  said,  '  .Joe  !  .Joe  ! '  and  immediately  after  exclaimed  with
ardent  surjarise,  '  George  Hanley  ! '  My  mother,  who  had  come  from  Melbourne,  a
distance  of  about  -10  miles,  where  George  Hanley  resided,  was  astonished  at  this,  and
said,  '  How  strange  he  should  see  George  Hanley.  He  died  only  10  days  ago  ! '  Then,
turning  to  my  sister-in Jaw,  asked  if  anybody  had  told  John  of  George  Hanley's  death.
She  said,  'No  one,'  and  my  mother  was  the  only  person  present  who  was  aware  of  the
fact. I  was  present  and  witnessed  this.  Hareiet  H.  Ogle."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Ogle  states  : —

".T.  A.  Ogle  was  neither  delirious  nor  unconscious  when  he  uttered  the  words  re-
corded. George  Hanley  was  an  acquaintance  of  John  A.  Ogle,  not  a  particularly
familiar  friend. The  death  of  Hanley  was  not  mentioned  in  his  hearing."


1889.] On  A'pixiritions  occurring  soon  after  Deatlt.


461


before  it,  as  I  had  placed  it  Defore  I  lay  down.  The  old  sister  who  waited  (jii
us  had  her  room  close  to  ours  ;  so  I  called  her  and  told  her  that  an  old  priest
had  come  into  my  room  to  pray  before  the  crucifix.  The  old  nun  said  that
there  was  not  a  man  on  all  the  premises,  nor  a  priest,  as  they  were  all  gone
to  the  funeral  of  the  Bishojj  of  St.  Brieuc,  16  miles  away,  which  was
being  performed  at  that  time.  I  described  the  appearance  and  dress,  and
what  he  said  to  me.  She  immediately  went  down  on  her  knees  to  me  and
said,  '  You  are  blessed  indeed,  for  it  was  the  Bishop  himself. '  He  had  come
to  his  accustomed  place  of  prayer  for  the  last  time  on  earth."

The  writer  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  and
refuses  to  regard  this  vision  as  a  hallucination.

Her  daughter  writes,  under  date  April  IStli,  1889  : —

My  sister  and  I  have  the  liveliest  recollection  of  our  mother  telling  us
about  seeing  the  Bishop,  directly  we  came  in  from  a  walk.

We  learn  from  the  French  official  records  that  Mgr.  Augustin
David,  Bishop  of  St.  Brieuc,  died  July  27th,  1882,  and  was  buried  at
St.  Brieuc,  Tuesday,  August  1st,  at  10  a.m.,  which  so  far  confirms  the
account  given  above.

We  may  conclude  our  list  of  apparitions  a  few  days  after  death  (the
death  being  unknown)  by  tlie  following  narrative,  procured  for  us
through  the  kindness  of  Lord  Charles  Beresford.

XXII.— Mr.  K.  writes  to  Lord  C.  Beresford,  April  22nd,  1888  :—

Teston,  Maidstone.
It  was  in  the  spring  of  1864,  whilst  on  board  H.M.S.  Racoon,  between
Gibraltar  and  Marseilles,  that  I  went  into  my  office  on  the  main  deck  to  get
my  pipe  ;  as  I  opened  the  door  I  saw  my  father  lying  in  his  coffin  as  plainly
as  I  could.  It  gave  me  an  awful  Jerk,  and  I  immediately  told  some  of  the
fellows  who  were  smoking  just  outside  in  the  usual  place  between  the  guns,
and  I  also  told  dear  old  Onslow,  our  chaplain,  a  few  days  after  we
arrived  at  Marseilles,  and  I  heard  of  my  father's  death  and  that  he  had  been
buried  that  very  day  and  at  that  time,  half-past  12  in  the  day.  I  may  add
that  at  the  time  it  was  a  bright  sunny  day,  and  I  had  not  been  fretting  about
my  father,  as  the  latest  news  I  had  of  him  was  that  although  very  ill  he  was
better.  My  dear  old  father  and  I  were  great  chums,  more  so  than  is  usual
between  a  man  of  72  and  a  boy  of  20,  our  respective  ages  then.

In  reply  to  inquiries  Mr.  K.  adds  : —

I  have  ascertained  that  my  fathei'  died  at  Kensington,  on  April
29th,  1864,  and  was  buried  on  May  4th,  1864.  I  don't  know  if  the
late  Mr.  Onslow  made  any  note  of  the  circumstance  as  narrated  in  my  letter
to  Lord  C.  Beresford.  He  has  been  dead  some  years  now.  [Mr.  K.  re-
membered one  other  officer  who  might  have  been  present  at  the  time,  but
this  gentleman  did  not  recollect  the  incident.  ]

I  may  further  state  that  I  have  never  experienced  any  other  liallucination,
and  am  not  at  all  emotional,  in  fact,  very  matter-of-fact.

This  case  is  too  remote  to  allow  of  certainty  as  to  the  number  of  days


462


On  Airparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


elapsed  after  death  ;  l)ut  it  seems  pretty  certain  that  the  apparition
must  have  been  very  decidedly  after  the  deatli,  or  tlie  ordinary  tendency
to  improve  the  exactitude  of  a  coincidence  would  proljably  liave  brought
the  two  dates  together.

And  here,  as  a  transition  between  cases  witli  a  few  days'  interval
and  cases  with  an  interval  of  months,  I  may  mention  our  single  case
(^Proceedings,  III.,  p.  99)  of  what  looks  like  tlie  old-fashioned  haunting
of  a  survivor  who  thwarts  the  wishes  of  the  decedent.  A  peculiar
feature  here  is  that  the  haunted  man  does  not  realise  that  he  is  beinsr

o

haunted,  but  yields  to  the  importunity  of  living  persons,  and  then  finds
himself  no  longer  troubled  by  visions  of  the  dead.  The  case,  however,
is  isolated,  and  admits  of  being  interpreted  as  a  subjective  result  of  a
sub-conscious  state  of  antagonism  to  the  deceased.

As  we  recede  further  from  the  moment  of  death,  we  find  the  records
of  recognised  apparitions  becon^ing  rarer  ;  and  few  of  these  records  can
be  used  as  evidential,  since  tlie  deatli  is  by  this  time  almost  always
known  to  surviving  friends.  In  two  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney — the
Akhurst  case  and  the  le  Maistre  case — it  so  happened  that  the  death  was
not  known  to  tlie  friends  till  long  after  it  occurred  ;  so  that  these  cases
are  strictly  evidential  as  far  as  they  go.  If,  indeed,  the  reality  of  any
post-mortem  apparitions  should  come  to  be  generally  admitted,  it  will
be  desirable  to  collect  and  compai'e  all  such  apparitions.  But  for
the  present  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  cases  where  the  percipient
was  vmaware  that  anyone  had  died  whose  aspect  corresponded  to  the
figure  seen.  This  reduces  us  (apart  from  cases  where  the  decedent
was  known  by  sight  to  the  percipient)  to  recognitions  of  the  phan-
tasmal figures  from  photographs,  pictures,  or  descriptions ;  and  it
further  limits  us  to  cases  where  there  is  some  obvious  connection  of
j)lace,  which  puts  the  percipient  on  the  right  road,  so  to  say,  for  the
identification  of  the  phantom.  Such  cases  will  naturally  be  very  rare ; —
Mr.  Gurney  has  cited  three  such, — Mr.  Husbands'  case,  Mrs.  Bacchus',
and  the  Tyre  case.  A  case  cited  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  {Proceedings,  III.,
p.  101),  falls  under  the  same  category.  I  have  veiy  few  to  add  which
fall  within  the  limit  of  one  year  after  death,  to  which,  as  above
explained,  these  supplementary  cases  will  ha  confined.  But  I  may  quote
a  case  so  singularly  resembling  the  Husbands  case  that,  although  the
identification  of  the  figure  is  weaker,  there  is  much  interest  in  the
narrative.  The  narrator  is  the  wife  of  Colonel  Lewin  ;  she  has  never
experienced  any  other  hallucinations.

St.  Leonards,  1883.
XXIII. — In  January,  1868,  one  <if  my  little  children  having  been  delicate
through  the  winter,  was  ordered  to  St.  Leonards,  and  I  took  a  house  there  on
the  Marine  Parade,  close  to  the  arch  dividing  St.  Leonards  from  Hastings.
I  was  young,  strung,  and  in  perfect  health  and  spirits  ;  1  rented  the  whole


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  463


house,  bringing  my  own  servants  ;  the  rooms  were  furnished  and  arranged  in
the  usual  sea-side  lodging-house  manner,  back  and  front  dining-room,  and
back  and  front  drawing-room  ;  above  the  latter  was  a  bedroom  and  dressing-
room  which  I  occupied  ;  over  the  back  drawing-room  was  another  bedroom,
occupied  by  my  eldest  sister,  some  nine  years  older  than  myself,  and  a  clever
sensible  woman  not  given  to  phantasies  ;  over  this  again  were 'the  servants
and  the  nurseries.

One  night  there  was  a  heavy  storm,  the  weather  was  bitterly  cold,  and  a
fire  was  burning  in  my  bedroom  when  I  went  to  bed  at  10.30.  My  sister  and
I  had  spent  the  evening  together,  quietly  talking,  reading,  and  dwelling  on  no
sensational  theories  of  any  sort  ;  I  went  to  bed  quickly,  locking  securely  the
doors  of  both  rooms  as  was  my  habit,  but  I  could  get  no  rest  on  account  of
the  noise  of  the  sea  and  the  wind.  At  last  the  noise  of  the  rain  bubbling  up
under  the  ill-fitting  window  sash  was  so  annoying,  that  I  got  uji  to  try  and
stop  it  by  laying  towels  across :  while  doing  so  I  noticed  that  the  fire  had
gone  out,  and  I  poked  it  and  tried  in  vain  to  re-animate  it ;  failing  to  do  so  I
extinguished  my  light  and  again  tried  to  sleep ;  it  was  no  use,  the  noise  of  the
sea  and  wind  was  too  great.  I  must  have  been  lying  like  this  for  a  couple  of
hours,  very  cross  and  tired,  when  I  became  conscious  of  what  seemed  like  a
light  in  the  room  ;  the  bed  I  was  sleeping  in  was  an  old-fashioned  wooden
(jne,  with  high  mahogany  head  and  foot ;  on  the  left  hand  side  was  the  wall,
on  the  right  the  door,  close  to  the  foot,  the  fire-place.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed
I  seemed  to  see  a  light.  I  thought  the  fire  must  have  re-kindled  itself,  and
crawled  along  on  my  knees  to  look  at  the  fire  over  tlie  high  wooden  foot  of
the  bed  to  see  how  this  might  be.  I  had  no  thought  of  anything  but  the  fire,
and  was  not  nervous  in  the  slightest  degree.  As  I  raised  myself  on  my  knees
and  looked  over  the  ioot  of  the  bed,  I  found  myself  face  to  face,  at  a  distance
of  about  three  feet,  with  the  semblance  of  a  man.  I  never  for  a  moment
thought  he  was  a  man,  but  was  struck  with  the  feeling  that  this  was  one  from
the  dead.

The  light  seemed  to  emanate  from  and  round  this  figure,  but  the  only
portions  which  I  saw  clearly  were  the  head  and  shoulders.  The  face  I  shall
never  forget  ;  it  was  pale,  emaciated,  with  a  thin  high-bridged  nose,  the  eyes
deeply  sunk  and  glowing  in  the  sockets  with  a  sort  of  glare.  A  long  beard
was  seemingly  rolled  in  under  a  white  comforter,  and  on  the  head  was  a
slouched  felt  hat.  I  had  a  nervous  shock,  I  felt  a  dead  person  was  looking
upon  mc — a  living  one,  but  had  no  sensation  of  being  actually  fi'ightened,
until  the  figure  moved  slowly  as  if  interposing  between  me  and  the  do(jr,  then
a  horror  overcame  me  and  I  fell  back  in  a  dead  faint.  J.Iow  long  I  remained
unconscious  I  know  not,  but  I  came  to  myself  cold  ahid  cramped,  having
fallen  backwards  as  I  knelt  with  my  legs  under  me  ;  the  room  was  quite  dark,
and,  although  strongly  impressed  by  the  ghostly  nature  of  my  experience  I
struck  a  light,  and  to  make  quite  sure,  I  carefully  examined  the  room,  looking
under  the  bed,  into  the  wardrobe  and  under  the  dressing-table.  I  tried
both  doors,  and  they  were  locked  as  I  had  left  them.  At  the  window  lay  my
towels  undisturbed  ;  the  chimney  was  too  small,  neither  were  there  any  signs
on  the  hearth.  Then,  thoroughly  tired  out,  I  got  into  bed  and  slept  soundly
till  morning.

When  I  came  down  to  breakfast,  my  sister,  before  I  had  said  a  word,

2  H


464  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


remarked  :  "Why,  what  is  the  matter  ?  you  look  as  if  you  had  seen  a  ghost,"
to  which  I  replied,  "  That  is  just  what  I  have  done,"  and  related  what  is  set
down  here.  I  was  anxious  not  to  frighten  the  servants  or  make  a  disturbance,
and  so  could  not  make  so  many  inquiries  as  I  otherwise  should  have  done,
but  from  the  house-agent  I  learnt  that  the  house  had  been  last  inhabited
during  the  past  winter,  by  a  young  man  in  rapid  consumption.  He  had  a
great  fancy  for  trying  experiments  with  collapsible  boats,  and  in  blowing  up
the  air  compartments  of  one  of  these  he  broke  a  blood  vessel,  w^is  carried  into
my  room,  and  died  there.

I  could  not  ascertain  anything  more  without  making  more  fuss  than  I
cared  to  do.

It  is  probable  or  possible  that  I  may  have  been  dreaming,  but  I  can  only
say,  that  I  was  conscious  of  no  sleep,  and  that  the  faint  was  a  very  real  one,
and  a  very  unusual  circumstance  for  me,  who  had  not  fainted  more  than
perhaps  twice  in  my  life. I  believed  tirmly  that  I  saw  an  apparition.

(Signed)  Margaret  Lewin.

I  add  a  case  where  both  the  date  of  the  death  and  the  recognition
are  uncertain  ;  but  where  the  liallucination  apparently  exercised  a  more
powerful  effect  on  the  percipient  than  in  almost  any  otlier  of  our  cases.

XXIV. — From  Miss  Jessie  Walker,  Botanic  View,  Smithdown-
lane,  Liverpool.

1884.

About  three  years  ago,  I  and  a  lady  friend  engaged  apartments  in  the
house  of  a  widow  lady  with  whoni  we  resided  about  eight  months,  when  the
following  incident  occurred.  One  evening,  we  had  been  sitting  up  reading  rather
later  than  usual,  and  did  not  rise  to  retire  until  within  a  few  minutes  to  12
o'clock.  We  went  upstairs  together,  I  being  perhajis  a  couple  of  steps  behind
niy  friend,  when,  on  reaching  the  topmost  step,  I  felt  something  suddenly  slip
behind  me  from  <ai  unoccupied  room  to  the  left  of  the  stairs.  Thinking  it  must
be  imagination,  no  one  being  in  the  h(juse  except  the  widow  and  servant,  who
occupied  rooms  on  another  landing,  I  did  not  speak  to  my  friend,  who  turned
off  to  a  room  on  the  right,  but  walked  quickly  into  my  own  room  which
faced  the  staircase,  still  feeling  as  though  a  tall  figure  were  behind  and
bending  over  me.  I  turned  on  the  gas,  struck  a  light  and  was  in  the  act  of
applying  it,  when  I  felt  a  heavy  grasji  on  my  arm  of  a  hand  minus  the
middle  finger.  Upon  this  I  uttered  a  loud  cry,  which  brought  my  friend,  the
widow  lady,  and  the  servant  girl  into  the  room,  to  inquire  the  cause  of  my
alarm.  The  two  latter  turned  very  pale  on  hearing  the  story.  The  house
was  thoroughly  searched,  but  nothing  was  discovered.

Some  weeks  passed  and  I  had  ceased  to  be  alarmed  at  the  occurrence,
when  I  chanced  to  mention  it  whilst  out  spending  the  afternoon  with  some
friends.  A  gentleman  present  inquired  if  I  had  ever  heard  a  description  or
seen  a  "carte"  of  the  lady's  late  husband.  On  receiving  a  reply  in  the
negative,  he  said  that  singularly  enough  he  was  tall,  had  a  slight  stoop,  and
had  lost  the  middle  finger  of  his  right  hand.  On  my  return  I  inquired  of  the
servant,  who  had  been  in  the  family  from  childhood,  if  such  were  the  case,
and  learned  that  it  was  quite  correct,  and  that  she  (the  girl)  had  once,  when


1889.] On  Apparitions  occtirring  soon  after  Death.


465


sleeping  in  the  same  room,  been  awakened  by  feeling  some  one  pressing
down  her  knees,  and  on  opening  her  eyes  saw  her  late  master  at  the  bedside,
on  which  she  fainted,  and  had  never  dared  to  enter  the  room  after  dusk  since.
I  did  not  see  anything.  I  may  say  I  am  not  in  the  least  nervous  or  super-
stitious, had  been  reading  nothing  of  an  excitable  character,  and  whilst
walking  upstairs  had  my  mind  occupied  in  conjectures  as  to  whether  the  key
of  my  watch  was  upstairs  or  down.  I  had  slept  in  tlie  room  for  eight  months,
and  never  before  experienced  anything  of  the  kind.

.1.  Walker.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Walker  adds  : —

I  did  not  hear  of  the  lady's  husband  being  short  of  a  finger  until  a  short
time  after  the  occurrence,  and  mentioned  at  the  time  that  the  hand  I  felt  had
lost  one.  I  have  written  to  my  friend  asking  her  to  send  you  her  recollections
of  the  affair.  She  came  into  my  room  immediately  after  the  event,  was
present  when  I  heard  from  the  acquaintance  that  the  widow's  husband  had
been  tall  and  lost  a  finger,  and  also  heard  the  servant  confirm  the  fact  and
give  her  account  of  her  fright  in  the  same  room  ;  so  I  think  she  will  be  able
to  confirm  each  point  of  the  case.

I  never  had  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  since.  I  am  not  in  the  least
superstitious.

The  servant  married  some  two  years  ago  and  left.  It  would  not  be
possible  to  get  any  account  from  her.  I  should  not  like  to  ask  the  landlady,
nor  do  I  think  she  would  give  an  account  if  I  did.  She  is  an  elderly  lady
and  was  very  sensitive  about  it  being  mentioned,  so  that  I  never  said
anything  before  her  after  the  first  evening.  You  can  well  understand  her
being  so.

It  would  not,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  be  easy  to  be  certain
that  a  hand  suddenly  grasping  one's  arm  lacked  the  middle  finger.  But
here,  of  course,  the  grasp  is  itself  a  hallucination  ;  and  assuming  that
this  hallucination  was  caused  in  some  way  by  the  decedent,  the  sense
of  the  lack  of  a  finger  may  have  been,  so  to  say,  of  the  very  essence  of
the  hallucinatoi'y  impression  produced.  I  may  add  that  the  date  of  the
husband's  death  remains  uncertain,  and  Miss  Walker  tells  me  that  it
was  spoken  of  as  though  it  had  occurred  more  than  a  year  before  the
hallucination.

I  subjoin  an  independent  account  from  Miss  Clara  A.  Spink,  Park
Gate,  Rotherham.

March  28th,  1884.
As  far  as  I  can  remember  the  circumstances  were  as  follows  : — About
three  years  ago  Miss  Walker  and  myself  took  apartments  at  the  house  of  a
widow  lady,  and  upon  the  night  in  question  we  retired  about  12  p.  m. ,  going
upstairs  in  the  darkness,  Miss  Walker  directly  before  me.  Her  room  lay
quite  opposite  to  the  staircase,  another  to  the  left,  and  mine  to  the  right.
As  she  passed  the  door  to  the  left,  which  was  slightly  opened,  she  described
the  feeling  of  a  tall  form  slipping  thr(jugh  the  open  door  and  following  closely
after  her,  and  bending  over  her  so  that  the  breath  was  quite  perceptible.

2  H  2


466  On  A'pparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


Her  first  impulse  was  to  rush  to  her  room  for  a  light,  and  whilst  in  the
act  of  striking  a  match  she  felt  a  hand,  minus  the  middle  finger,  grasp  her
arm  so  tightly  that  afterwards,  when  her  fright  had  subsided,  she  looked  to
see  whether  any  impression  had  been  made.  Upon  hearing  the  screams  I
went  to  her  room,  only  to  find  her  ujKjn  the  floor  in  an  hysteria  of  fright,
and  her  shrieks  soon  roused  the  other  inmates  of  the  house.  As  you  may
imagine  we  were  both  very  much  alarmed,  and  though  I  neither  saw  nor  felt
anything  of  it  I  shall  always  remember  the  occurrence,  and  during  our  stay
in  the  house  we  always  experienced  a  feeling  of  great  timidity  in  passing  the
room.  Strange  to  say  it  was  not  the  first  time  that  a  fright  had  been
witnessed  in  tlie  same  room,  though  our  landlady  seemed  to  scorn  the  idea.
Shortly  after  the  event  we  were  spending  the  evening  at  the  house  of  a  friend,
and  during  the  conversation  the  story  was  related,  upon  the  conclusi(,)n  of
which  a  gentlemen  remarked  that  the  ' '  late  husband  of  the  landlady  had
only  three  fingers  on  the  one  hand."  I  leave  you  to  imagine  our  dismay  and
horror,  for  to  describe  it  would  only  give  you  a  faint  idea.  I  have  often
expressed  a  desire  to  have  the  mystery  solved,  and  should  be  greatly  obliged
f,  at  your  convenience,  you  would  let  me  have  your  opinion  on  the  subject.
No  doubt  my  friend  would  tell  you  what  a  shock  it  proved  to  her  ;  in  fact
for  months  afterwards  she  was  a  martyr  to  it.

Clara  A.  Spink.

In  the  following  case  it  is  possible  that  a  real  pei-son  may  have  been
mistaken  for  an  apparition,  ljut  the  details,  as  reported,  tell  strongly
against  this  view.

XXV.  -From  Mrs.  Gierke,  68,  Redcliffe-square,  S.W.

1884.

In  the  autumn  of  1872,  I  stayed  at  Sorrento  with  my  two  daughters,  and
established  myself  for  some  months  at  the  Hotel  Columella,  which  stands  on
the  high  road,  within  half-a-mile  of  the  town.  My  suite  of  apartments
consisted  of  a  large  drawing-room,  ante-room,  and  three  bedrooms  ;  it  was
shaped  like  the  letter  U,  and  each  end  opened  on  a  large  terrace.  The  hotel
was  kept  by  two  men,  Rafaelle  and  Angelo,  and  the  service  of  the  rooms  was
conducted  by  their  wives,  a  family  arrangement  which  worked  harmoniously
for  the  guests.

On  the  evening  in  question  we  left  the  dining-room  l^efore  the  tea  was
finished,  anxious,  after  the  heat  of  the  day,  to  enjoy  the  freshness  and  beauty
of  the  terrace.

After  a  few  moments,  I  returned  to  my  bedroom  to  fetch  a  candlestick
and  a  shawl,  and  so  much  disliked  going  that  I  loitered  unreasonably  after  I
said  I  would  go.  I  entered  the  ante-room  and  passed  through  the  long
drawing-room,  its  porcelain  tiling  echoing  my  stejjs  with  a  sharp  creak,  till  I
reached  my  bedroom  door.  One  side  of  the  door  stood  open,  it  was  a  door-
way divided  in  two,  or,  as  the  French  say,  a  deux  hattants,  and  I  resolved  not
to  close  it,  as  I  perceived  everything  had  been  put  in  order  for  the  night.

I  got  my  shawl  and  my  candlestick,  and  was  prejjaring  to  return
through  the  drawing-room,  when,  on  turning  towards  the  half-open  door,  I
saw  it  filled  by  the  figui'e  of  an  old  woman. She  stood  motionless,  silent,.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  467


immovable,  framed  by  the  doorway,  with  an  expression  of  despairing  sadness,
such  as  I  had  never  seen  before.

I  don't  know  why  I  was  frightened,  but  some  idea  of  its  being  an  imbecile
or  mad  woman  flashed  thrdugh  my  mind,  and  in  an  unreasoning  panic  I
tvirned  from  the  drawing-room  door,  with  its  melancholy  figure,  and  fled
through  the  bedrooms  to  the  terrace.

My  daughter,  on  hearing  of  my  fright,  returned  to  the  rooms,  but  all  was
in  its  wonted  stillness  ;  nothing  was  to  be  seen.

The  next  morning  I  spoke  to  the  women  of  the  house  of  the  old  woman
who  had  come  to  my  room,  as  I  thought  she  might  be  in  some  way  connected
with  the  establishment,  and  they  were  dismayed  at  my  account  of  her,  and
assured  me  that  there  was  no  one  answering  the  description  in  the  house.  I
perceived  there  was  much  consternation  caused  by  my  narrati(jn,  but  paid
little  attention  to  it  at  the  time.

A  fortnight  afterwards  we  had  a  visit  from  the  parish  priest,  a  friend  of
our  landlord,  and  the  spiritual  adviser  of  the  family.  At  a  kiss  for  conversa-
tion, I  told  him  of  my  visitor,  who  arrived  punctually  at  8  o'clock,  "  Vora  dei
defunti."

The  padre  listened  to  me  with  the  greatest  gravity,  and  said,  after  a
pause : —

"Madam,  you  have  accurately  described  the  old  mistress  of  this  house,
who  died,  six  months  before  you  came,  in  the  room  over  yours.  The  people
of  the  hotel  have  been  already  with  me  about  it  ;  it  has  caused  them  much
anxiety  lest  you  should  leave,  and  they  recognised  in  your  description  the  old
padrona,  as  she  was  called."

This  explained  to  me  various  jaresents  of  fruit  and  special  attentions  I  had
received.  Nothing  more  came  of  it,  and  I  saw  the  apparition  no  more.  In
our  walks  we  looked  for  even  some  semblance  of  the  dress  in  which  the
woman  appeared,  but  never  saw  it.  Short  as  my  glance  towards  her  was,  I
could  have  painted  her  likeness  had  I  been  an  artist.  She  was  pale,  of  the
thick  pallor  of  age,  cold  grey  eyes,  straight  nose,  thick  bands  of  yellowish
grey  hair  crossing  her  forehead.  She  wore  a  lace  cap  with  the  border  closely
quilted  all  round,  a  white  handkerchief  crossed  over  her  chest,  and  a  long
white  apron.  Her  face  was  expressionless,  but  fixed  and  sad.  I  could  not
think  she  had  any  knowledge  of  where  she  was,  or  who  stood  before  her,  and
certainly,  for  breaking  through  the  barrier  of  the  unseen,  it  was  a  most
objectless  visit.

I  ought  to  mention  that  I  had  n<j  knowledge  of  there  having  been  such  a
person  in  existence  until  her  likeness  stood  at  my  bedroom  door.

Kate  M.  Clerke.

Mrs.  Clerke  further  writes : —

68,  Redcliffe-square,  S.W.

July  29tK  1884.

I  can  give  you  no  more  accurate  date  for  the  ghost  than  July,  1872.

Up  to  the  time  of  my  leaving  Sorrento,  which  was  in  two  or  three  months
after  I  saw  the  woman,  I  think  I  may  safely  affirm  no  one  in  the  house  had
ever  seen  her.  There  was  great  dismay  and  consternation,  and  they  were
reticent  on  the  subject. After  my  first  remonstrances  to  the  women  of  the


468


On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


house  who  performed  the  service,  against  strangers  coming  to  my  room,  I
never  alluded  to  the  subject,  but  we  perceived  that  the  one  who  arranged  the
rooms  never  again  entered  mine  alone,  but  brought  with  her  her  little
daughter.

I  never,  at  any  other  time,  or  under  any  circumstances,  saw  or  imagined
forms,  or  heard  voices,  and  I  disbelieved  in  ghosts.  I  never  dreamed  anything
particular,  and  even  after  the  appearance  at  Sorrento  I  more  imagined  it  to
be  a  weak-minded  person  kept  in  concealment.

The  peculiarity  of  it  is  my  literally  describing  a  person  whom  I  had  never
seen  or  known  about.  Everyone  was  overwhelmed  by  the  portraiture,  even
a  lady  who  had  seen  the  old  mistress.

Kate  M.  Clerke.

Mr.  Podmore  adds  the  follo^ving  notes  of  an  interview  with  Mrs.
Clerke.

Aiuind  15th,  1884.

Called  on  Mrs.  Clerke  to-day.  She  told  me  that  she  had  never  be-
lieved in  ghosts  before,  and  now  believed  in  very  few  besides  her
own.  She  was  quite  sure  that  the  description  she  gave  of  the  figure  was
detailed  enough  to  be  recognised.  Indeed,  the  dress  as  she  saw  it,  though
like  that  actually  worn  by  the  old  mistress,  was  not  a  common  one  in  the
district.  Mrs.  Clerke  never  saw  one  at  all  like  it  in  Italy.  When  she  saw
the  figure,  the  dress  struck  her  as  being  like  that  of  an  (jld  Irish  nurse  of
hers,  and  she  t(jld  her  daughter  so,  when  she  rejoined  them,  adding  that  the
face  was  (juite  unlike  the  nurse's.  Miss  Clerke  confirmed  this  statement
to  me.

Mrs.  Clerke  admitted  that  it  would  have  been  quite  possible  for  the  figure
which  she  saw,  had  it  been  that  of  a  real  woman,  to  have  escaped.  Slie  is,
however,  quite  convinced  that  she  saw  a  ghost  ;  partly  because  of  the
resemblance,  partly  because  of  the  unreasonaljle  tei'ror  which  seized  her  when
she  saw  the  figure,  for  she  is  not  a  nervous  woman  Jiaturally.

There  were  no  noises  or  other  disturbances  in  the  house  during  their  stay.

(Signed)  F.  P.

XXVI. — I  will  conclude  with  a  case  which  we  owe  to  the  kindness
of  General  Barter,  C.B.

This  case  presents  some  interesting  features.  In  the  first  place,  we
may  remai-k  that,  althougli  the  incident  is  remote,  the  testimony  is
remarkably  concordant.  We  have  three  streams  of  evidence  : —
(1)  General  Barter  himself,  corroborated  by  Mrs.  Barter  ;  (2)  Mr.
Steuart,  with  wliom  General  Barter  had  held  no  communication  on  the
matter  for  many  years,  when  (as  he  informs  me)  he  asked  his  old
friend,  in  writing,  at  my  request,  simply  what  he  remembered  of  the
incident ;  (3)  Major  Bond,  with  whom  General  Barter  is  not  acquainted,
and  who  gives  a  merely  hearsay  account  (not  here  reproduced).  Now
we  find  that  Mr.  Steuai't's  evidence  is  practically  identical  with  General
Barter's,  and  that  Major  Bond's — while  inaccurate  as  to  a  minor  point.


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  469


viz.,  the  precise  place  where  the  apparition  was  seen — has  preserved
an  important  item  wliich  Mr.  Steuart  omitted,  viz.,  the  repeated  hearing
of  sounds  of  a  horseman  galloping  down  the  haunted  pathway.

In  the  second  place,  this  narrative  strongly  exemplifies  the  dream-
like character  of  many  of  these  post-mortem  apparitions.  I  do  not
mean  that  they  resemble  dreams  dreamt  by  the  living  percipient,  but
dreams — if  one  may  so  say — dreamt  by  the  dead.  The  group  and  the
action  which  General  Barter  saw  was  like  a  scene  reproduced  or  pro-
longed from  the  fevered  fancies  of  the  man  who  had  now  been  some
months  in  the  grave.  In  the  third  place,  the  dogs'  behaviour  is
noticeable.  In  every  case  which  I  can  recall  where  a  dog  or  other
animal  is  stated  to  have  been  in  a  position  to  see  or  hear  phantasmal
sights  or  sounds,  it  has  been  alarmed  thereby.  But,  of  course,  animals
may  have  been  present — though  we  have  not  been  informed  of  it — on
other  occasions,  and  may  not  have  shown  alai-m.

From  General  Barter,  C.B.,  of  Careystown,  Whitegate,  Co.  Cork.

April  28th,  1888.

In  the  year  1854,  I,  then  a  subaltern  in  the  75th  Regiment,  was  doing
duty  at  the  liill  station  of  Murree  in  the  Punjab.  The  sanatoiiuni  had  not
been  long  in  being,  and  our  men  were  in  temporary  huts  perched  on  the
crest  of  a  hill  some  7,000  feet  above  sea  level,  and  the  officers  were  living  in
tents  pitched  in  sheltered  spots  on  the  hillside,  excejjt  three  or  four  who
had  been  fortunate  enough  to  rent  houses,  such  as  they  were,  which  had
been  built  by  their  predecessors.  I  rented  a  house  built  a  year  or  two  before
by  a  Lieutenant  B.,  who  had  died  the  previous  year  at  Peshawur.'^  This
house  was  built  on  a  spur  jutting  out  frum  the  side  of  the  mountain,  and
about  200  or  300  yards  under  the  M;ill,  as  the  only  road  then  made  which
ran  round  the  hill  was  called.  A  bridle-path  led  to  my  house  from  the
Mall,  and  this  was  scooped  out  of  the  hillside,  the  earth,  &c. ,  being  shovelled
over  the  side  next  my  house.  The  bridle-path  ended  at  a  precijjice,  but  a
few  yards  from  there  a  footpath  led  to  my  hut.

Shortly  after  I  had  occupied  my  hut  an  officer  named  D.  came  down  one
evening  with  his  wife  and  stayed  with  us  until  near  11  p.  m.  It  was  a  lovely
night,  with  the  moon  at  the  full,  and  I  walked  with  them  to  where  my  path
joined  the  bridle-road,  and  remained  standing  there  while  they  toiled  up  the
zig-zag  footpath  to  tlie  Mall,  from  which  they  called  down  to  me  good-night.
I  had  two  dogs  with  me,  and  remained  on  the  spot  while  I  finished  the  cigar
which  I  was  smoking,  the  dogs  meanwhile  hunting  about  in  the  brushwood
jungle  which  covered  the  hill.  I  had  just  turned  to  return  home  when  I
heard  the  ring  of  a  horse's  hoof  as  the  shoe  struck  the  stones  coming  along
the  bridle-path  before  it  takes  the  sharj)  bend  [marked  in  a  plan  which
General  Barter  encloses],  and  presently  I  could  see  a  tall  hat  appear,
evidently  worn  by  the  rider  of  the  animal.  The  steps  came  nearer,
and  in  a  few  seconds  round the  corner  appeared  a  man  uKjunted  on

iWe  learn  from  the  War  Office  that  Lieutenant  B.  died  at  Peshawiu-,  January
2nd,  1854.


470  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  IS,


a  pony  with  two  syces  or  grooms.  At  this  time  the  two  dogs  came,
and  crouching  at  my  side,  gave  low  frightened  whimpers.  The  moon
was  at  the  full,  a  tropical  moon,  so  bright  that  you  could  see  to  read  a
newSpajier  by  its  liglit,  and  I  saw  the  party  before  me  advance  as  plainly  as  if
it  were  noon-day  ;  they  were  above  me  some  eight  or  ten  feet  on  the  bridle-
road,  the  earth  tlirown  down  from  which  sloped  to  within  a  pace  or  two  of
my  feet.  On  the  party  came  until  almost  in  front  of  me  ;  and  now  I  had
better  describe  them.  The  rider  was  in  full  dinner  dress,  with  white  waist-
coat, and  wearing  a  tall  chimney-pot  hat,  and  he  sat  a  powerful  hill  pony  (dark
brown,  with  black  mane  and  tail)  in  a  listless  sort  of  way,  the  reins  hanging
loosely  from  both  hands.  A  syce  led  the  pony  at  each  side,  but  their  faces
I  couldn't  see,  the  one  next  tome  having  his  back  to  me,  and  the  one  farthest
off  being  hidden  by  the  pony's  head ;  each  held  the  bridle  close  up  by  the
bit,  the  man  next  me  with  his  right,  the  other  with  his  left  hand,  and  the
other  hands  were  on  the  thighs  of  the  rider  as  if  to  steady  him  in  his  seat.
As  they  apprcjached  I,  knowing  that  they  couldn't  get  to  any  place  other
than  my  own,  called  out  in  Hindustani,  "Quon  hai?"  (who  is  it?).  There  was
no  answer,  and  on  they  came  till  right  in  front  of  me,  when  I  said  in  English,

"  Hallo,  what  the  d  1  do  you  want  here  1  " Instantly  the  group  came  to

a  halt,  the  rider  gathering  the  bridle-reins  up  with  both  hands,  turned  his
face,  which  had  hitherto  been  looking  away  from  me,  towards  me  and  looked
down  upon  me.  The  group  was  still  as  in  a  tableau,  with  the  bright  moon
shining  full  upon  it,  and  I  at  once  recognised  the  rider  as  Lieutenant  B.,whom
I  had  formerly  known.  The  face,  however,  was  different  from  what  it  used
to  be  ;  in  place  of  being  clean-shaved  as  when  I  knew  it,  it  was  now
surrounded  by  a  fringe  (what  used  to  be  known  as  a  Newgate  fringe),  and  it
was  the  face  of  a  dead  man,  the  ghastly  waxen  pallor  of  it  brought  out  more
distinctly  in  the  moonlight  by  the  fringe  of  dark  hair  by  which  it  was
encircled  ;  the  body,  too,  was  far  stouter  than  when  I  had  known  it  in  life.

I  marked  all  this  in  a  moment,  and  then  resolved  to  lay  hold  of  the  thing
whatever  it  was.  I  dashed  up  the  bank,  and  the  earth  which  had  been
thrown  on  the  side  giving  under  my  feet  I  fell  forward  up  the  bank  on  my
hands  ;  rec(3vering  myself  instantly,  I  gained  the  road,  and  stood  in  the
exact  spot  where  the  group  had  been,  but  which  was  now  vacant ;  there  wasn't
a  trace  of  anything;  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  go  on,  the  road  stopped
at  a  precipice  about  20  yards  beyond,  and  it  was  impossible  to  turn  and  go
back  in  a  second.  All  this  flashed  through  my  mind,  and  I  then  ran  along
the  road  for  about  100  yards,  along  which  they  had  come,  until  I  had  to  stop
for  want  of  breath,  but  there  was  no  trace  of  anything,  and  not  a  sound  to  be
heard.  I  then  returned  home,  where  I  found  my  dogs,  who,  on  all  othei-
occasions  my  most  faithful  comj^anions,  had  not  come  with  mo  along  the  road.

Next  morning  I  went  up  to  D.,  who  belonged  to  the  same  regiment  as  B.,
and  gradually  induced  him  to  talk  of  him.  I  said  :  "  How  very  stout  he  had
become  lately,  and  what  possessed  him  to  allow  his  beard  to  grow  into  that
horrid  fringe  ?  "  D.  replied:  "Yes,  he  became  very  bloated  before  his  death  ;
you  know  he  led  a  very  fast  life,  and  while  on  tlie  sick  list  he  allowed  the
fringe  to  grow  in  spite  of  all  we  could  say  to  him,  and  I  believe  he  was  buried
with  it."  I  then  asked  where  he  got  the  pony  I  had  seen,  describing  it
minutely. "Why,"  said  D.,  "  how  do  you  know  anything  about  all  this?


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Becttli.  471


You  hadn't  seen  B.  for  two  or  three  years,  and  the  pony  you  never  saw.
He  bought  him  at  Peshawur,  and  killed  him  one  day  riding  in  his  reckless
fashion  down  the  hill  to  Trete. "

I  then  told  him  what  I  had  seen  the  ni^ht  before.

R.  Barter,  Major-General,  C.B.

In  conversation,  on  October  12th,  1888,  General  Barter  gave  me
some  furtlier  details,  which  1  put  down  next  day,  and  which  he  has
kindly  revised  and  corrected  : —

Odoher  13th,  1888.

When  I  saw  the  apparition  I  had  been  about  a  week  in  Uncle  Tom's
Cabin.  I  heard  that  B.  had  built  the  house  ;  but  that  fact  did  not
interest  me.  I  never  talked  about  B.  He  was  never  in  my  thoughts.
I  am  positive  that  I  had  not  heard  about  his  change  of  appearance  before
death.

When  I  saw  the  rider  and  syces  approaching  me  down  the  hill  I  noticed
that,  as  the  path  was  narrow  as  well  as  rough,  sometimes  one  syce  and  some-
times the  other  would  have  to  leave  the  path,  and  walk  on  the  hillside  above
or  below  it,  still  holding  the  rider.  When  I  rushed  up  tlie  hill  to  accost  the
rider  he  was  only  some  four  yards  from  me,  but  the  intervening  space  was  a
bank  of  soft  earth  (thrown  from  the  path  when  it  was  made),  so  that  I
stumbled  in  it  when  almost  close  on  the  horse.

We  remained  about  six  weeks  in  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  [i.e.,  as  afterwards
explained,  in  .June  and  July].  During  that  time  my  wife  and  I  rej^eatedly
heard  the  sound  of  a  man  riding  rapidly  down  the  path  to  the  house.  There
was  never  anyone  really  there;  and  in  fact,  except  B.,  I  doubt  whether
anyone  had  ever  ridden  down  that  path.  B.  was  a  reckless  rider,  and
eventually  rode  to  death  the  very  pony  whose  image  I  saw.  I  say  the
very  pony,  for  Lieutenant  Deane  recognised  tlie  pony  as  well  as  the  rider
from  my  description.

Once  when  the  galloping  sound  was  very  distinct,  I  rushed  to  the  door  of
the  house.  There  I  found  my  Hindoo  bearer,  standing  with  a  tattie  in  his
hand.  I  asked  him  what  he  was  there  for.  He  said  that  there  came  a  sound
of  riding  down  the  hill,  and  "passed  him  like  a  typhoon,"  and  went  round
the  corner  of  the  house,  and  he  was  determined  to  waylay  whatever  it  was.
He  added  :  "  Thitan  Tea  ghur  lud,"  (It  is  a  devil's  house).

R.  Baxter,  Major-General,  C.B.

Asked  whetlier  Lieutenant  B.  could  ever  have  ridden  that  pony
during  his  last  illness,  General  Barter  says  : —

Trete  is  the  first  march  down  the  hill  from  Murree  to  the  plains,  and  it
was  on  the  road  between  Murree  and  Trete  that  he  killed  the  pony  by
reckless  riding, — so  I  understood.  I  don't  believe  he  was  ill  when  he  killed
the  pony,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  think  that  the  scene  I  saw  had  ever  existed
in  reality.

The  attitude  of  the  rider  held  on  to  the  horse  suggested  intoxication
rather  than  illness.


472  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


Mr.  Adam  Steuart,  formerly  Lieutenant  87th  Royal  Irish  Fusiliers,,
writes  to  General  Barter,  September,  1888,  as  follows  : —

I  well  remember  your  coming  into  my  hut  at  Murree,  when  I  was  still
in  bed,  one  morning,  and  telling  me  you  had  seen  the  ghost  of  J.  B.  the
night  before.  Deane  of  the  22nd  had,  you  told  me,  been  to  dinner  with
you,  and  when  he  and  his  wife  left  you  walked  with  them  a  bit  of  the  way,
and  then  you  sat  down  to  finish  your  pipe  at  the  side  of  the  j^ath  before
going  home.  While  thus  sitting  you  heard  the  sound  of  horses'  hoofs  behind
you,  and  the  path  they  were  apparently  in  only  led  down  to  your  house.  You
jumped  uj)  to  see  who  it  could  be.  You  then  saw  a  European  on  a  black
pony,  with  two  native  servants,  apparently  holding  him  on.  You  called
out,  asking  who  it  was,  and  receiving  no  rej^ly  sjjrang  up  the  hill  to  give  him
a  lesson  in  politeness.  Doing  so,  you  caught  your  foot  and  fell,  and  when
you  recovered  your  feet  the  apparition  had  vanished.

On  this  account  General  Barter  comments  as  follows  : —
I  was  not  sitting  down,  but  was  standing  up,  finishing  a  cheroot,  and  the
sound  of  the  hoofs  was  in  front  of  me,  and  I  could  see  the  man's  hat  for  some
time  before  the  entire  group  came  into  view  on  my  left  front.

I  asked  Mr.  Steuart  "  wlietlier  he  remembered  anything  as  tO'
Lieutenant  B.'s  aspect  or  hair." He  I'eplied  as  follows  : —

10,  Crookham-road,  Fulham,  S.W.

September  24:th,  1888.
Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  favour  of  21st  inst. ,.
and  in  reply  have  to  state  that  when  Greneral  (then  Lieutenant)  Barter
told  me  of  what  he  had  seen  he  said  to  me,  in  almost  these  words,  "  I  would
have  said  it  was  J.  B.  but  that  it  was  so  stout,  and  that  he  had  what
is  commonly  called  a  Newgate  frill"  (viz.,  the  hair  of  the  beard  growing
under  the  chin).  I  had  not  myself  seen  Mr.  B.  for  some  time  before
his  death,  but  I  believe  he  did  get  bloated  before  he  died,  and  for  some
time  previously  he  had  from  some  freak  or  other  grown  the  hair  under  his
chin. — I  remain,  dear  sir,  yours  faithfully,

Adam  Steuart.

Finally,  Mrs.  Barter  confirms  as  follows  : —

October  ISth,  1888.

During  the  summer  of  1854  my  husband,  then  a  lieutenant  in  75th
Regiment,  was  doing  duty  at  the  Murree  Depot,  in  the  Punjaub,  and  one
night  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Deane,  22nd  Regiment,  had  been  spending  the
evening  with  us,  he  accompanied  them  part  of  the  way  home.  On  his  return,
seeing  him  very  pale  and  witli  a  tr(jubled  expression,  I  questioned  him,  and
he  told  me  that  when  the  Deanes  had  left  him,  as  he  was  about  returning
home,  he  was  surprised  to  hear  the  sound  of  a  liorse's  hoofs,  on  the  little
road  leading  to  our  house,  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin"  as  it  was  called,  and
that  when  the  horse  came  in  view  he  saw  that  he  was  ridden  by  a
European,  who  was  held  on  by  two  syces,  that  they  came  close
to  him,  on  the  roadway,  under  which  he  was  standing,  and  on  his
challenging  them  the  rider  stopped  the  pony  and  looked  down  on  him,  and
he,  by  the  light  of  the  full  moon,  at  once  recognised  him  as  Lieutenant  B. ,


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  473


22nd  Regiment,  who  had  [died  some  time  before  in  Peshawur.  My
liusband  said  that  lie  made  a  dash  up  the  bank  to  get  at  the  party,  but  the
earth  thrown  down  from  the  road  gave  under  his  feet,  and  he  slipf)ed  forward
on  his  hands,  and  wlien  he  recovered  himself  the  whole  thing  had  disappeared.

We  lived  at  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  "  for  about  six  weeks  after,  and  several
times  heard  a  horse  gallop  down  the  path  and  round  our  house,  at  break-neck
speed,  during  the  night,  the  panting  of  the  horse  being  quite  audible,  and
once  my  liusband,  hearing  it  approaching,  threw  open  the  door  as  it  passed
and  ran  into  the  verandah,  where  stood  our  old  bearer,  named  "Bola,"
armed  with  a  tattie,  who  said  he  often  heard  it  go  past  like  a  whirlwind,  and
that  it  was  the  devil's  house.  I  may  add  that  our  house,  "Uncle  Tom's
Cabin,"  had  been  built  by  Lieutenant  B.

(Signed)  M.  D.  Barter.

The  above  narrative  is  interesting  from  yet  another  point  of  view.
It  affords  a  marked  example  of  what  we  have  termed  "  local  cases," —
cases  where  the  appearance  of  the  phantom  seems  to  have  borne  relation
rather  to  the  place  where  it  was  seen  than  to  the  percipients  who  saw
it.  Such  cases  were  briefly  touched  upon,  both  by  Mr.  Gurney  and  by
myself,  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  ;  ^  but  in  this  fresh  collection  of
phantasms  of  persons  recently  dead  they  occur  in  decidedly  larger
proportion,  and  seem  to  call  for  renewed  notice.

The  27  cases  quoted  at  length  in  this  paper  (of  which  cases  XV.,

XVI.  ,  XVIII.,  XXVII.,  contain  more  than  one  separate  incident)  may
be  divided  thus. Five  were  dreams  or  "  borderland "  cases  (VII.,

XVII.  ,  XIX.,  XX.,  XXI.),  and  four  of  these  were  personal  rather  than
local,  while  in  case  XXI.  dream-communication — if  we  account  it  a
dream — was  apparently  caused  by  a  fact  of  locality.  Let  us  go  on
to  the  developed  waking  hallucinations  which  oui'  paper  contains.  Seven
of  these  were  purely  personal  in  character  (I.,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  XIII.,

XVIII.  ,  XXII.) ;  that  is  to  say,  the  phantom  appeared  to  a  surviving
friend,  in  that  surviving  friend's  own  entourage.  In  six  cases  (IX.,
XII.,  XIV.,  XV.,  XVI.,  XXVII.)  the  phantom  was  in  some  sense  both
personal  and  local ;  it  appeared  to  known  persons,  but  also  in  a
familiar  place.  In  one  of  these  narratives — Colonel  Ci'ealock's — the
connection  between  the  decedent  and  the  percipient  was  slight ;  but  the
percipient  was  in  a  sense  brought  nearer  to  the  decedent  by  the  fact
that  both  were  immersed  in  the  same  absorbing  train  of  ideas,  viz.,  the
Zulu  War.

Finally,  in  ten  cases  (V.,  VI.,  VIII.,  XL,  XVIb.,  XXL,  XXIIL,
XXIV.,  XXV.,  XXVI.)  the  connection  seems  to  have  been  purely
local.  In  only  one  of  these  cases — General  Barter's — had  the  percipient
ever  seen  the  decedent  when  in  life,  and  in  this  case  a  part  of  the

1  See  Vol.  II.,  pp.  268  (where  the  cases  below  mentioned  are  referred  to)  and
301-2,  where  locality,  as  an  attractive  cause  independent  of  personal  reasons,  is
suggested.


474  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


impression  was  sluired  hy  othei's,  to  whom  Lieutenant  B.  had  been  a
stranger.  In  four  of  these  cases  (V.,  VI.,  XI.,  XXIII.)  the  figure
appears  actually  in  the  room  whei;n  the  death  occurred.  In  three
(XVIb.,  XXIV.,  XXV.)  the  figure  appears  in  the  house,  but  not  in
the  room  where  death  occurred.  In  one — General  Barter's — the  figure
appears  a  few  hundred  yards  from  a  house  where  the  decedent  had
lived.  In  one — (VIII.) — the  decedent's  figure  appears,  not  in  the  room
or  the  house  where  he  himself  died,  but  in  the  house  where  his  wife  has
just  died,  and  in  the  room  above  that  in  which  her  body  lay  ;  and  in
one  (XXI.)  the  figure  is  in  a  room  occasionally  occupied  by  the
decedent.

Turning  back  to  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  we  note  that  there  were
B.  good  many  cases  where  there  may  have  been  a  local  as  well  as  a
personal  atti'acting  cause  for  the  phantasm, — as  when  a  man  dying
a,way  from  liome  appears  to  his  family  at  home.  But  besides  and
beyond  these  cases,  there  are  a  few  (as  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Gurney,  II.,
p.  268)  where  the  local  cause  may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  been  pre-
dominant. Such,  eminently,  was  the  Bard  and  de-Freville  case,  which  now
finds  its  more  suitable  place  among  cases  occurring  shortly  aftey-  death.
And  such  was  tlie  case  of  the  maltster  (II.,  p.  57),  who  saw  his  employer
standing  on  the  steps  leading  to  the  kiln  door.  Such,  too  (if  not  a
case  of  mistaken- identity),  was  the  appearance  of  Professor  Conington
to  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  in  Oriel-lane  (II.,  p.  70).  Such  was  the  case  where
the  phantom  of  a  servant,  absent  in  hospital,  appeared  to  a  fellow-
servant,  by  no  means  her  friend,  at  Troston  Hall.  Both  personal  and
local,  again,  was  the  case  (II.,  p.  230)  where  the  steps  of  a  butler
seemed  to  be  heard  in  his  mistress'  house,  as  though  he  were
extinguishing  the  gas,  at  the  moment  of  his  death  in  hospital  at
Ventnor.  This  case,  indeed,  pretty  closely  resembles  that  which
Colonel  Crealock  has  reported,  wliere  the  phantom  of  Mr.  D.,  killed
.at  some  distance,  was  seen  removing  his  bedding  from  the  camp.
Another  case  where  the  attraction  must  have  been  local  is  that  (II.,  p.
r)41 )  where  the  young  girl  just  about  to  coiinnit  suicide  by  hanging  hei'self
on  a  tree  was  seen  by  a  stranger  apparently  going  towards  the  grove,
at  a  moment  wlien  she  was  provably  within  doors.  This  last-mentioned
case  (unfortunately  very  remote)  resembles  a  "  haunting  "  before  death,
while  at  the  same  time  it  reminds  us  of  the  cases  where  a  man'fe
phantom  has  been  seen  returning  home,  &c.,  a  short  time  before  he
.actually  arrives.

Once  more.  General  Campbell's  case  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  local  as
well  as  personal.  That  is  to  say,  the  pliantasmal  phenomena  occurred
in  the  deceased  lady's  intended  home, — unfinished  at  her  death — and
mainly  in  the  presence  of  her  husband.  But  it  will  be  noted  that  one
of  the  most  marked  phenomena — the  visual  hallucination — occurred  not


1889.] On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


475


to  General  Campbell,  but  to  a  child  who  had  never  seen  the  decedent.
Are  we  thei'efore  to  class  this  case  as  predominantly  a  local  one  ?  or
may  we  suppose  that  the  effort  at  self-manifestation  was  made  for
General  Campbell's  benefit,  but  was,  as  it  happened,  more  easily
perceptible  by  the  child-guest  than  by  the  widower  himself  ?

There  are  several  cases  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  which  suggest
this  latter  interpretation  ; — cases,  that  is  to  say,  where  the  apparition
seems  to  be  conditioned  or  attracted  by  the  presence,  or  expected
presence,  of  some  one  other  than  the  person  who  actually  does  per-
ceive it.  Such  is  the  case  [I.,  p.  524]  where  Mrs.  Rankings  face  appears,
at  the  moment  of  death,  not  to  her  daughter,  but  to  hei'  daughter's
father-in-law,  who  is  sitting  in  the  same  room.  Such  is  the  case'
[II.,  p.  40]  where  Louisa  B.'s  phantom  is  seen  in  the  liouse  of  her  old
friend  Mr.  D.  ;  yet  not  by  Mr.  D.  himself,  but  by  his  sister,  to  whom
the  decedent  was  almost  a  stranger.  Such  was  a  case  [I.,  p.  559]  where
a  lady,  sitting  in  tlie  drawing-room  of  her  father's  rectory,  saw  the
phantom  of  a  dying  relation,  who  much  desired  to  see  her  father,  but
had  no  special  interest  in  herself.  Such  was  a  case  [II.,  p.  613]  where
the  apparition  of  a  dying  lady  was  seen  in  the  house  of  a  Mr.  Robertson,
to  whom  she  was  engaged  to  be  married,  but  seen  not  by  Mr.  Robertson,
who  was  away  from  home,  but  by  his  sons.  Such,  too,  was  the  very
singular  case  [II.,  p.  61]  where  the  phantom  of  Mr.  J.  H.  de  la  Poer
Beresford  appeared,  not  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Gierke,  but  to  a  black  nurse
who  was  near,  and  who  saw  the  figure  appai'ently  leaning  over  Mrs.
Gierke's  chair.  ^

And  while  the  j^ersonal  character  of  the  apparitions  tlius  tends  to
give  way,  in  post-mortem  apparitions,  to  the  local,  we  observe  also  (so
far  as  our  small  collection  of  cases  permits  of  generalisation),  that  tlie

1  Case.s  have  sometimes  been  reiDorted  (though  we  have  hardly  any  in  our  own
collection)  where  a  phantom  appears  to  a  stranger,  expressing  a  desu-e  that  a  near
friend  shall  be  informed  of  the  appearance.  Such  is  a  narrative  printed  by  the
American  Society  for  Pyschical  Research  (Proceedinris  IV.,  p.  507),  where  a  Mr.
N.  X.,  of  New  Jersey,  says:  "My  wife,  residing  with  relatives  in  a  remote  town  in
South- Western  Virginia,  died  suddenly  of  apoplexy  on  a  Thursday,  and  was  buried  on
the  Saturday  following.  Remoteness  made  the  telegraph  useless  as  a  summons  to  me,
and  on  the  Monday  morning  following  I  received  two  letters, — one  announcing  her
death,  and  one  from  a  lady,  a  school-teacher,  a  principal  [living  near  the  Delaware
Water  Gap],  with  whom  I  corresponded  much  on  the  educational  matters  affecting
her,  in  which  she  informed  me  that  a  spirit  had  appeared  to  her  and  desired  her  to
inform  me  of  her  identity  as  my  wife,  and  of  her  death.  Neither  party  had  ever  met ;
one  was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the  other.  The  sudden  death  of  my  wife,  a  few
hours'  illness,  her  ignorance  of  the  existence  of  my  correspondent,  preclude  all  pliysical
communication."

The  lady  referred  to  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  :  "  I  cannot  recall  the  details  of  my
interview  -ivith  Mrs.  X.  I  only  remember  that  I  seemed  to  be  at  her  home  in
Virginia,  and  in  conversation  with  her,  in  which  she  requested  me  to  inform  Mr.  X.,
who  was  then  in  New  York,  of  her  sudden  '  transition,'  which  I  did  immediately."


476  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.]  Mar.  18,


recognition  manifested  hy  the  apparition, — its  apparent  attention  to  the
percipient — tends  to  become  less.

In  these  respects  tliese  "  transitional  ghosts  "  occupy  a  midway
position  between  the  phantoms  which  appear  at  the  moment  of  death
and  the  "  haunting  "  figures  of  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  others  have
published  several  records.  In  few  of  those  narratives  of  "  haunting  "
has  it  been  thus  far  possible  to  establish  a  clear  connection  between  the
haunting  figure  and  any  deceased  person.

Nevertheless  there  are  a  few  instances  where  there  seems  to  have
been  a  recognition  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  a  year  from  the  date
of  death  ;  and  these  are  deferred  for  review  on  a  future  occasion.

Meantime,  the  evidence  given  in  this  paper  for  veridical  phantasms
occurring  sliortly  after  death  is  manifestly  nmch  weaker  than  the
evidence  already  published  for  veridical  phantasms  occurring  at  or  about
the  time  of  deatii.  Even  were  we  to  add  to  tiie  list  in  this  paper  all
the  non-evidential  "visions  of  consolation " — where  the  bereaved
husband,  for  instance,  sees  the  figure  of  his  wife,  for  whom  he  is  then
mourning — we  should  not  raise  the  total  to  anything  like  the  number
of  cases  which  roughly  coincide  with  the  death.  This  discrepancy,
however, — if  the  cases  be  indeed  veridical — need  not  surprise  us.  On
any  tiieory — except  that  of  direct  providential  intervention — we  should
think  it  antecedently  likely  that  any  power  of  communication  with
living  persons  must  lessen  as  the  decedent  becomes  more  remote  from
earthly  life.  This  need  not  lead  us  to  suppose,  with  the  Platonic  Cebes,
that  the  departed  person  is  gradually  extinguislied  altogether.  If
indeed  there  be  a  life  beyond  that  of  earth,  it  would  ill  become  us
to  assume  to  track  its  progress  or  to  assign  its  limitation.

I  must  conclude  by  an  earnest  request  for  accounts  of  further
cases  resembling  those  given  in  the  above  paper.^  No  part  of  our
inquiry  bears  more  directly  upon  problems  of  the  utmost  importance  to
all  of  us.  F.W.H.M.

APPENDIX.

The  following  account  is  tedious  and  the  recorded  plienomena
are  of  an  inconclusive  type.  We  have,  however,  thought  it  right
to  print  the  narrative  as  a  specimen  of  care  and  accuracy  in
observation  and  description.  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  went  over  the  house
witli  General  Campbell,  and  were  satisfied  that  no  more  candid  or
painstaking  informant  could  be  found. Unfoitunately  he  died  not

'  The  present  collection  is  not  a  complete  one.  Several  cases  of  great  interest
were  published  in  a  little  volume  called  Spirit  Identit//.  by  "M.  A.  (Oxon)"  (London,
1879.)  But  as  I  understand  that  there  is  a  prospect  that  this  work  (now  out  of  print)
may  be  re-issued  with  further  details,  I  defer  notice  of  its  contents.


1889.] 071  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  477


Ions  after  this  interview  ;  and  we  believed  that  there  had  been  few
further  phenomena  to  record.  We  have  not  tliought  it  needful  to  print
the  plan  of  the  house.  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  saw  the  principal  servant  ;
and  from  the  disposition  of  rooms  and  the  character  of  the  household,
we  agreed  with  General  Campbell  that  the  hypothesis  of  practical
joking  on  the  part  of  servants  was  quite  untenable.  It  may  be  ob-
served that  the  actual  ringing  of  a  bell  (if  not  due  to  ordinary  causes)
would  take  us  among  a  class  of  physical  phenomena  which  lie  outside
the  scope  of  this  paper.

XXVII. — From  General  Campbell,  Gwalior  House,  Southgate,  N.

April  27th,  1884.

Statement  of  apparently  ultra-mundane  occurrences,  at  times  and  places
seemingly  guided  by  intelligence,  from  September  15th,  1882,  to  April  otli,
1884,  in  my  large,  isolated  house  above  quoted.

The  above  quoted  is  a  large  two-storied  building,  having  an  area  of  58  by  71
feet,  the  lower  floor  raised  five  feet  from  the  ground  level,  which  is  concreted
throughout.  The  house  is  a  very  solid  one,  with  no  lath  and  plaster  to
convey  sounds,  thoroughly  lighted  in  every  part,  and  consequently  not  only
very  dry,  but  quite  free  from  rats  or  mice.  There  are  two  cats,  which  are
invariably  turned  out  at  night,  with  no  possibility  of  getting  in  again.  No
dogs,  except  one,  a  long  way  off  in  the  yard.  The  house  is  surrounded  by
fields  to  a  distance  of  300  yards  to  the  nearest  cottage,  situated  on  a  private
road,  not  metalled  (having  scarcely  any  wheeled  traffic,  and  very  rarely  any
at  night),  distant  40  yards  from  the  house.  It  was  completed  in  August,
1882,  and  tlie  only  ordinary  residents  are  myself  on  the  S.E.  side,  and  three
servants  on  the  N.  W.  side,  having  only  one  doorway  between  the  body  of  the
house  and  the  servants'  quarters  on  each  floor.  See  sketch  accompanying,  in
which  the  particular  rooms  referred  to  are  within  red  lines,  with  all  needful
details  marked  thereon.  It  is  naturally  a  particularly  quiet  house,  and  I
seldom  hear  a  sound,  not  made  by  myseK.  The  servants  are  always  in  their
bedi-oom  C  (see  sketch)  by  10.30  p.m.,  and  I  almost  invariably  enter  my
distant  bedroom  A  about  11  p.m.

I  have  explained  all  this  in  great  detail  to  show  that  every  sound  is  heard
among  perfect  quietness,  particularly  at  niglit.

The  rest  of  this  statement  refers  to  about  30  inexphcable  sounds,  as  if
inviting  my  attention  specially,  and  two  ajoparitions  or  visions,  apparently  of
a  carefully  calculated  nature,  seen  by  a  child  visitor,  being  a  blood  relation
of  my  late  wife,  who  died  in  J uly,  1882,  and  whom  this  chUd  had  never  seen,
nor  yet  any  likeness  of  her.

Having  now  cleared  the  way  for  a  general  view  of  the  whole  case,  I  will
give  the  details,  premising  that  I  am  much  the  reverse  of  a  nervous  or  fanciful
temperament,  rather  cautious,  at  my  present  advanced  age,  as  to  believing
anything  without  the  "  Q.  E.  D."  ;  also  of  very  regular  and  temperate  habits,
having  always  been  so,  never  drinking  wine  or  beer,  and  only  an  ounce  and  a
half  of  spirits  in  three-quarters  of  a  pint  of  water  in  24  hours  ;  and  that  the
child  quoted  does  not  yet  understand  what  the  word  "ghost"  means.

As  before  mentioned,  my  wife  died  in  July,  1882.  At  that  time  I  had
never  given  the  subject  of  ultra-mundane  indications  any  consideration  what


478


On  Apparitiam  occurrinrj  noon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


ever,  beyond  what  I  had  heard  of  the  experiences  of  two  of  my  relatives  in  a
vague  sort  of  way,  several  years  ag(j  (within  10  years),  and  it  was  not  till
about  the  middle  of  the  occurrences  under  notice  that  I  read  the  books
of  Dale  Owen,  D.  D.  Home,  and  Serjeant  Cox.

The  inexplicable  jjlienomena  quoted  have  only  been  in  my  own  bedroom,
A  (chiefly)  ;  the  visitors'  room,  B  ;  and  the  servants'  bedroom  (twice),  and
kitchen  below  the  latter  (once)  ;  also  once  in  my  day-room,  below  my
bedroom,  A.  With  so  much  variation  in  ([uality  of  sound,  there  must  have
been  quite  as  many  inexplicable  natural  causes,  (/  natural  (mundane)  causes
have  existed.

The  first  few  indications  I  did  not  record  at  all,  but  note  them  now
as  between  the  15th  and  30th  Sejitember,  1882,  being  six  weeks  from  the  date
of  my  wife's  death — i.e.,  the  former  date.  (1)  At  3  a.m.,  while  asleep  in  my
bedroom  A,  amid  perfect  quietness,  I  was  awoke  by  loud  and  prolonged
knocking,  as  by  knuckles  of  a  man.  Went  to  the  door  with  night-light ;
nothing  to  be  seen  or  heaid  :  thought  it  must  have  been  fancy.  I  may  add
that  my  late  wife  was  much  in  my  mind,  but  I  had  not  the  wildest  idea  of  any
ultra-mundane  communication,  having  given  no  thought  to  the  subject.  (2)
About  1.30  p.m.  Servants  at  dinner  in  kitclien  below  C.  Heard  a  loud  and
continuous  rapping  ;  part  rap,  part  rattle,  apparently  on  or  outside  the  room
window  in  front.  Thought  it  might  be  an  intimate  friend  rapping  with  his
umbrella,  as  no  bell  had  then  been  put  up.  Looked  through  every  wmdow
on  the  lower  floor,  then  round  the  house  outside  in  both  directions.  Saw
and  heard  nothing.  Returned  to  my  room  by  the  kitchen  door  (below  C) ;
found  the  servants  at  dinner  too  far  ott'  (over  60ft.,  with  two  closed  doors)
to  hear  the  rapping.  A  part  of  the  sound  was  that  of  the  soft  part  of  the
doubled  fist  striking  the  side  frame  of  the  window,  and  fingers  tapping  on  the
glass,  all  combined.  I  note  here  that  the  hour  (between  1  and  2  p.m.)  was
the  most  favourable  possible  to  avoid  confusion  with  other  sounds,  and  as  if —
as  I  now  think — the  rapping  by  day  came  after  the  unsuccessful  knocking  at
my  bedroom  door  at  night.  (3)  At  11  p.  m.  Servants  all  quiet  in  their  bed-
room, and  self  just  got  into  bed,  a  night-light  burning  as  usual.  Heard  two
clear  single  raps  on  the  door  X.  The  door  also  seemed  co  ojjen  about  a  foot.
The  sound  was  the  hollow  sound  of  knocking  with  knuckles,  not  the  creaking
of  a  door.  Got  up  and  saw  nothing  ;  all  dark  outside.  (4)  About  11  p.  m.
again,  and  (as  before)  just  after  getting  into  bed.  Servants  in  bed  at  9.30.
All  quiet,  without  a  sound  of  any  kind.  Heard  more  rappings  near  the  head
of  my  bed,  where  some  relics  are  kept.  On  the  two  last  occasions,  I  was
thinking  of  the  departed  one.  All  this  from  15th  to  30th  September,  1882,
and  I  think  chiefly  (as  subsequently)  between  Saturday  nights  and  sunrise  on
Mondays,  which  seems  curious.  The  two  apparitions,  hereafter  detailed,
were  also  at  daybreak  of  a  Saturday  (Sunday  being  Christmas  Day)  and
Monday.  After  30th  September,  1882,  the  rappings,  &c.,  were  regularly
recorded  on  the  day  following  the  night  of  the  occurrence.

22nd  October,  1882  (Sunday),  at  (note  that  by  "at"  I  mean  about,  but
will  keep  to  the  exact  records)  6.30  a.m.  I  had  been  previously  out  of  bed
for  half-an-hour.  Servants  just  gone  down  to  the  kitchen  below  their  bed-
room C.  I  seem  to  hear  quite  distinctly  the  Christian  name  of  my  late  wife
about  three  feet  from  my  ear  ;  it  was  not  in  her  natural  voice,  the  sound  was
moderately  low  (not  a  whisper),  with  each  syllable  given  at  equidistant


1889]. On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  479


intervals  and  at  the  same  pitch  as  is  pronounced  by  a  speaking  machine  ;  it
was  hardly  in  a  natural  voice  at  all.  There  is  a  servant  of  the  same  name  in
the  house,  then  far  from  my  room  ;  but  it  was  no  familiar  voice  that  I  heard,
and,  on  inquiry,  her  name  had  not  been  called  by  anyone  about  that  hour.  I
have  never  imagined  or  heard  a  name  in  the  same  manner.  After  this  I
obtained  the  two  books  by  Dale  Owen  and  read  them.

November  9th,  1882  (same  year),  time  about  7  a.m. — Heard  two  con-
secutive sets  of  sounds,  like  blows  on  my  under  pillow,  too  loud  for  heart
pulsations,  which  followed  (just  felt).  I  wrote  and  placed  on  my  chest  of
drawers  (see  sketch)  "  Give  three  raps  if  from  my  late  wife."

November  13th,  1882. — At  11.30  p.m.  had  just  got  into  bed  about  a
minute.  Servants  all  retired  at  10  p.m.,  and  perfect  quietness  inside  and
outside  of  the  house.  No  strong  wind.  Heard  three  very  loud  crashes
apparently  through  the  wall  (14in.  wall),  just  above  the  chest  of  drawers
marked  in  sketch  in  my  bedroom  A.  The  sound  was  indescribable — some-
thing between  the  blasting  of  a  tree-trunk  by  lightning,  the  sudden  breaking
of  a  Sin.  plank  across  a  fixed  fulcrum,  and  the  report  of  a  rifle,  but  more
prolonged — nearly  as  loud  as  the  report  of  a  large-bored  pistol  in  a  room
(which  I  have  heard  before).  This,  considering  my  rejDeated  request  for  three
raps,  startled  me  much.  There  was  an  interval  of  some  four  seconds  between
each  report.  Having  lighted  a  candle,  I  examined  the  wall  closely  to  seek
for  any  crack  or  fissure  in  it  or  the  colour  wash  (no  wall-paper),  but  could  see
nothing,  or  up  to  this  date.  Looked  over  the  long  corridor  (see  sketch),
then  examined  the  wall  in  the  empty  room  adjoining  at  S,  but  could  detect
nothing — no  sounds  of  any  kind,  nor  sign  of  failure  in  any  wall,  roof,  or  other
part  of  the  house.  The  servants  (who  sleep  soundly)  were  not  informed,
and  made  no  remark — having  60ft.  of  distance  and  three  closed  doors  between
us.  On  hearing  these  crashes,  I  knew  nothing  about  repeating  the  alphabet,
or  did  not  think  of  it  ;  but  I  took  a  pencil,  held  at  the  end  by  two  fingers
lightly,  to  see  if  a  precedent  quoted  by  Dale  Owen  might  again  occur — no
results.  I  now  requested,  as  before,  that  further  rappings  might  be  either  on
the  door  or  on  the  thin  jjanel-door  of  the  hangmg  wardrobe. (See  sketch. )

Up  to  December  23rd,  1882,  there  were  no  further  indications  of  the
same  kind,  but  on  the  24th  December,  1882,  I  had  as  visitors  a  lady  and  two
children,  aged  7  and  10,  both  girls.  They  were  blood  relatives  of  my  late
wife,  and  the  mother  a  special  favourite  of  hers.  The  mother  and  eldest  child
slept  on  the  "double  bed  "  (see  sketch)  in  bedroom  B,  wliile  the  younger
child,  a  very  delicate,  clever  child,  slept  in  the  "child's  "  bed,  near  the  fire-  '
place  (see  sketch),  looking  full  on  the  "easy  chair,"  so  marked  on  the  other
side  of  the  fire-place.

In  the  grey,  early  morning  light  of  the  24th  December,  the  younger
child,  on  the  "  child's  "  bed,  awoke  her  mother  saying,  "  Who  is  that  lady
sitting  in  the  arm-chair?"  (The  chair  was  usually  empty,  without  any
antimacassar.)  The  mother,  seeing  nothing  but  the  empty  chair  in  its
usual  position  and  state,  intervened  between  the  child  and  chair,  and
succeeded  in  soothing  her.  Nothing  further  was  said,  that  day,  either  to
myself  or  others.

Same  date,  about  midnight,  I  heard  a  sudden  and  loud  tap  in  my  bed-
room A  which  awoke  me  from  a  half  dozing  state.  The  lady  in  bedroom  B
also  heard  a  loud  tap  apparently  in  her  room  ;  whether  at  the  same  moment


480  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


could  not  be  ascertained.  (Curiously  enough,  one  of  the  servants  dreamed
that  the  lady  had  mentioned  this  tap  to  her,  which  was  not  the  case  till  next
morning,  astonishing  the  lady  by  replying,  "You  told  me  of  this  last  night,
or  I  must  have  dreamed  it.")

26tli  December,  1882. — At  daybreak,  as  before — a  grey  morning,  the
same  child,  being  wide  awake  (  as  usual  with  her  at  early  morning),  saw  the
figure  of  a  "  tall  lady  in  a  long  grey  dress,  a  tall  hat  with  a  feather  in  it  ;
the  face  was  very  thin  and  white  "  (the  child  shuddered  when  repeating  this
two  days  afterwards).  "  I  heard  the  sweep  of  the  long  dress  on  the  floor
and  the  sound  of  slippered  feet — the  heels — as  the  lady  came  by  the  door.
She  went  to  the  side  of  your  bed,"  the  mother's,  (see  double  bed  on  sketch)
"and  seemed  to  smooth  down  the  clothes  and  tuck  you  in  comfortably,  then
went  round  the  bed  to  the  table  on  the  other  side,  near  the  head  of  the  bed"
(see  sketch),  "then  took  up  some  books,  opened  them,  and  put  them  down
again."  A  Bible,  Prayer-book  and  others  lay  there.  "  Then  she  turned  round
and  was  coming  to  me,  when  I  put  my  head  under  the  bed-clothes.  I  was
so  frightened  that  I  could  not  sj)eak."  This  was  stated  by  the  mother  to  be
usual  with  her,  though  far  from  being  a  timid  child.  She  sle^it  in  August
following  in  the  spare  room  E  with  her  sister,  before  mentioned,  and  a
younger  brother  of  five  years,  recpiiring  no  night-light.  (The  room  was
chosen  as  being  nearest  to  the  servants  in  tlie  absence  of  the  mother.)  There
is  no  guessing  the  motives  of  a  child,  but  strangely  enough  she  said  nothing
about  it  till  about  to  be  put  to  bed  at  night,  when  she  said  to  a  young  servant
girl,  "  I  don't  want  to  sleep  alone  in  this  bed  again."  Then  the  whole  story
came  out.  The  servant  girl  told  the  mother,  who  came  at  once  to  my  room
with  it — stating  also  for  the  first  time  what  the  child  had  seen  on  the
Saturday  morning,  the  24th.  I  may  mention  here  that  there  had  been
no  Christmas  amusements  or  mummery  of  any  kind  to  affect  the  child's
nerves,  and  she  was  in  her  usual  health.  Her  veracity  is  beyond  suspicion,
and  she  may  have  been  afraid  of  displeasing  her  mother  in  consequence  of
what  occurred  on  the  24th.  The  whole  story  is  too  circumstantial  and
complete  for  such  a  child,  and  she  does  not,  as  before  stated,  understand
the  meaning  of  the  word  "  ghost "  (having  been  entirely  brought  up  by  the
mother).  We  did  not  like  to  question  so  young  a  child  much  in  the  matter  ;
but  during  the  remainder  of  her  visit  here  (some  two  weeks)  she  adhered
exactly  to  the  same  account,  telling  the  servant  that  she  would  not  sleep
again  in  the  same  bed,  or  without  a  light  (which  was  given),  because  "  that
woman  would  come  back. "  Child-like,  slie  did  not  object  to  sleeping  alone
in  room  E,  in  July  following.  (See  ante.)  The  child  continued  so  very
positive  as  to  what  she  had  seen  that  her  mother  made  the  best  of  it  l)y
saying  that  perhaps  she  had  seen  a  good  angel.  The  mother  is  far  from
being  a  Spiritualist,  and  is  a  lady  of  strong  common-sense  and  nerves.  Her
opinion  was — quoting  her  knowledge  of  the  child — that  the  latter  ' '  must
have  seen  something,"  as  tliere  had  been  no  previous  visions  of  any  kind,  nor
have  there  been  since.

As  regards  my  own  view  of  the  case,  I  cannot  help  remarking  the
intelligently  cautious  course  of  the  two  appearances  or  visions,  so  as  not
to  frighten  the  child,  and  the  similarity  between  the  description  given  by  the
child,  and  the  ordinary  appearance  of  my  late  wife — never  seen  by  the  child


1889]. On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  481


nor  any  such  likeness — in  her  forenoon  dress,  &c.,  when  on  her  regular
daily  visits  to  the  damp  garden,  stables,  and  poultry-yard.  The  similarity
stands  thus  : —

The  figure  "was  tall"  (my  late  wife  was  5ft.  5in.  in  house  shoes,  without
heels,  and  must  have  appeared  taller  to  the  child  in  consequence  of  the  rest
of  the  description,  being  also  taller  than  her  mother  and  other  people  usually
about  her).

" In  a  long  grey  dress."  The  dress — still  with  me — is  not  what  a  painter
would  call  grey  ;  being  made  of  "  pooshmena,"  an  Indian  cloth,  of  a  light
brownish  earth  colour,  sometimes  called  a  "brown  grey  "  by  milliners,  and
what  the  child  (according  to  the  mother)  would  call  "grey,"  particularly  in
the  grey  light  of  early  morning.  The  dress  (an  outer  garment  like  a  cloak)
seems  to  myself  to  be  of  a  grey  colour  in  the  grey  light  of  the  early  morning.
I  do  not  think  that  the  child  saw  anything  with  her  natural  eyes  ;  but  as
somnambulists  or  mesmerised  persons  see  and  hear  ;  else  the  mother  would
have  seen  the  first  or  (apparently)  preparatory  apparition  or  vision.

The  "  long  dress,"  described  corresponds  with  the  dress  just  described —
being  usually  looped  up,  as  is  often  done  with  "half-trains,"  when  out  of
doors.

"  With  a  tall  hat  and  feather  in  it."  The  garden  hat  was  a  high-crowned
soft  felt,  of  the  wide-awake  kind,  with  a  gauze  or  muslin  band  round  the
crown,  with  dropping  end  hanging  down  on  one  side — always  worn  with  the
dress  described. Long  dresses  were  always  worn.

"  Heard  the  trail  of  the  dress  on  the  floor,"  or  "rustling  sound  "  of  the
same.  This  I  have  never  heard  ;  but  sharper  ears  might  have  done  so.
"  And  the  sound  of  heels  on  the  floor."  This  corresponds,  as  rather  loose
goloshes  were  invariably  worn  with  the  same  general  dress,  when  leaving  or
entering  the  house.  A  light  stick,  not  quoted  by  the  child,  but  making  a
tapping  noise  in  the  house,  was  always  carried.  The  quoting  of  the  rustling
sound  of  the  dress  and  of  the  heels,  seems,  however,  to  give  an  objective
character  to  the  apparition.

"  Went  round  the  large  bed  (occupied  by  the  mother  and  elder  sister),
"  smoothing  down  and  tucking  in  the  bed-clothes. "  This  apparently  afiec-
tionate  procedure  seems  as  if  intended  to  prevent  alarm  to  the  seer,  as  also
the  taking  up  and  laying  down  of  books  before  passing  the  seer's  bed  in
returning  round  the  large  bed.  The  return  towards  the  child  (see  route
dotted  on  the  sketch)  was  too  much  for  the  child,  who  "  covered  up  her
head  with  the  bed-clothes. "  The  child  stated  that  she  "could  not  si)eak."
(This,  according  to  the  mother,  was  usual  with  her,  when  frightened. )  The
detailed  description  of  the  two  appearances,  and  of  the  whole  procedure  on
ths  second  occasion,  which  must  have  taken  some  minutes,  seems,  as  before
stated,  far  too  much  for  so  young  a  child,  and  i)articularly  this  child,  who  is
not  at  all  given  to  long  narratives.  The  fact  of  covering  up  her  head  sliows
that  she  was  quite  awake,  and  her  exact  repetition  of  the  same  details  for
many  days  shows  that  all  the  details  must  have  been  impressed  upon  lier
mind,  and  more  so  than  most  ordinary  occurrences,  in  such  detail.  The  child
changed  beds  with  her  sister  on  the  night  of  the  26th  December  (1882),  and
by  burning  a  night-liglit,  and  leaving  the  door  wide  open  (myself  being  just
on  the  outside),  pending  her  mother  entering  the  room  for  the  night,  slie  did


482  On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  [Mar.  18,


not  repeat  "that  woman  will  come  back  again.  My  idea  is  that  this  child
was  the  only  "  sensitive  "  (like  D.  D.  Home)  in  the  house,  and  made  use  of
to  supi:)lement  the  indications  which  I  and  the  servants  could  hear.  It
seems  to  be  admitted  (see  Mechmdsm  of  Man,  Vol.  II.)  that  a  few  people
have  the  power  of  inducing  artificial  somnambulism  or  trance,  with  full
power  over  the  thoughts  and  even  words  of  some  sensitives.  It  is  evidently
neither  a  mechanical  nor  persuasive  power.  Who  can  say  that  a  departed
spirit  in  another  stage  of  existence  has  not  the  same  power  ?

January  12th,  1883  ;  time,  about  2  a.m. — I  had  just  been  out  of  bed,  and
downstairs,  to  see  to  a  sound  of  footsteps  outside,  and  in  a  few  seconds,  after
getting  into  bed  again,  I  heard  a  distinct  continuous  knocking  on  the  ward-
robe panel  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  apparently  in  compliance  with  my  previous
requests,  (supposing  ultra-mundane  agency,)  since  the  last  indications — as  if  by
soft  knuckles,  about  four  feet  above  the  floor,  in  the  centre  of  the  panel,
which  forms,  pi-actically,  a  sounding-board.  All  servants  in  their  distant  bed-
room c,  and  the  rooms  adjoining  mine  both  empty.  All  quiet  inside  and
outside  the  house.  There  were  three  distinct  raps  at  intervals  of  a  second,
followed  by  a  long  continuous  and  extremely  raj)id  tapping,  at  nearly  double
the  pace  of  a  needle  in  a  sewing  machine,  and  yet  each  tap  quite  distinct,
without  any  resonance  from  the  thin  panel  as  a  sounding-board  ;  thus,  for
some  four  seconds  :

o o  o

I  do  not  see  how  all  this  could  be  effected  by  natural  or  artificial  mechanical
means,  unless  by  elaborate  machinery,  with  a  damper  behind  the  point  struck.
I  repeated  the  alphabet,  but  no  results.  At  the  time  of  hearing  I  was  looking
straight  at  the  wardrobe,  and  the  locality  of  the  sound  seemed  to  be  quite
unmistakable,  and  equally  inexplicable  from  any  natural  cause.

January  14th,  1883  :  o  a.m. — Rapping  near  my  bedroom  window  (not
loud,  and  not  like  the  rattling  of  a  window).

February  24th  ;  4  a.m. — Awakened  by  a  clapping  sound  near  table  of
relics.  Again  at  6  a.  m.  five  loud  knocks  at  my  door.  Called  out,  ' '  Come-
in,"  but  no  one  there.  Servants  did  not  leave  their  distant  rooms  till  7.30
.a.m.  that  day.

March  lltli,  1883  ;  5  a.m. — Knocking  near  the  head  of  my  bed.

March  15th,  1883  ;  6  a.m. — Awoke  as  if  by  a  small  hand  pressing  my  foot
very  firmly.  Same  day,  at  6.  30  a.m.,  a  thumping  at  my  bedroom  door  as  if
by  the  soft  part  of  a  doubled  fist. No  clue.

From  March  25th  till  May  15th  I  was  very  ill  from  a  purely  physical
■cause,  and  mostly  in  a  semi-conscious  or  unconscious  state.  Heard  nothing,
except  once  something  like  the  sound  of  crying  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  but
not  very  distinct.

June  13th,  1883. — Three  loud  crashes  on  the  wall  at  "s,"  the  last  of
which  seemed  to  travel  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning  through  the  wall  to  the
front  of  the  house.  The  crashes  were  as  if  given  by  blows  of  a  heavy
hammer,  quite  unlike  any  failure  of  masonry,  and  not  a  trace  of  anything  of
the  kind.

June  30th,  1883;  6.30  a.m. — Seemed  to  hear  my  own  Christian  name,
exactly  in  my  late  wife's  natural  voice,  when  in  good  spirits — not  loud.

August  2nd,  1883. — Early  morning  (hour  not  noted).  Four  knocking
sounds.


1889]. On  Airparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.  483


August  11th,  1883. — Three  knocks  as  above,  quite  distinct,  in  same  bed
room.

August  13th,  1883  ;  5  a.m. — Heard  again  my  o^vn  shortened  name,  as  on
30th  June  previous.

June  25th,  1883  ;  5  a.m. — Heard  the  clapping  sounds  again.

September  1st,  1883  ;  5  a.m. — Heard  three  dull  knocks  near  front
windows  and  table  of  relics.

September  4th,  1883;  early  morning. — Heard  three  soft  raps  near  the  head
of  the  bed.  (It  is  remarkable  how  often  three  raps — specially  asked  for —
have  been  heard. )

September  28th,  1883  ;  3.30  a.m. — When  quite  awake — having  just
previously  looked  at  my  watch — heard  six  distinct  raps  on  the  bedroom  door,
rather  slowly  given,  exactly  like  knuckle  raps,  at  the  usual  height  of  such
knockings,  and  on  a  panel  quite  inexplicable  by  any  possible  natural  cause.  -

November  6th,  1883 ;  10.30  p.m. — Had  just  got  into  bed.  Servants  retired
at  10.  Heard  three  soft  raps  on  a  spare  wardrobe,  being  exactly  the  sound
that  would  be  produced  on  such  a  panel.

February  4th,  1884. — Remarkable  bell  ringing,  repeated  second  time,
within  a  few  minutes  of  the  only  times  when  I  and  all  the  servants  could  hear
it.  About  5  p.m.  I  entered  the  "wash-room  "  D,  being  the  only  room  from
which  I  could  hear  a  bell  hung  at  the  corner  of  the  passage  to  the  servants'
room  C,  having  the  wire  bell-pull  in  a  brass  groove,  just  outside  my  bedroom
door.  It  has  only  two  bent  levers,  with  very  strong  springs,  the  wire  bemg
in  sight  along  the  roof  the  whole  way,  except  through  the  wall  near  the  bell
itself  (see  sketch).  This  bell  rang  quite  unaccountably  and  strongly  about  15
seconds  after  I  had  entered  the  "  wash-room."  It  could  not  have  happened
from  the  usual  gentle  closing  of  the  door  (15  seconds  before),  nor  from  any
gust  of  wind,  as  the  day  was  a  pretty  still  one,  and  no  windows  open  any-
where. Two  of  the  servants  were  in  their  bedroom  C,  and  one  of  them  came
at  once,  looking  alarmed  at  the  suddeness  and  loudness  of  the  ringing  at  so
unusual  an  hour,  and  fancying  sudden  illness  on  my  part  (in  fact,  I  seldom
ring  any  bell  at  all,  and  this  one  had  not  been  rung  for  the  previous  10  days
or  so).  On  my  suggesting  it  must  be  the  front  door  bell,  the  servant  took  me
to  the  bell  near  their  bedroom,  where  we  found  the  tongue  or  clapper  still
vibrating.  Knowing  that  there  were  no  rats  in  the  house,  nor  any  such
being  aljle  to  touch  the  wire,  I  thought  it  possible  that  the  bent  levers,  or
one  of  them,  might  have  been  left  at  "half-cock,"  as  it  were,  even  for  10
days,  from  the  knob-puller  not  having  gone  up  quite  home,  but  fouiid  it
impossible  to  arrange  it  that  way,  the  springs  being  too  strong.  I  found  also
that  the  bell  would  not  ring  at  all  unless  pulled  down  nearly  the  whole  way.
I  then  pushed  the  knob-puller  home  and  left  it.

Again  at  9.30  p.m.  on  the  same  evening,  I  entered  the  same  wash-room,
accompanied  by  a  servant  (the  same  who  answered  the  first  ringing),  with
hot  water  ;  and  again,  in  about  15  seconds,  we  both  heard  the  bell,  finding,
as  before,  the  clapper  still  moving  with  nearly  full  vibrations.  Two  servants
in  the  kitchen  below  also  heard  it,  and  one  came  up.  These  have  been  the
only  instances  of  inexplicable  bell-ringing  in  the  house.  The  two  ringings
could  not  have  been  better  timed  if  some  one  had  been  watching  an  oppor-
tunity of  letting  every  one  in  the  house  hear  them  as  well  as  myself,  and


484  071  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death. Mar.  18,


the  repetition,  exactly  under  the  same  circumstances,  seemed  intended  to
intimate  that  the  first  was  no  accident.  Any  trickery  in  the  matter  is  out
of  the  question.  They  (the  servants)  could  not  even  get  at  the  bell — being
12ft.  above  floor — to  ring  in  that  way,  and  are  not  inclined  to  ascribe  the
ringing  to  ultra-mundane  causes,  without  any  further  attempt  at  explanation,
beyond  asking  if  I  had  slammed  the  door  and  looking  unsuccessfully  for
open  windows.

As  to  any  illusions  or  hallucination  on  all  these  indications,  coupled  with
every  appearance  of  intelligent  choice  of  times,  varying  localities,  and
quality  of  sounds — it  seems  most  unlikely  that  six  people  out  of  seven,  who
have  been  mostly  in  the  house,  should  be  subject  to  illusions,  and  only  in  this
house,  or  that  I  should  have  been  subject  to  so  many  illusions  (about  30)
during  more  than  20  months,  and  with  nothing  to  induce  any  suspicion  of  the
kind  in  my  past  or  present  life.  Taking  all  the  indications  together,  they
seem  to  have  been  of  a  mutually  supplementary  character.  («)  Tlie  sense  of
hearing  by  one  person  chiefly  in  one  room — A.  (&)  Hearing  (one  loud  rap)
by  three  persons,  and  one  of  them  twice  seeing  an  apparition,  in  apparently
very  intelligent  sequence,  as  if  from  an  ultra-mundane  source — in  room  B.
(c)  Exact  timing  of  bell-ringing — twice — in  apparently  intelligent  sequence,
as  if  intended  chiefly  for  myself,  with  three  other  persons  also  hearing  the
same.

Assuming  a  fair  share  of  reason  and  common-sense  on  my  own  part,  and
going  from  effects  to  a  j^ossible  cause,  I  do  not  see  that  my  late  wife  (or
possibly  some  other,  except  for  the  description  given  by  the  child,  and  what
I  seemed  to  hear  of  names),  having  certain  limited  powers,-  could  have  em-
ployed them  more  intelligently  than  has  been  done,  [i.e.,  by  a  general  com-
parison of  the  whole],  for  my  particular  conviction  and  comfort,  particularly
as  regards  choice  of  times  and  variety  of  indications,  all  naturally  inexplicable.
I  have  only  the  choice  between  this  view  and  "inexplicable" — dismissing
the  idea  of  illusion  through  so  many  months.  I  feel  as  sure  of  having  heard
all  I  have  stated  as  that  I  am  now  writing  with  pen  and  ink.  I  have  never
felt  doubtful  as  to  the  sounds  heard  (specially  the  crashes  and  rappings),
while  the  child  mentioned  felt  quite  as  fully  the  fear,  several  times  repeated,
that  "  that  woman  will  come  back."

If  there  are  any  further  indications  I  will  record  and  mention  them  in
continuation — say  half-yearly.

I  look  upon  the  Psychic  Society  as  a  most  important  one,  setting  a  com-
mon-sense example,  on  quite  sufficiently  good  grounds,  and  the  more  so,
considering  the  evidently  great  want  of  moral  courage  among  many  who
keep  silent,  including,  of  course,  many  who  cannot  aficard  to  risk  their
professional  prospects  in  the  present  state  of  opinion  of  many  people,  with  a
further  disinclination  to  give  their  houses  a  kind  of  character  which  interferes
with  rental  and  sale.

J.  D.  Campbell.

P.S. — I  have  forgotten  to  record  that  the  "  crashes  "  quoted  under  13th
June,  1883,  also  occurred  two  or  three  times  just  before  that  date,  i.e.,  on
previous  nights,  soon  after  I  got  into  bed.  More  hammer-like — not  so  loud
—and  at  no  other  time.  I  only  wondered  then.  Also  a  case  mentioned  by
the  servants  as  follows  : — "  We  were  sitting  at  dinner  in  the  kitchen  about


1889]. On  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death.


485


1.30  p.m.  when  we  were  fairly  startled  by  hearing  a  loiul  sound,  as  if  a  lot  of
gravel  had  been  violently  tlirown  up  against  one  of  the  windows  (a  high  one,
some  seven  feet  above  ground  level).  We  all  went  out,  but  could  see
nothing  ;  groom  and  workmen  had  left  the  premises  for  dinner."

These  are  old  servants  who  saw  tlie  last  of  my  late  wife,  attending  the
funeral.

In  this  case  also  the  time  seems  to  have  been  chosen  with  intelligence.
I  have  purposely  omitted  some  knockings  heard  when  people  were  moving
about  the  house  and  premises.  J.  D.  C.

E.  G.  wrote  to  ask  General  Campbell  whether  it  was  possible  that  one
or  more  of  the  servants  might  have  seen  the  paper  which  he  wrote  on
November  9th,  ].882,  asking  for  three  raps  ;  and  also  whether  the  child
might  not  have  previously  seen  his  late  wife's  dress,  hanging  u]3  perhaps  in
some  wardrobe. The  rejjly  is  as  follows  : —

(1)  The  written  paper  (in  pencil)  was  written  just  before  I  got  into  bed,
about  11  p.m.,  and  burnt  about  5  a.m.  next  morning,  before  any  one  could
enter  the  room,  to  avoid  remarks  by  the  servants.  Anyhow,  they  could  not
have  made  the  loud  crashing  sounds  by  any  means  in  their  power,  nor
knocked  on  the  wardrobe  at  foot  of  my  bed  and  in  the  room,  without  waking
me  up,  having  a  night-light  burning  all  night.  I  am  sure  also  that  my
servants  would  never  think  of  taking  such  liberties.  I  was  always  awake  on
each  occasion  before  the  sounds  came,  except  once  as  quoted.

(2)  The  particular  dress  and  hat  (kept  as  relics)  were  under  lock  in  my
bedroom  (which  the  children  never  entered,  or  had  any  object  in  entering),
with  the  key  always  in  my  pocket.  The  children  were  only  on  the  bedroom
floor  to  sleep,  and  always  accompanied  by  the  mother  (chiefly)  or  the  nurse,
or  my  own  servants,  both  day  and  night.  I  asked  the  nKjther  whether  the
child  could  have  seen  any  dress  and  hat  like  the  unusual  ones  I  had,  and  the
answer  was  "No.  She  must  have  seen  something,"  i.e.,  as  a  vision — twice
and  differently.  There  was  a  steady  intelligent  consistency  (not  on  the
surface),  showing  affectionate  intention  and  caution,  which  the  child  herself
was  not  aware  of,  in  the  two  consecutive  statements,  and  which  no  child  of
seven  could  have  put  together.

J.  D.  Campbell.

Mr.  Gurney  and  I  bad  a  long  interview  witli  General  Camp-
bell, Oct.  4,  1884,  and  we  carefully  inspected  tlie  premises.  The  house
is  an  exceptionally  solidly -built  one,  with  extremely  thick  walls  inside ;
and  General  Campbell  assured  us  that,  since  he  built  the  house  some
few  years  back,  he  had  never  known  the  wood  to  crack  or  start.


486


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


[May  10,


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING  ON

May  10th,  1889.

The  thirty-second  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  May  10th,  1889.

The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

The  President  gave  an  address  on  the  "  Canons  of  Evidence  in
Psychical  Research."

The  following  paper  was  then  read  . —

III

RECENT EXPERIMENTS IN CRYSTAL- VISION.

[The  following  paper  is  contributed  by  a  lady,  well  known  to
the  Editor,  who  prefers  for  the  j^resent  to  remain  anonymous.]


It  is  proposed  in  the  following  paper  to  offer  a  short  account  of
some  recent  attempts  at  Crystal-vision,  experiments  in  which,  for
purposes  of  divination  or  clairvoyance,  have  been  recorded  from  the
earliest  ages.  I  should  have  been  glad  to  proceed  to  them  without
further  preface ;  since,  however,  I  have  been  unable  to  find  in  the
British  Museum  Library  any  English  book  bearing  directly  upon  the
subject  of  Crystallomancy,  I  venture  to  prefix  a  few  notes  upon  its
history  and  method.  Though  the  information  obtainable  upon  the
subject  has,  for  the  most  part,  no  great  evidential  value,  it  is  nevertheless
historically  interesting,  for,  just  as  the  witch-stories  contain  the  first
hint  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  now  so  familiar,  it  may  be  possible  to
discern  by  examination  and  experiment  whatever  element  of  truth  the
traditions  of  mirror-gazing  may  contain,  and  jjerhaps  to  apply  them  to
the  elucidation  or  illustration  of  some  of  those  questions  of  the  sub-
conscious workings  of  mind,  on  which,  in  spite  of  great  recent  eflbrt,
we  have  still  much  to  learn.

Alike  both  in  purpose  and  in  method  of  use,  and  therefoi'e  for  our
present  intention  to  be  classed  with  the  Crystal  as  a  means  of  divination,
were  vessels  containing  liquid,  usually  water, — water  in  springs,  mirrors
of  polished  steel,  liquid  poured  into  the  palm  of  the  hand,  and  various
objects  having  a  reflecting  surface,  such  as  the  beryl  or  other  gems,  the


1889.]


Recent  Experiment  in  Crystal-vision.


487


blade  of  a  sword,  ^  and  in  Egypt,  Persia,  and  in  Europe  in  tlie  Middle
Ages — even  the  human  finger  nail.

With  tlie  use  of  one  or  more  such  means,  we  find  that  mirror-
gazing  in  some  form  has  been  practised  for  at  least  3,000
years,  and  that  traces  of  it  exist  in  the  histories  of  Assyria,  Persia,
Egypt,  Greece,  Rome,  China,  Japan,  India,  possibly  ISTubia,  and,  in  the
form  of  cup-divination,  according  to  Captain  Cook,  among  the  natives
of  the  South  Sea  Islands.  Ceasing  to  rank  among  manifestations  of
Divine  power,  though  as  to  its  influence  on  the  minds  and  actions  of
those  consulting  it,  taking  a  no  less  important  place  as  the  accredited
work  of  the  author  of  evil,  mirror-gazing  assumed  a  new  importance  in
the  history  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages,  reaching  its  highest  develop-
ment in  the  16th  and  17th  centuries,  and  finding  its  exponents  among
the  learned  physicians  and  mathematicians  of  the  Courts  of  Elizabeth,
the  Italian  Princes,  the  Regent  Catherine  de  Medici,  and  the
Emperors  Maximilian  and  Rudolph.

It  is  interesting  to  observe  the  close  resemblance  in  the  various
methods  of  employing  the  mirror,  and  in  the  mystic  symbolism  which
surrounds  it,  not  only  in  different  ages,  but  in  different  countries.
From  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  monarch,  represented  on  the  walls  of  the
North  West  palace  of  Nimroud,  down  to  the  17th  century,  when  Dr.
Dee  placed  his  Shew-stone  on  a  cushioned  table,  "  in  the  goodly  little
chapel  next  his  chamber,"  in  the  college  of  which  he  was  Warden  at
Manchester,  the  seer  has  usually  surrounded  himself  with  the  cere-
monials of  worship,  whether  to  propitiate  Pan  or  Osiris,  or  to  disconcert
Ahriman  or  the  Prince  of  Darkness.  In  the  same  way  we  find  that  in
all  ages,  and  alike  in  Greece,  Rome,  Persia,  Egypt,  India,  as  well  as  in
later  traditions  of  Europe,  the  seer,  variously  called  Speculator,  Scryer,
"Viewer,  or  Reader,  was  usually  a  child,  "  who  had  not  known  sin."

Before  going  further  into  the  history  of  the  subject,  it  may  be  as
well  to  give  some  account  of  the  method  pursued,  which,  as  has  been
said,  is  in  all  essential  features  the  same  under  all  circumstances  ;  and
for  this  I  select  the  description  given  by  Lane  in  his  Manners  and
Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians,'^  written  in  Egypt,  during  the  years
18-33-4-5,  which  may  then  be  compared  with  the  traditions  of  antiquity.^

The  curiosity  of  the  author  had  been  excited  by  Mr.  Salt,  the
English  Consul-General,  who,  on  suspecting  his  servants  of  theft,  sent
for  a  Mughrebee  magician. Mr.  Salt  himself  selected  a  boy  as  Scryer,

1  "Blade  of  a  sword,  buckle,  or  other  shining  object." — Plin.  Hist.  Nat.,  xxxvii.  ii.

2  Vol.  I.,  c.  xii.

A  gnostic  papyrus  in  Greek,  said  to  have  been  written  in  Egypt  early  in  the
Christian  era,  now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  describes  a  scene,  in  which
Divination  with  the  Bowl,  under  conditions  very  similiar  to  those  of  Mr.  Lane's
story,  forms  an  essential  feature.


488


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


while  the  magician  occupied  himself  with  wiiting  charms  on  pieces  of
paper  which,  with  incense  and  perfumes,  were  afterwards  burnt  in  a
brazier  of  charcoal.  After  drawing  a  diagram  in  the  boy's  right  palm
into  the  middle  of  which  he  poured  some  ink,  the  magician  desired  him
to  look  into  it  fixedly,  when,  after  seeing  various  visionary  forms
as  directed,  the  boy  finally  perceived  the  guilty  person,  who,  from
the  description  given  of  his  dress  and  stature,  was  recognised  as  a
certain  labourer,  who,  on  being  arrested,  confessed  his  crime.

This  incident  prompted  Lane  to  further  inquiries,  and  on  a  subse-
quent occasion  other  results  were  obtained,  and  the  proceedings  are
described  with  greater  detail.

First,  invocations  were  written  on  paper  by  the  magician,  summon-
ing his  two  Genii,  then  a  verse  from  the  Koran  "  to  open  the  boy's  eyes
in  a  supernatural  manner.  ...  to  make  his  sight  pierce  into
what  is  to  us  the  invisible  world."  These  were  thrown  into  a  chafing-
dish  containing  live  charcoal,  frankincense,  coriander  seed,  and  benzoin.

A  boy  of  eight  or  nine  years  old  had  been  chosen  at  random  from  a
number  who  happened  to  be  passing  in  the  street,  and  the  magician,
taking  hold  of  his  right  hand,  drew  in  the  palm  of  it  a  magic  square,
that  is  to  say,  one  square  inscribed  within  another,  and  in  the  space
between  certain  Arabic  numerals ;  then,  pouring  ink  in  the  centre,  bade
the  boy  look  into  it  attentively.  At  first  he  could  see  only  the  face  of  the
magician,  but  proceeding  with  his  inspection,  while  the  other  continued
to  drop  written  invocations  into  the  chafing-dish,  he  at  length  described  a
man  sweeping  with  a  broom,  then  a  scene  in  which  flags  and  soldiers
appear,^  and  finally  Lane  asks  that  Lord  Nelson  should  be  called  for.
The  boy  describes  a  man  in  European  clothes  of  dark  blue,  who  has
lost  his  left  arm,  but  adds,  on  looking  more  intently,  "  No,  it  is  placed
to  his  breast."  Lord  Nelson  generally  had  an  empty  sleeve  attached  to
the  breast  of  his  coat,  but  as  it  was  the  right  arm  he  had  lost,  Lane
adds,  "  "Without  saying  that  I  suspected  the  boy  had  made  a  mistake,
I  asked  the  magician  whether  the  objects  appeared  in  the  ink  as  if
actually  befoi'e  the  eyes,  or  as  if  in  a  glass,  which  makes  the  right  appear
left.  He  answered  they  appeared  as  in  a  mirror.  This  rendered  the
boy's  description  faultless."

Among  the  Greeks,  various  methods  of  divination  by  reflections  on
glass  or  water  were  used.  \.  Hydromancy.  This  was  practised  chiefly
at  Patrse,  a  city  on  the  sea  coast  of  Achaia,  where  was  a  temple
dedicated  to  Demeter. Before  the  temple  was  a  fountain  in  which  were

1  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  a  lady  mentioned  by  Lane — a  friend  of  his  own,
who  was  invited  to  act  as  Scryer, — also  saw  a  man  with  a  broom,  that  the  same  vision
is  recorded  by  Dr.  Dee,  and  that  various  accounts  of  Egyptian  mirror-gazing,  given
by  Sir  G.  Wilkinson  and  by  Kinglake,  speak  of  flags.  Cp.  Account  of  Lord  Prudhoe,
in  Nortcs  Amhrosianw. — Blackioood,  Aug.,  1831.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


489


delivered  oracles,  very  famous  for  the  truth  of  their  predictions.  These
were  not  given  upon  eveiy  account,  but  concerned  only  the  events  of
diseases.!  The  manner  of  consulting  was  this  :  they  let  down  a  mirror
by  a  small  cord  into  the  fountain,  so  that  the  lower  edge  might
just  touch  the  surface  of  the  water,  but  not  be  covered  by  it  ;  this  done,
they  offered  incense  and  prayers  to  the  goddess,  then  looked  upon  the
mirror,  and  from  the  various  figures  and  images  represented  in  it,  made
conjectures  concerning  the  patient.  2.  Lecanomancy,  divination  by  a
bowl  containing  water  or  a  mixture  of  oil  and  wine.  The  Scholiast
upon  Lycophron  believes  this  method  to  have  been  practised  by
Ulysses,  and  to  have  given  occasion  to  the  stories  of  his  consultation
with  the  ghost  of  Tiresias.  3.  Catoptromancy,  in  which  mirrors  were
used  without  water.  Sometimes  it  was  performed  in  a  vessel  of
water,  the  middle  part  of  which  was  called  gaster,  and  then  the
divination  termed  Gastromancy  (4),  in  which  glass  vessels  were  used
filled  with  clear  water,  and  surrounded  by  torches.  A  demon  was
invoked,  and  a  boy  appointed  to  observe  whatever  appearances  arose
by  the  demon's  action  upon  the  water.  5.  Onychomancy,-  "performed
by  the  nails  of  an  unpolluted  boy,  covered  with  oil  and  soot,  which  they
turned  to  the  sun,  the  reflection  of  whose  rays  were  believed  to
represent  by  certain  images  the  things  they  had  a  mind  to  be  satisfied
about."  ^  6.  Crystallomancy,  "  performed  by  polished  and  enchanted
crystals,  in  which  future  events  were  signified  by  certain  marks  and
figures."

We  find  still  existing  in  India  ^  a  mode  of  divination  with  mirrors
(called  "  unjoun " — black  lamps),  which  reminds  us  of  the  Greek
hydromancy,  in  which  a  child,  gazing  into  a  mirror,  sees  the  image  of
the  sick  person,  whose  recovery  is  in  question.  Indian  magicians  have
also  another  process,  which  resembles  that  practised  in  Egypt.  Incense,
made  after  elaborate  and  careful  rules,  is  burnt,  and  the  remains
collected,  which,  after  being  moistened  with  castor-oil,  are  poured  into
the  hands  of  a  child,  who  sees  visions  of  spirits  and  demons.

Reinaud,  quoting  from  an  Arab  MS.,  gives  the  following  as  the
method  of  mirror-gazing  among  the  Mussulmans  : —

If  one  is  in  need  of  something,  he  writes  on  the  edge  of  a  mirror  the
names  of  Gabriel,  Azrael,  Raphael,  and  Asrafel,  with  words  from  the  Koran,
relating  to  the  Omnipotence  of  God.  He  then  fasts  for  seven  days  of  strict
retirement,  and  then,  the  mirror  being  held,  either  by  himself,  or  by  man,

1  Cp.  Potter's  Antiquities  of  Greece,  Vol.  I.  cxi.  Pausanias,  vii.,  21,  12.  Bouche
Leclercq,  HiMoire  dc  la  Dii-ination  dans  VAntiquite,  II.  255. — Del  Rio,  Disquis.  Mag.,
Lib.  IV.  Quest.  6,  Sec.  3.

2  Boissard,  Trac.  Div.,  c.  v.,  p.  17.  ^

3  Potter's  Antiquities  of  Greece,  Vol.  I.  cxviii.

■*  Maury,  La  Marjie  ct  VAstrologie,  p.  433 ;  cp.  Herklot,  Mussulman  and  Hindoo
Mirrors,  p.  375.


490


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


woman,  or  child,  no  matter  who,  he  recites  many  prayers,  and  is  enabled  to
see  what  he  needs,  i

It  may  be  as  well  to  note  here  that  the  ingenious  mechanical
mirrors  found  in  China,  India,  and  Japan,  the  secret  of  which  was
examined  by  Mr.  James  Prinsep,  Wolff,  of  Berlin,  and  Sir  David
Brewster,  are  concerned  with  purely  physical  magic,  and  appear  to  be
in  no  way  connected  with  our  present  subject.

Reinaud  also  refers  to  a  Persian  romance,  in  which  it  is  mentioned
that  if  a  mirror  be  covered  with  ink  and  placed  in  front  of  any  one,
it  will  indicate  whatever  he  wishes  to  know.

Pythagoras  is  said  to  have  written  on  a  steel  mirror  with  human
blood,  and  to  have  made  his  friends  read  the  message  by  the  light  of
the  full  moon,  which  appeared  to  reveal  the  message  as  a  reflection
from  her  own  surface.^

History.

As  has  already  been  said,  the  history  of  cup  and  mirror  divination
takes  us  back  to  the  eai'liest  ages.  The  art  of  divination,  of  which
this  is  one  of  the  oldest  forms,  is  ascribed  to  various  sources,
^schylus  3  refers  it  to  Prometheus,  Cicero  *  to  the  Assyrians  and
Etrurians,  Zoroaster  to  Ahriman,  Varro  to  the  Persian  Magi,^  and  a
very  large  class  of  authors,  from  tlie  Christian  Fathers  and  Schoolmen
downwards,  to  the  devil.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Cup  of  Joseph,  "  in  which  my
Lord  drinketh  and  whereby  indeed  he  divineth,"''  was  one  used  for  magical
purposes,  though  there  are  some  who  tell  us  that  even  here  the  mis-
translator  has  been  at  work.  The  tradition  seems  the  more  probable,
inasmuch  as  cups  having  special  pi'operties  figure  largely  in  the
earliest  Egyptian  sculptures,'^  having  a  further  symbolic  reference  to
Egypt  as  tlie  cup  of  the  Nile,  and  also  to  cycles  or  periods  of  time.

1  Reinaud,  Description  des  Monuments  M nsxdmans  dii  Cabinet  de  M.  Ic  Due  dc
Blacas. Paris,  1828. Vol.  II.,  p.  9.

-  "  The  moon's  orb  is  round  just  as  mirrors  are,  and  there  is  a  saying  that  those
who  are  skilled  in  such  matters  can  in  this  way  bring  the  goddess  down.  There  is,
too,  a  trick  of  Pythagoras  which  is  played  by  means  of  a  reflector  of  this  kind.  When
the  moon  is  full,  if  anyone  writes  with  blood  anything  he  pleases  on  a  mirror  and  holds
it  up  to  the  moon,  having  previously  bidden  a  friend  to  stand  behind  him,  his  friend,
looking  intently  at  the  jnoon's  reflected  orb,  will  read  everything  which  was  written  on
the  mirror  as  if  it  had  been  written  on  the  moon." — Scholiast's  Note  on  Aristophanes'
Nuhes,  V.  750.

3  ^sch.,  Prometheus  Vinctus,  492.
Cicero,  Dc  Dir.  I.  i.  and  I.  ii.,  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.,  i.  326.

5  S.  Augustine,  De  Civ.  Dei.,  vii.  35.

«Greg.  Naz.  Works,  Ed.  Bened,  ii.  137  and  Plin.  Nat.  Hist,  vii.  56;
Gen.  xliv.  5-15 ;  cp.  Burder's  Oriental  Customs,  p.  25.

''Nineveh  and  its  Palaces,  Bonomi,  p.  265;  Ed.  1852.  Hiivernick,  Intro,  to  the
Pentateuch. Cardan,  Dc  Rerura  Varict,  cap.  93.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


491


The  Persian  poets  make  frequent  allusion  to  the  Cup  of  Giamschid,
"  in  which  could  be  seen  the  whole  world  and  all  the  things  which  were
doing  in  it,"i  and  to  the  existence  of  which  they  ascribed  the  pi'osperity
of  their  ancient  monarchs.

To  the  possession  of  such  a  vessel  the  Orientals  ascribe  the  wisdom
of  Solomon,  -  and  that  used  by  Alexander  the  Great  was  probably  of
like  mystic  properties.^

The  sculpture  on  the  walls  of  the  Hall  of  Divination  at  Nimroud,
already  referred  to,  represents  the  king  as  drinking  or  divining  in  the
presence  of  the  gods  of  Assyria.

The  question  as  to  the  use  and  meaning  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim
is  one  upon  which  scholars  and  theologians,  rabbinical  and  Christian,
have  hesitated  in  all  ages  to  pronounce  a  decided  opinion.*  I  shall,
however,  venture  to  recur  to  this  subject  in  another  connection,  and
for  the  present  will  merely  add  that  the  earliest  and  best  accredited
traditions  assert  that  the  sacred  gems  worn  upon  the  breast  of  the
High  Priest  symbolised  light,  and  were  probably  of  some  colourless
stone,  in  which  light  was  embodied  in  clearest  purity,  probably  diamond
or  rock  crystal.^

Of  the  practice  of  mirroi'-gazing  among  the  Greeks,  we  have  already
spoken,  and  but  little  change  seems  to  have  occurred  in  the  course  of
ages,  from  what  we  learn  from  Pausanias,  who,  travelling  through
Greece  in  the  second  century,  visited  Patrte  in  Achaia,  and  witnessed
the  practice  of  catoptromancy  by  means  of  a  mirror  suspended  over
water,  with  the  usual  incantations  and  burning  of  incense.*^

The  instances  of  divination  by  mirror  or  crystal  gazing  which  occur
among  the  Romans  are  so  closely  allied  in  kind  and  in  method  to  those
of  Egypt  and  Greece  as  scarcely  to  need  special  mention.''  Varro  tells
a  story  of  a  child  who  was  consulted  as  to  the  war  of  Mithridates,  ^  and

1  Bonomi,  p.  266.

2  D'Herbelot  s.v.  "  Giamschid  "  (  =Vase  of  the  Sun),  Occult  Sciences,  817.  Cp.
Psalm  xvi.  5 ;  xxiii.  5 ;  also  in  reference  to  its  superstitions,  Babylon  spoken  of  as
a  "  Golden  Cup,"  Jer.  li.  7.  Such  was  perhaps  the  cup  made  by  Merlin.  Faerie
Queen,  III.  2,  19.

3  That  a  strong  feeling  still  exists  in  the  East  on  the  subject  of  cup  divination  is
illustrated  by  the  following  : — "  When  Seringapatam  was  stormed  by  General  Harris
and  Sir  David  Baird,  the  unfortunate  Tippoo  Saib  retired  during  the  heat  of  the
conflict  to  gaze  on  his  divining  cup.  After  remaining  a  long  while  in  profound  absori>
tion  he  rushed  desperately  among  the  combatants  in  the  breach,  and  fell  there  covered
with  wounds." — Encyc.  Met.,  Occult  Science. Elihu  Rich.

Kimchi,  Aben  Ezra,  S.  Augustine,  and  many  others  meet  us  with  such  expres-
sions as  "Non  constat,"  "Nescimus,"  "Difficile  est  invenire."
■5  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches,  Trench,  p.  125.
6  Pausanias,  VII.,  21,  12.  ,

Cicero,  De  Dir.,  i.  55.
8  Apuleius,  Axiolofj.  c.  41,  Ed.  Hildeb.,  p.  536. See  also  Cornelius  Agrippa,
Occ.  Phil.  B.  I.,  ch.  57.


492


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


children,  we  learn,  were  consulted  by  Fabius.  It  is  also  said  that  a
child  foresaw  by  reading  in  a  mirror  the  issue  of  the  contest  between
Severus  and  TuUius  Crispinus,  and  revealed  the  prophecy  to  Didius
Julianus,  by  whom  the  oracle  was  consulted.  ^

We  learn  from  Pliny  ^  that  in  the  ai"ts  of  divination  the  ancient
Britons  excelled  even  the  Persians  themselves,  but  we  have  no  means
of  discovering  whether  any  form  of  mirror  or  crystal  gazing  was  known
to  them.2

The  arts  of  the  crystal  seers,  or  as  they  were  called  in  the  Councils
of  the  Church,  "  Speculaiii,"  seem  to  have  passed,  with  but  little
change  except  in  outward  ceremonial,  from  the  superstitions  of  the
Pagan  to  those  of  the  Christian.

Casaubon  *  tells  a  story  of  a  Latin  Christian  who  was  frequently
mortified  by  seeing  the  opposite  faction  victorious  in  the  games.  He
accordingly  sought  out  Hilarion,  a  monk  of  great  piety,  who  put  into
his  hand  a  vase  of  water,  in  which  he  saw  horses  and  chariots,  and
became  aware  that  they  were  under  magical  spells.  Hilarion  dissipated
the  enchantment  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  his  client  departed,
giving  thanks  to  God.

The  Specularii,  or  those  who  inquired  into  the  future  with  the  aid
of  a  mirror,  had  a  large  following  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  are  mentioned
in  the  Councils  of  a  Synod  convened  by  S.  Patrick  and  two  others
about  450,^  which  shows  that  the  infection  had  spread  as  far  as
Ireland."  John  of  Salisbury,  Bishop  of  Chartres  1177-1181,  has  left  us
a  list  of  procedures  against  the  Speculai'ii,  who  were  looked  upon  as
heretics,  and  fell  under  the  ban  of  the  Church.?

S.  Thomas  Aquinas,  writing  about  the  same  period,  says  that  the
peculiar  gift  of  seeing  visions  possessed  by  children  is  not  to  be
ascribed  to  any  virtue  of  innocence  or  power  of  nature,  but  is  the  work
of  the  devil ;  nevertheless,  in  spite  of  S.  Thomas  and  John  of  Salisbury
and  a  special  condemnation  from  the  Faculty  of  Theology  in  Paris,

1  Spartian  Bid.  Jul.,  vii.  ;  Bouche  Leclercq.  Op.  cit.,  Note,  p.  341,  Vol.  I.  "On
prenait  un  mirroir  et  un  enfant  y  voyait  I'image  de  I'avenir,  non  avec  ses  yeux  qui
^taient  bandes,  mais  avec  le  sommet  de  la  tete,  probableraent  'enchant^.' C'est  de
cette  facon  que  Didius  Julianus  apprit  sa  chute  prochaine,  et  I'avenementde  Severe."
Hist.  Nat.,  XXX.,  13.

3  "  II  est  probable  que  les  druides  tenaient  d'une  source  orientale  leurs  doctrines
sur  la  vertu  des  pierres,  dont  on  retrouve  des  traces  parmi  les  traditions  poiJulaires  de
TArniorique  et  parmi  celles  des  parties  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  et  de  I'lrlande,  oil  le
druidisme  s'est  conserve  jjIus  longtemps.  Les  Ecossais  attachent  encore  une  vertu  par-
ticulifere  k  certaines  pierres  nomm^es  cairn-gorm  qu'on  trouve  dans  leurs  pays."— De
'R&aii,  Sciences  Occultes,  II.  p.  08.

■1  Ad  Spartian.,  c.  vii.  250. Paris,  1603. Ed.  Casaubon.
Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  III.,  p.  31.

<i  La  Mariie  et  I  Astrologie,  Maury,  pp.  427-31.

'John  of  Salisbury. Polycrat.,  I.,  c.  xii.,  27.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


493


1398,  the  Specularii  continued  to  flourish,^  and  the  art  of  mirror-
gazing  lingered  on  till  the  sixteenth  century,  when  it  received  a  new
impetus,  and  soon  reached  its  highest  development,  not  in  the  hands  of
obscure  charlatan  or  nameless  heretic,  but  under  the  auspices  of  a
Court  physician  or  a  University  professor.

The  time  was  at  hand  in  which  men  began  to  think  for  themselves,
alike  in  literature,  politics,  and  religion  ;  when,  just  as  a  nobleman
dared  also  to  be  a  poet,  a  statesman  to  question  a  priest,  or  a  country
gentleman  to  inquire  into  the  Divine  right  of  kings,  so  despite  the
terrors  of  the  Inquisition  on  the  one  hand,  or  the  prosecutions  of  civil  law
on  the  other,2  men  of  learning,  repute,  and  acknowledged  position  began
to  inquire  into  the  hidden  secrets  of  natural  magic.

At  the  time  of  the  struggle  between  Francis  I.  and  Chaiies  V.  w^e
are  told  that  the  action  of  the  French  was  influenced  by  a  magician,
who,  by  means  of  the  reflections  in  a  mirror,  discovered  to  the  Parisians
the  progress  of  events  at  Milan.

A  little  later,  we  find  Catherine  de  Medici  consulting  a  magician,
who  shows  her  by  means  of  a  mirror  how  long  her  sons  would  occupy
the  throne.  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  if  the  seer  on  this
occasion  were,  as  seems  very  probable,  Jean  Fernel,  Court  physician  to
Henry  II.,  who  has  recorded  that  he  saw  figures  in  a  mirror  which
expressed  their  meaning  in  gesture  so  significant  that  even  his  assistants
understood  them.*

Pico  de  Mirandola  (1463-94),  himself  a  foe to  astrologers,  who  •
had  declared  his  death  in  his  32nd  year,  was  nevertheless  "  infatue
de  la  vertu  des  mirroirs  constelles,  et  assurait  qu'il  sufiisait  d'en  faire
fabriquer  un  sous  une  constellation  favorable,  et  de  donner  a  son  corps
la  temperature  convenable,  pour  lire  dans  le  passe  le  present  et  I'avenir.''  ^

Johann  Rist,'^  an  accomplished  mathematician  and  scholar,  tells  of  a
crystal  made  by  Wisbro  in  Augsburg  in  which  were  seen  men  and
animals.  ^

1  "  Ah-eady  (1456)  were  crystals  used  in  England,  and  their  insi3ection  brought  to
a  science." — Die  Sichtharc  und  die  Unsichtharc  Welt. Max  Perty,  1881.

2  "En  1609  on  brClla  en  place deGrfeve  le  Sorcier  normand  Saint  Germain,  pour
avoir  fait  en  compagnie  d'une  femme  et  d'un  medecin,  usage  de  miroirs  magiques. "
Le  Mercure  francais,  1609,  p.  348. — Wierus,  Pseudo-Monarchia  Dcemonurii,  Lib.  III.,
c.  xii.  6.

s  Fernel,  De  Ahditis  Rcrum  Causis,  I.,  xi.

■*  Michael  Nostradamus  and  Cosimo  Ruggieri  were  Court  astrologers  to  Catherine
de  Medici.

5  Maury,  La  Mar/ie  et  I'Astrologie,  p.  431.

8  Rist,  a  voluminous  %vriter  both  in  German  and  Latin,  was  the  founder  of  a
literary  society  under  the  title  of  the  Order  of  the  Swan.  The  essay  quoted  is  one  of
a  series  ajiparently  published  monthly,  and  containing  much  quaint  talk  upon  various
subjects — mathematics,  medicine,  verse,  music,  magic  —between  himself  and  his
friends.

^  Lie  Aller-EdeUte  Zeit  Verkiirtung  der  ganzcn  Welt,  von  devi  Rilsti(jen,  1668,  p.  253.


494


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  , [May  10,


Aubrey,  writing  in  1696,^  refers  to  the  earlier  practice  of  mirror  or
crystal-reading  in  Italy.  The  Earl  of  Denbigh,  he  says,  when
Ambassador  at  Venice,  "  did  hnd  one  who  did  show  him  there  in
a  glass,  things  past  and  to  come "  ;  and  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale
when  in  Italy,  went  to  a  magician,  who  showed  liim  in  a  glass  a  vision
of  himself  kneeling  before  a  crucifix,  at  which  he,  being  a  devout
Protestant,  was  properly  shocked,  but  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled  when
he  later  became  a  Roman  Catholic.  "  He  told  Mr.  Thomas  Henshaw
this  himself."

Bodin,  a  lawyer  of  some  eminence  in  Toulouse  (d.  1596),  and  author
of  works  on  demonology,  gives  a  story  of  a  fellow-townsman,  who  used
to  divine  by  the  finger  nail  of  a  boy.

It  is  interesting  to  note  how  universally  the  theory  of  devil-posses-
sion was  held  in  regard  to  the  stone,  and  even  Avriters  holding  widely
different  views  such  as  Naude,^  Cornelius  Agrippa,^  and  his  pupil*
Wier  or  Wierus  on  the  one  hand,  and  their  opponents  Bodin  and  Del
Rio  5  on  the  other,  all  maintained  the  hypothesis,  though  they  made
use  of  it  for  different  ends.  Pomponatius,"  Fernel,  and  the  persecuting
De  I'Ancre  and  his  colleague  Espaignol,  also  recognised  a  supernatural
cause  for  the  phenomena.

We  now  come  to  the  period  of  Dr.  Dee,  who  perhaps  the  greatest,
is  certainly  tlie  most  voluminous  exponent  of  the  art  of  cxystallomancy
in  this  or  any  other  country. He  is  thus  described  by  Hudibras : —

I've  read  Dee's  prefaces  before,

Tlie  Devil  and  Euclid  o'er  and  o'er.

And  all  the  intrigues  'twixt  him  and  Kelly

Lescus  and  tlie  Emperor  would  tell  ye,

Kelly  did  all  his  feats  upon

The  devil's  looking-glass,  a  stone  ;  ^

Where  inlaying  with  him  at  Bo  Peep

He  solved  all  problems  ne'er  so  deep.  ^

— PaH  II.,  Canto  3.

John  Dee  was  born  in  London,  1527,  was  Fellow  of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge,  visited  the  Low  Countries  in  1547,  lived  afterwards

1  Aubrey "s  Miscdlanks,  pp.  129-30.

"  Naud^,  1600-53,  physician  and  librarian  to  the  Queen  of  Sweden,  author  of
Apologie  pour  Ics  Orands  Homines  accuses  dc  lei  Meigic.
See  Dc  Inccrt.  ct  Vcm.it.  Scientiar.,  cxxvi.

•*  Wier,  for  30  years  physician  to  the  Duke  of  Cleves,  and  of  high  medical
reputation.

5  Del  Rio,  1.551-1608.

6  Pomponatius,  1462-1525.

7  Mr.  Hockley  considers  the  stone  here  alluded  to,  to  be  one  which,  having  come
into  the  hands  of  Horace  Walpole,  was  sold  at  the  Strawberry  Hill  .sale  in  1842,  and
which  he  describes  as  "composed  apparently  of  a  flat  circular  and  highly  polished
piece  of  cannel  coal,  about  6  inches  in  diameter."


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  495


in  Louvain  and  Paris,  and  returned  to  England  in  1551,  when  he
became  Rector  of  Upton-on-Severn.  He  was  arrested  under  Mary,  on
suspicion  of  being  attached  to  the  cause  of  Elizabeth,  who  afterwards
showed  him  much  kindness,^  and  when  in  1564  he  left  England  to  pay
a  visit  to  the  Emperor,  and  fell  sick  at  Louvain  she  sent  two  doctors  to
inquire  into  his  condition.  Later,  Dee  settled  at  Mortlake,  where  he
became  famous  as  an  astrologer,  and  wliere  in  1583  his  library  of  4,000
books  was  plundered  by  the  people.

In  1582  Dee  became  associated  with  Kelly,  with  whom  he  was
induced  to  go  to  Germany  to  visit  Albert  Lasky.^  He  was  afterwards
banished  from  Poland  by  the  Pope's  Nuncio,  and  in  1589  was  recalled
by  Elizabeth  to  England.  Through  the  influence  of  Archbishop  Whit-
gift  and  Lady  Warwick  he  was  appointed  Chancellor  of  St.  Paul's,  and
two  years  after,  Warden  of  Manchester  College.  On  the  accession  of
James  I.  he  fell  under  suspicion  and  himself  invited  inquiry  into  his  life.
This  was  refused,  and  he  retired  to  Mortlake,  where  he  died  in  1608.

His  son  Arthur,  often  mentioned  in  liis  book,  was  brought  up  under
Camden  and  became  Court  physician  to  Charles  I.

His  account  of  his  various  experiments  may  be  read  in  a  thick  folio
volume,  edited  with  a  quaint  and  entertaining  preface  by  Meric
Casaubon,^  who  belonged  to  the  generation  following  that  of  Dee,  and
who  examines  the  subject  with  much  learning  and  care,  though  with  an
amusing  air  of  superiority  and  condescension.  He  seems  entirely  to
acquit  Dee  of  the  charge  of  charlatanry  and  imposture,  which  has  been
brought  upon  him  by  some,  for  he  says  : —

I  think  no  man  will  make  any  question  but  the  i^oor  man  did  deal  with
all  possible  Bimplicity  and  sincerity,  to  the  utmost  of  his  understanding  at
the  time.  And  truly,  this  one  thing  excepted,  his  mistaking  of  evil  spirits
for  good,  it  doth  not  apjiear  by  anytliing  but  that  he  had  understanding  and
perfect  use  of  his  reason  to  the  very  last.

Dee's  method  differed  so  far  from  that  of  his  predecessors  that  his
scryer  or  seer,  Kelly,  could  not  be  described  as  "unpolluted,"  or  "one
that  had  not  known  sin,"  for  he  seems  to  have  been  a  well  known
scoundrel,  to  which  recognition  the  fact  that  he  had  been  deprived  of
both  his  ears,  for  some  misdeeds  in  Lancashire,  bore  sufficient  testimony.
The  child,  who  seems  to  be  a  necessary  member  of  the  dramatis
personce  of  crystal  drama,  existed,  however,  in  Madimi,  one  of  their

1  "  Her  Majestie  willed  me  to  fetch  my  glass  so  famous,  and  to  shew  unto  her  some
of  the  properties  of  it,  which  I  did  ;  her  Majestie  being  taken  down  from  her  horse  by
the  Earl  of  Leicester,  did  see  some  of  the  properties  of  that  glass,  to  her  Majestie's
great  contentment  and  delight." — Diarii  of  Dr.  Dec,  March  16th,  1575.

2  Referred  to  by  Hudibras  as  "Lescus."

3  Meric  Casaubon,  son  of  Isaac  Casaubon,  Professor  of  Greek  at  Geneva,  was  a
scholar  and  critic,  Rector  of  Bleadon,  in  Somerset,  d.  1671.

2  K


496


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


most  frequent  spirit  visitors,  with  wliom  the  story  opens,  and  who  is
thus  described  : —

A  pretty  girle  of  seven  or  nine  years  of  age,  attired  on  her  head  with  her
hair  rowled  up  before  and  lianging  down  very  long  behind,  with  a  gown  of
Sey,  changeable  green  and  red,  with  a  train  that  seemed  to  play  up  and  down
like,  and  seemed  to  go  in  and  out  behind  my  books,  lying  on  heaps.

She  was  a  briglit,  pleasant,  little  creature,  anxious  to  make  herself
useful,  even  to  the  extent  of  wishing  to  learn  Greek,  Latin,  and
Syriac,  in  order  to  be  helpful  to  Dr.  Dee,  and  l^egging  to  be  taught
to  spell.  She  seems  to  have  had  a  dull  time  at  home,  to  judge  from  her
pleasure  in  the  society  of  two  old  savants  such  as  Dee  and  Kelly,  but
it  usually  happened  that  just  as  she  was  beginning  to  enjoy  herself,  her
mother,  a  somewhat  ill-tempered  person,  carried  her  oif  to  her  domestic
duties,  apparently  the  care  of  her  younger  brothers  and  sisters.  They
Jiad  also  some  20  other  visitors,  who  appear  in  the  crystal  in  endless
variety,  from  Angelicall  Creatures  and  Spirituall  Beings  down  to  a
Divel  of  Hell.  Dee  seems  to  have  had  a  theory  that  the  Crystal  or
Shew-stone  was  a  means  of  testing  the  spirits  wlietlier  they  were  of
God,  for  he  says  they  "  had  warrant  that  into  the  stone  no  wicked
spirits  should  enter,  but  witliout  the  stone  ill-doers  might  deal  with
them  unless  God  prevented  it."  However,  if  it  be  true  of  spirits  as  of
men,  that  "by  their  deeds  ye  shall  know  them,"  one  would  hesitate,
after  reading  the  history,  to  give  adhesion  to  his  creed  in  this
particular.

Some  of  their  visitors  are  described  minutely.  One  is,  "  A  woman
like  an  old  Mayde,  in  a  red  petticoat,  and  with  a  red  silk  upper  bodies,
her  hair  rowled  about  like  a  Scottish  woman,  the  same  being  yellow."

Another, — "  A  goodly  tall  man,  aged,  all  in  black,  with  a  Hat  on
his  head."

We  have  also,  "  A  young  man  sitting  on  the  side  of  a  ditch," — "  a
multitude  of  young  children," — "  a  thin-visaged  man,"  and  among  the
Angelicall  beings,  Esmeli,  Gabriel,  Michael,  Nalvage,  Uriel,  as  to  whom
Casaubon  says,  "  Whether  all  Interlocutors  I  know  not,  because  I  do
not  remember,  neither  doth  it  much  concern."

They  not  only  see  these  persons  but  hold  long  conversations  with
them ;  the  stone  also  produces  other  sounds,  sometimes  of  a  somewhat
disturbing  nature.  On  one  occasion,  Kelly  says,  "I  have  heard  a  voice
about  the  Shew  Stone  very  great,  as  though  men  were  beating  down  of
mud  walls, — the  thumping,  shussing,  and  cluttering,  is  such."  Another
time  we  read,  "  It  thundereth  in  the  Stone."

The  nature  of  the  messages  received  is  as  varied  as  the  style  of  the
messengers.  The  Angelicall  Beings  usually  relieve  themselves  of  a  good
deal  of  "  Sermon-like  Stuffe,"  somewhat  stale  and  thin  in  quality,  and
with  an  affectation  of  originality,  and  an  assumption  of  importance  in


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  '  497


their  teaching,  with  which  in  our  own  day  we  are  tolerably  familiar  at
the  hands  of  our  lady  novelists.  Madimi  is  a  pleasant  little  chatterbox.
The  Scottish  Mayde  was  apparently  "  on  a  journey,  too  busy-wise  to
stop  talking,"  and  soraewliat  offended  by  the  persistence  with  which  a
man,  whom  she  met  on  her  way,  inquired,  like  anotlier  historical
character,  "  Where  are  you  going  to,  my  pretty  Maid  ?  "  She  answers,
"  Belyk  you  are  of  kyn  to  these  men," — some  others  slie  had  met, — •
"  for  they  are  also  desirous  to  know  whither  I  go."

However  unsatisfactory  Kelly  ^  may  have  been  in  private  life,  his
sincerity  with  regard  to  the  crystal  seems  fairly  established  by  the
following  story.

It  seems  that,  if  contemporary  history  is  to  be  trusted,  Kelly  had
sold  himself  to  the  devil,  who  promised  he  should  live  1,000  yeai's.
(He  died  at  something  like  four-score.)  Pei'haps  with  a  view  to  provide
for  so  long  a  career,  Kelly  was  anxious  to  sell  his  accomplishments  to
the  highest  bidder,  and  ungratefully  left  his  master  in  the  lurch  on
more  than  one  occasion.  Once,  however,  his  designs  were  frusti'ated ;
though,  by  the  way,  I  think  the  story  ends  in  his  receiving  an  addition
to  his  salary.  There  appeared,  after  the  usual  preliminaries  of  prayer
and  self-mortification,  "  One  in  the  very  top  of  the  frame  of  the  Shew-
stone  much  like  Michael,"  and  soon  certain  words  are  seen,  which
Kelly,  not  understanding  the  Greek  character,  declared  to  be  "  Ghyb-
brish."  .  Madimi,  whose  classical  studies  seem  not  to  have  advanced  far,
is  of  opinion  that  the  language  is  Syriacke,  in  which  she  was  supported
by  Dee,  "  but  this  he  said,"  adds  Casaubon  commenting  on  the  story,
"  to  jeer  at  Kelly."

However,  the  message,  as  translated  by  Casaubon,  i-uns  thus  : — -

This  fellow  will  overthrow  this  work  His  baggage  is  in  a  readiness  And
he  doth  very  much  endeavour  To  withdraw  himself  from  this  common
friendship  Take  heed  that  you  give  him  no  occasion  For  he  doth  mightily  plot
by  art  and  cunning  How  he  may  leave  you  for  ever.^

The  descriptions  given  of  the  Shew-stone  itself  are  so  fragmentary
and  conflicting  that  Casaubon  is  of  opinion  that  Dr.  Dee  had  more  stones
than  one,  which  he  accounted  sacred,  including  the  "  Principal  Stone  "

1  \V.  Scott,  after  describing  the  use  of  crystals,  writes :  "Dr.  Dee,  an  excellent  mathe-
matician had  a  stone  of  this  kind,  and  is  said  to  have  been  imposed  upon  concerning
the  spirits  attached  to  it,  their  actions  and  answers,  by  the  report  of  one  Kelly,  who
acted  as  his  viewer.  The  unfortunate  Dee  was  ruined  by  his  associates  both  in  fortune
and  in  reputation." Demonology  and  Witchcraft,  p.  .339  acq.

2  KeUy  afterwards  owned  to  Dr.  Dee  "that  unless  this  had  so  fain  out  he  would
have  gone  beyond  the  seas,  taking  ship  at  Newcastle,  within  8  dayes  next, "  p.  28.

3  Now  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  interesting  also  to  know
that  Dee's  library,  the  scene  of  his  crystal  visions,  remains  almost  as  he  left  it  in  Man-
chester College,  difficult  though  it  be  to  associate  any  hue  of  romance  with  a  scene  so
blackened  with  dirt  and  money-getting.

• . ..  2  K  2


498


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


and  "this  other  stone,"  and  "first  sanctified  Stone,"  usual  "  Shew-
stone,  and  Holy  Stone." In  another  place  he  says  : —

The  form  of  it  was  round,  as  appeareth  by  some  coarse  representations  of
it  in  the  margins  (not  given  in  edition  of  1659),  and  it  seems  to  have  been  of
a  pretty  bigness.  It  seems  it  was  most  like  unto  crystal,  as  it  is  called
sometimes  Insj^ecto  Chrystallo, — nihil  visibile  apparuit  in  chrystallo  sacrato,
praiter  ipsius  crystalli  visibili  (sic.)  formam.  .  .  .  It  is  a  secret  of  Magick
which  hapjiily  may  be  grounded,  in  pnvt  at  least,  ujjon  some  natural  reason
(not  knowu  unto  us),  to  represent  Objects  (externally  not  visible)  in  smooth
things.

Of  the  history  of  the  stone,  or  how  it  came  into  Dee's  hands,  we
can  discover  nothing.  It  appears  in  the  very  fir.st  scene,  and  is  an
important  feature  in  almost  every  part  of  the  story.  In  a  letter  to
Rodolph,  Emperor  of  Germany,  Dee  says  (p.  223) : —

The  Holy  Angels  for  these  two  years  and  a  half  have  used  to  inform
me  .  ;  .  Yea,  they  have  brought  me  a  Stone  of  that  value  that  no
Earthly  Kingdom  is  of  that  worthinesse  as  to  be  comjiared  to  the  vertue  or
dignity  thereof.

And  in  another  place  (p.  245)  : —

The  Emperour,  desirous  to  see  the  Stone  brought  to  me  by  an  Angel,
willed  me  to  come  to-morrow  also  to  diner.

Casaubon,  in  the  absence  of  information  as  to  its  oi'igin,  suggests
that  the  reader,  if  he  please,  may  "  find  some  satisfaction  if  he  read
the  maner  how  it  was  taken  away  and  restored,  very  particularly  set
down."  Accordingly  we  tell  the  story  (with  some  omissions)  in  Dr.
Dee's  own  words  : — ^

Not  long  ago  there  appeared  a  great  flame  of  fire  in  the  principal  stone
(both  standing  im  the  table  before  E.  Kelly),  which  thing,  though  he  told  me,
I  made  no  end  of  my  prayer  to  God.  And,  behold,  suddenly  one  seemed  to
come  in  at  the  south  window  of  the  chappel,  right  against  E.  K.  (But
before  that  the  stone  was  heaved  up  an  handful  high,  and  set  down  again
well,  which  tiling  E.  K.  thought  did  signifie  some  strange  matter  toward. )
Then,  after  the  man  that  came  in  at  the  window  seemed  to  have  his  nether
parts  in  a  cloud,  and  with  spread-abroad  arms  to  come  toward  E.  K. ,  at
which  sight  he  shrinked  liack  somewhat,  and  then  the  creature  took  up
between  both  his  hands  the  stone,  awl  fmmc  of  gold,  and  mounted  up  away  as
he  came. E.  K.  catched  at  it,  but  could  not  touch  it.^

How  long  they  had  to  wait  for  the  recovery  of  the  stone  we  are  not
told.  They  lost  it  on  the  24th  of  April,  1587,  and  recovered  it  on
Friday  afternoon,  about  four  of  the  clock,  under  the  following  circum-
stances : — Dee  and  Kelly  had  been  taking  a  walk  by  the  "  little  River,"
and  were  returning  home  when  Kelly

saw  twain  as  high  as  my  son  Arthur,  fighting  by  the  River  side  witli  swords  ;

1  The  italics  are  Dr.  Dee's.
-  Page  19,  Second  Part.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


499


and  the  one  said  to  the  other,  "  Thou  hast  beguiled  me." Then  I  at  length
said  unto  them,  "Can  I  take  up  the  matter  between  you?" One  said,
Yea,  that  you  can. " "  In  what  is  it  ?"  quoth  I. Then  said  he,  "J  aent  a
thing  to  thy  wife  by  my  man,  and  thisfelloio  hath  taken  it  from  him."

Then  they  fought  again,  and  the  thief  being  wounded  produced  the
stolen  stone,  and  at  the  other's  bidding,  disappeared  and  on  his  return
was  asked  :  "  Hast  thou  laid  it  under  the  right  pillow  of  the  bed
where  his  wife  lay  yesternight  ? "  after  which  they  vanished.

And  I,  coming  to  my  chamber,  found  my  wife  lying  upon  her  bed,  and
there  I  lifted  up  the  right  pillow  upon  which  she  lay  resting  herself  (not  being
well  at  ease)  .  .  .  and  there  I  found  my  precious  Stone,  that  was  taken
away  by  Madimi.  Whereat  E.  K.  greatly  wondered,  doubtmg  the  verity  of
the  shew. But  I  and  my  wife  rejoiced,  thanking  God.

One  does  not  see  why  Madimi  should  be  charged  witli  the  deporta-
tion of  the  Shew-stone,  which  had  also  other  vicissitudes  in  its  career.
On  one  occasion  Uriel  appears,  and  after  some  pi'eliminary  "  Sermon
Stuife "  says,  "  This  is  the  last  time  any  shew  shall  be  made  in  this
Stone."  However,  the  sentence  is  afterwards  revoked,  and  the  stone
"dignified"  by  Nalvage,  another,  perhaps  a  rival,  spirit.  It  was  even
"  marvellously  brighter  than  before."  Sometimes  the  stone,  on  being
consulted,  gives  no  response,  but  remains  "  of  his  natui'al  diaphinitie."
On  one  such  occasion  we  gather  a  small  detail,  which  reminds  us  of  the
method  pursued  by  a  magician,  Simon  d'Achard,  who  was  hanged  in
Paris  in  1596  for  the  crime  of  mirror-reading,  and  whose  plan  was  to
write  down  the  questions  to  which  he  desired  an  answer,  and  put  the
paper  away  with  the  mirror,  in  which  the  following  day  he  read  the
message  for  which  he  sought.- Dr.  Dee  writes  : —

Very  long  I  prayed  m  my  Oratory  and  at  my  deske,  to  have  answer  or
resolution  of  divers  doubts  which  I  had  noted  in  a  paper, and  which  doubts
I  read  over  distinctly  .  ...  but  answer  came  there  none,  neither  in  the
Stone  did  anything  appear,  no,  not  the  golden  curtain.  .  .  .  But  I  held
on  in  a  pitiful  manner.

The  surroundings  of  the  Shew-stone  seem  to  have  been  a  matter  re-
quiring great  attention.  Even  when  on  a  passing  visit  to  the  Emperor
we  find  that  an  oratory  is  arranged,  and  "  the  Angelicall  Stone  set  in
the  frame  of  gold  on  the  Table,"  and  when  at  home,  Dee  frequently
speaks  of  the  oratory  or  sanctuary,  also  of  "  curtains  "  and  "  a  veil."
These curtains,  however,  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  another

1  Part  II.,  p.  23.

2  Story  told  by  De  I'Ancre  in  L'IncreduUte  et  Miscriancc  du  Sortilege.  Pavis,1622,
p.  774.

^  On  another  occasion,  we  read  that  Kelly  left  written  questions  in  his  window
{p.  80).  "Nalvage  told  him  the  devil  had  now  taken  away  his  questions.  E.  tC.
went  do\vn  to  see  if  it  were  true,  and  it  was  true."


500


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


"  curtain  "  often  mentioned,  which  "  a  man  would  think  at  first  per-
chance .  .  .  somewhat  outward,  but  it  will  be  found  otherwise,  it
was  seen  in  the  Stone,  and  appeared  of  different  forms  and  colours."  It
served  in  fact  as  a  sort  of  drop-scene  to  distinguish  between  the  acts,
and  was  sometimes  superseded  by  "  a  ball  or  cloud  of  smoak."

But  enough  of  Dr.  Dee,  whose  book,  liowever,  I  can  recommend
as  very  suggestive  and  entertaining  reading,  containing  much  which  is
unexpected,  from  what  seems  the  first  seed  of  certain  modern  theo-
logical heresies  down  to  an  early  statement  of  the  principles  of  Pepper's
Ghost.  The  results  attained  by  Cagliostro  were  so  similar  to  those  of
Dr.  Dee  as  scarcely  to  need  special  mention,  though  the  fact  that
Cagliostro  made  use  of  a  carafe  of  water  constitutes  a  slicrht  difference
in  method.  Some  interesting  facts  and  illustrations  of  crystal-gazing
ai'e  recorded  by  Boissard,^  in  which  we  have  the  usual  elements — the
mirror,  incantations,  and  child  seer ;  and  one  of  the  instances  given  is  note-
worthy as  an  example  of  clairvoyance,  rather  than  of  the  Spiritualistic
flavour  of  the  Dee  stories.

A  man  having  committed  a  murder  is  fleeing  from  his  country.  On
the  way  lie  goes  to  a  magician  for  news  of  his  wife.  Incantations  are
performed,  a  cliild  is  called,  and  looking  in  a  mirror  describes  a  room,  a
lady,  the  details  of  her  dress.  She  is  flattening  something  in  her  palm,
and  laughs  and  talks  with  a  young  man  who  sits  by.

The  husband  recognises  liis  wife,  and  the  room  she  occupies,  but
not  the  young  man,  and  seized  with  jealousy,  returns  at  the  risk  of  his
life  to  a  village  near  home,  whence  he  sends  a  messenger  to  his  wife
desiring  an  inter\dew.  The  lady  arrives  much  rejoiced  at  the  unex-
pected meeting,  and  on  being  questioned,  gives  an  account  of  the  scene
described,  which  agrees  in  every  particular,  even  as  to  the  dress  she  was
wearing  at  the  time.  The  mysterious  young  man  turns  out  to  be  the
husband's  brother,  for  whom  she  was  preparing  a  plaster  whicli  she
flattened  between  her  hands.

De  I'Ancre  gives  a  somewhat  similar  story  also  of  a  jealous  husband,
to  whom  a  magician,  reading  in  a  glass,  describes  a  scene  which  induces
him  to  return  home  at  once,  to  find  that  his  wife  had  broken  her  arm
which  had  been  set  by  a  surgeon-monk,  the  sight  of  wlioni  had  caused
so  much  unnecessary  anxiety.^  Ben  Jonson  enumerates  among  the
tricks  of  "the  Alchemist,"  "  taking  in  of  shadows  with  a  glass,  told  in
red  letters."  In  a  note  by  Whalley,  Ed.  1811,  we  read,  "i.e.  says
Mr.  Upton,  letters  written  in  blood,  and  he  tliinks  it  an  allusion  to  a
particular  manner  of  divination  with  a  glass  mentioned  by  the  Scholiast
of  Aristophanes  in  Nub.  760. I  rather  apprehend  it  an  allusion  to  the

1  Boissard,  Trac.  Dir.,  cap.  v.  \)\>.  15,  16.

-  Vlncredulite  ct  Miscreance  du  Sortilege,  De  I'Ancre,  p.  257.  Paris,  1622.  Readers
of  Sir  W.  Scott  may  be  reminded  of  "  Aunt  Margaret's  Mirror."


1889.]


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


501.


fortune-tellers  of  our  author's  day,  and  that  these  shadows  were  visions,
taken  by  a  beril,  which  is  a  kind  of  crystal,  they  had  used  to  look  into."

A  crystal  at  Nuremburg  is  often  referred  to  by  writers  of  the  17th
century,  ^  in  which  a  boy  could  read  answers  to  any  question  asked  and
by  which  an  important  scientific  difficulty  (we  are  not  told  of  what  kind)
was  once  decided.  Unfortunately,  the  owner  was  seized  with  scruples
as  to  its  use,  and  finally  broke  it  in  pieces.

Among  crystal-seers  of  importance  in  England  after  Dee's  time,  was
a  Mr.  Compton  of  Somersetshire,  ^  said  to  be  a  physician  of  repute,  who,
wishing  to  give  proof  of  occult  skill  to  a  patient,  Mr.  Hill,  asked  him  to
look  in  a  mirror,  which  (without  the  usual  preliminary  incantation,  &c.)
he  offered  for  his  immediate  inspection.  Mr.  Hill  then  beheld  his  wife,
who  was  many  miles  distant,  "  in  the  habit  which  she  then  wore,  work-
ing at  her  needle,  in  such  a  part  of  the  room,  in  which,  and  about  which
she  really  was,  as  he  found  upon  enquiry  when  he  came  home.  Comp-
ton . . . was  an  utter  stranger  to  the  person  of  his  wife."

To  the  same  period  belong  several  seers,  mentioned  by  Lilly,'^  none
of  whom  present  any  special  features  of  importance.  He  also  gives  us
a  description  of  a  crystal  used  in  his  time  by  a  Mr.  Gilbert  Wakering,
"  a  beril,  of  the  largeness  of  a  good  big  orange,  set  in  silver,  with  a
cross  on  the  top,  and  another  on  the  handle,  and  round  about  engraved
three  angels'  names, — Raphael,  Gabriel,  and  Uriel."

A  similar  description  is  given  by  Aubrey,^  of  "  a  berill  now  in  the
possession  of  Sir  Edmund  Harley,  K.B.,  at  Brampton  Bryan,  in
Herefordshire."  It  was  originally  used  by  a  minister  in  JSTorfolk  with
a  call,  "  afterwards  a  miller  had  it,  and  both  did  work  great  cures  with
it."  Finally,  "it  came  into  sonaebody's  hands  in  London,  who  did
strange  things  with  it,  and  was  questioned  for  it,  and  it  was  taken
away  by  authority."

The  "call"  seems  to  be  the  modern  substitute  for  the  earlier
incantation.  Examples  are  given  by  writers  of  the  time ;  one  quoted
by  Percy  ^  is  headed  "  An  excellent  way  to  get  a  Farie,"  of  which  the
conditions  are : —

' '  First  get  a  broad  square  crystal  or  Venice  glass,  in  length  and  breadth
3  inch.  Then  lay  that  crystal!  in  the  bloud  of  a  white  henne,  3  Wednes-
days or  3  Fridays."

And  so  on.  Another,  still  more  curious,  quoted  by  Reginald  Scot,*'

1  Sprenger,  Introduction  to  his  Edition  of  Plutarch's  Dc  Defcctu  Oraciilorum  ;
Casaubon  in  Introduction  to  Dr.  Dee.,  and  Bodin,  Fleau  des  Demons,  p.  129,  Ch.  II.

2  Saducisraus  Triumphattis,  Glanville,  1681,  pp.  202-3-4.

3  Life  and  Times  of  William  Lillii,  1602-81,  pp.  234-5.
■*  Miscellanies,  J.  Aubrey,  1096,  p.  130.

5  From  a  MS.  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum. Probably  the  one  referred  to  by
Aubrey  as  "  the  call  Mr.  Elias  Ashmole  had."
s  Discovery  of  Witchcraft,  Reginald  Scot.


502  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


is  called  "an  operation  ...  to  have  a  spirit  enclosed  in  a  crystal
stone  or  beryl  glass."  This  was  a  work  of  time,  demanding  not  only
"  new  and  fresh  and  clean  array,"  but  the  repeating  of  seven  Psalms,
several  long  prayers,  sundry  operations  with  line  bright  swords,
five  days'  fasting,  and  other  tedious  performances.

Lilly  tells  us  of  one  Mortlack  who  had  a  crystal  and  a  call  for
Queen  Mab.  "  He  deluded  many  thereby."  Once,  on  trying  in
presence  of  a  lai-ge  company  to  no  effect,  he  complained  of  adverse
influence  in  the  presence  of  Lilly,  who  adds :  "  I  at  last  showed  him
his  error,  but  left  him  as  I  found  him,  a  pretending  ignoramus."

Perhaps  the  latest  historical  example  of  mirror-gazing  is  that  given
by  Saint-Simon^,  who  tells  in  his  Memoirs  of  a  magician  who  predicted
to  the  Duke  of  Orleans  the  fate  of  the  princes  through  whose  death  he
attained  the  position  of  Regent  of  France.  The  seer  in  this  case  was
a  girl,  young  and  innocent,  whose  visions  were  perceived  by  means  of  a
glass  of  water.

Some  interesting  examples  of  crystal-seeing  are  mentioned  by
Mrs.  De  Morgan,'^  whose  comments  upon  them  are  as  follows  : —

Crystal-vision  is  a  well  attested  fact,  having  its  laws  and  conditions  like
other  phenomena  in  this  world  of  known  and  hidden  causes,  and  a  little
careful  observation  may  clear  away  some  of  that  obscurity  which  has  kept
it  as  the  property  of  witches  and  sorcerers.  The  Crystal  .  .  .  seems  to
produce  on  the  eye  of  the  seer  an  effect  exactly  like  what  would  ensue  under
the  fingers  of  a  powerful  mesmeriser.  The  person  who  looks  at  it  often
becomes  sleepy. Sometimes  the  eyes  close. At  other  times  tears  flow.

The  following  remarks  to  the  same  effect  are  from  La  Magie  et
VAstrologie  (Louis  F.  A.  Maury,  1860).

Entre  les  principaux  moyens  de  divination  un  grand  nombre  avait  pour
efFet  de  determiner  une  sorte  de  vertige,  en  agissant  sur  les  yeux,  et  par
consequent  sur  le  cerveau,  a  peu  pres  de  la  meme  fagon  que  dans  I'hypnotisme
le  font  des  corps  brillants. (p.  426. )

In  one  instance  quoted  by  Mrs.  De  Morgan  the  percipient  dwells
upon  the  fact  that  the  crystal  vision  is  not  interfered  with  by  the
normal  vision,  that  she  could  discontinue  her  observation,  occupy  herself
with  other  things,  and  return  to  find  the  scene  as  she  left  it.  In  my
own  experience,  on  the  contrary,  absolute  fixity  of  gaze  is  essential  to
the  very  existence  of  the  picture,  which  I'emains  only  so  long  as  I  can
continue  without  relaxation  either  of  attention  or  vision.

We  have  already  seen  that  there  seems  a  probability  that  the
divination  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim  was  in  some  way  analogous  to
that  by  mirror-gazing.  I  venture  to  quote  in  this  connection  from  Dean
Plumptre  who,  in  his article  "  Urim  and  Thummim,"  in  Smith's

1  Saint-Simon,  Ch.  clxi.
"  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  110.  ,


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


503


Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  says  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  In  what
way  was  tlie  Urim  instrumental  in  enabling  the  High  Priest  to  give  a
true  oracular  response  ? " —

In  some  way  they  helped  him  to  rise  out  of  all  selfishness  and  hypo-
crisy, out  of  all  ceremonial  routine,  and  to  pass  into  a  state  analogous  to  that
•of  the  later  prophets,  and  so  to  become  capable  of  a  new  sjiiritual  illumina-
tion. The  modus  operandi  in  this  case  may,  it  is  believed,  be  at  least
illustrated  by  some  lower  analogies  in  the  less  common  phenomena  of  con-
sciousness. Among  the  most  remarkable  of  such  phenomena  is  the  change
produced  by  concentrating  the  thoughts  on  a  single  idea,  by  gazing  steadfastly
on  a  single  fixed  jjoint.'^  The  brighter  and  more  dazzling  the  point  upon
which  the  eyes  are  turned,  the  more  rapidly  is  the  change  produced.  The
life  of  perception  is  interrupted.  Sight  and  hearing  fail  to  fulfil  their  usual
functions.  The  mind  passes  into  a  state  of  profound  alistraction,  and  loses
all  distinct  personal  consciousness.  Though  not  asleep,  it  may  see  visions
and  dream  dreams.  Under  the  suggestions  of  a  will  fur  the  time  stronger
than  itself  it  may  be  played  on  like  "  a  thinking  automaton."

Among  recent  examples  of  mirror-gazing  some,  at  once  the  best
attested,  as  well  as  the  most  striking,  come  to  us  from  modern  Egypt.
Some  interesting  remarks  upon  the  question  and  its  I'elation  to  the
phenomena  of  Mesmerism  may  be  found  in  an  article  by  Mr.  Hockley,
in  The  Zoist  (Vol.  VII.,  p.  251,  1849-50),  and  it  is  said,  though  I  have
not  been  able  to  meet  with  any  trustworthy  account  of  the  period,  that
the  subject  attracted  great  attention,  especially  in  Lancashire,  about
the  middle  of  this  century.  An  interesting  experiment,  made  in  1869,
lias  recently  been  recorded  by  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers  {Light,  March  16th,
1889).  He  relates  that  he  put  a  crystal  into  the  hands  of  a  lady,  to
whom  its  use  was  quite  unknown,  who,  after  gazing  into  it  for  a  short
time,  minutely  described  a  scene,  in  which  a  lecturer,  apparently  an
Englishman,  was  addressing  a  foreign  audience,  while  behind  his  chair
stood  the  spirit  of  a  North  American  Indian,  who  seemed,  to  some
extent,  to  inspire  his  discourse.  Some  months  later  the  lady  was  by
chance  introduced  to  the  United  States  Consul  for'  Trebizond,  whom

1  Cp.  Maury,  La  Magic  ct  VAslrologie,  pp.  430-31.  After  speaking  of  onycho-
mancy  and  similar  forms  of  divination  by  t/azing,  he  adds  :  "  Ces  moines  du  Mont
Athos  qu'on  avait  surnommes  umbilicains  ou  omphalo-psychiques,  et  qui  croyaient
voir,  apres  avoir  longtemps  contemple  leur  nombril,  la  lumiere  du  Thabor,  etaient
dupes  d'une  hallucination  de  meme  sorte.  .  .  .  Cette  secte  des  umbihcains  parut
dans  la  premiere  moitie  du  seizieme  siecle.  ...  La  rondelle  de  m(jtal  percee  d"un
trou  dont  fait  usage  M.  PhiUips  dans  ses  experiences  d'hypnotisme,  rappelle  la  forme
de  I'organe  sur  lequel  ces  moines  fixaiiBnt  leurs  regards  d 'admiration.  "—Fleury,  Hist.
Eccles.,  7,  xov.  c.  ix.

2  In  addition  to  works  already  referred  to,  see  Butler's  CovH  Life  in  Egi/pt,
pp.  238-242.

3  Crystal-seeing  now  very  common,— a  nine  days'  wonder  of  the  Metropolis.
Admitted  as  undoubted  truth  in  Lancaslure.  Ehhu  Rich,  JEnn/c.  Met.,  Occult  Sciences.
' '  Catoptromancy  still  found  in  many  \  illages.  "^Diet.  Infernal, Paris,  18G3,  p.  145.


504


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


she  recognised  as  the  subject  of  her  vision,  and  who  beHeved  it  to  refer
to  some  occasion  when  he  liad  given  an  address  in  that  town.  He  also
stated  that  other  SpirituaUst  seers  had  given  similar  descriptions  of  the
Indian  spirit.

An  interesting  little  volume  has  lately  been  brought  to  niy  notice,
Visionen  im  Wasserglasse,  by  Adelina  Freiin  v.  Vay ;  geb.  Grafin
Wurmbrand.

It  is  the  record  of  about  90  experiments,  extending  over  the  years
November,  1869 — Decemljer,  1875.  The  authoress  tells  us  that  they
were  undertaken  by  the  desire  of  her  "  Spirit  Leader  "  (p.  3),  who  also
explains  their  significance.  Except  that  I  can  lay  claim  to  neither
"  spirit  leader "  nor  spii'it  visitants,  and  am  responsible  for  my  own
explanations,  I  find  that  the  experiences  resemble  mine  in  many
respects.  Frau  v.  Vay  sees  her  pictures  without  distress  or  difficulty —
sometimes  like  photographs,  showing  liglit  and  shade  only,  at  others
with  their  natural  colouring,  usually  distinct  in  outline,  though  some-
times as  mere  cloud  pictures  ;  at  times  they  are  only  of  momentary
duration,  at  others  they  remain  some  time,  or  melt  gradually  into
new  combinations  (p.  4).  The  will  of  others  does  not  influence
her  visions — concentration  of  sight  and  attention  is  all  that  is
necessary.  The  "  Spirit  Leader "  speaks  of  such  picture-seeing  as
being  as  old  as  mankind,  known  to  all  the  nations  of  antiquity,
though  not  in  our  own  day  receiving  the  attention  it  deserves
(p.  5).  Though  no  attempt  has  been  made  at  classilication,  I  am
inclined  to  think  some  such  arrangement  as  I  have  ventured  to  suggest
for  my  own  would  also  meet  all  the  cases  in  the  record,  which  has  been
kept  in  an  orderly  manner.  Frau  v.  Vay  dictates  the  description  of
the  picture  while  present  before  her  to  her  husband,  the  "  Spirit  "
contributes  the  interpretation,  and  the  fulfilment  is  afterwards  added  in
proper  historical  order.

Experiments.

Those  interested  in  sucli  matters  may  perhaps  be  glad  to  learn  that
several  persons  have  lately  made  experiments  with  the  Crystal,  which
have  been  carefully  recorded.

In  attempting  some  examination  of  the  result,  I  have  for  material
several  cases  which  I  am  permitted  to  quote  at  first-hand,  as  well  as
more  than  70  of  my  own,  of  which  I  have  kept  notes,  invariably  made
within  a  short  time  (at  the  furthest,  an  hour)  of  the  occurrence  of
the  experiment.  Of  these,  I  believe  not  more  than  two  or  three  are
of  a  kind  to  which  I  can  assign  no  meaning,  and  even  as  to  these  I
think  it  (juite  possible  that  some  explanation  may  yet  be  forthcoming,
several  other  cases  having  occurred,  as  will  be  seen,  in  which  the  source
of  tlie  message  or  vision  was  not  immediately  evident.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  505


The  experiences  of  the  different  percipients  have  sufficient  resem-
blance to  each  other,  and  to  some  extent  to  those  recorded  in  history,  to
justify  a  provisional  classification.

In  the  first  place,  we  must  treat  the  Crystal-visions  on  tlie  analogy
of  other  hallucinations,  assuming  that  the  part  played  hy  tlie  Crystal  is
mainly  to  concentrate  the  gaze.  This  is  evident  fi'oui  tlie  variety  of
the  means  employed,  already  in  part  enumerated,  and  to  which
may  be  added  many  others  which  the  imagination  of  the  percipient  may
suggest,  the  crystal  having  maintained  its  position  of  preference,  pro-
bably on  the  ground  of  convenience.  From  my  own  experience  I
would  suggest  a  dark  framed  photograph,  hanging  on  the  same  side  of
the  room  as  that  on  which  the  light  enters,  as  very  effective.  The  reflect-
ing balls,  a  favourite  toy  on  a  Christmas  tree,  which  others  have  found
suitable,  always  strike  me  as  I'eflecting  too  much,  and  in  too  grotesque  a
manner,  to  be  of  use,  and  tlie  same  may  be  said  of  tlie  back  of  a  watch.
The  Arabs  and  Hindoos  sometimes  use  a  cup  of  treacle,  the  Chinese
the  palm  of  the  hand  alone ;  olive  oil,  lamp-black,  and  other  liquids
have  all,  as  we  have  seen,  their  place  amongst  the  methods  of  Crystal-
seeing.  The  Crystal  of  the  17tli  century  seers  seems  to  have  usually
been  cut  and  polished  and  mounted  in  a  ring,  but  was  occasionally  used
in  its  natural  form.  That  spoken  of  as  belonging  to  Mi'.  Dawson
Rogers  is  of  the  latter  kind.  A  glass  or  vase  of  water  serves  every
purpose,  but  is  obviously  inconvenient  to  handle,  especially  if  used  in
the  dark.  I  can  also  recommend,  particularly  for  daylight  experiment,
a  good-sized  magnifying  glass  placed  on  a  dark  l:)ackground.

Assuming,  then,  that  the  crystal  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  con-
centration, both  mental  and  physical,  we  sliall  find  that  tlie  visions
follow  the  main  lines  of  other  hallucination,  and  may  be :

1.  After-images  or  recrudescent  memories,  often  rising  thus  and

thus  only  from  the  sub-conscious  strata  to  which  they  liad
sunk.

2.  Objectivations  of  ideas  or  images

(a)  Consciously  or  {h)  unconciously  in  the  mind  of  the  per-
cipient.

3.  Visions,  possibly  telepathic  or  clairvoyant,  implying  acquirement

of  knowledge  by  super-normal  means.

In  seeking  to  illustrate  the  first  of  these  three  groups  I  hope  to  be
forgiven  if  I  draw  mainly  from  my  own  experience,  not  only  because
my  own  record  is  largely  concerned  with  this  class  of  vision,  but  because
such  stories  contain  so  little  of  the  marvellous  that  they  are  practically
ignored  by  most  writers  on  tlie  subject.

The  tendency  of  the  conscious  memory  is  so  strongly  in  favour  of
picture-making  tliat  we  may  naturally  assume  this  habit  on  the  part  of


-506  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


tliat  whicli  is  latent  or  sub-conscious.  We  notice  this  strongly  in  the
cliild,  whose  play  consists  for  the  most  part  of  a  reproduction  of
some  "  fragment  from  his  dream  of  human  life,"  and  it  becomes  still
more  marked  among  the  uneducated,  the  grown-up  children  of  our
civilisation.  One  asks  a  poor  woman  after  her  rheumatism,  or  her
flower  garden,  or  her  grandchild,  no  matter  what,  and  she  inevitably
begins  by  telling  you  how  on  a  certain  day  she  was  sitting,  "  as  it
might  be  the7-e"  and  a  friend  dropped  in  just  as  you  have  done  this
morning,  and  so  on — convinced  that  the  assertion  that  the  stones  remain
there  unto  this  day,  is  as  convincing  an  argument  to  your  mind  as  to
her  own.  The  question  often  asked,  "Is  thought  conducted  in  words?"
may  present  many  difficulties,  but  we  are  all  probably  agreed  as  to  the
tendency  of  recollection  to  the  forming  of  pictures.

The  revival  of  impressions  or  presentations,  says  Mr.  Sully,  has,  as  its
pliysidlogical  condition,  tlie  modification  of  the  centres  in  some  way  and  the
production  of  a  physiological  disposition.  Owing  to  this,  though  excitation
of  the  centres  can  take  place  at  first  only  through  some  peripheral  stimu-
lation it  may  subsequently  become  independent  of  it.  Milton  mentally
picturing  scenery  after  he  had  lost  his  sight,  and  Beethoven  representing
musical  sounds  after  he  had  lost  his  hearing,  are  striking  illustrations  of
this  surviving  central  eft'ect  of  external  stimulation.  ^

Such  pictures  sometimes  occur  in  the  Crystal  when  I  am  looking
for  sometliing  else,  and  may  consist  of  a  room  I  have  seen  during  the
day,  a  glimpse  of  some  corner  of  a  house  where  I  have  chanced  to  call,
a  sudden  movement  which  has  startled  me,  indoors  or  in  the  street,  as
when  a  maid  has  surprised  me  with  an  unexpected  service,  or  the  dog
has  run  under  a  passing  vehicle — sometliing  which  has  received  but  the
slightest  notice  at  the  moment  of  its  occurrence,  but  which  recurs  in
intensest  clearness  when  it  presents  itself  in  the  Ci'ystal.  It  is  a  matter
of  regret  to  me  that  for  the  present  I  am  unable  to  compare  notes
upon  this  kind  of  vision  with  any  other  percipient,  as  one  would  be  glad
to  know  how  far  it  depended  upon  the  liahit  of  visualising  impressions.
If,  for  example,  I  desire  to  describe  a  room  in  a  friend's  house,  I  return
in  recollection  to  the  occasion  of  my  last  visit ;  I  once  more  occupy  the
same  chair,  the  carpet  at  my  feet  becomes  visible,  the  furniture  nearest  to
my  seat,  gradually  the  wliole  contents  of  the  room,  till  walls  and  ceiling
complete  the  picture,  and  I  am  able  to  give  an  inventory  which  would
not  disgrace  an  auctioneer's  clerk.  How  much  this  idiosyncrasy  may
have  to  do  with  the  cleai'ness  of  my  crystal-pictures,  I  leave  to  the
wiser  in  such  matters  to  determine.

(No.  7.)  Here,  for  example,  I  find  in  the  Crystal  a  bit  of  dark  wall,
covered  with  white  jessamine,  and  I  ask  myself,  "  Where  have  I  walked
to-day  ?  " I  have  no  recollection  of  such  a  sight,  not  a  common  one  in


'  Sully,  Outlines  of  Psychologii,  p.  222.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


the  London  streets,  but  to-morrow  I  will  repeat  niy  walk  of  this
morning,  with  a  cai-eful  regard  for  creeper-covered  walls.  To-morrow
solves  the  mystery.  I  find  the  very  spot,  and  the  siglit  brings  with  it
the  further  recollection  that  at  the  moment  we  passed  this  spot  I  was
engaged  in  absorbing  conversation  with  my  companion,  and  my
voluntary  attention  was  pre-occupied.

(No.  62.)  To  take  another  example.  I  had  been  occupied  with
accounts;  I  opened  a  drawer  to  take  out  my  banking-book.  My  hand  came
in  contact  with  the  Crystal,  and  I  welcomed  the  suggestion  of  a  change
of  occupation.  However,  figures  were  still  uppermost,  and  the  Crystal
had  nothing  more  attractive  to  show  me  than  the  combination  7694.
Dismissing  this  as  probably  the  number  of  the  cab  I  liad  driven  in  tliat
day,  or  a  chance  grouping  of  the  figures  with  wliich  I  had  been
occupied,  I  laid  aside  the  Crystal  and  took  up  my  banking-book,  which
I  had  certainly  not  seen  for  some  months,  and  found,  to  my  surprise,
that  the  number  on  the  cover  was  7694.  Had  I  wished  to  recall  tlu;
figures  I  should,  without  doubt,  have  failed,  and  could  not  even  have
guessed  at  the  number  (jf  digits  or  the  value  of  the  first  figure.
Certainly,  one  result  of  crystal-gazing  is  to  teach  one  to  abjure  the
verb  "to  forget,"  in  all  its  moods  and  tenses.  Perhaps  the  time  may
come  when  we  shall  relegate  the  waters  of  Lethe  to  the  region  of  other
myths,  which  exist  only  for  the  Royal  Academician  hard  up  for  a
subject,  and  try  to  endure  the  conjugating  of  some  such  verb  as  to
"  dis-remember."

(No.  68.)  To  quote  again  from  my  note-book, — this  time  an  instance
more  satisfactory  to  myself.  I  had  carelessly  destroyed  a  letter  without
preserving  the  address  of  my  correspondent.  I  knew  the  county,  and
searching  in  a  map  recognised  the  name  of  the  town,  one  unfamiliar  to
me,  but  which  I  was  sure  I  should  know  when  I  saw  it.  But  I  had
no  clue  to  the  name  of  house  or  street,  till  at  last  it  struck  me  to  test
the  value  of  the  Crystal  as  a  means  of  recalling  forgotten  knowledge.
A  very  short  inspection  supplied  me  with  "  H.  House "  ^  in  grey
letters  on  a  white  ground,  and  having  nothing  Ijetter  to  suggest  from
any  other  source,  I  risked  posting  my  letter  to  the  address  so  strangely
supplied.

A  day  or  two  brought  me  an  answer,  headed  H.  House  in  grey
letters  on  a  white  ground.

(No.  .30. )  The  following  illustration  is  in  some  respects  similar.  It
was  suggested  to  me,  one  day  last  September,  that  I  should  look  into  the
Crystal  with  the  intention  of  seeing  words,  which  had  at  that  time
formed  no  part  of  my  experience.  I  was  immediately  rewarded  by  the
sight  of  what  was  obviously  a  newspaper  announcement,  in  the  type


The  entire  word— one  I  know  in  no  otiier  connection — was  supplied.


508  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


familiar  to  all  in  the  first  column  of  the  Times.  It  reported  the  death
of  a  lady,  at  one  time  a  very  frequent  visitor  in  my  circle,  and  very
intimate  with  some  of  my  nearest  friends,  an  announcement,  therefore,
which,  had  I  consciously  seen  it,  would  have  interested  me  considerably.
I  related  my  vision  at  breakfast,  quoting  name,  date,  place,  and  an
allusion  to  "  a  long  period  of  suffering  "  borne  by  the  deceased  lady,
and  added  that  I  was  sure  that  I  had  not  heard  any  report  of  her
illness  or  even,  for  some  months,  any  mention  of  her  likely  to  suggest
such  an  hallucination.  I  was,  however,  aware  that  I  had  the  day
before  taken  up  the  first  sheet  of  the  Times,  but  was  interrupted  before
I  liad  consciously  read  any  announcement  of  death.  Mrs.  Henry
tSidgwick,  with  whom  I  was  staying,  immediately  souglit  for  the  paper,
where  we  discovered  the  paragraph  almost  exactly  as  I  had  seen
it.  We  each  recorded  our  own  share  in  the  circumstance  and  carefully
preserved  the  newspaper  cutting.

(No.  71.)  The  following  is  a  more  recent  example  of  word-seeing,
which  depended  upon,  as  I  believe,  a  revival  of  memory.  It  had  occurred
to  me  to  write  down  some  verses  which  I  had  once  learnt  some  years  ago
and  which  I  knew  I  could  not  recover  should  I  ever  forget  them.  I  had
no  difficulty  in  recalling  what  I  believed  to  be  a  correct  version  and  was
therefore,  at  first,  surpiised  to  read  in  the  Crystal,  a  few  days  later,  one
verse,  in  which  occurred  the  following  line  : —

"  Clear  by  the  mountain  torrent,  and  soft  by  the  lonely  tarn,"
which  I  had  written,  and  certainly  had  long  believed  to  be,  "  clear  to
the  mountain  echo,  and  sweet  by  the  moorland  tarn."  I  believe  the
former  to  be  the  correct  version,  not  only  because  the  antithesis  was
characteristic  of  the  style  of  the  writer,  but  also  because,  as  forming
part  of  a  description  of  a  voice,  this  edition  obviously  conveys  more
meaning.

The  question  of  association,  as  in  all  cases  of  memory,  plays  an
active  part  in  this  class  of  crystal-vision.  One  of  my  earliest  ex-
periences was  of  a  picture,  perplexing  and  wholly  unexpected  (No.  11) —
a  quaint  oak  chair,  an  old  hand,  a  worn  black  coat-sleeve  resting  on  the
arm  of  the  chair, — slowly  recognised  as  a  recollection  of  a  room  in  a
country  vicarage,  which  I  had  not  entered  and  but  seldom  recalled
since  I  was  a  child  of  ten.  But  whence  came  this  vision,  what
association  has  conjured  up  this  picture  ?  What  have  I  done  to-
day ?  ...  At  length  the  clue  is  found.  I  have  to-day  been
reading  Dante,  first  enjoyed  with  the  help  of  our  dear  old  vicar  many
a  year  ago.

(No.  40.)  One  more  illustration  will  suffice.  We  all  know  the  mood  in
wliicli  it  is  impossible  to  recall  some  face  with  which  we  are  thoroughly
familiar.  I  have  been  speaking  of  M.  and  praising  her  beauty,  but  no
effort  will  bring  her  countenance  to  my  remembrance. The  crystal  is


1889.]


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


509


near, — an  album  containing  her  picture  across  the  room, — so  I  seek
what  I  want  in  the  crystal.  In  vain ;  it  remains,  as  Dr.  Dee  says,  of  its
"  natui'al  diaphinitie."  I  make  another  effort,  this  time  not  to  see  the
face  itself,  but  its  counterfeit  presentment.  The  Crystal  shows  me  the
npen  page  in  my  album,  and  the  left-hand  portrait,  but  that  of  M.  is
covered  by  what  appears  to  be  the  back  of  a  pliotograph  of  a  pinkish
yellow  colour,  lying  crookedly  above  it,  which  refuses  to  move.  This  is
irritating,  and  I  lay  aside  the  Crystal  and  fetch  the  book.  As  I  open  it,
out  falls  the  photograph  of  which  the  back  view  had  been  presented
to  me,  one  which  I  had  but  a  day  or  two  before,  promised  to  send  to
a  friend,  a  promise  I  had  carelessly  failed  (I  may  not  say  forgotten)  to
fulfil.  There  seems  to  be  a  curious  struggle  for  supremacy  between  a
voluntary  and  a  non-voluntary  faculty,  a  claim,  as  it  were,  of  duty
or  conscience  to  have  the  first  hearing.

(Ko.  28.)  Sometimes  the  latent  memory  is  less  certain,  more  confused
in  its  action,  than  in  the  cases  above  quoted.  One  day  I  had  been  seeking
a  medical  prescription  which  I  failed  to  find  among  my  papers.  After
looking  in  many  places,  likely  and  unlikely,  I  concluded  it  had  been
accidentally  destroyed,  and  dismissed  the  matter  from  my  thoughts.
Some  hours  later,  without  having  consciously  thought  of  my  search
meanwhile,  I  was  occupied  with  the  Crystal,  which,  after  presenting
me  with  one  or  two  other  pictures,  suddenly  showed  a  paper  which  by
its  colour  and  general  appearance  I  recognised  as  the  one  in  question.
On  further  inspection,  however,  I  observed,  without  being  able  to  read
tlie  words,  that  the  prescription  was  in  the  handwriting,  not  of  my
doctor,  but  of  my  friend  E.  As  I  have  never  yet  found  any  Crystal
vision  to  be  absolutely  without  meaning,  or  deceptive  in  any  particular,
I  resolved  to  follow  up  this  indication  in  the  only  way  which  occurred
to  me,  and  finally  found  my  lost  prescription  accidentally  folded  within
one  of  E.'s  letters,  where  it  had  remained,  I  have  reason  to  believe,
for  more  than  four  years.  I  may  add  that  E.  is  a  very  frequent  corre-
spondent ;  that  this  particular  letter  had  been  preserved  quite  by
accident,  and  that  there  was  no  possible  comiection  of  ideas,  either  of
time  or  place,  between  the  two  documents.

I  give  another  illustration,  of  a  rather  difi"erent  kind,  of  the  same
process  of  confused  recollection,  in  which  the  part  played  by  memory,
though  I  tliink  it  undoubtedly  exists,  is  of  so  undefijied  a  nature  that
at  first  sight  the  case  seems  almost  to  belong  to  the  third  group — that
in  which  we  find  trace  of  knowledge  acquired  by  some  kind  of  super-
normal means.

(No.  18.)  A  small  key  had  been  lost,  by  a  member  of  the  household,
to  the  great  general  inconvenience,  and  all  other  means  having  failed  I
applied  to  the  Crystal  for  information.  All  that  I  obtained,  after
patient  inspection,  was  a  glow  of  red  colour,  which,  as  I  had  taken


•510  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


every  precaution  against  reflection,  seemed  meaningless,  and  so,  con-
cluding that  a  mere  formless  shining,  so  entirely  new  in  my  experience,
could  be  merely  an  effect  of  weariness,  mental  or  physical,  I  put  the
Crystal  away.  Tlie  following  afternoon  I  was  playing  at  the  piano,
paying  no  attention  to  wliat  was  passing  in  the  room,  when  my  ear  was
caught  by  the  sound  of  a  click.  Before  I  had  consciously  recognised  it
as  the  snap  of  a  purse,  the  red  glow  recurred  to  mind,  and  it  flashed
across  my  thoughts  tliat  A.,  the  loser  of  the  key,  was  the  possessor  of  a
scarlet  morocco  purse.  Offering  no  reason,  I  begged  to  be  allowed  to
handle  it,  and  in  an  outside  pocket  found  the  missing  object.  I  ought
to  add  that,  as  it  was  all  along  supposed  that  the  key  had  dropped
from  its  ring  on  to  tlie  floor,  the  thought  of  tlie  scarlet  purse  was  not  a
likely  coincidence,  so  unless  it  be  assumed  that  the  knowledge  had  Ijeen
acquired  telepathically  from  the  lady  who  had  herself  placed  the  key
where  it  was  finally  found,  one  is  reduced  to  the  supposition  that  I  had
unconsciously  caught  sf)me  accidental  glimpse  of  its  whereabouts.

Readers  of  Du  Prel's  Philosophy  of  Mysticism  will  be  reminded
of  many  examples  given  of  a  like  exaltation  of  memory,^  sometimes
associated  with  some  circumstance  of  excitement  or  stimulus,  such  as  an
attack  of  fever,  of  insanity,  or  delirium, — sometimes  at  the  moment  of
death,"  in  a  condition  of  somnambulism,  or  even  in  ordinary  dream.
Du  Prel  says,  for  instance  (Vol.  II.,  p.  33) : —

"  The  true  cause  must  be  common  to  all  those  conditions,  and  is  no  other
than  the  disappearance  of  the  normal  habitual  consciousness  and  its  content.
Even  the  mere  stoj^jjing  up  of  the  chief  inlet  of  sense-impressions,
blindness,  as  it  usually  exalts  other  psychical  capacities,  can  also  awaken  the
latent  memory."

Is  it  an  over-stretching  of  analogy  to  compare  the  pre-occupation
of  the  sense  of  sight  by  the  fixity  of  gaze  required  for  crystal-seeing, — in
so  far  as  it  is  an  occasion  of  "  wisdom  at  that  entrance  quite  sliut  out," —
to  a  temporary  blindness  ?

We  now  pass  to  the  second  group  (2)  Objectivations  of  ideas  or
images ;  and  in  proceeding  with  some  illustrations  of  those  consciously
in  the  mind  of  the  percipient,  I  am  glad  here  to  be  able  to  draw  upon
the  experience  of  others.  In  two  cases  the  first  experiment  with
the  Crystal  resulted  in  a  vision  of  this  sort.

My  fi'iend  T.  had  never  handled  or  even  seen  a  Crystal  before  I  put
one  into  her  hand,  asking  her  to  attempt  to  make  use  of  it. The  vision

1  A  recent  probable  example  of  the  return  of  memory  is  that  familiar  to  readers
of  the  Procccdinris  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  of  Mr.  Schiller,  who  pro-
duced in  automatic  writing,  passages  in  the  Proven5al  dialect,  which  he  was  not  aware
of  having  ever  seen  or  heard  before.

-  It  is  interesting  to  find  this  fact  noticed  by  a  writer  of  the  17th  century.
"  Men  sometimes  at  the  hour  of  their  departure  do  speak  and  reason  above  them-
selves."— Rdigio  Medici,  xi. — Sir  Thomas  Browne,  1642.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


511


which  shortly  presented  itself  was  a  face  which,  at  first  indistinct,
gradually  became  clearer,  till  she  was  able  to  recognise  it  as  that  of  a
friend  whom  she  had  lately  nursed  in  a  fatal  illness,  and  who,  though
not  actually  in  her  thoughts  at  the  moment,  was  no  doubt  an  ever
present  memory.  In  the  same  way  G.  on  her  first  inspection  of  the
Crystal  saw  the  outline  of  a  sheeted  corpse  which,  without  seeing  the
face,  she  felt  assured  was  that  of  a  near  relative  whose  serious  illness
was  a  subject  of  deep  regret  to  herself  and  her  friends. i

Speaking  for  myself,  though  I  sometimes  deliberately  and  inten-
tionally call  into  the  Crystal  the  creatures  of  my  fancy,  this  reproduc-
tion of  the  more  familiar  subjects  of  recent  conscious  experience  is
very  unusual  with  me,  perhaps  for  the  same  reason  that  my  remembered
dreams  are  never, — contrary,  I  believe,  to  theory, — concerned  with  the
thoughts  and  events  of  the  past  day,  the  surroundings  of  daily  life,
seldom  even  with  the  friends  about  me ; — though  if  they  go  from  home
I  at  once  have  the  pleasure  of  their  presence  in  dreamland.

Just  as  a  fanciful  child  will  tell  itself  a  story,  I  sometimes  in  a
moment  of  idleness  create  a  group  of  figures  and  put  them  in  the
Crystal  to  see  what  they  will  do,  and  so  far  is  one's  conscious  a  stranger
to  one's  unconscious  Ego,  that  I  sometimes  find  their  little  drama  so
startling  and  unexpected  that  I  watch  the  scene  with  curiosity  and
surprise.

I  am  unable  to  quote  directly  from  the  Crystal  any  example  of  this
sort  of  vision,  in  any  way  worth  the  space  it  would  occupy,  but  as  it
has  already  been  submitted  that  the  nature  of  the  means  used  for
concentration  of  gaze  is  of  little  consequence,  I  venture  to  subjoin  the
following.

I  had  been  discussing  with  a  friend  the  motto,  "  Noblesse  oblige,"
and  mainly  for  the  sake  of  argument  had  supported  the  theory  that  tlie
conduct  illustrating  the  principles  it  involved  was  more  likely  to  be  an
hereditary  tendency  than  the  result  of  external  surroundings.  The
same  evening,  while  sitting  at  the  piano  in  the  fireliglit,  I  had  woven
into  my  music  a  story  in  support  of  my  argument,  and  had  reached  the
climax,  where  the  hero,  having  sacrificed  all  he  most  cared  for,  for  the
sake  of  his  principles,  was  about  to  be  re-instated  in  the  opinion  of  his
friends  by  the  good  oflices  of  one  who  had  appreciated  the  real  heroism
which  underlay  all  the  apparent  inconsistencies  of  his  career.  I  had
conjured  up  a  vivid  picture, — the  stately  mansion,  the  group  of  friends
gatliered  on  the  teri'ace,  the  distinguished  officer  who  pleads  the  cause
of  the  cast-ojf  son  of  the  house,  tlie  young  man  himself  in  whose
countenance  pride  and  affection  struggle  for  the  mastei'y. Just  then,

1  I  am  not  aware  that  either  friend  has  since  had  any  unpleasant  vision  of  the
kind.

2l


512


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


a  flame  suddenly  shooting  up  from  the  wood  on  the  hearth  showed  me
the  picture  I  had  imagined,  reflected  upon  the  polished  front  of  the
piano, ^ — carrying  out  my  fancy  witli  detailed  exactness,  except  in  one
particular.  The  ofiicer  is  dressed  for  riding,  and  his  horse  is  held  in
the  background  by  tlie  hero  himself  in  the  dress  of  a  private  soldier,
suggesting,  as  a  better  illustration  of  my  theoiy,  that  he  should  be
brought  triumphantly  through  scenes  of  coarse  temptation  and  an
atmosphere  of  lower  aims.

So  far  as  crystal-vision  is  a  revelation  of  one's  unconscious  self,  it
does  not,  so  far  as  my  experience  goes,  administer  greatly  to  one's  self-
esteem.  So  grotesque  and  commonplace  are  the  ideas  which  float  to
the  surface,  that  one  is  tempted  to  be  thankful  for  the  silence  of  the
"  songs  unsung."  I  give  as  illustration  one  or  two,  always  with  apology
for  their  very  trivial  nature.

(No.  26.)  I  find  in  my  note-book  a  memorandum  of  August  3rd,  as
to  a  vision  of  a  corner  of  a  room  with  a  red  cai  pet,  and  walls  decorated
in  stripes  of  pink,  white,  and  green,  for  which  for  many  months  I  was
unable  to  account.  Only  a  few  days  ago  I  called  on  a  friend  whom  I
had  not  visited  since  July,  and  whose  house  had,  I  observed,  been  newly
and  handsomely  decorated.  A  letter  which  she  had  written  to  me  before
leaving  town  in  the  summer  was  by  chance  referred  to,  and  on
returning  home  I  sought  it  in  order  to  settle  a  disputed  point,  and
found  that  it  was  dated  August  2nd  and  contained  the  information
that  her  staircase  had  been  painted  and  "  looked  at  present  like  a
Neapolitan  ice."  This,  I  doubt  not,  supplied  the  colouring  of  my
picture.

(No.  63.)  On  March  9th  I  saw  in  the  Crystal  a  rocky  coast,  a  rough
sea,  an  expanse  of  sand  in  the  foreground.  As  I  watched,  the  picture
was  nearly  effaced  by  that  of  a  mouse,  so  large  that  I  could  see  only  a  bit
of  clifl"  above  his  tail.  Two  days  later,  I  was  reading  a  volume  of
poetry  which  I  remembered  having  cut  open,  talking  the  while,  certainly
not  consciously  reading,  on  the  day  of  my  vision.  As  I  turned  over
the  leaves  a  couple  of  lines  struck  me  as  somehow  familiar,  though  the
book,  a  volume  by  Aldrich,  was  quite  new  to  me.

"  Only  the  sea  intoning,
Only  the  wainscoat  mouse. "
These  I  imagine  suggested  the  images.

(No.  74.)  The  remaining  example  was  of  a  more  practical  kind.  On
March  20th,  I  happened  to  want  the  date  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  which

1  The  writer  of  an  article  in  FAarkwood's  Magazine  upon  "Georges  Sand,"  tells  us  :
"  She  used  to  seat  herself  at  her  mother's  feet  before  the  fire,  gazing  into  an  old  fire-
screen covered  with  green.  In  that  fire-screen  marvellous  pictures  would  design
themselves,  as  they  were  said  to  do  in  the  pool  of  ink  in  the  palm  of  the  Egyptian
sorcerers.  .  .  .  She  shut  her  eyes  and  she  saw  it  all  still ;  when  she  opened  them
it  ■was  nowhere  visible  but  on  the  fire-screen." — Blackivood,  Vol.  CXXI.,  p.  76.


1889.] '  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


513


I  could  not  recall,  though  feeling  sure  that  I  knew  it,  and  that  I
associated  it  with  some  event  of  importance.  When  looking  in  the
Crystal  some  hours  later,  I  found  a  picture  of  an  old  man  with  long
white  hair  and  beard,  dressed  like  a  Lyceum  Shylock,  and  busy  writing
in  a  large  book  with  tarnished  massive  clasps.  I  wondered  much  who
he  was,  and  what  he  could  possibly  be  doing,  and  thought  it  a  good
opportunity  of  carrying  out  a  suggestion  which  had  been  made  to  me,
of  examining  objects  in  the  crystal  with  a  magnifying  glass.  The  glass
revealed  to  me  that  my  old  gentleman  was  writing  in  Greek,  though
the  lines  faded  away  as  I  looked,  all  but  the  characters  he  had  last
traced,  the  Latin  numerals  LXX.  Then  it  flashed  into  my  mind  that
he  was  one  of  the  Jewish  Elders  at  work  on  the  Septuagint,  and  that
its  date,  277  B.C.,  would  serve  equally  well  for  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  !
It  may  be  worth  while  to  add,  though  the  fact  was  not  in  my  conscious
memory  at  the  moment,  that  I  had  once  learnt  a  chronology  on  a
mnemonic  system  which  substituted  letters  for  figures,  and  that  the
memoria  technica  for  this  date,  was  "  Now  Jewish  Elders  indite  a
Grreek  copy."

It  is  easy  to  see  how  visions  of  this  kind,  occurring  in  the  age  of
superstition,  almost  irresistibly  suggested  the  theory  of  spirit-visitation.
The  percipient,  receiving  information  which  he  did  not  recognise  as
already  in  his  own  mind,  would  inevitably  suppose  it  to  be  derived  from
some  invisible  and  unknown  source  external  to  himself.  The  use  of
the  magnifying  glass  is  a  suggestive  test  of  the  degree  of  independence
of  the  stratum  of  thought  revealed  by  the  Crystal,  but  obviously  it
cannot  be  readily  or  usefully  applied  except  in  a  few  instances  where
the  object  perceived  is  of  a  kind  to  admit  of  minute  inspection.
Unfortunately,  the  suggestion  of  its  use  was  made  to  me  but  recently,
so  that  I  have  had  but  two  or  three  opportunities  of  applying  it,  but
on  each  occasion  with  the  result  of  acquiring  additional  information.

The  messages,  conveyed  from  one  stratum  of  consciousnses  to  another
are  indeed  sometimes  such  as  to  mystify  the  percipient.  ^

An  experience  of  this  kind  occurred  in  March,  1886,  to  Miss  Z.,  a
lady  known  to  Mr.  Myers,  who  has  shown  me  the  transcribed  message.
A  number  of  letters  appeared  to  her  in  the  crystal,  each  letter  seen

iNicetas,  (Andron.  Comn.,  II.  9.)  relates  that  the  Emperor  Andronicus  Comnenus
had  recourse  to  Lethos,  a  diviner  by  hydromancy,  in  order  to  solve  the  question  who
was  to  be  his  successor,  his  intention  being  to  defraud  the  revelation  of  its  due  by
instantly  destroying  the  person  indicated.  The  water  showed  the  letters  S  I,  and  upon
being  further  questioned  as  to  the  period  of  his  succession  denoted,  "  before  the  Feast  of
the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross. "  The  prediction  was  verified,  for  within  the  time  named
Isaac  Angelus  had  succeeded  to  power,  and  Andronicus  had  been  torn  in  pieces  by
his  infuriated  subjects.  ElihuRich,  commenting  on  this  story,  tells  us  that  "the  devil
spells  as  he  recites  the  Lord's  Prayer  backwards.  S  I,  when  inverted,  ^vould  fairly  enough
represent  Isaac  according  to  all  laws  of  magic."— O^j.  cit.,  p.  318.  Cp.  case  of
Kelly,  already  quoted,  reading  in  Greek  letters.

2  L  2


514  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,

separately,  of  a  bright  red  colour.  At  first  they  seemed  to  be  absolutely
meaningless,  but  it  was  at  length  discovered  that  they  composed  words,
spelt  backwards,  in  the  following  fashion  : —

detnawaenoemosotniojaetavirpelcricts
um  eb  gnilliwotevigsevlesmehtpuotehtt
c  e  j  b  u  s

and  the  message  at  length  became  intelligible  : —

Wanted  a  someone  to  join  a  private  circle,  must  be  willing  to  give  them-
selves up  to  the  subject.

In  illustrating  the  third  group,  visions  clairvoyant  or  telepathic,
I  have  but  few  instances  of  my  own  from  which  to  select  examples.  It
would  be  easy  to  draw  fi-om  a  very  large  number  of  recorded  cases;  but
as  in  this  connection,  even  more  than  in  our  former  examples,
everything  depends  on  the  evidence,  a  large  proportion  of  those  which
have  come  down  to  us  are  practically  without  value.  However,  I
select  a  few,  as  fairly  typical  of  the  class.

For  many  reasons, — the  gratification  of  a  taste  for  the  marvellous,
the  immediate  possibility  of  testing  their  accuracy, — the  greater
interest  to  the  on-looker, — the  demand  for  something  beyond  the
purely  subjective, — the  clairvoyant  vision  is  that  with  which  the
greater  number  of  seers  seem  to  have  been  in  all  ages  concerned.  The
fate  of  the  sick,  the  detection  of  robbers,  the  recovery  of  stolen  goods,
the  conduct  of  absent  friends — some  such  question  is  the  motif  of  the
scene,  let  who  will  be  the  players.

Some  recent  cases  have  been  already  given  from  Lane's  Modern
Egy2}tians,  with  which  we  may  compare  the  account  given  of  a  similar
scene  by  Sir  Grant  Wilkinson.^  The  mise-en-scene  is  exactly  as  before —
the  boy,  the  magician,  the  perfumes,  brazier,  magic  square,  invocations,
just  the  same  probably  as  at  any  time  for  some  hundreds  or  thousands
of  years.  But  the  result  was  not  satisfactory.  Lord  Fitzroy  Somerset
and  the  Queen  were  asked  for,  and  the  latter  described  by  the  seer  as
wearing  l)lack  trousers  and  shoes,  a  white  hat,  red  coat,  black  waist-
coat, having  whiskers,  and  presenting  a  glass  tumbler.

Lord  Nugent,^  later,  says  that  not  one  image  evoked  bore  the  smallest
resemblance  to  the  person  asked  for.  The  same  author  accounts  for
the  success  of  the  magician  interviewed  by  Lane  by  saying  that  though
known  as  Osman  Eff'endi,  he  was  really  a  Scotchman  and  may  therefore
be  supposed  to  have  had  some  sort  of  traditional  acquaintance  with  the
persons  asked  for,  which  he  conveyed  to  the  boy  by  means  of  leading
questions.  It  is,  however,  fair  to  remember  that  Lane's  experiences
were  not  confined  to  dealings  with  one  magician  only. Sir  Grant

1  Modern  Fr/t/ptians,  Sir  G.  Wilkinson,  Vol.  I.  218-23.  Similar  accounts  are  given
byReinaud,  Description  du  Cabinet  Bletcas,  p.  401.

2  Nugent,  Lands  Classical  and  Sacred,  pp.  134-5.


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  515


Wilkinson,  determined  to  avoid  all  chance  of  collusion,  sent  for  a  boy
from  a  distance,  and  the  evocations  were  all  failures  of  the  most
ludicrous  type,  upon  which  the  magician  accused  the  young  seer  of
lying,  which,  says  Lord  Nugent,  "  was  no  doubt  true,  but  not  the  cause
of  the  ill  success."

One  or  two  typical  cases,  in  addition  to  some  already  given,  may
suffice  for  illustration  before  proceeding  to  such  as  liave  resulted  from
recent  experiment.

A  story  told  by  Rist  ^  belongs  rather  to  that  class  of  prophecies
which  tend  to  their  own  fulhlment.  A  girl,  whose  parents  refused
their  sanction  to  her  betrothal,  interviewed  an  old  woman  who  volun-
teered to  show  her  in  the  Crystal  how  far  her  hopes  of  happiness  were  to
be  fulfilled.  The  girl,  afraid  to  be  left  alone  with  the  witch,  induced  Eist
to  be  present  at  the  interview,  which  he  was  thus  enabled  to  describe
at  first-hand.  The  usual  elaborate  ceremonies  were  performed,  and  the
crystal,  wrapped  in  a  yellow  handkerchief,  placed  on  a  green  bowl,
which  rested  on  a  blue  cloth  decorated  with  pictures  of  dragons.  The
incantations  completed,  Rist  and  the  girl  are  permitted  to  inspect  the
Crystal,  in  which  they  see  the  gii'l  herself,  attired  as  a  bride,  pale  and
timid,  accompanied  by  her  lover,  also  pale,  wearing  top-boots  with
spurs,  and  carrying  pistols.  The  seers  turn  faint  with  fear,  and  the
old  woman  hurries  away,  but  they  would  indeed  have  been  dull  of
imagination  had  not  the  story  ended,  as  it  did,  with  a  runaway
marriage.

The  same  explanation,  a  tendency  of  prophecies  of  this  kind  to
suggest  their  own  fulfilment,  maybe  found  also  in  a  story  told  by  Lilly.-
A  certain  Dr.  Hodge  had  a  Crystal,  which  his  partner  John  Scott
wished  to  inspect,  so  the  two  went  into  a  field  near  home,  and  Hodge,
pulling  out  the  crystal,  bade  his  friend  describe  what  he  saw.

"1  see,"  said  Scott,  "a  ruddy -complexioned  wench  in  a  red  waistcoat
drawing  beer."  Hodge:  "She  must  be  your  wife."  Scott  answered,
"  Nay,  for  he  should  marry  a  tall  woman  in  London."  Hodge  answered,
"  he  would  not,  but  would  marry  the  woman  he  now  saw,"  and  Hodge
was  right,  for  Scott  soon  found  the  tall  lady  had  thrown  him  over,  and
after  remaining  disconsolate  for  two  years  he  accidentally  saw  and
recognised  in  an  inn  in  Canterbury,  the  ruddy-complexioned  wench
drawing  ale,  whom  he  of  course  ultimately  married.

I  now  proceed  to  offer  some  examples  from  my  own  note-book,
beginning  with  three,  as  to  which  telepathy  seems  to  offer  a  very
plausible  explanation.

(No.  23.)  On  the  evening  of  Saturday  July  28th,  1888,  the  Crystal

;  1  Op.  cit.,  pp.  255-59.

-  Lilly,  Life  and  Times,  p.  117.


516


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


presented  me  with  a  picture  of  a  mediseval  saint,  carrying  a  rabbit.  This
I  recognised  as  representing  a  stained  glass  window  at  a  church  in  the
neighbourhood,  which  I  visit  perhaps  two  or  three  times  in  a  year,
always  sitting  within  view  of  this  window.  As  I  had  not  ])een  there
for  many  months,  nor  consciously  pictured  the  spot  since  my  last  visit,
I  was  puzzled  to  account  for  the  vision.  Early  the  next  morning  on
waking  I  observed  on  my  table  a  letter,  which  had  probably  lain  there
unnoticed  the  previous  evening  and  which  I  found  contained  a  request
that  I  would,  if  possible,  attend  the  early  service  at  the  church  in  ques-
tion that  morning.

The  friend  from  whom  this  request  came  was  an  invalid  who  had
come  to  London  the  day  before  for  medical  treatment,  whom  I  had
believed  unable  to  leave  his  room,  and  from  whom  I  had  certainly  not
expected  to  receive  any  such  message.  In  fact  this  attendance  at
church,  wliich  he  then  believed  to  be  possibly  his  last,  was  only  by  special
permission  of  the  doctor  and  he  did  not  leave  his  room  again  for
between  two  and  three  months.

(No.  55.)  On  Monday  evening,  February  11th,  I  took  up  the  Crystal,
with  the  deliberate  intention  of  seeing  in  it  a  figure,  which  happened  to
occupy  my  thoughts  at  the  moment,  but  I  found  the  field  jDre-occupied
by  a  small  bunch  of  daff'odils, — a  prim  little  posy,  not  larger  than  might
be  formed  by  two  or  three  fine  heads.  This  presented  itself  in  various
positions,  in  spite  of  my  hurry  to  be  rid  of  it,  for  I  rashly  concluded
my  vision  to  be  a  consequence  of  my  having  the  day  before  seen,  on  a
friend's  dinner  table,  the  first  daffodils  of  the  season.  The  resemblance
was  not  complete,  for  those  I  had  seen  were  loosely  arranged  and
intermixed  with  ferns  and  ivy,  whereas  my  crystal-vision  had  no
foliage,  and  was  a  compact  little  bunch.  It  was  not  till  Thursday,
14th,  that  I  received,  as  a  wholly  unexpected  '•  Valentine,"  a  painting,
on  a  blue  satin  gi'ound,  of  a  bunch  of  daffodils,  corresponding  exactly
with  my  crystal  picture,  and  learnt  that  the  artist  had  spent  some
hours  on  Monday,  previous  to  my  vision,  in  making  studies  of  the
flowers  in  various  positions.^

1  Readers  ot  Ftiantasins  oj  the  Livinr/ may  remember  a  case  [I.,  p.  255  where  Mr.
Keulemans  sees  in  his  mind's  eye  a  wicker  basket  of  rather  peculiar  eggs,  which,  as  it
turned  out,  precisely  resembled  a  basket  of  eggs  which  a  friend  at  that  moment  was
sending  off  to  him.  Mr.  Keulemans  says  of  these  mental  pictures  :  "There  is  no
attempt  on  my  part  to  conjure  them  up — on  the  contrary,  they  come  quite  suddenly
and  unexpectedly,  binding  my  thoughts  so  fixedly  to  the  subject  as  to  render  all
external  influences  imperceptible. "  It  would  seem  as  though  Mr.  Keulemans  (a  pro-
fessional draughtsman  of  noted  accuracy)  were  able  to  get  definite  pictures  transferred
from  the  unconscious  region  of  the  mind  without  needing  a  crystal  to  aid  in  their
fixation.  In  the  American  S.P.R.  Pror.  TV.,  p.  515,  two  somewhat  similar  cases  are
given  by  "  Mrs.  .J.  G.  W.,"  of  whom  Professor  Royce  speaks  (p.  526)  as  of  a  valued
correspondent. I  abbreviate  the  cases. "  About  two  years  ago,  as  I  sat  in  the  back


1889.]


Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


517


(No.  64.)  On  Saturday,  March  9th,  I  had  written  a  somewhat
impatient  note  to  a  friend,  accusing  her  of  having,  on  her  return  from
a  two  months'  absence  on  the  Continent,  spent  ten  days  in  London  with-
out paying  me  a  visit.  I  was  not,  therefoi'e,  surprised  when  on  Sunday
eveiiing  she  appeared  before  me  in  the  Crystal,  but  could  not  under-
stand why  she  should  hold  up,  with  an  air  of  deprecation,  what  appeared
to  be  a  music  portfolio.  On  Monday  I  received  an  answer,  written  the
previous  day,  pleading  guilty  to  my  charge,  but  urging,  in  excuse,  that
she  was  attending  the  Royal  Academy  of  Music,  and  was  engaged
there  during  the  greater  part  of  every  day.  This  intelligence  was  to
the  last  degree  unexpected,  for  my  friend  is  a  married  woman,  who  has
never  studied  music  in  any  but  amateur  style,  and  who,  according  to
the  standard  of  most  ladies  of  fashion,  Iiad  "  finished  her  education  "
some  years  ago.  I  have  since  ascertained  that  she,  in  fact,  carries  a
portfolio  corresponding  with  the  sketch  I  made  of  that  seen  in  the
vision. 1

I  now  add,  also  from  my  own  experience,  two  further  instances,  for
which,  as  it  seems,  telepathy  affords  no  explanation,  as  to  which  I  have
no  theory  to  offer,  and  which  I  can  only  leave  to  the  reader  to
interpret  as  clairvoyance,  or  coincidence,  or  prevision,  or  whatever  else
he  will.

(No.  36.)  In  January  last  I  saw  in  the  Crystal  the  figure  of  a  man
crouching  at  a  small  window,  and  looking  into  the  room  from  the  outside.
I  could  not  see  his  features,  which  appeared  to  be  mufiled,  but  the  crystal
was  particularly  dark  that  evening,  and  the  picture  being  an  un-
pleasant one,  I  did  not  persevere.  I  concluded  the  vision  to  be  a  result
of  a  discussion  in  my  presence  of  the  many  stories  of  burglary  with

of  the  carriage,  I  saw,  as  it  were,  in  the  air,  numberless  i^ansies  which  appeared
successively,  and  which  I  studied  in  detail  as  they  floated  in  vision  before  me.  Or
reaching  home  I  found  a  large  basket  containing  pansies  which  had  been  left  for  me
by  a  friend,  and  which  included  very  many  of  the  peculiar  pansies  which  I  had  seen
in  vision  on  my  way  home. "

"On  another  occasion  [when  similarly  driving]  I  saw  a  succession  of  flowers
called  bachelors'  buttons.  On  reaching  home  I  found  that  a  large  dish  of  bachelors'
buttons  had  been  left  for  me  by  a  friend,  and  every  distinctive  colour  that  I  had  seen
photographed  in  the  air  had  its  representative  flower  awaiting  me. "

I  am  glad  to  find  these  parallels  to  the  triviality  of  my  own  crystal-visions  ;  and  I
would  suggest  that  if — as  one  hopes  may  be  the  case — it  becomes  the  general  rule  to
set  doion  beforehand  any  image  of  this  kind  which  is  thought  to  have  "psychical"
significance,  then  the  record  will  be  made  easier  if  the  images  are  deliberately  looked
for  in  the  crystal,  and  thus  distinguished  from  other  more  fleeting  acts  of  inward
visualisation.  It  remains,  I  suppose,  to  be  seen  whether  such  images  insist  on
choosing  their  o^vn  time,  or  can  be  "called  from  the  vasty  deep  "of  the  crystal  at
hours  appointed  for  the  experiment.

^  Perhaps  I  may  here  mention  a  case,  given  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
S.P.R.,  Part  IV.,  p.  407,  which,  though  no  crystal  was  concerned  in  it,  seems  to  me  to
be  curiously  parallel  to  this  small  experience  of  my  own.  I  abridge  the  narrative.  A
Mrs.  M.  L.  M.  writes  that  she  was  anxious  to  see  a  Mr.  H.,  but  was  uncertain  on


518 ' Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


which  the  newspapers  had  lately  abounded,  and  reflected  with  a  passing
satisfaction  that  the  only  windows  in  the  house  divided  into  four  panes
as  were  those  of  the  Crystal-pictui'e,  were  in  the  front  attic  and  almost
inaccessible.  Three  days  later  a  lire  broke  out  in  that  very  room,
which  had  to  be  entered  from  outside  through  the  window,  the  face  of
the  fireman  being  covered  with  a  wet  cloth,  as  a  protection  from  the
smoke  which  rendered  access  through  the  door  impossible.

(No.  39.)  A  week  later  I  had  gone  to  my  room  for  the  night,  after
performing  some  small  services  for  an  invalid  member  of  the  household
whom  I  had  left  comfortably  settled,  if  not  asleep.  I  was  somewhat
surprised  when  the  Crystal  showed  me  tlie  same  friend,  sitting  up  in
bed,  and  apparently  in  a  state  of  alarm.  As  she  is  by  no  means  a
nervous  person,  and  her  illness  was  the  temporary  effect  of  cold,  I  could
not  account  for  the  picture,  but  was  sufficiently  alarmed  to  provide
myself  with  a  book  and  await  events,  instead  of  myself  going  to  bed  as
I  had  intended.  About  an  hour  and  a  half  later  I  heard  the  rush
of  fire  engines,  and  cries  of  "  fire,"  aiid  remembering  our  recent
misfortune  went  to  the  door  of  my  friend's  room  to  ascertain  whether
she  were  startled  by  the  commotion.  Hearing  her  call  my  name  I
entered  the  room  and  found  her  sitting  up  in  bed,  much  alarmed  at
having  been  aroused  from  sleep  by  so  near  a  reminder  of  the  enemy
with  which  we  were  now  familiar.  It  may  be  worth  while  to  mention
that  as  she  showed  no  excitement  whatever  on  the  occasion  of  the
immediate  danger,  I  could  not  have  anticipated  any  fear  at  that
which  was  merely  threatened.

All  who,  either  in  their  own  experience  or  in  that  of  others,  have
considered  the  question  of  premonitions  have  probably  found  that  a

what  day  he  would  call.  "  On  the  19th  [July,  1887]  I  was  called  out  of  the  office,
and,  before  going  out,  I  put  on  the  do(jr  a  card  having  these  words  on  it,  '  Will
return  soon.'  I  was  absent  about  an  hour.  On  my  return  I  came  upstairs,  but  did
not  ask  the  [elevator]  boy  if  anyone  had  called  ;  nor  did  he  tell  me  anyone  had  done
so.  As  I  came  within  a  short  distance  of  the  door  I  saw  some  characters  written  upon
the  card  I  had  left,  and  just  below  the  printed  words,  'Will  return  soon,'  I  stooped
down  and  read,  'Mr.  H.  has  been  here,  and  will  return.'  As  I  looked  the  words
faded  away.  I  entered  the  office,  and  in  a  very  short  time  Mr.  H.  came  in.  He  had
left  no  name  or  message.  He  had  impressed  my  face  upon  his  mind  very  strongly,
with  the  intention  of  seeing  if  I  would  be  in  any  way  affected  by  it,  or  conscious  of
his  approach."  Mr.  H.  gives  a  concordant  account,  saying,  "While  on  my  way  to
call  upon  her,  I  impressed  upon  my  mind  very  vividly  the  lineaments  of  her  face,
with  the  intention  of  learning  if  she  would  be  in  any  way  affected  thereby,  and  if
she  would  mention  anything  that  would  show  that  she  had  any  knowledge  of  my  visit
before  I  saw  her. "

Unless  we  take  this  coincidence  to  have  been  accidental,  we  must,  I  suppose,
assume  that  some  telepathic  influence  from  Mr.  H.  had  reached  Mrs.  M.'s  un-
conscious self,  and  externalised  itself  as  a  written  message  at  the  moment  when  Mrs.
M.  was  looking  at  the  card — a  suitable  surface  for  the  hallucination.  Did  not  Mrs.
M.'s  card  play  much  the  same  part  as  the  crystal  which  .showed  me  my  apologetic
friend  with  her  music- j)ortfolio  ?


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.


519


considerable  proportion  relate  to  the  arrival  of  letters  at  the  time  or
soon  afterwards  passing  through  the  post,  and  have  perhaps  concluded
that  from  such  premonitions  one  must,  as  a  rule,  discount  considerably
for  expectation,  conscious  or  unconscious,  for  probability,  and  perhaps
something  also  for  telejDathy.  It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  in  my
own  record  of  crystal- visions  about  14  per  cent,  are  of  this  character.
Though  some  of  these  are  more  or  less  interesting  to  myself,  I  cannot
regard  them  for  the  most  part  as  satisfactory  evidences  of  clairvoyance.
The  following  instance  is,  however,  somewhat  exceptional.

(No.  66.)  On  the  evening  of  March  11th,  being  tired,  I  was  about  to
go  early  to  my  room,  when  it  occurred  to  me  to  wait  for  the  last  post,
already  late,  that  I  might  not  be  again  disturbed  by  having  the
letters  brought  to  my  room.  I  took  up  the  Crystal  rather  to
pass  the  time  than  with  much  expectation  of  seeing  anything ;
for  as  a  rule  when  one  is  tired  the  concentration  of  attention
necessary  to  crystal-vision  is  somewhat  diiiicult  to  attain.  However,  I
perceived  a  white  object  on  a  dark  ground,  soon  becoming  more
clearly  defined  as  a  letter  in  a  very  large  envelope  torn  at  the  edges
as  if  not  sufficiently  strong  to  hold  its  contents.  Another  envelope,  of
ordinary  size,  lying  at  the  top,  concealed  the  address,  and  the  writing
on  the  smaller  one  was  too  much  blurred  to  decipher.  The  vision  was
momentary  only,  or  I  might  have  applied  the  test  of  the  magnifying
glass,  which  is  sometimes,  though  not  always,  of  use  in  such  cases.  I
thought  it  possible  that  the  vision  might  be  merely  the  result  of  expecta-
tion, but  it  seemed  at  least  worth  while,  after  making  a  note  of  the  fact,
— my  invariable  rule  whenever  possible, — to  test  its  significance.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  the  letters  were  lying  on  a  seat  in  the  hall,  showing
white  against  the  dark  polished  wood — placed  there  possibly  by  some-
one leaving  the  house  wlio  had  met  the  postman  before  he  had  time  to
ring.  The  letters  were  two, — the  lower  one,  which  had  burst  the
envelope,  was  of  the  size  of  a  sheet  of  letter-paper  not  folded,  and  was
for  myself,  the  upper  one  the  usual  size  of  a  note,  and  not  for  me,  whicli
may  have  accounted  for  my  inability  to  read  the  address.

The  following  cases  are  from  the  note-book  of  "  G.,"  a  lady  already
quoted,  and  both  lend  themselves  to  a  possible  explanation  by  thought-
transference  : —

She  had  lost  sight  of  a  friend  whose  address  she  had  no  opportunity
of  hearing,  as  it  was  unknown  to  all  about  her.  She,  however,  sub-
mitted the  question  to  the  test  of  the  crystal,  and  was  so  far  i-ewarded
as  to  discover,  as  the  event  proved  quite  correctly,  that  the  place  had  a
name  of  two  words,  each  beginning  with  a  capital ;  she  also  dis-
tinguished one  letter  and  its  place  in  the  word.  Encouraged  by  this
success,  she  next  consulted  the  crystal  as  to  her  friend's  surroundings,
and  obtained  a  picture  of  the  room,  with  many  details  as  to  shape,


520  Recent  Experiments  hi  Crystal-vision. [May  10,


colouring,  and  position  of  furniture ;  but  lier  gaze  was  moi-e  especially
attracted  by  a  photograph  frame,  containing  two  portraits,  which  she
knew  he  possessed,  though  she  had  no  means  of  knowing  anything  of
the  frame  in  which  they  had  been  placed.  This  she  described  to  me  at
the  time  minutely.  The  frame  was  double,  of  padded  leather,  dark  in
colour,  and  having  a  pattern  which  appeared  indistinct,  but  was  not  any
of  those  with  which  the  shop-windows  of  the  time  had  made  us
familiar,  such  as  sprays  of  flowers,  or  flights  of  birds,  or  representations
of  drapery.  It  was  not  till  about  three  months  later  that  she  saw  the
photographs  in  tlieir  actual  frame,  which  she  at  once  recognised  as  that
of  her  vision,  to  which  it  answered  exactly,  even  as  to  the  indistinct
outline  of  the  pattern  stamped  upon  tlie  leather.  Tlie  description  of
tlie  room  proved,  however,  wholly  wrong  in  every  respect,  neither  have
we  been  able  to  identify  it  with  any  other  which  the  same  friend  has
occupied  before  or  since.

As  this  paper  aims  merely  at  recording  some  cases  of  crystal-vision
and  does  not  profess  to  be  in  any  sense  an  inquiry  into  its  physio-
logical explanation,  or  psycliical  significance,  I  shall  have  achieved
my  purpose  if  I  suggest  to  others  to  attempt  a  wider  and  more
systematic  investigation  for  themselves.  Having  heard  from  trust-
worthy sources  ^  of  several  persons  who  have  been  dissuaded  from
experiment  by  the  disagreeable  sensation  it  has  produced,  I  think  it
worth  while  to  say  that  neither  to  myself  nor  to  any  of  the  friends
who  have  assisted  me  in  tlie  inquiry  has  tlie  use  of  the  Crystal,  whether
successful  or  no,  been  in  any  degree  painful  or  unpleasant ;  and  indeed
the  very  weariness  and  exhaustion,  mental  or  physical,  which  would
make  crystal-vision  a  fatigue,  suffices  in  my  own  case  to  prevent  its
occurrence.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  probable  that  it  is  only  with  a
very  few  persons  that  the  attempt  at  vision  will  lead  to  results  of  any
kind  whatever.  I  have  already  explained  the  very  simple  process ;  if
darkness  is  desired,  it  is  easy  at  any  hour  to  veil  the  Crystal  with  a
piece  of  black  drapery,  or  to  put  it  at  the  back  of  a  deep  half-opened
drawer,  nothing  further  being  essential  tlian  to  guard  against  reflection
of  surrounding  objects ;  and,  happily  our  enlightened  age  requires

1  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers  says  that  the  lady  whose  vision  has  been  already  described
found  the  sensation  caused  by  holding  the  Crystal  so  disagreeable  that  she  was
comijelled  to  desist,  and  continued  the  experiment  only  upon  his  persuasion,  and  with
some  reluctance.  He  has  also  communicated  to  me  an  interesting  account  of  another
percipient,  who  discontinued  the  practice  of  Crystal-gazing  on  account  of  its  being
accompanied  by  a  painful  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  forehead.  Mr.  Hockley  (O^j.  cit.,
1).  265),  speaking  of  a  friend  who  had  taken  up  a  Crystal  out  of  mere  curiosity,  without
kno\ving  its  use,  adds  :  "He  felt  so  great  an  oppression  of  giddiness  and  alarm  that
he  immediately  replaced  the  Crystal,  and  was  a  considerable  time  before  he  could
throw  off  the  unpleasant  sensations  it  had  produced."


1889.]  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-vision.  521


no  stimulant  of  burning  perfumes,  or  magic  square,  or  muttered
incantation.

It  is  perhaps  a  little  discouraging  to  find  from  a  recently  published
note  of  Mr.  Traill's  that  by  using  the  Crystal  in  the  search  for  lost  pro-
perty I  have  rendered  myself  amenable  to  the  law  !  ^  It  appears
that  when  in  1736  the  Act  of  James  I.  against  witchcraft  was
repealed,  "  punishment  was  very  wisely  provided  for  persons  pretending
to  exercise  any  kind  of  witchcraft,  sorcery,  enchantment,  or  conjuration,
or  to  discover  stolen  or  lost  property  by  any  occult  or  crafty  science."
I  can  only  hope  that  my  effort  at  experiment  may  be  taken  rather  as
a  proof  of  zeal  for  knowledge,  otherwise  Mr.  Traill's  further  remark
has  personally  a  somewhat  unpleasant  flavour.

It  may  be  doubted  whether  even  the  crystal  globes  of  Dr.  Dee  himself
would  in  these  days  continue  to  exhibit  the  same  proplietic  visions  to  his
clients,  if  its  magician  owner  had  just  "done  time"  under  the  oppressive
sentence  of  a  Manchester  stipendiary  magistrate.

But  even  in  the  service  of  morality,  crystal-vision  is  not  without
its  uses.  That  which  reveals  to  us  the  unbroken  continuity  of  life,
the  literal  truth  of  our  word  "  character,"  the  presence  of  the  past,  the
"  what  I  have  written,  I  have  written,"  cannot  but  add  to  our  sense  of
responsibility,  for

 With  the  Nameless  is  not  day  nor  hour,

Tho'  we  thin  minds  who  creep  from  thouglit  to  thouglit
Break  into  "  Thens  "  and  "  Whens  "  the  Eternal  Now.


1  "Etcaetera,"£'nr/.  niust.  Mag.,  March,


522


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


IV.

AUTOMATIC  WRITING.— IV.— THE  D^MON  OF  SOCRATES.i

In  offering  here,  after  an  interval  of  two  years,  a  further  instalment
of  the  series  of  papers  on  Automatic  Writing  of  which  three  have
already  appeared  in  these  Proceedings,  I  must  briefly  remind  my  readers
of  what  has  already  been  attempted  in  the  earlier  essays.  In  the  first
paper  (entitled  "  On  a  Telepathic  Explanation  of  some  so-called
Spiritualistic  Phenomena,"  Vol.  II.,  p.  217),  I  tried  to  explain  the
nature  of  automatic  writing,  and  illustrated  the  operation  of  un-
conscious cerebration  in  the  messages  given. In  the  second  paper  (Vol.

III.  ,  p.  1),  I  gave  cases  where  the  message  written  conveyed  intelligence
not  known  to  the  writer,  but  known  to  some  other  person  present  in
the  room,  or  at  any  rate  to  some  person  still  in  the  flesh.  And  I  gave
certain  reasons  for  supposing  that  this  telepathic  information  was
received  not  by  the  normal  consciousness  of  the  subject,  but  rather  by
some  subjacent  or  secondary  consciousness. In  the  third  paper  (Vol.

IV.  ,  p.  209),  I  discussed  some  cognate  forms  of  automatic  action,
pushed  in  some  cases  so  far  as  to  suggest  the  formation  of  a  fresh
personality;  and  I  argued  that  "the  sleep-waking  state,  natural  or
induced,  does  not  stand  alone  in  its  tendency  to  generate  a  secondary
memory,  a  secondary  manifestation  of  the  self,  but  that  this  tendency
shows  itself  whenever  there  is  any  habitual  shaking-up  of  those
elements";  any  habitual  alteration  of  the  threshold  of  consciousness.^

And  in  this  present  paper  I  shall  endeavour  further  to  extend  our
range  of  analogies,  and  to  show  that  automatic  writing  is  but  one
among  a  whole  series  of  kindred  automatisms  which  have  been  inter-
mittently noted,  divergently  interpreted,  since  history  began.  I  shall
try  to  show  that  this  word-writing  impulse  is  but  one  among  a  group
of  impulses  which  prompt  to  every  form  or  element — vocal,  visual,  or
auditory — of  automatic  verbalisation  ; — nay  more,  that  the  impulse  to
automatic  verbalisation  itself  is  but  one  leading  member  of  a  still  larger
group  of  kindred  impulses  which  parallel  automatically  whatever  our
conscious  will,  our  conscious  perception  can  discern  or  decree.

As  soon,  however,  as  we  begin  thus  widely  to  extend  the  province  of
our  specific  automatisms,  we  feel  at  once  the  need  of  some  general
definition  which  may  indicate  what  it  is  that  we  are  really  seeking, — in

^  This  palmer  was  read  before  a  General  Meeting,  June  17th,  1887 ;  but  its
publication  has  been  deferred  for  want  of  space.

-  The  point  at  which  the  term  'a  fresh  personality  '  becomes  appropriate  is  .a  mere
question  of  verbal  definition.  Personality,  as  we  know  it,  depends  on  memory  and
character,  and  character  itself  is  largely  a  product  of  memory.


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


523


what  points  the  automatisms  which  here  concern  us  differ  from  the
multitude  of  actions,  images,  ideas  to  which  such  terms  as  automatic, or
rejlex  are  commonly  applied.

It  would  be  interesting — but  it  would  delay  iis  too  long — to  analyse
the  whole  series  of  so-called  automatisms,  or  "  self -moved  "  phenomena,
in  health  and  disease,  and  to  show  what,  in  each  case,  is  the  "self"
which  supplies  the  initiating  power.  In  default  of  such  further  inquiry,
we  may  at  least  point  out  certain  main  characters  which  unite  in  a  true
class  all  the  automatisms  which  we  are  here  considering, — greatly
though  these  may  differ  among  themselves  in  external  form.

In  the  first  place,  then,  our  automatisms  are  independent  phenomena ;
they  are  what  the  physician  calls  idiognomonic.  That  is  to  say,  they  are
not  merely  symptomatic  of  some  other  affection,  or  incidental  to  some
profounder  change.  The  mere  fact,  for  instance,  that  a  man  writes
messages  which  he  does  not  consciously  originate  will  not,  when  taken  by
itself,  prove  any  thing  beyond,  this  fact  itself  as  to  the  writei-'s  condition.
He  may  be  perfectly  sane,  in  normal  health,  and  with  nothing  unusual
observable  about  him.  This  characteristic — pi-ovable  by  actual  observa-
tion and  experiment — distinguishes  our  automatisms  from  various
seemingly-kindred  phenomena.  Thus  we  may  have  to  include  in  our
class  the  occasional  automatic  utterance  of  words  or  sentences.  But
the  continuous  exhausting  vociferation  of  acute  mania  does  not  fall
within  our  province ;  for  those  shouts  are  merely  symptomatic ;  nor,
again,  does  the  cri  hydroccphalique  (or  spontaneous  meaningless  noise
which  sometimes  accompanies  water  on  the  brain),  for  that,  too,  is  no
independent  phenomenon,  but  the  direct  consequence  of  a  definite
lesion.  Furthermore,  we  shall  have  to  include  in  our  class  certain
simple  movements  of  the  hands,  co-oixlinated  into  the  act  of  writing.
But  here,  also,  our  definition  will  lead  us  to  exclude  cJioreic  movements,
which  are  merely  symptomatic  of  nervous  mal-nutrition  ;  or  which  we
may,  if  we  choose,  call  idioijathic,  as  constituting  an  independent
malady.  But  our  automatisms  are  not  idiopathic  but  idiognomonic ;
they  may  indeed  be  associated  with  or  facilitated  by  certain  states  of  the
organism,  but  they  are  neither  a  symptom  of  any  other  malady,  nor  are
they  a  malady  in  themselves.

Agreeing,  then,  that  our  peculiar  class  consists  of  automatisms
which  are  idiognomonic, — whose  existence  does  not  necessaiily  imply
the  existence  of  some  profounder  affection  already  known  as  producing
them, — we  have  still  to  look  for  some  more  positive  bond  of  connection
between  them,  some  quality  common  to  all  of  them,  and  which  makes
them  worth  our  prolonged  investigation.

This  we  shall  find  in  the  fact  that  they  are  all  of  them  message-
hearing  or  nunciative  automatisms.  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  they
all  of  them  bring  messages  from  sources  external  to  the  automatist's  own


524


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


mind.  In  some  few  cases  (as  in  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham's  case)  we
have  seen  that  they  do  this  ;  but  as  a  rule  the  so-called  messages  seem
more  probably  to  originate  within  the  automatist's  own  personality.
Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  do  I  call  them  messages  ?  We  do  not
usually  speak  of  a  man  as  sending  a  message  to  himself.  The  answer
to  this  question  involves,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  profoundest
conception  of  these  automatisms  to  which  we  can  as  yet  attain.  They
present  themselves  to  us  as  messages  communicated  from  one  sti'atum
to  another  stratum  of  the  same  personality.  Originating  in  some
deeper  zone  of  a  man's  being,  they  float  up  into  superficial  consciousness
as  deeds,  visions,  words,  ready-made  and  full-blown,  without  any  accom-
panying perception  of  the  elaborative  process  which  has  made  them
what  they  are.

We  may  illustrate  this  statement  by  the  example  of  post-hypnotic
suggestion, — a  phenomenon  which  will  presently  be  found  to  fall  readily
into  its  place  as  a  simple  and  typical  member  of  our  automatic  series.
Take,  for  instance,  one  of  Mr.  Gurney's  experiments  [Proceedings,  XI.,
p.  319),  where  the  subject  has  been  hypnotised,  told  that  "  it  has  begun
snowing,"  and  then  awakened.  He  then  reads  aloud,  in  a  waking  state,
and  meantime  (in  fultilment  of  a  previous  order)  his  hand  writes  out
the  piece  of  information  communicated  to  him  in  the  hypnotic  state  :
"  It  began  snowing.  "  Here  the  automatic  script  is  plainly  a  message
conveyed  from  the  hypnotic  stratum  (so  to  say)  of  the  subject's  per-
sonality to  himself  and  others  occupying  the  ordinary  level  of  waking-
consciousness.  And  we  shall  find  as  we  proceed  that  such  messages
may  emanate  fi'om,  and  may  be  conveyed  to,  various  strata  of  per-
sonality by  very  various  channels  ;  while  yet  we  discern  as  a  common
characteristic  of  all  these  cases  the  fact  that  the  "  message," — be  it
verbalisation,  picture,  motor  impulse,  or  other  impression, — comes  upon
the  recipient  phase  of  personality  as  though  from  some  extraneous
source, — is  presented  as  an  automatic  product  whose  initiation  lies
outside  the  conscious  will.

Yet  once  more.  We  have  made  it  clear  to  ourselves  that  the
automatisms  with  which  we  have  to  deal  are  messages,  and  are  not
necessarily  or  obviously  anything  more.  That  is  to  say,  they  signify  to
us  the  fact,  and  only  the  fact,  that  some  strain  of  intelligence,  whether
without  us  or  within,  which  is  not  our  conscious  waking  intelligence  of
the  moment,  is  in  some  fashion  impressing  or  informing  the  conscious
self.

But  there  is  yet  another  aspect  of  these  automatic  messages  which
we  must  bring  out  into  strong  prominence.  Interesting  though  the
mere  fact  of  communication  from  one  stratum  of  our  personality  to
another  may  be,  this  is  not  the  culminant  interest  which  has  attracted
us  to  the  present  inquiry.


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


525


That  liighest  interest  lies,  of  course,  in  the  natui'e  of  some  of  the
messages  thus  received  ;  in  the  fact  that  (like  the  hallucinations  dealt
with  in  Fhantasms  of  the  Living)  they  are  veridical  messages, — that
they  correspond  with  objective  facts  not  normally  within  the  purview
of  the  writer.  The  messages  written  by  Mrs.  Newnham,  and  showing
a  transference  of  thought  from  Mr.  Newnham,  have  been  the  main,
though  not  the  only,  examples  hitherto  cited  of  this  class.  More  are  to
come  ;  nor  can  telepathy,  as  we  as  yet  understand  it,  he  invoked  to
explain  all  the  cases  which  we  shall  have  to  consider.  If,  therefore,  we
are  to  label  with  a  single  epithet  all  automatic  messages  inexplicable  on
any  ordinaiily  accepted  hypothesis,  we  must  use  a  term  wider  than
telepathic  ;  we  must  call  them  siqK.rnormal ;  implying  by  this  term  (as
often  already  explained)  that,  whatever  the  precise  natui-e  of  the  powers
involved  in  the  production  of  these  messages  may  be,  they  seem  at
least  primd facie  to  transcend  human  powers,  as  known  to  us  at  the
present  stage  of  evolution.  The  word  "  supernormal "  is  thus  meant  to
beg  as  few  questions  as  possible ;  and  so  far  as  it  connotes  any  theory
as  to  the  soui'ce  oi'  nature  of  apparently  transcendent  powers,  it  implies
a  disposition  to  seek  the  origin  of  those  powers  in  some  continuance  of
the  same  evolutionary  process  by  which  we  explain — so  far  as  explanation
is  possible — such  powers  as  we  do  admittedly  possess.

This,  however,  has  not  been  the  line  on  whicli  a  clue  to  supernormal
messages  has  hitherto,  in  fact,  been  most  often  souglit.  It  is  on  this
admixture  of  the  supernormal  element  in  automatic  messages  that  the
doctrines  of  "  Modern  Spiritualism  "  have  mainly  been  upbuilt.  The
Spiritualist  unites — and  sometimes  not  only  unites  but  confounds — two
beliefs  for  which  little  evidence  has  as  yet  been  adduced  in  the  pages  of
these  Proceedings.  He  believes  that  effects  are  pi-oduced,  without
visible  cause,  on  this  material,  ponderable  world.  And  he  believes
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  send  messages  through  the  automatic
mediumship  of  living  men.  Now  the  acceptance  of  the  first  of  these
two  beliefs  would  not,  to  my  mind,  carry  with  it  any  clear  corollary  as
to  the  agency  of  departed  spirits  in  the  movements  of  matter  thus
inexplicably  produced.  Even  if  there  be  a  force  at  work  which  is  not
that  of  the  medium's  muscles  exerted  in  the  ordinaiy  way,  it  by  no
means  follows  that  that  force  should  be  referable  to  intelligences  who
exist  apart  from  the  medium,  but  who  have  once,  like  him,  Ijeen  men.
But  the  second  of  the  beliefs  above  referred  to, — the  belief  that
messages  are  received  whose  context  proves  their  emanation  from  a
departed  spirit, — this  is  indeed  for  the  Spiritualist,  as  I  conceive  the
matter,  the  true  articuhis  stantis  aut  cadentis  ecclesice.  And  surely
— if  only  there  be  any  hope  of  a  solution — the  human  mind  can  scarcely
be  engaged  on  any  question  of  greater  moment  than  this.

To  resume,  then;  we  have  realised  that  the  automatisms  which  we


526


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


discuss  are  to  be  dealt  with  as  independent,  idiognomonic  phenomena  ;
that  they  are  to  be  recognised  as  nunciative  or  message-bearing,
whencesoever  these  messages  be  derived  ;  and  that  it  is  especially  the
supernormal  element  traceable  in  some  of  them  which  claims  our
painstaking  analysis.

But  in  the  next  place, — and  this  was  in  fact  the  reason  for  intro-
ducing at  this  point  so  much  of  general  discussion, — so  soon  as  we  thus
attempt  to  form  a  coherent  conception  of  the  class  of  automatisms
which  we  seek  to  explain,  it  becomes  obvious  that  there  is  no  reason
why  such  automatism  should  be  observed  in  connection  with  the  act  of
writing  alone.

Indeed,  when  we  selected  writing  as  the  first  automatic  phenomenon
for  discussion,  this  was  avowedly  a  choice  determined  by  mere  con-
venience ;  automatic  script  being  a  definite  and  easily  perceptible
phenomenon,  and  rapidly  leading  to  intelligible  results.  And  we  soon
found  that  it  conducted  us  to  a  conception  far  wider  than  itself ; —
namely,  the  conception  of  automatic  verbalisation  as  a  whole,  including
under  this  convenient  word  the  four  allied  processes  (two  of  them
mainly  sensory  and  two  mainly  motor),  of  word-hearing,  word-seeing,
word-uttering,  and  word-wiiting.  I  tried  to  show,  in  diagrammatic
form  (Vol.  III.,  p.  51,  sqq.),  in  what  manner  a  "  second  focus  of  menta-
tion" might  initiate  supernormal  processes  of  seeing,  hearing,  or  uttering
words,  as  well  as  of  writing  them.

But  even  with  this  extension  of  our  purview  the  limit  assigned  is
still  an  arbitrary  one.  If  this  automatic  impulse  can  affect  the  pro-
cesses of  verbalisation,  it  can  presumably  affect  other  processes,  both
sensory  and  motor.  Have  we  any  limit  assignable  a  jwiori,  outside
which  it  would  be  useless  to  look  for  any  extei'nalisation  of  an  impulse
emanating  from  sub-conscious  strata  of  our  being  1

The  answer  to  this  must  be  that  no  such  limit  can  be  with  any
confidence  suggested.  We  have  not  yet  learnt  with  any  distinctness
even  how  far  the  wave  from  a  co«.s;cioitA'/i/-perceived  stimulus  will
spread,  or  what  changes  its  motion  will  assume.  Still  less  can  we
predict  the  limitations  which  the  resistance  of  the  organism  will  impose
on  the  radiation  of  a  stimulus  originated  within  itself.  We  are  learning
to  consider  the  human  organism  as  a  practically-infinite  complex  of
interacting  viljrations  ;  and  each  year  adds  many  new  facts  to  our
knowledge  of  the  various  transformations  which  these  vibrations  may
undergo,  and  of  the  unexpected  artifices  by  which  we  may  learn  to
cognise  some  stimulus  which  is  not  directly  felt.

A  few  concrete  instances  will  make  my  meaning  plainer.  And  my
first  example  shall  be  taken  from  those  experiments  in  muscle-reading —
less  correctly  termed  mind-reading — with  which  the  readers  of  these
Proceedings  are  already  familiar. Let  us  suppose  that  I  am  to  hide  a


The  Bcemon  of  Socrates.


527


pin,  and  that  Mr.  Sugden  {Pt-oceedirigs,  Vol.  I.,  p.  291),  or  some
accomplished  muscle-reader,  is  to  take  my  hand,  and  find  the  pin  by
noting  my  muscular  indications.  I  first  hide  the  pin  in  the  hearth  rug  ;
then  I  change  my  mind  and  hide  it  in  the  bookshelf.  I  fix  my  mind
on  the  bookshelf,  but  resolve  to  make  no  guiding  movement.  The
muscle-reader  takes  my  hand,  leads  me  first  to  the  rug,  then  to  the
bookshelf,  and  finds  the  pin.  Now,  what  has  happened  in  this  case  ?
What  movements  have  I  made  ?

Firstly,  I  have  made  no  voluntary  movement ;  and  secondly,  I
have  made  no  conscious  involuntary  movement.  But,  thirdly,  I  have
made  an  unconscious  involuntary  movement  which  directly  depended
on  conscious  ideation.  I  strongly  thought  of  the  bookshelf,  and  when
the  bookshelf  was  reached  in  our  vague  career  about  the  room  I  made
a  movement — say  rather  a  tremor  occurred — in  my  hand,  which,  though
beyond  both  my  knowledge  and  my  control,  was  enough  to  supply  to  the
muscle-reader's  delicate  sensibility  all  the  indication  required.  All  this
is  now  admitted,  and,  in  a  sense,  understood  ;  we  formulate  it  by
saying  that  my  conscious  ideation  contained  a  motor  element  ;  and  that
this  motor  element,  though  inhibited  from  any  conscious  manifestation,
did  yet  inevitably  externalise  itself  in  a  peripheral  tremor.

But,  fourthly,  something  more  than  this  has  cleai'ly  taken  place.
Before  the  muscle-reader  stopped  at  the  bookshelf  he  stopped  at  the
rug.  I  was  no  longer  consciously  thinking  of  the  rug  ;  but  the  idea
of  the  pin  in  the  rug  must  still  have  been  reverberating,  so  to  say,  in
my  sub-conscious  region ;  and  this  unconscious  memoiy,  this  unnoted
reverberation,  revealed  itself  in  a  peripheral  tremor  nearly  as  distinct  as
that  which  (when  the  bookshelf  was  reached)  corresponded  to  the  strain
of  conscious  thought.

This  tremor,  then,  was  in  a  certain  sense  a  message-bearing
automatism.  It  was  the  externalisation  of  an  idea  Avhich,  once
conscious,  had  become  unconscious,  though  in  the  slightest  conceivable
degree, — namely,  by  a  mere  slight  escape  from  the  field  of  direct
attention.

Having,  then,  considered  an  instance  where  the  automatic  message
passes  only  between  two  closely -adjacent  strata  of  consciousness, —
externalising  an  impulse  derived  from  an  idea  which  has  only  recently
sunk  out  of  consciousness  and  which  could  easily  be  summoned  back
again ; — let  us  find  our  next  illustration  in  a  case  where  the  line  of
demarcation  between  the  strata  of  consciousness  through  which  the
automatic  message  pierces  is  distinct  and  impassable  by  any  effort
of  will.

Let  us  take  a  case  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion  ; — say,  for  instance,  the
experiment  of  Mr.  Gurney's  {Proceedings,  XI.,  p.  319),  already  cited.
The  subject  had  been  trained  to  write  with  planchette,  after  he  had

2  M


528


■The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


been  awakened,  the  statements  which  had  been  made  to  him  when  in
the  hypnotic  trance.  He  wrote  the  desired  words,  or  something  like
them,  but  while  he  wrote  them  his  waking  self  was  entirely  unaware  of
what  his  hand  was  writing.  Thus,  having  been  told  in  the  trance,
"  It  has  begun  snowing  again,"  he  wrote  after  waking,  "  It  begun
snowing,"  while  he  read  aloud,  with  waking  intelligence,  from  a  book  of
stories,  and  was  quite  unconscious  of  what  his  hand  (placed  on  a
planchette  behind  a  screen)  was  at  the  same  time  writing.

Here  we  have  an  automatic  message  of  traceable  origin  ;  a  message
implanted  in  the  hypnotic  stratum  of  the  subject's  self,  and  cropping  up
— like  a  fault — in  the  waking  stratum, — externalised  in  automatic
movements  which  the  waking  self  could  neither  predict  nor  guide.

Yet  once  more.  In  the  discussion  which  will  follow  we  shall  have
various  instances  of  the  transformation  (as  I  shall  regard  it)  of  psychical
shock  into  definite  muscular  energy  of  apparently  a  quite  alien  kind.
Such  transformations  of  so-called  psychical  into  physical  force — of  will
into  motion — do  of  course  perpetually  occur  within  us.  But  the  nature
of  these  is  commonly  much  obscured  by  the  problem  as  to  the  true
efficacy  of  the  ivill ;  and  it  seems  desirable  to  cite  one  or  two  examples
of  such  transmutation  where  the  process  is  what  we  call  automatic,  and
we  seem  to  detect  the  simple  muscular  correlative — the  motor  equivalent
— to  some  emotion  or  sensation  which  contains  no  obvious  motor
element  at  all.

An  easy,  though  a  rough,  way  of  testing  transmutations  of  this  kind
is  afforded  by  tlie  dynamometer.  It  is  necessary  first  to  discover  the
amount  of  pressure  which  the  subject  of  experiment  can  exert  on  the
dynamometer,  by  squeezing  it  with  all  the  force  at  his  command,  in  his
ordinary  condition.  After  he  has  had  a  little  practice  his  highest
attainable  force  of  squeeze  becomes  nearly  constant ;  and  it  is  then
possible  to  subject  him  to  various  stimuli,  and  to  measure  the  degree  of
response ;  that  is,  the  degree  in  which  his  squeeze  becomes  either  more
or  less  powerful  while  the  stimulus  is  applied.  The  experiments  are,  in
fact,  a  sort  of  elaboration  of  a  familiar  phenomenon.  I  take  a  child  to
a  circus ;  he  sits  by  me  holding  my  hand ; — there  is  a  discharge  of
musketry  and  his  grip  tightens.  Now  in  this  case  we  should  call  the
child's  tightened  grip  automatic.  But  suppose  that,  instead  of  merely
holding  my  hand,  he  is  trying  with  all  his  might  to  squeeze  the  dyna-
mometer, and  that  the  sudden  excitation  enables  him  to  squeeze  it
harder — are  we  then  to  describe  that  extra  squeeze  as  automatic  ?  or  as
voluntary  ?

However  phrased,  it  is  the  fact  (as  amply  established  by  M.  Fer^
and  others^)  that  excitations  of  almost  any  kind, — whether  sudden  and

^Sensation  et  Mouvement,  par  Ch.  Fer^.  Paris :  Alcan,  1887.


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


529


startling  or  agreeable  and  prolonged, — do  tend  to  increase  the  subject's
dynamometrical  power.  In  the  first  place — and  this  is  in  itself  an
important  fact — the  average  of  squeezing-power  is  found  to  be  greater
among  educated  students  than  among  robust  labouring  men, — thus
showing  that  it  is  not  so  much  developed  muscle  as  active  brain  which
renders  possible  a  sudden  concentration  of  muscular  force.  But  more
than  this  M.  Fere  finds  that  with  himself  and  his  friends  the  mere
listening  to  an  interesting  lecture,  or  the  mere  stress  of  thought  in
solitude, — or  still  more  the  act  of  writing  or  of  speech^ — produces  a
decided  increase  of  strength  in  the  grip,  especially  of  the  right  hand.
The  same  effect  of  dynamogeny  is  produced  with  hypnotic  subjects,  by
musical  sounds,  by  coloured  light,  especially  red  light,  and  even
by  a  hallucinatory  suggestion  of  red  light.  "  All  our  sensations,"
says  M.  Fere  in  conclusion,  "are  accompanied  by  a  development  of
potential  energy,  which  passes  into  a  kinetic  state,  and  externalises
itself  in  motor  manifestations  which  even  so  rough  a  method  as  dyna-
mometry  is  able  to  observe  and  record."

I  would  beg  the  reader  to  keep  these  words  in  mind.  We  shall  pre-
sently find  that  a  method  apparently  even  rougher  than  dynamographic
tracings  may  be  able  to  interpret,  with  far  greater  delicacy,  the  auto-
matic tremors  which  are  coursing  to  and  fro  within  us.  If  once  we
can  get  a  spy  into  the  citadel  of  our  own  being,  his  rudest  signalling-
will  tell  us  more  than  our  subtlest  inferences  from  outside  of  what  is
being  planned  and  done  within.

Further  illustrations  might  easily  be  here  given.  But  for  brevity's
sake  I  pass  on  to  the  automatic  messages  which  form  our  special
subject,  trusting  that  the  specimens  above  given  of  motor  exter-
nalisations  of  unexpected  kinds  may  have  led  the  reader  to  feel  that
experiment  alone  can  tell  us  how  far  such  delicate  motor  indications
may  in  fact  be  traceable  ;  how  much  of  information  may  pass  from  one
stratum  of  our  consciousness  to  another,  and  in  a  foim  how  strangely
transmuted.  And  having  now  to  deal  with  what  I  define  as  messages
conveyed  by  one  stratum  in  man  ,to  another  stratum,  I  must  first
consider  in  what  general  ways  human  messages  can  be  conveyed.
Writing  and  speech  have  become  predominant  in  the  intercourse  of
civilised  men,  and  it  is  to  writing  and  speech  that  we  look  with  most
interest  among  the  communications  of  the  unconscious  self.  But  it
does  not  follow  that  the  unconscious  self  will  always  have  such  complex
methods  at  its  command.  We  have  seen  already  that  it  often  finds  it
hard  to  manage  the  delicate  coordinations  of  muscular  movement
required  for  writing, — that  the  attempt  at  automatic  script  ends  in  a
thump  and  a  scrawl.  Does  the  history  of  animal  communication
guggest  to  us  to  try  any  easier,  more  rudimentary  plan  ?

The  first  communications  of  animals  are  by  gesture  ;  and  even  when


530


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


sound  is  added  this  is  at  first  only  a  specialised  kind  of  gesture.  The
higher  animals  discriminate  their  calls  ;  man  develops  speech  ;  and  the
message-giving  impulse  parts  into  the  main  channels  of  movement —
movement  of  the  throat  and  movement  of  the  hand.  The  hand-
gestures — "high  as  heaven,"  "horned  like  a  stag,"  and  so  forth —
develop  in  their  turn  into  the  I'ude  drawing  of  objects ;  and  this
graphic  impulse  again  divides  along  two  channels.  On  the  one  hand
it  developes  into  the  pictorial  and  plastic  arts,  conveying  its  messages
through  what  may  be  termed  a  direct,  as  opposed  to  an  arbitrary
symbolism.  On  the  other  hand  it  assimilates  itself  to  the  laws  of
speech,  it  becomes  ideographic ;  and  gradually  merging  direct  into
arbitrary  symbolism  it  becomes  alphabetical  script,  arithmetic,  algebra,
telegraphy.

But  the  word  telegraphy  suggests  to  us  that  in  recent  times  a  fresh
beginning  has  had  to  be  made  in  human  communication  ;  modes  have
had  to  be  invented  by  which  a  civilised  man,  disposing  only  of  a  few
simple  movements, — the  deflections  of  the  indicating  needle, — might
attain  to  the  precision  of  grammatical  speech.  This,  as  we  know,  has
been  easily  effected ;  and  the  mere  repetition  of  one  or  two  simple
movements  at  varied  intervals  suffices,  to  eye  or  ear,  for  all  the
purposes  of  an  alphabet.

Now  we  shall  find,  perhaps,  among  the  communications  of  the
unconscious  self  parallels  to  all  these  varying  modes  of  communication.
But  since  the  unconscious  self,  like  the  telegraphist,  begins  its  effort
with  full  knowledge,  indeed,  of  the  alphabet,  but  with  only  weak  and
rude  command  over  our  muscular  adjustments,  it  is  a  2}fiori  likely  that
its  easiest  mode  of  communication  will  be  through  a  repetition  of  simple
movements,  so  arranged  as  to  correspond  to  letters  of  the  alphabet.

And  here,  I  think,  we  have  attained — perhaps  for  the  first  time —
to  a  conception  of  the  mysterious  and  much-derided  phenomenon  of
"  table-tilting  "  which  enables  us  to  correlate  it  with  known  phenomena,
and  to  start  at  least  from  an  intelligible  basis,  and  on  a  definite  line  of
inquiry.

A  few  words  are  needed  to  explain  what  are  the  verifiable
phenomena,  and  the  less  verifiable  hypotheses,  connoted  by  such  woi"ds
as  "  table-turning,"  "  spirit-rapping,"  and  the  like.

If  one  or  more  persons  of  a  special  type, — at  present  definable  only
by  the  question-begging  and  barbarous  term  "  mediumistic," — remain
quietly  for  some  time  with  hands  in  contact  with  some  easily  moveable
object,  and  desiring  its  movement,  that  object  will  sometimes  begin  to
move.  If,  further,  they  desire  it  to  indicate  letters  of  the  alphabet  by
its  movements, — as  by  tilting  once  for  a,  twice  for  b,  &c.,  it  will  often
do  so,  and  answers  unexpected  by  anyone  present  will  be  obtained.

Thus  far,  whatever  our  interpretation,  we  are  in  the  region  of  easily


TIlc  Dcemon  of  Socrates.  531

reproducible  facts,  which  many  of  my  readers  may  confirm  for
themselves  if  they  please.

But  beyond  the  simple  movements — or  table-turning, — and  the
intelligible  responses — or  table-tilting — both  of  which  are  at  least  2}f'imd
facie  physically  explicable  by  the  sitters'  unconscious  pressure,  without
postulating  any  unknown  physical  force  at  all, — it  is  alleged  by  many
persons  that  further  physical  phenomena  occur  ;  namely  that  the  table
moves  in  a  direction,  or  with  a  violence,  which  no  unconscious  pressure
can  explain  ;  and  also  that  percussive  sounds  or  "  raps  "  occur,  which
no  unconscious  action,  or  indeed  no  agency  known  to  us,  could  produce.
These  raps  communicate  messages  like  the  tilts,  and  it  is  to  them  that
the  name  of  "  spirit-rapping "  is  properly  given.  But  Spiritualists
generally  draw  little  distinction  between  these  four  phenomena, — mere
table-turning,  responsive  table-tilting,  movements  of  inexplicable
vehemence,  and  responsive  raps, — attributing  all  alike  to  the  agency  of
departed  spirits  of  men  and  women,  or  at  any  rate  to  disembodied
intelligences  of  some  kind  or  other.

The  present  paper  is  not  concerned  with  the  physical  phenomena  of
Spiritualism,  and  I  shall  therefore  leave  on  one  side  all  the  alleged
movements  and  noises  of  this  kind  for  which  unconscious  pressure  will
not  account.  I  do  not  prejudge  the  question  as  to  their  real  occurrence;
but  assuming  that  such  disturbances  of  the  physical  order  do  occur
there  is  at  least  no  |jri»ia  facie  need  to  refer  them  to  disembodied
spirits.  If  a  table  moves  when  no  one  is  touching  it,  this  is  not
obviously  more  likely  to  have  been  effected  by  my  deceased  grandfather
than  by  myself.  We  cannot  tell  how  /  could  move  it ;  but  then  we
cannot  tell  how  he  could  move  it  either.  The  question  must  be  argued
on  its  merits  in  each  case ;  and  our  present  argument  is  not  therefore
vitiated  by  our  postponement  of  this  further  problem.

For  the  present  there  will  for  most  of  my  readers  be  quite  enough
of  novelty  in  my  insistance  on  these  tilted  respoiises  as  a  phenomenon
easily  induced  by  many  normal  persons,  and  closely  akin  to  various
other  phenomena  on  which  ordinary  physiology  is  yearly  laying  an
increasing  stress.

With  the  single  exception  of  M.  Richet,i  I  am  not  aware  of  any
writer,  outside  the  Spiritualistic  group,  who  has  so  much  as  shown  any
■  practical  knowledge  of  this  phenomenon, — still  less  endeavoured  to
explain  it.  Faraday's  weU-known  explanation  of  table-turning  as  the
result  of  the  summation  of  many  unconscious  movements, — obviously
true  as  it  is  for  some  of  the  simplest  cases  of  table-movement, — does
not  touch  this  far  more  difficult  question  of  the  origination  of  these
intelligent  messages,  conveyed  by  distinct  and  repeated  movements  of


1  La  Suggestion  Mentale  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  239  sqq.).


532


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


some  object  admitting  of  ready  displacement.  The  only  explanation
that  I  have  seen  offered, — I  am  speaking,  of  course,  of  cases  where
fraud  is  not  in  question, — is  that  the  sitter  unconsciously  sets  going  and
stops  the  movements  so  as  to  shape  the  word  in  accordance  with  his
expectation.  Now  that  he  unconsciously  sets  going  and  stops  the
movements  is  part  of  my  own  present  contention,  but  that  the  word  is
thereby  shaped  in  accordance  with  his  expectation  is  often  far  indeed
from  being  the  case.  An  example  cited  at  length  in  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research  Journal  for  May,  1887,  may  illustrate  the  bizarre
capriciousness  of  these  replies, — their  want  of  relation  to  anything
anticipated  or  desired  by  the  persons  in  contact  with  the  table.  Similar
instances  might  be  indefinitely  multiplied ;  but  anyone  who  is  really
willing  to  take  the  requisite  trouble  can  satisfy  himself  on  this  point  by
experiment  with  a  sufficiently  varied  list  of  trustworthy  friends.  To
those  indeed  who  have  followed  with  any  agreement  my  discussion  of  the
written  messages,  this  question  as  to  the  unexpectedness  of  the  tilted
messages  will  present  itself  in  a  new  light.  If  the  written  messages
originate  somewhere  outside  the  writer's  consciousness,  so  too  may  the
tilted  messages; — even  though  we  admit  that  the  tilts  are  caused  by  his
hand's  pressure  of  the  table  just  as  directly  as  the  script  by  his  hand's
manipulation  of  the  pen.

It  may  be  remembered  that  one  of  tlie  pieces  of  evidence  which  I
cited  in  order  to  show  that  urr-itten  messages  were  not  always  the  mere
echo  of  expectation,  was  a  case  where  anctgrams  were  automatically
written,  which  their  writer  was  not  at  once  able  to  decipher.  Following
this  hint,  I  have  occasionally  succeeded  in  getting  anagrams  tilted  out
for  myself  by  movements  of  a  small  table  which  I  alone  touched.  I
should  add  that  although,  as  I  have  elsewhere  mentioned,  I  have  never
succeeded  in  writing  automatically,  I  have  nevertheless,  after  some
hundreds  of  trials,  continued  over  15  years,  attained  the  power  of
eliciting  by  unconscious  pressure  tilted  responses  which  do  not  emanate
from  my  own  conscious  self.  That  they  do,  howevei',  emanate  from
some  stratum  of  my  being — -from  that  fragmentary  and  incoherent
workshop  where  dreams  are  strung  together — seems  to  me,  as  already
indicated,  the  most  probable  hypothesis.

The  anagrams — or  ratlier  jumbles  of  letters  forming  a  short  word —
which  I  have  myself  obtained,  have  been  of  the  simplest  kind.  But
occasionally  I  have  not  at  once  recognised  the  word  thus  given,  but
have  been  aware  of  a  distinct  interval  before  the  word  wliich  my  own
unconscious  muscular  action  had  thus  confusedly  "tilted  out"  was  grasped
by  my  conscious  intelligence.  This  is  a  kind  of  experiment  which
might  with  advantage  be  oftener  repeated ;  for  the  extreme  incoherence
and  silliness  of  the  responses  thus  obtained  does  not  prevent  the  process
itself  from  being  in  a  high  degree  instructive. Here,  again  (as  in  the


The  Dcvraon  of  Socrates.


533


automatic  writing  of  the  "  Clelia  "  case),  a  man  may  hold  colloquy  with
his  own  dream — may  note  in  actual  juxtaposition  two  separate  strata  of
his  own  intelligence.

I  shall  not  at  present  pursue  the  discussion  of  these  tilted  responses
beyond  this  their  veiy  lowest  and  most  rudimentary  stage.  They
almost  immediately  suggest  another  problem,  for  which  our  discussion
is  hardly  ripe,  the  participation,  namely,  of  several  minds  in  the  pro-
duction of  the  same  automatic  message.  We  have  already  met  with
something  of  this  difficulty  in  our  consideration  of  messages  given
when  the  hands  of  two  persons  were  touching  a  planchette  ;  but  when
the  instrument  of  response  is  large,  and  the  method  of  response  simple,
as  with  table-tilting,  we  find  this  question  of  the  influence  of  more
minds  than  one  imperatively  recurring.

Our  immediate  object,  however,  is  rather  to  correlate  the  different
attainable  modes  of  automatic  response  in  some  intelligible  scheme  them
to  pursue  any  one  of  them  through  all  its  phases.  We  regarded  the
table-tilting  process  as  in  one  sense  the  simplest,  the  least  differentiated
form  of  motor  response.  It  is  a  kind  of  gesture  merely,  though  a
gesture  implying  knowledge  of  the  alphabet.  Let  us  see  in  what
directions  the  movement  of  response  becomes  more  specialised, — as
gesture  parts  into  pictorial  art  and  articulate  speech.  We  find,  in
fact,  that  a  just  similar  divei'gence  of  impulses  takes  place  in  automatic
response.  On  the  one  hand  the  motor  impulse  specialises  itself  into
drawing ;  on  the  other  hand  it  specialises  itself  into  speech.  Each  of
these  classes  of  phenomena — automatic  drawing  and  automatic  speech
— will  need  at  a  future  time  detailed  treatment.  At  present  I  sliall
only  briefly  indicate  their  position  among  cognate  automatisms.

Some  of  my  readers  may  have  seen  what  are  termed  "  spirit-
drawings," — designs,  usually  in  colour,  whose  author  asserts  that  he
drew  them  without  any  plan,  or  even  knowledge  of  what  his  hand
was  going  to  do.  This  assertion  may  be  quite  true,  and  the  person
making  it  may  be  perfectly  sane.^  The  drawings  so  made  will  be  found
curiously  accordant  with  what  the  view  which  I  am  explaining  would
lead  us  to  expect.  For  they  exhibit  a  fusion  of  arabesque  with
ideography  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  partly  resemble  the  forms  of  ornamen-
tation into  which  the  artistic  hand  strays  when,  as  it  were,  dreaming  on
the  paper  without  definite  plan  ;  and  partly  they  afford  a  parallel  to  the
early  attempts  at  symbolic  self-expression  of  savages  who  have  not  yet
learnt  an  alphabet. Like  savage  writing,  they  pass  by  insensible

1  Instances  will  be  afterwards  given  to  substantiate  this  statement.  But,  of
course,  like  other  automatic  impulses,  this  impulse  to  decorative  or  symbolical
drawing  is  sometimes  seen  at  its  maximum  in  insane  patients.  Some  drawings  of  an
insane  patient,  reproduced  in  the  American  Journal  of  Psychologij,  June,  1888,  show
a  noticeable  analogy  (in  my  view  a  predictable  analogy)  with  some  of  , the  "spirit-
drawings  "  above  discussed.


534


Tlhe  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


transitions  from  direct  pictorial  symbolism  to  an  abbreviated  ideo-
graphy,  mingled  in  its  turn  with  writing  of  a  fantastic  or  of  an
ordinary  kind.

Automatic  utterance,  again,is  a  phenomenon  rarer  than  those  which
we  have  thus  far  been  discussing,  and  it  has  in  consequence  become  much
more  closely  associated  with  "  professional  mediuniship."  So-called
"  trance-speaking  "  forms  a  recognised  calling  ;  and  many  volumes  of
"inspirational  addi'esses  "  have  been  printed  in  England  and  America.
Many  Spiritualists  hold  that  the  style  and  matter  of  these  addresses
afford  abundant  evidence  that  a  mind  higher  than  the  medium's  has
been  concerned  in  producing  them.  Without  denying  the  possibility  of
such  an  interpretation,  we  must  plainly  be  slow  to  infer  the  action  of  an
external  mind  any  improvement  in  the  quality  of  the  psychical  product.
Rather  we  shall  treat  these  trance-utterances  somewhat  as  we  should
discuss  some  passage  in  an  ancient  author  which  was  suspected  to  be  an
interpolation,  from  but  which  was  found  in  all  the  manuscripts.  A  mere
difference  in  style  would  in  such  a  case  be  far  less  convincing  than  the
discoveiy  in  the  disputed  passage  of  some  historical  fact  which  the  alleged
author  could  not  have  known.  Now  "  trance-addresses  "  are  eminently
barren  of  fact;  they  generally  show  little  moi'e  than  a  mere  power  of
improvisation,  which  may  either  be  fraudulently  practised,  or  may  be  a
characteristic  faculty  of  the  unconscious  self.

On  the  whole,  it  seems  best  to  defer  further  discussion  of  tliese  last
two  forms  of  active  automatism — picture-drawing  and  trance-utterance
— until  we  have  seen  what  light  j^cossive  automatisms  may  throw  on  the
value  of  messages  thus  given  from  within.

The  term  "  passive  automatism  "  may  sound  at  first,  perhajDS,  some-
what fantastic;  but  it  expresses  a  real  relation  between  various  methods
in  which  a  message  from  our  unconscious  self  may  reach  the  conscious
self.  For  that  message  may  take  a  sensory  as  well  as  a  motor  form  ;
it  may  present  itself  in  the  form  of  a  hallucination  of  sight  or  hearing
just  as  well  as  in  the  form  of  tilts  of  a  table  or  scrawls  with  a  pencil.
The  automatism  may  be  called  active  if  it  finds  a  motor  channel,  passwe
if  it  finds  a  sensory  channel,  but  the  impulse  whence  it  originates  may
be  much  the  same  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.

The  study  of  automatic  writing  leads  us  directly  to  this  conclusion.
Beginning  by  considering  automatic  writing  alone,  we  soon  found  that
it  presented  analogies  to  various  asemic  troubles  (or  brain-disturbances
influencing  the  recognition  and  reproduction  of  spoken  or  written
words),  and,  moreover,  that  these  asemic  disturbances,  in  their  various
types,  were  spread  over  all  the  processes  of  verbalisation.  They  affected,
that  is  to  say,  not  the  word-writing  process  alone,  nor  even  the  two
active  processes  of  word-writing  and  word-speaking  alone,  but  also  the
comparatively  j)assive  processes  of  word-hearing  and  word-seeing. In  the


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


535


scheme  drawn  out  (Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  58,  sqq.)  a  place  was  found
for  these  supernormal  sensory  or  passive  phenomena,  as  well  as  for  the
supernormal  motor  or  active  phenomena  which  were  then  primarily
under  discussion. ^

Without  reproducing  the  formube  there  given,  we  may  say  tliat  all
these  speech-processes  have  a  sensory  as  well  as  a  motor  side  ;  and
that  if  we  observe  an  affection  of  one  form  of  verbalisation — say,  the
act  of  word-writing — we  are  likely  to  come  upon  some  analogous
phenomenon,  affecting  the  other  forms  of  verbalisation — word-speaking,
word-hearing,  and  word-seeing.

Now  we  have  already  recognised  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as
automatic  word-speaking,  strictly  parallel  to  automatic  word-writing  ;
and  we  may  therefore  all  the  more  confidently  expect  to  find  some  form
of  automatic  hearing  and  seeing  of  words.  Nor  indeed  is  there  any
reason  why  these  twin  forms  of  automatism — active  and  passive — should
be  confined  to  the  region  of  verbalisation  alone.  Wherever  there  is  a
message  from  one  stratum  of  our  being  to  another,  we  may  expect  that
message  to  be  delivered  sometimes  in  motor  and  sometimes  in  sensory
terms.

Before  going  further,  we  may  test  the  meaning  of  these  assertions
by  applying  them  to  the  familiar  subject  of  dreams.

According  to  the  definition  above  suggested,  dreams  may  be  regarded
as  one  form — the  commonest  foi'm — of  message-bearing  automatisms  ;
that  is  to  say,  they  are  phenomena,  whose  origin  is  within  ourselves,
but  yet  outside  our  habitual  stream  of  consciousness.  Thus  they  fulfil
our  definition  of  automatisms.  And,  again,  they  are  certainly  message-
bearing  or  nunciative,  although  the  message  which  they  bring  to  the
waking  self  is  usually  merely  nonsensical,  useless  for  any  practical
purpose.  That  is  to  say,  in  my  view,  the  message  which  they  bring
comes  from  a  stratum  or  phase  of  our  personality  which  is  chaotic  and
fragmentary.  Nevertheless  a  message  there  is,  a  message  conveyed  by
automatic  action  from  the  sub-conscious  to  the  conscious  or  waking  self ;
and  my  immediate  object  is  to  show  that  that  message  may,  so  to  say,  be
communicated  in  either  motor  or  sensory  terms, — that  there  is  no
fundamental  difference  between  dream-speech  and  dream-audition,
between  dream-gesture  and  dream- vision, — but  that  the  message,  such
as  it  is,  which  the  dream-stratum  of  oui'  personality  has  to  convey
gets  itself  expressed  by  whatsoever  mechanism  it  can  in  each  instance
work  most  easily — by  whatsoever  path  of  extei'nalisation  is  worn  the
smoothest  in  that  special  brain.  (I  vary  the  metaphors  as  much  as
possible  in  order  to  guard  against  being  understood  to  give  any  of  them
as  a  real  transcript  of  the  unknown  processes  which  actually  occui'.)


See  tlie  definitions  of  the  formulce,  xx'-f-HH'  and  xx'-t-SS',  loc.  cit.


536


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


Now  the  "  psychostatical  conditions "  of  different  brains, — the
relative  arrangements  of  their  internal  forces, — are  inimitably  various.
But  for  present  purposes  the  three  main  divisions,  with  which  Mr.
Galton  and  others  have  made  the  woi'ld  familiar,  will  be  enough.  We
have  auditory  subjects,  that  is  to  say,  persons  in  whom  the  memory  of
sounds — of  uttered  words  and  so  on — is  clear  and  persistent,  and  who,  if
an  idea  is  suddenly  suggested  to  them,  conceive  it  as  though  heard  from
some  internal  utterance.  Thus,  suppose  that  an  auditory  subject — or
auditive — reads  the  words,  "  What  is  the  largest  quadruped  ? "  He
immediately  imagines  himself  as  1  tearing  the  word  "  elephant."  Next
we  have  the  visual  subjects  who  in  a  similar  case  see  either  the  object
itself  or  its  printed  name.  A  visualiser  reading  the  above  question  will
instantly  imagine  either  the  printed  word  elephant — or  the  picture  of  an
elephant — or  the  look  of  tlie  beast  itself.  Thirdly,  we  have  the  motor
subjects,  who  imagine  themselves  either  as  touching  the  object  suddenly
suggested,  or  (much  more  frequently)  as  merely  themselves  uttering  its
name.  A  "  motile  "  reading  the  above  question  will  dimly  imagine  the
movements  of  his  own  larynx  in  uttering  the  word  elephant.

Of  course  we  all  of  us,  if  we  possess  our  full  complement  of  senses,
more  or  less  combine  all  these  three  forms  of  memory.  And  probably
the  dreams  of  all  of  us  contain  images  of  all  three  kinds.  But  in  the
absence  of  external  stimuli,  our  permanent  psychostatical  attitude  will
naturally  determine  our  sensations  more  conspicuously  than  during
waking  hours.  The  visualiser  will  be  more  markedly  visual  in  dreams,
the  imagery  of  the  dream  "motile"  will  be  even  more  barren  of
auditory  or  visual  elements  than  in  his  waking  hours.

And,  observe,  that  the  very  faintness  and  instability  of  the
hallucinations  which  dreams  offer  to  us  affords  a  singular  insight  into
the  genesis  of  liallucination.  We  have  here  indeterminate  hallucina-
tions, which  cannot  be  assigned  to  one  sense  or  another  in  their
entirety  ;  nay,  which  sometimes  seem  to  inhabit  chambers  of  the  brain
in  which  the  partition  between  sensation  and  motion  is  still  indistinct.

The  mental  operations  connected  with  a  process  so  familiar  as
speech  take  place,  for  the  most  part,  too  easily  and  rapidly  for  us  to
note  them.  But  if  we  think  or  dream  in  a  foreign  language,  the
consequent  friction  will  reveal  somewhat  more  than  usual  of  our  mental
workings.  I  have  felt  (and  probably  many  others  have  felt  the  same)  a
marked  fatigue  after  dreaming  when  in  France, — a  fatigue  which  I  found
to  depend  upon  the  effort  made  in  sleep  to  conduct  conversations  in
French.  I  seemed  in  my  dream  to  be  hearing  Frenchmen  talk  to  me,
and  this  might  he  thought  to  resemble  an  auditory  hallucination  rather
than  an  act  of  utterance.  But  in  reality  the  experience  was  motor
rather  than  auditory ;  it  was  my  own  sub-conscious  effort  at  French


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


537


speech  which  presented  itself  to  me  as  a  dream  of  hearing  French
conversation.

With  other  dreamers,  again,  when  a  dream-scene  is  vividly  realised,
gesture  becomes  interchangeable  with  vision.  Within  the  limits  of  the
dream  itself  it  is  often  not  clear  whether  we  are  performing  an  action
ourselves  or  watching  others  perform  it, — our  centre  of  personality
shifting  to  the  focus  of  maximal  intensity  of  the  dream-operation.
And  the  gestures  of  the  excited  dreamer  illustrate  this  fusion  of
sensory  and  motor  elements  in  a  curious  way.  He  dreams  of  a  scene — •
say  of  tiger-hunting — in  which  he  is  actor.  Most  of  his  dream  is  a
visual  hallucination  merely  ;  but  when  the  tiger  seizes  him  the  stimulus
spreads  to  motor  centres  and  he  struggles  visibly  in  bed.  Then,  on
awaking,  he  remembers  the  visual  aspect  of  the  dream,  but  not  the
motor  message  which  it  has  already  conveyed  to  tlie  waking  observer.
To  find  a  memory  of  that  motor  message — of  his  movements  in  bed —
we  should  have  to  get  down  to  a  stratum  of  his  personality  profounder
than  dream.

On  this  last  point,  however,  with  its  faint  suggestion  of  possible
strata  below  the  dream-stratum,  we  must  not  at  present  dwell.  The
immediate  object  is  to  show  that  in  this  matter  of  messages  communi-
cated from  one  to  another  stratum  of  personality  the  form  of  the
message — whether  motor  or  sensory,  whether  an  action  or  a  hallucina-
tion— is  a  secondary,  and  in  some  sense  an  accidental  matter.  The
impulse  arising  in  the  sub-conscious  stratum  may  find  its  way  to  impress
the  conscious  life  by  very  various  channels,  according  to  the  pre"sdous
proclivities  of  the  brain  affected.  Quite  similarly,  we  can  inspire  by
post-hypnotic  suggestion  either  a  motor  act  or  a  sensory  hallucination.
There,  too,  we  enable  a  message  to  press  upwards  from  the  hypnotic  to
the  waking  stratum  of  the  subject's  mind ;  but  the  channel  by  which  that
upward  passage  is  made  may  be  motor  or  sensory  almost  indifferently  ; —
the  active  automatism  of  some  suggested  action,  or  the  passive  automa-
tism of  some  imaginary  sight  or  audition.  Considering  all  these  things,
therefore,  I  hold  that  in  order  to  understand  active  automatism  it  is
necessary  to  understand  passive  automatism  as  well.  And  among  the
various  forms  of  passive  automatism,  or  hallucination,  the  hearing  of
voices  is  one  of  the  commonest,  and  may  first  be  discussed  here.  But
such  discussion  will  involve  a  slight  divergence  from  the  main  thread
of  our  argument.  We  have  thus  far  been  mainly  concerned  with  the
mode,  rather  than  the  substance,  of  automatic  communications,  and  we
have  dwelt  willingly  on  perfectly  trivial  messages,  if  only  the  mode  of
their  reception  was  such  as  to  exclude  the  conscious  operation  of  the
mind.  But  in  the  case  of  the  hearing  of  voices  we  must  make  rather
a  different  choice.  For  whereas  automatic  writing  is  a  phenomenon
whose existence is  not  generally  admitted, and which  therefore


538


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


needs  proof  before  explanation,  hallucinatory  voices  are  a  very  well-
known  phenomenon,  only  they  are  for  the  most  part  associated  with
insanity.  We  do  not  need,  therefore,  to  prove  that  they  exist ;  but,  if
we  are  to  take  them  as  worth  seiious  discussion,  we  must  select  some
instances  where  insanity  cannot  be  alleged.

Or  if  this  be  saying  too  much, — for  some  writers  will  allege  insanity
wherever  there  is  any  markedly  unusual  psychical  manifestation, — we
must  at  least  select  some  instances  where  no  circumstance,  except  the
voice  itself,  can  he  held  to  indicate  insanity,  and  where  the  substance  of
the  messages  given  is  above  and  not  below  the  normal  level  of  human
thought.  To  find  a  case  of  this  sort, — a  case  where  the  messages  con-
veyed by  auditory  hallucination  have  been  unquestionably  above  and  not
below  the  level  of  ordinary  waking  sanity, — is  of  course  not  easy.  We
must  not  cite  any  modern  example,  where  the  repute  for  wisdom  of  the
hallucinated  person  is  yet  undecided.  Nor  must  we  cite  any  case,  like
Mahomet's,  of  religious  fanaticism  or  ecstacy,  where  genius  has  certainly
been  akin  to  insanity.

But  there  is  one  instance, — an  instance  well-observed  and  well-
attested,  though  remote  in  date, — which  will  at  once  occur  to  every
reader.  The  Founder  of  Science  himself, — the  permanent  type  of  sanity,
shrewdness,  physical  robustness,  and  moral  balance, — was  guided  in  all
the  affairs  of  life  by  a  monitory  Voice, — by  "  tlie  DtBmon  of  Socrates."
This  is  a  case  which  can  never  lose  its  interest,  a  case  which  has  been
vouched  for  by  the  most  practical,  and  discussed  by  the  loftiest  intellect  of
Greece — both  of  them  intimate  friends  of  the  illustrious  subject; — a  case,
therefore,  which  one  who  endeavours  to  throw  new  light  on  hallucination
and  automatism  is  bound,  even  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  endeavour  to
explain.  And  this  is  the  more  needful  since  a  treatise  was  actually
written,  a  generation  ago,  as  "a  specimen  of  the  application  of  the
science  of  psychology  to  the  science  of  history,"  arguing  from  the  records
of  the  Saifxavtov  in  Xenophon  and  Plato  that  Socrates  was  in  fact
insane.  1

I  believe  that  it  is  now  possible  to  give  a  truer  explanation  ;  to  place
these  old  records  in  juxtaposition  with  more  instructive  parallels  ;  and
to  show  that  the  messages  which  Socrates  received  were  only  advanced
examples  of  a  process  which,  if  supernormal,  is  not  abnormal,  and  which
characterises  tliat  form  of  intelligence  which  we  describe  as  genius.
For  genius  is  best  defined — not  as  "an  unlimited  capacity  of  taking
pains" — but  rather  as  a  mental  constitution  which  allows  a  man  to
draw  readily  into  conscious  life  the  pi'oducts  of  unconscious  thought.

I  have  already  urged  that  beneath  the  superficially  conscious  stratum

1  Z)«  Demon  de  Socratc;  &c.,  by  L.  F.  Lelut,  Membre  de  ITnstitut.  Nouvelle
edition,  185(i.


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


539


of  our  being  there  is  not  only  a  stratura  of  dream  and  confusion,  but  a
still  subjacent  stratum  of  coherent  mentation  as  well.  This  thesis,  I
think,  is  strongly  supported  by  the  records  which  have  come  down  to
us  as  to  the  Dsemon  of  Socrates.  We  shall  see  that  the  monitions
which  Socrates  thus  received  were  for  the  most  part  such  as  his  own
wiser  self  might  well  have  given  and  that  where  the  limits  of
knowledge  attainable  by  his  own  inmost  reflection  may  possibly  have
been  transcended,  they  seem  to  have  been  transcended  in  such  direction
as  a  clairvoyant  development  of  his  own  faculties  might  allow,  rather  than
in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  the  intervention  of  any  external  power.
Let  us  try  to  analyse  the  nature  of  the  "  divine  interventions  "  actually
recorded  by  Socrates'  contemporaries.  The  voice,  it  should  be  remarked,
was  always  a  voice  of  restraint ;  its  silence  implied  approval.  In  the
first  place  Xenophon's  testimony  completely  establishes  the  fact.  He
desires,  in  defending  his  friend  and  master  from  the  charge  of  impiety,
to  make  as  little  as  may  be  of  the  matter ;  but  what  he  says  is  quite
enough  to  prove — if  such  proof  were  needed — that  the  8aifi6vLov  is  no
metaphor,  but  is  to  be  taken  literally  as  a  notorious  and  repeated
incident  in  Socrates'  life.

"  First  then,"  he  says,i  "  as  to  his  not  worshipping  the  gods  whom
the  city  worships,  what  evidence  was  there  of  this  ?  He  sacrificed
constantly,  and  obviously  used  the  art  of  divination  ;  for  it  was  matter
of  notoriety  that  Socrates  said  that  tv  8ai^6viov — the  divine  Providence
— ^gave  him  indications ;  and  this  indeed  was  the  principal  reason  for
accusing  him  of  introducing  new  gods."

The  instances  where  such  indication  was  given  may  be  divided  into
three  heads.

First  come  the  cases  where  the  warning  voice — or  its  equally
significant  absence — -gives  proof  of  a  sagacity  at  least  equal  to  that  of
the  waking  Socrates,  and  decides  him  to  action,  or  to  abstention  from
action,  which  he  professes  always  to  have  recognised  as  right  and  wise.

Next  come  the  cases  where  the  monition  implies  some  sort  of
knowledge  not  dependent  on  any  external  source,  yet  not  attainable  by
ordinary  means, — as  a  knowledge  of  potential  "  rapport "  (to  use  the
term  of  the  elder  mesmerists),  or  special  relation  between  two  organisms.

And,  lastly,  come  one  or  two  doubtful  cases  where — if  they  be
correctly  reported — there  was  something  like  clairvoyance,  or  extension
of  the  ordinary  purview  of  sense.

The  first  of  these  classes  contains  the  great  majority  of  the
recorded  cases,  whether  small  or  great  matters  are  concerned.  And
it  is  noticeable  that  the  monition  frequently  occurred  in  reference  to
mere  trifles,  and  had  been  a  habitual  phenomenon  for  Socrates  from


1  Xen.  Memorahilia  I.  1.


540


The  Daemon  of  Socrates.


childhood  upwards, — both  of  which  points  are  eminently  in  analogy  with
what  we  know  of  other  automatisms.  Let  us  take  first  some  trivial
cases.

1.  In  the  Eutliydeimm  of  Plato,  Socrates  is  about  to  quit  the
paljestra ;  the  sign  detains  him ;  young  men  enter,  and  profitable
conversation  ensues.

2.  In  the  Phcedrus,  Socrates,  when  leaving  his  resting-place,  is
detained  by  the  sign,  which  thus  leads  him  to  a  discourse  which  he  had
not  intended  to  utter — Et^xi  hrj  jxavrn  fj,ev — "  I  am,  it  seems,  a  prophet,"
he  then  remarks, — but  only  just  enough  for  my  private  use  and  benefit.

3.  In  the  First  Alcihiades  the  sign  restrains  him  from  speaking  to
Alcibiades  until  the  latter  is  old  enough  to  understand  him  aright.

There  are  also  various  cases  where  Socrates  dissuades  his  friends  from
expeditions  which  ultimately  turn  to  their  harm.  None  of  these  are  in
our  sense  evidential  ;  and  in  some  of  them  (as  in  the  case  of  the
Athenian  expedition  against  Syracuse)  ordinary  sagacity  might  have
given  the  same  warning.  The  case  of  Timarchus  (Plato,  Tlteages)  is
the  most  dramatic  of  these  warnings.

Timarchus  was  sitting  at  supper  with  Socrates,  and  rose  to  go  out
to  a  plot  of  assassination,  to  which  plot  only  one  other  man  was  privy.
"  '  What  say  you,  Socrates  ? '  said  Timarchus,  '  do  you  continue  drink-
ing ;  I  must  go  out  somewhither,  but  will  return  in  a  little,  if  so  I
may.'  And  the  voice  came  to  me  ;  and  I  said  to  him,  '  By  no  means
rise  from  table  ;  for  the  accustomed  divine  sign  has  come  to  me.'  And
he  stayed.  And  after  a  time  again  he  got  up  to  go,  and  said,  'I  must
be  gone,  Socrates.'  And  the  sign  came  to  me  again  ;  and  again  I
made  him  stay.  And  the  third  time,  determining  that  I  should  not
see,  he  rose  and  said  naught  to  me,  when  my  mind  was  tui'ned  else-
where ;  and  thus  he  went  forth,  and  was  gone,  and  did  that  which  was
to  be  his  doom."

We  cannot  now  tell  what  the  evidential  value  of  this  case  may  have
been.  There  may  have  been  that  in  the  countenance  of  one  of  them
who  sat  at  meat,  which  may  have  shown  to  Socrates  that  the  hand  of
an  assassin  was  with  him  on  the  table.

But,  among  these  monitions  of  Socrates,  a  certain  silence  of  the
warning  voice  on  one  last  occasion  was  held  by  Socrates  himself,  and
has  since  been  reputed,  as  the  most  noteworthy  of  all.  This  was  when
Socrates,  accused  on  a  capital  charge  of  impiety,  from  which  he  might
have  freed  himself  by  far  less  of  retractation  than  has  been  consented
to  by  many  a  martyr,  refused  altogether  to  retract,  to  excuse
himself,  to  explain  away  ;  claiming  rather,  in  one  of  the  first  and
noblest  of  all  assertions  of  the  law  of  conscience  as  supreme,  that  he
deserved  to  be  supported  at  the  public  cost  in  the  Prytaneum,  as  a
man  devoted  to  the  mission  of  a  moral  teacher  of  men. The  divine


The  Doemon  of  Socrates.


541


sign,  as  has  been  said,  came  only  to  warn  or  to  restrain  ;  when  it  was
absent,  all  was  well.  And  throughout  the  whole  series  of  events  which
led  to  Socrates'  death,  the  voice  intervened  once  only, — to  check  him
from  preparing  any  speech  in  his  own  defence.  Thereafter,  by  an
emphatic  silence,  it  approved  the  various  steps  by  which  the  philosopher
brought  on  his  own  head  that  extreme  penalty  which,  save  for  his  own
inflexible  utterances,  the  Dikastery  would  not  have  ventured  to  inflict.

"  There  has  happened  to  me,  O  my  judges,"  he  said  in  his  last
speech  after  sentence  passed,  "a  wonderful  thing.  For  that  accustomed
divine  intimation  in  time  past  came  to  me  very  many  times,  and  met  me
on  slight  occasion,  if  I  were  about  to  act  in  some  way  not  aright ;  but
now  this  fate  which  ye  behold  has  come  upon  me, — this  which  a  man
might  deem,  and  which  is  considered,  the  very  worst  of  ills.  Yet
neither  when  I  left  my  home  this  morning  was  I  checked  by  that
accustomed  sign ;  nor  when  I  came  up  hither  to  the  judgment-hall,  nor
at  any  point  in  my  speech  as  I  spoke.  And  yet  in  other  speeches  of
mine  the  sign  has  often  stopped  me  in  the  midst.  But  now  it  has  not
hindered  me  in  any  deed  or  word  of  mine  connected  with  this  present
business.  What  then  do  I  suppose  to  be  the  reason  thereof  1  I  will
tell  you.  I  think  it  is  that  what  has  happened  to  me  has  been  a  good
thing  ;  and  we  must  have  been  mistaken  when  we  supposed  that  death
was  an  evil.  Herein  is  a  strong  proof  to  me  of  this ;  for  that  accus-
tomed sign  would  assuredly  have  checked  me,  had  I  been  about  to  do
aught  that  was  evil."

I  dwell  upon  this  incident ;  for  in  tlie  history  of  inward  messages
no  such  scene  is  likely  to  recur.  We  shall  never  again  see  such  a  man
at  such  a  moment  drawing  strength  from  the  silence  of  the  monitory
utterance  which  came  to  him  as  fi'om  without  himself,  though  it  were
from  the  depths  of  his  own  soul.

The  next  class  of  the  Socratic  monitions  can  only  be  briefly  dealt
with  here.  They  touch  on  that  singular  phenomenon  of  so-called
rapport  which  is  to  us  at  present  and  has  long  been  in  the  eyes  of  Science
an  unexplained  and  a  very  disputable  thing  ;  but  on  which  recent
hypnotic  experiments  are  slowly  Ijringing  us  to  look  as  in  some  sense  a
reality.  In  modern  terms  we  should  say  that  the  disciples  of  Socrates
were  influenced  not  so  much  by  his  insti'uction  as  by  his  siyjyestion  ;
and  that  some  inward  instinct — expressed  by  the  monitory  voice  whose
utterances  we  are  analysing — informed  him  without  conscious  con-
sideration whether  his  intending  disciples  were  receptive  to  his  sug-
gestion or  no.  It  is  in  the  Platonic  dialogue  Theages  that  this  aspect
of  the  divine  monition  is  most  insisted  on.

"  I  never  learnt  from  you,"  says  a  certain  Aristeides  to  Socrates,
"anything  at  all.  You  yourself  well  know  this.  But  I  always  made
progress  whenever  I  was  along  with  you,  even  if  I  were  in  the  same


542


The  Dwmon  of  Socrates.


house  but  not  in  the  same  room  ;  yet  most  when  I  was  in  the  same
room ;  and  even  in  the  same  room  I  got  on  better  if  I  looked  at  you
when  you  were  speaking  than  if  I  looked  anywhere  else.  But  I  got
on  far  the  best  of  all  when  I  was  sitting  near  you  and  holding  or
touching  you.  But  now,  said  he,  all  my  then  character  has  dribbled
out  of  me." Nw  bi,  rj  d'Ss,  naaa  eKflvrj  77  e'^iy  e^eppvrjKfv.

I  would  not  insist  too  strongly  on  an  interpretation  which  may  seem
merely  fanciful.  But  nevertheless  we  should  be  puzzled  to  find  Greek
words  more  expressive  of  the  gradual  dissipation  and  disappearance  of
a  post-hypnotic  suggestion, — the  melting  away  of  some  imparted  energy
in  well-doing  as  the  subject  is  removed  from  the  operator's  influence.
And  that  the  possibility  of  some  rapport  of  this  kind  should  be  indicated,
not  by  conscious  thought  but  by  a  message  emanating  from  some  sub-
conscious phase  of  a  man's  being,  this,  too,  is  a  phenomenon  to  which
modern  experience  furnishes  not  unfrequent  analogies.

The  third  class  of  Socratic  monitions  which  I  have  mentioned  rests
on  very  slender  evidence.  We  cannot  be  sure  that  the  monitory  sign
ever  warned  him  of  anything  which  no  possible  sagacity  of  the  ordinary
kind  could  have  led  him  to  discover.  As  is  natural  in  the  beginning
of  such  inquiries,  the  cases  cited  to  illustrate  this  supposed  supernormal
knowledge  are  mainly  interesting  and  important  incidents  ;  and  it  is
precisely  in  relation  to  such  incidents  that  some  unconscious  gtiess  is
likely  to  have  been  made.  What  we  should  like  would  be  just  what
Plato  has  omitted  ; — specimens,  namely,  of  the  trivial  cases  where  the
divine  warning  saved  the  philosopher  from  some  momentary  mishap.
Of  this  sort  I  can  find  one  only  ;  and  tliat  is  merely  a  tradition,  given
in  Plutarch's  essay  De  Genio  Socratis.  Socrates,  according  to  this
story  (which  Plutarch  puts  into  the  mouth  of  a  supposed  eye-witness),
is  walking  and  talking  with  Euthyphron,  but  stops  suddenly,  and  calls
his  friends  to  turn  back  by  another  street.  Most  of  them  follow  him,
but  otliers  keep  on  tlieir  way,  and  presently  meet  a  great  herd  of
swine  who  knock  down  some  of  them  and  befoul  the  rest.  "  Charillus  "
(who  had  thus  braved  Socrates'  warning)  "  returned  home  with  legs  and
clothes  all  full  of  mire, — so  that  we  all  remembered  Socrates'  familiar
spirit,  with  roars  of  laughter,  marvelling  how  the  Divinity  had  care  of
him  continually."

One  more  remark.  Among  the  most  singular  incidents  in  Socrates'
life  were  those  pauses  of  immobility,  frequently  lasting  for  hours,  and
once,  as  reported,  for  a  consecutive  day  and  night,  when  he  was
inaccessible  to  any  outward  stimulus,  and  remained  fixed  as  in  a  deep
contemplation.  Medical  readers  have  seen  that  there  must  have  been
more  than  mere  contemplation  here ;  and  Lelut  has  treated  these  accesses
as  a  kind  of  stupor  attonittis — of  bewildered  paralysis  of  all  intellectual
operation,  such  as  is  seen  in  minds  overbalanced  by  some  terrible


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


543


shock.  I  cannot  accept  the  parallel,  nof  believe  that  symptoms  so
grave  can  supervene  in  robust  health  and  disappear'  without  leaving  a
trace  behind.  Nor,  again,  is  there  anything  which  suggests  epilepsy.
I  believe  the  accesses  to  have  been  accesses  of  ecstacy,  reached,  as  in
some  rare  cases,  without  any  previous  hysterical  disturbance ;  and
indicating  (as  I  hold)  a  sub-conscious  self,  so  powerful  and  so  near  the
surface  that  some  slight  accident  sufficed  to  determine  its  temporary
predominance  over  the  whole  man.

But  I  must  leave  here  the  story  of  Socrates,  rich  in  unworked
psychological  suggestion,  but  cited  here  only  as  an  example  of  wise
automatism;  of  the  possibility  that  the  messages  which  are  conveyed
to  the  conscious  mind  from  unconscious  strata  of  the  personality, —
whether  as  sounds,  as  sights,  or  as  movements, — may  sometimes  come
from  far  beneath  the  realm  of  dream  and  confusion, — from  some  self
whose  monitions  convey  to  us  a  wisdom  profounder  than  we  know.

The  case,  assuredly,  is  a  marked  one  ;  but  it  may  be  thought  to  be  too
exceptional  for  the  purpose  of  my  argument.  Socrates,  it  may  be  said,
was  too  strangely  above  ordinary  men  to  allow  us  to  draw  wider
inferences  from  this  unique  example.  It  might  be  well  if  we  could  add
a  case  not  complicated  by  such  towering  genius ; — a  case  where  some-
one with  no  great  gifts  of  nature,  with  no  incomprehensible  workings  of
the  soul,  had,  nevertheless  by  monitory  voices  been  taught  wisdom  and
raised  to  honour, — and  who,  if  so  it  might  be,  had  testified  to  the
reality  of  the  inwaixl  message  by  some  witness  which  the  world  could
not  gainsay.  And  such  a  case  there  is  ;  there  is  a  figure  in  history
unique  and  marvellous,  but  marvellous  in  this  point  alone.  One  there
has  been  who  was  born  with  no  conspicuous  strength  of  intellect,  and
in  no  high  or  poweiful  place,  but  to  whom  voices  came  fi'om  childhood
onwards  and  brought  at  length  a  strange  command  ; — one  who  by  mere
obedience  to  that  monitory  call  rose  to  be  the  saviour  of  a  great  nation;
—one  to  whose  lot  it  fell  to  push  that  obedience  to  its  limit,  and  to
pledge  life  for  truth ;  to  perish  at  the  stake  rather  than  disown  those
voices  or  disobey  that  inward  law.

I  speak,  of  course,  of  Joan  of  Arc,  the  Maid  of  Orleans,  the
national  heroine  of  France ;  whose  name  crowns  the  poet's  list  of
those  famous  women  of  old  time  who  have  vanished  like  "  the  snows
of  yester-year."

La  reyne  blanche  comme  ung  lys
Qui  chantoit  a  voix  de  sereine
Berthe  au  grant  pie,  Bietris,  Allys,
Harembourges  qui  tint  le  Mayne
Et  Jehanne  la  bonne  Loraine
Qu'  Angloys  bruslerent  a  Rouen,
Oil  sont-ils,  Vierge  souveraine  '?
Mais  oil  sent  les  neiges  d'antan  1

2  N


544


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


I  must  be  excused  for  dwelling  on  this  signal  example ;  for  I
believe  that  only  now,  with  the  comprehension  which  we  are  gradually
gaining  of  tlie  possibility  of  an  impulse  from  tlie  mind's  deeper  strata
which  is  so  far  from  madness  that  it  is  wiser  than  our  sanity  itself, —
only  now,  I  repeat,  can  we  understand  aright  that  familiar  story.  I
shall  not  repeat  its  incidents  in  detail ;  but  shall  draw  my  citations
from  the  only  trustworthy  source,  namely,  Joan's  evidence,  given  in
1431,  before  Cauchon,  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  and  the  other  ecclesiastics
who  ultimately  condemned  her  to  be  burnt  alive.  The  condemnation
was  based  on  her  own  admissions ;  and  the  Latin  proces-verhal  still
exists,  and  was  published  from  the  MS.  by  M.  Quicherat,  1841-9,  for
the  French  Historical  Society.  Joan,  like  Socrates,  was  condemned
mainly  on  the  ground,  or  at  least  on  the  pretext,  of  her  monitory
voices ;  and  her  Apology  remarkably  resembles  his,  in  its  resolute
insistance  on  the  truth  of  the  very  phenomena  which  were  being  used
to  destroy  her.  Her  answers  are  clear  and  self-consistent,  and  seem
to  have  been  little,  if  at  all,  distorted  by  the  recorder.  Few  pieces  of
history  so  remote  as  this  can  be  so  accurately  known.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Proces  de  RehahilifMion,  held  some  20  years
after  Joan's  death,  when  memories  had  weakened  and  legend  had
begun  to  grow,  is  of  little  value  as  evidence.  Joan's  credit  must  rest
entirely  on  that  testimony  on  the  strength  of  which  she  was  condemned
to  death.

Fortunately  for  our  purpose,  her  inquisitors  asked  her  many
questions  as  to  her  voices  and  visions;  and  her  answers  enable  us  to
give  a  pretty  full  analysis  of  the  phenomena  which  concern  us.

I.  The  voices  do  not  begin  with  the  summons  to  fight  for  France.
Joan  heard  them  first  at  13  years  of  age, — as  with  Socrates  also  the
voice  began  in  childhood.  The  first  command  consisted  of  nothing
more  surprising  than  that  "  she  was  to  be  a  good  girl,  and  go  often  to
church."  After  this  the  voice— as  in  the  case  of  Socrates — intervened
frequently,  and  on  trivial  occasions.

II.  The  voice  was  accompanied  at  first  by  a  light,  and  sometimes
afterwards  by  figures  of  saints,  who  appeared  to  speak,  and  whom  Joan
appears  to  have  both  seen  and  felt,  as  clearly  as  though  they  had  been
living  persons.  But  here  there  is  some  obscurity  ;  and  Michelet  thinks
that  on  one  occasion  the  Maid  was  tricked  by  the  courtiers  for  political
ends.  For  she  asserted  (apparently  without  contradiction)  that  several
persons,  including  the  Archljishop  of  Rheims,  as  well  as  herself,  had
seen  an  angel  bringing  to  the  King  a  material  crown.

III.  The  voices  came  mainly  when  she  was  awake,  but  also  some-
times roused  her  from  sleep  :  a  piienomenon  often  observed  in  our  cases
of  "veridical  hallucination."  "Ipsa  dormiebat,  et  vox  excitabat  eam."
(Quicherat,  I.,  p.  62.)


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


545


IV.  The  voice  was  not  always  fully  intelligible  (especially  if  she  was
half  awake)  ; — in  this  respect  again  resembling  some  of  our  recorded
cases,  both  visual  and  auditory,  where,  on  the  view  taken  in
Phantasms,  the  externalisation  has  been  incomplete.  "  Vox  dixit
aliqua,  sed  non  omnia  intellexit."  (Quicherat,  I.,  62.)

V.  The  predictions  of  the  voice,  so  far  as  stated,  were  mainly
fulfilled  ;  viz.,  that  the  siege  of  Orleans  would  be  raised  ;  that  Charles
VII.  would  be  crowned  at  Rheims  ;  that  she  herself  would  be  wounded  ;
but  the  prediction  that  there  would  be  a  great  victory  over  the  English
within  seven  years  was  not  fulfilled  in  any  exact  way,  though  the
English  continued  to  lose  ground.  In  short,  about  so  much  was  fulfilled
as  an  ardent  self-devoted  mind  might  have  anticipated ;  much  indeed
that  might  have  seemed  irrational  to  ordinaiy  observers,  but  nothing
which  actually  needed  a  definite  prophetic  power.  Here,  again,  we  are
reminded  of  the  general  character  of  the  monitions  of  Socrates.  And
yet  in  Joan's  case,  more  probably  than  in  the  case  of  Socrates,  there
may  liave  been  one  singular  exception  to  this  general  rule.  She  knew
by  monition  that  there  was  a  sword  "  retro  altare  " — somewhere  behind
the  altar — in  the  Church  of  St.  Catherine  of  Fierbois.  "Scivit  ipsum  ibi
■esse  per  voces  "  : — she  sent  for  it,  nothing  doubting,  and  it  was  found
and  given  to  her.  This  was  an  unique  incident  in  her  career.  Her
Judges  asked  whether  she  had  not  once  found  a  cup,  and  a  missing-
priest,  by  help  of  similar  monitions,  but  this  she  denied ;  and  it  is
remarkable  that  no  serious  attempt  was  made  either  to  show  that  she  had
claimed  this  clairvoyant  power  habitually,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to
invalidate  the  one  instance  of  it  wliicli  she  did  in  efiect  claim.  It
would  be  absurd  to  cite  the  alleged  discovery  of  the  sword  as  a  proof  of
clairvoyance,  any  more  than  Socrates'  alleged  intimation  of  the
approaching  herd  of  swine.  But  wlien  we  are  considering  monitions
given  in  more  recent  times  it  will  be  well  to  remember  that  it  is  in  this
direction  tliat  some  supernormal  extension  of  knowledge  seems  possibly
traceable.

And,  lastly,  it  must  be  observed  that  among  all  the  messages  thus
given  to  Joan  of  Arc  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  one  which  fell
short  of  the  purest  heroism.  They  were  such  commands  as  were  best
suited  to  draw  forth  from  her  who  heard  bhem  the  extreme  of  force,
intelligence,  virtue,  of  which  she  had  the  potency  at  her  birth.  What
better  can  we  desire  as  the  guide  of  life  ?

We  need  not  assume  that  the  voices  which  she  heard  were  the
offspring  of  any  mind  but  her  own,  any  more  than  we  need  assume  that
the  figures  in  whicli  her  bi-ave  and  pious  impulses  sometimes  took
external  form  were  veritaljle  saints, — the  crowned  St.  Margaret  and
the  crowned  St.  Catherine  and  Michael  in  the  armoury  of  Heaven.

Yet,  on  tlie  other  hand,  we  have  no  right  to  class  Joan's  monitions,

2  N  2


546


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


any  more  than  those  of  Socrates,  as  an  incipient  madness.  To  be  sane,
after  all,  is  to  be  adjusted  to  our  environment,  to  be  capable  of  coping
witli  the  facts  around  us.  Tried  by  this  test,  it  is  Socrates  and  Joan
who  should  be  our  types  of  sanity  ;  their  difference  from  ourselves
lying  rather  in  the  fact  that  they  were  better  able  to  employ  their  own
whole  being,  and  received  a  clearer  inspiration  from  the  monitory  soul
within.

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  these  two  cases,  far  more  remote  in
date  than  those  to  which  it  is  our  custom  to  appeal.  But  this  has  been
because  I  held  it  essential  to  make  my  reader  understand  that  the
grotesque  and  trivial  messages  or  monitions,  with  which  in  this  inquiry
we  habitually  deal,  are  not  to  be  taken  as  covering  the  whole  field
of  automatic  action.  Before  we  proceed  to  consider  the  question  as  to
the  action  of  minds  external  to  the  automatist's  own,  we  ought  at
any  rate  to  recognise  that  words  given  in  these  strange  ways  may  in
themselves  be  worth  hearing, — that  not  the  mechanism  only  but  the
content  of  automatic  messages  may  sometimes  deserve  our  close  and
serious  attention.

My  promised  discussion  on  messages  claiming  an  external  source  is
still  delayed  for  lack  of  adequate  material.  More  cases  are  needed  where
facts  are  said  to  liave  been  given  which  were  not  known  to  tlie  automatist
himself,  or  to  any  person  present  at  the  time.  Some  such  cases  we
do  possess — a  few  have  been  already  printed  in  the  Journal — but  more
should  be  forthcoming  before  they  can  be  profitably  compared  and
discussed.

And  I  cannot  conclude  tliis  paper  without  making  yet  another
appeal  to  Spiritualists,  in  England  or  elsewhere,  for  any  evidence  wliich
they  can  send  me  bearing  on  this  question  of  "  spirit  identity," — on  the
possibility  of  proving  from  tlie  content  of  automatic  messages — howevei'
given — that  the  mind  of  some  departed  friend  has  in  truth  inspired
them.  For  the  few  cases  already  received  I  have  thanked  my  in-
formants privately,  and  liere  thank  them  again.  But  it  seems  to  me
an  extraordinary  thing  that  if,  as  seems  clear,  there  are  some  thousands
of  persons  in  tlie  world  who  do  actually  believe  that  the  dead  can
communicate  with  us  by  messages  of  this  kind,  these  believers  should
apparently  make  so  little  effort  either  to  prove  or  to  conduct  such
communication.  I  am  not  thinking  only  of  the  paucity  of  the  cases
sent  to  myself,  but  of  the  barrenness,  in  this  all-important  particular,  of
all  the  Spiritualistic  journals  whicli  I  know.  There  is  constant  assertion
that  proofs  of  identity  can  be  obtained  by  patience  and  care ;  but
actual  proofs — or  even  attempts  at  proof — are  hardly  ever  forthcoming.
Yet,  without  these,  what  reality  is  there  in  disquisitions  on  doctrine, —
in  lengthy  "revelations"  without  any  kind  of  guarantee?  For  my  own
part,  I  am  anxious  to  see  the  Spiritualistic  explanation  advocated  with


The  Dcemon  of  Socrates.


547


all  possible  industry  and  care.  It  is  by  far  the  most  interesting
hypothesis,  and  there  are  a  few  cases  which  tell  strongly  in  its
favour.  I  think  it  possible,  too,  that  the  attitude  of  receptiveness,
which  Spiritualists  urge  as  necessary,  may  contribute  to  the  attainment
of  proofs  which,  when  attained,  may  have  an  objective  and  independent
value.  If  so,  now  is  the  time  to  try  earnestly  to  attain  them,  and
to  reinforce  that  alleged  evidence  to  a  continuing  and  ever-present
intercourse  between  the  living  and  the  dead.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


Supplement.] On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


549


SUPPLEMENT.


ON  A  SERIES  OF  EXPERIMENTS  AT  PESARO.


I.

Introduction.

I  propose  to  give  some  account  of  a  series  of  experiments  which
have  been  carried  on  during  a  number  of  years  at  Pesaro,  a  small  town
on  the  east  coast  of  Italy,  a  little  to  the  north  of  Ancona.  These
experiments  are  partly  concerned  with  automatic  writing,  partly  with
spirit-rapping,  and  partly  with  hypnotism.

It  will  conduce  to  clearness  if  some  information  is  first  given  as  to
the  persons  concerned,  and  the  materials  from  which  my  account  of  the
experiments  is  drawn.  Professor  Rossi-Pagnoni  is  Director  of  the
Ginnasio  or  Public  School  at  Pesaro.  In  the  year  1871  he  was  led,  by
circumstances  which  need  not  be  here  detailed,  to  take  an  interest  in
Spiritualism,  and  began  daily  to  practise  automatic  writing  under  the
advice  and  direction  of  a  friend  who  had  frequently  obtained  communi-
cations from  spirits,  as  he  believed,  by  that  means.

In  his  experiments  in  automatic  writing  Professor  Rossi  used
what  is,  I  believe,  the  most  usual  method.  He  held  a  lead  pencil  in
his  hand,  allowing  its  point  to  rest  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  but  not  touch-
ing the  table  with  his  arm,  and  waited  for  results.  For  the  first
43  days  of  experiment  the  movements  of  the  pencil  were  incoherent
and  unintelligible.  On  the  44th,  a  name  was  written ;  and  from
that  time  Onwards  the  facility  and  distinctness  of  the  writing  increased,
and  communications  of  considerable  length  were  often  obtained.

These  experiments,  and  also  experiments  in  table-rapping,  which
had  been  tried  by  Professor  Rossi  and  a  small  circle  of  friends,  were
discontinued  in  the  year  1877,  owing  to  the  increased  claims  of  scholastic
duties  upon  the  Professor's  time.  In  1886  he  found  sufficient  leisure  to
resume  them  ;  and  he  was  then  joined  by  some  former  members  of  the
circle,  and  also  by  others.  Among  these  was  Dr.  Moroni,  who  has
been  for  30  years  Municipal  Doctor  at  Pesaro.  Dr.  Moroni  had
been  in  the  habit  of  hypnotising  a  woman  named  Isabella  Carzetti ;
and  hypnotic  experiments  with  this  subject  were  added  to  the  others.
The  hypnotic  experiments  were  at  first  directed  towards  the  observa-
tion of  physiological  phenomena. After  a  time,  however,  results


550


On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [supplement.


believed  to  be  spiritualistic  were  obtained  ;  and  spiritualistic  seances,
with  Carzetti  in  the  hypnotic  state  as  a  speaking  medium,  are  con-
tinued regularly  at  the  present  time.

In  the  year  1877  Professor  Rossi  published  a  pamphlet  entitled,
Intorno  ai  Fenoyneni  Spiritici,  Lettera  all'  Onorando  Signor  Conte
Terenzio  Mamiani.  This  contains,  besides  other  matter,  reports  of
the  more  striking  results  obtained  in  the  earlier  series  of  experiments,
which  were  concerned  chiefly  with  automatic  writing.  A  second
pamphlet,  entitled,  Alcuni  Saggi  di  Medianitd,  Ipnotica,  was  published
in  1888,  by  Professor  Rossi  and  Dr.  Moroni.  This  contains  accounts
of  hypnotic  seances  witli  Carzetti  as  medium.  Professor  Rossi  has  in
his  possession  a  number  of  documents  beai-ing  on  the  occurrences  and
experiments  related  in  these  two  pamphlets.  They  are  written  and
signed  by  persons  concerned,  and  confirm,  supplement,  or  correct  the
published  accounts.  Copies  of  these  documents  have  been  sent  by
Professor  Rossi  to  Mr.  Myers,  with  a  legal  certificate  that  the  copies
are  correct,  and  that  the  originals  bears  the  signatures  of  persons  who
are  known  and  respected.

In  November  last  I  paid  a  short  visit  to  Pesaro.  I  was  most
kindly  and  cordially  received  by  Professor  Rossi  and  his  friends,  and
was  present  at  three  stances,  with  Carzetti  as  medium  and  Dr.  Moroni
as  hypnotiser.  I  took  notes  of  everything  of  importance  that  occurred
at  these  seances ;  and  also  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  and  making
extracts  from  the  records  of  previous  stances,  and  other  documents.
Among  these  were  the  original  automatic  manuscripts,  which  have
been  preserved  from  the  beginning.

These,  then,  with  the  addition  of  several  letters  from  Professor  Rossi
to  Mr.  Myers  and  myself,  are  the  materials  for  the  following  account  of
the  more  important  experiments.

II.

Automatic  Writing.
The  following  case, in  which a  similar  message  was  received
independently,  in  automatic  writing,  by  Professor  Rossi  and  a  friend,
is  related  by  the  former  (Letter-  to  Mamiani,  p.  130) : —

One  evening  my  hand  unexjjectedly  wrote  the  name  of  a  very  dear  friend
who  was  dead.  He  gave  me  news  of  himself  which  was  far  from  joyful.  Some
evenings  later  he  returned,  expressing  himself  to  the  same  effect.  I  spoke
of  the  matter  in  confidence  to  a  friend,  whose  afFection  for  the  deceased  was  no
less  than  mine,  and  whom  I  knew,  from  some  words  which  I  had  chanced  to
hear,  to  be  of  like  inclination  with  myself,  and  desirous  to  make  trial  of
automatic  writing.  Some  time  jjassed,  and  one  evening,  while  I  was  evoking
my  accustomed  spirit  [i.e.,  another  friend  whose  name  frequently  appeared
in  the  scripts],  my  hand  instead  wrote  the  name  of  the  dead  friend
mentioned above, who told me that liis condition was  happily


Supplement.] On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


551


changed.  The  following  morning  (December  10th),  as  I  was  walking,
I  met  in  the  Piazza  the  friend  to  whom  I  had  confided  the  i^revious  conx-  •
munications  of  the  same  spirit.  He  no  sooner  saw  me  than  he  asked,  "  How
long  is  it  since  you  had  communication  with  so-and-so  ?  "  "  J.  ji/to^jos  he
came  yesterday  evening  and  said  that  his  state  was  changed  for  the  better."
*'Know,"  replied  my  friend,  "that  yesterday  evening  he  came  to  my  house,
too,  and  told  me  the  same  thing.  I  had  set  myself  down  for  the  first  time
to  make  a  trial,  without  evoking  anyone.  Before  telling  you  of  this  I  asked
you  that  question,  because,  as  this  communication  of  mine  did  not  agree
with  your  previous  message,  I  suspected  that  either  you  or  I  had  been
deceived."  We  showed  one  another  the  scripts.  At  an  interval  of  two  or
three  hours  we  had  both  received  the  same  unexpected  announcement.  My
friend  wrote  with  his  own  hand  an  account  of  the  occurrence,  and  gave  it  to
me.

In  confirmation  of  this  account  are  two  documents,  signed  by
Ferdinando  Spadoni.  The  first  is  apparently  the  narration  referred  to
by  Professor  Rossi. It  bears  no  date,  and  runs  as  follows  : —

On  Saturday,  December  9th,  1871,  at  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  having
desired  to  try  for  the  first  time  to  write  by  spiritualistic  means,  I  did  not
expect  any  positive  result  from  that  ex23eriment.  However,  when  I  had  set
myself  to  the  attempt,  without  any  invocation,  to  my  extreme  surprise  I
saw  produced  with  wonderful  rajjidity  the  name  of  Alessandro  Paterni,  and
in  the  second  line,  "  God  has  pardoned  me."

(Signed)  F.  Spadoni.

The  second  document  is  dated  December  26th,  1888.  Ferdinando
Spadoni  states  that  he  is  "  the  friend  "  mentioned  in  Professor  Rossi's
account  of  the  occurrence,  and  that  the  account  is  perfectly  true.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  case  Spadoni  knew  the  name  of  the
friend,  and  the  purport  of  the  former  message  :  that  the  second  message,
though  said  by  Rossi  to  be  unexpected,  was  not  an  unnatural  sequel  to
the  first :  that  the  wording  of  the  messages  was  not  the  same :  ^  and
that  the  coincidence  of  time  was  not  quite  exact.  Rossi's  message  was
received  at  8  p.m.,  and  the  interval,  therefore,  was  four  hours.^

The  next  case  is  somewhat  similar  in  character  (Letter  to  Mamiani,
p.  131):-

In  April,  1872,  a  friend  asked  Rossi  to  evoke  the  spirit  of  a  relation,
formerly  living  near  Modena,  who  had  been  dead  about  two  years.  "  I  had
never  known  her,"  says  Rossi,  "and  my  friend  told  me  what  I  was  to  ask
her  on  his  account.  I  did  as  I  was  asked,  and  after  the  answer  was  obtained,
to  my  great  astonishment  (for  a  similar  thing  had  never  happened  before)  I
felt  my  hand  impelled  to  draw,  one  after  the  other,  two  flowers,  with  their
little  leaves. After  this  addio  was  written,  and  the  movement  ceased.  The

1  The  message  written  by  Spadoni's  hand  was  "  Dio  mi  ha  perdonato  "  ;  while
Rossi's  hand  wrote,  in  answer  to  the  question  "  Stai  bene?  ",  "  Assai  bene  ;  in  sesta."
-  These  facts  appeared  from  the  original  record,  which  I  saw  at  Pesaro.


552


On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [Supplement.


following  day  I  took  the  answer  to  my  friend  and  told  him  of  the  curious
drawings.  '  Do  not  be  surprised, '  said  he.  '  Know  that  she  was  very  fond
of  drawing,  and  also  every  time  that  she  writes  by  my  hand,  she  makes  me
draw  something.'  "

This  account  is  confirmed  by  a  document  dated  December  28th,  1888,  and
signed  by  Cesare  Perseguiti,  barrister,  who  states  that  he  is  the  friend  men-
tioned by  Rossi,  and  that  the  account  of  the  incident  is  perfectly  true  in  all
particulars.

With  regard  to  the  character  of  the  writing  produced,'  Rossi  says
(^Letter  to  Mamiani  p.  133) : —

It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  say  that  my  ordinary  hand  writing  is  ugly
and  always  of  one  pattern.  Nevertheless,  when  writing  as  a  medium,  I
have  had  very  various  forms  of  caligraphy  according  as  various  beings  made
communication.  When  these  beings  presented  themselves  again,  often
unexpectedly  and  after  a  long  interval,  they  reproduced  their  former
handwriting.  Moreover,  in  that  uncomfortable  position  of  hand  and  arm  I
have  had  caligraphic  forms  so  perfect  that  I  could  not  reproduce  them  when
writing  at  ease.

This  statement  by  itself  is  too  vague  to  be  of  much  value  as
evidence ;  but  the  following  documents  confirm  it,  and  give  more
precise  information  as  to  the  persons  whose  writing  was  reproduced,,
and  as  to  the  degree  of  likeness  obtained  : —

I.  Pesaro,  January  1st,  1889.
To  Professor  Rossi-Pagnoni : —

My  dear  friend  Ercole  Artazii,  who  has  now  been  dead  for  some  years,
was  a  good  writer,  and  a  son  of  Luigi  Artazu,  municipal  accountant  and  at
one  time  public  teacher  of  caligraphy,  who  died  long  since.  I  remember
very  well  that  one  day,  in  conversation,  my  friend  Ercole  assured  me  that
he  had  not  before  believed  in  Spiritualism,  but  that  once  he  went  to  your
house  and  you  showed  him  certain  communications  written  in  pencil :  that
you  said  you  had  received  these  communications  when  evoking  the  spirit  of
his  father  Luigi,  no  other  person  being  present ;  that  in  those  pages  he  not
only  recogiused  the  elegant  form  of  his  father's  handwriting,  very  different
from  your  writing,  which  is  anything  but  beautiful  ;  but  that  the  flourish
made  underneath  the  signature  was  exactly  that  which  his  father  used  ;  and
that  he  himself,  who  had  for  so  long  had  it  before  his  eyes,  would  have  been
unable  to  reproduce  it,  at  any  rate  with  equal  rapidity  and  freedom.

•  (Signed)  Giro  Giovaonoli

(Telegraphic  Official).

This  evidence  is  second-hand,  but  it  is  the  best  obtainable,  as
Ercole  Artazu  is  dead.  It  is  worth  reproducing,  if  it  be  considered
in  connection  with  the  other  documents  which  bear  on  the  same
point : —

II.  Pesaro,  Jatiimry  1st,  1889.

I  have  a  lively  recollection  of  having  come  sometimes  to  your  house  in
1873,  to  take  part  in  spiritualistic  experiments  with  the  table  and  with


Supplement.] On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


553


writing.  One  evening,  after  some  experiments  with  the  table,  I  asked  youi
to  summon  my  dear  writing-master,  Luigi  Brunetti,  to  write.  He  had  at
that  time  been  dead  for  some  years.  .  .  .  You  set  yourself  to  try  the
experiment,  the  pencil  resting  vertically  upon  the  paper,  and  your  wrist  and
elbow  raised.  When  the  motion  of  the  hand,  which  you  assured  us  was
spontaneous,  began,  there  appeared,  after  the  signature  of  Brunetti,  some
lines  of  writing  of  various  sizes.  The  first  was  extremely  small — so  that  a
magnifying  glass  was  necessary  to  read  it  and  to  see  its  great  precision.  The
following  lines  were  of  middle  size,  and  the  last  large.  This,  I  recollect,
was  a  beautiful  verse.  I  remember  that  I  immediately  bore  witness  to  those
present — in  accordance  with  the  truth — that,  specially  in  the  larger  charac-
ter, the  manner  of  writing  and  the  hand  of  my  dear  master  were  clearly  to  be
seen.

So  much  for  the  truth,  which  now,  also,  I  willingly  confirm.

(Signed)  Cleto  Masini.

Professor  of  Writing  and  Book-keeping  at  the  Royal
Technical  School  of  Pesaro.

When  I  was  at  Pesaro  I  saw  the  original  MS.  here  referred  to.
The  writing  was  pretty  and  regulai',  and  entirely  different  from
Professor  Rossi's  usual  hand.

Ill: — This  also  is  at  second-hand,  the  original  witness  being  now
dead : —

Pesaro,  January  2'iid,  1889.  .
I,  the  undersigned,  well  remember  having  heard  several  times  from  my
father,  Pietro  Romei,  who  is  now  dead,  the  following  account :  He  once
went  to  the  house  of  Professor  Rossi,  who  showed  him,  amongst  others,
certain  communications  which  he  (the  Professor)  said  he  had  received  from
the  spirit  of  Dr.  Roberto  Trafarti,  who  had  long  been  dead.  My  father
observed  not  only  the  complete  resemblance  of  those  signatures  to  one
another,  but  also  their  entire  correspondence  with  the  actual  signatures  of  the
said  Doctor,  with  which  my  father,  as  a  chemist,  was  well  acquainted.  He
observed,  further,  below  the  signature  a  reproduction  of  the  flourish  [or
device — la  cifni]  generally  used  by  him.  He  told  this  to  the  Professor,  and,
in  confirmation  of  what  he  said,  invited  him  to  go  to  his  pharmacy  to  se&
some  prescriptions  of  that  Doctor's,  which  were  still  preserved.  In
confirmation  of  the  truth,  I  add  my  sig-nature.

Romei  Romolo,  Chemist.

IV.  Pesaro,  Jatmary  2nd,  1889.

I  comply  with  your  wish  and  willingly  declare,  as  I  have  a  lively
recollection  of  the  fact,  that  towards  the  end  of  1873  I  had  occasion  to  go  to-
your  house.  .  .  .  You  showed  me  certain  communications,  written  in
pencil,  which  you  said  you  had  received  from  the  spirit  of  the  lamented
Signer  Alessandro  Paterni,  uncle  of  my  wife.  I  said  that  the  writing  of  the
name  and  surname  seemed  to  me  very  like  the  real  signature  of  my  deceased
connexion.  You  asserted  that  you  had  never  seen  his  signature,  and,  in
fact,  it  was  very  probable  that  it  was  entirely  unknown  to  you.

Pietro  Bonini,  Captain.


554  On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [Supplement.


In  the  following  cases  messages,  apparently  telepathic,  were
received  by  means  of  raps  and  automatic  writing.

(1)  [LefMr  to  Mamiani,  p.  139): —

On  November  14th,  1873,  Professor  Rossi  was  correcting  the  proofs  of  a
pamphlet,  when  he  heard  a  rap  of  a  kind  which  he  believed  to  be  spiritualistic.
In  consetjuence,  he  sat  down  to  write  automatically,  and  was  advised  to  omit
some  pages  from  the  pamphlet  by  a  message  jDrofessing  to  come  from  the
spirit  of  a  person  whose  opinion  he  respected.  Wishing  to  know  whether
the  message  really  came  from  the  source  from  which  it  purported  to  come,
he  went  to  a  friend,  who  was  a  very  good  medium.  "  Without  informing  him
precisely  of  the  matter  concerned,  I  told  him  that  a  short  time  ago  I  had
had  a  certain  spirit  which  had  given  me  advice  with  regard  to
something  I  was  printing.  I  affirm  on  my  honour  that  I  did  not  explain
myself  more  fully.  I  added  that  the  advice  appeared  to  me  good  and  wise  ;
but  in  order  to  assure  myself  of  the  identity  of  the  spirit,  I  begged  him  to
evoke  it  by  himself,  that  he  might  question  it  on  this  point."  The  friend
undertook  to  send  the  answer  by  8  o'clock  next  morning,  and  Rossi  went
home.  Half -an-hour  afterwards  he  heard  another  rajj,  sat  down  again  to
write,  and  received  the  following  words,  with  the  same  name  as  before  :  —

"  You  were  deceived  in  my  name,  and  you  did  well  to  seek  the  aid  of
your  friend,  who  will  confirm  the  truth  to  you  to-morrow. "

Next  morning  Rossi  received  from  his  friend  a  note,  containing  the
answer  given  by  the  spirit  :  "  It  was  not  I  who  communicated  with  Rossi,
but  another  spirit,  whom  Rossi  ought  not  to  obey."  Words  were  added,
clearly  allusive  to  the  special  advice,  which  was  unknown  to  the  friend.
Rossi  then  compared  the  handwriting  of  the  two  messages  which  he  had
received,  and  in  the  first  of  the  two  found  differences  from  the  usual  hand-
writing of  the  spirit.

The  accuracy  (jf  this  account  is  confirmed  by  a  letter  from  the  friend  in
(question,  dated  January  2nd,  1889.

Here  we  have  a  similar  communication,  obtained  by  Rossi  and  his
friend.  The  friend,  liowever,  was  aware  that  Rossi  had  some  doubts
as  to  the  genuineness  of  tlie  original  message  ;  and  consequently  it
is  not  surprising  that  each  sliould  receive  a  message  confirming  those
doubts.  The  words  of  tliat  part  of  the  friend's  message  which  alluded
to  matters  unknown  to  liim  do  not  appear  in  the  printed  account.  It
is,  tlierefore,  impossible  for  us  to  form  an  independent  judgment  as  to
whether  they  can  have  been  suggested  by  guess,  or  inference  from  the
facts  of  the  case  so  far  as  they  had  been  communicated  to  the  friend.

(2)  {Letter'  to  Mamiani,  p.  143): —

On  November  21st,  1873,  about  half-past  10  in  the  evening,  Rossi  was  in
his  study.  He  had  been  correcting  proofs  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  was
tired  and  rather  cold.  In  consequence  he  intended,  when  his  work  was
finished,  not  to  go  to  the  cafe,  as  was  then  his  custom  almost  every  evening
about  11,  but  to  warm  himself  a  little  with  a  walk  through  the  streets.  He
tlien  perceived  two  slight  but  very  distinct  raps  close  to  him  on  a  side  door


Supplement.] Oil  ci  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


555


opening  into  an  inner  room  in  which  there  was  no  one.  He  paid  no  attention
to  these,  trying  to  persuade  himself  that  they  were  dvie  to  natural  causes.
Half-an-hour  afterwards  he  had  finished  his  work  and  was  going  out ;  but  at
the  moment  when  he  had  his  hand  upon  the  door  of  his  rooms,  to  shut  it
after  him,  he  heard  a  loud  knock  upon  it  as  if  given  with  the  fist.  He  had
no  doubt  that  this  was  spiritualistic  in  character,  and  returning  at  once  tO'
his  room,  sat  down  to  write.  He  fully  expected  to  receive  a  warning  against
going  out  that  evening  for  fear  of  some  dangerous  encounter.  Instead,  how-
ever, of  any  such  warning  the  following  message  appeared:  "  My  sincere
friendship  leads  me  to  warn  you  that  you  are  desired  by  S.^  ('•''.,  Stanislao
Cecchi)  :  go,  therefore,  to  see  him."  This  message  was  signed  with  the
name  of  a  dead  person  in  whose  name  messages  had  Ijeen  obtained  on  other
occasions.  Rossi  considered  it  extremely  improljable  that  Cecchi  (an
acquaintance  with  whom  he  was  not  then  intimate)  would  wish  to  see  him  ;
but  went  at  once  to  the  cafe  where  he  was  generally  to  he  found  at  tliat  hour.
As  he  approached,  he  saw  Stanislao  and  some  friends  coming  out  of  the  cafe.
"  He  had  no  sooner  seen  me,"  continues  Rossi,  "  than  he  came  to  meet  me,
and  said  he  had  need  of  a  certain  favour  from  me.  Knowing  from
some  conversations  which  I  had  had  with  him  that  he  was  a  disbeliever
(in  Spiritualism),  I  caught  at  the  opportunity  and  answered  that  I
would  willingly do  him  the  service,  on  condition  that  he  W(juld  at  once

accompany  me  to  my  house  We  went  to  my  house  together,

we  entered  into  the  room  together,  and  I  showed  him  on  my  table  the

message  which  had  caused  me  to  go  in  search  of  him  He

subsequently  gave  an  account  of  the  occurrence  to  some  friends,  though
without  adopting  my  explanation,  and  so  far  as  he  was  able,  loyally  bore
witness  to  its  truth."

Stanislao  Cecchi  is  now  dead,  and  therefore  direct  confirmation  of
tliis  account  cannot  be  obtained.  A  sister  of  his,  Clelia  by  name,  is
the  wife  of  Dr.  Luigi  Frigerio,  Director  of  the  Lunatic  Asylum  at
Alessandria.  Dr.  Frigerio  was  living  at  Pesaro  in  1873,  and  Rossi,
therefore,  applied  to  him  to  know  whether  he  or  his  wife  would
confirm  the  account. Dr.  Frigerio  writes  as  follows  : —

December  27th,  1888.
Clelia  remembers  to  have  heard  from  Stanislao  the  strange  event  of  which
you  write  to  me.  She  does  not,  however,  remember  the  particulars  after
10  years  [as  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  15].  I  remember  that  Stanislao  talked
to  me  about  it  in  those  days,  and  that  when  he  was  asked  with  reference
thereto,  he  replied  that  it  was  impossible  to  doubt  your  convictions. .  .

Frigerio.

The  second  confirmation  is  more  precise ;  but  in  estimating  its
value  as  evidence,  it  should  be  remembered  that  it  is  the  record  of  a
conversation i-etained in memory for  15 years,  and that  Rossi's

^  I  believe  that  the  name,  and  not  merely  the  initial,  was  written.  The  initial
only  is  given  in  the  printed  account,  because  at  that  time  Professor  Rossi  was  not  at.
liberty  to  publish  the  name.


556


On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [Supplement.


account  of  the  occurrence,  printed  in  1877,  may  have  influenced  to
some  extent  the  recollections  of  the  narrator.

Pesaro,  February  8th,  1889.

Dear  Professor,  — According  to  your  desire,  I  prepare  with  pleasure  to
narrate  the  inexplicable  occurrence  which  happened  between  you  and  our
excellent  friend,  the  engineer,  Stanislao  Cecchi,  of  good  memory,  more  than
once  told  by  him  at  that  time  to  me  and  to  others,  with  increasing
wonder.  I  cannot  remember  the  precise  time  at  which  the  event  happened,
but  I  think  about  1873,  that  is  15  years  ago,  when  our  deceased  friend,  you,
and  others,  used  to  frequent  the  Cafe  Masetti.

One  morning  Cecchi  had  no  sooner  seen  me  in  the  Piazza  than  with  a
very  serious  manner  (unusual  with  him  in  speaking  of  such  matters,  in
which,  as  he  used  openly  to  say,  he  did  not  in  the  least  believe)  he  said  to
me,  "Do  you  know,  yesterday  evening,  there  liajjpened  tome  .
really  curious  ...  a  thing  .  .  .  he's  lucky  who  can  explain
it.  .  .  .  Yesterday  I  had  it  in  my  mind  to  go  to  Professor  Rossi's
house  for  some  business  of  mine,  but  afterwards  I  put  aside  the  thought,  with
the  idea  of  seeing  him  in  the  evening.  As  I  came  out  of  the  Cafe  Masetti
late  in  the  evening  with  some  friends,  I  saw  him  coming  towards  me,  and  as  I
naturally  went  to  meet  him,  I  observed  upon  his  face  a  certain  expression  of
satisfaction,  as  if  at  something  which  happened  according  to  his  expectation.
I  begged  him  eagerly  to  do  for  me  a  little  piece  of  work,  for  the  marriage  of
a  near  relation  of  mine.  After  some  hesitation  Rossi  agreed  to  my  request
on  condition  that  I  would  go  at  once  with  him  to  his  house,  where  he  wished
to  show  me  something  which  would  surprise  me.  Unwillingly  I  consented.
We  went  at  once  to  his  house,  and  without  speaking  he  gave  me  to  read  a
short  piece  of  writing  which  he  said  he  had  received  from  a  familiar  spirit  of
his.  In  this  he  was  told  to  go  instantly  in  search  of  me,  since  I  wished  to
see  him.  .  .  .  Observe  also  that  I  had  not  indicated  my  wish  to  see
Professor  Rossi  in  any  way  tu  any  living  soul."

This  event,  which  Cecchi  at  that  time  told  more  than  once  to  me  and  to
others,  made  a  very  vivid  impression,  the  more  so  that  we  all  knew  what  a
character  for  truthfulness,  and  I  may  almost  say  for  rugged  sincerity,  our
excellent  friend  bore.  Sometimes,  when  discussing  this  matter  with  friends
at  the  cafe  he  ended  thus  :  "I  don't  believe  anything,  but  here  one  cannot
but  say  '  a  fact's  a  fact.'  "

I  hope  I  have  thus  satisfied  you.  Professor,  and  I  am  glad  to  have  been
able  to  do  so,  since  I  still  preserve  a  very  clear  recollection  of  the  facts.

Carlo  Cineili.

(Cavaliere  Carlo  Cinelli,  Member  of  the  Communal  Council,  &c.)

The  following  is  a  summary  of  Professor  Rossi's  account  of  another
occurrence,  of  a  very  similar  character  : —
(.3)  (Letter  to  Mamiani,  p.  144.)

On  the  evening  of  September  .3rd,  1875,  Rossi  had  been  at  the  cafe  till  8,
and  had  then  gone  home,  not  meaning  to  go  out  again  that  evening.  After
an  hour  he  heard  two  light  raps  of  the  kind  which  he  was  accustomed  to
consider  spiritualistic,  and  jjlaced  his  hand  with  a  pencil  on  the  sheet  of
paper  in  front  of  him. The  following  message  was  written  :  "lamA.O."


Supplement.] On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


557


(the  name  of  a  friend  who  had  been  dead  about  a  year),  "and  I  wished  to  warn
you  to  return  to  the  cafe,  where  your  presence  is  desired."  Rossi  noted  on
the  sheet  of  paper  the  hour  and  minute  and  went  out.  On  the  way  to  the
■cafe  he  met  Signor  Gaetano  Tosi,  a  barrister,  now  filling  a  judicial  p(jst
(Cancelliere  della  Reale  Corte  di  Cassazione)  at  Palermo,  and  Sign<jr
Zaniboni,  director  of  the  Post  Office  at  Pesaro.  Tosi  at  once  called  to  him
by  name,  and  said,  "  I  was  looking  for  you.  I  start  for  Messina  to-morrow,
and  wished  to  say  good-bye.  I  have  been  at  the  cafe  for  lialf-an-hour  till
just  now,  waiting  for  you  to  join  us,  and  I  have  inquired  about  you  also
from  the  cafe-keeper,"  Rossi  asked  his  two  friends  to  come  to  his  house
for  a  moment.  They  came,  and  went  with  him  into  the  room,  where  they
read  the  "  telegram,"  which  was  dated  four  or  five  minutes  before.

Signor  Tosi  wi-ites  under  the  date  November  11th,  1888,  partly  confirm-
ing and  partly  correcting  this  account.  He  says,  referring  to  the  passage
summarised  above  :  ' '  The  account  which  you  gave  in  the  Letter  to  Maniiani
is  not  absolutely  correct,  if  I  remember  right,  for  I  have  not  got  it  with  me
at  this  moment.  ...  I  will  correct  the  errors  by  narrating  the  facts
afresh.

"  On  September  4th,  1875,  I  had  to  leave  Pesaro  with  my  family  for
Naples  and  Palermo.  The  day  before  I  wished  to  take  leave  of  all  my
friends.  I  could  not  see  you  in  the  day,  but  I  hoj^ed  to  meet  you  as  usual  at
the  club.  The  evening  arrived,  and  at  a  rather  late  hour  I  found  myself
in  the  company  of  the  lamented  Cavaliere  Zaniboni.  I  asked  if  he  had  seen
you,  and  he  replied  that  he  had  not.  I  said  that  I  wished  to  go  to  your
house  to  say  good-bye,  and  Zaniboni  offered  to  accompany  me.  We  came
to  your  house  together.  .  i  .  We  knocked,  and  Angelica  (the  servant)
opened  the  door  to  us,  remaining  at  the  top  of  the  stair  with  the  light.
While  we  were  mounting  the  stair  you  appeared  upon  it  ;  and  it  was  then
that  you  made  us  come  into  your  room,  and  showed  us  the  so-called  '  tele-
gram '  of  four  or  five  minutes  before,  by  which  you  were  told  to  go  to  the
cafe  (where  Zaniboni  and  I  in  fact  were),  because  your  presence  was  desired.
It  was  then  that  I  said  that  if  I  had  been  with  you  a  little  longer  you  would
have  turned  my  head.  This  I  said  on  account  of  another  circumstance  also,
which  perhaps  you  do  not  remember.  I  did  not  find  it  mentioned  in  your
letter  to  Mamiani,  and  from  that  I  conclude  that  you  have  confused  a  little
two  separate  occurrences.

"  When  we  were  living  together  in  the  Palazzo  Mamiani,  you  will  re-
member that  almost  every  evening  after  midnight  we  were  at  the  club,  and
went  home  together.  One  evening,  in  1873  or  1874  (I  do  not  remember  the
exact  date),  I  had  in  vain  waited  for  you  at  the  club  till  about  one  in  the
morning,  and  started  home  alone.  As  I  was  passing  through  the  Piazza  my
name  was  called  by  Cesare  Perseguiti,  a  barrister,  who  was  at  the  door  of  the
cafe  underneath  the  Palazzo  Municipale.  He  said  that  he  had  been
waiting  there  about  an  hour,  having  urgent  need  to  speak  with  you,  and
hoping  to  see  you  pass  with  me.  I  replied  that,  contrary  to  our  custom,  I
had  not  seen  you,  and  went  (jn  my  way.  ...  A  little  afterwards  .
I  met  you.  Being  surprised  at  your  coming  out  so  late  I  asked  the  reason,
and  you  answered  that  you  were  working  and  had  not  wished  to  go  out,  but
that  you  had  been  compelled  to  do  so,  because  a  spirit  had  just  warned  you


558  On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [Supplement.


that  a  friend  of  yours  was  waiting  for  you  at  the  cafe.  I  was  astonished,
because  I  had  not  told  you  that  Perseguiti  was  actually  looking  for  you  and
waiting  for  you  at  the  cafe,  and  only  told  you  of  it  afterwards. . .  ."

In  a  subsequent  letter  Rossi  says  that  he  may,  perhaps,  have  con-
fused the  two  occasions  mentioned  by  Signor  Tosi,  and  that  this  may
account  for  the  discrepancy  as  to  the  place  where  he  met  Tosi  and
Zaniboni.

We  have,  then,  two  cases,  and  perhaps  three,  in  which  Rossi  was
induced  to  leave  his  house  by  an  automatic  message  telling  him  to  go
and  meet  a  friend.  The  first  question  which  occurs  is,  "  Had  Rossi
any  reason  to  suppose  that  the  friend  wanted  to  see  him  ? "

In  the  first  case,  that  of  Cecchi,  we  have  Rossi's  direct  statement
that  "  the  last  thing  which  would  come  into  his  mind,  and  the  most
unlikely,  was  that  Cecchi  should  be  looking  for  him."  In  the  second
case,  Rossi  must  probably  have  known  of  his  friend's  approaching
departure,  and  would  naturally  infer  that  he  would  wish  to  see  him.
In  the  third  case,  we  have  no  information,  and  no  means  of  judging.

The  value  of  the  second  case  as  evidence  for  thought-transference
or  spirit-messages  is  thus  much  diminished,  for  if  the  thought  that
Tosi  wished  to  see  him  was  present  even  indefinitely  in  Rossi's  mind,
it  might  be  produced  in  automatic  writing.  It  may,  however,  be  said
that  the  two  raps  which  he  heard  could  not  be  produced  in  this  way.
I  imagine  that  the  same  cause  which  on  this  hypothesis  produced  the
automatic  message,  might  also  produce  an  auditory  hallucination.
But  if  we  are  to  accept  Tosi's  corrections  of  Rossi's  account,  they  may,,
perhaps,  be  explained  in  another  way.  Tosi  says  :  "  We  knocked  at  the
door,"  meaning  clearly  the  street-door  at  the  foot  of  the  staircase.  It
is  not  impossible  that  Rossi,  intent  upon  his  work,  may  have  mistaken
even  so  familiar  a  sound  as  a  knock  at  the  street-door  for  spirit-
rappings.  A  little  delay  on  tlie  part  of  the  servant  in  opening  the
door  would  give  time  for  Rossi  to  write  the  message,  and  meet  them  on
the  stair.  The  "  four  or  five  minutes  "  which  elapsed  between  the
writing  of  the  message  and  the  entry  of  the  visitors  is  not  a  serious
obstacle  to  this  view,  for  the  vagueness  of  the  expression  shows
that  the  interval  was  not  precisely  noted.

The  first  case,  that  of  Stanislao  Cecchi,  is  much  stronger.  The
rappings  were  repeated  twice ;  the  second  time  loud.  The  message  was
entirely  unexpected  ;  and  there  is  confiiTuation  of  it,  though  necessarily
at  second-hand  and  after  a  long  interval.

If  the  facts  are  accepted  as  accurate,  I  think  there  are  only  two
admissible  explanations — telepathic  and  spiritualistic ;  and  if  the
former  of  these  be  adopted,  there  is  some  difficulty  with  regard  to  the
raps.

It  should  be  mentioned,  further,  that  Rossi  states  that  a  message  of


Supplement.] On  ct  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  559

this  nature,  spontaneously  given,  has  never  proved  false  in  his
experience.

III.

Hypnotic  Experiments,  Apparently  Showing  Thought-Transference
AND  Suggestion  at  a  Distance.

I  now  come  to  the  second  class  of  experiments,  viz.,  those  concerned
with  hypnotism.

Only  one  subject  has  been  employed.  Her  name  is  Isabella  Carzetti ;
but  she  is  generally  called  Aminta  instead  of  Isabella.  She  was  born
in  1845,  and  in  1870  she  came  to  Pesaro  as  servant  to  a  family  there.
In  1883  she  left  service,  and  since  then  has  lived  with  an  aunt,  working
as  a  sempstress  and  laundress.  Professor  Rossi  and  Dr.  Moroni  describe
her  as  fairly  intelligent,  but  uneducated.  They  say  that  she  does  not
read  newspapers,  but  has  read  a  few  novels.  In  1871  she  had  frequent
attacks  of  convulsions,  and  in  1873  a  cataleptic  stroke,  caused  by  fright
at  an  earthquake.  Dr.  Moroni  treated  her  successfully  with  hypnotism,
and  in  the  course  of  his  treatment  observed  other  remarkable  phenomena.
Of  these,  apparently,  no  systematic  account  has  been  preserved  ;  but
they  seem  to  have  been  of  the  nature  of  clairvoyance.  Dr.  Moroni
continued  to  employ  her  as  a  clairvoyant  for  the  purpose  of  diagnosis,
after  hypnotism  had  ceased  to  be  necessary  as  medical  treatment.

In  1886  Dr.  Moroni  renewed  these  experiments,  which  had  then
been  discontinued  for  some  years,  in  company  with  Professor  Rossi  and
the  other  members  of  his  circle.  The  experiments  were  at  first  physio-
logical, but  after  a  time  assumed  a  spiritualistic  character.  Professor
Rossi,  Dr.  Moroni,  and  their  fiiends  continue  to  hold  seances  regularly
once  a  \veek,  with  Carzetti  as  medium.

Among  the  accounts  of  these  experiments  there  are  several
incidents  which  give  evidence  for  the  possession  of  clairvoyant  powers
by  the  medium.

On  June  10th,  1886, ^  at  the  first  of  this  second  series  of  experiments,
Carzetti  came  to  Rossi's  house  for  the  first  time.  She  saw  nothing  but  the
entrance-hall,  in  which  she  was  hypnotised.  In  answer  to  questions,  she  said
that  between  the  hall  and  the  other  rooms  there  was  a  narrow  passage,  but
not  on  the  same  level  as  the  hall,  since  there  was  an  ascent  from  ib  of  five
steps,  two  of  masonry  and  three  of  wood.  Then  she  said  that  in  the  last
room  she  saw  against  the  wall  an  arm-chair,  and,  in  the  middle,  a  little  table.
Wlien  asked  the  shape  of  the  table,  she  said  it  was  round,  and  was  used  for
the  evocation  of  spirits. The  whole  of  this  description  was  correct.

On  August  6th,  of  the  same  year,  she  described  correctly  the  malady  of  a

1  Alcuni  Saggi,  p.  5.

'  2o


560


On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesat  '0.  [Supplement.


person  whose  portrait  was  placed  before  her  ;  and  at  the  same  seance  she
described  the  appearance  of  the  writer  of  a  letter  which  was  given  to  her.^

In  several  cases  the  medium,  at  a  distance  from  the  table  at  which
some  of  the  company  were  sitting,  indicated  beforehand  the  nature  of
the  communication  which  would  be  made  by  raps.

Thus  at  the  seance"  of  June  10th,  1886,^  after  describing  the  shape  of
the  table,  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  in  a  room  divided  by  a  passage
from  an  entrance  hall  in  which  the  medium  was  sitting,  she  said  that  it  was
used  for  evoking  spirits.  She  added,  "There  is  now  in  that  room  a  youth
who  demands  to  be  evoked,  and  begs  you  to  go  there."  Moroni  and  another
remained  with  the  medium,  while  Rossi  and  two  others  went  into  the  room.
The  two  sat  at  the  table,  and  a  commuidcation  came  from  the  spirit  of  a
young  man  who  had  been  dead  some  months.

In  this  case  those  sitting  at  the  table  had  heard  the  medium's
statement. The  experiment,  therefore,  is  of  very  little  value  so  far.

No  sooner,  however,  was  the  message  finished  than  the  movements  of  the
table  became  so  irregular  that  no  words  were  formed.  At  that  moment  one
of  the  two  who  had  been  left  with  the  medium  came  with  a  message  from
her,  telling  them  to  leave  the  table,  for  the  place  of  the  first  spirit  had  been
taken  by  an  intruder,  who  could  not  or  would  not  talk.

Here,  again,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  the  medium  could  not  hear
what  was  going  on  in  the  room  with  the  table  ;  and  the  indication  of
the  moment  at  which  the  message  came  is  not  sufficiently  precise.

Some  other  cases  are  not  open  to  objections  so  obvious  as  these;
and  seem  to  show  thought-transference  either  from  or  to  the  medium.

Thus  on  July  30th,  1886,^  two  friends  (one  of  whom  confirms  the  account)
sat  at  the  table,  at  some  yards  distance  from  the  medium,  evoking  a  spirit
called  Livia.  The  medium  made  gestures,  indicating  that  she  saw  a  spirit.
Asked  by  Moroni  in  a  low  voice  whom  she  saw,  she  answered,  "A  lady,
related  to  the  shorter  of  the  two  at  the  table."

A  message  was  rapped  out  from  Lucia,  aunt  of  the  person  indicated  by
the  shortness  of  his  stature.

The  medium  then  whispered  to  Moroni  that  the  spirit  of  a  young  man
whose  name  began  with  R  had  come  to  the  table.  A  message  was  received
from  a  young  man  whose  name  began  with  that  letter.

Here  it  is  not  definitely  stated,  but  it  is  certainly  implied,  that
those  at  the  table  did  not  consciously  hear  the  whispered  remarks  of
the  medium.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  they  may  have  heard  and
reproduced  with  the  table's  raps  indications  of  which  they  were  not
conscious.

Again,  on  August  6th of  the  same  year,  two  friends  sat  at  the  table.

1 1  do  not  give  the  details  of  these  experiments  because  it  does  not  appear  certain
that  the  information  given  by  the  medium  could  not  have  been  derived  from  the  con-
versation of  those  in  the  room,  or  from  other  natural  sources.

"  Alcuni  Sar/r/i,  p.  (3.

^Alcimi  Sar/r/i,  pp.  (>,  7.

*  Alcuni  Saggi,  p.  8.


Supplement.] On  ft  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


561


They  evoked  Lucia,  and  L  was  the  first  letter  given.  The  medium  whispered
to  Moroni  that  the  spirit  was  Livia,  and  that  the  word  ringraziu  would  be
rapped  out.  Moroni  took  a  note  of  this  on  a  piece  of  paper,  folded  it  with-
out speaking,  and  put  it  on  a  table.  The  word  was  rapped  out,  and  was
found  to  correspond  with  that  which  Moroni  had  written.

The  medium  then  told  Moroni  to  take  the  place  of  one  of  those  at  the
table.  He  did  so.  Another  person  went  to  the  medium  and  asked  her  what
spirit  she  would  like.  She  answered,  taking  great  care  not  to  be  heard,
"  The  Doctor's  sistpr."  The  table  rapped  out  Assunta,  the  name  of  a  sister
of  Dr.  Moroni's,  who  was  dead.  She  then  whispered  that  Moroni's  father
wished  to  manifest  himself  ;  and  the  words,  ' '  I  am  thy  father  ;  I  may  call
happy  the  moment  of  finding  myself  with  thee,"  were  rapped.  She  then
said  that  the  spirit  would  vap  one  more  word  ;  and  one  more  word,  addio,
was  given.

The  same  criticisms  apply  to  this  experiment,  except  that  we  are
told  that  the  medium  took  care  not  to  be  overheard.  Nevertheless,
more  stringent  conditions  are  to  be  desired.

Another  experiment,  of  a  slightly  different  kind,  seems  also  to
point  to  thought-transference.  In  this  case  we  have  an  extract  from
the  original  record,  made  at  the  time,  and  attested  by  the  signatures  of
those  present.  1

Two  of  the  company  sat  at  the  table.  The  medium,  who  was  not
hypnotised,  expressed  disbelief  in  the  table-game,  as  she  called  it  ;  and  said
she  would  believe  in  it  if  it  would  rap  her  real  name,  which  was  not
Aminta,  as  they  believed.  The  name  Isabella  was  rapped.  The  medium
was  surprised,  and  said  that  this  was  her  real  name.  It  was  unknown  to  all
those  present  except  Dr.  Moroni,  who  was  not  at  the  table.

In  this  case,  however,  it  is  not  impossible  that  one  of  those  at  the
table  may  have  heard  the  name,  and  forgotten  it.  Experience  shows
that  any  fact  once  known,  though  entirely  forgotten  by  the  conscious
mind,  may  be  reproduced  by  the  automatic  methods  of  writing  or
table-rapping.

Next  we  come  to  cases  of  suggestion  at  a  distance,  and  suggestion
without  communication  between  the  suggester  and  tlie  subject.^

On  August  29th,  1886,  in  the  course  of  a  seance  the  medium,
hypnotised,  said  to  Moroni,  "Wake  me  up  now  for  10  or  15  minutes.  Then
without  saying  anything  you  will  send  me  to  sleep  again."  She  was  waked,
got  up,  and  sat  on  a  sofa.  While  the  others  kept  her  in  conversation  Moroni
went  into  another  room,  on  the  pretence  of  fetching  a  glass  of  water.
Thence  he  mentally  suggested  to  her  to  go  to  sleep  and  to  return  to  her  usual
seat.  When  he  came  in  again  he  found  her  in  hypnotic  sleep,  and  said,
"Why  did  you  not  obey  completely?"  She  answered,  "  I  i^erceived  the
order  to  return  to  my  seat,  but  you  did  not  leave  me  time  to  carry  it  out."


1  Alauni  Saggi,  p.  10.
^  Alcuni  Saggi,  p.  12.


562  On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  [Supplement.


Here  the  hypnotic  sleep  may  well  have  been  the  execution  of  a
deferred  self-imposed  command ;  but  this  does  not  account  for  her
knowledge  of  the  second  part  of  the  order.

On  September  5th,  1886,  Rossi  called  out  of  the  room  a  medical
student  who  was  present ;  and  the  medical  student  called  out  Moroni.
Moroni  tried  from  the  neighbouring  room  to  hypnotise  the  subject,
who  was  standing  talking  to  the  others  who  were  present.  She  all
at  once  became  silent  and  passed  into  the  hypnotic  state.  One  of
those  to  whom  she  was  talking  came  out  and  told  those  outside
what  had  happened.  Moroni  and  the  student  then  agreed  to  try  and
transmit  to  her  the  command  to  shake  Rossi's  hand.  The  medium  hesitated
for  some  time,  moving  alternately  towards  Rossi  and  towards  the  medical
student.  Finally  she  went  to  the  latter  and  shook  his  hand,  to  the  surprise
of  Moroni,  who  saw  his  command  disobeyed.  The  student  then  explained
that,  being  afraid  of  collusion,  he  had  mentally  commanded  the  subject  to
shake  his  hand  instead  of  Rossi's.  The  subject  begged  the  hypnotiser's
pardon  for  having  disolieyed  him,  adding  that  she  had  perceived  both
commands,  but  Iiad  obeyed  the  first,  both  because  it  was  stronger  and  also
because  it  came  from  a  disbeliever.

The  force  of  this  experiment  is  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the  two
suggesters  were  in  the  room  at  the  time,  and  may  have  unconsciously
indicated  by  gestures  the  nature  of  the  action  to  be  performed.

On  September  12th  Moroni  arrived  before  the  subject,  and  was  taken  into
another  rooni.  When  Carzetti  came,  she  was  told  that  Moroni  had  not  yet
arrived.  The  Doctor  made  his  passes  from  the  room  in  which  he  was,  and
the  subject  at  once  fell  into  the  hypnotic  sleep.

Again,  on  October  13th  of  the  same  year,  Rossi,  Moroni,  and  Signor  Dini
met  by  chance.  It  had  not  been  intended  to  hold  a  seance  that  evening,  but
these  three  agreed  to  try  whether  a  suggestion  could  be  transmitted  from
Rossi's  house  to  Carzetti,  who  would  probably  be  at  home  at  that  hour  (about
8  p.m.).  Moroni  fixed  his  thoughts  firmly  upon  Carzetti  for  some  minutes,
and  then,  exhausted  by  the  effort,  ceased,  and  said,  "If  she  has  perceived
it,  well — if  not,  patience."  He  then  sat  down  to  write  automatically,  and  the
following  words  appeared  :  "She  has  perceived  you,  but  not  so  completely
as  to  satisfy  your  wishes.  Someone  must  go  to  her,  to  prevent  her  from
passing  a  disturbed  night.  You  will  find  her  in  the  street,  or  at  the  window,
waiting  in  indecision."

Dini  went  to  see  her,  on  some  excuse,  and  came  back  saying  that  Carzetti
was  out,  and  that  the  aunt  with  whom  she  lived  said  that  she  had  gone  out  a  few
moments  before  to  do  some  shopping  in  the  Piazza.  The  three  then  left
Rossi's  house  at  8.30,  and  Rossi  separated  from  the  other  two.  These  two
met  Carzetti  walking  with  a  friend,  and  Diui  asked  her,  "  Where  are  you
going  at  this  time  of  night  ?  "  She  answered,  "I  have  come  out  impelled  by
something,  I  don't  know  what,  which  made  me  think  that  someone  was  trying
to  magnetise  me."  "  Do  you  feel  well  now  ? "  "  I  am  a  little  agitated  ;  my
heart  beats  fast,  and  I  have  a  feeling  as  though  my  legs  were  tied."  "And
where  do  you  come  from  now  ?  " "Do  not  you  see ? I  have  come  from  the


Supplement.] On  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  563


Piazzaintothe  Via  Sabbatini,  and  if  I  hadfound  the  door  open  and  a  light  on  the
stairs  of  Rossi's  house,  as  on  the  evenings  when  there  is  a  seance,  I  should
have  gone  upstairs."

If  this  account  is  accurate — and  the  latter  part  of  it  is  confirmed
by  an  account  written  by  Signor  Dini,  and  dated  Oct.  13th,  1886 — there
can  be  little  doubt  that  we  have  here  a  case  of  suggestion  at  a
distance.

IV.

Hypnotic  Experiments,  Spiritualistic  in  Character.

After  a  time  the  character  of  the  seances  changed.  From  the
experiments  already  related  it  will  be  seen  that  the  medium  in  the
earlier  period  professed  to  see  and  hear  spirits,  regarding  them  as
something  external  to  herself.  Soon,  however,  she  began  to  speak  in
the  first  person,  in  the  character  of  difierent  dead  persons  ;  in  fact,  to
identify  herself  with  the  spirits,  or,  as  Professor  Rossi  prefers  to  put  it,
to  act  as  the  instrument  through  which  spirits  expressed  tliemselves.

In  this  way,  a  large  number  of  spirits — some  of  them  professing  to
be  historical  or  distinguished  persons,  others  relations  of  someone
present,  or  private  persons  who  had  died  at  Pesaro — have  conversed
through  the  medium  with  Professor  Rossi's  circle.  Records  of  these
conversations  have  been  diligently  kept,  and  a  certain  number  of  them
are  reproduced  in  the  pamphlet,  Alcuni  Saggi,  &c.

It  may  be  useful  first  to  consider  for  a  moment  the  value  of  these
conversations  as  evidence.

It  is  clear  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  medium  speaks  in  the
character  of  certain  dead  persons  proves  nothing  at  all ;  nor  is  it  of
much  value  evidentially  that  these  impersonations  were,  in  the  opinion
of  the  auditors,  decidedly  successful.  We  must  rely  upon  facts,  not
characteristics.  If  the  medium,  when  impersonating  a  spirit,  mentions
some  fact  which  was  certainly  not  known  not  known  to  her  by  the
ordinary  channels  of  knowledge,  we  have  at  least  something  new,
something  which  deserves  further  investigation.

It  is,  however,  extremely  difiicult  to  prove  that  a  particular  fact  is
not  known  to  a  particular  person ;  the  more  so,  that  experience  seems
to  show  that  no  record  once  made  upon  the  brain  is  ever  absolutely
efiaced,  and  that  memories  lost  to  the  ordinary  waking  consciousness
may  be  reproduced  in  the  hypnotic,  or  other  abnormal  states.  How-
ever faint  the  under-writing  of  the  palimpsest  may  be,  it  may,  at  some
time,  reappear  fresh  and  strong.  Besides  present  knowledge,  therefore,
all  past  possibilities  of  knowledge  must  be  taken  into  account.

So  far  as  I  could  judge  from  my  own  experiences  at  three  seances
at  Pesaro,  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  there  was  no  conscious  fraud
on  the  part  of  the  medium ;  but  this,  of  course,  does  not  exclude  the
use,  in  the  hypnotic  state,  of  knowledge  derived  from  the  conversation


564-


O  n  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.


[Supplement.


of  those  in  the  room,  or  from  other  sources,  for  the  purposes  of  im-
personation.

If,  after  giving  due  weight  to  these  considerations,  we  find  that  she
mentions  facts  which  she  cannot  have  known  through  the  ordinary
channels  of  information,  it  will  remain  to  consider  what  hypothesis,
telepathic,  spiritualistic,  or  other,  is  necessary  to  account  for  the
phenomena.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  that,  in  the  present  case,  it  is
unnecessary  to  go  on  to  this  further  investigation,  because  it  is
impossible  satisfactorily  to  establish  the  ignorance  of  the  medium  with
regard  to  the  facts  mentioned  in  the  conversations.

I  will  therefore  only  give  one  example  of  this  class  of  phenomena  : —

The  spirit  of  a  child,  named  Bettino,  son  of  Professor  Guidi,  came
several  times.  On  one  occasion  the  following  conversation  took  place  between
Bettino  and  his  father.  ' '  There  is  some  one  here  who  wishes  me  well — there
are  two."  .  .  .(Who  are  they  ?)  "  I  don't  know  them.  I  have  seen  one,
jjapa,  not  the  other.  .  .  .1  saw  him  with  such  a  lot  of  flowers."  (Where  ?)
"Where  so  many  ])eople  went — you  were  there,  papa — It's  he  who
wishes  me  so  well."  (Where  did  you  see  the  flowers  ?)  "Not  where  I  am,
where  you  are  .  .  .  when  he  was  dead.  .  .  .No — one  cannot  say
dead."

The  father  then  understood  that  he  referred  to  the  flowers  which  adorned
the  funeral  procession  of  Mamiani,  an  Italian  statesman,  a  native  of  Pesaro,
who  was  buried  there.  (Where  did  you  see  the  flowers  1  From  the  window  ?)
"Yes,  and  in  another  place  too."  (In  the  camera  ardente?  Who  took  you
there?)  "  My  brothers,  I  think.  .  .  .1  saw  him  through  a  hole  .
the  face. "  (There  was  in  fact  a  glazed  aperture  in  the  coflin,  over  the  face  of
Mamiani.)  "She  who  wished  me  well  was  with  me  too."  (What  was
her  name?) "Santina. "

The  father  confirms  the  truth  of  this  account  and  adds,  "  When,  at  that
seance,  ray  Bettino  said  that  he  had  seen  Mamiani  in  the  cainera  ardente
through  a  hole  and  so  on,  taken  there  by  Santina,  I  frankly  told  my  friends
who  were  present  that  I  did  not  know  anything  of  it,  and  did  not  believe
that  it  had  happened.  When  I  reached  home  I  asked  my  wife.  She  too  knew
nothing  of  it,  and  undertook  herself  to  question  the  maid  Santina.  The  maid
confessed  that,  impelled  by  curiosity,  she  had  gone  at  a  late  hour  to  see  the
camera  ardente,  accompanied  by  Bettino,  whom  she  could  not  have  left  alone
at  home."

Could  we  be  sure  that  Carzetti  knew  nothing  of  this,  it  would  be
very  striking ;  but  it  is  always  possible  that  she  may  have  been  among
the  crowds  which  assembled  to  see  the  camera  ardente,  and  may  have
seen  the  child  Bettino  there.

Other  cases  might  be  given,  in  which  the  detailed  knowledge  of
facts  exhibited  is  certainly  difficult  to  explain  as  the  efifect  of  memories
unconsciously  revived.  But  though  difficult,  this  explanation  does  not
seem  to  me  so  clearly  excluded  as  to  render  the  proof  of.  the  action  of
an  alien  intelligence  decisive ;  and  I  have,  therefore,  not  thought  it


Supplement.] On  a  ScHes  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro.  565


desirable  to  extend  an  article  already  somewhat  long  by  reporting  these
cases ;  though  I  shall  watch  with  interest  any  further  evidence  of  this
kind  which  the  circle  at  Pesaro  may  produce.

I  have  already  said  that  by  Professor  Rossi's  kindness  I  was  enabled
to  attend  three  seances  at  Pesaro  in  November  last.  The  seances  were
successful  in  one  way,  for  the  medium  talked  freely  in  the  person  of
different  spirits  ;  but  the  matter  of  these  conversations  gave  no  support,
so  far  as  I  am  aware,  to  the  spiritualistic  hypothesis  entertained  by
Professor  Rossi  and  his  friends.  Some  of  the  spirits  impersonated  by
the  medium  professed  to  be  friends  or  relations  of  mine  ;  and  there  was
therefore  a  good  opportunity  for  the  mention  of  matters  of  fact  which
were  unknown  to  the  medium.  None  such  were  produced.  All  the
statements  or  allusions  concerning  my  friends  and  relations  were
either  vague  or  incorrect.

'  It  is  therefore  unnecessary  to  reproduce  here  any  of  my  records  of
these  seances.

I  must  mention,  however,  two  things  which  bear  on  the  evidential
value  of  the  accounts  of  previous  experiments  published  by  Professor
Rossi.  During  the  greater  part  of  the  stances  I  wrote  down,  fully
and  carefully,  the  conversations  which  took  place.  This  was  possible,
because  the  medium  spoke  slowly  and  with  pauses.  A  comparison  of
my  notes  with  those  made  by  Professor  Rossi  and  his  friends  gave  me
a  favourable  impression  of  the  care  and  accuracy  with  which  the
seances  were  recorded  by  them.  On  the  other  hand,  strict  silence  was
not  observed  during  the  seances,  and  it  appeared  that  sufficient  care
was  not  taken  to  avoid  the  giving  of  hints  by  conversation  in  the
hearing  of  the  medium,  and  by  leading  questions.

At  the  third  seance  I  asked  that  some  experiments  in  thought-
transference  and  clairvoyance  might  be  tried.  Professor  Rossi  was
unwilling  that  this  should  be  done.  No  experiments  of  that  nature
had  been  tried  for  some  time,  and  he  believed  the  chance  of  success
to  be  very  small.  Dr.  Moroni,  however,  consented,  and  two  experi-
ments were  tried.

(1)  I  had  previously  written  a  name,  and  enclosed  it  in  an  envelope.
This  was  placed  in  the  medium's  hand  and  she  tried  to  read  it — first  as  a
whole,  and  subsequently  letter  by  letter,  but  without  success.

(2)  I  wrote  down  another  name,  and  showed  it  to  Moroni,  taking  care
that  it  should  not  be  visible  to  the  medium  or  to  anyone  else  in  the  room.
Moroni  then  tried  to  suggest  the  word  to  the  medium ;  again,  without
success.

H.  Babington  Smith.


566


Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "Hypnotism."


[Supplement.


II.

DR.  ALBERT  MOLL'S  "  HYPNOTLSM."*

If  it  is  true  that  a  youth  is  interesting  on  account  of  his
promise,  and  a  man  on  account  of  his  achievement,  we  may,
if  allowed  to  use  this  figure  in  speaking  of  the  development  of
a  science,  safely  affirm  that  hypnotism  has  now  entered  upon
its  manhood.  For  the  investigation  of  hypnotic  phenomena  is
really  now  in  the  stage  of  achievement.  It  is  showing  itself  to  be
of  service  in  the  spheres  of  labour  of  psychologists  and  of  medical
men,  of  physiologists  and  of  lawyers.  This,  however,  has  not  been
the  case  till  quite  recently.  Only  a  few  years  ago,  the  knowledge
of  even  the  principal  facts  was  confined  to  a  veiy  small  band  of
workers,  and  even  they  were  not  able  always  to  unravel  and  grasp  the
true  significance  of  their  conflicting  experiences.  It  was  not  until  some
definite  starting  points  were  attained  by  the  formation  of  schools  that
a  freer  outlook  became  possible.  Charcot's  coming  forward  in  1878
with  a  rigidly  consistent  system  was  a  fact  of  the  greatest  historical
significance,  however  differently  one  may  estimate  the  value  of  his
doctrines.  But  from  that  moment  experimental  and  literary  activity
in  this  subject  began  to  assume  such  extensive  proportions  that  a
comprehensive  view  such  as  had  just  been  with  difficulty  achieved,
threatened  to  become  again  an  utter  impossibility.  It  was  under
these  circumstances  that  some  time  ago  I  saw  the  desirability  of  collect-
ing the  most  important  part  of  the  widely-scattered  material  in  the
form  of  a  bibliography  ;  but  I  could  not  shut  my  eyes  to  the  fact  that
the  second  part  of  the  impending  task — I  mean  the  formulating  of  the
ideas  already  gained — would  be  incomparably  more  difficult.

It  is  therefore  with  all  the  more  pleasure  that  I  find  myself  able  to
point  out  to-day  a  work  which  fully  meets  all  requirements  as  a  standard
text-book  in  the  literature  of  Hypnotism.

Dr.  Moll  has  ah-eady  won  celebrity  through  several  smaller  works,
and  also  through  his  courageous  action  in  relation  to  the  Berlin
Professors  of  Medicine.  It  was  known  that  in  the  course  of  a  long-
practice  he  had  accumulated  much  valuable  experience  in  our  subject.

*  Der  Hi/pnotisnms  von  Dr.  med.  Albert  Moll  in  Berlin.  280pp.  8vo.,  Berlin  ;
rischer'a  Medizinische  Buchhandlung  (H.  Kornfeld).  1889.


Supplement.]  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism."


567


But  the  work  before  us  exhibits  not  only  experience,  but  also  a
reraarkable  acquaintance  with  the  literature  of  the  subject,  and  an
unusual  skill  in  sifting  the  valuable  from  the  worthless.  His  method
of  presenting  the  subject  is  purely  descriptive.  Herr  Moll  wisely
refrains  from  giving  any  artificial  system,  which  in  the  present
state  of  things  it  would  be  impossible  to  render  free  from  objections.
He  simply  describes  the  phenomena  and  the  theories,  and  attempts
no  causal  explanation.

I  will  now  take  up  several  points,  the  discussion  of  which  seems  to
me  likely  to  be  of  general  interest.  A  sketch  of  the  contents  of  the
book  lies  outside  my  task.

The  historical  survey  which  forms  the  beginning  of  this  book  is
distinguished  by  the  novelty  of  much,  and  the  trustworthiness  of  all,
that  is  said.  As  a  rule  these  inevitable  historical  surveys  are  written
with  copying-ink  : — the  author  borrows  his  information  from  previous
compilations,  and  then  proceeds  to  write  as  if  he  had  most  carefully
studied  the  sources  at  first  hand.  But  in  the  case  of  our  book  one  is
conscious  that  the  author  has  really  read  for  himself  the  chief  writings
in  the  original  languages,  and  this  enables  him  to  correct  many
prevalent  errors.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  also  is  here  treated
for  the  first  time  with  due  appreciation  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  book,
Edmund  Gurney's  remarkable  work  especially  meets  with  thorough
recognition.  I  am  only  surprised  that  no  mention  is  made  of  Beard.
Years  before  Schneider,  the  American  neurologist  advanced  the  con-
centration-theory ;  in  1877  he  attempted  to  classify  the  hypnotic
symptoms  into  negative  and  positive,  and  expressed  his  opinion  that
the  artificial  trance,  as  a  purely  psychical  phenomenon,  ought  to  l)e
studied  psychologically — for  which  task  none  but  psychologists  were
properly  qualified.

Speaking  in  his  second  chapter  of  the  induction  of  the  hypnotic
state,  Herr  Moll  observes,  in  the  first  place — possibly  moved  to  do  so
by  a  suggestion  made  in  an  earlier  notice  in  this  journal — that,  in
order  to  make  a  distinction  between  it  and  the  method  of  inducing
sleep  medicinally,  it  should  be  called  not  hypnogenesis  (uVvos — y'lyv^a-dai)
but  hypnosigenesis  {inrviocns — ylyveadaL).  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this
expression  will  come  into  general  use,  for  it  would  prevent
many  misunderstandings.  .  The  author  then  states  emphatically
that  much  depends  on  individualising  in  hypnosigenesis.  In
agreement  with  the  Nancy  doctors,  he  considers  that  in  each
individual  case  those  methods  should  be  chosen  by  which  the  idea
of  the  hypnotic  condition,  and  the  conviction  that  it  has  already
commenced,  should  be  suggested  as  vividly  as  possible  to  the  patient.
In  this  I  entirely  agree  with  him. Observation  and  experiment  are


568


Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism."  [Supplement.


indispensable:  a  knowledge  of  a  man's  mental  peculiarities  is  more
important  than  a  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology.

I  now  come  to  a  very  dilEcult  question,  namely,  the  classification
of  hypnotic  conditions.  Dr.  Moll  divides  them  into  three  grades  :  In
the  first  grade,  the  eyes  are  closed,  and  cannot,  or  can  only  with  great
difiiculty,  be  opened,  while  the  patient  is  generally  subject  to  feelings  of
lassitude.  In  the  second  grade,  the  movements  of  the  body,  which  at
other  times  are  voluntary,  are  either  partially  or  entirely  taken  out
of  the  patient's  own  control.  In  this  state,  too,  tlie  eyes  are  generally
closed,  but  sometimes — i.e.,  in  fascination — they  are  open.  In  the
third  grade  the  patient  is  susceptible  to  illusions,  and  these  are
always  accompanied  by  the  symptoms  of  the  second  grade.

I  must  in  the  first  place  remark  at  this  point,  that,  in  my  opinion,
a  description  of  some  typical  conditions,  arranged  in  order,  would  have
been  more  adapted  to  the  character  of  the  book  and  to  our  present
degree  of  knowledge.  Dr.  Moll  might  then  perhaps  have  taken  two  or
three  of  the  most  striking  cases,  and  described  them  according  to  their
mutual  relations.  Within  each  of  these  distinctly  defined  combinations
of  symptoms,  the  intensity  of  the  symptoms  would  show  the  high  or
deep  degree  of  the  condition.  But  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  bring
all  the  difi:erent  kinds  of  artificial  trance,  lethargy,  catalepsy,  somnam-
bulism, fascination,  ikc,  into  one  category.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
our  author's  classification  is  wanting  in  a  thoroughly  comprehensive
basis,  such  as  one  must  demand  from  the  standpoint  of  logical
method.  For  both  the  first  grades,  the  inhibition  of  voluntary  move-
ments, and  for  the  third  grade  susceptibility  to  illusions  have  been
fixed  upon  as  the  chief  characteristics.  The  distinction  of  the  first
from  the  second  is  one  of  degree,  of  the  first  and  second  from  the
third  one  of  kind.  And  moreover  the  shutting  of  the  eyes,  which  is
characteristic  of  the  first  grade,  does  not  occur  in  fascination,  which  is
placed  in  the  second  grade,  an  inconsistency  which  becomes  more
striking  when  it  is  specified  of  the  third  grade  that  it  includes  all  the
signs  of  the  second  grade.  The  expression  "  grade  of  the  hypnotic
state  "  implies  that  the  second  grade  includes  all  that  the  first  includes
with  some  addition,  and  that  the  third  grade  includes  all  that  the  first
and  second  include  with  some  addition.  In  Dr.  Moll's  scheme,  however,
this  does  not  always  appear  to  be  the  case.  He  might  have  spoken
of  three  conditions  or  even,  if  he  preferred,  of  three  phases,  but  surely
not  of  three  deepening  degrees  of  one  and  the  same  condition.

It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  in  every  instance  the  two  first  grades
must  be  considered  as  one.  They  have  in  common  a  degradation  of  the
tuill-iwwer  within  the  motor-sphere,  while  in  the  third  class  the  sensory-
nervous  system  becomes  the  theatre  of  the  phenomena.  That  in  most
experiments  the  beginning  of  the  hypnotic  condition  is  indicated  by  the


Supplement.]  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism."  569


shutting  of  the  eyes,  is  not  due  to  the  nature  of  the  experiment,  but
has  its  source  in  our  modus  operandi.  "We  have  had  such  a  firm
conviction  that  the  shutting  of  the  eyes  belongs  of  necessity  to  the
induction  of  the  hypnotic  state,  that  we  have  always  accustomed
ourselves  to  work  at  the  beginning  on  the  eyes  either  by  fixation  or
suggestion. I  do  not  think  that  this  conviction  is  really  justified.

On  the  contrary,  I  should  consider  it  equally  the  sign  of  the  begin-
ning of  a  trance,  if  by  somatic  or  psychical  means  we  could  prevent  the
subject  from  shutting  his  eyes.  Let  us  once  free  ourselves  from  this
tradition  and  from  the  idea  of  the  analogy  with  sleep,  and  let  us
experiment  on  a  person  who  is  not  at  all  familiar  with  these  things,  and
who  will  therefore  be  devoid  of  any  tendency  to  self-suggestion,  and  let
us  try  at  the  beginning  to  influence  some  other  set  of  muscles.  On
one  occasion  I  began  in  the  following  way  with  a  gentleman.  I
pressed  his  right  leg  firmly  with  my  hand,  and  at  the  same  time
conceived  the  corresponding  idea  of  his  not  being  able  to  lift  it  up.  As
this  experiment  was  crowned  with  success,  I  extended  the  treatment  to
the  other  leg  and  to  the  arms,  and  did  not  pass  to  the  influencing  of  the
movements  of  the  eyelids  until  the  end  of  the  experiment.  On  another
occasion  I  had  to  deal  with  a  postman,  whose  business  it  was  to  stamp
the  letters.  As  a  thorough  induction  of  the  hypnotic  state  did  not
take  place  in  spite  of  repeated  attempts,  it  occurred  to  me  that  I  might
attack  the  man  by  means  of  his  daily  occupation.  I  asked  him  to  make
the  movements  of  stamping  letters  before  me,  and  after  two  or
three  minutes  I  cried  to  him  in  an  enei'getic  tone  of  voice,  "  Now  you
cannot  leave  off  doing  it."  And  sure  enough  the  man  was  incapable  of
stopping  ;  and  in  this  way  a  hiatus  occurred  in  his  consciousness,  into
which  suggestion  was  able  to  make  its  way  with  such  success  that
within  a  short  time  the  complete  somnambulistic  state  supervened.  In
short,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  shutting  of  the  eyes  cannot  be  considered
as  an  essential  sign  of  the  first  grade,  still  less  as  a  specific  distinction.
The  connection  between  such  conditions  as  lethargy,  catalepsy,
fascination,  captation,  charm,  is  the  failure  in  all  of  them  of  the
voluntary  control  of  the  centrifugal  nerves,  and  the  muscles  respectively
innervated  by  them.  In  another  group  of  hypnotic  conditions  we  may
place  the  weakening  of  those  sensations  which  are  produced  through  the
centripetal  nerves.  Whether  this  second  group  may  be  described  as  "  a
deeper  hypnotic  condition,"  depends,  first.,  on  whether  it  includes
also  without  exception  the  phenomena  of  the  first  class,  and  secondly,
on  whether  the  second  class  is  considered  to  be  derivable  theoretically
from  the  first.  The  biological  law  that  we  may  apply  at  this  point
declares  that  every  evolution  advances  from  the  simple  to  the  complex,
and  that  dissolution  takes  the  opposite  course.  We  are  then
perhaps  dealing  in  reality  with  a  natiural  deepening  of  the  same  condition


570  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism."  [Supplement.

and  not  one  produced  by  the  usual  methods,  and  looking  at  it  from  this
point  of  view,  we  may  be  able  to  gain  many  useful  hints.

But  we  must  now  follow  our  author  into  his  symptomatology  of
hypnotism,  which  is  as  imj^ressive  as  it  is  comprehensive.  It  is  here — in
the  exposition  of  the  physiology  and  psychology  of  hypnotism — that
the  extraordinary  merits  of  the  book  most  strikingly  appear.
And  there  are  only  a  few  points  here  in  which  I  cannot  concur  with
Moll  in  his  opinions.  When  Hei'r  Moll,  e.g.,  defines  suggestion  as  the
influencing  of  a  person  through  the  presentation  of  an  idea,  and,
corresponding  to  this,  defines  character  as  the  sum  total  of  our  own
suggestions,  he  only  obscures  the  specific  meaning  of  the  words.  He
may  perhaps  be  historically  justified,  after  the  English  psychologists  of
the  18th  and  19th  centuries  (Brown,  &c.),  in  describing  every  con-
version of  a  mental  condition  into  an  extei'nal  act,  or  indeed  every
modification  of  one  idea  by  another,  as  suggestion,  but  such
terminology  is,  in  the  first  place,  antiquated,  and  secondly,  is  veiy
much  calculated  to  cause  confusion.  And  in  the  same  way,  when  a
subject  in  the  well-known  experiment  is  unable  to  leave  off
revolving  his  hands,  I  should  prefer  to  speak  of  this,  not  as  aiUomatic
movement,  but  as  continuative  movement,  because  the  first  of  these
expressions  is  already  in  use  for  two  other  kinds  of  movements.^

In  his  symptomatology  the  purely  descriptive  method  of  our  author
is  shown  in  a  marked  degree.  For  example,  he  is  content  to  say  that
every  kind  of  disorganisation  of  the  faculty  of  language  can  be  produced
experimentally  by  suggestion,  that  we  can  take  away  from  a  subject
the  possibility  of  pronouncing  the  letter  "  «  "  and  indeed  deprive  him
of  the  whole  idea  "  a."  But  it  is  just  in  problems  of  this  kind  that  a
more  profound  investigation  would  have  been  in  place.  It  would  have
been  very  useful  to  have  had  the  similarity  pointed  out  of  hypnotic
phenomena  to  occurrences  in  ordinaiy  life,  such  as  in  other  places  has
been  shown  most  skilfully  by  Herr  Moll,  and  to  have  had  a  comparison
made  with  pathological  conditions.  I  may  remind  the  reader  of
Trousseau's  conclusions,  according  to  which  the  aphasia  of  hysterical
patients  is  always  to  be  referred  either  to  the  loss  of  memory  of  sound
symbols,  or  to  a  failure  in  the  apparatus  of  articulation.  If,  with  W.
Ogle,  we  distinguish  two  kinds  of  word  memory — one  by  which  we
become  conscious  of  the  idea,  and  another  by  which  we  become  capable
of  its  expression — we  should  have  to  class  both  of  Trousseau's  groups
in  the  second  of  these  divisions,  and  admit  that  in  the  hypnotic  state
the  idea  "  «  "  still  remained,  though  the  power  of  the  vocal  and  graphic
expression  of  it  had  disappeared. And  this seems  to  l^e  the  only

1  Vide  Dessoir,  "Das  Doppel-Icli." — Part  II.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society
jor  Experimental  Psychology  at  Berlin,  1889,  pp.  2-G,  21


Supplement.]  . Dv.  Albert  MolVs  "Hypnotism."


571


possible  conclusion  from  the  standpoint  of  normal  psychology.  The
patient  who  writes  and  says  "■  Momo"  instead  of  "Mama"  still
retains  the  idea  "Mama,"  and  merely  uses  another  symbol  for
the  sound  "«."  The  association  of  his  ideas  is  not  false,  only  his
memory  of  their  expression.  And  as  he  is  not  at  all  aware  of  his  mis-
take, he  does  not  struggle  against  it,  as  do  those  in  whom  the  power  of
articulation  alone  is  weakened,  who  can  clearly  write  the  vowel  "a,"
but  who  cannot  make  it  pass  their  lips.  The  last  case  is,  indeed,
involved  in  the  first,  and  we  see  a  natural  gradation  from  one  to  the
other.  But  it  would  remain  to  be  discovered  whether  abstract  words
are  taken  away  by  suggestion  before  concrete,  and  all  notional  words
more  easily  than  exclamatory  sounds,  as  one  would  surmise  from  Max
Miiller's  investigations  into  the  psychology  of  speech.  Many  other
interesting  questions  might  also  arise.

Some  observations  seem  to  support  the  theoiy  just  given.  I  have
often  noticed,  for  example,  that  when  the  use  of  the  personal  pronouns
has  been  taken  away  from  a  subject  by  suggestion,  and  he  has  apparently
quite  forgotten  them,  he  does  not  say,  "  Let — go  away,  now  "  (omitting
"  me  "),  but,  "  Jetzt  fortgehen"  (German  idiom  which  cannot  be  literally
translated),  or  "  Charles  must  go  away  now."  These  skilful  substitutions
show  clearly  that  it  is  only  the  form  of  the  word,  and  not  the  idea  of  the
personal  pronouns,  of  which  he  is  temporarily  deprived.  When  I  gave
this  particular  order  to  one  of  my  subjects  E — stein,  the  young  man  got
out  of  the  difficulty  by  means  of  the  English  forms,  with  which  he  had
been  familiar  from  childhood.  I  have  accidentally  preserved  a  document
relating  to  this,  which  is  also  in  other  respects  interesting.  On  the  same
occasion  when  he  was  in  the  hypnotic  sleep,  I  gave  him  the  suggestion
that  he  should  dream  in  the  night  that  he  was  on  board  a  ship  with  a
friend,  Ewald  W.,  and  that  a  fearful  storm  should  arise.  Terrified  at
the  vividness  of  the  dream,  he  was  to  wake  up,  and  immediately  after
waking  was  to  write  down  what  he  had  dreamt.  When  the  next  day
Herr  E — stein  again  paid  me  a  visit,  he  could  tell  me  nothing  of  any
such  dream.  But  after  a  somewhat  long  search,  I  found  in  one  of  his
pockets  the  following  letter,  which  I  copy  verbatim  : —

'  'I  habe  einen  merkwiirdigen  Traum  gehabt.  J  war  mit  E.  W.  zusamraen
auf  der  Ueberfahrt  nach  Amerika.  We  sprachen  ueber  das  Verschiedenste,
als  sich  (!)  auf  einmal  ein  grosser  Sturm  erhob.  It  wurde  ganz  finster,
und.  I  sail,  wie  die  Wellen  am  SchifFe  emporschlugen.  Ewald  wurde  sehr
seekrank  und  musste  in  die  Kajiite  geschleppt  warden.  J  folgte  ilim  hierhin,
und  sail  wie  he  schlimnier  und  schlimmer  wurde  und  schlie. . . "  *

*  "  i"  have  had  a  remarkable  dream.  I  was  on  a  voyage  to  America  with  E.  W.
We  were  talking  about  varioiis  things  when  suddenly  a  great  storm  arose.  It  became
quite  dark  and  I  saw  the  waves  dashing  over  the  ship.  Ewald  grew  very  sea-sick  and
had  to  go  down  to  the  cabin.  /  followed  him  and  saw  that  he  grew  worse  and  worse
and  ..."


572


Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "Hypnotism."  [Supplement.


Here  the  account  breaks  olf :  but  it  is  interesting  not  merely  as
showing  a  spontaneous  carrying  over  of  a  suggestion.  But  of  this  on
some  other  occasion.

Very  ingenious  are  Moll's  numerous  analogies  from  waking  life  with
post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  author  might  perhaps  have  gone
further  and  given  us  examples  from  the  animal  kingdom,  which  as  far
as  I  know  has  never  yet  been  done  at  all.  If  I  tease  a  strange  dog
to-day  who  is  chained  and  cannot  therefore  defend  himself,  and  I  meet
the  same  dog  in  the  street  a  week  afterwards,  it  may  well  happen  that
he  at  once  flies  at  me  and  bites  me.  We  generally  speak  on  such
occasions  of  the  revengeful  feelings  of  the  animal,  without  considering
that  such  an  imputation  of  human  sentiments  is  not  justified  without
further  proof.  The  event  corresponds  intrinsically  much  more  to  a
post-hypnotic  suggestion  :  the  rage  of  the  animal  breaks  out  at  a  given
signal,  namely,  the  sight  of  the  person.  We  need  not  think  that  the
animal  has  carried  about  with  him  for  a  week  feelings  of  revenge  ;  it
is  enough  if  we  consider  his  action  as  an  act  of  memory,  as  a  result  of
the  association  of  ideas.  A  special  signal  raises  a  special  idea.  Exactly
as  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion.

The  fourth  part  of  the  book  treats  of  the  theories  about  hypnotism.
At  the  beginning  the  author  says  :  "  By  explanation  we  mean  tracing-
back  the  unknown  to  the  known.  But  hardly  anything  is  known  of
the  real  nature  of  psychical  life,  and  from  this  arises  the  difficulty,
nay  impossibility,  of  giving  any  explanation  of  hypnotism,  at  least  at
present."  This  admission  goes  somewhat  too  far.  Even  if  we  grant
that  we  know  nothing  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  soul-life,  we  may
still  give  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  a  proper  position  in  connection
with  psychical  processes,  without  exactly  penetrating  into  the  essence
of  their  being.  The  successful  carrying  out  of  such  a  work  might
quite  justly  be  called  an  explanation,  and  in  my  opinion,  Herr  Moll
might  well  have  taken  the  first  step  in  such  a  direction.  A  synthesis
of  the  psychological  theories,  instead  of  a  mere  enumeration  of  them,
would  have  shown  that  they  all,  in  substance,  run  on  the  same  lines.  It
sounds,  indeed,  very  different  to  speak  of  condition  of  heightened
suggestibility,  psychical  reflex  activity,  concentrated  attention,  or
condition  of  mono-ideism,  or  of  preponderating  sub-consciousness,  &c.,
but  at  bottom  they  all  prove  to  be  the  same  thing.  A  complete  proof
of  this  statement  would  in  this  place  lead  us  too  far.

The  author's  reference  to  physiological  theories  seems  to  me  very
excellent,  he  shows  their  insufficiency  in  a  most  striking  manner.  I
was  reminded,  whilst  reading  these  pages,  of  two  sayings  of  famous
men,  which  I  may  perhaps  quote.  Taine  says  somewhere :  "  The
geogi-aphy  of  the  brain  is  still  in  its  childhood.  One  perchance
distinguishes  a  few  of  the  bolder  outlines,  two  or  three  ranges  of


Supplement.]  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hyimotism."  573


mountains,  the  course  of  the  watersheds,  but  the  network  of  streets,  of
roads,  of  stages,  the  countless  flow  of  people  which  is  continually
circulating,  struggling  and  grouping  itself  in  them,  all  this  wonderful,
manifold,  fine  detail  escapes  the  physiologist."  And  Lotze  remarks
opportunely,  with  keen  irony,  that  he  had  for  a  long  time  made  in
secret  the  statistical  observation  that  the  great  positive  discoveries  of
exact  physiology  possessed  on  an  average  an  existence  of  about  four
years  each.

One  feels  that  the  remarks  that  Herr  Moll  makes  about  simulation
in  hypnosis  are  those  of  an  eminent  practitioner.  Very  just  is  his
dictum  that  one  should  never  conclude  that  the  failure  of  any  particular
symptom  is  a  proof  of  simulation.  But  the  emphasis  that  he  lays  on
the  power  of  dramatic  expression  in  a  hypnotised  person,  seems  to  me
less  to  the  pomt.  This  section,  however,  might  perhaps  have  gained  in
impressiveness  by  the  insertion  of  indi\'idual  examples.  I  can  think  at
once  of  one  quite  classical  case,  which  is  reported  by  Professor  Ch.
Richet.  "  One  day  B.  arrived  at  my  house  suffering  much  from  an
obstinate  attack  of  bronchitis.  She  was  coughing  incessantly.  When
she  was  asleep  she  left  off  coughing,  in  consequence,  probably,  of  the
general  anaesthesia  which  affected  also  the  larynx  and  the  bronchial
tubes.  As  soon  as  she  woke  up  the  cough  began  again,  obstinate  and
unbearable.  On  that  day  I  put  her  into  a  hypnotic  sleep  two  or  three
times,  and  observed,  without  having  said  anything  to  her  on  the
subject,  the  same  phenomenon  of  bronchial  auEesthesia,  which  lasted
during  the  patient's  sleep,  but  ceased  immediately  on  her  waking."
Could  one  think  of  a  better  refutation  of  those  ignorant  people  who  are
continually  blowing  the  trumpet  of  simulation'?

I  must  entirely  pass  over  the  chapter  relating  to  forensic  matters,
but  I  ^vill  mention  two  or  three  points  in  the  medical  chapter.  Herr
Moll  shows  very  clearly  that  by  means  of  suggestion  the  apj^earance  of
the  most  various  diseases  may  be  produced,  but  that  hypnosis  is  not
therefore  to  be  considered  identical  with  these  diseases.  The  condition
in  itself  is  not  pathological,  not  dangerous  to  health,  it  only  becomes  so
under  the  unskilful  hands  of  the  inexperienced  operator,  who  generally
overlooks  the  importance  of  removing  suggestions  before  rousing  the
patient.  But  this  remote  possibility  of  danger  should  not  prevent  the
physician  from  making  therapeutical  use  of  it,  for  it  may  be  asserted
of  any  remedial  agent  or  method  whatever  that  it  is  also  capable  of
doing  harm.  It  is  advisable  in  practice  to  let  some  preliminary  trials
precede  special  therapeutical  experiments,  and  always  to  bear  in  mind
the  psychological  bias.  "  Psychology  must  be  the  basis  for  a  rational
treatment  of  the  nerves."  It  therefore  follows  that  physicians  have
not  an  exclusive  interest  in  hypnotism.  "  Just  as  medicine  must  leave
the  investigation  of  chemical  and  physical  re-agents  in  part  to  the


574


Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism."  [Supplement.


representatives  of  other  sciences,  so  we  must  not  only  allow  psycholo-
gists to  make  a  thorough  examination  of  hypnotism,  but  it  is  precisely
they  who  must  attempt  it."

The  last  section  of  the  book  deals  >vith  animal  magnetism,  telepathy,
clairvoyance,  and  similar  phenomena  not  yet  generally  recognised.  In
spite  of  the  strong  objectivity  of  the  author,  it  seems  to  me  that  every
now  and  then  a  little  a  jmori  reasoning  peeps  out.  Herr  Moll  would
like  to  have  a  stenographer  present  at  telepathic  experiments,  because
each  word  may  be  a  source  of  error.  But  would  he  in  reality  be  content
with  a  shorthand  report?  Might  he  not  then  maintain  that  as  the  reader
has  no  means  of  knowing  the  movements  of  those  who  took  part  in
the  experiment,  this  is  still  not  free  from  objections?  In  Guthrie's  experi-
ments, e.g.,  the  author  finds  no  objections  to  make,  but  nevertheless  "he
has  the  subjective  conviction  that  sources  of  error  were  overlooked  in
those  experiments  and  that  suggestio7i  was  in  some  way  or  other  at
work."  Against  such  purely  subjective  convictions  it  is  difficult  to
iind  cogent  arguments.

In  conclusion  I  must  point  out  that  Dr.  Moll's  book  is  characterised
by  the  admirable  comprehensiveness  of  its  arrangement  and  by  two
excellent  indexes.  And,  moreover,  it  is  written  with  a  transparent
clearness  which  has  no  equal.  I  do  not  think  that  a  single  sentence
out  of  the  261  pages  leaves  the  reader  in  any  uncertainty  of  its  meaning.
I  took  up  the  work  with  the  highest  expectations,  and  I  laid  it  down
again- with  sincere  satisfaction,  and  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  every
one  who  reads  it  will  feel  himself  stimulated  and  benefited.  And  as
no  book  exists  either  in  the  English  or  French  languages  which  can  be
compared  with  this  comj)rehensive  account,  I  must  express  the  sincere
wish  that  before  long  Dr.  Moll's  foundation-laying  work  may  find  a
translator.

Max  Dessoir.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


575


V

EDMUND  GURNEY  LIBRARY.


In  accoi'dance  with  a  suggestion  made  by  a  member  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  that  it  would  be  fitting  to  commemorate  Mr.
Gurney's  work  in  Psychical  Research  by  dedicating  to  his  name  some
branch  of  the  Society's  Library,  and  raising  a  fund  to  make  the
department  more  complete,  the  Council  (with  the  approval  of  Mr.
Gurney's  family)  in\ated  contributions  to  a  fund  which  now  amounts  to
£275  12s.  It  is  hoped  that  the  greater  part  of  this  sum  may  be
permanently  invested — the  interest  being  expended  in  building  up  by
yearly  purchases  a  Library  of  works  bearing  on  Hypnotism  and  kindred
subjects,  to  be  known  as  the  "Edmund  Gurney  Library,"  and  bound
and  stamped  accordingly.

The  subject  of  Hypnotism  has  been  selected,  partly  because  it  was
in  this  direction  that  much  of  Mr.  Gurney's  most  valuable  and  original
work  was  done ;  and  partly  because  it  is  a  branch  of  research  now
widely  recognised  as  of  high  scientific  importance,  and  on  which  every
year  produces  new  publications  of  value.  The  Society's  collection  of
books  on  Hypnotism  forms  the  nucleus  of  the  Memorial  Library,  but
it  is  incomplete,  and  many  fresh  works  will  need  to  be  added  both  at
once  and,  in  all  probability,  for  many  years  to  come.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  the  Council  would  be  glad,  if  possible,  to  expend  in  eacli
year  only  the  interest  of  the  fund  collected.  All  books  thus  purchased
will  continue  to  form  part  of  the  "Edmund  Gurney  Library,"  and  the
employment  of  the  funds  raised  will  be  entrusted  to  the  Library
Committee  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  the  time  being.
Further  donations  would  be  very  welcome,  and  are  invited  both  from
members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  and  from  other  friends
of  Mr.  Gurney's,  who  may  be  glad  of  this  opportunity  of  doing  honour
to  his  memory.  The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  4,  Upper  Vernon-street,
London,  W.C.,  is  kindly  acting  as  treasurer,  and  will  receive  any  sum
entrusted  to  him  for  the  "Edmund  Gurney  Library  Fund."

The  following  donations  have  been  already  received  or  promised  : —


£  s.  d.

H.  G.  Gurney 50  0  0

Mrs.  Russell  Gurney  ... 25  0  0

Rev.  H.  Gurney 25  0  0

Walter  Leaf 10  0  0


£  s.  d.

F.  W.  H.  Myers 10  0  0

Mrs.  F.  W.  H.  Myers... 10  0  0

Dr.  A.  T.  Myers 10  0  0

Lord  and  Lady  Rayleigh 10  0  0


576


Echmmd  Gurney  Library.


£

s.

d.

£

s.

d.

Pi'of.  Sidgwick

10

0

0

Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett  ...

1

1

0

Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick

10

0

0

Prof.  Croom  Robertson

1

1

0

Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour

5

0

0

Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer

1

1

0

Mrs.  Flower

5

0

0

Countess  of  Haddington

1

1

0

Mrs.  Hollond

5

0

0

Prof.  0.  L.  Lodge  ...

1

1

0

C.  C.  Massey

5

0

0

Ernest  Myers

1

1

0

Lady  Mount-Temple  ...

5

0

0

Hon.  Mrs.  Fox  Powys

1

1

0

Mrs.  F.  Myers

5

0

0

Prof.  Ch.  Richet

1

1

0

Earl  of  Pembroke

5

0

0

L.  H.  Saunders

1

1

0

Miss  Bertha  Porter  ...

5

0

0

F.  C.  S.  Schiller

1

1

0

Lady  de  Rothschild  ...

5

0

0

Miss  Edith  Shove

1

1

0

Miss  Alice  de  Rothschild

5

0

0

G.  A.  Smith

1

1

0

Prof.  S.  H.  Butcher  ...

3

3

0

H.  B.  Smith

1

1

0

Miss  B.  Elliott

3

o
fj

0

J.  Sully

A.  W.  Verrall

1

1

0

Hon.  Alfred  Lyttelton...

3

0

0

1

1

0

Prof.  J.  C.  Adams

9

2

0

Gr.  H.  Wodehouse

1

1

0

Misses  Butcher

2

2

0

Mrs.  Barrett

1

0

0

Francis  Darwin

2

2

0

C.  D

1

0

0

Hon.  N.  Grosvenor  ...

2

2

0

Lieut-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.

R.  H.  Hutton

2

2

0

Taylor

1

0

0

Lord  Monteagle

2

2

0

Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey  ...

1

0

0

F.  E.  Marshall

2

2

0

Godfrey  Wehh

1

0

0

F.  Podmore

2

2

0

J.  Y.  W.  MacAlister  ...

0

10

0

J .  Herbert  fetacK

Q

u

ivT^^.f.  i\/r .-,1  ^ ,  J . . ^

Miss  iVlouque

n
U

1  A

n
u

Miss  Balfour

2

0

0

Mrs.  Auber

0

5

0

Mrs.  Adams

1

1

0

Miss  C.  Lymond

0

5

0

W.  Austen  Leigh

1

1

0

A  Catalogue  of  the  hooks  at  iwesent  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library

is  ajjjxnded.


A  Catalogtw  of  the  books  in  the  General  Library  was  given  at  the
end  of  Vol.  IV.  of  tlie  ^'■Proceedings"  and  it  is  thought  that  enough
works  have  not  since  been  added  to  the  General  Library,  as  distinct  from
the  Edmund  Gurney  Library,  to  make  it  desirable  to  sprint  a  catalogue
of  it  at  2)resent.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


577


EDMUND GURNEY  LIBRARY.

1889.


ENGLISH.

Alienist  and  Neurologist  (17  Nos.)  St.  Loxds,  U.S.A.  1884-8

AjSTMAl  Magnetis^i,  a  short  sketch  of,  by  a  Physician London,  1838

{Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vols.  VIII.  and  IX.)
AsHBURNER  (.lohn, M.D.),  Philosophy  of  Animal  Magnetism  and

Spiritualism  (2  copies)  London,  1867

Bain  (Professor  Alexander,  LL.D.)  Mental  and  Moral  Science  (2nd

edition) London,  1868

  The  Senses  and  the  Intellect London,  1868

— The  Emotions  and  the  Will London,  1880

Barth  (George)  The  Mesmerist's  Manual  (2nd  edition) London,  1851

Bastian  (H.  Charlton,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of

Mind. 3rd  edit  Londo^i,  1882

BAUMAinsr  (Madame),  Curative  Results  of  Modern  Somnambulism

(Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)  London,  1849

Beard  (George  M.,  M.A.,  M.D.),  The  Psychology  of  the  Salem

Witchcraft  Excitement  of  1692 Neio  York,  1882

 Trance  and  Muscle  Reading Neiv  York,  1882

Belden  (L.  W.,  M.D.),  An  Account  of  Jane  C.  Rider,  the  Springfield
Somnambulist. Lecture  to  Springfield  Lyceum  (2  co^nes)

Springfield.  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  1834

BoiSMONi  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.),  A  History  of  Dreams,  Visions,
Apparitions,  Ecstasy,  Magnetism  and  Somnambulism.  1st
American,  from  the  2nd  Paris  edition  Philadelphia,  1855

Braid  (James,  M.R.C.S.,  &c.),  Neiuypnology  ;  or,  the  Rationale  of

Nervous  Sleep  (4  copies) London,  1843

 Observations  on  Trance  ;  or,  Human  Hybernation  London,  1850

Brewster  (Sir  David),  Letters  on  Natural  Magic. 5th  edit 1842

Capern  (Thomas)  The  Curative  Powers  of  Mesmerism  proved  in  150

Cases London,  1851

Carpenter  (William  B.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c.).  Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,

«fcc..  Historically  and  Scientifically  considered  London,  1877

 Principles  of  Mental  Physiology. 6th  edit  London,  1881

COLQUHOUN  (J.C.),  Report  (1831)  on  Animal  Magnetism  of  the  French

Academy  of  Sciences.  From  the  ¥vench  {2  co2jies)...EdirLburgh,  1833
  Isis  Revelata  : An  Inquiry  into  Animal  Magnetism.  2  vols.

(2  copies) Edinburgh,  N.D.

•2  p  2


578  Edmund  Gurney  Library.

CuLLis  (Charles,  M.D.)  Faith  Cures Boston,  N.D.

 More  Faith  Cures Boston,  N.D.

*[R]  Dee  (Dr.  John),  On  Spirits. With  a  Preface  by  M.  Casaubon,  D.D.

London,  1659

Delaage  (Henri)  Pamphlets,  &c.,  including  Biography  of  the  Somnambule
Alexis.

Deleuze  (J.  P. F. ),  Practical  Instructions  in  Animal  Magnetism.

From  the  French,  by  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn JSfeiv  York,  1879

DoDS  (Rev.  John  Bovee),  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  Mesmerism

{Of.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.) Neiv  York,  N.D.
Du  Peel  (Dr.  Carl) The Philosophy  of  Mysticism. From  the

German  by  C.  C.  Massey. 2  vols  London,  1889

[R]  Elliotson  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric

State  London,  1843

 Mesmerism  in  India  ;  reprinted  from  The  Zoist London,  1850

{Of.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)

EsDAiLE  (James,  M.D.),  Mesmerism  in  India London,  1846

 The  Introduction  of  Mesmerism  with  Sanction  of  Government

into  the  Public  Hospitals  of  India.  2nd  edit  Londo/i,  1856

 Natui'al  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  (2  copies)  London,  1852

 Biography  of,  by  A.  T.  M.  ; reprinted  from  Dictionary  of

National  Biography,  Vol.  XVIII  London,  1889

Fahnestock  (Wm.  Baker,  M.D.),  Statuvolism  ;  or,  Artificial  Somnam-
bulism. 1st  and  2>rd  edits  Chicago,  1871

Ferribk  (David,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Functions  of  the  Brain.  2nd  edit.

London,  1886

Forbes  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  Illustrations  of  Modern  Mesmerism

London,  1845

[R]  Greatrak  (Valentine),  Account  of  Strange  Cures  ;  written  by  himself

in  a  Letter  to  Robert  Boyle  (4nc?  other  Pampldets)  London,  1666

.  Gregory  (Wm., M.D., F.R.S.E.),  Animal  Magnetism, or  Mes-
merism and  its  Phenomena. 3rd  edit. (2  copies) London,,  1884

Hall  (Spencer  T.),  Mesmeric  Experiences London,  1845

Heidenhain  (Professor  Rudolf,  M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism.  From  the

German,  by  J.  C.  Wooldridge,  B.  Sc.  With  a  preface  by  G.  J.

Romanes,  M.A.,  F.R.S  London,  1880

Hudson  (Captain)  An  Attemjit  to  explain  Mesmerism,  Biology,  and

Clairvoyance Ghorley,  1852

Jackson  (J.  Hughlings,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)  Remarks  on  Evolution  and

Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System London,  1887

Jackson  (J.  W.)  Mesmerism  in  Connection  with  Popular  Superstitions

London,  1858

James  (Captain)  Mesmerism,  with  Hints  for  Beginners  London,  1879


*  [R]  indicates  that  the  book  is  for  reference  only.


Edmund  Guvney  Library.


579


James  (Prof.  William)  Reaction-time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance.  Re-
printed from  No.  III.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Reseai-ch Boston,  U.S.A.,  1887

Journal  of  Mental  Science 1884  —

Lee  (Edwin  Lee,  M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism  London,  1866

Maitland  (Rev.  S.  R.,  D.D.,  F.R.S.),  Illustrations  and  Inquiries
relating to Mesmerism. Part  I.  (Cf.  PamphletSj  Vol.  VIII.)

Lmulmi,  1849

Martin  (John),  Animal  Magnetism  Examined  London,  1790

{Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  IX.)

Martineau  (Harriet)  Letters  on  Mesmerism. 2ii(Z  edit  London,  1845

Mayo  (Herbert,  M.D.),  On  the  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Supersti-
tions. With  an  account  of  Mesmerism.  2nd  edit  Edinburgh,  1851

Mesmeric  Hospital.  A  Record  of  the  Cases  Treated  in  Calcutta,  1847

Mesmerism  :  Its  History,  Phenomena,  and  Practice.  With  Reports  of

Cases  developed  in  Scotland Edinburgh,  1843

  (The Edinbu.rqh  Review, Mr. Cornewall Lewis  and  the

Rev.  S.  Maitland  on)  (Cf.  Pamphlets,  Vol.  VIII.)  ..London,  1851

MuiRHEAD  (Henry,  M.D.)  On  the  Mode  of  Mental  Inter-communica-
tion in  Thought-willing  and  Thought-reading Glasgow,  1882

Myers  (A.  T.,  M.D.),  The  Life  History  of  a  Case  of  Double  or  Multiple
Personality  (Reprinted  from  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  Jan.,
1886)  London,  1886

Newcombe  (Simon)  Annual  Address  of  the  President  of  the  American

Society  for  Psychical  Research 1886

Newnham  (H. ),  Human  Magnetism London,  1845

Pamphlets,  Vol.  II.

Hall  (Spencer,  T.)  Mesmeric  Experiences  London,  1845

Iota,  Maskelyne  and  Cook,  an  Expose  London,  1873

Wallace  (A.R.)  The  Scientific  Aspect  of  the  Supernatural,iowc?OM,  1875
etc. ,  etc.

Vol.  III.

Barkas  (T. P.)  Original  Researches  in  Psychology London,  1876

Elliotson  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  in  the

Mesmeric  State  London,  1843

Lewis  (Cornewall)  and  the  Rev.  S.  Maitland  on  Magnetism, Xowe^ow,  1851

etc. ,  etc.

Vol.  VIII.

Animal  Magnetism  (A  Short  Sketch  of)  by  a  Physician ...London,  1838

Hobenlohe London,  1823

 A  Plain  and  Rational  Account  of  London,  1790

Badeley  (John  Hughes,  M.D.)  Narrative  of  Cure  by  Prince
Baumann  (Madame)  Curative  Effects  of  Medical  Somnambulism

London,  1849

Bennett  (John  Hughes,  M.D.)  The Mesmeric  Mania  of  1851

Edinburgh,  1851
Borehaave  (Dr.  Herman)  Essay  on  the  Virtue  and  Efficient  Cause

of  Magnetical  Cures  London,  1743


580  '  Edmund  Gurney  Library.

Vol.  VIII.  (contimied).
Elliotson  (Dr. )  Mesmerism  in  India  (Rcjirinted  from  The  Zoist)

London,  1850

Maitland  (Rev.  S.  K,  D.D.,  F.R.S.)  Illustrations  and  Inquiries

Relating  to  Mesmerism. Part  I  London,  1849

Stubbe  (Henry, Physician)  Account  of  Cures  Performed  by

Valentine  Greatrak  Oxford,  1666

Wood  (Alexander,  M.D.)  What  is  Mesmerism  ? Edinburgh,  1851

Vol.  IX.

Animal  Magnetism,  The  Art,  Practice,  and  Progress  of  that  Use-
ful Science  London,  1791

Dods (Rev. John Bovee), Lectures  on  the Philosophy  of

Mesmerism New  York,  N.D.

Martin  (John)  Animal  Magnetism  Examined, London,  1790

etc.,  etc.

Peirce  (C.  J. ),  and  .1.  Jastrow  on  Small  Differences  of  Sensation.

Read  before  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  U.  S.  A 1884

Prater  (Horatio),  Lectures  on  True  and  False  Hypnotism  ...ionc?,o«.,  1851
Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  Parts

I. -IV,  Bodon,  U.S.A.,  1885-9

Psychology  (American  Journal  of)  Vol.  I.,  Nos.  2  and  3

Baltimore,  U.S.A.,  1888

Roth  (Dr.  Mathias)  The  Physiological  Effects  of  Artificial  Sleep,  with

some  Notes  on  the  Treatment  by  Suggestion London,  1887

Sandby  (Rev.  George,  jun.,  M.A.),  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents

(1st  and  2nd  edit.)  London,  1844,  1888

ScoRESBY(Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  F.R.S. ),  Zoistic  Magnetism  London,  1849

SiGERSON  (Geo.,  M.D.)  An  Examination  into  certain  recently  Re-
ported Phenomena  in  connection  -with  Hystero-Epilepsy  and
Cerebral  Antesthesia London,  1879

Skey  (F.  C,  F.R.S.),  Hysteria:  Six  Lectures  at  St.  Bartholomew's

Hospital London,  1866

Sully  (James),  Illusions  :  A  Psychological  Study.  2nd  edit.  London,  1882

Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.),  A  Practical  Manual  of  Animal  Magnetism.

From  the  French,  by  D.  Spillan,  M.A.,  M.D  London,  1843

Topham  (W.  and  W.  Squire  Ward),  Case  of  Amputation  of  Thigh

during  Mesmeric  State  London,  1842

TowNSHEND(Rev.  C.  H.,M. A.),  Facts  in  Mesmerism.  2ndedit.  London,  1844

 Mesmerism  Proved  True  London,  1854

TucKEY  (C,  Lloyd,  M.D.)  Psycho-Therapeutics; or,  Treatment  by

Sleep  and  Suggestion  London,  1889

TuKE  (Daniel  Hack,  M.D.),  The  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body.

2  vols  London,  1884

 Sleep  Walking  and  Hypnotism London,  1884

TwEEDiE  (A.C.)  Mesmerism  and  its  Realities  Edinhunjh,  1857

WiENHOLT  (Dr.  Arnold),  Somnambulism.  From  the  German,  by  J.  C.

Colquhoun Edinburgh,  1845

Wilson  (John,  M.D.),  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism London,  1839


Echmmcl  Gurney  Library.


581


Winter  (George,  M.D.),  Animal  Magnetism,  Dissertations  on  [various

diseases]  with  cases  London,  1801

ZoiST  (The). A  Journal  of  Cerebral  Physiology  and  Mesmerism,  13

vols.  (2  copies) London,  1844-1856


FRENCH.

Annales  du  Magnetisme  Animal,  8  vols,  (bound  in  four)  Paris,  1814-1816
AzAJi,  Hypnotisme. Double  Conscience  et  Alterations  de  la  Per-

sonnalite 1887

Baillarger  (M.  J.),  De  I'lnfluence  des  Hallucinations  Paris,  1846

Baillif  (Dr.  Louis  Ernest),  Du  Sommeil  Magnetique  dans  I'Hysterie

Strasburg,  1868

Bakagnon  (P.  Petrus),  Etude  du  Magnetisme  Animal.  2nd  edit.  Paris,  1853

Bar£ty  (Dr.),  Force  Neurique  Rayonnante  Paris,  1882

 Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1887

Barth  (Henri),  Du  Sommeil  non  naturel  Paris,  1886

Beaunis(H.),  Le  Somnambulisme  Provoque Paris,  1886

 Recherches Experimentales  sur  les  Conditions de  I'activite

cerebrale  Paris,  1886

Bergasse  (M.),  Considerations  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal. Saye,  1784

B^RiLLON  (Edgar),  Hypnotisme  Experimental  Paris,  1884

Bernheim  (Professor  H.),  De  la  Suggestion  dans  I'Etat  Hypnotique

(2  copies) Paris  1884

 Contribution  a  I'Etude  de  I'Aphasie  :  de  la  Cecite  Psychique

des  Glioses Paris,  1885

 De  la  Suggestion  et  de  ses  Applications  a  la  Therapeutique

Paris,  1886

 De  la  Suggestion  dans  I'Etat  Hypnotique  :  Reponse  a  M.  Paul

Janet  Pom-,  1884

Bertrand  (Alexandre),  Traite  du  Somnambulisme  Paris,  1823

 Du  Magnetisme  Animal  en  France Paris,  1826

BiBLioTHiiQPE  DU  Magnktisme  Animal.  8  vols.  (bound  in  4)  Par(.s,  1817-1819

BiNET  (Alfred)  Etudes  de  Psychologie  Experimentale Paris,  1888

BiNET  et  F^R^,  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1887

BoiSMONT  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.)  Des  Hallucinations. 2nd  edit.  Paris,  1852

BoTTEY  (Dr.  Fernand),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Par  is,  1884

BouRRU  (Prof.  H.  et  Prof.  P.  Burot)  Variations  de  la  Personnalite

Paris,  1888

 Action  a  Distance  des  Substances  Toxiques  et  Medicamenteuses ;

suivie  d'une  Communication  par  M.  Ch.  Richet  Paris,  1886

Brullard  (Dr.  Joseph),  Considerations  generales  sur  I'Etat  Hyjinotique

Nancij,  1886

Bulletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  (Parts  I.  II.  III.)

Paris,  1885-7

Burden  (C.  et  Dubois  Fred.),  Histoire  Academique  du  Magnetisme

Animal  Paris,  1841


582


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


Cahagnet  (L.  Alphonse),  Magnetisme.  2  vols.  (2  copies) Paris,  1848-9

  Therapeiitique  du  Magnetisme  et  du  Soninambulisme  Paris,  1883

Chambard  (Dr.  Ernest),  Du  Somnambulisme  en  general Paris,  1881

Chardel  (C),  Essai  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  Paris,  1844

Charpignon (J.), Physiologie, Medecine et Metai^hysique  du

Magnetisme  Paris,  1848

Comet  (Dr.)  La  Verite  aux  Medecins  et  aux  Gens  du  Monde  ...Paris,  1841
CuLLERRE,  Magnetisme  et  Hypnotisme  Paris,  1886


DEFENSE  Theologique  du  Magnetisme  Humain.  Par  M.  I'Abbe,  J.B.L.

Paris,  1845

De  Fonvielle  (W.)  Les  Endormeurs,  la  Verite  sur  les  Hypnotisants,

les  Suggestionistes,  les  Magnetiseurs,  les  Donatistes,  etc.  ...Paris,  1887
De  Lagrave  (Dr.  Costa)  Hyjinotisme  :  Etats  intermediaires  entre  le

Sommeil  et  la  Veille Paris,  1888

De  Laxjsanne  (M.)  Des  Principes  et  des  Precedes  du  Magnetisme

Animal  (2  vols,  bound  in  one) Paris,  1829

Delbceuf  (Prof.  J.)  Une  Visite  a  la  Salpetriere Brussels,  1886

  De  rOrigine  des  Effets  Curatifs  de  I'Hypnotisme Paris,  1887

Deleuze  (J.  P.  F. ),  Defense  du  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1819

 Histoire  Critique  du  Magnetisme  Animal.  (2  vols,  bound  in  one).

2ud  edit  Paris,  1819

Demarquay  et  Gibaud-Teulon,  Recherches  sur  I'Hypnotisme  Paris,  1860
De Puysegub, Recherches Physiologiques sur I'Homme  dans

I'Etat  de  Somnambulisme  (2  copies) Paris,  1811

 Appel  de  la  Decision  portee  contre  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1813

 Memoires  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire et a  I'Etablissement  du

Magnetisme  Animal.  2nd  and  3rd  ed/d.  (2  copies)  ...Paris,  1809  &  1820
 Du  Magnetisme  Animal  considere  dans  ses  rapports  avec  diverses

branches  de  la  Physique  Generale.  1st  and  2ndj  edit... Paris,  1807  &  1820

Despine  (Dr.  Prosper)  Etude  Scientifique  sur  le  Somnambulisme

Paris,  1880

Dichas  (Albert-Germaine)  Etude  de  la  Menioire  dans  ses  rapports  avec

le  Sommeil  Hypnotique Bordeaux,  1886

DuFOUR  (Dr.  E.),  Contribution  a  I'Etude  de  I'Hypnotisme  ...Grenoble,  1886
DuMONTPALLiER,  De  1' Action  Vaso-motrice  de  la  Suggestion  chez  les

Hysteriques  hypnotisables  {Gazette  des  Hopitaux,  1885,  j)-  619).
DuRViLLE  (H.)  Traite  ExjDerimentale  et  Therapeutique  de  Magnetisme


Paris,  1886

DuPAU  (J.  Amedee)  Lettres  surle  Magnetisme  Animal  :  Paris,  1826

Du  PoTET  (Le  Baron),  Manuel  de  I'Etudiant  Magnetiseur  ...Paris,  1851
DuRBAU  (A.),  Notes  Bibliographiques  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  du  Mag-
netisme Animal  Paris,  1869

Edard (Prof.  G. ) Vitalisme  Curatif par  les  Appareils  Electro

Magnetiques Paris,  1885


EsPiNAS  (Dr. A.), Du Sommeil  Provoque  chez les  Hysteriques

Bordeaux,  1885

Expos^  DES  Cubes  Operees  en  France  par  le  Magnetisme  Animal.  2  vols.

Paris,  1826


Edmund  Gurney  Library.  583

Fere  (Dr.  Ch.),  Sensation  et  Mouvement  (2  copies) Paris,  1887

 et  BiNET,  Le  Magnetism  e  Animal Paris,  1886

FoiSSAC  (P.,  M.D.),  Rapport  et  Discussions  de  I'Academie  Royale  de

Medecine  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1833

FoNTAj^  (Dr. J.)  et  Segard  (Dr. Cli.) Elements  de  Medecine

Suggestive Paris,  1887

GAKCiN(Dr.),  Le  Magnetisme  Explique  par  Lui-meme  Paris,  1855

Gasparin  (Comte  A.  de)  Tables  Tournantes.  2  vols  Paris,  1854

Gauthier  (Aubin),  Histoire  du  Somnambulisme.  2  vols  Paris,  1842

Gentil  (J.  A.)  Magnetisme  et  Somnambulisme  ;  Guide  des  Incredules

Paris,  1852

  Manuel  Elementaire  de  1' Aspirant  Magnetiseur...  Paris,  1857

Hericouri (J.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  en  dehors  de  I'Hysterie

(Eevue  Scientijique,  1884,  i.,  812)  Paris,  1884

Herzen,  Les  Conditions  de  Conscience Geneva,  1886

Laeontaine,  Memoires  d'un  Magnetiseur.  2  vols  Paris,  1886

Lemoine  (Albert),  Du  Sommeil Paris,  1855

Li^BEAULT  (Dr.  A. A.),  Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues  (2  copies)

Paris,  186G

 Ebauche  de  Psychologie Paris,  1873

 Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnetisme  (2  copies)  Paris,  1883

LifGEOis  (Jules),  De  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  ses  Rapports

avec  le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel Paris,  1884

  De  la  Suggestion  et  du  Somnambulisme  dans  leurs  Rapports

avec  la  Jurisprudence  et  la  Medecine  Legale Paris,  1889

LuYS  (Dr.  J. ),  Les  emotions  chez  les  sujets  en  etat  d'Hypnotisme  Paris,  1887
  Le  Cerveau.  3rd  edit  Paris,  1878

Magnin  (Paul),  Etude  clinique  et  experimentale  sur  I'Hypnotisme

Paris,  1884

 De  quelques Effets  des Excitations Peripheriques  chez  les

Hystero-epileptiques  a  I'etat  de  Veille  et  d'Hypnotisme ...Paris,  1884

Maricourt  (R.,  Comte  de)  Souvenirs  d'un  Magnetiseur Paris,  1884

Maury  (L.  P.  Alfred)  Le  Sommeil  et  les  Reves  Paris,  1878

M:^MOiRES  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  et  a  I'Etablissement  du  Magnetisme

Animal.  2  vols,  (bound  in  one)  2nd  edit  Paris,  1809

Mesjier,  Memoires  et  Aphorismes  de  Pctris,  1846

  Precis historique  des Faits  relatifs  au  Magnetisme  Animal

jusque  en  avril,  1781. Traduit  de  I'allemand London,  1781

Morand  (Dr.  J.  S.)Le  Magnetisme  Animal :  Hypnotisme  et  Suggestion

Paris,  1889

MoRiN  (S.A.)  Du  Magnetisme  et  des  Sciences  Occultes  Paris,  1860

NoiZET  (General),  Memoire  sur  le  Somnambulisme  et  le  Magnetisme

Animal  Pai  is,  1852

OcHOROwicz  (Dr.  J.),  Essai  sur  le  Sens  de  Toucher  et  le  Sens  du

Magnetisme [Bevue  Scientijique,  1884,  i.  553)  Paris,  1884


584


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


OcHOROwicz  (Dr.  J.)  De  la  Suggestion  Mentale  ;  avec  une  Preface  de

M.  Charles  Ricliet  (2  copies) Paris,  1887

Pailloux  (R.  A.Xavier)  Le  Magnetisme,  le  Spiritisme  et  la  Possession

Paris,  1863

Perronnet  (Dr.  Claude)  Force  Psychique  et  Suggestion  Mentale  Paris,  1886

 Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Lom-le-Saunier,  1884

P^T^TiN  (D.  M.),  Electricite  Animale Paris,  1808

Philips  (A.  J.  P.)  Cours  theorique  et  pratique  de  Braidisme  ou

I'Hypnotisme  nerveux  Paris,  1860

 Electrodynamisme  Vital  Paris,  1855

 Influence  Reciproque  de  la  Pensee,  de  la  Sensation,  et  des

Mouvements  Vegetatifs Paris,  1862

PiGEAiRE  (J.M.D.)  Puissance  de  I'Electricite  Animale  Paris,  1839

[R]  Rapport  de  I'un  des  Commissaires  (M.  de  Jussieu)  charg^  par  le  Roi

de  I'Examen  du  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1784

Revue  de  l'Hypnotisme  Paris,  1886  —

Revue  Philosophique  (Ed.  Th.  Ribot) Paris,  1884  —

Revue  Magnetique. Vol  I  Paris,  1844

Revue  de  Psychologie  Exp^rimentale,  publie  par  T.  Puel,  No.  1-6

Paris,  1874

Revue  Scientifique,  Nos.  23-26  of  1884,  and  Nos.  1-5  of  1885

Paris,  1884-5

RiCARD  (J.  J.  A.)  Traite Theorique  et  Pratique  du  Magnetisme

Animal  Paris,  1841

 Physiologie  et  Hygiene  du  Magnetiseur  Paris,  1841

Richer  (Dr.  Paul),  Etudes  Cliniques  sur  la  Grande  Hysterie  ...Paris,  1885

RiCHET  (Prof.  Charles)  La  Physiologie  et  la  Medecine Paris,  1888

  L'Homme  et  I'lntelligence Paris,  1884

RocHAS  (A.  de)  Les  Forces  non  definies Paris,  1887

Romanes  (J.  G.,  F.R.S.)  L'Intelligence  des  Animaux.  2  vols.  Paris,  1887
RouLLiER  (Auguste),  Exposition  Physiologique  des  Phenomenes  du

Magnetisme  Animal  et  du  Somnambulisme Paris,  1817

ScOBARDi  (R.  P.),  Rapport  Confidentiel  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal.

2n(l  edit  Paris,  1839

Sergi  (Professor  G.),  La  Psychologie  Physiologique.  From  the  Italian

by  M.  Mouton .'  Paris,  1887

Senso  (Marc),  La  Verite  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal Lausanne,  1881

Ser6  (G. Louis  de).  Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magnetique

(2  copies) Paris,  1855

Taguet  (Dr. )  Hypnotisme  avec  Hyperesth^sie  de  I'Ouie  et  de  I'Odorat,

Paris,  1884

Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Explique  Paris,  1845

 Manuel  Pratique  de  Magnetisme  Animal.  2nd  edit  Paris,  1845

Thore  (J.),  Communications  sur  une  Nouvelle  Force  Dax,  1887

Tourette  CDr.  Gilles  de  la),  L'Hypnotisme  et  les  Etats  Analogues  au

point  de  vue  Medico-legal  Paris,  1887


Edmund  Gurney  Library.  585

Voisix  (Dr.  Auguste),  Etude  sur  THypnotisme  et  sur  les  Suggestions

chez  les  Alienes Paris,  1884

 ,  De  I'Hj'pnotisme  employe  comme  moyen  de  Traitement  de

I'Alienation  Mentale  et  des  nevroses,  et  comme  Agent  Moralisateur

Paris,  1884

 ,  De  I'Hypnotisme  et  de  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  leur

application  au  Traitement  des  Maladies  Nerveuses  et  Mentales

Paris,  1886

  De  la  Therapeutique  suggestive  chez  les  Alienes Paris,  1887

 ,  Migraine  chez  une  Fille  de  Neuf  Ans  guerie  par  la  Suggestion

Hypnotique Paris,  1887

 ,  Du  Traitement  de  1'  Amenorrhea  par  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique

Paris,  1887

 ,  Traitement  et  Guerison  d'une  Morphinomane  par  la  Suggestion

Hypnotique  Paris,  1887

YuxG  (Dr.  Emile),  Le  Sommeil  Normal  et  le  Sommeil  Pathologique,

Paris,  1883

GERMAN.  '  *

Aechiv  fue  dex  Thierischen  SlAGjfETisirus.  G  vols  Leipzig,  1817-1820

Baumler  (Prof.  Dr.  C.)  Der  sogenannte  Animalische  Magnetismus

oder  Hypnotismus  (2  copies) Leipzig,  1881

Benedikt  (Prof.  D.  Moritz) Ueber  Katalepsie  und  Mesmerismus

{Wiener  Klinik;  March,  1880)  Vienna,  1880

Benoit  (und  Biat-Chretiex) Der  Gedanken  Telegraph  Weimar,  1852

Berger  (Prof.) Hypnotische  Zustande  und ihre  Genese.  (Bres-

lauer  Aertz.  Zeitsch. May  22nd  and  June  12th,  1880,  pp.  119  and

121) Breslau,  1880

Brexdai  (Franz),  Kritik  der  Commissarischen  Berichte  und  Protokolle

Tiber  die  Somnambiile  C.  Holme Freiberg,  1840

Brock  (Dr.  H. ) Ueber  Stoffliche  Veriinderungen  bei  der  Hypnose.

{Deutsche  Med.  Woch. JSTov.  6th,  1S80,  p.  598) Leipzig,  1880

BucHXER  (Dr.  Ludwig) Doppeltes  Bewusztsein. {Die  GaHenlaube.

Nov.  6th,  1878,  p.  101) 1878

Carus  (Carl  Gustav)  Ueber  Lebens  Magnetismus Leipzig,  1857

Dessoir  (Max)  Bibliographie  des  Modernen  Hypnotismus  Berlin,  1888

Diesel  (Th.) Magnetotherapie. Der Animalische oder  Lebens-

Magnetismus  als  Heilmethode  und  Heilmittel Munich,  1888

Drosdow  (Dr.  W.  J.)  Ueber  Hypnotismus. {Centralblatt  ;fur  die

Med.  Wiss. April  9th,  1881,  p.  275) Berlin,  1881

Du  Prel  (Carl),  Die  Philosophie  der  Mystik Leipzig,  1885

 Das  Gedankenlesen  (2  copies) Berlin,  n.d.

 Mesmer  und  Braid {Allg.  Zeitung,  Jan.  2nd,  1889,  p.  19).

Munich,  1889

EcKiLUiTSHAUSEX  (Hofrath  von),  Yerscliiedenes  zura  Unterricht  und

der  Unterhaltung  fiir  Liebhaber  des  Magnetismus Munich,  1791


586


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


Erk  (Dr.  Vincenz  von),  Ueber  den  Unterscliied  von  Traum  undWachen

Prague,  1874

EscHENMAYER  (Prof.  C.  A.  V.),  Versucli  die  Scheinbare  Magie  des
Tliierischen  Magnetisnms  aus  Physiologischen  und  Psychischen
Gesetzen  zu  erkltiren Stuttgart,  1816

EuLENBURG  (Prof.  Dr.  A.) Ueber  Galvano-Hypnotismus.  (Wiener

Med.  Pi'esse, loj  1880^  (2  copies^  Vie')iuaj  188Q

Fischer  (Prof.  Fr.),  Der  Somnambulismus.  3  vols  Basle,  1839

Flemings,  Visionen  vorzuglich  neuerer  und  neuersten  Zeit  philoso-

phisch  in  ein  Licht  gestellt Altenburij,  1781

Geselischaft fiir Experimental-Psych ologie zu Berlin.  Erster

Jahresbericht  Berlin,  1889

Gessmann  (Gustav),  Magnetisnms  und  Hypnotismus  Vienna,  1886

Gmelin  (Eberhard)  Ueber  tliierischen  Magnetismus Tiihingen,  1757

GoRWiTZ  (Dr.  Hermann),  Idio-Somnambulismus  Leipzig,  1851

Gurney  (Edmund),  Telepathie  :  Eine  Erwiderung  auf  die  Kritik  des

Herrn  Prof.  W.  Preyer Leipzig,  1887

Hamman  (Otto)  Gedankenlesen. (Fom  Fels znm Meer, No.  5,

p.  489,  1885) Stuttgart,  1885

Hanak  (Dr.  Michael)  Geschichte  eines  natiirlichen  Somnambulismus

Leipzig,  1833

Heidenhain  (Dr.  Rudolph)  Der  sogenannte  thierische  Magnetismus  1880

Leipzig,

Heidenhain  (Dr.  R.  und  P.  Griitzner)  Halbseitiger  Hypnotismus,
Hypnotische  Aphasie,  Farbenblindheit  und  Mangel  des  Temperatur-
sinnes  bei  Hypnotischen.  {Breslauer  Aertz.  Zeitsch.  Feb.  S8th,
1880,  p.  S9)  Breslau,  1880

Hellenbach  (L.B.)  1st  Hansen  ein  Schwindler  ? Eine  Studie  iiber

den  Animalischen  Magnetismus  {2nd  edit.)  Leipzig,  1887

Hennings  (.Justus  Christian)  Von  den  Triiumen  und  Nachtwandlern

Weimar,  1784

Hensleb  (Dr.  P.  J.),  Der  Menschen  Magnetismus  in  seiner  Wirkun-

gen  auf  Gesundheit  und  Leben Wurzbwrg,  1837

Hering,  Ueber  Hypnotismus Berlin,  1888

HoFRiCHTEK  (Leo  Napoleon)  Der  Lebensmagnetismus  als  Heilmittel

Dresden,  1886

HoHNE  (Johann  Christiane)  Die  in  Dresden  sich  Aufhaltende  Som-

nambiile Dresden,  1840

  Berichte und  Protokolle  liber  die  sogennante  Somnambiile

Dresden,  1840

HOPPE  (Professor  Dr.  .J.  I.)  Erklarung  der  Sinnestauschungen  bei

Gesunden  und  bei  Kranken(4t7(  edit.)  Wurtzburg,  1888

Kaane  (Dr.  Hans),  Uelier  Beziehungen  zwischen  Hypnotismus  und

cerebraler  Blutfilllung Wiesbaden,  1885

Kant (Immanuel) Traiime eines Geisterseher, erlaiitert  durch

Traiime  der  Metaphysik Leipzig,  N.D.


Edmund  Gumey  Library.  587

Karoly  (Dr.  Akon)  Das  Gedankenlesen. (Das  Neue  Blatt,  No.  35,

p.  555,  18S4) 1884

Keener  (Justinus),  Gescliichte  zweyer  Somnambiilen Karlsruhe,  1824

 Das  Miidchen  von  Orlach  (2  copies) Beutlingen,  n.d.

KiESER  (Dr. D. G.), System  des Tellurismus oder  Thierisclieu

Magnetismus.  2  vol  Leipzig,  1826

KiSTNER  (Alfons)  Hypnotismus  in  England  und  Frankreich.  {Novel

unci  Sud. Sep.,  1886,  p.  394) Konigsberg,  1886

Kluge  (Carl  A.  G.),  Versuch  einer  Darstellung  des  Animalischen

Magnetismus  als  Heilmittel.  2nd  edit  Berlin,  1815

Krausz (Friedrich), Nothschrei eines Magnetisch  -  Vergifteten

Stuttgart,  1852

 Notligedrungene  Fortsetzung  meines  Nothschrei  Stuttgart,  1867

Lambl,  Geschichte  eines  Hellseherin  als  Beitrage ziir  Lehre  der

Porencephalia  (^rc/i,.  /.  Psych.,  IS84,)  ,  Berlin,  1884

Langsdoeff  (Dr.  Georg  von)  Zur  Einfiihrung  in  das  Studium  des

Magnetismus,  Hypnotismus,  Si^iritualismus Berlin,  1889

 Das  Sterben. (A  translation  from  Hudson  Tuttle)  Berlin,  1889

LiEBiCH  (Constantin)  Der Somnambiile, der  im Schlafe  geistig-

hellsehender  Prediger( August  Schiller) ^Berlin,  1883

Loxz  (Carl)  Das  sogenannte  Tischriicken  oder  der  Verkehr  mit
Verstorbenen  :  mit  Zeichnungen,  Schriften  und  Rechnungen
des  Verstorbener Ka  iserskmtei  'u,  1855

Maack  (Ferdinand)  Zur  Einfiihrung  in  das  Studium  des  Hypno-
tismus und  thierischen  Magnetismus Berlin,  1888

Mantegazza  (Paul)  Die  Ekstasen  des  Menschen :  aus  dem  Italienischen

von  Dr.  R.  Tenscher  jena,  1888

Maecaed  (Dr.  and  Baron  von  Strombeck),  Geschichte  eines  animalis-
chen Magnetismus Brunswick,  1815

Mayer  (Dr.  A.) Die Sinnestiiuschungen, Hallucinationen  und

Illusionen Vienna,  1869

Meier  (Dr.),  Geschichte  der  hellsehenden  Auguste  Miiller StUttgart,  1818

Mendel  (E.  )  Der  Hypnotismus  und  seine  Verwerthung  als  Heilmittel

(Die  Nation. Jan.  14th,  1888,  p.  222)  '  1888

Mesmee  (Dr.  F.  A.)  Allgemeine  Erliiuterungen  iiber  den  Magnetismus

und  den  Somnambulismus Halle,  1812

Meyee  (Professor  G.  Hermann) Ueber Sinnestauschungen  (2nd

 Berlin,  1871

Miescher  (Prof.  L.)  Hypnotismus  und  Willensfreiheit  (Allg.  Schweitzer

Zeitung,  March  17th  and  22nd,  1888) Basle  1888

Mittheilungen  aus  dem  magnetischen  ScJilafleben  der  Somnambiile
Auguste  K.  in  Dresden.  [The  preface  is  signed  by  Johann  Karl
Bahr  and  Rudolph  Kohlschiitter  as  editors.] Dresden,  1843

NoTZiNG  (Albert  von)  Uebersinnliche  Eingebungen  in  der  Hypnose

(Schorers  Familienhlatt. Nov.  21st,  1887) 1887

  Ueber  Hypnotismus  und  Suggestion  M%mich,  1889

Passavant  (Dr.  Johann Carl),  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Lebens-

magnetismus  und  das  Hellsehen.  2nd  edit  Frankfort,  1837


588 '  ■  Edmund  Gurney  Library.

Pick  (Arnold),  Von  Bewusstein  in  Zusfcanden  sogenaiinter  Bewusst-

losigkeit  (Arch.  f.  Psych.,  1882).  Berlin,  1882

Preyer  (Professor  W. ),  Die  Entdeckung  der  Hypnotismus  . .  .Berlin,  1881

 Telepathie  und  Geisterseherei  in  England  {Dev.tsche  Rundschau,

Jan.,  1886,) Berlin,  188C

 Die  Erkltlrung  des  Gedankenlesens Leipzig,  1886

  Die  Katalepsie  und  der  thierische  Hypnotismus  (with  illustra-
tions)  Jena,  1878

Pritzl  (Dr.  Eduard)  Eine  Geburt  in  Hypnose. {Wiener  Med.  Woch.

Nov.  7th,  1885,  p.  1366) Vienna,  1885

Prophezeihungen  (Eine  Zusammenstellung  der  wichtigsten  aus  alter

und  neuer  Zeit)  Begenshurg,  1884

Reichenbach  (Freiherr  von)  Wer  ist  sensitiv,  wer  nicht  ? Vienna,  1856

RiEGER  (Dr.  Conrad),  Der  Hypn<jtismus  Jena,  1885

  und M. TiPPEL, Experimen  telle  Untersucliungen  ilber  die

Willenstliatigkeit Jena,  1884

RoHLiNG  (Prof.  Dr.  Aug. ),  Louise  Lateau  :  Die  Stigmatisirte  von  Bois

d'Haine Paderborn,  1874

RoEJiER (C),  Ausfiihrliche liistorisclie Darstellung eine  hoclist

nierkwurdigen  Somnambiile Stiittgart,  1821


Sallis  (Job.  G. ),  Der  Hypnotismus  in  der  Padagogik  Berlin,  1888

ScHBiBLE  (J.)  Die  Sympathetisch  Magnetische  Heilkunde.  ..Stiittga7-t,  1851
ScHEEER  (Friedrich)  Das  Walten  von  Wahrheit  und  Wahn  ...Cobiirg,  n.d.
Schneider  (G.  H.)  Die  Psychologische  Ursache  der  Hypnotischen

Erscheinungen  Leipzig,  1880

SCHULER,  Professor  Virchow's  Rede iiber  Louise  Lateau,  erliiutert

von Wiirzburg,  1874

ScHWARTZCHiLD  (Heinricli,  M.D. ),  Magnetismus,  Somnambulismus,

Clairvoyance. 2nd  vol  Cassel,  1854

ScHWARTZKOPFF  (Dr.  Paul)  Das  Leben  im  Traum Leipzig,  1887

Seherin  (Die  neue)  Offenbarungen,  Gesichte  und  Weissagungen  einer

23-jahrigen  Jungfrau  in  ihrem  in  Gott  entziickten  Zustiinde  Groz,  1860
Senator  (H.)  Eine  Bericht  iiber  die  Hypnotischen  Versuche  des

Herrn  Prof.  Heidenhain. {Berliner  Klin.  Woch.,  No.  19,  p.  277,

1880) Berlin,  1880

SiEGiSMUND (Karl)  Vademecum der  gesammten Litteratur  iiber

Occultismus Berlin,  1888

Stay  (Jones  Barton)  Der  Seelen  Telegraph.  Aus  dem  Englischen  von

J.S.  (6th  edit.) Leipzig,  n.d.

Steinbrugge  (Prof.  Dr.  H.)  Ueber  secundare  Sinnesempfindungen

Wiesbaden,  1887

Stelzner  (Alfred) Sympathie  und  Sympathie-mittel. (JJeber  Land

und  Meer,  No.  27,  1885,  p.  598) 1885

Strauss  (David  Friedrich)  J ustinus  Kerner  Bonn,  1876

SzAPARY  (Franz,  Graf  von)  Ein  Wort  iiber  Animalischen  Magnetismus

Leipzig,  1840

Thomassen  (Dr. J. H.)  Geschichte  und  System der  Natur  (5th

edit.)  Cologne,  1885


Edmund  Ourney  Library.


589


TiMJiLER  (Dr.  Julius  Ecluard)  Die  Heilkraft  des  Lebens-magnetismus
und  dessen  Beweiskraft  fiir  dieUnsterblichkeit  der  Seele.(4th  edit. )

Altenburg,  1883

Yay  (Adelina  Freihrn  von)  Visionen  im  Wasserglasse  Budapest,  1877

Walthee  (E.)  Ein  merkwiirdiger  Traum.  ("  Daheim,"  No.  13,  18S0)  1880
Weinhold  (Prof.  Dr.  Adolf  F.)  Hypnotische  Versuche  ...Chemnitz,  1880
Wenzelburgek  (Theodor)  Der  Process  Raundorif-Bourbon.  (Unsere

Zeit. June  15th,  1574,  P-  SJf5) 1874

Wernicke  (Alex.)  Zur  Theorie  der  Hypnose Altenburg,  1887

WiETH  (J.  U.),  Theorie  des  Somnambulismus  oder  des  Tliierischen

Magnetismus Leipzig,  1832

WoLFAET  (Dr.  Karl  C),  Mesmerismus Berlin,  1814

 Erlaiiterungen  zum  Mesmerismus  Berlin,  1815

WoLLNT  (Dr.  F.)  Ueber  Telepathic  Leipzig,  1888

  Eingabe  und  Addresse  (Telepathische)  Leipzig,  1888

ZEiTSCHKii'T  FUE  PsYCHiscHE  Aeezte,  Herausgegeben  von  Friedrich

Nasse. Vols.  I.-V  Leipzig,  1818-1822


ITALIAN.

Belfioee  (Dr.  Giulio)  L'Ipnotismo  e  gli  Stati  affini.  Prefazione  del

Prof.  Cesare  Loinbroso.  (2/ic?  edit.) Naples,  1888

Maggioeani  (Carlo),  Influenza  del  Magnetismo  sulla  Vita  Animale

Rome,  1880

Seegi  (Prof.  G.),  L'Origine  dei  Fenomeni  Psichici Milan,  1885


590  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{Mmj,  1889.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor  Henry  Sidc4wick,  Cambridge.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-gardens
London,  S.W.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  Rose  Castle,  Carlisle.
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Poi-tman-square,  W.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Englefield  Green,  Staines.
Hon.  Roden  Noel,  Livingstone  House,  Burgess  Hill,
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon,
Hensleigh  "Wedgwood,  Esq,,  31,  Queen  Anne-street,  London,  W.

COUNCIL  FOR  1889.


Professor  J.  C.  Adams,  F.R.S.
Thomas  Barkv^torth.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.
G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Walter  Leaf.

Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,M.  D. ,  F.  R.  S.
A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


Frank  Podmore.

Walter  Raleigh.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

J.  Herbert  Stack.

Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W,  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  12,  Millbank-street,  Westminster,  S.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  FRANCE.
Leon  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,  Paris.

ASSISTANT  SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  W.C.


HONORARY  MEMBERS.
Professor  J.  C.  Adams,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


591


William  Ceookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens, London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Hawarden  Castle,  Chester.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Lord  Tennyson,  Farringford,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wight.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.G.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  28,  Rue  de  Courcelles,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,U.S.A.
Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Dobroslavin,  M.  D  .,  Imperial  Medical  Academy,  St.Petersburg.
Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

PROFESSORG.S.FuLLERTON,PennsylvaniaUniversity,Philadelphia,U.S.  A.
Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore, U.S. A.
Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.
Professor  W.  James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Havre,  France.
Mahadeva  Vishnu  Kane,  B.A.,  Dharwar,  Bombay.
Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Russia.
Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.
Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelhof,  Berlin.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,Mass.,U.S.A.
Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universit^  Paris.
Baron  A.  von  Schrenk-Notzing,  Klenze-Strasse,  64,  Munich.

H.  Taine,  Menthon  St.  Bernard,  Haute  Savoie,  France.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.

MEMBERS.

Aksakof,  Hon.  Alexander  D.,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.

Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.

Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy-gardens,  Tynemovith.

Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-

gardens,  London,  S.W.
Balfour,  Lady  Frances,  32,  Addison-road,  London,  W.
Balfour,  G.  W.,  M.P.,  67,  Addison-road,  London,  W.  ,
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Balliston,  W.  H.  T.,  6,  Dover-sti-eet,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

2q


592  List  of  Members  and  Associates.

Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,  R.  A.,  Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,
London,  W.

Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.

Barkworth,  Thomas,  J. P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.

Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  6,  De  Vesci-terrace,  Kings-
town, Co.  Dublin.

Barrett,  Mrs.,  43,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  S.W.

Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.

Beatty,  Octavius,  Gorse  Cottage,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.

Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.

Bbrens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ptavensbury  Park,  Mitcliam,  Surrey.

Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

BiDDULPH,  Tpie  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.

Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.

Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.

Bridson,  Joseph  Ridgway,  Belle  Isle,  Windermere.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Budden,  Edward  Russell,  Camelot,  Netherhall-terrace,  South
Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Bugby,  William.

Bundy,  Colonel  John  C,  Chicago,  U.S.A.

BusHELL,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow- on-the-Hill.

Carpenter,  Major  G.  W.  Wallace,  28,  Ashley-place,  Victoria-street,

London,  S.W.
Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.
Chiltoff,  a.,  M.D.,  University  of  Kharkof,  Russia.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell,  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Cooper,  Edward  V., West  End  Cottage,  Great  Haseley,  Tetsworth,  Oxon.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CuFFE,  Hon.  O.  Frederick  Seymour.
Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.
Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.A.,  3,Upper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton, Bristol.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Dixon,  Edward  Travers,  5,  Portman-street,  Portman-square,  W.
DoDGSON,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Downing,  Charles,  Athelston,  High-road,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.
DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.L,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliflfe-

square,  London,  S.W.
Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elder,  Miss  M.  C,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


593


Elwyn,  Rev.Cano?^,M.A.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London,  E.G.
End,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,.  London,  E.G.
Florence, Ernest B., 33, Redclilfe-square, South  Kensington,

London,  S.W.
Flower,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.

FoRSTER,  Anthony,  6,  Anglesea-terrace,  Gensiog-gardens,  St.  Leonards-
on-Sea.

Fountain,  Alfred,  Saffron  Walden.

Freer,  Miss,  6,  Westbourne  Grove-terrace,  London,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  Goldney  House,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Gardner,  Herbert,  M.P.,  46,  Dover-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Garry,  Rev.  Canon  Francis  N.,  M.A.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Reading.

Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  Rue  d'Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris.

Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.  D.,  Hardwick,  Ellesmere,  Salop.

Gibson, Rev.  Marsden, M.A., The Master's Lodge,  Magdalene

Hospital,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Glinka,  Mademoiselle  de

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  SheflS.eld,
Graham,  Alexander.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Grant,  Thomas,  Shirley  House,  Maidstone.

Griffin,  Francis  Charles,  Junior  Athenaeum  Club,  Piccadilly,  W.
GuRNEY, Rev.  Alfred.  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas Parsonage,  Pimlico,

London,  S.W.
GuRNEY,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W.
GuRNEY,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.
Harrison,  William,  The  Horsehills,  Wolverhampton.
Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  6,  Grafton-street,  London,  W.
Heron-Allen,  Edward,  Constitutional  Club,  London,  S.W.
Hodgson,  Richard,  B.A.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
HoLLOND,  John  R.J  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford.
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hughes,  Captain  Henry  Morgan,  F.R.G.S.,  23,  Mount  Ararat-road,

Richmond,  Surrey.
Hume,  A.  0.,  C.B.,  Simla,  India.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park- villas,  London,  W.
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jebb,  Major  J.  de  Witt,  17,  Queen-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.
Jeune,  Mrs.,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.


594


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Joyce,  Samuel,  June., European Telegraph  Works,  Pownall-road,

Dalston,  London,  E.
Kay,  H.  a.,  71,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Keightley,  Bertram,  B.  A.,  30,  Linden-gardens,  London,  W.
Kelso,  Commander,  R-N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.
KiRWAN,  J.  J.,  Reform  Club,  London,  W.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Lafone, Alfred William,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  AValton-on-

Thames.

Lafone,  Harold,  B.A.,  Hanworth  Park,  Feltham,  Middlesex.
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.
Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.
Lees,  George  Frederick,  Westbury-on-Trym,  G-loucestershire.
Leycester,  Mrs.,  6  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.
Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of.  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.
LoNGSTAFF,  George  Blundell,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Southfield  Grange,

Woodhill  road,  Wandsworth,  S.W.
MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.  James's,

London,  S.W.

Manders,  H.,  F.Pt.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough
Station,  Hants.

Marshall,  John  William,  M. A.,  The  Holt,  Godalming.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Massey,  Charles  C,  The  Athen;eum  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.

Matthews,  Frank  Herbert,  M.A.,  Ivy  Villa,  Beulah  Hill,  Upper
Norwood,  London,  S.E.

MiLMAN,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,F.R.G.S.

Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,  Ancote,  Weybridge.

Montefiorb,  F.,  4,  Great  Stanhope-street,  London,  W.

Morell,  J.  D.,  LL.D.,  Clevelands,  Fitzjohn's-avenue,  London,  N.W.

Moulton,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  14,  Rue  Pierre  Chasson,  Paris.

Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Muirhead,  Henry,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  Bushy  Hill,  Oambuslang,  Glas-
gow, isr.B.

Murray-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.

Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  9,  Lower  Berkeley-street,  London,  W.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhanipton  House,  Cambridge.

Naidu,  C.  v..  Downing  College,  Cambridge.

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.

Paschkoff,  a.,  Quai  Gagarine,  10,  St.  Petersburg.

Pease,  Edward  R.,  7,  St.  Thomas'-terrace,  Newcastle  on-Tyne.

Pilcher,  Giles  Theodore,  33,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


595


PoDMORE,  Frank,  M.A.,  12,  Millbank-street,  London,  S.W.
Portal,  J.  Spencer,  Malshanger,  Basingstoke.
Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.
Porter,  Miss  A.,

PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Pratt,  Thomas,  Camden  House,  Lower  Mertou,  Surrey.
Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.
PuRDON,  John  E.,  M.B., Surgeon-Major,  Valley  Head,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Pye,  William  A.,  24,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Rayleigh,  Clara,  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.AV.
Rensselaer,  Mrs.  P.  L.  Van,  9,  Bolton-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Ridley,  Henry  IST.,  M.A.,F.L.S.,20,Portsea-place,Connaught-square,W.
Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green,  The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  Edward  H.,  M.A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-
on-Thames.

Rogers,  George  Frederick,  B.A.,  24,  St.  Andrew 's-street,  Cambridge.
Ross,  A.  Galt,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Broom  Hall,  Teddington,  Middlesex.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  16,  Somersfield-road,  Finsbury  Park,  London,  N.
Rylands,  Thomas  Glazebrook,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfields,  Thelwall,
near  Warrington.

Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  EUerslie,  Rhinebeck  on  Hudson,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone,  Padstow.

Schuster,  Professor  Arthur,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill, London, S.E.
Shove, Miss Edith, K.Q.C.P.L,  M.B.,  25, St.  Mark's-crescent,

Regent's  Park,  N.W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  HUl  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Smith,  Martin  Ridley,  13,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.

SOLOVIOFF,  WSEVOLOD,

SOLTYKOFF,  PrINCE  AlEXIS,  ■

Stack,  J.  Herbert,  30,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
Stanhope,  The  Right  Hon.E.,  M.P.,  23,  Eccleston-square,  London, S.W.
Stapelton,  Josiah  G.,  47,  Lee-terrace,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Stock,  St.  George,  M.  A.,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford.
Stogdon,  John  Cole,  M.A.,  18,  Clement's  Inn,  London,  W.C.


596  '  List  of  Members  and  Associates.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.
Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.
Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Cui'zon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Talbot,  Mrs.,  19,  Porchester-gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
ToKAROFF,  Leon,  M.D.

Tancred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.^  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Endsleigh-gardens,  London,  N.W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel,  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Farn-

borough  Station,  Hants.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  7,  Albert-road,  GIoucester-gate,Ptegent's  Park, London, N.W.
Thomson,  Professor  Joseph  John,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,

Cambridge.

Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
Travers,  John  Amory,  Dorney  House,  Weybridge.
TuCKEY, C. Lloyd, M.D., 14, Green-street, Grosvenor  -  square,
London,  W.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.
Vane,  Francis  P.  F.,  Isthmian  Club,  12  Graf  ton-street,  London,  W.
Vicars,  George  Rayleigh,  M.A.,  Woodville  House,  Rugby.
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  M.A;,  31,  Queen  Anne  street,  London,  W.
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Berniiard,  School  Field,  South  Hackney,  E.
White,  Harold  Holden,  96,  Queen's-gate,  London,  S.W.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  4,  The  Bank,  Crouch  Hill,  Hornsey,  N.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley-place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  Charles  M.,  Ptose  Villa,  North  Strand,  Limei'ick.
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Rosemont,  Hyeres,  France.
Winch,  William  Richard,  4,  Fenchurch-street,  London,  E.G.
WiNGFiELD,  Hugh  Edward,  M.A.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

WoosNAM,  W.  Burgess,  M.A.,  Petitor  House,  St.  Mary  Church,
Torquay.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
YoRKE,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.
Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.
Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  4,  Upper  Vernon-street,  Bloomsbury,  London, W.C.
Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  Rye  Oroft,  Fulford-road,  Scarboi-ough.
James,  Captain,  68,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  31,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  597


Kedlemans,  J.  G.,  4.  St.  Mark's- crescent,  Regent's  Park,  Lonclon,N.W.
Kleiber,  Joseph,  St.  Petersburg.

Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  43,  Hill  Side-road,  Stamford  Hill,  London,  N.
NiSBET,  E.  T.,  51,  Eldon-street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  11,  Kilburn-square,  London,  N.W.
Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.

ScuDAMORE,  Mrs.,  36,  Albion-road,  Stoke  Newington,  London,  N.
SuDGEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

ASSOCIATES.
Adair,  Mrs.,  Glenavon,  Cookstown,  Co.  Tyrone.

Adams, Rev. J. M. Goold, M.A., The Yicarage,  Rossdowney,

Londonderry.
Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.
AiNSLiE,  Ainslie  Douglas,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W.
Allen,  Henry  J.,  Ferndene,  Blackrock,  Co.  Dublin.
Anderson,  James  Arbuthnot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury.
AsHCROFT,  Rev.  Thomas,  The  Manse,  West  Leigh,  near  Manchester.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  E.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.
Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston.
Bates,  Miss,  care  of  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe-square,  S.W.
Becket,  Miss  Maria,  Hotel  V^endome,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Beer,  Mrs.,  14,  Stratton-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  Lucknow,  India.
Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.
Beresford,  Edward  A.,  21,  Hereford-square,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Berrey,  Walter  F.  M.,  M. A., Western  Lodge, Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Berriker,  George  T.,  Calvert,  Maryland,  U.S.A.
Bevan,  Rev.  O.B.,  M.A.,  Kirton  Vicarage,  Boston.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  26,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  K.W.
Bewley,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Netherton  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Bickford-Smith,  Pt.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,Endymion-road,  Brixton  Pi.ise,S.W.
Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.
BiCKNELL,  Norman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenham,  Kent.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Junb.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
BiRRELL,  Miss,  37,  Addison-gardens  Korth,  London,  W.
BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.
Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  care  of  King,  King  and  Co.,  Bombay,  India.


598


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bonus,  Joseph,  Major-General,  E.E.,  E.I.U.S.  Club,  14,  St.  James's-
square,  London,  S.W.

JBosTOCK,  Miss  E.  A.,  Penmaen  Gower,  Swansea.

Boucher, Mrs.,  care of Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  "Wiveliscombe,
Somerset.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Weston  Patrick,  Odiham,  Hants.
BowNESS,  William  Wilson,  20,Campden-gi-ove,  Keusington,London,W.
Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon.
BraysiiaWj  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.
Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.
Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  10,  Park-terrace,  JSlottingham.
Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.
Brown,  Mrs.,  Bradford  Court,  near  Taunton,  Somerset.
Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  Edgbaston  House,  Pittville,  Cheltenham.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  B.A.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidston,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.
Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  35,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Buck,  Sir  E.C,  Civil  Service,  Simla,  India.
Bull,  William  J.,  11,  New  Inn,  Strand,  London,  W.C.
Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.C.
Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.
Butcher,  Miss,  22,  Collingham-place,  London,  S.W.
Butler,  G.  W.,  B.  A.,  F.G.S.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
Caird, Mrs., 3, Lyndhurst-gardens, South Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  4,  Park-side,  Cambridge.
Campbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.
Campbell,  Robert  Allen,  C.E.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Capper,  Miss.  Madron,  Penzance.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Weir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield.
Caudee,  Miss  Emmeline,  care  of  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,
Founders  Court,  Lothbury,  London,  E.C.

Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C.,  S.O.,  Quetta  District,  Beluchistan.

Christopher,  H.  Carmichael,  50,  Romola-road,  Herne  Hill,  S.E.

Church,  Mrs.  Mary  M.,  Ashland,  Schuylkill  Co.,  Pennsylvania,  U.S.A.

Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.

Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


599


Clissold,  Edward  Mortimer,  M.A.,  United  University  Club,  S.W.
CoiT,  Stainton,  Ph.D.,  South-place  Chapel,  Finsbury,  London,  E.C.
Colchester,  Rev.  H.B.,  M.A.,  1,  Leinster-place,Paddington,London,W.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Cooke,  Rev.  John  Hunt,  Cape  House,  Coolhurst-road,  Crouch  End,
London,  N.

CooMBE,  Charles  Frederick,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  General  Infirmary,
Sheffield.

CouES,  Dr.  Elliott,  1726,  JST.  Street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Cox,  John,  M.A.,  Cambridge.

Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crossley,  Mrs.  Herbert,  Ferney  Green,  Windermere.
Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  24,  Cornwall-road,  Westbourne  Park,  W.
Crowther,  William  F.,  Hailshani;  Sussex.

Cunningham,  George,  D.M.D.  (Harvaixl,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's  Parade,
Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.
OzYNSKi,  Professor  C.  L.,  Rue  Batory  26,  Cracow.
Darbishire,  Samuel  D.,  M.D.,  60,  High-street,  Oxford.
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Davey,  S.  John,  2,  Addiscombe-terrace,  Addiscombe,  Surrey.
Davies,  William,  Bellfield,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  The  Western  and  Brazilian  Telegraph  Company,

Caixa,  453,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.
Debenham,  Ernest  Ridley,  B.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Dickinson,  Goldsworthy  L.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campder.  Hill  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dill, Robert C. Gordon, M.A.,  Isthmian  Club,  Grafton  street,

London,  W.

DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Austi-alia.
Doubleday,  Mrs.  Frances  G.,  care  of  Drexel,  Harris  and  Co.,  37,

Boulevard  Haussman,  Paris.
Doveton,  F.  B.,  10,  Grange-gardens,  Eastbourne.
Drummond,  Miss,  Upton  Court,  Slough.
Eady,  Mrs.,  Combe  Royal,  Kingsbridge,  South  Devon.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  Quernfield,  Latchford,  Warrington.
Edge,  H.  T.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.


600  List  of  Members  and  Associates.

Elliot,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  63,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W.  '

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  4,  E,ylett-road,  Pavenscourt  Park,  London,  W.

Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Evans,  Mrs.,  The  Great  House,  Llanmaes,  near  Cowbridge,  Glamorgan.
Fagan,  Mrs.,  26,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.

Fair,  Frederick  Kendall,  Lieutenant  Pt.E.,  Brompton  Barracks,
Chatham.

Farncombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  30,  Holyhead-road,  Handsworth,
Birmingham.

FitzGerald, Desmond G.,  M.S.T.E., 6, Akerman-road,  Brixton,
London,  S.W.

Fleming,  A.,  3,  Verulam-buildings,  Gray's  Inn,  London,  E.G.
Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  National  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W.
Fbaser,  Lt.-Col.  Alexander  Thomas,  R.E.,  Department  of  Public

Works,  Madras  Presidency.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Holcombe  Cottage,  Westcott,  Dorking.
Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater-hill,  London,  W.
Gaynor,  Henry  F.,  Lieutenant  R.E.,  50,  Westmorland-road,  New-

castle-on-Tyne.
Gell,  Rev.  A.  W.  Hamilton,  M.A.,  Winslade,  Exeter.
Gessmann,  Gustav.,  Junr.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altmansdorf,  Vienna.
Gibson,  Mrs.  Sumner,  Iridge-place,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.
Gladstone,  Miss  Catherine  Annie,  Shedfield  Cottage,  Botley,  Hants.
Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.
GoNEMYS,  Le  Comte  Dr.  Nicolo,  Corfu,  Ionian  Islands.
Goodman,  Roger  N.,  B.A.,  B.  Sc.,  Brookfield,  Cambridge.
Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  The  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.
Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rectory,  Cambridge.
Gbier,  Captain  George  R.,  Neyland,  R.S.O.,  Pembrokeshire.
Griffith,  Robert  W.,  M.A.,  The  Old  House,  Llandafi'.
Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  36,  Albion-road,  Stoke  Newington,

London,  N.

Grosvenor,  George  Fox,  M.D.,  121,  Ladbroke-grove,  Notting  Hill,  W.
Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stow  market.
Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta.

Gunton,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


601


GuNTON,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

GuRNEY,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Prestbury  Vicarage,  Cheltenham.

Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Hall,  T.  P.,  B.A.,  F.C.S.  (Eng.),  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Canada.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Harland,  Henry,  Authors' Club,  19,  West  24th-street,]Srew  York,  U.S.A.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  J.  Chantry,  iVe?t'.^eaZ«nc?2^MHesOffice,  Wellington,  New  Zealand.

Harris,  Miss,  40,  Lothrop-street,  Queen's  Park,  Harrow-road,  W.

Harris,  Miss  Isabel,  care  H.  Harris,  26,  Rosary-gardens,  South

Kensington,  London,  S.W.
HarTj  S.  Lavington,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Fawkham,  via  Dartford.
Hastie,  Miss,  Luscar,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Hennings,  Rev.  James,  Duncombe  House,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.
Herbert.  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Hibbs,  Reginald  R.,  1.3,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.
Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Cheltenham.
Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.
HiGGiN,  F.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin.
Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixliam.
Holland,  Mrs.,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Holt,  Mrs.,  The  Cottage,  East  Sheen,  Mortlake,  Surrey.
Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  M.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Hopkinson,  Professor  Alfred,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Hopkinson,  Miss,  37,  Woburn-place,  London,  W.C.
Horne,  Alderson,  10,  Norfolk-street,  London,  W.

Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Howorth,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
Hubbe-Schleiden,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Neuhausen,  near  Munich.
HrjGHES,  Frank  Septimus,  12,  Millbank-street,  S.W.
Humphreys,  Edward  H.  P.,  Denmark  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon-Major,  Government  House,  Ganesh  Khind,
Bombay.

Jackson,  William  Hatchett,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Penwartha,  Weston-
super-Mare.

James,  Mrs.,  10,  Pelhara-place,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Jeaffreson,Rev.  H.  H.,  M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Johnson,  William  Ernest,  B.A.,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.


602


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Joyce,  T.  Heath,  Freshford,  South  Hill,  Bromley,  Kent.

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Kay,  Walmsley  P.,  Bank-terrace,  Darwen.

Keatinge,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  62,  Ijexham-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  2,  Lloyd-place,  Biackheath,  London,  S.E.

Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

Kimball,  Benjamin,  8,  Congress-street,  Boston,  U.S.A.

Kimber,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

KuHLENBECK,  Dr.  Ludwig,  Osnabriick,  Germany.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,F.R.H.S.,  Newlyn  St.  Peter,  Penzance.

Lambert,  Rev.  Brooke,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Vicarage,  Greenwich.

Larken,  Rev.  E.  P.,  B.A.,  Gatton  Tower,  Reigate.

La  Touche,  Mrs.,  Harristown,  Brannoxtown,  Co.  Kildare,  Ireland.

Leap,  Arthur  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Leigh,  W,  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,W.

Leonard,  Arthur  G.,  M.A.,  44,  Highbury  Hill,  London,  N.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Chajnps,  Paris.

LiMOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Lindsay,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  59,  Caversham-i-oad,  London,  N.W.

Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  University  College,  Liverpool.

Macalister,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Cambridge.

Macalister,  J.  Y.  W.,  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,
53,  Berners-street,  W.

Mackenzie,  Miss  Minna,  Pool  House,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross-shire,  N.B.

MacNaughton,  Rev.  Samuel,  M.A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston.

Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.

Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-road,  London,  N.W.

Meade,  Miss,  Heywood,  Ballinakill,  Queen's  County,  Ireland.

Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  George  W.,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.,  Holmbush,  Upper  Richmond-
road,  Putney,  S.W.
Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Marson,  Gervase,  3,  Park-road,  Southport.

Martin,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),
France.

Martin,  W.  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


603


Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.

Mathews,  George  B.,  B.A.,  9,  Menai-view  Terrace,  Upper  Bangor,

North  Wales.
Max,  Professor  Gabriel,  17,  Heustrasse,  Munich.
Mayne,  Arthur  J.,  51,  Ashbourne-grove,  East  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
McChesney,  Mrs.  Joseph  Henry,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Medici,  La  Marchesa,  Villa  Emilia,  Ricorboli,  Florence.
Mellor,  W.  p.,  B.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Miller,  Robert,  6,  Chester-street,  Edinburgh.

Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Milnes,  George  Hutchinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.
MiNOT,  Dr.  C.  Sedgwick,  25,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  U.S.A.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  28,  Hyde  Park-gate,  London,  S.W.
Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.
Money,  Charles  L.,  Northbrook  Cottage,  Petersfield.
Moore,  Major-General  Montgomery,  Dover.
MouL,  Mrs.  10,  Cheniston-gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Moule,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.
MUNRO,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  New  College,  Oxford.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London.
Murray,  R.  Milne,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.O.P.  (Edin.),  10,  Hope-street,
Edinburgh.

Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Mylne,  Mrs.  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  "W.

Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.

Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.

Newton,  Rev.  Richard  Heber,  Garden  City,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Nichols,  Miss  Irene,  Lawford  Hall,  Manningtree.

Nicholls,  Rev.  T.B.,  M  A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.

Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nixon,  Brinsley.

Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  Livingstone  House,  Burgess  Hill,  Sussex.
O'Neill,  Gregory  Lamb,  M.B.,  140,  Elizabeth-street,  Sydney,  New
South  Wales.

Owen,  Rev.  Samuel  Hubert,  Bucknall  Rectory,  Stoke-upon-Trent.
Pagan,  Miss  C,  Masston  Lodge,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
Paget,  Lady,  The  Embassy,  Vienna.

Paige,  William,  M.A.,20,Blandford-road,Bedford  Park,  Chiswick,S.W.
Parker,  Hon.  Mrs.,  60,  Elm  Park-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Parker,  Miss  E.  A:,  The  Elms,  Gosforth,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.


604


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Parry,  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B.  A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  ClewerjWindsor.
Passingham,  Mrs.,  Penrhyn  House,  Alexandra-terrace,  Exmouth.
Peake,  Charles  William,  B.A,,  care  of  Mr.  Wood,  High-street,

Newport  Salop.
Perry,  Edwin  C,  M.A.,  24,  Railway-approach,  London,  S.B.
Pilciier,  Arthur  J.,  Lieutenant  R.E.,  Bromptoii  Barracks,  Chatham.
Plummer,  J.  W.,  Cockermouth.

Podmore,  Rev.  Thompson,  M.A.,  Aston-le- Walls  Rectory,  Byfield,
R.  S.  O.,  Northamptonshire.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  Co.  Dublin.

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  14,  The  Avenue,  Clifton,  Bristol.

PosTGATE,  Professor  J.  P.,  Lit.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Ptotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Pribitkop,  v.,  23,  Troitzky  P^reoulok,  St.  Petersburg.

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela.  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  8,  Ennisniore-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Railton,  Charles  W.,  Woodlands,  Alderley  Edge,  Cheshire.

Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.

Rawson,  Henry  G.,  68,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Reichel,  Principal  Henry  Rudolph,  M.A., University  College,

Bangor,  North  Wales.
RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J.,  B.A.,  General  Post  Office,  Sydney.
Ridley,  Miss,  18,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Roberts,  Rev.  William  W.,  Brook  Dene,  14,  Strawberry  Hill-road,

Twickenham,  S.W.
Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A..  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robins,  Mrs.  E.  C,  8,  Marlborough-road,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.
Robinson,  Mrs.  Lionel,  19,  Kensington-square,  London,  W.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
Rosenbach, Dr. Paul, Kaiserliche  Medicinische  Akademie,  St.

Petersburg.

Ross,  Joseph  Carne,  M.D.,  Parsonage  Nook,  Withington,  Manchester.
Roxburgh,  Robert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-buildings,  Weston-
super-Mare.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath.
Samuel,  Mrs.,

Sawyer,  Miss  Eliza  A.,  2,  Alexandra-villas,  Cheltenham.
Sawyer,  R.  D.,  Sherwood-buildings,  corner  of  57th-street  and  6th-
avenue.  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  B.A.,  129,  High-street,  Eton,  Windsor.

Scholefield,  Rev.  C.  C,  M.A.,  Eton  College,  Windsor.

Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5.  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


605


Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  OVington-square,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.
Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Sherburn,  Henry  Arthur,  Savings  Bank  Department,  General  Post

Oiiice,  London,  E.C.
SiDEBOTHAM,  Edward  J.,  Earlsdene,  Bowden,  Cheshire.
Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W.
Sims,  Mrs.  G-egrgeR.,  12,  Clarence-terrace,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Sladen,  Douglas  B.  W.

Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead.
Smart,  J.  Naish,  Sydney  House,  Burnham.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  15,  Royal  York-crescent,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Smith,  G.  A.,  Manstone  Cottage,  St.  Lawrence,  Kent.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Riverbank,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  Pt.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  56,  Longridge-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland-hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Southward,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.A.,  St.  Catherine's  College,  Cambridge.
Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Stackhouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.
Staple Y,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.
Stillman,  W.  J.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.

Stout,  George  F.,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Stuart,  Morton  G.,  New  University  Club,  St.  James's-street,  S.W.

Sturge,  Miss  Emily,  Tyndall's  Park,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Sturges,  Mrs  William,  32,  Oliarles-street,  Berkeley-square,  London, W.

Swan,  0.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W.

Swanwick,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland,

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  7,  Scarsdale-terrace,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Templeton,  J.  Murray,  Knockderry  Castle, Cove, Dumbartonshire, N.B.
Tennant,  Miss  Dorothy,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  S.W.
Todd,  Mrs.,  Queen  Anne  Chambers,  Bond-street,  Sydney,  New  South
Wales.

Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville  Park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thurstan,  Frederick,  W.,  M.A.,  La  Martiniere,  Luck  now,  India.
Thurtell,  Ellis,  M.A.,  24,  Vereker-road  West  Kensington,  S.W.


606


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Trench,  Rev.  F.  Chenevix.M.A.,  St.  John  Baptist,  Tuebrook,  Liverpool.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris,
North  Wales.

TuKER,  Miss  Mildred,  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  IST.W.
TuRNBDLL,  Mrs.  Peveril  a.,  Sandybrook  Hall,  Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.
Turner,  Miss  Lucy,  1,  Brigstock-road,  Thornton  Heath,  Croydon.  '
TyRer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  C.  W.,  M.A.,  Histon  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Venman,  Hezekiaii,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Ptiversdale,  Crantchester,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.

Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Walker,  Reginald  T.,  27,  Hanover-square,  Leeds.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B.

Wassell,  Henry  A.,  Addenbrook  Villa^  Love-lane,  Stourbridge.
Waterhouse,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  36,  Carl  Ludwig  Strasse,  Wahring,
Vienna.

Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.

White,  William,  Morden  House,  55,  Highbury  Hill,  London,  N.

Whiton,  James  M.,  Ph.D.,  Tremont,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Whitridge,  Frederick  W.,  University  Club,  New  York,  U.S.A.

WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.

Williams,  Lady,  Llanfoist,  Clifton  Down,  Bristol.

Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  5,  John-street,  Bedford-row,  W.C.

Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.

Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone.

WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.

Withers,  John  James,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.

Wood,  Mrs.  T.,  The  Avenue,  Colchester.

Woodhead,  John  E.,  171,  West  Washington-street,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
Worsley,  Mrs.,  Bromley  College,  Kent.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London,W.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  41,  Courtfield-road,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Young,  Rev.  Charles  John,  F.R.A.S.,  Stafford-place,  Halifax.
Young,  Professor  William  H.,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.

N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  iuformation  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,,  •
London,  W.C.  ,


PROCEEDINGS OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOL.  V.


A.

A.  ,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by ...  316

Adie,  Mrs.  and  Miss,  Case  contributed  by ... ...  450

Aksakow,  Alex. ,  Case  contributed  by  434

Aiger,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  293

Animals,  Evidence  for  Psychic  Perception  in 453,  454,  470

Anonymously  contributed.  Cases 293,  .301,  309,  311,  332,  345,  .346,  351,

411,  429,  438,  440,  460
Apparitions  Occurring  Soon  After  Death,  Edmund  Gurney  and  F.  W.  H.

Myers  on 1,  403

„ Analysis  of  Evidence 403-408,  415,  426-432,  473-476

„ Instances 408-426,  432-472,  476

Premonitional,  see  Premonitions

Ai-c,  Joan  of,  Monitions  of ... 543

Automatic  Writing,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 1,  522

,,  ,, Kindred  Automatic  Phenomena ... 138,  148,  522

„  „ Instances  of  ... 3-9,  283-285,  434,  524,  525,  550-559

by  Hypnotised  Subjects  3-9,  283-285,  324,  527,  528
Post-Hypnotic 3-9,  524,  527,  528

B.

B.  ,  Madame,  Case  of 31,  33-49,  164,  221,  374-382,  385-397,  573

B.,  M.  C,  Case  recorded  by 422

Babinski,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of .. 257

Bacchus,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 422

Barkworth,  T.,  On  the  Analogy  between  Hypnotic  Phenomena  and  Cer-
tain Phases  of  Normal  Consciousness 399

Barr,  Miss,  Cases  contributed  by 346,  347

Barter,  General,  Case  contributed  by  469

Beresford,  Lord  Charles,  Case  contributed  by  461


11


Index  to  Vol.  V.


Bettany,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 306

Bickford-Smith,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ...  298

Brighton  Experiments 3

Brooks,  Professor,  Case  contributed  by 291

C. .  ■

Campbell,  General,  Case  contributed  by 476

Castle,  R. ,  Case  contributed  by 348

Catleugh,  W.  T.,  Case  contributed  by  295

Clairvoyance,  Evidence  Pointing  to  Independent 2,  55-113,  148,  151,  153,

157-165

Clark,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  409

Clerke,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... 466

Council  of  the  Society.  See  Officers  and  Council.

Cox,  J. ,  Case  contributed  by 330

Crealock,  Colonel  J.  W.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ... 432

Creery,  the  Misses,  Untrustworthy  Nature  of  some  of  the  Experiments

with 269

Crystal  Vision-
History  of 490-504

Recent  Experiments  in 286,  298,  486

Prevision 298,  515-518

Sub-Conscious  jNIemory ...  505-512

Telepathic  (or  Clairvoyant) 500,  519

Curtis,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  303

,, ,, R.  F.,  Case  contributed  by  332

D.

De  Morgan,  Mrs.,  Cases  recorded  by 339,  502

Dessoir,  Max,  Experiments  in  Thought-transference  ... ... 355

,, ,, Review  of  Dr.  Albert  Moll's  "  Hypnotism '' 566

Donaldson,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  . . . 340

Dreams,  Automatism  of . . ... ... ... ... ... ...  5.35-538

,, Premonitional 293,  311-353

,, Veridical 162-163

Dusart,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of ...  223

E.

Edlsbury,  J.  F. ,  Case  contributed  by  318

Elliotson,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by  390

Ellis,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 342

Ellis,  Mrs.,  Note  on  an  Experiment  in  Post-Hypnotic  Suggestion  ... 12,  13


Index  to  Vol.  V.


Ill


Faulkner,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 417

Ferrari,  M. ,  Case  recorded  by 163

Fleet,  C.  F.,  Case  contributed  by 326

Fontan,  Prof.,  "  Hystero-epilepsie,"  by,  Critical  Notice  of 263

G.

GiBERT,  M.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 44,  45,  221

Gley,  Dr.  E. ,  Case  recorded  by ... . .  223

Goodall,  E.  A. ,  Case  contributed  by 453

Green,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 420

Gurney,  Edmund,  Apparitions  Occurring  soon  after  Deatli  (completed  by

F.  W.  H.  Myers)  1,403

,,  ,, Experimental  P.sycliology,  Mr. Gurney 's Work  in,

F.  W.  H.  Myers  and  Professor  Sidgwick  on... 271,  359

,, ,, Hypnotism,  Recent  Experiments  in . 3

,,  ,, and  Telepathy 216

,, Memorial Library. Formation  of the "  Edmund

Gurney  "  Library  575

H.

H.,  Col.,  Case  contributed  by 412

H. ,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by ... 303

Hallucinations. Premonitional 293-310, 515-518

Hericourt,  M.,  Hypnotic  Experiments,  &c.,  of 32,  45,  163,  222

Hockley,  Mr. ,  on  Crystal  Vision  ... ... 503

Holmes,  J.,  Case  contributed  by  320

Hunter,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 338

Howe,  Mr. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  436

Husbands,  J.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  416

Hypnotism —  ,
Experimental  Evidence  3,  32-138,  148-168,  216,  263,  279,  399,  .524,

527,  559-563

Action  a  Distance 47-55,264,561-562

Automatic  Writing  by  Hypnotised  Subjects  3-9,  283-285,  388,  524-527

Curative  Effects  of 13,  253,  263

Diagnosis  of  Disease  by  Hypnotised  Subjects 116-138

Drawings,  Reproductions  of,  by  Hypnotised  Subjects 57-113

Genesis  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena ...  216

Hypnotic  Clairvoyance 77-116,  148-153,  157

,, Ecstasy 396

„ Hallucination 10-13,  282,  283,  284

Memory 10,  387,  391-396

„ Rapport 241-246


iv


Index  to  Vol.  V.


Hyi)notic  Suggestion 10,  224,  236,  263

„  „  Post-Hypnotic ...  11-13,263,375-381,542,527

Self-Suggestion 280-289,  561

Local  Antesthesia 14-17,  254,  280-282,  375-388,  573

Magnets,  Experiments  with 257,  263,  268

Personality  in  the  Light  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion 374

Physical  Influence,  Facts  Pointing  to  a  Specific ...  246,  250,  252,  254

Sommeil  a  Distance 32-47,  220-223

Spiritualism  and 279,  563-565

Telepathic 55-77,  216,  559

Transference  of  Sensation 257,  264-267

Transposition  of  Senses 266-267

Unconscious  Waking  States,  Phenomena  of 375-397


J.

Janet,  Pkof. Pierre,  Hypnotic  Experiments and Uesearches  of,

31,  42,  43,  221,  222,  374


Judd,  Mrs.,  Case  Contrihuted  by 437

K.

K.,  Fraulein,  Case  contriljuted  by ...  335

K.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by ... ..  461

Kernochan,  C.  A.,  Case  recorded  by ... ...  449

King,  George,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  455

L.

Levey,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ■. 306

Lewin,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 462

Liebeault,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of  . . . ... ...  253

Licgeois,  Prof.  Hypnotic  Piesearches  and  Experiments  of ...  383

Library,  Formation  of  the  "  Edmund  Gurney  "  Memorial, ...  575

,, List  of  Subscribers ... ... ... ... ...  575

„ Works 577

M.

M.,  Mrs.  M.  L.,  Case  recorded  by 517

Mabire,  J.  E.,  Experiments  in  Thoiight-tran.sference 169

Mackenzie,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  . . . 343,  344

Maclaclilan,  Archibald,  Case  contributed liy ... ...  304

Mathews,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 249

JNIathews,  Mrs.  Charles,  Case  recorded  by 447

Medwell,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 340


Index  to  Vol.  V.


V


Meetings  of  the  Society 1,  2,  271,  279,  399,  403,  486

Mesmerism  Hypnotism.

Moll,  Dr.  Albert,  "  Der  Hypnotismus,"  by.  Review  of 566

Morrison,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 305

Myers,  Dr.  A.  T.,  Kecent  Experiments  in  Thought-transference  and

Independent  Clairvoyance 2

Myers,  F.  W.  H. ,  Apparitions  Occurring  soon  after  Deatli,  completed  by  403
Automatic  Writing  :  The  Dicmon  of  Socrates  ...  1,522

French  Experiments  on  Strata  of  Personality 374

Work  of  Edmund  Clurney  in  Experimental  Psychology  359


O.


Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society 590

Ogle,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  ...


460


O'Gorman,  Mrs.  Barclay,  Case  contributed  by 295


Personality,  French  Experiments  on  Strata  of ,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  ...  374

Diagram  Illustrating  Stages  of 397

Pe^aro,  Experiments  at 549

Physical  Influence,  Evidence  Pointing  to  a  Specilic— From  one  Organism

to  another —

Hypnotic  Cases 246,  250,  252,  254

Non-hypnotic  247

Pochin,  Kev.  E.  N.,  Case  contributed  by 33

Premonitions 2,  288,  515-518

by  Dreams 293,  311-353

,,  ,,  Hallucination —

Auditory 305-310

Visual ... 291-305,  515-518

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  on  the  Evidence  for 2,288

Presidential  Addresses 1,  271,  399

Probabilities,  Calculus  of,  in  Psychical  Research 24-54,  114,  138-139,  150,  151


K.

Reay,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  313

Reviews --^SO,  263,  566

Richardson,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  420

Richet, Prof.  Ch.,  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences  sur  la  Trans-
mission Mentale,"  par 18

Richet  Prof.  Ch.,  Hypnotic  Researches  and  Experiments  of  18,  223,  279,

374,  573


VI


Index  to  Vol.  V.


Richet,  Madame,  Case  contributed  by 162

Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Case  recorded  by ...  503

Rossi-Pagnoni,  Prof.,  Experiments  of,  at  Pesaro ... ... 549

Rowlands,  Rowland,  Case  contributed  by 341

S.

Sayles,  Ira,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... ... ...  429

Schmol],  Anton,  Experiments  in  Thought-transferrence 169

Schweitzer,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  322

Secondary  Intelligence. French  Experiments  in  Strata  of  Personality  ...  374

See  also  Phenomena  of  Automatic  Writing.
Self-Suggestion.  See  Hypnotism.

Seybert  Committee,  Report  of,  on  Spiritualism 260

Sidgwick,  Mrs. ,  on  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions 2,  288

Sidgwick,  Prof. ,  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research... ... ...  486

,, ,, Presidential  Addresses 1,  271,  399

Skilton,  J.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  333

Smith,  H.  Babington,  on  a  Series  of  Experiments  at  Pesaro ... ...  549

Smith,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  319

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  Case  contributed  by 454

Smith,  Rev.  Walter,  Case  contributed  by ... ... 344

Society  for  Psychical  Research —
Circular  III.,  issued  by — (i)

General  Meetings,  Ordinary 1,  2,  271,  279,  399,  403,  486

Members,  Associates,  and  Honorary  Members 590

Officers  and  Council 590

Socrates,  The  Uxmon  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 522,  538-543

Spiritualism —

Prof.  Sidgwick  on  the  Attitude of the Society  towards  the

Phenomena  of 399

Recent  Experiments  in  Spiritualistic  Phenomena 138,  549

Report  of  the  Seybert  Conmiittee  on 260

Stella,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 337,  338

Stewart,  Prof. ,  Prof.  Sidgwick  on  the  Death  of ...  1

Stone,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 299

Sudeley,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by 458

T.

Tandy,  Rev.  G.  M.,  Case  contributed  by 408

Taylor,  Rev.  C.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 459

Telepathy  and  Hypnotism,  Edumnd  Gurney  on 216

,, Telepathic  Crystal  Visions 500,  519

,, Dreams 162,  163


Index  to  Vol. V.  \  ii

Thought-transference —

Experimental  Evidence —

With  Mental  Commands 202-203,  204

„ Pictures 208-215,355,356

„ Playing  Cards 195-197,  198-202

,, Words  and  Names 197,198

Mental  Condition  of  Percipients  during 206,  207

Reproductions  (Plates  of)  made  by  Sensitives  ...  173-195,  208-215,  355-356

Treloar,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 307

Trevor,  T.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... 314

Tyre,  D.  M.,  Case  contributed  by  418

V.  .  ;

Vay,  Baroness  von,  Crystal  Visions  of 504

W.

W. ,  Miss  J.  J. ,  Case  recorded  by 516

Walker,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 464

Webley,  Mr.s. ,  Case  of 459

Welman,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by 302

Wherry,  Mr. ,  Case  recorded  by 248

Williams,  John,  Case  recorded  by 324

"  Willing  Game,"  Phenomena  of 248,249

X. ,  Me.  and  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  .. • ... 442-444


Z.


Z. ,  Mr.  ,  Case  contributed  by
