Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. 8 (Society for Psychical Research, 1892)
================================================================================================
Society for Psychical Research — Contains Richard Hodgson's landmark investigation of the trance medium Mrs. Piper — the most cited SPR report ever. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (proceedingsofsoc08soci) — Vol. 8, 1892.

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 

PROCEEDINGS 

OF  THE  ■    .      ■  :• 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARIH. 

VOLUME  VIII 
(CONTAINING    PARTS    XXI- XXIII.) 

1892.  •  _ 

London : 

KEGAN    PAUL,    TRENCH,    TRUBNER    and   CO.,  Limited. 
CHARING    CROSS  ROAD. 
1892. 

London : 

National  Press  Agency,  Limited, 
13,  Whitefriaks  Street,  E.G. 

5  5  -ISO 

r 

a 
J. 

A   Record   of  Observations   of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  By 
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D  : — 
§  1.  Introductory  ........ 

§  2.  Some  Peculiarities  of  the  Trance  State  . 
§  3.  Hypothesis  of  Fraud  ...... 

§  4.  Hypothesis  of  Thought-Transference  from  the  Sitters 
§  5.  Clairvoj^ance  and  Prophecy  ..... 

§  6.  The   "  Spirit  "  Hypothesis  Concerning  Pliinuit  and  other 
"Controls" 
Mrs.  Piper's  Early  Trances  . 
Phinuit's  Account  of  Himself 
§  9.  Relation  of  Phinuit  to  Mrs.  Piper 
!^10.  Conclusion  .... 

§  7. 

§  8. 

Detailed  Reports  of  Sittings 
^jjGenei-al  Meetings  ... 
;  On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge  on 
S  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.    By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  . 

the    part  of 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring  of  Phenomena  sometimes  attribu 

ted  to  Spirit  Agency.    By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D. 
Record  of  a  Haunted  Hou.se.    By  Miss  R.  C.  Morton 
i  he  Subliminal  Consciousness.    Chap.  III.    Tlie  Mechanism  of  Genius 

Chap.  IV.    Hypermnesic  Dreams.    By  F.  W.  H.  Myers 
Further  Information  as  to  Dr.  Backman's  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance 
General  Meetings  ......... 

De  I'Appreciation   du  Temps  par  les  Somnambules.     Par  M.  J 

I)elbcevf,  PrvfesseiiV  a  I'Universite  de  Liege 
Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.    By  Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw 
The  Subliminal  Consciousness.    Chap.  V.    Sensory  Automatism  and 

Induced  Hallucinations.    By  F.  W.  H.  Myers 
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.    By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and 

Miss  Alice  Johnson  

Supplement. 

I.    William  Stainton  Moses.    By  F.  W.  H.  Myers 
II.    The  Second  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology. 
Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  . 
List  of  Members  and  Associates  .       .       .       .       .       .       .  . 

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch 

PAGE 

1 

4 
6 
9 

27" 

28 
46 
50 
54 
56 
59 
169 

170 

253 
311 

333 
405 
413 

414 
422 

436 

536 

597 
601 
612 
615 
636 

c.  r  c 

ee  ft  ■«  , 

c   t  e  r 

«.  r  •  r  *- 

«    «    k  » 

•  *■  » 

• u •  • 

•        •  • 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH. 

A  RECORD  OF  OBSERVATIONS  OF  CERTAIN  PHENOMENA 

OF  TRANCE. 

By  Richakd  Hodgson,  LL.D. 
(27i./s  Paper  is  a  sequel  to  those  in  Proceedings,  Vul.  VI.,  X'P-  4-jG-650.) 

§   1.  IXTRODUCTORY. 

My  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  began  early  in  May,  1887,  aljout  a 
fortnight  after  my  arrival  in  Boston.  Professor  William  J ames  men- 
tioned her  to  me,  and  apjjointed  an  hour,  without,  of  course,  mentioning 
my  name,  at  which  Mrs.  Piper  could  give  me  a  sitting.  Mrs.  Piper, 
however,  was  engaged  at  the  time  I  called,  and  could  see  me  only  tO' 
arrange  for  a  sitting  a  day  or  two  later.  As  my  readers  know,  from  the 
article  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  436-650,  Mrs.  Piper  passes 
into  the  so-called  "mediumistic  trance,"  and  then  usually  purjjorts  to  be 
"controlled"  by  a  "Doctor  Phinuit."  For  convenience  of  reference  I 
shall  speak  of  "  Phinuit  "  as  a  distinct  personality,  and  consider  later 
some  points  that  bear  on  the  probability  or  improbability  that  Phinuit 
is  an  intelligence  entirely  separate  from  the  individuality  of  Mrs.  Piper. 
After  I  had  had  several  sittings  I  infoi-med  Mrs.  Piper  of  my  name 
and  address,  ifec,  for  convenience  in  arranging  sittings — either  for 
myself  or  for  other  persons — and  I  estimate  that  I  have  made  appoint- 
ments for  at  least  fifty  persons  whom  I  believed  to  be  sti'angers  to  Mrs.. 
Piper.  At  one  time  I  arranged  with  Mrs.  Piper  that  she  should  give 
me  the  first  hour  on  three  mornings  of  the  week  for  several  successive- 
weeks,  and  I  sent  persons  at  these  times  to  keep  the  appointment,, 
usually  warning  them  not  to  speak  of  their  intended  visit  e^'en  in  the- 
presence  of  their  nearest  relatives,  while  Mrs.  Piper  knew  simply  that 
either  myself  or  some  person  deputed  by  me  would  fill  each  engagement.. 
On  a  few  occasions  I  accompanied  the  sitters  and  took  notes  of  the 
sittings. 

Several  times  Mrs.  Piper  was  unable  to  go  into  trance  at  all.  At 
other  times  the  attempts  of  Phinuit  to  give  information  to  the  sitters- 

B 

2 

Mr.  B.  Hod(j?on. 

were  not  only  unsatisfactory,  hnt  were  calculated  to  produce  the  opinion 
that  he  had  no  supernormal  faculty  whateA^er,  but  was  "  fishing  "  and 
"  shuffling "  like  any  ordinary  pseudo-medium,  and  this  opinion  was 
produced  in  some  of  the  sitters,  who  i-egarded  Mrs.  Piper  as  probably 
fraudulent.  Others  again  believed  themselves  to  be,  through  Phinuit, 
actually  conversing  with  their  deceased  friends,  while  others  regarded 
the  communications  as  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  that  Mrs.  Piper 
in  her  trance  state  possesses  the  power  of  getting  glimpses  into  the 
sitter's  past  experiences,  or,  to  use  the  phrase  of  one  sitter,  of  "  fingering 
in  the  wastepajjer  basket  of  our  memories."  These  sittings,  therefore, 
were  very  much  of  the  same  character  as  those  already  reported  in 
Vol.  VI.  of  our  Proceedings.  Much  interest  was  aroused  by  these 
preliminary  inquiries,  which  I  conducted  for  my  own  personal  satisfac- 
tion, and  finally,  in  1888,  a  serious  attempt  was  made  by  the  Com- 
mittee on  Mediumistic  Phenomena  (apjDointed  by  the  Council  of  the 
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research)  to  investigate  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  I  extract  the  following  from  the  Report  of  the  Committee  {Pro- 
ceedings of  the  American  Society  for  Psychiccd  Research,  p.  320) : — 

"During  the  year  the  committee,  as  such,  has  undertaken  the  careful 
examination  of  the  resuUs  obtained  by  one  well-known  ti-ance  medium,  who 
is  reported  to  liave  given  to  many  prudent  sitters  names  and  communications 
of  such  accuracy  and  fulness  that  it  is  supposed  tliat  such  results  coukl  only 
he  reached  by  some  occult  agency,  or  by  some  mental  jirocess  whicli  is  not 
exactly  recognised  as  yet.  The  committee  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  reality 
of  sucli  phenomena  could  probablj^  be  satisfactorily  determined  by  a  series  of 
sittings  held  with  suitable  sitters  under  the  personal  supervision  of  a  member 
of  the  connnittee  and  stenographically  reported.  In  this  plan  we  were  aided 
very  materially  by  the  generous  co-oi)ei'ation  of  the  medium,  who  expressed 
herself  ready  and  willing  to  act  with  us  in  our  work.  Thus  far  we  have  been 
able  to  have  only  eight  <jr  ten  sittings  in  which  the  desired  conditions  were 
reasonably  fulfilled.  Tlie  results  tluis  obtained  are  not  of  such  a  character  as 
to  warrant  any  very  decided  judgment  as  to  the  nature  of  the  phenomena 
imder  examination,  but  they  throw  some  light  on  the  questions  involved." 

This  special  investigation  ended  owing  to  lack  of  funds.  The  com- 
mittee regarded  the  stenographic  reports  as  essential,  and  these  were 
expensive. 

I  had  the  opportunity  of  studying  the  stenographic  reports  men- 
tioned in  the  above  extract,  and  also  the  comments  of  the  sitter  and  of 
the  meml)er  <>f  the  committee  in  each  case.  I  have  also  in  my  posses- 
sion several  stenographic  I'eports  of  sittings  made  at  the  instance  of 
Professor  James  previous  to  my  arrival  in  America.  In  addition  I  have 
had  sittings  for  the  purpose  of  testing  Phinuit's  capacities  in  various 
ways,  aiul  among  them  a  series  of  sittings  which  Mrs.  Piper  gave 
gratuitously,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  me  to  find  out  what  T  could 
'from  Phinuit,  in  any  way  that  I  chose,  concerning  his  own  personality. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

3 

his  knowledge,  his  rehitions  to  Mrs.  Piper,  itc.  Tliis  series  of  sittings  last 
referred  to,  of  which  the  circumstances  at  the  time  permitted  me  to  have 
only  five,  were  stenographically  reported,  also  gratuitously,  by  a  lady 
member  of  our  Society  who  had  had  frequent  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  was  well  known  to  the  Phinuit  personality.  Furthermore,  I  have 
received  oi-al  accounts  from  a  large  number  of  pei'sons,  some  of  whoin 
hava  had  frequent  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  for  several  years,  indepen- 
dently of  my  arrangements.  I  have  before  me  also  the  I'eports  of  Mrs. 
Piper's  sittings  in  England.  Mrs.  Piper,  throughout  all  my  acquaint- 
ance with  her,  has  shown  the  fullest  readiness  to  accept  my  suggestions 
in  any  way  whatever  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  the 
Phinuit  personality,  and  both  she  and  Phinuit  gave  me  full  permission 
to  try  and  test  in  any  way  that  I  might  think  desirable.  As  my  investi- 
gations have  proceeded  I  have  been  more  and  more  strengthened  in  the 
conviction  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  is  a  genuine  abnoinial  state,  and 
that  the  normal  waking  Mi's.  Piper  has  no  direct  knowledge  whatever 
of  the  sayings  and  doings  of  her  trance  personality.  That  she  exhil^its 
supernormal  phenomena  in  the  trance  state  I  have  no  doubt.  In  brief, 
I  find  myself  in  entire  agreement  with  the  formal  summary  report  pre- 
sented by  Professor  Lodge  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  443, 
which  ran,  it  will  be  remembered,  as  follows  : — 

"It  is  the  case  of  a  lady  who  appears  to  go  off  into  a  trance  when  she 
pleases  to  will  it  under  favourable  surroundings,  and  in  that  trance  to  talk 
volubly,  with  a  manner  and  voice  quite  different  from  her  ordinary  manner 
and  voice,  on  details  concerning  which  she  lias  had  no  information  given  lier. 

"  In  tliis  abnormal  state  lier  speech  has  reference  mainly  to  people's 
relatives  and  friends,  living  or  deceased,  about  whom  she  is  able  to  hold  a 
conversation,  and  with  whom  she  ajDpears  more  or  less  familiar. 

"  By  introducing  anonymous  strangers,  and  by  catechising  lier  myself  in 
various  ways,  I  have  satisfied  myself  that  much  of  the  information  she 
possesses  in  the  trance  state  is  not  ac(:[uired  by  ordinary  commonplace 
methods,  but  that  she  has  some  unusual  means  of  acquiring  information. 
The  facts  on  which  she  discourses  are  usually  within  the  knowledge  of  some 
l)erson  present,  though  they  are  often  entirely  out  of  his  conscious  thought 
at  the  time.  Occasionally  facts  have  been  narrated  which  have  only  been 
verified  afterwai-ds,  and  which  are  in  good  faith  asserted  never  to  have  been 
known  ;  meaning  tliereby  that  they  have  left  no  trace  on  the  conscious 
memory  of  any  person  present  or  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that  it  is  liighly 
improbable  that  they  were  ever  known  to  such  persons. 

"  She  is  also  in  the  trance  state  able  to  diagnose  diseases  and  to  specify 
the  owners  or  late  owners  of  portable  property,  under  circumstances  which 
IJreclude  the  application  of  ordinary  metliods. 

"  In  the  midst  of  this  lucidity  a  numlicr  of  mistaken  and  confused 
statements  are  frequently  made,  having  little  or  no  apparent  meaning  or 
application. 

"  Concerning  the  particular  means  by  which  she  ac(]^uires  the  different 

4 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

kinds  of  iiifunuation,  there  i.s  no  .sufficient  evitleuce  to  make  it  safe  to  draw 
any  cijnclusion.  I  can  only  say  with  certainty  tliat  it  is  by  none  of  tlie 
ordinary  methods  known  t(.i  Physical  Science." 

...        S  2.  Some  Peculiarities  of  the  Trance  State. 

Mrs.  Piper  seems,  so  far  as  my  experiments  have  gone,  to  be  partially 
an;esthetic  in  the  medium-trance.  Prr)fessor  James  tells  me  that  on  one 
occasion  he  found  the  lips  and  tongue  analgesic.  Phinuit  claims  to 
have  neither  taste  nor  smell,  and  I  was  unable  to  get  any  indications  of 
them.  Once,  however,  when  I  was  testing  Phinuit's  knowledge  of  herbs 
(see  below,  p.  51),  Mrs.  Blodgett  was  present  and  tasted  one  of  the 
specimens,  whereupon  Phinuit  put  a  portion  in  his  mouth,  but  in  reply 
to  my  inquiry  said  that  he  could  not  taste  it.  Pliinuit  claimed  to  get 
no  sensations  of  smell  fr(»m  a  scent-bag  or  a  bottle  of  perfume, — at 
which  I  was  not  surprised,  since,  on  a  previous  occasion,  I  could  not 
detect  the  smallest  signs  of  discomfort^  after  he  had  taken  several 
inhalations  of  strong  annnonia.  I  took  special  care  to  see  that  the 
ammonia  was  actually  inhaled.  Similarly  lie  appeared  to  be  quite  un- 
aware of  a  spoonful  of  salt  which  I  placed  in  his  mouth.  Dr.  C.  W.  F. 
states  (see  below.  Reports  of  Sittings,  No.  23)  that  the  sense  of  taste 
Avas  in  the  forehead,  but  the  single  incident  upon  which  he  founded  this 
f)pinion  is  capable  oi  another  exjilanation.     Dr.  F.  writes  to  me  : — 

Fi'hyvary  Wth,  1891. 
"At  my  first  seance  with  Mrs.  Piper,  Phinuit  said,  '  Get  the  medium  to 
cut  off  a  lock  of  your  liair  for  me  to  examine  and  then  prescribe  some 
medicine  for  you.'  This  was  done  and  the  medicine  sent  to  me,  and  I  took  it 
for  a  time,  and  thought  it  sootlied  the  bladder.  I  put  a  small  vial  of  it  in  my 
pocket  before  visiting  Mi's.  Piper  again,  as  I  wished  Phinuit  to  tell  me  what 
it  was.  I  took  it  from  my  pocket  during  the  trance  and  handed  it  to  her, 
when  she  removed  the  cork  and  wetted  her  finger  either  from  the  cork  or 
vial  and  placed  it  to  her  forehead.  Phinuit  remarked  that  it  was  all  right, 
correctly  prepared.  It  contained,  among  other  tilings,  uva  ursi  and  wild 
carrot.  I  now  remember  asking  him  the  question,  '  Why  was  it  necessary 
for  you  to  have  a  lock  of  my  hair  to  examine  before  prescribing  for  me  when 
you  had  me  right  before  you  ? '  His  answer  was  to  the  effect  that  the 
medicine  might  be  examined  liy  him  after  its  preparation  to  see  that  it  was 
all  right.  He  then  instanced  a  case  he  prescribed  for  where  a  wrong  salt  was 
used  by  the  apothecary  to  the  injury  of  the  lady  having  the  seance.  I  made 
no  further  experiment  as  to  the  seat  of  the  sense  of  ta.ste." 

On  the  other  hand.  Miss  W.  relates  an  incident  that  seems  to  l)ear 
on  this  point  (see  p.  31),  where  Phiiuiit  apparently  went  through  the 
process  of  "  tasting,"  and  suggested  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  eating 
onions.    Miss  W.  further  writes  : — 

^  Mrs.  Piper  suffered  somewhat  after  the  trance  was  over. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  5 

"Dr.  Pliinuit  seemed  to  ki^te  the  onion.  The  tongue  moved  about  in  the 
mouth  and  smacked  on  tlie  lips  for  several  seconds,  while  I  -waited  witli  much 
curiosity.  Neither  then  nor  afterwards  did  I  get  any  hint  of  the  odour 
rhrougli  my  own  nostrils." 

He  localised  pinches  correctly  in  vaiious  pai-ts  of  the  body,  and 
sensations  of  touch,  teinjserature,  pressure,  and  the  muscular  sense  seem 
to  be  all  present,  though  apparently  somewhat  enfeebled.  The  sense  of 
hearing  is  pi'esent,  though  this  seems  to  vary  in  hneness  to  a  certain 
extent  in  different  trances.  AVhen  I  made  some  rough  experiments  on 
localisation  by  pinching — sometimes  rather  severely — Phinuit  explained 
that  he  "  lost  control "  temporaiily  of  that  portion  of  the  body. 
"  Makes  it  like  a  stick.  I  have  got  no  feeling  in  that  foi-  a  time,  but 
when  you  let  g(j  I  feel  it  again."  Later  on,  unexpectedly,  I  held  a 
lighted  match  to  the  left  forearm.  The  arm  was  drawn  away,  not 
suddenly,  but  slowly,  as  though  a  vague  discomfoit  was  appreciated. 
"  Oui,  I  feel  it,"  exclaimed  Phinuit.  "  Did  you  feel  pain  ? "  "  No,  felt 
cold — cold,  I  think."  I  have  not  tried  any  severe  pain  tests.  (See 
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  447.)  Whenever  I  examined  the  eye- 
balls in  the  medium-trance  I  found  them  rolled  up,  and  the  pupils 
reacted  to  light.  They  reacted  also,  I  learn  from  Professor  James,  in 
the  ordinaiy  hyjjnosis  which  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  with  Mrs.  Pi2:)ei-. 
On  one  occasion,  having  persuaded  Phinuit  to  stand  uji,^  I  held  the 
eyelids  up  and  ui*ged  Phinuit  to  force  the  eyeballs  into  their  oi'dinary 
waking  position.  This  seemed  to  involve  considerable  effort  on  Phijiuit's 
part,  and  Mrs.  Piper's  face  became  much  drawn  and  rather  ghastly 
during  the  process.  The  eyeballs,  with  a  vacant  stare,  I'emained  down 
for  about  half  a  minute,  though  I  did  not  take  the  exact  time,  and  then 
suddenly  rolled  uj?  again.  (At  the  end  of  that  sitting  Mrs.  Piper  was 
an  exceptionally  long  time  recovering  from  trance.  Phinuit  had  said 
"  Au  revoir,"  but  after  several  minutes  spoke  again  in  a  low  voice,  and 
complained  that  he  had  "got  twisted  round  somehow  and  could  not  find 
his  way  out."  After  a  short  interval,  however,  Mrs.  Pijier  began  to 
come  to  herself  in  the  usual  way.) 

Here  I  fully  expected  to  have  added  the  report  of  Mrs.  Pipei''s 
physician,  who  attended  her  for  several  months  in  1890,  and  who  was 
present  at  a  sitting  which  Mrs.  Piper  gave  on  December  4th,  1890; 
but  after  hesitating  for  some  time  he  absolutely  refused  to  make  any 
report  whatever. 

Dr.  Wadsworth,  who  made  aii  examination  of  Mrs.  Piper's  eyes  in 

1  Mrs.  Piper  stood  up  without  changiug  the  position  of  her  feet,  at  the  same 
time  tluowiug  her  head  slightly  back  and  her  chest  forward,  and  thrusting  the 
thumbs  jauntily  into  what  would  have  been  the  armholes  of  her  waistcoat  had  she 
worn  one. 

6 

Mr.  11  Hodgson. 

the  normal  state,  informs  me  that  she  has  slight  astigmatism,  l)ut  that 
otherwise  the  eyes  are  normal  in  all  respects.^ 

§  3.  Hypothesis  of  Fraud  o\  the  Part  of  Mrs.  Piper. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  in  estimating  the  value  of  my  own  as  of 
iill  other  sittings,  I  was  comijelled  to  assume,  in  the  first  instance, 
that  Mrs.  Piper  was  fraudulent  and  obtained  her  information  previously 
by  ordinary  means,  such  as  inquiries  by  confederates,  etc.  Not  only 
Avas  this  assumption  as  to  Mrs.  Piper's  fraud  necessary,  but  it  was  also 
needful  to  suppose  that  she  worked  herself  into  a  hyperresthetic  state 
during  which  she  obtained  mucli  further  information  given  in  various 
ways  by  the  sitter,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  speech,  gesture,  and 
other  muscular  action.  That  I  did  not  olitain  a  sitting  at  my  first  visit 
might  be  j^ointed  to  as  a  very  suspicious  circumstance,  and  it  might  well 
be  supposed  that,  in  consequence  of  my  known  connection  with  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Mrs.  Piper  might  have  previously  "got 
lip  "  information  about  myself  and  othei;  active  workers  in  the  Society 
in  the  expectation  of  future  use.  The  inadequacy,  moreover,  of  my 
notes  may  also  he  alleged,  since  they  were  not  absolutely  verbatim  and 
my  attention  was  more  or  less  given  to  the  associations  connected  with 
the  information  communicated  l)y  Phinuit.  In  reply  to  this  I  can  only- 
say  that  I  have  striven  Avith  the  utmost  care  to  avoid  attributing  to 
Phinuit  any  statement  which  might  have  been  obtained  previously  from 
my  own  words.-  My  opinion  about  my  own  sittings  is  that  they  would 
ap2)ear  much  more  i-emarl^able  if  stenographic  I'eports  had  l)een  taken. 

Now,  we  cannot  argue  that  the  facts  i-elated  to  me  by  Phinuit  were 
jiot  such  as  were  likely  to  have  been  prov  ided  by  confederates,  because 
we  must  suj^pose  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  an  astuteness  at  least  equal  to 
ours,  and  would  theiefore  anticipate  an  argument  of  this  kind.  And 
there  is  hardly  any  single  fact  about  any  single  person  of  which  a  mediuin 
may  not  be  legitimately  supposed  to  have  acquired  some  knowledge, 
either  accidentally  or  by  systematic  secret  inquiry.  The  difficulty  in 
supposing  that  Phinuit's  knowledge  has  been  acquired  in  this  way  is 

^  Exaiiiination  hij  O.  F.  Wadswortli,  M.D.,  Boston,  Muss. — Mrs.  L.  E.  Piper, 
January  11th,  1891. — Eyes  on  external  inspection  normal  in  appearance.  Right  eye  : 
vision,  with — '25  sph.  and  +  75  cyl.,  axis  vertical,  1^  +.  Left  eye:  vision,  with 
+  -50 cyl.,  axis  vertical,  +.  Reads  '.o  Snellen  2G"  to  9".  Field  of  vision  in  each  eye 
normal.    Colour  sense  normal.    Fundus  normal. 

-  In  recording  the  early  sittings  both  of  myself  and  other  persons,  my  object  was 
not  so  much  to  note  down  every  word  of  Phinuit,  but  to  note  the  substance  of  sucli 
specific  statements  as  were  made  by  Phinuit  without  help  from  the  sitter,  using,  of 
course,  Phinuit's  words  as  far  as  possible.  I  did  not,  moreover,  anticipate  any  detailtd 
publicaiton  of  these  early  records,  which  I  made  for  my  own  satisfaction  and  for 
subsequent  questioning  of  the  sitters,  at  a  time  when  I  was  looking  forward  to  a 
systematic  examination  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  state  by  the  then  existing  American 
S.P.R. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  7 

owing  to  the  large  number  of  facts  communicated  concerning  a  large 
number  of  different  sitters,  sj^ecial  care  having  been  taken  with  the  view 
of  preventing  Mrs.  Piper's  knowing  anything  of  these  persons  before- 
hand. There  is,  I  think,  in  the  reports  which  follow,  enough  evidence 
to  show  that  fraud  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper  is  very  far  from  lieing  an 
adequate  explanation,  though  it  is,  of  course,  conceivable  that  in 
some  cases  Mrs.  Piper,  had  she  been  fraudulent,  might  have  acquired  by 
ordinary  means  such  information  as  Phinuit  gave  to  the  sitter.  Mr. 
John  F.  Brown,  for  example,  appears  to  have  concluded  that  this 
supposition,  allowing  also  for  guesswork  and  questioning  during  the 
sitting,  is  the  actual  explanation  of  his  own  experiences  with  Mi's. 
Piper  {Jiejwrts  of  Sittings,  No.  13) ;  and  Professor  Henry  P.  Bowditch, 
M.D.,  has  given  me  an  account  of  some  circumstances  which  he  finds 
hard  to  explain,  except  upon  the  hypothesis  that  Mrs.  Piper  was 
acting  fraudulently. 

Professor   Bowditch  had  a    sitting    with    Mrs.   Piper   in  May, 

1886,  at  which  the  communications  were  entirely  irrelevant.  His  con- 
nection with  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  was 
prominent,  and  he  might  have  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Piper  presiding  at 
public  meetingis,  and  his  name  ascertained.  He  is  frequently  called  Dr. 
Henry  Bowditch.  An  uncle  of  his,  Hem-y  I.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  was  also 
well  known  as  a  practising  physician  in  Boston.    About  December, 

1887,  Professor  Bowditch,  accompanied  by  his  brother's  wife,  called  on 
Mrs.  Piper  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  sitting.  Mrs.  Piper,  he  says, 
declined  to  give  a  sitting  o)i  the  plea  of  ill-health,  l)ut  held  some  con- 
versation with  them,  and  presumably  recognised  Professor  Bowditch. 
Sevei-al  weeks  later  I  arranged  a  sitting  for  them,  at  the  rec|uest  of  Pro- 
fessor Bowditch,  without,  of  course,  mentioning  any  names.  At  this 
sitting,  which  was  held  on  January  17th,  1888,  several  specific  details 
were  given  which  purported  to  come  from  a  deceased  lady  well  known 
to  the  sitters.  Her  Christian  name  and  surname  were  correctly  given, 
and  also  the  place  of  her  death,  in  Europe ;  but  the  references  to  Pro- 
fessor Bowditch,  his  father,  and  other  relatives  were  incori'«ct  as  apjjlied 
to  him,  but  would  have  been  correct  if  applied  to  his  uncle.  Dr.  Henry 
I.  Bowditch,  to  whom  also  the  deceased  lady  had  been  well  knowii. 
Moreover,  no  statements  at  all  were  made  which  appeared  specially  to 
concern  Professor  Bowditch's  sister-in-law,  who  accompanied  him.  It 
was  plain  to  him  during  the  sitting  that  there  was  some  confusion,  but 
it  was  not  till  afterwards,  in  talking  the  matter  over  with  his  sister-in- 
law,  that  it  occurred  to  him  that  the  leferences  would  have  fitted  his 
uncle.  Professor  Bowditch's  inference  was  that  Mrs.  Piper  had 
obtained  information  beforehand  by  ordinary  means  concerning  Dr. 
Henry  I.  Bowditch,  and  had  applied  it  to  himself,  supposing  him  to  be^ 
the  person. 

8 

31  r.  R.  Hodgson. 

Unfortunately  no  record  was  made  of  this  sitting,  and  although 
Professor  Bowditch's  explanation  is  the  one  that  would  appear  most 
reasonable  to  any  person  who  was  not  familiar  with  Mrs.  Piper's 
trance  state,  I  think  it  probable  that  the  incident  could  easily  be 
explained  otherwise  if  we  had  a  detailed  report  of  the  conversation 
between  Professor  Bowditch  and  Phinuit.  In  peisonal  appearance, 
at  least,  Professor  Buwditch  could  never  Ije  mistaken  for  his  uncle  ; 
but  if  we  suppose  Phinuit  to  be  receiving  there  and  then — from 
whatever  source,  "departed  spirits"  or  the  minds  of  the  sitters — a 
general  mass  of  infonnation  alx>ut  the  Bowditch  family,  it  wovild  not  be 
matter  of  surprise  that  he  should  Ije  confused  as  to  the  two  doctors 
Henry  Bowditch.  It  would  be  much  more  matter  of  suipiise  that  Mrs. 
Pi2Kr  should  make  this  mistake.  It  may  even  be  that  Phinuit  was 
drawing  information,  not  only — at  the  time  of  the  sitting — from  the 
sitters  or  from  some  extraneous  source,  but  also  from  the  knowledge, 
conscious  and  unconscious,  jjreviously  possessed  by  Mrs.  Piper,  and  in 
attempting  to  piece  these  fragments  of  information  together  made  some 
mistakes.  But  in  the  absence  of  precise  details  as  to  what  Phinuit  said, 
how  far  there  was  mere  confusion  and  how  far  there  was  definite  mis- 
taken identity,  my  explanation  cannot  go  beyond  conjecture.  The  i-eader 
may  compare  the  incidents  described  by  Professor  Lodge  in  Proceedings, 
Vol.  VI.,  p.  454  and  p.  462  (footnote). 

I  have  already  stated  my  conviction  of  Mrs.  Pij^er's  honesty,  and  I 
hold  further  that  the  reports  quoted  here — not  to  speak  of  those  ah'eady 
puljlished  in  Vol.  VI. — establish  the  existence  of  some  faculty  in 
Phinuit  which  goes  at  least  as  far  as  telepathy.  The  detailed 
reports  themselves  are  offered  as  justification  for  this  view,  and 
— after  what  has  been  ah'eady  published — I  think  it  superfluous  to 
attempt  any  summaiy  of  them  for  the  purpose  of  proving  either  that 
Mrs.  Piper  could  not  have  acquired  hy  normal  means  the  information 
giveia  at  the  sittings,  or  that  Phinuit,  as  distinguished  from  Mrs.  Piper, 
could  not  have  obtained  all  this  information  by  guessing,  questioning, 
aiid  interpretation  of  muscular  and  other  indications  consciously  and 
unconsciously  given  l)y  the  sitters.  My  readers,  I  shall  assume,  are 
familiar  with  the  analysis  of  Phinuit's  character  and  methods  by 
Professor  Lodge  and  also  with  the  -  to  a  certain  extent  complementary 
— analysis  by  Mr.  Leaf.  With  all  their  criticisms  of  Phinuit's  "  tricks 
and  manners  "  I  substantially  if  not  completely  agree,  and  I  wish  to 
enqohasise  this  fact  very  strongly,  not  because  of  the  mere  agi^eement 
itself,  but  l)ecause  it  should  be  understood  that  I  do  not  pass  lightly 
over  the  weakness  and  deficiei^cies  of  the  Phinuit  personality.  Indeed^ 
I  have  been  at  sittings  where  Phinuit  has  displayed  such  paltering  and 
equivocation,  and  such  a  lack  of  lucidity,  that  I  believe  had  these  been 
my  only  experiences  with  him  I  shoukl  without  any  hesitation  have 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

9 

condemned  Mrs.  Pipei-  as  an  impostor.  kSucIi  failures  appear  to  depend 
sometimes,  but  not  always,  on  the  sitter.  As  Phinuit  himself  confessed 
{May  26th,  1888):  "Sometimes  when  I  come  here,  do  you  know, 
actually  it  is  hard  work  for  me  to  get  control  of  the  medium.  Some- 
times I  think  I  am  almost  like  the  medium,  and  sometimes  not  at  all. 
Then  [when  the  control  is  incomplete]  I  am  weak  and  confused." 

Admitting,  then,  and  emphasising  the  shortcomings  of  Phinuit,  and 
allowing  that  many  statements  correctly  made  by  Phinuit  might  be 
accounted  for  on  the  supposition  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  "got  up"  the 
information  beforehand,  I  shall  here  assume  that  there  is  nevertheless  a 
large  residuum  to  be  attributed  to  some  su^ieinormal  faculty.  From 
this  point  of  view  the  really  important  questions  for  consideration  are  : 
(1)  What  is  Phinuit?  and  (2)  By  what  supernormal  means  does  he  get 
his  information  1  I  have  no  final  answer  for  eithei-  of  these  questions, 
but  I  think  it  useful  to  collate  briefly  some  of  the  most  important 
incidents  in  the  records  here  published,  with  the  view  of  showing  why 
the  most  obvious  answeis  are  not  entirely  satisfactory.  In  d<jing  this 
I  propose  to  follow  the  example  of  Professor  Lodge  (Proceedings,  Vol. 
VI.,  p.  647),  and  dismiss  altogether  the  hypothesis  of  imposture  on  the 
part  of  Mrs.  Piper.  -  • 

§  4.  Hypothesis  of  Thouoht-Traxsferexce  from  the  Sitters. 

Consideiing,  then,  my  own  first  six  sittings,  I  find  that  all  the  cor- 
rect (verifiable)  statements  made  by  Phinuit  concerned  matters  known 
to  me,  except  the  insignificant  prophecy  that  my  sister  (in  Australia) 
Avould  soon  have  a  foui  th  child — a  boy.  I  had  no  (cojiscious)  knowledge 
even  that  another  child  was  "  coming  very  soon."  On  the  other  hand, 
I  did  not  consciously  know  the  Christian  name  of  my  mothei''s  father, 
though  I  had  probably  heard  it,  and  this  was  incorrectly  given  as  John. 
Further,  Phinuit  failed  to  obtain  information,  or  made  fundamental 
mistakes,  in  matters  about  which  my  own  recollections  were  very  clear 
and  vivid.  The  most  striking  circumstances  correctly  mentioned  were 
concerning  the  lady  whom  I  have  called  "  Q."  and  my  cousin  Fred,  and 
were  such  as  I  should  expect  those  persons  to  select,  if  in  actual  com- 
munication with  me,  as  proofs  of  identity.  But  then,  again,  Phinvxit  was 
unable  to  tell  me  of  circvimstances  about  which  I  made  special  inquiry,  and 
which  were  at  least  as  familiar  to  the  alleged  "  spirit"  as  those  described 
to  me.  Thus,  Phinuit  never  told  me  the  full  name  of  "  Q.,"  though  I 
frequently  asked  for  it  at  later  sittings.  His  explanation  was  that  "  Q." 
refused  to  tell  him,  but  Phinuit  has  frequently  urged  his  ignorance  on 
this  point  as  a  proof  that  he  cannot  "  read  my  mind  "  (an  inability  of 
which  he  is  very  anxious  to  assui'e  me),  and  I  suspect  that  this  ignorance 
may  be  assumed.    However  this  may  be,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that 

10 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Phinuit's  unquestionable  failure  to  obtain  satisfactory  replies  to  many 
questions  which  have  been  asked  of  the  "deceased  friends"  is  a  most 
formidaljle  objection,  as  we  shall  see  later,  to  the  "  spirit  hypothesis  " — 
at  least,  as  it  is  commonly  accepted. 

Admitting  now  that  the  facts  mentioned  at  these  first  sittings- 
of  mine  were  drawn  by  Phinuit  from  my  mind,  I  must  notice 
that  they  were,  certainly  most  of  them,  and  possibly  all  of  them, 
obtained  from  my  mind  at  a  time  when  I  was  not  consciously  think- 
ing of  them,  that  is,  presuming  that  Phinuit  oV)tained  his  knowledge 
during  the  sittings.  Vivid  conscious  thinking  of  a  circumstance 
does  not  seem,  indeed,  to  help  Phinuit  in  any  way,  ljut  rather 
the  contrary.  Mr.  Wendell's  experience  (Report,  No.  21),  which 
apparently  suggested  to  him  that  Phinuit's  obtaining  the  names  of  his 
uncle  and  E.  was  in  consequence  of  their  "  coming  into  his  head  "  after 
he  had  been  reminded  of  their  "  death  conditions  "  by  the  actions  of 
Phinuit — clutching  of  throat,  gasping — does  not,  I  think,  necessarily 
involve  any  conscious  as  distinguished  from  subconscious  thought-trans- 
ference, especially  if  we  consider  that  Mr.  Wendell's  attention  may 
have  been  temporarily  diverted  by  Phinuit  from  the  thought  of  the 
name  or  the  personal  appearance.  (See  my  remarks  about  Phinuit's  habit 
of  turning  the  conversation  away  from  a  suliject  upon  which  infoima- 
tion  is  sought,  p.  14.) 

My  conclusion,  then,  about  my  own  first  six  sittings  is  that  the 
statements  made  l)y  Phinuit  may  be  regarded  as  explicable  on  the 
hypothesis  that  he  had  access  to  portions  of  my  "  subconscious  "  mind. 
The  same,  allowing  for  Phinuit's  previous  knowledge,  can  also  be  said  of 
the  sittings  of  Mrs.  Okie  and  Dr.  Hopkins,  and  Mr.  T.  P.  Derham,  my 
brother-in-law  (Reports,  Nos.  7,  8,  and  9).  I  understand  that  all  the 
(verified)  facts  mentioned  to  Mr.  Derham  were  known  to  him,  though 
some  of  them  were  unknown  to  myself. 

The  next  reports,  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Blodgett  (Report,  No.  10), 
are  specially  important,  owing  to  Mrs.  Blcdgett's  attempts  to  obtain 
from  Phinuit  a  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  her  sistei'.  Miss  Plannah 
Wild,  shortly  lief<jre  death,  the  contents  of  this  letter  being  at  the  time 
of  the  first  experiment  unknown  to  any  living  person.  Mrs.  Blodgett 
(of  Holyoke,  Mass.,  about  100  miles  from  Boston),  previously  unknown 
to  Professor  James,  wrote  to  him  explaining  the  circumstances  of  the 
letter  written  l>y  her  sister.  Mrs.  Blodgett  thinks  that  she  sent 
Professor  James  a  cojiy  of  the  Woman's  Journal  containing  a  notice  of 
her  sistei''s  death,  though  Professor  James  has  no  recollection  of  this,  or 
of  knowing  even  the  name  of  Hannah  Wild  until  the  conclusion  of  the 
first  experiment.  Professor  James  suggested  tiying  Mrs.  Pipei".  The 
case  may  be  most  conveniently  considered  in  four  stages. 

(A)  The  first  trial  was  made  eai'ly  in  1887.    Articles  worn  by  Miss 

Observations  of  Gertavn  Fhcnomena  of  Trance.  11 

Wild  were  forwarded  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  to  Professor  James  and  by  him 
to  Mrs.  Piper's  father-in-law,  Mr.  J.  M.  Piper,  at  whose  house  Mrs.  Piper 
was  living  at  the  time.  Professor  James  had  explained  the  nature  of  the 
test  to  Mr.  Piper  without  giving  any  names,  and  Phinuit  had  requested 
some  articles  worn  by  the  writer  of  the  letter,  to  enable  him,  as  he 
alleged,  to  get  into  conmiunication  with  the  "  spirit."  As  a  result 
Phinuit  obtained  the  name  of  Hannah  Wild,  and  pei-haps  some  per- 
ception of  her  connection  with  the  IVomans  Journal,  in  which  she  was 
interested  and  to  whose  pages  she  had  contributed,  also  the  name  of  her 
sistei',  Bessie  (Mrs.  Blodgett),  to  whom  she  was  to  give  the  test,  and 
some  impression  concerniiig  the  then  recent  marriage  of  this  sister. 
Beyond  these  facts  practically  nothing  correct  was  obtained.  Mr.  Piper 
had  numerous  sittings  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  the  details  of  what 
Phinuit  gave  as  the  death-bed  letter,  and  was  confident  that  he  had 
been  conversing  with  the  spirit  of  Hannah  Wild  ;  yet  the  description 
given  of  her  personal  appearance  was  almost  entirely  wrong,  Phinuifs. 
letter  contained  no  hint  of  the  substance  of  the  real  letter,  which  Mi  s. 
Blodgett  forwarded  to  Professor  James^  for  comparison  with  Pliinuit  s 
statements,  and  the  numerous  circumstances  referred  to  in  Phinuit's 
letter  had  scarcely  any  relation  to  the  life  of  Hannah  Wild.  They 
were  chiefly  a  tissue  of  incorrect  statements.  This  result  so  far 
suggested  that  however  Phinuit  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  names  and 
the  other  impressions  which  proved  to  be  more  or  less  correct,  he  at 
least  did  not  get  them  from  the  "  spirit "  of  Hannah  Wild. 

(JJ)  The  next  attempt  made  Avas  about  a  year  later — May  30th,  18f^S 
— by  Mrs.  Blodgett  herself,  who  took  with  her  to  the  sitting,  in  a  small 
bag,  -s-arious  articles  which  had  belonged  to  her  deceased  sister.  This 
sitting,  at  which  I  was  present,  was  very  striking,  and  contaiaied  much 
of  the  personal  element  which  has  led  so  many  to  suppose  that  in  their 
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  they  have  been  communicating  with  their 
deceased  friends.  In  this  case  Phinuit  "controlled"  throughout,  and 
professed  most  of  the  time  to  be  repeating  the  remarks  of  Hannah  Wild., 
who  was  represented  as  exceedingly  anxious  to  prove  her  identity  tw 
Mrs.  Blodgett,  frequently  affirming  that  she  was  Hannah  Wild,  aiid 
Avould  give  her  sister  "  that  letter."  Mrs.  Blodgett  had  carried  the 
small  bag  into  the  sitting-room  vmperceived  by  me,  and  had  j)laced  it 
on  the  floor  behind  her.  Phinuit  groped  for  this  near  the  begijining  of 
the  sitting.  All  the  articles  in  the  bag — spectacles,  hair,  photograph, 
and  will — which  had  belonged  to  Miss  Wild  were  seized,  and  various 
details  concerning  them  correctly  given  by  Phinuit,  excepting  the 
death-bed  letter  which  had  been  in  the  bag,  wrapped  in  a  rubbei;  cloth, 

1  Professcir  James  i^;  the  only  living  person  who  knows  the  contents  of  the  letter. 
He  read  it  at  the  end  of  the  first  experiment,  and  immediately  returned  it  to  Mrs. 
Blodgett,  in  whose  possession  it  has  since  remained. 

12 

R.  Hodgson. 

5ind  which  Mrs.  Blodgett  took  out  of  the  bag  and  placed  on  the  floor 
behind  her  when  the  bag  was  opened  at  the  sitting.  This  letter  was 
wrongly  stated  to  be  "  at  home  in  the  box."  The  bag  itself  was  incor- 
rectly described  as  Miss  Wild's,  but  it  seems  noteworthy  that  Miss  Wild 
liad  frequently  used  it.  Mrs.  Blodgett  was  not  consciously  aware  that 
her  sister's  photogi  aph  was  in  the  bag,  yet  Phinuit  correctly  asserted'  that 
it  was  before  finding  it.  tSimilaily  Mrs.  Blodgett  was  not  consciously 
aware  that  she  had  put  her  sistei-'s  thimble  into  the  bag,  but  "Hannah" 
stated  that  she  saw  INIis.  Blodgett  put  it  into  tlie  bag,  and  Mrs.  Blodgett 
afterwards  found  that  she  had  done  so,  but  had  taken  it  with  othei' 
a,rticles  out  of  the  bag  before  starting  for  the  sitting.  Mrs.  Blodgett 
was  doubtless  subconsciously  aware  of  both  of  these  facts  (compare  the 
experiments  of  Miss  X.  in  Crystal  Vision,  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.) ;  and 
Professor  Lodge  has  noted  the  keen  "  scent "  Avhich  Phinuit  often 
displays  for  ai'ticles  which  have  been  connected  with  some  object  which 
he  is  examining.  (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  460.)  The  names  and 
other  circumstances  mentioned  at  the  sitting  showed  an  intimate 
knowledge  in  some  respects  of  personal  matters  connected  with 
Hannah  Wild  and  her  i-elatives,  and  the  l  emark  made  by  Hannah  Wild 
to  Mis.  Blodgett  when  the  test  letter  was  put  away  in  the  tin  box  was 
quoted,  "  It  would  Ije  like  linging  church  bells  if  I  could  come  back  " 
(instead  of  "  the  City  Hall  bell  ").  With  all  this  personal  matter 
correctly  given  and  ]iuiporting  to  come  from  Hannah  Wild,  Mrs. 
Blodgett  herself  was  acquainted.  On  the  other  hand,  leferences  were 
made  to  a  comb  and  to  a  Moses  which  had  no  significance  for  Mi's. 
Blodgett,  and  the  attempt  by  Phinuit  to  read  the  contents  of  a 
letter  written  by  Alice  Wild  to  Hannah  was  a  failure.  Also, 
two  especially  important  statements  were  made  about  Elizabeth 
Wild  and  Sarah  H(.ds(jn  (the  full  name  of  the  latter  being  cor- 
rectly given  by  Phinuit),  one  of  which  at  least  was  incorrect.  Both 
were  friends  of  Hannah  AYild  ;  the  foimer  living  in  Philadelphia, 
the  other  in  Waterbury,  Conn.  Neither  of  these  ladies  was  in  good 
health  when  Mrs.  Blodgett  last  heard  of  them  about  two  years  before 
the  sitting.  In  reply  to  Mrs.  Blodgett's  question  whether  "  Cousin 
Elizabeth  "  was  living,  Phiiniit  stated  that  she  had  "  passed  out  of  the 
body."  Sai'ah  Hodson,  according  to  my  notes  at  the  sitting,  was  affirmed 
to  be  living,  but  according  to  Mrs.  Blodgett's  I'ecollections,  Phinuit 
stated  that  she  was  dead.  It  was  afterwards  ascertained  that  both 
ladies  were  living  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  and  in  nnich  l^etter  health 
than  at  the  time  of  Miss  Wild's  death. 

1  When  Phinuit  made  tliis  statement  he  could  hardly  have  detected  the  presence 
of  a  photogvaiih  by  normal  means,  since,  as  I  remember  the  incident,  the  photograph 
was  of  small  size — vignette,  not  cabinet — and  the  envelope  in  which  it  was  had  been 
placed  with  other  objects  in  a  small  parcel  not  yet  opened.  The  statement  may, 
however,  have  been  a  likely  guess. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenovtena.  of  Trance. 

(C)  At  the  sitting  on  May  30th,  1888,  I  beheve  that  some  promise 
was  made  by  Phinuit  that  the  letter  Avould  he  dictated  to  me  at  a 
later  sitting.  Mrs.  Blodgett  sent  me  a  lock  of  her  sister's  hair,  which 
she  had  cut  from  her  sister's  head  after  death,  and  with  the  help  of  this, 
on  August  1st,  1888,  Phinuit  gave  what  purported  to  be  the  substance 
of  the  letter.  This  was  a  statement  (in  general  terms,  no  names  being- 
given)  concerning  a  disappointment  which  j^ievented  Miss  Wild  from 
marrying.  Mis.  Blodgett  refers  to  it  as  "the  one  sorrow  of  sister's 
life."  At  a  later  sitting — October  3rd,  in  the  same  year — with  thehelj^ 
of  a  much  larger  lock  of  hair  and  a  "  tidy,"  which  Miss  Wild  had 
finished  a  few  days  before  her  death,  Phinuit  made  another  attempt, 
worse  than  before,  to  give  the  letter.  The  statements  pui-porting  to 
come  from  Hannah  Wild,  some  of  them  as  the  substance  of  her  death- 
bed letter  and  others  in  reply  to  cjuestions  which  Mis.  Blodgett  had 
requested  me  to  ask,  were  almost  entirely  wrong,  though  there  may  have 
been  one  or  two  oljscure  perceptions  l)y  Phinuit  of  circumstances  con- 
nected with  Miss  W^ild  or  Mrs.  Blodgett  that  had  not  been  mentioned 
in  previous  sittings.  Mrs.  Blodgett's  tirst  husband's  name  was  given  as 
John  Henry  (or  Henry  John)  Clifford,  whereas  it  was  John  Rothmall 
Barr,  although  a  Mr.  John  Henry  Cliffoid  is  known  to  her.  The  name 
of  her  son  was  given  as  "Willie,"  instead  of  "John  Marion  Barr."  Miss 
Wild  knew  a  "Mr.  Tom  "  and  his  sister,  and  had  talked  with  him  on 
church  matters,  and  worked  on  the  tidy  in  their  presence.  In  Phinuit's 
letter  she  is  described  as  having  talked  on  church  matters  with  a 
Mr.  Totcn  and  his  sister.  There  was  possibly  also  a  leference  to  the 
existence  of  a  test  between  Miss  Wild  and  her  sister  Alice.  But 
the  death-bed  letter,  as  we  learn  from  Professor  James,  was  not 
concerned  with  any  of  these  matters.  It  will  hardly  be  contended 
that  there  is  any  proof  here  of  the  actual  presence  of  Miss  Wild. 

{D)  The  last  efforts  made  to  obtain  the  letter,  at  two  sittings 
on  May  28th  and  29th,  1889,  when  Mrs.  Blodgett  herself  was  again 
present,  were  equally  unsuccessful.  On  May  28th  Mrs.  Blodgett 
tested  Phinuit  with  eleven  articles,  iive  of  which  had  been  u.?ed  by 
her  sister.  The  "  iniluence  "  of  Miss  Wild  was  recognised'  in  connec- 
tion with  the  five  articles  which  had  been  used  by  her,  though  incorrect 
statements  were  also  made  concerning  them,  and  Phinuit  (rightly)  did  not 
connect  her  with  any  of  the  other  six  articles.     A  "  waist "  was  rightly 

1  The  articles  were  (1)  wai.st,  (2)  letter,  (3)  lock  of  hair,  (4)  birds'  ej-e.s,  (5)  pin, 
(G)  glove,  (7)  stocking,  (8)  box,  (11)  ear-spoon,  (10)  probe,  (11)  chain.  Of  these  articles 
(t),  (8),  (0),  (10),  and  (11)  had  been  used  by  Miss  Wild.  My  notes  of  the  sitting  are 
specific  as  to  the  recognition  of  (1),  (S),  (U),  and  (11)  as  Miss  Wild's,  and  my  impres- 
sion is  tliat  (10)  was  also  recognised  as  hers,  though  my  notes  do  not  specifically  state 
this.  Phinuit  failed  in  ('.'),  (3),  and  (4),  was  partially  right  in  (.5),  getting  the 
*'  mother's  influence  "  with  it,  but  said  nothing  at  all  about  ((J)  and  (7). 

14 

Mr.  B.  Hodgson. 

said  to  have  Ijeloiiged  to  Miss  Wild,  but  wrongly  alleged  to  have  been  worn 
by  her  during  her  sickness.  And  a  piece  of  chain  was  rightly  said  to 
have  belonged  first  to  Miss  Wild's  mother  and  later  to  Miss  Wild,  but 
wrongly  alleged  to  have  been  given  to  Miss  Wild  by  her  mother.  These 
two  mistakes  wei'e  likely  mistakes  for  anyone  who  was  somehow  aware 
of  the  connection  of  the  articles  in  question  with  particular  persons, 
but  did  not  otherwise  know  the  related  facts  ;  and  Mrs.  Blodgett  in  her 
notes  has  drawn  special  attention  to  other  points  in  the  sitting  that 
tell  strongly  against  the  presence  of  the  "spirit"  of  Hannah  Wild. 
Thus  the  "  1)irds'  eyes "  were  not  recognised  "by  Hannah"  at  all. 
The  real  Hannah  Wild,  however — although  she  had  never  touched 
them — yet  knew  all  about  them,  and  had  been  in  the  habit  of  seeing 
them  for  many  years.  One  incident  that  occurred  at  the  sitting  affords 
a  striking  example  of  what  appears  to  be  a  frequent  resource  of 
Phinuit.  Mrs.  Blodgett  asked  who  was  j^i'csent  when  her  sister 
wrote  the  letter.  Phinuit  began  to  reply,  showed  some  confusion,  and 
then  abru2:)tly  changed  the  subject,  tlius  diverting  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
thoughts  from  her  question  and  the  answer.  Shortly  afterwards 
Phinuit  recuri'ed  to  the  matter,  and  gave  a  correct  desciiption  of  the 
circumstances.  "She  wrote  the  letter  on  a  stand  ;  you  and  sister  Alice 
were  there.    She  sat  in  a  chair  with  big  aims  to  it  ;  leant  back,  tired." 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  some  of  our  experiments  in  thought- 
transference  the  result  suggested  that  the  percipient  might  have  been 
getting  impressions  not  of  the  object  upon  which  the  agent's  attention 
was  concentrated  at  the  moment,  but  of  the  object  j^reviously  thought 
of.  In  a  sei'ies  of  six  experiments  with  diagrams  which  I  made  some 
years  ago,  with  myself  as  percipient,  the  agent,  a  lady,  discai'ded  the 
first  diagram  made  by  her  in  two  of  the  experiments,  in  one  case  on 
the  ground  that  it  was  too  simple,  in  the  other  case  on  the  ground  that 
it  was  too  complicated.  She  had  drawn  the  figure,  tlien  crumpled  the 
paper  and  thrown  it  on  one  side,  and  di'awn  another.  In  each  of  these 
two  cases  I  got  a  correct  impression  of  the  rejected  figure  (not  of  the 
adopted  figure  in  any  of  the  trials),  and  it  may  even  be  that  when  the 
object  thought  of  "at  the  time"  is  correctly  guessed  by  the  percijaient, 
the  impression  is  in  reality  obtained  by  him  not  while  the  ol^ject  is 
j^erceived  by  the  agent,  but  during  one  of  those  transient  mental 
depai'tures  from  the  object  which  no  agent  can  altogether  prevent,  and 
which  in  truth,  in  the  alternate  moments,  render  his  own  perception  of 
it  more  vivid  and,  strictly  speaking,  are  necessary  for  any  consciousness 
of  it  at  all.  Now  I  have  observed  that  Phinuit,  when  questioned  about 
points  know)!  to  the  sitter,  is  accustomed  to  change  the  subject  of 
conversation  somewhat  abruptly,  apj^arently  for  the  purpose  of 
absorbing  the  sitter's  waking  consciousness  by  another  topic.  In  the 
meantime  perhaps  he  is — for  so  his  behaviour  suggests — grasping  at 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenovicna  of  Trance.  15 

and  surreptitiouslyexfinTifiiir^ 'the  e5£:prtr5ie'ji?;fe  ■>$'llic3Kte' has  induced  tlie 
sitter  to  lay  on  one  side. 

There  is  in  this  sitting  also  a  good  illustration  of  a  clumsy  attempt 
by  Phinuit  to  minimise  the  serious  mistake  which  he  made  in  saying 
that  Elizabeth  Wild  was  dead.  Mrs.  Blodgett  had  learned  that  this 
lady  was  still  living,  and  Phinuit's  inquiry  about  her  implies  that  he, 
too,  had  acquired  this  knowledge — may  we  not  assume  from  Mrs. 
Blodgett  at  this  later  sitting  ? — and  was  aljout  to  evade  if  possible  the 
charge  to  be  brought  against  him.  Making  a  vague  I'emark  about  being 
"confused"  when  he  made  this  wrong  statement,  he  changed  the 
subject,  but  later  referred  once  more  to  the  "  Aunt  Elizal^eth "  and 
made  some  statements  about  her  ill-health,  &c.,  since  ascertained  to  lie 
entirely  untrue.  These  statements  were  made  apparently  for  the 
purpose  of  suggesting  to  us  that  Phinuit  had  confused  mere  illness 
with  a  death. 

On  May  29th  one  intimate  question  asked  by  Mrs.  Blodgett,  viz., 
what  had  happened  to  Hannah  that  Alice  only  knew,  was  answei'ed 
correctly — that  something  "about  mother"  had  "happened  twice, 
and  if  it  happened  the  third  time  Hannah  would  pass  out."  This 
was  as  much  as  Mrs.  Blodgett  knew,  and  no  more  was  giA  en  by 
Phinuit,  though  Hannah  knew  more  about  it,  and  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
living  sister  knows  more. 

The  evidence,  then,  in  this  series  of  sittings  seems  to  be  A  ery  far 
from  proving  the  presence  of  Hannah  Wild.  Most  of  the  statemeiits 
made  by  Phinuit  are  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  thought-tiansfei- 
ence  from  Mrs.  Blodgett's  mind  ;  even  the  correct  statements  made  to 
myself,  months  after  Mrs.  Blodgett  had  left  Boston,  Phinuit  miglit 
he  presumed  to  have  obtained  from  her  duiing  her  sitting  and  stored  up 
for  later  use.  Still,  there  are  a  few  circumstances  for  which  this  hypo- 
thesis seems  insufficient,  and  among  these  it  ought  to  l)e  said  that  there 
are  some  facts  which  j^riind  facie  seem  to  support  Phinuit's  belief  that 
he  is  aided  in  obtaining  knowledge  by  handling  articles  which  have 
been  used  by  persons  who  possess  the  knowledge.  Thus  the  fact  that 
Phinuit  got  the  name  of  Hannah  Wild  and  other  connected  facts  Ijefore 
Mrs.  Blodgett  had  seen  Mrs.  Piper  at  all  would  he  explained  if  we  could 
suppose  that,  by  means  of  the  articles  sent  originally  through  Pi(:)fessf)r 
James,  he  got  into  some  relation  with  Mrs.  Blodgett's  mind  or  the  mind 
<)i  Professor  James.  It  may  be  noted,  too,  that  the  name  of  John  Henry 
(or  Henry  J ohn)  Clifford  was  given  (incori-ectly  given  as  name  of  Mrs. 
Blodgett's  first  husband),  while  Phinuit  was  handling  a  "  tidy  "  which 
had  been  (probably)  worked  upr)n  l^iy  Hannah  in  the  house  of  Mr.  John 
Henry  Clifford,  and,  further,  that  Pliinuit  seemed  to  obtain  a  glimpse 
of  specific  incidents  in  connection  with  Mr.  Tom  and  his  sister,  in 
whose  presence  Hannah  had  worked  on  the  tidy.    How  far  the  hypo- 

16  '  "•'''iilrfi^'^^^so^:''*"  ' 

•<,»•■•,••••  • 

thesis  that  thesa  fa'Gts'.Sut(<J-eSt'.  taii  be'J^toiiJjfflv  entertained,  I  shall 

afterwards  consider.  At  present  I  am  chiefly  concerned  to  note  the 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  supposing  that  all  Phinuit's  statements  in 
connection  with  Mrs.  Blodgett's  experiments  can  be  accounted  for  by 
thousht-transference  from  the  mind  of  the  sitter. 

The  next  incident  in  the  rejjorts  which  suggests  that  the  hypothesis 
of  thought-transference  from  the  sitter  is  inadequate  is  the  subject  of 
No.  15,  the  announcement  to  Mrs.  William  James  and  Mr.  Roljertson 
James  that  their  aunt  Mis.  AValsh,  in  New  Yoik,  had  died  that  morn- 
ing, and  that  Mrs.  James  would  find  a  "letter  or  telegram"  to  that 
effect  when  she  got  home.  But  this,  as  Professor  James  says  {^Pro- 
ceedings, Vol.  VI.,  p.  658),  may  "  haA^e  been  occasioned  by  the  sitters' 
conscious  apprehension  of  the  event."' 

In  Report  No.  19,  Mr.  "A.  Y."  states  that  what  a  certain  person 
was  doing  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  was  correctly  described,  but  it  seems 
possible  that  this  might  have  been  susjjected  by  the  sitter.  He  also 
writes  that  another  person  was  named,  and  stated  to  be  fatally  ill,  a& 
was  true,  although  the  fact  was  not  known  to  Mr.  "A.  Y."  at  the  time 
of  the  sitting.  But  here  another  hyjjothesis  should  be  mentioned,  sug- 
gested by  circumstances  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge  concerning- 
the  sittings  of  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Savage  and  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage 
(Reports,  Nos.  26  and  27),  and  to  which  I  shall  refer  later  (see  p.  35).. 
Can  we  he  sui'e  that  no  other  friend  who  knew  of  the  illness  had  had  a 
sitting  pi-eviously  and  had  provided  Phinuit  telejjathically  or  otherwise 
with  the  information  afterwards  given  to  Mr.  "  A.  Y."  1  At  the 
same  time,  there  are  cases  in  which  this  hypothesis  is  highly  improbable, 
such  as  the  case  mentioned  by  Miss  Z.  (Report,  No.  28),  who  had  but 
one  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  for  A\  hich  she  made  engagement  herself 
about  a  week  in  advance  and  without  giving  her  name.  "  In  the 
midst  of  other  tests  "  Phinuit  suddenly  said  that  he  "  saw  a  lady  by 
the  name  of  Marie  or  Maria,  and  in  the  room  with  her  was,  she  should 
say,  her  daughter,  perhaps,  named  Estelle  or  Stella.  The  lady  Maria 
had  some  trouble  on  the  l)ack  of  her  hands  and  wi'ists  which  looked  like 
eczema."  This  was  practically  true,  as  Miss  Z.,  who  was  ignorant  of 
the  fact,  ascertained  by  writing  to  her  "  Aunt  Maria  living  in  Vermont, 
some  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Boston,  who  has  a  daughter 

i  Misapprehensions  are  so  easy  that  I  think  it  well  here  to  remind  the  reader  that 
for  my  present  purpose  I  have  dismissed  from  consideration  the  hypothesis  of  imposture 
on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Referring  to  the  above-mentioned  incident  from  the 
barely  evidential  point  of  view  I  wrote  in  an  article  in  the  Forma  for  April,  1890,  that 
"it  might  be  alleged  that  the  medium,  in  Boston,  had  a  confederate  in  New  York, 
where  the  death  occurred,  who  was  watching  for  the  death  of  the  aunt,  and  who 
telegraphed  to  the  medium  the  information  that  was  given  to  the  sitters.  This  is  far 
from  being  my  own  opinion,  but  I  feel  bound  to  mention  the  possibility  of  such  an 
arrangement." 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  IT 

Stella."  This  incident  could  hardly  have  been  learnt  from  the  mind  of 
the  sitter,  as  she  was  unlikely  to  have  heard  of  the  trouble  with  her 
aunt's  hands  and  completely  forgotten  about  it. 

The  incident  narrated  in  Report  No.  29  might  have  been  among 
the  most  remarkable  of  the  series  had  contemporary  records  been 
obtainable.  It  appears  from  the  account  that  Mrs.  W.  was  told  by 
Phinuit  that  her  son  Nelson — who  had  been  away  from  home  about 
seventeen  years,  from  whom  she  had  not  heard  for  three  years,  and  of- 
whose  whereabouts  she  was  ignorant — was  coming  home,  that  she 
would  hear  from  Nelson  within  two  weeks  by  a  letter  from  a  friend  of 
Nelson's,  and  that  she  would  afterwards  get  a  letter  from  Nelson 
himself.  These  letters  came  within  the  stated  time,  and  a  later  one 
(all  three  from  California)  announcing  his  departure  for  home.  The 
account  is  given  by  Mrs.  D.  (sister  of  Mrs.  W.),  who  states  that  Mrs. 
W.  informed  her  of  these  details  of  the  sitting  immediately  on  her 
return  from  Mrs.  Piper.  It  is  corroborated  by  Miss  Webster  (now  Mrs. 
Browne,  see  Report  No.  39) — known  to  me — who  states  that  she  heard 
of  the  incident  from  Mrs.  D.  before  Mrs.  W.'s  son  had  returned.  The 
case  is  a  very  interesting  one,  but  as  the  account  was  written  nearly 
two  years  after  the  event,  and  we  cannot  question  the  sitter,  Mrs.  W. 
herself,  who  died  two  months  after  her  son's  return,  we  can  hardly  use 
it  as  a  basis  for  any  new  theory  as  to  Phinuit's  capacity.  It  may  be 
well  to  point  out,  however,  that  the  experience,  as  it  stands,  seems 
explicable  on  the  hypothesis  that  Phinuit  got  somehow  into  relation 
with  the  mind  of  Mrs.  V/.'s  son  Nelson. 

Mr.  A.  J".  C.  (Report  No.  32)  was  informed  that  his  niece  had  "  a 
humour,  a  breaking  out."  He  was  unaware  of  it,  and  the  statement 
was  correct,  but  he  was  also  incorrectly  told  that  his  sister  had  trouble 
with  a  tooth. 

Another  case  which  loses  much  of  its  value  from  not  having  been 
I'ecorded  in  writing  until  a  year  afterwards  is  the  report  (Report  No.  34) 
given  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "  M.  N.,"  both  personally  known  to  me,  but 
not,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  residing  in  America.  According  to  the 
account,  the  death  of  Mr.  M.  N.'s  father  was  foretold  as  about  to 
happen  in  a  few  weeks.  It  occurred  suddenly  a  few  weeks  afterwards, 
ill  England,  from  heart-failure.  Mr.  M.  N.  probably  knew  that  his 
father  had  been  suffering  from  an  attack  of  bronchitis.  Two  or  three 
days  after  the  death  Phinuit  described  some  of  the  details  of  his 
father's  will,  and  claimed  to  have  influenced  his  father,  while  yet  alive,, 
on  these  matters ;  but  the  most  extraordinary  part  of  the  account  is 
the  statement  that  Mr.  M.  N.'s  sister  in  England,  who  was  chiefly  at 
her  father's  bedside  the  last  three  days  of  his  life,  said  that  her  father 
"  had  repeatedly  complained  of  the  presence  of  an  old  man  at  the  foot 
of  his  bed,  who  annoyed  him  by  discussing  his  private  afifairs."  Miss 

c 

18 

Mr,  R.  Hodgson. 

*' M.  N.'s"  testimony,  however,  at  present  is  only  second-hand  ;  and  I 
do  not  recall  any  other  testimony  to  the  appaiition  of  Phinuit  (?)  except 
an  incident  related  by  Mrs.  Holmes  (who  assisted  me  in  several  experi- 
ments with  Mrs.  Piper,  see  Reports  Nos.  45-50),  whei'e  there  is  nothing 
to  show  that  what  was  seen  was  any  more  than  a  purely  subjective  hallu- 
cination. The  receipt  of  a  special  letter  which  Phinuit  correctly  prophe- 
sied for  Mr.  "  M.  N."  might  possibly  have  been  anticipated  in  the  sitter's 
unconscious  mind  ;  but  the  statement  that  a  relative  had  a  sore  or 
wounded  thumb — afterwards  verified — was  probably  entirely  beyond 
the  knowledge  of  the  sitters. 

Mr.  Rich  (Report  No.  40)  was  informed  of  mistakes  made  by  his 
coloured  cook  in  the  preparation  of  medicine,  and  afterwards  verified  the 
statements  made  by  Phinuit,  though  he  was  ignorant  of  the  circum- 
stances at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  He  was  also  informed  that  he  had 
a  sister  who  was  born  dead  (premature  birth)  some  years  before  his  own 
birth,  and,  so  far  as  he  knew,  he  first  heard  of  the  fact  from  Phinuit. 
He  was  directed  by  Phinuit  for  verification  to  his  "  aunts,"  from  one 
of  whom  he  did,  in  fact,  obtain  confirmation  of  the  statement. 

But  the  strongest  evidence  that  Phinuit  is  not  confined  for  his  in- 
formation to  the  knowledge  of  the  sitter  is  drawn  from  the  records  of 
experiments  with  locks  of  hair  and  other  objects.  Ccp.teris  paribus, 
information  volunteered,  so  to  speak,  by  Phinuit,  can  never  be  so  valu- 
able evidentially  as  information  obtained  in  response  to  determinate 
experiment.  Thus,  for  example,  the  chances  that  Phinuit  may  have 
ascertained  from  previous  sitters,  telepathically  or  otherwise,  the  infor- 
mation desired,  are  vastly  reduced  when  the  choice  of  subject  lies  with 
the  sitters  and  not  with  Phinuit.  Three  notable  instances  of  experi- 
ment on  this  line  are  described  by  Professor  Lodge  {Proceedings, 
Vol.  VI.,  pp.  458-463),  and  there  are  not  a  few  cases  in  the  reports  here 
■quoted.    Let  us  take  a  brief  survey  of  these. 

Discovering  somewhat  early  in  my  investigation  that  Phinuit 
claimed  to  o]:)tain  special  information  from  locks  of  hair,  which  he  re- 
commended should  be  enclosed  in  silk  or  tinfoil,  I  procured  some  locks 
of  hair  from  friends  in  England,  arranging  that  I  should  be  ignorant  of 
their  associations.  Those  which  I  tried  under  these  conditions  were 
complete  failures  (Report  No.  41,  1-5).  In  another  case  a  lady,  Mrs.  M., 
known  to  me,  sent  from  England,  at  my  request,  a  lock  of  her  own  hair. 
This  evoked  from  Phinuit  a  general  description  of  character,  true  as  far 
•as  it  went,  and  some  other  details  about  which  I  was  ignorant,  and 
wliich  were  chiefly  wrong  (Report  No.  41,  6).  These  trials,  of  course, 
suggest  that  when  Phinuit  does  recognise  a  lock  of  hair,  it  is  by  direct 
telepathy,  but  I  venture  to  think  that  we  must  hesitate  before  adopting 
this  explanation,  as  Phiiiuit's  success  in  "  recognising  "  locks  of  hair  in 
many  other  cases  is  certainly  remarkable.    A  lock  of  hair  from  Hannah 

Observations  oj  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  19 

-Wild,  deceased,  was  at  once  recognised  (Report  No.  10).    In  another 
case  (Report  No.  12)  two  locks  of  hair,  known  to  the  sitter,  were 
given  successively  to  Phinuit.     These  had  been  close  together  for  a 
.short  time,  and  Phinuit  complained  of  their  being  "  mixed."  His 
remarks  about  each  lock  of  hair  would  have  been  almost  entirely 
correct,  so  far  as  they  went,  if  applied  to  the  other.     Miss  Savage  (Re- 
port No.  25)  took  three  locks  of  hair  to  her  sitting.   One  of  them  was  her 
mother's  hair  ;  this  was  correctly  stated  by  Phinuit,  and  her  mother's 
ill-health  was  correctly  diagnosed,  other  details  concerning  the  family 
being  also  given.    These  facts  were  known  to  Miss  Savage.    The  other 
two  locks  of  hair  Avere  given  to  her  by  Mr.  Day,  and  Miss  Savage  was 
n.inaware  to  whom  they  belonged.    One  of  them  was  recognised  as  be- 
longing to  Ml',  Day,  concerning  whom  additional  facts  wei-e  given  ;  but 
as  Mr.  Day  had  previously  had  a  sitting  with  Mis.  Piper,  we  may  sup- 
pose that  these  statements  were  possibly  reminiscences  from  this  previous 
sitting.     As  to  the  third  lock  of  hair,  Phinuit  could  only  say  that  it 
had  not  been  cut  off  near  the  head,  and  had.  been  handled  by  too  many 
people ;  and,  in  fact,  it  had  been  cut  off  near  the  end  of  the  hair,  and 
had  passed  through  several  people's  hands.    Miss  Z.  (Report  No.  28) 
took  two  locks  of  hair,  knowing  to  whom  they  belonged — her  brother 
and  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage.    It  does  not  appear  that  Mr.  Savage's  own 
name  was  given  by  Phinuit,  but  he  was  unmistakably  signilDed  by  the 
aiames  of  other  members  of  his  family  and  his  relationship  to  them. 
In  connection  with  her  brother's  hair  Miss  Z.  received  her  brothei''s 
name — Charlie — and  the  details  of  an  incident  in  her  brother's  life 
about  his  spending  a  night  with  Ned  M.  or  N.  just  before  this  Ned 
died  of  consumption.     All  that  Miss  Z.  knew  consciously  was  that 
a  poor  boy  of  whose  last  name  she  was  not  sure,  and  whose  first  name 
she  had  never  heard,  had  died  several  years  before  of  consumption 
and  that  her  brother  had  been  kind  to  him.    She  leaint  afterwards 
from  her  brother  that  the  statements  made  at  the  sitting  were  true. 
Ned's  surname  began  with  N.     Mrs.  G.  H.  Browne  (Report  No.  39) 
took  two  locks  of  hair,  apparently  knowing  from  whom  they  were  ob- 
tained.   Phinuit  demanded  both  of  these  before  he  described  either, 
on  the   ground,  seemingly,  as  he  has  frequently  put  it  at  other 
times,  that  the  " influences  "  had  got  "mixed,"  and  he  wished  to  dis- 
entangle them.    The  characters  were  correctly  given  from  the  locks  of 
hair  and  the  full  name  correctly  stated  in  connection  with  at  least  one 
of  them,  viz.,  "Bertram  Ellis."    Mr.  Rich  (Report  No.  40)  took  a  lock 
of  hair,  knowing  that  it  belonged  to  a  friend's  sister,  but  descriptions 
unknown  to  him  were  given  of  persons  said  to  be  connected  with  a  fire 
(about  which  the  owner  of  the  lock  of  hair  was  specially  interested  and 
wished  him  to  inquire),  and  these  descriptions  "  tallied  perfectly  with 
that  of  the  parties  suspected."    Again,  a  lock  of  hair  belonging  to  a 

'20 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

friend  was  at  once  recognised  as  his  by  Phinuit  when  Mr.  Rich  pre- 
sented it.  Miss  E.  G.  W.  (p.  32)  mentions  the  incident  of  her  sending 
a  lock  of  liair  of  a  sick  friend  from  a  distance  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the 
complete  failure  of  the  test.  The  lock  of  hair  sent  to  me  by  Mrs.  S., 
from  Albany,  N.Y.,  suggested  to  Phinuit  a  strange  mixture  of  truth 
and  error  (Report  No.  41,  7)  ;  l)ut  the  correct  statements  might  have 
been  chiefly  guesses  depending  upon  the  fact,  known  to  the  sitter 
(myself),  that  the  hair  was  white. 

On  May  28th,  1891,  I  gave  to  Phinuit  some  hair  carefully  tied  up 
with  silk  ribbon,  which  had  been  in  my  possession  about  six  months, 
and  came,  as  I  knew,  from  a  cat  which  I  had  seen  in  Baltimore.  It  was 
given  to  me  while  on  a  visit  in  Baltimore  by  a  young  lady  of  the  family, 
with  whom  the  cat  was  a  vei^y  great  pet.  None  of  the  family  had  ever 
seen  Mrs.  Piper.  Of  coiirse,  I  gave  no  intimation  to  Phinuit  that  the 
hair  was  other  than  human,  though  this  would  be  revealed  by  its 
colour. 

"  Lady  in  connection  with  this  that's  passed  out  of  the  body  not  long  ago. 
I  see  a  big  black  grey  cat,  and  I  see,  oh,  a  funny  looking  cat,  kind  of  a  pet.  It 
lays  dcvvn  on  a  rug  a  good  deal.  Tlie  lady  that  gave  it  you  .  .  .  it's  a 
general  pet,  a  big  fellow."  (Go  and  try  to  get  cat's  name.)  "This  cat  was 
ill  a  little  while  ago, — didn't  eat  much.  Great  big  nice  fellow.  Mary  con- 
nected with  it,  in  body  .  .  .  elderly  lady,  aunt,  I  think,  passed  out  of  body 
some  time  ago.    Will  get  more  another  time." 

At  the  close  of  a  sitting  on  June  4th,  1891,  I  asked  for  the  name  of 
the  cat,  presenting  the  hair  again. 

"Sounds  like  PicL" 

Phinuit  then  wrote  what  might  be  interpreted  as  Pisk  or  Disk,  but 
more  probal^ly  Pisk. 

"  I  think  it's  Pete,— P—e—t—e.    .No,  Peek "  '       '  • 

On  July  10th,  1891,  I  tried  the  hair  again,  and  Phinuit  said  : 
"Name  sounds  like  Pich.     Girl  has  headaches  a  good  deal  in  sur- 
roundings of  this  one.    .    .    .    There's  four  of  them,  five  of  them.  One 
of  them's  away.    Think  it's  a  cousin  ;  tliink  they  call  him  Fred.    The  lady 
Mary  wears  glasses,  you  know,  occasionally." 

The  cat  is  of  enormous  size,  of  uniform  purplish  grey  colour  (no 
black).  Mary  is  the  first  name  of  the  mother  of  the  family  to  whom 
the  cat  belongs.  This  I  had  forgotten,  but  knew  "  subconsciously,"  as 
it  appeared  in  her  signature  to  the  account  of  some  experiences  which 
I  had  read,  her  first  names  being  written  Mary  E.  The  cat's  name,  as 
I  knew,  was  Dick,  and  that  Phinuit  should  finally  give  Pick  for 
Dick  is  curious  in  connection  with  the  precisely  similar  approxima- 
tion in  the  case  of  Professor  Richet's  dog.  (^Proceedings,  Vol.  VI., 
p.  620.) 

Immediately  after  the  sitting  on  May  28th,  I  wrote  to  the  lady  who 
'gave  me  the  cat's  hair,  who  informed  me  that  there  had  not  been  any 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

21 

death  of  an  "  elderly  lady  aunt,"  and  there  had  not  been  "  deaths  of 
any  such  members  of  the  family  for  years  "  ;  also  that  the  statements 
about  the  cat  (on  May  28th)  were  "  not  correct  in  any  one  particular"; 
also  that  the  Mary  in  her  mother's  name  "  was  completely  droj^ped,  and 
to  her  family  and  friends  she  has  always  been  Lily  and  Lizzie  "  (her 
name  being  Mary  Elizabeth).  To  my  further  inquiries,  after  the  later 
sittings,  I  have  received  no  reply.  I  vaguely  recalled  having  seen 
Mrs.  [X.]  wear  glasses,  but  could  not  recall  having  heard  that  either  of 
the  daughters  had  headaches.  On  these  points  I  have  learnt  through  a 
friend  [November  2nd,  1891]  that  Mrs.  [X.]  does  wear  glasses 
"  occasionally,  but  not  regularly,"  and  that  the  daughter  who  gave  me 
the  hair  "  has  suffered  from  terrible  headaches  until  recently."  I  have 
not  yet  succeeded  in  obtaining  information  concernijig  the  other  points 
mentioned. 

But  it  is  not  merely  "  locks  of  hair"  that  appear  to  set  Phinuit  on 
the  track  of  events  that  may  or  may  not  be  known  to  the  sitters.  Any 
■object,  if  it  has  been  handled  or  worn  much  and  ahnost  exclusively  by 
specific  persons,  seems  to  serve  equally  well.  Indeed,  though  not 
enough  experiments  in  this  direction  have  as  yet  been  tried  to 
warrant  me  in  making  any  final  statement  about  this,  the  conclusion 
is  strongly  suggested  that  on  this  path  Phinuit  is  most  relialjle,  though 
not  by  any  means  infallilale.  At  least  I  think  that  he  is  much  more 
likely  to  succeed  with  the  help  of  such  objects  than  without  them.  It 
is  quite  conceivable,  of  course,  that  Phinuit's  belief  that  such  articles 
act  as  clues  may  itself  influence  his  success,  even  though  that  belief 
be  merely  subjective. 

At  my  fourth  sitting  (Report  No.  4)  Phinuit  was  able  to  tell  me 
that  I  had  "lost  something,"  and  after  handling  my  keys  gave  a 
fairly  detailed  description  of  the  jalace  in  the  mountains  where  I  had 
lost  a  bunch  of  keys,  between  two  or  three  months  previously  ;  but, 
oddly  enough,  he  insisted  that  the  keys  were  still  in  the  mountains, 
much  as  if  a  picture  of  the  place  had  been  suggested  to  him  with  the 
keys  lying  there  as  a  part  of  the  scene  ;  and  this,  moreover,  after  the 
keys  had  been  returned  to  me.  Somewhat  similar  was  Phinuit's 
detection  that  Mr.  Derham  (Report  No.  9)  had  lost  a  "  funny  round 
thing,  a  ring  thing  .  .  .  black  fellow  got  it,"  Mr.  Derham 
having  left  his  field-glass  in  the  train  at  Niagara,  and  suspecting  that 
the  conductor,  a  coloured  man,  had  taken  it.  But  in  this  case  it  does 
not  appear  whether  Phinuit  obtained  a  "  clue "  from  some  specific 
object  worn  by  Mr.  Derham  at  the  sitting,  or,  v/ithout  such  help,  by 
direct  telepathy.  In  the  experiment  made  by  Mre.  Blodgett  (Report 
No.  10)  the  name  Hannah  Wild  was  correctly  given  by  Phinuit  as  the 
wearer  of  a  glove  and  a  hat-lining,  but,  besides  this,  Phinuit  made  a 
large  number  of  other  statements  in  connection  with  Hannah  Wild, 

22 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

nearly  all  of  which  were  wrong.  At  later  sittings  other  articles  belonging 
to  Hannah  Wild  were  immediately  recognised  as  hers.  (See  Report 
No.  10,  and  see  also  pp.  11-15).  The  stone  presented  by  Miss  Z. 
(Report  No.  28)  appai-ently  afforded  a  clue  to  the  personality  and 
surroundings  of  the  owner,  and  possibly  to  the  circumstances  under 
which  he  first  obtained  it.  The  "  piece  of  embroidery  "  tried  by  Mr. 
Rich  (Report  No.  40)  produced  the  name  of  the  sailor  who  made  it. 
More  important  still,  Mr.  Rich  took  a  box,  of  the  contents  of  which 
he  knew  nothing,  and  Phinuit  described  correctly  the  person  X.  wha 
gave  Mr.  Rich  the  box,  the  person  Y.  who  had  provided  X.  with  the 
article  for  the  expeiiment,  and  the  person  Q.  who  had  given  the  article 
to  Y.  The  article  in  the  box  was  described  by  Phinuit  as  a  "  charm  " 
and  "  glittering,"  and  as  having  been  brought  from  "  far  off  over  the 
sea  "  ;  it  was  a  cai'ved  "  but  not  glittering "  button  brought  from 
Japan,  and  "  latterly  worn  as  a  charm  with  a  gold  attachment."  Mr. 
Rich  also  tried  a  dog's  collar,  with  which  Phinuit  got  the  description 
of  the  dog  and  his  names,  Rovei'  and  Grover,  these  circumstances  being 
known  to  Mr.  Rich.  Miss  Edmunds  (Report  No.  43)  was  correctly  told 
that  her  locket  brought  her  grandmother's  "influence,"  and  that  she 
had  had  it  since  she  was  a  little  girl,  also  that  her  watch  had  been 
given  by  her  father  to  her  aunt,  who  had  given  it  to  her  ;  these  state^ 
ments  being  made  after  Phinuit  had  handled  the  objects.  A  little  box 
in  which  her  father  used  to  keep  coins  was  also  recognised  as  having 
contained  "little  shiny  things"  and  having  been  connected  with  her 
father.  At  a  sitting  on  June  25th  I  presented  a  bookmark  which 
Miss  Edmunds  had  placed  between  cards  to  jDrevent  injury,  and  the 
history  of  which  was  known  to  her  l)ut  not  to  me.  Phinuit  recognised 
Miss  E.'s  "influence"  in  the  cards,  but  was  comi^letely  wrong  about 
the  bookmark.  At  a  later  sittiiig  Miss  E.  herself  took  the  bookmark,, 
and  Phinuit  obtained  its  "  associations  "  :  that  it  was  connected  with  a 
little  girl  pupil — described — of  Miss  E. ;  that  Miss  E.  had  heard  from 
her  when  she  was.  ill ;  that  she  was  dead.  The  names  Emma  and 
Maria  were  given,  and  a  message  was  offered  from  Maria  to  Emma,  and 
Gideon  was  said  to  be  a  cousin.  These  statements  were  correct,  Maria 
being  the  girl's  name,  and  Emma  the  name  of  her  mother.  All  these 
circumstances  were  known  to  Miss  E.  Two  other  statements  about 
which  Miss  E.  was  ignorant  were  made  in  connection  with  the  book- 
mai'k,  and  she  has  not  yet  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  they  ai-e  true 
or  not. 

The  pen  which  Mrs.  C.  presented  (Report  No.  44)  was  at  once 
recognised  as  bringing  the  "  influence  "  of  her  deceased  husband,  and 
Phinuit  was  conscious  of  another  article  on  the  person  of  Mrs.  C.  that 
was  also  her  husband's,  and  finally  named  the  watch.  "  Your  husl)and 
says  it's  his  watch,  but  it's  not  his  chain."    Mrs.  C.  had  temporarily 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

23 

forgotten  that  she  was  wearing  her  husband's  watch,  which  she  had 
carried  for  about  a  month,  having  broken  her  own.  She  had  taken  her 
husband's  chain  off  and  put  her  own  on. 

Now  some  of  these  incidents  are  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of 
direct  telepathy  from  the  sitter,  though  even  in  these  the  object  seems 
to  sei've  in  some  way  as  a  link  of  association  ;  but  in  others  this  hypo- 
thesis is  inadequate,  as  in  the  case  of  the  box  taken  by  Mr.  Rich.  The 
evidence,  of  course,  in  the  cases  which  I  have  thus  briefly  sunnnarised  is 
too  slender  to  afford  a  substantial  conclusion,  but  the  expei'iments 
recorded  in  the  last  series  of  sittings — those  held  since  Mrs.  Piper's 
return  to  America — go  far  to  conlirm  the  view  that  it  is  not  necessary 
that  the  sitter  should  be  aware  of  the  associations  of  the  object,  but 
that  contact  with  the  object  itself,  independently  of  the  sitter,  in  some 
way  enables  Phinuit  to  obtain  correct  information  concerning  its- 
associations. 

In  experiments  T  made  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Holmes  (pp.  139, 140), 
the  first  two  locks  of  her  hair  presented — the  one  by  myself  who  knew 
to  whom  it  belonged,  and  the  other  by  Miss  R.  who  knew  nothing 
about  it — both  failed  as  clues ;  but  a  third  lock,  which — unlike  the 
others — had  been  cut  close  to  the  head,  was  immediately  recognised  by 
Phinuit  as  the  "same  influence."  I  presented  this  on  June  5th,  1891, 
at  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting  (the  first  part  of  which  had  been 
occupied  by  the  objects  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  "V.,"  see  p.  132),  and 
Phinuit  at  once  began  to  make  statements  which  suggested  that  he  was 
getting  veridical  glimpses  of  some  kind  owing  to  the  lock  of  hair. 
Among  other  things  Phinuit  stated  that  the  owner  "had  something  the 
matter  with  her  foot  "  and  that  she  "  had  to  have  something  done  to  it 
not  long  since  and  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  letter  of  Mrs. 
Holmes  accompanying  the  hair  mentioned  an  accident  to  her  son's  foot, 
and  also  enclosed  a  letter  from  this  son  describing  the  accident.  I  may 
have  read  these  letters  hastily,  when  I  received  them,  on  June  4th,  the 
day  before  the  sitting,  but  could  not  recall  the  incident  of  the  "foot." 

I  draw  attention  here  to  a  "  trivial "  circumstance,  which  in  itself 
proves  nothing,  because  I  think  it,  nevertheless,  may  indicate  a  possible 
cause  of  some  of  Phinuit's  mistakes,  or  apparent  mistakes.  At  one  of 
my  early  sittings  I  handed  Phinuit  an  envelope  addressed  to  myself,  con- 
taining a  letter.  Phinuit  gave  a  correct  general  description  of  the 
writer  and  gave  the  single  name  William  in  connection  with  it.  This, 
though  correct,  was,  of  course,  not  remarkable,  but  Phinuit  went  on 
then  to  describe  a  lady  also  in  connection  with  it — tall,  fair,  <fec.  Later 
on  in  the  sitting  I  gave  Phinuit  another  envelope,  and  after  handling  it 
he  at  once  exclaimed  that  this  was  the  "  influence  "  he  had  described 
isreviously  in  connection  with  "  the  gentleman  "  ;  that  I  had  got  them 

24 

i/r.  R.  Hodgson. 

mixed  "  ;  that  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  him.  The  description  as  first 
given  did  suit  the  writer  of  the  second  letter,  viz.,  Mrs.  Piper  herself.' 

Returning  to  the  experiment  of  June  5th,  some  of  the  correct  state- 
ments made  by  Phinuit  concerned  matters  known  to  me,  but  of  most  of 
them  I  was  ignorant,  and  Phinuit  was  wrong  in  describing  the  hair  as 
grey  and  black,  whereas  I  knew  that  it  was  grey  and  brown-gold- 
Similarly,  most  of  the  statements  at  the  later  sittings  referred  to  matters 
unknown  to  me,  though  I  had  visited  Mrs.  Holmes,  had  seen  the  house 
and  surroundings,  and  met  the  members  of  her  daughter's  family.  I  had 
also  met  Miss  Eleanor  or  Ella  B.,  whose  first  name  was  given  as  Ella  by 
Phinuit.  The  apparent  success  of  Phinuit  in  locating  Mrs.  Holmes  at 
the  sitting  of  June  10th  led  to  my  requesting  her  to  make  notes  of  her 
doings  on  June  15th  at  the  time  of  my  sitting.  This,  unfortunately, 
she  did  not  do  until  after  she  had  received  my  report  of  the  sitting. 
According  to  her  annotations,  the  following  statements  made  by  Phinuit 
were  approximately  correct  as  regards  her  doings  close  to  and  during 
the  hour  of  the  experiment,  but  Phinuit's  description  did  not  coincide 
exactly  in  time  with  her  actions,  but  were  given  about  half  an  hour  later. 
Phinuit  stated  that  she  trimmed  some  flowers  and  put  them  in  a  vase ; 
that  she  sat  down  at  a  desk  to  write,  and  that  Charles  was  on  the 
paper  in  front  of  her  ;  that  she  went  to  the  window  to  speak  to  a  man, 
that  she  pulled  something  down  at  the  window  and  retui'ned  to  the  desk  ; 
that  she  "pawed  over  a  box  of  things."  Phinuit  also  stated,  incor- 
rectly, that  she  had  a  parcel  like  a  book  in  her  hand  that  she  had  been 
reading,  had  thrown  a  wrap  over  her  head,  had  on  a  dai'k  dress  with 
little  light  spots  in  it,  was  doing  something  to  a  picture,  and,  later,  was 
doing  something  with  a  brush. 

The  correct  statements  appeared  to  be  so  much  more  than  could 
be  due  to  chance  that  I  requested  Mrs.  Holmes  to  write  out  her  doings 
hetween  11.15  and  12.30  on  June  23rd  and  24th,  sign  the  record  and 
obtain  the  corroborative  signature  of  her  daughter,  Mrs.  K.,  and  mail 
her  account  at  once  to  Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  to  whom  also  on 
the  day  of  the  experiment  I  sent  a  copy  of  my  notes  of  Pliinuit's 
statements  concerning  the  doings  of  Mrs.  Holmes.  These  two  sittings 
I  regard  as  failures  on  tlie  part  of  Phinuit  to  see  what  Mrs.  Holmes 
was  doing  at  the  time,  but  to  the  student  of  the  detailed  accounts 
(Rejjorts  Nos.  45  to  49),  with  the  comments  of  Mrs.  Holmes,  it  will,  I 
think,  be  strongly  suggested  that  Phinuit  in  some  way  was  getting 

^  I  asked  Phinuit  whether  the  writer  of  this  second  letter  was  "  in  the  body  "  or 
"in  spirit."  He  replied  at  once,  "In  the  body,"  but  added:  "Why,  no;  that's 
curious.  There  she  is  in  the  spirit,  talking-  to  an  old  lady. "  This  appeared  to  be- 
wilder Phinuit,  who,  after  some  soliloquising  and  mumbling,  went  on  to  another  sub- 
ject. Several  times  at  the  close  of  later  sittings  he  referred  to  the  "medium"  as 
"coming  back,"  "  laughing,"  "asking  questions,"  "  trying  to  touch  the  sitter,"  &c. 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Pltenomena  of  Trance.  25 

glimpses  into  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Holmes,  was  reading  off  some  of  her 
j)ast  experiences  (i.e.,  past  before  the  moment  of  Phinuit's  statements), 
and  that  some  of  these  occurred  as  recently  as,  say,  half  an  hour 
previously ;  though  certainly  Phinuit  was  not  clairvoyantly  then  and 
there  perceiving  what  Mrs.  Holmes  was  doing. 

A  similar  conclusion  is  suggested  by  the  attempts  of  Phinuit 
to  describe  my  doings  on  July  1st  (Report  No.  50),  and  the  doings  of 
Mrs.  Holmes  and  myself  on  July  6th  (Report  No.  51).  In  this  sitting 
•of  July  6th,  1891,  Phinuit  located  me  incorrectly  at  two  different 
places,  his  description  of  which  indicates  circumstances  of  my  holi- 
days in  the  summer  of  1S90,  and  although,  after  handling  the  envelope 
addressed  by  me,  Phinuit  corrected  these  mistakes  and  located  me  in 
my  own  rooms,  he  may  have  acquired  this  information  thi'ough  the 
leading  question  asked  intentionally  by  Miss  Edmunds,  who  knew 
where  I  was.  Still,  even  in  this  case,  and  putting  on  one  side  the 
knowledge  that  he  may  have  obtained  telepathically  or  otherwise 
from  Miss  Edmunds  concerning  my  doings,  Phinuit  seems  to  have 
given  more  correct  iixformation  concerning  my  actual  doings  than  can 
be  accounted  for  by  mere  chance  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  as  much  success 
were  obtained  in  a  large  number  of  experiments,  we  should  infer  that 
Phinuit  was  exhibiting  some  supernormal  faculty  beyond  that  of 
thought-transference  from  the  sitter. 

This  general  conclusion  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  results 
of  a  sitting  on  October  16th,  1891  (Report  No.  53).  Miss  A. 
took  with  her  to  the  sitting  three  articles,  of  the  history  of  which 
she  knew  nothing — a  locket,  a  ring,  and  a  watch.  The  locket  she 
obtained  the  evening  before  through  a  lady  friend  whom  she  met 
by  accident  in  the  street.  This  friend,  at  Miss  A.'s  request  for 
a  "  personal  article  of  an  individual  unknown  to  her,"  called  at  the 
office  of  a  gentleman  whom  Miss  A.  had  never  seen  (she  "  knew  only 
his  surname  in  a  casual  way  ")  and  procured  from  him  the  locket.  It 
was  wrapped  in  a  paper  envelope,  and  Miss  A.  did  not  look  at  it  till 
the  sitting  was  over.  Inter  alia,  the  owner  of  the  locket  was  correctly 
described  as  being  physically  well,  handsome,  of  light  hair  and  com- 
plexion, as  having  a  big  head,  and  as  being  immensely  extravagant,  as 
writing  and  dictating  (letters,  &c.)  a  great  deal.  Phinuit  stumbled 
round  and  about  the  names  J oseph  and  George  in  his  attempts  to  get 
the  owner's  Christian  name,  mentioning  both  (and  also  we  must  add 
J udson)  without  affirming  either  to  be  the  name.  Joseph  George  were 
the  owner's  first  names.  After  the  locket  Avas  opened,  which  con- 
tained a  picture  of  the  owner's  mother  on  one  side  and  some  hair  of 
his  father  and  mother  on  the  other,  Phinuit  correctly  got  the  father's 
and  mother's  "  influence  "  from  the  hair,  and  apparently  connected 
the   name    Elizabeth    with    the    hair   and  the   picture,  Elizabeth 

26  Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

being  the  name  of  the  owner's  mother.  Tliere  seemed,  indeed,  to  be 
some  confusion  between  the  "influences"  of  the  owner  and  those  of  his 
mother  ;  and  in  connection  with  the  latter,  apparently,  various  names 
were  given,  of  which  the  owner  knows  nothing.  He  knows,  however, 
very  little  of  his  mother's  family,  and  apparently  is  not  interested 
enough  to  make  the  iiKjuiries  necessary  for  corroboration. 

Miss  A.  knew,  \mt  not  intimately,  the  owner  of  the  ring  and  the 
watch,  Phinuit  said  that  the  ring  brought  a  lad  influence — that  there 
was  an  insane  lady  connected  with  it  who  began  to  lose  her  mind  at 
an  eai-ly  age,  and  that  another  person  connected  with  it  died  with 
cancer.  Concerning  the  watch  Phimiit  said  that  it  came  across  the 
water  many  yeare  ago,  had  been  in  Italy  ;  that  it  had  the  influence  of 
a  gentleman  who  had  died  ;  that  the  owner  had  a  sister  named  Annie. 
The  name  Elizabeth,  Eliza,  Lizzie  was  given  in  connection  with  the 
watch.  Phinuit  said  that  he  saw  the  watch  in  a  box  with  other 
trinkets  kej^t  in  cotton.  The  names,  John,  Joseph,  and  Jennie  were 
finally  given.  All  these  details  proved  to  be  correct,  except  the  name 
J ennie,  the  owner's  mother  being  named  Jesse  [Jessie  ?]. 

The  name  of  a  relative  Henry  was  given  as  having  been  connected 
with  some  "  printing "  establishment,  and  also  the  name  Davis.  It 
was  further  stated  that  a  Henry  gave  the  watch  to  Elizabeth.  I  j)yq- 
sume  that  these  details  are  incorrect,  though  the  report  is  not  quite 
clear  upon  this  ]>oint.    The  i:)resent  owner  was  wrongly  called  a  man. 

The  ring  and  watch,  it  appears,  were  kept  in  the  same  box.  John,  a 
"bad  character,"  had  given  the  ring  to  the  present  owner,  who  suspected 
him  of  having  stolen  it.  John's  father  had  repudiated  a  debt  to  the 
owner's  mother  ;  he  died  of  cancer  in  the  stomach.  The  owner's  sister, 
named  Elizabeth,  and  called  Eliza  and  Lizzie,  suffered  a  great  fright  at 
the  age  of  three  years,  from  being  left  alone  in  a  burning  house,  and 
"  gradually  became  entirely  idiotic."  She  was  for  many  years  under 
the  sole  charge  of  the  owner  of  the  ring,  and  as  the  watch  amused  her, 
it  was  f retjuently  given  to  her  by  the  present  owner's  mother,  to  whom 
it  came  at  the  death  of  the  uncle  Josef^h.  The  watch,  Geneva  make, 
had  been  bought  aljroad  by  Joseph,  who  lived  for  some  time  in  Italy. 
Several  additional  correct  statements  which  were  made  in  connection 
with  the  articles,  but  not  mentioned  in  the  rejjort,  were  i-egai-ded  as 
too  private  for  publication. 

Miss  A.'s  own  view  appears  to  be  a  form  of  that  suggested  by  several 
previous  reports,  and  particularly  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
experiments,  that  the  information  given  by  Phinuit  was  obtained  in 
some  way  from  the  objects  themselves,  to  the  exclusion,  that  is,  of 
individual  minds  either  of  the  living  or  the  dead.  Miss  A.  stated,  in 
reply  to  my  inquiry,  that  Phinuit  did  not  profess  to  obtain  his  infor- 
mation (concerning  the  objects)  from  "spirits."    "Lie  gave  no  iutima- 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

tion  that  he  was  getting  his  facts  frum  anyone,  '  in '  or  '  out  of  the 
body '  ;  the  impression  conveyed  was  rather  that  he  was  ferreting  about 
for  himself  in  some  obscure  way  for  the  information  asked."  It  is 
probable,  however,  that  if  Phinuit  had  been  questioned  on  this  point  he 
would  have  claimed  that  his  information  was  derived  from  the  deceased. 

Thus  (March  21st,  1888)  :  Phinuit :  "  Who's  Margaret  in  your  family  ? " 
R.  H.  :  "Can't  you  tell  nie  that?"  Phinuit:  "It's  your  mother." 
[Correct.]     R.  H.  :  "  Who  told  you  that  ?  "    Phinuit :  "  Your  father." 

Again,  I  placed  in  Phinuit's  hands  a  pencil-case  with  the  initials 
■J.  B.  upon  it,  saying  that  I  had  received  it  from  a  friend  who  waiited 

to  be  told  who  gave  it  to  him.     The  name  of  John  B          was  given 

correctly,  but  he  has  a  middle  name  which  was  not  given  at  all.  (That 
he  had  a  middle  name  was  known  to  me  at  the  time,  though  I  cannot 
recall  that  I  had  ever  heard  what  it  was,  beyond  the  initial  letter.) 
Then  :— 

"  George  gave  it  to  him.  I  get  the  influence  of  Elinor  and  Palline,  and 
a  young  man.  No,  it  wasn't  George,  cross  that  out.  It  was  Harry  or 
Henry,  and  Harry's  sister's  influence  was  connected  with  it  before  he  gave  it 
to  hira.  That  is  all  I  can  tell  you."  "How  did  you  get  to  know  this  ? " 
"  J  B  's  wife  in  spirit  told  jue.    She's  gone  away  now." 

Pauline  is  the  name  of  Mr.  B.'s  eldest  daughter,  and  Eleanor  is  the 
name  of  one  of  her  most  intimate  friends.  But  Miss  B.  and  two  other 
members  of  Mr.  B.'s  family  (not  himself)  had  previously  had  a  sitting- 
each  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  names  Eleanor  and  Pauline  had  been 
given  at  Miss  B.'s  sitting,  at  which  her  mother,  deceased,  was  also- 
referred  to.  All  that  was  cori'ect  was  in  my  mind,  consciously  or 
subconsciously,  but  what  I  desii'e  specially  to  emphasise  here  is  that 
while  Phinuit's  language — about  "  getting  the  influence,"  Arc. — did  not 
suggest  the  "  spirit "  hypothesis,  but  rather  the  contrary,  he  claimed, 
on  being  questioned,  that  he  received  his  information  from  a  "spirit." 
Further,  he  has  recently  expressly  disclaimed  any  power  of  obtain- 
ing information  from  objects  themselves  indejaendently  of  specific 
personalities.  .     •  .      .  , 

§5.  Clairvoyance  and  Prophecy.      -  .      .    .•  . 

At  different  times,  I  have  tried  a  few  experiments  for  "  clairvoy- 
ance," presenting  envelopes  containing  writing  unknown  to  me,  and 
turning  the  hands  of  a  hunting-watch  so  that  I  should  be  ignorant 
of  their  position.  Phinuit  disclaimed  any  ability  to  tell  the  contents 
of  the  letters,  but  thought  he  could  "  feel,"  through  the  case  of  the 
watch,  the  positions  of  the  hands.  The  results,  however,  on  that 
occasion  did  not  justify  his  belief,  and  I  did  2iot  repeat  the  watch 
experiments.    (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  457.) 

Several  incidents  recounted  in  the  reports  suggest  that  Phinuit  may 
have  "  prophetic  "  power  (see  especially  the  cases  related  by  Miss  W., 

28 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

p.  34,  and  Reports  Nos.  34  and  36),  but  there  are  other  cases,  besides  those 
mentioned  in  the  report,  wh.ere  Phinuit  has  made  specific  prophecies 
which  were  unfulfilled,  and  without  a  tolerably  complete  record  of  both 
the  fulfilled  and  the  unfulfilled  predictions,  we  cannot  conclude  that  his 
successes,  allowing  for  supernormal  knowledge  of  the  present,  are  more 
than  would  be  due  to  chance.  But  I  think  that  while  there  is  no 
evidence  at  present  worth  detailed  consideration,  for  the  view  that 
Phinuit  possesses  any  power  of  premonition,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term,  there  is  enough  evidence  to  make  it  desirable  to  record  his 
*'  prophecies  "  most  carefully  in  future. 

§  6.  The  "Spirit"  Hypothesis  concerning  Phinuit  and  other 
■ .  "  Controls." 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  take  into  more  direct  consideration 
the  assertion  which  Phinuit  persistently  makes  concerning  himself  and 
his  communications,  that  he  is  the  "spirit"  of  a  once  but  no  longer 
living  human  being,  that  he  occupies  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  during  her 
trance,  and  receives  direct  messages  from  the  "  spirit "  friends  of  the 
:sitters.  This,  as  is  known  to  the  readers  of  the  previously  published 
reports,  is  the  invariable  form  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  save  that  other 
"controls,"  who  also  profess  to  be  "spirits"  of  once  living  human 
beings,  occasionally  take  the  place  of  Phinuit. 

Now,  the  status  to  be  assigned  to  Phinuit  will  depend,  partly  on  his 
own  account  of  himself — with  verification  or  otherwise — our  opinion  of 
his  veracity,  the  conclusions  we  may  reach  concerning  his  "  powers,"  &c., 
jind  also  upon  the  impressions  produced  by  the  other  alleged  "controls." 
Thei'e  appear  to  be  at  least  three  instances  of  other  "  controls  "  in  the 
following  reports  (Reports  Nos.  16,  30,  and  40.  See  also  Report  No. 
35).  But  the  fullest  account  which  I  have  received  concerning  other 
controls  "  is  given  by  Miss  W.,  a  most  excellent  and  discriminating 
witness.  Other  members  of  her  family  have  also  had  sittings  with 
Mrs.  Piper,  and  they  form  such  an  important  contribution  to  our  study 
of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  that  I  quote  Miss  W.'s  account  in 
this  part  of  my  article.'    Miss  W.  has  had  forty-five  sittings  with  Mrs. 

1  My  attention  was  first  called  to  the  sittings  of  the  W.  family  by  a  message  given 
by  Phinuit  in  the  latter  part  of  January,  18110,  while  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  England,  and 
forwarded  to  me  by  Mr.  Myers.  "  Little  Katie  W.  is  very  sorry  (in  the  spirit  world) 
that  the  little  dog  Gyp  has  been  run  over  and  had  its  foot  hurt.  Her  father 
(William  W. )  has  had  a  cold,  but  is  better. "  Mr.  W.  's  address  was  sent  to  me,  having 
been  obtained  from  Mrs.  Piper.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  W.,  informing  him  that  I  had 
received  a  message  from  his  daughter  through  Mrs.  Piper,  but  wished,  before  deliver- 
ing it,  to  ask  him  some  questions.  He  called  upon  me  on  February  11th,  1890.  H.  : 
"  Have  you  a  little  dog  Gyp?  "  W.  :  "  Yes."  H.  :  "  Is  he  all  right  ?  W.  :  "  So 
far  as  I  know  ;  he  v/as  all  right  when  I  left  home  this  morning."  H.  :  "  Gyp  has  not 
had  any  accident  within  the  last  few  weeks?"  W.  :  "No;  he  had  an  accident  last 
fall  some  time.    He  was  run  over  by  a  milk-cart,  and  one  of  his  toes  was  nearly  cut 

observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  29 

Piper  between  November,  1886,  and  June,  1889.  She  has  witnessed 
four  controls — Phinuit,  her  mother's  stepmother,  and  two  friends. 
These  personalities  appeared  very  different  from  one  another.  Miss 
W.  has  made  a  careful  record  of  her  sittings,  usually  taking  notes 
during  the  sitting,  and  writing  out  her  detailed  account  the  same  day. 
Her  father  has  also  had  many  sittings,  unfortunately  not  recorded,  at 
most  of  which  his  daughter  Katy,  who  died  in  1871,  when  but  three 
months  old,  purported  to  control  directly.  Her  mother  has  had  one 
sitting,  not  recorded,  and  her  sister.  Miss  M.  A.  W.,  has  had  thi'ee  or 
four  sittings,  also  not  recorded.  Miss  W.  states  that  the  majority  of 
her  own  sittings  contained  practically  no  indifferent  matter,  but  some 
of  them  contained  a  good  deal  of  irrelevant  talk  such  as  might  have 
come  from  a  stranger  to  her,  although  her  personal  friends  pui'ported 
to  be  speaking  ;  and  on  these  occasions,  although  the  thread,  so  to  say, 
of  the  personality  was  kept  up,  there  was  nothing  that  actually  sug- 
gested the  actual  presence  of  her  friends.  She  has  received  at  the 
sittings  numerous  correct  statements  of  facts  concerning  herself  and 
her  friends,  living  and  dead,  and,  among  them,  many  which  she  regards 
as  too  personal  for  publication.  Especially,  allusions  have  been  made 
to  circumstances  known  to  no  person  living  but  herself,  yet  known  to 
the  person  from  whom  they  purported  to  come,  and  who  had  died 
between  one  and  two  years  previously.  . 

3Iiss  E.  G.  W.'s  Acconnf.  of  Sittings  with  3Irs.  Piper. 
My  forty-five  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  cover  the  period  from  November 
12tli,  1886,  to  June  19th,  1889.  In  forty-one  of  these  the  control  was  taken, 
for  at  least  a  part  of  the  hour,  by  a  jjersonal  friend  whose  subjects  of  con- 
versation, forms  of  expression,  and  ways  of  looking  at  things  were  distinctly 
unlike  either  Mrs.  Piper's  or  Dr.  Phinuit's.  The  clearly-marked  personality 
of  that  friend,  whom  I  will  call  T.,  is  to  me  the  most  convincing  proof  of 
Mrs.  P.'s  supernatural  power,  but  it  is  a  proof  impossible  to  present  to  any- 
one else.    Messages,  in  some  instances  characteristic,  were  received  from 

off."  H.  :  "  Was  this  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Piper?"  W.  :  "I  have  no  remembrance 
of  any  such  reference  ;  indeed,  I  do  not  think  I  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  after 
the  accident  occurred." 

H.  :  "  How  has  your  liealth  been  ?  "  W.  :  "  Pretty  good."  H.  :  "  Have  you  had 
a  cold  ?  "  W.  :  "  Well,  I  had  a  cold  in  about  the  latter  part  of  November,  and  it 
held  on  so  tenaciously  that  I  thought  I  might  have  to  go  South."  H.  :  "  When  did 
you  recover  from  it?"  W.  :  "  Well,  it  was  worked  off  very  slowly;  if  I  had  to 
state  the  time  when  I  recovered  from  it,  I  should  say,  perhaps  a  month  ago. " 

Further  conversation  made  it  clear  that  the  accident  to  the  dog  occurred  before 
Mrs.  Piper  left  America  in  1880,  but  it  appears  that  no  members  of  Mr.  W.'s  family 
saw  Mrs.  Piper  between  the  time  of  the  accident  and  Mrs.  Pijjer's  departure  for 
England. 

Mr.  W.  mentioned  some  incidents  which  had  occurred  at  his  own  sittings,  and 
stated  that  one  of  his  daughters,  then  in  Italy,  had  made  careful  notes  of  her 
experiences.    This  led  to  my  obtaining  an  account  from  Miss  W.  herself. 

30 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

«ther  friends,  but  no  long-sustained  conversations  were  held  save  with  T. 
and  Dr.  Phinuit.  T.,  who  was,  while  living,  a  Congregational' minister, 
talked  of  religious  subjects  (of  which  Pliinuit  disclaimed  either  interest  or 
knowledge),  of  professional  matters,  of  our  large  circle  of  mutual  acquaint- 
ances, and  of  many  private  affairs  known  only  to  liimself  and  me. 

T.  was  a  Western  man,  and  the  localism  of  using  like  as  a  conjunction 
clung  to  him,  despite  my  frequent  correction,  all  his  life.  At  my  sitting  on 
December  16th,  1886,  he  remarked,  "If  you  could  see  it  like  I  do."  For- 
getful for  tlie  instant  of  changed  conditions,  I  promjitly  repeated,  "  J.s  I 
do."  "Ah,"  came  the  response,  "that  sounds  natural.  That  sounds  like 
old  times." 

March  1st,  1888,  he  requested,  "Throw  off  this  rug,"  referring  to  a 
loose  fur-lined  cloak  which  I  wore.  I  noted  the  word  as  a  singular  designa- 
tion for  such  a  garment,  and  weeks  after  recalled  that  he  had  once,  while 
living,  spoken  of  it  in  the  same  way  as  I  threw  it  over  him  on  the  lounge. 
Februai-y  18th,  1887,  T.  remarked,  "  I  like  your  arranc/ement  here," 
referring  to  a  new  gown  by  a  term  which  he  was  wont  to  use. 

March  2nd,  1887,  came  this  :  "I  never  knew  you  had  a  little  sister  here. 
She  tells  me  she  has  heen  hei'e  a  long  time,  ever  since  she  was  a  little 
toddling  baby."  Certainly  not  I,  nor  Mrs.  P.,  who  has  children  of  her  own, 
would  speak  of  a  four  months  old  child  as  a  ^''toddling  baby."  It  is  more 
thinkable  of  a  man  who,  like  T.,  never  knew  anything  of  young  children. 

I  have  received  from  T.,  dictated  through  Mrs.  P.  to  her  husband  and 
sent  me  by  post,  seven  letters  at  intervals  from  November  29th,  1886,  to 
January  22nd,  1889.  Each  contains  some  unintelligible  matter,  but  each 
contains  familiar  allusions  and  the  old-time  opening  and  closing  phrases, 
either  of  which  is  too  long  and  individual  to  have  been  merely  chanced  upon. 
The  post-office  address  of  the  first  is  worth  mention.  Mrs.  P.  had  learned 
from  me  neither  name  nor  residence,  nor  had  any  other  than  my  pet  name, 
Nellie,  been  given  at  the  sittings.  On  November  16th,  188G,  Dr.  P.  told 
me  that  T.  was  dictating  a  letter  to  me.  "How  will  you  address  it?"  I 
asked.  "  T.  knows  your  address  and  will  give  it  to  the  medium."  November 
■29th,  a  friend,  who  had  been  sitting  with  Mrs.  P.,  brought  me  word  that 
the  promised  letter  had  Ijeen  mailed  to — 

Miss  Nellie  Wilson, 

Care  David  Wilson, 

Reading,  Mass. 

By  applying  at  the  post-office  at  Reading  I  was  able  to  obtain  the  letter. 
I  alter  the  names,  but  these  points  may  be  noted  : — 

1.  My  surname  is  given  correctly. 

2.  I  have  a  cousin,  David  Wilson,  of  whose  relationship^  and  friendship 
T.  was  well  aware.    His  home,  however,  has  always  been  in  New  York. 

3.  Reading  was  my  home  during  my  childhood  and  youth,  but  I  removed 
from  it  thirteen  years  ago.    I  knew  T.  only  subsequent  to  that  removal. 

4.  While  living  thei'e  I  wrote  my  name  with  the  diminutive,  Nellie,  but 
since  then  have  preferred  to  write  my  baptismal  name  Ella,  or  merely  the 
initial  E.    T.  was  wont  to  use  the  initials  merely. 

At  my  next  sitting,  November  30th,  I  inquired  about  this  mongrel  addres.s. 
■"T.  was  not  strong  enough,"  said  Phinuit,  "  to  direct  where  the  letter  should 
be  sent,  but  he  thought  your  cousin  David  would  attend  to  your  getting  it. 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  31 

Your  other  friends  here  helped  us  on  the  rest  of  the  address."  "But  they 
would  not  tell  you  to  send  to  Reading."  "  Yes,  they  would,  they  did.  It 
was  Mary  told  us  that."  "  Nonsense,"  said  I,  thinking  of  a  sister  of  that 
name.  ' '  Not  Mary  in  the  body.  Mary  in  the  spirit. "  ' '  But  I  have  no  such 
friend."  "  Yes,  you  have.  It  was  Mary  L.— Mary  E.— Mary  E.  Parker  told 
us  that. "  I  then  recalled  a  little  playmate  of  that  name,  a  next  door  neighbour, 
who  moved  away  from  Reading  when  I  was  ten  years  old,  and  of  whose  deatli 
I  learned  a  few  years  later.  I  had  scarcely  thought  of  her  for  twenty  years. 
The  "  E."  in  the  name  I  have  not  verified. 

I  quote  two  tests  of  partial  clairvoyance.  March  2nd,  1887,  I  was  asked 
'bj  my  mother  to  inquire  the  whereabouts  of  two  silver  cups,  heirlooms, 
which  she  had  misplaced.  Said  Dr.  P.  :  "  They  are  in  your  house,  in  a  room 
higher  up  than  your  sleeping  room,  in  wliat  looks  to  me  the  back  part  of 
the  house,  but  very  likely  I  am  turned  round.  You'll  find  there  a  large  chest 
filled  with  clotliing,  and  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  chest  are  the  cups.  Annie 
[my  mother's  name]  placed  them  there  and  will  remember  it."  Returning 
liome  I  went  to  a  room  on  the  third  floor  at  tlie  front  of  the  house,  but 
remotest  from  the  stairway,  found  the  chest  (of  which  I  knew)  and  the  con- 
tents (of  which  I  was  ignorant)  both  as  described,  but  no  silver.  Reporting 
the  message  to  my  mother  I  learned  that  she  had  at  one  time  kept  the  cups 
in  that  chest,  but  more  recently  had  removed  them. 

February  11th,  1887,  my  sister  L.  wished  me  to  ask  Phinuit  where  she 
should  find  her  missing  card-plate.  To  be  thoroughly  explicit,  I  took  her 
calling-card  with  me  and  placed  it  in  Mrs.  P. 's  hand,  inquiring,  "Where  is 
the  plate  from  which  this  is  engraved  ?  "  Phinuit  replied,  "You  will  find  it 
in  a  box  with  a  brush  and  a  bottle.  The  box  is  in  the  house  where  you  live, 
in  a  drawer  under  something  that  looks  like  a  cupboard  or  closet  or  some- 
thing of  that  sort.  There  are  soft  things  cluttered  up  in  the  drawer."  L. 
and  I  searched  together  all  possible  places,  and  finally  concluded  that  the 
"cupboard  or  closet "  might  be  the  stationary  washstand  in  her  bedrooili 
which  is  set  into  a  recess  with  shelves  above  and  drawers  below.  The  second 
of  these  three  drawers,  of  whose  contents  I  knew  notliing,  we  found  filled 
with  loose  pieces  of  woollen  and  muslin,  and  under  these  pieces  a  small  box. 
The  box  contained  specified  box  and  bottle,  but  instead  of  L.'s  card-plate  her 
stencil-plate.  We  subsequently  wondered  that  the  mention  of  brush  and 
bottle  had  not  forewarned  us  of  this  mistake,  but  it  had  not. 

I  am  asked  if  I  have  any  indications  that  Mrs.  P.  is  ignorant  of  her 
vitterances  during  the  trance.    These  five  instances  may  bear  on  that 

1.  November  26th,  1886,  Phinuit,  on  taking  control,  tasted  for  several 
seconds  and  then  began,  "The  medium  has  been  eating  that  nadij  thing, 
what  do  you  call  it  ?  "  I  had  perceived  no  odour,  but  suggested  "  onions." 
"Yes,  that's  it,  you  must  excuse  it."  After  the  trance  I  asked  Mrs.  P.  if 
she  had  eaten  onions  lately.  She  said  she  had  yesterday,  and  asked  was  it 
possible  that  any  unpleasantness  lingered  in  her  breath  ? 

2.  March  2nd,  1887,  T.  controlling,  remarked,  "The  medium's  hand 
feels  numb.    I  can't  use  it  well.    It  doesn't  seem  natural,  "i    I  rubbed  it  a 

1  At  a  sitting  which  I  attended  on  February  20th,  1888,  Phinuit  declared  that 
one  of  his  thumbs  "belonged  to  the  medium,"  and  added,  "I  cannot  move 
that."— R,  H. 

32 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

little  and  gilt  the  acknowledgment,  "  That  helps  it."  I  asked  Mrs.  P.  later- 
if  her  hand  was  hurt,  and  slie  said,  "No,"  adding  after  a  moment,  'T 
jammed  it  slightly  this  morning,  but  the  pain  was  gone  long  ago." 

3.  At  the  same  sitting  T.  narrated  how  a  few  days  before  when  he  was. 
dictating  a  letter  to  me  "  there  were  some  tilings  about  her  ears  I  didn't: 
like."  "Earrings?"  "Yes.  They  got  in  my  way  and  I  couldn't  hear 
well.  You  never  wore  such  things  and  I  never  did,  so  I  asked  the  gentle- 
man in  lier  surroundings  [Mr.  Piper]  to  liave  them  removed."  This  incident, 
was  substantiated. 

4.  More  than  once  in  the  winter  of  1886-1887  T.  spoke  gratefully  of  ' '  the 
medium's  great  kindness  in  letting  me  come  and  talk  with  you."  To  this  I 
always  assented.  From  my  sitting  of  February  18th  I  quote,  "  Tell  me, 
how  is  it  about  talking  with  me  here  1  Do  you  pay  anything  to  come 
here  ? " 

5.  March  15th,  1887,  T.  observed,  "  This  medium  is  good  and  true.  I 
am  glad  to  say  that  because  I  used  to  think  she  was  a  fi-aud.  Do  you 
remember?"  "No;  I  didn't  know  you  ever  said  so" — thinking  only  of 
communications  received  thrfiugh  her.  "  Why,  yes,  last  summer,  wlien 
you  sent  her  a  lock  of  my  hair.  Don't  you  remember  ? "  I  then  recalled 
that  during  T.'s  fatal  illness  in  June,  1886,  I  had  won  his  reluctant  consent 
to  send  Mrs.  P.  a  lock  of  his  hair.  I  first  heard  of  her  at  that  time,  and 
faintly  hoped  that  a  clairvoyant  might  diagnose  a  malady  which  pliysicians. 
had  failed  to  reach.  The  diagnosis  proved  worthless,  and  T.  had  freely 
characterised  the  Avhole  thing  as  trickery  and  fraud.  I  have  never  mentioned 
that  correspondence  to  Mrs.  P.,  and  since  I  wrote  her  from  a  distant  city, 
she  is  not  likely  to  have  associated  it  with  me. 

Somewhat  analogous  to  the  incident  of  the  bruised  hand  is  this  : — A_ 
friend,  H.,  was  visiting  me  who  during  his  childhood  and  youth  had  been, 
paralysed  throughout  his  left  side.  He  had  so  far  recovered  that  a  slight  limp 
and  a  little  awkwardness  in  the  use  of  the  left  hand  were  the  only  indica- 
tions of  tlie  illness.  H.,  interested  in  our  account  of  Mrs.  P.,  arranged  for 
a  sitting,  but,  alone  among  tlie  many  whom  I  have  sent  to  her,  was  disap- 
pointed ;  the  trance  would  not  come  on.  He  went  again  in  the  evening, 
October  23rd,  1887,  and  I  went  with  him  to  establisli  comnuuiication.  He 
had  a  long  and,  he  assured  me,  satisfactory  conversation  with  Dr.  Phinuit, 
during  wliich  no  allusion  was  made  to  liis  former  invalidism,  or  to  the  failure 
of  tlie  morning.  At  my  next  sitting.  Dr.  Phinuit  asked,  "  Who  was  that 
here  with  you  the  other  day  1  A  fine  fellow,  but  I  found  him  very  hard  to 
talk  witli.  Some  queer  things  about  him.  All  the  way  down  this  side 
[indicating  the  left]  I  couldn't  get  hold  of  him  or  get  any  magnetism  from 
him.  But  I  would  not  be  so  impolite  as  to  tell  him  so."  Unwonted  reserve 
for  Dr.  Phinuit  ! 

These  three  cases  suggesting  clouded  vision  of  pliysical  things  interested 
me  : — 

1.  December  16th,  1886,  I  mentioned  to  T.  that  I  had  recently  met  D., 
a  foi'mer  acquaintance  of  his,  and  asked  if  he  remembered  him.  "  Yes,  I 
remember  D. ,  but  not  in  your  ijresent  surroundings,  nor  in  X.  [referring  to  a 
former  home].  It  was  in  D.'s  surroiuidings  that  I  knew  you  first,  but  not  in 
his  home.    He  has  not  a  church,  but  a  large  house,  an  institution  to  take 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  33 

charge  of."  My  request  for  fuller  particulars  was  met  by  a  promise  to  think 
of  the  matter  and  tell  me  at  my  next  visit.  December  21st,  T.  introduced 
the  subject,  saying,  "  I  was  to  remember  about  D.  It  was  in  his  institution 
that  I  met  you  first.  I  think  the  institution  was  for  poor  people,  sick 
people."  "  No,  that  is  wrong."  "  I  cannot  tell  why  it  seems  to  me  like  a 
hospital,  unless  because  so  many  of  the  people  that  I'm  working  among  here 
have  come  from  hospitals."  I  first  met  T.  when  he  was  visiting  at  a  Western 
college,  of  which  D.  was  president  and  I  a  teacher. 

2.  February  11th,  1887,  T.  remarked,  "I  saw  you  lately  working  at 
your  desk  with  your  back  toward  the  window,  the  light.  But  what  is  that 
large  piece  of  furniture  at  the  right  of  the  door  in  your  room  1 "  For  the 
purpose  of  misleading  I  suggested,  "A  tabled"  "No,  that  is  at  the  left." 
After  several  leading  questions  from  me  he  concluded  it  might  be  the  book- 
case, which  it  was.  Question  from  me  :  "If  you  see  the  furniture  so 
indistinctly,  are  you  quite  sure  whom  you  saw  at  the  desk  ? "  An  emphatic 
affirmative,  with  a  denial  of  any  analogy  between  me  and  the  book-case. 

3.  Late  in  June,  1887,  Mrs.  Piper  went  yachting  with  us  for  an  after- 
noon. At  my  next  sitting,  July  1st,  T.  said,  ' '  I  saw  you  with  the  medium 
the  other  day  riding  along  in  a  very  large  vehicle  of  some  sort.  I  could  not 
make  out  what.  It  moved  so  quietly  and  gently,  'twas  as  if  on  a  carpet. 
But  it  was  not.  It  was  clear,  and  I  could  see  into  it."  "  Was  it  a  carriage  ?" 
"  Oh,  no  ;  larger  than  that.  And  it  was  not  moving  on  the  ground,  either." 
"A  balloon,  perhaps?"    "No,  I  couldn't  see  as  clearly  as  if  it  had  been  air." 

"Well,  if  neither  earth  nor  air,  it  must  have  been  "    "  Water,  of  course. 

That  was  it.    You  were  in  a  boat.    Strange  that  I  could  not  see  it  !  " 

The  scepticism  of  one,  B.,  with  whom  he  had  much  in  common,  had 
seemed  a  matter  of  concern  to  T.  He  spoke  of  it  November  26th,  1886  :  "  I 
remember  how  we  used  to  talk  about  this  [spirit-control],  and  how  set  against 
it  B.  was — like  a  wall.  He  thinks  so  yet."  December  16th,  1886,  he  again 
introduced  the  matter,  saying,  "I  notice  your  father  has  a  letter  from  B. 
How  strongly  he  holds  his  old  notions.  He's  determined  not  to  admit  any- 
thing in  this,  isn't  he  1  "  The  letter,  whose  contents  were  correctly  sum- 
marised, was  received  by  my  father  that  very  morning.  I  did  not  know  of 
its  arrival  until  my  return  home  after  this  sitting.  In  July,  1887,  B.  visited, 
my  father  and  the  two  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  P.  At  my  next  visit,  August 
5th,  T.  thus  spoke  of  it  :  "I  have  seen  B.  He  seems  changed  and  so 
inquisitive.  I  do  not  remember  him  so.  But  he  seemed  to  think  we- 
difierent."  I  learned  afterward  from  my  father  that  B.'s  conversation  had. 
been  a  bombardment  of  questions. 

On  one  occasion  my  mother  went  with  my  father  to  Mrs.  P.'s.  On 
my  next  visit,  August  loth,  1887,  T.  spoke  of  it  with  pleasure,  but 
added  :  "  This  seemed  so  strange.  A  little  while  after  she  was  here  I  heard, 
her  say  to  your  father,  '  It  did  not  really  seem  like  T.'  It  was  on  the  piazza 
that  she  said  it."  I  verified  this  on  reaching  home.  Nothing  of  the  sort 
had  been  said  to  me. 

January  5th,  1888,  I  was  told,  "Here  is  somebody  who  says  he  is  your- 
grandfather.  He  is  tall,  wears  glasses,  and  is  smooth-shaven."  "Which 
grandfather  ?  "  "  He  gives  his  name  F."  "  Yes,  it  must  be  my  grandfather- 
F.,  if  smooth-shaven."    "Well,  it  is.    But  do  you  mean  that  your  grand- 

D 

34 

j\Ir.  R.  Hodgson. 

father  E.  wccars  a  beard?"  "Yes."  "I  think  you  must  be  mistaken." 
"No  ;  I  am  sure  that  he  did."  "  T  never  see  him  so,  and  I  see  liim  often." 
My  grandfather  E.  died  before  }ny  birtli,  but  I  felt  sure  tliat  he  had  been 
described  to  me  as  full-bearded,  like  his  son.  But  my  father,  when  appealed 
to,  disajjpointed  me.  "No,  you  are  wrong,"  he  said;  "I  am  like  him  in 
figure  and  features,  but  not  in  cut  of  beard.  He  was  always  smooth-shaven." 

Here  are  tlie  most  significant  projjhecies.  Tliere  have  been  others,  ful- 
filled and  unfvillilled — about  half  of  each. 

In  tlie  autumn  of  1886  my  young  brother,  K.,  started  in  business.  He  had 
had  slight  experience,  had  given  no  marked  promise,  and  those  who  knew 
him  best  were  not  confident  of  success.  At  my  first  sitting,  November  12th, 
1886,  Dr.  Phinuit's  first  words  were  of  K.,  calling  him  by  name  and  assuring 
me  that  he  was  bound  to  get  on  ;  there  was  no  trouble  about  him.  He  would 
do  finely.  At  nearly  every  sitting  during  the  winter  Phinuit  recurred  to  the 
subject,  asserting,  with  laughaljle  emphasis,  "  K.'s  the  fellow  for  me.  He'll 
get  on  ;  he'll  get  to  the  top.  He  may  not  care  so  much  for  books  as  some  of 
you,  but  he's  sure  to  succeed."  K.,  while  not  yet  at  "  the  top,"  has  wholly 
disajjpointed  the  fears  of  his  fiiends,  and  has  established  (March,  1891)  an 
influential  and  profitable  business. 

On  January  5th,  1887,  T.  brought  me  the  message  :  "  N.  is  here  and  has 
something  to  tell  you.  She  says  O.  is  to  be  married  in  the  spring."  N.  was 
a  friend  who  had  died  five  years  before,  and  whose  widowed  husltand,  O.,  I 
saw  not  infrequently.  "  Preposterous  I  "  I  replied.  "  It  cannot  be  N.  who 
tells  me  that."  "  She  does  not  ask  you  to  believe  it.  She  simply  a.sks  you 
to  hear  it.  She  knows  you  would  rather  hear  it  from  her  than  from  any 
other  source.  And  she  would  like,  too,  that  you  should  remember  it  as  a 
little  test  that  it  is  she  who  is  speaking  to  you."  Then  followed  a  somewhat 
extended  conversation  in  which  N.  took  positions  which  I  was  forced  to 
admit  were  characteiistic.  Her  first  assertion,  however,  was  so  violently 
improbable  to  my  mind  that  I  attached  little  importance  to  it  all.  The 
prophesied  marriage  occurred,  however,  in  the  following  Jinie. 

In  the  spring  of  1888,  an  acquaintance,  S.,  was  suflTering  tortining 
disease.  There  was  no  hope  of  relief,  and  only  distant  prospect  of  release. 
A  considtation  of  jdiysicians  predicted  continued  physical  suffering  and 
})robably  mental  decay,  continuing  perhaps  through  a  series  of  years.  S.'s 
daughter,  worn  with  anxiety  and  care,  was  in  danger  of  breaking  in  health. 
"How  can  I  get  her  away  for  a  little  rest?"  I  asked  Dr.  Phinuit,  May  24th, 
1888.  "  She  will  not  leave  her  father,"  was  his  reply,  "  btit  his  suffering  is 
not  for  long.  The  doctors  are  wrong  about  that.  There  will  be  a  change 
■soon,  and  he  will  pa.'^s  out  of  the  body  before  the  summer  is  over."  His 
■death  occurred  in  June,  1888. 

E.  G.  W. 

I  have  also  received  from  Miss  W.  the  accounts  of  several  other 
incidents,  the  details  of  which  she  gave  to  nie  before  writing  her  genei  al 
report.  One  of  the  communications  from  Phinuit  that  seemed  specially 
striking  in  the  first  instance  has  lost  much  of  its  significance  owing  to 
facts  wliicli  I  have  ascertaintd  from  Miss  W.  The  Rev.  W.  H.  Savage, 
at  a  sitting  on  December  28th,  1888  (see  Reports,  Nos.  27  and  28), 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  35 

Teceived  a  message  for  his  brother,  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  purporting 
to  come  from  the  Rev.  Robert  West — full  name  and  description  given 
— regretting  a  certain  article  which  he  had  wiitten  against  the  Rev. 
-M..  J.  Savage  in  a  paper  called  the  Advance,  and  naming  correctly  the 
^•ause  and  the  date  of  his  death.  At  a  sitting  on  January  loth,  1889, 
.the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  also  received  a  communication  purporting  to 
fome  from  the  Rev.  Roljert  West,  in  "which  the  place  of  his  burial  and 
the  text  on  his  tombstone  were  correctly  given.  All  these  circum- 
stances were  unknown  to  the  sitters.  Now,  Miss  W.,  it  appears,  was  a 
friend  of  the  Rev.  Robert  West,  and  aware  of  the  text  on  his  tomb- 
stone. The  Rev.  Robert  West  has  purported  to  communicate  directly 
with  her,  v/ithout  the  intervention  of  Phinuit,  and  early  in  1888 
(February  2nd)  referred  to  '-  a  blue-eyed.  In-own-bearded  man,  about 
my  age  [Jr2],  who  comes  here,  named  'Savage,'"'  and  wished  Miss  W. 
to  refresh  his  (West's)  memory  about  Mr.  Savage,  whom  he  claimed  lie 
used  to  know  in  the  West.  Miss  W.  put  some  leading  questions  with 
this  object  in  view,  and  Mr.  West  then  referred  to  the  article  in  the 
Advance,  which  Miss  W.  had  not  specially  mentioned,  but  about  which 
she  knew.  There  were  also  allusions,  at  her  sittings  in  the  early  jDart 
of  1888,  to  the  text  on  the  tombstone  and  the  place  of  burial.  It 
seems  clear,  therefore,  that  all  the  information  which  was  given  to  the 
Rev.  W.  H.  Savage  and  his  brother  might  have  been  obtained  previously 
from  Miss  W.  without  supposing  any  more  than  telepathy  from  the 
sitter. 

The  above  is  the  simple  outline  of  the  case.  The  full  details  are 
.somewhat  more  complicated,  and  appear  to  be  as  follow  : — 

On  February  2nd,  1888,  "Mr.  West"  gave  to  Miss  W.  a  general 
personal  description  of  "  Savage  "  which  would  suit  well  enough  either 
M.  J.  Savage  or  W.  H.  Savage.  Miss  W^.  did  not  know  whether  the 
description  was  applicable  or  not,  but  supposed  at  the  time  that  M.  J. 
Savage  was  meant,  for  she  did  not  know  of  the  existence  of  his  brother. 
But  Mr.  West  never  knew  M.  J.  Savage  in  the  West,  but  he  did  know 
W.  H.  Savage  thei'e,  both  being  Congregational  ministers  at  the  same 
time  in  towns  not  very  far  apart  in  the  State  of  Illinois.  On  May 
24:th,  1888,  "Mr.  West"  stated  to  Miss  W.  that  he  had  (since  February 
2nd,  1888)  seen  Mr.  Savage  and  communicated  with  him.  "I  had  a 
talk  with  Mr.  Savage.  Dr.  Phinuit  was  talking  with  him,  and  I  said 
to  the  doctor,  '  I  think  I  know  that  gentleman.'  So  he  told  Mr. 
Savage,  who  asked  me  to  come.  I  told  Mr.  Savage  about  a  good  many- 
things  in  my  life,  about  my  illness,  itc,  reminded  him  of  that  note  we 
jjublished.  He  remembered  it  very  well,  said  he  did  not  think  it  quite 
the  right  thing,  but  was  ready  to  overlook  it." 

Mr.  M.  J.  Savage  did  not  remember  any  such  sitting,  and 
in    reply   to   my    inquiry   stated  that  he  had  no  recollection  of 

36 

Mr.  R,  Hodgson. 

attending  any  sitting  between  February  2nd  and  May  24th,  1888. 
I  discovered,  however,  that  during  this  interval  Mr.  Savage  had 
visited  Mrs.  Piper,  not  as  the  "  sitter,"  but  as  an  officer  of  the 
committee  of  the  A.S.P.R.,  accompanying  the  sitter  and  a  steno- 
graphic reporter  for  the  pui'pose  of  sujjervising  and  adding  com- 
ments concerning  incidents  at  the  sitting  which  were  not  likely  to  be 
noted  by  tlie  reporter,  and  avoiding,  as  far  as  possible,  communications 
to  himself.  He  received  no  communication  from  the  Rev.  Robert 
West  at  this  sitting  (March  7th),  as  I  have  ascertained  from  an  exami- 
nation of  the  stenographic  report  in  my  jDOSsession.  Mr.  W.  H.  Savage 
also  believes  that  he  did  not  visit  Mrs.  Pijser  at  all  between  those  dates. 
It  is,  of  course,  just  possible  that  since  Mr.  M.  J.  Savage  forgot  that  he 
had  any  sitting  at  all  with  Mrs.  Piper  between  the  dates  of  February 
2nd  and  May  24th,  1888,  whereas  he  was  certainly  present  at  an  im- 
portant official  sitting  between  those  dates,  he  might  have  also  had 
another  sitting  as  alleged  ))y  "  Mr.  West,"  though  perhaps  he  was 
hardly  likely  to  forget  such  a  conversation  as  that  described  on  May 
24th  to  Miss  W.  Recently  (November,  1891)  I  questioned  Phinuit 
about  this  incident  and  quoted  Mr.  Savage's  statement  that  no  such 
conversation  had  occurred.  Phinuit  purported  then  to  get  into  com- 
munication with  ''  Mr.  West,"  and  stated  in  exjalanation  that  it  was 
proljaljly  his  (Phinuit's)  fault,  that  Mr.  West  had  given  him  the  mes- 
sage to  deliver,  and  he  had  forgotten  it,  and  told  Mr.  West  that  it 
would  be  "  all  right,  or  something  of  that  sort,"  thus  giving  rise  to 
another  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  Mr.  West  that  ]\Ir.  Savage 
had  offered  a  communication  in  return.  But  this  explanation  seems 
somewhat  inadequate  when  we  consider  the  exjjlicit  account  given  to 
Miss  W.  on  May  24th  by  "  Mr.  West." 

Again,  at  Mr.  M,  J.  Savage's  sitting  on  January  15th,  1889, 
when  he  received  from  "  Mr.  West  "  the  information  about  the  place 
of  burial  and  the  text  on  the  tombstone,  the  Rev.  C.  L.  Goodell 
purported  to  be  present  (Report,  No.  27).  Mr.  Savage  was  unaware 
of  his  death,  but  afterwards  ascertained  that  Mr.  Goodell  died  early 
in  1886.  Miss  W.  writes  to  me :  "  Dr.  C.  L.  Goodell  was  an 
acquaintance  of  mine.  His  name  was  mentioned  to  me  (at  a  sitting- 
with  Mrs.  Piper)  with  a  message  of  i-egards  on  December  16th,  1886, 
and  several  times  thei'eafter."  Dr.  Goodell  was  also  known  to  the 
Rev.  Robert  West. 

Taken  altogether,  the  incidents  form  a  curious  series  of  events. 
The  jjerson  unfamiliar  with,  and  incredulous  of,  the  possibilities  of 
trance  states  like  Mrs.  Pijjer's  would  naturally  infer,  on  reading 
the  accounts  given  by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  and  his  brother, 
that  Mrs.  Pijier  had  "  worked  up  "  the  cases  of  West  and  Goodell  by 
ordinary  means  of    inquiry.     The  firm  believer  in  "  spirit  control " 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  37 

would  probably  conclude  at  once  that  the  Rev.  Robert  West  and  Dr. 
Goodell  were  personally  communicating.  But  while  we  cannot  say  that 
this  second  view  is  absolutely  untenable,  there  remains  another  expla- 
nation, that  Phinuit,  drawing  his  information  from  Miss  W.  telepathi- 
cally  and  by  conversation,  and  knowing  (as  Miss  W.,  consciously,  did 
not  know)  that  both  M.  J.  Savage  and  his  brother  had  talked  with  him 
and  were  likely  to  come  again,  stored  up  the  information  for  future 
use,  and  found  the  first  favourable  opportunity  on  the  visit  of  W.  H. 
Savage. 

In  the  light  of  the  foregoing  incident  we  are,  I  think,  bound 
to  regard  several  other  peculiar  cases  of  which  accounts  have  been 
furnished  to  me  by  Miss  W. 

On  March  23rd,  1887,  Miss  W.  received  a  communication  from 
"  Mr.  AVest "  to  this  effect :  "  Katy  asks,  Do  you  know  Mabel 
Fuller  1  She  lived  in  Lake  City  and  was  drowned  there  some  six  or 
eight  years  ago,  while  skating  on  the  lake  with  John  Gerster."  On 
March  31st  she  was  further  told :  "It  was  in  Lake  Pepin  she  was 
drowned  with  Gerster  some  seven  or  eight  years  ago.  Her  father's 
name  is  John." 

Mr.  W.  also  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  about  this  time,  and  in 
reply  to  his  inquiries  the  information  concerning  the  above  incident 
gradually  became  more  definite  in  successive  sittings.  Unfortunately 
no  record  was  made  of  the  actual  changes,  &c.,  but  Mr.  AY.  is  sure  that 
he  finally  had  the  following  statements  to  go  wpon  : — That  a  boy  named 
Fred  Guernsey,  whose  father  kept  a  drug-store  in  Lake  City,  was 
drowned  in  Lake  Pepin  while  skating  in  company  with  a  girl,  and  that 
their  bodies  were  found  clasped  together  in  the  lake.  He  could  not 
get  the  name  of  the  State,  and  several  States  contain  a  Lake  City,  but 
the  Lake  Pepin  pointed  to  the  Lake  City  in  Minnesota,  and  he  ac- 
cordingly wrote  to  Mr.  Guernsey  to  this  address  on  May  20th,  1887 
and  received  the  following  letter  in  reply  : — 

Drugs,  Books,  Stationery,  Notions, 
Fancy  Goods,  Wall  Paper. 

A.  T.  Guernsey. 

Lake  City,  Minn. 

Mail  2Uh,  1887. 

...  In  reply  to  your  inquiries  under  date  of  the  20th,  would  say  that 
I  lost  a  son  by  drowning  December  13th,  1878,  while  skating  on  Lake 
Pepin  in  company  with  Miss  Florence  E.  WyckofF,  daughter  of  Rev.  Samll 
WyckofF,  at  that  time  jiastor  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  this  place.  Both 
were  lost.    His  name  was  Porter  Brewster  Guernsey. 

A.  T.  GXTERNSET. 

On  July  1st,  1887,  Miss  W.  drew  the  attention  of  the  "control" 
to  the  mistake  in  the  name  Mabel  Fuller,  acquainting  hhii  probably,  as 

38 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

she  thinks,  with  tlie  contents  of  the  letter  received  from  Mr.  Guernsey. 
An  exphmation  of  the  mistake  was  offered  to  the  effect  tliat  Mabel 
Fuller  had  lived  in  Lake  City,  was  a  friend  of  Miss  Wyckoff,  and  was 
the  daughter  of  a  Baptist  minister  there,  Miss  Wyckoff  being  also  the 
daughter  of  a  minister.  It  was  not  ascertained  at  the  time  whether 
this  explanation  was  founded  on  facts  or  not,  and  my  own  letters  t<9 
Lake  City  received  no  reply.  I  have  at  last,  however,  received  tlie 
following  statement  from  one  of  our  members,  Mr.  H.  W.  Smith  : — 

St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Novcmlm-  30th,  1891.  , 
You  ask  as  to  the  identity  of  Miss  Mabel  Fuller,  &c.,  all  of 
which  I  will  try  to  pince  before  you  in  the  following.  Your  letter  of  March 
yth  to  A.  T.  G-uernsey  is  also  before  me — temporarily  in  my  possession — and 
I  also  attempt  to  cover  the  questions  therein  contained.  Before  me  also  are 
t\YO  letters,  copies  of  which  I  enclose,  wliich  Mr.  Guernsey  states  reached 
him  from  a  party  claiming  to  be  W.  H.  W.  The  origmals  are  written  in  a 
beautiful  cultivated  hand,  well  punctuated  ;  otherwise  my  copies  are  accurate. 

Mr.  A.  T.  Guernsey  is  a  druggist  doing  business  at  the  corner  of  Sel);y- 
avenue  and  Dale-street,  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  having  removed  with  his  family 
from  Lake  City,  Minn.,  some  three  years  ago.  The  following  statement.s 
were  made  to  me  this  evening  l}y  said  Mr.  Guernsey,  while  in  his  presence,  by 
firal  declaration.  He  is  the  fatlier  of  Porter  Brewster  Guernsey,  who  v.-as 
drowned  in  Lake  Pepin  in  the  vicinity  of  Lake  City,  Minn.,  in  the  evening 
(not  the  afternoon  or  day)  oi  December  loth,  1878.  He  (young  Guernsey) 
was  skating  in  company  with  Fkirence  E.  Wyckoff  at  the  time,  and  she  was 
drowned  with  him.  Miss  Wyckoff's  father  was  the  Presbyterian  minister  at 
Lake  City,  Minn.,  having  removed  from  Portage,  Wisconsin.  The  former 
Baptist  minister  at  Lake  City  was  a  Mr.  Fuller,  wlio  removed  to  Litchfield, 
Minn.,  two  or  three  years  liefore  Mr.  Wyckoff  or  any  of  his  (Wyckoff's) 
family  arrived.  Besides  this  strong  indication  that  the  Fullers  and  Wyckoffs 
were  not  acquainted,  there  is  independent  evidence  which  is  nearly  conclu- 
sive. There  was  no  such  person  as  Mabel  Fuller  residing  in  Lake  City  or 
anywhere  around,  or  known  thei'e,  before,  at  tlie  time,  or  subsequent  to  the 
above-mentioned  drowning.  Mr.  Fuller  had  two  daughters,  neither  of  whom 
was  drowned,  neither  knew  the  Wyckoffs,  neither  of  them  was  named  Mabel. 
Both,  and  all  the  family,  moved  away,  as  above  stated,  two  or  three  years 
jjrior  to  Wyckoff"s  arrival,  and  now  reside  at  Litchfield,  Minn.  Porter 
Brewster  Guernsey  and  Florence  E.  Wyckoff  were  drowned  and  died  together 
on  one  and  the  same  occasion.  The  evidence  is  that  Guernsey  was  trying  to 
assist  Miss  Wj^ckoff,  v,dien  both  went  down  together,  and  the  fact  is  that  when 
found  the  bodies  were  attached  ;  that  is  to  say,  Mr.  Guernsey  had  hold  of 
Miss  VVyckoff^s  arm  at  death  and  the  bodies  had  remained  so.  I  have  already 
given  you  the  date  of  drowning.  Young  Guernsey's  name  is  correctly  given 
above,  and  Fred  Guernsey  (see  Mr.  W.'s  letter)  is  not  correct.  No  such  per- 
son as  Fred  Guernsey  was  drowned.  Mr.  A.  T.  Guernsey  never  saw,  nor  coi- 
responded  with,  nor  heard  Rev.'  Rol)ert  West;  never  subscribed  to  the 
Advcoicc,  and  believes,  therefore,  his  name  never  came  to  their  notice.  He 
had  read  the  Admnce,  and  recollects  Rev.  West  as  a  writer. 

Again,  Miss  W.,  at  a  sitting  on  March  31st,  1887,  was  informed 

Ohsenmtions  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

30 

])y  "Ml-.  West"  that  he  was  very  Vjusy  just  then  with  the  care  of  a 
WiUiam  N.  (giving  the  name  in  full),  who  had  passed  out  of  the  body 
"  by  his  own  act,  from  some  Westei'n  City."  William  N.  wanted  to 
send  a  message  to  his  wife  Lidu.  Shortly  after  this,  Miss  W.  ascer- 
tained that  a  bearer  of  the  name  given  had  been  in  .  .  .  in 
*  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  and  had  committed  suicide.  I  learn  (November 
29th,  1891)  from  Mr.  H.  W.  Smith,  who  sent  me  the  information 
concerning  the  Guernsey  incident,  that  William  R.  N.  committed 
suicide  in  1883,  and  that  his  wife's  name  is  Louise.  My  infoimant 
adds  that  "  the  remains  were,  or  were  to  be,  taken  to  Lake  City, 
Minn.,  for  interment." 

Now,  taking  the  view  which  I  do  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  (and 
therefore  rejecting  the  supposition  which  many  of  my  readers  will 
naturally  make,  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  waking  state  had  consciously 
"  got  up '"  the  information  given),  there  are  at  least  four  hypotheses 
which  might  be  suggested  for  the  "Guernsey"  and  "W.  N."  incidents. 

1.  The  hypothesis  of  "  spiiit-control."  But  in  this  case  it  se?ms 
difficult  to  account  for  the  mistakes  made  in  connection  with  the 
"  Guernsey  "  incident. 

2.  The  hypothesis  suggested  by  the  "  West-Savage  "  incident,  that 
■   some  other  person  to  whom  the  facts  were  at  least  partially  or 

"unconsciously"  known  had  previously  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  that  Phinuit  had  obtained  his  information  from  this  other  sitter. 
It  is  curious  that  the  statements  in  both  cases  concerned  events  in 
Minnesota.  Possibly  the  sitter  came  from  that  State,  or  was  specially 
interested  in  matters  occurring  there. 

3.  The  hypothesis  that  Miss  W.  or  her  father  had  casually  seen 
a  brief  account  of  the  circumstances  in  some  newsjoajoer,  ar^d  either 
had  forgotten  them  afteiwaids  or  perhaps  in  the  first  instance  had 
never  consciously  noticed  them  (compare  the  experiences  of  Miss  X., 
Vol.  v.,  pp.  507-8),  and  that  Phinuit  had  filched  them  telepathically 
from  their  subconsciousnesses. 

4.  The  hypothesis  that  Mrs.  Piper  herself  had  thus  casually  seen 
these  items  of  news  without  noticing  them,  but  that  the  "  Phimiit 
personality  "  had  noticed  them  and  reproduced  them  afterwards  as 
tests.  This  and  the  two  previous  hypotheses  seem  to  fit  most  naturally 
with  the  scantiness  and  partial  incorrectness  of  the  statements  made 
about  the  "Guernsey"  incident.  It  is  a  common  thing  to  find  an 
item  of  nev\'s  in  a  paper  in  the  form  of  a  despatch  prefaced  by  the 
name  of  a  city  without  the  name  of  the  State.'    Thus  a  telegraphic 

'  In  making-  inqiiiries  about  remarkable  stories  which  Lave  appeared  in  news- 
papers, I  have  several  times  been  inconvenienced  by  this  fact.  There  are  numerous 
instances  where  towns,  frequently  important  ones,  of  the  same  name  are  found  in 
different  States. 

40 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

despatch  might  appear  somewhat  in  this  way : — Lake  City.^ — A  boy 
named  Guernsey,  whose  father  keeps  a  drug-store  in  this  city,  was 
drowned  to-day  in  Lake  Pepin  while  skating  in  company  Math  a  girl, — 
&c.  We  must  note  further  that  the  Christian  name  of  the  boy  was 
first  given  a§  John  and  afterwards  as  Fred,  his  first  names  being  in 
reality  Porter  Brewster.  These  errors  would  be  rather  remarkable  for 
either  the  boy  himself  or  his  girl-companion  to  make,  and  if  we  add  to 
these  the  further  facts  that  the  name  of  the  State  was  not  obtainable, 
and  that  the  name  of  the  girl  who  was  drowiied,  from  Avhom, 
apparently,  the  information  purported  to  come,  was  given  as  Mabel 
Fuller  instead  of  Florence  E.  Wyckoff,  there  remains  practically  no 
evidence  whatever  for  the  identity  of  the  sujjposed  "  spirits "  whose 
bodies  were  drowned. 

After  writing  the  above  I  made  further  inquiries  of  Miss  W.,  who 
says  in  reply  : — 

"The  acquaintance  who  introcluced  me  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  1886  was  a  St. 
Paul  business  man.  He  liad  tlien  had  several  sittings  with  her,  but  has  had 
few  since  that  time.  He  could,  if  he  would,  tell  you  much  of  interest  about 
her,  hut  he  would  not.  .  .  .  My  St.  Paul  friend  was  the  person 
tlirough  whom  I  verified  the  account  of  William  N.'s  suicide.  I  think  he 
knew  him  personally — certainly  knew  of  hini." 

Miss  W.  also  states  that  she  remembers  telling  her  St.  Paul  friend 
(now  abroad)  of  the  Guernsey  incident,  and  "  he  had  no  recollection  of 
having  heard  of  the  matter." 

This  additional  information  certainly  seems  to  make  the  second  of 
the  above  hypotheses  so  much  more  proliable  than  the  others  that  I 
allow  the  others  to  remain  as  suggestions  only  because  of  the  next 
incident  to  which  I  turn,  which  is  also  an  outcome  of  the  W.  sittings. 

In  May,  1888,  Mr.  W.  was  told  by  his  daughter  "control"  that  she 
was  intimate  (in  the  "  spirit-world ")  with  a  little  girl  whose  father's 
name  was  X.  Miss  W.  received  further  details  on  May  24th, 
1888,  purporting  to  come  from  Katy  through  "Mr.  West."  "  Gracie 
X.  here  about  four  years.  Her  father  is  William  X.,  who  keeps  a 
shop  on  Winter-street  (Boston),  sells  furnishings,  buttons,  fancy  goods, 
trimmings.  Katy  describes  her  dress,  in  open  work  stockings,  high 
buttoned  boots,  white  dress  with  two  frills  round  the  bottom  and  falling 
just  below  the  knees,  sash  of  blue  ribbon  tied  a  little  at  one  side  of  the 
back,  long,  light  flowing  hair,  crimped  by  being  braided,  smoothed 
back  from  her  forehead  and  parted  off  from  each  side  and  tied  here 
(the  back  of  the  top  of  the  head  indicated  by  a  gesture)  with  a  ribbon 
and  falling  down  behind.  She  is  not  so  old  as  Katy.  She  was  ill  with 
membranous  diphtheria.  She  Avants  you  to  tell  her  papa  about  this 
and  see  what  he  says.    She  was  an  only  child." 

Mr.  W.  walked  down  Winter-street  and  found  a  shop  there  corre- 

Observations  of  Certain  Plienomena  of  Trance.  41 

sponding  with  the  name  of  X.,  but  not  William  X.,  and  he  made  no  in- 
quiry at  that  time.  Miss  W.  afterwards  inquired  for  William  X.  at  the 
shop  and  found  that  he  was  or  had  been  a  junior  member  of  the  firm, 
but  was  engaged  in  another  business  in  Devonshire-street.  She  found 
him  there,  and  was  informed  that  the  statements  concerning  his  daughter 
w-ere  correct.  The  description  of  his  daughter's  dress  was  accurate,  but 
his  daughter's  grave  was  in  Forest  Hills  Cemetery,  and  there  was  a 
statue  of  his  daughter  there  dressed  as  described.  His  daughter,  he 
said,  was  wont  to  wear  blue.  Miss  W.  cjuestioned  Mrs.  Piper  concern- 
ing her  knowledge  of  Forest  Hills  Cemetery,  which  is  in  one  of  the 
suburbs  of  Boston,  and  Mrs.  Piper  recalled  that  she  had  several  years 
previously  visited  this  cemetery  on  a  drive,  but  she  could  not  i-ecall 
anything  about  the  statue. 

I  questioned  Mrs.  Piper  about  her  visit  to  the  cemetery,  and  she 
stated  that  she  accompanied  a  lady,  Mrs.  E.,  to  the  cemetery,  that  they 
went  in  a  horse-car,  and  walked  in  the  cemetery  itself ;  that  some  time 
after  Miss  W.  told  her  about  the  statue  she  visited  the  cemetery  again, 
on  purpose  to  see  the  statue,  that  she  could  not  recall  having  ever  seen 
it  before,  and  that  Mrs.  E.'s  lot  is  in  another  part  of  the  cemetery. 

Miss  Edmunds  has  visited  the  cemetery  and  furnished  me  with  a 
detailed  description  of  the  X.  lot,  from  which  I  extract  the  following 
passages : — 

On  the  upright  between  the  top  and  lower  steps  is  engraved  ' '  Wm.  H. 
X."    In  the  centre  of  the  lot  is  a  large  grey  granite  monument 
forming  a  jjedestal  for  the  statue  of  a  woman  in  flowing  draperies,  full  size, 
the  whole  bemg  about  twenty  feet.    ...    In  the  front  is  engraved  in 

large  letters  "X  ."    On  the  left  hand  side  of  the  monument  [and  not 

seen  when  directly  facing  the  monument  from  the  front  of  the  lot]  .  .  . 
is  "children  of  William  H.  and  Emily  D.  C.  X.  Grace  Sherwood,  June  5th, 
1876 — November  11th,  1880."  [Below  this  is  a  space  as  though  for  one  or 
more  otlier  names.]  ...  To  the  left  of  the  large  monument  is  the 
statue  of  a  beautiful  child,  about  three  feet  high,  in  pure  white  marble, 
standing  on  a  pedestal,  only  a  few  inclies  from  tlie  ground,  wliicli  is  decorated 
with  leaves.  .  .  .  Her  left  hand  is  holding  her  sash,  and  in  her  right 
hand  are  a  few  flowers,  held  down  in  front.  The  sash  is  plain,  in  loose  folds 
below  the  waist  and  tied  at  the  back  in  a  large  bow ;  and  the  dress,  apparently 
of  fine  white  mushn,  beautifully  and  closely  embroidered  (not  "open"  work). 
The  front  and  back  down  to  the  sash  has  a  broad  embroidered  band,  and  the 
skirt  below  the  sash  is  beautifully  worked.  The  hair  is  tied  with  a  ribbon, 
with  large  bow  and  ends  falling  back  from  the  top  of  the  head,  straight 
fringe  over  forehead.  The  whole  statue  is  enclosed  in  a  glass  case. 
("  Gracie  "  seems  to  be  the  only  one  as  yet  buried  in  the  lot.)    .    .  . 

I  have  also  visited  the  lot  myself,  and  add  some  further  details 
which  were  brought  out  also  in  drawings  made  by  Miss  Edmunds  of 
the  statue,  and  which  should  be  compared  with  the  statements  made  to 
Miss  W.  at  her  sitting.    The  boots  are  "  high-buttoned,"  and  the  dress 

42 

j\fi:  R.  Hodgson. 

falls  ''just  below  the  knees,'  out  the  sash  is  tied  exactly  in  the  middle 
of  the  back.  There  is  no  sion  of  any  "openwork"  about  the  stockings,, 
and  there  appear  to  be  no  frills  round  tlie  bottoiB  of  the  dress.  There 
is  no  indication  on  the  lot  as  to  the  cause  of  Gi-acie's  death.  She  had 
been  dead  not  "  about  four  years,"  as  stated  in  the  communication,  but 
between  seven  and  eight  years.  The  name  Gracie  appears  in  large 
letters  on  the  pedestal  of  the  statue. 

In  reply  to  my  further  inf|uiries,  INIiss  W.  writes  on  November  9th,. 
1891 

I  liave  no  notes  of  niy  conversation  with  Mr.  X.  My  recollection  is  that 
lie  said  Gracie  wa.s  at  her  death  the  only  child  ;  that  another  had  been  born 
since.  He  assented  to  tlie  description  as  correct,  at  the  same  time  saying 
that  the  statue  on  the  grave  probably  gave  Mrs.  P.  her  information. 
Whether  I  rpioted  to  him  the  "open-worked  .stockings"  and  "sash  tied  on 
one  side,"  and  he  failed  to  notice  the  discrepancy,  or  whether  I  gave  him  only 
my  recollection  of  the  description,  I  do  not  remember.  I  should  doubt,  how- 
ever, that  I  omitted  both  items.  Should  you  lind  Mr.  X.,  yovx  may  care  to 
ask  him  about  this  "  test  "  which  I  find  in  my  notes  for  June  21st,  1888.  It. 
seemed  so  intrinsically  improbable  that  I  never  cared  to  inquire.  "Gracie 
X.  is  glad  you  have  been  to  see  her  pajja,  and  wants  you  to  ask  him  if  he 
remembers  a  little  light  blue  silk  dress  witli  white  lace  that  her  mamma  made 
her.  She  knows  about  her  little  sister,  but  she  does  not  know  her  name 
[apparently  in  reply  to  my  inquiry].  She  will  go  to  the  house,  a  little  way 
out  from  this  city,  with  trees  all  round  it,  and  find  out." 

It  has  not  yet  been  ascertained  v/hether  these  further  statements 
are  true  or  not,  and,  even  if  true,  it  is,  of  course,  possible  that  they  may 
have  been  obtained  from  some  other  sitter,  a  relative  or  friend  of  the 
X.  family. 

Pteverting  to  our  four  hypotheses  (p.  39),  it  is  clear  that  not  only 
(2),  but  (3)  or  (4)  might  be  the  actual  exjilanation  of  the  Gracie  X.. 
incident  ;  even  if  we  suppose  that  neither  Mrs.  Piper,  nor  Miss  W,, 
nor  Mr.  W.  had  ever  seen  the  grave  in  Forest  Hills  Cemetery. 
It  is  not  improbable,  e.r/.,  that  some  account  of  the  statue  appeared  in 
a  newspaper,  together  with  some  statement  about  Mr.  X.  and  tlie 
manner  of  his  daughter's  death.  This  account  may  have  been  read, 
and  afterwards  completely  fox-gotten,  by  Mrs.  Piper  or  the  sitters,  but 
lingering  still  in  the  "  subconscious  "  n.iind,  it  may  have  formed  the 
source  of  the  information  given  out  by  the  trance  joersonality.  It 
certainly  seems  I'emarkable  that  the  dress  of  Gracie  should  be  described 
with  such  minute  particularity,  unless  the  statue  in  some  way  formed 
the  starting  point  of  the  communication.  On  the  other  hand,  however, 
an  advocate  of  the  "spirit"  hypothesis  may  urge  that  the  very 
circumstances  in  connection  with  the  dress  that  led  Mr.  X.  to  place  the 
statue  on  his  child's  grave  may  be  held  in  very  definite  remembrance  by 
Gracie  hei-self.  But,  on  this  hypothesis,  how  did  the  mistake  of  four 
years  instead  of  eight  years  as  the  interval  since  her  death  originate? 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  43 

Taken  together,  I  think  it  nuist  be  conceded  that  these  cases  which 
Miss  W.  has  given  me,  in  addition  to  her  general  report,  do  not  in 
themselves  furnish  any  proof  of  the  "spirit"  hypothesis.  Miss  W.'s 
opinion  as  to  the  personality  of  her  friend  T.  I  regard  as  valuable,  but 
it  should  be  noticed  that  her  mother,  at  the  single  sitting  which  she 
had  with  Mrs.  Piper,  was  not  equally  impressed  with  the  T.  control. 
"  It  did  not  really  seem  like  T."  The  incident  of  this  remark,  made  tO' 
Mr.  W.  by  Mrs.  W.  on  their  piazza,  was  mentioned  at  her  next  sitting, 
to  Miss  W.,  who  was  ignorant  of  the  circumstances.  This  apparently 
goes  beyond  thought-transference  from  the  sitter.  So  also  does  the 
more  striking  instance  of  Mr.  W.'s  receipt  of  a  letter  from  B.,  of  which 
Miss  W.  was  informed  at  her  sitting  on  December  16th,  1886,  with  a 
correct  reference  to  its  contents.  These  cases  are,  of  course,  explicable 
on  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  mind  of  a  distant  living  persijii 
(Mr.  W.) ;  and  the  ca.ses  of  the  "  silver  cups  "  and  the  "card-plate" 
perhaps  strengthen  this  explanation,  as  tlie  details  comnuuiicated  to 
Miss  W.,  though  unknovv-n  to  her,  were,  presumably,  known  to  her 
mother  and  sister  respectively,  and  did  not  include  the  information  of 
w  hich  they  were — consciously — ignorant,  and  which  Miss  W.  specially 
sought,  viz.,  the  actual  whereabouts  of  the  missing  objects.  Omitting 
for  the  present  the  prophecies  mentioned  in  Miss  W.'s  report,  it  would 
seem  that  the  T.  "control  "  presented  marked  characteristics  of  the  fries  id 
it  purported  to  be ;  showed  specific  knowledge  of  private  matters  known 
only  to  that  friend  and  the  sitter  ;  showed  a  knowledge  of  facts  of  which 
he  was  reminded  by  the  sitter,  and  in  turn  reminded  the  sitter  of  facts 
temporarily  forgotten  by  her  ;  made  some  mistakes  in  matters  once 
known  to  the  friend,  and  remembered  well  by  the  sitter,  and  told  the 
sitter  of  facts  not  known  to  her  and  afterwards  verified.  Is  it  probable 
that  Miss  W.'s  friend  was  in  some  sense  actually  communicating  with 
her,  or  was  the  T.  personality  fictitiously  represented  by  Phinuit  1  Or, 
shall  we  put  it  rather,  does  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality 
fictitiously  represent  itself  as  (or  believe  itself  to  be)  Phinuit,  T.,  ai:d 
various  other  "  controls  "  ? 

I  have  myself  witnessed  five  "  controls  "  besides  Phinuit.  At  one 
of  my  earliest  sittings,  I  believe  the  third,  Mrs.  Piper  became  entranced,, 
and  yet,  as  I  thought,  nf)  one  spoke  for  some  minutes.  Finally  my 
attention  was  drawn  to  a  xevj  low  whispering  sound  which  I  was  con- 
scious had  been  continuing  for  some  time,  and  on  bending  my  head  I 
caught  the  repetition  of  my  Christian  name,  with  the  statement  that 
the- speaker,  who  purported  to  be  "Q."  (see  p.  9),  was  too  weak  to  talk 
any  more.  Shortly  afterwards  Phiiuiit  came  to  the  front  in  the  usual 
way.  About  a  year  later,  Phinuit,  in  connection  with  an  inquiry  that  I 
was  making,  had  asserted  (wrongly,  as  afterwards  appeared)  that  :i 
l^articular  j^erson  was  in  Denv  er,  Colorado.    I  wished  to  know  whether 

44 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Phinuit  could  not  visit  Denver  then  and  there  and  become  quite  sure 
of  his  statements.  He  said  he  could,  it  would  take  him  about  five 
minutes,  and  in  the  meantime  the  medium  was  to  "  leave  the  room  and 
have  a  change  of  surroundings  and  be  freshened  up."  Mrs.  Piper  came 
out  of  trance.  I  told  her  of  the  circumstances.  She  left  the  room  and 
returned  in  a  few  minutes,  and  immediately  became  again  entranced. 
To  my  surprise  the  first  words  were,  "  I'm  Commodore  Vanderbilt," 
and  then  followed  some  general  statements  about  Vanderbilt's  life 
which  I  cannot  recall.  I  inquired  how  it  was  that  he  canie  when  I 
expected  Dr.  Phinuit.  "  Dr.  Phinuit  said  he  had  to  go  off  in  a  luirry 
and  didn't  know  whether  he  could  be  back  in  time.  If  he  didn't  get 
back  he  said  I  was  to  come  and  talk  to  you  till  he  came."  The  style 
Avas  curiously  different  from  that  of  Phinuit,  and  after  a  short  talk, 
suggesting  the  fragmentary  conversation  which  one  might  hold  with  a 
stranger  while  waiting  for  dinner,  the  alleged  "  Commodore "  said, 
"  Here's  Dr.  Phinuit,  I'm  going,  good-bye."  After  a  pause  came  the 
characteristic  Phinuit,  and  I  inquired  how  it  was  that  he  could  take 
the  place  of  Commodore  Vanderbilt  so  easily. 

"Oh!  I  said,  '  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  I  want  to  speak  to  you.'  He 
came  out  and  I  popped  in."  "  What  sort  of  a  fellow  is  he  ? "  "  Oh  !  he's  a 
good  sort  of  fellow;  but  I  don't  care  about  him  very  much."  "Why?" 
"  Oh  !  he  swears." 

Vanderbilt  is  mentioned  both  by  Mrs.  Piper  (p.  46)  and  Phinuit 
(e.g.,  in  sitting  on  June  9th,  1888)  as  among  the  early  "  controls." 

I  have  also  had  several  experiences  with  the  "  E.  control."  (See 
Proceedings,  Vol  VI.,  pp.  493,  516-7,  524,  552-3,  and  656.)  This 
began  by  alleged  messages  from  "  E."  through  Phinuit  at  a  sitting  on 
March  15th,  1889,  with  Professor  and  Mrs.  James.  On  March  22nd, 
1889,  the  mother  of  Mrs.  James  received  through  Phinuit  a  message 
from  "E."  for  Professor  James.  A  few  days  later  "E."  purported  to 
control  directly  at  a  sitting  where  a  friend  of  mine,  Mrs.  Y.  (unknown 
to  "E."),  was  present,  giving  name,  (fee,  and  saying  that  he  had  heard 
my  name  and  found  that  the  "  conditions  "  of  Mrs.  Y.  were  specially 
favourable  for  his  "controlling."  With  Mrs.  Y.,  Professor  James  and 
myself  both  witnessed  this  supposed  "control  "  afterwards.  The  language 
was  not  at  all  like  that  used  by  the  living  "  E.,"  who  was  well  known  to 
Professor  James  and  myself,  though  there  were  occasionally  reminders, 
as  [it  were,  not  in  words,  but  in  ideas,  of  his  manner  and  thought. 
Thus  he  earnestly  desired  that  tests  should  be  provided  by  another 
friend  who  had  known  him  most  intimately ;  but,  on  the  other  liand, 
when  the  test  questions  were  obtained  and  presented  the  answers  were 
either  not  forthcoming  or  were  wrong.  The  whole  thing  rather 
suggested  a  simulation  by  Phinuit,  though  a  specific  question  of  my 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

45 

own  was  correctly  answered,  and  other  matters  were  alluded  to  which 
showed   knowledge   of  some  events  j^ersonal  to   "E."  and  myself. 
Further,  the  full  name  and  occupation,  when  living,  of  another  jierson, 
"  Z.,"  were  mentioned  by  the  "E."  control,  as  well  as  the  fact  that 
"  Z."  had  died  before  "  E."    The  name  of  "  Z."  was  first  mentioned 
incidentally.    "E."  said  that  he  himself  was  very  much  confused,  but 
that  he  had  met  "  Z."  and  found  "Z."  in  a  still  more  confused  state, 
although  "Z."  had  been  longer  in  the  "  other  world."    The  rest  of  the 
information  was  given  in  reply  to  our  inquiries.    The  statements  made 
were  afterwards  verified,  and  neither  Mrs.  Y.,  nor  Professor  James,  nor 
myself  knew  (consciously)  anything  about  such  a  person.    I  was  the  only 
one  who  was  likely  to  have  known  anything  about  him,  and  it  is  almost, 
certain  that,  years  previously,  I  had  heard  of  his  name  and  position ; 
but  it  was  improbable,  though  quite  possible,  that  I  had  heard  of  his 
death.    It  was  probable  also  that  "  E."  had  known  him  personally. 
This  incident  was  the  only  case  where  any  knowledge  was  at  that  time 
shown  concerning  matters  which  the  sitters  were  unable  to  recall, 
and  it  may  have  been  drawn  from  my  subconsciousness  or  fi'om  the 
mind  of  some  other  living  person.    If  we  assume  that  this  conti'ol 
was  the  "make-up"  of  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality,  it  apparently 
involved  some  very  subtle  use  of  information  drawn  telepathically  from 
at  least  the  minds  of  the  sitters,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  extra- 
vagant ignorance  and  confusion  concerning  other  facts,  some  of  which 
were  known  to  the  sitters,  and  which  we  should  expect  to  be  vivid  in 
the  remembrance  of  "  E." 

Several  times  in  reply  to  my  request  Phinuit  had  promised  to  bring 
several  other  persons  to  "control"  in  succession,  and  on  November  7th, 
1889,  after  Phinuit's  voice  had  died  away,  another  "control"  started,, 
purporting  to  be  a  friend  of  "  E."  and  to  be  a  German.  Beyond  this 
the  words  uttered,  including  the  name,  wei-e  almost  entirely  unintel- 
ligible. This  "  manifestation,"  which  lasted  a  very  short  time,  and  was 
not  at  all  like  Phinuit,  was  followed  by  the  "  Mrs.  Walsh "  control, 
which  I  have  described  in  Report  16.  This  was  decidedly  sui  generis^ 
and  strongly  suggestive  of  Mrs.  Walsh  (the  aunt  of  Professor  James. 
See  Proceedings,  Yol.  YL,  p.  656).  I  have  heard  of  several  other 
"  controls,"  purporting  to  l)e  relatives  of  sitters  who  regard  their 
experiences  as  too  private  for  publication,  and  I  think  it  probal)le  that 
some  of  these  may  now  be,  whatever  they  were  in  their  incipieiit 
stages,  fairly  good  personations.  On  any  hypothesis,  perhaps,  we  should 
expect  such  personations  to  improve.  Phinuit  himself  is  much  superior 
to  what  he  was  four  and  a-half  years  ago,  though  he  has  remained 
throughout  the  same  characteristic  personality,  and  his  origin,  I  venture 
to  think,  is  still  open  to  doubt. 

46 

E.  Hodgson. 

§  7.    Mrs.  Piper's  Early  Trances. 

Much  light  might  be  thrown  on  this  problem  of  Phinuit's  origin, 
and  thus  also  on  that  of  the  other  '•  controls,"  did  we  j^ossess  a 
stenographic  report  of  what  ensued  on  Phinuit's  first  appearance  as 
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality,  but  I  have  been  finable  to  obtain 
any  satisfactory  accounts  of  Mrs.  Pijjer's  early  finances.  Mrs.  Piper 
herself  has  given  me  what  information  she  could.  In  rejsly  to  inquiries 
in  January,  1888,  she  informed  me  that  her  husband's  father  and 
mother  had  been  impressed  by  a  sitting  which  they  had  with  a 
medium  in  1884,  and  persuaded  her  to  try  consultation  with  a  medium 
who  gave  medical  advice.  She  was  at  that  time  suffering  from  a 
tumour.  Slie  visited  Mr.  J.  R.  Cocke,  a  blind  medium,  also  a 
"  developer  "  of  mediums.  He  professed  to  be  controlled  by  a  French 
pliysician  whose  name  was  pronounced  Finny.  While  there,  she  felt 
curious  twitchings,  and  thought  she  might  become  completely  imcon- 
scious.  On  a  second  visit  to  Mi'.  Cocke  he  placed  his  hands  on  her 
head,  and  shortly  after  she  became  unconscious.  As  she  was  losing 
c:)nsciousness  she  was  awai'e  of  a  flood  of  light  and  saw  strange  faces, 
and  a  hand  moving  before  her.  The  "flood  of  light"  she  had  ex- 
parienced  once  before,  a  few  months  previously  ;  it  immediately  pre- 
ceded a  swoon,  caused  by  a  sudden  l^low  on  the  side  of  the  head. 
When  she  lost  consciousness  on  the  occasi(jn  of  her  second  visit  to  Mr. 
Cjcke,  she  was  said  to  have  been  controlled  l)y  an  Indian  girl  who 
gave  the  name  "  Chlorine,"  and  to  have  given  a  i-emarkable  test  to  a 
sl^ranger  who  was  present.  She  had  several  more  sittings  with  Mr. 
Cocke,  and  was  again  controlled,  apparently  on  each  occasion  by 
"Chlorine."  On  her  second  visit  to  Mr.  Cocke  he  professed  to  be 
controlled  by  John  Sebastian  Bach.  Aftei'  this  she  tried  sitting  at 
home  with  her  relatives  and  friends.  Fliinmiit.  {sic)  "controlled"  iirst, 
and  since  then  regularly,  but  she  was  alsu  controlled  at  occasional 
times  by  Mrs.  Siddons,  Bach,  Longfellow,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  and 
Loretta  P(jnchini.  It  was  said  that  "  Mi  s.  Siddons  "  I'ecited  a  scene 
from  Macbeth,  Longfellow  was  said  to  have  wiitten  some  verses,  and 
Loretta  Poiichini  (who  purported  to  be  an  Italian  girl)  to  have  made 
some  drawings.    These  verses  and  drawings  have  not  Ijeen  preserved. 

I  requested  a  lady  memljer  of  our  Society,  who  is  a  shorthand 
reporter,  and  personally  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  her  family,  to 
make  some  inquiries  of  Mr.  James  M.  Piper  (Mrs.  Piper's  father-in-law) 
concerning  the  earlier  "  trances."  The  following  is  her  account  of  Mr. 
Piper's  statements  : — 

Mr.  Piper  said  that  the  first  time  Mrs.  Pijjer  went  to  Dr.  Cocke's  she 
went  for  medical  advice,  and  was  told  she  would  make  a  remarkable  meduim 
(siie  went  to  see  if  she  had  cancer). 

Tlie  second  time  slie  visited  Dr.  Cocke  she  v/ent  uud«r  control  and  wrote 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  47 

a  message.  Mr.  Piper  only  accompanied  her  on  those  two  occasions.  INIrs. 
Piper  herself  only  went  a  few  times.  She  was  first  controlled  by  Chlorine, 
:;ind  I  asked  Mr.  Piper  distinctly  if  the  names  of  any  of  her  controls  were 
anentioned  in  her  presence  at  the  seances  before  she  professed  to  be  con- 
trolled by  them,  and  he  said,  positively,  Nv} 

Sebastian  Bach  said  he  was  the  one  to  "form  her  band,"  and  Chlorine 
was  the  principal  control  for  a  long  time  iov  ontaide  sitters,  and  Loretta 
Ponchini  and  Mrs.  Siddons,  and  one  or  two  others,  used  to  come  at  first  for 
familij  sittings  only  and  not  for  outsiders. 

Dr.  Phinuit  only  came  at  first  to  give  medical  advice.  He  "  didn't  care 
to  come  for  other  matters,"  as  he  thought  them  "too  trivial." 

Finally  Sebastian  Bach  said  they  were  going  to  concentrate  all  their  powers 
on  Phinuit,  and  lie  became  ultimately  the  chief  control. 

Mr.  Piper  says  that  there  is  no  question  but  that  it  is  the  same  Phinuit 
or  personality  who  controls  Dr.  Cocke,  no  matter  how  their  names  are  spelt. 

Phinuit  said  at  first  that  he  was  pevmitted  to  come  through  Mrs.  Piper, 
;ind  for  quite  a  while  he  used  to  speak  of  a  "  blind  medium  "  and  of  things 
that  had  happened  at  the  blind  medium's,  and  would  speak  of  certain  persoiis 
who  had  been  at  the  Ijlind  medium's  and  would  descrilje  them.  And  Mr. 
Piper  had  asked  Dr.  Cocke  if  such  persons  were  with  him  at  such  a  time 
Jinswering  to  Phinuit's  description,  and  he  said  Yes. 

Mr.  Cocke  is  a  professional  medium.  I  visited  him  myself,  accom- 
panied by  a  friend — not  giving  any  names.  He  purported  to  go  into 
ti'ance  and  give  medical  diagnoses.  His  diagnoses  of  my  friend  and 
myself  were  completely  wrong,  and  there  was  nothing  of  any  sort,  in 
voice,  words,  gestures,  etc.,  alx)ut  this  suj^posed  "trance  personality" 
which  in  the  least  degree  ieseml)led  Mrs.  Piper's  Phinuit.  I  was 
informed,  in  reply  to  my  inquiry,  that  the  conti'ol  was  a  "  Dr.  Finny  " 
{so  pronounced),  but  I  forbore  to  press  further  questions,  as  my  inquiry 
<ippeared  to  me  to  be  received  with  a  certain  amount  of  resentment. 
But  I  may  have  misjudged  Mr.  Cocke  in  this,  since  at  a  later  period  he 
•gave  some  information  to  my  assistant  Miss  Edmunds,  when  he  found 
that  she  had  called  in  the  interests  of  the  S.P.R.  He  stated  that  he 
liad  a  full  history  of  his  "  control "  written  out  which  he  did  not  mean 
to  divulge  until  he  published  it  himself.  But  he  was  willing  to  state 
that  his  control  was  Albert  G.  Finnett  (pronounced  Fin'-ne),  a  French- 
man, who  had  studied  medicine  a  little  as  a  "  Ijarber's  surgeon."  He 
claims  to  be  "  no  one  in  particular."  When  "  controlling  "  Mr.  Cocke 
lie  gives  medical  diagnoses  and  prescribes  medicines.  Mr.  Cocke  stated 
further  that  Albert  G.  Finnett  also  speaks  French  fluently,  but  he 
explained  that  he  had  studied  French  thoroughly  himself  when  at 
■school,  and  that,  though  not  by  any  means  a  Fiench  scholar  now,  he 
understands  it  fairly  well. 

^  A  lady  who  had  been  at  Mr.  Cocke's  "  circle  "  at  the  same  time  as  Mrs.  Piper 
-stated,  in  reply  to  my  inquiry,  that  all  the  early  "controls  "  of  Mrs.  Piper  had  been 
previously  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence.  This  lady,  however,  declined  later 
to  give  me  any  -wi-itten  statement  cm  the  subject. — R.  H. 

48 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

I  have  ascertained  from  several  persons  who  attended  some  of  Mrs. 
Piper's  early  sittings  that  Phinuit's  name  was  originally  pronounced 
Finny  or  Fin'-ne  (see  Report,  No.  39)  ;  but  I  do  not  know  of  any 
"  authentic  "  spelling  of  his  name  before  the  incident  referred  to  at  the 
close  of  the  following  account  received  by  me  fi-om  Mrs.  Piper  on 
September  23rd,  1890.  Mrs.  Piper  had  given  me  an  oral  account  of 
this  incident  a  long  time  previously,  hnt  I  was  unable  to  find  any 
record  of  it  among  my  notes. 

In  reply  to  your  several  letters  of  recent  date,  asking  for  information  in 
regard  to  my  family  history  and  other  matters,  I  will  say  that  I  have  taken 
special  pains  to  get  the  information  you  desire,  and  the  facts  about  my  family 
I  feel  certain  are  absolutely  correct. 

1st.  Whether  there  has  been  in  my  family  any  jjhenomena  similar  to  my 
trance  ? 

I  know  of  nothing  of  the  kind,  except  in  the  case  of  a  younger  brother 
who  has  been  all  his  life  somewhat  of  an  invalid.  He  lias  a  nervous 
temperament,  although  the  physicians  say  he  has  no  regular  nervous  disease. 
He  has  several  times  been  entranced,  but  the  fact  is  known  to  no  one  outside 
of  his  immediate  family,  and  he  would  positively  refuse  to  submit  to  any 
investigation  by  strangers. 

2nd.  Whether  there  has  been  any  nervous  disease  of  any  kind,  any 
insanity  or  crankiness  of  any  sort,  on  either  my  mother's  or  father's  side  ? 

None  at  all.  My  grandfather,  on  my  father's  side,  died  of  old  age,  at  the 
age  of  ninety.  My  grandmother  is  now  living.  They  had  twelve  children, 
eight  of  whom  are  living,  and  the  rest  died  in  infancy.  My  grandfather  on 
my  mother's  side  died  of  heart  disease  at  about  eighty  years  of  age.  My 
grandmotlier  died  suddenly  in  bed  at  an  advanced  age,  over  eighty,  being  in 
full  possession  of  all  her  faculties  uj^  to  the  time  of  her  deatli.  They  also 
had  twelve  children,  six  boys  and  six  girls.  Of  these,  one  uncle  died  in 
infancy,  two  uncles  are  now  living,  and  the  remaining  three  died  of  heart 
disease  at  a  mature  age.  Of  my  aunts,  one  died  in  childhood  of  hemorrhage, 
one  of  cancer,  and  one  of  diabetes  in  middle  age  ;  my  mother  and  two  aunts, 
are  now  living. 

3rd.  Did  Phinuit  ever  give  the  last  name,  Scliville,  to  any  person  before 
the  sitting  which  you  and  Miss  R.  had  together  1 

Yes,  he  had  several  times  given  the  name  to  Mr.  Piper. 

4th.  Can  I  give  you  the  date  of  my  marriage,  and  the  date  of  my  eldest 
child's  birth,  and  the  date  of  my  first  experiences  in  trance  ? 

I  was  married  October  6th,  1881.  My  first  child  was  born  May  16th, 
1884.  My  second  child  was  born  October  7th,  1885.  My  first  experience  of 
being  in  trance  was  on  the  29th  of  June,  1884.  I  remember  this  date 
distinctly,  from  its  being  two  days  after  my  first  birthday  following  the  birth 
of  my  first  child.  I  consulted  a  certain  medium  for  medical  advice  on  a 
Saturday,  and  during  the  interview  was  partially  unconscious  for  a  few 
moments.  The  next  day,  Sunday,  I  attended  a  circle  at  the  house  of  this, 
same  medium,  being  urged  to  do  so  by  friends  who  were  curious  to  see  if 
anything  further  would  develop,  and  went  into  a  trance.  What  took  place  at 
that  time  I  have  previously  explained  to  you. 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

49 

5th.  Can  I  describe  the  circumstances  of  my  seeing  the  name  Phiniiit 
written  out  for  the  first  time,  giving  tlie  date  as  nearly  as  possible,  and,  of 
course,  telling  exactly  what  I  saw  written  ? 

As  near  as  I  can  recollect,  it  was  several  months  after  the  birth  of  my 
second  child,  which  was  in  October,  1885.  I  had  not,  of  course,  been  giving  ^ 
sittings  for  a  considerable  length  of  time.  It  was  in  the  evening,  soon  after 
I  had  retired,  and  before  I  had  fallen  asleep  at  all.  The  room  was  quite 
dark.  Then  I  suddenly  saw  light.  I  said  to  Mr.  Piper,  "Do  you  see  a 
light  ?"  He  said,  "Why,  no,  what  is  the  matter?  Are  you  going  into  a 
trance?"  I  replied  no,  that  I  was  my  natural  self,  but  that  the  room  was  full 
i)f  light.  He  said  that  he  saw  nothing.  I  said,  "  Wait  a  minute  ;  I  see 
something  "  ;  and  just  then  I  saw  on  the  wall  beside  my  bed  the  letters 
"Dr.,"  a  capital  D  and  small  r  and  a  period,  just  as  the  abbreviation  is 
ordinarily  written.  Then  I  saw  the  letters  "  P-li-i-n,"  but  could  see  nothing 
more.  I  arose,  got  a  light,  and  placed  it  so  that  it  would  shine  on  the  same 
spot  on  the  wall  to  see  what  effect  it  would  produce,  but  there  was  nothing 
like  what  I  had  just  seen. 

Whether  the  letters  P-h-i-n  were  given  to  or  suggested  by  any 
sitter  prior  to  this  "  hallucination "  of  Mrs.  Pii^er,  I  do  not  know. 
The  spelling  given  to  me  both  l^y  Mrs.  Piper  and  Phinuit  in  1887  was 
Phinnuit,  and  I  incline  to  think  that  the  present  spelling  Phinuit  is 
due  indirectly  to  an  error  of  niy  own.  Forgetting  the  spelling  as 
originally  given  to  me,  and  being  frequently  asked  by  persons  who 
were  interested  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  how  Phinuit  was  spelt,  I  not 
only  got  into  the  habit  of  spelling  it  with  a  single  n  myself,  but,  as  I 
believe,  caused  many  sitters  and  other  persons  to  spell  it  with  a  single 
n.  I  was  never  confident  of  this  spelling,  but  did  not  for  a  long  time 
refer  to  my  original  notes.  The  waking  Mrs.  Piper  herself  in  this 
way  became  familiarised  with  the  spelling  Phinuit.  The  result, 
apparently,  of  all  this  was  that  Phinuit  himself  began  in  the  first  half 
of  1 888  to  spell  his  name  with  a  single  n.  He  spelt  it  thus  on 
June  5th,  1891,  and  when  I  then  charged  him  with  having  dropped  an 
71  owing  to  a  mistake  on  my  part,  and  pointed  out  that  he  had  changed 
his  name  unwittingly,  he  denied  it,  saying  that  there  were  two  7ts,  and 
affirming  that  probably  he  jumbled  the  two  ?i's  together  quickly  so 
that  it  sounded  like  a  single  n.  But  there  was  no  tone  of  confidence 
in  the  denial,  and  Phinuit's  ivritten  signature,  given  on  June  30th^ 
1888,  contains  only  one  n. 

Returning  to  the  statements  made  by  Mr.  J.  M.  Piper,  it  is  curious' 
that  Phinuit  himself,  in  a  sitting  of  May  26th,  1888,  should  have 
stated  specifically  that  he  had  never  controlled  any  other  medium  hwt 
Mrs.  Piper. 

Q.  :  "  Did  you  ever  control  any  other  medium?"  A.  :  "  No."  Q.  : 
"  Who  is  this  Dr.  Phinuit  that  controls  the  organism  of  Dr.  J.  Cocke?" 
A.  :  "Is  that  the  same  Dr.  Phinuit  that  controls  Dr. — what  is  that 
doctor's  name  in  your  country  ?  I  do  not  know  those  fellows  at  all.  Another- 

so 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

gentleman  tells  nie  that  ho  went  to  two  mediums,  and  they  both  got  a  Dr. 
Phiniiit  ;  one  is  Phinuit  and  the  other  is  Phinnie."  (This  name  may  not  be 
spelled  correctly,  but  it  ends  with  an  c  in  distinction  from  the  other. — Sten.) 

§  8.  Phixuit's  Account  of  Himself. 
In  reply  to  my  inquiries  on  different  occasions,  Phinuit  stated  that 
his  full  name  was  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville.  "  Phinuit  is  one  of  my  names  ; 
Scliville  is  my  other  name  ■;  Dr.  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville  ;  they  always 
called  me  Dr.  Phinuit."  He  was  unable  to  tell  the  year  of  his  birth 
or  the  year  of  his  death,  but  by  putting  together  several  of  his  state- 
ments, it  would  appear  that  he  was  born  about  1790  and  died  about 
1860.  He  was  born  in  Marseilles,  went  to  school  and  studied  medicine 
at  a  college  in  Paris  called  "  Merciana  "  (?)  College,  where  lie  took  his 
degree  when  he  was  between  twenty-five  and  twenty-eight  years  old 
"  Merciana.  You  know  the  name  '  Meeishaum '  ?  That  is  the  same 
name;  I  cannot  spell  it;  sounds  something  like  that."  He  also 
studied  medicine  at  "  Metz,  in  Germany."  At  the  age  of  thirty-five 
he  married  Marie  Latimer,  who  had  a  sister  named  Josephine. 
"  Josephine  was  a  sweetheart  of  mine  first,  but  I  went  back  on  her  and 
married  Marie  after  all."  Marie  was  thirty  years  of  age  when  he 
married  her,  and  died  when  she  was  about  fifty.  He  had  no  children. 
P.  :  "  Do  you  know  where  the  Hospital  of  God  is.  Hospital  de  Dieu 
(Hotel  Dieu)  ?"  Sitter  :  "  It  is  in  Paris."  P.  :  "  Do  you  remember  old 
Dyruijutia  ?  Dyruputia  [Dupuytren  ?]  was  the  head  of  the  hospital, 
and  there  is  a  street  named  for  him."  He  went  to  London  and  from 
London  to  Belgium.  "  I  went  to  very  different  places  after  my  health 
broke  down." 

Some  discrepancies  will  be  noticed  between  these  statements 
and  those  given  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  520,  and  I  understand 
that  no  trace  of  "  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville  "  has  been  discovered  at  the 
medical  schools  where  Phinuit  claims  to  have  studied  and  practised,  or 
along  other  lines  of  inquiry  suggested  by  the  few  fragments  which  he 
offers  of  his  life  history.  Definite  evidence  establishing  the  existence 
of  a  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville  under  the  circumstances  described  by 
Phinuit  would  not,  of  course,  establish  the  identity  of  such  once  living 
person  with  Mrs.  Piper's  Phinuit,  but  the  complete  lack  of  any  such 
■evidence  appears  to  me  to  tell  forcibly  against  the  su2:>position  that 
Mrs.  Piper-'s  Phinuit  is  what  for  several  years  he  has  been  asserting 
himself  to  be. 

Concerning  his  inability  to  speak  French,  Phinuit's  original  explana- 
tion to  me  was  that  he  had  lived  in  Metz  the  latter  part  of  his  life, 
and  there  wei'e  many  English  there,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  speak 
English  and  had  forgotten  his  French.  I  replied  that  this  exi^lanatioii 
was  very  surprising,  and  that  a  much  more  plausible  one  would  be  that 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  51 

lie  was  obliged  to  use  the  brain  of  the  medium,  and  would  therefore 
manifest  no  more  familiarity  with  French  than  she  possessed.  This — 
trite  enough — suggestion  appeared  to  Phinuit  also  more  plausible,  since 
a  few  days  later  he  offered  it  himself  to  another  sitter  as  an  explana- 
tion of  his  inability  to  sustain  a  conversation  in  French  ! 

Dr.  C.  W.  F.  (see  Report,  No.  23)  questioned  Phinuit  about  the 
prominent  medical  men  in  Paris  in  Phinuit's  time.  The  names  of 
Bourier  and  Dupuy tren  were  given.  Dr.  F.  tells  me  that  he  (Dr.  C.  W.  F. ) 
knew  nothing  about  Bouvier  previously,  hut  knew  well  about  Dupuytren. 
The  doctors  he  had  in  mind  at  the  time  of  his  question  "were  Velpeau, 
Bouillaud,  Nelaton,  Andral,  and  many  others,  all  prominent  forty  or 
fifty  years  ago  with  extended  reputations." 

Taking  the  foregoing  considerations  together,  it  appears  to  me  that 
there  is  good  reason  for  concluding  that  Phinuit  is  not  a  French  doctor. 

How  far  in  the  next  place  can  Phinuit  substantiate  his  claim  to  be 
Ji  doctor  at  all  ?  Where  the  sitter  was  aware  of  the  nature  of  the 
ailments  described,  we  can  suppose  that  Phinuit's  communication  may 
be  accounted  for  by  telepathy.  Mr.  Piper  informed  me  that  Phinuit 
had  been  frequently  tested  with  herbs  and  had  never  made  a  mistake. 
I  obtained  three  specimens  of  herbs  from  a  friend  of  mine,  a  druggist, 
taking  care  that  their  names  and  uses  should  be  entirely  unknown  to 
me.  Phinuit  spent  considerable  time  over  these,  but  was  absolutely 
wrong  in  everything  that  he  said  about  them.  Dr.  F.,  who  had  three 
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  who  has  given  me  information  concerning 
them  additional  to  that  contained  in  his  letter  on  p.  4,  questions  whether 
Phinuit's  medical  knowledge  extends  "  beyond  what  Mrs.  Piper  has 
read  in  'Domestic  medicine.'  He  gives  always  the  common  or  vulgar 
names  of  the  medicines  he  describes,  and  never  their  botanical  ones." 
Dr.  F.  tells  me  that  at  his  first  sitting  Phinuit 

"  dictated  a  prescription  of  plants  to  be  steeped.  They  are  in  common  use, 
save  one,  for  bladder  affections,  and  Sir  Henry  Thompson,  in  his  special 
work,  refers  to  this  rather  exceptional  one  as  having  done  good  service  in 
some  bladder  cases.  I  told  Phinuit  these  might  sootlie  tlie  l)ladder  some, 
but  could  effect  nothing  for  me.  '  Have  you  ever  prescribed  triticum  repens  ? ' 
I  asked.  I  gave  the  French  for  it  (chiendent).  Now  this  is  used  every  day 
in  the  week  in  the  Paris  hospitals  as  a  diet  drink,  and  when  Pliinviit  said, 
'  What  is  the  English  of  that  1 '  I  was  astonished.  He  neither  knew  tlio 
botanical  nor  tlie  Frencli  name  of  this  common  dog-grass." 

The  chances  for  diagnosis  of  myself  23ersonally  have  been  few.  At 
one  of  my  earliest  sittings  Phinuit  pronounced  me  to  be  perfectly 
sound,  "  an  old  bach  [bachelor],  live  to  be  a  hundred  "  (not,  of  course, 
meant  as  a  literal  prophecy)  ;  then  added  that  there  was  a  slight  in- 
flammation of  the  nasal  membranes,  which  was  correct,  though  I  know 
of  no  external  sign  that  could  have  guided  him  to  this.  He  recom- 
mended a  preparation  of  hamamelis.    At  another  sitting  I  inquired 

E  2 

52 

3Ir.  R.  Hodgson. 

concerning  a  slight  pain  which  I  no  longer  had,  but  had  recently 
suffered  from,  and  Phinuit,  after  first  objecting  that  he  had  told  me 
before  that  I  was  "  all  right,"  passed  his  hand  over  my  left  shoulder, 
and  put  a  finger  on  the  exact  point  under  my  left  scapula  where  the 
pain  had  l^een,  saying  that  it  Avas  due  to  a  cold  draught  from  an  open 
window,  as  might  have  been  the  case.  At  another  time  I  inquired 
concerning  a  pain  which  I  h;id,  and  Phinuit  almost  instantaneously 
located  it  correctly,  somewhat  below  the  chest,  pressing  on  the  precise 
place  with  his  finger,  and  began  to  say  that  it  was  indigestion,  but 
corrected  himself  and  explained  that  it  was  a  strained  muscle,  due  to 
sudden  exercise.  I  had  not  consciously  thought  of  this  as  the  explana- 
tion, which  was  probalily  correct,  as  on  the  second  night  previously, 
just  before  i-etiring,  I  had,  for  the  first  time  for  many  weeks,  gone 
through  a  series  ■  of  exercises,  bending  forwards  and  backwards,  (tc„j 
and  I  first  experienced  the  pain  on  the  day  following.  Phinuit's  pre- 
scription was  to  rul)  the  part  affected  with  cold  water,  applied  by  the 
hand. 

I  have  been  informed  privately  of  other  diagnoses  in  addition  to  those 
mentioned  in  the  reports,  and  agi-ee  with  Professor  Lodge  (^Proceedings, 
Vol.  VI.,  p.  449)  that  the  "medical  statements"  form  j)art  of  the  evidence 
in  favour  of  "  the  existence  of  some  abnormal  means  of  acquiring  infor- 
mation "  ;  l^ut  if  we  allow  for  telepathy,  and  admit  that  Phinuit  may 
acquire  supernoi'mal  perceptions  of  the  various  parts  of  the  body,  in- 
cluding the  internal  organs,  I  see  no  reason  to  sujspose  that  he  possesses 
any  technical  medical  knowledge — in  other  words,  any  more  knowledge 
than  might  be  possessed  by  a  secondary  pei-sonality  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Nor 
do  I  know  of  any  statements  made  by  Phinuit  which,  from  the  linguistic, 
or  scientific,  or  j^hilosophic  point  of  view,  can  be  regarded  as  beyond 
the  capacity  of  such  a  secondary  personality.  Incidents  like  that 
related  by  Mr.  Rich  (Report,  No.  40) — c'est  une  alliance — even  were 
there  many  of  them,  as  there  are  not,  might  be  explained  by  the 
.supposition  that  Phinuit  obtained  these  expressions  from  ^"'revious 
sittei'S,  or  by  the  fact  that  for  several  years  Mrs.  Piper's  children  had 
a  quasi-governess  who  lived  in  the  house,  and  who  could  speak  French 
fluently.  We  ai'e  then,  I  think,  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is 
far  from  sufficient  evidence  to  prove  that  Phinuit  is  either  a  Frenchman 
or  a.  physician. 

Further,  he  now  believes — or  confesses — that  his  name  is  not 
Phinuit  at  all.  I  have  referred  above  to  the  changes — appai'ently  botli 
of  pronunciation  and  of  spelling — through  which  this  name  has  passed, 
and  have  spoken  of  the  matter  on  more  than  one  occasion  to  Phinuit 
himself,  to  whom  I  have  frequently  pointed  out  some  of  the  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  supposing  that  he  is  what  he  purports  to  be,  a  "  spirit 
Jrom  the  other  world."    I  have  also  spoken  of  the  matter  to  Mrs. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

53 

Piper  on  several  occasions,  and  in  the  last  convei*sation  with  her  prior 
to  November  13th,  1891,  I  pointed  out  to  her  how  strong  the  presump- 
tion was  that  Phinuit  was  an  instance  of  auto-hypnotic  suggestion, 
•especially  since  he  first  called  himself  Dr.  Finney,  a  French  physician, 
and  she  had  previously  witnessed  Mr.  Cocke's  alleged  "  control "  of  the 
-same  name  (so  pronounced).  On  November  13th,  1891,  Phinuit  asked 
me  to  state  candidly  what  I  really  thought  al^out  him,  and  the  result 
was  a  very  plain  conversation,  in  the  course  of  which  I  described  the 
view  that  he  was  the  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  that  his 
name  was  suggested  by  that  of  the  alleged  "  control  "  of  Mr.  Cocke  ; 
and  I  mentioned  the  changes  in  the  pi'onunciation  and  spelling  of  his 
name,  and  quoted  the  statements  of  Mr.  J.  M.  Piper,  that  Phinuit  was 
unquestionably  the  same  person  who  had  controlled  Mr.  Cocke,  that 
Phinuit  had  described  Mr.  Cocke's  sitters,  itc.  (p.  47).  Phinuit  then 
said  that  the  frequent  mention  of  Mr.  Cocke's  name  had  brought  back 
to  him  circumstances  which  he  had  forgotten.  He  said  that  he  recalled 
that  on  the  first  occasion  of  liis  "  controlling "  Mrs.  Piper,  this  Mr. 
Cocke  was  present,  that  he  (Phinuit)  had  made  some  diagnosis,  and  on 
Ijeing  questioned  "Who  are  you?"  had  replied  that  his  name  was 
Scliville,  but  that  Mi".  Cocke  had  said,  "  No ;  you're  Dr.  Finny." 
"My  name's  Scliville."  "  No  ;  you're  Dr.  Phinuit."  "All  right ;  call 
me  Phinuit  if  you  like."  "And  I  tell  you,  Hodgson,  I  i-eally  don't 
know  Avhether  I'm  Phinuit  or  not,  but  I  think  that's  the  way  it  came  in. 
My  name  is  Jean,  and  Scliville,  or  something  like  that."  Phinuit 
explained  further  that  he  did  describe  sitters  with  Mr.  Cocke,  but 
only  in  the  same  way  that  he  described  what,  e.g.,  Mrs.  Holmes  (Reports, 
Nos.  45-49)  was  doing  at  a  certain  time.  They  sent  him,  he  said,  to 
find  out  what  Cocke  was  doing,  but  he  never  professed  to  "  control 
Cocke's  organism."  He  still  insisted  that  his  name  was  really  Scliville, 
that  he  was  connected  with  Dupuyti'en  and  Latimer,  and  that  some 
triice  of  him  should  be  discovered. 

In  reply  to  my  inquiries,  Mr.  Wm.  Piper  states  that  "fi-om  the 
commencement  and  through  the  whole  period  of  her  [Mrs.  Piper's] 
trances,  the  control  has  given  his  name  as  Schliville,  coupling  it  with 
Jean  and  Phinuit.  Phinuit  lieing  the  easier  for  me  to  say,  I  have 
always  spoken  to  and  of  him  as  Phinuit.  '  In  conversation,  Mr.  Piper 
has  further  informed  me  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  any  such 
circumstances  as  those  described  hy  Phinuit,  and  he  l^elieves  that  Mr. 
Cocke  was  not  jaresent  at  all  when  Phinuit  made  his  fii-st  appearance. 
I  have  also  made  inquiiy  of  Mr.  Cocke  as  to  what  ha^Dpened  when  he 
witnessed  Mrs.  Piper's  Phinuit  control,  and  he  assured  me  that  he  had 
Jiever  seen  the  Phinuit  conti'ol  at  all,  that  he  had  witnessed  "  Chlorine  " 
only.  To  say  the  least,  therefore,  there  is  no  evidence  to  cori'oborate 
Phinuit's  statenient  alwut  the  origin  of  the  name  Phinuit. 

54 

Ml'.  R.  Hodgson. 

On  jSTovember  17th  I  questioned  Pliinuit  still  further,  pressing  him 
with  the  apparent  inconsistencies  between  statements  of  his,  and  the 
difficulty  of  maintaining  that  he  was  Scliville  when  such  name  could 
not  be  found  in  the  hospitals  where  he  said  he  had  been.  I  asked 
him  if  Mr.  Cocke  htul  not  also  suggested  to  hun  those  details  about 
his  life  which  he  has  frequently  given,  but  he  maintained  resolutely 
that  this  was  not  the  case,  that  he  was  Scliville,  that  he  was  born  in 
Metz,  afterwards  went  to  Marseilles,  and  studied  under  Dupuytren  in 
Paris,  and  that  Iris  name  ought  to  appear  in  the  register  of  physicians 
in  Metz.  On  my  reminding  liim  that  he  had  formerly  said  that  he 
was  born  at  Marseilles,  he  queried  whether  he  had  2iot  told  me  that  it 
was  either  Marseilles  or  Metz,  and  he  added  that  he  was  sure 
now  that  it  was  Metz.  I  tind  on  examining  my  notes  that 
Phinuit  stated  at  my  early  sittings  that  he  was  born  at  Marseilles,  but 
on  June  5th,  1891,  that  he  was  born  either  at  Metz  or  Marseilles. 

At  the  close  of  a  sitting  on  November  20th,  1891,  after  Phinuit 
had  said  "  Au  revoir,"  and  was  in  the  act  of  "departing,"  he  murmured, 
"Jean  Phinuit — no,  not  Phinuit — Scliville."  This  was  repeated,  and  then 
a  third  time  he  began,  "  Jean  [hei'e  came  a  word  which  I  could  not 
hear  distinctly,  but  it  was  not  "Phinuit"]  Scliville.  Ha!  ha!  I've 
got  my  name  at  last."  I  refei'red  to  this  incident  at  my  next  sitting, 
November  21st,  and  Phinuit  said  that  he  had  recollected  his  middle 
name,  which  was  Alaen.  He  reitei'atecl  that  he  was  born  in  Metz,  but 
thinks  that  he  left  Metz  when  he  was  very  young.  His  full  name  was 
Dr.  Jean  Alaen  Scliville.  At  more  than  one  later  sitting  I  have  tried 
to  shake  Phiimit's  belief  or  statement  that  he  is  "Dr.  Scliville"  the 
"  spirit  "  of  a  once  living  human  being,  but  without  success. 

These  recent  incidents,  taking  into  account  the  statements  of  Mr. 
J.  M.  Piper  (p.  47)  and  Phinuit's  distinct  prevarication  concerning 
the  spellmg  of  his  name  (p.  49),  strongly  suggest  that  Phinuit  found 
himself  al)Solutely  "cornered  "  at  last  on  the  wAmQ  Fhiiiint,  and  so  sur- 
rendered it  with  an  ingenious  exj)lanation  of  its  origin  which  he  had 
Avorked  up  on  the  very  basis  of  my  olijections.  This  hypothesis  is 
strengthened  hy  the  fact,  as  I  think,  that  Phinuit's  memory  is  marvel- 
lously good,  so  good  that  it  is  scarcely  crediljle  that  he  could  have 
forgotten  the  circumstances  which  he  now  alleges  occurred  on  his  first 
apjjearance. 

§  9.  Relation  of  Phinuit  to  Mrs.  Piper. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  aiiy  continuity  of  memory  between 
Phinuit  and  Mrs.  Piper.  I  have  already  stated  my  belief  that  Mrs. 
Piper  is  entirely  ignorant  of  what  occurs  during  the  trance,  and  Phinuit 
is,  or  pretends  to  be,  equally  unaware  of  the  knowledge  jjossessed  by  Mrs. 
Piper,  and  of  the  incidents  which  happen  to  her  in  her  ordinary  life. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

55 

On  one  occasion,  not  long  before  a  sitting  (June  30th,  1888),  Mrs. 
Piper  was  startled  by  a  very  near  sudden  clap  of  thunder,  and  Phinuit, 
on  being  afterwards  questioned,  appeared  to  have  no  knowledge  of  the 
circumstance,  and  apparently  tiied  to  guess  at  what  had  occurred. 
Similai-ly  on  questioning  Phinuit  at  one  of  niy  early  sittings  concerning 
the  life  of  Mi-s.  Piper,  he  professed  ignorance  on  the  subject,  but  said 
that  he  would  "  find  out  things  "  about  her.  At  anothei'  sitting  he 
said  that  he  had  been  enjoined  by  Mi's.  Piper's  relatives  not  to  talk 
about  her  and  her  family  (membei's  of  which  at  that  time,  occasionally 
resorted  to  Phinuit  for  information  and  advice).  Soon  afterwards, 
however,  Phinuit  told  me  of  incidents  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Pipei' 
which  I  think  that  Mrs.  Piper  herself  would  never  have  mentioned  tO' 
me,  but  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  possessed  this  knowledge  by  virtue 
of  Mrs.  Piper's  possessing  it,  or  whether  he  acquired  it  by  whatevei' 
supernormal  means  he  uses  with  ordinary  sitters,  or  simply  by  conversa- 
tion with  ]\[i's.  Piper's  relatives.  I  have  also  met  with  several  cases 
where  Mi's.  Piper  knew  ]iot  a  little  of  the  sitter's  ordinaiy  enviromnent,. 
names  of  friends,  &c.,  and  yet  this  information  Avas  not  given  by 
Phinuit.  Further,  indeed,  I  have  known  Phinuit  under  such  circum- 
stances to  be  confused  and  to  make  mistakes  upon  points  well  known  to 
Mrs.  Piper.  Still,  all  this  "ignorance"  may  be  "the  perfection  of 
actmg  "  on  the  part  of  Phinuit,  and  j^ossibly  many  of  the  details  given 
by  Phinuit  in  his  attempts  to  describe  my  distant  doings  were  specula- 
tions resting  upon  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge.  (See  Nos.  50  and  51.) 
Recently,  in  giving  a  diagnosis,  he  spoke  of  "bronical,"  but 
immediately  corrected  it  to  "bronchial,"  and  a  day  or  two  later 
Mrs.  Pipei',  in  her  normal  waking  state,  pronounced  the  word  "bronical," 
without  correcting  it.^  But  an  incident  of  this  kind  hardly  proves 
anything,  since  it  might  be  alleged  that  Phinuit's  mistake  was  literally 
a  lapsus  linguce  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  and  therefore  explicable  on 
either  hypothesis — of  secondary  personality,  or  of  extraneous  intel- 
ligence. 

It  seems  hard  to  prove  that  Phinuit  possesses  all  the  kno^v- 
ledge  of  Mrs.  Pipei',  and  still  harder  to  prove  that  he  possesses  none 
of  it,  but  I  incline  myself  to  think  that  if  Phinuit  is  the  secondary 
personality  of  Mrs.  Piper,  the  case  does  not  belong  to  the  class  referred 
to  by  Mr.  Leaf  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  560),  where  "  the  abnormal 
state  is  conscious  of  what  goes  on  in  the  normal,"  but  rather  to  a  type 
where  the  change  to  the  trance  personality  involves  a  partial  oblitera- 

1  Since  the  above  was  written  I  mentioned  the  circumstances  to  Mrs.  Piper  and 
explained  the  word,  and  she  was  apparently  unaware  that  it  should  be  pronounced 
bronchial.  Later  still,  after  I  had  been  sent  out  of  the  room  by  Phinuit  during  a 
sitting,  I  lingered  within  earshot  for  the  purpose  of  taking  notes,  and  heard  Phinuit 
say  bronical  without  making  any  correction. 

S6 

Mr.  B.  Hodgson. 

tiun  of  the  facts  known  t(j  the  noi'inal  waking  self.  (See  "  A  Case  of 
Double  Consciousness,"  Proceedings,  Part  XIX.)  Supposing  that 
there  is  such  a  pai'tial  obliteration,  I  have  no  suggestion  to  offer  as  to 
its  extent,  unless  it  be  that  Phinuit  possesses  the  subconsciousness  of 
Mi's.  Pijjei',  so  that  he  knows  all  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  known  and 
lias  forgotten,  hut  is  ignorant  of  what  she  can  still  consciously  remember. 
But,  again,  I  am  unable  to  trace  any  connection  between  the  apparent 
deficiencies  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sense-organs  during  the  trance  state  and 
any  limitations  of  the  knowledge  exhibited  by  Phinuit. 

I  made  one  attempt  only,  unsuccessful,  to  hypnotise  Mrs.  Piper. 
Professor  James,  after  several  trials  with  her,  succeeded  in  producing  a 
semi-hypnosis  which  he  describes  as  "  very  different  from  her  medium- 
trance."  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  G53.)  I  have  frequently  given 
Phinuit  post-hypnotic  suggestions  concei'ning  acts  to  be  performed  by 
Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking  state,  but  entirely  without  i-esult.  The 
attempts  of  Professor  James  in  the  same  direction  were  also  unavailing, 
and  we  have  both  tried  to  obtain,  dui'ing  Mrs.  Piper's  waking  state, 
some  manifestation  of  Phinuit  l)y  gesture,  speech,  or  automatic  writing, 
in  reply  to  our  inquiries  and  commands,  and  duiing  the  trance  state 
some  manifestation  of  Mrs.  Piper;  but  no  I'esj^onse  of  any  kind  was 
elicited  from  the  temporarily  "  hidden  "  personality. 

§  10.  Conclusion. 
These  considerations  are  all  that  I  can  offer  at  present  towards  the 
elucidation  of  the  Phinuit  personality,  and  they  leave  me  still  unsatisfied 
with  any  simple  interpretation.  As  expeiiments  are  still  proceeding, 
I  have  not  entered  into  such  a  detailed  discussion  as  it  seems  to  me 
would  be  desirable  were  this  report  to  be  looked  upon  as  final.  So 
far,  howev  er,  I  am  convinced,  as  regards  the  ))are  information  shown 
hy  Phinuit,  that  it  cannot  be  accounted  for  entirely  by  thought-trans- 
ference from  the  sitters,  and  that  at  least  some  hypothesis  which  goes 
as  far  as  thought-transference  from  the  minds  of  distant  living  persons 
is  demanded.  Although  Phinuit  purports  to  obtain  most  of  his  infor- 
mation from  "  spirits,"  he  has  at  times  stated  that  some  of  his  informa- 
tion he  obtained  himself  from  the  sitter's  "surroundings"  (as  once  in  my 
own  case),  or  from  the  sitter's  "astral  light"  (Report,  No.  23) — a  phrase 
which  he  doul)tless  acquired  from  a  previous  sitter,  just  as  he  learned 
the  word  "ethereal"  from  myself.  Possibly  Phinuit  maybe  assisted 
in  some  way  by  inanimate  objects  which  have  been  much  worn  or 
1  Kindled  by  siiecihc  persons,  and,  as  I  have  said,  they  seem  to  add  to 
the  chances  of  his  success.  There  are  some  striking  examples  of 
this  already  I'eferred  to  in  the  i-eports,  reminding  one  of  the  singular 
term  "  psychometry "  (originated,  I  believe,  by  J.  R.  Buchanan  in 
1842),   so    common  in  Spiritualistic  literature.    Pliinuit  apparently 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  57 

claims  that  such  objects  bi'ing  him  into  relation  with  the  persons  who 
have  handled  them,  whether  such  persons  be  living  or  dead.  Now 
where  the  sitter  knows  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  oljject, 
the  associations  will  probaljly  form  a  specially  vivid  cluster  of  ex- 
periences in  his  mind,  conscious  or  suljconscious,  owing  to  the  very 
presence  of  the  object  within  the  held  of  his  perception,  and  this  may 
help  Phinuit  to  discover  and  disentangle  these  associations  by  direct 
thought-transference.  Where,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sitter  is  ignorant 
of  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  object,  it  may,  at  any  rate, 
form  a  sort  of  2^oint  de  repere  enabling  Phinuit  to  get  telepathically, 
through  the  mind  of  the  sitter,  at  the  mind  of  the  distant  living- 
person  from  whom  the  object  was  obtained  and  who  knows  of  its 
associations. 

And  here  we  touch  what  is  pei-haps  the  most  important  question 
concerned  in  the  phenomena  cijnnected  with  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-state. 
Putting  aside  all  the  facts  which  can  be  exjDlained  by  direct  thought- 
transference  from  the  sitter,  and  considering  simply  the  information 
given  which  was  not  known  to  the  sitter  and  which  purports  to  come 
from  "  deceased  "  persons,  but  which  was  known  to,  and  afterwards 
verified  by,  distant  living  persons, — is  there  sufficient  ground  for 
concluding  that  Phinuit  is  in  direct  communication  with  "  deceased "' 
persons,  and  that  he  is  a  "  deceased  "  person  himself  as  he  alleges  1  I 
think  that  the  evidence  here  presented,  together  with  that  previously 
published,  is  very  far  from  sufficient  to  establish  any  such  conclusion, 
and  indeed  the  failures  in  answering  test-questions  and  the  apparent 
ignorance  displayed  in  other  ways  by  the  alleged  "  communicatoi's," 
such  as  I  have  instanced  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Blodgett  s  exjjeri- 
ments  (pp.  10-16),  the  "  E."  control  (p.  44),  and  the  additional  cases 
furnished  me  by  Miss  W.  (pp.  28-4.3),  constitute  almost  insuperalile 
objections  to  the  supposition  that  the  "  deceased  "  persons  concerned 
were  in  direct  communication  with  Phinuit,  at  least  in  anything  like 
the  fulness,  so  to  speak,  of  their  personality.  Whether  Phinuit  )nay 
jiot  possibly  get  into  some  indirect  communication — actual,  though 
partial  and  fragmentary — with  "  deceased  "  persons,  is  a  much  more 
difficult  question  to  determine,  and  I  venture  to  think  that  this 
hypothesis  is  one  that  should  be  continually  borne  in  mind. 

The  hypothesis  which  for  a  long  time  seemed  to  me  the  most 
satisfactory  is  that  of  an  auto-hypnotic  trance  in  which  a  secondary 
personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  either  eiToneously  believes  itself  to  be,  or 
consciously  and  falsely  pretends  to  be,  the  "  spirit "  of  a  deceased 
human  being,  Phinuit  or  Scliville,  and  further  fictitiously  represents 
various  other  personalities  according  to  the  latent  ideas  of  some  of 
the  sitters.  Several  facts  which  I -have  mentioned — especially  con- 
cerning the  name  "  Dr.  Fin-ne  "  as  that  of  Mr.  Cocke's  "  control," 

58 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

witnessed  by  Mrs.  Piper  before  her  trances  began,  the  adoption  of 
this  name  by  Mrs.  Pijuer's  trance-personality,  its  coii'uption  into 
Phinnnit,  later  into  Phinuit,  and  the  subsequent  apparent  prevarica- 
tion to  ex2:)lain  these  facts  away — seem  to  point  strongly  towards  this 
view.  My  confidence,  however,  in  this  explanation  has  been  consider- 
ably shaken  by  further  familiarity  with  tlie  Phinuit  personality  and 
other  allied  "manifestations"  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-state,  and  I  have 
no  certain  conviction  that  any  single  theory  which  has  been  put 
forward  is  really  the  correct  one.  I  do  not  know  of  any  precise 
parallel  to  the  phenomena  which  we  are  here  discussing,  among  any 
of  the  recorded  types  of  hyjinotic  trance  where  the  action  of  other 
than  embodied  human  intelligence  is  a  plainly  superfluous  hypothesis. 
It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  any  of  our  members  who  may  happen 
to  haA'e  ample  opportunity  for  experiment  with  hypnotic  subjects,, 
should,  by  endeavouring  to  reproduce  cases  akin  to  Mrs.  Piper's,  see 
what  can  be  done  in  the  way  of  demonstrating  whether  these  phe- 
nomena can  be  fully  accounted  for  without  supposing  the  action  of 
such  extraneous  intelligence. 

Addenchnn.    May,  1892. 

The  foregoing  report  is  based  upon  sittings  not  later  than  1891. 
Mrs.  Piper  has  given  some  sittings  very  recently  which  materially 
strengthen  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  some  faculty  that  goes, 
beyond  thought-transference  from  the  sitters,  and  which  certainly 
2)rimd  yacie  appear  to  render  some  form  of  the  "spiritistic"  hypothesis 
more  plausd^le.  I  hope  to  discuss  these  among  other  results  in  a  later 
article. 

Observations  of  .  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  59 

-         ■  APPENDIX. 

DETAILED  REPORTS  OF  SITTINGS. 

The  following  accounts  of  sittings  comprise  nearly  all  the  records-, 
which  I  have  received  (before  November,  1891).  I  possess  several 
records  which  I  have  no  permission  to  use,  and  several  others  which, 
either  from  the  fragmentariness  of  the  account  or  the  insufficiency  of 
the  explanations  of  the  statements  made  at  the  sitting,  I  regard  as  of  no- 
value ;  hwt  all  of  these  that  I  omit,  I  believe,  are  favourable  to  the  ^dew 
that  Mrs.  Piper  exhibits  some  supernormal  faculty.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,, 
I  have  not  omitted  any  other  records  in  my  possession — except,  of 
course,  the  two  series  of  stenographic  repoi-ts  dealt  with  by  the 
Committee  of  the  former  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research^ 
and  the  recent  series  concerning  articles  sent  by  Mr.  "  V."  (See  p.  132.)- 
It  is  hardly  needful  to  point  out  that  the  records  differ  widely  in 
e-vidential  value.  Some  of  them  are  made  from  very  full  notes  taken 
during  the  sittings,  others  from  memory  long  afterwards,  but  I  think 
that  all  of  them  will  prove  of  some  service  in  our  endeavour  to  get  at 
the  real  meaning  of  the  Phinuit  personality,  of  which  it  is  desirable  to 
have  as  complete  a  history  as  possible. 

The  series  of  reports  1 — 17  are  of  sittings  which  came  under  my 
own  immediate  arrangement  or  v/ere  noted  by  me,  and  may  be  regarded 
as  a  representative  (iiot  selected)  group. 

Reports  18 — 23  were  forwarded  to  me  by  Professor  James,  and 
reports  21 — 28  by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  ;  reports  36  and  38  I  received 
owing  to  my  having  made  the  appointment  for  the  sittings.  In 
connection  with  the  work  of  the  Society  I  ascertained  the  names  of 
many  persons  who  had  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Pijjer,  and  endeavoured 
to  obtain  accounts  from  them,  but  with  little  success.  Reports  29,  30, 
33,  34,  37,  39,  and  40  represent  the  result.  Mrs.  Piper  also  furnished 
me,  at  my  request,  with  some  names  of  persons  who  had  had  sittings 
with  her,  and  hence  reports  31,  32,  and  35.  Report  41  is  of  specific 
experiments  made  by  myself  at  difFei'ent  times  with  locks  of  hair. 

Reports  42 — 53  form  a  representative  group  of  sittings  given  by 
Mrs.  Piper  since  her  return  to  America. 

I  have  also  the  stenographic  reports  of  my  attempts  in  1888  (Maj 
26th,  June  2nd,  9th,  16th,  and  30th)  to  obtain  better  explanations  from 
Phinuit  himself  of  his  own  "  control,"  kc.  (see  pp.  2,  3).  I  have  used 
these  largely  and  quoted  from  them  in  the  previous  pages.  It  seems 
unnecessary  to  print  further  exti-acts  at  present. 

^  See  iny  reference  to  this  on  p.  2,  and  the  remark  of  Professor  James  in  S.P.E. 
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp,  052-3.  The  stenographic  reports  -ivere  for  the  private  use 
of  the  Committee. 

60 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

1.  B.  ILxhjson.    Fird  SittiH'j.    May  Wi,  1887.  10.30  a.m. 

[From  notes  made  on  return  to  my  rooms  immediately  after  the  sitting.] 

Pliinuit  began,  after  the  usual  introduction,  by  describing  members  of  my 
•family. 

"Mother  living,  father  dead,  little  brotlier  dead."  [True.]  Father  and 
mother  described  correctly,  though  not  with  much  detail.  In  connection 
with  the  enumeration  of  the  members  of  our  family,  Phinuit  tried  to  get  a 
name  beginning  with  "R,"  but  failed.  [A  little  sister  of  mine,  named 
Rebecca,  died  when  I  was  very  young,  I  think  less  than  eighteen  montlis 
old.] 

"  Four  of  you  living  besides  mother. "  [True.] 

Phinuit  mentioned  the  name  "Fred."  I  said  that  it  might  be  my  cousin. 
■"He  says  you  went  to  school  together.  He  goes  on  jumping-frogs,  and 
laughs.  He  says  he  used  to  get  the  better  of  you.  He  had  convvdsive 
movements  before  his  death,  struggles.  He  went  off  in  a  sort  of  spasm. 
You  were  not  there. "  [My  cousin  Fred  far  excelled  any  other  person  that 
I  have  seen  in  the  games  of  leap-frog,  fly  the  garter,  &c.  He  took  very 
long  flying  jumps,  and  whenever  lie  played,  the  game  was  lined  by  crowds  of 
school-mates  to  watch  him.  He  injured  his  spine  in  a  gymnasium  in 
Melbourne,  Australia,  in  1871,  and  was  carried  to  the  hospital,  where  he 
lingered  for  a  fortnight,  with  occasional  s^jasmodic  convulsions,  in  one  of 
which  he  died.] 

Phinuit  described  a  lady,  in  general  terms,  dark  hair,  dark  eyes,  slim 
figure,  &c. ,  and  said  that  she  was  much  closer  to  me  than  any  other  person  : 
that  she  "died  slowly.  Too  bad  you  weren't  with  her.  You  were  at  a 
•distance.  It  was  a  great  pain  to  both  of  you  that  you  weren't  there.  She 
would  have  sent  you  a  message,  if  she  had  known  she  was  going.  She  had 
two  rings  ;  one  was  buried  witli  her  body  ;  the  other  ought  to  have  gone  to 
you.  The  second  part  of  her  first  name  is — sie."  [True,  with  the  exception 
of  the  statement  about  the  I'ings,  which  may  or  may  not  be  true.  I  have 
been  unable  to  ol)tain  any  information  about  them.  No  ring  ever  passed  be- 
tween tlie  lady  and  myself.  Slie  died  in  Australia  in  1879.  There  were  no 
relations  between  her  family  and  ours  after  1875.  After  trying  in  vain  to 
"hear  distinctly  "  the  first  part  of  the  name,  Phinuit  gave  up  the  attempt, 
-and  asked  me  what  the  first  name  was.  I  told  him.  I  shall  refer  to  it 
afterwards  as  "  Q."] 

In  reply  to  Phinuit's  question  as  to  tlie  name  of  my  living  brother,  I  said 
■"Tom."  "  There  are  two  Toms,"  said  Phinuit,  "  both  brothers  ;  the  sjjirit 
brother  is  Tom  as  well."  [True.] 

John  was  given  as  the  name  of  my  mother's  father.  [Since  ascertained 
ito  be  not  true.] 

Names  of  William  and  Robert —said  to  be  not  living — were  mentioned  ; 
and  also  Alfred,  Alice,  Arthur,  Carrie,  Charlie,  Ellen,  James,  Lizzie,  and 
Marie,  but  nothing  specific  was  stated  in  connection  with  them. 

During  the  sitting  I  could  not  recall  anyone  named  Marie,  one  of  the 
names  which  Phinuit  said  lie  heard.  When  "Charlie"  was  mentioned  I 
tliouglit  of  a  living  friend  of  mine  and  said  so.  No  further  details  were 
given.    As  I  walked  down  the  street  after  the  sitting  was  over,  it  flashed 

Observations  of  Certain  Phcnoraena  of  Trance.  61 

upon  me  that  Charlie  was  the  name  of  a  friend,  an  Oxford  University  man^ 
who  had  died  in  India  (I  think  in  1885),  that  he  was  engaged  to  a  young- 
lady  whose  first  name  was  Marie,  whom  I  knew  exceedingly  well  and  was 
accustomed  to  hear  called  Marie,  and  that  tliese  names  had  been  connected 
in  some  way  by  Phinuit.  This  incident  is  doubly  suggestive,  as  regards  the 
extreme  importance  of  stenographic  reports  in  investigations  of  this  kind. 
The  relation  between  Marie  and  Charlie  might  not  have  been  directly 
suggested  by  Phinuit  at  all,  but  might  have  been  the  result  of  my  own 
mental  action  afterwards.  On  the  other  hand,  during  the  sitting,  I  denied 
ever  having  known  a  Marie,  and  did  not  think  of  the  Chai'lie  who  liad  paid  a 
special  visit  to  my  rooms  in  Cambridge,  and  whom  I  had  accomi^anied  tO' 
the  station  on  his  departure.  As  I  have  learnt  by  later  experience,  Phinuit 
frequently  mentions  a  name,  having  some  specific  facts  to  give  in  connection 
with  it  if  the  sitter  recognises  the  person  Phinuit  lias  in  mind.  Thus,  Fred, 
is  mentioned,  and  I  say  that  it  might  be  my  cousin,  and  Phinuit  details 
highly  characteristic  marks  of  identity.  Charlie  is  mentioned,  and,  possibly, 
I  think  of  the  wrong  Charlie,  and  get  nothing  further. 

My  younger  sister  was  rightly  spoken  of  by  Phinuit  as  married,  and  he- 
used  a  phrase,  the  exact  words  of  which  I  could  not  recall,  implying  clearly 
that  she  had  three  children.  This  was  true,  but  I  gave  no  sign  of  ajjproval, 
whereas  I  had  been  assenting  to  at  least  the  important  statements  previously 
-made  by  Phinuit.  Following  my  silence,  Phinuit  repeated  the  statement, 
and  I  again  let  it  pass  without  agreeing  ;  whereupon  he  attempted  to  turn 
the  phrase  and  have  another  "shot."  "What  I  mean  is  tliat  thei'e  are- 
three  in  tlie  family,  don't  you  see  1  There's  herself,  and  her  husband,  and 
one  child.  That  makes  three."  I  then  told  him  that  he  had  been  right  at 
first.  "  Why  didn't  you  say  so,  then  ?  And  there's  another  one  coming  very 
soon,  and  it's  a  boy."  [True.  My  sister,  who  lives  in  Australia,  had  a. 
fourth  child,  a  boy,  before  the  end  of  May.] 

2.  B.  Hodgson.    Second  Sitting.    Novcmhcr  IStli,  1887.    12— 1  jj.m. 
[From  notes  made  during  the  sitting.] 
•     '  _     ■  m>v€mher  IStJi,  1887. 

Various  persons  mentioned  as  in  previous  sitting.  Fred — with 
description  of  death — Harry,  &c.  [Harry,  Fred's  brother,  still  living  in_ 
Australia.]  Other  incidents  repeated.  The  following  is  chiefly  new 
matter. 

Phinuit  mentioned  "  Q."  and  apparently  said  that  she  had  a  sister  and  a 
brother.  [Not  true,  as  I  believe  ;  I  think  that  there  was  only  one  other- 
child  in  the  family,  still-boi-n  ;  I  do  not  know  the  sex.] 

Phinuit  said  that  "  Q. "  would  soon  be  able  to  "control"; — referred  to 
a  black  lace  collar,  with  a  pin  with  a  head,  also  a  ring  with  a  stone,  and 
said  that  "Q."  wanted  the  pin  and  the  ring  to  be  given  to  me.  [I 
recollect  the  collar  distinctly,  and  the  pi-ii  vaguely,  but  cannot  recall  any- 
specific  incidents  attaching  to  them.  I  do  not  recall  a  "ring  with  a  stone."] 

School-mate,  with  lot  of  freckles,  little  fellow,  red  liair,  name  that 
sounded  something  like  Wingford — he  lived  with  his  grandmother.  [This 
recalled  a  school-mate  of  mine — Australia,  about  1868.    One  day  I  took  him 

62 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

on  a  bathing  excursion,  and  lie  was  very  anxious  to  get  home  by  a  certain 
time,  because  his  grandmother  had  tokl  him  to  do  so,  and  I  learnt. for  the 
first  time  that  his  mother  was  dead.  I  felt  a  special  tenderness  for  the  boy 
ixfter  this,  but  do  not  know  what  became  of  him.  His  name  was  not 
Wingford,  but  I  struggled  vainly  at  the  sitting  to  recall  it.  Some  hours  later 
it  came — Grim  wood.] 

Referred  to  another  school-mate  mentioned  by  "Wingford  " — this  other 
\\'as  lame — the  name  sovmded  like  Brookford.  [Grimwood  used  to  sit  on  the 
front  row,  and  on  the  same  row,  and  I  think  next  to  Grimwood,  sat  a  boy 
who  was  lame.  His  name  was  not  Brookford,  but  I  think  was  something 
like  Brooks.] 

Referred  to  Charles  Knight,  and  said  his  uncle  was  present.  [I  think  that 
Charles  Knight  sat  immediately  behind  me  in  the  same  class,  but  I  also  knew 
a  Charlie  Knight  at  a  Sunday-school,  and  cannot  distinguish  them  clearly.] 

Edward — a  Dr. — "Tell  him  he  uses  his  brain  tooinuch."  He  hasn't 
been  very  well.    [I  was  associated  in  S.  P.  R.  matters  with  a  Dr.  Edward 

 ,  whose  other  work  was  slightly  straining  him  at  the  time,  but  hardly 

-so  as  to  justify  Phinuit's  statement.] 

Weldon.  Wilton:  "He's  all  right."  [I  knew  both  a  Weldon  and  a 
Wilton  intimately,  the  former  in  England,  the  latter  in  Australia,  but  nothing 
specific  was  mentioned  concerning  either  of  them.] 

[I  here  made  inquiry  concerning  an  incident  which  occurred  on 
November  9th,  1887.  On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  a  lady  called  ujion  me, 
with  whom  I  had  corresponded  concerning  her  "  mediumistic  "  (private) 
experiences.  During  the  interview  she  obtained  an  "impression"  with 
reference  to  myself,  that  she  said  came  from  a  person  who  was  slow  at 
expressing  his  thoughts,  and  who  had  never  "  communicated  "  before.  She 
thought  the  communication  came  from  a  man  ;  but  the  only  word  she  could 
get  was  Lakes.  I  described  the  occurrence,  and  asked  Phinuit  if  he  could 
explain  it.]  He  said  at  once,  "Henry  Lakes,'"  connected  with  Emily  and 
Sarah.  Both  "passed  "  [dead],  he  also  ;  lived  at  house  at  corner  of  a  Park- 
street  in  England,  an  old  house.  [These  remarks  recalled  to  me  an  elderly 
man,  who  lived  in  a  house  at,  or  close  to,  the  corner  of  Park-street  and  the 
passage  from  St.  John-street  into  Park-street.  I  think  that  two  young  ladies 
lived  in  the  same  house,  which  I  passed  several  times  a  day  on  my  way  to 
and  from  my  lodgings  in  Park-street.  I  have  no  remembrance  of  ever 
knowing  the  names  of  any  of  them.  Mr.  Myers  inquired,  and  cannot 
ascertain  that  anyone  of  the  name  of  Lakes  lived  there.] 

J.  gave  a  descrij^tion  of  Mr.  J.    [Full  name  given.]    Said  J.  was  in 

spirit  land  some  time,  couldn't  tell  exactly  how  long,  difficulty  in  estimating;- 
time.  George  J.  mathematics,  some  jiaper  in  a  book  in  a  desk.  Tell  Al. 
something — to  get  it ;  will  be  useful.  [There  was  an  obscurity  about  this 
message,  l)ut  my  impression  was  that  Phinuit  wished  to  convey  to  me  that 
Mr.  J.  was  dead.  The  family  was  identified  clearly  enough.  The  eldest 
son  George  had  specialised  in  mathematics,  and  one  of  the  daughters  is 
named  Alice.  I  had  not  heard  anything  about  the  J.  's  since  leaving  England 
in  April,  1887.  Two  years  after  the  sitting  I  learnt  that  Mrs.  J.,  who 
was  a  special  friend  of  mine,  died  on  November  10th,  1887.  Mr.  J.  is 
still  living.] 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena^  of  Trance.  C3 

Referred  to  beautiful  teeth  of  "  Q. "  Said  that  she  wanted  me  to  keep 
the  book  of  poems  always  with  me,  the  book  which  I  had  sent  her,  and  had 
received  back.  I  should  recollect  the  writing  in  front  of  it,  wliich  I  had 
written  myself.  ["  Q. 's  "  teeth  were  not  beautiful.  On  the  contrary,  a  year 
or  two  before  her  death,  the  state  of  her  teeth  compelled  the  drawing  of  a 
large  number  of  them.  Many  were  taken  out  at  one  time,  and  the  opera- 
tion entailed  upon  her  a  severe  nervous  exhaustion,  from  which,  however, 
she  was  eventually  supposed  to  have  recovered.  I  had  lent  "  Q."  Tlie  Prlnce^a 
(Tennyson),  which  had  been  returned.  It  is  the  only  book  in  my  possession, 
and  I  think  the  only  book  of  any  kind,  which  I  had  ever  lent  her.  This 
book  is  now  with  most  of  my  other  books  in  England.  It  was  my  custom  at 
that  time  to  write  favourite  lines  on  the  fly-leaves  of  special  books.  I  do 
not  recall  with  certainty  what  lines,  if  any,  I  had  written  in  this  book.] 

Marie.  Aunt  of  Marie,  in  spirit  world,  appeared,  but  witli  veil  before, 
couldn't  impress  or  be  seen  distinctly,  hair  parted  in  middle,  curled  back 
over  ears,  peculiar  crook  in  nose.  [See  note  concerning  name  Marie  in  first 
sitting.    I  know  nothing  of  her  aunt.] 

****** 

[Phinuit  said  he  could  describe  ray  rooms  by  "leaving  the  medium" 
for  five  minutes,  would  try  when  I  had  the  earliest  sitting  some  morning, 
when  not  confused  by  atmosi:)heres  of  different  spirits  and  different  persons.] 

R.  Hodgson.     Third  Sitting.    November  29t]i,  1887.    9.30  «.jn. 

[The  only  special  note  which  I  can  find  concerning  this  sitting  is  tlie 
following,  which  I  had  written  as  an  appendix  to  my  account  of  the  second 
sitting.] 

Tried  to  describe  the  room  at  next  sitting,  which  was  poor,  chiefly 
repetition  ;  but  did  not  "  leave  the  medium."  The  description  was,  on  the 
whole,  a  failure,  and  failed  as  description  of  the  rooms  at  the  time. 

4.  R.  .Hodgson.    Fourth  Sitting.    December  ith,  1887. 
[From  notess  made  during  the  sitting.] 

Just  returned  from  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  At  my  previous  sitting  I 
liad  arranged  with  "Dr.  Phinuit"  that  he  should  make  inquiries  of  my 
{dead)  friends,  and  communicate  the  results  to  me  at  the  next  subsequent 
sitting.  I  had  arranged  for  sitting  on  Wednesday,  November  30th,  1887, 
'9.30  a.m.,  the  first  which  Mrs.  P.  should  give  that  morning,  but  Mrs.  P. 
begged  to  be  allowed  to  give  a  sitting  at  8.30  a.m.  to  a  lady  who  was  going 
to  New  York,  to  which  I  assented.  On  Wednesday  morning  Mrs.  P.  told 
me  that  she  liad  considerable  difiiculty  in  going  into  trance  for  her  previous 
visitor.  After  waiting  for  about  half  an  hovu-  with  me,  Mrs.  Pijjer  gave  up 
the  sitting,  as  she  could  not  go  into  trance.  The  sitting  of  tliis  morning 
was  substituted  for  Wednesday's. 

Usual  preliminaries,  and  then  "Dr.  Phinuit"  started  away  at  once  without 
any  remark  at  all  by  me,  to  reproduce  what  he  recollected  of  his  conversa- 
tions. I  changed  my  seat  to  tlie  floor  partly  behind  Mrs.  Piper,  where  I 
-could  get  enough  light  to  make  notes. 

64 

M r.  R.  Hodgson. 

1.  Information  purporting  to  have  been  received  from  "  Q."  The  chief 
new  matter  was  : 

(o)  That  I  had  given  her  a  book,  "Dr.  Phinuit"  thinks,  of  poems,  and 
I  had  written  her  name  in  it,  in  connection  with  her  birthday, 
[Correct.] 

(/))  [Correct.    This  includes  a  reference  to  circumstances 

under  which  I  had  a  very  special  conversation  with  "Q."  I 
think  it  impossible  that  "  Q. "  could  have  spoken  of  this  to  any 
other  person.    It  occurred  in  Australia  in  1875.] 

(c)  That  she  "left  the  body"  in  England,  and  that  I  was  across  the 
country.  [This  is  incorrect.  "Q."died  in  Australia.  I  was  in 
England.] 

2.  Information  purporting  to  have  been  received  from  my  cousin  Fred. 
The  chief  new  matter  was  : 

(a)  That  I  was  not  there  when  he  swung  on  the  trapeze  and  fell  and 
injured  his  spine,  iinally  dying  in  a  convulsion.  [At  my  first  sitting 
the  accident  was  not  described,  only  the  death,  at  which  I  was 
rightly  said  not  to  have  been  jjresent.  At  this  sitting  the  accident  was 
described,  at  which  also  I  was  rightly  said  not  to  have  been  present.] 

(h)  That  he  wanted  to  remind  me  of  Harris  at  school,  who  was  a  very 
able  man,  &c.  [I  believe  it  was  also  stated  that  Fred  and  myself 
talked  together  about  Harris,  and  that  Harris  had  a  high  opinion  of 
Fred's  ability.  This  was  all  true.  Harris  was  a  schoolmaster  who 
taught  Fred  and  myself  (Melbourne,  Australia),  about  1868  or 
.1869.  I  saw  Harris,  I  think,  a  short  time  after  my  cousin's  death 
(in  1871),  and  he  expressed  his  regrets,  &c.  I  do  not  recall  having 
seen  or  heard  anything  of  Harris  since.] 

(c)  That  his  father  was  my  mother's  brother.  [True.] 

All  the  preceding  matter  came  steadily  out,  after  which  "Dr.  Pliinuit  " 
appeared  to  have  exhausted  his  recollections,  and  to  be  attempting  to  get 
further  information  there  and  then.  He  referred  to  a  church  to  which  both 
"  Q."  and  myself  used  to  go,  and  then  asked  if  it  was  in  "Hanover  Square." 
I  replied.  No,  whereupon  he  told  mc  not  to  note  anything  until  he  got  it 
"  clearer." 

"Dr.  Phinuit"  then  charged  me  with  weighing  too  much  who  he  was, 
where  he  came  from,  &c. ,  while  he  was  trying  to  give  me  information,  and 
said  that  this  harassed  and  confused  him.  I  should,  he  said,  be  as 
"negative "as  possible  during  the  sitting.  [The  charge  was  justified,  as  I  had 
actually  drifted  into  the  consideration  of  wliat  Phinuit  was,  &c.] 

He  referi-ed  to  a  "Joe,"  but  told  me  nothing  special  about  him. 
[Although  I  had  a  special  friend  in  Australia  whom  I  used  to  call  Joe.] 

He  said  he  heard  "something  about  being  in  Yorkshire."  Was  the 
lady  [i.e.,  "  Q."]  in  Yorkshire  ?  (No.)  [I  have  spent  holidays  in  Yorkshire, 
and  my  father  was  a  Yorkshireman.] 

*  *  *  *  *  *  '  ■ 

"Dr.  Phinuit "  then  said  there  was  something  in  my  pocket  connected 
with  a  loss,  and  a.sked  me  to  empty  the  objects  from  my  pocket  into  her 
and.     I  asked  which  pocket?      "The   right   pants  pocket."      I  gave 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

65 

her  each  article  in  turn,  and  she  rejected  all,  and  then  said  it  was 
in  my  other  pocket.  She  rejected  purse  and  lens  from  this  pocket  and 
grabbed  at  the  keys.  She  (''  Dr.  Phinuit  ")  said  I  had  lost  some  of  my  keys 
near  some  mountains.  There  was  a  big  mountain  near  ;  the  keys  were  lying 
near  a  walk,  by  some  leaves.  There  was  a  cottage  near.  The  kej's  were 
still  there.  They  were  on  a  ring,  something  different  from  the  holder  of  the 
keys  in  her  hand.  What  lield  the  lost  keys  was  round.  [I  had  lost  my  key.s 
in  the  Adirondack  Mountains,  and  hunted  vainly  for  them.  They  were 
found  after  my  departure  from  camij  on  a  spot  answering  to  "  Phinuit's  " 
description.  Before  their  recovery,  however,  I  had  been  compelled  to 
obtain  du^jlicates  of  most  of  the  keys,  and  had  fastened  these  on  a  heart- 
shaped  holder.  The  old  keys  were  fastened  on  a  common  key-rinr/.  All  that 
"Phinuit  "  said  was  known  to  me.  "  Phinuit"  was  right  in  all  except  in  the 
statement  that  the  lost  keys  were  still  in  the  mountains.  At  the  time  of  the 
sitting  they  were  locked  up  in  my  desk.  I  believe  that  some  of  the  old 
keys  were  on  the  new  buncli,  though  I  cannot  be  certain  of  this,  not  having: 
noted  tliis  point  at  the  time.] 

Tasked  "Dr.  Phinuit"  to  get  me  information,  before  my  next  sitting, 
concerning:  1.  Full  name  of  lady — "Q."  2.  Detailed  description  of  face. 
3.  Place  of  dying.  4.  The  church  to  which  "Dr.  Phinuit"  referred^ 
5.  Details  of  the  finding  of  my  keys,  witli  all  the  persons  concerned. 

5.  R.  Hodgson.    Fifth  Sittiiuj.    Decemhcr  23)-d,  1887. 
[From  notes  made  during  the  sitting.] 

Fred  says  you  came  from  Australia.  [True.]  Lady,  "Q.,"says  so  too, 
says  she  was  there  and  knew  you  tliere,  and  used  to  be  a  great  friend  of  your- 
sister.  [True.]  You  heard  about  her  death  by  letter  from  your  sister.  [True.] 
[Little  confusion  about  letters.    This  note  was  made  during  the  sitting.] 

You  went  into  Germany.  Fred  went  with  you  in  spirit.  You  went  tO' 
G-erraany  after  father  went  into  spirit.  (No.)  Got  awfully  provoked  with  a. 
lady  in  Germany.  You  said  she  was  deceitful,  called  her  a  storyteller.  [True. 
While  in  Germany,  in  1882,  I  charged  a  lady  with  falsehood  under  somewhat 
peculiar  circumstances.    My  father  died  in  188.5.] 

Harris.   [See  previous  sitting.] 

Wordsworth  and  St.  John's.  Fred  mentions  it,  i.e.,  Fred  mentions  that" 
one  of  my  chief  reasons  for  choosing  St.  John's  College  was  the  fact  that 
Wordsworth  was  a  Johniaa.  [True,  though  Fred  died  in  1871,  and  it  was. 
years  afterwards  when  I  first  contemplated  going  to  Cambridge.] 

Mary  Chadwick.  [No  significance.  I  know  a  family  named  Chadwick,  but. 
not  any  Mary  Chadwick.] 

Ellis  ?  Bates  '?  Connected  or  associated  with  "Q."  [I  know  nothing- 
about  "  Q. 's  "  companions  between  1875  and  1879.]  Isn't  her  name  Eller- 
ton  ?  (No.)  Doesn't  it  end  with  "  on  "  ?  (You  must  tell  me.)  Her  hair  is 
brown,  blue  eyes,  she's  rather  small,  slim,  hair  darker  than  yours,  prominent, 
nose,  considerable  colour  in  cheeks,  rather  pretty  teeth.  She  says  she  died, 
in  England.  (Wrong.  Your  description  of  "  Q."  all  wrong.)  [Note  made 
during  sitting.  She  went  over  facts  correctly.]  [The  preceding  note  apparently 
means  that  the  general  description  and  place  of  deatli  of  "Q.,"  Australia^ 
were  correctly  given.] 

F 

66 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

We  then  had  a  long  talk  about  tlie  "  Phinuit'.s  "  powers,  Ac,  and  he  said 
that  I  had  confused  him  l)y  not  letting  liim  go  his  own  way,  that  when  he 
^vas  trying  to  get  through  his  uieinories  of  what  Fred  had  told  him  I  inter- 
rupted him,  &c.,  and  that  he  got  mixed  up  about  what  "  Q.  "  told  him,  that 
I  had  asked  him  too  many  things  at  once,  &c. ;  said  he  would  ascertain 
full  name  of  ''Q. "  and  her  exact  description,  and  that  would  be  enough. 
[The  aljove  sitting  bejian  by  Phinuit's  saying  that  he  liad  had  long  talks 
with  Fred,  and  that  he  now  knew  all  about  me,  that  Fred  in  spirit  had 
accompanied  me  wherever  I  went,  &c.  I  interrupted  Phiuuit  by  demanding 
replies  to  my  specific  (]uestions  asked  at  previous  sittings.] 

0.  B.  Hodgson..    Sixth  Sitting.    January  20th,  1888. 
[From  notes  taken  during  sitting,  with  several  minor  points  recollected  after- 
wards during  the  same  day.] 
Had  a  sitting  this  morning  with  Mrs.  Piper. 

Phinuit  referi-ed  to  "Q.,"  said  she  spoke  of  a  Loo — something.  [Louie 
was  the  name  of  a  cousin  of  "Q. ,"  very  intimate  with  "Q."  and  myself  in 

childhood.]     Said  her  full  name  was  "Q."  A  .  Is  that  right?  (No.) 

Well,  she  says  "Q. "  A  .     [A  is  the  surname  of  other  cousins  of 

"  Q.,"  who  frequently  stayed  at  her  house,  and  were  well  known  to  me.] 

Phinuit  then  proceeded  to  give  a  general  descriiotion  of  "Q.,"  right  so 
far  as  it  went,  and  described  the  eyes  as  "  dark."  She  then  began  to  rub 
the  right  eye  on  the  under  side,  saying,  "There's  a  spot  here.  This  eye 
(left)  is  brown,  the  other  eye  has  a  spot  in  it  of  a  light  colour,  in  the  iris. 
This  spot  is  straggly,  of  a  bluish  cast.  It  is  a  birth-mark.  It  looks  as  if  it 
had  been  thrown  on.  [Being  asked  to  describe  its  shape.]  It  is  like  this, 
running  in  towards  the  pupil. "  [Presenting  the  back  of  one  hand  towards 
3ue,  with  fingers  pointing  downwards,  and  tracing  on  the  little  finger-nail, 
with  the  forefinger  of  the  other  hand,  an  acute-angled  triangle  v/ith  apex 
■upward — tluis  :  — 

I  asked  her  t;)  draw  it,  the  re  uilt  being  the  figure,  a  reproduction  of  v/hicli 
is  attempted  below  : —  y 

A 

This  was  drawn  with  the  block-book  held  away  from  Mrs.  P.,  where  she 
•could  not  .see  what  she  was  drawing,  her  eyes  being  behind  and  clos3  to  the 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

67 

Hock-book.]  "This  (U)  is  the  top  part  i.if  the  iris.  This  (L)  is  the  bijttom. 
This  (P)  is  the  pupil.  The  light  part  is  here"  [luakiDg  the  other  lines  in  the 
figure]. 

["  Q."  had  a  splash  of  wliat  I  should  call  (//•<?;/ (rather  than  blue)  in  the 
right  eye,  occupying  the  position  and  having  very  nearly  the  shape  assigned 
by  Phinuit.    I  should  have  drawn  it  as  I  remember  it,  thus  : — 

® 

It  v/as  very  peculiar  ;  a  little  jagged  in  the  edges,  and  sharply  and  dis- 
tinctly marked  off  from  the  rest  of  the  hwim  iris.  I  asked  Phinuit  how  he 
obtained  the  information  about  the  eyes.  He  said  that  "  Q."  was  standing 
close  to  him  and  shov\'ing  him  her  right  eye  so  that  he  could  see  it  clearly, 
and  saying  that  that  was  what  I  wanted.  This  peculiarity  in  the  eye  was 
what  I  had  in  mind  when  I  asked  Pliinuit  for  a  detailed  description  of 
"Q.'s"  face.] 

***** 

7.  Mrs.  Howard  Ohie.    Fdrruanj,  1888. 
[Appointments  made  by  R.  H.    No  name  given.] 

Mrs.  Okie  had  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at  both  tif  which  I  Avas 
present.  I  took  notes  during  the  first  sitting  on  February  1st,  1888, 
but  I  cannot  find  any  notes  of  the  second  sitting,  on  February  8th, 
1888,  excejjt  a  brief  entry  in  my  diary.  At  this  second  sitting  Mrs. 
Okie's  father  was  again  described,  and  said  to  be  her  father.  The  name  was 
also  given,  being  spelt  out  Vaughn,  the  real  name  being  Vaughan.  There 
was  also  what  apparently  purported  to  be  the  direct  "control"  l)y  Mr. 
Vaughan,  addressing  Mrs.  Okie  as  his  "  daughter  Lily, "  according  to  Mr. 
Vaughan's  custom  when  alive.  "Lily,  I  jiassed  away  in  my  chair."  It  was 
also  stated  that  he  was  reading  Mill's  Loijic  when  he  died.  Mr.  Vaughan 
died  in  Providence,  R.I.  He  was  found  dead  in  his  chair  before  the  fire, 
with  a  book  in  his  hand,  but  Mrs.  Okie  has  been  unable  to  ascertain  the  name 
of  the  book.  Mr.  Vaughan  was  much  interested  in  philosojjhical  questions, 
and  talked  with  me  about  Mill,  Hamilton,  Spencer,  &c.  In  this  second 
sitting  the  name  Henry  was  also  given,  and  Phinuit  stated  that  Heniy  was 
managing  the  money  matters  all  right.  Henry  is  the  name  of  Mrs.  Okie's 
brother,  but  the  statement  about  him  made  by  Phinuit  liad  no  sjjecial 
significance. 

Mrs.  Okie  writes:  "My  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  Pifier  was  not  at  all 
satisfactory  to  me.  There  seemed  to  me  to  be  a  great  deal  of  guessing  and 
'  hedging. '  As  we  were  leaving  the  house  we  met  friends,  two  of  whom 
had  known  me  since  I  was  a  young  girl.  Owing  to  this  occiu-rence  I  could 
not  help  feeling  a  bit  suspicious  on  my  next  visit  when  the  medium  was  able 
to  give  the  full  names  of  many  of  my  relatives  with  pei'fect  accuracy  and 
confidence  ;  but  nothing  was  given  to  me  which  those  friends  did  not  know." 

68 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

8.  Saml.  A.  Hopldns,  M.D.    I^privij  of  1888. 
[Appointment  made  by  R.  H.    No  name  given.] 

235,  Marlborongh-street,  Jm>e  21  th,  1890. 
My  Dear  Hodgson, — I  have  no  notes  of  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Pi2)er,  nor 
was  there  anything  remarkable  to  record,  save,  possibly,  one  incident,  which 
is  perfectly  clear  in  my  mind.  After  the  usual  I'ubbish  of  mentioning  a  lot 
of  names — John,  Will,  Fanny,  &c.,  she  seemed  to  stick  at  Lily,  and  insisted 
that  I  knew  Lily,  and  asked  me  ^vdlo  the  doctor  was  who  was  near  Lily,  and 
insisted  that  I  knew  liim.  [Mrs.  Okie's  husband  is  a  doctor. — R.  H.]  Then 
she  said,  "  Tliere  is  someone  here  who  has  been  in  spirit  land  only  a  short 
time,  who  wants  to  send  a  message  to  Lily.  V — A — U — G — H — N — 
Yaughn  wants  to  send  a  message  to  Lily.  He  wants  you  to  give  her  his 
kind  regards.  Don't  forget  it,  now.  Vaughn  has  only  been  here  a  little 
while,  and  is  a  little  lame,"  Mrs.  Okie's  father  had  been  dead  only  a  short 
time,  and  I  afterwards  found  was  a  little  lame,  though  I  had  never  discovered 
it.  Tlie  other  statements  of  Mrs.  Piper's  were  either  wrong  or  entirely 
negative.    ...  S.  A.  Hopkins. 

9.  T.  P.  Da-ham.    May  21d-22nd,  1888. 
[Appointments  made  by  R.  H.     No  name  given.] 

Notes  w6re  made  by  me  during  the  sitting.  Mr.  Derham  is  my  brother- 
in-law,  having  married  my  younger  sister.  He  resides  in  Melbourne, 
Australia.  The  sitting  was  a  successful  one,  though  Phinuit  inade  a  few 
mistakes.  Several  circumstances  mentioned  were  unknown  to  me,  among 
them  the  following.  Early  in  the  fii'st  sitting,  Phinuit  said  :  ' '  Something 
lost.  Pin.  Watch  cliain.  What  the  devil  is  that  thing  you've  lost  ? "  And 
later  on  in  tlie  same  sitting  returned  to  it :  "  You've  lost  something.  It's  a 
funny  rf>und  thing  ;  a  ring  thing,  don't  you  know  1  Black  fellow  got  it. 
You'll  never  see  it  again.  You  lest  it  escapading. "  Mr.  Dei'ham  says : — "I 
was  the  last  to  leave  the  railway  carriage  at  Niagara,  and  left  my  field-glass 
suspended  by  its  strap  to  a  bar  below  the  roof.  I  have  no  doubt  the  coloured 
conductor  secreted  it.  I  had  telegrams  sent  to  every  station,  but  never  re- 
covered tlie  glass." 

Mr.  Derham's  comments  on  the  sittings  sufficiently  explain  their  char- 
acter:— Avgnst  18th,  1890. — I  have  made  no  study  of  the  subject,  but  am 
inclined  to  think  that  the  condition  into  which  Mrs.  Piper  seemed  to  pass 
was  real  and  not  assumed.  For  one  thing,  I  d(j  not  think  a  nervous  woman 
could  go  tlu'ough  the  teeth-grinding  she  did  without  shuddering.  The  only 
incident  that  would  incline  me  to  the  contrary  view  is  that  when  she  said  I 
had  lost  something  slie  put  her  hand  to  my  watch-chain,  whicli  had  a  short 
jjendant  chain,  Init  notliing  at  the  end  of  the  pendant.  She  seemed  to  infer 
that  what  was  lost  had  been  attached  to  the  pendant  ;  though  she  did  not 
say  so. 

' '  I  may  say  that  scarcely  anything  she  said  was  in  my  mind  the  moment 
before  she  spoke,  though  everything  of  which  I  now  have  any  knowledge, 
except  prophecies,  was  stored  somewhere  in  my  mind. 

"  I  was  much  impressed  with  her  groping  after  '  Eggleston,'  my  partner's 
name.  I  feel  sure  that  if  it  had  been  a  little  less  difficult  she  would  have 
found  the  name.    [The  nearest  approach  was  'Everson.'] 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

69 

' '  Tlie  liistory  of  my  family,  living  and  dead,  was  given  straight  out — 
without  any  guessing  and  without  the  slightest  assistance  from  either  Dr. 
Hodgson  or  myself.  I  think  I  did  not  speak  at  all,  and  Dr.  Hodgson  only 
.s]3oke  to  bring  her  to  the  point. 

"  If  I  remember  rightly,  Mrs.  Piper  rejjresents  herself  as  taken  possession 
of  by  the  sjairit  of  a  deceased  doctor  whose  name  I  forget.  (Is  it  Phinuit  ?) 
In  fact,  the  iirst  words  she  uttered  after  'going  off'  were,  'Comment  vous 
portez  vous  ? '  and  she  continued,  with  more  or  less  constancy,  to  sj)eak  in 
broken  English.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  believe  this  pretence,  and  am, 
therefore,  inclined  to  say  that  Mrs.  Piper  introduces  some  humbug  into  her 
performances,  though,  as  I  do  not  understand  the  subject,  she  may  be 
herself  deceived.  The  exjjlanation  that  would  harmonise  with  my  imjiression 
at  the  interviews  is,  that  she  had  the  power  of  reading,  not  my  thoughts  at 
the  moment,  but  facts  stored  away  in  the  recesses  of  my  memory. 

"  I  do  not  know  that  I  can  usefully  add  anything,  except  that  I  am  naturally 
sceptical,  and,  by  training,  incredulous." 

10.  Mrs.  Blodijctt.    Man  30f^,  1888.    9.30  a.m. 

Mrs.  Blodgett  was  anxious  to  obtain  a  special  test,  if  possiVjle,  con- 
cerning her  deceased  sister.  She  gives  an  account  of  this  in  the 
following  statement : — 

Miss  Hannah  Wild  died  July  28th,  1886.  She  was  a  strong  Baptist, — 
never  went  to  any  other  church.  About  one  year  before  her  death  a  paper 
in  Boston  jsublished  what  claimed  to  be  a  message  from  our  dead  mother. 
My  sister  was  very  much  wrought  up  about  it. 

I  had  been  very  much  interested  in  the  subject  for  about  two  years, 
but  as  far  as  I  had  gone  had  never  got  anything  true,  only  what  could 
have  been  mind-reading.  So  I  told  sister  all  my  experience  and  asked  her 
to  write  me  a  private  letter,  and  if  ever  she  came  back  she  was  to  tell  me 
what  was  in  it.  If  she  could  not  tell  I  was  not  to  believe  it  was  her  sjsirit. 
We  talked  it  over  every  day  for  weeks,  in  fact  every  time  she  had  a  bad 
spell  I  would  say,  "  Sister,  you  have  not  written  me  the  letter."  One  day, 
about  a  week  before  she  died,  she  said,  "  Bring  me  pen  and  paper.  If  sjoirit 
return  is  true,  the  world  should  know.  I  will  write  the  letter.  It  will  also 
prove  that  the  dead  do  not  lie  asleep  in  their  graves  waiting  for  a  resurrec- 
tion, like  the  Second  Adventists  believe." 

She  wrote  the  letter, — sealed  it  (no  mortal  hands  were  to  touch  it),  and 
put  it  into  a  tin  box  with  bank  book,  where  it  was  to  remain  until  I  got  a 
copy  of  it  that  sounded  like  her.  When  she  handed  me  the  box  she  said, 
"  If  I  can  come  back,  it  will  be  like  ringing  the  City  Hall  bell."  She  spoke 
about  the  letter  often  after.  I  told  her  I  would  wait  for  an  answer  if  I  had 
to  get  an  English  medium  to  answer. 

My  hands  have  never  touched  that  letter.    It  is  in  my  husband's  safe. 
When  I  sent  to  Professor  James,  I  took  it  out  with  scissors. — Yours, 

Mrs.  Bessie  Blodgett,  sister  of  Miss  Hannah  Wild. 
Holyoke,  Jidtj,  1890. 

P.S. — The  letter  is  in  my  husband's  safe,  where  it  has  been  kept  ever 
since  we  were  married.  • 

70 

Mr.  R.  Hodgso'n. 

Mi'S.  Blodgett,  having  seen  a  notice  of  the  American  S.  P.  R.  in  a 
papei"  in  the  hxtter  part  of  1886,  in  which  the  name  of  Professor 
James  was  mentioned,  wrote  to  him,  teUing  liim  the  circumstances  of 
the  letter  wi-itten  by  her  sister.  As  a  result  of  the  correspondence, 
Professor  James  endeavoured  to  oljtain  some  information  from 
Phinuit.  A  brief  account  of  the  experiment,  which  was  a  faihire,  was. 
given  by  Professor  James  {^Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  G57),  but  it  appears 
ta  me  to  be  of  such  extreme  importance  in  the^endeaAT)ur  to  estimate- 
the  significance  of  the  Phinuit  personality  that  I  give  the  details- 
Mrs.  Blodgett  sent  Professor  James  a  glove  that  her  sister  wore  on  the 
day  she  wrote  the  letter,  and  the  lining  from  her  sister's  hat.  The 
original  copy  of  what  purported  to  be  tlie  letter — sent  to  Professoi* 
James  by  Mr.  J.  M.  Piper,  the  father-in-law  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  after- 
wai'ds  returned  to  him — I  have  been  unable  to  obtain.  It  was  either 
lost  or  destroyed.  Mrs.  Blodgett,  however,  made  a  substantial  copy  of 
.it,  and  I  reproduce  her  copy  of  it  here,  with  her  remai'ks.  Mr.  Pipei', 
as  appears  from  one  of  his  comnninications  to  Professor  James,  had 
many  sittings  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  letter,  and  was  quite 
confident  that  he  had  been  conversing  with  the  "  spiiit "  of  Hannah 
Wild. 

*'"P'J  "f  Letter  dictated  by  Phinuit. 

1.  Dear  Sister, — In  the  bottom  of  my  tiunk  in  the  attic  with  my 
clothes  I  liave  placed  a  little  money,  and.  some  jewels  given  to  me,  as  you 
know,  by  mother,  and  given  to  her  by  grandfather  who  has  now  passed 
away.  Bessie,  I  now  give  ti>  you  ;  they  are  all  I  have,  I  wish  I  could  have 
more.  It  has  grieved  me  not  a  little  not  to  have  given  the  Society  something, 
but  as  you  know,  sister,  I  am  unable  to  do  so.  If  it  be  possible  I  will  give 
them  my  presence  in  spirit.  [Sister  left  no  trunk.  Never  lived  in  any  house 
with  an  attic.  Mother  never  gave  her  any  jewels.  Mother's  father  died  in 
1835.  Mother  died  in  1880,  and  gave  all  her  jewels  to  me.  These  jewels  had 
been  previously  given  to  mother  by  myself.  Sister  left  money,  and  could 
have  given  the  Society  some  had  she  cliosen  to  do  so.] 

2.  The  table-cover  which  I  worked  one  year  ago  I  want  you  to  give 
sister  Ellen,  John's  wife.  The  reason  I  did  not  disjDose  of  them  before  will 
be  a  satisfactory  proof  of  sjiirit  return.  My  dearest  sister,  should  you  ever 
marry,  as  I  think  you  will,  take  the  money  and  use  it  as  you  think  best,  to 
buy  a  wedding  outfit.  [She  never  worked  a  table-cover.  I  worked  one  and 
gave  her.  Brother  Jolni  died  when  five  years  old.  There  is  no  one  by  the 
name  of  Ellen  connected  with  the  family.  She  did  think  I  would  marry, 
but  knew  that  I  had  plenty  of  money  to  buy  an  outfit.] 

3.  Do  not  dress  in  mourning  for  me,  for  if  it  be  true  the  spii-it  can  return 
I  want  to  see  you  di'essed  in  light,  not  black.  Not  for  me  now,  my  dear  sister 
Bessie.  Try  to  be  cheerful  and  happy  through  your  married  life,  and  when 
you  hear  from  me — this  for  you  a  copy,  ' '  remember  sister  Hannah  is  not 
dead,  only  passed  out  of  the  body."  I  will  give  you  a  beautiful  description 
of  oiu'  life  thei'e  and  of  my  dailing  mother  if  I  see  her.    [Hannah  alway.s 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  71 

wore  black,  and  often  said  it  would  be  wicked  for  nie  to  take  it  off,  for  my 
child  always  said,  "Mamma,  you  will  always  wear  black  for  me,"  and  I  have 
worn  black  for  twenty  years,  ever  since  my  child  died.] 

4.  In  regard  to  brother  Jolm  I  forgot  to  say  I  worked  him  a  pair  of 
slippers,  and  they  are  in  the  bottom  of  that  old-fashioned  carpet-bag  of  mine, 
with  the  check  silk  handkerchief  of  grandma  which  your  uncle  Ezra  brought 
from  California.  The  bag  hangs  in  my  room,  in  the  closet.  [Brother  John 
died  July  10th,  1858,  aged  five  years.  Hannah  never  worked  liim  any 
slippers.  Slie  did  embroider  a  memorial  piece  with  the  date  of  his  death  on. 
This  was  framed,  and  has  hung  on  the  wall  since  1860.  There  has  been  no 
old  carpet-bag  in  the  family  since  1856,  when  we  moved.  Sister  Hannah 
made  it  into  a  ftoor-niat,  which  I  now  have  on  the  floor ;  it  was  between  the 
kitchen  and  the  sitting-room  when  Hannah  died,  and  had  been  tliere  for 
years.  We  had  a  check  .silk  handkerchief  that  came  from  England,  but  not 
from  grandma.  One  grandma  died  in  1815,  the  other  about  1860.  Never 
was  any  Ezra  connected  with  the  family.  My  husband  was  in  Calif<-)rnia  from 
1868  to  1870.    His  name  is  Charles.] 

5.  The  wreatli  of  flowers  which  we  pressed  and  was  laid  on  mother's 
casket  keep  for  your  cliildi'en,  if  you  have  any.  Always  remind  them  it  is  a 
token  from  Aunt  Hannah.  I  shall  be  with  you,  dear  sister,  if  possible.  All 
the  little  things  I  have  done  in  this  way  is  for  the  purpose  of  giving  you  tests, 
as  I  call  them.  If  I  can  produce  a  copy  of  this  after  I  have  jjassed  out  you 
will  fully  understand  that  I  am  as  conscious  in  the  spirit,  and  have  in  my 
memoiy  tlie  things  concerning  this  letter  of  which  I  now  write.  [We  had  no 
•wreath  of  flowers  on  mother's  casket.  A  friend  sent  a  bunch  of  lilies  tied 
with  white  ribbon.  These  were  put  f/iside  mother's  cas!;et.  A  wreath  of  solid 
green  English  ivy  was  placed  on  top  of  the  casket  and  was  liuried  with  the 
casket.    It  was  I  alone  who  arranged  tlie  wreath.] 

6.  In  my  little  chest  you  will  find  two  copies  of  tlie  WomaiCs  Journal, 
not  to  be  disturbed  until  I  write  a  copy  of  this.  Tell  my  particular  friend, 
Margaret  Dow,  I  am  sorry  I  left  matters,  so  unsettled  in  connection  with  the 
paper.  But  not^vithstanding  all,  I  will  make  a  satisfactory  explanation  if  it 
is  possible  for  me  to  return.  This  thing  concerns  me  here,  as  you  know  it 
was  my  life  work  there.  Dear  sister,  the  reason  for  writing  this  is  to  floor 
the  fact  of  spirit  return,  as  I  know  no  human  being  can  produce  a  copy  of 
this,  and  no  other  spirit  but  my  o^yT^.  Dear  sister,  you  say  you  want  a  test 
of  my  spii-it  return.  I  shall  now  coyty  this,  so  there  will  be  no  mistake.  I 
may  mix  things  up  a  little,  but  I  do  it  as  a  test  for  my  sister.  [We  had  a 
small  chest  which  at  the  time  of  Hannah's  death  was  full  of  papers  and  tracts 
on  different  subjects,  and  this  contained,  among  other  tilings,  perhajjs  as 
many  as  thirty  copies  of  the  Woman's  Journal.  The  chest  was  not  Hannah's, 
and  she  never  called  it  hers.  It  was  my  father's  school  chest,  and  we. all 
called  it  the  "  night-gown  chest,"  as  it  was  kejjt  for  that  purjjose  until  1874, 
when  my  boy  died.  Hannah  called  it  the  night-gown  cliest  all  tlirough  her 
sickness.    No  such  person  as  Margaret  Dow  is  known  to  us.] 

The  following  points  may  also  be  noted.  They  are  taken  from  con- 
temporary letters  [1887]  written  by  Professor  James  and  Mr.  J.  M. 
Piper,  and  were  obtained  by  the  latter  from  Phiuuit. 

72 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

1.  The  name  of  the  writer  of  the  letter  was  Miss  Hannah  Wild.  [True.] 

2.  "You  [Mrs.  Blodgett]  were  married  last  summer  [1886],  after  your 
sister's  death."  [My  sister  died  July  28th,  1886.  I  was  married  in  the 
following  winter,  December  18tli,  1886.] 

3.  ' '  There  was  an  agreement  between  you  and  your  sister  that  her  letter 
was  not  to  be  opened  till  the  10th  of  October,  1887."  It  was  ;ilso  alleged  that 
this  date  was  mentioned  in  the  letter.    [Absolutely  wrong.] 

4.  "  Miss  Wild  has  given  the  following  description  of  her  former  self  : 
Eyes,  bluish  grey.  [Correct.]  Hair,  dark  brown  sprinkled  with  grey.  [Her 
hair  was  not  dark  brown  but  was  light  brown,  and  I  do  not  think  she  had  a 
grey  hair  in  her  head.]  Nose,  retrousse.  [Wrong.]  Teeth,  jieculiar  in 
appearance,  some  of  them  artificial.  [Her  teeth  were  very  good,  and  so  even 
that  many  asked  if  they  were  not  false.  She  had  four  filled,  but  not  one 
artificial.]  And  also  stated  that  it  was  her  custom  to  comb  her  hair  straight 
back  and  do  it  up  in  a  coil  behind.  [Wrong.  She  parted  her  liair  in  the 
middle,  combed  it  down  on  each  side,  and  wore  it  in  a  "French  twist" 
behind.]  My  recollection  is  that  she  said  her  age  was  48,  but  I  will  not  be 
positive."    [Her  age  was  51.] 

In  1888,  Mrs.  Blodgett  made  an  appointment  by  letter  with  Pro- 
fessor James,  to  meet  him  and  myself  at  my  office,  5,  Boylston  Place,  on 
the  afternoon  of  May  29th,  and  I  arranged  an  appcjintment  with  Mrs. 
Piper  for  the  Wednesday  morning,  May  30th,  Avithout,  of  course,  men- 
tioning any  names.  I  was  present  at  the  sitting  and  took  notes,  which  are 
reproduced  in  the  next  account.  The  statements  in  the  round  brackets 
were  made  by  Mrs.  B.  during  the  sitting ;  those  in  square  brackets  are 
explanatory,  and  have  been  made  hj  myself  since  ;  the  other  state- 
ments were  made  by  Phinuit,  as  taken  down  by  me  during  the  sitting. 
T  sent  these  notes  recently  to  Mrs.  B.,  requesting  her  to  supplement  my 
statements  by  further  explanations,  and  she  has  given  me  a  fuller 
account  of  the  sitting,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  in  the  main  accui'ate, 
and  has  also  added  detailed  notes  of  explanation.  I  think  it  desirable 
to  give  both  my  own  original  notes  and  Mrs.  B.'s  fuller  account, 
especially  as  there  was  much  important  matter  that  I  was  unable  to 
take  down  during  the  sitting.  After  the  usual  beginning,  Phinuit 
during  most  of  the  sitting  purported  to  be  repeating  the  words  of 
Mrs.  B.'s  sister. 

[From  notes  of  R.  H.] 

You  have  a  sister  here,  and  did  you  ever  find  out  about  tliat  letter  1 
Anna.  Hannah.  Hannah  Wild.  Slie  calls  you  Bessie  Blodgett.  You 
was  in  an  audience  and  a  message  was  thrown  to  you.  She'll  tell  you  all 
about  that.  How's  the  Society — the  women  you  know  ?  Moses.  He's  in 
the  body.    I  want  to  tell  you  about  that  letter. 

[Phinuit  groj^es  on  the  flof)r  with  hand  to  get  a  small  leather  bag,  which 
Mrs.  B.  had  taken  into  the  room  without  saying  anything  about  it  to  Mrs. 
Piper.    Phinuit  takes  bag  in  lap,  saying  "  Mine."  Tries  to  open  it,  but  fails. 

Observations  of  Certain  Pheiwmena  of  Trance. 

73 

Mrs.  B.  opens  it.  Mrs.  B.  says  that  her  sister  visually  had  much  difficulty 
in  opening  the  bag.  ] 

[Takes  spectacles,  hair.]  That's  mine.  Picture  of  mine  here.  [Mrs.  B. 
shook  her  head.  Finally  Phinuit  jiroduced  a  photograph  of  Miss  Hannah 
Wild,  tied  up  in  a  small  parcel  with  other  objects.]  That's  the  picture. 
(Truly  I  didn't  know  that  picture  was  there.) 

[Be  letter,  i.e.,  as  Mrs.  B.  explains,  the  will  of  her  sister.]  This  is  to 
you.  That  was  mine  to  you.  I  wrote  it  and  gave  it  to  you.  That  was  my 
feelings  at  tlie  time.  I  felt  there  was  something  that  would  never  divide  us. 
Wherever  you  go  and  whatever  you  do,  don't  vary  from  the  instructions 
I  gave  you  there. 

You  remember  my  dress  and  my  comb.  You  remember  what  I  told  you 
to  do  with  my  money.  I  told  you  personally,  on  my  death-bed.  Alice.  Our 
sister's  little  girl.  She  is  a  namesake.  (Shall  I  give  her  the  money  ?)  Yes. 
(Wliat  is  this  ?)  [Giving  Mrs.  P.  a  paper  in  a  yellow  envelope.]  Alice  has 
written  here  for  the  disposition  of  the  money.  [Wrong.]  This  is  my  little 
niece.  Mother's  here.  [Fingering  the  envelope  and  jmper.]  Where's  the 
doctor?  (He's  home.)  Where's  brother?  (I  don't  know.)  I'll  tell  you 
about  him  in  a  minute.    Alice  wrote  this, — Sister  Alice. 

Who's  Sarah  ?  That  belongs  to  gentleman  over  there.  Sarah  01)s, 
Holjs.    (Hodge  ?)    Hodge,  Odge.  [See  below.] 

Where's  my  great  big  silk  handkerchief  /  (The  little  niece  has  got  it. 
You  gave  it  to  her.)  Where's  my  thimble  ?  (Hovf  many  brothers  have  you 
got  in  spirit-life  ?)  One, — two, — three.  Who's  Henry  ?  He's  in  the  spirit, 
but  not  with  us — a  good  way  off.    He  has  been  here  weeks. 

Do  you  remember  T  told  you  it  would  l}e  ringing  a  church  bell  ?  (City 
Hall  bell.) 

[Asked  concerning  the  contents  of  the  yellow  letter.]  Alice  wrote  to 
know  about  some  money  and  the  children.    [Wrong.  ] 

Who's  William  and  the  doctor  ?  Brother  William.  I've  found  him. 
He's  all  right.  Don't  worry  about  him.  William's  influence  is  stronger 
than  mine.  He'll  come  to  see  you  every  day  and  every  hour.  What  do  you 
think  about  the  lot  ?    (What  lot  ?)    The  lot  where  he  was  buried. 

[Concerning  the  bag.]    That's  my  own.    I  give  it  to  you. 

[Asked  concerning  the  contents  of  the  sealed  letter  whicli  she  liad 
written  on  her  death-bed.]  Sacred  and  religious.  I  remember  something 
about  elevation  of  myself. 

William  Henry  is  better  out  of  the  world  than  he  was  in  it. 

(Cousin  Elizabeth  living  ?)  She's  passed  out  of  the  body.  [Mrs.  B.  writes 
on  June  6th,  1888,  that  Elizabeth  is  still  living.] 

Bo  you  remember  the  morning  you  rubbed  me  ?  [Mrs.  Blodgett  writes  : 
"Cannot  recall  any  particular  morning  I  rubbed  sister.  I  did  it  every 
morning,  and  she  would  put  her  arms  around  me  and  kiss  me  and  say  liow 
good  I  was."] 

(Can  you  tell  me  what  I  did  with  the  instrument  that  the  doctor  told 
me  ?)  You  know  what  I  did.  I'm  here  and  I  want  you  to  know  it.  Brother 
Henry  was  a  queer  genius.  (Do  you  know  what  your  brother  Fred  died 
Avith  f)  It  was  in  his  stomach.  He  passed  out  suddenly,  congestion  of 
organs  in  the  stomachi 

74 

i/r.  R.  Hodgson. 

You  go  up  in  luy  rooms  and  sit  tliere.  [This,  as  I  remember  it,  was  an 
injunction  and  not  a  dogmatic  statement.]  (Can  you  tell  me  anything  new 
I've  got  in  my  home  ?)  Give  me  the  little  one.  [Meaning  the  picture.]  It's 
tiken  from  this  and  elevated  larger.  [No  reference  to  change  of  house,  etc.,, 
of  which  Mrs.  B.  was  thinking.] 

[Mrs.  B.  picked  something  wrajapsd  in  silk  out  of  the  Lag  and  asked  what 
it  was.    Mrs.  P.  took  it  in  her  hand.]    That's  mother's  chain. 

Sarah  Hodson.  [Here  Phinuit  explained  that  there  was  no  "g"  in  the 
name,  and  that  Sarah  Hodson  was  a  friend  of  Hannah.]  Sarah's  in  the- 
body.  [Mrs.  Blodgett  thinks  that  I  made  a  mistake  in  noting  this,  and 
that  Phinuit  said  that  Sarah  was  not  in  the  body.] 

Mrs.  Blodgett  writes  on  June  6th,  1888  :— 

I  write  to  inform  you  that  I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  Philadelphia 
saying  the  lady,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Wild,  who  Mrs.  Piper  said  was  dead,  is- 
living,  and  in  much  better  health  than  she  was  two  years  ago  when  I  heard 
from  her.  Perhaps  you  will  remember  sister  Hannah  said  she  went  to  see 
her  after  she  left  the  body.  I  think  I  can  exjjlain  why  she  said  so.  The- 
letter  which  I  brought  fronr  sister  to  have  the  medium  read,  and  which  she 
did  not  read  correctly,  was  first  written  ' '  Did  you  go  to  cousin  Elizabeth' 
after  you  left  the  body  ?  "  Sister  Alice  then  thought  we  had  heard  of  that,, 
and  so  wrote  the  note  which  you  read,  and  put  it  into  the  same  envelope. 

The  m'.>re  I  think  of  o'ur  sitting  the  more  strange  points  I  see  in  it.  It 
was  all  true,  yet  not  one  word  I  did  not  know. 

Another  point  :  Sister  Hannah  was  so  slow  and  took  so  long  to  tell  a 
story.  She  would  go  all  around  the  story  before  she  would  touch  the  point, 
and  you  know  that  was  not  the  case  when  we  were  sitting.  Every  medium  I 
sit  with  says  it  is  because  I  am  so  clear  and  my  magnetism  is  so  strong  that 
they  can  get  better  tests. 

I  almost  know  it  was  not  sister  for  this  reason.  She  said  I  was  to  go  sit 
in  her  room.  I  did  sit  there  evei-y  day  until  we  moved,  and  have  wanted  to 
so  much  since  that  I  feel  that  it  must  have  come  from  me.  It  is  very 
wonderful  how  quick  she  got  into  my  magnetism.  This  is  the  point  I  want 
to  find  out — did  I  enter  the  medium,  or  did  she  enter  me,  or  was  there  a 
third  party,  and  if  so,  who  or  what  is  the  third  i^arty  ? 

Mrs.  Blodgett  writes  on  June  10th,  1888  :— 

I  have  just  received  a  letter  saying  Sarah  Hodson,  cif  Waterbury,  Conn., 
is  living,  and  is  better  than  she  was  two  years  ago,  when  last  sister  Hannah 
heard  from  her. 

Mrs.  Bl(.)dgett  writes  on  July  10th,  1890  :— 

I  have  written  from  my  own  notes  of  sitting  as  I  took  them  down  that 
night.  Yours  are  very  good.  Only,  not  knowing  the  j^arties,  you  seem  to 
have  misplaced  one  or  two  things.  About  the  photo  :  I  am  sure  I  did  not 
know  it  was  there,  as  I  brought  another  one,  which  I  showed  Professor 
James  and  you  the  night  before.  Also,  what  you  call  a  letter  was  her  will.  . 
She  did  not  give  me  name  of  Alice  until  she  took  mother's  chain  in  hand, 
I  cannot  remember  much  about  the  place  I  have  mai-ked  with  a  cross  ; 
only  I  know  she  was  religious,  and  did  say  something  about  it.    I  know  the 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

7.5- 

reason.  I  tried  to  get  her  to  tell  me  her  funeral  text,  but  she  did  not. 
[This  concerns  the  passage  in  my  notes,  referring  to  the  contents  of  the 
sealed  letter. — R.H.] 

Please  note. — Brother  Josejjh  was  travelling.  She  did  not  tell  mc  where 
he  was.  Alice's  letter  I  did  not  know.  That  was  not  correct.  Sarali  Hod- 
son.  Did  not  know.  That  was  wrong.  [According  to  my  notes  takeiu 
during  the  sitting,  Phinuit  was  right  about  this. — R.H.]  Cousin  Elizabeth 
also.  But  what  I  knew  was  most  all  correct,  except  the  bag.  She  said  that 
■was  hers,  and  it  never  was  [though  Miss  Wild  had  frequently  used  it]. 

She  took  no  notice  of  Maria's  scissors  in  the  bag,  nor  of  the  letter  whicli 
was  wrapped  in  rubber  cloth.  [Maria  was  my  husband's  first  wife.  Sister 
had  known  her,  and  also  said  many  times  during  her  sickness,  when  lie  went 
away,  "  When  I  die,  I  will  tell  Maria  all  about  him,  how  good  he  has  been 
to  me."] 

[Account  by  Mrs.  Blodgett.] 

1.  "  Bessie,  Betsie  Blodgett,  mj'  sister.  How  glad  I  am  to  see  you  I  I 
am  Anna,  Hannah,  your  sister,  Hannali  Wild.  How's  father  and  all  tlie 
folks  ?    Oh  I  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  1  " 

2.  "  Saw  you  once  before  in  that  audience.    Threw  a  message  at  you." 
Mrs.  B.  :  "  AVhere  was  it  ?  " 

P.  :  "Oh,  I  will  tell  you  all  a))out  that." 

3.  "How's  the  Society,  Lucy  Stone  and  all  of  them'?  " 

4.  "  Moses  is  here.    He  is  in  the  body." 

5.  "  Want  to  tell  you  about  my  letter. "  (Gropes  around  floor  for  bag, 
which  I  had  taken  in  and  whicli  Mrs.  P.  had  not  seen.)  "  My  photo  in  that 
bag."  (Could  not  open  the  bag.  I  opened  it.)  Kept  pulling  things  out  of 
bag,  saying,  "  Picture  of  mine  in  here."  Finds  picture. 

6.  Taking  spectacles  in  hand.  "  These  are  my  old  glasses.  I  have  read 
many  precious  truths  with  them." 

7.  Taking  hair  switch.  "That's  mine.  I  made  it.  Hard  work,  l^ut  I 
did  it." 

8.  Picks  up  the  will,  wliicli  slie  had  shaken  out  of  the  envelope  when  she 
found  picture.  "  This  is  to  you.  I  wrote  it  and  gave  to  you.  Tliat  was  my 
feelings  at  the  time  I  wrote  it.  You  did  not  think  as  I  did.  You  made  me 
feel  sad  sometimes.  But  you  did  take  good  care  of  me.  I  always  felt  tliere 
was  something  that  would  never  part  us.  Do  just  as  I  told  you  to.  Don't 
vary  at  all.  You  remember  about  my  dress  Where's  my  comb  ?  You 
remember  about  my  money  ?  I  told  you  what  to  do  witli  that.  That  ain't 
written  in  tliis  paper.    I  told  you  that  on  my  deatli-bed. " 

9.  "  How  is  Alice  ?  "  Mrs.  B.  :  "  What  Alice  ?"  P.  :  "The  little  girl 
that's  a  namesake." 

10.  Takes  Alice's  letter  in  yellow  envelope.  Mrs.  B.  :  "What  is  in 
that?"  P.  tore  it  open,  saying:  "  Slie  wants  to  know  wliat's  going  to  be 
done  with  the  money."  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Shall  I  give  Clara  part  of  the  money  ? " 
P.  :  "Yes." 

11.  "  Mother  is  here.    Where's  doctor  ?    Where's  brother  ?  " 

12.  Takes  mother's  chain  in  hand.    It  was  wrapped  in  silk.    I  said. 

Y6 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

"Hannah,  tell  nie  whose  and  what  is  that?"  Feels  of  tassel  on  end  of 
•chain.  P.:  "  My  niotlier's  chain.  Alice  Wild,  niy  mother,  and  Alice  Wild, 
my  sister,  wrote  tliis  letter." 

13.  "Who's   Sarah?"     I   asked,    "Sarah   Grover?"     "No.  Sarah 

Obb — Hodg  "    At  last,  after  pointing  to  Mr.  Hodgson,  said  it  belonged 

to  him.    Then  said  it  was  "  Sarah  Hodson. " 

14.  P.  :  "Where  is  my  big  silk  handkerchief  T'  Mrs.  B.  :  "I  gave  it  to 
Clara.  Ycm  told  me  to."  P.:  "Where  is  my  thimble?"  Mrs.  B.  :  "I 
don't  know."    P.  :  "I  saw  you  put  it  into  this  bag." 

15.  Mrs.  B.  :  "Can  you  tell  me,  sister,  how  many  brotliers  you  have 
in  sj^irit-life  ?  "    P.  :  "  One,  two,  three." 

1(5.  "  Who's  Henry  ?    He  is  in  spirit  a  good  way  oft"." 
.  17.  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  wliere  tliat  letter  is  now  tliat  you  wrote  ?  " 
P.  :  "  It  is  at  home,  in  tin  box."    Mrs.  B.  :  "Can't  you  tell  me  more  about 
it?"    P.  :  "I  have  told  you.    It  would  l)e  like  ringing  cluu'ch  bells  if  I 
could  come  back." 

18.  "  Where's  William  and  doctor  ?"  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Hannah,  you  tell  me 
where  William  is  ?  "  P.:  "  He  is  here.  I  found  him."  Mrs.  B.  :  "How 
long  has  he  been  ?  "  P.  :  "Weeks.  You  know  all  about  it.  He  sticks  to 
you  all  the  time  every  day.  William  wants  to  know  how  you  like  that  lot." 
Mrs.  B.  :  "What  lot  ?  "  P.  :  "You  ought  to  know.  You  bought  it  to  bury 
him  in.  William  is  better  out  of  tlie  world  tlian  in  it.  He  was  a  strange 
fellow.    He  don't  like  that  lot.    Do  you  ?  "    I  answered,  "No." 

19.  "  Cousin  Elizabeth  is  liere."  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Hannah,  did  you  go  to  see 
lier  the  day  you  died  ?  "    P.  :  "  I  never  did  die." 

20.  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Do  you  know  what  I  did  witli  instrument  doctor  told  me 
to  do        P.  :  "  You  know  what  you  did." 

21.  Mrs.  B.  :  "Can  you  tell  me  what  brother  Fred  died  with?"  P.  : 
"Oh,  sudden  ;  it  was  liis  stomach.    Congestion  of  stomach." 

22.  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  anytliing  new  that  I  have  got  since  you 
went  away  ?  "  P.  took  small  picture  and  said,  "  One  from  this.  A  larger 
one,  elevated." 

23.  Closed  by  saying  it  was  cluu-cli  time.  She  must  go,  as  she  never 
missed  church. 

[Notes  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  on  the  f(jreg<)ing  account,  1888.] 

1.  Correct.  Kept  slap] ting  me  with  lier  hand.  Just  like  sister.  My 
name  was  Bessie  Barr  when  sister  died. 

2.  Went  to  Lake  Pleasant  four  weeks  after  she  died.  John  Slater, 
medium,  said,  pointing  to  me  in  a  large  audience,  "  Lady  here  who  wants  to 
have  you  know  slie  is  here.  Henry,  the  lame  man,  is  with  her.  Slie  wants 
to  know  about  big  silk  liandkerchief .  Says  she  will  tell  you  what  is  in  that 
pajjer  soon." 

3.  I  was  down  to  Boston  to  attend  the  AVomen's  Suffrage  meetings.  Lucy 
iStone  is  the  editor  of  the  Wom(ni\'i  JinrrnaJ,  and  wrote  a  piece  about  sister 
when  she  died. 

4.  Diiu't  know  any  Moses.  ■  ... 

Observations  of  CcrtoAn  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

5.  B;ig  contained  her  glasses,  hair,  niotlier's  chain,  Maria's  scissors,  whicli 
she  did  not  take  out,  and  her  letter,  -s-i-i-apped  up  in  rubber  cloth,  -R-hich  she 
did  not  touch  ;  also  her  will,  in  ^vhich  was  the  picture.  It  must  have  been  in 
envelope  when  I  put  will  in  envelope,  for  I  did  not  know  that  I  had  taken 
the  photo  with  me  ;  also  a  letter  which  sister  Alice  had  written  for  Hannah 
to  tell  what  was  in  it.    The  letter  was  sealed. 

6.  Correct. 

7.  Her  own  hair,  which  she  had  learnt  to  weave  into  a  switch. 

8.  Correct, — but  I  do  not  know  anything  about  any  comb.  The  paper 
was  about  her  books  and  dresses  and  all  her  personal  effects  except  money. 

9.  Sister  Alice  (living)  had  a   cliild  named  Alice  Olivia,  and  Hannali 
always  called  her  Alice.    The  rest  call  her  Ollie.    Hannah  did  not  like  it, 
as  she  was  named  Alic3  after  my  motlier,  and  Olivia   after  my  sister's, 
husband's  mother.    Hannah  took  pains  to  liave  us  all  know  she  did  not 
want  the  .-Uice  di-opped. 

10.  I  do  not  know  what  was  written  in  the  letter.  Sister  Alice  wrote 
it.    But  what  was  said  about  the  contents  was  not  con-ect. 

11.  My  husband  is  a  doctor,  known  to  Hannah.  I  have  one  brother 
living,  jiamed  Josepli,  who  travels  most  of  the  time. 

12.  TJie  chain  was  a  long  chain  of  mother's.  It  was  cut  in  two  after 
mother  died.  Hannah  had  worn  one  lialf.  The  half  which  I  took  to  the 
sitting  had  not  been  worn  since  mother's  death,  and  it  had  a  tassel  on  the 
end,  different  from  the  half  Hannah  had  worn.  Did  not  tell  who  wrote  the 
letter  until  she  got  the  name  with  the  chain. 

13.  Sarah  Hodson  was  a  friend  of  sister's  in  Waterbury,  Conn.  I  had 
thought  of  her  the  night  before  when  I  met  Mr.  H.,  as  she  also  came  from 
London,  England. 

14.  The  handkerchief  was  a  large  silk  one  given  to  sister  by  a  lady  who 
lived  with  us  for  years,  and  it  came  from  England.  I  did  not  know  I  had. 
put  Hannah's  thimble  into  the  bag,  but  found  on  return  to  tlie  hotel  tliat  it 
was  there  on  the  bed,  with  tlie  rest  of  the  things  I  had  taken  out  of  the  bag 
before  starting  for  the  sitting. 

15.  I  asked  her  how  many  brothers  because  Williani  had  only  been  dead 
since  March  27th,  same  year  (1888).  Wanted  to  have  her  tell  me  if  she  had 
seen  him.    '•  Three  "  was  correct. 

16.  This  Henry  was  my  mother's  only  mile  cousin,  and  slie  had  lived 
with  him  all  her  life  until  she  was  married.  His  picture  Jiangs  in  tlie  liouse. 
He  was  lame.    The  same  one  John  Slater  had  told  of  before.    (See  Note  2.) 

17.  The  letter  was  in  the  bag  wrapped  up  in  rubber  cloth.  Sister  did  say 
when  we  put  the  letter  in  tin  box,  It  would  be  like  ringing  the  City  Hall 
bell  if  I  can  come  back." 

18.  I  had  bought  him  a  lot  in  Wood-lawn  Cemetery,  N.Y.  His  wife- 
wanted  him  buried  there.  We  wanted  to  take  him  to  our  home,  and  bury 
him  by  mother.  Brother  was  ^-ery  proud,  and  we  thouglit  that  the  lot  was. 
not  as  nice  as  he  would  like. 

19.  When  sister  died  Cousin  Elizabeth  was  sick  and  dreamt  at  about  the. 

78 

lylr.  R.  Hoiljjsov. 

same  hour  some  one  was  dead  at  our  house,  so  I  asked  question.  She  lives 
In  Philadelphia.    Mrs.  P.  would  not  answer  the  question. 

20.  Dr.  Blodgett  had  to  come  and  inject  morphia  into  sister  every  few 
hours  for  the  last  few  days,  her  pain  was  so  great.  He  made  me  do  it  the 
last  two  days.  It  almost  killed  me  to  do  it.  I  wanted  to  see  if  she  knew  it. 
Would  not  answer  my  question.  I  remember  I  asked  a  number  of  questions, 
but  Mrs.  P.  would  not  answer.  She  kept  saying,  "  I  want  you  to  know  it 
is  mo,  Hannah  Wild,  Hannah  Wild." 

21.  Brother  Fred  dropped  dead  as  soon  as  he  reached  the  sidewalk  after 
getting  out  of  a  street  car  in  Chicago,  111.  Hannah  went  on  there.  The 
jdoctor  told  her  it  was  heart  disease. 

22.  Dr.  and  I  had  got  married  since  Hannah  died.  Built  a  new  liouse  and 
moved  into  it.  Took  father  to  live  with  us.  I  wa,nted  her  to  tell  me  about 
it.  She  seemed  to  think  I  went  up  and  sat  in  her  room,  and  I  could  not,  as 
tlie  house  was  rented  to  another  family.  I  did  have  a  large  jDicture  made  of 
sister  for  father's  Christmas  present,  and  it  hangs  on  the  wall.  Sister 
Hannah's  cousin  made  it,  and  I  should  have  thought  she  would  have  said 
something  about  him,  as  he  took  a  new  picture  of  her  every  time  she  'went  to 
see  him. 

23.  Just  like  sister,  never  missed  church.  It  was  Decoration  Day,  and  she 
always  went  to  the  service. 

Tha  next  reports,  which  have  been  made  by  Mrs.  Blodgett,  with  the 
.assistance  of  my  notes  taken  during  the  sitting,  and  which  have  been 
revised  by  me,  refer  to  sittings  which  Mrs.  Blodgett  requested  me  to 
have  on  her  behalf,  for  the  purpose,  if  jjossible,  of  obtaining  the  letter 
written  by  her  sister.  After  her  sitting  in  May,  Mrs.  Blodgett  told 
Mrs.  Piper  who  she  was. 

SittiiKj  on  Aiiijiid  Id,  1888. 

I  sent  a  lock  of  liair  which  I  liad  cut  from  sister's  head  after  her  death. 
Pliinuit  thought  that  it  was  not  Hannali's  hair,  tlien  that  it  was,  ljut  that 
someone  had  handled  it.  He  then  purported  to  give  a  copy  of  the  letter  : 
*'It's  something  about  Hannah's  early  history,  that  letter  is."  "At  one 
time  I  met  a  person  wliom  I  loved.  A  circumstance  in  our  affection  changed 
my  whole  life.  Had  it  not  been  for  this  one  tiling,  I  sliould  liave  been 
married  and  hapjiy.  Consequently  I  went  into  religious  work  and  did  all  tlie 
good  I  could.  The  circumstance  that  niarred  my  happiness  regarded  my 
intended  marriage.  Whoever  reads  this  letter  after  I  am  gone  will  knov/  the 
reason  why  I  remained  as  Hannah  Wild.  Wlien  I  am  gone  I  will  retui'n  and 
repeat  word  for  word  this  letter."    "It  has  been  opened,  I'm  sorry  to  .say." 

Phinuit  said  that  if  lie  had  a  longer  piece  of  hair  next  sitting  he  could 
give  the  letter  word  for  word. 

[Tlie  fact  referred  to  in  the  above  dictated  letter  is  correct.  It  was  the 
one  sorrow  of  sister's  life.  But  we  learn  from  Professor  James  that  it  was 
not  wliat  sister  wrote  in  lier  death-bed  letter.  Phinuit  had  ju'eviou.sly  been 
told  tliat  tlie  letter  liad  been  examined  for  comparison  with  his  first 
statements.] 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

79 

Sitting  on  October  3rd,  1888. 

I  sent  Mr.  Hodgson  a  large  lock  of  hair,  and  also  a  tidy  wliich  sister  Iiad 
iinislied  a  few  days  before  lier  death,  requesting  him  to  ask  the  name  of  my 
first  husband— tlie  middle  name  he  was  to  be  very  particular  about— also  t(j 
ask  the  name  of  my  only  child,  who  died  at  the  age  of  ten,  whom  Hannah 
had  taken  care  of  for  years.  Had  names  been  given  correctly,  it  would  have 
«ut  of!'  all  thought-transference  as  far  as  Mr.  Hodgson  was  concerned. 

R.  H.  placing  hair  and  tidy  in  Mrs.  P.'s  hands.  P.  :  What  is  this  for  ? 
R.  H.  ■:  You  must  tell.  P.  :  Hannah  Wild.  Betsy  gave  vou  this.  Ill  tell 
you  all  about  this  directly.  R.  H.  :  What  was  the  name  of  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
first  husband  ?  P.  :  John  Henry  or  Henry  Jolni  Cliiibrd.  [The  name 
of  niy  fir.st  husband  was  John  Rothmall  Barr.  I  know  a  Mr.  John  Henry 
Clifford,  and  his  daughter  tells  me  that  she  i.s  almost  sure  that  Hannah 
had  worked  upon  the  tidy  in  their-  house.]  R.  H.  :  What  was  tlie 
name  of  Iier  boy  ?  P.  :  Willie.  [The  name  of  my  child  was  John  Blarion 
Barr.]  P.  :  Hannah  says,  Ask  my  sister  Bessie  if  she  doesn't  know  wliat  I 
said  to  her  last.  It's  awful  hard  work  to  bring  back  recollections.  "  I  said 
tins,  '  It's  hard  work  to  be  ill  and  leave  your  friends  in  the  l^ody.'  " 

The  letter  was  said  to  be  as  follows  : — 

"I  left  a  great  deal  of  my  work  unfinished.  Could  I  have  been  able  to 
.stay  here  longer,  I  should  try  to  be  of  some  benefit  to  those  who  were  le^n- 
nig  more  particularly  on  me.  There's  Mr.  Town  has  always  been  very,  very 
kind  to  me.  I  had  some  talk  with  liim  regarding  matters  in  the  church  which 
nobody  knows  but  himself  and  me,  and  a  sister  of  his.  After  I  liave  passed 
out  and  returned  to  eartli  to  dictate  this  letter,  and  it  is  opened,  please  crive 
1,000  [liere  Phinuit  wrote  1,000  on  my  block-book.— R.  H.]  dollars  for°the 
benefit  of  the  church.— Hannah  Wild."  "  I  told  my  sister  should  I  come 
back  and  dictate  tliis  letter  it'll  be  like  tiie  ringing  of  tlie  villaoe  church  bell  " 
{Hannah  never  said  it  was  hard  to  be  ill  ;  neitlier  did  slie  think  it  I^ard  to 
die.  Slie  left  no  work  unfinished.  I  sat  by  her  side  liour  after  hour  and 
wrote  down  to  whom  every  article  she  possessed  sliould  be  given.  She  made 
all  her  own  arrangements  for  her  funeral  and  selected  the  verse  for  her 
funeral  serm<.n.    No  one  was  leaning  on  her.    My  sister  had  a  friend  named 

Mr.  Thomas  F  ,  who  was  kind  to  her  and  who  had  some  talk  with  her  on 

church  matters-Hannah  often  called  him  Mr.  Tom.  She  had  worked  ,.n  tlie 
tidy  in  tlie  presence  of  tliis  gentleman  and  his  sister.  My  sister  made  me 
promise  not  to  give  any  money  to  the  church,  as  they  had  built  a  new  one  in 
a  fashionable  part  of  tlie  city  and  closed  tlie  old  one  where  it  was  needed 
.She  never  said  "  Tlie  village  bells,"  but  always  the  "  City  Hall  bell  "  See 
sitting  of  May  30th,  1888,  Note  17,  p.  77.  We  learn  from  Professor  James 
that  tins  was  not  tlie  substance  of  Hannah's  death-bed  letter.] 

P  :  Hannah  wants  to  give  you  a  test  to  her  sister,  something  that  no  one 
else  knows,  but  she  cannot  recollect  it  now.  [There  was  a  test  between  sister 
Alice  and  Hannah,  but  I  do  not  know  what  it  was.  The  test  lias  never  been 
given,  and  sister  AHce  has  seen  the  accounts  of  our  attempts  to  obtain  com- 
munications from  Hannah.] 

The  next  attempt  to  obtain  the  letter  was  in  1889,  when  Mrs.  Blod<^ett 
and  myself  had  two  sittings,  of  which  the  following  are  the  reports, 

80  •  Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

made  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  with  the  assistance  of  my  notes  taken  during- 
the  sitting,  and  finally  revised  by  me. 

Sitting  on  Muij  2Sth,  1889. 

P.  :  Anna's  liere.  No,  Hannah  !  Hannah  says  :  ' '  Bessie,  you  haven't 
been  feeling  very  well  of  late."  Mrs.  B.  :  No.  What  has  been  the  matter?' 
[No  answer.]  P. :  What  noise  did  you  hear  the  night  before  this  ?  Mrs.  B.  r 
Rapjjing.  [I  had  heard  a  rap  that  seemed  to  come  on  the  bed  the  night 
before,  but  could  get  no  answer  from  it.]  P.  :  Hannah  did  that.  [Here 
followed  some  talk  about  father.] 

Mrs.  B.  :  Can  you  give  us  a  cojiy  of  Hannah's  letter  this  morning  ?' 
P.  :  Hannah  says  that  she  did  mention  a  sum  <>f  money  to  the  chvu-ch.  Some- 
money  for  tlie  benefit  of,  for  educating  the  children.  Mrs.  B.  :  What 
church  ?  [I  asked  what  church  to  see  if  she  would  say  the  old  Baj^tist  or  the 
new  Baptist.]  P.  :  Baptist.  P.  :  Where's  Aunt  EHzabeth  ?  Mrs.  B.  :  She 
ought  to  be  in  Philadelphia.  You  said  she  had  passed  out,  the  last  time  I 
was  here.  (See  sitting  of  May  30th,  1888,  pp.  76,  77,  Note  19.)  She  had  not. 
P.  ;  [Made  some  I'emark  about  being  "confased,"  and  returned  to  the- 
"letter."]  Also  about  the  doctor,  when  he  should  have  changed  his  sur- 
roundings, if  she  had  been  with  him,  she  would  be  of  great  assistance  to  him.. 
If  she  had  stayed  in  the  body  she  would  have  helped  the  brother.  Mrs. 
B.  :  Are  the  words  "  My  brother"  halfway  down  the  second  page  ?  [I  got 
an  impression  that  they  were  there.]  P.  :  Yes  ;  halfway  down  the  second 
page.  [Some  obscurity  here  in  the  notes.  Either,  "  Got  good  memory.  I 
see  the  things  over  again,"  or,  "  Not  a  good  memory.  I  say  the  same  things, 
over  again." — R.H.]  [Hannah's  memory  was  very  good,  and  she  was  the 
encycloptedia  for  the  whole  family.] 

P.  :  [Fingering  a  "waist"  wliich  Mrs.  B.  had  placed  on  her  lap.]  She- 
wore  that  when  she  was  sick.  She  knows  that.  [The  "  waist  "  belonged  tO' 
Hannah,  who  had  worn  it  frequently,  but  not  when  she  had  her  last  sickness.] 

Mrs.  B.  :  [Taking  out  an  envelope  containing  a  lock  of  hair  and  some 
writing  and  giving  them  to  P.]  Tell  me  about  these.  P.  :  Letter  to  her. 
It  ain't  written  nice.  [The  letter  was  written  by  Hannah's  niece  to  Hannah, 
and  was  written  nicely.  The  lock  of  hair  was  from  the  same  person.]  P.  : 
[Fingering  the  hair.]  Do  you  know  who  Alice  is  ?  This  comes  in  connection 
with  Alice.  This  is  the  mother's.  Mrs.  B.  :  Alice  is  the  mother's  name. 
P.:  That  hair  is  in  the  spirit.  [Wrong.] 

Mrs.  B.  [Putting  some  imitation  birds'  eyes  into  P.'s  hands.]  Tell  me 
aVjout  those.  P.  :  Eyes.  Cats'  eyes.  Came  from  Euroije.  Mrs.  B.  :  Did 
they  come  from  France  ?  P.  :  No.  More  German  like.  [A  box  of  birds' 
eyes,  from  which  these  were  taken,  was  a  prize  drawn  by  father  in  the  first 
I*aris  Exposition  for  a  white  crane  which  he  had  sent,  about  1847  or  1848,  T 
cannot  recall  the  exact  year.  Hannah  was  very  proud  of  them  and  would 
have  known  them  at  once.  But  she  had  never  handled  them.  We  were 
only  allowed  to  look  at  them  in  a  glass  case.] 

Mrs.  B.  :  [Puts  a  jfin  into  P.'s  hands.]  P.:  Mother's  influence.  Got  the 
little  nephew  here.  Your  mother's  pin  brings  the  nephew.  He  had  some 
trouble  with  head,  throat,  and  stomach.  You  gave  this  to  her.  [It  was  my 
mother's  pin,  but  had  been  given  to  her  by  my  father.     My  boy  died  of 

Ohservatioiis  of  CerUiin  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

81 

consumption.]  P.  :  She  used  to  have  a  chain  witli  this.  Mrs.  B.  :  Yes.  I 
gave  it  to  Alice.    [A  chain  was  sometimes  worn  with  tlie  pin.] 

Mrs.  B.  [Handing  P.  a  glove  and  stocking  belonging  to  her  child,  the 
nephew  referred  to,  asked  :  ]  Who  is  there  in  Heaven  that  I  should  love  best  ? 
P.  :  You  ought  to  know.  [Hannah  had  always  kept  the  glove  and  stocking 
in  the  family  Bible,  and  would  have  known  them  at  once.] 

Mrs.  B.  [Puts  a  round  box,  from  which  she  took  an  ear-spoon  and  eye- 
probe,  in  P.'s  hands.]  P.:  Sister's  influence.  [Correct.]  [Concerning  the 
ear-spoon.]  That's  her  ear-thing.  [Fingering  the  probe  a  long  time,  asked 
what  it  was,  and  at  last  said  :]  That's  a  probe.  [I  had  hoped  to  make 
Hannah  say  that  she  was  very  deaf — as  she  was — a  fact  never  given  by  P.] 

P.:  [Concerning  a  chain  wliicli  I  put  into  Phinuit's  hands.]  Before  she 
passed  out  she  broke  this  chain  three  or  four  times  and  tied  it  up  with 
thread.  Mother's  influence  comes  with  this  chain.  It  v/as  mother's  first. 
Mother  gave  it  to  her.  [See  sitting  of  May  30th,  1888,  pp.  76,  77,  Note  12. 
Mother  gave  her  chain  to  me.  I  liad  it  cvit  in  half,  and  ga\'e  one  portion 
to  Alice,  and  the  other  portion  to  Hannah.  The  piece  belonging  to  Alice 
I  took  to  my  sitting  of  May  30th,  1888.  Alice  never  ^core  it,  but  Pliinuit  got 
the  name  from  it.  The  otlier  piece  was  that  which  I  gave  here  to  Phiuuit, 
and  had  been  worn  by  Hannah.  It  had  also  been  broken  and  tied  up  with 
thread  by  Hannah  in  as  many  as  three  places  ;  by  myself  in  two  places  when 
she  was  sick  in  bed.    It  was  tied  with  thread  when  Phinuit  held  it.] 

Mrs.  B. :  Ask  Hannah  who  was  there  when  she  wrote  the  letter.  P.  r 
You  were  there  and  another  lady,  not  her  sister,  but  your  sister.  [Some- 
confusion,  but  no  help  by  Mrs.  B.    See  below. — R.  H.] 

P.  :  Fred's  here  ;  says,  How's  Joe  ?  Mrs.  B. :  Yes  ;  that's  my  brotlier. 
[Fred  was  my  dead  brother.  Joe  is  my  only  living  brother.]  P. :  Ella  in  Joe's 
surroundings.  [I  fovmd  soon  after  the  sitting  that  brother  Fred  had  a  sister- 
in-law  in  Chicago  named  Helen,  who  is  living  and  is  often  called  Ella.  But 
my  brother  Joe  does  not  know  of  any  such  person.  I  did  not  think  until 
recently  (1891)  of  my  father's  cousin's  children,  of  New  York  State,  in  con- 
nection with  this  communication.  We  played  together  as  children,  and  were 
like  one  family.  Their  names  were  Fred,  Anna,  Joe,  and  Ella.  They  were 
all  known  to  my  brotlier  Fred.  Further,  this  second  cousin  Fred  went  to- 
Chicago  about  the  year  1865,  and  both  father  and  I  think  that  we  heard  he- 
was  drowned  on  the  lakes.  Anyway,  we  have  not  heard  from  him  since  about 
tliat  time.  Joe,  Ella,  and  Anna  are  living.]  [The  cousin  Fred  was  not 
drowned,  as  Mrs.  B.  supposed.  KShe  has  since  ascertained  that  he  is  still 
living.— R.  H.] 

P.  :  Hannah's  coming.  Aunt  Elizabeth  is  lame  ;  had  a  fall ;  got 
rheumatism  ;  sore  eyes.  [Every  detail  incorrect,  as  I  ha^'e  since  learned.} 
P. :  She  (Hannah)  used  to  write  for  the  i^apers,  and  she  said  in  her  letter- 
that  she  wanted  the  paper  to  be  kept  up  as  well  as  the  church  matters, 
[Hannah  wrote  many  letters  to  Lucy  Stone  on  Woman  Suffrage.  Some  were- 
printed  in  the  Woman's  Journal.  Hannah  did  say  to  me  that  I  was  to  keep 
up  that  journal,  but  I  cannot  recall  that  .she  asked  me  to  keep  up  any 
church  matters.] 

P.  :  She  wrote  tlie  letter  on  a  stand.  You  and  sister  Alice  were 
there.    She  sat  in  a  chair  with  big  arms  to  it.    Leant  back  tired.  It'll 

G 

82 

J\fr.  R.  Hodgson. 

he  like  ringing  the  old  clnn-cli  bell.  Mrs.  B. :  The  City  Hall  bell.  P. :  Yes, 
that's  it.  [The  account  given  of  the  writing  of  the  •  letter  and  the  persons 
present  is  correct.] 

P. :  Much  in  the  letter  about  the  doctor.  Slie  sjjeaks  about  the  piece 
of  land  in  the  letter,  and  that's  in  connection  with  the  doctor  also. 
And  it's  four  pages.  P.S. — And  this  is  all  settled  satisfactory  to  me.  Sister 
Hannah.  About  the  church,  land,  doctor,  paper,  lirother,  and  helping 
the  doctor  in  change  of  surroundings.  [My  husband  had  bought  a  new  piece 
of  land  since  Hannah's  death,  and  had  built  a  new  house  and  moved  into  it. 
But  [  cannot  see  how  Hannah  could  have  helped  him.  I  think  she  would 
have  helped  brother  if  she  had  lived.]  [We  learn  from  Professor  James  that 
the  above  details  are  not  the  substance  of  Hannah's  death-bed  letter.] 

Sittiiuj  on  May  2Wi,  1889. 

P.  :  Are  you  well  ?  Mrs.  B.  :  No.  I  want  a  medical  examination.  P.  : 
No  real  organic  disease  ;  little  weakness  in  kidney.  Sometimes  trouble  in 
held.  Mrs.  B.  :  What  is  the  cause  of  the  head  trouble?  P. :  That's  because 
you're  a  medium.  R.  H.  :  You  must  be  careful.  Doctor,  as  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
husband  is  a  medical  man.  P.  :  You  clear  out.  I  won't  do  anything  while 
you're  here.  [R.  H.  leaves  the  room.]  Mrs.  B.  :  [Phinuit  made  a  thorough 
examinatifin.    Said  I  was  perfect.    This  is  not  correct.]    [R.  H.  recalled.] 

P.  :  Light  complexioned  person,  grey  hair,  acpiiline  nose,  full  eye,  S([uare 
face,  moustache,  don't  see  any  beard,  much  to  do  with  new  building.  Marie 
in  surroundings.  [Maria  was  the  name  of  my  husband's  first  wife.  The 
description  does  not  answer  to  my  husband.  I  do  not  know  anyone  who 
corresponds  to  it.]  P.  :  Esther  also.  [I  dn  not  know  an  Esther,  nor,  as  far 
*is  I  can  ascertain,  did  Maria.  My  husband  had  an  aunt  of  that  name,  who 
died  a  long  time  ago.]  Mrs.  B.  :  Whom  does  Maria  wish  to  talk  to  ?  P.  : 
■Given  name  is  Charles,  and  he's  across  the  country.  [Charles  is  my  husband's 
first  name,  and  Maria  called  him  Charles.  He  was  in  Holyoke,  where  we 
live.] 

Mrs.  B.  :  Is  Hannah  Wild  here  to-day  ?  P.  :  No.  R.  H.  :  Tell  her  she 
did  not  give  the  letter  correctly.  P.  :  How  do  you  know  ?  Have  you  read 
it?  R.  H.  :  No.  James  says  so.  [P.  was  angry,  and  said  that  James  had 
lietter  "  .sharpen  up  his  memory,"  &c.,  and  finally  said  he  would  go  and  get 
Hannah.]  [Mrs.  P.  came  out  of  trance,  and  after  a  short  interval  became 
entranced  again.] 

P. :  Miss  Davis — Hannah  wants  you  to  go  and  see  her  and  say 
■she  has  a  message  for  her.  Will  give  it  later  on.  [I  do  not  know  a  Miss 
Davis.  I  know  a  Mrs.  Davis,  who  was  a  widov/  when  Hannah  died.  Hannah 
knew  her,  but  was  never  in  her  house.]  Mrs.  B.  :  What  was  the  maiden  name 
of  mother,  and  where  was  she  born  ?  P.  :  You  ought  to  know  as  well  as 
Hannah.  [Hannah  knew  mother's  maiden  name.  She  was  a  perfect  family 
encyclopaDdia.]  P.  :  There's  something  in  [the  letter]  about  motlier. 
]Mrs.  B.  :  What  happened  to  Hannah  that  Alice  only  knew?  P.  :  It 
happened  twice,  and  if  it  happened  the  third  time  Hannah  would  pass  out. 
Mrs.  B.  :  Did  it  happen  the  third  time  ?  P.  :  Yes.  It  was  about  motlier. 
[Correct  as  far  as  I  know.    Sister  Alice  will  nut  tell  yAv^t  it  was,  as  she 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  83 

promised  Hannah  not  to.  It  was  about  mother.  Sister  cannot  say  wli ether 
it  happened  three  times  or  not,  as  she  was  not  present  at  tlie  deatli  <:>f  Hannali, 
but  I  have  notes  of  every  word  Hannah  spoke  that  day.]  Mrs.  B.  :  Whom 
did  you  see  just  before  you  passed  out "?  F.  :  Mother.  [She  said  slie  saw 
Mary,  but  not  mother.]  P.  :  I  say  in  the  letter  to  my  sisters  Alice  and 
Bessie, — If  she  could  see  her  mother  in  spirit  she  would  come  back  and  tell 
you  of  her  experience  with  her  mother,  also  of  any  other  friends  that  I  may 
meet.  I  mention  my  brother  also,  the  church,  your  happiness  with  the 
doctor,  and  the  surroundings.  [Mixture  of  pronouns  due  to  Phinuit. — R.  H.] 
P.  :  Mr.  "E."  is  here.  He  says,  "What  is  this  all  about  ? "  R.  H.  : 
Tell  him.  P.  :  He  says  you  must  always  send  Phinuit  away  from  the  medium 
to  ask  and  then  come  straight  back  to  the  medium  and  tell  you.  [Tliis  is  the 
device  that  I  suggested  and  carried  out  long  before. — R.  H.]  [The  results  of 
this  sitting  were  submitted  to  Professor  James.  He  replied  :  "  All  this  is  not 
to  the  point.  The  sister's  letter,  as  I  remember  it,  contained  none  of  these 
statements."] 

Addcndnm.    {By  E.  H.) 

On  May  27th,  1891,  Dr.  Blodgett  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  Mrs. 
Blodgett  and  myself  accompanied  him,  but  Mrs.  Blodgett  remained  at  first  in 
the  adjoining  room.  Phinuit,  however  (on  behalf  of  "Bessie's  father"), 
insisted  upon  seeing  Mrs.  Blodgett,  and  then  shortly  afterwards  refused  to 
proceed  unless  Dr.  Blodgett  and  myself  left  the  room.  Hannah  purported  to 
be  present.  In  the  last  part  of  the  sitting  Phinuit  talked  with  Dr.  Blodgett 
alone.  My  notes  are  too  fragmentary  to  be  of  any  value,  but  the  main  point 
is  that  no  further  attempt  was  made  by  Phinuit  to  give  the  letter,  and 
apparently  not  the  slightest  reference  was  made  to  it  by  either  Phinuit  or 
any  of  the  sitters.  No  other  information  was  given  that  inclined  IMrs.  Blod- 
gett at  all  to  believe  that  her  sister  was  actually  "  comminiicating."  At  a 
sitting  on  May  28th,  1891,  Phinuit's  first  statement  (Mrs.  Piper  entranced  at 
12.10  p.m.)  was  :  "  Been  with  Bessie.  She's  been  writing,  a  few  minutes 
ago."    On  June  1st  Mrs.  Blodgett  writes  : — 

"  Phinuit  was  correct.  I  was  writing  my  notes  out  of  book  on  different 
papers." 

Two  days  later  (June  3rd)  Mrs.  Blodgett  sent  me  a  letter  to  Phinuit, 
Tvdiich  I  read  at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  on  June  15th.  This  occasioned 
tlie  following  statement  from  Pliinuit,  whicli  had  nothing  to  do  with  the 
letter  :— 

"  She's  been  reading  a  funny  book.  A  life  of  somebody.  She  called  on 
an  old  friend  of  Hannah's,  somebody  I  told  her  to  go  and  see.  Hannah  told 
her.    Mrs.  B.  has  a  friend  named  Severance." 

Mrs.  Blodgett  writes  on  June  17th  : — 

' '  Really  he  [Pliinuit]  is  doing  wonderfully  well  as  far  as  thouglit-trans- 
ference  goes,  but  positive  proof  that  it  is  not  Hannah.  Saturday  night 
[June  13th]  I  gave  a  talk  to  the  Young  Women's  Rooms  about  Helen  Gar- 
dener's new  book,  Is  this  yonr  Son,  my  Lord?  14th.  I  did  not  go  to  see  the 
friend  in  body,  but  I  know  my  mind  went,  and  I  wrote  him  the  letter  to 
ask  him  what  Phinuit  told  me  to  do  when  there.    You  will  recall  lie  said,  I 

84 

il/r.  R..  Hodgson. 

must  go  and  see  Mr.  L          and  tell  him  I  ^yas  so-ny  I  had  slighted  him. 

You  will  see  by  letter  enclosed  [dated  and  postmarked  June  loth,  and 

referring  to  Mrs.  B.'s  letter  of  June  14t]i. — R.  H.]  Mr  .L  did  not  see  me 

in  the  Senate.    That  was  my  mind.    Hannah  never  saw  Mr.  L  ,  nor,  to 

my  knowledge,  ever  heard  me  speak  of  him.    He  was  my  fi-iend  in  W  . 

This  is  quite  a  point.  I  also  know  Hannah  never  heard  of  'Severance.'  I 
wrote  him  three  lettei-s,  just  before  we  were  married,  as  doctor  had  seen  him 
and  bought  the  enclosed  jjicture  at  Onset.  I  said  on  the  14th  how  I  would 
love  to  write  him  again  now  we  were  married  and  see  if  he  would  know  it, 
or  if  Maria  would." 

11.    0.  F.  Wcuhworth,  31.  D.,  Jnm  15th,  1888. 

[Appointment  made  by  R.  H.    No  name  given.] 

[Notes  made  hy  R.  H.  during  sitting.] 

This  sitting  was  a  failure,  tliough  one  or  two  incidents  suggested  to  me 
that  the  ' '  c:  )nditions  "  of  success  wei'e  present  had  Phinuit  received  any 
assurance  at  the  beginning  that  he  was  not  confused.  Thus  there  seemed  to 
be  an  ap^jroximation  to  the  sitter's  name  in  tlie  first  specific  statement  made 
by  Phinuit:  "Got  a  lady  here  calling  Watson."  And  later  on  another 
attempt  was  made — JValsou  .  But  this  may  have  been  a  mere  coincidence, 
as  altogether  more  than  twenty  statements  and  names  were  offered,  almost 
all  of  which  were  wrong. 

12.  3Irs.  P.     Jnhj  11th,  1888. 
[Appointments  made  by  R.  H.    No  name  given.] 

Mrs.  P.  had  a  sitting  a  few  weeks  previously,  at  which  I  was  not  present, 
and  no  written  account  of  it  was  made  at  the  time.  Much  of  what  was  said 
by  Phinuit  at  this  first  sitting  appeared  to  Mrs.  P.  to  be  vague  and 
irrelevant,  but  her  father-in-law  was  described  and  alleged  to  be  very  ill, 
as  was  the  case.  There  was  an  approximation  made  to  the  name  P. ,  which 
was  not,  however,  correctly  given.  Among  other  names  mentioned,  to 
which  Mrs.  P.  could  attach  no  special  significance,  the  name  Sarah  was 
given  and  said  to  be  that  of  her  mother,  and  it  was  stated  that  she  died  from 
a  cancer.  Tliis  was  true,  ))ut  Mrs.  P.  does  not  attribute  much  importance 
to  this,  as  she  afterwards  heard  that  a  similar  statement  was  made  to  another 
sitter,  to  whom  it  did  not  apply. 

I  took  notes  during  the  sitting  of  July  11th,  at  which  the  father-in-law, 
in  the  meantime  deceased,  was  represented  as  appearing.  His  surname  was 
correctly  given.  So  also  was  the  surname  of  tlie  sitter's  mother,  but  the 
sitter  is  not  sure  that  she  did  not  mentioji  her  mother's  name  at  the  previous 
sitting.  In  addition,  eight  Christian  names  were  given,  of  wliich  five  (Sarah, 
Fanny,  Telly,  Helen,  Frank)  were  closely  connected  with  the  sitter.  The 
other  three  names  were  also  approximations.  John  and  Thornahan  were 
the  attemjjts  to  get  the  name  of  the  father-in-law,  Jonathan  ;  a  lady  relative 
was  mentioned  as  having  a  nickname  Tete,  and  Pete  would  have  been 
correct  ;  one  of  the  sitter's  five  brothers  is  named  Edgar,  and  Phinuit  spoke 
of  an  "Ed — something."    No  other  names  were  given  by  Phinuit.  Several 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

85 

irrelevant  and  incorrect  statements,  however,  were  made,  and  a  propliecy 
that  the  sitter  was  going  to  California  the  next  year  was  not  fuliilled.  In 
addition,  tlie  sitter  made  experiments  with  two  locks  of  hair. 

1.  Had  great  deal  of  sickness — disease.  Person  has  passed  out  of  the  body. 
Did  this  one  have  a  cancer  I  He  liad  disease  in  stomach.  Don't  you 
remember  the  sighs  he  used  to  make  '?  You've  got  them  mixed.  [All  wrong. 
The  hair  of  a  living  person, — a  lady.] 

2.  This  is  lady's  influence.  She  thought  everything  of  you.  I  want  to  say 
there's  a  misunderstanding  all  round  in  this  influence.  Weakness  across 
chest  and  right  round  the  heart.  [All  wroiig.  The  liair  of  my  father-in-law, 
Mr.  J.  P.,  deceased.] 

13.  Mi:  John  F.  Brown.     Jane  and  Odohet;  1888. 

The  following  accounts  are  by  Mr.  John  F.  Brown,  a  meraber  of  our 
Society.  Mr.  Brown  writes  to  me  on  February  20th,  1891,  that  he  is 
fully  convinced  that  Mrs.  Piper's  dealings  with  him  have  l^een  false  and 
fraudulent  throughout.  His  opinion,  I  believe,  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  pre- 
tends to  go  into  trance,  proceeds  by  guesswork,  questioning,  etc.,  and 
adds  such  information  as  she  has  been  al)le  to  obtain  ])y  secret  inquiry 
beforehand  concerning  the  sitters.  I  understand  that  he  attributes 
importance  to  the  details  of  all  his  visits  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  his 
accounts  are  therefore  given  in  full. 

Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  June  llth,  1888.    9.30  a.jfi. 

Tlie  bell  was  answered  by  a  voice  through  tlie  speaking-tube.  I  after- 
ward recognised  the  voice  as  Mrs.  Piper's.  I  said  1  had  an  appointment  and 
was  told  to  come  up.    Mrs.  Piper  met  me  at  the  door  upstairs. 

Without  much  delay  she  took  me  into  the  room  adjoining,  seated  me  in  a 
chair,  and  after  looking  the  door  between  the  rooms  and  closing  the  shutters 
sat  down  in  a  rocking-cliair  in  front  of  me.  Said  she  supposed  Mr.  Hodgson 
had  told  me  how  to  talk  to  her  when  in  the  trance,  about  asking  cjuestions 
and  answering  what  the  Doctor  said.  I  replied,  "Yes,  I  understand  I  can 
ask  any  questions  I  wish  to."  This  did  not  satisfy  her  ;  said  I  should  admit 
what  the  Doctor  told  me,  if  it  was  true  ;  that  I  should  talk  freely,  and  ansAver 
all  his  questions  ;  that  hy  so  doing  much  better  results  would  be  oljtained. 
Having  settled  this  matter,  whicli  slie  seemed  to  consider  of  the  greatest 
importance,  she  speedily  went  into  the  trance. 

Wlien  fully  under  control,  some  Frencliy  salutations  were  given  and  tlien 
the  Doctor  said,  "  Hallo  I  John,  I'm  pretty  well.  How  are  you  ?  "  I  said  I 
was  well  also  and  was  pleased  to  make  his  acquaintance.  Soon  he  spoke  my 
last  name,  getting  it  piecemeal  and  pronouncing  it  Bur-oun.  Had  some  difti- 
culty  witli  tlie  name,  said  it  over  a  number  of  times  and  a.sked  me  two  or 
three  times  what  I  called  it.  I  said  I  was  satisfied  with  what  he  called  it  and 
did  not  help  him  out.  Then  he  gave  my  middle  name  (Fenner),  but  did  not  get 
it  cpiite  right,  got  in  a  d — Fedner,  or  something  like  that,  and  seemed  to  think 
it  was  not  quite  riglit  and  asked  me  what  it  was.  He  kept  saying  it  over, 
trying  to  get  it  just  right,  and  kept  asking  me  wliat  I  called  it.  I  said,  "Let 
it  go  that  way,  that's  near  enough."    But  he  persisted,  and  finally,  thinking 

86 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

that  he  knew  ah-eady,  for  hu  came  as  near  it  as  he  possilily  coukl  and  miss, 
I  said,  "  It  is  Fenner."  "Yes,  yes,"  he  replied,  "Femier,  tlmt's  it,  Fenner.'' 
Then  he  spoke  aljout  my  chiklren,  said  I  had  two  pretty  chiklren.  I  asked  if 
they  were  boys  or  girls.  He  said  one  was  a  boy,  the  older  one  ;  the  younger 
he  seemed  to  be  in  d(jubt  about,  was  inclined  to  tliink  it  was  a  girl — asked 
nie  wliich  it  was.  I  said  that  was  for  him  to  tell.  He  seemed  a  little  pro- 
voked, and  said  lie  couldn't  tell  everything  and  that  I  must  answer  his. 
(juestions.  He  asked  me  two  or  three  times,  and  finally  said  in  a  very  decided 
manner  that  he  wouldn't  say  another  word  until  I  answered  the  question.  I 
tliought  for  a  moment  that  the  sitting  was  at  an  end  and  also  my  accpiaintance 
with  Dr.  Phinuit.  I  wasted  no  words,  however,  and  showed  no  irritation, 
but  very  quietly  told  him  to  tell  me  what  he  could  and  let  the  rest  go.  By 
this  time  he  had  about  concluded  (supjoosing  he  did  not  already  know,  and  I 
have  no  special  reason  for  thinking  that  he  did)  that  the  child  was  a  boy,  said 
it  looked  like  a  girl  (lie  had  already  sj^oken  of  it  as  a  baby)  but  that  it  might 
be  a  boy. 

There  was  something,  however,  that  looked  very  much  like  finessing.  I 
rode  to  Boston  on  my  wheel,  wearing  long  stockings  and  knee  breeches. 
Mrs.  Piper  said  she  took  it  I  dissipated  on  the  bicycle.  I  said.  Yes,  I  had 
been  riding,  and  some  remarks  were  made  about  bicycle  riding.  Dr.  Phinuit 
took  hold  (_)f  my  breeches  at  the  knee  and  asked  what  I  wore  those  for.  I 
said,  "I  must  wear  something."  "Yes,  but  what  for  you  wear  those?" 
"  They  look  pretty,  don't  they  V  "  Oh,  I  am  not  joking,  I  am  in  earnest. 
Why  don't  you  wear  the  long  ones  ? "  Then  I  tried  to  make  him  tell,  but  he 
would  not  and  said  no  more  about  it.  The  Doctor  did  not  give  up  trying  to 
pump  nie,  but,  liaving  resolved  beforehand  to  resist  all  such  attempts  as 
irregular  and  uncalled  for,  his  efforts  were  in  vain.  At  one  time  he  said  I 
must  be  frank  and  not  try  to  mislead  him,  that  I  could  put  him  on  the  wrong- 
track  if  I  wished.  I  assured  him  I  would  not  be  guilty  of  anything  of  that 
kind,  and  I  certainly  was  not. 

Again,  he  declared  he  was  going  to  thrash  me.  I  laughed  and  said  it 
took  considei'able  of  a  man  to  do  that.  He  said  he  could  do  it.  I  asked 
why  he  proposed  to  thrasli  me.  Instantly  came  the  answer,  sharp  and 
decided,  "Don't  you  say  [/;//(  to  me  any  more  ;  you  say,  Yes,  sir."  Then 
he  said  he  was  coming  to  see  me  at  my  house.  I  told  him  to  come  along, 
I  should  l^e  pleased  to  see  him,  and  I  wouldn't  thrash  him  either,  I  didn't 
thrash  spirits.    He  said  I  was  wise  not  to  try  it. 

He  gave  the  name  Edward  for  the  older  child,  which  is  altogether  wrong. 
The  name  of  the  younger  he  did  not  give.  The  medium  put  her  hand  on 
her  chest,  rubbing  it  up  and  down,  and  Phinuit  said  there  was  or  had  been 
something  the  matter  with  one  of  the  children.  I  asked  which  one.  Said 
he  thought  it  was  the  younger,  that  he  would  get  all  over  it  and  that  they 
v/ould  both  grow  up  and  be  strong  and  healthy.  Said  they  were  fine 
children  and  things  of  that  sort.  I  asked  if  there  were  any  more.  He 
said.  No.  Would  there  be  any  more  1  Said  he  seemed  to  see  another — 
a  girl — but  that  had  not  come  yet. 

By-and-liye  he  spoke  the  name  Fannie.  I  said,  "  Who  is  Fannie  1 "  At 
first  he  couldn't  tell,  but  finally  said  it  was  Edward's  mother.  He  called  me 
a  funny  fellow,  but  did  not  explain  in  what  way,  and  I  couldn't  get  it  out  of 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  87 

him,  "  Oh,  what  a  fine  dog  I  "  Said  it  was  mine,  and  then  asked  me  if  it  was 
mine.   I  didn't  say  whether  I  ever  owned  a  dog  or  not.   Said  dogs  liked  me, 
I  asked  if  folks  liked  me  as  well  as  dogs.  He  didn't  answer  tlie  question  very 
directly,  but  said  I  didn't  make  very  many  intimate  friends,  but  I  was  a  good 
man.    Spoke  of  the  girls  I  had  been  intimate  with  and  said  I  had  had  a  good 
many  "  escapades."    Gave  the  names  of  two  girls  that  I  had  thought  a  great 
deal  of.  One  was  Louie,  who  was  very  congenial.  We  were  very  fond  of  each 
other.    I  asked  why  I  did  not  marry  Louie.    The  answer  was,  "  Because 
you  were  crazy,  cranky."    Felt  of  the  top  of  my  head  and  said  I  had  lost  a 
good  deal  of  hair,  but  that  he  could  have  saved  it  seven  or  eight  years  ago. 
I  asked  how,  and  he  mentioned  some  remedy  which  I  do  not  remember,  and 
said  that  would  stop  it  from  coming  out  any  more.    Felt  of  my  fingers  and 
asked  if  I  did  not  come  near  losing  one  some  years  ago.    Felt  of  the  bones 
and  joints  as  if  trying  to  make  out  which  finger  it  was.    Asked  me  w  hich  it 
was  and  if  I  had  not  had  some  such  injury.    I  said  merely  that  I  had  had 
some  injury  to  my  fingers,  and  he  went  no  further.    Said  that  years  ago  I 
had  been  bathing  with  a  friend  who  came  near  being  drowned  ;  tried  to  give 
the  person's  name  and  asked  me  what  it  was.    I  said  I  used  to  go  bathing 
sometimes  and  asked  the  Doctor  the  name  of  tlie  person  to  whom  lie  refei'red. 
Then  he  gave  the  name  of  a  white-haired  gentleman  who  knew  me,  and  said 
this  gentleman  knew  the  name  of  the  friend  who  came  near  drowning. 
Several  other  names  were  given.    I  did  not  recognise  any  such  persons,  but 
did  not  say  whether  I  did  or  not.    He  told  me  I  was  going  to  make  a  change 
in  business  within  four  months.    I  asked  what  sort  of  a  change  it  would  be, 
but  could  not  find  out.    When  the  opportunity  presented  itself,  I  was  tO' 
take  it  without  hesitation — the  change  would  be  greatly  to  my  advantage. 
Said  I  had  been  making  some  investments  tliat  had  turned  out  well.  The 
Doctor  questioned  me  closely  about  this,  but  nothing  further  was  elicited. 

After  a  time  the  Doctor  said  he  was  going  away,  but  if  I  had  any  questions 
to  ask  I  could  do  so.  I  said  he  had  told  me  enough  for  once  and  asked  if  he 
would  come  and  see  me  again.  Yes,  he  would.  I  asked  if  he  would  see  my 
friends  in  the  spirit,  talk  with  them  and  tell  me  all  about  myself  and  family 
when  I  came  again.  Yes,  he  would.  "  Au  revoir."  "  Good-bye,"  and  the 
medium  twisted,  groaned  and  grated  her  teeth  just  as  she  did  when  going 
into  the  trance,  then  stared  about  wildly  and  appeared  to  be  coming  to  her- 
self. She  seemed  surprised  to  see  me  and  said,  "Are  you  here  ?  I  didn't 
know  you  were  here."  She  acted  bewildered  for  a  moment  and  in  answer  to 
my  question  said  she  felt  dizzy.  She  asked  if  the  sitting  had  been  satis- 
factory. I  replied  that  she  had  told  me  a  good  many  tilings,  but  that  I  had 
nothing  with  whicli  to  compare  it,  never  having  sat  before  v/ith  the  same 
kind  of  medium.  Said  she  thought  it  very  desirable  for  sitters  to  have  seen 
other  mediums,  and  that  she  would  like  to  know  if  there  wasn't  someone 
else  who  could  do  "  this  "  and  relieve  her. 

When  in  the  trance  Mrs.  Piper  talked  in  a  gruff,  masculine  voice,  very 
different  from  her  own,  and  the  Doctor's  identity  was  well  sustained 
throughout.  Everything  connected  with  the  trance  seemed  very  natural, 
excepting  her  surj^rise  and  bevrilderment  -when  coming  out.  It  seemed  to 
me  that  there  was  some  assumption  about  this,  but  it  may  have  been  just  as 
genuine  as  the  rest. 

.•88 

Mr.  R.  Hod(json. 

Second  call  oii,  Mrs.  riper,  Jane  12Ui,  1888.    9.30  c(.m. 

I  was  a  few  minutes  late,  having  let  tlie  car  I  wanted  pass  by  and  then 
having  to  wait  a  long  time  for  another.  I  touched  the  electric  knob  and  a 
voice  came  through  the  speaking  tube.  The  voice  I  recognised  immediately 
iis  Mrs.  Piper's.  I  said  :  "I  have  another  ajjpointment  with  you,  and  will 
come  up."  Hearing  nothing  more,  I  went  upstairs,  and  waited  at  the  door. 
No  one  came,  and  I  was  thinking  of  knocking  when  the  door  opened  and  the 
Swedish  servant-girl  let  mo  in.  It  was  just  ten  minutes  past  the  appointed 
time  when  I  sat  down  in  the  parlour.  After  waiting  five  minutes  or  more 
Mrs.  Pij^er  came  in.  I  said  "  Good  morning,"  and  she  asked  if  I  had  come 
for  a  sitting  for  that  hour.  I  said  I  had.  She  did  not  speak  as  though  I  had 
already  told  her  I  h;i,d  come  for  a  sitting,  but  acted  as  though  she  would  have 
me  think  she  had  liad  no  jjrevious  conversation  with  ]ne  that  day,  and  that  it 
■was  the  girl  who  had  answered  my  call.  She  seemed  to  be  in  no  hurry  what- 
ever, and  I  got  the  idea  that  she  had  no  engagement  for  the  hour  following. 

I  could  hear  a  noise  as  of  water  falling  upon  tin.  She  called  my  attention 
to  it  after  she  had  been  in  the  room  a  few  minutes  and  said  a  man  was 
coming  to  fix  the  faucet  in  the  bathroom,  that  the  water  had  been  running  all 
the  morning  and  made  her  nervous,  as  she  feared  an  overflow.  Said  she 
hoped  the  man  would  not  disturb  us.  She  went  out  to  look  at  the  running- 
water,  saying  she  was  afraid  it  would  overfiow,  and  it  was  9.50  when  we  went 
into  the  seance-room.  She  did  not  get  on  well,  the  noise  troubled  her,  said 
it  made  her  nervous.  She  went  out  again,  but  apparently  did  nothing  to 
deaden  the  sovnid,  though  a  sponge  or  cloth  would  have  stopped  it.  The 
noise  of  washing  dishes  also  disturbed  her,  and  she  left  the  room  again  to 
sjDeak  to  the  girl  and  see  that  the  door  into  the  kitchen  was  closed. 

By  this  time  it  must  have  been  about  ten  o'clock.  She  now  spoke  for  the 
first  time  of  another  sitter  who  was  coming  at  10.30,  a  business  man  who 
couldn't  afford  to  lose  any  time.  She  said  she  would  leave  a  note  for  him  ;  that 
she  sometimes  had  to  do  this  when  the  jirevious  sitter  was  late,  as  though 
trying  to  lay  the  blame  on  me.  She  put  a  note  on  the  sofa  in  the  parlour 
and  came  back  and  tried  again,  but  without  success.  Then  she  asked  me  if  I 
would  wait  and  let  her  try  first  with  the  gentleman  who  was  coming,  saying 
if  she  could  succeed  with  him  she  probably  could  with  me  afterwards.  I 
agreed  to  this,  and  we  went  into  the  parlour,  the  note  being  removed.  She 
didn't  stop  in  the  ]>,irlour,  ljut  went  off  through  tlie  hall  and  talked  with  the 
girl,  leaving  tlie  hall  do(.)r  open.  At  first  I  could  not  heai'  what  was  said,  then 
Mrs.  Piper  spoke  up  (piite  loudly,  so  I  eould  hear  eveiy  word.  It's  some- 
thing about  the  faucet.  The  leather  is  worn  (jr  something  like  that.  Soon 
the  gentleman  came,  and  she  explained  tlie  situation  and  took  him  into  the 
seance-room,  leaving  me  in  the  parlour.  She  came  back  and  said  if  she 
succeeded  in  going  into  the  trance  she  would  ask  Phinuit  what  the  trouble 
was  before,  if  it  was  anything  about  me,  though  she  was  sure  that  was  not  it. 

She  had  no  better  success  than  before  and  soon  gave  it  up,  the  gentleman 
leaving  immediately.  She  asked  if  I  wished  to  nr.ike  another  engagement. 
I  said  I  could  not  then,  and  went  away. 

Mr.  Brown  writes  on  Juno  20th,  1888  :— 
I  wrote  to  my  wife,  who  is  away  (without  giving  any  details  of  my 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance. 

89 

sittings),  and  asked  her  to  send  nie  a  statement  of  what  Mrs.  Piper  told  lier 
about  ourselves  and  the  boys,  in  order  to  compare  it  with  what  I  got.  In 
reply  she  sends  me  a  full  account  of  her  sitting,  which  she  says  was  already 
nearly  written.  This  I  include  also.  [I  do  not  know  whether  I  received  this 
or  not,  but  I  cannot  find  it  among  my  documents. — R.  H.] 

In  regard  to  Mrs.  Piper,  I  have  the  secret  of  her  jxiwer.  That  is,  I  have 
a  good  deal  of  confidence  tliat  such  is  the  case,  and  am  anxious  to  have  my 
theory  tested  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  either  proved  true  or  shown  to  be 
false.  I  think  she  proceeds  by  guesswork,  in  whicli  she  is  materially  assisted 
by  the  conversation  of  the  sitters,  this  conversation  being  to  a  considerable 
extent  guided  and  controlled  by  herself.  So  far  as  pure  guesswork  goes,  do 
not  think  she  shows  any  great  skill,  that  there  are  others  wlio  can  do  this 
much  more  scientifically  and  successfully,  and  that  her  skill  lies  chiefly  in 
getting  the  help  of  the  sitter,  who  points  out  the  v/ay  she  is  to  travel  in  a 
manner  analogous  to  that  in  whicli  Bishop's  subjects  lead  him  to  the  hidden 
articles. 

When  Mrs.  Brown  told  me  about  her  sitting  I  resolved  that  when  I 
sat  the  Doctor  should  get  no  information  from  me  as  to  the  truth  or 
falsity  of  what  he  told  me.  This  I  pretty  consistently  carried  out,  though  I 
asked  many  questions  and  was  as  frank  and  open  as  possible.  Now,  what 
was  the  result  ?  Leaving  out  of  account  such  statements  as  these  :  that  dogs 
liked  ine,  that  I  don't  make  as  many  intimate  friends  as  some,  but  am  a 
good  fellow  all  the  same,  and  that  one  of  my  boys  has  had  a  Ijad  cold,  she 
told  me  absolutely  nothing  that  is  true  except  the  following  facts  :  My  name 
in  full,  John  Fenner  Brown  ;  my  wife's  first  name,  Fannie  ;  that  we  have 
two  children,  the  elder  being  a  boy. 

You  will  remember  that  when  we  were  in  your  room,  May  9th  (it  is 
referred  to  in  Mrs.  B.'s  report),  Mrs.  Piper  came  in.  The  sitting  vfith 
Mrs.  Brown  had  just  taken  place.  Mrs.  Piper  would  naturally  guess  who  I 
was,  and  the  fact  of  finding  us  there  would  make  her  exiject  a  call  from  me 
and  be  on  the  look  out  for  it.  Referring  to  Mrs.  B.'s  report,  we  find  Dr. 
Phinuit's  knowledge  at  the  conclusion  of  this  sitting,  and  in  relation  to  the 
above-mentioned  facts,  to  be  as  follows  :  My  name  in  full,  John  Fenner 
Brown  ;  my  wife's  first  name  Fannie  ;  that  we  have  two  boys  ;  the  name  of 
the  younger — the  correspondence  is  startling. 

What  I  wrote  to  my  wife  was  that  I  had  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper 
and  that  she  had  told  me  nothing  except  what  she  already  knew  or  could 
guess.  This  can  be  verified,  for  Mrs.  B.  will  have  the  letter.  I  also  said  I 
was  going  to  give  the  medium  a  surprise  party  the  following  morning  (June 
12th),  and  that  I  would  not  be  received  with  open  arms.  It  certainly  turned 
•jut  as  I  anticipated.  Quelling  all  suspicion  about  the  leaky  faucet,  the  fact 
remains  that  Mrs.  Piper  wanted  to  get  rid  of  me.    She  showed  it  just  as 

plainly  as  did  the  slate-writer.    In  fact,  her  manner  tallied  exactly  v/ith 

that  of  the  other  medians  I  have  met.  They  all  do  fairly  well  for  me  at  first 
(doesn't  this  go  to  show  that  there  is  no  trouble  with  me  ?)  and  then  their 
jjowers  are  on  the  wane. 

Sitting  jvith  31rs.  Piper,  Oct<iler  20th,  1888. 
I  rang  the  bell  at  9.25.    Mrs.  Piper,  I  am  quite  sure,  answered  the  call. 

90 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

I  said,  "  I  had  an  appointiuont  for  9.30,"  and  was  told  to  come  up.  A  girl 
met  me  at  the  door  upstair.?.  Mrs.  P.  came  in  almost  immediately.  Her 
greeting  was  by  no  means  cordial,  and  she  seemed  to  be  ill  at  ease,  though, 
trying  hard,  and  with  pretty  good  success,  to  conceal  her  embarrassment.. 
She  asked  if  Mr.  Hodgson  made  the  appointment  for  me,  and  if  I  had  not 
had  one  sitting  and  failed  a  second  time  owing  to  her  nervousness.  I 
answered  "Yes"  to  these  questions,  which  were  evidently  not  asked  for  the 
XJurpose  of  getting  information. 

Soon  she  commenced  talking  about  peojile  who  mistrusted  her,  who 
had  no  faith  in  the  manifestations.  Said  they  made  her  nervous,  and  she 
wished  they  wouldn't  come  ;  that  slie  was  foolish  to  mind  it  so,  but  she 
couldn't  help  it,  slie  was  so  very  sensitive.  She  talked  in  tliis  strain  for  some 
time,  there  being  nothing  personal  in  her  remarks,  except  by  inference.  At 
length  I  said:  "You  don't  think  I  mistrust  you,  do  you?"  "Yes,"  she 
re^jlied,  "  I  know  you  do."  Then  she  spoke  freely,  said  I  had  no  faith  in  her 
or  the  manifestations,  and  that  I  thouglit  slie  did  not  wish  to  sit  for  me.  She 
spoke  of  the  leaking  faucet  mentioned  in  my  last  report.  Said  that  when  slie 
told  me  of  it  I  showed  by  niy  looks  that  I  did  not  believe  it.  I  said  I  did 
not  doubt  the  faucet  leaked.  "  Yes,"  she  replied,  "but  you  thought  it  was 
a  pretext  to  get  rid  of  you."  I  could  not  deny  this,  nor  would  it  have  been 
of  any  use  to  have  done  so,  for  she  evidently  knew  how  I  felt  about  it.  She 
said  it  was  a  misfortune  to  be  a  medium,  and  spoke  in  general  terms  of  the 
insults  to  which  slie  had  been  subjected.  It  did  not  occur  to  me  to  ask  if 
she  thought  I  had  misused  her  in  any  way,  but  I  did  ask  if  she  thought 
I  had  attempted  to  mislead  Dr.  Phinuit.  She  did  not  give  a  direct 
answer,  but  appeared  to  think  that  perhaps  I  had  done  so.  I  assured 
lier  that  such  was  not  the  case,  and  that  I  did  not  think  there  was  anything 
in  my  attitude  that  ought  to  ]jrevent  a  satisfactory  sitting.  Ever  since  she 
first  spoke  of  i:)eople  who  mistrusted  lier  she  had  been  in  a  very  nervous  and 
excited  condition.  But  slie  gradually  became  calmer.  She  said  she  was 
afraid  I  W(.)uld  nut  like  to  have  her  talk  so  freely,  but  she  was  so  very  sensi- 
tive she  couldn't  stand  it,  and  must  speak  out  to  relieve  herself.  I  told  her 
that  was  right,  she  couldn't  talk  any  too  freely  to  suit  me. 

About  9.55  she  announced  that  she  was  ready,  acting  as  thougli  she  hated 
to  sit,  but  as  though  for  some  reason,  not  altogether  apparent,  she  must  do 
so,  and  was  resigned  to  the  inevitable.  She  took  my  hands  pretty  soon  after 
we  were  seated,  and  almost  immediately  I  became  aware  that  she  was  going 
into  the  trance.  Her  nervousness  seemed  to  be  all  gone,  and  it  took  but  a 
very  short  time. 

Dr.  Phinuit  called  me  by  n:xme,  John,  and  said  he  had  talked  with  my 
friends  who  had  passed  over  and  had  learned  a  good  deal  about  me.  Three 
or  four  of  my  friends  were  present — a  grandfather,  a  brother,  and  an  uncle. 
The  name  Edward  was  given  (see  account  of  first  sitting)  and  I  was  asked  if 
that  was  tlie  name  of  the  brother.  I  said,  Not  exactly.  This  was  as  near  as 
the  Doctor  could  get  it,  and  he  asked  me  what  the  name  was.  I  said,  Edgar. 
Then  Phinuit  saw  an  elderly  man  witli  "these"  (stroking  my  beard)  on  his 
face.  He  had  trouble  with  his  stomach,  had  dyspepsia.  [True.]  I  asked 
who  he  was.  P.  :  My  father.  B.  :  Living  or  dead  ?  P.  :  Living.  B.  :  What 
is  his  middle  name  ?    The  Doct(.)r  could  not  tell.    I  was  told  to  ask  questions 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

91 

if  I  wished  to,  and  I  said:  "Tell  me  about  my  brothers  and  sistei's,  if  I 
have  any,"  and  intimating  more  by  my  tones  than  by  what  was  said,  that  I 
had  brothers  but  no  sisters.  (This  I  did  inadvertently.  Throughout  tli& 
sitting  I  answered  all  the  Doctor's  questions  and  asked  a  good  many  myself,, 
but  was  in  general  careful  not  to  make  my  questions  leading,  or  no  more  so 
than  could  be  helped.)  Phinuit  laughed  and  said  he  wasn't  going  to  tell  m& 
about  what  I  hadn't,  but  about  what  I  had.  And  I  said,  "Tell  me  about  my 
brothers,  then."  He  replied  that  there  were  five  of  us,  four  living  and  one 
dead,  which  is  correct.  I  had  already  in  eflect  admitted  that  I  had  brothers 
and  a  brother  not  living,  but,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  this  is  all  tliat  could  b& 
gathered  from  what  I  had  said. 

The  medium  rubbed  her  hands  over  mine,  felt  of  my  fingers,  and  then  the 
Doctor  said  he  saw  wheels,  wheels  all  over  me.  I  waited  a  moment  to  see 
what  was  coming,  but  as  usual  during  this  sitting  nothing  came  until  I  asked 
for  it.  I  said,  "  Wliat  kind  of  wheels  ?  "  And  then,  in  a  moment :  "  Large 
ones  or  small  ones  ?  "  The  answer  was  :  "  Oh,  big  ones,  great  big  ones,  with 
crooked  things  in  tliem.  What  you  call  them  ?  S^Dokes?"  I  asked  what  they 
were  used  for.  The  Doctor  said  for  machinery,  but  didn't  seem  to  know  for 
what  kind  of  machinery  until  I  asked  the  direct  question,  and  then  he  said, 
hesitatingly  at  fir.st.  then  with  confidence,  "Steam  engines."  Then  lie  saw  an 
office  where  writing  was  being  done ;  the  elderly  man  was  there  and  I  was 
there.  Business  was  to  be  good  for  the  next  year  and  I  need  not  worry  about 
that  account  tliat  had  been  ti-oubling  me — that  would  come  out  all  right.  Thc^ 
names  Fannie  and  Mira  (Meera)  (see  Mrs.  B.'s  report  of  her  sitting)  were 
given.  Fannie  was  the  mother  of  my  boys.  Tliere  was  some  difficulty  in 
finding  out  who  Mira  was,  and  it  was  finally  given  up  after  some  apparent 
guesses  had  been  made. 

I  was  told  to  ask  questions  if  I  wished,  and  I  said,  ' '  Who  is  Horace 
Brown?"  The  answer  came  immediately,  "He  is  your  uncle" — the  uncle 
who  was  there,  and  whose  presence  I  had  forgotten  till  thus  reminded  of  it. 
I  said,  "  How  about  his  son  ?"  What  followed  I  consider  quite  interesting 
and  remarkable,  though  by  no  means  a  good  test  of  the  alleged  supernormal 
power.  So  far  as  I  am  aware  the  medium  knew  nothing  about  Horace  Brown 
or  his  son,  certainly  they  had  never  been  mentioned  by  me.  My  question 
would  aflbrd  a  professional  guesser  the  opportunity  to  get  in  some  pretty 
good  work,  but  there  was  no  appearance  of  guesswork.  Nothing  was  said  tO' 
draw  me  out  in  the  slightest  degree — unless  it  was  to  make  me  ask  questions. 
The  replies  were  not  given  in  a  hesitating  and  half-questioning  tone,  so  that 
I  could  deny  or  correct,  or  the  speaker  readily  change  them  if  occasion 
required  ;  they  were  plumped  out  in  the  most  positive  and  decided  manner, 
and,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  with  but  one  partial  exception,  were 
exactly  right. 

My  last  question  was  answered  like  this:  "Oh,  he's  alive."  Then,  without 
anything  being  said  by  me,  it  was  added  that  he  left  home  some  time  ago. 
Afterwards  it  was  said  a  good  many  years  ago,  though  this  may  have  come 
from  me  ;  that  he  had  been  about  a  good  deal  and  had  been  at  sea.  This  also 
(and  what  follows,  unless  otherwise  stated)  without  help  from  me.  That  when 
he  left  home  he  was  single,  but  now  was  married  and  living  in  Southern 
California.    I  asked  why  he  left  home.    Because  he  was  uneasy  and  of  a 

92 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson, 

roving  disposition.  Why  didn't  lie  write  to  his  folks  ?  There  was  no 
particular  reason  ;  it  never  occurred  to  him  to  do  so.  Phinuit  said  he 
couldn't  tell  just  where  in  Southern  California  he  was  (this  without 
questioning  by  me),  but  that  he  could  find  out.  I  told  him  to  do  so.  Said 
he  couldn't  theia,  I  would  have  to  come  again  for  that.  (Finessing  ?)  He 
gave  the  name  of  the  son  as  Charles  (in  reply  to  my  (juestion)  and  said  I 
would  hear  from  him  soon,  within  a  year,  I  think.  The  best  way  to  get  a 
good  sitting,  Phinuit  said,  was  to  have  him  talk  with  my  departed  friends 
and  then  see  me  within  three  or  four  days. 

There  was  nothing  further  of  interest,  nor  wliich  I  can  recall.  Phinuit 
said  if  I  had  anything  more  to  ask  about  I  must  do  it  soon,  Init  I  tuld  him 
there  was  nothing  more,  bade  him  good-bye,  and  he  took  his  depaiture. 
When  the  medium  was  coming  to,  she  saw  snakes  on  my  hands  and  kindly 
pulled  them  off.  She  complained  of  being  pricked  on  the  hand,  said,  "Don't 
prick  me  so,"  or  something  like  that,  and  after  she  was  entirely  herself  asked 
me  two  or  three  times  if  I  had  pricked  her.  I  assured  her  that  I  had  not. 
She  asked  if  I  got  anything,  and  I  told  her  she  did  very  well,  much  better 
than  she  did  the  first  t'nm.  This  seemed  to  please  her  greatly.  As  I  was 
going  out,  I  said,  "You  have  done  so  well  to-day,  if  I  should  come  again,  you 
v/ouldn't  feel  towards  me  as  you  have  this  time,  would  you  ?  "  She  shrugged 
her  shoulders,  said,  "I  don't  know,"  and  mumbled  something  further  which  I 
<;ouId  not  catch. 

John  F.  Brown. 

14.  Mr.  "()."    December  2dth,  1888. 

This  sitting  was  a  failure.  At  the  close  of  it  Phinuit  said  that  he  thought 
he  had  been  getting  the  influence  of  the  previous  sitter,  and  was  anxious  to 
try  another  sitting.  We  arranged  for  another  sitting  for  the  following  day, 
but  Mrs.  Piper's  illness  then  prevented  our  having  it,  and  Mr.  "Q."  was 
unable  to  stay  in  Boston  any  longer.  Mr.  "Q. '  writes  on  September  11th, 
1890. — "I  return  the  notes  of  the  conversation  with  Mrs.  Piper.  At  the 
time  of  the  sitting  my  general  iniiDression  Avas  unfavourable  ;  the  answers. 
At  any  rate,  were  irrelevant  and  inaccurate  in  everything  except  as  to  those 
which  might  have  been  inferences  from  my  personal  appearance." 

15.    3Ir.  Boherhoii  Jame^i.    Murdi  Wi,  1889. 

5,  Boylston-place,  Marclt  Gtli,,  1889.  1p.m. 

Mr.  Robertson  James  has  just  called  here  on  return  from  a  sitting  with 
]Mrs.  P.,  during  which  he  was  informed  by  Mrs.  P. — entranced — that  "Aunt 
Kate"  had  died  about  2  or  2.30  in  the  morning.  Aunt  Kate  was  also 
referred  to  as  Mrs.  Walsh. 

Mrs.  Walsh  has  been  ill  for  some  time  and  has  Ijeen  expected  during  the 
last  few  days  to  die  at  any  hour.  This  is  written  before  any  desj^atch  has 
been  received  informing  of  the  death,  in  presence  of  the  following  : — 

Richard  Hodgson. 
Wm.  James. 
Robertson  James. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

93 

On  reaching  home  an  hour  later  I  found  a  telegram  as  follows  : — "  Aunt 
Kate  passed  away  a  few  minutes  after  midnight. — E.  R.  Walsh." 

(Signed)  Wm.  James. 

Mrs.  William  James,  wlio,  accompanied  Mr.  Robertson  James  to  the 
sitting  on  March  6tli,  writes  as  follows  : — 

18,  Garden -street,  Cambridge,  March  28th,  1889. 
Concerning  the  sitting  mentioned  above  on  March  6th,  I  may  add  that 
the  "control"  said,  when  mentioning  that  Aunt  K.ite  had  died,  that  1 
would  tind  "  a  letter  or  telegram  "  when  I  got  home,  saying  she  was  gone. 

Alice  H.  James. 

Jiihi,  1890. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  add  that  early  at  this  sitting  I  inquired,  "  How 
is  Aunt  Kate  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  She  is  poorly."  This  reply  disappointed 
me,  from  its  baldne-ss.  Nothing  more  was  said  about  Aunt  Kate  till  towards 
the  close  of  the  sitting,  when  I  again  said,  "  Can  you  tell  me  nothing  more 
about  Aunt  Kate  1  "  The  medium  suddenly  threw  back  her  head  and  said 
in  a  startled  way,  "  Why,  Aunt  Kate's  here.  All  around  me  I  hear  voices 
saying,  '  Aunt  Kate  has  come. '  "  Then  followed  the  announcement  that 
she  had  died  very  early  that  morning,  and  on  being  pres.sed  to  give  the  time, 
shortly  after  two  was  named. 

A.  H.  J. 

16.  B.  Hodgson.    November  7th,  1889. 
[From  a  letter  written  to  Professor  W.  James  on  the  day  of  tlie  sitting.] 

Mrs.  D.  and  I  had  sitting  to-day  at  Arlington  Heights,  and  the  usurpa- 
tion by  "  Kate  Walsh  "  was  extraordinaiy.  She  (Mrs.  PiiJer)  had  got  hold 
of  my  hands,  and  I  liad  to  make  a  few  fragmentary  notes  afterwards  of  the 
remarks,  themselves  fragmentary,  wliich  she  made.  The  personality  seemed 
very  intense,  and  .spoke  in  effortful  whispers. 

"William — William  —  God  bless  you."  (Who  are  you?)  —  "Kate  — 
Walsh  " — (I  know  you.)  "  Help  me — help  me —  "  [Taking  my  right  hand 
with  her  right,  and  passing  it  to  her  left  and  making  me  take  hold  of  her 
left  hand.]  "  That  hand's  dead — dead — this  one's  alive  "  [i.e.,  the  right] — 
"  help  me."  The  left  hand  appeared  to  be  at  a  decidedly  lower  temperatvu^e 
than  the  right.  It  was  cooler  than  either  of  my  hands,  while  the  right  liand 
was  warmer  than  either  of  my  hands. 

"  I'm  alive — I'm  alive — Albert's  coming  over  soon.  He  can't  stay — poor 
boy — poor  boy — Albert — Albert — Alfred — Albert — I  know  you — Alice — ■ 
Alice — William — Alice — "  (Yes,  I  know.  I'll  tell  them.  You  remember 
me.  I  stayed  with  you  in  New  York.)  "  Yes — I  know.  But,  oli,  I  can't 
remember.  I'm  so  cold — I'm  so  cold.  Gh,  lielp  me — help  me  " — [making 
tremulous  movements  of  hands].  (I  know.  I'll  tell  tliem.  You  remember 
me;  my  name's  Hodgson.)  "Yes.  Mr.  Hudgson.  Where  are  the  girls? 
Yes.  You  had  fish  for  breakfast  on  the  second  day,  didn't  you  ?  "  (I  don't 
remember  very  well.)  "And  the  tea — who  was  it  spilt  the  cup  of  tea  ?  Was 
it  you  or  William  1"  [I  think  I  remember  something  about  the  tea,  but  not 
very  clearly.]    "  You  were  in  the  corner  room — bedroom — upstairs.  Were 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

you  cold  ?  Then  there  was  some  lilaiicmange — you  didn't  like  that.  No. 
It  was  cream — Bavarian  cream.  Albert — poor  boy  ;  he's  coming  soon. 
William  " — [s(jmething  about  arranging  tlie  property].  "  William — God 
Hess  him." 

The  above  Avas  much  less  tlian  was  really  said.  But  that  was  the  sort  of 
"thing,  and  nothing  a  la  mode  Phinuit  at  all.  It  was  the  most  strikingly 
personal  thing  I  have  seen.  I  recollect  having  fish  for  some  meal,  and  recall 
that  some  remarks  were  made  about  it  at  the  time.  I  recall  very  clearly  that 
Mrs.  Walsh  made  tea  more  than  once  for  my  special  benefit,  and  I  seem  to 
remember  something  about  the  spilling  of  a  cup  of  tea,  but  cannot  be  sure. 
I  don't  know  whether  my  rooni  was  called  corner  or  not.  It  was  an  end 
Toom,  but  was  in  front  of  the  house.  There  was  a  little  stumbling  over  the 
name,  which  appeared  to  be  Albert.  I  don't  recall  anything  about  the 
blancmange  or  cream  stuft',  but  I  have  little  taste  for  that  kind  of  dish. 

Co)i,cerning  sitting  of  November  *ith,oiul  '■^  Kate  WahJi,"  Control. 

Professor  James  says,  in  letter  of  Novemlier  10th,  1889  : — 

"The  'Kate  Walsh'  freak  is  very  interesting.  The  first  mention  of  lier 
by  Phinuit  was  when  she  was  living,  three  ye;irs  or  more  ago,  when  slie  had 
written  to  my  wife  imploring  her  not  to  sit  for  development.  Phinuit  knew 
this  in  some  incomprehensible  way.  A  year  later  [in  a  sitting]  with  Margaret 
Gibbens  [sister  of  Mrs.  James],  I  present,  Phinuit  alluded  jocosely  to  this 
fear  of  hers  again,  and  made  some  derisive  remarks  about  her  unhappy 
marriage,  calling  her  an  '  old  crank,'  &c.  Her  death  was  announced  last 
spring,  as  you  remember.  In  September,  sitting  with  me  and  my  wife,  Mrs. 
Piper  wa3  suddenly  '  controlled '  by  her  spirit,  who  spoke  directly  with 
much  imjjressiveness  of  manner,  and  great  similarity  of  temf)erament  to 
herself.  Platitudes.  She  said  Henry  Wyckoft'  had  exjjerienced  a  change, 
and  that  Albert  was  coming  over  soon  ;  nothing  definite  about  either.  Queer 
business  I  " 

[From  Miss  E.  R.  Walsh.] 

2.58,  Fourth  Avenue,  December  1st,  1889. 

My  Dear  William, — In  reply  to  the  questions  you  ask  apropos  of  Mr. 
Hodgson's  "sitting": 

Poor  Aunt  Kate's  rigid  side  was  the  one  affected  by  the  paralysis.  She 
bad  the  use  of  her  left  hand  and  arm  until  near  the  end.  I  have  no  recol- 
lection of  hearing  of  any  such  incidents  as  the  "spilling  of  tea,"  &c.  ;  but  I 
thought  if  anything  of  the  kind  had  occurred,  Margaret,  in  Forty-fourth- 
street,  would  be  likely  to  remember  it,  so,  when  I  was  there  to-day  to  ask 
after  Cousin  H.  [Henry  Wyckoff],  I  questioned  M.,  but  with  absolutely  no 
confirmatory  result. 

The  partial  coincidence  of  tlie  following  facts  with  the  statements  made 
to  you  and  your  wife  comes  a  little  nearer  to  the  mark.  The  last  week  in 
August  Cousin  Henry  did  have  a  very  severe  convulsion,  lasting  many 
hours,  from  wliich  the  doctors  thought  he  could  hardly  rally.  An  hour 
before,  one  of  the  nurses,  in  helping  move  him,  knocked  under  accident- 
ally the  folding  support  on  one  side  of  the  cot  on  which  he  lay,  and  the 
poor  man  slipped  almost  to  the  floor.    He  did  not  really  fall,  and  was  not 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

95 

at  all  injured,  but  the  nervous  sliock  brought  on  the  convulsion.  Wonderful 
to  say,  he  cauie  out  of  it  entirely,  and  for  several  days  after  his  brain  seemed 
much  more  active  ;  he  made  constant  and  excited  efforts  to  speak,  and  it 
seemed  as  though  some  great  change  might  take  place  in  his  condition. 
This  happened  in  Mrs.  GrifStt's  stay  with  him.  By  the  time  we  came  to 
Forty-fourth-street,  in  September,  he  Iiad  subsided  to  a  great  extent,  and 
then,  in  a  week  or  two  more,  began  a  gradual  failure,  which  has  been  going 
on  by  the  slowest  degrees  ever  since.  Now  he  can't  even  lift  what  they  call 
Lis  "good  hand"  outside  the  bed  covering  without  help.  They  think, 
however,  he  may  live  months  as  he  is.  What  a  death  in  life  !  Poor  man,  to 
liave  such  an  end  to  liis  harmless  life.  Again,  Albert  did  intermit  his  visits 
for  seven  weeks  or  more,  from  the  middle  of  August  to  early  in  October, 
being  detained  at  home  by  a  severe  attack  of  bronchitis,  and  when  he  first 
reappeared  one  of  the  nurses  said  he  looked  more  like  dying  than  his 
uncle.  Since  then,  however,  he  has  (piite  recovered,  and  starts  for 
Oalifornia  on  the  18th. 

Elizabeth  Robertson  Walsh. 

17.  Fniidan.  Veith.     Septeinher  22/w/,  1889. 

This  sitting  was  held  at  the  summer  residence  of  Professor  James 
in  the  White  Mountains,  Fraulein  Veith  being  a  governess  in  the 
family  of  Professor  James,  and  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  several  days  in  the 
house.  Miss  Gibbsas  and  R.  Hodgson  were  also  present  at  the  sitting, 
the  latter  taking  notes. 

Phinuit  wrongly  mentioned  the  sitter's  father  as  being  "in  sjjirit."  To 
the  sitter's  inquiry  about  her  sisters  he  gave  the  names  Mary  [coi-rect]  and 
Marna  [Martha  ?],  and  said  that  there  were  two  otliers  [correct],  who  were 
.afterwards  named  as  Edith  and  Janet  [instead  of  Ida  and  Anna],  The 
name  Edith  was  written  as  tliat  of  a  sister  who  died,  and  the  tliroat  was 
indicated  as  cause  of  death.  Ida  died  of  croup.  She  was  said  to  have  a 
brother  in  spirit,  afterwards  that  Frith  was  brother,  then  that  she  had  two 
larothers,  the  second  one  also  dead.  She  had  two  brothers  deceased  named 
Fritz  and  Julius.  Later  on  the  name  Juli — Julus  was  given  without  any 
further  statement  about  it.  Some  reference  was  made  to  a  "  father's 
brother,"  as  an  old  gentleman  who  left  some  property  unsettled,  and  who 
had  a  son,  and  afterwards  to  an  uncle  Charles.  The  statement  made  about 
the  "  father's  brother  "  would  have  fitted  an  intimate  friend  of  the  sitter's 
father,  named  Karl.  J oseph  was  correctly  described  as  uncle,  and  ' '  full  of 
fun."  The  name  Katrine,  given  by  Phinuit  early  in  the  sitting,  was  later 
on  said  to  be  Adeline,  "  in  the  body  "  and  "  across  the  water."  The  sitter 
bad  a  special  friend  named  Adelheid,  who  was  much  in  the  house  in 
Germany.  The  only  other  name  given  was  Emmeline,  the  sitter's  name 
being  Emilie.  Phinuit  mide  further  two  or  three  mistakes  about  incidents, 
and  seemed  much  confused  by  the  nxmss,  saying  that  the  sitter's  friends 
were  talking  German  to  him,  and  he  could  not  understand  them.  Following 
the  sitter's  remark  that  she  had  "a  sore  eye,"  Phinuit  said,  "There's  a 

90 

Mr.  11.  Hodgson. 

little  poison  there.  Something  stung  you  there."  This  circumstance  was- 
known  previously  to  Mrs.  Piper. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  sitting  Professor  James  comes  in  behind  Mrs. 
P.  and  says,  "Mrs.  Piper,  raise  your  left  arm."  Repeated.  "  Raise  your 
right  arm,"  &c.,  &c.  Professor  James  then  seizes  the  right  arm  of  Mrs.  P. 
and  moves  it  slightly,  with  effect  that  Dr.  P.  "calls  after  the  toucher,"' 
saying,  "Who  the  devil  is  it  touching  me  ?  " 

18.    Mr.  "  A.  r.,"  Bodon. 
To  Professor  W.  James. 

June  13th,  1886. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  have  tliis  evening  received  your  favour  dated  the 
11th. 

I  have  made  only  two  visits  to  Mrs.  Piper.  I  have  had  two  other 
appointments,  hut  in  tlie  one  case  I  v/as  too  ill  to  attend,  and  in  the  other 
tlie  weather  was  rainy,  and  therefore  "  tlie  c auditions"  (whatever  that  may 
signify)  were  unfavourable. 

At  the  first  interview  several  remarkable  phenomena  occurred. 
Although  I  was  introduced  by  another  name,  my  true  name  was  early 
given  and  some  incidents  of  my  life  stated,  wliich  by  no  conceivable  way 
c  juld  have  been  known  to  the  medium,  even  if  she  had  known  who  I  was. 
The  persons  seeking  communication  with  me  were  described  by  name  and 
by  person,  with  much  particularity,  and  the  inquiries  made  were  such  as. 
they  would  have  made  if  in  consciovis  comniunicaticm  with  me.  I  was  told 
that  I  was  about  to  make  a  journey  to  a  distant  part  of  the  country,  which  I 
had  no  intention  to  make,  and  wliich,  indeed,  had  never  been  in  my 
mind,  but  whicli  soon  afterwards  it  became  necessary  for  me  to  make,  and 
I  did  make  it.  One  thing  j^roininent  at  this  interview  and  very  unusual, 
s  _)  far  as  I  know,  was  the  concurrent  descrijjtions  of  persons  in  life  and  in 
tlie  otlier  world  and  their  relations  t(3  each  otlier.  For  example  :  It  was- 
Slid  to  me  that  tliere  was  an  elderly  gentleman  in  the  si^ii'it-world,  who- 
was  very  desirous  of  speaking  with  me,  and  a  full  description  of  his  person, 
and  of  his  occupation,  while  in  this  life,  was  given,  also  a  like  description 
of  an  elderly  lady,  as  to  her  person,  and  what  slie  was  at  that  moment 
doing.  After  a  moment  it  was  said  that  the  lady  is  in  tlie  Hesh,  and  that 
the  gentleman  was  her  husband,  and  in  the  sinrit-world,  and  tlitit  he 
v.'ished  me  to  give  his  love  to  lier.  A  moment  later  I  was  told  tliat  I  am 
his  son-in-law,  which  is  correct,  as  all  of  the  other  circumstances  were. 
At  this  first  intei'view  I  do  not  remember  that  there  was  one  thing 
incorrect,  but  some  statements  were  more  vague  than  others,  and  this- 
seemed  not  only  to  be  known  but  to  be  accounted  for  in  this  way,  namely, 
that  the  communicators  had  less  jjower  with  tlie  medium  than  wcjuld  be 
tlie  case  after  some  further  experience,  but  that  there  would  be  an  increase 
of  power  with  a  repetiti(->n  of  attempts. 

The  second  interview  was,  on  the  whole,  less  satisfactory.  The  medium 
seemed  less  composed,  there  was  more  of  her  own  personality  in  the  inter- 
view, and  a  certain  something  akin  to  anxiety  to  make  it  a  success.  New 
persons  appeared,  and  inquiries  by  them  anxiou.sly  made  concerning  what  I 
knew  of  a  certain  person  named,  who  was  stated  to  be  very  ill,  fatally  so. 

Observatio7i8  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  T ranee. 

and  wlio  is  thus  ill,  though  the  fact  was  not  then  known  to  me.  Mucli 
conversation  similar  to  that  of  tlis  first  interview  was  had,  some  things  of  a 
jjurely  jjrivate  nature  were  correctly  told  ;  among  otliers  the  pet  name  in 
German  by  which  I  was  accustomed  to  address  my  wife  when  living  and  we 
were  alone  together.  But  most  of  the  incidents  of  this  second  interview 
were  semi-psychical  or  circumstantial,  rather  than  supernal  or  sj^irituah 
There  was  little  that  was  erroneous,  though  there  was  some,  but  it  was  for 
the  most  [part  ?]  secondary  and  unimportant.    .    .    .  [A.  Y.  ] 

19.  Miss  Mary  A.  T.,  Boston,  May  2ist  [1886]. 

Miss  T.  visited  Mrs.  Piper  about  May  21st,  1886,  as  on  that  date  she 
wrote  to  Professor  James,  giving  him  an  account  of  the  sitting.  It  was  -a 
complete  failure. 

20.  Mi:  E.  D.  6'.,  Boston. 

[My  wife's  cousin's  widower — got  admirable  tests.  (W.  J.)] 

My  Dea'k  James, — The  communication  I  had  through  Mrs.  Piper  was  of 
such  a  nature  that  I  should  hardly  like  to  put  it  on  paper.  I  will  say,  how- 
ever, that  I  went  there  totally  unknown  to  her,  and  the  names  she  called  and 
the  facts  she  spoke  of,  known  only  to  myself  and  those  who  are  no  longer 
here,  astonished  me  beyond  measure,  for  I  had  never  before  visited  a  medium 
or  seen  anything  of  the  kind.  Some  time  I  should  like  to  talk  witli  you 
about  it. — Very  truly  youi-s, 

E.  D.  C. 

Boston,  Jnur  litlt,  1886. 

Not  till  after  the  sitting,  and  just  before  leaving  the  house,  did  T  let  lier 
know  that  I  was  acquainted  v/ith  you  and  Mrs.  M. 

'•     21.  3Ir.  Barrett  WcnJeU,  Boston,  Mass. 

18,  Gray's,  May  2(itli  [1886]. 

Dear  Mr.  James, — My  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  was  rather  interesting. 
In  the  course  of  it,  I  had  what  purjjorted  to  be  comniunications  from  a. 
number  of  people,  viz.,  1,  S.  [surname  correctly  given];  2,  my  uncle  C 
[Christian  name  correctly  given];  3,  "Ellie,"whom  I  half  identified;  4, 
E.  [surname  correctly  given],  who  bade  me  say  that  he  meant  to  com- 
municate with  you  l)ef  ore  long  ;  5,  one  Alvin  Clark,  who  bade  me  "thank 
Dr.  Everett  for  the  beautiful  prayer  he  made  at  my  funeral." 

Certain  curious  circumstances  attended  one  or  two  of  the  communications,, 
and  Mrs.  Piper's  recovery  from  the  trance  state  was,  perhaps,  the  most- 
shocking  sight  I  ever  witnessed. 

I  have  no  question  of  her  honesty  ;  and  not  a  shadow  of  belief  in  anytliing- 
supernatural.  Mind-reading  .she  undoubtedly  accomplished  to  some  extent. 
By  the  way,  is  not  this  mind-reading  a  rudimentary  survival  of  the  metliods. 
of  communication  of  lower  animals — birds,  fishes,  horses,  etc.,  &c.,  mucli 
dimmed  in  ordinary  men  by  the— in  every  sense— improved  development  of 
communication  l)y  language  ? 

Barrett  Wendell. 

II 

.98 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Mr.  Wendell  ailils,  in  a  letter  of  June  21,st,  1890  ■ 

Neither  0.  C.  Everett  nor  William  Everett — the  only  "Dr.  Everett"  I 
know  anything  about — liad  ever  made  a  prayer  at  any  Alvin  Clark's  funeral, 
or  at  least  they  personally  assured  me  that  they  had  not.  Alvin  Clark,  the 
well-known  manufacturer  of  telescopic  lenses,  was  still  alive  at  the  time  of 
my  sitting,  which  I  think  was  in  188(j  ;  it  could  not  have  been  later. 

The  "curious  circumstances"  mentioned  in  my  second  paragraph  were 
these.  During  tlie  sitting  Mrs.  Piper  was  constantly  moving,  sometimes 
writhing,  and  frequently  uttering  inarticulate  sounds.  In  her  writhing  she 
frequently  clutched  her  thiNjat  witli  both  hands  ;  this  reminded  me  of  the 
curious  aft'ection  of  the  throat — a  very  large  external  swelling — of  which  my 
friend  E.  (4)  had  died  within  a  few  weeks.  Thus  he  came  into  my  head  ; 
witliin  a  lialf  hour  or  so  she  had  tolerably  described  and  distinctly  named 
him.  A  similar  jilienomenon  preceded  the  naming  of  my  uncle  (2)  ;  her 
inarticulate  utterances  took  a  fijrm  that  reminded  me  strongly  of  tlie  gasping 
which  I  liad  heard  him  utter  during  tlie  interval  of  nearly  a  day  wliich 
elapsed  between  a  stroke  of  apoplexy  and  liis  deatli.  Once  in  my  Iiead,  she 
named  liim  before  long. 

22.  Mr.  X.  (A  Stidnit  o/  miic,  W.  .J.)    M<i;i  lllh,  1889. 
Tliis  sitting  was  practically  a  complete  failure. 

23.    a  ir.  F.,  M.D.    r,oL-IJe,ire,  E.  I.,  May  17th,  1889.        '  V 
Pkofessou  Wjr.  J  asfes. 

My  Dear  Sir, — As  I  am  interested,  as  an  outsider,  in  the  wnrk  of  the 
8.P.R.,  and  have  called  its  attention,  through  Mr.  Hodgson,  to  a  few  cases 
of  interest,  I  Avisli  to  ask  you  if  any  endeavour  has  been  made  to  prove  the 
identity  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "control" — Dr.  Phinuit  ?  Mr.  Hodgson  kindly 
arranged  a  seance  for  me  with  lier  in  Januaiy,  .and  I  have  had  two  others 
.since  that  date.  All  have  l)een  interesting,  and  rather  force  me  to  believe 
tiiat  Dr.  P.  is  not  a  fictitious  personage.  Von  Hartmann  says,  "  If  the  si^irits 
jire  unable  to  act  without  a  living  medium,  if  they  have  need  of  its  un- 
conscious will  for  their  mediation,  we  may  as  well  content  ourselves  with 
this  unconscious  will  as  a  cause."  I  fail  to  be  satisfied  with  this  hypothesis, 
because  some  interesting  disclosures  Iiave  come  from  mediums  not  in  an 
unconscious  state. 

Dr.  P.  has  partially  forgotten  his  French,  so  far  as  speaking  it  goes,  yet 
I  am  convinced  that  he  understands  all  I  say  in  that  language,  and  that 
Mrs.  I',  does  not,  from  my  tests  of  her  capacity,  and  she  impresses  me  as 
being  a  truly  honest  woman. 

I  will  hei'e  give  some  of  my  questions  to  Dr.  P.  and  Ids  replies  : — Q.  : 
' '  What  medical  men  were  prominent  in  Paris  in  your  time  ?  "  ^4 . ;  "  P)Ovivier 
^md  Dupuytren,  who  was  at  Hotel  Dieu."  (Bouvier  died  in  1827,  Dupuytren 
in  1835.)  Q.  :  "'Was  D.  alive  wlien  you  '  juissed  out'?"  ^4..-  "No,  lie 
passed  out  before  me  ;  I  jiassed  out  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago.''  Q.  : 
"  How  long  do  you  think  I  shall  live  ?  "  (He  had  pretty  well  described  my 
^ihysical  condition.)  He  answered  this  question  by  counting  in  French  on 
ihe  medium's  fingers  to  di-n'ii.     Q.  :  "  Wliat  influence  has  my  mind  on  wliat 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

99 

you  tell  me  ?  "  A.  :  I  get  notliing  from  j'our  mind  ;  I  can't  read  your  mind 
any  more  than  I  can  see  tlirough  a  stone  wall."  He  added  that  he  saw 
objectively  the  persons  of  whom  he  spoke  to  me,  and  that  they  conveyed  to 
him  the  messages  given.  Q.  :  "  Have  you  any  relatives  living  in  Marseilles  ?  " 
A.  :  "I  had  a  brother  wlio  died  tliere  two  or  three  years  ago." 

The  names  of  several  persons  he  called  up  lie  spelt  in  French,  as  lloljert, 
not  being  able,  seemingly,  to  jn'onounce  them  well  in  English.  He  mentioned 
by  name  my  three  deceased  sisters,  and  dwelt  at  much  length  on  my  brnther 
<f;ieorge  ;  onr  strong  attachment,  our  travels  in  Europe,  of  his  being  near  me 
a  great  deal,  of  our  future  reunion,  &c.,  &c.  Q.  :  "  Will  you  ask  George  to 
give  me  some  incident  in  his  life  known  only  to  ourselves  I  "  Dr.  P.  then 
alluded  to  the  loss  of  our  luggage,  &c.,  in  Euro^je.  (A  train  went  ort'  without 
us,  in  which  were  our  coats,  luggage,  &c.) 

"  Robert  and  Clara  are  very  grateful  to  you  for  your  good 
care  of  their  son,  your  nephew  Georgie  ;  you  and  Georgie  will  surely  go  to 
Europe  together  after  your  mother's  decease. "  This  was  spontaneously  given, 
and  much  was  added  regarding  this  nei)hew.  Being  quite  curious  as  to  the 
result  of  a  seance  I  desired  my  nephew  to  have  Ijefore  my  last  one,  he  got  a 
friend  to  arrange  one,  so  that  his  name  should  not  appear.  At  this  stance  of 
my  nephew  the  first  names  given  were  those  of  his  father  and  mother,  but  no 
impression  of  any  weight  was  made  upon  his  mind  by  the  seance,  .ind  he 
utterly  discarded  the  spiritual  hypothesis.  In  drawing  out  of  him  what  little 
I  could,  I  found  he  asked  his  father  to  give  him,  the  son,  his  exact  age.  He 

asked  Dr.  P.  how  his  uncle  (myself)  was.    A.  :  "Oh,  C.  W.,  he  has  

 . "    (Correct.)    "  He  plays  on  the  violin."    (Correct.)    At  my  seance 

subsequent  to  tins  Dr.  P.  spontaneously  said  :  "Your  nephew  George  has 
been  here."  I  said,  lie  is  sceptical  about  your  being  a  spirit.  Reply  :  "No 
matter  how  smart  George  is,  he  will  have  to  learn  that  there  is  another  life." 
(My  nephew,  who  is  thoroughly  absorbed  in  his  work  as  professor  at  the 
M.  I.  T.,  had  said  to  me  that  he  didn't  want  another  life.) 

At  my  first  seance  Dr.  P.  said  :  "Your  friend  William  is  here,  and  ho 
addressed  you  as  C.  W.  (This,"  said  Dr.  P.,  "is  the  way  you  sign  your 
name),  and  William  is  detei'iiiined  to  give  you  his  whole  name  before  I  go 
out."  As  Mrs.  P.  began  to  come  out  of  the  trance,  "  Pabodie  "  was  spoken 
with  great  force,  and  Mrs.  P.  gave  a  start,  saying,  "  Somebody  spoke  right 
in  my  ear."  I  thought  she  seemed  to  think  I  had  done  so.  At  my  third 
seance  Dr.  P.  said  spontaneously  :  ' '  William  Pabodie  sends  his  love  to  you, 
and  says  he  has  sufl^ered  greatly  over  here  from  remorse  of  conscience  :  and 
that,  had  he  his  life  to  live  ovei',  he  would  not  do  what  he  did."  (Ho  com- 
mitted suicide  in  1870. )    .    .  . 

Dr.  P.  .said  :  "  Many  people  think  I  am  the  medium  ;  that  is  all  bosh." 
Q.  :  "Do  you  see  George  ?  "  (Brother.)  A.:  "Yes."  ;  "  How  doe.s  he 
look  ?  "  A.  :  "  He  has  dark  hair,  and  looks  younger  than  you."  (He  had 
nearly  black  hair,  and  died  at  f(jrty-two,  and  I  am  nearly  sixty-one.)  Q.  : 
' '  How  do  you  get  what  you  tell  me  about  myself  ;  my  length  of  life,  my  going 
to  Europe,  &c.  ?"  A.:  "I  get  it  from  your  astral  light."  .  .  .  He 
seemed  to  know  about  my  mother's  condition,  and  spoke  of  it  spontaneously. 
I  then  asked,  "  Can  you  tell  me  how  long  she  may  live  '?  "  A.  :  "  I  cannot 
.see  that  she  will  live  a  year  or  two  hiuger."    .    .    .    The  sense  of  taste  I 

100 

Mr.  B.  Hodgson. 

fouiid  to  l)e  iii>t  ill  the  tongue,  but  on  the  forehead.  [See  p.  4.]  Q.  :  "Do 
you  see  me  now  distinctly?"  A.:  ''I  see  more  your -ethereal  organism.'' 
Q.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  vv"ho  that  lady  was  whose  rcroiaut  I  saw  some  years 
ago  in  my  own  house  ?  "  A.  :  "  That  was  your  sister  Clara.  Clara  was 
originally  named  Clarissa,  and  it  was  afterwards  changed."  (Correct.)  The 
doctor  has  emphasised  my  own  mediumistic  power  at  each  seance,  and  has 
said  that  I  would  surely  write.  "  Get  a  jjlanchetto,  and  I  will  come  to  your 
own  house  as  a  test. " 

C.  W.  F. 

24.    i.V'c.  M.  J.  ,S(iniijc.  188.j-(!. 

[The  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  has  long  been  widely  known  in  the  United 
(States,  both  as  a  minister  and  as  an  investigator  of  "  Spiritualism."] 

Bo.ston,  Jww  2m,  1890. 

During  the  winter  of  1885-6,  I  had  my  first  sitting  witli  Mrs.  Piper.  She 
was  then  on  Pinckney-street,  in  this  city. 

Innnediately  on  becoming  entranced,  her  control.  Dr.  Phinuit,  said  there 
were  many  spirit  friends  present.  Among  them  he  said  was  an  old  man, 
whom  he de.scribed,  l;ut  only  in  a  general  way.  Then  he  said,  "He  is  your 
father,  and  he  calls  you  Judson."  Attention  was  also  called  to  the  fact  that 
he  had  a  peculiar  bai  e  sjjot  on  his  head,  and  Mrs.  I'iper  jjut  her  hand  on  the 
corresponding  i)lace  on  her  own  head. 

Now  for  the  facts  that  give  tliese  two  a]ii)arently  siniple  points  whatever 
significance  they  possess.  My  father  had  died  during  the  preceding  summer, 
aged  ninety  years  and  six  months.  He  had  never  lived  in  Boston,  and  Mrs. 
Piper,  I  am  quite  sure,  had  never  seen  liim  nor  been  in  any  way  interested 
in  him.  He  wasn't  at  all  Imld,  but  when  quite  young  liad  been  burned  ;  so 
that  there  was  a  bare  spot  on  tlie  right  side  of  the  top  of  his  head,  i)erhaps 
an  inch  wide  and  three  inches  long,  running  from  tlie  forehead  back  towards 
the  crown.  This  he  covered  by  combing  his  hair  over  it.  This  was  the 
spot  that  Mrs.  Piper  indicated.  Now  as  to  the  name  by  which  he  addressed 
me  :  I  was  given  the  middle  name,  Judson,  at  the  re([uest  of  a  half-sister, 
my  father's  daughter,  who  died  soon  after  I  was  born.  Out  of  tenderness 
iov  lier  memory  (as  I  always  supjiosed)  father  always  used,  when  I  was  a 
boy,  to  call  me  Judson,  though  all  the  rest  of  the  family  called  me  by  my 
first  name,  Minot.  In  his  later  life  father  also  got  to  calling  me  by  my  first 
name.  No  one,  therefore,  had  called  me  by  my  second  name  for  many 
years.  I  was  therefore  naturally  struck  and  surprised  by  suddenly  hearing 
one  who  claimed  to  be  my  father  giving  me  once  more  my  old  boyhood  name. 
I  was  not  consciously  tliinking  of  either  of  tliese  things  ;  and  I  am  con- 
vinced that  Mrs.  Piper  couldn't  have  known  anything  about  them. 

During  this  same  sitting  Mrs.  Piper's  control  also  said,  "Here  is  some- 
body who  says  his  name  is  John.  He  was  your  brother.  No,  not  your  (jwn 
brotlier  ;  your  lialf-brother. "  Then,  pressing  her  hand  on  the  base  of  her 
brain,  she  moaned,  as  she  swayed  to  and  fi-o.  Then  she  continued,  "Ho 
says  it  was  so  hard  to  die  away  off  tliere  all  alone  I  How  he  did  want  to  see 
motlier  1  "  She  went  on  to  explain  that  he  died  from  a  fall,  striking  th.e 
back  of  liis  head.    Her  whole  account  of  this  was  realistic  in  the  extreme. 

Ohser  vat  Ions  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Tnvnee.  101 

My  half-brotlier  Jolin,  tlie  son  of  my  mother  —  for  both  father  and 
mother  liad  been  twice  married — died  several  years  jirevious  to  this  sitting. 
While  building  a  mill  in  Michigan  lie  fell,  striking  the  back  of  his  head  on  a 
piece  f)f  timber.  He  was  far  from  all  friends  ;  and  was  a  most  tender  lover 
<if  liis  motlier.    I  was  not  thinking  nf  him  until  told  tliat  he  was  present. 

Many  other  tilings  occurred  during  the  sitting.  But  I  mention  only 
these,  because,  though  simple,  they  are  clear-cut  and  striking,  and  liecause  I 
see  no  way  by  whicli  Mrs.  Piper  could  ever  have  known  them. 

M.  J.  Savaiik. 

P.S. — I  liave  had  other  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  Most  of  the  tilings  told 
were,  however,  too  personal  for  publication.  Nearly  all  are  inexplicable  on 
any  theory  tliat  does  not  go  at  least  as  far  as  telepathy. 

25.  Miss  Gertrude.  Saixige.    Ortoher  23/y/,  1888. 

Boston,  October  23rJ,  1888. 

I  made  an  apjiointment  fi)r  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  under  an  assumed 
name  (that  of  "Miss  Margaret  Brown  ''),  and  giving  the  address  of  a  fi-iend 
on  Walnut  Avenue. 

At  the  time  set  I  went  to  Mrs.  Pijier's  ;  she  kept  me  waiting  for  a  few 
moments,  on  account  of  a  severe  headaclie  from  which  she  was  suffering. 
Then,  on  taking  me  into  her  parlour,  she  spoke  with  me  for  a  moment  or 
two.  She  said,  "Your  home  is  on  Walnut  Avenue;  you  mu.st  liave  had 
quite  a  little  walk  over  here  {''  I  replied,  "No,  my  home  is  not  on 
Walnut  Avenue  ;  I  gave  you  an  assumed  name  and  a  false  address,  to  make 
the  sitting  a  better  test."  She  said,  "  Oh,  well,  that  doe.s  not  matter.  I 
only  hope  I  can  give  you  something  satisfactory,  for  when  my  liead  aclies  so, 
it  is  rather  apt  not  to  lie  so  successful."  We  then  went  into  the  darkened 
room  adjoining,  and  she  took  my  hand  in  hers.  Immediately  her  fingers 
began  to  twitch  and  tlien  lier  wliole  body,  and  she  groaned  and  ground  her 
teeth,  and  constantly  muttered,  "  ( »li,  what's  the  matter?  what  is  the 
anatter  ? " 

Before  entering  the  dark  room,  I  had  taken  three  locks  of  hair,  each  one 
enclosed  in  an  envelope,  and  liad  placed  one  in  the  front  of  a  b<iok,  one  in 
the  back,  and  one  in  the  middle.  The  one  in  the  middle  I  knew  was  my 
mother's  ;  it  was  only  a  few  hairs,  taken  by  stealth,  for  she  would  not  give 
her  consent  to  niy  having  them.  The  otlier  two  I  had  not  looked  at,  and 
had  no  idea  to  -whom  tliey  l^elonged.  They  were  sent  me  by  a  friend, 
already  enclosed  in  tlie  little  envelopes,  and  I  was  purposely  ignorant  cmi- 
cerning  them — all  to  make  the  test  more  complete.  It  was  on  this  errand, 
for  this  friend,  Mr.  Fred  Day,  that  I  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper. 

Ongoing  into  the  trance  state,  Mrs.  Pijier's  voice  became  guttural,  harsh, 
and  she  spoke  with  a  decided  accent.  Keejjing  my  hand  in  hers,  and 
pressed  against  her  forehead,  she  began  instantly  to  speak,  and  she 
talked  with  me  incessantly  for  an  hour.  She  said  :  "I  never  talked 
with  you  before,  ancf  you  are  very  peculiar  ;  it  is  not  easy  for  me  to 
i:ell  you  anything  about  yourself  personally,  you  are  s(^  queer.  I  do 
not  know  -who  you  are.  I  cannot  get  your  name.  My  name  is  Dr. 
Fin  way.   Can  you  understand   me '!    Sometimes  people  cannot,  because 

102 

Mr.  1{.  IIod(ji<ou. 

I  s^jenk  with  an  accent."  "Oh,  yew,"  I  answered,  "I  can  understand 
you  ijerfectly.  I  want  to  give  you  a  hick  of  hair  for  you  to  examine." 
I  then  gave  into  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  the  h>ck  of  hair  from  the  enveloi>e  in  tlie 
front  of  the  book — not  knowing  myself  whose  it  was.  Innnediately  on 
receiving  it,  "Dr.  Finway  "  exclaimed,  "Fred  I  Oh  yes,  Fred,  a  young 
man,  very  thin,  wears  glasses,  little  beard,  great  friend  of  yours.  This 
Fred — I  never  had  his  hair  ])efore,  but  the  influence  does  not  seem  new  1. 
[I  learn  that  Mr.  Day  had  sat  previously  with  Mrs.  Piper. — R.  H.J 
Imogene — who's  Imogene  ?  "  "  I  do  not  know,  "said  I.  "Yes.  Tmogene, 
a  young  lady,  friend  of  Fred's  ;  influence  very  strong.  Who  is  .she  "I 
am  sure  I  do  not  know.  I  did  not  know  he  had  a  friend  named  Imogene.  I 
do  not  think  he  has."  "He  has  I  Don't  contradict  me!"  exclaimed  he. 
Then  he  resumed,  "This  Fred  is  an  only  child,  mother  plump,  a  lovely 
lady,  l)ut  she  is  not  long  for  y(.iur  world.  This  Fred  is  going  on  a  long; 
journey,  acrc^ss  the  water,  within  a  year  or  two.  He  has  already  taken  two 
long  journeys,  one  across  the  water,  one  not  ;  hasn't  he,  now  ?  "  "  lam  not 
Kui-e,"  said  I.  "Well,  he  has,"  replied  he.  "You  ask  him.  What  I  tell 
you  I  l:now — I  can  see  it  all,  and  I  only  tell  you  facts,  and  you  will  find  tliat 
they  are  so." 

I  then  gave  him  the  other  unknown  lock  of  hair,  from  tlie  back  of 
the  book.  Immediately  he  exclaimed,  "Ugh!  This  is  crazy!  It  makes 
me  sick  I  '  "Well,''  he  said,  "I  cannot  tell  you  anything  about  this^ 
because  the  influence  is  so  mixed  ;  it  has  been  handled  by  too  many  people, 
and  it  was  not  cut  oft"  near  the  head,  where  the  magnetism  from  the  body 
could  permeate  it  ;  I  can't  tell  you  al)out  it."  (It  proved  to  have  been  the^ 
hair  of  Mr.  Day's  aunt  Mary,  wlio  died  within  the  year,  and  it  lias  passed 
through  several  pe<jple's  hands,  and  was  cut  ofl'  near  the  end  of  the  hair. ) 

Then  I  gave  him  the  little  lock  of  my  mother's  hair,  from  the  centre  of 
the  Ijook.  "Ella,"  he  cried,  "she  is  stingy  enough  with  her  hair  !  "  "This 
Ella  is  very  sweet  dispositioned,  very  ;  but  she  is  not  at  all  well.  She  has 
trouble  with  her  head  ;  she  h;is  fearful  bili<nis  headaches,  and  they  come 
from  the  weak  state  of  the  nerves  of  the  stomacli  ;  avid  her  liver  is,  of 
course,  disordered  ;  you  tell  her  that  I  am  a  ])hysician,  and  that  I  say  for 
her  to  take  hot  douche  baths  :  now  rcmcmhcr  !  She  is,  it  seems  to  me,  some 
relatiiin  to  you.  Wait  a  moment — she  is  your  mother,  I  think.  Yes,  she  is 
yi_)ur  mother.  And  she  has  \iu,  dciw,  trots,  (fnatrc — four  children — two  girls, 
itnd  two  boys.  You  have  a  brother  who  is  off",  away  from  you,  somewhere,, 
a  little  west  of  you  ;  he  is  very  independent  ;  he  is  a  strong  influence  in 
Ella's  life.  And  you  h;ive  a  yoiuiger  Ijrother,  and  a  sister  ;  her  n;uue  begins 
with  II — e —  Hellen,  I  think  it  is.  But  here  is  an  ()ld  lady  here — in  the 
spirit.  She  has  only  left  the  Ijody  within  a  month,  and  she  is  your  grand- 
mother. You,  young  lady,  are  a  flirt  I  "  "No,"  said  I,  "I  am  not."  "The 
deevil  you  aren't.  You  (ov- .'"  cried  he.  "You  are  flirty,  l)ecause  you  do 
not  know  ;  you  have  not  made  uji  your  mind  ;  you  like  ycjur  friends  in 
general,  but  no  one  of  them  in  particular.  I  can  see  the  picture  of  some  of 
them.  There  is  Clift'iml — he  is  moody.  And  his  bi-otlier  Fred  is  cranky, 
like  you  ;  he  does  not  know  his  own  mind.  Then  there  is  Chester  ;  lie  is. 
out  W^est  making  his  fortune  ;  and  he  will  make  a  Ijig  one,  too.  And  who  is. 
Bert?"    "I  do  not  know,"  said  I.     "Yes,  you  do.     He  is  a  very  good 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance. 

103 

friend  to  you,  very  good,  altliougli  lie  is  not  very  demonstrative  in  liis 
speech."  (I  then  knew  he  meant  a  young  friend  of  mine,  a  Harvard  man. 
whoni  I  call  Herbert,  usually.)  Then  he  said,  "  And  there  is  this  Fred  ;  he 
is  a  true  friend  to  you  :  liis  last  name  is  Day — Fred  Day  ;  and  oh  1  I 
can  see  hooks,  papers,  and  pictures  all  about  him  :  I  think  he  must 
take  jnctures  himself  for  amusement. 

"  I  suppose  you  tliink  I  cannot  see  you,  but  I  can — you  have  dark  eyes 
and  light  hair.  I  always  liked  dark  eyes  and  light  hair — now,  what  are  you 
laughing  at  ? — and  you  will  l)e  married.  But  there  is  no  liurry,  not  ;i  bit — 
and  in  tlie  latter  part  of  your  life,  you  will  not  live  here, — it  will  be  in  some 
foreign  country — in  England,  I  tliink.  I  can  see  you  crossing  the  water 
with  a  middle-aged  lady  and  a  young  man.  Your  life,  so  far,  has  been 
rather  even,  not  eventful ;  but  it  will  be  full  of  action,  later  on.  But  you 
are  so  peculiar  ;  and  this  Fred  is  so  peculiar  ;  you  tell  your  father  that  he 
will,  within  a  year,  realise  sometliing  from  some  money  he  invested  out 
West,  about  two  years  ago  ;  y(ju  tell  him  I  said  so,  and  I  htoii\  And  you 
tell  Ella  that  she  will  be  better  in  a  few  years  if  she  takes  care  of  herself  ; 
she  is  a  little  over  fm'ty  now,  and  she  is  often,  on  the  street,  even,  taken 
with  dizziness,  and  with  darkness  before  her  eyes  :  it  all  comes  from  the 
weak  state  of  her  nerves.  And  now  I  am  getting  tired.  Is  there  anything 
you  want  to  ask  me  ?  I  will  tell  you  if  I  can.  I  cannot  tell  you  even  yoiu' 
name.  I  do  not  know  :  I  cannot  seem  to  get  yoiiv  influence  separate  from 
the  others — Fred,  and  Ella,  and  all.  If  you  will  come  some  time  witli(_iut 
any  locks  of  hair,  I  will  see  how  it  will  be  then." 

Mrs.  Piper  then  came  out  of  the  trance,  with  a  face  dia^vn  and  haggard, 
and  with  a  dazed  look  in  her  eyes.  "  Who  are  you  ''.  "  she  said.  "I  do  not 
know  who  you  are,  d(.>  I  ?"  I  said,  ''No,  but  I  will  tell  you  now.  I  am 
Gertrude  )Savage  ;  you  have  met  my  father,  I  think."  She  was  deliglited  to 
know  me,  and  who  I  was,  and  asked  if  she  had  told  me  anything  satisfac- 
tory.   She  was  very  glad  when  I  told  her  she  had. 

Everything  she  told  me  when  in  the  trance  was  true  as  to  fact :  the 
prophecies  remain  to  be  verified.  The  "Imogene,"  so  insisted  upon,  was 
immediately  verified  by  Mr.  Day,  as  his  old  friend.  Miss  Imogene  Gurney, 
whose  first  name  I  had  forgotten.  The  lock  of  hair  was  his  own — and 
everything  she  said  in  coiniection  with  it  was  true. 

During  the  sitthig  Dr.  Finway  talked  vrith  me  a  little  in  French,  liut  I 
assured  him  I  had  forgotten  my  French.  "  Oh,"  lie  said,  and  laughed.  "I 
sLipi^ose  je  ne  sais  ^"'s  i«  all  you  can  say  ?"  And  one  thing  further  :  He 
insisted  upon  it  that  I  must  either  jjlay  or  embroider  (ir  draw,  or  do  gome- 
thing  with  my  fingers.  "No,"  said  I;  "  my  accomplishments  are  highly 
practical."  "Well,  I  see  notes  of  music,  anyway,"  said  he.  "  What  Ju  you 
do?"  "I  write  .shorthand."  "  Why  didn't  you  say  so  before  ?  That's  it. 
Sliorthand  looks  like  music  notes.  You  do  not  print  it  afterwards,  though  ; 
you  are  not  a  regular  stenographer  ;  you  just  do  it  for  some  friend,  to  help 
him,  I  think. " 

All  of  which,  as  well  as  all  of  the  whole  interview,  was  perfectly  true. 

Gertrude  Sa^'acje. 

Wednesday,  Odohcr  24:th,  1888. 

104 

Afr.  R.  Hodgson. 

[Notes  Ijy  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  father  of  Miss  Savage.] 

June  27th,  1890. 

Miss  Savage  had  her  sitting  on  October  23rd,  1888,  and  began  to  write 
her  account  tlie  same  day,  nit  did  not  finish  it  till  the  day  following. 
Mr.  Fred  Day  paid  a  visit  to  England  in  1889. 

Clifford  and  Fred  were  friends  of  Miss  Savage,  living  in  Boston  at  the 
time  of  the  sitting. 

Chester's  home  was  in  Pennsylvania.  He  had  visited  Bo.ston,  but  had 
not  been  there  for  several  year.^.  He  met  our  family  at  a  summer  resort  on 
the  Maine  coast,  near  Old  Orchard. 

I  had  invested  money  out  West  about  two  years  previously,  but  while  a 
good  investment,  there  has  been  no  specially  fiivnuralile  change  of  any 
note. 

M.  J.  Savage. 

20.    Rff.  ir.  H.  Savage.  Bittinrj  with  Mrs.  Fiper,  Hotel  Humboldt,  Holborn- 
^trc't,  Pwxh)ir)j,  December  28th,  1888,  al  12.30  j;.m. 

Concerning  the  two  following  rec(jrds  of  .sittings  in  connection  with 
I  he  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  see  my  remarks,  pp.  34-37. 

After  several  remarkable  sayings,  she  suddeidy  said,  "Ah!  Here  is 
.somebody  from  outside — he  says  his  name  is  Robert  West.  He  wants  to  send 
a  message  to  your  brother."  Then,  after  a  moment,  "I  wrote  an — he  is 
writing  it  and  I  am  reading  for  you — an  AR — TI — article  A — G — A  against  his 
W — work  in  the  AD — Y — Advance.  What  the  dickens  is  the  Advance  ?  " 
I  said,  "  It  is  a  paper. "  Then  she  continued,  "I  thought  he  was  wrong, 
l)ut — he  was — right,  and  I  repent,  he  was  right,  I  want  you  to  tell  him  for 
me.  I  am  sorry.  I  v/ant  you  to  tell  him  for  me.  I  want  to  right  all  the 
wrong  I  did  in  the  body."  I  said  to  her,  "Can  you  see  him?"  "Yes," 
she  rejjlied.  "  How  does  he  look  T' I  asked.  "  He  has  greyish  blue  eyes, 
a  jjcard,  a  rather  prominent  nose,  a  firm  mouth,  a  large  forehead,  and  he 
brushed  his  hair  up,  so,"  brushing  my  hair  with  her  hand,  to  show  the 
fashion  of  his.  "He  is  of  medium  build,  rather  tall.  He  died  of  hemor- 
rhage of  the  kidneys." 

The  above  is  an  e.xact  reproduction  of  Mrs.  Piper's  words,  saving  that  I 
may  have  failed  to  reproduce  in  every  particular  the  precise  word.  The 
substance  is  exact,  and  the  words  in  no  way  dejjart  from  the  sense  of  what 
she  said.  The  description  of  Mr.  West  is  photographic  in  its  truth.  HLs 
;i])])earancc  at  our  interview  was  entirely  unheralded  by  anything  leading 
up  to  it.  All  that  had  gone  before  had  been  personal  to  myself  and  confined 
to  my  family  and  near  relatives. 

Written  out  between  3  and  3.30  p.m.  on  my  return  from  Mrs.  Piper's 
hotel. 

W.  H.  Savage. 

Mr.  M.  J.  Savage  writes  on  -Tunc  26th,  1890  :— 

In  explanation  of  this  sitting  of  my  brother,  in  ^vhich  the  Rev.  Robert 
West  was  reported  as  present,  I  need  to  say  :  — 

1.  He  was  a  Congregational  minister  in  Alton,  111.,  vv  hen  my  brother  was 

Observations  of  Certain  Fhenomena  of  Traoice.  105 

fi  minister,  in  the  same  denomination,  at  Jacksonville,  in  the  same  State. 
They  knew  each  otlier  there. 

2.  Mr.  West  was  afterwards  a  minister  here  in  Boston.  He  went  to 
•Chicago  and  became  editor  of  Thi'  Advance.  Wliile  on  that  pajjer  he  wrote  a 
severe  criticism  on  me,  my  doctrines,  and  niy  work.  My  brother  had  not 
seen  this  criticism,  and  did  not  even  know  about  it. 

3.  Neither  of  us  knew  the  cause  of  his  death.  On  writing  to  The  Advance, 
after  this  sitting,  the  correctness  of  Mrs.  Piper's  statement  as  to  his  death 
was  confirmed. 

4.  My  brother  is  tlie  minister  of  the  Unitarian  Cliurcli  in  Watertown, 
n  suburb  of  Boston. 

Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  writes  July  1st,  1890,  from  Watertown,  Mass.: — 

My  brother  niade  the  appointment  [for  my  sitting]  by  a  letter  saying 
that  a  friend  of  his  desired  to  see  her.  He  gave  her  no  name.  [I  have  since 
learnt  from  Mr.  Savage  that  he  had  seen  Mrs.  Pijier  about  one  and  a-half  or 
two  years  previously. — R.  H.] 

Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  further  writes  July  5th,  1890  :— 

1.  When  Mrs.  P.  l)egan  sjjeaking  of  Mr.  West,  she  turned  with  a  sur- 
prised look,  as  at  an  unlooked  for  interruption,  with  the  remark,  "All! 
here  is,  &c." 

2.  When  I  asked  for  a  description  she  turned  again  in  the  same  direction 
and  said,  ''Hold  up  your  head  and  let  me  look  at  you."  Then  she  went  on 
to  descrilje  as  given  in  the  statement. 

3.  She  gave  date  of  death  correctly,  as  well  as  cause. 

4.  I  did  not  know  that  West  was  dead. 

5.  As  my  brother  says,  I  had  never  heard  of  the  attack  on  my  brother  of 
Avhich  the  interview  speaks. 

[For  other  incidents  concerning  Rev.  Robert  West,  see  the  next  account. 
From  the  Congregational  Year  Book  f(jr  1887,  it  appears  that  Rev.  Robert 
West  died  at  Sycamore,  111. ,  of  Bright's  disease,  on  October  25th,  1886  : 
jjastor's  assistant  at  Shawmut  Church,  Boston,  1881-2  ;  editor  of  Advance, 
Chicago,  from  1882  till  death.— R.  H.] 

27.  Bev.  M.  J.  Savage.    Januanj  irjth,  1889. 

Jnhj  2ifh,  1889. 

On  January  15th,  1889,  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs. 
Piper,  in  the  course  of  which  Rev.  Robert  West  purported  to  communicate, 
stating  that  his  body  was  buried  at  Alton,  111.,  and  giving  the  text  on  his 
tombstone.  Mr.  Savage  was  unaware  of  either  of  these  facts  at  tlie  time  of 
the  sitting.  He  soon  afterwards  ascertained  that  Rev.  Robert  West's  grave 
was  at  Alton,  111. ,  but  he  did  not  ascertain  the  text  on  the  tombstone.  He 
recently  informed  me  of  the  circumstance,  and  I  liave  since  obtained  from 
Mr.  J.  A.  Cousley,  editor  of  the  Daihj  Telegraph,  .\lton.  111.,  a  copy  of  tlie 
inscriptions  on  the  tombstone.  I  requested  Mr.  Savage  then  to  furnish  me 
with  the  text  which  had  been  given  to  him  through  Mrs.  Piper.  Yesterday 

106 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

lie  fi.iiuul  lii.s  iiutes  m;ide  (Hi  tliu  d;iy  of  the  sitting,  ru;id  mc  tliu  text, 

wliich  agreed  witli  that  sent  to  mc  from  Alton —viz.,  "  Fervent  in  spirit^ 
serving  t\\u  Lord." 

II.  Hodgson. 

Tlie  above  is  correct. 

(Signed)  M.  J.  Savage^ 

Jiilij  2btlt,  1»!I0. 

Mr.  Savage  adds  on  July  2r)tli,  1890:— 

At  tlii.s  same  sitting  (January  loth,  188!)),  the  Ilev.  C.  L.  (loodell, 
formerly  (if  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  claimed  to  be  present.  I  was  much  surprised, 
for  I  did  not  know  he  was  dead,  and  I  know  of  no  reason  why  Mrs.  Piper 
shiiidd  have  associated  us  in  any  way  iu  her  mind.  I  had  a  slight 
acijuaintance  with  him  at  (.)ne  time  ;  and  when  he  was  settled  in  St.  Louis,. 
I  preached  the  sermon.  I  made  no  recoi'd  at  the  time  (jf  anything  beyond 
the  fact  (.)f  his  jnu'porting  to  l^e  jiresent.  Two  days  ago  I  went  to  the 
Congregational  House  in  Boston,  and  asceitained  tlic  date  of  his  death — 
February  1st,  188(1 

28.  Miss  Z.  (well-hwirn  to  Err.  31.  J.  Suraijc).     Novemhcr  19//i,  1888. 

[Account  by  Miss  Z.] 

While  talking  witli  Mrs.  Piper  before  she  went  under  the  influence  of 
li  jr  control  I  showed  her  the  stone  taken  from  Mr.  Savage,  and  asked  her  if 
she  would,  when  in  the  trance  state,  tell  me  all  .she  could  al)out  its  story,  as 
I  wished  it  for  a  test.  She  took  it  in  her  hand,  put  it  between  her  teeth, 
and  then  said,  "It  was  given  you  by  a  gentleman,  a  great  smoker,  an 
Englishman — that  is,  directly  descended  in  a  straiglit  line  from  English 
ancestors  ;  a  man  as  set  as  iron,  very  intellectual,  and  of  a  most  jjowerful 
will.  A  man  I  have  the  impression  has  been  to  me,  and  whom  I  call  very 
fascinating."  Upon  my  denying  that  the  man  had  seen  her,  as  I  thought 
then  was  true,  she  said,  "  I  cannot  have  made  a  mistake  ;  but  come  cpiickly 
into  the  other  room,  and  sit  down  as  soon  as  you  can,  for  I  can't  wait  long. " 
She  afterwards  told  me  she  was  then  partially  in  the  trance  condition. 

Her  first  communication  w;is  to  me  about  my  brother,  whose  hair  I  gave 
her.  She  said  a  young  man  called  Ned  came  and  said,  "  Holloa,  Charlie  ! 
Holh.ia,  Charlie  !  "  and  said  Charlie  was  my  brother.  This  Ned  told  of  his 
own  death  by  consumption  some  time  ago  ;  how  my  Ijrother  was  hy  his  bed- 
side near  to  the  time  he  jiassed  away  ;  that  he  spent  a  night  by  him  just 
before  he  died,  and  said  his  other  name  began  with  "M"  or  "N"  or 
something  like,  but  that  all  was  so  far  removed  from  me  that  it  would  ha 
impossible  to  be  clear  about  it.  All  of  which  I  found  was  true  when  I 
]'eturned  home,  and  none  of  which  I  knew,  saA-e  that  a  jjoor  boy  had  died 
several  years  since  of  consumjjtion — a  friend  to  wlmm  }uy  brother  was  kind. 
Tlie  [first]  name  I  never  heard  before,  and  was  not  sure  even  of  his  last 
name.  His  message  to  my  brother  was  jjersonal,  and  my  brotlier  felt  it 
truth.  As  soon  as  she  finished  this  message  she  began  to  hurriedly  grope 
abi)ut  for  the  "stone,"  which  was  in  her  lap.  She  told  me  tlie  stone  Avas 
found  in  this  country,  a  long  way  oii',  and  near  where  some  very  valuable 
things  had  been  found.    Under  where  it  was  found  are  mines  with  lead  and 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  lOT 

jjossibly  silver.  It  was  given  to  tlie  iiwuer,  wlin  was  not  I,  but  a  man  of 
very  tirui  will,  and  to  whom  I  slionld  return  it,  1  ly  a  lady  who  came  into  and 
went  out  of  his  life  a  long  time  since,  and  with  whom  I  had  no  interest. 
The  lady  she  thoiijlit  was  now  dead.  There  were  three  influences  about  the 
stone,  as  the  lady  gave  the  stone  from  the  hand  of  some  one  who  gave  it  to 
her,  in  the  jjresence  of  a  iniddle-aged  gentleman  who  stood  beside  his  dear 
friend,  the  present  owner.  The  stone  has  been  kept  in  a  box  on  the  back 
part  of  a  desk  in  a  room  like  an  office,  of  an  incessant  smoker.  Room  did 
not  look  like  lawyer's  or  doctor's  office.  She  then  described  the  character- 
of  the  man  who  gave  me  the  stone,  speaking  ])articularly  of  will-power 
and  intellect,  and  saying,  "Oh,  what  an  old  bach.  '.  isn't  he  ?  Everything 
must  be  just  so  fixed  and  even,  or  he  is  frantic  with  his  nerves  ;  and  isn't 
he  a  fuss  1  A  real  old  bach.  I  "  As  she  had  already  mentioned  that  I 
was  a  "double-twisted  old  maid,"  I  tried  to  induce  her  to  believe  that  the 
owner  of  the  stone  and  I  were  in  danger  of  coming  nearer  t(.i  each  other  than 
at  present.  She  made  answer  to  all  my  old  maid  silly  airs,  "  No,  no,  no, 
for  who  then  is  Ella  ?  "  And  then  came  in  a  quick  tone,  "  Who's  Josejjh  ? 
Don't  you  know  1  Well,  he  i.s  this  man's  father,  and  he  says  he  was  there 
when  you  took  the  stone,  and  he  knows  you  well.  ' 

The  letter  which  I  gave  lier  she  said  was  so  foreign  in  its  magnetism  to 
me  that  she  could  tell  but  little  about  it — said  it  was  written  a  long  time  ago, 
and  came  from  a  foreign  land.  In  its  surroundings  whence  it  came  were  five 
people,  three  gentlemen  and  two  ladies — one  gentleman  an  elderly  man.  She 
received  the  name  Elizabeth  in  its  connection,  and  it  seem.s  to  contain  a  sort 
of  invitation.  Near  to  the  letter,  or  the  one  to  win  nn  it  was  written,  comes 
Wm.  and  Ruth.  Then  I  gave  her  the  lock  of  hair.  She  said,  after  a  general 
outline  of  the  character  of  the  person  from  whose  head  it  came,  which  was 
much  the  same  as  the  character  connected  with  tlie  stone-owner,  "  How'd 
you  come  to  have  this  hair  ?  The  other  was  your  brother's,  but  where  in  the 
world  did  you  get  this  !  Oh,  you  cut  it  off  yourself,  didn't  you  ?  Where  di<l 
that  man  get  liis  big  nose  ?  He's  been  a  trip  to  Europe  lately  for  his  health, 
and  it  has  done  him  good,  too.  Tell  him  he'll  be  as  well  as  ever  if  he  don't 
overwork,  and  that  he  has  catarrh  and  part  of  the  pain  in  his  head  comes 
from  that."  I  said,  "  Does  this  man  smoke  as  much  as  the  other  ?"  and  she 
said,  "  Oh  no,  not  so  much  nearly,  and  I  like  him.  He  likes  you,  and  you. 
like  him,  don't  you  '(  "  I  then  tried  t(j  persuade  her  to  believe  in  a  romance 
connecting  me  and  the  man  from  whose  head  I  had  taken  the  hair,  thinking 
that  a  very  probable  conclusion.  She  answered,  "Fiancee.  No,  didn't  I 
say  who  was  Ella  and  Gertrude  and  Phil  '.  Why,  what  are  you  talking  about  i 
What's  to  be  done  with  his  other  ties?  and  let  me  tell  you,  if  you  are  think- 
ing of  that,  there  are  as  many  as  five  women  to  be  disposed  of — then  — (_ih  ! 
what's  the  use  of  trying  to  cheat  me  I  know  all  al)out  it,  and  you  never 
either  of  you  had  such  an  idea,  but  Joseph  is  here,  and  is  this  man's  father- 
He  says  he  sees  you  talking  with  his  son,  and  there  is  never  anything  but  kind 
friendship  about  it.  He  stood  by  the  window  there  all  the  time  you  were  in 
that  queer  little  office,  and  you  shouldn't  try  to  cheat  a  medium  so.  Joking, 
is  all  right,  but  you  needn't  try  to  fool  him,  for  he  knows.  He's  glad  to  send 
a  message  by  you  to  his  son,  he  wishes  you  to  tell  him  he  watches  over  liim 
always,  as  he  ever  has,  that  he's  so  pleased  to  see  he  has  come  to  l)e  so  gi.iud. 

108 

21  r.  R.  Hodgson. 

•a  man,  anil  tliat  he  tries  so  hard  to  help  others,  and  he  must  not  be  dis- 
couraged or  despondent  about  it,  for  he  often  lielps  many  whom  lie  does  not 
know  anything  about,  that  his  father  is  so  pleased  to  see  how  he  treats  his 
mother,  who  is  now  in  the  earth-world.  Also,  he  must  not  give  Gertrude  a 
worrying  thought,  for  she  is  a  good,  good  girl,  and  her  father  need  never  to 
worry  a  bit  about  her. "  Mrs.  Piper  told  me  to  put  that  down  in  my  head 
and  tell  it  as  soon  as  possible,  for  no  one  but  tlie  man  himself  knew  what 
thoughts  he  liad  about  Gertrude.  She  then  told  about  Ella's  sick  headaches, 
and  said  "Phil  "  had  a  pain  and  trouble  in  his  chest  which  his  father  must 
look  out  for,  as  he  did  not  know  it,  and  a  weak  stomach,  whicli  was  not  so 
serious.  A  description  of  the  pleasant  influences  about  the  home  life  of  the 
family  of  six — two  "big"  and  four  not  so  "big"  people — and  the  telling  why 
Dr.  F.  did  not  like  Ella,  because  Ella  did  not  like  him,  and  would  prefer 
■others  not  to  come  to  him,  closed  the  seance. 

[Notes  on  the  above  by  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage.] 

June  27tii,  1890. 

Daring  the  week  preceding  her  visit  to  Mrs.  P.,  Miss  Z.,  having 
■iiccidentally  met  me,  told  me  that  she  was  going  to  have  a  sitting  with  Mrs. 
P.  on  the  following  Monday.  I  then  said,  "This  will  be  a  capital  oi^portunity 
for  a  test.  She  will  never  think  of  connecting  you  with  me  in  any  way.  I 
w(juld  like  you  to  take  two  or  three  tilings  for  me,  and  see  if  she  can  get 
any  tiling  about  me."  I  arranged  to  take  these  things  to  her  on  Saturday,  but 
not  being  well,  failed  to  do  so.  Meeting  her  in  the  Sunday  school-room 
after  church  on  Sunday,  I  asked  her  to  step  with  me  into  the  study,  and  get 
them.  We  went  togetlier  to  the  study  ;  I  unlocked  my  desk,  and  took  the 
.stone  from  a  collection  of  curios  which  lie  there,  without  telling  her  anything 
of  its  history.  I  gave  lier  also  a  letter  and  a  lock  of  my  own  liair,  Avhich  she 
cut  off  at  my  request. 

Tlie  history  of  tlie  stone  is  as  follows  : — In  the  spring  of  L865  a  party  of 
friends,  among  them  myself,  living  at  San  Mateo,  Cal.,  went  across  the 
■coast  range  of  mountains  to  the  seashore,  where  there  is  a  famous  pebble 
beach,  called  the  Pescadero  Beach.  While  there  one  of  the  party  jDicked  up 
this  curious  stone  among  others,  and  it  was  given  me  by  a  lady  of  my 
acquaintance  in  the  party,  and  has  since  lain  most  of  tire  time  in  my  roller- 
to23ped  desk  in  my  study,  not  strictly  in  a  box.  There  are  mines  not  far 
■away  from  Pescadero  Beach.  I  do  not  know  whetlier  the  lady  is  dead  or  not, 
and  have  no  means  of  easily  tracing  her.  Tliere  was  a  middle-aged  gentleman 
in  tlie  party,  one  of  my  parishioners.  I  do  not  know  who  picked  up  the 
.stone. 

Mrs.  P.  's  reference  to  my  habits  as  a  smoker  is  sufficiently  accurate,  and 
any  study  looks  like  an  office.  Ella  is  the  name  of  my  wife,  and  Joseph  is 
the  name  of  my  father. 

What  Mrs.  P.  said  of  me  before  Ijecoming  entranced  was  iiraccurate  as 
regards  my  ancestry.  I  am  of  American  birth  and  jiarontage,  though  my 
ancestors,  like  those  of  most  Americans,  came  from  England. 

The  letter  was  one  not  written  to  me,  and  one  in  which  I  had  no  ])ersonal 
interest.  It  was  an  old  letter,  liearing  evident  marks  of  age  in  its  faded 
yellow  tint,  and  came  from.  England.    I  know  nothing  of  the  circumstances 

Observations  of  Certain  PlLenomena  of  Trance.  10!> 

under  which  the  letter  was  written,  and  do  not  tliink  they  could  now  be 
ascertained.  Ileferences  to  nose  and  triji  to  Europe  and  catarrhal  tendency 
all  correct.  Gertrude  and  Phil  are  the  names  of  two  of  niy  children.  The 
references  to  the  physical  condition  of  my  wife  and  son  were  substantially 
correct,  and  Phinuit  was  also  right  in  describing  us  as  a  family  of  six,  as  I 
have  four  children. 

M.  J.  Savage. 

June  27th,  1890. 

Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  writes  on  June  30th,  1890  :— 
I  have  seen  Miss  Z. 

1.  She  made  the  engagement  for  her  sitting  in  ])erson,  and  about  a  week 
in  advance.  Two  other  ladies  were  present  at  the  time,  and  she  did  not  give- 
her  name. 

2.  The  last  name  of  "Ned,"  in  her  re])ort,  begins  with  "N." 

Miss  Z.  writes,  about  June  30th  [received  July  1st,  1890]  : — 

Mr.  Hodgson, — At  the  request  of  Mr.  M.  J.  Savage,  I  write  you  an 
addition  to  the  rejjort  which  you  already  have,  of  a  sitting  which  I  had  witli 
the  medium,  Mrs.  Piper,  November  19,  1888. 

My  appointment  with  the  medium  was  made  by  myself  personally.  I  sav\- 
her  for  only  a  moment  at  the  time,  as  others  were  waiting  for  her,  and  I  Iiad 
no  conversation  whatever  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  any  other  subject  than  tlie 
time  convenient  for  her  to  give  me  for  a  seancd.  I  had  never  seen  her 
before,  and  have  never  met  her  since,  except  the  day  she  sat  to  give  me 
tests — November  19. 

The  point  which  Mr.  Savage  tells  me  you  wish  to  know  more  about 
is  in  regard  to  something  told  me  of  my  aunt,  who  was  then  in  Vermont. 
In  the  midst  of  other  tests,  and  utterly  without  suggestion  from  me,  Mrs. 
Piper  suddenly  said  she  saw  a  lady  by  the  name  of  Marie  or  Maria,  and  in 
the  room  with  her  was,  she  should  say,  her  daughter,  perhaps,  named  Estelle 
tir  Stella.  The  lady  Maria  had  some  trouble  on  the  back  of  her  hands  and 
wrists  which  looked  like  eczema.  They  were  very  troublesome  tf)  her,  but 
she  would  soon  come  to  Boston  for  a  long  visit,  and  her  health  would  be 
much  improved. 

I  have  an  aunt  Maria  living  in  Vermont,  some  one  hundred  and  hftj' 
miles  from  Boston,  who  has  a  daughter  Stella.  I  immediately  wrote  my 
aunt,  asking  if  she  had  any  trouble  with  her  hands,  and  in  about  two  days 
X'eceived  a  reply,  that  she  had  been  much  aimoyed  by  something  on  the 
back  of  her  hands,  and  extending  up  the  arms  beyond  the  wrists  a  little, 
which  she  supposed  to  be  ivy  poison,  as  she  knew  of  nothing  else  vi'hich 
could  have  caused  it.  She  later  came  to  visit  us,  which  was  unexpected  tn 
all  at  that  time,  and  as  her  health  improved  she  has  had  no  more  of  the 
trouble  with  her  hands. 

Miss  Z.  adds,  on  July  5th  : — I  knew  nothing  of  any  trouble  with  my 
aunt's  hands  or  arms  until  told  of  it  by  Mrs.  P.,  November  19th,  1888.  Then 
I  wrote  inquiring  about  it,  and  received  the  answer  whicli  I  wrote  to  you  a 
few  days  since. 

no 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

•2'.}.    Mrs.  ir.    March,  1886.  '  " 

[From  Miss  E.  R.  AVebster.] 

158,  Nortli  A\-enue.  Cambridgo. 
My  Dear  Mr.  H(jDiisox, — You  ^\ill  tiiul   enclosed  a  statement  of  tlie 
•  experience  of  tlie  lady  of  whom  T  spoke  to  yon.    It  was  wi-itten  down  as 
Mrs.  D.  t(^ld  it,  and  is  necessarily  crude,   but  I  think  contains  all  the 
facts.    .    .    .  Emily  R.  Webster. 

The  statement  eucLised  by  Miss  Webster  is  as  follows  :  — 

Jaiiiuinj  2ith,  1888. 

Mrs.  W.'s  son,  Nelson  (i.  W.,  ran  away  from  home  when  he  was  between 
fourteen  and  fifteen  years  old,  about  the  year  18B9.  From  tliat  time  she 
heard  from  him  very  irregularly,  sometimes  a  period  of  several  years 
elapsing  between  the  letters.  In  the  intervals  between  his  letters,  she  knew 
nothing  about  his  whereabtiuts,  as  he  was  roving  from  one  country  to 
another.  The  last  letter  which  liis  mother  received  from  him  was  written 
three  years  before  the  tinie  when  she  received  information  about  him  frcim 
Mrs.  Piper.  She  had  given  up  all  hope  of  seeing  him  again,  and  was 
inclined  to  think  that  he  was  dead.  She  had  been  to  Mrs.  Piper  not  [more] 
than  twice  before  the  sitting  in  question.  On  these  occasions  she  had  been 
there  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  communications  from  children  who  had 
died  a  short  time  before,  and  had  received  no  message  concerning  Nelson. 

Some  time  in  March,  1881)  (this  date  is  correct  within  a  month,  without 
4oubt),  she  went  to  Mrs.  Piper  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  some  a.s.surance 
(if  his  death,  if  nothing  more.  Mrs.  Piper  did  not  kno-\v  her  name,  and  had 
no  idea  what  she  wished  to  find  out.  She  went  into  a  trance, [however,  and 
said  without  previous  explanation,  "Yon  will  hear  from  Nelson  within  two 
weeks."  She  then  went  <jn  to  tell  her  that  the  first  letter  would  not  be  from 
Nelson,  but  from  a  friend  of  liis  (Mrs.  Piper  told  his  name,  but  the  narrator 
has  forgotten  it)  concerning  liiiu.  Tliis  would  be  follow-ed  l)y  a  letter  from 
Nelson,  the  contents  (jf  which  she  did  not  disclose.  She  then  told  Mrs.  W. 
tliat  her  son  was  coming  liome.  This  is  all  the  account  that  remains  of  the 
sitting.  Within  tlie  stated  time  the  letters  arrived,  and  later,  one  an- 
nouncing his  departure  for  hon\e.  These  letters  all  came  from  California. 
He  arrived  in  Cambridge  June  15th,  1880,  and  remained  with  his  motlier 
until  she  died,  August  10th,  188(i. 

Mrs.  W.  was  a  Spiritualist,  and  l)elieved  that  these  communications 
came  from  the  spirit- world,  but  immediately  on  her  return  from  Mrs. 
Piper's,  she  told  her  sister  of  the  information  she  had  received,  so  tlie  vision 
was  not  coloured  by  the  light  of  suljsequent  events. 

This  above  account  is  given  by  tliis  sister,  who  hereby  testifies  to  its 
correctness.  Mrs.  II.  A.  D. 

Mrs.  D.  related  this  incident  to  me  a  day  or  two  after  her  sister  told  her, 
and  before  Mrs.  W.'s  s<jn  had  returned.  Emily  R.  Webster. 

In  re)>ly  to  further  ini|uiries  Miss  Webster  wrote  : — 

No  record  w'as  ever  made  of  Mrs.  W.'s  experience  with  Mrs.  Piper. 
Mrs.  D.  related  it  from  memory,  and  the  only  strengthening  evidence  we 

Ohservailons  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  Ill 

liave  is  that  of  my  memory,  according  to  wliieh  lier  last  account  varied  scarcely 
at  all  from  her  first  one,  given  shortly  after  the  events  occurred.  It  is  not 
probable  that  the  letters  exist,  for  the  son  destroyed  all  his  mother's  papers 
after  her  death.  There  is  no  independent  evidence  to  confirm  the  date  of 
the  sitting,  unless  Mrs.  Piper  has  it,  wliicli  is  unlikely,  as  she  did  not  know 
Mrs.  W.  's  name.  The  dates  of  tlie  letters  too  are  unobtainable.  The  son 
returned  on  the  Panama  steamer  which  reached  New  York  on  or  about  the 
16tli  of  .Tune,  188(5.    Tlie  name  has  gone  from  Mrs.  D.'s  mind. 

Mrs.  Browne  {ne'e  Webster)  writes  on  February  16th,  1890  : — 

'*  I  have  seen  Mrs.  D.  this  afternoon,  and  asked  her  if  Mrs.  Piper  gave 
tlie  correct  name  of  the  person  wlio  wrote  to  Mrs.  W.  about  her  son.  She 
is  absolutely  sure  that  she  did.  Tliis  coincides  with  my  impression  of  the 
story  as  Mrs.  D.  told  it  to  me."' 

30.    MisA  A.  M.  R. 

Boston,  Fehnutnj  lith,  1888. 
I  have  had  a  number  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  I  think  thirteen  within 
tlie  past  three  years,  at  intei-vals  of  some  months.  At  the  first  sitting  I  tried 
to  get  some  information  regarding  a  friend  who  had  tlien  lieen  dead  about  three 
months.  I  was  told  by  Dr.  Phinuit,  the  medium's  regular  '■  control,''  that  I 
probably  would  not  get  anything  satisfactory  for  some  time,  and  was  advised 
to  wait  about  eight  months.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  I  sat  again,  and 
At  the  third  sitting  from  that  time  (I  think  my  dates  are  correct)  the  medium 
was  controlled  for  a  few  minutes  during  tlie  hour  hy  what  purported  to  lie 
the  spirit  of  ray  friend,  who,  however,  seemed  to  have  such  imperfect  control 
that  he  could  only  speak  in  a  choked,  whispering  voice.  At  the  next  sitting 
he  was  stronger,  and  now  is  able  to  take  control  and  talk  easily  and  distinctly 
for  perliaps  half  an  hour.  I  have  received  the  impression,  from  what  has 
been  told  me  tlirougli  the  medium,  that  for  some  months  after  the  death  of 
my  friend  he  did  not  sufficiently  understand  the  conditions  of  his  new  exist- 
ence, or  the  conditions  under  wliicli  lie  could  return,  to  be  able  to  reach  me 
through  any  medium. 

A.  M.  R. 

Boston,  Decemher  17//',  1888. 

I  spent  a  very  pleasant  evening  with  Mrs.  Piper  a  week  ag(j  Saturday, 
nnd  had  an  interesting  sitting. 

My  friend  took  control  first.  He  used  to  be  lame  ;  liad  a  fall  when 
he  was  a  baby,  and  one  leg  was  shorter  than  the  other,  and  he  always 
walked  with  a  crutch,  stepping  only  on  one  foot.  He  has  often  said  to  me 
-'You  know  my  lame  leg  ;  well,  that  is  all  well  now."  This  evenino'  lie  sat 
ftbout  five  or  six  feet  from  my  folding  bed,  on  which  were  some  ornaments. 
I  asked  him  if  he  thought  he  could  walk  over  there,  and  he  tried  very  hard 
to  raise  himself  from  the  chair,  without  succeeding  at  first.  I  told  liim  he 
had  better  not  try,  as  it  might  Ite  too  much  for  the  medium.  He  insisted  ou 
trying,  however,  but  commenced  rubbing  one  leg,  and  asked  me  if  I 
remembered  which  leg  was  lame.  At  last  he  raised  liimself,  but  instead  of 
walking,  as  Dr.  P.  wouhl  do,  lie  leaned  heavily  on  me,  and  seemed  to  liop 

112 

Mr.  R.  Hodyson. 

or  hitch  along  on  one  foot,  exactly  as  a  person  would  do  who  could  only  use- 
one  foot  in  walking.  After  he  came  back,  he  dropped  into  the  chair 
exhausted,  and  said  that  was  the  hardest  work  he  had  done  since  coming 
back,  and  that  it  was  too  much  of  the  real  life  for  him  ;  he  did  not  like  it  ; 
he  was  very  glad  to  have  had  the  opportunity  to  handle  the  articles  with  the 
hands  of  the  medium,  because  now  he  could  handle  them  with  his  spirit 
hands,  but  he  did  not  like  it  ;  he  would  rather  sit  in  the  chair  and  talk. 

I  had  both  of  them  write  their  names  on  a  block  of  paper,  with  my  name. 
The  two  styles  of  handwriting  were  very  different  ;  both  were  scrawly,  but  I 
think  I  can  detect  quite  a  strong  resemblance  in  the  capital  letter  H  to  my 
friend's  old  handwriting,  which  was  peculiar,  although  he  did  not  spell  his 
own  Christian  name  right.  ...  I  handed  my  friend  a  grape,  and 
asked  him  what  it  was.  He  insisted  that  it  was  an  orange.  Then  I  handed 
him  an  orange,  and  asked  what  that  was.  He  said  it  was  a  ball  ;  did  not 
know  what  else  to  call  it.  I  tried  the  same  thing  with  Dr.  P.,  and  he  called 
them  by  their  right  names  at  once.  I  told  him  the  mistake  my  friend  had 
made,  and  he  said,  "  Well,  he  does  not  handle  things  in  the  material  world 
as  much  as  I  do  ;  he  is  as  much  above  sensing  an  orange  as  you  would  be 
above  your  dead  body  if  you  had  2:)assed  out  of  it,"  or  words  to  that  effect. 

I  asked  my  friend  if  he  would  not  get  my  sister,  who  seemed  to  be  there, 
and  Dr.  P.  and  all  to  stand  back  of  me  when  the  medium  returned,  to  see  if 
she  could  not  see  them.  So  when  half  out  of  her  trance  she  exclaimed  at  some- 
thing which  she  saw.  She  described  afterwards  three  persons  whom  she  saw — 
two  gentlemen  and  one  lady — and  also  some  beautiful  flowers.  I  have  had 
a  similar  experience  with  her  twice  before.  On  one  of  these  occasions  she 
described  my  friend  (referred  to  above)  in  general  terms,  and  added  :  ' '  His- 
nose  was  just  a  little  bit  crooked."  This  amused  me,  as  my  friend  and  I, 
before  his  death,  frequently  disputed  as  to  the  straightness  of  his  nose,  and 
I  always  maintained  that  it  was  slightly  crooked.  I  am  satisfied  that  Mrs. 
Piper  could  have  known  nothing  whatever  of  this. 

A.  M.  E. 

Boston,  Mass.,  June  23nl,  1890. 
I  have  had  a  number  of  sittings  since  the  date  of  my  last  letter  to  you,, 
and  have  made  notes  of  what  was  said  within  a  short  time  after  the  sittings. 
At  each  sitting  I  have  conversed  with  two  personalities,  Dr.  P. ,  the  regular 
control,  ;uid  the  control  which  claims  to  be  the  spirit  of  my  friend  H.  I 
cannot  give  you  very  mucli  in  the  nature  of  tests,  as  most  of  my  conversation 
with  Dr.  P.  was  of  a  personal  nature,  consisting  of  advice,  &c. ,  more 
interesting  to  me  than  it  would  be  to  anyone  else.  He  recognises  me  each 
time  as  an  old  friend,  and  remembers  a  great  deal  of  what  he  has  said  to  me- 
at previous  sittings  ;  in  fact,  his  memory  seems  to  be  quite  a  remarkable  one. 
He  has  jirophesied  a  number  of  material  changes  which  are  to  come  into  my 
life,  and  which  I  do  not  foresee.  At  first  he  mentioned  the  time  which  he 
thought  would  elapse  before  these  changes  would  take  place  ;  but  when  the 
sjjecified  time  passed,  and  nothing  happened,  he  said  that  the  changes- 
jjrojjliesied  would  certainly  come  about,  but  that  he  could  not  tell  definitely 
in  regard  to  time.  Several  unimjiortant  things  have  happened  which  he  said 
would  happen  ;  for  instance,  that  a  certain  person  whom  I  had  not  seen  for 
a  long  time  was  coming  to  see  me,  &c.    A  lady  with  whom  I  am  well 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  113 

acquainted  at  one  time  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  Dr.  P.  told  lier 
slie  was  not  going  to  marry  a  certain  gentleman  with  wliom  she  was  at  the 
time  very  friendly.  This  lady's  name  was  K.  At  a  later  date,  at  a  sitting 
of  my  own,  I  told  Dr.  P.  that  he  must  have  made  a  mistake  in  regard  to  K. , 
as  she  was  engaged  to  tlie  gentleman  mentioned,  and  expected  to  be  married 
shortly.  He  excused  himself  by  saying  that  he  had  had  only  one  sitting  with 
K.,  and  did  not  get  the  right  influence  ;  that  she  was  very  mediumistic 
herself,  and  weakened  him  when  talking  with  her  ;  but  he  added  that 
"  there  was  many  a  slip  'twixt  cup  and  lip."  It  turned  out  that  K.  never  did 
marry  the  gentleman  in  Cjuestion,  as  he  was  taken  with  a  hemorrhage,  and 
died  quite  suddenly  a  few  months  after  their  engagement.  Dr.  P.  has 
described  living  friends  of  mine  very  accurately,  one  in  particular  whom  I 
remember,  witli  whom  the  medium  was  not  acquainted,  and  whom  I  think 
she  had  never  seen. 

When  my  friend  H.  takes  control  of  the  medium  it  seems  to  be  quite  a 
different  pei-sonality,  although  there  is  something  in  the  voice  or  manner  of 
speaking  that  is  like  Dr.  P.  The  voice,  however,  is  not  nearly  so  loud. 
When  I  asked  him  once  why  this  was,  he  told  me  that  Dr.  P.  was  right  by 
him  and  that  he  could  not  stay  a  moment  without  his  help.  In  a  great 
many  little  ways  he  is  quite  like  what  my  friend  used  to  be  when  living,  so 
much  so  that  I  am  afraid  it  would  take  a  great  deal  of  explanation  to  make 
me  believe  that  his  identical  self  had  not  something  to  do  with  it,  wholly 
apart  from  the  medium's  powers  or  from  anything  that  may  be  in  my  own 
mind  concerning  him.  This,  too,  in  si^ite  of  the  fact  that  he  does  not 
alwaiis  know  how  to  spell  his  own  name  correctly,  though  I  am  happy  to  be 
able  to  state  that  he  certainly  knoivs  what  his  name  is.  He  says  the  longer 
he  is  away  the  more  he  forgets  about  things  in  this  life,  though  he  does  not 
forget  his  friends.  In  one  of  the  earlier  sittings  he  gave  the  name  of  a 
mutual  acquaintance,  a  gentleman  with,  whom  he  was  very  friendly  just 
before  he  died.  Also  in  one  of  the  early  sittings  he  asked  me  if  I  did  not 
remember  about  his  lameness,  saying  that  his  spiritual  body  was  not  lame, 
but  that  he  had  to  come  back  that  way  so  that  I  would  recognise  him.  This 
was  before  he  was  able  to  take  control  himself.  He  insists  that  he  can  see- 
me  in  my  room,  and  often  knows  what  I  am  doing.  At  one  time  he  asked 
me  how  I  liked  that  little  drab-coloured  book  that  I  had  been  reading  with 
another  person.  There  was  a  particuha-  book  which  I  had  been  reading 
aloud  with  a  friend,  but  it  was  covered  with  brown  paper,  as  I  remember,  and 
I  had  no  idea  what  the  cloth  cover  was.  On  reaching  liome  I  took  off  the 
paper  cover,  and  found  that  it  was  a  drab-coloured  cloth  cover.  I  may  have- 
seen  the  book  when  new,  and  before  the  paper  cover  was  put  on,  but  if  I  did 
I  had  completely  forgotten  about  it.  I  asked  him  one  time  if  he  could  tell 
where  I  had  been  that  day.  He  said  I  had  been  in  a  box  with  windows,  and 
had  taken  out  a  pencil  and  written,  that  after  that  I  went  in  something  else 
with  horses,  then  into  a  buildhig,  where  he  left  me.  I  had  that  day  been  in 
a  drawing-room  car  of  a  railroad  train,  and  had  done  some  writing  e)i  roufe^ 
had  then  taken  a  carriage  to  my  destination. 

When  I  talk  with  H.  about  the  philosophy  of  spirit  return,  he  always 
seems  more  or  less  puzzled,  and  generally  refers  me  to  Dr.  P. ,  saying  that  he 
knows  more  about  such  things.   He  hardly  knew  at  first  what  I  meant  by  the 

I 

114 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

medium,  but  says  that  he  has  for  the  time  being  another  organism,  and  that 
is  about  all  he  knows.  When  he  asked  me  why  I  did  not  come  oftener  to 
see  him,  I  explained  to  him,  somewhat  as  I  would  to  a  child,  that  the  medium 
was  not  always  at  command,  and  that  I  had  to  pay  money  for  a  sitting  with 
her.  He  said,  "I  am  an  expensive  article,  then?"  I  replied,  "Yes,  you 
spirits  are  quite  expensive  articles." 

A.  M.  R. 

31.  Miss  A.  A.  B.,  Boston.    Jannanj  or  Fehruar}j,  1888. 

Jidy  nth,  1890. 

Your  letter  to  my  mother  .  .  .  was  received.  She  does  not  think 
her  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  was  of  sufJicient  interest  to  report.  I  had  one 
sitting,  and  will  send  you  the  account  of  some  portions  of  it,  and  you  can 
use  it  or  not,  as  you  see  fit.    I  wrote  it  out  quite  fully  at  the  time. 

I  went  to  Mrs.  Piper  chiefly  to  see  if  she  could  tell  me  of  some  china  we 
had  lost.  It  had  been  stored  during  a  long  absence  in  Europe,  and  upon  our 
return  we  could  not  find  it.  It  was  taken  from  our  house,  among  other 
things,  by  a  man  who  had  been  in  our  employ  for  many  years.  There  was 
no  thought  in  my  mind  of  his  dishonesty.  I  said  nothing  about  it  to 
Mrs.  Piper  either  before  or  during  the  trance,  and  she  did  not  even  know  my 
name.  I  was  determined  to  give  her  no  clue  of  any  kind,  and  only  once 
asked  a  leading  question,  and  then  purposely  to  see  if  she  would  take  the 
opportunity  to  build  anything  from  it. 

She  began  by  speaking  of  my  father's  illness,  describing  accurately  his 
symjatoms,  and  said  his  sLster  Emmeline  (who  had  died  many  years  ago)  was 
watching  over  him,  and  that  he  would  be  much  better  in  the  fall.  This  latter 
proved  true.  Then  she  said,  "You  have  lost  some  china,  and  you  feel  very 
badly  about  it.  It  was  taken  from  your  home  by  a  man  who  has  been  in 
the  employ  of  your  family  a  long  time.  It  is  in  his  surroundings  now.  You 
must  get  him  to  restore  it,  but  do  not  accuse  him  of  having  taken  it.  He 
has  already  been  spoken  to  about  it,  and  thinks  you  suspect  him.  It  was  a 
very  wicked  thing  for  him  to  do,  very."  Several  months  after  Mrs.  Piper 
told  me  this,  the  china  was  found  precisely  where  it  had  been  first  placed, 
and  where  it  had  been  overlooked,  as  the  box  was  believed  to  contain 
■something  else. 

Mrs.  Pijjer  continued,  "There  is  a  Mary  here,  who  wishes  to  speak  to 
you.  Do  you  know  who  I  mean  ?  "  "  No,"  I  said.  She  went  on  speaking 
of  other  things,  finally  broke  oft' — "This  Mary  says  you  wi»(.s^  understand  who 
■she  is."  I  said  I  could  not  think  who  it  could  be.  Again,  after  speaking  of 
other  things,  "  Mary  will  not  go  away.  You  have  a  friend  Lizzie,  haven't 
you?"  "Yes."  "  Well,  it  is  her  sister.  She  had  such  a  bad  cough.  Now 
do  you  know  her  ?  "  "  Yes."  "She  wants  me  to  tell  you  to  tell  Lizzie  that 
she  is  happy,  and  .she  doesn't  cough  now,  and  she  sends  her  love."  All  this 
very  emphatically.  Mary  I  had  never  seen  ;  she  died  years  ago  in 
consumption,  before  I  knew  Lizzie,  and  without  the  explanation  I  should 
never  have  thought  of  her.  Once  again  Mrs.  Piper  returned  to  her,  and 
said,  "Mary  is  still  here,  and  wants  you  very  much  to  tell  Lizzie  that  she 
wants  to  see  her,"  adding,  "you  will  tell  her,  won't  you  ? " 

The  one  rather  leading  question  I  asked  was  if  an  aunt  for  whom  I  was 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  115 

named  was  present.  She  said,  "No.  Do  you  wish  to  speak  with  her?" 
"Yes."  "  Then  I  will  have  to  call  her."  In  a  moment  she  said,  "  She  does 
not  come  ;  I  can't  find  her.  Did  she  pass  away  a  long  time  ago  1  "  "Yes, 
many  years."  "That  is  the  reason  she  does  not  come.  She  has  grown  too 
far  away  from  this  world. "  "  Do  they,  then,  forget  this  world?"  I  asked. 
■"  All  that  is  material  is  forgotten  as  of  no  consequence.  It  is  all  a  spiritual 
growth,  and  all  spiritual  growth  here  will  help  you  there. " 

"Did  you  ever  own  a  bird  ?  "  "  Yes."  "It  is  a  parrot,  and  is  flying  all 
about  your  head  now."  "  Do  birds,  then,  have  another  life  V  "I  tell  you 
this — anything  that  you  have  liad  liere  and  want  there  again,  you  will  have. 
You  will  have  that  parrot  again."  I  never  owned  but  one  bird,  and  that 
was  a  grey  parrot. 

"Do  you  expect  to  go  to  a  party  in  a  few  days?"  "No."  "Well,  you 
will.  Witliin  three  days  I  see  you  in  a  large  company."  I  did  go  in  just 
three  days,  most  unexpectedly.  Another  prophecy,  that  she  saw  me  across 
the  ocean  within  two  years,  was  not  fulfilled.  She  described  accurately  my 
home  surroundings  and  my  life.  She  spoke  of  a  number  of  persons  being 
present,  always  giving  the  name,  and  several  times  naming  the  member 
•of  the  family  to  wliom  they  sent  a  message.  She  also  mentioned  a  number 
of  names  that  I  did  not  know  at  all. 

These  are  the  chief  points  of  the  sitting,  I  think,  though  I  have  not  by 
me  the  report  I  wrote  at  the  time.  It  made  a  deep  impression  upon  me.  I 
shall  be  much  interested  in  the  report  of  the  Society. — Yours  very  truly, 

(Miss)  A.  A.  B. 

Miss  B.  writes  on  July  17th,  1890  :— 

I  cannot  give  you  the  precise  date  of  my  sitting,  but  it  was  a  month  or 
two  after  my  mother's,  in  January  or  February  of  1888.  My  motlier  made 
my  engagement  without  mentioning  for  whom  she  made  it. 

The  original  di'aft  of  my  interview  is  in  our  town  house,  and  in  a  day  or 
two  I  will  go  in  and  get  it,  and  then  add  some  otlier  matter.  If  I  remember 
rightly,  the  rest  of  it  was  so  very  personal  I  should  hesitate  to  publish  it 
even  without  my  name.  I  will  then  try  to  give  you  some  statement  of  my 
mother's  sitting. 

Miss  B.  writes  on  July  21st,  1890  :— 

I  will  add  from  my  notes  upon  my  sitting  witli  Mrs.  Piper  what  I  have 
omitted  from  my  first  paper. 

"You  have  a  brother  William  in  the  spirit-land."  ...  I  had  a 
brother  William  who  died  when  a  child. 

' '  I  see  you  painting.  You  get  too  absorbed  and  get  very  tired.  Work 
for  lialf  an  hour  and  then  walk  about  the  room.  You  are  not  strong  enougK 
to  work  steadily."  .  .  .  You  were  very  strong  once,  but  for  some  reason 
lost  your  health.  But  you  are  much  better,  and  will  be  very  well  again.  You 
are  made  of  good  material,  and  there  is  no  disease."  It  is  true  I  was 
particularly  strong,  but  was  poisoned  and  for  some  years  was  much  out  of 

IIG 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

health.  When  I  saw  Mrs.  Pijjer  I  was  much  better.  My  painting  affected 
me  as  she  said. 

She  sijoke  of  different  friends  in  the  spirit-land  as  being  present,  only 
saying  of  them  that  they  were  very  hajjpy. 

She  broke  off  very  abruptly  once  and  said,  Who  is  Sadie  ?  "  "I  do  not 
know."  "Yes,  you  do.  She  says  she  did  not  know  you,  but  knew  Lettie. 
She  had  a  cancer  in  her  cheek — now  you  know  ? "  "  Yes."  "She  says,  give 
her  love  to  Lettie."  This  whs  a  young  girl  whom  I  had  never  seen,  who  died 
as  described,  and  of  whom  I  had  heard  much  from  "Lettie." 

Cei'tain  other  incidents  of  my  life  she  described  with  perfect  correctness, 
and  the  sitting  closed. 

Of  my  mother's  sitting  I  can  give  you  but  very  little,  as  she  had  for- 
gotten much  of  it.  She  spoke  first  of  my  father's  illness,  saying  that  was 
the  most  important  thing  in  her  life  then.  She  described  correctly  his 
symptoms,  and  told  her,  as  she  had  told  me,  that  Emmelinc  was  watching 
over  him.  She  described  her  home  and  surroundings  correctly,  particularly 
mentioning  Ainiie,  my  mother's  maid,  as  being  such  a  very  nice  j^erson,  and 
said  she  would  live  with  us  a  long  time. 

She  also  spoke  of  a  brother  "Joe,"  who  lived  a  long  way  across  the 
country,  and  who  would  come  into  her  life  in  some  important  matter.  The 
brother  lives  in  Cleveland,  and  "  the  imj^ortant  matter  "  has  not  yet  trans- 
pired. She  spoke  of  Judge  B.,  and  my  mother  said  she  knew  no  such 
person.  Mrs.  P.  said,  "Your  husband  will  know  him.  Ask  him  when 
you  go  home."  My  niother  did  so,  and  found  he  was  an  old  and  particular 
friend  of  my  father's,  who  died  many  years  ago.  My  mother  never  knew  him. 

32.  Mr.  A.  J.  a,  Mcriden,  Conn.    About  Febnumj,  1889. 

Miss  A.  A.  B.  [see  the  preceding  account]  writes  on  July  17th,  1890  : — ■ 

I  enclose  to  you  a  statement  of  a  sitting  my  uncle,  Mr.  A.  J.  C,  had  with 
Mrs.  Piper.  I  made  the  appointment  for  him,  about  one  year  after  I  had 
my  sitting.  I  made  the  engagement  in  my  own  name,  but  did  not  mention 
for  whom  I  made  it.  The  remarks  in  regard  to  my  uncle  are  very  accurate, 
as  he  is  very  much  of  a  recluse,  living  among  his  books,  much  attached  to 
his  home,  and  with  the  great  aversion  to  medicine  which  she  amusingly 
illustrates.  He  is  also  "open  to  conviction,"  but  hard  to  convince.  Since 
he  has  put  down  the  prophecy  of  my  going  to  Europe  and  marrying  there,  I 
will  add  to  the  statement  she  made  me  on  this  subject,  which  I  omitted  in  my 
account,  that  she  said  I  would  be  in  very  congenial  company  there  ;  that  I 
would  marry  and  be  very  happy  ;  and  with  much  emphasis,  putting  her  liand 
in  mine,  "This  will  certainly  happen,  and  when  it  comes  to  you  you  will 
remember  what  I  tell  yiju."  I  mention  it  as  being  rather  remarkable,  her 
telling  this  to  both  of  us,  tlie  sittings  being  a  year  apart,  and  I  having  had 
no  communication  with  her  in  tlie  meantime. 

[Account  by  Mr.  A.  J.  C] 

"  I  am  Dr.  Favineau  [Phinuit].    What  do  you  want  ?  " 

"  You  h  ive  in  your  surroundings  William.    He  is  not  well  and  does  not 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  117 

hike  good  care   of  himself."     (This  statement,  if  made  concerning  Mr. 

William  ,  my  brother-in-law,  at  whose  house  I  was  a  visitor,  would  be 

true. ) 

' '  Henry  is  here  in  the  spirit — says  he  is  a  friend  of  yours,  but  considerably 
younger  ;  knew  your  family  well ;  there  is  something  about  over  the  water." 
(I  did  not  at  first  think  of  Henry  "C,"  and,  upon  my  saying  that  I  did  not 
know  who  was  meant,  the  remark  about  "  over  the  water  "  was  made,  and 
this  reminded  me  of  Henry  "C,"  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  witli  whom  I  had 
planned  a  European  trip.  It  seems  he  had  spoken  of  it  to  his  friends,  for  it 
was  mentioned  in  his  obituary  published  in  the  Hartfurd  Conmnt.)  "  Gives 
you  his  love."  "1  see  you  in  your  library — books  all  around  and  a  desk 
there.  There  are  four  in  your  family.  I  see  a  lady — she  is  your  sister  ; 
your  mother  is  there — she  is  lame  in  this  (riglit)  foot.  There  is  a  little 
girl — not  so  very  little — she  is  a  sister's  child  ;  she  plays  music  a  great 
deal." 

Is  the  sister  who  is  with  me  older  or  younger  than  I  ? 

"  She  is  a  great  deal  older  ;  at  least,  she  looks  so.  I  see  your  fatlier's 
picture,  with  a  remarkable  expression  ;  no  hair  on  top  of  his  head  ;  hair 
around  the  base.  You  have  had  trouble  with  irregularity  of  heart  action. 
You  thought  something  might  be  the  matter  with  the  heart.  But  there  was 
nothing.  It  was  nervous,  sympathetic  ;  came  from  the  -stomach.  You  must 
be  very  particular  about  your  diet.  Be  careful  what  you  eat.  About  two 
years  ago  you  made  a  change  which  was  very  beneficial." 

Shall  I  take  medicine  '? 

' '  No,  there  is  no  use  giving  you  medicine.  You  are  not  that  kind  of  a 
man.  You  would  let  the  vials  stand  until  the  bottoms  dropped  out  before 
you.  would  take  it.  Do  you  know  fussy  willow  ?  You  can  take  some  of  tliat 
and  pour  on  boiling  water  and  let  it  stand,  and  take  a  wine-glass  full  of  that 
if  you  like. 

"I  don't  like  your  mother's  condition,  but  she  will  live  a  good  while  yet. 
You  lead  a  very  regular,  quiet  life,  with  nothing  to  excite  you,  and  are  in 
comfortable  circumstances,  financially,  and  it  will  be  a  long  time  before 
you  are  in  the  sjiirit-land.  There  is  one  Tom  here,  and  says  that  he  is  a 
friend  of  yours — that  his  family  lived  near  you.  His  hair  is  very  grey — 
says,  remember  him  to  his  wife.  Your  father  is  here  :  says  you  thought  of 
doing  something  to  your  house  ;  that  you  had  l^etter  postpone.  You  will  go 
iiway  within  two  years  on  account  of  somebody's  health." 

Do  you  mean  permanently  ? 

' '  No.    You  are  so  settled  that  nothing  on  earth  can  take  you  away. 
Your  mother's  mind  is  preserved  remarkably.    Is  it  not  wonderful  V' 
How  many  are  her  family  ? 

"  Five  brothers — three  are  living — two  in  the  spirit.     Three  sisters." 
Wrong.    There  are  five  sisters. 

' '  I  can  see  only  three.  Your  sister  who  is  with  you  has  had  trouble 
with  one  tooth  since  you  came  away.  Your  niece,  who  is  with  you,  has  a 
humour,  a  breaking  out. "  I  don't  think  so.  "She  has.  Ask  your  sister 
and  she  will  tell  you.  You  are  staying  with  friends  here — a  sister.  You 
have  a.  niece  who  paints.  She  will  go  to  Europe  within  two  years  and  meet 
some  one  there  whom  she  will  marry.    You  have  a  friend,  the  last  three 

118 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

letters  of  whose  name  are  '  S — 0 — N.'  He  is  at  a  distance  from  here.  You 
have  a  grandmother  in  the  spirit  named  Elizabeth.  One  of  your  grand- 
mothers had  a  relative  named  Sarah,  who  died  from  a  sore  in  her  side.  Your 
mother  will  know  about  it.  You  deal  in  real  estate."  No.  "There  is 
something  about  land — I  see  land."  I  own  land.  "  Hurry  and  ask  your 
questions.    I  am  tired. 

"  You  do  not  readily  believe.  You  are  willing  to  receive  evidence,  but 
hard  to  convince.  You  have  been  around  a  good  deal,  and  know  the  world 
well." 

I  do  not  remember  the  precise  date  of  my  visit  to  Mrs.  Piper.  I  think 
it  was  in  February,  1889.  My  niece  made  the  appointment  for  me,  giving 
her  no  inforniation  regarding  me.  I  waited  about  an  hour  in  the  parlour 
while  she  was  occuj^ied  with  another.  Dr.  Savage,  she  said,  and  said  that  she 
was  tired.  At  my  first  leisure,  two  or  three  days  afterwards,  I  wrote  out  the 
above,  putting  down  what  she  said  in  the  order  in  which  it  was  said,  ai> 
nearly  as  I  could  recollect. 

In  the  early  jjart  her  statements  were,  in  the  main,  positive  and 
emjihatic.  Afterwards,  especially  at  the  last,  mostly  tentative  and  inter- 
rogatory, and  at  the  last,  in  response  to  my  in(iuiries  for  names  of  friends  in 
the  sjiirit-land  (made  for  the  purpose  of  testing  her  powers),  lior  guesses 
were  no  better  than  anyone  could  make.  She  many  times  repeated,  ' '  I  am 
tired." 

All  the  statements  relative  to  my  family  wore  strikingly  accurate,  except 
as  to  the  number  of  my  sisters,  and  that  relative  to  my  sister  having  trouble 
v.'ith  her  tootli.  My  niece  had  the  humour  or  breaking  out,  although  I  was 
not  aware  of  it,  and  questioned  it. 

Mother  was  at  the  time  nearly  eighty-eight,  now  jmst  ninety,  and  still  a 
cyclopfedia  of  historical,  literary,  and  general  information. 

The  diagnosis  for  me  was  correct,  so  far  as  I  know  or  can  judge.  The 
family  physician  had  exam-ined  me  for  heart  trouble  and  said  substantially 
the  same,  and  a  system  of  dieting  adopted  two  years  previously  had  helped 
me  greatly. 

Father's  picture  is  as  described.  (It  represents  him  at  eighty-hve.  He 
died  at  ninety-three.)  There  was  a  "  Tom,"  commonly  so-called  (Thomas 
Clark),  answering  the  description,  who  married  my  cousin  and  removed  from 
here  to  California,  where  he  died,  a  full  believer  in  the  Spiritualistic  faith. 

Father's  mother's  name  was  Elizabeth.  I  was  thinking  of  doing  some- 
thing to  the  house  wliicli  is  not  yet  done.  Mother  knows  nothing  of  the 
"Sarah."  The  prophecies  regarding  my  niece  and  myself  have  not  been 
fulfilled. 

My  recollection  of  the  order  in  whicli  the  statements  were  made  was 
approximate  only.  There  was  no  connection  between  them,  but  abrupt 
changes  of  subject. 

Before  the  seance  Mrs.  P.  asked  if  I  came  for  medical  advice.  I  said, 
"No,"  my  object  being  merely  to  investigate,  to  witness  myself 
plienomena  of  which  I  had  heard. 

A.  J.  C. 

Meriden,  Conn.,  Jahj  lotli,  1890. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  119 

33.  3Ir.  F.  S.  S.     Record  of  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper  {about  June,  1888]. 

The  following  record  was  written  immediately  after  returning  from  Mrs. 
P.  's  house  : — 

A  week  before  the  stance  recorded  below,  I  went  with  another  man,  both 
of  us  unknown  to  Mrs.  Pij^er,  to  make  an  ajjpointment.  She  gave  us  a 
sitting  at  that  time,  but  with  no  success.  1  I  then  made  an  appointment  for  a 
week  ahead,  not  through  the  Psychical  Society,  but  on  my  own  account,  and 
not  giving  my  name.  My  friend,  subsequently  to  my  second  stance,  assured 
me  that  he  had  given  no  information  of  any  kind  whatever  to  Mrs.  P.,  or  to 
anyone  else.  At  the  second  meeting  the  medium  soon  began  to  talk  in  the 
usual  broken  English  dialect,  so  dear  to  mediums,  as  follows  : — 

' '  There  is  a  '  Lou '  in  your  surroundings.  She  is  Louise,  but  she 
called  'Lou.'  "  (My  sister  has  a  step-daughter  of  this  name.)  "  There  are 
five  of  you  ;  three  brothers,  one  of  them  Harry."  (Answer  :  "No,  Harry 
is  a  brother-in-law."  I  have  one  own  brother.)  "  Then  there  are  Lizzie  and 
Fanny,  who  are  associated  together."  (My  brother-in-law  has  two  sisters, 
Lizzie  and  Fanny.)  "Lou  is  now  with  Lizzie."  (They  were  at  the  time 
together  at  Greenfield,  Mass.)  "Lou  and  Harry  are  associated"  (father 
and  daughter),  "and  Lizzie  and  Fanny"  (sisters).  "  Then  there  is  your 
mother."  (Question:  What  is  she  like?)  "She  wears  her  hair,  which  is 
wavy  and  grey,  drawn  simply  back  on  the  sides  "  (accompanied  by  gesture 
exactly  indicating).  "She  has  a  very  sweet  face,  and  pleasant  smile."  (Two 
marked  characteristics.)  "She  has  a  sister  ;  she  is  Sarah."  (Question  : 
Well,  Sarah  is  her  middle  name.  What  is  her  other?  Could  not  answer.) 
"She  is  difl'erent  from  your  mother  ;  has  very  original  ways  of  thinking,  and 
ideas.  She  is  very  positive  ;  set  as  the  hills  ;  and  doesn't  believe  in  me. 
She  is  a  crank,  and  so  am  I,  but  she  will  have  to  be  a  good  deal  bigger  th.an 
she  is  to  scare  me." 

(Tliis  part  of  the  conversation  is  very  interesting,  as  it  bristles  with  many 
facts.  My  aunt  is  of  very  different  nature  and  temperament  from  my  mother 
in  many  ways.  Her  thought  is  original  ;  she  is  progressive  and  radical  in  her 
ideas.  Positiveness  and  firmness  are  most  certainly  characteristics  of  hers. 
My  aunt  had  given  several  sittings  to  Mrs.  P. ,  \mt  with  no  success  ;  hence 
she  had  become  somewhat  sceptical ;  hence  the  medium's  words,  "  She  does 
not  believe  in  me."  Mrs.  P.  had  no  possible  means  of  associating  my  aunt 
and  me,  to  my  knowledge,  as  neither  of  us  had  spoken  of  the  other  to  the 
medium.  Her  allusions  to  her  "  having  to  be  a  good  deal  bigger  than  she  is 
now,  &c.,"  are  also  very  pertinent.) 

"  You  and  your  brother  have  lately  had  a  change."  (Question  :  What  do 
you  mean  ?)  "Your  domestic  relations  have  changed,  you  are  living  in  a 
different  place."  (My  parents  had  lately  died,  and  my  brother  and  I  had 
moved  from  the  house  where  we  had  all  lived. )  ' '  There  is  somebody  in 
your  surroundings  who  is  lame."  (I  had  been  lame  ofi'  and  on  for  several 
years,  from  an  injury  to  the  shin-bone  from  a  blow.  At  the  time  of  ray  visit 
to  Mrs.  P.  there  was  no  trace  of  lameness  in  my  gait.    Question  :  What  is 

^  I  learn  from  Mr.  S.  that  Mr.s.  Piper  tried  but  was  unable  to  go  into  trance  on 
this  first  occasion.    Both  Mr.  S.  and  his  companion  are  well  known  to  me. — R.H, 

120 

j\Ir.  B.  Hodgson. 

the  matter  ?)  "He  is  lame  here  below  the  knee,  on  the  shin.  It  is  like  an 
accident  ;  there  is  a  growth  of  some  kind."  (This  was  said  before  touching 
the  place.  There  had  been  some  enlargement  of  the  periosteum.)  "  Yes, 
Frank  " — (I  had  previously  mentioned  my  first  name  in  course  of  inquiry) 
— "  has  had  a  good  deal  of  trouble  with  the  knee.  You  don't  sleep  well,  do 
you?  Your  condition  is  poor  from  wakefvilness."  (Perfectly  true. )  "You 
have  been  on  a  journey  lately  for  your  health."  (Question:  Where?) 
Answer  :  ' '  Isn't  there  a  place  called  Now  Y(5rk  ?  Well,  you  went  in  that 
direction  and  then  south."  (I  had  been  shortly  before  this  for  a  change  and 
for  my  liealtli  as  far  south  as  Aiken,  S.C.)  "  You  will  take  another  journey 
before  long.  You  will  be  called  away  by  another's  illness. "  [This  did  not 
come  true.]  "  I  can't  see  it  all  definitely,  but  you  will  go  away  in  about  a 
month." 

"  Is  there  any  hiW  on  your  mind  ?  "  (Question  :  Bill,  wliat  do  you  mean 
— wliat  kind  of  bill?)  "A  bill,  or  a  mortgage,  or  anything?  Are  you 
tliinking  of  buying  any  building  ?  "  (Two  days  before  tliis  seance  a  man 
had  spoken  to  my  brother  and  me  about  taking  a  house  as  an  investment, 
upon  wliich  tliere  was  a  mortgage.  We  three  were  the  only  persons 
cognisant  of  this.)  "  Y(.)U  are  sometimes  blue  and  discouraged,  owing  to 
poor  physical  condition  ;  but  you  will  come  out  all  right,  and  you  have  a 
happy-go-lucky  temperament."  (I  had  suffered  so  from  sleejilessness,  owing 
to  my  lameness,  that  it  did  wear  upon  me  a  great  deal.) 

There  the  medium  came  to,  and  the  stance  ended.  This  is  my  only 
experience  of  tlie  sort. 

F.  H.  S. 

34.  ''Mr.  M.  N."    March,  1888. 

Ajml  5th  [1889]. 

Briefly  stated,  the  three  cases  of  prophesying  which  I  have  experienced 
with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  which  have  come  true,  are  as  follows  :  — 

About  end  March  of  last  year  I  made  her  a  visit  (having  been  in  the  liabit 
of  doing  so,  since  early  in  February,  about  once  a  fortnight).  She  told  me 
tliat  a  death  of  a  near  relative  of  mine  would  occur  in  about  six  weeks,  from 
which  I  should  realise  some  pecuniary  advantages.  I  naturally  thought  of 
my  father,  wlio  was  advanced  in  years,  and  whose  description  Mrs.  Pij)er 
had  given  me  very  accurately  some  week  or  two  previously.  She  had  not 
.spoken  of  him  as  my  father,  but  merely  as  a  person  nearly  connected  with 
me.  I  asked  lier  at  that  sitting  whether  this  person  was  the  one  who  would 
die,  but  she  declined  to  state  anything  more  clearly  to  me.  My  wife,  to 
whom  I  was  then  engaged,  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper  a  few  days  afterwards, 
<md  she  told  her  (my  wife)  that  my  father  would  die  in  a  few  weeks. 

About  the  middle  of  May  my  father  died  very  suddenly  in  London  from 
hear't  failure,  when  he  was  recovering  from  a  very  slight  attack  of  bronchitis. 
And  the  very  day  that  his  doctor  had  pronounced  him  out  of  danger. 
Previous  to  this  Mrs.  Piper  (as  Dr.  Phinuit)  had  told  me  that  she  would 
endeavour  to  influence  my  father  about  certain  matters  connected  with  his 
will  before  he  died.  Two  days  after  I  received  the  cable  announcing  his 
deatli  my  wife  and  I  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper,  and  she  [Phinuit]  sjjoke  of  his 
presence,  and  his  sudden  arrival  in  the  spirit-world,  and  said  that  he  (Dr. 

Observations  of  .  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  121 

Phinuit)  had  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  in  tliose  matters  while  my  father 
was  sick.  Dr.  Phinuit  tokl  me  the  state  of  the  will,  and  described  the 
principal  executor,  and  said  that  lie  (the  executor)  would  make  a  certain 
disposition  in  my  favour,  subject  to  the  consent  of  the  two  other  executors, 
when  I  got  to  London,  Eng.  Three  weeks  afterwards  I  arrived  in  London  ; 
found  the  principal  executor  to  be  the  man  Dr.  Phinuit  had  desci'ibed.  The 
will  went  materially  as  he  had  stated.  The  disj^osition  was  made  in  my 
fa\'our,  and  my  sister,  who  was  chiefly  at  my  father's  bedside  the  last  three 
days  of  his  life,  told  me  that  he  had  repeatedly  complained  of  the  presence 
of  an  old  man  at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  who  annoyed  him  by  discussing  his 
private  affairs. 

The  second  instance  I  would  give  you  is  as  follows  : — 

Dr.  Phinuit  stated  tliat  I  would  receive  a  professional  offer  within  two 
weeks,  by  letter,  to  my  present  address,  with  the  name  of  the  manager's  firm 
on  the  left  hand  corner  of  the  envelope,  and  (as  far  as  I  could  understand  him) 
either  from  a  man  named  French,  or  else  from  a  Frenchman.  Within  the 
time  stated  the  letter  came,  answering  to  the  description  of  its  appearance, 
and  to  this  address,  but  the  off'er  was  from  a  Frenchman. 

The  third  is  as  follows  : — 

Dr.  Phinuit  stated  on  one  occasion  that  some  relative  was  suffering  at  that 
time  from  a  sore  or  wounded  thumb.  We  knew  of  no  one  at  the  time,  and 
thought  this  would  be  a  good  test.  A  few  days  afterwards  we  went  to  my 
wife's  grandmother's  to  dinner,  and  we  asked  our  aunt  how  all  the  family 
were,  and  particularly  if  she  knew  anyone  who  had  a  swollen  or  sore  thumb. 
She  said,  "No."  Shortly  after  this  conversation  my  aunt  stated  that  she 
liad  received  a  letter  from  cousins  in  Philadelphia.  My  wife  asked  how  they 
were,  and  particularly  for  a  certain  cousin  Jennie.  "  Oh,  by-the-bye, "  was 
the  reply,  "  Jennie  has  had  a  little  accident  ;  she  has  injured  her  thumb  in 
some  machine." 

I  chose  these  three  instances  for  their  simplicity,  and  I  liope  they  will  be 
<jf  service  to  you.  My  wife,  as  a  rule,  attended  my  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  can  attest  these  facts.  I  cannot  be  sure  of  any  other  I  can  call  upon  to 
support  my  testimony.  I  have  certainly  mentioned  certain  foretellings  to 
others  before  they  became  facts,  but  I  cannot  recall  to  wliom  I  have  done  so,  as 
these  matters  have  chiefly  concerned  myself  and  my  wife.  I  leave  it  to  your 
good  taste  to  print  nothing  that  will  identify  me  or  my  family  with  any 
publication  you  may  issue,  either  at  your  meetings  or  in  the  papers.  I  can 
also  say  that  Dr.  Phinuit  cured  me,  or  apparently  did  so,  by  a  prescription 
sent  me  by  Mrs.  Piper,  of  an  internal  trouble  from  which  I  liad  suff'ered  for 
eighteen  months. 

["M.N."] 

I  hereby  corroborate  the  above  statements. 

["Mfis.  M.  N."] 

35.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.    About  June,  1888. 
[From  Mrs.  T.    Detroit,  June  3rd,  1889.] 
In  response  to  the  request  contained  in  your  note  of  May  27th,  I  will 
give  you  as  full  an  account  as  possible,  knowing  that  you  desire  the  facts  for 
scientific  reasons  ahjne. 

122 

Mr.  JR.  Hodgson. 

Mr.  T.  or  myself  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Pijier,  but  we  had  heard  of  your 
Society,  and  that  you  used  her  mediumistic  jjovver  for  the  purposes  of  inves- 
tigation. For  that  one  reason,  and  tliat  alone,  I  had  sufficient  confidence  to- 
wish  to  consult  her.  I  am  not  a  believer  in  the  generally  so-called  medium, 
and  previous  to  our  visit  to  Mrs.  P.  had  been  an  absolute  sceptic.  We  were 
visiting  in  Taunton  ;  took  the  early  train  to  Boston,  and  left  on  the  3  p.m. 
train  for  Detroit.  We  reached  Mrs.  Piper's  shortly  after  9  a.m.  She  was 
an  absolute  stranger  to  us,  as  we  were  strangers  to  her,  meeting  her  then  for 
the  first  time.  My  husband  introduced  himself  and  me  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T., 
and  requested  a  sitting,  which  she  declined  to  give,  having  an  appointment 
at  9.30.  We  were  urgent  for  the  sitting,  and  she  yielded  sufficiently  to  say  that 
if  we  desired  to  wait,  and  the  parties  failed  to  keep  the  appointment,  she 
would  give  us  the  time.  We  waited  and  secured  the  sitting.  Nothing  was- 
aid  of  ourselves — we  were  there  to  test  her  power.  I  had  lost  a  very  dear 
aunt  in  November,  and  my  loved  father  had  gone  on  in  May.  Grief- 
stricken  under  the  double  bereavement,  I  was  soul-hungry  for  some  word — 
if  word  or  sign  were  possible.  Mrs.  P.  could  not  know  of  this,  for  we  do 
not  believe  in  mourning  robes,  and  I  wore  not  a  particle  of  black. 

You  can,  therefore,  imagine  my  astonishment  when,  after  Mrs.  P.  was 
under  control,  and  the  greeting  by  the  little  French  doctor  (the  voice  was 
that  of  a  brisk  old  man  and  a  foreigner  ;  he  introduced  himself  as  Dr. 
Findlay,  or  such  a  name  ;  said  he  was  French),  we  were  greeted  by  our 
Christian  names  of  Frank  and  Mary,  and  told  there  was  a  lady  there  who 
was  so  glad  to  see  us  and  wanted  to  speak  with  us  ;  her  name  was  Mary — 
(hesitating  on  the  surname,  but  giving  it  correctly).  "She  is  not  strong 
yet,  and  will  speak  to  you  through  me.  Slie  left  you  so  suddenly — she 
scarcely  realised  it,  and  it  was  a  great  grief  to  her  to  leave  her  children. 
She  is  still  weak,  but  is  gaining  strength.  She  knows  now  it  was  all  for 
the  best.  She  asks,  '  How  are  my  dear  children,  Mary  1  Don't  let  them 
forget  me.  I  want  them  to  feel  I  am  ever  near  them,  and  tell  Cyrenius 
(her  husband)  not  to  grieve  so — that  all  is  well,  and  that  the  babe  is  with 
me  and  our  other  children.  Tell  him  I  could  not  be  reconciled  to  it  at  first, 
but  now  I  know  it  is  best,  and  I  am  happy  here.  I  have  tried  so  hard  to 
make  myself  known  to  you  at  home,  but  could  not.  I  am  often  there,  and 
see  the  home  life  going  on,  and  see  your  care  of  them .  Mary — and  you, 
Frank — you  were  so  kind  and  thoughtful,  and  I  love  and  thank  you  both. 
Oh,  Mary  !  I've  seen  my  own  dear  mother's  face  and  been  with  her  ;  and 
you  know,  Mary,  how  I  have  longed  to  know  her,"  &c.  I  then  asked,  Did 
you  want  me  to  stay  with  the  children,  aunt  Mary?  "That  has  been  part 
of  my  happiness  here." 

The  doctor  then  said,  "The  lady  is  tired  and  must  rest  awhile."  He 
described  her  perfectly,  even  to  a  peculiar  motion  of  the  hand,  and  spoke  of 
much  pertaining  to  the  home  and  of  persons  in  my  husband's  family  and  my 
own,  calling  each  one  by  Christian  name — describing  them  or  saying  some- 
tliing  of  each  one — of  at  least  fifteen  or  twenty  individuals.  He  spoke  so 
rapidly,  and  of  so  many,  I  became  confused,  and  from  surprise  was  dumb- 
foundered.  Then  he  said,  ' '  Here  comes  a  gentleman  who  wants  to  speak  to 
you.  He  is  hurrying  and  motioning  to  me.  Why,  what's  the  matter  with 
him  ?    He  is  lame — the  left  leg  is  drawn  up  as  if  from  rheumatism."  (My 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  123- 

father  slipped  on  the  ice  six  weeks  before  his  death,  and  had  broken  his  left 
leg  below  the  hip  ;  the  bone  did  not  knit,  and  it  was  several  inches  shorter 
than  the  right.)  "It's  your  father,  Frank."  "  No,  not  my  father," said  my 
husband.  "  T  tell  you  it  is  your  father. "  "  It  is  my  father, "  said  I.  "Well, 
it  is  your  father  any  way. "  Then  came  the  greeting  from  my  father  and  a 
description  of  the  life  there,  and  of  his  first  day  there,  and  that  his  only 
unhappiness  was  that  he  could  not  tell  me  how  well  it  was  with  him.  He  had 
found  so  many  of  his  friends  there — his  father  and  mother  and  my  mother. 
He  spoke  of  the  home  here  and  of  my  step-mother,  and  of  much  known  to 
him  alone.  He  spoke  of  the  life  at  some  length  and  in  words  and  manner 
peculiar  to  himself.  My  father  had  been  a  great  student,  with  an  intense 
love  of  books,  and  always  expressed  his  thoughts  with  a  piquant,  caustic^ 
ready  eloquence,  as  rare  as  it  was  peculiar  to  himself.  Anyone  wlio  had. 
ever  heard  my  father  speak  could  not  mistake  the  beautiful  and  rounded, 
phraseology  of  his  address  to  us.    It  could  be  no  one  but  my  father. 

Dr.  F.  then  said  the  old  gentleman  was  weary  and  must  rest,  but  he  was- 
so  glad  to  have  seen  us.  Dr.  F.  then  spoke  of  my  sisters  and  others, 
and  of  circumstances  about  us,  and  asked  if  we  had  any  questions.  I  had 
received  so  much  more  than  I  had  anticijjated  that  I  could  think  of  no 
question  to  ask.  I  must  have  time  to  think  it  all  over.  What  did  it 
mean  ?  It  could  not  be  mental  transference.  Dr.  F.  had  talked  raj^idly 
and  steadily  for  more  than  an  hour  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  and  of 
persons  and  things  soine  of  whom  were  far  from  our  thoughts. 

All  of  the  foregoing  that  I  have  written,  as  given  us,  was  true  in  every 
particular.    I  cannot  explain  it  in  any  material  way. 

Mary  E.  T. 

[From  Mr.  T.] 

Detroit,  June  12th,  1889. 

As  you  request  a  statement  from  me,  I  will  answer  the  items  in  your 
letter  instead  of  my  wife. 

On  our  way  to  Taunton,  a  year  ago,  we  stopped  in  Boston  a  few  hours- 
and  called  at  Mrs.  Piper's  house,  hoping  for  a  sitting.  She  was  out,  and  I 
left  a  card  with  my  name  signed,  as  it  will  be  at  the  end  of  this  letter, 
asking  her  to  name  an  hour  she  would  give  us  during  the  coming  week.  The 
name  was  written  hastily  with  a  lead  pencil,  and  in  an  awkward  position 
while  standing  at  the  door.  I  did  not  hear  from  her,  so  on  our  return  to 
Boston,  on  our  way  home,  we  called  on  her  again.  She  said  she  had  not 
been  able  to  read  my  name  and  therefore  had  not  answered  the  note.  We 
waited  a  long  time  for  otliers  to  come  who  had  engaged  the  time,  talking 
more  or  less  on  general  subjects.  I  told  her  my  surname  and  that  we  lived 
in  Detroit,  but  notliing  more.  From  the  initial  F.  she  might  have  guessed 
that  my  name  was  Frank,  but  she  could  not  have  gotten  at  it  in  any  otlier 
way.  My  wife's  first  name  she  could  not  have  known,  as  we  were  careful 
not  to  address  each  other  before  the  sitting  by  our  given  names.  Almost 
the  first  words,  if  not  the  first  ones,  after  .she  went  into  the  trance  state, 
were  "  Frank  and  Mary,  I  am  glad  to  see  you."  During  the  sitting  she 
mentioned  fully  twenty  relatives  and  friends,  all  but  one  or  two  of  whose 
names  were  given  without  mistake,  and  most  of  them  without  hesitation. 
The  name  of  Cyrenius  troubled  her,  but  was  given  finally  without  our  hel  p.. 

124 

Mo\  R.  Hodgson. 

Mary  Newcomb — tlie  name  you  ask  for — she  also  stumbled  over  somewhat. 
The  point  that  made  the  strongest  imjjression  on  both  of  us  was  the  message 
that  came  from  my  wife's  father.  He  was  a  man  of  strong  personality,  and 
many  peculiarities  of  speech.  The  message  seemed  as  though  he  were 
speaking,  and  in  nearly  his  natural  voice  ;  it  was  so  natural  that  we  both 
were  startled. 

F.  N.  T. 

3G.  3Iiss  Lilhoi  Whltiiuj.    Jannanj  Wi,  1889. 

[Appointment  made  by  R.  H.,  but  Miss  Whiting  had  made  one  or  two 
previous  attempts  to  have  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  to  whom  lier  name  was 
known.] 

The  Brunswick,  Boston,  January  btli,  1889. 

My  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  yesterday  was  one  of  curious  and  satisfactory 
interest.  As  a  test  I  asked  her  to  describe  my  rooms  at  the  Brunswick.  This 
was  done  in  several  particulars.  One  thing  described  was  a  photograph  of 
the  novelist,  Edgar  Fawcett.  "What  does  that  man  do  1  "  I  inquired, 
"lie  writes  books,"  was  the  reply.  In  my  room  are  several  pictures  of 
Miss  Kate  Field.  This  was  noted  by  the  medium  as  "so  many  pictures  of 
one  lady — oh,  a  great  many  I  "  "Tell  me  about  that  lady,"  I  said.  "  )She 
appears  before  the  public  in  some  way.  Yes,  I  see  !  she  lectures.  She  has 
a  very  strong  intellect — a  brilliant  mind.  One  of  these  pictures  I  do  not 
like.  It  is  not  good  of  her.  You  should  jjut  it  away.  Turn  the  back  to  the 
wall."  [This  is  true  ;  the  largest  picture  I  have  of  Miss  Field  being  one  that 
does  her  injustice.] 

The  projihecy  was  made  that  I  should  go  abroad  within  a  year  to  remain 
indefinitely,  and  that  hereafter  my  life  would  be  spent  mainly  in  England. 
The  place  was  described ;  a  country  estate,  north  of  London.  We  can  see 
wliether  this  will  be  verified.  At  tliis  time  nothing  could  seem  more 
imi^robable  and  all  but  impossible  to  me.  This  I  said  to  the  medium,  stating 
that  I  had  not  money  enijugh  to  dream  of  doing  such  a  thing,  but  she  replied 
that  it  would  come. 

My  writing  methods  and  many  personal  details  were  correctly  given. 

Lilian  Whiting. 

Jnhj  1th,  1890. 

Glancing  at  the  proof  copy  of  the  aljove,  for  which  I  am  greatly  indebted 
to  your  courtesy,  may  I  add  that  the  prophecy  of  my  going  abroad  has  not 
been  fulfilled  ;  but  that  circumstances  occurred,  after  my  sitting  with  Mrs. 
Piper,  which  were  entirely  undreamed  of  by  me  previously,  and  which 
would  have  resulted  in  almost  a  literal  fulfilment  of  the  proj^hecy,  only  pre- 
vented by  an  equally  inilooked-for  event '?  That  is,  the  prophecy  nearlj' 
approached  completion,  but  did  not  reach  it. 

I  had  a  subsequent  sitting  for  a  friend — with  a  lock  of  hair  and  regarding 
an  illness.  Mrs.  Piper  described  the  person  more  vividly  than  I  could  have 
done,  and  prescribed  a  medicine  that  proved  highly  efficacious. 

Lilian  Whiting. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance.  125' 

37.    Mr."C.B."    May  3rd,  18S9. 

Mr.  "  C.  D.,"  a  student  of  psychology,  went  to  Mrs.  Piper  under  an 
assumed  name.  He  recorded  the  sitting  immediately  afterwards,  and  it  was  a. 
very  successful  one  on  the  whole,  many  correct  statements  being  made  about 
Mr.  "  C.  D.,"  his  family,  and  acquaintances, — all  matters  known  to  Mr, 
"  C.  D. "  There  were  a  few  mistakes,  and  some  attempts  at  prophecy  which 
v/ere  failures. 

38.  Dr.  a  L  .     October  31.rf,  1889. 

[Appointment  made  by  me.     But  I  believe  that  Dr.  L  had  called 

on  Mi's.  Piper  previously,  and  had  given  his  name. — R.  H.] 

Boston,  November  9th,  1889. 

I  saw  Mrs.  Piper  October  31st.    She  did  not  know  me  before. 

She  reminded  me  of  an  accident  by  which  I,  as  a  seven-year-old  boy,  was 
very  nearly  drowned.  It  is  very  seldom  that  my  thoughts  occupy  themselves 
witli  the  incident.    I  did  not  at  the  time  fully  realise  the  danger. 

The  trance  person  and  I  spoke  French  two  or  three  times  during  the 
sitting.  He  did  not  seem  to  be  desirous  of  talking  it  a  long  time.  He 
would  very  soon  translate  my  answer  into  English,  and  then  go  on  in 
English. 

Asked  if  he  could  tell  me  which  gentlemen  I  had  dined  with  the  previous 
day,  he  described  both  of  them  in  a  surprisingly  accurate  way,  their  appear- 
ance as  well  as  their  character. 

He  told  me  how  many  we  were  at  home,  described  my  sister,  and  gave 
even  her  name,  Marie.    She  is  in  Norway. 

He  saw  me  surrovmded  by  books  and  papers. 

He  told  me  that  my  strmiach  and  nervous  system  had  been  broken  do'wn, 
and  described  my  illness  at  the  time  very  well. 

I  have  been  trying  to  press  my  brain  for  more,  but  I  think  this  is  about 
all  of  any  imjiortance  that  residted  of  the  sitting. 

C  L  . 

November  20th. 

In  conversation  Dr.  L  told  me  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  said  nothing 

that  was  incorrect. 

R.  H. 

39.  Mrs.  G.  H.  Bnncne. 

[March  5th,  1891.] 
Mrs.  Browne  {nee  Webster)  wrote  her  account  early  in  March,  1891.  Her 
first  sitting  was  about  July  22nd,  1886.    I  abridge  her  statements. 

"Mrs.  D  ,who  sewed  almost  daily  at  the  house  of  Mr.  R  ,  wliere  I 

lived,  had  told  me  the  story  (No.  28,  from  Miss  E.  R.  Webster)  whicli  I  sent 
you,  and  also  that  Professor  James  was  interested  in  Mrs.  P.  and  Miss 

R  ,   '  Cora, '  and  I  determined  to  go  to  her.    No  one  but  Miss  R.  's 

sister  knew  our  intention."  Mrs.  Piper  consented  to  sit  for  one  of  them  and 
Mrs.  Browne  took  the  sitting. 

' '  The  first  words  she  uttered  in  her  '  trance  voice '  were  :  '  It  is  Dr. 
Finnee  '  (I  spell  it  as  she  pronounced  it,  the  accent  was  decidedly  on  the 

126 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

last  syllable,  )mt  the  '  e  '  was  not  the  French  one),  '  who  is  talking  to 
jou.'  I  did  not  understand  and  she  repeated  it  twice,  always  the  same 
pronunciation." 

Phinuit  talked  about  "  Otto,'    who  was  in  Euroije  at  the  time,  and 

called  him  Her-r-r  ,  and  said  :  "You  will  marry  in  two  and  a-half  years. 

You  will  marry  Herr."  [I  was  married  in  a  little  more  than  three  years,  but 
not  to  Herr.]  Phinuit  descrilied  two  other  men  and  gave  their  names 
correctly,  George  and  Fred.  He  called  Mrs.  Browne  Elmily  from  the  first, 
and  kept  apologising  for  mispronouncing  it ;  Emily  being  her  first  name. 

"The  next  day,  after  my  first  sitting.  Miss  R.  went  to  see  her,  but  got 
nothing  new,  I  believe." 

The  second  sitting  was  probably  in  tlie  fall  of  1886.  Phinuit  g(3t  the 
name  "  Oscar  Zinkeisen,"  known  to  Mrs.  Browne,  but  wrongly  said  that  he 
was  older  than  she  was. 

Phinuit  spoke  of  a  man  named  "  Frank  Tarbelle."  He  was  an  acquaint- 
ance of  "  Cora's,"  and  Mrs.  Browne  had  never  met  liim. 

"In  fact,  much  of  what  Mrs.  Piper  said  tome  was  exactly  the  sort  of 
thing  one  might  dream  ;  queer  mixtures  of  things  perfectly  natural,  and 
things  too  silly  to  repeat ;  slight  suggestions  magnified,  and  constant  reitera- 
tion of  points  which  took  her  fancy  ;  astonishing  accuracy  in  much,  and 
very  little  that  could  be  shown  to  be  absolutely  wrong." 

' '  I  have  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  the  date  of  my  third  sitting.  I 
think,  however,  it  was  four  years  ago  next  spring.  Mrs.  P.  sat  for  both 
Miss  R.  and  me. 

"We  took  the  hair  of  two  friends.  "  Cora  "  had  both  in  one  compartment 
of  her  purse,  and  when  she  gave  the  first  lock  to  Mrs.  P.  the  latter  com- 
]ilained  tliat  it  had  been  with  other  hair  which  she  demanded,  saying  she 
could  make  nothing  out  of  lock  No.  1.  On  receiving  lock  No.  2  she  imme- 
diately described  tlie  original  of  No.  1,  giving  an  estimate  of  his  character 
entirely  coinciding  witli  mine.  Wliile  she  was  pressing  these  locks  to  her 
forehead,  she  seized  my  hand  and  held  it  forcibly  (part  of  tlie  time  to  her 
forehead)  wliile  she  described  the  owners  of  the  locks.  I  have  forgotten 
wliether  she  told  the  name  of  lock  No.  1,  but  No.  2 — whom  she  described 
most  fully — was  "Bertram  Ellis.  '  You  will  notice  that  she  mentioned  him  in 
Mr.  Browne's  sitting.  I  am  very  certain  that  she  spoke  of  him  the  first  or 
second  time  I  went,  though  I  find  nothing  of  it  in  the  notes  I  took.  Mr. 
Ellis  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  Browne's,  and  a  man  whose  distinguishing 
characteristics  were  very  easy  to  desciibe.  It  was  evident  that  his  influence 
was  the  stronger  of  the  two. 

Emily  W.  Browne. 

40.  Mr.  J.  i^of/ci-.s  7^ /<•/(.        •  ■  '  - 

Tlio  following  report  lias  been  made  from  contemjjorary  notes  of  the  sit- 
tings. On  the  day  of  eacli  sitting  I  made  notes  in  my  diary  of  all  tlie  important 
points.  There  was  much  repetition  at  my  sittings,  and  a  few  other  matters 
were  referred   to,  especially  concerning  tlie  landing  of  my  ancestors  in 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  127 

America,  which  I  have  not  liad  the  opportunity  yet  either  to  prove  or 
disj)rove. 

Having  fre([uently  lieard  of  tlie  remarkable  things  said  to  be  done  by  Mrs. 
Piper,  I  finally  persviaded  myself  to  call  on  her.  I  had  always  had  a  dislike 
for  any  "mediums"  or  "spiritualists"  of  every  kind,  but  on  meeting  this 
woman  I  was  at  once  attracted  to  her  by  the  simple  and  sympathetic  manner 
which  she  showed  on  greeting  me,  and  I  felt  a  delicacy  about  making 
fin  appointment  for  a  sitting,  she  seeming  to  me  too  gentle  and  refined  for  a 
business  of  this  sort.  I  was  at  once  struck  with  the  peculiar  light,  or  inward 
look,  in  her  eyes.  Her  voice  was  full  and  agreeable,  but  in  every  way  a 
"  feminine  "  voice,  and  there  was  an  entire  absence  of  any  masculinity  in  her 
manner,  which  I  had  been  expecting  to  find  under  the  circumstances. 

My  first  sittnig  with  her  was  on  September  6th,  1888.     With  little 
trouble  she  went  into  the  trance — a  state  which  was  entirely  new  to  my 
exi^erience — and  after  a  moment's  silence,  which  followed  her  rather  violent 
movements,  I  was  startled  by  the  remarkable  change  in  her  voice — an 
exclamation,  a  sort  of  grunt  of  satisfaction,  as  if  the  person  had  reached  liis 
destination  and  gave  vent  to  his  pleasure  thereat  by  this  sound,  uttered  in 
an  unmistakably  male  voice,  but  rather  husky.    I  was  at  once  addressed  in 
Frencli   with,    "  Bonjour,    Monsieur,    comment   vous   portez  vous  ? "  to 
which  I  gave  answer  in  the  same  language,  with  which  I  happen  to  he 
perfectly  familiar.    My  answer  was  responded  to  witli  a  sort  of  inquiring 
grunt,    much   like    the   French    "  Hein  1 "   and   then   the  conversation 
continued   in  English,   with   rarely  a   French  word,  and  more  rarely  a 
French  expression  coming  into  it.    Nearly  all  my  interviews  were  begun 
in  the  same  manner.    I  had  given  no  means  of  identification,  and  simply 
awaited  results.     At  the  time  I  made  my  first  visits  to  Mrs.  Piper  I  was 
quite  unwell  with  nervous  troubles,  for  which  I  had  been  under  treatment 
"by  a  noted  specialist.    The  first  thing  told  me  was  of  a  "  great  light  behind 
me,  a  good  sign,"  &c.    Then  suddenly  all  my  ills  were  very  clearly  and  dis- 
tinctly explained  and  so  thoroughly  that  I  felt  certain  that  Mrs.  Piper 
herself  would  have  hesitated  to  use  such  plain  language  !  Prescrijjtions 
were  given  to  me  for  the  purchase  of  herbs,  and  the  manner  of  preparing 
them,  which  I  was  to  do  myself.    I  speak  of  this  now,  as  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  refer  to  it  farther  on.    My  profession  (painting)  was  described, 
and  my  particular  talents  and  mannerisms  in  design  were  mentioned.    I  was 
surrounded  with  pictures — "Oh  1  pictures  everywhere  I  "    At  this  interview 
my  mother  was  clearly  described  !    She  was  "  beside  me,  dressed  as  in  her 
portrait  (painted  a  year  or  two  before  her  death),  and  wearing  a  certain  cameo 
pin,  the  portrait  of  my  father."    Two  living  aunts,  who  are  very  dear  to  me, 
my  brother  and  his  wife  "Nellie"  weve  well  descrilied,  and  in  svich  a  way 
as  to  have  made  it  impossible  for  Mrs.  Piper  to  have  so  minutely  informed 
herself  about  them. 

Second  Sitting,  on  October  5tli. — Mention  was  made  of  an  old  friend  whom 
I  had  lost  sight  of  for  a  long  time,  last  hearing  of  him  in  a  mining  camp  in 
Southern  California.  He  ("Dr.  Phinuit ")  suddenly  said:  "You  will  hear 
in  a  few  months  from  Lennox — you  call  him  '  Frank.'  He  is  doing  well  and 
is  prosperous."  On  my  asking  where  he  was,  if  still  in  California,  he  said, 
"  No,"  but  had  "  gone  across  water  to  Al — Aul — Aula — how  you  call  that  ? " 

128 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

I  suggested  "  Australia,"  which  seemed  to  puzzle  the  good  "Doctor"  for  he 
doubted  the  name,  hesitated,  but  finally  said,  "Yes,  Australia."  Within  a 
year  afterwards  I  received  very  unexpectedly  a  letter  from  this  friend,  then 
in  Florida,  saying  that  he  had  been  mining  in  Alaska  and  met  with  some 
success  and  was  at  the  moment  of  writing  doing  better  than  ever  before.  At 
this  sitting  the  "Doctor"  told  me  of  my  niece  being  fi-equently  "in  my 
surroundings,"  and  that  she  was  then  at  my  side.  Up  to  this  time  I  had  not 
heard  my  name  mentioned  so  I  asked  of  it  from  my  niece.  The  "  Doctor  "  was 
again  puzzled  and  said,  "What  a  funny  name — wait,  I  cannot  go  so  fast  ! 
Then  my  entire  name  was  correctly  spelled  out  but  entirely  with  the  French 
alphabet,  each  separate  letter  being  clearly  pronounced  in  that  language. 
My  niece  had  heen  born,  lived  most  of  her  short  life,  and  died  in  France. 
Then  the  attempt  to  pronounce  my  name  was  amusing — finally  calling  me 
"Thames  Rowghearce  Reach."  The  "  Doctor  "  never  called  me  after  that 
anything  but  "  Reach."  I  speak  hereof  the  pronunciation  of  my  name  as 
I  will  later  on  refer  to  it  again.  Was  told  of  the  arrival  in  this  country  of  my 
paternal  ancestors  from  Scotland  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  and  the 
family  name  was  correctly  given  as  Richie,  but  I  have  not  as  yet  verified  the 
accounts  of  their  settling  here  as  the  "Doctor"  gave  me,  and  which  differ 
much  from  family  traditions.  On  placing  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hands  the  marriage 
register  of  my  grandfather,  she  gave  a  veiy  minute  description  of  it,  although 
she  could  not  possibly  have  seen  it  or  its  contents.  Phinuit  said  there  were 
lots  of  people's  names — it  was  a  marriage — a  blood-relation — my  grandfather 
and  grandmother.  This  was  all  correct ;  the  certificate  was  of  a  Quaker 
marriage,  and  signed  by  a  large  number  of  persons. 

November  8th,  1888. — My  sitting  on  this  date  was  quite  remarkable.  A 
friend's  sister  had  met  with  a  loss  hy  fire,  and  wished  to  see  what  could  be 
done  towards  tracing  the  incendiary.  This  lady  had  a  habit  of  colouring  or 
bleaching  her  hair,  of  whicli  she  had  sent  a  lock  as  a  test.  ' '  Dr. 
Phinuit"  at  first  refused  to  toucli  the  hair,  saying  that  it  was  "dead  and 
devilish!"  As  I  knew  nothing  whatever  of  the  persons  connected  with  the 
fire,  I  noted  down  the  descriptions  given,  which  tallied  perfectly  with  that  of 
the  parties  suspected,  as  I  afterwards  learned.  At  this  sitting  a  remarkable 
incident  happened.  Breaking  into  the  run  of  conversation,  the  "Doctor"  of 
a  sudden  said,  "Hullo,  here's  Newell !  "  (mentioning  the  name  of  a  friend 
who  had  died  some  months  before).  "Newell"  is  a  substitute  for  the  real 
name.  I  should  add  that  "Newell  "  had  frequently  purported  to  com- 
municate directly  with  his  mother  through  Mrs.  l^iper  at  previous  sittings, 
but  this  was  the  first  time  that  any  intimation  of  his  presence  was  given  to 
me.  I  was  totally  unprepared  for  this,  and  said,  "Who  did  you  say?"  The 
name  was  repeated  with  a  strong  foreign  accent,  and  in  the  familiar  voice  and 
tone  of  the  "Doctor."  Then  there  seemed  for  a  moment  to  be  a  mingling 
of  voices  as  if  in  dispute,  followed  by  silence  and  heavy  breathing  of  the 
medium.  All  at  once  I  was  astonished  to  hear,  in  an  entirely  different  tone 
and  in  the  purest  English  accent,  "  Well,  of  all  persons  under  the  sun, 
Rogers  Rich,  what  brought  you  here  ?  I'm  glad  to  see  you,  old  fellow  ?  How 
is  X  and  Y  and  Z,  and  all  the  boys  at  the  club  ?  "  Some  names  were  given 
which  I  knew  of,  but  their  owners  I  had  never  met,  and  so  reminded  my 
friend  "  Newell,"  who  recalled  that  he  followed  me  in  college  l)y  some  years 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  129' 

and  tliat  all  his  acquaintances  were  younger  than  I.  I  remarked  an  odd 
movement  of  the  medium  while  under  this  influence  ;  she  apparently  waa 
twirling  a  moustache,  a  trick  which  my  friend  formerly  practised  much. 
"Newell"  also  told  me  that  his  cousin  was  then  visiting  his  brother,  a  fact 
which  I  afterwards  learned  to  be  true. 

December  3rrf,  1888. — I  had  my  fifth  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  but  the  result^ 
was  not  remarkably  interesting,  being  mostly  devoted  to  family  affairs  and 
certain  friends  who  were  perfectly  described.  All  this  time  I  had  been  u.sing 
the  medicines  given  me  by  the  "  Doctor,"  and  generally  with  the  best  results. 
At  this  sitting  he  changed  the  prescrij^tion. 

December  2dth,  1888. — This  sitting,  similar  to  my  last  one,  was  interesting 
in  its  relation  to  private  family  affairs,  and  some  remarkable  descriptions  o 
these. 

Januar]!  ^Ist,  1889. — My  seventh  sitting  was  amusing  in  one  thing.  I 
had  been  following  the  treatment  prescribed  by  the  "Doctor,"  and  Imd 
I)repared  at  my  home  tlie  herbs,  &c.,  according  to  his  orders,  as  I  thought. 
But  I  found  that  the  medicine  had  not  the  effect  promised  and  so  told  him. 
The  answer  was  that  it  was  my  fault  for  "  they  were  not  properly  prepared." 
I  assured  him  that  they  were,  whereat  he  said  that  "that  old  nigger  "  (refer- 
ring to  a  respectable  coloured  cook  in  my  employ  at  the  time) ' '  had  not  followed 
my  directions,  had  used  the  wrong  proportions,  had  forgotten  to  watch  the 
cooking,  and  was  a  fool  any  way  !  "  On  inquiry  I  found  this  to  be  the  fact, 
for  she  had  understood  me  to  say  a  quart  instead  of  a  pint,  and  confessed  to 
having  fox-gotten  the  mixture  and  allowed  it  to  boil  down  but  ' '  thought  it 
wouldn't  make  any  difference  1  "  I  took  a  piece  of  embroidery  made  by  a 
sailor  while  abroad  on  a  cruise  and  at  once  "  An  old,  wizened-up  man  "  came 
to  its  influence.  "  Who  is  he  ?  "  "  Why,  D. 's  grandfather,"  giving  me  the 
correct  name  of  my  friend  but  one  by  which  I  had  never  known  him,  but 
which  I  only  knew  after  an  acquaintance  of  a  year  or  more,  ho  having 
followed  the  sea,  as  usual  with  sailors,  under  an  assumed  name. 

March  2&th,  1889. — My  eighth  sitting.  A  test  was  given  me  by  a  friend 
of  which  I  knew  nothing.  The  article  was  j^laced  in  cotton  wool  within  a 
box,  wrapped  in  paper  and  tied  with  a  string.  The  "Doctor"  said  he 
"  could  see  it,"  and  described  the  object  fairly  well,  but  said  that  if  I  would 
open  the  box  he  could  tell  just  where  it  came  from.  I  had  no  idea  what  was; 
in  the  box,  and  the  box  v/as  not  opened  until  I  returned  it  to  my  friend.  As 
it  was,  he  described  well  my  friend  X,  who  gave  me  the  parcel  ;  then  he 
described  his  friend  Y,  who  had  given  the  article,  the  person  who  gave  Y  the 
article  from  "  far  off  over  the  sea,"  and  explained  certain  characteristics  of 
these  persons  and  their  connection  witli  my  friend  X.  All  of  these  descrip- 
tions, X  afterwards  told  me,  were  correct,  and  the  article  which  the  "Doctor"' 
described  as  a  "cliarm,"  and  "glittering,"  proved  to  be  a  beautifully  carved, 
but  not  "glittering,"  button,  latterly  worn  as  a  charm  with  a  gold  attach- 
ment, formerly  in  the  possession  of  a  noble  Japanese  family  of  great 
antiquity,  and  surreptitiously  taken  from  there  by  a  visitor  and  brought  to 
this  country.  A  lock  of  hair  belonging  to  a  friend  who  is  quite  noted  for  his- 
amusing  self-conceit  was  greeted  with  a  laugh  and  recognised  as  belonging 
to  "  His  Royal  Highness,"  or  the  "  Duke  B,"  calling  him  by  his  real  name 
and  attaching  the  titles  by  way  of  "  chaff." 

K 

130 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Some  prophecies  were  made  to  "  occur  soon,"  but  I  regret  to  say  that  the 
"Doctor's  "  idea  of  "  soonness  "  and  mine  differ  greatly — for  they  are  not  yet 
fulfilled. 

Jnne  3rd,  1889. — My  ninth  sitting.  This  time  I  asked  to  communicate 
with  my  friend  "  Newell,"  previously  referred  to  in  my  fourth  sitting.  The 
"  Doctor  "  said,  "  I'll  send  for  liim,"  and  hepb  on  talking  with  me  for  awhile. 
Then  he  said,  "Here's  Newell,  and  he  wants  to  talk  with  you  'Reach,'  so 
I'll  go  about  my  business  whilst  you  are  talking  with  him,  and  will  come  back 
again  later."  Then  followed  a  confusion  of  words,  but  I  cleai'ly  heard  the 
voice  of  the  "Doctor"  saying:  "  Here,  Newell, you  come  by  the  hands  while 
I  go  out  by  the  feet,"  which  aj^parently  being  accomplished  in  the  proper 
manner,  my  name  was  called  clearly  as  "Rogers,  old  fellow  1  "  without  a  sign 
of  accent,  and  the  same  questions  put  as  to  how  were  the  ' '  fellows  at  the 
club."  My  liand  was  cordially  shaken,  and  I  remarked  the  same  movement 
of  twisting  the  moustache,  which  was  kept  up  by  Mrs.  Piper  during  the  inter- 
view. "  Newell  "  spoke  of  a  "pastel"  which  I  was  drawing  as  a  wedding 
present,  and  described  the  pleasure  he  had  in  watching  me  do  it.  He  told 
me  of  certain  jjrivate  family  affairs  which  I  knew  to  be  correct.  Finally  he 
bade  me  good-bye.  Before  going  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  "present  life,"  and 
told  me  that  he  was  writing  a  poem  ;  that  he  was  now  pursuing  his  literary 
studies  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  &c.,  &c.  "But,"  he  said,  "was  I  not 
sick,  and  did  I  not  suffer  before  I  left  you  all  ?  Why,  the  leaving  of  the 
material  body,  Rogers,  is  terrible.  It  is  like  tearing  limb  from  limb  ;  but 
once  free,  how  happy  one  is."  When  "Newell"  left  me  there  was  the  usual 
disturbance  in  the  medium's  condition,  and  then  the  resumption  of  the 
iimiliar  voice,  accent  and  mannerisms  of  Dr.  Phinuit. 

Then  I  jjroduced  a  dog's  collar.  After  some  handling  of  it  the  ' '  Doctor  " 
recognised  it  as  belonging  to  a  dog  which  I  had  once  owned.  I  asked  ' '  If 
there  were  dogs  where  he  was?"  "Thousands  of  them!"  and  he  said  he 
would  try  to  attract  the  attention  of  my  dog  with  this  collar.  In  the  midst 
•of  our  conversation  he  suddeidy  exclaimed,  "There  !  I  think  he  knows  you 
are  here,  for  I  see  [him]  coming  from  away  off  I  "  He  then  described  my  collie 
perfectly,  and  said,  "  You  call  him.  Reach,"  and  I  gave  my  whistle  by  which 
I  used  to  call  him.  "Here  he  comes  !  Oh,  how  he  jumps!  There  he  is  now, 
jumping  upon  and  around  you.  So  glad  to  see  you  !  Rover  !  Rover  I  No — 
G-rover,  Grover  !  That's  his  name  ! "  The  dog  was  once  called  Rover,  but 
liis  name  was  changed  to  Grover  in  1884,  in  honour  of  the  election  of 
Grover  Cleveland. 

July  12tli,  1889. — My  tenth  sitting.  This  was  of  little  interest  outside 
of  certain  afiiiirs  which  tlie  good  "Doctor"  talked  about.  I  tried  no  tests 
iind  had  no  experiences. 

,Tuly  nth,  1889.— My  eleventh  sitting.  The  "Doctor"  this  time  gave 
me  his  full  name,  &c.,  as  follows  : — 

"Dr.  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville,  113  or  115,  Rue  Dupuytren,  Paris.  Ami 
•du  Docteur  Latimer."  This  was  my  last  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  before  she 
went  to  England.    It  was  again  of  little  or  no  interest  to  report  about. 

Among  other  curious  things  told  me  by  the  "  Doctor  "  was  the  following  : 
A  child  was  constantly  beside  me  and  in  my  surroundings.  It  was  attracted  to 
me  and  had  much  influence  over  me:  "It  is  a  blood  relation,  a  sister."  I 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  131 

denied  tliis  to  have  ever  been  a  fact  for  I  never  had  a  sister  and  never  lieard 
of  one.  The  answer  came  :  "  I  know  that,  xjou  were  never  told  of  it.  The 
birth  was  premature,  the  child  dead,  born  some  years  before  you  were.  Go 
and  ask  your  aunts  to  prove  it."  On  questioning  an  aunt  who  had  been 
always  a  member  of  our  family,  I  learned  that  such  had  been  the  case,  and 
that  by  the  time  I  came  into  the  world  the  affair  had  been  forgotten  and 
there  had  never  been  a  reason  for  informing  me  of  the  circumstances, 
proving  that  I  in  no  way  had  any  intimation  of  it,  and  that  this  communica- 
tion could  not  be  explained  by  thought-transference  or  the  like. 

Although  the  "prophecies"  of  the  "Doctor  "were  not  fulfilled  at  the 
time  I  understood  him  to  mean  as  "in  the  spring"  or  "in  the  fall,"  I  have 
since  found  several  of  these  things  come  true,  and  in  the  season  which  he 
mentioned,  but  not  that  year  in  which  he  led  me  to  expect  them  to  be 
realised. 

One  day  Mrs.  Piper  pointed  to  a  plain  gold  ring  on  my  finger  and  said  : 
"  C'est  une  alliance,  how  you  call  that  1  A  wedding  ring,  n'est-ce  pas  V  This 
was  true.  Now  if  Mrs.  Piper  had  learned  French  at  school  here  she  would 
most  probably  have  called  this  ring  "  un  anneau  de  marriage,"  and  not  have 
given  it  the  technical  name  "alliance."  I  several  times  carried  on  a  short 
conversation  in  French,  making  my  observations  in  that  language  and 
receiving  answers  in  the  same,  but  which  were  always  curt,  and  ended  with 
an  expressed  wish  in  broken  English  not  ' '  to  bodder  about  French  but  to 
speak  in  English."  I  made  use,  too,  of  certain  slang  expressions  which  were 
apparently  perfectly  understood  but  answered  in  English,  though  correctly. 

J.  Rogers  Rich. 

167,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

April  lUh,  1891.  ■       '  . 

41.  R.  Hodgson.  Locks  of  Hair. 
I  knew  nothing  concerning  the  first  five  locks  of  hair,  but  did  know 
from  whom  the  hair  came  in  the  sixth  case.  The  first  five  cases  were 
complete  failures.  In  the  sixth  case  perhaps  there  is  no  more  than  can 
be  accounted  for  by  chance.  I  did  not  know  to  whom  the  hair  sent  to 
me  in  the  seventh  case  belonged.  It  was  sent  to  me  from  Albany, 
N.Y.,  wrapped,  at  my  request,  in  rubber  cloth.  I  took  it  out  of  the 
cloth  before  giving  it  to  Phinuit,  and  saw  that  it  was  white.  , 

1-5.  Locks  of  hair  sent  from  England,  tried  in  March,  1888.  Complete 
failures.     While  holding  lock  5  Phinuit  said  :   "  Here's  a  spirit  named 

J  .    Something  very  sad  about  it.    And  I  can  see  two  little  boys  and 

a  girl  here,  and  there's  a  person  named  Alice  in  the  family."  [This  apparently 
independent  of  the  hair.  The  name  mentioned  was  the  same  as  that  in  my 
second  sitting.    See  p.  62.] 

6.  June  27th,  1888. — Mother  in  spirit.    [No.]    Friend  in  her  family 
named  Joe.    [No.]    Sister  got  married,  and  very  unhappy  life.    [No.]  Good 
deal  of  intellect.    Had  some  pain  in  right  breast,  and  I  think  up  through. 
4    this  (right)  jaw.    [Left  side.]    There's  four  in  her  family,  an  elderly  lady 
rather  stout,  looks  like  a  mother-in-law.    [Yes,  yes.]    Charles,  uncle  of  hers. 

K  2 

132 

Mr.  li.  Hodgson. 

[No.]  Very  nice  lady,  but  set  as  the  hills.  Plenty  of  determination,  will, 
intellect,  and  good  sense.  Morally,  all  right.  Open,  frank,  sincere,  true. 
[The  preceding  notes  in  this  case  were  made  by  the  lady  herself,  now  dead. 
The  descrijjtion  of  her  character,  so  far  as  it  goes,  I  think,  is  correct.  I 
knew  nothing  of  the  other  circumstances  mentioned. — R.H.] 

7.  June  10th,  1891. — There's  been  a  friend  passed  out  of  the  body. 
There's  an  elderly  gentleman  connected  with  this.  Oh,  and  he's  such  a  nice 
old  fellow  !  And  I  get  John  right  off  with  tliis.  There's  somebody — Adams. 
Oh,  I  get  sucli  a  pain  in  my  head.  Take  that  away  quick.  [Giving  the  hair 
back  to  me.]  There's  a  relative  of  the  old  gentleman  whose  hair  that  is,  who's 
insane.  [Taking  hair  again.]  He  had  trouble  with  his  heart  and  throat. 
He  couldn't  hear  very  well.  He  has  a  daughter  in  the  body  who  was  very 
much  devoted  to  him.  Henry — still  in  the  body.  I'll  have  to  take  this 
another  time.  John  calls  for  Henry  and  says  :  "  Don't  worry  about  Charles. 
Let  him  take  his  own  course  and  all  will  be  right.  Don't  oppose.  He'll  be 
better  for  the  journey."  That's  not  been  jiassed  out  so  very  long.  He  was 
very  fond  of  music. 

Jii.ne  23rd,  1891. — Oh,  this  is  the  elderly  gentleman,  John,  that  I  told  you 
of.  There's  somebody  named  Carter  connected  with  this.  There's  very  little 
influence  in  this.  It's  nearly  gone.  It  belongs  to  somebody  who  has  passed 
out  of  the  body. 

[Mrs.  S.,  who  sent  me  the  hair,  writes  as  follows  : — "  Yes.  The  friend  has 
passed  out  of  the  body.  He  was  an  old  man  of  90,  and  a  remarkably 
genial,  lovable  man.  John  is  not  right.  The  old  gentleman's  name  was 
William,  and  John  is  not  a  family  name.  Nor  is  the  name  of  Adams  right  ; 
no  such  name  that  we  know  of.  There  is  a  relative  of  the  old  gentleman  who 
has  a  disease  at  present  that  makes  her  delirious  much  of  the  time,  but  there's 
no  insanity  anywhere  in  the  family.  He  died  of  heart  failure  and  had  a  lung 
and  throat  trouble.  Yes,  he  was  very  deaf.  Yes,  he  has  a  daughter  living 
who  was  exceeduujly  devoted  to  him.  All  that  about  Henry,  and  John  calling 
for  Henry,  and  what  he  says  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  old  gentleman,  but 
"  not  been  passed  out  so  very  long  "  is  true.  The  old  gentleman  died  only 
the  middle  of  last  April.  Yes,  he  was  very  fond  of  music.  On  the  second 
date,  June  23rd,  there  is  almost  nothing.  John  is  not  the  right  name,  nor 
is  there  any  such  name  as  Carter  connected  with  the  family.  The  old 
gentleman  was  my  grandfather,  who  died  only  two  months  ago.  Some  of  the 
things  were  strikingly  true.  He  was  deaf,  fond  of  nuisic,  and  had  this  one 
daughter  (my  mother)  who  was  passionately  devoted  to  him."] 

The  remaining  records  are  of  sittings  given  by  Mrs.  Pij^er  since  her 
return  from  England.  (See  also  last  part  of  No.  41.)  The  greater  part  of 
eight  sittings  between  May  15tli  and  June  25th  inclusive  was  occupied 
by  endeavours  to  ol>tain  definite  information  concerning  some  articles  fur- 
nished to  me  by  a  gentleman,  whom  I  shall  call  for  the  present  Mr.  "  V." 
r  reserve  these  for  later  publication,  partly  because  I  wish  to  make  some 
further  experiments  in  connection  with  the  matters  involved  in  the 
articles,  and  partly  Ijecause  I  wish  to  ascertain  the  result  of  further 
inquiries  concerning  the  statements  already  made. 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  133 

42.  Sitting  on  December-  4cth,  1890. 
The  first  sitting  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  since  her  return  (February, 
1890)  to  America  was  in  the  presence  of  her  physician  and  Professor 
Wilham  J ames  and  a  stenographic  reporter.  Unfortunately,  as  I  have 
already  mentioned  (see  p.  5),  her  physician  has  refused  to  make  any 
report  whatever.  An  incident,  however,  occurred  at  the  sitting  having 
reference  to  some  relations  of  Professor  James,  and  1  give  the  account 
•of  it  here,  with  additional  statements  in  explanation. 

[Extracts  from  stenographic  report  of  sitting.] 

P.  :  Tou  are  not  the  captain.  You  are  William.  I  know  you  ;  you  are 
James.  I  am  glad  to  see  you.  Do  you  know  the — the — the — little  one  ?  J.  : 
Which  little  one  ?  P.  :  A  little  one,  Eliza.  [Makes  several  attempts  to 
jjronounce  the  name  ;  then  pronounces  it  correctly.]  It  is  a  little  one  in  the 
spirit.  Do  you  know  a  father  named  William  ?  J.  :  Of  course  I  do  ;  but 
what  William  '?  P.  :  He  is  what  you  call  the  papa.  That  little  one  that 
talked  to  me.  J.  :  Does  she  talk  to  you,  Eliza  ?  P.  :  She  has  got  the 
remembrance  of  her  papa  ;  do  you  know  what  I  mean  ?    J.  :  Yes.    P.  :  The 

last  one  she  remembers  is  papa.    She  wants  him  to  [Takes  watch  and 

other  articles  out  of  Mr.  James's  pocket.  Gets  knife  and  holds  it  up  to  head  ; 
fumbles  it  with  fingers.]  J.  :  You  want  to  open  that  ?  [No  answer  ;  makes 
motion  of  drawing  it  away.]  P.  :  William  1  J.  :  Yes.  P.  :  The  last  thing 
that  the  little  one  remembers  is  the  knife  ;  the  knife  ;  her  paj^ji  opened  the 
knife.  She  asked  him  to  open  the  knife.  That  is  the  last  thing  she  says  she 
xemembers.  J.  :  What  did  she  die  of  ?  P.  :  [Taking  hold  of  J.'s  necktie.] 
Diphtheria.  She  got  that  of  a  lady.  A  lady  came  into  the  place  that  had  a 
trunk.  You  know  trunk  "?  Some  clothes  that  had  been  tending  the  lady. 
J.  :  I  see  ;  correct.  P.  :  She  tells  me  and  your  mother  tells  me  that.  J.  : 
Is  my  mother  with  Eliza  ?  P.  :  She  has  got  her,  Emily.  J.  :  Whose  knife 
is  this  that  you  are  holding  ?    P.  :  This  knife  is  not  the  one. 

*  *  *  *  * 

P.  :  WiUiam,  do  you  know  what  I  mean  ?  You  know  what  Eliza  said  ? 
That  is  the  name,  Eliza.  J,  :  W^ho  is  that  the  name  of  1  P.  :  That  is  the 
name  of  the  one  I  was  talking  about.    That  is  the  little  child. 

*  *  *  *  * 

.  P.  :  Where  is  the  knife  1  [J.  hands  knife.]  P.  :  William,  I  want  to  ask  you 
if  you  know  this  little  one  is  very  small  ?  Will  you  find  out  what  she  means 
by  tlie  knife  ?  J.  :  I  will.  P.  :  She  says  something  aljout  William — that  is 
j)apa — to  open  the  knife.  J.  :  Does  she  want  him  to  open  it  now  or  does  she 
say  that  she  did  ?  P.  :  She  wanted  him  to  open  it,  I  believe  ;  I  can't  tell  you 
exactly  ;  that  is  the  last  thing  she  remembers.  Do  you  know  anything  about 
it  ?  J.  :  No,  I  don't  know  anything  about  it.  P.  :  He  took  her  up  the  last, 
do  you  know,  and  put  her  back  again.  J.  :  Can  she  tell  him  anything  about 
w^here  she  now  is  or  who  with  ?  P.  :  She  is  with — do  you  know  his  sister  ? 
J.  :  No,  I  don't.  P.  :  Don't  know  Mary  ?  J.  :  No.  P.  :  Don't  know  Lizzie, 
D — I — Z — Z — I — E  ?    There  are  two  or  three  and  she  is  with  them. 

*  *  *  *  *  . 

P.  :  Will  you  tell  Mary  that  it  is  the  lady's  clothes  ?    J.  :  I  will.    P.  : 

134 

31r.  B.  Hodgson. 

Will  you  tell  William  that  Eliza  says  she  caught  her  dii)htheria  fi'o.a  tlie 
lady's  clothes  ?    J.  :  That  is  right. 

[I  think  there  was  another  slight  reference  to  this  matter,  but  not 
important.] 

[A.  M.  R.,  Stenograjyher.l 

[Addressed  to  me.  Dictated  by  W.  M.  Salter  to  his  wife. — W.J.] 
516,  North-avenue,  Chicago,  December  9th,  1890. 
Dear  William, — We  are  greatly  obliged  for  the  account  of  the  sitting 
with  Mrs.  Piper.  Baby  Eliza  did  play  witli  my  knife,  and  asked  me  to  open 
it  but  a  sliort  time  before  she  died — indeed,  it  was  the  last  show  of  intelligence 
tliat  I  distinctly  remember.  I  have  told  this  incident  to  many  people,  and 
the  wlii^le  question  is  wliether  in  any  way  it  could  have  got  to  Mrs.  Piper. 
Margaret  tliinks  she  did  not  tell  her,  but  she  is  not  absolutely  sure.  If  Mrs. 
Piper  had  not  heard  of  it  in  any  way  it  is  certainly  remarkable. 

[From  Mr.  W.  M.  Salter.] 

■  Chicago,  Dtrem^ec  17^//,  1890. 
Dear  William, — Mrs.  Piper  stumbled  (with  my  assistance)  on  to  my 
sister  Mary's  name  a  year  ago  in  Chocorua.  The  first  name  she  used  then 
was  "  Lizzie,"  and  who  was  meant  I  could  not  say.  I  have  a  living  aunt  whose^ 
middle  name  is  Elizabeth,  but  she  is  never  called  Lizzie.  "  Emily  "  I  do  not 
recognise  at  all — have  never  known  or  lieard  of  an  Emily  in  our  family.  If  L 
could  only  be  sure  Margaret  had  not  told  Mrs.  Pijjer  of  the  knife  incident  1 

Wm.  Salter. 

[From  Mrs.  W.  M.  Salter.] 

Chicago,  Decemhcr  17th,  1890. 
Dear  William, — We  were  very  glad  to  get  your  letter  with  tlie  steno- 
graphic rejjort  of  the  Piper  interview.  I  hope  that  you  will  not  object  to  our 
keeping  it.  I  am  ready  to  swear,  if  necessary,  that  I  did  not  tell  Mrs.  Piper 
of  the  knife  incident  when  I  went  to  see  her  last  October  with  mother.  I 
recall  clearly  the  whole  interview.  And,  indeed,  my  baby's  illness  is  some- 
tiling  I  can  speak  of  to  no  one.  Time  for  nre  only  adds  to  its  pathos. 
■*(•  *  *  *  * 

■      '       .  .       Mary  G.  Salter. 

P.S. — I  think  there  is  small  chance  of  Margaret's  having  told  Mrs.  Pijaer 
the  incident  of  the  knife.  She  says  that  her  first  impulse  was  to  deny 
;ibsolutely  having  done  so.  Almost  the  whole  interview  was  taken  up  witli 
Mrs.  Piper's  account  of  her  Englisli  experiences.  Towards  the  close  .she 
referred  to  Baby's  death.  Because  Margie  cannot  remember  just  what  she 
said  she  is  unable  to  positively  assert  anything  in  regard  to  it. — Yours, 

M.  G.  S. 

[Statement  by  Professor  James.] 

It  seems  nnlikchj  that  so  interesting  an  incident  as  that  of  the  knife  could 
have  been  mentioned  to  Mrs.  P.  by  Margaret  G.  in  the  few  minutes'  talk 
whicli  she  could  have  had  about  the  death  of  "Eliza."   It  was  more  likely  to 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  135 

have  been  mentioned  to  me,  but  if  so,  it  has  sunk  to  an  unrecoverable  part 
of  my  consciousness. 

Mrs.  P.  saw  "Eliza"  when  at  Chocorua  in  1889.  She  saw  Margaret  once, 
soon  after  her  return  from  England,  and  Mary  Salter  and  Mrs.  Gibben.s 
together  once,  in  October  last. 

■     .  [W.J.] 
[Statement  by  Mrs.  PijJer.] 

December  22nd,  1890. 
Mrs.  Piper  states  that  neither  Mrs.  Gibbons  nor  Mrs.  Salter  nor  Miss 
Gibbens  said  anything  whatever  to  her  concerning  any  knife  incident  in 
connection  with  Eliza.  Mrs.  Salter  made  one  reference  only  to  Eliza  during 
her  conversation  in  the  fall,  viz. :  "  I  thought  I  might  get  a  word  from  Baby." 
This  impressed  Mrs.  Pijjer  because  Mrs.  Salter  was  much  affected  when  she 
made  this  remark.  Miss  Gibbens  on  a  prior  visit  talked  more  freely  about 
Eliza  and  the  grief  which  Mrs.  Salter  felt,  but  said  no  more  about  the  details 
of  the  death  than  Mrs.  Piper  had  learned  in  England  from  Mr.  Glai-ke,  who 
had  told  her  that  the  child  was  dead  and  that  the  cause  of  death  was- 
diphtheria.  Mrs.  Piper  is  not  quite  sure  whether  he  said- diphtheria  or 
scarlet  fever. 

[R.  H.] 

Mrs.  Salter  writes  on  December  27th,  1890  :— 

When  I  saw  Mrs.  Piper  she  talked  almost  exckisively  about  her  own. 
affairs.  I  merely  referred  to  my  child's  death  when  I  asked  her  for  a  sitting, 
otherwise  I  said  nothing  about  it. 

43.  Miss  Edmunds.    June  1st,  1891. 
[From  notes  made  during  the  sitting  by  Miss  Edmunds.] 

[Mrs.  Piper  knew  my  name  ;  that  I  was  English ;  had  seen  me  at  the  office 
of  the  S.P.R.  ;  and,  during  the  conversation  we  had  before  the  sitting,  I  had 
made  a  passing  allusion  to  a  nephew  ;  beyond  these  facts  I  think  that  she 
knew  nothing  of  me.  (This  neiahew  was  not  alluded  to  during  the  sitting.) 
The  following  account  is  an  abridgment.] 

Phinuit  stated  that  I  had  a  father  in  spirit  and  mother  in  body, 
describing  some  characteristics  of  each  one.  .  .  .  John — no,  Joseph — 
Joseph.  [Father  and  mother  each  had  a  brother  named  Joseph,  both 
deceased.]  There's  one,  two,  three,  four  brothers.  [True.]  One,  two 
passed  out — little  things — with  their  father — that's  all  there  was  of  you 
passed  out.  [True.]  .James.  [Pause.]  James.  [Emphatically,  and  writes  the 
name  on  my  pad.]  (I  don't  know  any  one  in  the  family  of  that  name.) 
Yes,  you  do,  I  know — James  in  body,  married  your  aunt.  (Oh,  Uncle 
Henry.)  [James  Henry  Thomas,  whom  we  have  always  called  "  Uncle 
Henry."  But  father  used  to  call  him  ".James  Henry."]  There's  a  little 
one,  came  after  he  [father]  passed  out.  [True.]  Al — Alice,  another  little 
girl.  (Not  Alice.)  [Forgetting  for  tlie  moment  that  Lillie's  name  is  Alice 
Lilian,  and  that  my  brother  usually  calls  her  Alice  and  writes  to  her  as  such.] 
Yes,  Alice.  You  call  her  Lil,  but  she's  Alice !  [Phinuit  enumerated  the 
girls  in  the  family  correctly,  giving  the  name  "  Ethel,  musical,"  and  stating 
that  one  was  in  Australia,  sunmiing  up  :]    There's  yourself,  one  married. 

136 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

one  in  Australia,  one  that  studies,  one  that  paints,  and  the  two  little  ones. 
[My  older  brother  was  wrongly  said  to  be  married.  Ellen,  the  name  of  a 
little  sister  who  died  in  infancy,  was  referred  to  as  sending  a  message,  and 
as  being  "  a  big  girl  now."  Mary  was  mentioned  and  "  Aunt  Ellen."  Mary 
and  Ellen  were  great  aunts.] 

[Here  Phinuit  made  a  sudden  dart  at  my  watchcord,  and  I  thought  of  his 
"  scent  for  trinkets  "  as  he  pulled  out  a  heart-shaped  locket  made  of  the  ser- 
pentine rocks  at  the  Land's  End,  which  had  been  in  my  possession  since  a 
cliild.]  Ha  I  You  had  that  a  long  time,  since  you  little  girl — rock — sea 
v/ashed  over  that.  Your  mother's  influence  comes  with  that — no,  your 
mother's  mother — your  grandmother.  [True.]  [Takes  the  watch  from 
the  other  end  of  the  cord.]  School  watch  ?  No,  you  not  had  that  so 
long  as  this.  [Holding  ujj  the  locket.]  Ask  me  something  else — I'll 
tell  you  about  the  watch  presently.  [Pause.]  No,  your  father  knows 
that, — see,  I  hold  it  up  and  he  say,  "Oh,  I  know  that."  [Phinuit 
holds  up  the  watch  as  if  to  show  it  to  some  invisible  per.son  behind  him.] 
He  gave  it  to  your  aunt,  and  she  gave  it  to  you.  [True.]  Box,  oh,  box, 
he  knows  that  I  [I  had  taken  from  my  pocket  a  little  round  black  l)ox 
which  father  used  to  keep  in  his  desk,  full  of  old  coins.]  (What  was  in 
it?)  [It  was  then  emi:>ty.]  Oh,  I'll  tell  you  presently.  I  can't  hear  what 
he  says.  [Looking  over  his  shoulder  as  though  listening  to  someone  behind 
him,  while  I  mentally  said,  "Coins,  coins,"  and  formed  a  distinct  picture 
of  them  in  my  mind.]  Picture,  where's  picture?  [Working  his  jSnger  round 
n  hole  in  the  lid  where  I  believe  at  one  time  was  a  picture  under  glass.] 
But  you  don't  know.    He  does. 

Little  shiny  things  in  box.  (Chain  ?)  No.  (Coins  ?)  Coins,  yes,  coins, 
coins,  I  knew!  [Other  names  given  were  Uncle  William  (correct),  Fred  and 
Albert  (both  brothers),  Jessie  (sister),  Carlotte  (Charlotte,  sister),  ' '  named 
f(jr  a  relative  on  mother's  side  "  (correct),  Margaret  (unrecognised),  Edith 
(married  sister),  Fred  her  husband  (correct),  with  further  correct  descriptions 
of  character,  &c.] 

L.  Edmunds. 

Jidij  Id,  1891.  (See  also  No.  50,  p.  154.)  [Mrs.  Holmes  present. 
L.  E.  taking  notes.] 

*  *  *  *  *  •. 

[Once  Phinuit  turned  to  me  with  :]  How's  Catherine  ?  (Who  is  Catherine  ?) 
You  know — your  sister — the  one  whose  name  I  did  not  give  you  last  time. 
[I  had  not  mentioned  to  Phinuit  that  he  had  omitted  to  give  the  name  of  one 
sister,  although  I  had  made  a  note  of  the  fact.]  (I  have  no  sister  named 
Catherine.)  Yes,  you  have.  (Not  Catherine,  but  Kate.)  It's  Catherine, 
that's  what  your  father  told  me.  (That's  funny,  for  father  disliked  the  name  of 
Catherine,  and  took  sfjecial  pains  to  register  the  name  of  my  sister  as  Kate, 
so  that  she  should  not  be  called  Catherine.)  Phinuit  hei'e  looked  a  little 
disconcerted,  and  mumbled,  "Well,  that's  what  he  said." 

[After  another  interval  with  Mrs.  Holmes,  Phinuit  turned  to  me  and  said  :] 
You've  got  something  here  you  want  ine  to  tell  you  about.    I'll  tell  you 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  137 

all  about  it.  Hodgson  gave  me  something  with  influence  of  yours,  and  I  did 
not  tell  him  right — where  is  it  I  Give  it  to  nie  again.  [I  gave  him  the  book- 
mark, and  wondered  how  he  knew  that  he  had  given  wrong  information  about 
it.]  Yes,  that's  it.  It's  something  to  do  with  your  .sister  Editha.  (No,  I  do 
not  think  she  ever  even  saw  it.)  Well,  you  let  me  have  it  for  a  time, 
and  I'll  tell  you  all  about  it.  I'll  put  it  in  my  hair. 
This  mark  has  something  to  do  with  school-friend.  (No.)  No,  not 
exactly  that,  but  I  see  something  about  school  about  it.  It's  something 
to  do  with  somebody  that  was  under  you — someone  that  you  had  to  teach. 
There's  an  influence  comes  with  it — a  little  girl — rather  pretty.  Light  hair 
and  dark  eyes — bright.  You  had  something  to  do  with  teaching  her.  Nice 
little  girl.  She  seems  to  recognise  this.  She's  passed  out  of  the  body.  You 
heard  from  her  when  she  was  ill.  [All  true.]  There's  another  influence  comes 
with  it — not  her  brother,  but  she  was  very  fond  of  him.  She  called  him  cousin 
— Gideon — he's  in  Australia.  [It  is  not  known  where  he  is  now.]  He  is 
erratic,  but  he  is  doing  well,  ph  ysically  [laying  great  stress  on  the  last  word]. 
He  has  not  passed  out.  He  will  return.  Ella — Elma — Emly — Ehnly — Oh, 
what  is  it  ?  Emily — no,  Emma — Maria  sends  her  love  to  Emma — do  you 
undei'stand  ?  Maria  sends  her  love  to  Ennna,  and  says  she  is  often  with  her. 
Emma  is  not  well — not  at  all  well — not  happy.  [Maria  was  the  little  girl's 
name  ;  Emma  is  the  mother's  name,  and  Gideon  the  name  of  her  nephew, 
whose  whereabouts  is  not  at  present  known.] 

[Note  by  R.  H.] 

At  a  sitting  on  June  25th,  I  gave  Phinuit  the  bookmark,  which  Miss 
Edmunds  had  carefully  wrapped  up  between  two  pieces  of  plain  card.  I 
knew  nothing  of  the  history  of  tlie  bookmark.    My  notes  are  as  follow  : — 

"  [Phinuit  asks  me  to  read  it.]  A  little  faint  influence  about  the  young 
lady  with  you.  Didn't  she  wrap  them  uj)  ?  (Yes,  I  think  so.)  Fleshy  lady 
connected  with  this  in  body.  It  was  given  to  her  mother  as  a  bookmark. 
This  has  been  in  some  book  like  a  Bible  tiling,  and  it  looks  like  I  get  the 
influence  Margaret.  There's  also  Edith.  There's  an  influence  here  of  a 
lady  that's  fond  of  her  brother — Miss  Edmunds'  brother.  .  .  .  This 
ha.sn't  so  much  of  her  influence  as  Edith's.  I  think  Edith  made  it.  (Is 
Edith  in  the  body?)  Oui.  Isn't  Miss  Ednmnds  funny?  She's  handled  this, 
hasn't  she  ?  She  put  it  there  [indicating  between  cards],  and  I  get  all  her 
influences  come  back  with  it.  This  came  across  water  originally.  These 
[cards]  were  handled  more  by  her  than  tliis  [mark],  and  the  mark  has  been 
handled  more  by  the  person  who  made  it  than  by  anybody  else." 

On  my  return  from  the  sitting,  Miss  Edmunds  informed  me  that  the 
statements  about  the  bookmark  itself  were  incorrect.  I  did  not  see  Mrs. 
Piper  again  until  after  the  sitting  of  July  1st. 

Juhj  Gth,  1891.    (See  also  No.  51,  p.  155.) 

[At  the  sitting  on  July  6th,  besides  giving  information  concerning  some 
tests  which  I  had  brought  with  me,  Phinuit  gave  messages  "from  father," 
and  stated  that :]  Your  mother  has  been  having  pains  in  her  head.  She's 
gone  from  the  place  where  I  saw  her  first.  [I  was  then  myself  under  the 
impression  that  mother  was  visiting  my  sister,  but  (October  2nd)  I  have  just 

138 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

heard  that  she  made  that  visit  in  September.]  [Remarks  about  my  sister 
Ethel.]  There  are  two  children  just  alike  in  spirit — they  were  twins  [true] — 
with  your  father  now.  Tliere  are  two  Charlottes,  sister  and  aunt.  [True, 
and  Phinuit  makes  a  prophecy  concerning  my  sister  Charlotte.]  [Messages 
to  my  brother  Albert.]  You  are  going  to  visit  Albert  soon.  I  see  you  in  his 
surroundings.  Tliere  will  be  a  change  for  him  soon  after  that.  [Then, 
breakiiig  off :]  You  take  this  as  a  test  from  me — your  mother  has  had  a  falL 
She  has  slipped  and  hurt  her  foot.  Now  you  remember  that  I  said  so. 
[December,  1891. — My  mother  had  no  fall.]  You  are  going  into  the 
country  and  also  near  water — three  different  places.  To  the  water  with 
a  lady,  Mrs.  Holmes.  I  see  you  with  her  by  the  water.  And  you'll  also  go 
to  a  country  place  where  there  are  children  and  mountains — a  mountainous 
place — and  you'll  see  your  brother  last  of  all.  [Ocfoher  2)1(1. — I  had  then 
just  received  an  invitation  from  Mrs.  Holmes  to  spend  a  week  with  her  at 
the  seaside,  but  I  had  not  mentioned  the  fact  either  to  Phinuit  or  Mrs. 
Pilfer,  and  Mrs.  Holmes  said  that  slie  had  not  mentioned  it.  I  also  have 
visited  "the  mountainous  place  wliere  there  were  children,"  and  am  hoping 
.soon  to  visit  my  l)r(jther  (as  she  did. — R.H.),  but  all  these  circumstances, 
were  previously  known  to  me  and  I  expected  each  event  to  happen 
in  the  order  wliich  Phinuit  described.]  [Mention  was  also  made  in  this 
sitting  of  a  younger  brother,  and  his  name  given  without  effort — Martin.J 

L.  Edmunds. 

44.  Mr.i.  C.    June  19th,  1891. 

[Mrs.  C.  liad  a  sitting  alone  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1889.  Of  this  no  record 
was  made.  Little  mention  of  her  husband  was  made  in  that  sitting,  which 
was  chiefly  occujjied  by  the  subject  of  her  daughter's  ill-health.  Mrs.  C. 
lives  in  New  York,  and  I  believe  that  her  name  was  unknown  to  Mrs.  Pijjer. 
I  was  sent  out  of  the  room  early  in  the  sitting,  and  could  hear  only  frag- 
ments of  the  conversation  after  this.  At  the  close  of  the  sitting  Mrs.  C. 
gave  an  account  which  I  took  down  at  the  time.  I  abridge  this  account,  and 
embody  tlie  information  since  received  from  Mrs.  C.  The  names  mentioned 
during  tlie  sitting  have  been  changed  to  others  in  the  record  at  the  request 
of  Mrs.  C.    I  made  the  appointments  for  both  sittings. — R.H.] 

[Re  fountain  pen.]  This  Ijrings  John  in  the  spirit.  John  the  son  in  body. 
[Correct.  ]  Phinuit  described  a  little  elderly  lady,  nervous,  in  my  surround- 
ings, and  said  slie  wouldn't  live  long.  This  suggests  my  sister,  who  is  never 
in  very  good  health.  [An  aunt  living  in  New  York,  aged  76,  not  nervous, 
death  not  anticipated  for  several  years,  began  to  fail  about  .June  20th,  and 
died  July  10th.] 

He  said  I  would  get  a  letter  h-om  my  brother  very  shortly.  [Not  true.] 
He  said  there  was  a  stick  witli  a  funny  handle,  marks  on  it,  a  walking- 
stick,  that  belonged  to  an  old  gentleman,  grandfather,  my  father,  who  had  it 
when  in  the  body,  and  that  he  wanted  me  to  have  it.  that  Sis  has  it  and  that 
I  must  ask  for  it.  [The  sister  writes  that  there  is  a  walking-stick  used  by 
her  father.    It  has  not  a  crook  handle,  but  a  knob.] 

The  names  Anderson  or  Andrews  and  Flack  were  given  [not  recognised]. 
He  kept  feeling  about  me  and  said  :  "You  have  something  about  you  belonging 
to  him  "  [my  husband].   Felt  my  ring  and  said  :  "  Oh,  he  gave  you  that  many 

Ohsei'vations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  13^ 

yeai's  ago."  After  searching  about  and  touching  various  objects,  he  said  :■ 
"  You've  got  my  watch."  I  took  it  out.  He  said  :  "  Your  husband  says  it's- 
his  watch,  but  it's  not  his  cliain."  This  was  correct.  I  had  broken  my  own 
watch  about  a  month  before,  and  since  then  have  carried  his  watch,  but  had 
taken  off  his  chain  and  put  my  own  chain  on.  Until  the  watch  was  men- 
tioned I  had  entirely  forgotten  that  I  had  it. 

Phinuit  said  that  I  had  a  bad  time  with  my  teeth  a  while  ago,  and  that 
my  husband  was  with  me  [i.e.,  in  si^iiit]  when  I  had  them  extracted.  I  had 
two  teeth  extracted  under  gas  a  niontli  or  six  weeks  ago. 

References  were  made  to  a  document,  which  made  it  clear  that  a  cer- 
tain insurance  paper  was  intended.  This  I  was  requested  to  publish,  on 
the  ground  that  it  would  be  of  benefit  to  myself  and  a  satisfaction  to  my 
husband  who  would  then  feel  that  justice  was  done.  The  circumstances 
connected  with  this  document,  wliich  are  too  private  to  be  mentioned  in  this 
report,  concerned  a  matter  which  was  of  the  most  vital  interest  to  my 
husband.  It  is  the  very  matter  he  would  be  most  likely  to  speak  of  if  he 
were  actually  in  communication  with  me.  Some  specific  advice  was  given 
about  the  publication  of  this  document.  [This  advice  j^roved  upon  inquiry 
to  be  irrelevant.] 

A  correct  statement  was  made  about  the  unfortunate  sale  of  some  of  my 
property.  Hem-y  was  correctly  given  as  the  first  name  of  the  man  who- 
defrauded  me. 

A  prophecy  made  that  Mrs.  C.  would  be  out  of  her  difficulties  "when 
snow  came  "  was  not  fulfilled. 

[NotebyR.H.] 

[At  a  sitting  on  July  8th,  Phinuit  said  :  ]  "John's  lady  feeling  particularly 
blue  to-day.  I  think  this  is  the  day  John  passed  out  of  the  body.  I  hear 
this  from  John  himself." 

Mrs.  C.  writes  on  July  10th  : — 

"Your  note  of  the  8th  is  just  received.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  Phinuit 
is  'mixed'  in  his  facts,  as  the  date  of  my  husband's  death  was  June  18th,  the 
day  before  our  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  During  the  8th,  at  the  time  you  had 
this  sitting,  I  was  not  particularly  'blue,'  and  there  was  nothing  uniisualhj 
depressing  in  any  way,  but  I  had  a  bad  headache,  and  was  feeling  generally 
tired  and  miserable ;  but  the  condition  was  more  physical  than  mental. 

Sittings  45-50. 

When  I  was  in  New  York  early  in  May,  1891,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler 
Holmes,  a  member  of  our  Society,  gave  me,  at  my  request,  two  locks 
of  her  hair  for  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  ;  but  I  had  not  explained  to 
her  that  Phinuit  prefers  locks  cut  close  to  the  head,  and  I  found 
later  that  these  two  pieces  had  been  cut  several  inches  away. 

On  May  21st,  1891,  at  the  end  of  a  sitting  where  Phinuit  had  been 
describing  the  influences  of  other  articles  (sent  to  me  by  Mr.  V. ),  I  gave 
him  one  of  the  two  locks  which  I  had  first  recei\-ed  from  Mrs.  Holmes. 
Phinuit  said  :  "  I've  seen  this  influence  before.    This  came  from  across- 

140 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

the  water.  Relative  of  this  person  across  the  water.  Her  name  spells 
with  an  '  E.'  (No.)  The  influences  are  all  mixed."  And  he  declined 
to  do  anything  further  with  it. 

Being  aware  that  Miss  R.  Avas  to  have  a  sitting  on  May  23rd,  I 
placed  the  second  of  the  two  locks  in  a  clean  envelope,  different  from 
those  which  I  am  in  the  habit  of  using,  and  requested  Miss  R.  to  give 
it  to  Phinuit  during  the  course  of  the  sitting.  She  did  so,  and  Phinuit 
at  once  said  that  7ny  influence  was  on  the  envelope,  that  the  hair  was 
the  "  same  influence  "  as  that  which  I  had  recently  given  him,  that  he 
got  the  name  Esther  with  it,  but  that  it  had  very  little  "  influence  " 
about  it,  and  he  wanted  a  "  better  "  piece.  During  a  sitting  which  I 
had  on  May  25th,  Phinuit  referred  to  this  incident,  and  repeated  that  he 
wanted  a  "  better  "  piece  of  hair,  but  did  not  mention  the  name  Esther. 
I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Holmes  on  the  subject  and  requested  her  to  send  me 
another  lock  of  hair  cut  close  to  the  head,  and  some  article  of  dress, 
such  as  a  collar,  which  had  come  much  in  contact  with  the  skin  (Phinuit 
claiming  that  such  objects  had  "influence"),  and  she  sent  me  a  "veritable 
scalp-lock,"  and  a  piece  of  libbon  which  she  had  worn  round  her  neck. 
I  gave  these  to  Phinuit  on  June  5th.  In  this  and  in  the  two  follow- 
ing sittings  with  the  articles  received  from  Mrs.  Holmes,  the  notes  were 
taken  by  me  during  the  sitting,  and  copies  of  them  forwarded  to  Mrs. 
Holmes.  The  remarks  in  square  Ijrackets  (except  where  otherwise 
specified)  were  either  interpolated  by  Mrs.  Holmes  herself  oi'  incor- 
j3orated  by  me  from  her  letters  in  answer  to  my  inquiries. 

45.    Sitting  on  Jvne  5th,  1891. 
[Last  part  of  sitting.] 

He  Hair. 

Ha !  that's  in  the  body.  That's  the  same  influence  I  had  before,  but  that's 
a  better  piece.  She's  thinking  about  going  away.  [Yes.]  She's  had  con- 
»siderable  sorrow.  [Yes.]  Lady  relative  of  hers  passed  out  in  last  year. 
|Yes,  Emma  Holmes.]  She's  done  a  great  deal  of  good.  She's  a  nice  lady, 
a  lady  who  has  a  great  deal  of  firmness  of  character.  She  doesn't  tell  all  her 
sorrows  to  others.  You  ask  her  how  3Irs.  French  is.  [My  mother  has  a 
■cousin  Soph.  French,  or  it  may  be  Phinuit  sees  Mrs.  French,  the  medium, 
wliose  circles  I  liave  been  attending  recently.]  And  there's  somebody  con- 
nected with  her  Ijy  the  name  of  Anna  [Mrs.  Holmes  had  recently  made 
the  acquaintance,  through  me,  of  Dr.  Anna  Lukens. — R.H.],  and  James  in  the 
body.  There's  a  gentleman  in  her  surroundings  and  he's  kind  of  cranky. 
[Yes.]  His  name  is  William.  [No.]  She's  changed  her  home  within  a  year 
•or  two.  [Yes.]  She's  a  briglit  lady,  mighty  deep,  though  ;  nervous,  too  ; 
has  some  trouble  with  her  stomach.  [Yes.]  She  liad  something  the  matter 
with  her  foot.  [No,  son's  foot.]  Had  to  have  something  done  to  it  not 
long  since.  Somebody  connected  with  it  hy  the  name  of  Harris,  and  Fred. 
£Yes,  Harry  and  Fred.] 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  141 

Ee  Bihbo'ii. 

Same  influence.  Her  hair  is  grey  and  black,  mixed,  and  she  dresses  it 
very  prettily,  and  she  goes  near  the  water  very  often,  and  she  writes  some- 
times quite  nicely.  Lady's  mother — Auntie  called  Eliza — Elzie — Eliza  is  not 
right,  but  something  like  it.  She  wants  to  know  about  Mamie.  [See  next 
sitting.— R.H.]  Who's  Cooper?  ¥/ho's  Miss  Roberts  ?  And  Miss  Davis  ? 
A  little  sister  passed  out  of  the  body  quite  a  number  of  years  ago.  [Yes,  a 
sister  died  in  babyhood.  Recognise  Cooper,  Roberts,  Davis.  "  Lady's 
mother  "  (mother-in-law)  in  spirit  life  is  named  Elizabeth.  I  know  also  a 
lady,  called  "Aunt  Eliza"  in  my  childhood,  aunt  by  marriage.  She  is  still 
living,  however.] 

[Fvftlici-  comments.] 

[In  the  envelope  which  brought  the  "ribbon"  and  hair  was  enclosed  a 
letter  from  Mrs.  Holmes's  son,  Harry,  in  which  he  refers  to  the  cutting  of 
his  foot  accidentally,  and  its  being  "fixed  up"  by  a  doctor.  This  letter  is. 
dated  May  9th,  1891. — R.H.]  [His  letter  (Hariy's)  was  brought  to  me  from 
New  York  by  my  son  Fred.  It  was  sent  originally  to  the  inan  who  is 
"  cran/:;/, "  who  forwai'ded  it  from  B.  The  cranky  man  is  associated  with  a 
geologist  named  Davis,  who  located  some  lead  and  silver  mines  near  B.  and 
then  ran  off  with  the  secret.  We  have  been  quite  excited  with  this  Davis, 
who  has  now  returned  to  B.  Mrs.  Piper  caught  all  this  from  Harry's 
letter,  which  had  probably  been  carried  in  the  cranky  man's  pocket.  The 
only  mistake  she  made  was  in  the  colour  of  my  hair — it  was  never  black,  but 
shaded  from  a  brown  to  a  gold.  Curiously,  what  she  handled  she  could 
not  see,  and  the  cut  foot  in  Montana  was  shown  to  her  as  mine.  Possibly 
because  this  son  Harry  (not  Harris)  is  nearer  to  me  than  any  other  living- 
thing. 

***** 

Closely  connected  with  this  Southern  business  is  one  James  Roberts,  a 

friend  of  the  K  family.    Fortunes  hang  upon  his  honesty  and  ability.  I 

think  the  Miss  Roberts  and  the  Miss  Davis  are  undoubtedly  these  two 
gentlemen.  The  Coopers  are  all  related,  and  associated  socially  and 
financially  with  James  Roberts,  the  K  's,  and  the  '■'cranhj"  man.] 

46.  Sitting  on  June  10th,  1891. 

Ee  Hair  and  Eibbou. 

There's  somebody  connected  with  this  named  Vaughn.  [Yes.]  And 
Mamie.  [About  that  Vaiiglm.  He  committed  suicide.  ...  If  the 
name  were  Marde,  it  would  fi.t  the  situation  just  now,  as  the  Manie  K. 
(sister-in-law  to  my  daughter)    ...    is  constantly  on  our  lips.] 

-Re  Strip  of  Velvet.    [Since  the  previous  sitting  I  had  received  from  Mrs. 
Holmes  a  strip  of  velvet  which  she  had  worn.] 

Same  influence.  She  lives  out  a  little  way.  [Mrs.  Holmes  lives  in  a, 
suburb  of  New  York.]  There's  a  big  vine  [No,  a  tree  in  blossom]  round  the 
end  of  the  house  where  she  is,  on  the  right  as  you  go  in.  She's  a  very  nice 
lady.  Who's  Emily?  [My  sister  who  died  in  babyhood.]  (I  don't  know.) 
Well,  she  knows  who  she  is.    .    .    .    She's  got  a  mother,  a  father,  and  a- 

142 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Ijrother  in  spirit.  [Yes.  Not  mother,  but  mother-in-law.]  Either  the 
father  or  the  brother  is  named  William.  [It's  the  brother.  His  name  was 
William  Henry  Harrison  Sadler.  I  generally  called  him  Henry.]  There's 
somebody  named  French  connected  with  her.  [Yes.]  She  takes  me  to  New 
York.  [Yes.]  (How  do  you  know  it's  New  York  ?)  I  can  see  N.  Y.  I  see 
a  desk,  and  a  piece  of  statuary  stands  at  the  end  of  the  desk,  and  I  see  a 
letter  on  it  witli  N.  Y.  at  the  top.  [The  desk  had  ornaments,  but  no  statue. 
There  are  two  bronze  statues,  however,  on  a  bookcase  near.]  The  letter 
begins  :  "  My  dear  Lucy."  She  has  a  friend  jiamed  Jones.  [Yes.  Who 
hasn't?]  .  .  Emerson.  [Not  recognised.]  You  ask  her  if  she  didn't 
liave  an  aunt  named  Caroline  or  Katherine  in  sj^irit.  [Yes,  we  called  her 
Auntie  Mason.]  [See  Notes  to  next  Sittings,  No.  47. — R.H.]  And  there's 
Doctor  Somebody  here.  (Who  ?  Can  you  get  his  name  ?)  [Doctor  un- 
known.] It's  in  the  surroundings  of  a  doctor.  I  think  this  lady  had  a  sister 
who  went  across  the  water  some  time  ago.  I  don't  think  joxi  know  this. 
[No,  I  went  myself.]    ...    I  see  a  letter  on  the  desk  : — 

June  2,  1891. 

My  Dear  Lucy, — 

Will  go  to-morrow  evening  : 
if  possible.    In  case  you  do  not  hear 
come  round.  .  - 

[T  did  not  write  this  in  the  letter,  but  said  these  very  words  to  her  next  day, 
■or  nearly.]  (Can  you  see  how  it's  signed  ?  )  I'm  trying  to.  The  last  letter 
is  "s."  (That's  right.)  [I  was  thinking  of  the  last  letter  of  the  name 
Holmes. — R.H.]  [Here  Phinuit  tried  to  write  the  initials.  His  attempts 
hIiow  two  separate  capital  S's,  another  doubtful  capital  S,  a  scrawl  like  a 
■capital  U,  two  initials  together  like  LS,  then  three  initials  together,  the  first 
■of  which  might  be  L  or  J  or  Q,  the  second  of  which  might  be  S  or  G,  and 
the  third  of  which  is  most  like  S. — R.H.]  Signed  by  initials.  Looks  like 
A.  R.  S.  You  know  she's  got  three  names.  (That's  right. )  Looks  like  "  L  " 
or  "J."  (Is  that  the  first  or  last  or  the  middle  one  ?  )  The  first.  I'll  get 
more  another  time.  [When  Mrs.  Holmes  signs  "  initials,"  her  J  is  as  much 
like  an  L  as  it  is  like  a  J. — R.H.]  [Lucy  H.  wrote  me,  June  1st,  to  meet 
her  and  go  to  H.  the  next  Sunday.  June  1st,  I  wrote  her  to  visit  me  ;  our 
letters  crossed.  Friday,  June  5th,  I  called  upon  her,  saying,  "  Will  you  go 
to  Gilmore's  concert  with  me  to-morrow  evening  ?  In  case  you  do  not  hear 
to  the  contrary,  expect  me  about  5  p.m.  Saturday.  I  will  come  romul  ior  you, 
take  you  to  the  concert,  and  then  home  with  me  for  Sunday.  I  did  not 
Address  her  as  "  My  dear  Lucy,"  but  did  sign  my  initials  to  a  postal  card, 
sent  another  mail,  J.  S.  H.] 

47.  Sitting  on  June  loth,  1891. 

[Mrs.  Holmes  understood  that  I  was  to  try  to  get  information  from 
Phinuit,  during  the  sitting,  of  her  doings  11.30 — 12.30.] 
He  Glove,  Mrs.  Holmes. 

Who's  Ella  ?  [See  below.]  I've  seen  this  influence  before.  Somebody's 
sweetheart.  You  handed  ma  some  influence  like  this  before.  Give  me  the 
piece  that  goes  with  it.    I  saw   the  date   with  this,  you  know.  N.Y. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  143 

(That's  right.)  This  lady's  been  across  the  water.  [Yes,  once  only,  to  England.] 
Been  across  two  or  three  times.  Spent  much  time  in  Paris.  [Ella  has.  I 
have  never  been  on  the  Continent.] 

Be  Velvet  as  ikU,  also  Hair  and  Ribbon. 

This  [velvet]  is  a  bonnet  tie.  Nice  generous  bit  of  hair,  tliis  is.  Cut 
right  close  to  the  head.  Dersyer,  I  see  that  written.  [Unrecognised  by  me.] 
She  has  a  large  blue  vase  that  was  given  to  her  by  an  elderly  gentleman  and 
lady  across  the  water.  [No,  but  we  have  two  Bolton  vases  brouglit  from 
Ireland,  by  Miss  Maggie  K.]  Ask  her  if  she  knows  anybody  named  Sweat. 
[Yes,  Frances  Sweat,  sister  of  my  aunt  Louisa,  died  many  years  ago.] 
You  know  you  have  to  go  up  steps  to  get  into  her  house.  There's 
fi  little  thing  in  front  that  you  swing  in.  (Hammock  ? )  Yes,  hammock. 
[Baby's  swing  on  side  piazza.  Hammock  is  in  garden.]  There's  a  chair 
with  a  crooked  back.  [No.]  A  funny  back  that  throws  back  with  a  spring. 
[We  have  a  velvet  chair  in  New  York  that  falls  back  with  a  rod — too  big 
for  this  cottage.]  There  is  a  young  lady  witli  veiy  dark  hair  sitting 
therein  this  minute.    (About  11.55  a.m.,  June  15th,  1891.)    [Do  not  know.] 

12  Noon  . — The  elderly  lady  has  a  parcel,  a  square  package,  looks  like  a 
book,  in  lier  hand.  She's  been  reading,  and  she's  just  arranged  something 
on  her  head.  It  looks  like  a  little  wrap  she's  thrown  over  her  head.  The  lady 
herself  has  gone  to  speak  to  the  younger  lady,  and  she  has  on  a  dark  dress 
with  little  light  spots  in  it.  [Wrong,  but  see  Mrs.  H.'s  letter  concerning  the 
dress. — R.H.]  .  .  .  She  has  a  friend  that  she's  very  fond  of,  named 
Ella  or  Ellen.  [Eleanor  B.,  commonly  called  Ella.]  How  do  you  spell  that  ? 
That's  her  name — S — T — R,  S — T — A — .  [Gives  it  up,  apparently. — R.H.] 
She  knows  who  Louise  is,  Louise  in  spirit.  [I  have  Aunt  Louise  in  the  body.] 
(What  is  she  doing  ?)  [I  explained  about  appointment  from  11.30  to  12.30. 
— R.H.]  Slie  came  mighty  near  forgetting  it.  [No,  I  thought  very  mucli 
about  it.] 

12.15. — She  looks  as  if  she's  putting  some  flowers  in  a  vase.  [Yes,  I  was.] 
She  trims  and  puts  them  in  that.  [Yes,  pulled  out  dead  ferns  and  placed 
vase  on  desk.]  Since  I  saw  her  influence  the  other  day  [Wednesday, 
June  10th. — R.H.]  she  has  been  having  the  pillows  changed  in  the  room 
where  she  sleeps,  and  some  things  changed  in  the  bed  [Yes,  bed  broke 
clown — new  post  put  in],  and  she's  been  having  sometliing  put  up  over  the 
window.  [Yes.]  Do  you  know  her  girl  ?  (Her  daughter  ?)  Yes.  (Yes,  I 
Tsnow  her.)  She's  a  nice  girl.  .  .  .  Her  daughter  has  a  friend  who's 
going  to  be  married  right  away.  [Yes,  we  guess  so.]  (A  lady?)  Oiii.  The 
last  part  of  her  name  ends  in  son,  doesn't  it?  (No.)  Last  part  of  her  first 
name?  (No.)  She  has  three  names.  Miza  comes  with  this  {relret)  and 
she's  in  the  body.  [Yes,  "Aunt  Eliza,"  sister  of  Albert's  mother.]  [See 
telow.— R.H.] 

12.22. — Now  she's  doing  something  to  a  picture — the  mother,  who  is 
still  in  the  body — I  think  there's  something  the  matter  witli  her  teeth. 
[My  notes  are  not  clear  as  to  whether  this  statement  was  abovit  Mrs.  Holmes 
or  her  mother,  but  my  impression  during  the  sitting  was,  I  believe,  tliat  it 
referred  to  the  mother  of  Mrs.  Holmes,  viz.,  Mrs.  Sadler,  who  writes  on 
Dec.  4th,  1891  :    "I  cannot  remember  toothache  on  June  15th,  1891.  Have 

144 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

had  general  trouble  with  my  teeth  all  the  year." — R.H.]  [Yes,  lost  gold  out 
of  niy  back  tooth  yesterday.]  [Phinuit  asked  at  beginning  of  sitting  if  he 
wasn't  right  about  the  mother,  father,  and  brother  being  in  spirit.  I  said 
that  the  mother-in-law  was  in  spirit. — R.H.]  I  hear  the  name  of  William 
Henry,  who's  called  Henry.  [At  beginning  of  sitting  Phinuit  asked  me  if 
William  wasn't  the  name  of  the  brotlier.  I  said  that  the  lady  recognised 
that,  although  she  didn't  at  first. — 11. H.]  Did  you  ever  see  her  paint? 
(No.)  [My  daughter  is  an  artist.]  She's  doing  something  with  a  brush. 
Now  she's  drojiped  tliat — she  sits  down  at  desk  to  write.  Charles  is  on  the 
page  in  front  of  lier.  [J  sat  at  desk  to  write,  not  my  daughter.]  [The  above 
remarks,  including  the  painting,  were  applied  by  Phinuit  to  Mrs.  Holmes. — 
R.H.] 

12.25. — Now  I  see  her  go  to  the  window  and  speak  to  a  man,  short,  kind 
of  stout.  [Yes,  the  butcher.]  She  reaches  up  and  pulls  something  down, 
[I  opened  blind  for  more  light  and  arranged  curtain.]  Slie's  gone  back  tO' 
sit  down  again,  at  the  desk.  [Yes.]  I  hear  "Caroline,  aunt,  passed  away 
with  stomach  and  heart  trouble,  recognises  this  influence."  [Yes.  A  dear 
friend.  Aunt  Cai'oline  Mason — Kathcrine  was  her  sister-in-law,  also  called  by 
me  Aunt  Kate.]  She  seems  to  be  writing.  [Yes,  I  was  writing  witli  plan- 
chette.]  Albert — cousin,  a  wandering  sort  of  fellow,  something  to  do  with 
soldiers,  fighting.  Old-fashioned  picture  of  him  taken  some  years  ago. 
[Yes,  on  a  hobby-horse.]  He  doesn't  know  whether  she  or  his  mother,  her 
aunt,  has  tlie  photo.  [Aunt  Eliza  has  it.]  He  was  very  f(md  of  shooting. 
[Yes,  but  Albert  is  alive.]  Maria.  A  relative  on  her  husband's  side. 
[Maria  Holmes,  but  on  my  mother's  side,  wife  of  her  brother.  I  ant 
named  Julia  Maria  from  this  aunt.] 

12.30. — She's  got  a  whole  box  of  things.  She's  pawing  them  over  for  all 
she's  worth.  [I  was.]  You  ask  her  for  another  piece  of  fresh  hair,  cub 
close,  but  I  don't  want  to  rob  her  liead. 

[Further  comments.'] 

I  have  a  small  steamer  trunk  in  my  bedroom,  full  of  MSS.,  &c.  About  12 
noon  I  ran  up  to  this  trunk  after  a  red  pencil.  At  11.30,  .June  1.5th,  I  .sat  down 
to  my  writing-desk  in  bay  wind(jw  to  write  with  plancliette.  Noticing  some 
flowers  fading  in  glass  dish  on  the  desk,  I  stopped  to  puU.  out  dead  ferns  and 
rearrange  tlie  daisies.  On  the  paper  under  planchette  was  the  name  Charles, 
which  Lucy  Hothersall  had  jiartially  written  last  week,  Sunday.  (No,  I  never 
spoke  to  her  of  Mrs.  Piper  or  our  experiments. )  It  was  very  hot,  and  plan- 
chette was  evidently  wilted.  He,  she,  or  it  did  manage,  however,  to  spell 
out  Phinuit  once  or  twice,  witli  a  very  sqiieuhj  pencil,  which  rasped  me- 
so,  I  threw  it  away,  and  got  the  new  red  one  froni  "  box  of  things  "  uj^stairs. 

Strange  Phinuit,  in  second  sitting,  should  have  given  "Caroline  and 
Katherine  "  together.  They  were  sisters-in-law.  I  always  called  them  Aunt, 
though  neither  were  related  by  blood.  Caroline  Mason's  daughter,  Emma, 
married  my  mother's  nephew,  Edgar  Holmes.  We  were  intimate  from 
cliildhood,  and  I  never  knew  any  difference  between  my  own  aunt,  Maria 
Holmes,  Edgar's  mother,  and  "Auntie  Mason,"  Emma's  mother.  Albert 
Holmes  is  Edgar's  cousin  and  mine.  Albert's  Aunt  Eliza,  his  mother's  sister, 
adopted  him  on  the  death  of  his  mother,  Susan,  and  we  cousins  always  called 

Ohservations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance. 

145 

her  Aunt  Eliza.  She  is  now  living,  and  AU^ert  has  always  lived  with  her, 
except  when  he  wanders  away  ;  he  is  rather  of  a  roving  disposition. 
Catherine  Mason  Curtis,  Emma's  aunt,  is  principal  of  Livingston  Park 
Seminary.  Emma  and  I  were  educated  there  and  called  her  Aunt  Kate.  These 
may  be  prosy  details  to  you,  but  they  are  important  as  proofs  of  Phinuit's, 
l)ower. 

-:«■  *  *  * 

I  have  a  dark  blue  dress  with  small  white  spots,  but  I  did  not  wear  it  at' 
all  on  June  15th.  The  hammock  is  only  a  few  yards  from  the  parlour  bay 
window,  swinging  from  a  pear  and  cedar  tree,  around  which  twines  a  grape 
vine,  forming  a  natural  arbour.  It  is  out  of  sight  of  the  jjiazza  with  the 
v.'ooden  swing,  on  the  ojjposite  side  of  the  house,  in  the  garden.  There  are 
three  steps  leading  up  to  the  side  piazza  where  swing  is,  and  it  is  the  first 
thing  one  would  naturally  notice  coming  from  the  depot.  There  are  alsO' 
three  steps  leading  to  front  piazza,  where  you  sat  sneezing  that  cold  night,, 
but  no  hammock  or  swing  in  view  from  that. 

During  the  two  weeks  footboard  v/as  in  city  being  mended  we  put  pillows 
out  on  grass  and  looked  them  over.    We  did  this  twice. 

The  something  over  windo^vs  was  curtains.  We  put  up  a  new  set  in  th& 
sitting-room  downstairs.  This  room  has  an  antique  oak  folding  bed,  too 
large  to  be  got  upstairs,  and  I  slept  here  all  winter,  but  m  y  bedroom  is  really 
the  one  above,  whei-e  maliogany  bed  is.  I  had  it  at  first  and  moved  back 
there  this  spring.  This  is  why  Phinuit  speaks  of  them  both  as  "  nui  room." 
The  curtains  were  too  long.  My  daughter  arranged  the  extra  length  in  a. 
lamhreqiiin  drapery  over  the  top,  which  I  afterward  rearranged  to  suit  my- 
self.   .    .    .    We  did  this  about  June  1st. 

I  cannot  remember  the  exact  second  when  I  fixed  blind  and  flowers,  or 
spoke  to  butcher — will  take  the  watch  next  time.  They  all  occurred  within 
the  hour,  at  intervals  of  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes.  I  went  to  box  of  thinga 
about  noon,  in  the  middle  of  experiment. 

I  think  Auntie  Mason  died  with  stomach  and  heart  troulile.  Was  sick 
a  long  time,  up  and  down, 

Julia  Holmes. 

Mrs.  H.  writes  on  June  Cist,  1891  :— 

At  12.30,  June  loth,  I  went  upstairs,  changed  morning  dress  for  street 
costume,  opened  trunk,  searched  among  your  letters  for  address  of 
Dr.  Lukens,  and  took  the  1  p.m.  train  for  New  York.  I  was  at  the  trunk 
about  12.40.  J.  S.  H. 

At  this  stage  I  acquainted  Professor  Bowditch  with  the  circum- 
stances of  the  pi'evious  experiments,  and  arranged  with  him  that  Mrs.. 
Holmes  should  write  down,  at  the  time,  accounts  of  her  doings  between 
11.15  and  12.30  on  the  mornings  of  June  2.3rd  and  24th,  sign  them 
a;id  obtain  her  daughter's  signatui'e,  and  post  them  immediately  to- 
Professor  Bowditcli.  Similarly,  I  was  to  send  at  once  to  Professor 
Bowditch  my  notes  taken  during  the  sitting.  This  programme  was. 
carried  out,  but  it  will  be  seen  from  the  reports  that  there  is  practically 
no  correspondence  between  Pliinuit's  descriptions  and  the  notes  made 

14G 

Mr.  R.  TloJrjson. 

by  Mrs.  Holmes  during  the  time  of  the  experiment.  A  few  days  later 
I  sent  the  notes  of  the  sittings  to  Mrs.  Holmes,  I'ecjuesting  her  to 
comment  upon  the  statements  made  l)y  Phinuit,  and  to  specify  whether 
Phinuit's  descriptions  given  during  the  hour  of  expei'iment  appeared  to 
be  correct  pictures  of  incidents  which  had  liajopened  at  otlier  times. 

48.  ,S',7/;;i;/ (./(  J/(/ie  23rf/,  1891. 
[R.IT.  t.iking  notes.]    (Eiti ranrril  11.25  a.m.) 

1.  11.30. — I^R.  H.  gives  Phinuit  .i  fresh  lock  of  hair  in  piece  of  muslin 
fabric,  whicli  Phinuit  then  sep;uMtes.]  That's  tlia  same  lady.  That's  our 
friend  in  New  York.    (Riglit.    I  want  you  to  tell  me  wliat's  she's  doing.) 

2.  11.35. — Just  at  this  very  minute  she's  reading.  She's  gut  a  book, 
looking  in  it.  I  get  the  name  Elizabeth.  (How  do  you  get  it  ? )  I  can  hear 
it.    And  there's  somebody  connected  with  her,  named  Alice. 

3.  11.37. — She's  laid  the  book  in  a  chair.  She  goes  to  a  mirror  and  she's 
doing  something  to  her  front  hair.  You  know  how  slie  wears  it,  witli  funny 
things  here — frizzelettes.    Slie's  tidying  them  up  a  little. 

3i.  11.40.—  Now  I  see  her  walking  to  and  fr<i,  ti>  and  fro,  to  and  fro, 
A-e.  " 

11.41.-  Wliose  little  child  is  that?  (Can't  you  tell  me?)  I  think  it's 
lier  grandchild.  Looks  like  a  boy.  She's  stopjjed  and  spoke  to  him, 
stopped  the  pacing  to  and  fro,  you  know. 

4.  11.42. — Now  it  looks  as  if  she  was  showing  hha  some  pictures.  (In  a 
book  ?)  Looks  like  pictures  of  persons,  you  know.  (Portraits  ?)  Things 
like  that. 

5.  11.44. — Now  she  goes  to  the  desk,  now  gone  back  to  the  chair  ;  takes 
up  book,  folds  it  and  puts  on  a  shelf  high  up.  Now  slie  goes  to  tlie  desk,  and 
has  seated  herself. 

6.  11.45.- She  says  :    "  Oh,  liow  strange  1  "    W~I— L— L— I^A— M 
•and  there's  sometliing  -.ibiint  ivater,  W — A — T — E — R.    1  don't  know  wliat 

tint  is.    (Do  you  see  tliose  words  written  ? )    I  do. 

7.  She  leaves  that — she's  going  upstairs.  She  g(jes  to  the  room  to  her 
right.  She  turns  in,  slie  takes  up  a  garment  off  the  cot  and  brushes  it.  She's 
got  a  little  cold.    Now  I  see  her  go  to  a  closet — she  stands  a  minute. 

11.47. — Oil,  she's  hanging  up  tliis  garment,  smootliing  it  down,  and  she's 
■closed  the  door.    (<  )f  tlie  closet  ? )    Of  the  closet. 

8.  She  isn't  feeling  just  well,  she's  got  a  slight  headache.  She's  now 
arranging  something  here  [touching  me  down  the  buttons  of  waistcoat]. 
Fastening  it.    [Front  of  dress,  apparently.] 

9.  11.50. — Now  the  lady  tliat  I  saw  before  [at  previous  sitting]  goes  and 
■speaks  to  her  and  calls  "  Mother."  The  lady  [mother]  leaves  the  a])artment 
and  is  goincdown  again.  The  (»ne  that's  callin'f  looks  as  if  she  was  icoim;'  out- 
side  with  something  in  her  hand  and  watering  the  (lowers.  The  elderly  lady 
goes  to  the  door  and  is  speaking  to  her  while  she's  doing  that. 

10.  She's  got  on  a  dark  garment  with  stripes,  stripcx.  Now  I  see  her 
talking  to  a  kind  of  a  stout  iierson — looks  like  a  servant.   (A  woman  ? )  Oui, 

Ohseri'dfiom  of  Ccrtaii}  Phenomena  of  Trnvre.  147 

Slie's  turned  back  fiom  the  doorway  more  into  the  passage-room.  The 
-woman  leans  over  the  railing  [from  iipstaii's]  and  asks  her  ahoiit  the  gar- 
ment which  she  [the  servant]  has  in  her  hand.  The  lady  tells  her  slie  had 
Letter  put  it  on  the  line. 

11.  11.57. — Tlie  servant  lias  disappeared.  She  goes  to  the  liack  part  of 
t'.ie  building.  A  lady  in  black  comes  in,  dressed  in — like  mourning  ;  a  caller, 
She  [subject  of  experiment]  takers  from  a  little  stand  in  the  room  a  photograph 
jiiid  shows  it  to  the  lady  [caller].  The  photograpli  is  of  another  lady  at  a 
<listance.  She  wants  to  know  if  she  doesn't  think  it's  good.  She's  now  in 
tjeneral  conversation  with  the  lady.  I'll  have  to  wait  till  she  changes  tliat. 
The  lady  wlio  has  called  has  a  little  Idack  thing  in  her  hand,  looks  like  an 
umbrella. 

12.3. — [Here  Phinuit  explains  that  the  spirit  AVilliam  is  ttdliug  liim  s(jme 
things,  that  other  things  he  sees  himself.] 

12.5. — I'm  sorry  she's  got  this  tickling  sensation  in  her  throat.  Slie  doc-i 
this,  h — m,  li — m  [clearing  the  throat],  while  she's  talking. 

12.  12.(5. — Lady  just  going  out  now.  She's  rather  stout,  nice-looking 
lady  [i.e.,  the  caller].  She  [Mrs.  Holmes]  mentioned  to  the  lady  that  she 
was  trying  some  experiments jwith  a  friend  of  hers,  but  slie  doesn't  tell  her 
liow  or  wliich  way.    She  walks  out  witli  her  a  little  way. 

13.  12.7. — The  lady's  [Mrs.  Holmes]  got  a  little  rheumatism  in  one  (jf 
her  legs.  Caller  lady  comes  around  in  a  carriage.  The  carriage  waits  f(^r  her. 
Any  (piestions  you  want  to  ask  )ue  i  I'm  getting  a  little  obscure,  can't  see  so 
well. 

14.  12.8. — Now  she's  picked  up  something  and  eating  it.  (What  is  it  ?  ) 
It  looks  like  a  little  round  thing,  kind  of  white.    Perhaps  it's  a  cake. 

15.  12.10. — 'Now  there  seems  to  be  something  going  on  here.  There's  a 
))oy  called,  and  she  delivers  to  him  a  parcel.  Now  she's  gone  to  lie  down,  and 
she'll  probably  stay  there  some  time,  so  I'm  going  to  leave  her.  (See  anything 
written  on  desk  ? )    T-e-1-1    m-e    t-h-i-s    i-f    y-o-u  c-a-n. 

16.  12.13. — (Can  you  see  the  daughter?)  She's  thinking  about  going 
away.  Isn't  that  all  right  ?  (T  don't  know.  Do  you  mean  "going  away  fi-om 
Where's  she's  living  ? )  Yes. 

17.  You  tell  her — elderly  lady — the  boy's  not  g<jing  to  be  ill,  and  to  tak3 
good  care  of  hev.^elf. 

18.  12.15. — She's  got  a  Vjook.  I  didn't  see  her  pick  it  up.  (  )li,  it's  the 
same  book.    She's  lying  there,  reclining. 

19.  12.20. — She's  just  had  a  picture  changed  on  the  wall.  She  ha  I 
somebody  else  move  it.  He"s  gone  now.  He  says  "Good-bye"  [i.e.,thi 
^'  spirit  "  William,  who,  according  to  Phinuit,  has  been  supi^lying  most  of  tha 
information]. 

12.25.    [Trance  ends.] 

[Notes  made  hy  Mrs.  Holmes  during  tlie  hour  of  sitting.  In  envelope 
iiddressed  to  Professor  Henry  P.  Bowditch,  postmarked  "New  York,  June 
ti3,  2  p.m.,"  and  "  Back  Bay,  Boston,  .lune  24,  7  a.m."] 

Spuyten  Duyvil,  Tuesdaij,  June  23rd,  1891. 
Experiment  began  at  11.5,  cottage  parlour.    I  sat  at  desk  in  dark  bluj 

L  2 

148 

Mr.  It  Hodgson. 

calico  wrapper  with  white  spots,  and  wrote  until  11.30  a  letter  beginning- 

"  Dear  Dr.  Hodgson."    My  daugliter,  Mrs.  Margaret  K  ,  lounged  on 

.sofa  in  wliite  muslin  dress,  reading.    Went  to  bookcase,  took  out  encyclo- 

p<edia,  carried  it  to  sofa  and  read  until  door  bell  rang  at  11.30.    Mrs.  K  

answered  bell ;  found  at  door  a  one-eyed  beggar  who  wanted  money.  She 
went  upstairs  for  pocket-book  and  stopped  to  eat  a  jjiece  of  pea-nut  candy  p 
came  down,  gave  him  some  money,  and  returned  to  parlour. 

From  11.30  to  11.45  we  sat  in  parlour  and  shelled  jjcas  without  interrup- 
tion.    Conklin,  the  grocer,  passed  window.     From  11.45  to  12  Mrs.  K  

continued  wlielling  peas  and  I  sat  at  desk  writing  Dogmatic,  Bigoted,  Nice,. 
Smart,  Wings,  in  liig  letters,  on  sheets  of  pajjer. 

From  12  to  12.15  played  pi;ino  while  my  daughter  sang  to  big  rag  doll,, 
rocked  it,  trotted  it  on  knee,  danced  round  tlie  room  with  it,  and  finally 
tossed  it  [to]  ceiling. 

From  12.15  to  12.30  sat  on  floor  and  1)uilt  block  houses.  We  lioth  built 
a  tower  of  Babel,  and  closed  our  hour  (jf  experiment  with  a  grand  downfall. 

[Later  notes  by  Mrs.  Holmes  on  the  report  of  sitting,  June  23rd,  1891.] 

2.  No,  not  reading — my  daughter  had  just  laid  down  book,  11.30.  Yes.. 
Elizaheth  Hoyt  Holmes,  my  mother-in-law,  has  a  granddaughter  Alice. 

3.  No.  My  daughter  laid  book  down,  went  ujjstairs,  stood  before 
mirror,  opened  bureau  drawer,  for  purse — does  not  recall  touching  her  hair. 

4-7.  Wrong. 

8.    Yes.    Sliglit  headache  —very  unusual  for  me. 
1).    No.    My  daughter  left  apartment.    I  did  not. 

10.  I  wore  dark  blue  dress  with  spots,  not  stripes.  Yes,  we  have  a  new 
servant,  stout  j)erson.    I  did  not  talk  to  lier  tlien. 

11.  A  lady  called  in  her  carriage  six  weeks  ago.  She  took  Margaret's 
j)liotograph  from  ta])le,  admired  it,  asked  for  it,  put  her  parasol  against  table 
while  holding  photo.  I  gave  her  the  picture.  Do  not  rememVjer  her  dress. 
[It  was  afterwards  ascertained  that  it  was  not  l)lack.] 

12.  This  lady  dined  witli  us  last  Friday.  After  dinner,  I  told  her  the 
story  of  Phinuit's  experiments,  how  lie  saw  me  at  "  box  of  things,"  &c. 
Called  him  "  clairvoyante's  control."    No  name  mentioned. 

13.  Yes,  left  knee  —  leg  sometimes  gives  out.  Yes,  lady's  carriage 
waited  outside  and  drove  round  a  little.  While  waiting  for  it  to  return  we 
walled  in  the  (jarden..    See  12. 

1(5.    My  daugliter  is  building  a  liouse  in  B  .    She  will  move  there 

in  the  fall. 

17.  I  have  worried  al)Out  the  <jiii,  not  the  boy.  Thought  of  asking 
Phinuit  to  read  her  hair. 

19.  No,  we  have  had  no  picture  changed  in  this  cottage  ;  we  did  in  the 
city. 

(Signed) 

Mes.  Julia  Holmes. 
Margaret  H.  K. 

14.  No. 

15.  No. 

18.  No. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  149 

49.  Silting  on  June  24:th,  18!d. 
[R.H.  taking  notes.]    (Entranced  11.29.) 

1.  William  has  been  telling  nic  lots  of  things.  This  lady  lost  a  little 
child  many  years  ago,  a  little  child  that  scarcely  lived,  stilU^orn  or  nearly  so. 

2.  Her  own  mother  is  quite  well,  l)ut  she's  a  little  bit  deaf.  A  little 
trouble  on  right  side  of  head  of  mother.  The  right  ear  is  a  little  troublesome 
sometimes.  Years  ago  she  had  quite  a  severe  illness  in  the  stomach,  ljut 
recovered,  and  she'll  stay  in  the  body  some  time  yet.  William  remembers  it. 
£The  foregoing  concerns  Mrs.  H.'s  mother.]  This  lady  [Mrs.  H.]  takes  a  good 
deal  from  her  mother.  Aunt  Caroline  on  the  mother's  side.  You  want  me 
to  go  and  see  what  she  is  doing?  (Yes.)  Sometimes  William  tells  me  and 
sometimes  I  go  myself.    He  takes  me  there. 

3.  11.34. — Her  throat's  a  little  better  to-day. 

4.  11.35. — She  has  a  big  stick  in  her  hand,  luck -5  like  a  handle.  She's  got 
it,  and  she's  reaching  up  quite  highly  and  arranging  a  picture  on  the  wall.  A 
cord  from  whicli  the  picture  is  suspended.  Now  she  steps  to  the  window 
and  takes  the  stick  and  reaches  up  and  drawing  the  draperies — sort  of 
portiere  that  hangs  l)y  the  window  on  one  side.  She  stands  the  stick  in  the 
corner,  and  makes  the  canojiy  thing  drop  down  from  outside.  William  tells 
me  it  is  a-w-n-i-n-g. 

5.  She's  got  on  a  greyish  gown. 

6.  11.40. — Now  she's  helping  this  fleshy  person  I  told  you  about — looks 
like  a  servant — to  arrange  furniture  and  things  in  the  room. 

7.  11.42. — Now  she's  disposed  of  this  person  and  she's  sitting  down. 

8.  11.44. — Well  I'll  be  hanged  if  she  isn't  musical.  Her  fingers  going 
like  this  [tapping  with  fingers  as  if  strumming  on  a  board].  (Do  you  hear 
anything  ?)  No,  I  think  she's  doing  it  for  fun,  to  see  if  I  can  see  it.  Now 
she  goes  to  the  desk.  She's  writing  something.  Does  she  write  to  you  what 
she's  doing  ?  (Yes.)  She's  writing  down  :  X'ra-it'/t  cnifai/i..  Talked  tu  Willie. 
Who's  Willie  ?    (I  don't  know.) 

9.  Told  Mary  to  brush  my  eloah.  Phase  haii'j  in  closet  hi  my  room  after 
jmtting  on  line. 

10.  'My  dear  mother,  I  v-ill  send  tilings  to  you  to-morrow  if  possilile. 
11.50.— That's  all.    Now  she's  stopped. 

11.  11.51. — Samps.  Can't  get  any  more  of  that  now.  Perhaps  I'll  get 
that  later.    I  see  June. 

12.  She's  got  a  letter  that's  got  your  influence  there,  on  her  desk.  She's 
just  lifted  it  up  and  looked  at  it.  Have  you  been  writing  to  her  ?  (Yes.) 
She's  laid  it  on  one  side  now. 

13.  11.54. — Do  you  know  she's  got  something  ?  She's  just  picked  it  up  ; 
looks  like  a  watch — a  round  thing,  shiny.  Hold  on  now,  she's  writing 
something.  June  24</(.  Then  a  dash — two  ones  and  two  aiid  five,  11:25. 
{She's  in  the  same  surroundings  ?)  She's  at  her  desk.  That  what  you 
mean  ?    (Yes. ) 

14.  Had  a  call  from  Mrs.  French.  I  don't  think  that's  quite  riglit,  but 
,-t  looks  like  it. 

150 

Mr.  J{.  Hnihjson. 

15.  Sampson.  (Is  Samjisoii  written  tliore  ?)  Yes,  that  looks  like  on  tht; 
note  to  luotlier. 

16.  Do  you  know  Steven  '!  (No,  I  don't  think  so.  Do  you  see  that 
written  ?  )    No,  1  hear  it. 

17.  12.2. — I  see  3Iuri/  written.  iSlic  had  a  grandfather  naiued  John, 
(Do  you  see  that  written  ? )    No,  I  hear  that. 

18.  12.3. — As  true  as  you  live  she's  had  tlie  portrait  of  a  gentleman 
moved  on  the  wall.    I  see  portrait.    (Written  ?  )  Yes. 

19.  12.5. — She  gets  up,  and  takes  a  little  red  wrap-like  thing,  and  puts 
over  her  shoulders.  Then  she  goes  back,  and  sits  down  again  in  the  same 
seat.  "  Oh  dear  1  "  she  says.  She  takes  the  hook  on  her  knee  now.  She 
writes  pretty  fast  this  minute. 

20.  Here  conies  the  same  girl  now.  (The  servant  ? )  Yes.  Rapsontlicf 
door  and  2)asses  her  a  paper.  She  [Mrs.  H.]  says,  "  Lay  it  down,  j'leasc — 
tliank  you."    Servant  passes  out. 

21.  Now  the  daughter  conies  in  and  sits  down  in  rocking-chair  and  tiilks 
with  her  mother  about  making  arrangements  al)out  a  house. 

22.  Who  do  those  two  children  belong  to  ?  Her  daughter  ?  Slie  don't, 
know  but  she'll  send  one  of  them  away  for  ;i  little  time.  For  rest  and 
change,  you  know.    Have  you  been  there  yourself  ?  (Yes.) 

23.  12.8. — Did  you  notice  that  little  body  of  Avater  near  there  ?  (Yes.) 

24.  I  should  tl link  she  wouldn't  like  to  be  w;itched  like  this,  but  she 
don't  mind. 

25.  12.10. — Do  you  know,  I  see  tlic  name  Manjuret. 
20.    Tills  lady  [Mrs.  H.]  likes  Miss  P  . 

27.  The  daughter  Siiys  something — .she'll  h;ive  somebody— sounds  like- 
Ed — something — trim  up  that  tree. 

28.  12.12. — Her  daughter  shows  her  something  white  like  cloth,  and  asks, 
lier  how  to  put  it  together,  which  is  the  best  way  to  have  it  go. 

29.  Right  liehiad  the  lady  [Mrs.  H.]  is  a  stand  with  something  yellow  in 
it  like  fruit. 

30.  12.15. — I'jxin  my  word,  that  lady's  going  out  to  drive.  She  thinks, 
.she  w(_>ii't  go  till  a  little  later,  so  it's  all  riglit.  What  time  of  day  l  She's- 
talking  aliout  lunch.  Slie  doesn't  know  whether  to  drive  before  lunch  or 
after.    She  finally  thinks  she'll  not  go  till  after. 

31.  I  mnd  get  these  off  hij  earlij  iiutil  to-mfjrroiv.  (Slic  writes  that?) 
Out.    No,  I've  made  a  mistake  there.    She  sa\is  that. 

32.  12.18. — Slie's  taken  up  a  little  tiling  and  looks  as  if  .she  was  doing- 
something  to  the  ends  of  her  nails.    Now  slie  sits  back  and  rocks. 

33.  The  daughter's  just  going  out.  The  mother  goes  towards  the  window 
and  looks  out.  Then  she  puts  her  hands  behind  her  and  paces  the  room  to 
and  fro,  to  and  fro,  like  she  did  lieforc,  you  know.  She  goes  towards  door, 
whicli  is  open,  then  goes  out  into  the  yard. 

34.  12.20.-— Now  she's  stooped  over  looking  at  something,  a  flower. 
She's  got  a  little  jxiir  of  nijipers  and  she's  culling  them.  She's  trimming  tlic 
ends  of  them.  She's  nipping  off  the  little  briars  on  the  lower  end  of  the 
stems,  and  the  lower  leaves,  to  make  a  pretty  nosegay. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  151 

35.  12.23. — Now  she  jjulls  up  lier  guwn  and  she  steps  up  the  steps  and 
she  comes  in.  Now  she  goes  to  a  long  mantel — like,  takes  a  vase,  puts- 
water  in  it,  puts  the  flowers  in  it,  and  stands  it  on  her  desk.  Looks  like  roses, 

36.  12.25. — Now  she's  just  picked  uji  her  2>encil.  Picked.  She  put.s 
her  hand  uj)  to  lier  ear.  Flowers,  trimmed  stems,  2}itt  them  on  desk  in,  «(;/ 
room.    I'm  getting  dim. 

37.  Now  looks  as  if  she  was  Ijrushiug  herself  [imitating].  (With  Iilt 
hands  ?)    I  don't  see  any  brush. 

38.  12.26. — Left  room,  goes  out  and  upstairs.  Goes  to  mirror  and  is 
tidying  herself  up.  I  cannot  see  any  more.  11.29. — I'm  too  dim.  I  can't 
see  any  more.  I  haven't  heard  William  so  plainly.  I've  had  to  work  alone 
a  little  hit.  He  helps  me,  he  gives  me  strengtli.  If  I  hadn't  had  him  to 
help  me,  I  couldn't  do  half  so  well.  The  influence  of  the  articles  [lock  of 
hair,  ribl.)on,  ttc]  goes  through  nis  to  him  like  a  battery. 

39.  You  ask  her  wlien  you  write  if  she  remembers  Florence.  William 
says  tliis. 

[Notes  made  by  Mr.-;.  Holmes  during  the  hour  of  sitting.  In  envelops 
addressed  to  Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  and  postmarked  "  New  York,  June 
24,  2  jj.m.,"  and  "  Back  Bay,  Boston,  June  25,  7  a.m."] 

Wedncsdaii,  June  2ith,  1891. 

Cottage  parlour  at  11.15  a.m.  I  sit  in  bay  window,  making  the  word 
Pliinuit  in  leaves.  For  fifteen  minutes  I  sew  green  leaves  on  a  sheet  of  white 
jjaper.  From  11.30  to  11.45  I  write  a  few  lines  to  Phinuit  on  this  sheet. 
At  11.45  I  stop' writing  and  go  to  the  garden  to  pick  flowers  and  hunt  for  a 
child's  sun  hat.  Do  not  find  the  liat,  but  pick  up  a  small  blue  jacket.  At  12 
I  lie  in  the  hammock  and  "loaf  with  (Walt  Whitman)  and  iny  soul '' for 
fifteen  minutes.  Then  a  boy  drives  up  with  a  cart  and  a  dog.  I  get  ujj,  pat 
the  dog,  take  down  liammock  and  speak  to  tlie  boy.  At  12.15  I  return  to 
parlour,  write  a  few  lines  to  Phinuit,  and  lie  down  on  sofa.    I  lie  on  the  same 

sofa,  in  the  same  dress  which  my  daughter,  Mrs.  K  ,  wore  yesterday, 

imitating  her  manner  and  attitude.  At  12.30  I  rise,  sit  at  desk  and  write  to 
Professor  Bowditcli.    It  is  now  12.45. 

.Tt'lia  Holme.s. 

[Later  notes  by  Mrs.  Holmes  on  tlie  report  of  sitting  on  June  24th,  1891.] 

1.  Yes,  I  lost  a  little  child,  years  ago — a  premature  birth — never  knew 
the  sex. 

2.  Yes,  my  own  mother  is  a  little  deaf  (don't  remember  in  which  ear), 
sometimes  worse  than  others.  Y'es,  her  illness  generally  takes  that  form.  Has 
a  chronic  inflammation  of  stomach  and  bowels.  Do  not  remember  any  special 
severe  sickness  so  long  ago  (forty  years).  William  miglit.  No.  I  am  not 
at  all  like  my  mother. 

3.  Shouldn't  have  noticed  throat  if  Phinuit  hadn't  called  my  attention 
to  it.  Yes,  I  have  some  irritation  there — the  tonsils  are  always  a  little 
.swollen. 

4.  No,  didn't  have  stick  in  my  hand,  and  we  have  no  aivnings  anywhere. 
[See  Addendtmi,  p.  153.]  I  daily  dust  a  painting  which  hangs  over  writing- 
desk.    I  use  a  small  feather  duster.    Picture  hangs  close  to  curtain. 

152 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

5.  I  liad  on  white  muslin. 

6.  We  have  a  new  servant,  who  is  lioshy,  named  Bridget.  No,  I  was 
not  helping  her  arrange  furniture  at  this  time. 

7.  No,  not  at  this  hour. 

8.  I  played  piano  while  my  daughter  rocked  rag  doll,  the  day  before, 
about  this  time,  11.44.  I  jjlayed  "Johnny,  get  your  gun,"  &c.,  to  see  if 
Phinuit  could  hear  me.  Yes,  I  was  "  doing  it  for  fun,  to  see  if  I  can  see  it." 
■I  left  piano  and  returned  to  desk.  I  wrote  two  lines  in  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Hodgson,  and  made  words  to  look  at.  I  did  not  write  "  Drcnvn  curtain," 
but  I  explained  in  my  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgs<m,  finished  in  the  afternoon,  about 
some  curtains  ptut  up  three  weeks  previously.  [All  tliis  on  the  day  before, 
June  23rd. — R.H.]    Did  not  say  or  write  "  tallied  to  Willie." 

9.  No. 

10.  Six  weeks  ago  I  wrote  my  mother  I  would  send  her  things  by 
express — may  have  said  "to-morrow  if  possible." 

11.  See  15. 

12.  Yes,  I  had  Dr.  Hodgson's  last  letter  of  instructions  on  my  desk,  to 
which  I  repeatedly  referred. 

13.  Yes,  I  had  watch  on  my  desk,  consulted  it  cverj' fifteen  minutes,  and 
wrote  the  hour  and  minutes  on  paper. 

14.  No,  had  no  call  from  Mrs.  French — no  one  called. 

15.  Sampson  was  a  nickname  given  to  my  baliy,  Charles  Hoyt  Holmes, 
on  account  of  his  extreme  littleness.  He  lived  six  months.  Sampson  was 
not  ivritten  anijivlicre,  and  I  wrote  no  note  to  mother  at  this  time. 

16.  I  know  Mary  Stevens,  nee  Holmes,  my  mother's  niece.  My  mother 
also  has  an  uncle  Stephen. 

17.  I  had  a  great-great-grandfather  named  John  Sadler.  No  Mary 
was  written. 

18.  Wrong.    We  have  no  i^ortrait  of  gentleman  on  any  wall. 

19.  I  got  up  and  put  on  a  red  shawl  over  my  muslin  dress,  wore  it  in 
the  garden,  in  the  hammock,  and  after  experiment  closed.  I  wrote  i^retty 
fast  fifteen  minutes  later,  when  finishing  notes  for  Dr.  Bowditch — hurried 
to  catch  postman. 

■    20.  Wrong. 

21.  No,  my  daughter  was  in  New  York.  We  have  often  tallced  over  a 
new  house,  which  we  have  been  designing  during  the  last  month. 

22.  My  grandchildren  Kenneth  and  Marjorie  K  .    We  have  not 

discussed  sending  them  away,  but  I  have  been  anxious  about  Marjorie,  and 
wished  she  might  have  a  change. 

23.  Yes.    Spuyten  Duyvil  Creek  and  Hudson  River. 

25.  Margaret  is  my  daughter. 

26.  True. 

27.  We  have  not  said  anything  to  Ned  about  training  tree.  He  is  the 
gardener.    [See  Addendum,  p.  153.] 

28.  No. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena,  of  Trance. 

153 

29.  A  yellow  table  stands  just  back  of  my  writing  chair.  Had  a  disli  of 
cherries  there  day  before  experiment. 

30.  No. 

31.  Wrong. 

32  and  33.  At  11.14  my  daughter  went  to  the  station.  I  hadn't  small 
loaves  enough  to  make  the  word  Pliiiiuit.  I  went  to  the  garden  for  another 
branch,  came  back,  and  cut  off  the  smallest  ones  with  some  little  scissors 
lying  on  desk.  Cutting  out  round  dots  for  the  /,  some  leaves  fell  in  my  lap. 
I  brushed  thena  off  with  my  hands.  Think  I  cleaned  nails  with  these  scissors 
just  before  beginning  to  cut  leaves.  Don't  remember  sitting  in  rocking-chair, 
hut  did  pace  up  and  down  two  or  three  times  after  coming  from  garden.  It 
is  my  habit. 

34.  Yes,  the  smaller  leaves  were  all  at  tlie  cud  of  the  branch — not  to 
make  a  nosegay,  but  a  Phiiiuit. 

35.  At  12.15  I  lifted  my  dress,  came  ujj  steps,  went  to  Ijookcase,  put 
flowers  (daisies)  in  a  yellow  vase,  but  forgot  the  water.  I  put  vase  back  on 
bookcase.  There  was  a  pitcher  of  roses  on  desk — wild  roses,  brought  on 
Sunday.    The  same  wild  roses  are  painted  on  the  pitcher. 

36.  At  12.25  I  took  my  pen  and  wrote  few  lines  to  Phinuit.  No,  did 
not  say  "Put  them  on  desk  in  my  room,"  but  gathered  up  stems  left  from 
word  Phinuit  and  laid  them  on  top  of  desk  by  the  roses. 

37.  May  have  brushed  a  few  leaves  from  my  dress  just  here,  but  think  I 
did  it  all  before — remember  going  to  open  window  to  let  leaves  fall  in  grass. 

38.  Don't  remember  doing  this  at  any  time. 

39.  Can't  remember  Florence. 

Addendv-  m :  That  pole  my  daughter  put  out  of  the  window  to  poke  Walter's 
coat  off  the  roof  may  be  the  pole  Phinuit  saw.  Could  he  have  mistaken  the 
coat  for  an  awning  1  I  was  writing  to  you  about  it,  and  my  letter  lay  upon 
desk  during  hour  of  experiment.  ^  Could  he  have  sensed  the  word  Walter  and 
mistaken  it  for  Water?  He  confused  me  and  my  daughter,  and  he  mixed 
up  the  two  days  of  experiments,  but  he  really  did  see  a  good  deal. 

While  lying  in  hammock,  moriiing  before  first  experiment,  .June  2.3rd,  I 
looked  into  cedar  and  pear  trees  and  thought  if  I  were  mistress  here,  I  should 
"  have  iN'ed  trim  up  these  trees."  But  nothing  of  this  kind  was  said.  It 
■svas  about  tliLs  tune  my  daughter  came  to  the  window  with  the  pole  when  I 
laughed  and  cried  out  to  her  :  "  Oh,  if  Pliinuit  could  only  see  you  now." 

Julia  Holmes. 

[Note  by  R.H.] 

The  following  statements  were  made  by  Phinuit  to  me  at  a  sitting  on  June 
25th,  1891  :— 

11.40. — She  is  taking  books  out.    She's  been  dusting  them.  [No.] 
12.31. — She's  written  two  notes  and  posted  them  off  this  very  day. 

^  June  23rd.  "Wonder  if  Phinuit  saw  [my  daughter]  WTap  the  window  curtain 
about  her  shoulders  and  poke  Walter's  old  coat  off  the  bay  window  roof  with  a 
long  pole  about  10.30  this  a.m."— [Extract  from  letter  to  me  from  Mrs.  Holmes, 
wTitteu  June  23rd ;  received  by  me  on  return  from  sitting  on  June  24th.— R.H.] 

154 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

[Ye.s.]  There's  been  a  dark-coloured  man  there  within  24  hours.  [No.]  I 
saw  her  juist  a  little  while  ago,  combing  her  hair,  bru.shing  her  hair.  [Yes.| 
She's  going  to  make  a  call,  then  she's  going  to  do  a  few  little  things  at  home. 
[No.]  She  wrote  a  lot  of  nuiubers  in  one  of  the  books — objects  tliat  she's 
going  to  get — a  sort  of  list.  [My  daughter  did  -  made  a  list,  went  to  the  city, 
and  called  on  Ella,  .fune  24th,  iiof  25f/i.] 

50.  Miss  Edinimds  and  3Irs.  Holmes.    Jul n  1.4,  1S91. 

[I  was  at  Bar  Hai])or  June  2(ith  to  July  3rd,  and  having  learned  by  letter 
from  Mrs.  Holmes  that  slie  intended  to  spend  a  day  or  two  in  Boston,  and 
wished  to  have  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  I  explauied  the  circumstances  to- 
Miss  Edmunds  (my  assistant),  and  requested  her  to  accompany  Mrs.  Holmes 
to  the  sitting  and  take  notes.  Blrs.  Holmes  came  to  my  office  upon  her 
arrival  in  Boston,  on  June  30th,  and  had  an  interview  with  Miss  Edmunds.^ 
who  was  to  have  a  sitting  on  July  1st.  Mrs.  Holmes  did  not  wait  till  July 
1st,  and  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  afternoon  of  June  30th  in  the  hope 
of  obtaining  a  sitting.  Mrs.  Piper  could  not  give  her  a  sitting  then,  but 
Mrs.  Holmes  had  some  conversation  with  Mrs.  Pij^er  and,  inadvertently^ 
"  revealed  her  identity  "  as  the  subject  of  the  experiments  which  I  had  been 
making.  The  new  matter,  therefore,  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Holmes  at  this 
sitting  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  of  evidential  value,  and  I  give  the  details, 
only  of  the  attempt  to  obtain  from  Phinuit  some  description  of  my  own 
doings  during  tlie  hour  of  the  experiment. — R.  H.] 

[L.E.  taking  notes.]    (Mrs.  Piper  erdratired  cdjont  11.30.) 

*  *  *  * 

[L.  E.  speaks  of  the  time — twelve  o'clock — and  suggests  that  Phinuit  be- 
"sent  after"  Dr.  Hodgson.  Phinuit  does  not  seem  to  compreliend  at  first., 
and  goes  on  :]    .    .  . 

[Phinuit  is  told  again  to  see  where  Dr.  Hodgson  is.]  Is  that  where- 
Marie  D  is  '.    I'll  go  there.    I  saw  him  a  minute  ago.    (What  is  ho 

doing?)  [Long  pause  of  nearly  two  minutes,  during  whicli  Mrs.  Piper 
breathes  heavily  and  seems  to  be  in  a  deep,  natural  sleep  ;  takes  her  hand 
away  from  Mrs.  Holmes,  and  her  face  is  seen  hjoking  perfectly  natural.], 

Ha  I  What  do  you  think  he  is  doing  ?    He  handed  a  book  to  Marie  D  . 

She  turns  it  over,  flopped  over  some  of  the  pages  and  handed  it  back  to  him. 
He  says  he  is  going  out  with  Charles — going  out  towards  the  water — going  to^ 
take  a  ride  when  I  left  liim.  He  had  one  foot  crossed  over  the  other  ;  slio'w.'i 
the  book  to  Marie  and  goes  out.  He  looks  like  a  countryman.  (What's, 
he  got  on  ?)  Oh,  he  looks  like  a  Scotclnnan.  [Another  pause,  during  which 
Mrs.  Piper  again  seems  a.sleep.]  Oh,  he's  flopped  over  on  his  stomacli  I 
Now  he's  turned  over  the  other  way !  I  never  saw  him  cut  up  like 
that  before.  He  throws  both  aims  up.  Now  he's  stretching  and 
yawning  I  .  .  .  [Long  pause  again.]  Ha  I  ha  !  He  did  something 
like  leap-frog  witli  Cliarles — like  leaping  frog.  (On  the  sands  ? )  No,  on 
the  front  of  the  building,  at  the  farther  end  of  it.  He  going  to  take  a  drive 
now — will  presently.    [Pause  again.]    He's  got  into  a  kind  of  funny  thing 

and  rolled  off. 

*  *  *  *  * 

[Mrs.  Piper  came  to  herself  at  12.40.] 

Observations  of  Certain  2'henomena  of  Trance.  155- 

[Notes  hy  R.  H.] 

I  made  only  the  following  notes  during  the  time  of  the  experiment  :-  - 
12. — Up  from  beach  with  Miss  A.  Carriage. 
12.15. — Started  for  Green. 
12.17. — Dropped  book. 

[I  Avas  staying  at  Mrs.  D  's,  in  l>ar  Harbor,  as  was  known  to  Miss- 
Edmunds  and  also,  I  believe,  to  Mrs.  Pijier.  Phinuit  usually  calls  Mrs. 
D.  by  the  name  Marie  (Mary),  and  Mr.  D.  by  his  first  name  Charles.  I  did 
not  look  "  like  a  Scotchman,"  but  Phinuit's  remarks  might  have  done  very 
well  for  George  D.,  who  wore  knickerbockers  and  a  tam  o'shanter  hat  fre- 
cptently  during  my  visit.  I  had  also  specially  noticed  him  lounging  on  the 
grass  and  flinging  his  arms  and  body  about,  but  cf>uld  not  say  at  what  time 
he  did  this,  nor  could  he  give  me  any  information.  Somewhere  between 
11. oO  and  12  I  strolled  down  to  the  edge  of  the  water  with  Miss  A.,  return- 
ing about  12.  I  fell  on  a  slippery  rock  just  as  we  left  the  beach.  The 
carriage  was  waiting  to  take  a  i)arty  of  us  np  Green  Mountain.  We  waited- 
a  short  time  for  some  other  members  of  tlio  party,  and  then  we  mounted 
the  high  carriage,  and,  as  Phinuit  describes  it,  evidently  near  the  right 
moment,  "rolled  off."  The  incident  of  the  drive  appears  to  l)e  the  only 
one  that  Phinuit  hit  correctly — as  to  time.  As  we  started  in  the  carriage 
■we  were  joking  about  the  iiossibility  of  Phinuit's  seeing  us.] 

51.  Edmifudg.    Jidij  Gtli,  1891. 

[From  notes  made  during  the  sitting  by  Miss  Edmunds.] 

[Mrs.  Piper  entranced  about  11.45.    I  handed  to  Phinuit  an  envelope 
containing  what  I  afterwards  found  to  be  a  piece  of  narrow  white  silk  ribbo 
Phinuit's  remarks  are  abridged.] 

[Phinuit  takes  the  ribbon  from  its  wrappings.]  It's  nothing  but  a  string- 
like thing,  nothing  but  string.  I  get  Hodgson's  influence — Hodgson  and 
some  woman  put  that  together.  [He  then  threw  the  wiaps  on  the  ground 
and  tucked  the  "string"  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hair.  I  then  gave  him  the  large 
envelope  containing  some  MSS.]  That's  another  of  Hodgson's  tricks.  .  .  . 
You  see  if  there  is  not  writing  on  that.  (Yes,  there  is.)  Open  it  out.  [I  open 
it  out  and  put  it  over  his  head.]  No,  not  that  way  ;  put  it  with  the  writing 
next  to  my  head.  [I  turned  it  over.]  There,  that's  better.  I  want  to  get 
Hodgson's  influence  off  it.  He  has  had  something  to  do  with  it,  but  he 
didn't  write  it.  Now,  please,  give  me  the  wrapper  it  was  in.  You  see,  if 
we  put  anything  like  this  into  a  wrapper  the  wrapper  holds  the  influence. 
It's  a  kind  of  document.  It  does  not  belong  to  wrapper.  I  wanted  to  get 
it  right  side  up,  it  was  no  good  the  other  way.  You  wait  a  minute  and  I'll 
strain  it  all  out.  It  has  been  written  a  long  time — has  not  been  much 
handled — came  way  across  country.  (Across  the  water  1}  [Hesitatingly.]; 
Yes,  across  the  water.  (I  don't  know  anything  about  it.)  No,  I  know  you 
don't,  it's  some  of  Hodgson's  ti  icJ;s.  If  I  could  only  get  the  least  bit  of 
perspiration  of  the  person  who  handled  it,  but  there's  nothing.  And 
that  thing — the  string  thing — is  just  a  joke  [taking  it  from  his  hair  and 
throwing  it  on  the  floor].  Somebody  connected  with  this  [the  manuscript] 
that's  lost,  someone  that's  lost,  don't  you  understand  ?    .    .    ,    There  is 

156 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

no  magnetism  in  that.  [Tliu  MS. — Creases  it  up  and  throws  it  after  the 
ribbon.] 

(Can  you  find  out  anything  aljout  this  ? )  [Giving  him  some  manuscript 
written  l)y  "  Y.,"  whicli  he  throws  away  immediately,  saying  :  ]  This  makes 
me  cross  !  .  .  .  Tliis  takes  me  to  a  relative.  (No.)  I  saw  this  with 
Hodgson.  When  he  handed  it  to  me  it  made  me  sick — I  couldn't  tell 
him  anything  about  it — it's  something  to  do  with  a  woman.  This  woman 
is  a  perfect  crank.  What  she  says  is  no  good — she's  kind  of  funny.  She's 
in  body — not  likely  to  go  out  yet ;  she  live  long  time  yet.  You  know 
all  you  want  to  of  her.  She  thinks  she  is  smart,  knows  a  good  deal, 
but  she  don't  ;  she  don't  know  so  much  as  she  thinks.  She's  married. 
It's  got  your  influence  on  it,  too — it  was  written  for  you — you  had  some- 
thing to  do  with  it  after  she  wrote  it.  [True,  I  copied  the  hieroglyphs.] 
It's  no  earthly  use.  Her  names  spell  with  an  .  .  .  [Tliree  right  letters 
given  in  last  name.]  Her  first  name,  Lawlio,  Larie,  Laurie — no,  Lavn-a. 
(That's  wrong.  You  are  nearly  right,  though,  with  the  last  name.)  She's  a 
crank.  I  don't  like  her  influence.  She  thinks  she's  very  clever.  She  travels 
IX  lot.  (Very  true.)  She's  going  across  the  water  soon.  .  .  .  [Right 
iiame  given — first  name  and  surname.]  .  .  .  [Further  description  of 
character  correctly  given.] 

[But  I  want  y(ju  to  tell  me  where  Dr.  Hodgson  is.  He  wants  you  to  call 
on  liim  this  uKjrning.]  Oh,  I  see  Hodgson  near  the  water.  Who  are  those 
children — two  of  them  ?    He's  been  talking  to  two  boys. 

1 .  This  lady  [meaning  Mrs.  Holmes]  near  the  water.  She's  sitting  in  a 
chair  [12.15]  in  front  of  the  building.  Slie's  got  a  v/rap  round  her.  She 
thinks  she  is  going  in.  She's  got  up  to  go  now.  Now  she's  patting  botli 
hands  together — clap  hands.  I  like  her.  Her  astral  body  is  very  clear,  very 
light.  [Pause  as  if  asleejj.]  I  went  right  close  to  her.  She  has  gone  in  and 
put  on  more  wraps — you  kn(.)W,  like  a  lady  does — and  .she  is  going  out  to  take 
SI  walk,  a  little  walk  for  a  little  exei'cise. 

2.  Do  you  know  who  HJidUm.  is — Shepard — what  you  call  him  ?  Don't 
you  remember  a  little  fellow  with  you  at  same  school  ?  He  was  taken  from 
school  on  account  of  being  ill.  You  were  going  to  see  him  with  a  lady,  to 
visit  him.  He  passed  out.  Charles — Charlie — a  little  lame  fellow.  (No,  I  do 
.not  remember  anything  about  it.)  Can't  you  think  ?  [In  a  tone  of  great  dis- 
appointment.] (I  do  not  remember  a  lame  boy  of  that  name.)  [There  was 
;i  lame  Ijoy  with  curvature  of  spine  at  school  by  the  name  of  Candler  (I  do 
mot  remember  first  name  unless  it  was  Edward),  for  whom  I  remember  feeling 
;great  pity,  but  I  never  spoke  to  him  or  visited  him.  I  was  friendly  with  his 
rsisters — the  boys  were  in  another  house.  I  have  heard  nothing  of  them 
«ince.] 

3.  I  see  Hodgson  in  the  country — what's  the  name  of  that  place  ? — 
country — in  place  where  William  is  ?  (There  are  a  number  of  Williams  in  the 
world  1)  Yes,  but  Hodgson  doesn't  know  fifty  million  Williams  1  He  is  not 
in  Cliarles'  surroundings,  ljut  in  with  another  William — not  William 
James.  Tliere's  a  lady  that  has  light  hair.  I  get  his  influence  and  the 
lady's  together.  Now  Hodgson  is  with  her.  I  get  their  influence  together. 
I  see  him  in  surroundings  of — I  get  name  William — not  William  James — you 
have  to  go  aeross  the  water  a  little  way  and  it  is  near  the  water — a  country 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomoia  of  Trance. 

place.    He  is  not  with  Mrs.  D  now — not  there,  but  in  another  jjlace. 

[Seeing  he  had  made  so  many  mistakes  I  asked  a  leading  question  to  see. 
whether  he  would  alter  his  track.]  (Is  he  not  in  Boylston-place  ?)  No. 
Light-haii'ed  lady.  He  has  been  within  a  few  days  in  surroundings  of 
William — tall  man,  rather  grey,  and  light-haired  lady.  Give  me  something  of 
his.  (I  have  not  anything  unless  this.)  [Handing  envelope,  addressed  by 
Dr.  Hodgson,  which  contained  the  "string."  Phinuit  puts  it  to  his  forehead 
for  a  time  and  went  on  :]  He's  writing  now — lots  of  Ijooks  and  papers  around 
him.  Got  his  feet  on  something,  I  can't  describe  well.  I  thought  he  was  by 
the  water  ;  that  water  is  a  tank  thing  tliat  holds  water,  and  he  was  washing 
his  feet  and  hands,  that  was  what  the  water  was.  You  see  it  confuses  me, 
Lulie.  Mrs.  Holmes  was  by  the  water.  I  saw  her  there,  and  I  sav.^  water 
around  Hodgson,  and  I  thought  he  was  by  the  water,  too,  but  lie  was  washing 
himself.  He  was  doing  something  witli  the  water.  Now  he  has  sat  down 
and  is  writing.  [12.30.] 

4.  He  is  talking  to  someone  named  William,  Imt  not  William  James.  I. 
have  got  the  two  mixed — Mrs.  Holmes  and  Hodgson.  Now  I  get  it  clearer. 
He  takes  a  stick  and  is  poking  about  in  the  funniest  kind  of  way,  and  ho 
seems  as  if  he  is  talking  and  laughing  to  me,  and  saying  all  kinds  of  things, 
to  me.  He  said  :  "Oh,  Phinuit,  you're  no  good."  Now  he  says,  "  Now.^ 
Phinuit,  you  see  if  you  can  see  that."  And  he  has  piled  a  lot  of  things  one 
on  top  of  another  [and  in  same  breath]  How's  Kate  ?  You've  sent  lier  a  book. 
Your  father  say  it  has  reached  its  destination.  [I  had  recently  sent  Kate  a 
book.]  .  .  .  [Returns  to  Dr.  H.]  Oh,  now  I  see  him  open  the  window 
— now  he  uses  water.  I  see  him  brushing  his  hair.  I  see  him  drinking 
something  from  a  c\\\).  Now  he's  making  a  picture  like  a  great  big  scrawl — 
funny  looking  thing  I  Now  I  see  him  go  to  a  closet-like  thing  and  open  it 
and  take  out  something.  (What  is  the  "  something  "  ?)  Looks  like  a  dish  of 
some  kind.  Now  he  is  walking  up  and  down.  Oh,  now  lie's  making  such  a 
horrid-looking  face.  He  lias  i)ut  his  hands  in  his  pocket  and  .sat  back  and  is 
looking  at  something.  He's  taken  a  wreath,  a  funny  thing,  and  put  it  on  his 
head.  What  are  those  books  and  papers  round  him  ?  He's  got  so  many  of 
them.  Are  they  his  ?  (I  expect  so.)  He  goes  downstairs,  pat-a-pat,  and  gets 
letter  and  goes  vipstairs,  pat-a-pat.  That's  not  his  house.  An  old  lady  there. 
(Landlady  ?)  I  don't  know.  Who's  William  ?  A  light-haired  old  lady. 
(Light-haired  ?)  Well,  perhaps  grey — it's  not  lilack,  anyhow.  (Why,  yes, 
grey  is  light,  it  is  not  dark.)  Yes,  grey  is  liglit.  I  was  right  in  saying 
"light-haired."  A  gent  has  called  with  a  book  in  his  hand.  (Do  you 
know  him  ?)  He  lectures  or  something.  Hodgson  has  sat  down  and  talks 
to  someone. 

Boston,  Mass.,  JdZj/TWi,  1891. 

[Comments  by  R.  Hodgson  on  the  sitting  of  July  6tli,  1891.] 
The  piece  of  ribbon  was  sent  to  me  by  a  lady  relative  of  T.  C.  Hartshorn,, 
the  translator  of  Deleuze's  Practical  Instriictions  in  Animal  Marinetiam,  and 
the  first  manuscript  given  to  Phinuit  at  this  sitting  was  in  the  handwriting, 
many  years  ago,  of  Mr.  Hartshorn,  deceased.  The  ribbon  had  been  worn 
by  the  lady.  No  one  was  "  lost  "  in  connection  with  the  MSS.,  and  the  rest 
of  what  Phinuit  said  about  these  articles,  though  correct,  can  hardly  be^ 
regarded  as  indicating  any  suiieinoriiial  knowledge. 

158 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

The  second  l(jt  of  MSS.  1  Iiad  taken  fit  a  previous  sitting,  anil  Phinuifc 
•seemed  disgusted  witli  it,  and  declined  Ui  tell  anytliing  about  it,  saying  that 
it  was  rubbisii,  and  he  didn't  want  to  have  anytliing  to  do  with  it,  and 
throwing  it  upon  the  floor.  It  was  an  almost  undecij)herable  first  draft  of  a 
lecture  by  a  lady  known  to  Miss  Edmunds. 

Mrs.  Holmes  made  the  following  notes  (either  July  7tli  nv  duly  8th, 
1891)  upon  seeing  the  record  of  the  sitting  : — 

1.  At  12  noon  I  was  sitting  on  tlie  sand  at  Onset  beach,  tliiiiking  intently 
of  Pliinuit  and  willing  him  to  see  me.  Supposing  Dr.  Hodgson  to  he  with 
Airs.  Piper,  I  also  concentrated  iny  mind  upon  hiui.  I  liad  on  Idack  wra]) 
trinnned  with  gold.  At  12.15  I  arose,  patted  the  sand  from  my  hands,  and 
went  to  dinner  at  the  Washburn  House.  I  went  into  the  hall,  took  off  my 
wrap,  hung  up  my  umbrella,  had  dinner,  came  out  about  1  Yi.m. — possibly 
12.45 — and  walked  to  my  room  in  an(;tlier  street. 

2.  T  think  possibly  Phinuit  heard  tlie  name  Cliaiies  f>]\eUon,  and  confused 
it  witli  tlie  lame  boy.  He  is  tlie  fatlier  of  the  late  Willis  C.  Slielton,  tho 
celebrated  boy  organist. 

3.  I  was  thinking  much  of  my  Ijrotlier  William,  WiHidering  if  lie  coidd 
see  me  as  Phinuit  suggested.  1  was  also  apostrophizing  Phinuit,  saying, 
"  Now  c(jme  and  try  to  see  what  T  am  doing.    Are  you  here,  Phinuit  ? "  etc. 

4.  Yes,  Phinuit  evidently  "got  the  two  mixed,  Mrs.' Holmes  and  Dr. 
Hodgson."  ...  I  poked  my  parasol  in  the  sand  unconsci(jusly,  while 
thinking,  but  I  piled  up  nothing. 

I  l>elieve  tliat  Mrs.  Piper  and  perhaps  Phinuit  also  inde]jeiidently  (since 
Mrs.  Holmes  had  a  sitting  alone  on  July  3rd)  knew  that  Mrs.  Holmes  was  at 
Onset  (by  the  sea),  so  that  there  is  nothing  remarkal)le  in  Pliinuit's  state- 
ments about  her,  except,  possibly,  the  descri^jtion  of  her  clapping  her  liands 
.about  the  time  when  she  v>'as  patting  her  hands  together  to  get  rid  of  tlio 
sand. 

The  notes  of  my  own  doings,  which  I  made  during  the  hour  of  tho 
experiment,  are  as  follows  : — 

jiihj  (Ml,,  m.n. 

11.30.  12. — Getting  up  with  usual  incidents — boiling  kettle,  making 
tea,  itc. 

12  noon. — In  office,  turning  chair  upside  down.  Arc  Getting  letters,  then 
writing  these  notes. 

12.3. — Pull  up  window  blind. 

12.8. — Put  on  jester's  cap  with  bells.    Took  it  otf. 

12.12. — Walked  about  room  with  jester's  liat  on.  Went  into  l)8droom, 
took  up  ginger-ale  bottle,  having  cherocjt  in  my  mouth  unlit.  Light  cheroot. 
Printed  "  sly  veal  "  on  pajier  and  placed  it  on  to])  of  desk,  next  little  clock, 
■Haying,  "  Phinuit,  do  you  see  that  I  "  rejioatedly  and  pointing  to  it  with  pen. 
■Open  and  read  various  letters,  occasionally  directing  my  attention  to  dij  real. 

12.20. — Put  teacup  away  in  cupboard. 

12.25.  — Postman  comes  in  with  registered  letter  from  England. 

12.26.  — Read  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  letter— envelops  contains  plurtograph,  &c. 
12.35. — Take  out  large  shell  from  box,  and  hold  it  up  near  dy  veal.  Tak-j 

piece  of  brick  from  shell  and  fit  it  to  the  <jther  fragment,  &c.  Then  read 
reports  of  Mrs.  H.'s  sittings. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Tranrr.  159 

The  description  of  my  liaving  bath,  going  downstairs  to  get  letters, 
drinking  tea,  &c.,  would  have  been  true  if  given  attlie  riglit  time  ;  but  these 
form  part  of  the  usual  morning  routine,  and  were  known  to  Miss  Edmunds 
ftnd  I  ])elieve  also  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Pliinuit's  account  of  my  talking  and 
laugliing  to  him  might,  perhaps,  have  been  a  shrewd  guess,  since  he  was  aware 
that  I  had  arranged  the  experiment.  His  reference  to  uiy  making  "  a 
picture  like  a  great  big  scrawl,"  putting  the  "  wreath,  a  funny  thing  "  on  my 
head,  and  the  calling  of  "a  gent  with  a  book  in  his  hand  "  miglit,  indeed,  bo 
vague  glimpses  of  my  doings  in  printing  the  words  "sly  veal,"  putting  the 
jester's  cap  on,  and  receiving  the  postman  and  signing  in  his  little  book  for 
the  registered  letter.  I  sat  down  at  my  desk  to  sign,  and  intei'changed  a  few 
words  with  the  postman.  This  last  incident  must  have  occurred  only  a  very 
few  minutes  before  Phinuit's  mention  of  the  i)erson  callirig.  Taken 
altogether,  there  is  enough  coincidence  to  suggest  that  furtlier  experiments 
in  this  direction  may  be  successful.  It  is  worth  while  adding,  with  regard  to 
possible  hypotheses,  that  there  were  three  "  wreaths  "  (wliicli  had  been 
there  since  Christmas)  lianging  in  my  room,  and  that  T  liad  contemplated 
jjlacing  one  of  these  on  my  head  during  the  Inmr  of  e\pe)'inient,  Imt  found 
them  too  dusty. 

52.  Dr.  C  L  .  Jnhj  7th,  1891. 

[See  No.  38,  p.  125.] 

Boston,  Jul,,  !)//,,  1891. 
In  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  I  had  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  7tli  July,  she,  or 
"Dr.  Finlay,"  was  uninteresting  and  vague,  l)ut  gradually  he  grew  interest- 
ing. He  read  some  names  of  persons  which  I  had  written  down  on  a  paper, 
although  Mrs.  Piper  was  to  all  appearances  scnnul  asleep,  and  with  lier  head 
bent  down,  so  that  she  could  not  possil)ly  see  the  paper.  Asked  to  give  some 
tost  that  I  could  tell  Dr.  Hodgson,  he  said  :  "  Do  you  know  Dr.  Hodgson  ?"  and 
he  continued  :  "  You  had  a  tire  at  your  camp  at  night  some  time  ago  ;  it  did 
not  last  very  long,  but  caused  some  confusion.  I  tell  you  this  because 
nobody  could  possibly  have  informed  me  of  it."  This  is  perfectly  correct. 
About  f(jur  months  ago,  in  a  very  windy  night,  in  Mexico,  a  tire  started  in 
my  camp,  near  the  kitchen  fire.  The  cook  got  his  blankets  and  some  of  liis 
■clothes  burnt,  and  most  of  ovir  scanty  provisitms  were  destroyed,  but  the 
damage  was  nothing  much  to  speak  of,  and  I  cannot  recijllect  I  ever  men- 
tioned this  event  any  more.  I  feel  at  least  cei'tain  I  never  spoke  of  it  in 
U.S.;  in  fact  it  was  too  insignificant  an  accident  ever  to  l)e  mentioned  any 
more. 

I  then  asked  whether  I  had  been  in  any  danger  on  tlio  road,  to  which  ho 
answered;  "  You  came  nearly  being  shot  at  by  tlie  Indians.  You  were  out 
Tvith  another  man  shooting,  and  tliey  thought  you  were  after  tliem,  but  see- 
ing that  you  were  looking  for  deer  they  did  not  disturlt  you.  This  happened 
in  the  beginning  of  your  journey,  and  you  had  no  idea  of  any  danger."  In 
Tegard  to  this  event,  I  suppose  he  refers  to  what  took  [)lace  aliout  five  weeks 
after  my  start  on  my  journey.  Two  of  my  men  who  had  l)een  out  prospect- 
ing all  day  reported  on  their  arrival  in  the  evening  tliat  they  liad  seen  fresh 
tracks  of  Apache  Indians.  We  were  a  large  party,  and  I  did  not  feel  any 
anxiety  about  their  attacking  us.  Next  morning  I  went  out  alone  with  a 
Mexican,  shooting  deer,  and  I  heard  in  the  course  of  the  day  a  shot  at  some 

100 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

distance.  He  said  that  this  is  wliat  he  refers  to.  The  .sliot  was  fired  off  at 
such  a  distance  that  it  was  not  meant  for  me,  I  am  sure.  He  said  that  it  was. 
only  intended  to  frighten  me. 

He  next  spoke  of  my  family  in  Europe.  They  are  all  well,  lie  said.  My 
sister  has  just  been,  "or  is  just  going  to  be,  married.  My  married  sister- 
hxs  just  become  a  mother. This  is  news  for  me,  as  I  have  had  no  mail  for 
a  very  long  time,  but  as  soon  as  I  get  news  from  abroad  I  will  let  you  know 
whether  lie  is  riglit. 

C  L  . 

53.  MUs  A.    Odohcr  Wth,  1891,  11  a.m. 

In  accordance  with  my  request,  Mrs.  Piper  arranged  to  give  a  sit- 
ting on  Friday,  October  16th,  1891.  The  name  of  the  sitter  was,  of 
course,  not  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper.  She  is  a  member  of  our  Society, 
residing  in  New  York.    I  shall  call  her  Miss  A. 

On  October  19th  she  writes  : — 

In  my  judgment,  the  tests  were  very  conclusive,  and  the  infor- 
mation given  hy  Pliinuit  has  proved  correct  in  all  three  cases  according  to 
the  statements  of  the  owners  of  the  articles  I  took  with  me  for  the  experi- 
ment. I  enclose  an  account  of  the  sitting  which  I  have  been  enabled  to 
make  from  some  quite  full  notes  made  [during  the  sitting]  by  the  friend  who 
accompanied  me.  The  delay  has  been  in  getting  the  various  items  of  infor- 
mation verified,  as  in  the  case  of  the  locket  the  owner  is  unknown  to  me  and 
could  only  be  approached  through  a  friend  whom  I  could  not  get  at  till  late 
on  Saturday. 

For  myself  I  am  quite  convinced,  after  this  test,  that  objects  d(j  carry 
spheres,  whereby  the  passive  personality  is  enabled  in  trance  to  enter  the 
?(> I ccr  astral  plane,  wherein  all  the  memories  of  past  and  present  are  indelibly 
pictured. 

From  conversation  with  Miss  A.  I  learn  that  additional  points 
were  given  correctly  at  the  sitting  whicli  have  been  omitted  from  the- 
report  on  the  ground  that  the  owners  of  the  articles  would  object  to 
their  publication. 

[Account  by  Miss  A.]  . 
*  *  *  *  * 

Sitter:  "I  have  brought  some  things  I  want  you  to  tell  me  about." 
Phinuit :  "Do  you  know  about  them?"  S.  :  "No,  I  want  you  to  tell 
me."  P.  :  "I  feel  a  very  strong  influence  here.  It  is  your  father — oh,, 
very  strong.  He  is  out  of  the  Ijody.  .  .  .  [Continued  with  some 
characteristics  of  my  father,  all  quite  true.]  S.  :  "I  don't  want  to  know 
anything  about  myself,  or  my  relations.  I  want  you  to  tell  me  some- 
thing I  don't  know  anything  about."  P.  :  "Ha,  well,  I  will  do  what 
I  can  for  you." 

[Here  a  locket  was  given  to  the  medium  and  she  took  it,  but  imme^ 

'  This  statement  not  correct,  as  Dr.  L.  writes  to  me  from  South  America.  lie 
docs  not  mention  whether  a  sister  had  just  been  married  or  not. — ^R.  11. 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  IGl 

cliately  called  out:]  "There  is  another  influence  here,  I  feel  ib.  V/ho 
is  it  ? "  [A  friend  of  mine  v/as  sitting  at  other  end  of  room  taking 
notes.]  S.  :  "  She  is  a  friend  of  mine,  a  dear  friend.  She  is  a  good 
influence."  P.  :  [Imperatively]  "Tell  her  to  come  here."  [My  friend  came 
up  close,  and  the  medium  felt  over  her  face.]  P.  :  "  Ha  !  she  is  good  ;  but 
she  is  not  very  well — nervous — I  don't  mean  irritable,  but  weak  nerves. 
She  thinks  too  much.  She  has  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  but  it  has  not 
been  her  own  fault."  [Here  Phiuuit  seemed  inclined  to  go  on  about  the- 
lady  in  question,  but  she  said  :  "I  don't  want  you  to  tell  me  anything  about 
me,"  and  I  recalled  him  to  the  articles  I  had  brought,  and  said  I  wanted  him 
to  tell  me  about  them.]  P.  :  "  Qui,  oui — yes,  I  will  ;  but  I  have  to  go  a  long- 
way  off. " 

1.  Lochet. — [Here  medium  began  fingering  the  locket  all  over.]  P.  : 
"There  is  a  lady  connected  with  it.  She  has  passed  out  of  the  body.  A 
young  lady,  too.  She  speaks  French.  She  is  out  of  the  body.  Her  name  is 
Al — Aleece — Alice.  Somebody  here  named  Win — Winnie — William.  [Here 
medium  began  to  cough  hard.]  He  makes  me  cough.  Oh!  very  bad  cough  ; 
passed  out  of  the  body  with — what  you  call  it  ? — lung  trouble,  consumption. 
A  lady  comes  with  him.  ...  I  get  the  influence  of  a  nice  gentleman — 
he  writes  a  good  deal — a  good  head — a  big  head — a — what  you  call  it? — 
good  mind;  but  he  is  immensely  extravagant."  S.:  "Can't  you  tell  me 
v/ho  this  gentlemaii  is  ?  Is  he  the  one  who  coughs  ?  "  P. :  "  No,  no.  Tliis 
is  another  influence.  He  has  the  locket.  He  has  it."  S. :  "  Do  you  mean 
it  belongs  to  him?"  P.:  "Yes,  he  has  it."  [Here  medium  asked  to 
have  the  locket  opened,  and  then  rubbed  it  all  over  her  head,  and  finally 
held  it  for  a  full  minute  right  on  top  of  her  head,  breathing  very 
heavily.  I  spoke,  but  got  no  answer.  Then  suddenly  Phinuit's  voice  called 
out  very  loudly:]  "Ha!  I  have  it.  This  carries  the  mother's  and  the 
father's  influence.  It  has  hair — che.veux — two  hairs  in  it.  [Here  medium 
began  coughing  again.]  Too  bad  he  has  that  cough.  Tiiis  takes  me  a  long 
way — across  water.  [Coughed  hard  again.]  Difliculty  of  the  throat,  but  will 
improve — get  better.  Matured  early — good  mind.  Too  bad  he  has  this 
trouble  here.  [I  asked  where,  and  medium  placed  her  hand  on  my  cliest.] 
Here,  here  ;  and  his  heart  was  affected,  too.  Did  you  know  that  ?  Well,  it 
was  so.  [Fery  emphatically.]  You  find  out  and  tell  them  I  say  so,  and  it  i.s. 
so.  Gone  avray  across  water.  He  is  in  spirit  now.  He  has  a  good  friend — 
Cory — Car — Carrie — Carey.  Has  a  daughter  living.  .  .  .  There  is  a. 
sjjirit  I  get  called  Marie— Mary — an  aunt  of  the  lady  who  owned  it — a  lady 
in  the  body  who  had  it."  Here  the  medium  wandered  a  little,  saying  to  tha 
sitter:  "Do  you  know  Simeons  in  the  body — Hodgson?  Ha  gives  me 
things  I  don't  know,  and  wants  me  to  find  out  for  him,"  and  as  Phinuit 
seemed  inclined  to  talk  of  other  matters,  I  recalled  the  hjcket  to  his  remem- 
brance, whereupon  he  said  :  ]  "  Oui,  oui,  but  it  takes  me  a  long  while,  don't 
you  know,  to  find  out.  I  will  find  out — but  it  takes  me  far  back — a  long: 
way.  [Here  medium  began  fumbling  with  locket  again,  rubbing  it  on  her 
head.]  This  has  several  influences  about  it.  Did  you  know  that  ?  Well,  it. 
is  so.  An  aunt — Marie — Mary — in  the  spirit.  A  good  influence  is  connected 
with  it.  She  passed  out  of  the  body  with  something  internal — stomacli 
wrong.    .    .    .    Elizabeth — Elizabeth — do  you  know  Elizabeth  ?  Elizabeth. 

M 

162 

Mr.  R.  Ilodijson. 

There  is  a  picture  here — there  is  hair  here—  two  liairn.  He  was  a  good  man, 
had  a  good  mind.  .  .  .  Who  is  a  Richard  ^  Tliere  is  Richard  here — do  you 
know  him?  This  has  been  laid  away — not  used  all  of  the  time.  .  .  .  I  get 
El — Ellen — Elinor — a  cousin — and  a  Julia.  I  see  a  hig  building — a  gentleman 
— tlie  gentleman  with  good  mind.  Edward,  his  son,  studying  books  in  a  large 
])lace.  .  .  ."  [Here  medium  seemed  to  be  getting  so  confused  that  I 
said  :  "  That  is  enough  about  the  locket,"  and  placed  another  object  in  her 
hand  belonging  to  a  different  person.  I  regi'et  this  now,  and  tliink  it  was  a 
mistake,  as,  later  (m,  the  medium  got  the  articles  rather  mixed,  and  if  T  had 
kept  her  to  the  one  slie  would  possibly  have  got  clearer  indications  concerning 
it.  After  telling  a  good  deal  about  tlie  two  other  oljjects,  Pliinuit  suddenly 
.Slid:]  "There  was  something  around  the  locket — give  me  what  was 
around  it."  [Tlie  wrapper,  an  envelope  folded  several  times,  was  handed  to 
the  medium.  She  felt  it  all  over  and  put  it  on  top  of  her  head,  then 
said:]  "Several  influences  about  this.  I  can't  tell  much.  Feel  a  doctor 
strongly  I  "  [Medium  threw  the  envelojie  away  and  asked  for  locket  again.] 
P.  :  "  The  gentleman  wlio  has  this  is  physically  well,  and  is  fine,  handsome — 
what  you  call  it? — good,  good-looking."  [Here  the  sitter  suggested  the 
French  phrase,  "Un  l>el  homme,"  as  Phinuit  seemed  to  be  waxing  so  enthu- 
siastic over  the  said  gentleman's  appearance.  Pliinuit  said,  "  Qui,  oui,"  but 
did  not  repeat  the  idiom.]  P.  "  He  has  light  hair  and  complexion.  He  is  a 
nice  man,  big  head,  writes  a  great  deal.  I  see  him  in  an  office — he  dictates 
to  others."  [Asked  here  what  he  meant  exactly  by  dictating,  as  T  thought 
giving  orders  niiglit  be  the  sense  intended  ;  but  Phinuit  explained  that  "  the 
others  around  tlie  nice  gentleman  wrote  down  what  lie  was  saying."]  P. : 
"He  is  a  good  man — I  like  his  influence.  Henry — do  you  know  Henry? 
He  will  tell  you  who  Henry  is — ask  him.    I  feel  Henry's  influence  strong. 

[Here  medium  interpolated  some  remarks  having  evident  reference 
to  the  other  objects  given  her.]  .  .  .  He  has  a  good  mind — is  intellectual. 
He  has  a  wife  wlio  is  a  nice  lady.  I  get  Ag — Aug — August — A — U — G — U 
— S — T."  [Thinking  this  might  be  a  date  wliicli  would  be  useful  I  asked 
Phinuit  about  it,  but  could  get  nothing  definite.]  P.  :  "The  locket  has 
passed  througli  four  lip.nds.  A  child  had  it  first — given  to  a  cliild."  [This 
seemed  to  me  so  unlikely  that  I  imagined  Pliinuit  to  be  off  the  track,  and  to 
put  him  upon  it  again  I  said  :  "  Can't  you  tell  me  the  name  of  the  owner  ?  " 
Phinuit  replied  he  "would  try" — and  spelled  out  G — E,  J — E,  Jose — 
Josey — G — E,  but  seemed  very  uncertain,  and  constantly  apjjealed  to  me  for 
corroboration,  but  I  could  not  help  at  all  as  tlie  Christian  names  were 
unknown  to  me.]  P. :  "  Marie — the  aunt  out  of  the  body — nice,  good 
influence.    I  get  William  with  it.    His  son's  name  spells  with  an  "S." 

Je — Josey — no,  that  is  not  it.  [I  asked  if  Josephiui'  was  what  he 
meant.]  No,  no,  J — U — D — S — 0 — N.  [Spelled  out  very  rapidly,  but  did 
not  seem  satisfied  with  it.]  .  .  .  You  tell  the  nice  gentleman  he  is  to  go 
away  unexpectedly- -will  be  called  away  suddenly.  J — O — H — N  [spelled 
out  quickly].  Who  is  he  ?  Ell — Ellswart — Ellsworth.  Do  you  know  him  ? 
George  [came  very  suddenly].  No,  that  is  not  it.  The  gentleman  had  a 
friend  Cory — Car — Carey.  .  .  .  Jo — Josey — Joseph  [called  out  suddenly] 
— Joseph."  S.  :  "  Is  that  the  name  of  the  nice  gentleman  ?  "  P.  :  "There 
is  a  '  U  '  and  an  '  E  ' — Jose — Jo.seph."    [Tliis  last  came  quickly  and  with  a 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,      3  63 

certain  tone  of  conviction,  so  I  asked  again  if  that  was  the  gentleman's  name, 
but  Phinuit  could  not  tell  me.] 

Here  I  thought  the  medium  had  h&en  long  enough  in  trance — 45  minutes 
— and  I  said  to  Phinuit:  "I  think  this  is  enough.  I  don't  want  to  know 
any  more."  Whereupon  Phinuit  said  hastily,  angrily  :  "  You  can't  send  me 
away.  I  will  go  when  I  get  ready."  -  I  explained  that  I  thought  the  medium 
would  be  too  tii-ed  and  that  it  was  enough.  P.  :  "I  will  g<j  when  I  get 
through.  Don't  you  want  me  to  find  out  something  more  for  you  ? "  S. 
"No,  that  is  all  I  want  to  know  about  the  locket,  Ac,  &c."  P.  :  [Eagerly.] 
"  Well,  I  will  tell  you  about  yourself,  then."  [Here  followed  some  amusingly 
correct  characteristics  of  my  own,  very  drolly  phrased.  He  pronounced  me 
to  be  physically  well,  but  insisted  that  I  slept  with  my  head  too  high  and  that 
it  was  bad,  must  give  it  up  ;  mentioned  some  events  likely  to  hajipen  in  the 
near  future  which  have  vaguely  shajjed  themselves  in  my  own  mind  as  among 
the  possibilities.  Here  I  said  again  :  "I  don't  want  to  be  told  anything  I 
know  already."  P.  :  "  Don't  you  want  to  know  any  more  1  Ask  me  what- 
ever you  want  "  [and  after  a  little  niore  talk  said  :]  "  Now  I  am  going,"  and 
shortly  thereupon  medium  came  out  of  the  trance. 

What  particularly  struck  me  as  very  marked,  and  also  curious  in  the 
whole  experience,  was  the  docility  of  the  passive  personality — calling  itself 
Phinuit — to  the  influence  of  a  strong  will.  Even  when  I  did  not  Sf)eak  my 
thought,  but  mentally  willed  that  certain  subjects  should  not  be  touched 
upon — as,  for  instance,  recollections  of  some  deceased  relations  of  mine — it 
was  odd  to  note  how  the  medium  would  glance  off  suddenly  and  go  upon 
quite  a  diflerent  tack  where  my  sphere  was  not  armed  against  intrusion,  such 
as  temperamental  facts,  characteristics,  habits,  and  so  forth. 

2.  FuYuj. — Sitter  :  "Here  is  a  ring.  Dr.  Phinuit,  I  want  you  to  tell  me 
about."  P.:  "Do  you  know  about  it  ?  "  S.  :  "  No,  I  want  yon  to  tell  me.' 
P.  :  "  I  do  not  like  the  influence  of  this.  It  makes  me  feel  bad — mcoivais — 
bad,  bad.  Someone  connected  with  it  who  is  wrong  in  her  head — insane — 
a  lady.  She  began  to  lose  her  mind  at  an  early  age.  Oh  1  it  makes  me  feel 
bad.  .  .  .  Bad  influence.  .  .  .  Someone  connected  with  it  ^jassed 
out  of  the  body  with  cancer.  I  do  not  like  it."  [Very  positively  said.] 
Here  tlie  medium  seemed  so  distressed  that  the  sitter  took  the  ring  fronx  her 
hand  and  put  a  watch  in  place  of  it. 

3.  Watch. — P.  :  "This  is  a  better  influence.  [Here  medium  breathed 
very  heavily  and  was  quiet  for  what  seemed  fully  two  minutes.]  Ha  !  it 
takes  me  a  long  way.  I  can  see  the  surroundings  of  tliat  watcli.  [Here 
medium  wanted  it  opened  for  lier.]  It  had  a  curious  looking  chain — a — 
what  you  call  it  ? — fob.  It  has  a  gentleman's  influence.  Came  from  across 
the  water  many  years  ago.  It  lias  been  in  Italy.  The  gentleman  has  passed 
out  of  the  body.  I  see  a  brick  hou3e,  door  in  the  centre,  two  windows  over 
the  door  and  two  windows  each  side — no — one  window  each  side  of  door. 
You  come  up  to  it  Ijy  a — what  you  call  it  ? — walk — path — and  passing  around 
the  house  at  the  end  is  a  very  singular  looking  tree.  The  man  who  has  it  i;-i 
in  the  body.  There  is  a  sister  named  Ann — Ann — Annie  (suddenly).  I  get 
the  name  Elizabeth.  Who  is  Elizabeth  ?- -Eliza — Lizzie.  I  get  Elizabeth 
strongly — and  Henry,  too.  Heniy  gave  it  to  Elizabeth — is  not  that  so  ?  " 
S.  :  ''I  don't  know — will  have  to  ask."    P.  :  "  Well,  it  is  so.    I  say  it  is  so 

2lr.  R.  Hodgson. 

[angrily],  and  you  will  find  it  so  when  you  ask.  ...  I  fuel  tlie  influence 
of  someone  who  worked  with  great,  round  rolling  things."  [A^arious  occupa- 
tions here  suggested,  and  finally  Phinuit  seemed  to  adopt  tlie  idea  that  it 
was  a  printing  liouse  he  meant,  for  he  innnediately  after  said  :]  "There  was 
n  brother  who  was  a  printer.  He  lias  handled  this.  He  has  passed  out  of 
the  body.    He  was  Henry.    Someone  connected  with  it  named  Dav. — Davis. 

I  see  this  now  in  a  box  with  (jther  things — little  things — what 
you  call  them  ? — trinkets — kept  in  cotton.  It  makes  me  sad  now.  Eliza- 
beth— Eliza — don't  you  know  Elizal)eth  ?  There  is  an  Eliza.  [Very  po.si- 
tively.]  J — O — H — N  [spelled  rajjidly].  ...  I  get  liim — who  is  he  ? — 
and  Jo — Joseph  [called  out  quickly  and  positively].  .  .  .  Jen — Je — Jes 
— Jenny.  Ask  who  J — E — N,  N — I — E  is.  .  .  ."  [Here  medium 
seemed  to  wander  a  little  and  presently  called  out :  "  What  was  around  the 
locket  ?  Tliere  was  something  around  it  " — and  when  wrapper  was  given  her 
Phinuit  resumed  upon  the  locket.] 

[Notes.] 

None  of  the  three  articles  in  question  were  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper 
before  she  went  into  trance,  nor  were  they  even  taken  out  of  the  bag  in  which 
they  were  brought,  or  unwrapped,  till  they  were  handed  to  the  medium. 
The  sitter  had  handled  them  as  little  as  j^ossible,  and  knew  notliing  whatever 
of  their  associations,  and  in  the  matter  of  the  locket  did  not  even  know  the 
owner.  Nor  did  the  lady  who  t(.iok  the  notes  at  the  sitting  know  anything 
whatever  concerning  the  articles. 

1.  Lucket. — I  got  the  locket  the  evening  before  the  sitting,  through  a  friend 
whom  I  met  by  accident  in  the  street,  and  upon  stating  to  her  that  I  wanted 
isome  personal  article  of  an  individual  unknown  to  me,  she  said:  "  We  are 

close  to  Mr.  's  office  and  I  will  go  in  and  ask  him  if  he  happens  to  have 

any  trinket  aljout  him  tliat  he  will  lend."  I  waited  outside  in  the  street  till 
my  friend  returned  with  a  little  object  wraj^ped  up  in  a  paper  envelope  and 
handed  it  to  me,  saying  that  "she  knew  what  it  was,  Intt  knew  nothing  of 
its  history,"  &c.  I  was  not  told  what  tlie  article  was,  nor  was  I  acquainted 
with  tlie  owner — had  never  seen  him  and  knew  only  his  surname  in  a  casual 
way.  I  did  not  hjok  at  tlie  object  given  till  the  sitting  witli  Mrs.  Piper  v/as 
over  and  she  had  come  out  of  the  trance,  when  we  both  examined  it. 

The  gentleman  who  owns  the  locket  bought  it  for  himself  when  a  cJiild, 
quite  a  little  fellow,  with  some  money  tliat  had  been  given  him  as  a  present. 
It  liad  been  jnit  away  for  many  years  and  quite  forgotten  ;  seven  or  eight 
years  ago  it  was  by  chance  recalled  to  his  memory,  which  occasioned  a  search 
for  it,  and,  when  found,  he  attached  it  to  his  watch-chain,  and  has  worn  it 
since.  The  locket  within  lias  a  picture  of  the  owner's  mother  on  one  side, 
and  the  hair  of  his  father  and  mother  on  the  other.  The  gentleman  who  had 
fi  cough,  owner  identifies  as  an  uncle — Charles  by  name — a  brother  of  his 
mother.  He  liimself  never  saw  this  uncle  Charles,  but  remembers,  when  a 
little  boy,  hearing  him  spoken  of  as  out  of  health — in  his  own  words,  "A 
physical  wreck  "  ;  that  he  had  consumption,  and  went  to  Soutli  Africa,  where 
he  seemed  for  a  time  to  improve,  but  finally  died  tliere.  Owner  knows  no 
name  like  Cory  or  Carey  in  connection  vvitli  the  locket,  and,  in  fact,  cannot 
verify  any  of  the  names.    He  says  tliey  may  all  be  correct  for  all  lie  knows 

Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  1G5 

■Tind  belong  to  difFerent  members  of  his  motlier'.s  family,  v/lio  lived  in  Scot- 
land, and  lie  has  never  been  brought  into  contact  vrith  any  of  them,  his 
mother  having  been  tlie  eldest  of  a  family  of  10  or  12,  and  she  married  early 
and  came  to  this  country,  where  he  was  born  and  has  always  lived.  He  never 
inew  any  of  his  aunts,  uncles,  or  cousins  till  a  few  years  ago,  when  he  went 
Jibroad  and  met  certain  ones  who'come  in  later  in  connection  with  this. 

He  says  his  mother  might  have  had  a  sister  Mavij ;  he  has  a  sister 
living  christened  Mary  Ann,  now  called  Marian,  and  that  at  one  time  the 
locket  may  have  been  in  her  keeping,  but  he  is  not  sure  of  this. 

The  "  son,  studying  books  in  a  large  building  upstairs,"  owner  thinks  is 
an  allusion  to  a  cousin  of  his,  whose  chance  acquaintance  he  made  in  England 
•some  years  ago.    This  young  cousin  was  the  son  of  an  aunt ;  Iiis  father  was 

very  proud  of  the  lad's  cleverness  and  took  Mr.   to  see  him.  They 

found  the  boy  in  a  large  building  up  some  stairs,  surrounded  by  books,  which 
he  v/as  studying.  He  cannot  remember  whether  the  young  man's  name  was 
Edioard  or  not,  as  he  was  merely  introduced  to  him  and  never  saw  liini 
afterwards,  nor  has  even  thought  of  the  incident  till  brouglit  up  in  this 
connection. 

The  doctor  mentioned  when  the  envelope  was  handled,  owner  tliinks 
may  be  an  allusion  to  his  father-in-law,  who  was  a  physician,  and  there  was. 
a  very  intimate  relation  between  them. 

Knows  nothing  about  the  name  Judson,  or  ElLswoi-th. 

Thinks  the  attempts  to  find  out  his  own  name  were  good,  his  names 
being  Josej^h  George,  and  there  is  a  "  TJ  "  and  an  "  E  "  in  his  surname.  His 
mother's  name  was  Elizabeth.  Thinks  the  allusion  to  some  throat  difficulty, 
in  contradistinction  to  the  lung  trouble  connected  with  the  uncle,  refers  to 
his  mother,  for  she  suffered  with  a  bronchial  affection  which  occasioned 
severe  spasms  in  the  throat  for  some  years,  and  she  finally  died  of  tlie 
malady — has  been  dead  many  years.  He  thinks  the  allusions,  "good  mind 
— matiu'ed  early,"  refer  also  to  his  mother,  who  was  very  quick,  intelligent, 
and  capable.  He  says  the  allusions  to  himself  are  true  :  he  i'*-  very 
extravagant — to  use  his  own  words  :  "  Has  had  two  fortunes  and  has  gone 
through  both  of  them  "  ;  is  physically  well,  has  a  big  head  ;  v/rites,  but 
dictates  more — says  he  is  "  too  lazy  to  write  himself  v/hen  he  has  others 
to  do  it  for  him."  Has  a  wife,  and  she  it  was  who  hunted  up  and  found  the 
locket,  when  it  had  been  so  long  laid  away  and  forgotten.  Says  it  would  be 
impossible  at  this  distance  of  time  to  verify  any  of  the  names.  They  are 
none  of  them  familiar  to  him  except  Elizabeth — his  mother's,  and  Alice — that 
of  his  little  niece  [who  is  living,  seven  years  old,  and  does  not  "speak 
French  "]. 

My  friend  who  asked  Mr.  for  the  locket  says  the  description  of  him 

is  excellent  as  to  appearance.    He  has  a  big  head,  is  intellectual — is  very 

good-looking,  and  is  a  very  kind,  generous-hearted  man.    Mr.  says  he 

knows  of  nothing  likely  to  call  him  away  suddenly  in  the  matter  of  his 
business. 

2.  Ring. — The  ring  and  watch  were  handed  to  me  just  as  I  was  going  to 
keep  my  appointment  with  Mrs.  Piper.  They  were  in  a  box,  tied  up.  I 
had  never  seen  them,  and  did  not  even  know  of  their  existence  tUl  entrusted 
to  my  keeping.    The  oivner  is  known  to  me,  but  not  intimately,  so  that  I 

16G 

Mr,  R.  Hodgson. 

knew  notliiug  wluituver  of  tlie  circumstances  connected  with  the  articles,, 
which  the  owner  pruniiunces  to  l)e  correctly  stated  in  every  particular,  but 
has  never  before  .si^oken  of  them  to  anyone. 

The  ring,  an  old-fashioned  gold  one,  with  English  hall-marks  on  the 
inner  rim,  and  a  few  small  sti:)nes  set  in  the  middle,  was  given  to  present  owner 

by  a  young  man  named  J ohn  .    Ov/ner  always  suspected  him  of  having 

stolen  it,  as  he  was  of  bad  character,  and  would  not  say  how  he  had  come  by 
it.  Owner  never  would  wear  it,  and  has  often  thouglit  of  throwing  it  away,, 
but  has  kept  it  in  a  box  with  some  other  old-time  trinkets  done  up  in  cotton, 
the  watch  being  one  of  them. 

Tlie  young  man's  father  owed  a  large  siuu  of  mimey  to  the  mother  of  the 
present  owner  of  ring,  but  there  having  been  no  papers  to  prove  the  loan, 
upon  the  mother's  decease  tlie  father  of  .John  [wlio  gave  the  ring]  repu- 
diated the  debt  altogetlier,  whicli  naturally  caused  much  trouble  and  bad 
feeling.  The  father  died  of  cancer  in  the  stomach.  Present  owner  has  a 
sister,  who,  at  the  age  of  three  years,  had  a  great  fright  from  being  left  alone 
in  a  burning  house.  When  rescued  she  could  make  no  audible  sound,  and 
gradually  became  entirely  idiotic.  She  is  now  fifty  years  old.  Her  name  is^ 
Elizal)eth — was  called  Eliza  and  Lizzie.  Present  owner  of  ring  had  sole 
charge  of  her  for  many  years,  but  on  her  becoming  worse  she  was  jilaced  in 
an  institution  for  the  insane,  where  she  now  is.  She  haw  always  been  a  great 
care  and  anxiety  to  the  present  owner  of  ring. 

3.  Watcli. — The  watch  is  also  old-fashioned,  witli  a  gold  engraved  back 
and  dial,  and  is  of  Geneva  make.  It  was  bought  by  an  uncle  of  present 
owner  while  he  was  abroad.  His  name  was  Joseph,  and  he  lived  quite  a  while 
in  Italy.  Does  not  know  of  his  having  been  a  jjrinter,  but  may  possibly  have 
been  one.  He  always  W()re  the  watch,  and  at  his  death  it  came  to  the 
mother  of  present  owner.  The  mother  used  often  to  give  the  watch  to  the 
insane  daugliter,  Elizabeth,  as  it  amused  her  and  kept  her  quiet.  The  owner 
cannot  identify  the  building  so  minutely  described,  but  thinks  there  is  some- 
where in  the  family  a  picture  of  some  such  liouse,  and  will  endeavour  to  look 
it  up.  Present  owner  has  another  sister  living,  named  Annie.  John  was 
tlie  name  f>f  tlie  young  man  who  gave  the  ring.  Joseph  the  name  (if  the 
uncle  who  had  the  watcli.  Owner  keeps  in  same  box  with  watcli  and  ring  a 
little  crystal  seal  witli  .Joseph  engraved  on  it,  wliicli  belonged  to  the  uncle. 
Jesse  (not  Jen-nie)  was  the  name  of  the  mother  of  present  owner. 

[Miss  A.] 

T  have  ascertained  from  Miss  A.  that  her  companion  at  the  sitting 
liad  never  seen  Mrs.  Piper  before.    This  lady  herself  writes  : — • 

Odohcr  21sl,  1891. 

To  Me.  Hodgson, — I  desire  to  verify  Miss  [A.'s]  statement,  that  I  Imew 
oiolhinrj  of  the  articles  submitted  to  Mrs.  Piper  duiing  the  siltiitfj  at  her 
house  recently. 

T  know  the  owner  of  the  watcli  and  ring,  and  though  my  acquaintance 
with  her  is  less  than  Miss  [A.'s]  I  know  her  to  be  a  truthful  and  reliable 
person,  and  I  believe  her  report  relating  to  the  history  of  these  articles  to  be 
strictly  true. 

Observations  of  Certain  Fhenoraena  of  Trance  1G7 

I  have  also  received  the  following  statement  : — 

October  21d,  18111. 

This  is  to  certify,  as  the  owner  of  tlie  ring  and  watch  given  to  Miss  [A.] 
f(  ir  the  sitting  witli  Mrs.  Piper,  that  I  am  positive  Miss  [A.]  did  not  know  any 
■oi  the  family  or  otlier  circumstances  connected  with  the  articles,  all  of  which 
were  truly  stated  by  Mrs.  Piper. 

The  day  before  the  sitting  I  had  taken  a  l)rooch  for  Miss  [A.]  to  use  in 
the  sitting,  but  on  second  thouglits  I  believed  the  ring  and  watch  would  Ijc 
better,  as  I  wanted  to  find  out,  if  possible,  wlio  first  had  the  ring,  and  how 
the  person  who  ga\'e  it  to  me  got  it.  I  brought  the  ring  and  watch  to  Miss 
[A.]  tlie  next  morning  in  a  box  with  an  elastic  Ijand  round  it,  and  told  her 
nothing  but  that  a  ring  and  watch  were  inside. 

I  have  never  spoken  to  her  of  our  family  connections,  and  she  could 
know  nothing  about  them. 

The  owner  of  the  locket  rej^lies  to  my  questions  : — 

Q.  Were  any  names  or  initials  on  locket  ?  A.  No.  <.^.  Had  Uncle 
Charles  any  other  Christian  name  ?  A.  Don't  remember.  Was  he  the 
brother  of  owner's  mother  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Was  the  locket  neio  when  bought 
hy  present  owner  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Did  the  Uncle  Charles  have  a  friend  with 
a  name  anything  like  Cory  or  Carey  ?  A.  Don't  remember.  Q.  Has  he  a 
daughter  living  !  A.  Don't  know.  Q.  Has  this  Cory  or  Carey  a  daughter 
living  ?  A.  Don't  know.  Q.  Did  owner's  mother  have  a  sister  Mary  ?  A. 
Yes.  Q.  Did  his  mother  have  an  Aunt  Mary  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Was  tins  Mary 
•closely  connected  with  a  William  '?  A.  Owner's  mother's  sister  Mary's  hus- 
Ijand  was  named  William.  Q.  Will  you  inform  me  if  the  owner  should  soon 
be  called  away  suddenly  ?  A.  Not  yet.  Q.  Will  the  owner  try  to  identify 
the  following  names,  probably  connected  with  his  mother  '!  Richaitl,  Ellen 
or  Elinor — cousin  of  owner  or  owner's  mother — Julia,  Edward,  Henry. 
A.  Mother's  brother  named  "  Henry,"  living.  Don't  rememlier  [the  others]. 
The  owner  of  the  ring  and  watch  replies  to  my  (juestiinis  : — 
Q.  Were  any  names  or  initials  on  ring  or  w^atch  ?  A.  N<i.  Q.  Did  the 
owner  of  watch  identify  the  Henry  referred  to  ?  A.  No.  Q.  Does  the  owner 
recognise  any  name  like  Ellsworth  ?    A.  No. 

I  have  records  of  various  sittings^with  Mrs.  Piper  since  October 
16th,  1891.  These  are  reserved  for  later  publication,  except  several 
incidents  which  have  an  immediate  and  important  bearing  on  the 
name  of  Phinuit.  I  have  referred  to  these  incidents  in  tlie  course  of 
my  introduction. 

General  Meetings. 

PROCEEDINUS   OF   GENERAL  MEETINGS. 

The  51st  General  Meeting  <>f  the  Society  was  held  at  the  AVest- 
niuister  Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  March  4tli,  1892,  at  8.30  ixm.,  the 
President  in  tlie  chair. 

Mr.  Myers  -read  a  paper  on  "  Indications  of  Continued  Knowledge 
of  Terrene  Events  shown  by  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,"  printed  below„ 

The  r)L>nd  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday, 
April  8th,  at  4  p.m.    The  chair  was  taken  by  Professor  0.  Lodge. 

Mr.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  Hypermnesic  Dreams,"  being  a 
further  portion  of  his  study  of  the  Subliminal  Consciousness.  This,, 
with  "  The  Mechan.ism  of  Genius,"  given  at  the  50th  General  Meeting, 
is  printed  below. 

"A  Recjrcl  of  a  Haunted  House,"  l^y  the  chief  percipient  in  the 
case,  a  lady  known  t:>  Mr.  Myers,  was  also  read  by  him  and  is  printed 
l)elow. 

The  53rd  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,. 
May  ■27th,  at  8.30  p.m.,  the  President  in  the  chair. 

A  paper  by  Mrs.  H.  SiDcaviCK,  on  "  Further  Experiments  in 
Thought-Transference,"  was  read.  It  is  proposed  to  print  this  in  a. 
subsequent  imml)er  of  the  Proceeding.?. 

Portions  of  a  paper  by  Dr.  Hodosox,  printed  below,  on  "  Mr. 
Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring  of  Phenomena  sometimes  attributed 
to  Spirit  Agency,"  were  read  by  Mr.  Myers. 

170 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

ON  INDICATIONS  OF  CONTINUED  TERRENE  KNOWLEDGE 
ON  THE  PART  OF  PHANTASMS  OF  THE  DEAD. 

By  Feederic  W.  H.  Myers. 

ajSdrav  SXa   klovchv  vTrip    HpajcXeo?  nepav  evfjiapis' 

6vp€,   Tiva  TTpos   dWoSaTTuv  . 
UKpav  epuu   ttKoov   77apap.(ll3eai  ;  .  • 

PlUDAR. 

Whatevei-  else  a  ghost  may  be,  it  is  prubably  one  of  the  most  com- 
plex phenomena  in  nature.  The  l^riefest  and  simplest  veridical  apparition, 
suggests  a  series  of  questions  which  as  yet  we  are  unable  even  to  formu- 
late with  any  distinctness.  Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  how  many 
difficulties,  and  of  what  vaiious  kinds,  are  involved  in  the  very  attempt 
to  grasp  distinctly  the  nature  of  any  such  occurrence.  In  the  first 
place  there  is  the  evidential  question.  We  have  to  satisfy  ourselves 
that  the  alleged  apparition  was  actually  seen,  and  that  it  corresponded 
with  some  objective  event  in  such  away  as  to  raise  a  strong  presumption 
that  it  had  more  than  a  merely  subjective  oi'igin  ; — was  not  due,  I  mean, 
to  some  condition  which  affected  the  peroijsient  alone,  and  involved  the 
operation  of  no  other  intelligence.  This  evidential  question  is  of  course 
of  primary  importance  ;  and  our  efforts  have  mainly  been,  and  for  a 
long  time  yet  must  mainly  be  directed  towards  the  attainment  of  an 
answer  which  shall  cany  conviction  to  all  uul)iassed  minds.  But 
while  still  keeping  the  evidential  question  foremost  in  our  regaixl,  we 
may  of  course  at  the  same  time  endeavour  to  discuss  some  of  the  fui'ther 
questions  to  which  the  evidence,  when  duly  sifted,  is  found  to  point. 
Thus  we  may  ask  ourselves  what  proportion  the  ;\pparitions  which  we 
deem  veridical  bear  to  the  phantasmal  figures  for  which  we  can  advance 
no  such  claim.  We  may  ask,  again,  what  proportion  the  supposed 
veridical  apparitions  of  the  dead  bear  to  veiidical  apparitions  of  liviiig 
persons,  or  of  persons  at  the  point  of  death.  Such  questions  are  likely 
to  be  answered  more  fully  tlian  heretofore  when  the  results  of  the 
Census  of  Hallucinations,  now  being  conducted  in  several  countries  for 
report  to  the  approaching  International  Congress  of  Expeiimental 
Psychology,  are  laid  before  the  public. 

Furthermore  it  is  natural  to  inquire  as  to  the  relation  between  the 
frequency  of  veridical  apparitiojis  and  the  time  which  has  elapsed  since 
the  death  of  the  person  whose  phantasm  is  perceived.  A  first  provi- 
sional answer  to  this  question  was  attempted  by  Mr.  Gurney  and 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  &c.  171 

myself.  (Vol.  V.,  p.  40-3,  sqq.)  Once  more,  before  actually  committing 
ourselves  to  any  hypothesis  involving  so  extreme  a  supposition  as  the 
continued  action  of  dead  men,  we  may  natui'ally  inquire,  as  Mr. 
Podmore  has  done  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  229,  sqq.),  whether  these  soi-diacuit 
apparitions  of  the  dead  may  not  still  be  explained  by  the  more  familiar 
coaiception  of  telepathy  between  the  living.  In  my  reply,  which  imme- 
diately follows  Mr.  Podmore's  paper,  I  have  set  forth  cei'tain  reasons 
which  seem  to  me  to  make  this  explanation  insufficient.  I  am  there- 
fore, for  my  part,  bound  to  go  on  and  to  face  the  enormous  difficulties 
involved  in  the  very  idea  of  intercourse  between  an  incarnate  and  a 
discarnate  mind. 

Our  attempt  to  study  such  intercourse  may  begin  at  either  end  of 
the  communication, — with  the  percipient  or  with  the  agent.  We 
.shall  have  to  ask.  How  does  the  incarnate  mind  receive  the  message  1 
and  we  shall  have  to  ask  also.  How  does  the  discarnate  mind  originate 
and  convey  it  ? 

Now  it  is  by  pressing  the  foraier  of  these  two  questions  that  we 
have,  I  think,  the  best  chance  at  present  of  gaining  fresh  light.  So 
long  as  we  are  considering  the  incarnate  mind  we  are  to  some  extent 
at  least  on  known  ground  ;  and  we  may  hope  to  discern  analogies  in 
some  other  among  that  mind's  ojjerations  to  that  possibly  most  perplex- 
ing of  all  its  operations  which  consists  in  taking  cognisance  of 
messages  from  unembodied  minds,  and  from  an  unseen  world.  I  think, 
therefore,  that  "the  surest  way,  though  most  about,"  as  Bacon  would 
say,  to  the  comprehension  of  this  sudden  and  startling  phenomenon 
lies  in  the  study  of  other  rare  mental  phenomena  which  can  be 
observed  more  at  leisure  ; — just  as  "  the  surest  way,  though  most  about," 
to  the  comprehension  of  some  blazing  inaccessible  star  has  lain  in  tlie 
patient  study  of  the  spectra  of  the  incandescence  of  terrestrial  substances 
which  lie  about  our  feet.  I  am  in  hopes  that  by  the  study  of  various 
forms  of  subliminal  consciousness,  subliminal  faculty,  subliminal  per- 
ception, we  may  ultimately  (jljtain  a  concepti(jn  of  our  own  total 
being  and  operation  which  may  show  us  the  incarnate  mind's  percep- 
tion of  the  discarnate  mind's  message  as  no  isolated  anomaly,  bvit  an 
orderly  exercise  of  natural  and  innate  powers,  frequently  observed  in 
action  in  somewhat  similar  ways. 

But  although  approaching  the  problem  with  most  hope  by  thi.s 
purely  terrene  inquiry,  we  must  not  neglect  any  indication  which  the 
evidence  offers  as  to  the  other  and  remoter  side  of  the  act  of  com- 
munication ; — as  to  the  condition  in  which  the  discarnate  mind  appears 
to  be  when  communicating,  or  the  apparent  motive  of  his  message,  or 
the  apparent  knowledge  which  he  possesses  either  of  what  may  be 
passing  in  an  unseen  world,  or  of  what  has  passed  in  this  world  since 
his  earthly  death. 

N-2 

172 

Mr.  F.  W.  TI.  Myers. 

On  none  of  these  points,  I  may  say  at  once,  have  ^ve  as  yet  any- 
thing more  than  scattered  indication  and  dubious  inference.  Yet  none 
the  less  are  we  bound  to  set  foith  our  fragments  of  knowledge  as  best 
we  may ; — in  the  hope  that  the  direction  of  attention  to  these  various, 
points  in  turn  may  lead  to  widei'  interest  in  the  subject,  more  intelli- 
gent obsei'vation,  m(.)re  careful  record. 

And  having  now  a  group  of  unpuljlished  cases  (largely  due  to  Dr.. 
Hodgson's  energy  in  collection)  to  offer  to  our  readers,  I  take  occasion: 
to  arrange  them  in  such  a  way  as  may  throw  some  little  light  on  the 
last  of  the  proljlems  on  Avhich  I  ha\-e  touched ; — namely,  the  question  of 
coiithmous  knowledge  ; — or,  How  far  do  phantasms  of  the  dead  indicate 
any  acquaintance  with  terrestial  facts  of  whicli  they  were  not  aware 
while  they  yet  lived  on  earth  1^ 

And  here  it  looks  as  though  we  might  best  begin  l)y  asking  whether 
these  phantasms  always  show  a  memory  of  facts  which  they  did  know 
while  on  eai'th  ; — whether  we  can  assume  that  they  start  with  at  least, 
that  equipment,  while  we  inquire  into  any  fresh  knowledge  which  they 
may  since  have  gained.  But  this  difficult  question  may  be,  I  think, 
more  conveniently  kept  separate  from  the  inquiry  which  I  now  projjose, 
and  discussed  elsewhere  in  connection  with  the  more  general  question  of 
the  persistence  or  otherwise  of  the  same  chain  of  memory  in  different, 
p.sychical  states. 

I  proceed,  therefore,  to  our  nmre  limited  question.  And  hei'e  in 
the  first  place  it  is  evident  that  the  narratives  with  which  we  have  to 
deal  may  1>3  classed  in  three  main  groups,  with  reference  to  this  special 
inquiry.  First  we  shall  have  cases  where  the  phantasm  is  such  as  to 
give  no  indicatitni  whatever  of  either  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  what 
has  occurred  on  earth  since  the  assumed  agent's  death.  Secondly,  the 
phantasm  may  indicate  ignorance  of  what  has  thus  occurred.  Thirdly, 
it  may  indicate  knowledge : — and  this  in  \%vy  varying  degrees, — from  a 
mere  realisation  of  some  scene  immediately  following  death,  up  to  a 
more  than  terrene  comj^rehension  of  complex  circumstances, — a  more 
than  terrene  power  of  predicting  events  yet  to  be. 

On  the  first  (and  largest)  of  these  three  groujDS  I  need  not  linger  long. 
All  will  admit  that  the  phantasm  is  usually  so  fugitive  a  thing  that, 
))eyond  its  mere  identification  with  some  departed  person,  little  or 
nothing  can  be  inferred  in  detail.  I  will  cite  in  illustration  a  case 
recently  received. 

G.  203. 

We  owe  this  case  to  the  kindness  of  Lady  Gore  Bootli,  from  whom  I  first 

1  111  ai).aper  in  Vol.  VI.,  p.  13,  .S'yr/.,  I  Lave  arranged  another  batch  of  material 
in  a  .somewhat  simihir  way,  and  have  given  reference.s  to  other  pijbli.shed  cases  which 
1  need  not  here  repeat.  As  the  evidence  increases  it  becomes  needful  to  keep  many 
narratives  in  mind,  if  we  ai'e  to  understand  any  of  them  ai'ight.  • 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  173 

heard  the  account  by  wdwI  of  iiKuitli.  Hev  son  (then  a  schoolboy  aged  10)  was 
the  percipient,  and  her  ytamgest  daughter,  tlien  aged  15,  also  gives  a  first- 
hand accomit  of  the  incident  as  follows  : — 

Lissadell,  Sligo,  Fehntarij,  1891. 
On  the  10th  of  April,  1889,  at  about  lialf-past  nine  o'clock  a. hi.,  niy 
youngest  brother  and  I  were  going  down  a  short  flight  of  stall's  leading  to  the 
kitchen,  to  fetch  food  for  my  chickens,  as  usual.  We  were  about  half  way 
down,  my  brother  a  few  steps  in  advance  of  me,  when  he  suddenly  said — 
"Why,  there's  John  Blaney,  I  didn't  knijw  he  was  in  the  house  I  '  .John 
Blaney  was  a  boy  who  lived  not  far  from  us,  and  he  had  Ijeen  empLiyed  in 
the  house  as  hall-boy  not  long  before.  I  said  that  I  was  sure  it  was  not  he, 
(for  I  knew  he  had  left  some  months  previously  on  account  of  ill-health),  and 
looked  down  into  the  passage,  but  saw  no  one.  The  passage  was  a  long  one, 
with  a  rather  sharp  turn  in  it,  so  we  ran  quickly  down  the  last  few  steps,  and 
looked  round  the  corner,  but  nobody  was  there,  and  the  only  door  he  could 
have  gone  through  was  shut.  As  we  went  upstaii's  my  brother  said,  "  How 
pale  and  ill  John  looked,  and  why  did  he  stare  so  ?  "  I  asked  what  he  was 
doing.  My  brother  answered  that  he  had  his  sleeves  turned  up,  and  was 
wearing  a  large  green  apron,  sucli  as  the  footmen  always  wear  at  their  work. 
An  hour  or  two  afterwards  I  asked  my  maid  liow  long  John  Blaney  had  been 
back  in  the  house  ?  She  seemed  much  surprised,  and  said,  ' '  Didn't  you 
hear,  miss,  that  he  died  this  morning  V  On  inquiry  we  found  he  h;ul  died 
about  two  hours  Ijefore  my  brother  saw  him.  My  mother  did  not  wish  that 
my  brother  sh(ndd  be  t(jld  this,  but  he  heard  of  it  somehow,  and  at  once 
declared  that  he  must  ha\"e  seen  his  ghost. 

Mabel  Olive  Gore  Booth. 

Tlie  actual  percipient's  independent  account  is  as  follows  : — 

March,  1891. 

We  were  going  downstairs  to  get  food  for  Mabel's  fowl,  wlien  I  saw  John 
Blaney  walking  round  the  corner.  I  said  to  Mabel,  "Tliat's  .J(.)hn  BLmey  !  '' 
but  she  could  not  see  him.  Wlien  we  came  up  afterwards  we  f(jund  he  was 
dead.  He  seemed  to  me  to  look  rather  ill.  He  looked  yellow  ;  his  eyes 
looked  hollow,  and  he  liad  a  green  apron  on. 

MORDAT  NT  GoUE  BoOTH. 

We  have  received  the  fullowing  confirmation  of  the  date  of  death  :  — 

I  certify  from  the  jiarish  register  of  deaths  that  John  Blaney  (Dunfore) 
was  interred  on  tlie  12th  day  of  April,  1889,  liaving  died  on  the  10th  day  of 
April,  1889.  P.  J.  Shemaghs,  CO. 

The  Presbytery,  Ballingal,  Sligo. 
10th  Fehniarij,  1891. 

Lady  Gore  Booth  writes  :—  May  31d,  1890. 

When  my  little  boy  came  upstairs  and  told  us  lie  had  seen  John  Blaney, 
we  thought  nothing  of  it  till  some  hours  after,  when  we  heard  that  he  was 
dead.  Then  for  fear  (A  frightening  the  children,  I  avoided  any  allusion  to 
what  he  had  told  us,  and  asked  everyone  else  to  do  the  same.  Probably  liy 
now  he  has  forgotten  all  about  it,  but  it  certainly  was  very  remarkable, 
especially  as  only  one  child  shav  him,  and  they  were  standing  together.  The 

174 

Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers. 

place  where  he  seeins  to  have  appeared  was  in  the  passage  outside  the  pantry 
door,  where  John  Blaney's  work  always  took  him.  My  boy  is  a  very  matter 
of  fact  sort  of  boy,  and  I  never  heard  of  his  having  any  other  hallucination. 

G.  GoKE  Booth. 

Now  this  ap2:iai'ition — unless  we  exj^lain  it  as  a  telej^athic  impres- 
sion projected  at  tlie  moment  of  death  and  remaining  latent  foi-  some 
hours  before  it  attained  externalisation — may  jDOSsibly  be  taken  as  show- 
ing something  of  continued  memory  in  the  dejoarted  boy.  Something  of 
him  or  from  him,  it  may  be  said,  reverted  to  well-known  haunts,  and 
was  discerned  in  habitual  surroundings.  But  even  of  this  there  is  no 
sure  indication.  If  it  be  suggested  that  the  dead  boy  waited  to  mani- 
fest until  his  young  master  reached  a  suitable  spot,  it  may  be  replied 
that  the  living  Ijoy's  j)resence  in  that  spot  merely  enabled  him  to 
discern  some  influence  which  might  have  been  discernible  in  that  spot 
possibly  at  any  moment  duiing  some  hours,  if  the  fitting  percipient  had 
been  at  hand.  Oi'  else,  and  perhaps  more  simply,  we  may  suppose  tliat 
there  was  a  mere  influence  transmitted  from  the  departed  mind  to  the 
living  mind,  which  influence  the  li^-ing  mind  discerned  when  in  sur- 
roundings in  which  its  own  recollection  of  the  decedent  might  most 
readily  be  evoked.^ 

Let  us  turn  to  the  second  of  our  three  groups,  the  cases  (if  such 
there  be)  where  the  phantasm  appeai-s  to  show  ignorance  of  what  has 
taken  jjlace  since  the  agent's  death.  May  we  ascribe  to  this  group 
certain  cases  already  published  where  the  phantasm  seems  to  return  to 

1  As  bearing  wpon  the  terror  whicli  is  popularly  supposed  to  be  inspired  by  any 
manifestation  of  the  so-called  "  supernatural,''  it  is  worth  remarking  that  in  cases  like 
the  above,  where  the  death  was  not  known,  and  the  phantasm  appears  in  natural 
surroundings,  it  frequently  ha])pens  that  no  terror  at  all  is  felt  by  the  percipient.  On 
the  f>ther  hand,  when  the  death  is  known  (and  the  apparition,  therefore,  of  no  e\  iden- 
tial  value),  there  may  be  extreme  terror.  But  that  terror  is  in  itself  no  proof  that  the 
Xshantasm  in  such  cases  is  anything  more  than  a  mere  after-image.  I  subjoin  a  curious 
case  which  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mr.  Frank  Cornell,  of  Athens,  Ont.,  to  whom 
Mr.  Barnes'  first  letter  is  addressed. 

"  In  accordance  with  your  request  to  give  niy  recent  experience  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,!  \vould  say  :  On  the  4th  of  the  present  month  my 
grandmother,  .Jane  Elizabeth  Barnes,  died,  and  ^^■as  buried  on  the  Gth.  On  Saturday 
evening,  the  Tthinst.,  my  father  and  mother  drove  over  to  my  uncle's,  with  whom  my 
grandmother  had  resided  many  years  previous  to  her  death,  lea^■ing  me  alone.  I  had 
no  thought  of  being  afraid,  and  as  it  became  dark  I  lit  a  lamp  and  placed  it  on  a  table 
in  the  room  ;  took  my  pipe  and  began  to  smoke.  I  sat  thus  for  some  time  thinking 
over  business  matters,  but  my  thoughts  were  in  no  way  connected  with  my  grand- 
mother. 

Having  finished  smoking,  I  laid  my  pipe  on  a  stand  near  by,  and  my  dog  coming- 
to  me,  jumped  upon  my  lap,  and  I  began  to  play  with  \ma.  All  at  once  I  became 
conscious  of  the  presence  of  someone  in  the  room,  and  on  looking  up  I  plainly  saw  my 
grandmother  sitting  on  a  coucli  directly  in  front  of  me.  I  was  not  frightened  at  first, 
but  astonishment  held  me  fast.  I  noticed  her  dress,  the  same  she  usually  \vore  when 
alive  ;  one  hand  rested  on  her  lap,  the  <jther  was  by  her  side.  I  noticed  particularly 
every  feature  ;  her  face  wore  the  same  expression  as  in  life.    The  distance  between  us 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  175 

a  place  rather  than  to  a  j^erson  ?  where,  perhaps,  it  seems  to  be  looking' 
for  a  person  who  is  no  longei'  in  the  accustomed  j^lace  ? 

I  do  not  think  that  we  can  safely  thus  interpret  these  cases  of  local 
attraction.  For  aught  we  know,  the  impulse  of  the  discarnate  mind 
may  have  gone  forth  to  the  familiar  house  quite  irrespective  of  its 
present  occupants.  Or  in  some  of  these  cases  our  nearest  analogy  may  not 
ba  the  projection  of  an  impulse,  but  rath«r  the  persistence  of  a  picture. 
It  may  1)3  that  the  departed  person's  semblance  is  seen  in  that  house 
because  he  once  lias  been  there  ;  and  not  because,  in  any  sense,  he  is 
thei«  still. 

Bat  there  are  other  cases  where  the  phantasm  seems  to  be  not 
merely  attracted  to  a  place,  but  absorl)ed  in  some  train  of  thought 
which  was  natural  at  the  time  of  death,  but  has  since  become  inappro- 
priate. Thus  in  Mr.  Lewis's  case  (^Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  93)  the 
clergyman  whose  visit  the  decedent  had  desired,  and  who  would  gladly 
have  paid  that  visit,  had  he  known  of  the  decedent's  illness,  saw  the 
phantasm,  two  days  after  death,  pursuing  him  with  a  gaze  of  reproach. 
The  decedent  thus  appeared  to  prolong  a  feeling  of  resentment  which  he 
might  have  learnt  to  be  unjust. 

Very  similar  is  a  case  quoted  in  Annales  des  Sciences  Fsyc]iiques„ 
No.  T.,  p.  31,  sqq.,  and  which  may  be  summarised  as  follows  ; — 

^'  Observation  de  Muntijellier. 

Tliis  case  consists  of  a  dream  of  distressing  vividness,  dreamt  hy  M. 
Noell,  now  a  chemist  at  Cette,  at  4  a.m.,  November  24th,  1869. 

was  not  m')re  than  ten  feet.  Not  until  I  had  noted  every  particular  did  I  realise  the 
strangeness  of  the  occurrence.  No  sooner  had  I  thought  of  this  than  fear  seized  me, 
and  I  started  for  the  door,  intending  to  go  to  a  neighbour  some  ten  feet  distant.  I 
remember  nothing  further  until  I  found  myself  on  the  bed  in  my  neighbour's  house. 

I  am  twenty-four  years  of  *ge,  have  a  good  common  school  education,  am  strictly 
temperate,  never  believed  in  ghosts,  am  not  a  si:)iritualist,  had  not  been  reading  any 
e.tciting  literature.  I  can  offer  no  explanation  ;  can  say,  however,  that  it  all  happened. 

Athens,  Leeds  Co.,  Ont.  Samuel  E.  B.\knes." 

Fehraary  l\th,  1S91. 

"This  is  to  certify  that  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  of  February,  about  7.30  o'clock, 
I  heard  something  fall  against  the  door,  and  on  opening  it  I  found  Samuel  Barnes  in  an 
insensible  condition.  I  took  him  in  and  used  means  to  restore  him.  After  some  time 
he  said,  '  I  have  seen,"  but  w  as  too  weak  to  finish.  In  the  course  of  an  hour  he  was 
sufficiently  restored  to  talk,  and  related  the  story  as  given  above.  I  have  known 
B.xrnes  for  years,  and  believe  his  testimony  to  be  reliable.  y^^^  Pe  \ece  " 

Athens,  February  1-ith,  1891. 

Mr.  Barnes  further  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  under  date  January  22nd,  1802  :  — 
"  I  can  say  I  have  never  fainted  or  become  imconscious  in  my  life  except  when  I 
saw  the  appai-ition  of  my  grandmother.  SiMUET  Barnes  " 

Mr.  Cornell  adds  that  Mr.  Barnes  does  not  remember  anything  regarding  the 
behaviour  of  the  dog,  and  has  ne\er  had  anj'  other  psychical  experience.  This  may 
have  been  nothing  more  than  an  after-image  ;  but  the  shock  given  was  greater  than  in 
most  veridical  cases. 

176 

J//'.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

He  first  mentions  the  fact  (cunfirmed  l.iy  tlie  register  of  deatlis)  that  liis 
favourite  sister  died  suddenly  from  diplitlieria,  at  Perpignan,  at  5  a.m.  [the 
•o^iicial  register  says  at  4],  November  23rd,  1869.  Slie  had  been  perfectly 
well  up  to  within  13  hours  of  death.  The  telegrams  which  the  family  sent 
to  the  absent  brother  were  not  delivered,  owing  to  the  fault  of  a  servant. 

"  During  the  night  of  November  23-24,"  he  proceeds,  in  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Dariex,  dated  Cette,  January  7th,  1891,  "I  was  the  ])rey  of  a  terrible 
hallucination.  I  had  returned  to  my  lodgings  at  2  a.m.,  my  mind  at  rest,  and 
still  dwelling  upon  the  pleasure  which  I  had  felt  during  the  22nd  and  23rd, 
wliich  had  been  spent  in  a  party  of  pleasure.  I  went  liappily  to  l)ed  and  fell 
asleep  in  five  minutes. 

"At  4  a.m.  I  saw  before  me  the  face  of  my  sister,  pale,  covered  withldood, 
and  lifeless,  and  I  heard  a  piercing,  reiterated  cry  :  '  What  are  you  doing, 
my  Louis'^  Gomel  come!'  In  my  agitated  sleep  1  seemed  to  take  a 
carriage  ;  but  alas  I  in  spite  of  suj^erhuman  effort  i  I  could  not  make  it  go  on. 
And  I  still  saw  my  sister's  face,  and  heard  that  same  cry. 

"I  woke  suddenly — )ny  face  red,  my  head  on  fire,  my  tliroat  dry.  but  my 
body  streaming  with  23ers2)iration.  ...  At  eleven  I  readied  the  phar- 
maceutical school,  a  prey  to  an  insurm  juut  ible  melancholy.  Questioned 
by  my  comrade3,  I  told  them  the  crude  fact,  as  I  had  experienced  it. 

[He  describes  how  his  surviving  sister  came  to  tell  him  of  his  loss 
and  the  tarrible  shock  which  the  news  gave  him.]  Two  hours  afterwards, 
when  I  had  become  more  calm,  I  described  to  my  sister  my  hallucination 
of  the  previous  night." 

Mile.  Th^rese  Noell  fully  confirms  her  brother's  recollection  of  tlie  circimi- 
stances,  and  of  liis  having  at  once  inf.)rmed  her  of  the  hallucination  or 
di-eam. 

Now  here  also  the  decedent  appears  still  to  be  feeling  grieved  sur- 
pi-ise  at  her  brother's  absence  from  her  death-bed  ;  although  a  clair- 
voyant knowledge,  had  she  acquired  such  knowledge  by  death,  might 
have  informed  hei-  that  liis  absence  was  due  only  to  his  non-receipt  of 
certain  telegrams.^ 

We  may,  however,  doubt  wlietlier  in  sucli  cases  there  is  any  fresh 
realisation  of  the  circumstances  on  the  decedent's  part,  or  whether  tlie 
mood  exliiljitefl  may  not  l)e  a  mere  dreamlike  prolongation  of  the  dis- 
tress or  anxiety  which  was  felt  at  the  moment  of  death.  I  cannot 
recall  any  instances  where  the  phantasm  of  a  jjerson  who  has  been  dead 
for  more  than  a  few  days  has  shown  any  definite  misapprehension  of 
facts.    And  this  notion  of  a  prolonged  dream  is  countenanced  by  cei'- 

'  Those  who  believe  in  telepathj',  but  are  unwilling  ti>  extend  it  lieyoud  the 
grave,  may  urge  tliat  there  was  in  fact  a  living  mind  -  that  of  Mile.  Therese  Noell— 
which  was  still  perplexed  as  to  the  brother's  absence,— and  which  jjerhaps  dwelt  on  him 
with  special  intensity  as  the  hour  of  the  death  came  round.  That  the  interval  n-ns 
just  24  hours  is  rendered  highly  probable  by  the  fact  that  M.  Noell  has  not 
himself  perceived  this  coincidence  ;— but  has  placed  his  sister's  death  at  5  (instead  of 
4),  and,  through  some  confusion,  descrities  his  own  vision  at  4  a.m.  as  occurring 
18  liours  after  the  death . 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoidedge,  Xr.  177 

tain  cases  where  the  decedent  exhibits  traces  of  his  fatal  malady  ; 
either  in  his  worn  appearance,  as  in  Mrs.  Lewin's  case  {Proceedings, 
Vol.  v.,  p.  462),  or  in  the  phantasmal  sound  of  coughing,  as  in  a  case 
contributed  by  the  Dowager  Marchioness  of  Downshire,  and  not 
jet  published,  though  printed  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal,  Octolier,  1890, 
p.  308.  ., 

G.    196.    Visual  and  Auditory. 

The  percipient  in  this  case  is  doad,  and  the  account  is,  therefore,  nt 
second  hand  as  regards  his  experience  ;  but,  as  will  he  seen,  it  is  at  lirst 
hand  for  certain  important  details. 

December  Wth,  1889. 
It  may  have  been  in  1850  or  soon  after.  We  had  a  French  cook,  who 
had  been  several  years  with  us,  named  Cartel.  It  wAi  in  July,  when  lie 
caught  a  violent  cold,  which  became  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  etc.,  and  the 
man  was  dangerously  ill.  Two  doctors  attended  liim.  Tlie  weather  being 
extremely  hot,  and  his  bedroom  over  the  kitchen,  I  had  him  moved  into  a 
best  spare  bedroom,  wiiere  he  continued  very  ill  and  had  a  fearful  cough. 
At  last  tlie  doctors  said  tliey  could  do  no  more  for  him,  and  he  was  dying. 
I  asked  their  permission  to  try  mesmerism.  Of  course  they  laughed  at  me, 
but  admitted  it  could  do  no  harm.  I  sent  for  Fisher,  a  professional  mes- 
merist. Cartel  was  mesmerised  three  times  a  day,  and  rapidly  improved.  At 
the  end  of  a  fortnight  the  doctors  (who  had  not  given  up  attending  him) 
pronounced  him  out  of  danger,  and  advised  Fisher  being  sent  away.  He 
went,  but  after  a  day  or  two  poor  Cartel  began  to  fail  again,  and  died, 
though  I  liad  Fisher  back.  As  I  mentioned,  it  Avas  venj  hot  weather,  and, 
ixfter  the  poor  man's  death,  I  liad  the  room  in  which  lie  died  dismantled,  the 
window  left  open  day  and  night,  and  the  door  locked.  It  remained  so  for 
two  or  three  months,  as  well  as  I  remember,  and  then,  as  we  were  going  to 
have  the  house  full,  the  furniture  was  all  rei^laced,  and  Mr.  Popham,  of 
Littlecote,  was  i^ut  into  that  bedroom.  A  day  or  two  afterwards  Mr. 
Popham  said,  "I  have  seen  a  ghost."  He  then  told  us  that  the  previous 
night  he  vfas  reading  in  bed,  when  lie  heard  a  man  coughing  fearfully  in  his 
room.  He  could  not  understand  it,  as  he  could  see  no  one,  though  he 
searched  tlie  room.  He  went  on  reading,  and  then  suddenly  looking  up  he 
saw  a  head  (only)  at  the  foot  of  Ids  bed.  He  described  tlie  features,  which 
were  tliose  of  Cartel,  exactly,  tliougli  Mr.  Popham  had  never  seen  liim,  and 
liad  never  lieard  of  liis  illness  or  death.  After  that  several  people  slept  iu 
the  room,  but  notliiiig  was  ever  seen  or  heard. 

C.  Downshire. 

Virgil's  assertion  as  to  the  persistence  of  bodily  evils — 

Non  tamen  omne  malum  miseris,  nec  funditus  omnes 
Corporeae  excedunt  pestes — 

may  contain  much  of  truth  ;  yet  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  the 
central  current  of  the  intelligence  of  a  departed  spirit  is  unaware  that 
he  has  at  any  rate  shaken  himself  clear  of  pulmonary  mici-obes. 

It  is  true  that  we  sometimes  find  a  moral  situation  apparently  much 

178 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

further  pi'<.il(nigeil,  a>  in  the  tV)llowhig  case,  Avhich  seems  intermediate 
between  such  cases  as  Mrs.  Lewin's  and  a  "  haunt "  of  the  traditional 

type- 

G.  205. 

The  fc,)ll(.)wing  narrative  was  sent  to  us  witli  the  true  names,  but  with 
a  re(juest  to  conceal  them,  and  some  local  details,  on  account  of  the  painful 
nature  of  the  incident  described. 

Our  informant,  wliom  I  will  call  Mrs.  M.,  writes  under  date  December- 
Loth,  181)1. 

"Before  relating  my  experience  of  having  seen  a  gho.st,  I  should  like  my 
readers  thoroughly  to  understand  that  1  had  not  the  slightest  idea  that  the 
house  in  which  my  husband  and  I  were  living  was  haunted,  or  that  the  family 
residing  there  iov  many  years  before  us  had  had  any  family  troubles.  The 
house  was  delightfully  situated  [ttc.].  The  house  being  partly  new  and  partly 
old,  we  occupied  the  old  part  for  our  sleeping  apartments.  There  were  two 
staircases  leading  to  them,  with  a  landing  and  window,  adjoining  a  morning 
sitting-room.  (.>ne  night  on  retiring  to  my  bedroom  about  11  o'clock,  I 
thought  I  heard  a  peculiar  moaning  sound,  and  someone  sobbing  as  if  in  great 
distress  of  mind.  I  listened  very  attentively,  and  still  it  continued  ;  so  I 
raised  the  gas  in  my  boilrooni,  and  tlien  went  to  the  landing  window  of  which 
I  have  spoken,  di-ew  tlie  lilind  aside  ; — and  tliere  on  the  grass  was  a  very  beauti- 
ful young  girl  hi  a  kneeling  posture  befoi'e  a  soldier,  in  a  general's  uniform, 
sobbing,  and  clasping  lier  hands  togetlier,  entreating  for  pardon  ; — but,  alas  ! 
he  only  waved  her  away  from  him.  So  mucli  did  I  feel  for  the  girl,  that 
witliout  a  moment's  hesitation  I  ran  down  the  staircase  to  the  door  opening 
upon  tlie  lawn,  and  begged  her  to  come  in,  and  tell  me  her  sorrow.  The 
figures  then  disappeared  !  Not  in  tlie  least  nervous  did  I  feel  then  ; — went 
again  to  my  Ijedi'oom,  took  a  sheet  of  writing-papei'  and  ivi'ote  down  what  I 
had  seen.  [Mrs.  M.  has  found  and  sent  us  this  paper.  The  following  words 
are  written  in  pencil  on  a  half  slieetof  notepaper  :  "  Marcli  13th,  188(5.  Have 
just  seen  visions  on  lawn  : — a  soldier  in  general's  uniform, — a  young  lady 
kneeling  to  him.  11.40  p.m."]  My  liusband  was  away  from  home  when  this 
event  occurred,  ljut  a  lady  friend  was  staying  witli  me,  so  I  went  to  lier  bed- 
room and  told  her  that  I  had  been  rather  frightened  with  some  noises  ; — could 
I  stay  with  lier  a  little  while  ?  A  few  days  afterwards  I  found  myself  in  a 
very  nervous  state  ;  but  it  seemed  so  strange  that  I  was  not  friglitened  at  the 
time. 

It  appears  the  story  is  only  too  true.  Tlie  youngest  daughter  of  this 
very  old,  proud  family  had  had  an  illegitimatj  child  ;  and  her  parents  and 
relatives  would  not  recognise  her  again,  and  slie  died  broken-hearted.  The 
soldier  was  a  near  relative  (also  a  connection  of  my  husband's)  ;  and  it  was  in 
vain  she  tried  to  gain  his — the  soldier's — forgiveness.  [In  a  subsequent  letter 
Sir  X.  Y.'s  career  is  described.    He  was  a  distinguished  officer.] 

"  So  vivid  was  my  remembrance  of  the  features  of  the  soldier  that  some 
months  after  the  occurrence,  when  I  happened  to  be  calling  with  my  husband 
at  a  house  where  there  was  a  portrait  of  him,  I  stejiped  before  it  and  said  : 
'  Why,  look  I  There  is  the  General !  '    And  sure  enough  it  was." 

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mrs.  M.  writes  :  "  I  did  see  the  figures  on  the  lawn 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoviedge,  <L-c.  I7i> 

after  opening  tlie  door  leading  on  to  tlie  luwn  ;  and  they  by  no  means  dis- 
appeared instantly,  but  more  like  a  dissolving  view,  viz.,  gradually;  and  I  did 
not  leave  the  door  until  they  had  jjassed  away.  It  was  imjjossible  for  any  real 
persons  to  act  such  a  scene.  .  .  .  The  General  was  born  and  died  in  [th& 
liouse  where  I  saw  him].  ...  I  was  not  aware  that  tlie  portrait  of  the 
General  was  in  that  room  [where  I  saw  it]  ;  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  been 
in  that  room.  The  misfortune  to  the  poor  girl  happened  in  1847  or  1848.'' 
Mrs.  M.  then  mentions  that  a  respectable  local  tradesman,  hearing  of  the- 
incident,  remarked  :  "  That  is  not  an  unconnuon  thing  to  see  her  about  the- 
place,  jjoor  soul  I    She  was  a  badly  used  girl.  ' 

Mr.  M.  writes  as  follows,  under  date  December  23rd,  1891  :  — 

"  I  have  seen  my  wife's  letter  in  regard  to  the  recognition  of  Sir  X.  Y.'s 

picture  at  .    Notliing  was  said  by  me  to  her  on  the  subject ;  but  knowing 

the  portrait  to  be  a  remarkably  good  likeness  I  proposed  calling  at  the 
house  [which  was  that  of  a  nejjhew  of  Sir  X.  Y.  's],  being  anxious  to  see  wliat 
effect  it  wovdd  have  on  my  ivife.  Immediately  on  entering  the  room  she 
almost  staggered  back,  and  turned  jjale,  saying — looking  hard  at  the  picture—  • 
'  Why,  tliere's  the  General  1 '  .  .  .  Being  a  connection  of  the  family,  I 
knew  all  about  tlie  people,  but  my  wife  was  then  a  stranger,  and  I  had  never- 
mentioned  such  things  to  her  ;  in  fact,  they  had  been  almost  forgotten." 

This  case  may  remind  us  of  Mr.  Guriiey's  description  of  a  some- 
what similar  vision  (Vol.  V.,  p.  418),  as  suggesting  "the  survival  of  a 
mere  image,  impressed,  we  cannot  gue.ss  how,  on  we  cannot  guess 
what,  by  [the  agent's]  physical  organism  ;  and  perceptible  at  times  to- 
those  endowed  with  some  cognate  f(_>rni  of  sensitiveness."  We  are, 
indeed,  always  uncertain  as  to  the  degree  of  the  decedent's  active  par- 
ticipation in  post-mortem  phantasms, — as  to  the  relation  of  such  mani- 
festations to  the  central  current  of  his  continuing  individuality.  But 
it  is  in  dealing  witli  these  persistent  pictures  of  a  bygone  earth-scene 
that  this  perplexity  reaches  its  climax.  They  may,  as  I  have  said  else- 
where, be  the  mere  di-eams  of  the  dead  : — affording  no  true  indication 
of  the  point  which  the  decedent's  knowledge  or  emotion  has  really 
reached. 

On  the  whole,  then,  and  speaking  from  an  avowedly  inadequate  in- 
duction, I  see  no  clear  evidence  that  the  phantasm  of  a  person  who  has 
Ijeen  dead  foi'  more  than  a  few  days  has  shown  definite  ignorance  of 
events  whicli  have  occuri-ed  on  earth  since  his  departui-e.  We  have 
now  to  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  to  what  extent  i^hantasms  have 
shown  definite  knowledge  of  such  posthumous  events. 

This  question  is  in  the  first  j^lace  complicated  by  the  difficulty  of 
determining  of  what  events  the  decedent  was  in  fact  aware — by  normal 
or  supernormal  means — 1>efore  his  decease.  I  add  here  the  word  super- 
normal,  because  there  is  some  evidence  of  a  tendency  to  clairvoyance 
on  the  part  of  dying  persons.  This  is  shown  in  some  of  our  rare 
"  recijarocal "  cases,  where  the  dying  man  not  only  produces  a  tele- 
pathic impression  upon  some  pei-son  at  a  distance,  ljut  is  also  apparently 

ISO 

Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers. 

uwat-e  of  having  in  some  way  visited  tliat  person.  Now  it  is  oV)vious 
that  in  order  to  produce  an  evidential  instance  of  this  sort  of  reciprocity 
some  very  unusual  circumstances  must  occur  in  conjunction.  The 
■dying  agent  must  mention  the  fact  of  his  clairvoyant  perception  ;  and 
the  distant  friend  wliom  the  decedent  supposes  himself  to  be  iji  some 
way  visiting  must  be  so  constituted  and  situated  as  to  be  able  to  realise 
and  remember  the  so-called  visit  thus  made  to  him.  Each  of  these 
•conditions  is  rare  ;  and  their  accidental  conjunction  will  therefore  be 
rarer  still. 

It  is  230ssible  that  we  might  learn  much  wei'e  we  to  question  dying 
persoiis,  Oil  their  awakening  from  some  comatose  condition,  as  to  their 
memory  of  any  dream  or  vision  during  that  state.  If  there  has  in  fact 
been  any  such  experience  it  sliould  be  at  once  recoixled,  as  it  will 
proVmbly  fade  rapidly  from  the  patient's  supraliminal  memory,  even  if 
he  does  not  die  directly  afterwaixls.  A  curious  case  was  published  in 
Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  II.,  p.  305),  where  a  dying  man  returns, 
as  it  were,  from  the  gates  of  death  expressly  to  announce  that  he  has 
had  a  vision,  or  "paid  a  visit,"  of  this  kind — which  "visit,"  however-, 
it  was  not  possible  to  verify.  A  somewhat  similar  instance,  but  with 
ultimate  recovery  of  the  p.atient,  Dr.  Wiltse,  was  printed  in  the  St. 
Louis  Medical  and  Surgical  Joihrital^  ISTovembei',  1889,  and  in  the 
Mid-Continental  lieview,  Fel)rua.ry,  1890.  Dr.  Wiltse  has  since  ob- 
tained for  us  the  sworn  depusitions  of  the  witnesses  of  importance. 
The  experience  is  long,  and  for  the  most  part  of  a  tlioroughly  dreamlike 
type ;  but  in  any  view  it  is  extremely  unusual,  nor  can  it  l)e  fairly 
understood  from  extracts  alone.  I  (juote,  therefore,  the  essential  part 
of  the  case  in  full. 

G.  20;;. 

After  describing  his  giMclu.il  sinking  under  aii  unusual  disease —typlioid 
fever  with  subnormal  temperature  and  pulse — Dr.  Wiltse  (of  Skiddy,  Kansas) 
continues  as  follows  :— "  I  asked  if  I  was  perfectly  in  possession  of  niy  mind, 
«o  that  what  I  niight  say  should  be  worthy  of  being  relied  upon.  Being  an- 
swered in  the  decided  affirmative,  I  bade  adieu  to  family  and  friends,  giving 
such  advice  and  consolation  to  eacli  and  all  as  I  deemed  best,  conversed  upon 
the  proofs  pro  and  con,,  of  ininiorbality,  and  called  upon  each  and  all  to  take 
testimony  for  tliemselves  by  watcliing  tlie  action  of  my  mind,  in  tlie  Ixidily 
state  in  which  tliey  saw  me,  and  hnally,  as  my  pupils  fell  open,  and  vision 
began  to  fail,  and  my  V(jic3  to  weaken,  feeling  a  sense  of  drowsiness  come 
over  me,  with  a  strong  effort,  I  straiglitened  my  stifl'ened  legs,  got  my  arms 
over  the  breast,  and  clasped  the  fast  stiffening  fingers,  and  soon  sank  into 
utter  unconsciousness. 

"I  passed  about  four  hours  in  all  without  pulse  or  perceptible  heart-beat, 
as  I  am  informed  by  Dr.  S.  H.  Raynes,  who  was  the  only  physician  present. 
Dui'ing  a  portion  of  this  time  several  of  the  bystanders  thouglit  I  was  dead, 
and  sucli  a  report  being  cari-ied  outside,  tlie  village  cliurcli  bell  was  tolled. 

On  IndlcaiioviS  of  Gonfhraed  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  181 

Dr.  Rayues  informs  me,  however,  that  by  bringing  liis  eyes  cloae  to  my  face, 
lie  coukl  pyrceive  an  occasional  short  gasp,  so  very  light  as  to  be  barely  fier- 
osptible,  and  that  he  was  upon  the  point,  several  times,  of  saying,  '  He  is 
dead,'  when  a  gasp  would  occur  in  time  to  check  liim.  [See  Dr.  Raynes,  p.  103.] 
He  thrust  a  needle  deep  into  the  flesli  at  different  points  from  the  feet 
to  the  hijjs,  but  got  no  response.  Altliough  I  vi^as  pulseless  about  four  hours, 
this  state  of  apparent  death  lasted  only  about  half  an  hour. 

"  I  lost,  I  believe,  all  power  of  thought  or  knowledge  of  existence  in  abso- 
lute unconsciousness.  Of  course,  I  need  not  guess  at  the  time  so  lost,  as  in 
such  a  state  a  minute  or  a  thousand  years  would  appear  the  same.  I  came 
again  into  a  state  of  conscious  existence  and  discovered  that  I  was  still  in  the 
body,  but  the  l)ody  and  I  had  no  longer  any  interests  in  connnon.  I  hjoked 
in  astonishment  and  joy  for  the  first  time  upon  myself — the  me,  tlie  real 
Ego,  wliile  the  not  me  closed  it  upon  all  sides  like  a  sepulchre  of  clay. 

"With  all  the  interest  of  a  physician,  1  beheld  the  wonders  of  my  bodily 
anatomy,  intimately  interwoven  with  wliicli,  even  tissue  for  tissue,  was  I, 
tlie  living  soul  of  that  dead  body.  I  learned  that  tlie  eijidermis  was  the  out- 
side boundarj'  of  the  ultimate  tissues,  so  to  sjieak,  of  tlie  soul.  I  realised  my 
condition  and  reasoned  calmly  tlius.  I  have  died,  as  men  term  death,  and 
yet  I  am  as  mucli  a  man  as  ever.  I  am  about  to  get  out  of  the  body.  I 
watched  the  interesting  process  of  the  sepai-ation  of  soul  and  body.  By  some 
power,  apparently  not  my  own,  the  Ego  was  rocked  to  and  fro,  laterally,  as 
a  cradle  is  rocked;  Ijy  wliich  process  its  connection  with  tlie  tissues  of  the 
body  was  broken  u]j.  After  a  little  time  the  lateral  motion  ceased,  and 
along  the  soles  of  the  feet  beginning  at  the  toes,  passing  rapidly  to  the  lioels 
I  felt  and  heard,  as  it  seemed,  the  snapping  of  iimumeraljle  small  cords. 
When  this  was  accomplished  I  liegan  slowly  to  retreat  from  the  feet,  toward 
the  head,  as  a  rubber  cord  shortens.  I  remember  reaching  the  Iiips  and  say- 
ing to  myself,  '  Now,  there  is  no  life  below  the  hips.'  I  can  recall  no 
memory  of  passing  through  the  abdomen  and  chest,  but  recollect  distinctly 
when  my  whole  self  was  collected  into  the  head,  when  I  reflected  thus  :  lam 
all  in  the  head  now,  and  I  shall  soon  be  free.  I  passed.around  tlie  brain  as 
if  I  were  hollow,  compressing  it  and  its  membranes,  slightly,  on  all  sides, 
toward  the  centre  and  peeped  out  between  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  emerg- 
ing like  the  flattened  edges  of  a  bag  of  membranes.  I  recollect  distinctly  how 
I  appeared  to  myself  something  like  a  jelly  fish  as  regards  colour  and  form. 
As  I  emerged,  I  saw  two  ladies  sitting  at  my  head.  I  measured  the  distances 
between  the  head  of  my  cot  and  the  knees  of  the  lady  opposite  the  head  and 
concluded  there  was  room  for  me  to  stand,  but  felt  considerable  embarrass- 
ment as  I  reflected  that  I  was  about  t  j  emerge  naked  before  her,  but  com- 
forted myself  with  the  thought  that  in  all  probability  slie  could  not  see  me 
with  her  liodily  eyes,  as  I  was  a  spirit.  As  I  emerged  from  the  head  I 
floated  up  and  down  and  laterally  like  a  si  )ap-bul)ble  attached  to  the  bowl  of  a 
pipe  until  I  at  last  hvoke  loose  fi'om  the  body  and  fell  lightly  to  tlie  floor, 
where  I  slowly  rose  and  expanded  into  tlie  full  stature  of  a  man.  I  seemed 
to  be  translucent,  of  a  bluish  cast  and  perfectly  naked.  With  a  painful  sense- 
of  embarrassment  I  fled  toward  the  partially  opened  door  to  escape  the  eyes 
of  the  two  ladies  whom  I  was  facing  as  well  as  others  wliom  I  knew  were 
about  me,  but  upon  reaching  the  door  I  found  myself  clotlied,  and  satisfied. 

182 

Mr.  F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers, 

upon  tluit  pumt  I  turned  and  faced  the  company.  Am  I  turned,  niy  left 
■elbow  came  in  contact  with  the  arm  of  one  of  two  gentlemen,  who  were 
standing  in  the  door.  To  my  surprise,  his  arm  passed  thn.iugh  mine  without 
apparent  resistance,  the  severed  parts  closing  again  without  pain,  as  air  re- 
luiites.  I  looked  quickly  up  at  his  face  to  see  if  he  had  noticed  the  contact, 
l)ut  he  gave  me  no  sign, — only  stood  and  gazed  toward  the  couch  I  had  just  left. 
I  directed  my  gaze  in  the  direction  of  his,  and  saw  my  own  dead  body.  It 
was  lying  just  as  I  had  taken  m  mucli  pains  to  place  it,  partially  upon  tlie 
right  side,  the  feet  close  together  and  the  hands  clasped  across  the  breast.  I 
was  surprised  at  the  paleness  of  the  face.  I  had  not  looked  in  a  glass  for 
•some  days  and  had  imagined  that  I  was  not  as  pale  as  most  very  sick  people 
are.  I  congratulated  myself  upon  the  decency  with  which  I  had  composed 
the  body  and  thouglit  my  friends  would  have  little  trouble  on  that  score. 

"I  saw  a  number  of  persons  sitting  and  standing  about  the  body,  and  parti- 
cularly noticed  two  women  apparently  kneeling  by  my  left  side,  and  I  knew 
that  they  were  weeping.  I  have  since  learned  that  they  were  my  wife  and 
niy  sister,  but  I  had  no  conception  of  individuality.  Wife,  sister,  or  friend 
were  as  one  to  me.  I  did  not  rememljer  any  conditions  of  relationship  ;  at 
least  I  did  not  think  of  any.    I  cmild  distinguish  sex,  but  nothing  further. 

"I  now  attempted  to  gain  the  attention  of  the  people  with  the  object  of 
comforting  tliem  as  well  as  assuring  them  of  tlieir  own  immortality.  I  bowed 
to  them  playfully  and  saluted  with  my  right  hand.  I  passed  about  among 
tliem  also,  but  found  that  they  gave  me  no  heed.  Then  tlie  situation  struck 
nie  as  humorous  and  I  laughed  outright. 

"They  certainly  must  have  heard  that,  I  thouglit,  liut  it  seemed  otherwise, 
for  not  one  lifted  their  eyes  from  my  body.  It  did  not  once  occur  to  me  to 
speak  and  I  concluded  the  matter  by  saying  to  myself  :  '  They  see  only  with 
the  eyes  of  the  body.  They  cannot  see  si^irits.  They  are  watching  what 
they  think  is  I,  but  they  are  mistaken.  That  is  not  I.  This  is  I  and  I  am 
as  Huich  alive  as  ever.' 

"I  turned  and  passed  out  at  the  open  door,  inclining  my  head  and  watch- 
ing where  I  set  my  feet  as  I  stejiped  down  on  to  the  porch. 

"I  crossed  the  porch,  descended  the  steps,  walked  down  the  path  and  into 
tlie  street.  There  I  stopped  and  looked  about  me.  I  never  saw  that  street 
more  distinctly  than  I  saw  it  then.  I  took  n(.)te  of  the  redness  of  the  soil  and 
of  the  washes  the  rain  had  made.  I  took  a  rather  pathetic  look  about  me, 
like  one  who  is  about  to  leave  his  liome  for  a  long  time.  Then  I  discovered 
that  I  had  become  larger  than  I  was  in  earth  life  and  congratulated  myself 
thereupon.  I  was  somewhat  smaller  in  the  body  than  I  just  liked  to  be,  but 
in  the  next  life,  I  thought,  T  am  in  be  as  I  desired. 

"  My  clothes,  I  noticed,  liad  accommodated  themselves  to  my  increased 
stature,  and  I  fell  to  wondering  where  they  came  from  and  how  they  gi  )t  on  to 
me  so  quickly  and  without  my  knowledge.  I  examined  the  fabric  and  judged 
it  to  be  of  some  kind  of  Scotch  material,  a  good  suit,  I  thought,  but  not  hand- 
some ;  still,  neat  and  good  enough.  The  coat  fits  loosely  too,  and  that  is 
well  f<n'  summer.  '  How  well  I  feel,'  I  thought.  'Only  a  few  minutes  ago  I 
was  horribly  sick  and  distressed.  Then  caiae  that  change,  called  death,  which 
I  have  so  mucli  dreaded.  It  is  jjast  now,  and  here  am  I  still  a  man,  alive 
and  thinking,  yes,  thinking  as  clearly  as  ever,  and  how  well  I  feel,  I  sliall 

On  Indications  of  Oontinned  Terrene  Knowledge,  cCt.  183 

never  be  sick  again.  I  have  no  more  to  die.'  And  in  sheer  exuberance  of 
spirits  I  danced  a  figure,  and  fell  again  to  looking  at  niy  form  and  clotlies. 

' '  Suddenly  I  discovered  that  I  was  looking  at  the  straight  seam  down  the 
back  of  my  coat.  How  is  this,  I  thought,  how  do  I  see  my  back  I  and  I 
looked  again,  to  reassure  myself,  down  the  back  of  the  coat,  or  down  the 
Ijack  of  my  legs  to  the  very  heels.  I  put  my  hand  to  my  face  and  felt  for  my 
«yes.  They  are  where  they  should  be,  I  thought.  Am  I  like  an  owl  that  I 
■can  turn  my  head  half  way  round  ?    I  tried  the  experiment  and  failed. 

' '  No  !  Then  it  must  be  that  having  been  out  of  the  body,  but  a  few 
moments,  I  have  yet  the  power  to  use  the  eyes  of  my  body,  and  I  turned 
about  and  looked  back  in  at  the  open  door,  where  I  could  see  the  Iiead  (jf  my 
body  in  a  line  with  me.  I  discovered  then  a  small  cord,  like  a  spider's  web, 
running  from  my  slioulders  back  to  my  body  and  attaching  to  it  at  tlie  base 
of  the  neck  in  front. 

"  I  was  satisfied  with  the  conclusion  that  by  means  of  that  cord,  I  was 
using  the  eyes  of  my  body,  and  turning,  walked  down  the  street. 

■'I  had  walked  but  a  few  steps  when  I  again  lost  my  consciousness,  and 
when  I  again  awoke  found  myself  in  the  air,  where  I  was  upheld  by  a  jjair  of 
hands,  which  I  could  feel  pressing  lightly  against  my  sides.  The  owner  of 
the  hands,  if  they  had  one,  was  behind  me,  and  was  shoving  me  through  the 
air  at  a  swift  but  a  pleasant  rate  of  speed.  By  the  time  I  fairly  realised 
the  situation  I  was  pitched  away  and  floated  easily  down  a  few  feet,  aligliting 
gently  upon  the  beginning  of  a  narrow,  but  well  built  roadway,  inclined 
upward  at  an  angle  of  something  less  than  45deg. 

"  I  looked  up  and  could  see  sky  and  clouds  above  me  at  the  usual  heiglit. 
I  looked  down  and  saw  the  tops  of  green  trees  and  thought  :  It  is  as  far 
down  to  the  tree  tops  as  it  is  high  to  the  clouds. 

"As  I  walked  up  the  road,  I  seemed  to  face  nearly  north.  I  looked  over 
tlie  right  side  of  the  road  and  under  it  could  see  the  forest,  but  discovered 
naught  to  support  the  roadway,  yet  I  felt  no  fear  of  its  falling.  I  examined 
the  material  of  which  it  was  built.  It  was  built  of  milky  quartz  and  fine 
sand.  I  picked  up  one  i;if  tlie  gravels  and  looked  at  it  particulai'ly.  I  dis- 
tinctly renieuiber  that  it  had  a  dark  speck  in  the  centi'e.  I  brought  it  close 
to  the  eye  and  so  discovered  that  it  was  a  small  hole  apparently  caused  by 
chemical  action  of  some  metal.  There  had  been  a  recent  rain,  and  the  cool- 
ness was  refreshing  to  me.  I  noticed  that,  although  the  grade  was  steep,  I 
felt  no  fatigue  in  walking,  but  my  feet  seemed  light,  and  my  step  buoyant 
as  the  step  of  childliood,  and  as  I  walked  I  again  reverted  to  my  late  con- 
dition of  illness  and  rejoiced  in  my  perfect  health  and  strength.  Tlieii  a 
sense  of  great  loneliness  came  over  me  and  I  greatly  desired  company,  so  I 
reasoned  thus  :  Someone  dies  every  minute.  If  I  wait  twenty  minutes  the 
chances  ai'e  great  that  someone  in  tlie  mountains  will  die,  and  thus  I  sliall 
have  company.  I  waited,  and  while  so  doing  surveyed  the  scenery  about  me. 
To  the  east  was  a  long  line  of  mountains,  and  the  forest  underneath  me 
extended  to  the  mountains,  up  their  sides  and  out  on  to  the  mountain  top. 
Underneath  me  lay  a  forest-clad  valley,  througli  which  ran  a  beautiful  river 
full  of  shoals,  which  caused  the  water  to  ripjDle  in  white  sjjrays.  I  th(.)ught 
the  river  looked  much  like  the  Emerald  River,  and  the  mountains,  I  thought, 
as  strongly  resembled  Waldron's  Ridge.    On  the  left  of  the  road  was  a  Jiigli 

184 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

bluff  of  'black  wtone,  and  it  reminded  me  of  Lookout  Mountain,  where  the 
railroad  passes  between  it  and  the  Tennerssee  River.  Thus  memory,  judg- 
ment, and  imagination,  the  three  great  faculties  of  the  mind,  were  intact  and 
active. 

"I  waited  for  company,  what  I  judged  to  be  twenty  minutes  ;  but  no  one 
came.  Then  I  reasoned  thus :  It  is  probable  that  when  a  man  dies  he  has  his 
individual  road  to  travel  and  must  travel  it  alone.  As  no  two  men  are  ex- 
actly alike,  so,  most  likely,  no  two  travel  the  same  road  into  the  other  world. 
I  reliected  that  as  eternal  existence  was  now  assured,  I  had  no  need  to  hurry, 
and  so  walked  very  leisurely  along,  now  stopjjing  and  looking  at  the  scenery,, 
or  looking  back  over  the  road  if,  perchance,  someone  might  come  along,  and 
occasionally  turning  and  walking  backward,  and  thus  watching  the  road 
behind  me  for  company  I  so  strongly  desired.  I  thought  certainly  some  one 
from  the  other  v/orld  would  be  out  to  meet  me,  though  strangely  enough,  I 
thought  of  no  person  whom  above  others  I  desired  to  see.  Angels  or  fiends, 
one,  I  said,  will  come  out  to  meet  me — I  wonder  which  it  will  be  ?  I 
reflected  that  I  had  not  believed  all  the  Church  tenets,  but  had  written  and 
taught  verbally  a  new  and,  I  believed,  a  better  faitli.  But,  I  reasoned,  I 
knew  nothing,  and  where  there  is  room  for  doubt  there  is  room  for  mistake. 
I  may,  therefore,  be  on  my  way  to  a  terrible  doom.  And  here  occurred  a 
thing  hard  to  describe.  At  different  points  about  me  I  was  aware  of  the 
expressed  thought,  '  Feai'  not,  you  are  safe  1 '  I  heard  no  voice,  I  saw  no- 
I^erson,  yet  I  was  perfectly  aware  that  at  different  points,  at  varying  distances 
from  me,  someone  was  thinking  that  thought  for  my  benefit,  but  how  I  was 
made  aware  of  it  was  so  great  a  mysteiy  tliat  it  staggered  my  faith  in  iti 
reality.  A  great  fear  and  doubt  came  over  me  and  I  was  beginning  to  be 
vei'y  miserable,  wlien  a  face  so  full  of  ineffable  love  and  tenderness  apj^eared 
to  me  f<.>r  an  instant  as  set  me  to  rights  upon  that  score. 

"  Suddenly  I  saw  at  some  distance  ahead  of  me  three  prodigious  rock.s- 
blocking  the  road,  at  which  sight  I  stopped,  wondering  why  so  fair  a  road 
should  l)e  thus  blockaded,  and  while  I  considered  v/hat  I  was  to  do,  a  great- 
and  dark  cloud,  which  I  compared  to  a  cubic  acre  in  size,  stood  over  my  head. 
Quickly  it  became  filled  witli  living,  moving  liolts  of  fire,  which  darted  hitliei- 
and  thitlier  through  the  cloud.  They  were  not  extinguished  by  contact  with 
the  cloud,  for  I  could  see  tliem  in  the  cloud  as  one  sees  fish  in  deep  water. 

"The  cloud  became  concave  on  the  under  surface  like  a  great  tent  and 
began  slowly  to  revolve  upon  its  perpendicular  axis.  When  it  had  turned 
three  times,  I  was  aware  of  a  presence,  which  I  could  not  see,  but  wliich  I 
knew  was  entering  into  the  cloud  from  the  southern  side.  The  presence  did 
not  seem,  to  my  mind,  as  a  form,  because  it  filled  tlie  cloud  like  some  vast, 
intelligence.  He  is  not  as  I,  I  reas()ned  :  I  fill  a  little  space  witli  my  form, 
and  when  I  niDve  the  space  is  left  void,  but  he  may  fill  innnensity  at  his  will,, 
even  as  he  fills  this  cloud.  Then  from  tlie  right  side  and  froni  the  left  of  the 
cloud  a  tongue  of  black  vapi.>ur  shot  forth  and  rested  lightly  upon  eitlier  side 
of  my  head,  and  as  they  touched  me  thoughts  not  my  own  entered  into  my 
brain. 

"These,  I  said,  are  his  thoughts  and  not  mine  ;  they  might  be  in  Greek  or 
Hebrew  for  all  power  I  have  over  them.  But  how  kindly  am  I  addressed  in 
my  mother  tongue  that  so  I  may  understand  all  his  will. 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  185 

"Yet,  although  the  language  was  English,  it  was  so  eminently  above  my 
power  to  reproduce  that  my  rendition  of  it  is  as  far  short  of  the  original  as 
any  translation  of  a  dead  language  is  weaker  than  the  original  ;  for  instance, 
the  expression,  '  This  is  the  road  to  the  eternal  world, '  did  not  contain  over 
four  words,  neither  did  any  sentence  in  the  wliole  harangue,  and  every 
sentence,  had  it  been  written,  must  have  closed  with  a  period,  so  complete 
was  the  sense.    The  following  is  as  near  as  I  can  render  it  :  — 

"  '  This  is  the  road  to  the  eternal  world.  Yonder  rocks  are  the  boundary 
between  the  two  worlds  and  the  two  lives.  Once  you  pass  them,  you  can  no 
more  return  into  the  body.  If  your  work  was  to  write  the  things  that  have 
been  taught  you,  waiting  for  mere  chance  to  publish  them,  if  your  work  was 
to  talk  to  private  individuals  in  the  privacy  of  friendship — if  this  was  all,  it 
is  done,  and  you  may  pass  beyond  the  rocks.  If,  however,  upon  considera- 
tion you  conclude  that  it  shall  be  to  j^ublish  as  well  as  to  write  what  you  are 
taught,  if  it  shall  be  to  call  together  the  multitudes  and  teach  them,  it  is  not 
done  and  you  can  return  into  the  body.' 

' '  The  thoughts  ceased  and  the  cloud  passed  away,  moving  slowly  toward  the 
mountain  in  the  east.  I  turned  and  watched  it  for  some  time  when,  suddenly, 
and  without  having  felt  myself  moved,  I  stood  close  to  and  in  front  of  the 
three  rocks.  I  was  seized  with  a  strong  curiosity  then  to  look  into  the  next 
world. 

' '  There  were  four  entrances,  one  very  dark,  at  the  left  between  the 
wall  of  black  rock  and  the  left  hand  one  of  the  three  rocks,  a  low  archway, 
between  the  left  hand  and  tlie  middle  rock,  and  a  similar  one  between  that 
find  the  right  hand  rock,  and  a  very  narrow  pathway  running  around  the 
right  hand  rock  at  the  edge  of  the  roadway. 

"I  did  not  examine  the  opening  at  the  left — I  know  not  why,  unless  it  was 
because  it  appeared  dark,  but  I  knelt  at  each  of  the  low  archways  and  looked 
through.  The  atmosphere  was  green  and  everything  seemed  cool  and  quiet 
and  beautiful.  Beyond  the  rocks,  the  roadway,  the  valley,  and  the  mountain 
range  curved  gently  to  the  left,  tlius  shutting  off  the  view  at  a  short  distance. 
If  I  were  only  around  there,  I  tliought,  I  should  soon  see  angels  or  devils  or 
both,  and  as  I  thought  this,  I  saw  the  forms  of  both  as  I  had  often  pictured 
tliem  in  my  mind.  I  looked  at  them  closely  and  discovered  that  they  were 
not  realities,  but  the  mere  shadowy  forms  in  my  thoughts,  and  that  any  form 
might  be  brouglit  up  in  the  same  way.  What  a  wonderful  world,  I  exclaimed, 
mentally,  where  thought  is  so  intensified  as  to  take  visible  form.  How 
liappy  shall  I  be  in  such  a  realm  of  thought  as  that. 

' '  I  listened  at  the  archways  for  any  sound  of  voice  or  of  music,  but  could 
bear  nothing.  Solid  substances,  I  thought,  are  better  media  of  sound  than 
air,  I  will  use  tlie  rocks  as  media,  and  I  rose  and  placed  my  left  ear  to  first 
one  rock  and  then  the  other  througliout,  but  could  hear  notliing. 

"Then  suddenly  I  was  tempted  to  cross  the  boundary  line.  I  hesitated 
and  reasoned  thus  :  '  I  have  died  once  and  if  I  go  back,  soon  or  late,  I  must 
die  again.  If  I  stay  someone  else  will  do  my  work,  and  so  the  end  will  be 
as  well  and  as  surely  accomplished  and  shall  I  die  again  ?  I  will  not,  but  now 
that  I  am  so  near  I  will  cross  the  line  and  stay.'  So  determining  I  moved 
cautiously  along  the  rocks.    There  was  danger  of  falling  over  the  side  of  the 

O 

186     "  Mr.  F.W.  IT.  Myers. 

road,  for  the  pathway  around  was  hut  narrow.  I  thought  not  of  the  archways, 
I  placed  my  back  against  the  rock  and  walked  sideways. 

"I  reached  the  exact  centre  of  the  rock,  which  I  knew  by  a  carved  knob  in 
the  rock  marking  the  exact  boundary.  Here,  like  Csesar  at  the  Rubicon,  I 
halted  and  parleyed  with  conscience.  It  seemed  like  taking  a  good  deal  of 
responsibility,  but  I  determined  to  do  it,  and  advanced  the  left  foot  across  the 
line.  As  I  did  so,  a  small,  densely  black  cloud  appeared  in  front  of  me  and 
advanced  toward  my  face.  I  knew  that  I  was  to  be  stopped.  I  felt  the 
power  to  move  or  to  think  leaving  me.  My  hands  fell  powerless  at  my  side, 
my  shoulders  and  head  dropped  forward,  the  cloud  touched  my  face  and  I 
knew  no  more. 

' '  Without  jorevious  tliought  and  without  apparent  effort  on  my  part,  ray 
eyes  opened.  I  looked  at  my  hands  and  then  at  tlie  little  white  cot  upon 
"which  I  was  lying,  and  realising  that  I  was  in  the  body,  in  astonishment  and 
disappointment,  I  exclaimed  :  What  in  the  world  has  happened  to  me  ?  Must 
I  die  again  ? 

"I  was  extremely  weak,  l)ut  strong  enough  to  relate  the  above  exjierience 
despite  all  injunctions  to  quiet.  Soon  afterward  I  was  seized  with  vomiting, 
severe  and  uncontrollable.  About  tliis  time  Doctor  J.  H.  Sewel,  of  Rock- 
wood,  Tenn.,  called  upon  a  friendly  visit,  not  knowing  I  was  sick.  I  was 
hiccoughing  terribly  and  in  consultation  he  said,  '  Nothing  sh.ort  of  a 
aniracle,  I  fear,  can  save  him.' 

"After  many  days,  it  seemed  to  me,  the  temijerature  began  to  creep  up  and 
soon  ran  above  normal,  but  only  a  little,  wavei'ed  back  and  fortli  for  a  fevr 
days  and  settled  at  a  half  degree  below  where  it  remained  during  the  greater 
part  of  convalescence,  when  it  mounted  to  normal,  the  pulse  mounted  to 
above  fifty  for  keeps,  as  boys  say  at  marbles,  then  went  to  seventy-six  and  I 
made  a  rapid  and  good  recovery,  for  having  travelled  some  hundreds  of  miles 
during  the  interval,  as  T  close  tliis  paper  my  pulse  stands  at  eighty-four  and 
is  strong,  just  eight  weeks  from  'the  day  I  died,'  as  some  of  my  neighbours 
.sp)eak  of  it. 

' '  There  are  plenty  f )f  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  the  above  statements,  in  so 
far  as  my  pliysical  condition  was  concerned.  Also  to  the  fact  that  just  as  I 
described  tlie  conditions  about  my  body  and  in  the  room,  so  tliey  actually 
•were.    I  must,  therefore,  have  seen  these  things  by  some  means," 

In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  Dr.  Wiltse  adds  : — 

"In  reply  will  say  that  I  have  delayed  answer  to  this  date  in  order  to 
interview  several  persons  who  have  followed  me  from  Tennessee  to  this 
State,  and  who  were  eye-witnesses  to  my  physical  condition  at  the  time  of 
my  strange  experience. 

"I  have  questioned  six  of  these  jjersons  uj^on  the  jioints  at  issue  and  find, 
according  to  their  testimony,  the  facts  to  be  as  stated  in  answers  to  your 
questions. 

"Tlie  pai'ties  named  below  were  present  during  the  phenomena  mentioned 
in  your  letter.  If  desirable,  you  can  interview  them.  I  give  their  present 
address  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carpenter,  Miss  Sara  E.  Wiltse,  318,  Washington- 
street,  Dorchester,  Mass. 

"With  modem  Spiritism  I  can  hardly  affiliate,  although  I  do  not  fail  to 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  tOc.  187 

make  all  the  investigations  I  can,  but  I  generally  find  an  explanation  short  of 
tlie  claims  set  ujJ." 

Questions. 

Statement. — You  perceived  two  gentlemen  standing  in  the  door. 

1.  Q.  :  Were  they  actually  standing  in  the  door  ?    A.  :  They  were. 

2.  Q.  :  Was  your  face  as  pale  as  you  perceived  it  to  be  '?  A.  :  It  was 
much  paler  as  compared  with  some  days  before,  but  one  witness  states  that, 
as  compared  with  only  a  short  time  before  becoming  unconscious,  the  face 
appeared  of  a  dark  purple  hue. 

3.  Q.  :  Did  you  not  recognise  any  person  at  all  among  those  whom  you 
perceived  in  the  room  ?  A.  :  I  had  no  thought  of  names  nor  ideas  of  relation- 
ship. I  had  a  strong  sense  of  good  fellowship,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  but  my 
interest  in  each  seemed  alike.    I  must  have  forgotten  all  personalities. 

4.  Q.  :  Did  the  washes  which  you  perceived  the  rain  to  have  made  actually 
exist  ?  A.  :  They  did  to  a  marked  degree,  there  having  been  heavy  rains  for 
many  days  consecutively. 

5.  Q.  :  Did  the  fabric  in  which  you  seemed  to  be  clothed  resemble  ap_y 
which  you  had  ever  worn  ?  A.  :  It  did  not,  and  I  distinctly  recollect 
thinking  that  I  had  no  such  clothing  in  the  house,  although  it  did  not  tlien 
occur  to  me  that  I  had  never  possessed  such  a  suit.  I  think,  however,  that 
my  brother  who  vv^as  visiting  me  had  on  something  such  a  suit,  but  cannot  be 
certain,  as  I  cannot  learn  that  I  made  any  reference  to  any  suit  in  the  room 
as  being  like  it  vrliile  rehearsing  my  experience  after  awaking.  If  I  could  see 
a  suit  like  it  I  should  recognise  it  at  once. 

G.  Q. :  Were  you  previously  familiar  with  the  notion  that  a  delicate  thread, 
in  cases  of  trance,  connects  the  ethereal  organism  with  the  ordinary  body  1 
A.  :  Yes,  and  this  will  seem  to  you  a  case  of  expectancy.  I  deem  it  fair  to 
your  Society  to  state,  however,  that  so  far  from  believing  the  theory  was  I 
that  in  a  volume  of  fiction  upon  which  I  am  engaged  I  had  set  down  an 
entirely  different  theory  as  emanating  from  one  of  the  characters  who  is  made 
to  teach  my  own  private  views  strongly  enough.  When  I  discovered  the 
thread  my  mind  did  not  go  back  to  any  previous  recollections  or  ideas  upon 
the  subject,  as  I  should  suppose  would  naturally  be  the  case. 

Dr.  Wiltse  adds,  June  30th,  1890  :  — 

' '  In  accordance  with  your  request  in  letter  of  June  18th  for  evidential 
statements  I  have  obtained  three  sworn  statements,  which  I  send  herewith." 
•  .>•■■■• 

Statement  of  Mrs.  Haidee  I.  Wiltse. 

Skiddy,  Kas.,  June  27i7i,  1890. 

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Sir, — I  was  present  at  the  bedside  of  my  husband  during  that  time  in 
his  sickness  last  summer  that  his  physician  and  friends  supposed  him  to  be 
dying,  some  even  believing  he  was  dead. 

His  condition  of  unconsciousness  lasted,  I  suppose,  about  half  an  hour, 
during  which  I  could  see  no  sign  of  life  in  him.  Still,  I  did  not  really  believe 
him  to  be  dead,  nor  did  I  give  up  all  hope  of  his  recovery,  for  reasons  stated 

0  2 

188 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

further  on  in  this  letter.  Tliis  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  physician 
in  attendance  told  me  that  he  was  certainly  dying. 

After  remaining -like  one  dead  to  apjjearance  (from  where  I  was)  for  some 
time,  he  suddenly  opened  liis  eyes  and  said,  "  Must  I  die  again  ?" 

I  told  him  he  had  not  died  yet.  But  he  said  he  had  died,  and  began  to 
tell  wliat  lie  had  seen,  when  his  physician  made  him  stop  talking.  He  per- 
sisted for  a  little,  but  finally  yielded,  said  he  would  tell  us  all  after  a  while 
why  he  had  come  back,  saying  he  had  seen  something  wonderful,  and  should 
never  doubt  of  immortality  again. 

As  to  the  other  matters,  I  do  not  recollect. 

The  reason  I  did  not  believe  he  was  going  to  die  was  this  :  I  have  several 
times  in  my  life  dreamed  of  seeing  a  white  horse  and  a  black  horse  harnessed 
in  a  carriage  and  running  througli  the  air  over  an  open  field  and  disap- 
pearing in  a  forest  on  the  opposite  side.  Some  friend  of  mine  sits  in  the 
carriage  and  is  recognised  by  me,  who  invariably  dies  a  few  days  afterwards. 
A  few  days  before  the  doctor  was  taken  sick  I  saw  him  in  that  carriage. 
But  the  dream  varied  in  this,  that  I  ran  and  caught  the  white  liorse  by  tlie  bits, 
just  before  they  got  into  tlie  wood,  and  so  stopped  them.  So  strangely  had 
I  come  to  believe  in  this  dream,  that  I  kept  believing  in  it  clear  through.  I 
told  the  dream  to  the  doctor  the  next  morning  after  I  dreamed  it,  and  he 
laughed  at  me. — Very  respectfully, 

Mrs.  HAiDiE  Wiltse. 

Morris  County,  State  of  Kansas,  S.S. 

Mrs.  Haidee  Wiltse,  being  duly  sworn,  deposes  and  says  that  she  is  well 
acquainted  with  all  the  facts  stated  in  the  above,  and  that  she  signed  the 
above  with  her  free  will  and  accord. 

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me,  a  Notary  Pulilic  in  and  for  Morris 
County,  State  of  Kansas,  this  30th  day  of  June,  a.d.  1890. 

H.  S.  Miller,  Notary  Public, 

Com.  Ex.,  3Iarch  21.rf,  1892. 

Statement  of  A.  J.  Howard. 

Skiddy,  Kas.,  Jnne  29th,  1890. 

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Sir, — I  was  chosen  by  Dr.  Wiltse,  during  his  sickness  last  summer,  as 
the  one  who  could  turn  and  lift  him  easiest,  whicli  arrangement  kejrt  me  by 
liis  bedside  a  large  share  of  tlie  time. 

One  day  (I  forget  the  date)  he  seemed  much  worse,  so  that  the  family 
and  neighbours  thought  he  was  dying. 

I  took  Dr.  S.  H.  Raynes,  the  only  attending  pliysician  present,  out  into 
the  porch,  and  asked  him  to  tell  me  confidentially  wliat  he  thought  of  the 
case.  He  said,  "  A  gone  case  ;  he  is  as  good  as  dead  now."  He  was  fixing 
a  hypodermic  syringe,  and  I  asked  about  it,  and  he  said  he  was  making 
ready  to  give  the  doctor  an  injection  of  morphine,  in  case  he  should  have 
spasms  while  dying.    This  was  not  done,  however. 

Doctor  Wiltse  called  to  him  just  then,  and  said,  "Doctor,  as  soon  as  I 
am  dead  try  that  experiment,  and  be  sure  you  don't  -put  it  off  so  late  that 
jou  have  no  chance  of  a  positive  result.    It  is  worth  looking  into."  He 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  189 

spoke  of  this  several  times,  and  exacted  a  promise  from  some  of  us  that  it 
should  be  tried.  It  was,  I  have  since  learned,  to  inject  ether  to  see  if  he 
would  speak,  and  what  he  would  say. 

He  told  us  to  leave  room  in  front  of  tlie  window,  that  he  might  have 
light,  and  that  if  he  should  see  anything  tliat  would  prove  imm<jitality  he 
would  tell  us,  if  he  liad  strength  even  to  whisper,  and  would  tell  us  the 
truth.  He  afterwards  spoke  of  a  light,  but  after  being  silent  for  some  time 
said  he  understood  the  philosophy  of  the  light,  that  it  was  a  natural  occur- 
rence, and  explained  it  to  us.  He  had  sjiells  of  quiet,  like  he  was  going- 
down,  but  would  rouse  out  of  tlieni  and  talk.  He  called  to  one  of  the 
neighbours,  wlio  was  sitting  at  his  riglit  foot  rubbing  it,  and  said,  ' '  Look 
now,  Mr.  Fordliam,  we  have  talked  a  good  deal  about  immortality.  I  see 
you  rubljing  my  foot,  but  I  have  only  sight  to  tell  me.  I  cannot  feel  you  ; 
my  body  is  about  dead.  But  did  you  ever  see  my  mind  clearer  ?  It  is  not 
dying  yet."  Mr.  Fordham  said,  "I  never  saw  anything  like  it."  Dr. 
Wiltse  said,  " This  is  my  last  argument.  Do  you  begin  to  be  convinced?" 
Soon  after  this  he  closed  his  eyes,  and  seemed  to  become  entirely  uncon- 
scious. I  did  not  think  him  entirely  dead,  although  many  did.  After  about 
half  an  hour  he  suddenly  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  about  as  if  greatly 
surprised,  and  said,  "Do  I  have  to  die  again  V  He  then  told  us  not  to  be 
scared  any  more,  for  he  should  get  well ;  that  his  work  was  not  finished,  and 
he  was  to  live  imtil  it  was.  He  said  he  had  been  to  the  otlier  world,  and 
began  to  tell  of  things  he  had  seen,  and  said  we  were  immortal.  Dr.  Raynes 
made  him  stop  talking  several  times  ;  but  he  would  soon  begin  again,  and  so 
in  a  short  time  he  had  told  by  piecemeal  tliat  same  story  wliich  lias  since 
been  printed,  and  which  he  has  read  to  me  before  it  was  printed  and  since, 
to  see  if  it  was  stated  as  I  rememljered  it.  I  came  to  Kansas  along  with 
him,  and  so  saw  the  story  before  it  was  printed,  and  it  is  just  as  he  first 
told,  so  far  as  the  incidents  are  concerned,  and  he  must  have  thought  it 
up  mighty  quick  if  it  is  not  true. 

I  distinctly  remember  tliat  while  he  was  sleejjing,  Mrs.  Wiltse  and  the 
doctor's  sister — Miss  Sara  E.  Wiltse— were  sitting  at  his  left  side.  Tliere 
were  also  some  women  at  his  head.  There  were  also  some  men  in  the  door 
— I  think  Mr.  H.  M.  Wiltse,  tlie  doctor's  brother,  and  Dr.  Raynes. 

The  washes  in  the  street  during  the  doctor's  sickness  were  considerably 
deepened  and  widened,  as  the  street  in  front  of  his  house  has  a  heavy 
grade.  I  am  sure  it  showed  a  good  deal  of  diff'erence  from  the  last  time  he 
saw  it  before  that  to  the  day  he  so  nearly  died,  as  it  rained  a  great  deal  in 
the  time. 

A.  J.  Howard. 

State  of  Kansas,  Morris  County,  S.S. 

A.  J.  Howard,  being  duly  sworn,  deposes  and  says  that  all  the  facts 
stated  in  the  within  and  attached  instrument  are  true,  according  to  his 
judgment  and  lielief. 

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me,  a  Notary  Public  in  and  for  Morris 
County,  State  of  Kansas. 

H.  S.  Miller,  Notary  Public, 

Com.  Ex.,  March  21st,  1892. 

190 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

William  T.  Howard. 

Skiddy,  Morri.s  Co.,  Kas.,  June  28th,  1890. 
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  Boston. 

Sir, — I  was  with  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse  and  helped  to  nurse  him  for  many- 
days  wliile  sick  in  Tennessee  about  a  year  ago.  I  was  present  <.)n  that 
day  when  his  friends  and  his  physician  supposed  he  was  dying.  He 
was  several  hours  without  pulse  that  I  could  discover,  and  the  jjhysician, 
Dr.  S.  H.  Raynes,  rejDorted  the  same  also.  I  asked  Dr.  Raynes  privately 
about  his  chances  for  life,  and  was  told  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  him 
to  recover,  as  he  was  already  dying.  I  was  greatly  agitated  at  this  intelligence 
until  Dr.  Wiltse  asked  his  friends  to  be  very  quiet  and  attentive  that  so  they 
miglit  watch  very  closely  for  any  sign  he  might  be  able  to  give  which 
might  be  proof  to  them  of  immortality  as  a  f;ict  instead  of  a  mere  hope  or 
belief.  He  asked  if  tlie  physician  was  well  satisfied  that  his  mind  was  clear, 
so  that  what  he  might  say  should  be  entirely  worthy  of  belief.  Dr.  Raynes 
told  him  it  was  as  clear  as  any  well  man's.  Dr.  Wiltse  said  he  felt  that  it 
was,  and  I  must  say  that  I  never  saw  anyone  exhibit  greater  clearness  of 
intellect. 

Dr.  Wiltse  then  said  that  we  should  stand  close  by  him,  as  his  voice  was 
weak,  so  that  we  could  hear  even  a  whisper,  and  that  if  lio  saw  anything  that 
was  a  proof  he  would  tell  us,  and  that  what  he  might  tell  us  we  could  rely 
upon. 

Tlie  pupils  of  his  eyes  fell  open  and  so  his  sight  began  to  fail  so  that  he 
complained  of  it,  when  he  said  he  saw  a  light  at  the  end  of  the  room  in 
the  window,  but  soon  after  said  he  had  discovered  what  it  was,  and  ex- 
plained it  upon  some  scientific  plan  whicli  I  do  not  recollect,  but  which 
seemed  reasonable. 

I  became  so  interested  in  his  talk  that  I  no  longer  felt  excited,  and  went 
and  stood  by  his  head  that  I  might  hear  any  words  he  might  S23eak.  I  think 
all  in  the  room  must  have  felt  the  same,  for  I  noticed  that  most  of  them 
stopped  crying,  and  crowded  about  him  as  if  they  wished  and  exjiected  to 
hear  something  curious  and  interesting. 

His  eyes  finally  closed,  and  he  lay  for  some  time  like  one  dead.  I  don't 
know  how  long,  when  he  suddenly  opened  his  eyes  and,  as  if  greatly  surprised, 
said  vehemently,  ' '  What  in  the  world  has  happened  ?  Is  it  possible  that  I 
have  to  die  again  ?  " 

He  then  began  to  tell  us  of  things  he  had  seen,  but  the  attending 
physician  interfered  and  said  he  must  not  talk.  Dr.  Wiltse  then  said  he 
would  tell  us  all  about  it  before  long,  and  soon  after  told  the  same  story 
substantially  as  he  has  since  puljlished. 

As  to  matters  seen  by  him  about  the  room,  &c.,  I  distinctly  recollect  that 
the  door  was  standing  partly  open  and  that  two  men  stood  in  it  a  portion  of 
the  time,  although  I  do  not  feel  certain  who  they  were.  It  rained  a  good  deal 
while  he  was  sick,  but  did  not  rain  on  this  particular  day,  but  was  a  bright 
day.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  washes  in  the  street  had  changed  a  good  deal 
from  what  they  had  been  when  he  last  saw  them  with  his  natural  eyes.  I 
recollect  also  that  there  were  some  women  sitting  at  his  head,  althougli  I  am 
not  certain  how  many.  I  heard  him  relate  his  strange  experience  tlie  first 
time  soon  after  he  awoke,  and  have  heard  liim  relate  it  j^robably  to  a  score  or 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  (l-c,  191 

more  of  people  since  and  twice  to  audiences,  and  have  purposely  watched  for 
any  contradictory  statements  which  might  throw  doubt  upon  its  entire  truth- 
fulness. Have  also  read  his  published  statement,  but  in  all  he  has  never 
crossed  his  statements.  His  experience  has  evidently  made  a  strong  inipres- 
.sion  upon  him,  for  I  have  never  heard  him  express  any  doubts  as  to  immor- 
tality since,  although  before  that  he  had  often  expressed  fear  and  doubt  upon 
the  subject. — Yours  truly, 

W.  T.  Howard. 

State  of  Kansas,  Morris  County,  S.S. 

William  T.  Howard,  being  duly  sworn,  says  the  above  is  true  in  all  the 
matters  there  .stated. 

W.  T.  Howard. 

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  nie,  a  Notary  Public  in  and  for  Morris 
County,  State  of  Kansas. 

H.  S.  Miller,  Notai-y  Public, 

Com.  Ex.,  March  21st,  1892. 

Miss  Sara  E.  Wiltse,  Corunna,  Mich. 

Corunna,  Michigan,  Jidij  10th,  1890. 

Mr.  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — I  cannot  make  this  statement  as  brief  as  I  would  like  because 
tlie  value  of  it  depends  upon  some  of  the  details. 

Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse  is  my  brother,  and  had  I  supposed  his  illness  otlier  than 
a  fatal  one,  I  should  certainly  have  made  notes  upon  his  condition  from  day 
to  day.  I  think  his  record  in  the  St.  Louis  Medical  and  Siuvjical  Journal 
remarkably  clear  and  exact,  even  as  to  our  positions  beside  what  we  supposed 
to  be  his  dying  bed.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carpenter  read  that  report  with  me  on 
its  first  appearance,  and  found  it  in  harmony  with  what  we  knew  or  could 
recall  of  the  circumstances,  except  that  I  tliought  my  brother  was  mistaken 
iibout  my  position  beside  his  cot,  but  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carpenter  assure  me 
that  my  memory  and  not  that  of  my  brother  is  at  fault  in  that  particular. 
Mrs.  Carpenter  is  in  ill-health  and  I  would  not  like  her  to  review  this  painful 
.subject  at  present,  otherwise  she  would  respond  to  your  request  for  a 
.statement. 

When  my  brother,  Hon.  H.  M.  Wiltse,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carpenter 
came  in  resjjonse  to  my  telegram,  we  agreed  there  should  be  no  moment  of 
what  we  supposed  would  be  the  brief  remainder  of  Dr.  Wiltse's  life,  v/hen  he 
could  not  see  or  touch  either  his  brother,  his  sister,  or  his  niece,  the  only 
ones  present  v\dio  were  part  of  the  old  home  cii'cle.  We  also  resolved  that,  at 
whatever  cost  to  us,  he  should  be  troubled  by  no  tears  or  sorrowful  tones. 

Dr.  Wiltse  has,  and  has  always  had,  very  strong  tendencies  to  beliefs  in  the 
supernatural,  and  has  been  a  ghost  hunter,  visiting  "haunted"  houses  and 
inquiring  into  all  pojaular  sujjerstitions  that  he  could  find  about  him.  His 
brother,  Henry  M.  Wiltse,  is  a  lawyer,  with  little  patience  with  such 
speculations.  I  am  a  teacher,  believing  strongly  in  the  immortality  of  tlie 
.soul,  but  not  in  ghostly  visitors,  though  all  phenomena  of  this  nature  were 
a  favourite  tojDic  between  Dr.  Wiltse  and  myself.  I  claimed  that  a  person 
who  saw  spirits  was  in  an  abnormal  condition,  and  needed  medical  treat- 
ment, assuring  him  whenever  I  should  see  one  I  would  send  for  liim  if  he 

192 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

■would  bi'ing  his  lancet  and  jjowders.  Mr.  Carpenter,  also  a  teacher,  Is 
something  of  a  modern  Tlieosophist,  and  Mrs.  Carpenter  is  a  music  teacher 
of  decidedly  practical  turn  of  mind,  believing  in  the  f)ossibility  of  seeing  a 
disembodied  spirit,  but  never  dwelling  upon  the  subject,  being  rather  reticent 
about  tlie  most  serious  matters.  Such  were  our  mental  attitudes  when  we 
gathered  for  what  we  supposed  our  last  earthly  meeting.  The  physicians  in 
attendance  I  never  met  until  that  week,  and  I  do  not  now  know  what  their 
beliefs  are. 

My  brother  longed  for  some  Heavenly  vision.  I  think  he  was  profoundly 
disappointed  because  he  saw  no  angels  and  heard  no  seraphs,  for  previous  tO' 
his  unconsciousness  he  expressed  surprise  that  he  should  be  so  near  the  other 
life  and  get  no  impression  of  it  through  his  bodily  senses.  I  remember  per- 
fectly his  attention  to  his  failing  sight,  his  measurement  of  tlie  decreasing 
length  of  vision,  and  liis  rej^ort  of  the  growing  dimness  while  his  voice  was  yet 
tolerably  clear.  He  often  appealed  to  us  to  know  if  we  still  believed  in  the 
life  eternal  even  in  that  presence,  and  it  seemed  to  increase  his  hopefulness 
that  we  believed  without  aid  of  unaccountable  sights  or  sounds,  and  while 
longing  for  some  remarkable  revelation,  he  yet  rejoiced  in  his  mental  vigour, 
and  occasionally  asked  the  doctor  in  attendance  if  he  seemed  to  him  to  be 
wandering  in  the  least,  for  he  sliould  he  sorry  not  to  be  in  full  jjossession  of 
his  mental  faculties  when  body  and  spirit  separated. 

I  remember  perfectly  the  attempt  he  naade  to  straighten  his  stiffening 
limbs,  for,  although  he  could  not  sjjeak,  he  smiled  his  thanks  for  the  service 
I  rendered  by  helping  him  in  th;it  last  physical  effort.  I  thought  he  could 
feel  my  touch,  and  believed  he  saw  my  face,  and  so  I  would  not  give  way  to 
tears.  It  was  'not  until  ive  were  sure  that  all  his  hodihj  senses  had  failed  that  I 
allowed-  mijself  to  cry;  therefore  his  singularly  well  remembered  train  of 
tliouglit  al)out  his  soul,  and  his  oljservance  of  his  weeping  wife  and  sister,  must 
have  occurred  wliile  he  was  apparently  unconscious,  and  after  the  doctor  had 
pronounced  life  extinct. 

That  it  was  not  an  ordinary  or  even  extraordinary  delusion  of  a  fevered 
brain  seems  proven  by  his  continued  clearness  of  mind ;  there  was  none  of  the 
usual  delirium  of  fever  at  any  time  during  his  illness,  even  during  those  days 
that  are  a  blank  in  his  memory.  I  think  he  was  perfectly  cognisant  of  the 
j)resent  moment,  its  symjitoms  and  his  attendants,  during  all  of  the  time  tliat 
he  was  conscious,  but  lie  could  not  remember  from  hour  to  liour  what 
medicines  had  been  administered.  He  prescribed  for  himself  with  admirable 
skill,  but  liad  to  ask  the  other  doctors  if  tliat  remedy  had  already  been  tried, 
and  was  as  professionally  courteous  to  them  as  if  lie  had  been  in  consultation 
over  some  other  patient.  I  remember  his  telling  them  that  he  did  not  forget 
that  he  was  the  sick  man,  and  would  not  ojjpose  the  opinion  of  the  patient 
to  that  of  the  doctors,  and  showed  none  of  the  bravado  which  a  delirious 
doctor  might  have  felt.  I  sat  up  with  him  many  nights  in  succession,  a 
physician  sleeping  in  his  office,  and  when  there  was  any  alarming  change  in 
his  condition  he  would  tell  me  what  to  give  instantly — if  there  seemed  no 
time  to  lose  in  calling  for  aid,  always  insisting  afterwards  that  I  should  speak 
to  the  doctor  to  make  sure  the  remedy  was  approved  by  a  jjhysician  in 
healtli.  Tliese  alarming  conditions  came  on  very  suddenly,  and  were 
extremely  dangerous,  but  Dr.  Wiltse's  coolness  and  good  judgment  were 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  &c.  193 

invariably  commended  by  the  other  doctors  ;  his  failure  of  memory  finally 
interfered  with  the  safety  of  his  own  advice,  but  liis  judgment  even  then  was 
perfectly  sound,  and  there  was  no  muddling  of  symptoms  or  treatment. 

The  fever  was  of  a  very  uncommon  type,  and  one  of  the  attending 
physicians  had  a  book  with  descriptions  of  a  like  case.  Dr.  Wiltse  wanted  it 
to  read,  but  the  other  doctor  pretended  he  forgot  to  bring  it,  telling  me  there 
were  points  that  my  brother  should  not  read  up  under  the  circumstances, 
and  my  brother  felt  hurt  that  a  doctor  could  forget  at  such  a  time.  Happily 
he  himself  forgot  the  book  before  many  hours.  All  these  recollections  are  to 
show  my  brother's  mental  and  physical  condition  as  I  observed  it  in  that 
illness. 

I  have  had  typhoid  fever  myself,  and  have  seen  several  cases  of  it,  having 
been  with  a  cousin  several  days  previous  to  and  during  all  of  his  dying  hours, 

I  have  seen  several  people  die  of  various  diseases,  and  am  sadly  familiar 
with  the  symptoms  of  ajiproaching  death.  I  had  no  hope  whatever  of  my 
brother's  recovery  after  the  convulsions  set  in,  although  I  joined  in  every 
effort  made  to  prolong  his  life. 

His  sinking  and  all  the  preceding  symptoms  were  so  like  death  that  I 
always  think  of  the  occasion  as  "when  he  died,"  and  have  to  think  twice 
before  I  can  speak  with  precision  of  the  time  when  he  seemed  to  die. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  psychological  value  of  this  phenomenon  lies  in  the 
probable  activity  of  the  mind  during  apparent  unconsciousness,  and  not  in 
any  guesses  that  may  be  hazarded  about  relations  of  life  and  death  which 
might  be  based  upon  it,  although  one  must  reverence  the  opinion  of  any  who 
think  as  some  of  the  good  mountain  people  do,  that  Dr.  Wiltse  actually  died 
and  came  to  life  again.  —  Very  respectfully  yours, 

Sara  E.  Wiltse. 

Finally,  we  have  now  obtained  the  account  of  the  doctor  in  attendance, 
as  follows  : — 

Kismet,  Morgan  Co.,  Tennessee,  March  3l6t,  1892. 
Mr.  R.  Hodgson,  LL.D. 

Dear  Sir, — I  was  the  attending  physician  present  when  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse 
lay  apparently  dead  in  August,  1889.  I  observed  his  symptoms  closely,  and 
if  there  are  any  symptoms  marking  a  patient  as  in  articulo  mortis  that  were 
not  presented  in  his  case,  I  am  igiiorant  of  them.  I  supposed  at  one  time  that 
he  was  actually  dead  as  fully  as  I  ever  supposed  anyone  dead.  I  thrust  a 
needle  deep  into  the  flesh  at  difierent  points,  and  got  no  sign  of  sensibility. 
There  was  no  pulse  and  no  perceptible  heart-sounds.  The  breath  was,  so 
far  as  observable,  absolutely  suspended. 

S.  H.  Raynes,  M.D. 

Some  readers,  perhaps,  may  smile  at  this  highly  modernised 
parallel  to  the  death  scene  of  the  Pluado.  But  surely  Socrates  would 
himself  have  been  the  first  to  approve  Dr.  Wiltse's  resolute  attempt  to 
substitute  knowledge  for  opinion  in  this  weightiest  of  all  crises.  Nor 
need  we  find  anything  irreverent  in  this  absorption  in  experiment  in 
the  face  of  advancing  Death.  Death's  "  truer  name,"  the  Laureate  has 
said,  "is  Onward";  and  for  an  agnostic,  at  least,  no  attitude  in  the 

194 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

last  earthly  hour  can  be  more  manful  than  the  desire  that  his  own 
pai'ting  experience  should  leave  light  and  hope  for  other  men. 

Here,  at  any  rate,  whatever  view  we  take  as  to  the  source  or  the 
content  of  Dr.  Wiltse's  vision,  the  fact  remains  that  the  patient, 
while  in  a  comatose  state,  almost  j^ulseless,  and  at  a  temperature  much 
below  the  noi'mal,  did,  nevertheless,  undei'go  a  remai'kably  vivid  seiies 
■of  mental  impressions.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  we  may  err  in 
other  cases  by  assuming  prematurely  that  all  power  of  perception  or 
inference  has  ceased. 

Setting  aside  the  manifestly  dream-like  or  symbolical  element  of  the 
vision,  we  observe  that  Dr.  Wiltse  believes  that  his  perception  of  the 
peo^jle  in  the  room,  and  of  the  rain-washed  streets  outside,  was  of  a 
clairvoyant  type.  But  this  cannot  be  proved ;  for  the  picture  of  the 
streets  might  be  due  to  unconscious  inference ;  and  some  acuteness  of 
perception,  like  that  of  the  lethargic  hyj^notised  subject,  might  account 
for  his  knowledge  of  movements  in  the  room  made  after  his  eyes  were 
closed.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  probable  that  if  he  had  actually 
died,  and  if  some  kind  of  message  from  him  had  been  subsequently 
received,  that  message  might  have  included  facts  as  to  the  scene  of 
death  which  the  survivoi's  would  have  believed  to  have  been  unknown 
to  him  while  still  living,  but  wliich  he  did  in  fact  acquire  during  his 
comatose  condition. 

G.  207. 

The  following  narrative,  while  lacking  both  the  precision  and  the  corrobo- 
ration of  Dr.  Wiltse's  record,  indicates  a  more  marked  clairvoyance, — exer- 
cised, singularly  enough,  under  very  similar  conditions  of  deathly  cold. 
The  Rev.  L.  J.  Bertrand  (Huguenot  minister)  gave  Dr.  Hodgson  an  oral 
account  of  this  experience,  and  has  now  sent  it  in  wiiting  to  Professor  W. 
James.  The  case  is  very  remote  ;  hut  although  the  details  cannot  be  trusted 
at  this  distance  of  time,  the  main  fact  of  the  clairvoyance  hi  extremis,  and 
of  the  practical  joke  played  on  the  guide,  can  hardly  have  crept  unawares 
into  the  story.  M.  Bertrand's  memory  of  Switzerland,  I  may  add,  seems 
2n'etty  clear. 

Neuilly,  Seine,  14  Bis,  Rue  Borghfese,  October  10th,  1891. 

Dear  Dr.  James, — Excuse  me,  but  since  your  last  kind  letter,  illness  and 
death  have  come  in  my  family  ;  then  I  have  been  obliged  to  visit  Belgium, 
then  to  lielp  my  societies,  &c.,  &c.    I  have  had  no  time  for  answers. 

Many  people  remembering  my  accident  on  the  Titlis  answer  me,  but 
they  exaggerate  everything  ;  others  have  only  a  vague  notion,  and  because  I 
am  alive,  I  am  surprised  to  find  how  many  have  died  during  the  last  30 
years  ;  how  many  have  disappeared  from  their  place.  My  friends'  letters 
and  mine  will,  however,  sooner  or  later,  unite  the  past  and  the  present.  If 
I  had  been  able  to  visit  Switzerland  !  But  death  has  come,  and  our  plans 
are  forwarded  to  next  year.  I  have  written  and  written  to  India — but  no 
answer  has  yet  arrived. 

'Meanwhile,  I  send  you  the  relation  of  the  fact,  avoiding  for  this  time 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  &c.  195 

everything  wliicli  ouglit  to  be  told  by  others,  and  whicli  liappened  after  the 
awakening  or  resurrection.  I  must  write,  cnrrente  calamo,  and  in  niy  poor 
English  ;  my  time  is  absorbed  by  too  many  things.  I  authorise  you  to  use 
my  notes  as  you  please,  provided  you  correct  them,  and  that  you  do  not  alter 
in  the  slightest  way  wliat  I  affirm. — Most  respectfully  yours, 

L.  J.  Bertrand. 

Dear  Dr.  James, — For  27  consecutive  years,  during  the  two  best 
months,  I  climbed  with  two,  three,  or  four  pupils  the  peaks  of  the  Alps 
and  Pyrenees  ;  of  course  we  had,  now  and  then,  disagreeable  adventures. 
Once,  a  young  English  officer,  Hatton  Turner,  and  I  were  lost  in  the  snow 
near  the  Vignemale  for  40  hours.  I  read  in  a  paper  the  full  description 
of  our  own  death  :  it  seems  that  we  were  murdered  by  Spanish  brigands  ! 
Later,  my  father  and  my  wife  became  fully  convinced  that  once  or  another  I 
would  fall  into  a  crevice  or  a  precipice,  or  he  shot  in  the  dark  by  a  bandit. 
To  calm  tlieir  perpetual  alarm,  I  resolved  to  hide  from  them  all  my  little 
accidents,  and  to  write  no  journal.  Now,  I  deeply  regret  my  taking  such  a 
resolution — too  late. 

Some  30  years  ago,  after  crossing  from  the  Rhone  valley,  I  sent  my 
young  men  to  Meyringen,  and  I  went  to  Interlaken  to  pi'ove  to  my  v/ife  that 
tliough  she  had  heard  of  my  falling  into  a  deep  crevice  of  a  glacier,  I  was 
still  fully  alive.  On  my  return  I  missed  the  coach,  and  instead  of  meeting 
■•■'=my  young  men  at  the  foot  of  the  Yoch  Pass  at  9  a.m.,  as  agreed,  I 
reached  them  at  the  inn  Engstlenalp — foot  of  the  Titlis,  45  minutes  from  the 
Col  of  the  Yoch — only  at  1  p.m. 

Whilst  taking  my  meal  on  the  grass,  surrounded  hj  my  companions,  I 
said  to  a  guide  :  ' '  Why  do  you  not  climb  that  beautiful  Titlis  straight  up 
from  this  side  instead  of  going  round  to  meet  the  long,  zigzagging  Triibsee 
Alp  way  ?    You  make  such  a  fuss  for  an  easy  climbing  of  10,000  feet  !  " 

"  Because  this  side  is  genei'ally  hard,  sometimes  dangerous,  and  this  year 
impossible." 

One  of  my  young  men  replied,  laughingly  :  "I  suppose  that  you  never 
tried  ;  if  tourists  did  not  first  guide  the  guide,  no  guide  would  guide  the 
tourist." 

Then  came  another  older  guide,  called,  I  think,  Karl  Infanger,  who  told 
me  :  ' '  Lately  I  went  there  hunting,  and  I  assure  you  that  this  year,  because 
of  the  snow  and  of  an  enormous  bump  of  the  glacier,  it  would  be  perfect 
madness  to  risk  it. " 

' '  Well,  we  may  try,  and  I  will  give  you  double  pay,  vv^hen  even  we 
should  be  obliged  to  come  back  unsuccessful." 

"When  do  you  mean  to  leave  ? " 

"  As  soon  as  you  are  ready,  because  I  hope  to  see  from  the  top  the  sun- 
set instead  of  the  sunrise.  Take  only  a  rope  ;  we  have  pikes  and  hooks 
enough." 

"  We  will  then  make  two  follies  instead  of  one,  for  the  snow  is  melting 
and  slippery." 

He  was  right  in  calling  my  obstinacy  "  perfect  madness,"  for  wlien  we  at 
last  reached  the  top  of  the  steep  and  dangerous  part  we  all  felt  surprised  that 
we  had  not  fallen  from  a  precipice  and  smashed  our  bodies  against  a  rock. 
And  then  my  legs  complained  pitifully  that  they  had  walked  from  six  in  tlie 

196 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

morning  till  five  in  the  afternoon,  and  had  made  strenuous,  tremendous  efforts 
for  the  last  two  hours. 

I  therefore  said  to  my  companions  :  "I  have  been  many  times  on  the 
summit,  and  know  that  you  no  longer  want  my  prudent  (!)  direction.  As  I  am 
very  tired,  I  will  remain  here,  if  you  promise  me  to  follow  my  orders. '  You, 
guide,  do  you  promise  me,  when  you  climb  the  peak,  to  go  up  by  the  left  and 
come  down  by  the  right  ?  " 

"  Of  course  ;  we  always  do  so.    I  promise." 

Tlien  I  explained  to  my  young  men  that  the  peak  is  like  one  half  of  a 
sugar-loaf,  cvit  from  to^  to  bottom,  and  that  on  the  left  there  was  a  dangerous 
cut,  which  they  might  not  see  in  coming  down.  I  therefore  placed  the 
strongest  of  my  pupils  at  the  end  of  the  rope,  and  said  :  "  Do  you  promise  me 
to  remain  there  the  last  ?  " 

"  I  promise." 

"  Veiy  well,  go." 

I  sat  down,  my  legs  hanging  on  a  dangerous  slope  or  precipice,  my  back 
leaning  on  a  I'cck  as  Ijig  as  an  armchair.  I  chose  that  lirink  because  there 
was  no  snow,  and  because  I  could  face  better  the  magnificent  panoi'ama  of  the 
Alpes  Bernoises.  I  at  once  remembered  that  in  my  pocket  were  two  cigars, 
and  put  one  between  my  teetli,  lighted  a  match,  and  considered  myself  as  <;he 
happiest  of  men.  Suddenly  I  felt  as  thunderstruck  by  apoplexy,  and  tliouj^h 
the  match  burned  my  fingers,  I  could  not  throw  it  down.  My  head^was  per- 
fectly clear  and  healthy,  but  my  body  was  as  powerless  and  motionless  as  a 
rock.  Tliere  was  for  me  no  hesitation.  "  This,"  I  thought,  '■^  is  the  sleep  of 
the  snoivs !  If  I  move  I  shall  roll  down  in  tlie  abyss  ;  if  I  do  not  move  I 
shall  be  a  dead  man  in  25  or  30  minutes."  A  kind  of  prayer  was  sent 
to  God,  and  then  I  resolved  to  study  quietly  the  progress  of  death.  My  feet 
and  hands  were  first  frozen,  and  little  by  little  death  reached  my  knees  and 
elbows.  The  sensation  was  not  painful,  and  my  mind  felt  quite  easy.  But 
when  death  had  been  all  over  my  body  my  head  became  unbearably  cold,  and 
it  seemed  to  me  that  concave  pincers  s  [ueezed  my  heart,  so  as  to  extract  my 
life.  I  never  felt  such  an  acute  pain,  but  it  lasted  only  a  second  or  a  minute, 
and  my  life  went  out.  "  Well,"  thought  I,  "at  last  I  am  what  they  call  a 
dead  man,  and  here  I  am,  a  ball  of  air  in  the  air,  a  captive  balloon  still 
attached  to  earth  by  a  kind  of  elastic  string  and  going  up  and  always  up.  How 
strange  !  I  see  better  tlian  ever,  and  I  am  dead — only  a  small  space  in  the 
space  without  a  body  I  .  .  .  Where  is  my  last  body  ?  "  Looking  down,  I 
was  astounded  to  recognise  my  own  envelope.  "  Strange  !  "  said  I  to  myself. 
"There  is  the  corpse  in  which  I  lived  and  which  I  called  me,  as  if  the  coat 
were  the  body,  as  if  the  body  were  the  soul  !  What  a  horrid  thing  is  that 
body  I — deadly  pale,  with  a  yellowish-blue  colour,  holding  a  cigar  in  its  mouth 
and  a  match  in  its  two  burned  fingers  !  Well,  I  hope  that  you  shall  never 
smoke  again,  dirty  rag  !  Ah  !  if  only  I  had  a  hand  and  scissors  to  cut  the 
thread  which  ties  me  still  to  it  !  When  my  comijanions  return  they  will  look 
at  that  and  exclaim,  'The  Professor  is  dead.'  Poor  young  friends!  They 
do  not  know  that  I  never  was  as  alive  as  I  am,  and  the  joroof  is  tliat  I  see  the 
guide  going  up  ratlier  by  the  right,  when  he  j)romised  me  to  go  by  the  left ; 
W.  was  to  be  the  last,  and  he  is  neither  the  first  nor  the  last,  but  alone,  away 
from  the  rope.    Now  tlie  guide  thinks  that  I  do  not  see  him  because  he  hides 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  Sc.  197 

liimself  behind  the  young  men  whilst  drinking  at  my  bottle  of  Madeira. 
Well,  go  on,  poor  man,  I  hope, that  my  body  will  never  drink  of  it  again. 
Ah  !  there  he  is  stealing  a  leg  of  my  chicken.  Go  on,  old  fellow,  eat  the 
whole  of  the  chicken  if  you  choose,  for  I  hope  that  my  miserable  corpse  will 
never  eat  or  drink  again."  I  felt  neither  surprise  nor  vexation  ;  I  simply 
stated  facts  with  indifference.  "  Hallo  !  "  said  I,  "  there  is  my  wife  going  to 
Lucerne,  and  she  told  me  that  she  would  not  leave  before  to-morrow,  or  after 
to-morrow.  They  are  five  before  the  hotel  of  Lungern.  Well,  wife,  I  am  a 
dead  man.  Good-bye." 

I  must  confess  that  I  did  not  call  dear  the  one  who  has  always  heen  very 
clear  to  me,  and  that  I  felt  neither  regret  nor  joy  at  leaving  her.  My  only 
regret  was  that  I  could  not  cut  the  string.  In  vain  I  travelled  through  so 
beautiful  worlds  that  earth  became  insignificant.  I  had  only  two  wishes :  the 
certitude  of  not  returning  to  earth  and  the  discovery  of  my  next  glorious 
body,  without  which  I  felt  powerless.  I  could  not  be  happy  because  the 
thread,  though  thinner  than  ever,  was  not  cut,  and  the  wished-for  body  was 
still  invisible  to  my  searching  looks. 

Suddenly  a  shock  stopped  my  ascension,  and  I  felt  that  somebody  was 
pulling  and  pulling  the  balloon  down.  My  grief  was  measureless.  The  fact 
was  that  whilst  my  young  friends  threw  snowballs  at  each  other  our  guide 
had  discovered  and  administered  to  my  body  the  well-known  remedy,  rubbing 
with  snow  ;  but  as  I  was  cold  and  stiff  as  ice,  he  dared  not  roll  me  for  fear  of 
breaking  my  hands  still  near  the  cigar.  I  could  neither  see  nor  hear  any 
more,  but  I  could  measure  my  way  down,  and  when  I  reached  my  body  again 
I  had  a  last  hope — the  balloon  seemed  much  too  big  for  the  mouth.  Sudflenly 
I  uttered  the  awful  roar  of  a  wild  beast — the  corpse  swallowed  the  balloon, 
and  Bertrand  was  Bertrand  again,  though  for  a  time  worse  than  before. 

Here  is  for  me  an  obscurity.  I  remember  only  tliat  all  seemed  t(j  me 
confusion  and  chaos,  and  I  felt  disdain  for  the  guide  who,  expecting  a  good 
reward,  tried  to  make  me  understand  that  he  had  done  wonders,  and  for  my 
pupils,  who  repeatedly  approved  his  tiresome  sayings.  What  I  know,  too,  is 
that  for  a  time  tliey  unmercifully  shook  and  dragged  my  sore  body  as  if  I  had 
been  a  drunkard.  I  never  felt  a  more  violent  irritation.  At  last  I  could  say 
to  my  poor  guide,  "Because  you  are  a  fool  you  take  me  for  a  fool,  whilst  my 
body  alone  is  sick.    Ah  !  if  you  had  simply  cut  the  string." 

"  The  string  ?    What  string  1    You  were  nearly  dead." 

"Dead  !  I  was  less  dead  than  you  are  now,  and  the  proof  is  that  I  saw  you 
going  up  the  Titlis  by  the  right,  whilst  you  promised  me  to  go  by  the  left." 

The  man  staggered  before  replying,  ' '  Because  the  snow  was  soft  and  that 
there  was  no  danger  of  slipping." 

' '  You  say  that  because  you  thought  me  far  away.  You  went  up  by  the 
right  and  allowed  two  young  men  to  put  aside  the  rope.  Who  is  a  fool  1  You 
— not  I.    Now  show  me  my  bottle  of  Madeira,  and  we  will  see  if  it  is  full." 

The  blow  was  such  that  his  hands  left  my  body  and  he  fell  down,  saying, 
evidently  to  himself,  "Did  lie  follow  us?  No,  we  should  have  seen  him. 
Could  he  see  through  the  mountain  ?  Is  his  body  dead,  and  does  his  ghost 
jeproach  me  for  what  I  did  ?  " 

"  Oh,"  said  I,  brutally,  "you  may  fall  down  and  stare  at  me  as  much  a,3 

198 

Mr.  F,  W.  H.  Myers. 

you  please,  and  give  your  poor  explanations,  bub  you  cannot  prove  that  my 
chicken  has  two  legs,  because  you  stole  one." 

This  was  too  much  for  the  good  man.  He  got  up,  emjjtied  his  knai^sack 
whilst  muttering  a  kind  of  confession,  and  then  flew  away.  I  never  saw  him 
after,  but  I  heard  that  at  an  inn  he  ri^as  as  delirious  as  myself,  and  spoke 
somewhat  like  this  : — 

"You  believe  that  captain  is  a  mail.  [Some  guides  in  the  Oberland  and 
at  Zermatt  called  me  sometimes  captain  because  I  often  liad  with  me  young- 
cadets.]  But  now  I  know  him.  This  year  I  never  would  have  gone  straight 
up  this  side  of  the  Titlis.     Sure  of  unsuccess,  I  went,  and  we  succeeded 

without  any  serious  trouble.    This  was  already  astonishing.    At  ^  he 

pretended  to  be  tired  and  stopped  there.  When  we  returned  he  apparently 
was  as  dead  as  death  itself  from  apoplexy,  or  the  sleep  of  the  snows,  and 
a  cigar  in  his  mouth.  However,  I  rubbed  and  rubbed  him,  and  to  my  amaze- 
jnent  he  came  to  life  again  to  reproach  me  for  all  I  had  done.  He  had  been 
in  two  places,  seen  his  companions  leaving  the  rope,  seen  me  taking  a  leg  of 
our  chicken  and  some  of  our  wine.  Cajotain  is  not  a  man  ;  my  belief  is  that 
I  never  saw  the  devil  before  yesterday  and  that  I  saw  him  all  this  half  day." 

"  Did  he  pay  you  what  he  promised  ?  " 

"  Surely  not.  I  would  not  receive  a  centime  from  the  devil."  [This  is 
true  ;  I  have  not  yet  paid.] 

We,  of  course,  arrived  late  at  night  at  Trlibsee  Alp,  and  in  the  morning  my 
legs  and  arms  were  so  stiff  that  to  walk  tlie  five  miles  between  Trdbsee  and, 
Engelberg,  I  took  nearly  the  whole  day.  How  often  did  I  regret  that  the 
guide  had  n(.)t  cut  the  string  !  My  young  men  tried  over  and  over  again  to 
calm  my  irritation  by  assuring  me  that  the  violation  of  their  promises  was 
justifiable  because  of  the  softness  of  the  snow.  I  simply  asked  them  not  to 
say  a  word  to  my  wife,  wlio  for  them  was  to  be  next  day — and  for  me  was 
already — in  Lucerne. 

When  I  arrived  tliere,  I  asked  her  why  she  had  left  Interlaken  sooner 
than  she  had  told  me. 

"  Because  I  was  afraid  of  another  accident,  and  wanted  to  be  nearer." 

"Were  you  five  in  the  carriage,  and  did  you  stop  at  the  Lungern 
Hotel  ? " 

'' '  Yes  ;  who  told  you  all  that  1    Have  you  a  spy  for  me  ?  " 
"  Surely  not."    And  I  went  away  laughing,  to  write  a  letter  to  Karl,  wha 
did  not  answer. 

Three  days  after,  being  at  Pitzlvcr  Ijoarding-house,  I  gave  my  young 
friends,  as  a  token  of  my  gratitude  (1),  a  little  banquet  at  the  Englislier  Hof,. 
to  which,  of  course,  were  invited  my  wife  and  her  fi'iend,  Miss  Hope,  of 
Manchester.  Tliere  a  young  man  advised  secretly  Miss  H.  to  ask  my  wife- 
how  I  knew  of  tlieir  disobedience  ?  My  wife  looked  so  surprised  and 
displeased  that  I  avoided  the  answer  by  a  furious  attack  on  chatterboxes,, 
and  the  subject  was  dropped. 

Anotlier  fact  tormented  me.  I  had  j^lainly  seen,  from  on  high,  places 
where  I  had  never  been,  and,  of  course,  I  much  wanted  to  visit  them,  and 
verify  whether  my  vision  was  exact.    One  was  the  route  from  Meyringen  to 

1  I  cannot  remember  the  name  of  tlie  spot,  which  is  at  the  extreme  right  of  the- 
Eotheck. 

On  Indications  of  Gontinv,ed  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  19& 

Waseii  by  the  Justen.  I  found  later  that  I  had  a  perfect  topography  of 
it,  and  I  must  confess  that  if  I  kept  all  those  facts  secretly  in  my  heart,  they 
had  a  real,  decisive  influence  on  my  life.  If  I  have  been  brought  to  religion, 
it  is  not  through  a  pastor  or  even  my  Bible,  but  by  a  good  many  like  or 
different  facts  which  I  might  relate,  but  which  I  cannot  explain. 

In  1883  I  was  with  my  colleague,  Reveilland,  and  Pastors  Elgin  and 
Krieger  on  the  summit  of  Santa  Cruz,  Algeria,  when  our  conversation  led  us 
to  "the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body."  I  deplored  to  see  medical 
doctors  making  a  confusion  between  tlie  soul  and  the  life  of  a  man,  and 
because  I  thought  myself  far  enough  from  my  wife,  Ireldted  publ id i/  fur  tJie 
first  time  my  story  of  the  Titlis.  To  my  horror,  my  friend  Elgin  asked 
nie  an  abbreviation  of  it,  which  he  corrected  or  not,  but  published  in  one  of 
his  books  I 

When  in  Boston,  as  fantastic  argument  against  materialism,  I  quoted  it 
again  before  Doctors  Twombly,  GriiHs,  Calkins,  Thomas,  McKenzie,  &c.  I 
always  thought  that  I  alone  could  understand  its  meaning,  and  I  used  it  as 
to  say,  "Do  you  know  v/hat  is  behind  the  curtain?    I  am  afraid  of  occult 
^sciences,  but    .    .  ." 

Then  came  Dr.  James,  saying:  "  Hallo  I  This  concerns  a  scierdific 
question.  Write  for  me  your  adventure,  as  you  remember  it,  and,  if 
possible,  find  witnesses."    Scientific  question  I    Witnesses  ! 

Of  course,  now  I  regret  not  ta  have  keiit  a  journal,  for  20  years  have 
elapsed.  When  I  v/rote  about  my  guide  the  answer  v/as  :  ' '  Your  Karl 
fell  from  the  Titlis  over  the  precipice."  When  I  Vv^rote — from  Boston — to 
my  dearest  friend.  Professor  Jules  Dubourg,  to  whom  I  had  said  and  written 
everything,  his  son  Rev.  J.  A.  Dubourg  replied  :  "  My  father  died  lately, 
and  we  have  not  found  your  paper."  When  I  wrote  to  one  of  my  pupils, 
his  friends  answered  :  ' '  His  name  is  not  on  the  list  because  he  was  killed  in 
the  colonies."  Another  "  left  the  place  years  ago,  but  I  hope  to  find  his  new 
address."  A  fifth  "is  probably  in  India,  but  I  have  not  yet  an  answer."  I 
begged  of  a  friend  to  say  to  some  Swiss  guides  and  chaletiers  :  "If  you  can 
find  what  Karl  Infanger  said  of  a  tourist  called  Captain,  his  real  naiiie  being 
Bertrand,  who  often  climbed  the  Titlis,  you  may  expect  a  reward."  I 
received  two  letters  only.  One  is  a  ridiculous  account  of  my  resurrection  hij 
magic  at  Engelberg  or  Trdbsee  Alp.  The  other  remembers  only  having 
heard  that  a  ghost  or  devil  had  a  duel  with  a  French  officer  on  the  Titlis, 
but  could  not  tlirow  him  dov^n  as  he  did  tlirow  Karl  Infanger— -mere  trash  of 
people  who  heard  evidently  of  my  accident,  laughed  at  Kail's  sayings,  and 
who  have  now  forgotten  everything,  but  would  like  the  reward.  My  wife 
remembers  well  the  dinner  at  the  Englisher  Hof  and  why  I  gave  it,  but  as 
she  knew  little,  she  answers  vaguely  about  the  details,  even  about  Lungern 
and  her  travelling  companions,  whom  she  tliinks  were  Russi;ins  and  English. 
Miss  Hope  writes  that  the  fact  made  upon  her  a  deep  im.prcsslon.,  but  as  she 
was  quite  a  young  lady,  the  deepest  impression  was  that  my  young  men  took 
a  long,  long  time  to  come  from  the  Titlis  to  Lucerne. 

My  children  heard — never  from  me — for  twenty  years,  and  from  different 
sides  of  my  adventure,  but  cannot  now  give  me  names. 

Tliere  I  am,  but  I  still  persist  in  thinking  that  I  will  find  some  missing 
links  allowing  me  to  complete  my  story.    All  the  friends  I  have  questioned 

200 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

remember /acfo,  grosso  modo,  only  because  I  refused  to  speak  ;  some  disagree 
with  me  on  names  and  dates,  and  they  puzzled  my  poor  memory  for  the 
present.  L.  J.  B. 

It  is  pretty  certain,  I  repeat,  that  this  narrative,  written  so  long 
sifter  the  event,  must  contain  errors  of  detail.  But  if  ^ye  accept  the 
writer's  good  faith — which  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt — it  is  probable 
that  there  must  have  been  an  amount  of  knowledge  supernormally 
acquired  before  actual  death  which,  if  reproduced  in  some  post- 
mortem communication,  would  have  seemed  to  prove  a  continued  power 
of  terrene  observation, — although  in  fact  that  power,  for  aught  we  can 
tell,  might  have  abrujatly  ceased  so  soon  as  the  "  thread  "  was  iinally 
S3vered. 

Here,  then,  is  one  possible  source  of  mistaken  ascription  of  post- 
mortem knowledge  to  the  dead.  Nor  is  the  decedent's  own  clair- 
voyance in  extremis  the  only  clairvoyance  which  may  thus  mis- 
interpreted. There  may  be  telepathic  clairvoyance  on  the  percipient's 
part.  Various  cases  quoted  or  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  {Pro- 
ceedings, Vols.  VI.  and  VII.),  or  published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living 
(see  Clairvoyance  in  Index),  indicate  that  the  shock  of  the  message 
from  the  dying  friend  may  in  some  way  enable  the  percipient  to 
discern,  not  only  his  personality,  but  his  actual  suri'oundings  at  the 
moment.^ 

Let  us  pass  a  little  beyond  the  dying  scene,  and  come  to  cases 
where  the  decedent  shows  a  knowledge  of  his  own  appearance  or 
dress  in  the  colRn.  A  striking  case  of  this  kind  was  given  in 
Vol.  VI.,  p.  17,  and  Dr.  Hodgson  has  since  interviewed  the  informant, 
with  the  result  of  an  increased  confidence  in  his  accuracy.^  Dr. 
Hodgson  has  since  sent  us  two  cases  where  a  similar  knowledge  on  the 
decedent's  part  appears  to  be  shown. 

G.  208. 

The  Herald,  Dubuque,  Iowa, 

February  11th,  1891. 

A  most  remarkable  incident  has  just  come  to  light,  and  while  it  cannot  be 
said  that  the  truth  of  Spii'itualism  is  thereby  demonstrated,  it  furnishes  a 
deeply  interesting  topic  for  tliose  who  make  a  study  of  the  human  mind  and 
would  vainly  attempt  to  exjalain  some  of  the  strange  impressions  made  upon  it. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  February  2nd,  Michael  Conley,  a  farmer 
living  near  Ionia,  Chickasaw  County,  was  found  dead  in  an  outhouse  at  the 
Jefferson  house.  He  was  carried  to  Coroner  Hoffmann's  morgue,  where,  after 
the  inquest,  his  body  was  prepared  for  shipment  to  his  late  liome.    Tlie  old 

1  See  ill  thi.s  connection  Mrs.  Farnane's  dream  (S.  P.  R.  Journal,  July,  1801,  p.  105), 
where  a  mother  sees  her  son  lying  dead,  under  circumstances  fairly  correspond inj^ 
with  those  which  had  accompanied  his  death,  unkncnvn  to  her,  a  few  days  previously. 

2  See  also  Procccdinffs,  "Vol.  III.,  95,  sqq. 

On.  I ndlcatlons  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledtje,  t&c.  201 

clothes  wliich  liu  wore  wore  covered  with  filth  from  the  place  whore  he  was 
found  and  tliey  were  thrown  outside  tlie  morgue  on  tlie  ground. 

Hiw  son  came  from  Ionia  and  took  the  corpse  home.  When  he  reached 
there  and  one  of  tlie  daughteivs  was  told  that  lier  father  was  dead,  sJie  fell 
into  a  swoon,  in  wliich  she  renrained  for  several  hour.s.  When  at  last  she  was* 
brought  from  the  swoon,  she  said,  "  Where  are  father's  old  clothes  ?  He  has 
just  appeared  to  me  dressed  in  a  white  shirt,  black  clothes,  and  felt  [mis- 
reported  for  Mitlii]  slijjpers,  and  told  me  that  after  leaving  home  he  sewed  a 
large  roll  of  bills  inside  his  grey  shiit  with  a  piece  of  my  red  dress  and  tlie 
money  is  still  there."  In  a  short  time  she  fell  into  another  swoon  and  when 
out  of  it  demanded  that  somebody  go  to  Dubuque  and  get  the  clothes.  She 
"was  deathly  sick,  and  is  so  yet. 

The  entire  family  considered  it  only  a  hallucination,  but  the  physician 
advised  thou  to  get  the  clothes,  as  it  might  set  her  mind  at  rest.  The  son 
telephoned  Coroner  Hoffmann  asking  if  the  clothes  were  still  in  his  possession. 
He  looked  and  found  them  in  the  backyard,  although  he  had  supposed  they 
vv'ere  thrown  in  the  vault  as  he  had  intended.  He  answered  that  he  still  had 
them,  and  on  being  told  that  the  son  would  come  to  get  them,  they  were 
wrapped  in  a  bundle. 

The  young  man  arrived  last  Monday  afternoon  and  told  Coroner  Hoffmaini 
v.-hat  his  sister  had  said.  Mr.  Hotrmann  admitted  that  the  lady  had  described 
the  identical  burial  garb  in  which  her  father  was  clad,  even  to  the  slippei's. 
although  she  never  saw  him  after  death,  and  none  of  the  family  had  seen 
more  than  his  face  through  the  coffin  lid.  Curiosity  being  fully  aroused,  they 
took  the  grey  shirt  from  the  bundle  and  within  the  bosom  found  a  large  roll 
of  bills  sewed  with  a  piece  of  red  cloth.  The  young  man  said  his  sister  had 
a  red  dress  exactly  like  it.  The  stitches  were  large  and  irregular,  and  looked 
to  be  those  of  a  man.  The  sou  v.-rajjped  up  the  garments  and  took  them 
home  with  him  yesterday  morning,  filled  with  wonder  at  the  supernatui'al 
revelation  made  t(  >  his  sister,  wlio  is  at  present  lingering  between  life  and  deatli. 

The  Herald,  Ham  and  Carver,  Projirietors,  Dubuque, 

Iowa,  ilfrti-c/t  2nd,  1891. 

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Deak  Sir, — Replying  to  inipiiry  of  Febi'uary  25th,  would  say  that  the 
facts  in  case  you  mention  are  as  stated  in  an  article  published  in  the  Herald 
of  February  11th,  a  copy  of  v.hich  is  enclosed.  The  facts  were  given  our 
re^jorter,  Mr.  H.  L.  Sill,  who  wrt)te  the  article,  by  Mr.  Mat  Hoff'mann^ 
coroner  for  Dubuque  County.  We  do  not  know  the  name  of  the  young  lady's- 
physician,  but  you  could  probably  learn  it  by  addressing  J.  A.  Wood,  Ionia, 
Iowa. —Yours  truly, 

Ham  and  Cakver. 

The  Hemld,  Established  183;'i,  Ham  and  Carver,  Proprietors, 

Dubuque,  Iowa,  March  11th,  1891. 

R.  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — I  am  in  receipt  of  your  favour  of  the  6th  inst.,  and  in  answer 
will  state  as  follows  : — 

Michael  Conley  came  to  Dubuque  from  Ionia,  Chickasaw  County,  I(.)wa, 

P 

202 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

on  some  sort  of  business.  He  was  found  dead  in  the  outhouse  at  the 
Jefferson  House,  on  Monday,  February  2nd.  Coroner  Hoffmann,  who  is  an 
undertaker,  took  charge  of  the  remains.  The  clothes  were  covered  with  filth 
and  thrown  outside  the  morgue.  Word  was  sent  the  family,  and  in  a  day  or 
two  the  son  of  deceased  came  and  took  the  remains  home.  The  following 
Monday,  February  9fch,  the  son  returned,  as  stated  in  my  article  of  February 
11th.  I  happened  in  the  coroner's  office  while  the  son  was  still  there,  with 
the  clothes  wrapped  in  a  bundle  to  take  home  with  him.  It  was  a  few  minutes 
after  the  money  was  found.  The  story  as  published  is  as  told  me  by  the  son 
and  the  coroner,  and,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  tlie  published  account  is  not 
exaggerated  in  the  least. 

The  coroner's  address  is,  "M.  M.  Hoffmann,  Coroner,  Fifteenth  and  Clay 
streets,  Dubuque,  Iowa." 

I  cannot  tell  you  the  name  of  Miss  Conley's  physician.  Ionia  is  in 
Chickasaw  County,  Iowa,  and  over  100  miles  from  Dubuque.  You  could 
ascertain  by  writing  the  postmaster  there. 

I  will  gladly  do  all  in  my  power  to  aid  your  investigation. 

H.  L.  Sill. 

M.  M.  Hoffmann, l^ndertaker  and  Embalmer,  Dubuqvie,  Iowa,  March  18th, 
1891,  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows  ; — 

In  regard  to  the  statement  in  the  Dubuque  Herald,  about  February  19th, 
•about  the  Conley  matter  is  more  tlian  true  by  my  investigation.  I  laughed, 
and  did  not  believe  in  the  matter  when  I  first  heard  of  it,  until  I  satisfied 
myself  by  investigating  and  seeing  what  I  did. 

M.  M.  HoFFJiANN,  County  Coroner. 

Ionia,  July  20f/i,  1891. 

Rev.  J.  M.  Ferris,  Earlville,  la. 

Dear  Sik, — Will  fulfil  my  promise  as  near  as  possible. 

Elizabeth  Conley,  the  subject  of  so  much  comment  in  the  various  papers, 
was  born  in  Chickasaw  township,  Chickasaw  County,  Iowa,  in  Marcli,  1863. 
Her  mother  died  tlie  same  year.  Is  of  Irish  parentage  ;  l)r()uglit  up,  and  is, 
a  Roman  Catholic  ;  has  been  keeping  house  for  her  father  for  ten  years. 

On  the  1st  day  of  February,  1891,  her  fatlier  went  to  Dubuque,  Iowa, 
for  medical  treatment,  and  died  on  the  3rd  of  the  same  montli  very  sud- 
denly. His  son  was  notified  by  telegraph  the  same  day,  and  he  and  I 
started  the  next  morning  after  the  remains,  which  we  found  in  cliarge  of 
Coroner  Hoffmann. 

He  had  9  dollars  75  cents,  which  he  Iiad  taken  from  his  pocket-book.  I 
think  it  was  about  two  days  after  our  return  she  had  the  dream,  or  vision. 
She  claimed  her  father  had  appeared  to  her,  and  told  her  there  was  a  sum  of 
money  in  an  inside  pocket  of  his  under-shirt.  Her  brother  started  for 
Dubuque  a  few  days  afterwards,  and  found  the  clothes  as  we  had  left  them, 
and  in  the  pocket  referred  to  found  30  dollars  in  currency.  Tliese  are  the 
facts  of  the  matter  as  near  as  I  can  give  tliem. 

GEOiifiE  Brown. 

Mr.  George  Brown  is  an  intelligent  and  reliable  farmer,  residing  about 
one  mile  from  the  Conleys. 

A.  Crum. 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  d-c.  203 

Ionia,  la.,  J«Z;/ 24^7),  1891.  • 

Rev.  J.  M.  Ferris,  Earlville,  la. 

Dear  Brother,  — You  asked  me  to  write  you  out  a  statement  of  facts 
regarding  the  Conley  girl,  who  has  caused  so  much  newspaper  comment  con- 
cerning an  alleged  vision  of  hers.  She  is  of  Irish  parentage  ;  socially, 
rather  above  the  average  as  to  respectability  ;  of  the  Roman  Catholic  faith, 
yet  commonly  regarded  as  quite  free  from  a  superstitious  tendency  ;  and 
intellectually,  rather  above  the  average,  though  possessed  of  a  limited 
education.  The  community  is  divided  as  to  the  merits  of  the  case.  Many 
of  the  most  intelligent  citizens,  and  those  most  intimately  acquainted  with 
all  the  circumstances,  are  pronounced  in  their  unbelief  in  anything  ' '  super- 
natural"  connected  witli  the  dream  Miss  Conley  had.  No  one  doubts  her 
sincerity.  At  times  she  is  regarded  as  partially  deranged  in  mind  since  her 
father's  death. 

Personally,  I  am  inclined  to  join  with  the  sceptical  as  to  any  supernatural 
vision  appearing  to  Miss  Conley  ;  but  am  free  to  admit  that  I  am  unable  to 
account  for  some  features  of  the  case,  admitting  as  I  must  the  veracity  and 
sincerity  of  the  young  lady  and  her  brotlier. 

If  I  have  omitted  any  jDoint  concerning  which  you  would  like  to  inquire, 
let  me  know,  and  I  will  try  to  answer  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 

L.  A.  Green,  Past.  M.  E.  Ch.,  Ionia,  la. 

Dubuque,  Iowa,  J  Line  23nl,  1891. 

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — 

I  have  not  been  able  to  visit  Ionia,  Chickasaw  County,  la.,  to  investigate 
the  case  of  the  daughter  of  Michael  Conley  ;  but  from  Mr.  Hoffmann's 
assistant  wlio  did  all  the  work  on  Mr.  Couley's  body,  finding  the  clothes, 
recovering  tlie  money,  &c.,  &c.,  I  learn  that  tlie  case  has  been  correctly 
stated  in  the  enclosed  clipping.  I  can  learn  nothing  of  Miss  Conley,  but 
should  I  be  able  to  go  to  her  neighbourhood  I  shall  make  all  inquiries  and 
faithfully  report  the  findings. — Very  truly,  &c., 

A:vios  Crum,  Past.  Univ.  Cli. 

Dubuque,  Iowa,  Au(j\ist  Wtli,  1891. 
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — I  send  you  in  another  cover  a  detailed  account  of 
interview  with  the  Conleys. 
I  could  not  get  the  doctor. 

I  have  had  a  long  talk  with  Mr.  Hoffmann  about  the  Conley  inc  dent,  and 
think  you  have  all  the  facts — and  they  are /acis. 

The  girl  Lizzie  Conley  swooned.  She  saw  her  dead  father  ;  she  heard  from 
him  of  the  money  left  in  his  old  shirt ;  she  returned  to  bodily  consciousness ; 
she  described  her  father's  burial  dress,  robe,  shirt,  and  slippers,  exactly, 
though  she  had  never  seen  them.  She  described  the  pocket  in  the  shirt  that 
had  been  left  for  days  in  the  shed  at  the  undertaker's.  It  was  a  ragged- 
edged  piece  of  red  cloth  clumsily  sewn,  and  in  this  pocket  was  found  a  roll  of 
bills — 35  dollars  in  amount  — as  taken  out  by  Mr.  Hoffmann  in  presence  of 
Pat  Conley,  son  of  the  deceased,  and  brother  of  the  Lizzie  Conley  whose 
remarkable  dream  or  vision  is  tlie  subject  of  inquiry. 

Amos  Crum,  Past.  Univ.  Ch. 

204< 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Richard  Hodgson. 

My  Dear  Sir, — Complying  wifcli  your  request  under  date  of  July  7th, 
1891,  I  have  made  incjuiries  of  the  Conley  family  residing  in  Ionia,  Cndckasavf 
County,  la.,  and  herewitli  traiiscrilje  my  ijuestions  addressed  to  Miss  Elizabeth 
Conley  and  her  replies  to  the  same  concerning  her  alleged  dream  or  vision  in 
which  slie  saw  and  received  information  from  her  father,  then  lately 
deceased. 

On  July  17th,  ahout  noon,  I  called  at  the  Conley  home  near  Ionia, 
Chickasaw  County,  Iowa,  and  inquired  for  Elizabeth  Conley.  She  was  present 
and  engaged  in  her  domestic  labours.  When  I  stated  the  object  of  my  call, 
she  seemed  ijuite  reluctant  for  a  monient  to  engage  in  conversation.  T!ien 
she  directed  a  lad  who  was  present  to  leave  the  room.  vShe  said  she  would 
converse  with  me  upon  the  matter  pertaining  to  hei'  fatlier. 

Q.  :  What  is  your  ago  ?    A.  :  Twenty-eight. 

Q.  :  What  is  the  state  of  your  health  ?  A.  :  Not  good  since  my  fathei''s 
death. 

Q.  :  What  was  the  state  of  your  lie:ilth  previous  to  his  deatli  ?  A.  :  It 
was  good.    I  was  a  healthy  girl. 

Q.  :  Did  you  have  dreams,  visions,  or  swoons  previous  to  your  father's 
death  1    A.  :  Why,  I  had  dreams.    Everybody  has  dreams. 

Q.  :  Have  you  ever  made  discoveries  or  received  other  information  during 
your  dreams  or  visions  previous  to  your  father's  deatli  ?    A.  :  No. 

Q.  :  Had  there  been  anything  unusual  in  your  dreams  or  visions  previous 
to  your  father's  death  ?    A.  :  No,  not  that  I  know  of. 

Q.  :  Was  your  father  in  tlie  haljit  of  carrying  consideral)le  sums  of  money 
about  his  person  ?    A.  :  Not  tiiat  I  kne\v  of. 

Q.  :  Did  you  know  before  /i/.s  deatli  of  the  pocket  in  tlie  breast  of  the 
shirt  worn  by  him  to  Dubuque  ?    A.  :  N.i. 

Q.  :  Did  you  wash  or  prepare  tliat  shirt  for  him  to  wear  on  his  trip  to 
Dubuciue  A.  :  No.  It  was  a  heavy  woollen  undershirt,  and  the  pocket  was 
stitched  inside  of  the  breast  of  it. 

Q.  :  Will  you  recite  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  recovery  of 
raoney  from  clothing  worn  by  your  fatlier  at  the  time  oi  his  death  ?  A. 
(after  some  hesitation)  :  When  they  told  me  that  father  was  dead  I  felt  very 
sick  and  bad  ;  I  did  not  know  anything.  Then  father  came  to  me.  He  had 
on  a  white  shirt  and  black  clothes  and  slippers.  When  I  came  to,  I  told  Pat 
[her  brother]  I  had  seen  father.  I  asked  him  (Pat)  if  he  had  brought  l)ack 
father's  old  clothes.  He  said  "No,"  and  asked  me  why  I  wanted  them.  I 
told  him  father  said  to  me  he  had  sewed  a  roll  of  bills  inside  of  his  grey 
shirt,  in  a  pocket  made  of  a  piece  of  my  old  red  dress.  I  went  to  sleep, 
and  father  came  to  me  again.  When  I  a'lvoke,  I  told  Pat  he  must  go  and  get 
the  clothes. 

Q.  :  While  in  these  swoons  did  you  hear  tlie  ordinary  conversations  or 
noises  in  the  house  about  you  ?    A.  :  No. 

Q.  :  Did  you  see  your  father's  body  after  it  was  placed  in  its  coffin  ? 
A.  :  No  ;  I  did  not  see  him  after  he  left  the  house  to  go  to  Dubuque. 

Q.  :  Have  you  an  education  ?    A.  :  No. 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  tCr.  205 

Q.  :  Can  you  reiul  and  viTite  ?  A.  :  Oh  yes,  I  can  read  and  write  ;  hut 
I've  not  been,  to  school  much. 

Q.  :  Are  you  willing  to  write  out  wliat  you  have  ti_)ld  me  of  this  strange 
affair  (    A.  :  Why  I've  told  you  all  I  know  about  it. 

She  was  averse  to  writing  or  to  signing  a  written  statement.  Duiing  the 
conversation  she  was  quite  emotional,  and  manifested  much  effort  to  .suppress 
lier  feelings.  She  is  of  little  more  than  medium  size,  of  Irish  parentage,  of 
Catholic  faith,  and  shows  by  her  conversation  that  her  education  is  limited. 

Her  brother,  Pat  Conley,  corroborates  all  tliat  she  has  recited.  He  is  a 
.sincere  and  substantial  man,  and  has  no  theory  upon  wliicli  to  account  for 
the  strange  facts  that  have  come  to  his  knowledge.  In  his  presence.  Coroner 
Hoffmann,  in  Dubuque,  fovnid  the  shirt  with  its  pocket  of  red  cloth  stitched 
on  the  inside  with  long,  straggling,  and  awkward  stitches,  just  as  a  dim- 
sighted  old  man  or  an  awkward  boy  might  sew  it  tliere.  The  pocket  was 
about  7  [seven]  inches  deep,  and  in  the  pocket  of  that  dirty  old  shirt  that 
had  lain  in  Hoffmann's  back  room  was  a  roll  of  bills  amounting  to  35  dollars. 
When  the  shirt  was  found  with  the  pocket,  as  described  by  his  sister  after 
her  swoon — and  the  money  as  told  her  by  tlie  old  man  after  liis  death,  Pat 
Conley  seemed  dazed  and  overcome  by  the  mystery.  Hoffmann  says  tlie  girl, 
after  her  swoon,  described  exactly  the  burial  suit,  shirt,  coat  or  robe,  and 
satin  slippers,  in  vidiich  the  body  vi'as  ^n-epared  for  burial.  She  even  described 
minutely  the  slippers,  which  were  of  a  new  pattern  tliat  had  not  been  in  the 
market  here,  and  which  the  girl  could  never  have  seen  a  sample  of  ;  and  she 
had  not  seen,  and  never  saw,  the  body  of  her  fatlier  after  it  was  placed  in  the 
coffin,  and  if  slie  had  seen  it  she  could  not  have  seen  his  feet  "  in  the  nice 
black  satin  slippers  "  v>'hich  she  described. 

You  m-iy  write  this  Conley  incident  down  as  a  simple,  honest  thing.  It 
is  unquestionably  genuine. 

I  send  you  two  letters  from  citizens  of  Ionia,  who  are  certified  to  me  by 
the  Rev.  J.  M.  Ferris,  concerning  tlie  Conleys.  Mr.  Ferris  allows  me  to 
send  the  letters  as  received.  They  were  obtained  at  my  request  from  old 
friends  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Ferris.  I  have  done  all  I  could  to  get  the  bottom 
facts. —Cordially  yours, 

Alios  Cruh,  Pastor  Univ.  Cliurcli. 

Dubuque,  Li. 

If  we  may  accept  the  details  of  this  ]iarrative,  which  seems  to  have 
baeu  carefully  and  promptly  investigated,  we  find  that  the  phantasm 
communicates  two  sets  of  facts  ;  one  of  them  known  only  to  sti'angers 
(the  dress  in  which  he  was  ljuried),  and  one  of  them  known  only  to 
himself  (the  existence  of  the  inside  pocket  and  the  money  therein). 
In  discussing  from  what  mind  these  images  originate  it  is  of  course 
important  to  note  wdiether  any  living  minds,  known  or  unknown  to 
the  percipient,  were  aware  of  the  facts  thus  conveyed. 

The  second  instance  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  a  series  of  experiences, 
which,  for  convenience'  sake,  may  here  he  gi^-en  entire.  The  coinci- 
dences irivolved  are  not  all  of  them  equally  striking  ;  but  their  frequent 
repetition  with  the  same  percipient  is  a  fact  of  interest. 

206 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Dr.  Hodgson  has  interviewed  Mr.  Quint,  and  considers  him  a  trustworthy- 
witness.    He  has  never  asked  money  for  the  exercise  of  his  fiowers. 

G.  209. 

Febniarn  mil,  1891. 
My  wife's  brother  died  a  year  ago  hist  fall.    I  couhl  not  go  to  tlie  funeral 
myself  owing  to  pressure  of  business,  but  all  of  my  family  went. 

About  two  months  later  I  was  sitting  alone  with  my  wife  at  supper  when 
I  felt  an  extraordinary  heat  d(jwn  the  spinal  cord,  preceded  by  a  shock 
reseml)ling  an  electric  shock.  It  made  me  start.  My  wife  asked  the  reason. 
I  told  her  that  I  saw  Frank  {i.e.,  her  brother)  with  his  n^other  (who  had  died 
about  eight  years  previously)  standing  Ijehind  me.  I  explained  that  he  was 
dressed  as  I  had  never  seen  him — the  shirt  being  very  deep  and  wide  oi)eii. 
My  wife  then  told  me  that  he  had  been  laid  out  in  precisely  that  way.  I  had 
not  heard  any  details  of  his  laying  out. 

(Signed)  Wilson  Quint. 

The  above  is  correct. 
(Confirmation  of  wife)    J.  W.  Quint. 

A  year  ago  I  went  to  Maiden  to  pay  a  ljusiness  visit  in  the  evening  to  a 
gentleman  there,  Mr.  M.  I  had  been  on  two  previous  occasions  to  the  house 
and  stayed  but  a  moment  or  two,  as  my  visits  were  of  a  very  brief  business 
nature.  On  the  first  visit  I  had  seen  Mr.  M.  and  his  wife,  and  I  have  a  faint 
recollection  of  seeing  some  children  at  the  house. 

On  the  second  visit  I  saw  Mr.  M.  for  a  moment  at  the  door. 

On  this  last  occasion,  as  I  entered  the  house  I  fdt  my  head  enveloped  in 
a  cloud,  as  it  were,  though  I  did  not  .st'c  anything.  I  sat  down  with  Mr.  M. 
His  wife  came  into  the  room,  and,  as  she  shook  hands,  she  said,  "We  have 
met  with  a  great  trial.  Yesterday  we  liuried  our  little  girl.  She  was  run 
over  and  killed  almost  immediately.  She  breathed  but  once  after  entering 
tlie  house."  Almost  as  soon  as  she  had  finished  speaking,  I  saw  tlie  figure  of 
a  little  girl  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  Mr.  M.  I  did  not  mention  this  at 
once,  but  first  said  a  few  words  of  comfort,  and  then  stated  that  with  tlieir 
permission  I  would  tell  them  what  I  saw.  They  desired  me  to  tell  them,  and 
I  described  the  figure.  "She  was  dressed  in  light  clothing,  not  what  you 
would  call  Cfdico,  I  think,  but  probably  you  would  call  it  muslin.  She  is 
round-favoured,  blue  eyes,  light  hair.  A  peculiarity  of  her  dress  is  what  we 
used  to  call  a  tire  tied  loosely  roxuid  the  neck  and  loosely  round  the  waist  at 
the  back." 

I  then  rose  to  go.  Mrs.  M.  sprang  from  her  seat  and  caught  me  by  the 
hand,  saying,  "  Mr.  Quint,  the  description  of  our  little  one  is  perfect."  Mr. 
M.  alsf)  said  that  the  descrijjtion  was  perfect. 

(Signed)    Wilson  Quint. 
[Mrs.  M.  writes  that  they  wish  to  l)e  excused  from  giving  their  testi- 
mony.— R.H.] 

In  a  savings  bank  where  I  am  employed,  a  lady,  of  apparently  about  fifty 
years  of  age,  was  waiting  to  be  attended  to,  and  slie  spoke  to  me  with  regard 
to  business  matters,  saying  that  she  found  it  ditticult  tf)  manage  her  husljand's 
affairs.     I  said,  Did  your  head  come  to  about  your  husband's  shoulder 
Yes. 

Oil  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  207 

Did  your  husband  wear  a  long  frock  coat  buttoned  up  ?  Yes. 
Did  he  wear  a  silk  hat  ?    Yes.    But  why  do  you  ask  these  questions  ? 
I  ex2:)lained  to  her  tliat  I  saw  a  figure  standing  a  few  paces  behind  her  as; 
I  described  it. 

I  do  not  know  who  the  lady  was,  and  have  never  seen  her  before  or  since. 

(Signed)  Wilson  Quint. 

About  a  year  ago,  when  treating  a  rheumatic  patient  by  massage  treat- 
ment and  passes,  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  young  man  standing  at  her  right 
liand  holding  a  hat  in  his  hand.  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  and 
she  said  that  a  son  of  hers  had  died  about  a  year  before,  and  that  it  might 
j)ossibly  be  he.  Nothing  further  special  was  said  at  that  time,  but  the  scene 
recurred  to  me  in  reflection,  and  I  wondered  why  the  figure  should  be  hold- 
ing a  hat,  so  peculiar  as  it  seemed  to  be.  On  my  next  visit  two  weeks  later,  I 
questioned  the  lady  about  tlie  hat  and  described  it  in  detail.  It  was  a  form 
of  Derbj',  but  the  top  was  square  like  a  silk  hat.  She  was  much  surprised, 
and  told  me  tliat  that  was  tlie  identical  shape  of  hat  that  her  son  had  always 
persisted  in  wearing. 

[The  above  is  perfectly  correct  in  every  respect.  To  me  it  is  wonderful.  I 
am  the  mother  of  the  young  man. 

(Signed)  Mrs.  Maria  E.  Fisher.] 

I  have  had  experiences  of  tliis  kind  occasionally  for  about  three  years, 
perhajjs  eighteen  or  twenty  of  them.  The  forms  are  just  as  vivid  and  real  in 
every  way,  so  far  as  vision  goes,  as  liviiig  men  and  women.  They  disappear 
by  gradually  fading  away — vanishing  like  a  cloud.  I  have  never  touched  any 
of  the  forms. 

About  two  and  a  half  years  ago,  I  called  upon  a  friend  one  Sunday  morn- 
ing, and  while  conversing  with  him,  just  after  he  had  made  some  reference  to 
his  daughter,  I  saw  three  figures  in  the  corner  of  the  room  in  the  direction  of 
his  riglit      I  descriV)ed  them  to  him  as  follows  :  — 

"  I  see  a  young  lady  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  an  elderly  lady  with  her 
with  a  cap  on,  and  another  lady  a  little  in  tlie  rear  of  them  and  between  them, 
apparently  abovit  thirty-five  years  of  age."  He  recognised  them  as  his  wife, 
his  mother,  and  liis  daughter,  and  informed  m.e  that  his  daughter  had  died  at 
the  age  of  eighteen,  and  his  wife  at  the  age  of  thirty-five. 

I  had  never  seen  these  persons  living,  so  far  as  I  know,  but  I  believe  I 
had  heard  that  these  two  members  of  his  family  had  died. 

Wilson  Quint. 

Everett,  April  13th,  1891. 
I  remember  perfectly  well  the  circumstances  as  related  above. 

G.  H.  Burr. 

March  21s/,  1891. 
About  six  or  seven  months  ago  I  was  talking  witli  a  friend  of  mine,  Mr. 
Dill,  when  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  somewhat  past  middle  age  half  reclining 
behind  him,  as  though  leaning  to  the  right  on  one  side  of  a  chair,  though  I 
did  not  see  any  chair.  I  described  the  figure  to  Mr.  Dill  at  his  request  as 
follows  :  "  Light  complexion,  blue  eyes,  round-favoured,  with  broad  fore- 

208     .  Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Mijers. 

hoad  and  not  iv  superfluous  quantity  of  hair  on  the  front  of  his  head.  The 
peculiarity  of  his  dress  was  a  buff  waistcoat,  with  noticeable  watchchaiu  and 
fob  hanging  down  by  the  buttons." 

Mr.  Dill  recognised  upon  tlie  instant  a  man  whom  he  had  known,  an  old 
friend,  down  at  Cape  Cod,  Avho  had  been  gone  a  number  of  years.  I  knew 
nothing  whatever  about  any  such  person. 

Wilson  Quint. 

Everett,  April  2iuJ,  1891. 
The  above  statement  is  true  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  recognise  one  from  a 
description  of  his  person.  Tiie  person  described  Avas  Cajstain  J.  J.  Jacobs,  of 
Wenfleet,  Mass.  N.  S.  C.  Dill. 

I  may  here  mention  a  dream-case  recorded  in  FIumtnsDis  of  tlfi 
Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  365,  with  regard  to  wliich  we  have  since  learnt  an 
interesting  detail.  The  case  is  briefly  as  follows  :  About  March,  1857, 
Mrs.  Menneer  in  England  dreamt  that  she  saw  her  l^rother,  whose 
whereabouts  she  did  not  know,  standing  headless  at  the  foot  fif  the 
bed,  with  his  head  lying  on  a  coffin  by  his  side.  The  dream  was  at 
once  mentioned.  It  afterwards  apjaeared  that  at  about  that  time  the 
head  of  the  brother  seen,  Mr.  "Wellington,  was  actually  cut  off  by 
Chinese  at  Sarawak.  On  this  case  Mr.  Gurney  remarks  :  "  This  dream, 
if  it  is  to  be  telepatliically  explained,  must  apparently  have  been  due 
to  the  last  flash  of  tliought  in  the  l)i-other's  consciousness.  It  may 
seem  strange  that  a  definite  picture  of  liis  uu)de  of  death  should  present 
itself  to  a  man  in  the  instant  of  receiving  an  unexpected  and  fatal 
blow  ;  but,  as  Hobbes  said,  'Thought  is  quick.'  The  coffin,  at  any  rate, 
may  be  taken  as  an  item  of  death-image  ly  supplied  by  the  dreamer's 
mind." 

We  have  now,  howe\er,  seen  a  letter  from  Sir  James  Brooke 
(Rajah  of  Sarawak)  and  an  extract  from  the  Straits  Times  of  March 
21st,  1857,  in  the  (London)  Times  for  April  29th,  1857,  which  make  it, 
I  think,  quite  conceivable  that  the  dream  was  a  reflection  of  kiutw- 
ledge  acquired  by  Mr.  Wellington  after  death,  and  that  the  liead  on 
the  coffin  had  a  distinct  meaning.  Sir  James  Brooke  says :  "  Poor 
Wellington's  remains  were  consumed  [l)y  the  Chinese]  ;  his  head,  l)orne 
off  in  triumph,  alone  attesting  liis  previous  murder."  The  Straits 
Times  says:  "The  head  was  given  up  on  the  following  day."  The 
head,  therefore,  and  the  head  alone,  must  undouljtedly  have  been 
buried  by  Mr.  Wellington's  friends  ;  and  its  appearance  in  the  dream 
on  a  coffin,  with  the  headless  body  standing  beside  it,  is  a  coincidence 
even  more  significant  than  the  facts  which  Mr.  Gurney  had  l)efore  him 
when  he  wrote. 

Somewhat  similar  is  a  case  of  viaking  apparition  sent  by  I))',  and 
Mrs.  Entwistle  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  where  tlie  j^hantom  of  a  man  wlio 
dies  of  a  sudden  wound, — certainly  of  a  more  ordinary  type  than  Mr. 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  <t-r.  209 

Wellington's  decapitation  ! — is  seen  with  the  wound,  while  the  l)ody  is 
lying  in  the  morgue. 

G.  223. 

Englewood,  Mmj  Idth,  1891. 

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Your  invitation,  as  indicated  by  yours  of  May  14th,  at 
hand,  and  reminds  me  of  a  recent  experience  of  my  husband.  It  occuired 
the  latter  part  of  February,'  1891.  I  will  call  my  husband  Doctor,  as  he  is 
a  physician.  The  others  I  will  give  true  initials  ;  L'ut  as  they  might  object, 
will  not  give  full  names.  One  mor-ning,  about  nine  o'clock,  the  latter  ])arfc 
of  February,  the  Doctor  was  walking  rajjidly  along  Hixty-third-street  for  the 
station  to  catch  a  trahi  Ijouud  for  tlie  city,  Ciiicag;),  some  seven  miles 
distant.  He  crossed  over  from  the  south  side  to  the  north  side  of  fl;e 
street,  and  looking  ujj  ahead  of  him  saw  Mr.  M.  coming- -a  man  wIkj  was 
a  drinking  profligate,  and  who  boarded  in  the  city,  and  a  carouser  v.ho 
turned  night  into  day,  but  one  whom  the  doct(jr  had  known  f<n-  twenty 
years,  and  had  seen,  perhaps,  every  few  weeks,  as  he  might  meet  him  in  the 
Grand  Pacific  Hotel  in  the  city.  So  his  first  thought  in  seeing  him  was, 
"You  must  have  had  an  early  start."  He  noted  in  his  mind  his  clothes,  his 
overcoat,  his  hat,  and  that  he  looked  begrimed  and  cold.  He  kept  looking 
at  him,  and  Mr.  M.  looked  directly  at  the  Doctor  v.  ith  such  a  woe-begone, 
God-forsaken  expression.  The  Doctor  noticed  he  was  bruised,  and  had  a 
certain  shaped  cut  vmder  one  eye,  and  he  thought,  "Well,  you  must  have 
been  on  a  regular  tear."  Not  caring  to  be  stopped,  he  passed  him  without 
speaking  ;  and  Mr.  M.  turned  his  head,  and  kept  watching  him  with  that 
same  forlorn  expression,  that  the  Doctor  felt  in  his  lieart  he  ought  to  have 
spoken,  and  hesitated,  thinking  to  go  after  him,  but  did  not,  as  he  (Mr.  M.) 
crossed  the  street,  and  went  down  Yale,  and  was  lost  to  view,  though  he 
looked  around  at  the  Doctor.  When  the  Doctor  got  on  the  train  he  met 
Mr.  L.,  a  brother-in-law  of  mine,  and  he  told  him  that  he  just  met  Cliarley 
M.,  and  he  should  judge  he  had  been  on  a  terrible  tear,  and  went  on  telling 
him  as  I  have  told,  mentioning  this  cut,  and  telling  under  which  eye  it  was, 
&c.  Mr.  L.  asked  where  he  (Mr.  M.)  went,  and  the  Doctor  said,  "Why,  ho 
went  down  Yale,  and  I  suppose  he  was  going  down  to  see  his  wife."  "  Ob, 
no,"  said  Mr.  L.,  "his  wife  won't  allow  him  round."  (His  wife  had 
obtained  a  divorce  some  years  before.)  So  the  two  arrived  in  the  city,  and 
went  to  tlie  Grand  Pacific,  and  met  Mr.  A.  B.,  who  had  a  Tribune  in  his 
hand,  and  he  said,  "Charley  M.,  I  guess,  is  dead,  for  here  is  a  notice  in  the 
paper  that  seems  it  must  be  him  lying  in  the  morgue  for  identification, 
although  the  name  is  not  quite  right."  Before  he  finished  the  Doctor  spoke 
lip  and  said,  "It  is  not  he,  for  I  just  met  him  in  Englewood."  "les," 
said  Mr.  L.,  "  he  told  me  about  it."  Mr.  A.  B.  said,  "  Why,  my  brother, 
Mr.  W.  B.  (who  was  a  brother-in-law  to  the  dead  man),  has  gone  to  the 
morgue  to  see  if  it  is  Mr.  M.  ;  but,  of  course,  if  j'ou  met  him,  \\hy  it 
can't  be."  So  the  Doctor  took  the  Tribune  and  read  the  notice,  and  said, 
"This  says  Mr.  iV.,  and  says  so-and-so  ;  and  shows  on  the  face  of  it  they 
did  not  know  as  he  was  dressed  so-and-so,  and  had  a  cut  under  such  an  eye. 
Then,  anyway,  I  saw  him  witliin  the  hour  alicc."  After  a  while  Mr.  W.  B. 
came  in,  and  said  it  was  Mr.  M.  sure  enough  ;  that  he  was  going  out  to 

210 

Mr.  F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers. 

Englewood  to  inform  Mrs.  M.,  wliiuli  he  did,  ;uul  the  body  was  cared  for 
and  buried.  As  matters  turned  out  it  seems  tliat  he  liad  some  drunken  brawl 
in  some  low  dive,  and  the  conclusion  was  lie  was  thrown  out,  was  found  by 
the  police  unconscious,  was  taken  to  the  county  hospital,  where  he  died 
within  a  few  hours,  still  unconscious,  was  taken  to  the  morgue  to  await 
i<lentification,  and  the  notice  put  in  the  one  paper,  probably  by  some  night 
reporter.  It  also  came  out  that  the  Doctor's  description  was  exactly  so,  and 
that  the  time  he  met  the  man  his  body  was  lying  in  the  morgue.  Now,  these 
are  the  main  facts.  If  there  are  any  questions  that  the  Doctor  can  answer, 
he  is  willing  to  do  so.  M.  L.  Entwistle. 

J.  G.  W.  Entwistle,  M.D. 

Investigating  a  Death. 

C.  H.  N. ,  a  veteran  pensioner,  became  involved  in  a  quarrel  at  the 
^W'stern  House  on  Clark-street,  near  Van  Buren,  and  was  ejected.  He  was 
found  by  the  jjolice  on  the  sidewalk,  taken  first  to  the  station  and  later  to 
tlie  county  hospital,  where  he  died  last  evening.  The  case  is  being  investi- 
gated.—The  Ohkafjo  Trihnne,  February  10th,  1891. 

M.— Monday,  February  9tli,  at  the  Cook  County  Hospital,  C.  H.  M., 
aged  47  years,  late  member  of  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade  Battery.  Notice 
of  funeral  later.— The  Chicago  Tribune,  February  11th,  1891. 

Dr.  l<]utwistle's  companion  adds  the  foll(_>\ving  corroboration  : — 

"I  think  some  details  in  the  latter  part  of  the  above  narrative  have  not 
been  told  nearly  strongly  enough. 

' '  After  Dr.  Entwistle  and  myself  reached  the  city,  we  went  immediately 
to  the  hotel,  and  meeting  Mr.  A.  B.,  sat  down  and  entered  into  conversation 
with  him  on  general  subjects.  Some  gentleman,  unknown  to  either  of  us, 
stepped  up  and  pointing  out  a  notice  in  the  morning  paper,  asked  A.  B.  if 
he  thought  it  referred  to  C.  M.,  as  the  name  in  print  was  misspelled.  A.  B. 
immediately  expressed  himself  that  it  was  C.  M. ,  and  then  Dr.  E.,  reading 
the  notice,  said  it  could  not  be,  as  he  had  met  M.  at  Englewood  that  morn- 
ing. I  stated  that  it  was  a  fact,  as  the  Doctor  had  told  me,  and  we  had 
talked  of  the  circumstance  on  the  way  to  the  city.  This  seemed  to  convince 
A.  B.  that  it  was  not  M.,  as  he  knew  Dr.  Entwistle  was  well  acquainted 
with  M.,  and  would  not  be  liable  to  be  misled.  At  this  time  W.  B.,  a 
brother-in-law  of  M.'s,  joined  us,  and  the  matter  of  the  notice  brought  to  his 
attention,  he  suggested  that  he  and  the  stranger  (who  we  afterwards 
learned  was  an  army  companion  of  M.  's)  should  visit  the  morgue.  This  they 
did,  although  A.  B.  protested  that  it  was  no  use,  from  the  fact  that  M.  had 
been  seen  that  morning  at  Englewood.  Upon  returning  from  the  morgue, 
W.  B.  told  us  it  was  M.,  and  went  on  to  describe  his  marks  and  clothing, 
which  tallied  in  every  particular  with  the  description  given  me  hy  the 
Doctor  in  the  morning. 

"C.  L.i 

''March  22mJ,  1892." 

I  In  another  case,  which  we  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Lord  lJute,  the  face  of  the 
deceased  was  seen  with  wraps  wliich  apparently  corresponded  to  some  rather 
unusual  swathings  after  death.  Mrs.  Pilkington,  of  Valley  Lodge,  Scarborough, 
tells  us  that  some  years  ago  an  aunt  of  hers  died  in  London.     "About  3  months 

On  Tndications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  dr.  211 

I  have  already  (Vol.  VI.,  ]).  31)  mentioned  the  "curious  type  of 
cases  where  some  manifestation  occurs  just  before  the  news  of  the 
death  is  received  by  the  percipient."  Some  more  narratives  of  this 
kind  have  reached  us  ; — thus  illustrating  what  we  often  find  to  be  the 
case,  that  these  phenomena  do  really  fall  into  natural  groups, — although 
those  groups  are  often  such  as  we  had  no  previous  reason  for  anticipating. 

It  is  evidentially  important  to  observe  that  these  apparitions  occur 
before  and  not  after  the  news  has  Ijeen  actually  communicated.  The 
moment  after  the  communication  may  be  taken  as  that  of  maximum 
shock,  and  if  the  recipient  of  the  news  were  then  to  see  a  phantom  of 
his  friend,  one  might  well  suppose  that  this  was  the  mere  embodiment 
of  his  own  agitated  grief.  But  I  do  not  remember  any  instance  (except 
Conley's,  just  quoted)  where  the  apparition  followed  on  the  receipt  of 
the  news.  And  in  Conley's  case  the  phantom  showed  its  reality,  as 
we  have  seen,  in  other  ways.  Apait  from  that  case  (so  far  as  I  know) 
the  appai'ition  has  alwajs  preceded  the  arrival  of  the  letter  or  messenger 
announcing  the  death. 

What  mind,  then,  is  it  which  knows  that  the  letter  is  coming  ?  We 
have  elsewhere  remarked  that  this  sense  of  an  approaching  letter  seems 
sometimes  to  occur  as  a  form  of  clairvoyance,  where  no  mind  other  than 
the  percipient's  can  be  supposed  to  be  specially  interested  in  the  letter's 
arrival.    On  the  other  hand,  if  spirits  still  in  the  flesh  may  possess 

afterwards  she  appeared  to  me  in  this  way.  I  belield  her  in  my  room  near  the  door. 
I  noticed  that  her  head  was  much  enveloped  and  that  her  mouth  was  covered  over. 
I  wrote  an  account  of  this  to  my  sister  who  was  with  hsr  at  lier  death.''  "My  sister 
did  not  keep  my  letter,  but  she  told  me  that  previous  to  death  my  aunt's  liead  had 
been  much  enveloped  by  shawls,  as  she  complained  so  much  of  the  cold  ;  and  that 
after  death  blood  had  issued  from  the  mouth,  caused  by  her  complaint,  bronchitis, 
so  that  her  mouth  was  covered  over  after  her  deatli."  But  here  the  habitual  mental 
picture  of  a  corpse  as  swathed  about  the  head  seems  to  com*  too  near  to  the 
apparition  actually  seen  to  allow  us  to  ascribe  evidential  force  to  the  coincidence 
in  the  wrappings. 

I  might  add  here  a  reference  to  ISIr.  Romilly's  account  of  the  phantasm  of 
the  murdered  Kimueli,  with  banda;;es  such  as  had  actually  been  placed  on  his 
head  {Procecdimjs,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  55).  But  Mr.  Allardyce  (with  whona  we  were 
unable  previously  to  communicate,  owing  to  ignorance  of  his  address)  has  now 
returned  to  England;  and  we  learn  from  him  that  he  did  not  himself  see  the  figure 
of  Kimueli,  and  that  his  journal  contains  no  record  of  Mr.  Romilly's  having  seen 
Kimueli ;— although  he  knows  that  the  natives  were  on  the  look-out  for  the  ghost. 
Xow  Mr.  Romilly  does  not  precisel3-  say  that  Mr.  Allardyce  saw  the  figure  ;  but 
Mr.  Allardyce's  account  leads  us  to  think  that  Mr.  Romilly 's  experience  may  have 
been  a  mere  subjective  hallucination,  caused  by  expectation,  and  which,  even  if 
shared  by  superstitious  natives,  cannot  count  as  evidential. 

I  may  mention  that  we  have  succeeded  in  tracing  one  of  Mr.  Owen's 
informants  in  the  Children  case  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  54).  This  ladj'  is,  as  Mr.  Owen  said,  of 
good  position  ;  but  she  dislikes  the  topic,  and  partly  (as  she  tells  us)  from  defect  of 
memory,  partly  from  some  private  reason,  she  declines  to  correspond  further  on  tlie 
matter.  We  can  only  regret  t'lat  Mr.  Owen  did  not  obtain  first-hand  signed  state- 
ments at  the  time. 

212 

Mr.  F.  W.  11.  Mtjevs. 

clairvoyant  power  we  cannot  say  that  dif  c  ii'nate  spirits  may  not  possess 
such  power  also  ;  pei-haps  specially  as  to  inatters  relating  to  their  own 
earth-history, — such  as  the  diffusion  of  iiews  of  their  own  demise. 
For  the  present  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  noting  these  cases  as  they 
occur. 

But  before  proceedhig  to  new  cases,  I  may  mention  that  Mr. 
Cameron  Grant's  case  {Pluintasms  of  the  Liciag,  Vol.  II.,  p.  690,  and 
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  31)  has  l)een  further  strengthened,  by 
permission  to  print  the  jJassages  from  Mr.  (Irant's  diary,  and  by  inter- 
views of  my  own  with  the  widow  and  daughter  of  the  decedent.  Lord 
Z.,  (not  the  true  initial,)  who  were  present  at  the  time  of  the  death. 

The  following  is  Mr.  Grant's  statement,  made .  to  me  July  28th, 
1S89 

"  The  first  form  in  which  tliis  impression  canie  to  me  was  tliat  of  deep 
sympathy  for  [a  member  of  Lord  Z.'s  family].  After  this  had  lasted  for 
some  time  I  found  myself  rudely  drawing  a  tall  man  stooping  forwards  on  to 
another  man.  I  had  a  conviction  that  Lord  Z.  was  dead, — that  tlie  falling 
forward  indicated  death.  I  also  dimly  jjerceived  tlie  position  of  windows 
behind  the  falling  figure,  tliougli  I  did  not  draw  these.  I  wrote  to  my  mother 
at  once  to  say  that  I  knew  tliat  Lord  Z.  was  dead.  [Letter  not  preserved.]  I 
was  then  up  the  country  in  Brazil,  ;ind  saw  few  papers.  I  heard  from 
England  that  Lord  Z.  was  dead  ;  but  (as  I  told  Mr.  Gurney)  did  not  look  for 
<late  in  papers,  and  did  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  hear  the  date  in  any  letter. 

"  Gn  reaching  England  I  was  partially  hypnotised  by  a  jjliysician  of  my 
ncquaintance  [name  given]  ;  but  did  not  lose  cansciousness.  During  my 
semi-trance  I  became  aware  that  I  was  seeing  the  room  and  windows  and  the 
falling  figure,  )nore  clearly  than  ever  Ijefore.  I  talked  of  this  scene  to  the 
jjliysician.  Afterwards  he  invited  me  to  lo(jk  in  a  crystal.  I  did  so  ;  and 
saw  the  same  room  ; — the  windows,  bed,  ;uul  figure,  more  distinctly. 

"  I  afterwards  went  to  stay  in  tlie  liiiusc  wliere  LordZ.  died.  As  soon  as 
I  entered  I  asked  Lady  Z.  to  allow  ma  to  describe  to  her  the  room  wliere  I 
had  seemed  to  see  Lord  Z.  dying.  Lady  Z.  was  at  first  increduhnis  ;  Init  on 
my  describing  the  position  of  bed  and  windows  she  admitted  that  it  was 
correct.  Lord  Z.  had  died  in  a  dressing-room  adjacent  to  his  bedroom.  Tlie 
temporary  bed  and  windows  were  exactly  as  I  liad  seen  tliem.  He  had 
fallen  foi-ward.s  into  the  arms  oi  a  m;ile  attendant,  dying  suddenly." 

The  first  impression  of  the  death, — which  was  nearly  coiiu-ident, — was  on 
December  24th,  1885  (date  verified  by  Mr.  Gurney).  Entry  in  diary 
December  25th,  1885  :  There  was  somatliing  upon  my  mind  idl  day  from 
yesterday, — a  sense  of  a  death  or  loss  of  someone  dear  to  me.  I  spoke  to 
E.C.  [Mr.  Catlin,  tlie  manager,  who  wrote  in  corroboration]  about  it  ;  and  I 
don't  know  how  it  is,  but  as  I  wrote  the  above  [a  member  of  Lord  Z.'s 
family]  has  )5Son  constantly  in  my  thoughts. 

Tlien  on  Tuesday,  January  26t]i,  188f),  is  an  entry, — read  Ijy  me  in  Mr. 
Grant's  journal,  and  copied  for  me  by  liim, — as  follows  :•  — 

"Impression  at  al)out  1  o'clock  and  drawing  and  reasoning  therefrom 
on  death." 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoniedye,  ct-c.  213 

January  27th.  "Very  tired,  but  did  not  sleep  a  wink  all  night.  I  am 
sure  that  something  has  happened  to  [a  member  of  Lord  Z.'s  family].  I 
heard  every  hour  strike,  and  kept  thinking  of  [all  the  members  of  the 
family]  but  not  of  the  dear  old  gentleman  [i.e.,  imagining  tJiem  in  sorrow, 
l)ut  not  Lord  Z.  himself].  I  got  up  and  wanted  to  draw  him.  His  features 
seemed  before  me.  I  had  before  shown  Mr.  Catlin  a  face  in  the  Graph  ic  thiit 
was  like  him,  also  that  of  a  dead  man.  I  had  the  greatest  difficulty  not  to 
draw  his  portrait  with  his  head  forward  and  sunk  on  his  breast,  as  if  he  had 
been  sitting  in  a  room  with  a  v.  indow  on  his  right  hand  and  an  old  man- 
servant ; — and  then  his  head  just  went  forward,  and  he  fell  asleep.  Weeks 
ago  [i.e.,  December  25th]  I  thought  of  him, — some  time  aliout  Christmas  ; 
and  ever  since  I  have  been  feeling  [pity,  &c.,  for  members  of  family]. 

On  the  next  day,  Thursday,  January  28th,  188(),  Mr.  Grant  received  by 
accident  a  Scotch  paper  in  which  Lord  Z. '.s  death  was  mentioned, — but 
apparently  without  the  precise  date. 

I  have  received  a  letter,  (which  I  have  unfortunately  mislaid,)  from  Mr. 
Catlin,  corroborating  Mr.  Grant's  statements  as  to  liis  having  shown  hiin 
drawings  and  spoken  of  the  death  of  a  friend  at  home. 

Lady  Z.  and  Miss  Z.  gave  me,  in  April,  18!>2.  the  following  corrobora- 
tion : — 

Lord  Z.  died  December  24th,  1885,  in  a  dressing-room  adjoining  his  own 
larger  room.  The  dressing-room  was  narrow,  with  a  Vv'indow  at  one  end,  and 
a  small  bed,  then  occupied  by  a  man-servant  who  attended  on  him.  Lord  Z. 
had  entered  this  room  to  speak  to  the  sei-vant,  when  he  fell  forward,  the 
.servant  catching  him  in  his  arms,  and  shortly  afcerw^ii'ds  breathed  his  last. 
His  death  was  unexpected,  adthough  he  had  lonj/  been  ill.  I  remember  that 
Mr.  Cameron  Grant  visited  our  country  seat,-  where  tliis  occurred, — for  the 
first  time  some  months  after  Lord  Z.'s  death  :  and  that  he  said  something  to 
me  as  to  his  having  known  of  it,  or  recognised  the  scene  ;  but  I  cannot  now 
remember  the  details.  (Signed)  [Lady  Z.] 

I  rem9nd)er  that  Mr.  Cuneron  Grant,  before  going  upstairs,  when  he 
arrived  on  the  visit  referred  to,  asked  whether  my  father  had  not  fallen 
forwards  into  the  arms  of  a  man,  in  a  long  rtiom  with  a  window  at  one  end 
of  it.  »  (Signed)  [Miss  Z.] 

This  case  should  be  studied  along  with  Mr.  Cameron  Grant's  other 
records  of  experiences  (Plifoifasms  of  tlie  Livliuj.  IT..  \.\).  fi88-690). 

It  would  in  a  certain  way  explain  these  intimations  if  we  coidd  su[)pose 
that  Lord  Z.,  (who  was,  and  who  knew  Mr.  Grant  to  lie,  much  interested  in 
such  phenomena,)  first  imjirassed  Mr.  Grant  at  the  time  of  his  own  death, 
and  then  renewed  the  impression  when  he  knew — in  some  inconceivable 
manner — that  Mr.  Grant  was  about  to  receive,  quite  e;isually,  a  newsjiaper 
announcement  ol  the  decease.  On  that  occasion  the  decedent  seems  to  have 
been  able  to  impress  a  picture  of  the  scene  of  death  on  Mr.  Grant's, 
subconscious  mind  ;  an  impression  which  worked  itself  out  in  the  rude 
drawings,  as  a  "motor  message,"  and  afterwards  returned  both  as  a  vision 
in  hypnotic  trance,  and  as  a  "crystal-vision"  in  the  waking  state.  Here, 
however,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  wide 
clairvoyance  on  the  percij^ient's  own  jwi't-     Tiie  full  psychical  history  of. 

214 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

every  such  percipient  should  be  studied  ; — a  matter  hard  of  attainment  in 
Mr.  Gi-ant's  case,  owing  to  liis  absorption  in  business,  and  his  residence  at 
Marahu,  in  Brazil. 

In  the  first  new  case  which  I  shall  quote  there  was  already  a  vivid . 
emotional  shock  in  neighbouring  minds,   from   the    receipt   of  the 
message,  which  may  have  facilitated — some  may  say  have  caused — the 
apparition  seen  by  the  man  to  whom  the  news  had  not  yet  been  de- 
livered. 

Tliis  letter  was  addressed  to  the  late  Professor  Adams,  at  Cambridge. 
G.  210. 

St.  Luke's  Church,  Cer  Van  Ness-avenue,  and  Clay-street, 

San  Francisco,  California,  Septvmhev  11th,  1890. 

Dear  Sir, — I  received  to-day  from  some  officer  of  your  Society  a  few 
circulars  re  your  work.  These  circulars  remind  me  of  an  interesting  and 
curious  occurrence  in  my  parisli  a  few  weeks  ago,  which  may  be  useful  as  a 
contribution  to  your  investigations.  I  will  detail  it  Ijrielly  and  without 
Tiames  ;  but  if  you  find  it  valuable  will  try  to  obtain  affidavits,  &c.  Let  me 
premise  by  saying  that  I  am  in  the  ]30sition  of  reserving  my  judgment  " 
about  such  phenomena  as  you  investigate.  I  do  not  deny  that  such  things 
occur,  nor  have  I  of  my  own  experience  any  knowledge  on  the  subject. 

My  choir-trainer,  a  man  in  robust  healtli  and  with  a  predisposition  «//rt//(sf 
anything  "  Spiritualistic,"  saw  plainly  the  apparition  of  one  of  his  choir,  a 
man  of  fifty  years  old.    It  happened  thus  :  — 

Mr.  R[ussell],  the  bass-singer  of  the  choir,  fell  in  an  apo])lectic  fit  upon  the 
street  at  10  o'clock  on  a  certain  Fiiday  ;  he  died  at  11  o'cLjck  at  his  house. 
My  wife,  learning  of  his  death,  sent  my  brother-in-law  down  to  the  house  of 
the  choirmaster  [Mr.  Reeves]  to  ask  liim  about  music  f(jr  the  funeral.  The 
messenger  reached  the  house  of  the  clioirmaster  about  1.30  i).m.  He  was  told 
that  the  choirmaster  was  upstairs,  liusy  looking  over  some  music.  He 
accordingly  sat  down  in  the  drawing-r(.)om,  and,  wliile  w;uting,  began  to  tell 
the  ladies  (sister  and  niece  of  the  clioirmaster)  about  Mr.  R.'s  death.  While 
they  were  talking  they  heard  an  exclamation  in  tlie  hall- way.  Some  one  said, 
"  My  God  1  "  They  rushed  out,  and  halfway  down,  sitting  on  the  stairs,  saw 
the  choirmaster  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  showing  signs  of  great  fright  and  con- 
fusion. As  soon  as  he  saw  them  he  exclaimed,  "  I  have  just  seenR.  1  "  The 
niece  at  once  said,  "Why,  R.  is  dead  !  "  At  this  the  choirmaster  without  a 
word  turned  back  upstairs  and  went  to  his  room.  My  brother-in-law 
followed  him  and  found  him  in  complete  jjrostration,  his  face  white,  &c.  He 
then  told  my  brother-in-law  what  he  had  experienced. 

He  had  been  looking  over  some  music  ;  had  just  selecte<l  a  "Te  Deum"  for 
the  morning  service.  This  "Te  Deum"  closed  with  a  quartette  setting  for  two 
bass  and  two  tenor  voices.  He  was  wondering  where  he  could  get  a  second 
tenor.  Finally,  he  went  to  the  door  on  his  way  downstairs  to  look  up 
anotlier  "  Te  Deum."  At  the  door  lie  saw  Mr.  R.,  who  stood  with  one 
hand  on  his  brow,  and  one  hand  extended,  holding  a  sheet  of  music.  The 
choirmaster  advanced,  extended  his  hand,  and  was  going  to  speak,  wlien  the 
figure  vanished.    Then  it  was  that  lie  gave  the  exclamation  mentioned  above. 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d'c.  215 

You  must  remember  that  he  knew  nothing  of  R.'s  deatli  until  ho 
heard  his  niece  speak  of  it  as  detailed  above. 

This  is  the  best  authenticated  ghost  story  I  ever  lieard.  I  know  all  tlio 
parties  well,  and  can  vouch  for  their  trutlifulness.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
choirmaster  saw  something,  either  subjectively  or  objectively.  Whatever  it 
was,  the  experience  was  so  vivid  that  it  made  him  sick  for  days,  though  he 
is  a  man  of  exceptional  physique. 

At  first  I  tried  to  explain  tliis  on  natural  grounds.  I  thought  possildy  he 
liad  been  in  the  room  overhead,  and  had  overheard,  unconsciously,  the  story 
of  R.'s  death,  and  by  a  process  of  unconscious  cerebration  summoned  up 
the  image  of  the  dead  man.  But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  house  is  very 
large,  the  rooms  widely  apart,  &c. 

My  present  conviction  is  this  :  Mr.  R.  was  a  man  of  tlie  utmost  regu- 
larity and  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  his  duties.  He  has  sung  for  us  without 
pay  for  many  years.  His  first  thought  (or  one  of  the  first),  after  his  stroke 
of  apoplexy,  must  have  been  :  "  Hovf  shall  I  get  word  to  the  choirmaster 
that  I  cannot  go  to  rehearsal  to-morrow  niglit  ']  "  In  an  hour  he  died, 
without  ever  having  recovered  consciousness.  My  notion  is  that  in  some 
way  he  was  enabled  to  make  himself  appear  to  the  choirmaster.  If  you  refer 
to  the  attitude  in  which  he  appeared,  you  will  see  that  it  answers  to  my 
supposition.  It  indicates  his  illness  (a  pain  in  the  head),  and  his  desire  to 
give  up,  so  to  speak,  his  duty  as  singer. 

You  probably  have  many  other  incidents  of  this  nature  on  record.  If 
you  have  any  theory  about  them  I  wish  you  would  send  me  a  copy  of  whatever 
you  have  bearing  on  this. 

It  is  interesting  to  me  because  it  is  so  perfectly  authenticated. — Yours 
faithfully,  Wm.  W.  Davis, Rector. 

Mr.  Reeves'  own  account  is  i-ei3orted  in  the  San  Francisco  Ohronicle 
{quoted  in  Light,  September  27th,  1890)  as  "a  tale  told  to  a  Chronicle  repoi'ter 
Ijy  a  gentleman  who  would  be  at  once  pronounced  the  last  person  in  the 
world  to  become  the  prey  of  superstition  or  the  victim  of  delusion. 

"Early  on  Friday  morning  Edwin  Russell,  an  Englishman,  well  known  as 
n  real  estate  agent,  was  walking  near  the  corner  of  Sutter  and  Mason  streets 
when  he  sustained  an  apoplectic  stroke,  from  the  eft'ects  of  which  he  died 
shortly  before  noon.  He  had  resided  in  the  city  ten  years,  and  was  well  and 
favourably  known  in  the  commercial  world  here. 

' '  Mr.  Russell  was  a  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  and  also 
the  possessor  of  a  rich  bass  voice.  This  made  him  a  welcome  addition  to  the 
choir  of  St.  Luke's  Church,  and  brought  him  in  immediate  contact  witli  the 
Rev.  W.  W.  Davis,  vicar  of  the  church,  and  with  Harry  E.  Reeves,  tlie 
recently  appointed  choir  leader.  Mr.  Reeves  is  a  nephew  of  the  distinguished 
English  tenor  of  the  name,  and  conducted  tlie  musical  services  at  the  funeral 
of  President  Chester  A.  Arthur. 

"It  was  to  Mr.  Reeves  that  the  very  sensational  and  startling  revelation 
Tiow  to  be  recoi-ded  was  vouchsafed.  Mr.  Reeves  was  found  at  the  residence 
of  his  sister,  Mrs.  Cavanagh,  2,121,  California-street,  by  a  Chronicle  reporter. 
He  became  evidently  agitated  when  asked  if  it  were  true  that  he  had  seen  the 
apparition  of  Russell  before  hearing  of  the  latter's  death. 

216 

Mr.  F.  ir.  H.  Mijers. 

"  '  1  will  tull  yiiu  all  about  it,'  said  Mr.  Reeve.-i,  'and,  if  you  allow  me,  I 
will  illustrate  the  matter  by  sliowing  you  the  positions  I  occupied  during  this 
strange  ;iffair.  I  want  to  say  at  once  that  I  am  not  a  Spiritualist,  and  have 
always  been  very  sceptical  about  all  stories  of  post-mortem  appearances  and 
ghosts  generally. 

"  'I  last  saw  Russell  alive  on  the  Saturday  night  previous  to  his  death. 
Russell  came  to  the  choir  rehearsal.  I  said  to  him  ;  "  Do  you  know  where  I 
can  get  a  good  cigar  ? "  and  he  recommended  a  place.  I  went  there  with  him, 
and  then  took  such  a  fancy  to  him  that  I  invited  him  to  come  to  my  house,  or 
rather  my  sister's  house.  We  agreed  to  postpone  his  visit  till  the  following- 
Saturday,  and  he  said  :  "Well,  I'll  call  on  you  next  week  anyhow."  The 
matter  passed  from  my  mind  until  Friday  afternoon,  about  three  o'clock.  I 
always  make  it  a  jjoint  to  look  over  my  music  for  Sunday  a  day  or  two  before, 
and  on  this  occasion  I  vras  sitting  in  the  parlour  and  took  up  two  "Te  Deums" 
to  make  a  choice.  One  was  Starkweather's  in  G,  the  other  a  composition  of 
Kroell's.  Just  as  I  had  taken  one  in  my  liand  and  was  going  upstairs  to  my 
room  to  look  over  it  I  heard  the  front  door  bell  ring,  and  recognised  that 
f.  )me  visitor  whom  I  did  not  then  know  had  called.  I  afterwards  learned  that 
it  was  young  Mr.  Sprague,  who  can  tell  you  his  story  v.'hen  you  ask  him. 

" '  I  went  into  my  room  [illustrating  the  action  as  he  ascended  the  stairs  and 
opened  the  door  into  a  well-lighted  and  comfortably-furnished  sleeping  apart- 
ment, with  a  lounge  and  parkair  organ].  I  lay  down  on  the  lounge  for  ;i 
moment,  then  by  an  impulse  I  cannot  account  for,  I  walked  to  the  door.  The 
head  of  the  stairway  was  somewhat  dindy  lighted,  as  you  see  it  now,  but  not 
so  dimly  but  what  I  could  at  once  see  what  appeared  to  be  the  figure  of 
Russell.  It  was  so  real,  so  lifelike,  that  I  at  once  stepped  forward  and 
stretched  out  my  liand,  and  was  about  to  speak  some  words  of  welcome. 

' '  '  The  figure  seemed  to  have  a  roll  of  music  in  one  hand  and  the  other  over 
its  face,  but  it  was  Russell's  image.  I  am  cpiite  sure  of  that.  As  I  advanced 
to  the  head  of  the  stairway  the  tigui'e  seemed  to  turn,  as  if  about  to  descend, 
and  faded  into  the  air.' 

"  Mr.  Reeves'  manner  during  the  recital  was  precisely  that  of  a  person  witli 
well-balanced  mind  who  had  seen  something  horrible  and  startling,  but  was 
willing  and  ready  to  accept  a  rational  explanation  if  any  were  forthcoming. 
He  went  on  to  say  :  — 

"  '  I  remember  trying  to  speak  to  the  figure,  but  the  tongue  clung  to  the 
roof  of  my  mouth.  Tlien  I  fell  against  the  wall  and  gasped  out.  "Ah  !  My 
God  I  "  just  like  that.  My  sister  and  niece,  with  the  other  folks,  came  up. 
My  niece  said,  "  Uncle  Harry,  what's  the  matter?"  I  went  on  to  explain 
what  it  was,  but  was  so  scared  I  could  hardly  speak.  My  niece  said,  "  Don't 
you  know  Russell  is  dead  >.  "  Well,  that  flabbergasted  me  ;  it  only  made 
matters  worse,  and  I  nearly  fainted.  Then  they  told  me  that  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Davis  had  sent  Mr.  Sprague  to  tell  me  of  the  sad  news.  I  was  terribly 
startled  by  the  affair,  and  feel  shaky  even  now,  but  I  am  not  given  to  super- 
■stitious  fears,  and  I  suppose  it  can  be  explained.  Mr.  Sprague  had  been 
v/aiting  nearly  half  an  hour  before  I  saw  him  and  obtained  corroboration  of 
the  n.ews  of  Russell's  death.  It  is  very  strange  ;  very  strange,  indeed.  I  savv^ 
that  man  Russell  after  he  must  have  been  dead  three  hours  at  least,  as  plainly 
as  I  see  you  in  that  chair.' 

O  n  Indications  of  Contin  ued  Terrene  Knowledge,  <tc.  217 

"  In  an  interview  with  Mr.  Sprague  the  essential  features  of  tliis  strange 
story  were  C(jnfirmed.  It  is  a  significant  departure  from,  the  routine  ghost 
story  that  all  tlie  persons  connected  witli  this  case  are  unconnected  with  any 
Spiritualistic  organisation,  are  of  well-balanced  mind,  thoughtful,  and 
sceptical  on  all  sensational  matters.  Mr.  Reeves  is  not  only  a  man  in  the 
prime  of  life,  of  temperate  habits,  and  in  good  health,  but  he  is  also  a  person 
of  strong  nerve,  a  man  of  the  world,  a  Master  Mason,  and  the  last  person  in 
tlie  world  to  be  scared  by  a  ghost  or  a  mediumistic  imposition." 

Mr.  Reeves  confirms  this  account  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows  : — 

San  Francisco,  September  15th,  1890. 

Richard  Hodgson,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir, —With  reference  to  your  favour  of  5th  inst.,  just  received,  the 
full  particulars  were  given  in  city  papers  ;  some  things  not  just  exactly  as 
stated,  especially  the  word  "flabbergasted,"  which  is  foreign  to  me. 

Apart  from  what  you  read,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  given. — With 
best  wishes,  yours  very  truly, 

H.  E.  Reeves. 

We  have  received  the  following  independent  and  corroborative 
account  from  Mr.  Sprague  : — 

Goldwin  S.  Sprague. 

Grand  Forks,  Dak.,  November  29th,  1890. 

Mr.  Ricliard  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Your  communication  was  received  some  time  ago,  but  I  have 
been  greatly  pressed  for  time  and  unable  to  answer. 

You  probably  know  all  about  Mr.  Russell's  death  and  connection  with 
St.  Luke's  Church,  so  I  shall  only  give  you  the  facts  as  they  came  to 
my  knowledge. 

On  Friday  noon,  August  22nd,  a  young  lady  friend  of  the  Russells  came- 
to  my  brother-in-law's  (Mr.  Davis's)  house  and  asked  to  see  Mr.  Davis.  As 
Mr.  Davis  was  out,  his  wife  (my  sister)  saw  this  young  lady.  I  was  not 
j)resent  at  the  interview,  but  my  sister  told  me  shortly  afterwards  the  facts 
of  Mr.  Russell's  death,  &c. ,  and  said  that  'this  young  lady  had  come  to  ask 
Mr.  Davis  if  the  church  choir  would  be  willing  to  sing  at  Mr.  Russell's 
funeral,  as  Mr.  R.'s  family  were  of  limited  means  and  could  not  afford  to 
pay  the  choir. 

As  I  was  going  to  Mr.  Reeves'  house  that  afternoon  my  sister  asked  me 
to  tell  Mr.  Reeves  about  Russell's  death  and  ask  liim  about  the  singing.  I 
called  at  1,221,  California-street,  about  3  [three]  o'clock  that  afternoon,  and 
liad  been  in  tlie  parlour  some  20  [twenty]  minutes  talking  with  Miss 
Kavanagh  (Mr.  Reeves'  niece),  when  ws  heard  Mr.  Reeves'  exclamation  on 
the  stairs,  and  I  followed  Miss  Kavanagh  to  see  what  the  trouble  was.  We 
found  Mr.  R.  sitting  ou  the  stairs  in  his  shirt  sleeves  and  evidently  very 
much  frightened.  Miss  K.  brought  him  a  glass  of  wine,  also  a  glass  of  water,. 
l)ut  I  think  he  did  not  touch  either.  After  a  couple  of  minutes  Mr.  R.  went 
up  to  his  room,  and  Miss  Kavanagh  asked  me  to  go  up  and  see  if  he  was  all 
right,  as  she  was  afraid  to  go.  I  went  up  and  found  Mr.  Reeves  sitting  down 
on  a  chair  near  the  window  with  his  legs  crossed.  He  had  no  coat  or  vest, 
collar  or  necktie  on,  and  the  perspiratic^n  seemed  to  roll  off  him.   He  seemed 

Q 

218 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

greatly  agitated,  but  in  a  few  minutes  he  told  me  his  story  and  I  left  him. 
In  ahout  5  [five]  minutes  he  came  downstairs  and  began  to  talk  about  it,  and 
continually  said,  "  It  is  the  strangest  thing  ;  I  can't  understand  it." 

GoLDWiN  S.  Speague. 

The  next  two  cases  are  so  grotesque  that  I  have  been  tempted  to 
suppress  them.  But  it  is  not  my  business  to  apologise  for  the  forms 
which  supernormal  phenomena  happen  to  take  ;  and  the  amount  of 
evidence  in  each  case  seems  enough  to  make  it  my  duty  to  allow  my 
readers  to  foi  m  their  own  ojiinion. 

The  principal  percipient  in  the  case  which  here  follows  is  known  to 
me,  and  is  a  sensible  witness,  and  much  in  earnest  as  to  the  reality  of 
this  her  unique  supernormal  experience. 

G.  211. 

Written  out  l^y  F.  W.  H.  M.,  December  22nd,  1888,  from  notes  taken 
during  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Davies  the  same  day  ;  revised  and  signed 
by  Mrs.  Davies. 

About  20  years  ago  I  was  living  with  my  mother  and  brother  at  Islington. 
Near  us  lived  a  family  whose  name  is  not  important  to  the  narrative.  One 
of  their  daughters  married  a  Mr.  J.  W.,  who  went  to  India.  Mrs.  J.  W. 
•continued  living  at  her  father's  liouse.  Her  father,  however,  changed  his 
residence,  and  as  Mr.  J.  W.'s  address  in  India  was  not  known  at  the  time, 
Mrs.  J.  W.  could  not  inform  liim  of  the  change  (.)f  address.  The  house  where 
she  was  living  with  her  fatlier  when  her  husl^and  left  home  passed  to  a  family 
whom  I  will  call  Brown,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted,  as  I  also  was  with  Mrs. 
J.  W.  and  her  family. 

One  evening  I  paid  a  visit  to  Mrs.  Brown,  and  she  gave  me  an  Indian 
letter  which  had  arrived  for  Mrs.  J.  W.  at  the  house  now  occupied  by  the 
Browns.  Mrs.  Brown  asked  me  to  transmit  this  letter  to  Mrs.  J.  W.  tlirough 
my  brother,  who  frequently  saw  a  brother  of  Mrs.  J.  W.'s.  There  had  thus 
been  some  little  delay,  and  perhaps  slackness,  in  getting  the  letter  sent  on  to 
Mrs.  J.  W.  I  promised  to  give  it  to  my  brother,  and  took  it  home.  It  was 
a  dirty  looking  letter,  addressed  in  an  uneducated  handwriting,  and  of  ordinary 
bulk.  I  placed  it  on  the  chimney-piece  in  our  sitting-room,  and  sat  down 
alone.  I  expected  my  brother  home  in  an  hour  or  two.  The  letter,  of  course, 
in  no  way  interested  me.  In  a  minute  or  two  I  heard  a  ticking  on  the 
chimney-piece,  and  it  struck  me  that  an  old-fashioned  watch  which  my  motlier 
always  had  standing  in  her  bedroom  must  have  been  brought  downstairs.  I 
went  to  the  chimney-piece,  but  there  was  no  watch  or  clock  there  or  elsewhere 
in  the  room.  The  ticking,  which  was  loud  and  sharp,  seemed  to  proceed 
from  the  letter  itself.  Greatly  surprised,  I  removed  the  letter  and  put  it  on 
a  sideboard,  and  then  in  one  or  two  other  jjlaces  ;  but  the  ticking  continued, 
proceeding  undoubtedly  from  where  the  letter  was  each  time.  After  an  hour 
or  so  of  this  I  could  bear  the  tliinw  no  longer,  and  went  out  and  sat  in  the 
hall  to  await  my  brother.  Wlien  he  canie  in  I  simply  took  him  into  the  sitting- 
room  and  asked  liim  if  he  heard  anything.  He  said  at  once,  "  I  hear  a  watch 
or  clock  ticking."  There  was  no  watch  or  clock,  as  I  have  said,  in  the  room. 
He  went  to  where  the  letter  was  and  exclaimed,  "  Why  the  letter  is  ticking." 
We  then  listened  to  it  togetlier,  moved  it  about,  and  satisfied  oui'selves  that 

On  Indications  of  Gontinned  Terrene  Knowledge,  <L-c.  219 

the  ticking  proceeded  from  the  letter,  which,  however,  plainly  contained 
nothing  but  a  sheet  of  paper.  The  impression  which  the  ticking  made  was 
that  of  an  urgent  call  for  attention.  My  brother  took  the  letter  to  Mrs.  J.  W. 
either  that  night  (it  was  very  late)  or  next  morning.  On  opening  it,  she 
found  that  her  husband  had  suddenly  died  of  sunstroke,  and  the  letter  was 
written  by  some  servant  or  companion  to  inform  her  of  his  death.  The 
ticking  no  doubt  made  my  brother  and  myself  hand  on  the  letter  more 
promptly  than  we  might  otherwise  have  done. 

I  have  never  experienced  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses.  I  once 
heard  a  strong  push  at  the  street-door  at  the  minute  (for  I  looked  at  my 
watch)  that  my  father  died  at  a  distance  ;  but,  though  I  went  to  the  door  at 
once  and  saw  no  one,  I  cannot,  of  course,  be  sure  that  some  passer-by  might 
not  have  pushed  the  door  and  got  out  of  sight  ;  for  the  house  was  in  a  street 
with  many  passers.  I  have  also  lieard  ticks  before  a  death  ;  but  these  may 
very  likely  have  been  caused  by  the  death-watch  insect  ;  which  certainly  was 
not  the  case  with  the  ticks  which  came  from  the  letter.  The  incident  of  the 
letter  made  a  deep  impression  on  me. 

(Signed)    Anna  Davies. 

Mr.  Davies,  brother  to  Mrs.  Davies  (who  married  a  gentleman  of  the 
.same  name),  gives  his  independent  recollection  as  follows  : — ■ 

64,  Church-road,  Southgate-road,  N. 

February  ISth,  1889. 

I  am  afraid  my  recollection  of  the  details  after  so  long  a  time  has  elapsed 
is  rather  limited  and  somewhat  hazy,  so  that  if  my  sister  has  expanded  into 
details,  and  her  version  should  slightly  differ  from  mine,  please  consider  that 
I  bow  to  her  superior  memory,  and  accept  her  account  as  correct.  The  main, 
features  of  the  incident  are,  however,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  as  follow  : — 
One  night,  it  must  be  nearly,  if  not  quite,  30  years  ago,  I  returned  home 
between  10  and  11  o'clock,  and  my  sister  told  me  that  she  had  brought  home 
from  the  house  of  a  friend  of  hers  a  letter  from  India,  addressed  to  a 
Mrs.  Walker,  who  had  formerly  lived  at  the  house  the  letter  was  directed  to, 
;ind  being  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Walker  (whose  brother  was  an  intimate 
friend  of  mine),  I  was  asked  to  be  the  bearer  of  the  letter  to  her.  I  found  it 
on  the  mantel  shelf,  and  my  sister  and  myself  heard  very  distinctly  a  clear 
ticking  noise,  as  loud  as,  and  similar  to,  tliat  of  a  small  clock,  which  we  spent 
some  time  in  trying  to  account  for,  and  which  we  could  so  clearly  trace  to 
the  vicinity  of  the  letter  that  it  seemed  to  proceed  from  tlie  letter  itself,  but 
we  could  find  nothing  which  would  in  any  way  account  for  what  we  heard.  I 
delivered  the  letter  to  my  friend  the  following  day  to  hand  to  his  sister,  Mrs. 
Walker,  and  afterwards  heard  that  it  contained  the  news  of  the  decease  of 
her  husband  in  India.  I  am  not  quite  sure  but  almost  so,  that  on  hearing 
the  mysterious  noise  we  remarked  on  the  probable  contents  of  the  letter,  but 
we  were  certainly  struck  with  the  coincidence  of  the  noise  being  heard  whilst 
the  letter  was  on  the  shelf  (and  apparently  proceeding  from  it)  and  discon- 
tinuing on  its  removal. 

I  have  no  means  of  fixing  the  date,  or  even  the  year,  as  Mrs.  Walker  and. 
her  brother  have  both  been  dead  for  some  years. 

L.  A.  Davies. 
Q  2 

220 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

The  next  case  is  even  more  pei-plexing. 
G.  212. 

 Wis.,  Septeinher  22nd,  1890. 

Prof.  Will.  James. 

A  very  unusual  thing  occurred  to  the  writer  and  one  other  person — luy 

sister,  Miss  Mary  Q. — at  tlie  city  of  ,  Wisconsin,  on  the  5th  day  of 

jSToveuiher,  1885,  at  10  o'clock  p.m. 

Our  mother,  Mrs.  Mary  Margaret  Q.  K.,  died  at  our  liome,  in  said  city  of 

 ,  Wisconsin,  on  the  above  date,  at  8.40  p.m. ,  very  suddenly,  of  pneumonia. 

Oiir  ynungest  half-brother,  Robert  B.  E.,  was  working  at  S  ,  N.  Dakota, 

at  that  time,  about  TOO  miles  distant  from  ,  Wisconsin.     At  9.45  we 

retired  to  the  guests'  chamber,  a  room  over  tlie  south  parlour,  and  about  the 
Sam;  dimensions  as  said  parlour,  having  two  windows  to  the  south  and  one  to 
the  east.  There  were  tv.'o  beds  in  this  large  room,  and  I  lay  on  one  and  my 
sister  on  the  other,  trying  to  compose  our  broken  liearts,  for  we  loved  our 
mother  very  dearly.  The  night  was  cold  and  the  windows  were  all  closed, 
except  the  east  was  down  at  the  top  a  few  inches,  when,  lo  I  we  both  dis- 
tinctly heard  at  the  same  instant  my  brother,  Robert  B.  R.,  singing,  "We 
had  better  liide  a  wee,"  in  a  clear,  deep  tenor,  accompanied  by  a  high- 
jjitched  soprano  and  an  old-fashioned  small  melodeon  accompaniment,  and  it 
sounded  as  tliough  they  were  up  on  a  level  with  our  windows,  about  15  feet 
from  the  ground  ;  and  I  arose  and  threw  up  the  south-west  window,  from 
whence  the  sounds  seemed  to  proceed,  and  then  they — the  singing— moved 
to  the  next,  or  south-east,  window,  and  sang  another  verse.  And  I  threw 
tliat  up  and  saw  nothing,  but  still  distinctly  heard  the  words  as  well  as  the 
music,  and  m  round  to  the  east  window,  where  they  sang  the  last  verse,  and 
then  the  music  seemed  to  float  away  to  the  north.  But  the  queer  part  of 
this  occurrence  is  the  fact  that  at  the  very  time  that  we  heard  my  brother 

singing  in  ,  Wisconsin,  he  icas  singing  the  same  song  before  an  audience, 

with  the  identical  accompaniment,  an  old,  tiny  melodeon,  and  a  high-pitclied 
soprano  young  lady — a  Miss  E. ,  of  North  Dakota — as  we  learned  two  day.* 
afterwards,  when  he  came  home  in  response  to  our  telegram  announcing  the 
death  of  our  mother. 

Any  verification  of  the  above  facts  will  be  cheerfully  made. 

(Signed)       [Miss  Q.] 

 ,  Wis.,  October  nth,  1890. 

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  the  6th  inst.  was  duly  received,  and  in  replj'' 
to  your  request  for  corroborative  testimony  relative  to  the  ' '  phenomenal 
occurrence"  on  the  night  of  November  5th,  1885,  at  Janesville,  Rock  Co., 
Wisconsin — that  is,  the  hearing  music  ;ind  two  human  voices,  and  the  words 
distinctly  audible — one  voice  perfectively  familiar  to  us  as  that  of  our  lialf- 
brother,  Robert  B.  R.,  then  of  N.  Dakota,  and  the  other  voice  that  of  a 
strange  lady — soijrano,  and  they,  my  said  brother  R.  B.  R.,  and  Miss  Sarali 
JE.,  of  N.  Dak.,  were  singing  that  sone  song,  "We  Iiad  better  bide  a  wee," 

at  an  entertainment  given  by  a  church  society  of  S  ,  a  j^rinted  pi-o- 

gramme  of  which  my  brother  afterwards  sent  to  us  : — 

I  am  an  exceedingly  busy  person,  but  a  lover  of  the  truth,  and  interested 
in  tlie  progress  of  the  race  ;  but  my  sister.  Miss  Mary  Q.,  cf  tliis  city,  is 

On.  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knmvledge,  d:c.  221 

very  conservative  and  proud,  and  when  I  asked  her  for  an  affidavit  of  her 
experience  on  that  eventful  5th  of  November,  1885,  she  rephed,  "  I  do  not 
wish  the  workl  to  think  nie  or  you  a  '  crank '  or  Spiritualist,  and  do  not 
wish  our  names  published."  I  will  add  that  my  sister,  who  is  blind,  is 
rery  intuitive  and  clairvoyant,  and  there  is  much  in  her  experience  to  deeply 
interest  the  psychical  student.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  loss  of  her  sight  has 
been  comj)ensated  by  another  sense — a  super-intuition. 

I  have  written  to  my  brother,  R.  B.  R.,  to  reply  to  your  request  and 

also  to  obtain  a  programme  of  the  church  entertainment  at  S  ,  N .  Dak . ,  on 

November  5th,  1885,  at  which  lie  and  Miss  Sarah  E.  sang  "  We  had  better 
bide  a  wee,"  and  also  to  state  the  exact  hour  when  they  were  called  in  tlie 
programme,  for  as  Robert  stated  to  us  when  lie  arrived  on  that  sad  occasion 
— the  death  of  our  good  mother— he  informed  vis  that  the  telegram  was 
brought  to  him,  and  was  lidd  by  tlie  operator  so  as  not  to  spoil  the  entertain- 
ment by  telling  him  before  he  sang,  and  we — my  sister  Mary  Q.  and  I — both 
lieard  every  note  and  word  of  that  song  sung  about  seven  hundred  (700) 
miles  away,  while  our  mother's  remains  were  in  tlie  parlour  under  our 
bedroom .  —  Cordially  yours, 

(Signed)       [Miss  Q.] 

Miss  Mary  Q. 

 ,  Wis.,  November  lof],,  1890. 

Richard  Hodgson,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir, — [In  reply  to]  your  kind  note  of  inquiry,  relative  to  my  ex- 
jieriences  on  the  night  of  November  5th,  1885,  they  were  such  as  have  been 
described  by  my  sister  [Miss  Q.  ],  who  is  a  lover  of  scientific  research,  and  is 
not  so  timid  as  I  and  my  brother  ;  the  latter  is  very  much  opposed  to  either 
of  us  making  known  our  experience  on  that  night,  and  has  urged  me  not  to 
tell  aiij'one  of  the  occurrences  of  that  eventful  time,  and  he  refuses  to  fur- 
nish the  printed  programme  of  the  entertainment,  at  which  he  and  INIiss  E. 
were  singing  "We  had  better  bide  a  wee,"  insisting  that  people  will  believe 
us  all  "luny"  if  we  make  known  all  the  facts  ;  and  so  in  deference  to  liis 
prejudices  I  must  respectfully  decline  to  make  any  further  disclosures  at 
present. — Respectfully  yours,  [Miss  Maky  Q.] 

Per  Amanuensis. 

December  IWi. — A  letter  of  inquiry  sent  to  Mr.  Robert  B.  "R.,"  and  an 
envelope,  with  official  stamp  of  our  Society  on  the  cover,  has  been  returned 
to  ine,  unopened,  by  Mr.  Robert  B.  "R.,"  so  that  further  corroboration  is 
lacking,  at  least  for  the  present. — R.H. 

It  will  be  observed  that  Miss  Mary  Q.'s  letter  is  vii'tually  a  confir- 
mation of  Miss  Q.'s  account ;  and  that  Mr.  Q.'s  action  is  in  harmony 
with  his  sisters  belief  that  he  cannot  deny,  l)ut  does  not  Avisli  to 
confirm,  the  truth  of  tliis  singular  narrativ  e. 

Are  we  in  this  case  to  assume  any  agencj'  on  the  part  of  the  deceased 
mother  ?  Was  her  mind  conscious  of  the  scene  at  the  concert-room, 
and  did  she  transfer  it  to  her  daughters  ?  Or  did  they  become  clair- 
voyantly  aware  of  it  1  Or  was  it  flashed  upon  them  from  the  mind  of 
the  telegraph  operator,  who  w^as  the  only  living  person  who  both  knew 
of  the  death  and  heard  the  song  ?    If  we  are  to  press  the  details  of  the 

222 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

story,  we  might  say  that  the  long  continuance,  and  apjjarently  shifting 
position,  of  the  phantasmal  music  indicated  not  so  much  an  involuntary 
flashing  of  the  scene  upon  the  daughters'  minds  as  a  deliberate  effort  to 
attract  their  attention. 

Let  us  pass  on  to  inquire  whether  the  phantom  ever  shows  knowledge 
of  events  in  an  eai'thly  friend's  life  not  connected  with  the  decedent's 
own  death.  Such  cases,  as  already  remai'ked,  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,. 
32,)  are  very  rare.  Here  is  one  where  the  decedent,  who  had  been 
strongly  intercisted  in  an  event  which  was  closely  approaching  when  he 
died,  seems  to  choose  the  occasion  of  that  event  to  manifest  his- 
continued  interest  in  the  friend  whom  the  little  crisis — a  theatrical 
pei'formance — closely  concerned.  It  is  at  least  not  easy  to  see  any  other 
exijlanation  of  the  fact  that  a  moment  of  the  percipient's  eager  excite- 
ment about  a  quite  different  matter  was  also  the  moment  when  the 
phantom  took  shape  l)efoi-e  her  eyes. 

G.  195.  Transitional. 

The  following  account  of  an  apparition  two  days  after  the  death  of  the- 
person  seen  was  written  down  by  me  from  the  verbal  account  of  the  per- 
cipient, Miss  J.,  and  corrected  and  signed  by  lier  : — 

Angud  4f/(.,  1890. 

On  the  evening  (jf  Saturday,  April  26tli,  1890,  I  was  engaged  with  my 
.sister  and  other  friends  in  giving  an  amateiu-  performance  of  the  Antigone,  at 
the  Westminster  Town  Hall. 

A  passage  led  down  to  several  dressing-rooius  used  by  tlie  ladies  who 
were  taking  part  in  the  representation,  and  nowhere  else.  None  of  the 
public  had  any  business  down  this  passage  ;  altliough  a  friend  came  to  tlie 
door  of  the  dressing-room  once  to  speak  to  some  of  us. 

I  was  passing  from  one  dressing-room  to  another,  a  few  steps  further 
along  the  passage,  just  before  going  on  to  the  stage,  when  I  saw  in  the 
passage,  leaning  against  tlie  door-post  of  the  dressing-room  which  I  left,  a 
Mr.  H.,  wliom  I  had  met  only  twice,  but  whom  I  knew  well  by  sight,  and  as 
an  acquaintance,  thougli  I  liad  heard  Jiothing  of  liim  for  two  years.  I  lield 
out  my  hand  to  him,  saying,  "  Oh,  Mr.  H.,  I  am  so  ghid  to  see  you."  In  the 
excitement  of  the  moment  it  did  not  occur  to  me  as  odd  that  he  should  have 
come  thus  to  the  door  of  tlie  dressing-room,— altliough  this  would  have  been 
an  unlikely  thing  for  a  mere  acquaintance  to  do.  Thei-e  was  a  brilliant  light, 
and  I  did  not  feel  tlie  slightest  doubt  as  to  his  identity.  He  was  a  tall,  sin- 
gular-looking man,  and  used  to  wear  a  frock-coat  buttoned  unusually  high 
roiuid  the  throat.  I  just  ol)served  tliis  coat,  but  noticed  nothing  else  al)out 
him  sj)ecially  excejit  liis  face.  He  was  looking  at  me  with  a  sad  expres.sion . 
When  I  held  out  my  hand  he  did  not  take  it,  but  shook  his  head  slowly,  witli- 
ont  a  word,  and  walked  away  down  the  passage — back  to  the  entrance.  I  did 
not  stop  to  look  at  him,  or  to  think  over  tliis  strange  conduct,  being  in  ;i 
great  hurry  to  finish  dressing  in  time. 

Next  day,  as  a  number  of  us  were  talking  over  the  performance,  my  sister 
called  out  to  me,  "  You  will  l)e  sorry  to  hear  that  Mr.  H.  is  dead."  "Surely 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledgc,  (ice.  223 

not,"  I  exclaimed,  "  for  I  saw  him  last  night  at  the  Antigone."  It  turned 
out  that  he  had  been  dead  two  days  when  I  saw  the  figure. 

I  have  never  experienced  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses. 

Miss  .J.'s  sister.  Lady  M.,  writes  : — 

Aagud  Mh,  1890. 

The  day  after  the  performance  of  the  Antigone  I  heard  unexpectedly  that 
Mr.  H.  was  dead  (I  had  not  known  that  he  was  ill),  and  I  mentioned  the  fact 
to  my  sister,  at  a  party.  She  seemed  greatly  astonished,  and  said  that  she 
had  seen  him  at  tlie  Antigone  the  night  before.  Mr.  H.  had  only  met  my 
sister  twice  ;  but  I  happened  to  know,  from  a  conversation  which  I  had  witli 
him,  that  he  had  been  greatly  interested  in  her.  An  announcement  of  the 
performance  of  the  Antigone  was  found  in  a  small  box  of  papers  which  he  had 
with  him  at  his  death. 

I  think  it  most  unlikely  that  there  should  have  been  any  mistake  of  iden- 
tity, as  the  passage  where  the  figure  was  seen  led  only  to  the  dressing-rooms. 
But  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  on  tliis  point,  I  sent  an  account  of  the  occur- 
rence to  the  papers.  It  was  widely  copied,  and  I  received  letters  on  the 
subject.  If  the  figure  had  been  some  living  man,  I  think  that  the  fact  would 
probably  have  come  out.    Mr.  H.'s  appearance  was  very  peculiar. 

Mr.  W.  S.  Lilly,  the  well-known  Roman  Catholic  author,  corroborates  as 
follows  : — 

August  Ath,  1890. 

I  was  present  at  a  party  when  Lady  M.  suddenly  informed  her  sister, 
Miss  J.,  of  the  death  of  Mr.  H.  I  can  bear  witness  to  Miss  J.'s  extreme 
astonishment,  and  her  exclan\ati(jn,  "  Why,  I  saw  him  last  niglit  at  the 
Antigone." 

We  Iiave  referred  to  the  Times,  where  the  death  of  Mr.  H.  is  announced 
as  having  taken  place  on  Aj^ril  24t]i,  1890. 

The  account  spoken  of  by  Lady  M.  was  sent  to  the  papers  within  a  week 
of  the  occurrence. 

But  the  paucity  of  ajiparitions  of  dead  persons  at  moments  when 
events  which  would  have  interested  those  dead  persons  are  happening- 
is  noticeable  on  any  view  of  the  phenomena.  Those  who  hold  that 
such  apparitions  are  always  purely  subjective,  and  mainly  due  to 
excited  expectancy,  would  look  for  a  special  crop  of  tliem  at  these 
emotional  moments.  And  on  the  other  hand  those  who  hold  that  the 
dead  are  really  engaged  in  watching  over  the  living  would  anticipate 
more  frequent  indications  of  their  guardianship  and  care.  I  am  dis- 
posed to  think  that  the  objection  to  publicity  which  stifles  so  many 
of  our  best  narratives  operates  here  with  more  than  usual  strength. 
For  instance,  the  experience  given  in  Proceedings,  VI.,  p.  26,  is  one 
which  many  informants  less  concerned  that  truth  should  be  known 
would  have  entirely  suppressed.  Another  case  privately  told  to  me  by 
one  of  the  percipients,  where  an  apparition  seen  by  both  persons 
present  averted  a  deed  of  violence,  will  certainly  never  see  the  light. 

224 

Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers. 

In  the  Journal  for  January,  1891,  Ave  have  printed  a  case  where  a 
■deceased  mother  is  seen,  as  though  floating  in  the  church,  at  the  moment 
of  her  son's  confirmation.  The  percipient,  however,  had  been  well 
acquainted  with  the  deceased  lady's  aspect,  so  that  there  is  here  no 
evidence  of  external  agency,  except  the  fact  that  tlie  percipient  liad 
had  other  similar  expeiiences,  of  which  some  at  least,  if  not  all,  seem 
■certainly  to  have  been  veridical. 

And  here  we  approach  the  question  of  so-called  "  spirit  guardian- 
shij)," — the  question  whether  a  departed  sjiirit  may  continue  habitually 
in  some  sense  in  the  neighboui-hood  of  a  friend  still  on  earth.  Like  all 
the  more  attractive  hypotheses  throughout  our  range  of  inquiry,  this 
hypothesis  has  suflfered  from  the  amount  of  had  evidence  adduced  to 
support  it.  It  is  the  favourite  commonplace  of  the  fraudulent  "clair- 
voyant medium";  and,  apart  from  conscious  fraud,  it  is  the  response 
which  most  often  presents  itself  as  the  mere  reflection  of  the  bereaved 
person's  desire.  But  worthless  evidence  does  not  disprove  a  theory, 
any  more  than  it  proves  it;  nor  need  it  greatly  surpi'ise  us  if  that 
impalpable  telepathic  connection  Avhich  sometimes  seems  to  be  long 
maintained  between  two  living  persons  were  to  persist  after  the 
removal  of  one  of  them  by  bodily  death.  Especially  where  the  decedent 
has  telepathically  affected  his  friend  at  the  hour  of  death  shall  we  look 
with  interest  for  any  account  of  a  similar  influence  posthiunously 
exercised.  In  this  connection  the  following  case  deserves  record.  The 
writer,  Princess  di  Cristoforo,  who  is  personally  known  to  me,  is  the 
wife  of  Colonel  Wickham,  of  7,  Comeragh-road,  W.  ;  but  is  of  Greek 
and  Maltese  descent.  The  names  given  to  the  decedents  ai-e  not  the 
i-eal  ones. 

L.  854.    A<l  Ps 

On  the  evening  of  March  IStli,  1879,  I  was  dressing  myself  to  go  to  a 
dinner  party  at  Admiralty  House,  Vittoriosa,  Malta.    I  had  accepted  Admiral 

and  Mrs.  's  invitation,  much  against  my  will,  as  a  dear  friend  was  lying 

seriously  ill  at  Brighton.  However,  the  latest  accounts  had  been  so  cheering 
and  hopeful  that  I  had  allowed  myself  to  he  persuaded  by  niy  husband  into 
going.  An  eerie  feeling  was  creeping  over  me  in  an  unaccountable  manner, 
but  I  tried  to  throw  it  off  and  succeeded  in  doing  so  to  a  certain  extent  ; 
.still,  something  made  me  turn  my  head  round  and  stare  into  my  liusband's 
dressing-room,  which  opened  into  mine.  I  distinctly  saw  a  hand  waving 
backwards  and  forwards  twice.  I  rushed  into  the  room — it  was  emjjty. 
Soon  afterward,  my  husband  came  upstairs,  and  I  told  liini  what  I  had  seen, 
but  he  put  it  down  to  "nerves."  As  we  crossed  the  water  the  cool  night 
air  seemed  to  revive  me  and  I  began  to  laugh  at  myself  for  letting  my 
imagination  play  such  tricks.  Arrived  at  the  Admiral's,  the  same  weird  feel- 
ing, that  something  was  near  me,  crej^t  over  me  again.  I  felt  sure  that  if  I 
were  to  turn  round  I  should  see  something.  All  through  dinner  this  idea 
xemained  fixed  in  my  mind — and  my  liost,  by  whom  I  was  seated,  teased  me 

On  Indications  of  Contimted  Terrene  Knoivledge,  &€.  225 

about  my  preoccupation  and.  want  of  appetite.  I  was  glad  when  we  came 
away;  had  the  horrible  tension  continued  much  longer  I  must  have  screamed, 
I  think.  It  was  only  by  the  most  powerful  elfort  I  could  assume  the  sem- 
blance of  composure.  We  got  liome,  somehow,  and  I  dragged  myself  upstairs 
to  my  room,  and  commenced  undressing.  Whilst  taking  down  my  hair  I 
distinctly  felt  a  hand  pass  over  my  head  and  neck  as  if  someone  was  assisting 
me.  I  told  my  husband — to  be  again  laughed  at.  I  knelt  to  say  my  prayers. 
Instead  of  praying  (as  I  had  been  used  to  do)  for  God  to  make  my  friend 
well,  I,  without  any  will  of  my  own,  prayed  tliat  he  might  be  taken  out  of 
his  niiseiy.  I  went  to  bed.  Something  came  and  lay  beside  me.  I  clung  to 
my  husband,  Avho  tried  to  calm  me,  assuring  me  there  was  nothing  there  to 
hurt  or  frighten  me.  A  cold  mouth  seemed  to  freeze  on  my  cheek,  and  I 
distinctly  heard,  "Good-bye,  Sis,  good-bye,"  in  my  friend's  well-knovvn 
voice.  Still  my  husband  declared  he  could  hear  nothing.  I  said,  "  I  am  sure 
Mr.  Abbott  is  dead.''  My  husband  said  I  was  hysterical  and  over-wrought, 
drew  me  towards  him  and  held  my  hand  till  I  fell  aslee^J— for  I  suppose  it 
was  a  dream  and  not  a  vision  I  had.  Be  this  as  it  niay,  I  saw  my  friend 
come  into  my  room  ;  a  livid  mark  was  across  his  face.  He  was  dressed 
in  a  night-shirt,  and  his  feet  were  bare.  He  came  and  sat  beside  me — 
told  me  he  was  dead — that  he  had  left  me  some  money,  and  before  he  died 
had  wished  to  make  some  alteration  in  his  bequest,  but  the  end  had  come  so 
soon,  he  had  not  time  to  do  so.  He  repeated  his  "Good-bye,"  kissed  me, 
and  disappeared. 

I  told  my  husband  of  my  dream  and  marked  the  date.  Five  days  after- 
wards a  letter  with  a  deep  black  border  came  to  me  from  my  friend's  brother, 
telling  me  his  brother  had  passed  away  at  10  o'clock,  March  13th.  Allowing 
for  the  difference  of  time,  Mr.  Abbott  must  have  come  to  me  either  just 
before  or  just  after  his  death.  The  legacy  left  me  was  as  he  had  stated, 
also  the  fact  that  he  had  intended  to  make  a  change  as  regarded  it,  but  though 
the  lawyer  was  sent  for,  he  came  too  late. 

August,  1890. 

Colonel  Wickham  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

Certified  to  truth  of  above  facts. — G.  H.  Wickham  (Lieut. -Colonel 
late  R.A.). 

L.  855.     M  Pn  Collective.  Visual. 

A  friend  of  mine,  an  officer  in  the  Gordon  Highlanders,  was  severely 
wounded  in  the  knee  at  Tel-el-Kebir. 

His  mother  was  a  great  friend  of  mine,  and  when  the  CaftJiage  hospital 
ship  brought  him  to  Malta  she  sent  me  on  board  to  see  him  and  make 
arrangements  for  bringing  him  on  shore.  When  I  got  on  board  I  was  told 
his  was  one  of  the  worst  cases  there.  So  badly  was  my  poor  friend  wounded 
that  it  was  not  considered  safe  to  send  him  to  the  Military  Hospital,  and  lie, 
together  with  an  officer  of  the  Black  Watch,  was  admitted  to  the  naval  one. 
By  dint  of  much  entreaty,  his  mother  and  I  were  allowed  to  go  there  and 
nurse  him.  The  poor  fellow  was  very  ill,  and  as  the  doctors  considered  he 
would  die  if  an  operation  was  performed,  they  did  not  amputate  his  leg, 
which  was  tlie  only  tiling  that  could  give  him  a  chance  of  life.     His  leg 

226 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

mortified,  but  the  parts  sloughed  away,  and  as  he  still  lingered  on,  some- 
times better,  sometimes  worse,  the  doctors  began  to  think  he  might,  perhaps, 
recover  to  a  certain  degree,  though  he  would  be  lame  for  life,  and  must 
eventually  die  of  decline.  For  nearly  three  montlis  and  a  half  he  lay  on  his 
bed  of  ag.)ny.  About  a  month  before  his  death  the  head  doctor  said  that 
tlie  presence  of  a  lady  always  near  him  excited  him  and  retarded  his 
recovery,  so  I  went  away  to  my  home  on  the  other  side  of  tlie  harbour,  going 
over  frequently  to  see  his  mother  and  learn  from  her  how  he  was.  As  he 
Avould  never  take  food  or  medicine,  excepting  from  me,  I  was  troubled  to 
think  what  tlie  poor  boy  might  do.  At  last  the  doctor  sent  for  me,  begging; 
me  to  go  back,  as  he  was  literally  dying  of  starvation,  refusing  to  take  food  or 
medicine  until  I  returned.  When  I  went  to  him  he  put  out  his  hand  to  me 
and  said  :  ' '  Tliey  have  let  you  come  back  to  me  now  that  it  is  too  late.  I've 
eaten  nothing."  He  lingered  about  a  fortnight  after  this,  and  a  few  days, 
before  the  end  I  pinned  the  Order  of  tlie  Osmanli  on  the  front  of  the  poor 
dying  bo.y's  night-shirt.  It  was  very  cold,  and  the  hospital  draughty,  my 
lungs  were  delicate,  and  I  got  a  fearful  cough  and  kind  of  fever  from  the 
impure  air  of  the  room,  for  I  sat  in  an  armchair  by  liis  Ijed  all  niglit,  as  he 
slejjt  better  holding  my  hand. 

One  night,  January  4th,  1886,  no  immediate  change  Ijeing  apprehended, 
his  mother  made  me  go  home  to  have  a  night's  rest,  as  I  was  by  this  time 
very  ill  indeed,  not  being  strong  at  the  best  (_>f  times.  He  had  l)een  in  a 
kind  of  lethargy  for  some  hours,  and  as  the  doctor  said  he  would  probably 
.sleep,  being  under  tlie  effects  of  morphia,  until  the  next  morning,  I  con- 
sented to  go,  intending  to  return  at  daybreak,  so  that  he  should  find  mo 
there  when  he  awoke.  About  tliree  o'clock  that  night  my  eldest  son,  who 
was  sleeping  in  my  room,  woke  me  with  the  cry  of  :  "  Mamma  !  there  is 
Mr.  Blake !"  I  started  up  !  It  was  quite  true.  He  floated  through  the  room 
about  half  a  f(jot  from  the  floor,  smiling  at  me  as  he  disappeared  through  tlie 
window.  He  was  in  his  night-dress,  l)ut,  strange  to  say,  his  foot,  of  which 
the  toes  had  dropped  ofl'  from  mortification,  iwfs  exadly  like  the  other  one. 
We  (both  my  son  and  myself)  noticed  this.  Half  an  hour  afterwards  a  man 
came  to  tell  me  that  Mr.  Blake  had  died  at  3  o'clock,  and  I  must  go  to  his 
mother,  who  had  sent  for  me.  She  told  me  that  he  had  been  half  conscious  just 
before  he  died,  and  was  feeling  about  for  my  liand,  after  pressing  hers  and 
that  of  his  soldier-servant  who  had  remained  with  him  to  the  last.  I  have 
never  forgiven  myself  for  going  home  that  night. 

The  wi'iter's  son,  who   was,  as   she   informs  us,    nine  years  old  at 
the  time  of  the  occurrence,  signs  the  account  as  follows  : — - 
I  certify  to  the  .ibove  fact. — Edmund  Wickhaji. 

G.  040.    Collective.    Visual  and  tactile. 

Aug>ist,  1890. 

In  tlie  summer  of  1886  I  was  living  at  Stuttgart,  having  taken  my  family 
there  for  educational  reasons.  We  were  all  seated  at  the  tea-table,  talking 
and  laughing,  when  I  felt  an  extraordinary  sensation  as  if  someone  was 
leaning  heavily  on  my  shoulders.  I  tried  to  turn  round  but  literally  coiddn't 
do  so.  My  head  was  stroked,  and  my  cup,  which  was  full,  was  lifted  up,  and 
put  down  half  emjity.    Looking  across  the  table  I  found  my  daughter's  eyes 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  dr.  227 

fixed,  and  staring  with  a  scared  look  in  them  I  never  wish  to  see  again,  at 
the  back  of  where  I  sat.  I  said  nothing  at  the  time,  but  when  we  were- 
alone  together  in  the  drawing-room  I  asked  L.  what  had  made  her  stare  at,  or 
rather  beyond,  me  so. 

' '  I  saw  Mr.  Abbott  and  Mr.  Blake  standing,  one  on  either  side  of  you  ; 
they  had  one  of  their  hands  on  each  of  your  shoulders,  and  they  changed 
places  once,"  replied  L. 

"How  were  they  dressed  ? "  I  asked. 

"  Mr.  Abbott  was  in  his  grey  suit  ;  Mr.  Blake  in  Highland  uniform." 
"  Did  either  of  them  drink  out  of  my  cup  ?"  I  asked. 
• '  I  don't  know.    My  head  was  fixed  as  if  in  a  photographer's  rest,  and  I 
could  not  take  my  eyes  ofi"  their  faces." 
"  Were  they  sad-looking  ?  " 

"  No  !  They  were  both  smiling  down  at  you.  I  could  not  see  lower  than 
their  waists  clearly  ;  there  seemed  to  be  a  kind  of  liaze,  but  their  faces  were 
quite  clear." 

Both  these  young  men  had  appeared  to  me  previously- -at  the  time  of 
their  deaths.  [See  two  previous  accounts.]  They  were  much  attached  to 
me,  and  very  fond  of  my  little  daughter.  When  first  meeting  these  two  men 
they  buth  told  me  they  had  seen  me  before — that  I  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting 
in  a  chair  by  their  bedside  and  staring  at  tliem. 

Miss  Wickham  has  given  to  me,  vei'bally  and  in  writing,  a  com- 
pletely concordant  account. 

The  Princess  di  Cristoforo  believes  that  the  same  two  figures  have 
^ince  been  described  to  her  by  a  clairvoyante. 

If  the  departed  thus  watch  their  friends  on  earth,  it  is  possible  that 
they  may  acquire  some  retrospective  or  ^prospective  insight  into  the 
events  of  those  friends'  lives.  They  may,  for  instance,  discern  the 
approach  of  death  before  that  prognosis  is  clear  to  an  earthly  i^thysiciau. 
A  narrative  of  this  type  reaches  us  from  America. 

G.  213 

Junuanj  28th,  1891. 
About  eleven  years  ago  I  was  much  distressed  owing  to  tlie  illness  of  my 
wife,  who  suffered  from  cancer  in  tlie  stomach.  I  heard  about  a  medium, 
Miss  Susie  Nickerson  White,  who  was  said  to  have  given  some  remarkable 
tests,  and  I  called  on  her  as  a  stranger  and  requested  a  sitting.  My  wife's 
sister  purported  to  "  control,"  giving  her  name,  Maria,  and  mentioning  facts, 
about  my  family  which  were  correct.  She  also  caUed  my  wife  by  her  name, 
Ehza  Aime,  described  her  sickness,  and  said  that  she  would  pass  over,  hut 
not  for  some  months.  I  said,  "  What  do  you  call  this  ?  Is  it  psychoh^gy,  or 
mesmerism,  or  what  ?  "  Maria  said,  "  I  knew  you  were  going  to  ask  that ; 
I  saw  it  in  your  mind."  I  said,  "Do  you  get  aU  the  things  out  of  my 
mind?"  She  replied,  "No.  I'll  tell  you  some  things  that  are  not  in  your 
mind.  Within  three  days  Eliza  Anne  will  say  that  she  lias  seen  me  and 
mother,  too,  if  I  can  get  mother  to  come  along."    (My  wife's  mother  had  died 

228 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Muers. 

aboixt  f(3rfcy-five  years  pre^'ioiisly,  and  my  wife's  sister  had  been  dead  from 
six  to  eight  years.) 

I  kept  these  circumstances  to  myself,  but  within  thi'ee  days  the  nurse 
who  was  in  attendance  upon  my  wife  came  running  to  me  and  said  that  my 
wife  was  worse,  and  was  going  out  of  her  mind  ;  that  slie  had  called  \i]}on 
Maria  and  mother,  and  had  sjorung  out  of  bed  and  ran  towards  the  door, 
crying,  "  Stop,  Maria  !    Stop,  motlier  1    Don't  go  yet  !" 

I  soon  consulted  Miss  White  again,  and  Maria  again  purported  to  control, 
My  wife  had  l:)een  unable  iov  some  days  to  retain  any  food  in  her  stomach, 
could  not  keep  even  water  or  milk,  and  was  very  weak  and  also  unable  to 
sleep. 

Maria  told  me  to  give  her  some  hot,  very  strong  coffee,  with  jjlenty  of 
cream  and  sugar  and  some  cream  toast.  This  prescription  amazed  me,  but  it 
was  prepared.  My  wife  ate  and  drank  with  relish,  and  slept  soundly  after- 
wards. She  lived  upon  this  food  for  some  days,  but  gradually  became  unable 
even  to  take  this. 

I  consulted  Miss  White  again,  and  Maria  told  me  to  get  some  limes,  and 
to  give  my  wife  some  pure  juice  of  the  lime  several  times  a  day  ;  she  said 
that  this  would  give  her  an  appetite  and  enable  her  to  retain  food.  The 
prescrijjtion  was  a  success  ;  but  gra.dually  my  wife  failed,  and  I  consulted 
Miss  White  again,  and  asked  Maria  how  long  my  wife  would  continue  to 
suffer.  She  said  she  could  not  tell  exactly  when  she  would  pass  away,  but 
would  give  me  a  warning — ' '  Tlie  next  time  she  says  she  has  seen  me, 
don't  leave  her  afterwards." 

Some  days  later,  as  I  was  relieving  the  nurse  about  three  or  four  in  the 
morning,  the  nurse  said,  "  Mammie  "  (meaning  my  wife)  "says  she  has  seen 
Maria  again."  In  a  few  minutes  my  wife  said,  "I  must  go."  And  she 
expired. 

(Signed)  E.  Paige,  Mary  A.  Paige. 

[Formerly  Mary  A.  Dockerty,  the  nurse.] 
[I  have  had  long  interviews  with  Mr.  Paige.    He  seems  to  be  a  shrewd 
and  careful  witness. — Richard  Hodgson.] 

To  this  may  be  added  a  French  incident, — carefully  observed,  but  in 
itself  not  conclusive  e^'idence  for  move  than  telepathy  between  living- 
minds. 

G.  214. 

In  Annales  P.-ii/cluquia,  Pait  II.  (Marcli-April,  1891),  p.  98,  a  case  is  given 
which  presents  some  analogy  to  these.  The  case  is  a  recent  one,  aird  it 
occurred  among  the  immediate  friends  of  M.  Richet  ;  but,  as  Avill  be  seen,  the 
apparitions  were  very  indistinct.  There  was  a  coincidence  of  two  dreams  or 
"  borderland  "  impressions,  as  follows  :  — 

1.  Soeur  Marthe,  attending  on  tlie  dying  M.  Bastian,  dreams  v/ith  great 
vividness  that  an  unrecognised  female  figure,  with  the  voice  of  Mme.  Bastian, 
dead  some  eight  months  previously,  approaclies  the  bedside  of  Cecile,  daughter 
of  Mme.  B.  (asleep  in  tlie  same  room  with  Sceur  Marthe),  takes  her  hand,  and 
says,  "  Elle  est  gentille,  Cecile." 

2.  0]i  the  same  night,  and  at  uhuid  the  same  time,  Mme.  M.  Houdaille, 
daugliter  of  M.  Bastian,  lying  in  bed  between  sleep  and  waking,  saw  a  white 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  &c.  229 

figure  standing  beside  her  bed,  which  so  alarmed  her  that  she  shrieked  aloud. 
Her  brother,  alarmed  by  the  shriek,  rushed  into  her  room  and  found  her  -witli 
a  terrified  expression. 

These  dreams  or  impressions  were  independently  noted. 

They  occurred  March  Gth,  1891.    M.  Bastian  died  March  13th. 

On  the  analogy  of  the  cases  given  above,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  figure 
represented  Mme.  Bastian,  aiid  that  its  appearance  was  induced  by  the 
approaching  end  of  M.  Bastian. 

This  view,  however,  is  obviously  incapable  of  proof  in  this  case. 

Two  other  Ameiican  cases  may  be  added  to  this  small  group. 
G.  215. 

From  Mrs.  Wilson,  through  Prof.  W.  C.  Crosby,  Associate  memljer^ 
S.P.R. 

Mrs.  Caroline  Rogers,  72  years  old,  a  -widow  who  had  been  twice  married, 
and  whose  first  husband,  a  Mr.  Tisdale,  died  al^out  35  years  ago,  lias  lived  on 
Ashland-street,  in  Roslindale,  Mass.,  for  the  hist  25  years  ;  and  since  the 
death  of  her  last  child,  some  years  ago,  she  has  lived  quite  alone.  Early  in 
March  of  this  year  she  was  stricken  with  paralysis,  and  after  an  illness  of 
nearly  six  weeks  died  on  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  April  15th. 

Mrs.  Mary  Wilson,  a  professional  nurse,  forty-five  years  old,  attended  Mrs. 
Rogers  during  lier  illness,  remaining  with  her  almost  constantly  until  she 
died.  She  liad  never  seen  Mrs.  Rogers  before  the  latter's  illness,  and  knew 
nothing  of  her  family  or  history.  Mrs.  Rogers  sj^oke  frequently  to  Mrs. 
Wilson,  and  also  to  others,  as  had  long  been  her  custom,  of  her  second 
husband,  Mr.  Rogers,  and  her  children,  expressing  a  desire  to  see  them 
again,  &c. 

On  the  afternoon  of  April  14th  Mrs.  Rogers  became  unconscious,  and 
remained  so  all  the  time  until  her  death  twenty -four  hours  later.  Mrs.  Wilson 
sat  up  with  her  through  the  whole  of  Monday  night.  Mrs.  Wilson's  daughter 
Ida,  twenty-five  years  old,  kept  her  mother  company,  and  a  boy  of  ten  or  twelve 
years  slept  in  an  adjoining  chamber,  to  be  called  in  case  of  an  emergency. 
These  four  were  the  only  persons  in  the  house.  The  outer  doors  were 
securely  locked,  the  door  leading  from  the  sick  chamber,  on  the  second  floor, 
into  the  hall  was  kept  locked  all  the  time,  because  it  was  near  the  foot  of 
Mrs.  Rogers'  bed  ;  and  entrance  to  the  sick  chamber  was  gained  by  passing- 
from  the  upper  hall  into  the  living-room  liy  a  door  which  was  locked  that 
night,  and  thence  tlirough  the  chamljer  in  which  tlie  boy  slept  ;  the  two 
chambers  having  been  made  to  communicate  by  cutting  a  door  through  the 
back  of  a  small  closet.  This  door  was  diagonally  facing  the  bed  on  which 
Mrs.  Rogers  lay.  Mrs.  Wilson  rested  on  a  settee  placed  at  right  angles  to 
the  head  of  Mrs.  R.'s  bed,  so  that  when  lying  down  her  face  was  almost 
directly  ojiposite  this  door  and  not  more  than  ten  or  twelve  feet  from  it. 
The  lamp,  wliich  burned  brightly  all  night,  stood  on  a  small  table  in  the 
corner  of  the  room  directly  opposite  the  door  ;  and  Ida  occupied  a  coucli 
against  the  wall  and  between  the  lamp  and  door. 

230 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

13 

-ti  o 
.B  o 

Mrs.  Rogers. 

o 

stove. 

Window. 

Doov  into  chamber  in  which 
l)oy.slept.  It  was  in  this  room 
iliattheapparitionappeared. 

Ida  Wilson. 

Window. 

Table  and 
Lamp. 

Window. 

Mrs.  Wilson  was  pretty  well  worn  out  with  her  long  vigil ;  believing  that 
Mrs.  Rogers  was  dying,  she  was  naturally  very  nervous  and  timid  ;  and  having 
lieard  Mrs.  R.  speak  frequently  of  seeing  her  departed  friends,  etc.,  she  had 
a  feeling  of  expectancy  and  dread  witli  regard  to  supernatural  visitations. 
Betweentwoandthreea.nl.,  while  Jier  daughter  was  asleep,  and  while  she 
was  resting  on  the  settee,  Init  wide  awake,  slie  happened  to  look  toward  tlie 
door  into  the  adjoining  chamber  and  saw  a  man  standing  exactly  in  the  door- 
way, the  door  being  kej^t  open  all  the  time.  He  was  middle-sized,  broad- 
shouldered,  with  shoulders  thrown  Ijack,  had  a  florid  complexion,  reddish- 
Ijrown  hair  (bare  headed)  and  beard,  and  wore  a  brown  sack  overcoat,  which 
was  unbuttoned.  His  expression  was  grave,  neither  stern  nor  jjleasant,  and 
lie  seemed  to  li:)ok  straight  at  Mrs.  Wilson,  and  then  at  Mrs.  Rogers  without 
moving.  Mrs.  Wilson  supposed,  of  course,  that  it  was  a  real  man,  and  tried 
to  think  how  he  could  have  got  int(j  the  liouse.  Tlien,  as  he  remained  quite 
motionless,  she  began  to  realise  that  it  was  something  uncanny,  and  becoming 
friglitened,  turned  her  head  away  and  called  her  daughter,  wlio  was  still 
asleep  on  the  couch,  awakening  her.  On  looking  back  at  the  door  after  an 
interval  of  a  minute  or  two,  the  apparition  liad  disappeared  ;  both  its  coming 
and  going  were  noiseless,  and  Mrs.  Rogers  remained  perfectly  quiet,  and  so 
far  as  could  1)e  known  entirely  unconscious  during  this  time.  The  chamber 
into  which  this  door  leads  being  quite  dark,  there  was  no  opjiortunity  to 
•observe  whether  or  not  the  apjDarition  was  transparent.  Mrs.  Wilson  shortly 
afterwards  went  into  tliis  chamber  and  tlie  living-room,  but  did  not  examine 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  231 

the  lower  part  of  the  house  until  morning,  when  the  doors  were  found  2)ro- 
perly  locked  and  everything  all  right. 

In  the  morning  Mrs.  Rogers'  niece,  Mrs.  Hildreth,  who  lives  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  has  known  Mrs.  R.  and  her  family  for  many  years, 
called  at  the  house.  Mrs.  Wilson  related  her  experience  to  her  and  asked  if 
the  apparition  resembled  Mr.  Rogers,  and  Mrs.  Hildreth  replied  emphatically 
that  it  did  not.  (All  who  knew  Mr.  Rogers  are  agreed  on  this  point.)  Their 
conversation  was  interrupted  then,  but  when  resumed  later  in  the  day  Mrs. 
Hildreth  said  that  Mrs.  Wilson's  description  agreed  exactly  with  Mr.  Tisdale, 
Mrs.  Rogers'  first  husband.  Mrs.  Rogers  came  to  Roslindale  after  marrying 
Mr.  Rogers,  and  Mrs.  Hildreth  is  the  only  person  in  that  vicinity  who  ever 
saw  Mr.  Tisdale  ;  and  in  Mrs.  Rogers'  house  there  is  no  portrait  of  him  nor 
anything  suggestive  of  his  personal  appearance.  Mrs.  Wilson  is  also  very 
positive  that  the  apparition  was  unlike  anyone  she  ever  knew. 

Mrs.  Wilson  has  had  similar  experiences  before,  and  at  least  one,  which 
occurred  when  she  was  18  years  old,  which  appears  to  have  been  veridical. 

The  foregoing  account  of  my  experience  is  correct  in  every  particular. 

Mary  Wilson. 

The  foregoing  is  a  full  and  accurate  statement  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  experience 
as  she  related  it  to  me  on  the  morning  of  April  15th. 

F.  E.  Hildreth. 
June  otli,  1890. 

Mrs.  Wilson  and  Mrs.  Hildreth  have  both  impressed  me  as  being  intelli- 
gent and  perfectly  honest  and  trutliful  ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  Mrs. 
Wilson's  experience  was  real  and  substantially  as  she  has  described  it. 
.  W.  O.  Crosby. 

The  next  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mrs.  Reynolds,  Millington  House, 
Thehvall,  Warrington. 

G.    221.  Congleton,  Cheshire. 

3Iarch  23rd,  1892. 

A  friend  of  mine, named  Mrs.  Johnson,  died  in  November,  1877;  she  had 
been  confined  just  over  a  week.  A  few  days  before  she  died  she  said  to  me, 
"I  am  going  to  die,"  and  asked  me  to  take  care  of  her  baby,  which  I  did 
.  until  it  died  three  months  after.  The  night  before  she  died  we  were  awakened 
between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  by  a  noise  like  tapping  at  the  window 
twice.  My  husband  got  up  and  went  downstairs,  but  could  see  nothing.  So 
we  tried  to  settle  to  sleep  again,  when  all  of  a  sudden  we  were  alarmed  by 
our  little  boy,  who  was  not  quite  two  years  old,  calling  out  "Auntie,"  by 
■which  name  he  used  to  call  her,  and  pointing  towards  the  fo<jt  uf  the  bed, 
and  there  I  saw  her  standing  all  in  white.  She  died  the  next  morning 
(Thvn-sday)  between  nine  and  ten.  She  appeared  again  a  second  time  three 
months  later  ;  it  would  be  about  midnight.  My  husband  saw  her  standing 
by  the  fire.  At  first  he  thought  it  Avas  I,  until  he  turned  round  and  saw  I 
was  in  bed.  We  were  very  much  frightened  for  a  long  time  after.  The 
baby  died  the  next  day  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (Thursday). 
They  both  died  on  the  Thursday  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge.  And  it  was 
on  the  Sunday  when  they  were  both  buried.   We  can't  recollect  the  exact  day 

232 

Mr.  F.  TF.  H.  Myers. 

of  tlie  mouth,  as  they  had  no  cards  printed  for  either.  The  mother  died  in 
November,  1877,  the  baby  in  February,  1878.  This  is  as  near  a  trua 
account  as  we  can  give,  it  being  so  long  ago,  nearly  fifteen  years  since. 

Mary  Jane  Pedley. 

James  Pedley. 

Mrs.  Reynolds  adds,  under  date  March  24tli,  1892  :— 
Mr.  Reynolds  and  I  went  to  Congleton  yesterday,  and  called  upon  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Pedley.    We  heard  the  story  from  both. 

It  seems  that  when  Mrs.  Pedley  saw  tlie  apparition  on  its  first  appear- 
ance she  screamed,  and  frightened  her  husband  so  much  that  he  dared, 
not  look. 

Tliere  was  a  light  in  tlie  room  on  both  occasions.  We  saw  the  son  who 
called  out  "Auntie  " — a  youth  between  16  and  17  years  of  age. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pedley  consent  to  the  story  being  published,  with  name.? 
and  address. — Believe  me,  yours  sincerely, 

Edith  Reynolds. 

He  told  me  that  he  looked  several  times,  and  each  time  saw  it  standing- 
by  the  tire.  Mrs.  Johnson  is  stated  to  have  been  unconscious  the  night 
before  she  died.  -  . 

E.  R. 

Mrs.  Pedley  subsequently  procured  for  us  the  certificates  of  death  which 
follow,  and  whicli  show  that  each  death  occurred  on  a  Thursday,  as  she  had 
remembered. 

Annie  Johnson  died  on  the  1st  of  November,  1877,  at  Thomas-street, 
Congleton,  aged  23  years. 

Elijah  Johnson  died  on  the  31st  of  January,  1878,  at  Thomas-street, 
Congleton,  aged  14  weeks. 

Given  this  24th  March,  1892. 

W.  Henry  Carter, 
Deputy  Superintendent  Registrar. 

Congleton. 

A  point  of  difficulty  which  often  meets  us  in  estimating  the  know- 
ledge possessed  by  the  departed  is  as  follows  : — 

Cases  occur  whei-e  there  is  certainly  some  kind  of  coincidence, — say 
an  apparition  at  the  moment  of  death — but  along  with  this  coincidental 
apparition  of  a  dying  person  there  is  an  apparition  or  dream  of  some 
other  person,  already  known  as  deceased.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  a 
mother  loses  her  son  at  a  distance  ;  and  while  that  son  is  dying  sees 
him  in  a  dream  accompanied  by  his  long-dead  fatlier.  Here,  consider- 
ing the  symbolical  character  of  the  details  in  many  of  these  veridical 
dreams,  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  father's  figure  is  itself 
more  than  a  symbol.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is,  of  course,  conceivable 
that  the  father  may  be  welcoming  the  son  in  some  other  world,  and 
that  both  may  bo  able  to  appear  together  to  the  surviving  wife  and 
mother. 

The  case  which  follows  is  interesting,  as  showing  that  a  monition  of 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c,  233 

death  which  at  first  appears  of  simple  type  may  in  reality  be  based 
upon  a  background  of  symbolism  involving  the  possible  action  of  a 
deceased  relative. 

A  young  German  lady,  whom  I  will  call  Fraulein  A.,  known  to  me 
as  governess  in  the  house  of  friends,  sent  to  me  in  January,  1892,  a 
statement  which  I  here  tra,nslate. 

G.  216. 

"On  November  23rcl,  1890,  while  I  held  my  [previous]  situation  as 
governess  at  H.,  I  was  awakened  at  half -past  six  by  a  strong  smell  of  death. 
Before  awakening  I  had  had  a  vision  of  the  corpse  of  my  brother  Caid,  who 
was  at  that  time  at  Zurich.  Alarmed  by  this  strange  dream,  I  sent  a 
telegram  to  Zurich,  in  which  I  said  that  I  would  return  home  if  my  brother 
were  dangerously  Ul.  [In  a  further  letter  Fraulein  A.  explains  that 
November  23rd  was  a  fSunday,  and  that  her  pupil's  lessons  prevented  her 
from  telegraphing  till  the  afternoon  of  November  24th  ;  as  she  did  not  like 
t'j  mention  her  wish  to  send  a  telegi'am  merely  because  of  a  dream.]  I 
received  a  telegraphic  reply  which  advised  me  to  remain  where  I  was.  Two 
days  later  I  received  from  my  relations  the  news  of  the  death  of  my  brother 
Carl,  which  had  taken  place  at  6  a.m.  on  November  23rd,  1890." 

The  date  of  the  death  is  confirmed  by  a  "  Todtenschein "  sent  to 
Praulein  A.  from  tlie  Civilstandbeamte  of  the  Civilstandskreis  in  which  the 
death  occurred.    Fraulein  A.  has  kindly  presented  us  with  this  certificate. 

The  fact  of  the  receipt  of  Fraulein  A.  's  telegram  is  testified  to  by  Fraulein 
Pauline  Tobler,  who  writes  as  follows  from  Zurich,  February  12th,  1892  : — 

The  undersigned  bears  witness  that  between  herself  and  Fraulein  [A.], 
then  in  Helensburgh,  on  November  24th,  1890,  at  6  p.m.  a  telegram  and 
reply  passed  as  follows: — "Wenn  Carl  gefiihrlich  erkrankc,  komm  nach 
Hause.    Antwort."    "  Conseille  rester."  Pauiine  Tobler. 

We  learn  from  the  General  Post  Office,  Edinburgh,  tliat  the  forms  of 
foreign  telegrams  are  preserved  for  six  montlis  only.  Nor  has  the  Zurich 
post-oflice  preserved  a  copy.  We  cannot,  therefore,  produce  the  original  de- 
spatch. It  is  obvious,  however,  from  Fraulein  Tobler's  evidence,  that  Fraulein 
A.  telegraphed  while  unaware  of  her  brother's  death.  Thus  far,  then,  the  case 
appeared  to  be  a  Avell-atbested  dream  of  death,  promptly  acted  upon,  but 
with  no  unusual  features.  In  conversation  with  Fraulein  A. ,  however,  I  found 
that  she  regarded  the  incident  in  a  difi'erent  light ;  as  forming  one  of  a 
series  of  instances  in  which  her  departed  mother  had  informed  her  of  events 
closely  concerning  her.  One  of  these  instances  was  too  private  for  publica- 
tion ;  the  rest  Fraulein  A.  records  as  follows  : — 

"  On  May  31st,  1887,  my  dear  mother  died.  I  had  mn-sed  her  during 
her  illness  ;  and  before  her  death  I  begged  her  to  send  me  some  intimation 
if  anything  of  importance  were  to  happen  in  our  family.  She  promised  me 
to  do  this,  so  far  as  might  be  possible  to  her. 

"In  December,  1839,  I  left  Switzerland,  and  went  to  London,  and  thence 
took  a  teiui^orary  engagement  as  governess  near  Welwyn.  In  Februaiy, 
1890,  my  mother  appeared  to  me  in  a  dream.  She  held  in  her  hand  three 
small  nosegays,  each  of  them  consisting  of  a  bunch  of  green  leaves  and  a 
primrose  ;  and  signed  to  me  to  choose  one  of  them.    I  stretched  out  my 

234 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

hand  to  the  middle  one.  Bef(ji-e  I  had  grasped  it,  the  flower  fell.  My 
mother  pointed  to  the  fallen  flower,  and  turned  sadly  away,  Tlie  dream 
impressed  me  strangely,  as  I  had  three  brothers,  of  whom  the  middle  one 
had  been  specially  recommended  to  my  care  by  my  dying  mother.  I  inquired 
at  once  after  his  health  ;  but  he  was  ({uite  well. 

"In  the  following  June,  1890,  I  saw  my  mother  again  in  a  dream,  as 
though  on  her  deathbed.  This  dream  was  repeated.  After  the  second 
dream  I  woke,  and  again  slept  and  dreamt.  Tliis  time  I  saw  my  brother, 
already  mentioned  ;  his  cheeks  red  with  fever.  Alarmed  by  this  dream  I 
wrote  home  next  day,  but  could  hear  of  nothing  unusual.  I  was  reassured  ; 
and  dreamt  no  more  until  some  months  later  I  dreamt  of  my  brother  as  dead. 
It  was  only  after  his  death  that  I  learnt  that  at  the  time  when  I  dreamt  of 
him  as  in  a  fever  he  actually  had  influenza.  He  recovered  ;  but  died  some 
months  later  from  a  second  attack. 

"Tliese  were  the  only  dreanis  which  have  ever  left  a  deep  and  permanent 
impression  upon  me — the  only  dreams  upon  which  I  have  ever  acted." 

It  is,  of  course,  conceivable  that  the  mother's  figure  seen  in  dream 
may  have  been  merely  a  syml^olic  form  assumed  hy  a  telepathic  message 
from  the  still  living  l^rother.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  mother's 
dying  promise  to  bring  just  such  messages,  if  possible,  from  her  new 
world.' 

In  Fraulein  A.'s  case  the  intimations,  as  will  have  been  observed, 
are  ivordlessly  conveyed,  and  so  it  is  with  the  majoi'ity  of  these  visions, 

1  I  add  in  a  note  a  cas3  where  the  apparition  conveys  information  which  leads  to 
important  results  ;  in  the  hope  that  the  publication  of  the  narrative,  which  is  now 
obtainable  only  at  second  hand,  may  lead  to  the  invprovement  of  the  evidence.  We 
have  the  real  names  ;  the  transmitter  of  the  case,  Mrs.  Bodington,  a  medical  jirac- 
titioner  at  Matsqui,  British  Cohmibia,  and  author  of  a  book  of  lectures  on  Evolu- 
tion, is  known  to  us  by  correspondence  as  a  painstaking  informant. 
G.  222. 

I  was  residing  in  the  year  18G9  in  the  family  of  a  retired  naval  officer  and  his 
wife,  two  miles  from  a  seaport  town.  The  wife,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  R.,  was  what  is 
usually  understood  as  a  highly  domesticated  person  ;  to  the  last  degree  unimaginative  ; 
rarely  opening  a  book,  and  indifferent  to  everything  except  household  concerns  and 
the  care  of  her  children. 

One  afternoon,  in  the  month  of  September,  the  conversation  happened  to  turn 
tipon  the  subject  of  the  often  recorded  appearances  of  dying  persons  to  their  friends 
at  the  moment  of  death.  [After  some  talk]  Mrs.  R.  and  her  husband  looked  at  each 
other  and  seemed  as  if  hesitating  about  speaking.  After  a  pause,  Mrs.  R.  said  :  "  If 
you  do  not  laugh  at  the  very  idea  of  the  possible  apjjearance  of  the  dead,  I  should  like 
to  tell  you  of  something  that  happened  to  myself.  When  I  was  engaged  to  my 
husband  I  was  li\  ing  with  my  brother,  who  was  British  Consul  at  Cadiz.  [Captain 
R.  was  a  widower ;  his  first  Avife,  with  whom  he  had  not  lived  happily,  having  died 
some  eight  months  previously,  leaving  a  young  infant.  Mrs.  R.  had  never  seen  or- 
known  the  fii'st  wife,  and  was  not  in  England  at  the  time  of  her  death.]  After  our 
marriage  we  returned  to  E:igiand,  and  my  husband's  first  care  was  to  find  tl;e  nurse 
with  whom  his  youngest  child  had  been  left.  To  his  great  grief,  the  woman  had  left 
P.,  and  had  removed  to  some  other  part  of  England,  taking  the  baby  with  her.  Soon 
after  this  vain  search  for  the  baby  we  went  up  to  London,  and  took  lodgings  for  a 
time.  The  bedroom  in  these  lodgings  was  entered  from  the  sitting-room,  and  there 
was  no  other  means  of  getting  in  or  out.    One  night  I  could  not  go  to  sleep  ;  the  fire 

On  Indications  of  Gojitimied  Terrene  Knowledge,  &c,  235 

Sometimes,  as  in  the  narrative  next  to  be  cited,  there  is  a  record  of 
prolonged  speech,  but  in  such  cases,  especially  when  few  or  no  actual 
words  are  quoted,  we  can  hardly  be  sure  as  to  the  degree  of  externali- 
sation  which  the  voice  assumes.  The  apparition  here  seems  to  have  at 
least  comprehended  the  percipient's  inward  situation,  although  it  is  not 
clear  that  any  prediction  requiring  supernormal  insight  was  actually 
made.  I  owe  the  narrative  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Morell  Theoljald, 
who  printed  it  first  in  Light  for  March  5th,  1892.  It  is  written  on  an 
old  piece  of  paper  (sent  to  me)  and  marked  "  For  Mr.  B.'s  private 
perusal."  The  histoiy  of  the  paper  is  as  follows  ; — A  Mr.  C.  (I  must 
not  give  the  names),  well  known  to  Mr.  Theobald,  and  holding  a  good 
position  in  one  of  the  Australian  colonies,  discovered  it  among  the 
private  papers  of  his  uncle,  Mr.  B.,  who  died  twelve  years  ago.  The 
apparition,  as  will  be  seen,  occurred  on  October  24:th,  1860,  and  the 
account  is  endorsed  November  9th  by  the  percipient's  father.  Further 
particulars,  sent  to  Mr.  B.  by  the  percipient,  are  dated  November  13th, 
1860.  The  first  accoui^t  seems  to  have  been  sent  l)y  the  percipient  to 
his  father,  and  by  the  father  to  Mr.  B. 

The  percipient  has  been  identified,  and  confirms,  as  will  be  seen, 
this  early  narrative.  It  is  interesting  to  find  a  contemporaneous  record 
of  a  case  of  this  now  familiar  type,  written  down  at  a  time  when  less 
attention  had  been  directed  to  these  messages  from  departing  or 
departed  friends. 

was  burning  brightly  in  the  sitting-room,  and  the  door  was  partly  open.    I  had  a- 
consciousness  that  there  was  someone  in  the  next  room.    I  saw  the  door  gently  pushed 
back,  and  a  beautiful  lady  came  in,  followed  by  a  common  looking  woman,  carry ing- 
a  child  about  a  year  old,  dressed  in  a  yellow  pelisse.    The  lady  came  up  to  the  side  of 
the  bed,  and  said,  pointing  to  the  baby,  '  This  is  Johnny  ;  you  will  remember 
Johnny.'    She  smiled  at  me,  and  I  was  just  going  to  answer,  when  the  whole  vision 
was  gone.     I  did  not  feel  the  least  afraid,  and  I  even  turned  to  see  where  the 
beautiful  lady  with  the  child  and  nurse  Iiad  gone  to.    Then  it  suddenly  struck  me  that 
these  were  not  real  i:)eople,  and  I  woke  my  husband  and  described  what  I  had  seen. 
He  said,  '  I  do  not  know  what  to  think,  but  you  have  exactly  described  my  first  tuife." 
The  lost  child's  name  was  Johnnie.     Well,  we  tried  to  think  the  incident  had  been 
an  ordinary  dream,  and  some  daj's  elapsed,  when  we  chanced  to  lose  ourselves  in 
returning  from  Westminster  Abbey  in  one  of  the  low  streets  of  that  neighbourhood. 
Suddenly  I  saw  coming  do^TO  the  street  the  common-looking  woman  I  had  seen  in 
the  vision,  carrying  the  baby  with  the  yellow  pelisse.     I  said  to  my  husband,  '  That 
is  the  woman  I  saw. '    He  warned  me  to  be  careful,  and  as  the  woman  ai)proached,  he 
said  to  her,  'That  is  a  nice  little  boy  you  have  got  there.'     'Yes,  sir,'  she  said,  'he 
is  a  nice  little  boy.    But  I  wish  I  cculd  find  them  as  owns  him.    His  father  is  an 
ofBoer  in  the  navy,  and  I  doubt  whether  his  ship  is  back  yet.'    We  made  further 
inquiries,  and  we  found  the  woman  was  really  the  one  with  whom  my  husband's  wife's 
relations  had  placed  the  baby.  We  took  the  baby  home,  and  he  grew  up  and  v/ent  into 
the  navy  when  he  was  old  enough,  and  it  is  for  him  that  I  am  now  in  mourning." 
This  was  the  story  as  told  by  Mrs.  R.,  and  so  great  was  the  impression  made  upon  my 
mind  that  I  am  certain  of  remembering  all  the  details,  if  not  always  the  precise 
words.  But  these  words  I  do  remember  precisely, "  This  is  Johnny  ;  you  will  remember 
Johnny." 

Alice  Bodingtox. 

R  2        '  , 

236 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

G.  217. 

' '  On  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  October  24th,  1860,  having  retired  to  bed 
about  nine  o'cIocIj:,  I  had  slept,  I  conclude,  about  two  hours,  making  it  then 
about  eleven  o'clock  p.m.  I  was  awoke  from  my  sleep  by  a  hand  touching 
my  forehead,  and  the  well-known  voice  of  Mrs.  B.  pronouncing  my  name,  E. 
I  started  up,  and  sat  in  bed,  rubbed  my  eyes,  and  then  saw  Mrs.  B.  Froni 
the  head  to  the  waist  the  figure  was  distinct,  clear,  and  well-defined  :  but 
from  the  waist  downwards  it  was  all  misty  and  the  lower  part  transparent. 
She  appeared  to  be  dressed  in  black  silk.  Her  countenance  was  grave  and 
rather  sad,  but  not  unhappy. 

"The  words  she  first  uttered  were:  'I  have  left  dear  John';  what 
followed  related  entirely  to  myself,  and  slie  was  permitted  by  a  most 
kind  Providence  to  speak  words  of  mercy,  promise,  and  comfort,  and 
assurance  that  what  I  most  wished  would  come  to  pass.  She  came  to  me 
in  an  hour  of  bitter  mental  agony,  and  was  sent  as  a  messenger  of  mercy. 

"I  would  have  spoken  more  to  her,  but  tlie  form  faded,  and  in  answer 
to  an  earnest  apjjeal,  a  voice  came  to  me  which,  though  apparently  hundreds 
of  miles  away,  Avas  distinct  and  clear,  saying,  '  Only  believe, '  and  she  was 
gone. 

"  Througliout  the  interview  I  felt  no  fear,  but  an  inward,  heavenly 
peace.    It  was  new  moon,  but  the  room  was  as  light  as  day  !  " 

Our  next  information  consists  of  a  statement  of  Mr.  D. 's  (so  to  term  the 
percipient,  a  gentleman  of  position),  written  in  reply  to  Mr.  B.'s  questions, 
November  13th,  1860  ;  found  (in  Mr.  B.'s  handwriting)  among  Mr.  B.'s 
papers,  and  now  summarised  for  us  by  Mr.  C. 

' '  Mr.  D.  had  been  asleep  but  could  not  say  how  long.  Had  not  seen 
Mrs.  B.  for  several  months.  Can't  recollect  what  dress  she  had  on  then. 
Was  not  in  l)ad  health.  Was  alone  in  tlie  house.  The  subject  of  his  anxiety 
was  not  know-n  to  Mrs.  B.  nor  connected  witli  her.  The  apparition  seemed 
to  wait  for  questions,  and  when  put  they  were  answered.  The  subject  of 
the  communication  was  one  greatly  influencing  his  thouglits  and  feelings, 
and  had  been  deeply  agitating  him  before  he  went  to  bed.  It  was  not  a 
religious  matter  ;  but  Scriptural  language  was  used  ;  Mark  xi.  23,  24  were 
quoted  ; — a  passage  well  known  to  the  writer,  and  often  dwelt  u])on  by  him. 
The  window  faces  north.  Tlie  night  was  wet  and  cloudy.  The  writer  did 
not  put  it  down  at  the  time,  believing  it  too  real  ever  to  be  forgotten.  He 
had  not  mentioned  it  to  anyone  but  his  father  and  Mrs.  B.  He  saw  the 
notice  of  the  death  for  the  first  time  on  Saturday  in  the  Observer.  Resided 
about  10  miles  from  Gawler,  which  is  25  miles  from  Adelaide." 

Mr.  C.  has  forwai-ded  to  us  a  ])rinted  extract  from  the  South  Australian 
Mexjister  of  C)ctober  25th,  1860,  which  includes  a  notice  of  the  death  of  Mrs. 
B.  on  October  24th,  at  Bank-street,  Adelaide.  The  lioiur  of  the  death  is 
fixed  by  Mr.  C.'s  ownr  recollection,  depending  on  his  own  fixed  habits 
at  the  time.    He  writes  to  Mr.  Theobald,  under  date  May  3rd,  1892 

"  I  was  at  that  time  a  clerk  in  ray  uncle's  office,  which  was  at  his  house  in 
Bank-street,  Adelaide  ;  but  was  staying  just  then  at  Glenelly.  I  left  the 
office  at  4  p.m.  on  the  23rd  after  saying  good-bye  to  Mrs.  B.,  leaving  her  in  her 
visual  state  of  health.  She  was  taken  ill  about  11  p.m.,  and  asked  frequently 
for  me,  expressing  a  strong  desire  not  to  die  before  I  arrived  ;  but  when  I 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  X-c.  237 

got  to  the  house  at  the  usual  time,  about  10  a.m.,  next  morning,  I  was  met 
witli  the  news  that  she  had  been  dead  about  two  hours." 

The  death,  therefore,  had  taken  place  more  than  twelve  hours  before  the 
ajiparition  was  seen. 

Mr.  D.  makes  a  slight  mistake  in  his  original  account,  in  saying  that  it 
was  new  moon,  whereas  the  moon  was  then  ten  days  old.  But  as  it  ■was  a 
cloudy  night,  and  his  window  faced  north,  the  light  by  which  the  figure  was 
seen  was  doubtless,  as  in  so  many  of  these  cases,  itself  a  part  of  the 
apparition. 

At  Mr.  Theobald's  request  Mr.  C.  communicated  with  Mr.  D.,  who  is 
still  living  ;  and  we  have  therefore  the  opportunity  of  comparing  a  thirty 
years'  old  recollection  with  the  same  person's  contemporary  statement.  Tlio 
comparison  shows  that, — as  I  believe  to  be  often  tlie  case, — the  memory  of 
the  supernormal  incident  had  not  grown,  but  dwindled. 

Reminded  in  a  general  way,  but  without  detail,  of  the  occurrence,  Mr. 
D.  writes  (in  a  letter  seen  by  me),  April  21st,  1892  : — 

"There  was  no  conversation.  She  only  said  to  me,  '  E.,  I  have  left 
dear  John.'  I  cannot  remember  whether  it  was  wet  or  not;  but  as  to  the 
moon,  it  was  not  at  all  like  that  light.  It  Vv'as  more  like  an  electric  light ; — 
a  subdued  brilliancy.  .  .  .  '  How  long  did  the  spirit  remain  in 
conversation  with  me  1 '  Certainly  not  more  than  5  minutes,  if  so 
long.  ...  I  sent  the  account  to  my  father,  who  probably  handed  it  to 
Mrs.  B." 

Further  reminded  of  his  contemjjorary  account,  Mr.  D.  writes.  May  1st, 
1892  : — "  I  appear  to  have  spoken,  but  have  no  distinct  recollection  of  doing 
so.  What  slie  did  say  was  entirely  personal."  It  related  to  the  removal  of 
a  painful  misunderstanding  with  a  friend.  "  So  far  as  I  know  she  had  never 
seen,  or  even  heard,  of  the  friend  alluded  to."  Mr.  D.  declines  to  give 
fiu-ther  detail;  but  he  still  considers  that  the  communication  showed  "a 
plenary  knowledge  "  of  facts  personal  to  himself.  His  hesitation  of  memory 
seems  to  have  been  on  the  point  whether  the  h'ope  and  consolation  were 
conveyed  by  spoken  words,  or  in  some  directer  fashion.  The  confidence 
inspired  by  the  message  was,  he  tells  us,  justified  by  the  result. 

The  supposed  conversation  in  this  case  may  have  been  more  dream- 
like than  the  percipient  supposed.  It  may  have  taken  place,  so  to  say, 
in  his  own  mind,  without  definite  auditory  externalisation. 

We  may,  indeed,  expect  to  find  various  transitional  forms  between 
the  visual  phantom  and  the  more  strictly  automatic  message ; — between 
the  hallucinatory  image  of  the  departed  friend  and  the  words  uttered 
in  trance,  or  given  by  writing  or  table-tilting,  which  claim  to  originate 
in  his  intelligence.  The  manifestations  are  fundamentally  of  the  same 
ordei',  but  with  this  advantage  on  the  part  of  the  motor  messages,  that 
they  employ  a  physical  faculty  of  the  automatist's  which  can  be  easily 
exercised  for  a  long  time  continuously ;  whereas  the  faculty  needed 
to  see  or  hear  a  phantasmal  figure  or  voice  seems  liable  to  rapid 
exhaustion. 

I  will  conclude  this  paper,  as    I  concluded   my    "  Defence  of 

238 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Phantasms  of  the  Dead,"  in  Vol.  VI.,  with  a  group  of  messages  of 
the  motor  type — messages  given  through  automatic  writing  or  other 
varieties  of  automatic  movement.  Such  messages  have  perplexities  of 
their  own, — perplexities  discvissed  in  other  papers,  and  to  which  I  can- 
not here  return.  But  with  all  the  doubts  as  to  their  true  origin  these 
written  messages  seem  to  me  to  form  our  most  hopeful  approach  to  the 
exact  knowledge  which  we  desire.  A  single  form  of  o-epeatable  ex2Kri- 
ment, — even  if  that  experiment  succeed  but  once  in  a  thousand  times, 
— is  basis  enough  for  generations  of  research. 

I  will  give  three  cases,  presenting  different  points  of  interest.  In 
the  first  we  have  a  message  containing  a  fact  perhaps  known  to  the  de- 
ceased person  from  whom  the  message  purpoi'ted  to  come  ;  and  certainly 
not  "  consciously  " — that  is,  supraliminally — known  to  the  automatists 
who  I'eceived  it.  If,  however,  we  assume  the  existence  of  any  sub- 
liminal clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  those  living  persons, — or  even, 
perhaps,  of  a  degree  of  perspicacity  exceeding  that  possessed  by  their 
normal  selves, — we  might  explain  the  message  as  having  originated  in 
their  own  minds. 

In  the  second  case  we  have  a  series  of  automatic  messages, — some 
of  them,  perhaps,  explicable  on  the  liiies  just  now  suggested  ;  some  of 
them  possibly  to  be  explained  by  telepathy  from  living  minds,  some  of 
them,  on  the  other  hand,  at  least  ^;rt»i(?  facie  referable  to  the  source  in 
the  mind  of  a  departed  person,  from  which  they  professed  to  come. 
Whether  there  are  in  reality  so  many  different  oi'igins  of  a  series  of 
messages  given  to  one  automatist,  or  wdiether  any  one  explanation  can 
be  made  to  cover  them  all,  is  a  matter  to  which  Ave  shall  elsewhere  have 
to  return. 

The  third  case  narrates  the  success  of  a  direct  experiment, — a  test- 
message  planned  Ijefore  death  and  cojnmunicated  after  death,  by  a  man 
who  held  that  the  hope  of  an  assurance  of  continued  presence  was  worth 
at  least  a  resolute  effort,  whatever  its  I'esult  might  be. 

G.  218. 

345,  W.  34th-street,  New  York,  October  3rd,  1888. 
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

My  Dear  Sir, — Thinking  tliat  you  may  possibly  be  back  from  your 
vacation,  I  send  you  witli  this  the  account  of  the  finding  of  the  note  by  Mrs. 
B.  and  the  letter  to  me  from  Dr.  Knorr. 

(Signed)  W.  D.  Harden, 

Savannah,  Ga.,  September  16th,  1888. 

Judge  W.  D.  Harden, 

345,  W.  34th-street,  New  York. 
Dear  Friend, — This  morning,  when  I  paid  a  professional  visit  to  Mrs. 
B.'s  sick  son,  she  showed  me  a  rougli  draught  of  tlie  statement  she  intended 
to  send  to  you.    Fearing  further  delay  from  her  intended  re-writing  repoz-t,  I 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  d-c.  239 

begged  her  to  let  me  have  it.  She  consented,  if  I  would  explain  to  you  the 
circumstances  of  the  shortcomings  of  that  draught. 

I  think  I  need  to  add  very  little  to  Mrs.  B.'s  statements.  You  are 
acquainted  with  the  modus  operandi  of  the  communications  with  the  sliding 
rod,  the  rod  and  the  alphabet  board  being  at  B.'s  house,  the  same  you  saw  at 
Miss  Maggie  R.'s.  In  order  to  facilitate  your  description  for  Dr.  H.  I  send 
you  a  paper  model  of  the  rod  and  a  printed  alphabet  (with  other  convenient 
inscriptions),  that  is  to  be  pasted  near  the  two  (right  and  left)  edges,  leaving  a 
space  between  of  sufficient  "width  for  the  points  of  the  rod  to  point  out  the 
desired  letters. 

I  have  to  remark  that  a  couple  of  days  after  the  death  of  Miss  Nina  B.'s 
Jiance  (Mx.  N.  H.)  I  assisted  her  to  get  into  communication  with  him.  "We 
succeeded,  Miss  Nina  turning  out  to  be  feebly  mediumistic,  and  many  com- 
munications were  received  from  him. 

This  attracted  Major  B.'s  attention.  He  tried  then  with  me  (the  major 
■was  then  an  Agnostic),  and  found  that  he  also  was  mediumistic,  and  he  got 
communications  from  his  father  and  his  uncle  that  were  so  characteristic  that 
he  became  convinced  of  the  reality  of  spirit  communion.  So  when  the  major 
departed,  last  spring  or  summer,  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  modus 
operandi  of  spirit  communion  ;  and  therefore  the  very  day  after  his  departure 
■we  could  receive  a  few  words  from  him.  Later  on  we  received  many  messages 
from  him. 

I  think  I  was  present  at  the  seance  when  he  stated  that  the  note  was 
deposited  somewhere,  but  could  not  tell  where.  It  looks  as  if  at  that  time 
he  had  not  yet  discovered  the  whereabouts  of  the  note,  but  continued  hunting 
for  it,  and  at  last  discovered  it. 

I  think  I  have  touched  upon  every  point  that  needed  elucidation. 

.  L.  Knork,  Savannah. 

Judge  Harden. 

In  compliance  with  your  request  I  will  state  :  After  my  honoured 
husband  Major  Lucius  B.'s  departure  from  this  life,  I  was  in  distress  of 
mind  that  none  could  understand  but  one  sin-rounded  by  similar  circum- 
stances. Of  his  business  transactions  I  knew  but  little.  After  a  week  or 
two  of  stunning  agony,  I  aroused  myself  to  look  into  our  financial  condition. 
I  was  aware  that  he  had  in  his  keeping  a  note  given  by  Judge  H.  W. 
Hopkms  to  some  several  hundred  which  was  due,  and  I  searched  all  the 
nooks  and  corners  of  his  secretaire,  manuscript,  letters,  memorandum-books, 
read  several  hundred  letters  ;  but  aU  for  naught.  For  two  months  I  spent 
most  of  the  time  going  over  and  over,  but  with  the  same  result.  I  finally 
asked  him  at  a  seance  about  the  note. 

Q.  :  "  Have  you  deposited  the  note  anywhere  V    A.  :  ''  I  have." 

Q.  :  "  Where  ?  "    No  answer. 

Finally  I  wrote  to  Judge  H.  (who  had  written  me  about  it)  :  "I  had  as 
•well  tell  you  the  note  has  not  been  found.  I  cannot  imagine  where  it  is." 
This  was  on  Friday.  The  following  Sunday,  about  four  o'clock,  my  daughter 
Nina,  who  possesses  some  singular  power,  proposed  we  try  if  we  could  not 
get  a  communication  from  our  loved  ones.  While  she  went  to  get  a  little 
arrangement  (a  rod  that  worked  on  a  board  upon  which  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  were  printed)  I  sat  in  my  room  alone,  thinking,  if  it  were  possible 

240. 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

for  Major  B.  to  see  the  heart  iilled  to  overflowing  witli  anguish,  and  added  to 
this  the  mind  distressed  by  business  cares,  would  he  not  communicate  with 
me  and  try  to  give  some  consolation  or  assistance. 

But  I  did  not  express  my  thoughts  to  anyone.  Nina  returned,  and  after 
a  little  conversation  we  put  our  hands  on  the  rod  and  it  prvmpthj  spelt 
"  Look  in  my  long  drawer  and  find  Willie. "  I  became  excited,  ran  to  the 
bureau  and  pulled  out  the  bottom  drawer,  turned  the  contents  upon  the 
floor,  and  commenced  to  search.  Under  all  the  things  was  a  vest  ;  in  its 
little  breast  pocket  was  the  note. 

Major  B.  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  bottom  drawer,  where  only  his 
under-garments  were  kejit,  "  My  long  drawer, "  to  designate  it  from  several 
small  drawers  set  aside  for  his  use.  The  vest  was  the  only  garment,  other . 
than  underwear,  in  the  drawer.  The  vest  was  the  one  taken  off  him  when 
he  first  became  ill.  He  was  unconscious  during  the  first  day  of  his  illness. 
The  vest  was  put  in  the  drawer  after  or  during  his  illness  by  my  friend,  I 
think,  who  assisted  in  caring  for  him  while  sick. 

The  drawer  had  not  been  opened  that  we  knew  of  after  he  left  us  until 
the  note  was  discovered.  Although  I  had  moved  to  another  room,  I  gave 
instructions  that  the  bottom  drawer  was  not  to  be  disturbed. 

As  soon  as  the  rod  spelt  "  Look  in  my  long  drawer  and  find  Willie"  I 
was  perfectly  electrified  with  the  knowledge  that  Willie  H.'s  note  was 
in  that  drawer,  although  I  never  would  have  thought  of  looking  in  such  a 
place  for  a  valuable  paper. 

Major  B.  and  myself  always  spoke  to  and  of  Judge  H.  as  "Willie,"  he 
being  a  relation  of  mine  and  a  favourite  of  Major  B.  from  Willie's  childhoods 

I  have  just  read  the  above  to  my  davighter,  and  she  says  she  will  endorse 
the  statement  as  being  correct. — I  am,  very  respectfully, 

(Signed)  Mrs.  E.  F.  B.  B.,  widow  of  the 

late  Major  Lucius  C.  B. 
(Signed)  N.  H.  B. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  September  l&h,  1888. 
The  two  signatures  have  been  made  in  my  presence,  and  I  corroborate 
many  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  above  report.    I  am 
now  requested  by  the  ladies  to  say  that  they  do  not  wish  their  names  to 
appear  in  public.  (Signed)  Louis  Knorr,  M.D. 

Savannah,  October  27 fh,  1888. 

Judge  W.  D.  Harden, 

345,  W.  34th-street,  New  York. 
My  Dear  Friend, — The  delay  in  answering  yours  of  the  9th  inst.  was 
caused  by  Mrs.  B.,  who  sent  me  her  answer  only  an  hour  ago,  notwithstanding 
my  having  reminded  her  a  dozen  times. 

As  you  see  from  her  statement,  the  exact  date  of  tlie  memorable  seance 
cannot  be  given  by  her.  But  some  coincidental  occuri-ences,  as  you'll 
jn-esently  see,  will  make  it  the  13th  or  the  20th  of  May  last.  It  is  certain 
that  it  was  a  Sunday,  as  Mrs.  B.  states,  for  I  remember  that,  when  I 
returned  from  Wilmington  Island  that  Sunday,  Mrs.  K.  told  me  that  Miss 
Nina  B.  Iiad  been  here  and  had  told  her  to  inform  me  that  something 
important  had  happened  that  afternoon,  and  she  had  pleasant  news  to  com- 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoiuledge,  d-c.  241 

municate  to  me.  I  guessed  at  once  what  it  referred  to  ;  for  they  had  all  along 
been  so  anxious  to  get  some  information  about  that  note,  and  I  was  present 
at  the  several  previous  seances,  when  ineffectual  attempts  had  been  made  to 
get  that  information. 

When  I  was  conferring  with  Mrs.  B.  for  the  purpose  of  getting  at  the  date, 
she  at  last  remarked  :  "  It  was  about  a  week  or  two  after  Miss  Ida  entered  Dr. 
Nunn's  service."  I  remembered  that  circumstance  well,  and  thinking  Miss 
Ida  might  help  to  get  at  the  date,  I  called  on  her.  She  distinctly  remembers 
the  circumstances  and  thinks  it  was  the  second  Sunday  after.  She  told  me 
that  she  commenced  with  Dr.  N.  on  Monday,  the  7th  of  May  last  ;  then  the 
following  Sunday  was  the  13th  and  the  second  Sunday  the  20th  of  May.  I 
thought  first  that  it  would  be  possible  to  decide  if  it  was  the  13th  or  20th 
by  consulting  the  tide-tables — making  that  Sunday  the  correct  one  on  which 
there  was  an  afternoon  flood  tide.  But  on  further  consideration  I  see  that 
would  not  be  perfectly  reliable  ;  for  although  I  generally  selected  such 
Sundays  for  going  down  and  coming  uj)  from  the  island  on  which  there  was  a 
favourable  (flood)  tide,  still  I  did  not  do  so  invariably,  because  the  prevailing 
southerly  winds  in  summer  permitted  sailing  up  to  Thunderbolt  even  against 
the  tide.  So  there  is  no  means  to  decide  whether  it  was  on  the  13th  or  the 
20th  of  May. 

I  see  Mrs.  B.  does  not  answer  No.  2  of  Dr.  H.'s  questions  (date  of 
sitting  where  question  about  the  note  was  first  asked)  at  all  ;  so  I  will  do  so  as 
far  as  I  can.  It  was  about  a  week  after  Major  B.'s  demise  that  the  question 
was  put  in  my  presence,  and  further  at  several  subsequent  seances  at  which  I 
was  present  ;  but  no  exact  dates  could  be  given,  further  than  that  it 
occurred,  say,  between  the  6th  of  April  and  the  13th  of  May,  on  several 
occasions  in  my  presence,  and  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  B.,  Miss  Nina  B.,  and 
sometimes  of  the  youngest  child  (Lettie,  eight  or  nine  years). 

In  answer  to  No.  5  of  Dr.  H.'s  questions  ("Is  Mrs.  B.  certain  that  neither 
she  nor  her  daughter  put  the  vest  away  ?  ")  I  have  to  state  that  I  have  the 
rejjeated  assurance  of  both  the  ladies  that  they  feel  sure  that  they  did  not 
put  the  vest  away,  nor  that  they  had  the  least  suspicion  that  there  could  have 
been  so  valuable  a  paper  in  that  vest-pocket,  or  else  they  would  have 
hunted  for  the  vest  in  that  drawer,  a)uong  others  where  clothing  might 
have  been  stowed  away,  and  thus  should  have  discovered  what  they  hunted 
for. 

And  as  to  question  No.  4  ("  Can  aiiy  more  definite  statement  be  obtained 
concerning  the  putting  away  of  the  vest '? ")  I  have  to  state  that  Mrs.  B.  and 
Miss  B.  always  thought  that  their  cousin  (Miss  Mel  Thomas),  who  had  with 
the  most  seK-sacrificing  devotion  nursed  the  major  during  his  sickness  and  had 
the  entire  management  of  the  sick  room,  had  put  it  away.  But  on  questioning 
her  she  said  she  had  no  recollection  of  so  trifling  an  occurrence. 

In  answer  to  question  No.  6  ("  Who  were  present  ?  ")  Mrs.  B.  says, 
"Possibly  one  of  the  children."  I  have  to  ex^jlain  this  answer.  She  ought 
to  have  answered,  "  Possibly  my  youngest  child,  Lettie."  For  of  her  children, 
besides  Miss  Nina,  it  is  only  Lettie  who  has  something  to  do  with  these 
seances — she  being  a  far  stronger  medium  than  Mrs.  B.  or  Miss  B. — but  at 
the  same  time  does  not  feel  the  least  interest  in  the  matter  ;  on  the  contrary, 
hates  to  be  called  away  from  her  dolls,  puts  her  hands  on  the  sliding-rod  with 

2^2 

Mr.  F.  If.  H.  Myers. 

a  great  deal  of  grumbling,  and  is  always  very  glad  to  get  off,  the  sooner  the 
better. 

Miss  Nina  reported  to  me  that  that  Sunday  slie  and  her  sister  Lettie  were 
first  holding  communication  with  their  father  and  received  some  pleasant  and 
convincing  messages  from  their  father  ;  then  Lettie  would  not  continue  any 
longer.  It  was  then  tliat  Miss  N.  called  her  mother  to  take  Lettie's  place, 
and  the  result  was  the  getting  of  that  message  in  regard  to  the  note.  So,  you 
see,  it  may  have  been  possible  that  Lettie  had  not  left  the  room  yet  at  the 
time. 

I  have  also  to  state  tliat  great  precautions  are  taken  against  intruding 
spirits  that  may  jDersonate  (and  on  one  occasion  have  done  so,  personating 
Willie  Morrison,  the  young  lawyer  staying  in  Colonel  Lester's  office)  and 
give  us  all  kinds  of  lying  messages.  These  jarecautions  consist  in  a  secret 
signal  and  a  secret  pass-Avord — the  two  being  necessary,  since  at  one  time 
the  intruders  succeeded  in  getting  hold  of  one  ;  but  could  not  get  hold  of 
the  otlier  too,  and  thus  were  foiled.  To  make  doubly  sure,  the  two  signs 
of  recognition  are  changed  frequently. — Yours  truly, 

Louis  Knorr. 
October  27th,  1888. 

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Li  answer  to  your  questions  I  will  say  :  1.  Major  B.  died 
just  at  sunrise  (Easter  morning),  first  day  of  April,  1888.  2.  I  told  all  I  know 
about  2:iutting  away  the  vest.  3.  About  three  o'clock,  Sunday,  the  first  or 
second  week  in  May.  Myself  and  daughter  were  the  only  ones  present  that  I 
remember — possibly  one  of  the  children.  It  happened  just  as  I  stated.  To 
me  there  is  but  one  solution. — In  great  haste,  very  respectfully, 

(Signed)          E.  F.  B. 

The  next  case  is  from  a  gentleman  whose  name  cannot  at  present  be 
given  in  full. 

G.  219. 

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson.  N.Y.,  Novemhcr  15th,  1891. 

Dear  Sir, — Recently  I  learned  that  you  are  the  Secretary  of  the  American 
Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  Being  interested  in  the  sub- 
ject, I  concluded  to  write  to  you,  offering  a  statement  of  my  own  experience. 
As  so-called  spiritual  manifestations  are  viewed  unfavourably  here,  and  as  it 
would  be  mucli  to  my  detriment  if  my  connection  with  the  subject  were  to 
become  known,  I  ask  that  my  name  be  withlield  from  the  public. 

For  the  past  five  years  I  have  been  a  so-called  writing  medium.  The 
writing  is  involuntary  on  my  jDart,  and  the  thoughts  expressed  are  not  mine — 
that  is,  as  far  as  I  know  they  are  not  mine. 

Sometimes,  instead  of  writing,  off-hand  pen  work  will  be  done,  but  it  is  not 
of  a  very  high  order.  In  the  writing  the  penmanship  is  generally  very  good, 
and  the  thoughts  expressed  are  generally  good,  and  are  sometimes  valuable. 
As  you  are  undoubtedly  familiar  with  this  class  of  writing,  I  will  not  go  into 
details,  but  will  leave  you  to  inquire  for  such  facts  as  you  see  fit. 

I  am  anxious  to  find  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this,  and  I  hope  the 
Society  may  yet  be  able  to  furnish  one. 

As  an  indication  of  the  trend  of  my  thoughts,  I  will  add  that  for  the  past 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoidedge,  dx.  243 

13  or  14  years  I  have  been  a  student  of  the  works  of  Herbert  Spencer  and 
other  great  men  of  liberal  views,  and  that  I  am  an  evolutionist,  so  called. 

If  you  think  my  experience  will  be  of  use,  please  call  for  it.  You  may 
send  questions,  or  you  may  state  in  a  general  way  the  outline  of  what  will  be 
of  use. 

N.Y.,  December  22nd,  1891. 

Dr.  Ilichard  Hodgson. 

Sir, —  .  .  .  Five  years  ago  I  was  in  Vermont  on  business,  and  •while 
there  made  a  visit  at  the  home  of  a  relative.  In  the  evening,  for  amusement, 
a  planchette  was  produced  and  operated.  Pretty  soon  it  was  written  that  I 
was  a  writing  medium,  and  I  was  requested  to  try  with  a  pencil.  I  took  a 
pencil  in  my  hand  and  to  my  surprise  I  found  I  could  write  some  in  the 
"automatic  "  manner.  The  writing  was  not  very  good  and  was  accomj^anied 
with  more  or  less  breaks  and  difficulties.  It  was  written  that  practice  would 
make  it  much  freer  and  better.  This  I  found  to  be  so.  Persons  in  the  room 
asked  as  to  dates  on  pieces  of  money  and  other  similar  tests,  and  the  answers 
were  generally  correct.  After  that  I  wrote  some  almost  daily  for  some  time 
and  soon  became  quite  a  ready  writer  in  this  manner. 

On  one  occasion,  not  long  after,  a  friend,  of  whose  life  I  had  known 
nothing  until  about  that  time,  proposed  to  ask  some  questions  mentally  and 
see  if  the  answers  written  would  be  correct.  It  was  written  that  the  spirit  of 
his  wife  was  present.  I  inquired  (mentally)  for  her  name.  In  reply  her 
name  was  written  out  in  full,  correctly.  I  did  not  know  her  name  :  I  knew  that 
he  was  a  widower,  and  I  knew  no  more  of  his  wife  or  the  matters  inquired 
about.  My  friend  then  asked  (mentally)  where  she  died  and  when  ?  The 
answers  were  correct.  He  then  asked,  "  What  was  the  cause  of  her  death  ?  " 
The  answer,  "Heart  disease,"  was  correct.  He  then  asked  for  the  circum- 
stances of  her  death.  It  was  written  that  she  died  suddenly,  at  night,  by 
the  side  of  him,  in  bed,  and  that  tlie  first  thing  he  knew  of  her  death  was 
when  he  found  her  dead  m  the  morning.  This  was  correct.  He  asked  for 
her  age,  size,  and  for  any  particular  mark  by  which  she  could  be  identified  1 
The  answer  w^as  correct  as  to  age  and  size,  and  as  to  identification  it  was 
written  that  she  had  a  large  scar  near  the  knee,  caused  by  a  burn.  This  was 
also  correct. 

Many  other  questions  were  asked  and  answered  ;  and  whether  he  asked 
the  questions  aloud,  or  mentally  to  himself,  tlie  answers  were  strictly  correct 
in  almost  every  instance.    There  was  no  one  but  us  two  present. 

On  another  occasion,  about  the  same  time,  I  made  inquiry  (I  was  alone) 
touching  a  case  I  was  then  investigating.  Briefly,  the  facts  are  these  : — 
A  wealthy  widow,  Mrs.  X. ,  had  died  at  her  summer  cottage  with  no  one 
present  save  her  sister  and  a  neighbour.  She  left  a  will  :  by  its  terms  this 
sister  was  to  receive  several  thousand  dollars.  Our  client,  Mrs.  Y.,  was  also 
a  legatee  and  the  executrix  of  the  will ;  and  as  such  it  was  her  duty  to  collect 
in  all  assets.  Our  client  knew  it  to  be  a  fact  that  the  deceased  had  in  cash 
in  her  possession  a  short  time  before  her  death  about  $700.  After  Mrs.  X.'s 
death  no  money  was  found,  and  the  sister  who  was  with  her  claimed  there 
was  no  money  ;  that  Mrs.  X.  had  no  money  at  the  time  of  her  death  about 
her,  except  some  f  15.  Our  client  saw  this  sister  and  questioned  her  closely, 
but  to  no  purpose.  I  did  not  see  or  know  this  sister  until  some  time  after 
the  writing  I  am  about  to  give.    The  question  was,  what  had  become  of  the 

•244 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

$700  1  Alone  by  myself  I  asked  for  the  facts,  which  were  written  out  much  in 
detail,  but  in  substance  the  facts  as  written  were  these  :  Tliat  the  deceased 
had  on  her  person  at  the  time  of  her  death  about  $600  ;  that  she  had  spent 
the  other  $100  ;  that  immediately  after  her  death  her  sister,  Mrs.  Z.,  had 
stolen  the  $600  from  her  dead  body  ;  that  she  had  since  spent  some  of  it  and 
deposited  the  balance,  some  $500,  in  a  bank  in  the  village  of  A.  In  the 
course  of  a  few  days  we  made  inquiry,  and  learned  that  Mrs.  Z.  had  made 
the  deposit  there,  but  had  recently  drawn  it  out.  We  then  cited  her  before 
the  Surrogate,  and  she  swore  that  just  before  the  death  of  Mrs.  X.  (the  same 
night  she  died)  Mi's.  X.  gave  her  the  money,  $520,  to  give  to  a  nephew 
as  a  present ;  that  there  was  only  $520  ;  that  she  had  just  given  it  to  the 
nephew.  We  commenced  a  suit  against  her  for  the  money  ($520)  and 
recovered  it.  The  jury  did  not  believe  her  defence  and  made  her  pay.  I 
have  only  stated  so  mucli  of  tlie  case  as  seems  to  bear  on  the  "automatic  " 
writing.  The  question  is,  where  did  I  get  the  knowledge  of  the  theft,  the 
amount  and  the  deposit  in  the  bank  ?  I  may  add  that  wo  afterwards  learned 
she  did  spend  some  money  about  that  time  that  Ave  always  thought  was  some 
she  took  in  addition  to  the  §520,  and  it  would  have  made  the  sum  stolen 
about  $600. 

About  four  and  a  half  years  ago  an  aunt  of  mine.  Miss  T.,  learned  that 
she  had  a  cancer  growing  on  her  breast.  She  liad  it  cut  out,  and  soon  was 
apparently  in  very  fair  health.  After  a  few  months  she  began  to  fail  very 
much  ;  was  about  the  house,  but  was  very  generally  run  down.  Cancer  did 
not  reappear.  She  was  not  said  by  her  doctors  to  be  in  any  immediate 
danger ;  but  for  some  reason  I  made  inquiry,  and  to  my  surprise  it  was 
written  that  she  was  very  badly  off  and  that  she  would  only  live  a  very  short 
time.  I  inquired  the  cause,  &c.,  and  it  was  written  that  her  system  was 
poisoned  through  and  through  with  cancerous  matter.  I  inquired  as  to  when 
she  would  die  ?  The  answer  was  that  it  was  impossible  to  tell  just  when,  that 
the  most  that  could  be  said  was  tliat  she  would  live  about  thirty  days,  judging 
from  a  careful  examination  of  her  case  made  at  that  time.  It  was  written  that 
she  would  certainly  die,  that  she  could  not  possibly  get  better  or  live  much 
longer  than  thirty  days.  Within  the  next  week  or  so  I  inquired  on  several 
occasions  as  to  the  matter,  but  the  answers  were  always  to  the  same  effect  and 
positive.  My  aunt  declined  fast  and  died  at  the  time  set  within  a  day,  and  I 
think  it  was  just  30  days.  She  was  abed  only  10  days  or  so.  A  post-mortem 
showed  she  died  from  cancerous  jjoisoning. 

On  many  occasions  I  have  made  inquiry  as  to  whetlier  certain  sick  ones 
would  die  or  recover  ;  and  if  die,  when  ']  Generally  the  answers  proved  very 
cori'ect. 

About  a  year  ago  I  was  writing  (for  the  spirit  of  deceased  friend,  Mr.  A. 
so  claimed).  After  some  writing  of  a  friendly  nature,  it  was  written  sub- 
stantially as  follows  : — "  There  is  one  thing  that  I  wish  you  could  do  for  me, 
but  I  don't  see  how  you  can,  and  that  is,  stop  my  son  "  (name  fully  given) 
"from  drhiking."  I  answered  (by  thought),  "Why,  I  am  surprised.  He 
doesn't  drink,  does  he  ?  that  is,  not  any  to  speak  of,  any  way  ? "  A.  :  "Yes, 
I  am  sorry  to  say  he  drinks  a  good  deal  too  much."  Q.  :  "  Where  does  he 
do  his  drinking  mostly  ?  "  A.  :  "  At  the  B.  Hotel."  I  said  I  never  heard 
of  his  drinking.    A.  :  "  Well,  you  watch  and  inquire,  and  you  will  find  out 

Oil  Tndications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  &c.  2-45 

that  he  does."  "  I  should  be  very  glad  to  be  of  some  service  in  the  matter." 
A.  :  "If  I  see  a  chance  where  you  can  I  shall  certainly  call  on  you." 
Upon  investigation  I  found  this  ivas  all  true. 

In  May,  1887,  while  looking  for  authorities  on  an  obscure  point  in  a  case 
I  was  then  preparing  for  trial,  it  was  written  in  substance  :  "I  know  where 
the  authority  is  that  you  need."  Q.  :  "Where?"  A.;  "In  WendelVs 
Reports,  Vol.  — ,  page  — ."  Q.  :  "Who  are  you?"  A.  :  "  I  am  A.  B." 
The  volume  and  page,  as  well  as  the  name,  were  given  in  full ;  the  name 
was  that  of  an  old  lawyer  that  I  had  known  well.  The  case  cited  was  just 
vdiat  I  needed.  I  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  the  case  before  to  my  best 
knowledge.  There  are  26  volumes  of  Wendell's  Reports,  of  about  700  pages 
each. 

I  frequently  find  as  I  am  examining  indexes  for  judgment,  debtors, 
grantee's  or  grantor's,  &c. ,  in  clerks'  offices,  and  elsewhere,  that  there  is 
this  same  manifestation  of  intelligence  in  another  form.  Let  me  explain  : 
iSay  I  am  searching  an  index  under  the  head  of  "  S,"  looking  for  the  name 
•of  Stearns,  John  J.  By  jjlacing  my  hand  or  finger  on  the  book,  drawing  it 
along  down  over  the  names,  with  no  thought  of  the  work  in  hand,  as  soon 
as  my  finger  passes  the  name  desired  my  finger  will  stop.  My  eyes  must  be 
directed  towards  the  book,  but  no  matter  how  listless  or  absent-minded 
I  may  be,  still  at  such  times  my  finger  will  stop  at  the  name  in  question. 
When  contrasted  with  ordinary  searching  the  unconscious  intelligence  that 
seems  to  be  behind  this  is  very  marl^cd. 

Once,  being  much  in  doubt,  I  asked,  "What  ails  ?  "  (one  of  my  sons) 

"  What  shall  I  do  for  him  ?  "  The  answer  was,  "  You  had  better  not  try  to 
•do  anything  for  him,  but  go  and  get  Dr.  T.  He  will  know  what  to  do."  I 
called  Dr.  T.  He  examined  him  and  immediately  gave  an  emetic.  The 
contents  of  the  stomach  showed  that  digestion  had  been  stopped,  or  rather, 
that  the  food  had  not  digested  at  all.  The  boy  recovered  rapidly.  Dr.  T.  said 
it  was  well  I  called  him.  The  boy  had  been  rather  suddenly  taken  ill  a  few 
hours  after  a  hearty  meal  and  soon  after  a  severe  fright  or  mental  strain. 

In  a  contested  case  over  a  certain  clause  or  bequest  in  the  will  of  C.  we 
Jiad  been  defeated  and  were  about  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeals,  our 
highest  court.  It  was  my  opinion,  also  my  partner's,  that  we  would  win  on 
the  appeal  ;  but  upon  inquiry  it  was  written  tliat  we  would  be  beaten,  and 
this  opinion  was  expressed  on  several  occasions,  with  very  good  reasons 
assigned.  We  were  advised  not  to  appeal.  We  brought  the  appeal  and  were 
defeated. 

I  have  made  many  inquiries  as  to  whether  certain  sick  persons  would 
xecover  or  die.  The  answers  have  been  very  correct,  generally.  Writing- 
touching  the  future  is  generally  stated  to  be  but  an  opinion,  based  on  known 
facts,  and  fallibility  is  freely  admitted.  When  oj)inions  are  written  the 
reasons  assigned  are  very  frequently  not  only  new  to  me,  or  unthought  of, 
but  are  generally  good  reasons.  ■ 

I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  experience  and  made  a  good  many  tests.  Those 
T  have  given  are  a  fair  sample,  I  think,  of  the  writing  that  proved  to  be  true. 
Many  statements  made  were  false  and  many  predictions  made  proved  untrue  ; 
of  these  I  have  given  no  illustration,  but  could  if  necessary.  I  have  done 
most  of  my  writing  when  no  one  was  present.    Perhaps  I  should  state  that 

246 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

it  has  been  repeatedly  written  not  to  believe  any  writing  or  statement  unless 
my  own  good  judgment  approved  of  it.  I  have  written  a  good  deal  touching 
a  future  state,  political  and  philosophical  matters.  Of  all  this  I  have  not 
spoken,  as  it  does  not  seem  of  iuuch  importance  for  our  present  purposes. 
In  passing  I  will  say  that  much  of  it  was  apparently  very  good,  and  quite 
reasonable. 

December  28th. 

Since  writing  the  foregoing  I  have  read  your  very  able  article  [on 
"Premonitions"]  in  the  AreiM  for  January,  and  I  have  also  had  an 
experience  that  may  be  of  interest. 

On  Christmas  Eve  there  was,  as  you  are  probably  aware,  a  railway  accident 
near  Hastings,  a  little  way  out  from  New  Yoi'k  City,  in  which  12  persons 
were  killed  and  another  has  since  died  from  injuries  received.  This  last- 
mentioned  person  resided  near  me.  The  news  of  the  injury  to  this  person 
reached  me  on  Christmas  Day.  Telegrams  in  the  afternoon  were  favourable, 
and  indicated  a  recovery. 

I  made  in(iuiry  as  to  the  matter,  and  it  was  written  in  substance  that  the 
person  would  not  recover.  I  suggested  tliat  telegrams  indicated  a  recovery. 
The  answer  was  :  ' '  Yes  ;  but  we  have  made  an  examination,  and  are  of 
opinion  tliat  no  recovery  will  take  place." 

Telegrams  the  second  day  were  still  more  favourable,  but  my  writing  did 
not  change  in  oi:)inion.  The  party  died  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the 
26th. 

January  29th,  1892. 

Dr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Deab  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  inquiry  for  such  facts  as  I  may  be  able  to 
give,  touching  the  experiences  given  you  by  my  husband,  as  automatic 
writer,  I  will  state  : — 

Not  long  after  he  began  to  write,  some  five  yeai's  ago,  I  saw  a  sheet  of 
paper  upon  which  was  written  a  full  account  of  the  robbing  of  the  body  of 
the  dead  sister.  I  read  the  account  carefully.  My  husband  said  that  he  had 
written  it  automatically  ;  that  he  had  asked  for  the  facts  and  tliat  was  the 
answer.  The  account  of  it,  as  written  out  for  you  by  my  husband,  is  the 
same  in  substance  as  what  I  saw  and  read,  except  it  is  very  much  shortened. 
I  had  the  paper  for  some  time,  and,  I  think,  until  after  the  facts  as  given  were 
proven  true  ;  but  it  was  destroyed  long  ago.  I  attended  the  trial  of  the  suit 
brought  to  recover  the  money.  His  account  given  you  I  Ijelieve  to  be 
correct. 

The  lady,  Miss  T.,  who  had  a  cancer,  was  my  aunt.  The  account  of  her 
sickness  and  death  are  correctly  given  you  by  my  husband,  but  I  saw  no 
writing,  although  my  husband  told  me  at  the  time  he  had  written  something 
concerning  her,  and  he  stated  that  it  was  written  that  she  would  die  and  told 
when.  I  do  not  recall  the  time  set,  but  I  recollect  her  death  occurred  at  the 
time  predicted. 

I  recollect  the  time  referred  to  when  our  son  was  sick.    I  saw  my 

husband  doing  some  writing  on  that  occasion,  and  it  was  written  to  go  and 
get  Dr.  T.  The  account  as  written  out  for  you  by  my  husband  is,  as  I 
recollect  it,  true  in  every  respect. 

Concerning  the  accident  of  Christmas  Eve,  I  remember  that  on  Christmas 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  &c.  247 

Day,  after  we  heard  of  the  accident,  my  husband  did  some  writing.  He  said  he 
had  inquired  as  to  Mr.  E.'s  condition,  &c.,  and  that  it  was  written  that  E. 
would  die,  that  he  was  internally  and  dangerously  injured.  On  the  next  day 
the  answers  that  he  received  as  to  Mr.  E.'s  condition  were  to  the  same  effect. 
The  telegrams  received  during  the  same  time  indicated  tliat  he  would  recover, 
one  reported  him  out  of  danger.  E.  died  about  nine  on  the  night  of 
the  26th. 

I  have  known  my  husband  to  write  out  correctly  quite  a  good  many 
things  tliat  were  out  of  the  knowledge  of  ordinary  persons,  but  of  the 
circumstances  which  he  has  given  to  you  I  do  not  now  recall  anything 
further.  [Mrs.  W.] 

Jaiiuary  29fh,  1892. 

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — I  recollect  the  occasion  referred  to  by  Mr.  W.  I  think  it  was 
about  five  years  ago.  We  were  alone  ;  he  spoke  of  the  queer  writing  he  was. 
doing.  After  some  talk  on  the  subject  Mr.  W.  consented  to  try  his  skill.  I 
inquired  what  spirits  were  present,  and  Mr.  W.'s  hand  wrote  that  my  wife' 
was.  I  inquired  for  her  name,  and  he  wrote  Adelia  O.  B.,  which  was  correct. 
I  also  inquired  where  slie  died,  and  where  and  under  what  circumstances, 
and  I  asked  for  a  description  of  her.  Mr.  W.  wrote  out  answers  to  all 
the  questions  as  I  asked  them.  As  I  recall  it,  I  asked  most  of  the  questions- 
l)y  thinking.  He  wrote  that  she  died  of  heart  disease,  and  the  date  of  her 
death  was  correctly  given,  as  was  also  her  personal  appearance.  And  it  was 
written  that  slie  died  in  hed  witli  me  ;  that  the  first  I  knew  of  her  death  was. 
when  I  awoke  in  the  morning.  He  also  wrote  that  there  was  a  large  scar 
near  the  knee  on  the  left  leg. 

I  recollect  that  the  answers  were  correct,  altlioiigh  I  don't  recollect  all  the 
words  used,  j^erhaps.  I  am  very  certain  tliat  Mr.  W.  did  not  know  anything 
about  my  wife.  I  had  not  lived  within  20  miles  of  him,  neither  had  I  kn<:)wn 
him  until  several  years  after  the  death  of  my  wife.  It  puzzled  me  how  he 
was  able  to  answer  as  he  did,  as  I  have  no  reason  to  think  he  had  any  know- 
ledge on  the  subject.  I  will  add  that  the  height,  colour  of  eyes  and  liair  and 
the  entire  personal  description  given  were  exceedingly  exact  and  correct. 

Mr.  W.  also  wrote  on  that  occasion  what  purported  to  come  from  an  old 
friend  of  mine — that  he  went  fishing  with  me  to  Lake  Ontario,  that  I  tipped 
the  boat  over  near  shore  and  got  him  wet.  This  was  true,  but  I  hadn't 
thought  of  it  in  a  long  time.  Mr.  W.  never  lieard  of  it,  I  am  confident,  until 
he  wrote  it  out. 

S.  H.  Bkitton. 

As  soon  as  Mr.  Britton  called  my  attention  to  the  tipping  over  of  the  boat 
I  recalled  that  I  wrote  about  it  at  the  time.  W. 

JSTew  York,  February  Hh,  1892. 

Dr.  R.  Hodgson. 

[In  a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  W.  adds  : — ]  I  began  my  automatic  writing 
with  my  left  hand,  and  have  ever  since  been  able  to  write  in  that  manner 
with  my  left  hand,  but  I  am  naturally  right-lianded,  and  I  can  write  more 
rapidly  and  readily  with  my  riglit  hand,  although  the  ideas  expressed,  &:., 

248  ■     ■         Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

are  of  as  higli  an  order,  as  far  as  I  have  observed,  when  written  with  one 
hand  as  when  written  with  tlie  otlier. 

In  automatic  work,  when  the  mechanical  ability  to  form  letters  is  not 
required,  as,  for  instance,  in  running  the  hand  down  an  index,  I  find  my 
left  hand  is  fully  tlie  ecj^ual  of  my  right.  Perhaps  I  should  state  that  I  met 
with  a  serious  injury  to  my  right  hand  many  years  ago,  by  which  I  lost  the 
two  first  fingers  and  greatly  crippled  my  hand  otherwise. 

The  reason  that  I  did  my  first  automatic  writing  with  my  left  hand  was 
that  the  planchette  directed  me  to  do  so.  I  wrote  a  day  or  two  with  my 
left  hand  and  then  I  tried  my  right,  and  since  that  I  have  generally  written 
with  my  riglit.  I  can  write  some  slowly  in  tlie  natural  manner  with  my  left 
hand,  but  have  never  done  so  but  very  little.  The  special  point  I  wish  to 
call  attention  to  is,  that  the  ideas  autoni'itically  writien  are  of  as  high  an 
order,  written  with  one  hand,  as  with  the  other. 

I  will  conclude  the  present  instalment  of  evidence  with  the  third 
motor  message  already  mentioned  ; — a  case  singularly  interesting,  as 
re3ording  what  purports  to  be  the  successful  accomplishment  of  an  experi- 
msnt  whose  partial  failure  in  one  carefully  watched  instance  we  have 
already  recorded.  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  657.)  It  is  an  experiment  which  every- 
one may  make; — which  everyone  oiiglit  to  make  ; — for,  small  as  may  be 
the  chances  of  success,  a  few  score  of  distinct  successes  would  establish 
a  presumption  of  man's  survival  wliich  the  common-sense  of  mankind 
would  refuse  to  explain  away.  If  accepted,  the  incident  shows  a 
continued  perception  on  the  part  of  the  decedent  of  the  efforts  made  by 
friends  to  communicate  with  him. 

G.  220. 

TJie  first  account,  says  Dr.  Hodgson,  which  I  received  of  the  following 
case  was  given  in  an  article  by  Herman  Snow  in  the  Religio-Philosophical 
Journal  for  January  31st,  1891.    Mr.  Snow  Vi^rote  as  follows  ;  — 

■  The  most  perfect  spirit  identity  test  which  I  find  upon  my  records  is  as 
follows  :  It  occurred  in  the  town  of  Kingston,  Mass. ,  about  twenty -five  years 
ago,  and  was  related  to  me  by  the  Unitarian  minister  of  tlie  place  in  whose 
parish  the  parties  resided.  All  the  facts  were  well  known  to  him  and  per- 
sonally vouched  for  to  me.  There  lived  in  that  town  a  young  man  of  marked 
spirituality,  who  was  also  a  poet  of  a  high  order  of  inspiration.  A  volume 
entitled  Cousin  Benjas  Poems,  written  by  him,  was  held  in  high  esteem 
by  many  Spiritualists  of  the  earlier  times.  The  home  of  this  young  man  was 
with  a  sister,  between  whom  and  himself  existed  ties  of  affinity  and  affection 
of  unusual  strength  and  p3rmanency.  Bat  the  brother  was  a  confirmed 
invalid.  Consumption  had  laid  its  irresistible  hand  upon  him  and  was  slowly 
but  surely  loosening  the  immortal  from  the  mortal  of  his  being.  Knowing 
this,  and  having  a  firm  faith  in  the  spirit's  power  to  return,  but  being  at  the 
same  time,  as  an  advanced  spiritual  tliinker,  aware  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  a  perfect  identification,  he  told  his  sister  that  he  would  try  to  arrange 
matters  so  that  she  would  have  satisfactory  proof  of  his  return  to  her  when  at 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knoivledge,  dr.  249 

length  he  should  be  fairly  over  to  the  other  side  of  life.  And  this  was  the 
way  it  was  done  ;  He  took  a  piece  of  soft  brick  and  carved  it  into  a  slender 
oblong  form,  and  taking  it  to  his  sister  broke  it  in  two  pieces,  giving  one  to 
her  with  the  injunction  to  take  good  care  of  it  ;  the  other,  he  said,  he  would 
himself  take  care  of.  He  also  especially  enjoined  upon  his  sister  that  after 
his  departure  she  should  give  him  an  early  opportunity  of  communicating 
with  her  to  the  end  that  the  proposed  test  might  be  consummated.  When  at 
length  the  time  came,  it  was  communicated  to  her  that  if  she  would  go  into 
the  carefully  arranged  room  formerly  occupied  by  him,  and  look  upon  a  cer- 
tain shelf  in  the  corner  now  designated,  she  would  find  a  large  sea-shell ;  and 
in  the  recess  of  that  shell  she  would  find  the  mate  to  the  piece  of  brick  he 
had  given  her.  This  was  done,  and  thus  was  the  test  made  comjalete.  For, 
on  trial,  the  two  pieces  were  found  exactly  to  fit  into  each  other,  thus  proving 
beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  this  discovery  of  the  piece  of  brick  was  made 
by  the  brother,  the  only  one  who  had  known  of  its  hiding  place. 

Belvidere,  N.J.  Herman  Snow. 

The  Unitarian  minister,  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Phipp,  who  informed  Mr.  Snow 
of  the  case,  died  in  1871.  We  learnt  the  address  of  the  decedent's  sister, 
Mrs.  William  A.  Finney,  from  the  Rev.  Courtland  Y.  de  Normandie,  who  is 
now  pastor  of  a  church  in  Kingston,  Massachusetts. 

Mr.  Snow  has  also  sent  us  a  transcript  from  his  note-book  of  his 
first  article  on  the  subject,  written  at  San  Francisco,  January,  1881, 
and  published,  he  thinks,  in  1881,  in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal. 
The  later  article  is  merely  a  repetition  of  this  earlier  account.  We 
have  therefore  two  independent  memories, — one  at  third  hand  from 
Mr.  Snow,  recorded  15  years  after  the  event,  one  at  first  hand  from 
Mrs.  Finney,  recorded  25  years  after  the  event, — closely  coinciding 
with  each  other. 

The  following  letters  on  the  subject  have  been  received  from  Mrs. 
Finney : — 

Rockland,  Mass.,  April  19i/i,  1891. 

Mr.  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Some  weeks  ago  I  received  from  you  a  few  lines  asking  me  to 
give  you  an  account  of  the  communication  received  from  Cousin  Benja  in. 
spirit-Hfe,  some  twenty-five  years  ago. 

For  weeks  and  months  before  my  brother  left  tlie  form  we  conversed 
freely  on  the  subject  of  spirit  communion  and  such  matters,  and  one  morning 
he  requested  me  to  bring  him  a  small  piece  of  brick,  also  pen  and  ink  ;  he 
then  made  two  marks  on  one  side  and  one  on  the  other  with  the  ink,  then 
breaking  the  brick  in  two,  gave  me  one  piece,  telling  me  at  the  time  to  take 
care  of  it,  and  some  day  he  would  hide  the  other  piece  away  where  no  one 
but  himself  would  know,  and  after  leaving  the  form,  if  possible,  would  return 
in  some  way  and  tell  me  where  it  was.  I  could  then  compare  them  together, 
and  it  would  be  a  test  that  he  could  return  and  communicate,  and  mi/  mind 
could  not  have  any  influence  over  it,  as  I  did  not  know  where  he  put  it. 

After  he  left  the  form  our  anxiety  was  %-erij  great  to  hear  and  learn  all  we 
could  of  communicating  with  spirits,  and  for  months  we  got  nothing  satis- 
factory, ^  .,. 

250 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

We  tlien  commenced  sitting  at  the  table  at  home  (uiother  and  myself), 
which  we  did  for  some  little  time  ;  at  last  it  commenced  tijjping,  and  by 
calling  the  alphabet  spelled  out  where  we  could  find  the  -piece  of  brick  that 
he  put  away, — that  was  tlie  way  we  got  the  test.  To  us  that  was  truth  that 
spirits  can  and  do  communicate  with  us,  and  nothing  but  the  influence  and 
power  of  Benja  could  tell  us  that  test. — Truly  yours, 

Mrs.  Wm.  A.  Finney. 

Rockland,  Mass. 

Rockland,  May  3rd,  1891. 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  April  21st  received,  and  I  will  add  a  few  more  lines 
as  to  statement  of  brother  Benja's  communication. 
By  calling  the  alphabet  we  spelled  out  : — 

"You  will  find  that  piece  of  brick  in  the  cabinet  under  the  tomahawk. — 
"Ben.ta." 

I  went  to  tliat  room  and  took  the  key,  unlocked  the  cabinet,  which  had 
not  been  touched  by  anyone  after  he  locked  it  and  put  away  the  key.  There 
I  found  that  piece  of  brick  just  as  it  liad  spelled  out,  and  it  corresponded 
with  tlie  piece  I  had  retained,  fitting  on  exactly  where  he  broke  it  off  the 
piece  I  had.  It  was  wrapped  in  a  bit  of  paper  and  tucked  into  a  shell,  and 
placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  cabinet  exactlij  under  the  tomahawk,  as  was 
spelled  out  by  the  alphaliet. 

This  is  truth,  and  no  power  but  Benja's  could  tell  that. 

Mother  is  not  living  ;  I  am  the  only  one  of  the  family  that  is  living. — • 
Yours  respectfully, 

Mrs.  Wm.  A.  Finney. 

Rockland,  Mass. 

Rockland.  3Ia>i  11th,  1891. 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  6th  received.  I  will  continue  to  say,  in  answer  to- 
your  questions,  that  the  piece  of  brick  was  entirely  concealed  in  the  sliell,  so 
that  it  could  not  be  seen  from  outside  of  cabinet.  It  was  wrapped  in  a  piece 
of  paper  stuck  togetlier  witli  nuicilage  and  tucked  into  the  end  of  the  shell, 
then  a  piece  of  pajjer  gummed  over  that,  so  that  nothing  was  visible  from  the 
.shell. 

The  shell  was  on  the  lower  shelf  of  the  cabinet,  and  only  the  top  of  the 
shell  was  visiljle  outside  tlie  cabinet. 

One  more  little  incident  I  will  mention,  for  to  me  it  is  as  valuable  as  the 
other.  He  wrote  me  a  letter  (about  tlie  time  he  gave  me  tlie  piece  of  brick) 
and  sealed  it,  saying  at  the  time  it  was  not  to  be  answei-ed,  but  the  contents 
of  the  letter  to  be  told.  I  got  that  in  the  same  way  I  did  the  other,  by 
calling  the  alphaljet  and  the  table  tipping.    It  was  these  words  : — 

"Julia!  do  right  and  be  hajjpy. — Benja." 

That  was  correct.  Just  the  contents  of  my  letter.  I  have  no  particular 
objection  as  to  giving  my  name,  for  I  have  stated  notliing  but  the  truth. 

At  my  home  in  Kingston  I  have  that  little  shell  with  the  piece  of  brick, 
and  if  you  would  like  them  I  will  send  them  to  you.    Will  place  the  brick 

On  Indications  of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge,  (Lx.  251- 

into  tlie  shell  as  it  was  when  I  found  it.  Of  course,  the  paper  that  was 
around  it  then  is  worn  out  years  ago.    The  cabinet  is  disposed  of. 

Julia  A.  Finney. 

Mrs.  Finney  further  writes  : — 

Rockland,  June  26th,  1891. 

I  send  you  by  express  a  box  containing  the  letter  and  shell  -with  the 
piece  of  brick.  I  liave  placed  one  piece  in  the  shell  just  as  it  was  when 
I  found  it,  so  you  can  see  how  nicely  it  was  concealed  in  the  shell.  The 
papers  that  were  around  it  then  are  worn  out.  You  can  retain  them  if  you 
like,  as  I  do  not  care  for  them  now. 

To  me  it  is  a  positive  truth  that  he  did  communicate  to  us,  and  our  minds 
could  have  nothing  to  do  with  it. 

J.  A.  Finney. 

Rockland,  Juhj  Idth,  1891. 
.  The  shell  was  placed  on  the  same  shelf  with  the  tomahawk, 
and  no  other  shells  on  that  shelf.  It  was  placed  with  the  open  side 
down,  and  the  tomahawk  stood  directly  over  it.  I  cannot  say  why  he 
did  not  tell  us  to  look  inside  of  the  shell.  We  started  to  look  as  soon  as  he 
told  us.  It  was  in  the  cabinet  under  the  tomaliawk.  We  did  not  wait  for 
any  more  to  be  said. 

I  am  not  intimately  acquainted  with  many  public  people.  As  to  my 
integrity,  will  refer  you  to  Rev.  C.  Y.  de  Normandie,  of  Kingston. 

J.  A.  Finney. 

The  shell  is  a  large  Triton,  about  ten  inches  long.  The  piece  of  brick 
was  wrapped  in  folds  of  soft  paper  and  tucked  dee2:)ly  into  the  recess. 
Another  piece  of  pajaer  was  then  gummed  around  the  sides  of  the  shell  in  the 
interior,  so  as  absolutely  to  prevent  the  piece  of  brick  from  falling  out.  When 
I  received  the  shell  from  Mrs.  Finney  and  looked  into  the  interior  and  shook 
the  sliell  violently,  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  shell  contained 
anything  but  the  piece  of  gummed  paper. 

The  piece  of  brick  in  the  shell  weighs  one  and  a  half  ounces,  and  the 
piece  of  brick  retained  by  Mrs.  Finney  weighs  about  two  and  a  quarter 
ounces.  The  sliell  with  the  piece  of  brick  and  paper  wrapping  weighs  about 
eleven  and  a  half  ounces. 

Mrs.  Finney  also  forwarded  me  the  letter  written  by  her  brother.  The 
shell  and  the  pieces  of  brick  and  the  letter  are  now  all  in  my  possession. 

R.  Hodgson. 

We  have  a  letter  (in  original)  from  the  Rev.  C.  Y.  de  Noi'mandie,  of 
Kingston,  Canada,  to  Mrs.  Finney.  "  I  expressed  then,"  he  says,  speaking 
of  a  former  note  to  Dr.  Hodgson  which  accidentally  went  astray,  ' '  that  to 
the  best  knowledge  I  had  of  you  and  to  my  firm  belief  your  word  could  be 
implicitly  relied  on.  I  felt  confident  that  you  would  state  a  matter  as  you 
understood  it,  as  you  regarded  it,  without  reference  to  the  consequences  ;  and 
that  you  would  not  be  any  more  likely  to  be  misled  and  deceived  about  a 
matter  of  that  kind  than  others  similarly  situated." 

The  experiment  which  was  in  this  case  successful  is  one  which 
might  be  tried  by  everybody.  And  I  may  close  the  present  instalment 
of  evidence  with  the  remark  that  it  is  to  experiment  with  automatic 

252 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

writing,  crystal- vision,  kc,  rather  than  to  spontaneous  apparitions,  that 
we  must  look  for  any  real  information  as  to  the  degree  in  which  departed 
spirits  retain  their  knowledge  of  the  things  of  earth. 

Once  more  I  must  express  my  astonishment  and  regret  that 
amongst  some  tens — perhaps  hundreds — of  thousands  of  persons, 
scattered  over  many  countries,  who  already  believe  that  the  road  of 
communication  between  the  two  worlds  is  open,  there  should  be  so  very 
few  who  can  or  will  make  any  serious  effort  to  obtain  fresh  evidence  of 
so  importaiit  a  fact.  But,  quite  apart  from  the  Spiritist  camp,  there 
are  now  many  inquirers  who  know  that  automatic  writing  is  a  real  fact 
in  nature,  and  who  are  willing  to  discuss  with  an  open  mind  the  origin 
of  any  message  which  may  thus  be  given.  Let  these  set  themselves  to 
the  task,  and  the  result  of  organised  and  intelligent  effort  will  soon, 
as  I  believe,  be  made  plain. 

For  aught  that  we  can  tell,  there  may  be  coUaboratox'S  elsewhere 
■who  only  await  our  appeal.  Why  should  not  every  death-bed  be  made 
the  starting-point  of  a  long  experiment  1  And  why  should  not  every 
friend  who  sails  forth  kiovoiv  vnip  "HpaKkioi- — into  the  unknown  sea — 
endeavour  to  send  us  news  from  that  bourne  from  which  few 
travellers,  perhaps,  have  as  yet  made  any  adequate  or  systematic  effort 
to  return? 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  &c.  253 

II. 

MR.  DAVEY'S  IMITATIONS  BY  CONJURING  OF  PHENOMENA 
SOMETIMES  ATTRIBUTED  TO  SPIRIT  AGENCY, 

By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.  .  " 

In  the  Introduction  which  I  wrote  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Yol.  lY., 
pp.  381-404)  for  the  late  Mr.  Davey's  "Experimental  Investigation," 
conducted  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  "  the  jDOSsibilities  of  mal- 
observation  and  lapse  of  memory  from  a  practical  point  of  \'iew," 
I  pointed  out  that  "  to  explain  the  tricks  would  in  itself  be  of  little 
advantage  to  the  investigator  of  the  'physical  phenomena'  of  mediums"; 
that  other  methods  than  those  employed  by  Mr.  Davey  may  be  (and 
unquestionably  are)  practised  ;  and  in  any  case  that  explanations  of  the 
methods  in  use  would  hardly  be  likely  to  convince  persons  who  have 
testified  from  personal  experience  to  the  genuineness  of  the  "psycho- 
graphy "  of  well-known  "  slate-writing  "  mediums  that  such  methods 
were  used  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena  which  they  witnessed. 
"They  will  scarcely,"  I  said,  "be  likely  to  remember  the  occurrence  of 
events  which  they  perhaps  never  observed  at  all,  or  observed  only 
partiiilly  and  erroneously ;  which,  whether  correctly  or  incorrectly 
observed,  they  have  afterwards  continually  misdescribed  or  completely 
forgotten ;  and  which,  in  many  cases,  would  be  distinctly  excluded  hy 
the  acceptance  of  their  testimony  as  it  stands."  The  notes  appended 
to  the  detailed  rei^orts  quoted  in  the  article  referred  to  would,  we 
thought,  sufficiently  show  to  the  reader  the  several  kinds  of  mistakes 
made  by  intelligent  witnesses  in  recording  their  impressions  of  per- 
formances like  Mr.  Davey's,  and  would  enable  the  student — not 
necessarily  to  discover  in  every  case  the  exact  modus  operandi  of  the 
tricks,  for  this  appeared  to  us  to  be  of  trivial  importance,  but — to 
appreciate  the  unreliability  of  human  testimony  under  circumstances 
common  to  such  perfoi'mances.  It  was,  indeed,  my  own  personal  opinion 
that  on  the  whole  it  was  advisable  that  the  methods  of  Mr.  Davey 
should  be  described  in  detail,  as  far  as  possible,  though  in  many  cases 
it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  verbally  exactly  what  occurred  so  that 
the  reader  could  enter  fully  into  the  situation.  Mr.  Davey,  however, 
was  strongly  opposed  to  the  revelation,  and  for  various  reasons.  His 
chief  objections,  I  believe,  were  that  other  methods  than  the  ones 
which  he  employed  had  probably  been  used  by  pseudo-mediums,  that 
new  methods  would  doubtless  be  invented,  that  the  description  of  hia 

254  ■  '  Mr.  R.  Hodgson 

inethods  would  interfere  greatly  with  his  projected  plan  of  giving  nume- 
rous additional  sittings  and  obtaining  further  reports  (in  connection 
with  which  he  proposed  to  explain  his  methods  fully),  and  that  many  of 
his  sitters  would  be  annoyed  at  finding  jDrecisely  how  they  had  been 
deceived.  Mr.  Davey's  death  has  removed  the  only  argument — I  may 
now  freely  say — which  had  special  cogency  in  my  own  case,  viz.,  his 
purpose  to  give  another  series  of  sittings,  all  of  which  should  be 
attended  by  a  person  thoroughly  familiar  with  his  methods,  and 
cognisant  beforehand  (so  far  as  such  cognisance  was  possible)  of  the 
precise  things  which  he  intended  to  do ;  this  person  was  to  write  an 
account  both  of  what  was  intended  and  what  he  witnessed  ;  Mr.  Davey 
was  to  supplement  this  account  by  his  own  statements ;  and  these 
accounts  were  to  be  compared  with  the  reports  of  the  sitter  in  each 
case.  The  object,  of  course,  in  this  projected  later  series  was  to  em- 
phasise still  more  forcibly  the  unrelialjility  of  the  testimony  so  widely 
accepted,  among  Spiritualists,  as  adequate  to  establish  the  genuineness 
of  the  manifestations  in  question. 

It  appears,  however,  that  the  accounts  of  Mr.  Davey's  sittings  pub- 
lished in  Vol.  IV.  of  (lur  Proceedings  are  in  themselves  more  than 
enough  to  demonstrate  the  affirmed  unreliability  of  such  testimony,  and 
to  justify  the  position  originally  put  forward  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that 
the  possibilities  of  mal-observation  and  lapse  of  memory  must  be  abso- 
lutely excluded  before  the  testimony  to  "  slate-writing "  and  similar 
performances  can  be  taken  into  further  serious  consideration.  This  is 
clearly  shown  by  the  communication  which  formed  the  immediate 
cause  of  this  article,  viz.,  the  letter  of  Mr.  Alfi'ed  Russel  Wallace 
jjrinted  in  the  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for 
March,  1891,  in  which  he  stated  that  Mr.  Davey's  performances  "are 
claimed  to  be  all  trick,  and  unless  all  can  be  so  explained  many  of  us 
will  be  confirmed  in  our  belief  that  Mi*.  Davey  was  really  a  medium  as 
well  as  a  conjurer."  At  the  close  of  my  Introduction  to  the  reports  of 
Mr.  Davey's  sittings,  I  asked  the  "  experienced  Spiritualist  "  to  "  point 
out  exactly  where  the  difference  lies  between  '  Mr.  Davey's  perform- 
ances '  and  mediumistic  phenomena."  Mr.  Wallace  has  accepted  this 
challenge  in  the  name  of  "  many  of  us  "  ; — there  is  no  more  illustrious 
name  than  his  upon  the  roll  of  adherents  to  a  belief  in  Spiiitualism  ; 
and  his  reply  is  substantially  a  confession  that  he  cannot  distinguish 
between  Mr.  Davey's  pei'formances  and  ordinary  "  mediumistic  " 
phenomena.  But,  strangely  enough,  as  it  appears  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick 
and  myself,  and  others  who  were  familiar  Avith  IMr.  Da^^ey's  devices, 
Mr.  Wallace's  conclusion  seems  to  l^e,  not  that  the  analogous  pheno- 
mena which  have  been  reported  about  "  mediums  "  were  dvie  to  trickery, 
but  that  Mr.  Davey's  performances  were  "mediumistic"!  The  issue 
has  changed.      We  are  no  longer  asked  to  prove  that  this  or  that 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conju-rivg,  &c.  255 

medium  is  a  "  trickster  "  ; — we  are  asked  to  prove  that  Mr.  Davey 
was  not  a  medium  !  Could  any  Vjetter  evidence  be  offered  that  Mr. 
Davey's  performances  and  those  of  certain  professional  mediums  belong 
to  the  same  class  1  ■         .       •  .  . 

Now,  I  am  not  at  all  sure  how  far  my  explanations  of  Mr.  Davey's 
devices  will  make  clear  to  Mr.  Wallace  and  the  many  others  who  agree 
with  him,  that  every  apparently  "  phenomenal  "  occurrence  at  his 
sittings  can  be  accounted  for  by  ordinary  means.  It  is  impossible  to 
reproduce  all  the  details  of  the  sittings,  so  that  the  reader  may  have  a 
faithful  picture  of  the  seemingly  insignificant  incidents  that  made  the 
writing  upon  a  slate  on  or  under  the  table,  or  the  turning  over  of  one 
or  two  slates,  or  the  substitution  of  one  slate  for  another,  or  the  secreting 
and  carrying  out  of  the  room  (to  deal  with  at  leisure)  of  one  of  the 
.sitter's  own  slates,  appear  to  the  instructed  and  watchful  observer  so 
transparently  easy.  I  should  have  much  greater  confidence  did  I  know 
that  these  doubters  of  Mr.  Davey's  dexterity  were  familiarising  them- 
selves with  such  books  as  Professor  Hoffmann's  Modern  Magic  and 
More  Magic,  Mr.  John  W.  Truesdell's  Spiritualism,  Bottom  Facts,  and 
fi  recent  book  published  in  America  by  Farrington  and  Co.  (St.  Paul, 
Minn.),  entitled  Revelations  of  a  Spirit-Mediu7n.  Above  all,  I  recom- 
mend these  doubters  to  experiment  for  themselves.  It  may  be  difficult 
for  them  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  a  person  like  Mr.  Davey,  but  they 
can  at  least  study  from  books  on  conjuring  the  details  of  many  per- 
formances commonly  exhibited  on  the  pviljlic  stage,  and  by  accompanying 
their  uninitiated  friends  to  the  entertainment,  and  listening  to  their 
accounts  of  the  tricks  afterwards,  they  will  be,  I  venture  to  think, 
considerably  helped  towards  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  misdescriptions 
usually  given  of  such  performances,  and  will  perhaps  begin  to  see  the 
absurdity  of  attributing  "  mediumship "  to  Maskelyne,  or  Lynn,  or 
Davey.  In  this  direction  at  least  the  account  of  Mr.  Davey's  methods 
may  prove  serviceable. 

I  shall  begin  by  giving  a  brief  statement  of  the  chief  methods  used 
by  Mr.  Davey  and  then  illustrate  his  actual  practice  by  describing  in 
detail  some  of  the  most  important  occurrences  at  sittings  where  I  was 
present  myself.  I  shall  then  state  what  occurred,  according  to  Mr. 
Davey,  at  the  sittings  particularly  noted  by  Mi'.  Wallace  as  remarkable, 
and  finally  give  the  explanation  of  other  incidents  which  without  such 
special  reference  might  still  remain  incomprehensible.  Had  I  foreseen 
my  departure  for  America,  and  my  continued  stay  here,  and  therefore 
the  impossibility  of  my  conducting  such  a  later  series  of  experiments 
as  I  have  mentioned  above,  I  should  doubtless  have  reduced  to  written 
record  at  the  time  the  details  of  the  sittings  which  I  myself  witnessed, 
as  well  as  Mr.  Davey's  statements  concerning  the  other  sittings.  As  it 
is,  I  must  depend  upon  my  recollections,  assisted  by  the  contemporary 

258 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

notes  published,  in  connection  with  the  repoi-ts,  in  Vol.  IV.  of  the 
Proceedings.  With  the  regular  methods  employed  by  Mr.  Davey  I  was, 
of  course,  very  familiar,  as  he  frequently  practised  them  in  my  presence, 
and  consulted  me  about  variations  of  them.  Further,  I  talked  them 
over  in  detail  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Professor  Hoffmann,  and  was 
present  at  five  out  of  the  sixteen  sittings  reported,  and  saw  them  used. 
I  questioned  Mr.  Davey  at  the  time  about  all  the  incidents  at  the 
sittings  where  I  was  not  present,  and  was  perfectly  satisfied  with  his 
explanations.  I  may  add  that  I  have  seen  similar  methods  used  by 
"  mediums  "  in  America,  as  will  be  seen  later  from  my  account  of  a 
visit  to  the  notorious  medium  Slade. 

Referring  to  the  reports,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  manifestations 
most  frequent  at  Mr.  Davey's  sittings  were : — (1)  Writing  on  the 
upper  surface  of  a  single  slate  held  against  the  underside  of  the  table  ; 
(2)  Writing  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  under  slate  when  two  slates 
were  placed  together  above  the  table;  (3)  Writing  in  Mr.  Davey's  locked 
slate.  I  shall  describe  the  normal  method  used  in  each  case ;  I  say 
"  normal,"  because  differences  between  the  sitters  as  to  their  attention, 
(fee,  together  with  other  incidental  circumstances,  produced,  in  almost 
every  instance,  certain  slight  variations  from  the  prescribed  stej^s. 

(1)  The  slate  having  been  cleaned  and  placed  near  the  edge  of  the 
table  on  top,  with  a  piece  of  pencil  or  chalk  upon  it,  Mr.  Davey 
takes  a  thiml:)le-pencil  from  a  hip-pocket,  and  slips  it  on  the  end  of  a 
finger,  say  the  third,  of  the  right  hand.  A  thimble-pencil  is  a 
tailor's  thimljle  with  a  small  piece  of  pencil  (or  chalk)  fastened  to  it. 
He  then  draws  the  slate  over  the  edge  of  the  table,  with  the  thumb  of 
his  right  hand  on  top  of  the  slate,  the  finger  with  j^encil  being  tucked 
into  his  palm,  brings  the  first  and  second  fingers  up  to  the  under 
■surface  of  the  slate,  and  slowly  slides  the  slate  under  the  table, 
requesting  the  sitter  on  his  right  to  hold  the  slate  with  him,  and  to 
keep  it  pressed  closely  up  to  the  under  surface  of  the  table.  The  sitter 
does  so.  The  slate  is  out  of  sight,  ljut  the  thumbs  of  the  holders  are 
visiljle.  The  sitter,  in  response  to  Mr.  Davey's  suggestion,  asks  a 
question.  Mr.  Davey  writes  the  answer  noiselessly  with  his  thimble- 
pencil  on  the  under  surface  of  the  slate,  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  sitter.  After  an  interval  of  waiting,  he  proceeds  to  withdraw  the 
slate,  ostensibly  to  see  if  anything  has  been  written.  He  places  it  on 
the  table,  and  by  that  time  the  sitter  has  let  go  of  the  slate.  Nothing 
is  found  written  (on  the  upper  surface  of  the  slate,  where  the  sitter 
knows  that  the  writing  is  to  appear  if  it  comes  at  all,  and  where 
alone  inspection  is  made).  Mr.  Davey  lifts  the  piece  of  pencil  off, 
rubs  the  upper  surface  again  with  a  cloth,  then  seizes  the  slate  with 
the  fingers  uppermost,  and  the  thumb  underneath,  raises  the  slate 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  &c. 

257 

from  the  table  and  places  it  once  more  under  the  table,  turning  the 
slate  over  as  it  is  going  under  the  table,  and  just  before  pressing  it 
against  the  under  surface  of  the  table,  drops  upon  it  again  a  piece  of 
pencil  from  the  table.  The  answer  to  the  question  is  now  on  the 
upper  surface  of  the  slate,  pressed  against  the  table;  He  then  reminds 
the  sitter  to  hold  the  slate  also,  and  asks  that  the  question  be  re- 
peated. After  a  short  interval,  the  sound  of  writing  is  heard,  caused 
by  Mr.  Davey  writing  (for  it  is  possible  to  write  either  with  or  with- 
out noise),  on  the  now  under  surface  of  the  slate,  the  answer  to  a 
question  not  yet  asked,  and  which  Mr.  Davey  may  ask  himself  after 
the  next  insertion  of  the  slate  under  the  table.  The  slate  is  then 
withdrawn  as  before,  the  answer  on  the  upjjer  surface  is  read,  that 
surface  is  cleaned  by  Mr.  Davey ;  the  slate  is  again  placed  under  the 
table  and  turned  as  before  in  the  process.    And  so  on. 

(2)  Writing  on  the  interior  surface  of  one  of  two  slates  held  to- 
gether above  the  table. 

One  slate  has  already  been  written  upon,  during  or  previous  to  the 
sitting,  and  this  lies,  writing  downward,  upon  the  table.  Mr.  Davey 
gives  two  other  similar  slates  to  the  sitter  to  examine  and  clean,  asks 
him  to  place  pencil  (or  chalk)  on  one  of  them  on  the  table,  cover  it 
with  the  other,  and  place  his  hands  upon  them.  Mr.  Davey  also 
places  his  hands  uj^on  them.  After  an  interval  of  waiting  Mr.  Davey 
suggests  looking  to  see  if  there  is  writing.  The  sitter  removes  hi.s 
hands,  Mr.  Davey  takes  olF  the  top  slate  and  places  it  with  seeming 
carelessness  on  one  side  close  to  where  the  third  slate  is  lying,  and  after 
removing  the  pencil,  say,  from  the  other  slate,  and  perhaps  rubbing 
it  again  with  the  duster,  which  afterwards  is  perhaps  thrown  on  the 
slate  just  removed,  and  placing  some  pieces  of  chalk  again  on  the 
slate,  he  takes  the  third  slate  (writing  already  on  the  under  surface) 
and  places  it  on  top.  The  sitter  and  Mr.  Davey  place  their  hands  on 
the  slates  as  before.  After  another  interval  of  waiting  Mr.  Davey 
proposes  to  hold  the  slates  in  the  air,  or  resting  against  the  sitter's 
shoulder.  The  sitter  raises  his  hands  from  the  slates.  Mr.  Davey 
takes  the  two  slates  together,  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  above, 
the  thumb  below,  and  in  lifting  them  from  the  table  turns  them  both 
over  together.  This  movement  is  probably  completed  by  the  time  the 
sitter  also  takes  hold  of  the  slates.  After  a  short  time,  a  sound  as  of 
writing  is  heard,  and  when  this  is  finished,  the  sitter  lifts  the  top 
slate,  and  finds  the  upper  surface  of  the  lower  slate  covered  v^ith 
writing.  But  what  produces  the  sound  as  of  writing  1  Sometimes  the 
finger-nail  of  Mr.  Davey  on  the  under  surface  of  the  bottom  slate,  some- 
times a  movement  of  his  knee  to  which  is  attached  a  piece  of  common 
slate-pencil,  the  ends  resting  in  two  small  loops  of  rubber  sewn  on  to 
his  trousers.     He  chafes  this  piece  of  pencil  against  another  piece 

258 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

attached  to  a  fragment  of  wood  from  which  project  two  fine  steel  points, 
by  means  of  which  he  easily  secures  it  to  the  pendent  rim  or  the  leg  of 
the  table.  This  was  Mr.  Davey's  variation,  I  believe,  on  the  idea 
suggested  by  the  wedge-shaped  clamp  illustrated  by  Mr.  Truesdell. 
{Spiritucdism,  Bottom  Facts,  p.  199.) 
(3)  Writing  in  the  locked  slate. 

Mr.  Davey  has  two  locked  slates  precisely  alike,  i.e.,  as  precisely 
alike  as  skilled  Avorkmanship  could  make  them.  In  some  cases  a  com- 
munication was  prepared  beforehand,  and  when  a  reply  was  not  de- 
manded to  some  specific  question,  a  single  substitution  was  all  that 
was  required.  When  a  question  was  asked  in  the  locked  slate,  two 
substitutions  were  needed.  Thus,  a  question  is  written  by  the  sitter 
in  locked  slate  A.  Mr.  Davey  sul>stitutes  locked  slate  B  for  A,  opens 
A  and  answers  the  question  (usually  taking  it  out  of  the  room  for  the 
purpose),  and  later  on  re-substitutes  it  for  B. 

"  Well,  but,"  I  hear  some  readers  say,  "  I  want  to  know  exactly 
how  and  when  he  makes  these  substitutions,  and  besides,  how  and  when 
-does  he  cover  the  side  of  one  of  the  sitter's  own  slates  with  writing  ? " 
It  is  just  these  questions  that  are  difiicult  to  answer  satisfactorily 
without  introducing  the  whole  mise  en  scene,  so  to  speak,  of  the  sitting. 
I  think,  however,  that  a  tolerably  fair  conception  may  be  formed  by 
considering  several  of  the  reports  and  descriljing,  as  far  as  I  can  now 
reproduce  them,  the  immediately  connected  details.  But  before  doing 
so  I  shall  describe  Mr.  Davey's  usual  method  of  substituting  one  of 
his  locked  slates  for  the  other.  This  might  almost  be  called  his  favourite 
device. 

The  first  step  was  to  engage  the  "attention  of  the  sitter  on  some 
other  object.  This  was  usually  done  by  starting  an  experiment  with 
another  single  slate  or  pair  of  slates.  While  the  sitter  was  occupied  in 
cleaning  a  slate,  or  examining  pieces  of  pencil  or  chalk,  or  inspecting 
the  writing  that  so  "mysteriously  "  appeared  on  the  oixlinaiy  slate,  Mr. 
Davey  was  manipulating  his  "  duster,"  a  cloth  which  he  used  for  dry- 
ing the  slates.  This,  after  perhaps  drying  a  slate  with  it,  he  would 
throw,  apparently  carelessly,  over  the  locked  slate  on  the  table,  and  so 
as  to  hide  this  slate  completely.  Then,  under  cover,  occasionally,  of 
the  use  of  his  handkerchief,  he  would  slip  the  other  locked  slate  from 
his  coat  pocket  or  from  beneath  liis  waistcoat,  slide  it  softly  upon  the 
edge  of  the  table,  and,  l^ending  over  the  table  somewhat,  with 
possibly  one  arm  resting  far  forward  on  the  table,  so  as  partly  to 
obstruct  the  view  of  the  moving  skite,  2:>ush  the  slate  softly  forward  till 
it  was  near  the  first  slate  concealed  by  the  "  duster."  He  would  then 
sometimes  boldly  remove  the  duster  with  the  first  slate  inside,  and, 
below  the  surface  of  the  table,  slip  the  slate  beneath  his  waistcoat, 
afterwards  replacing  the  duster  on  the  table.  Sometimes  after  the  second 

Mr.  Bavey's  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  dec.  259 

slate  had  been  placed  upon  the  table,  he  allowed  the  first  slate,  covered 
by  the  duster,  to  remain  on  the  table  also  for  a  considerable  interval, 
owing  to  the  possible  danger  of  removing  it  without  detection.  On 
one  occasion  it  remained  there,  I  think,  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  until  at  least  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting,  when  he  gathered  up 
his  various  articles  into  his  bag.  While  the  sitter  was  wondering  at 
the  long  communication  in  the  second  locked  slate,  the  first  locked  slate, 
under  the  duster,  was  lying  within  his  reach  on  the  table  before  him. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  above  explajiations  in  detail  with  special 
reference  to  Sitting  II.  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  426-435.)  For 
convenience  of  reference  I  here  reproduce  portions  of  the  accounts  : — 

Mrs.  Y.'s  Account. 
A  jiiece  of  clialk  was  placed  on  one  of  our  slates,  and  the  slate  was  held 
tightly  up  against  the  underside  of  the  table  leaf  by  one  of  Mr.  Davey's  hands 
and  one  of  my  daughter's.  Their  thumbs  were  on  top  of  the  table,  and  their 
hands  spread  underneath  on  the  underside  oi  the  slate.  I  hekl  Mr.  Davey's 
other  hand,  and  we  all  joined  hands  around  the  taljle.  I  watched  tlie  two 
hands  holding  the  slate  without  a  moment's  intermission,  and  I  am  confident 
that  neither  Mr.  Davey's  hand  nor  my  daughter's  moved  in  the  least  durmg 
the  whole  time.  Two  or  three  c^uestions  were  asked  without  any  sign  of 
response.  Then  Mr.  Davey  asked  rather  emphatically,  looking  hard  at  the 
corner  of  the  table  under  which  they  were  holding  the  slate,  "  Will  you  do 
anything  for  us  ? "  After  this  question  had  been  repeated  three  or  four 
times,  a  scratching  noise  was  heard,  and  on  drawing  out  the  slate  a  distinct 
"  Yes  "  was  found  written  on  it,  tlie  chalk  being  found  stationary  at  the  pomt 
where  the  writing  ceased.  As  my  eyes  were  fixed  uninterruptedly  on  both 
my  daughter's  hand  and  on  Mr.  Davey's  also,  and  as  I  certainly  had  fast 
hold  of  his  other  liand  all  the  time,  I  feel  confident  he  did  not  write  this  word 
in  any  ordinary  way.    This  same  result  was  obtained  two  or  three  times. 

•  ■        ,  Miss  Y.'s  Account. 

Mr.  Hodgson  brought  us  a  little  pasteboard  box,  in  which  were  a  number 
of  small  pieces  of  chalk  of  different  colours.  I  chose  two  of  these  and  placed 
them  on  one  of  om-  slates.  We  had  all  previously  written  either  our  names  or 
our  initials  on  that  side  of  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  slipjjed  the  slate  under  the 
edge  of  the  table,  I  holding  on  to  it  all  the  time,  and  we  held  it  flat  under 
the  table  with  our  thumbs  above  the  table.  I  held  the  slate  very  firmly 
against  tlie  table,  and  I  am  sure  I  did  not  relax  my  hold  once.  After  waiting 
some  time  and  asking  various  questions,  we  heard,  or  seemed  to  hear,  the 
chalk  moving  on  tlie  slate.  We  drew  tlie  slate  out,  and  on  it  was  written 
"Yes,"  which  was  an  answer  to  our  last  question.  We  again  put  the  slate 
under  the  table,  and,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  nothing  liad  been  written  on 
it,  I  half  slipped  it  out  again  and  saw  that  it  was  pei'fectly  clean.  After 
some  more  waiting,  my  father  asked  when  we  were  to  sail  for  America.  The 
chalk  again  squeaked,  and  on  drawing  the  slate  out  we  found  "the  18th" 
written  very  indistinctly.  This  hajipeued  not  to  be  the  date,  which  was  the 
loth. 

260 

Ilr.  R.  Hodgson. 

There  is  no  mention  of  the  previous  withdrawals  in  either  of  these 
accounts.  Mr.  Y.,  however,  did  remember  them,  and  recorded  them 
in  his  report. 

At  the  first  and  second  examination  nothing  was  on  the  slate,  and  it  was. 
washed  afresh,  and  soon  the  word  "Yes"  was  found  scrawled  on  the  upper 
side  of  the  slate  as  an  answer  to  some  indifferent  question. 

Mr.  Davey  did  not  venture  to  write  the  word  at  once,  and  did  not 
produce  his  writings  continuously.  The  first  part  of  a  sitting  was 
often  a  time  of  tedious  waiting,  so  that  the  vigilance  of  the  sitters 
might  become  relaxed,  and  so  that  they  might  be  accustomed  to  regard 
the  withdrawals  of  the  slate  as  having  no  special  meaning,  if,  indeed, 
it  should  ever  occur  to  a  sitter  that  they  were  suspicious.  After  one  of 
the  early  withdrawals,  Mr.  Davey,  having  previously  written  the  word 
yes  on  the  under  surface  of  the  slate,  turned  the  slate  over  in  the  act 
of  replacing  it,  and,  of  course,  during  this  interval  Miss  Y.'s  hand  was 
not  holding  the  slate.  She  had  relinquished  her  hold  when  the  slate 
was  placed  on  the  table.  Mr.  Davey  then  asked  his  own  question,  t» 
which  the  yes  was  a  proper  reply.  Similarly  after  one  of  the  later 
withdrawals,  Mr.  Davey,  having  written  "the  18th"  on  the  under 
surface  as  a  reply  to  a  question  previously  asked  by  Mr.  Y.,  and  having 
turned  the  slate  over  in  the  act  of  replacing  it,  requested  Mr.  Y.  to 
repeat  his  question.  "On  what  day  do  Ave  sail  for  America?"' 
Thereupon  the  writing  was  apparently  produced,  and  the  answer 
exhibited  proved  to  be  relevant,  though  the  date  given  was  not  correct. 
It  would  weary  the  reader  were  I  to  point  out  all  the  discrepancies 
between  the  reports  which  I  quote,  such  as  that  Mrs.  Y.  speaks  of  "a 
piece  of  chalk,"  and  Miss  Y.  speaks  of  "two"  pieces  as  having  been  placed 
on  the  slate.  It  is  important,  however,  to  emphasise  here  that  although 
the  slate  was  several  times  withdrawn  from  under  the  table,  and  Miss 
Y.  on  these  occasions  relinquished  her  hold  of  it  completely,  yet  there 
is  not  the  slightest  indication  in  the  above  accounts  that  Miss  Y.'s  hold 
was  ever  relaxed  at  all,  or  that  there  Avas  a  single  AvithdraAval  Avhen 
nothing  Avas  found  Avritten  upon  the  slate.  These  are  instances  of  the 
complete  omission,  from  the  record,  of  circumstances  without  which 
the  trick  Avould  have  been  impossible.  They  were  due  to  lapse  of 
memory  rather  than  to  mal-observation,  since  at  the  times  of  the 
withdrawals  the  sitters  Avere  doubtless  aware  of  them.  The  turnings  of 
the  slate  as  Mr.  Davey  replaced  it  under  the  table  Avere  probably  not 
observed  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  Avas  not  observed  that  his  method  of  placing 
the  slate  under  the  table  brought  the  unexamined  surface  to  the  top. 

After  this  exj^lanation  I  think  that  the  reader  Avill  find  no  difficulty 
in  seeing  exactly  hoAv  the  similar  "  phenomena  "  recounted  in  the  other 
reports,  in  connection  Avith  a  single  slate  held  under  the  table,  Avere  pro- 
duced.   He  must  sujjply,  of  course,  the  "  AvithdraAvals  "  and  the  accom- 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  <&c.  261 

panying  circumstances,  since  these  are  completely  omitted  from  nearly 
all  the  records,  and  where  the  withdrawals  are  mentioned  there  seems 
to  have  been  no  conception,  in  the  mind  of  the  witness,  of  their 
significance. 

Proceeding  to  the  cases  of  Avriting  appearing  between  two  slates 
above  the  table,  I  quote  the  three  different  accounts  from  Sitting  II. 

Mrs.  Y.'s  Account. 
After  a  short  rest,  Mr.  Davey  asked  us  to  wash  two  of  our  own  slates  and 
put  them  together,  with  pieces  of  chalk  of  different  colours  between,  and  all 
of  us  to  reach  across  the  table  and  hold  them  all  together.  This  we  did,  and 
then  Mr.  Davey  asked  my  husband  to  choose  mentally  three  colours  he 
wished  used  in  writing.  After  all  holding  the  slates  closely  pressed  together 
for  a  few  minutes,  we  placed  them  on  the  table,  and  Mr.  Davey  and  I  placed 
our  hands  on  them  while  the  rest  joined  hands.  In  a  few  moments  the  same 
sort  of  electric  shock  seemed  to  pass  through  Mr.  Dav^ey,  and  his  hand  and 
arm  which  were  on  the  slates  quivered  nervously,  and  immediately  a  scratch- 
ing noise  was  heard.  He  then  asked  me  to  lift  one  slate  off  the  other,  which 
I  did,  and  found  one  side  covered  with  writing  in  three  colours,  the  very 
three  my  husband  had  mentally  chosen.  I  am  perfectly  confident  that  my 
hand  was  not  removed  from  the  slates  for  one  single  instant,  and  that  I  never 
lost  sight  of  them  for  a  moment. 

Miss  Y.'s  Account. 
After  this  experiment,  we  put  aside  Mr.  Davey's  slate  and  took  two  of  our 
own.  We  cleaned  them,  and  placed  on  one  a  number  of  little  pieces  of 
coloured  chalk.  The  second  slate  was  put  on  the  first  one,  and  my  mother 
and  Mr.  Davey  held  it  above  the  table.  Mr.  Davey  asked  my  father  to  think 
of  three  colours.  We  joined  hands  once  more,  and  in  a  little  while  we  heard 
writing  between  the  slates.  When  we  took  one  off,  on  tlie  under  one  was 
written  : — 

In  red,  "  We  are  very  glad  to  be  able  to  give  you  this." 
In  u'hite,  "  We  can  do  more  yet." 
In  green,  "  Good-bye." 

My  father  had  thought  of  red,  white,  and  blue.  We  could  not  be  sure  by 
the  night  light  whether  the  "  good-bye  "  was  written  in  green  or  blue.  But 
there  was  a  piece  of  chalk  on  the  slate  that  looked  much  more  blue  than  the 
piece  with  which  the  "good-bye"  was  written. 

Mr.  Y.'s  Account. 

We  next  placed  small  pencils,  in  six  colours,  between  two  of  my  newly- 
"bought  slates,  marked  by  ourselves  with  our  names  written  in  pencil,  without 
removing  them  from  the  top  of  the  table,  and  the  hands  of  some  of  the  party 
were  laid  upon  them  for  some  minutes,  after  which  they  were  held  up  in  the 
hands  of  two  persons.  I  had  been  asked  to  choose  the  colours  in  which  the 
writing  should  be  made.  I  mentally  chose  red,  white,  and  blue,  but  did  not 
tell  my  choice.  After  holding  Mr.  Davey's  hand  for  some  minutes,  with  my 
mind  strongly  fixed  on  these  colours,  the  slates  were  opened,  and  we  found, 
in  the  order  I  had  mentally  selected  :  — 

262  '     ■     Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

(Red)  "  We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  give  you  this."       ■  '• 
(White)  "  We  can  do  more  yet." 
(Blue)  "Good-bye." 

The  slates  used  were  the  three  ordinary  school  slates  which  Mr.  Y, 
had  purchased  on  the  way  to  the  sitting,  which  was  held  at  my  room.s 
at  Furnival's  Inn.  The  experiment  preceding  this  was  with  Mr. 
Davey's  locked  slate.  While  the  sitters  were  still  pondering  over  the 
writing  that  had  appeared  in  the  locked  slate,  Mr.  Davey  retired  to 
an  adjoining  room,  taking  with  him,  under  his  waistcoat,  one  of  Mr. 
Y.'s  slates.  He  there  wrote  upon  the  slate  in  red,  white,  and  blue, 
thinking  that  if  Mr.  Y.  were  asked  to  choose  mentally  three  colours, 
he  would  be  more  likely  to  select  these  three  than  any  others.  (I 
believe  that  Mr.  Davey  usually  had  red,  green,  pink,  blue,  yellow,  and 
white  chalks  at  his  sittings.)  Returning  to  the  room  and  the  table  he 
surreptitiously  placed  this  slate  on  the  table  again,  writing  downward,, 
pushed  Mr.  Y.'s  remaining  two  slates,  which  we  may  call  the  first  and 
second,  forward,  and  requested  that  these  shoiild  be  cleaned  thoroughly. 
After  the  cleaning,  Mr.  Davey  placed  some  coloured  pieces  of  chalk 
upon  the  first  slate  and  covered  it  with  the  second.  According  to  my 
remembrance,  Mr.  Davey  then  lifted  the  two  slates  a  little  from  the 
table  and  asked  all  the  sitters  to  join  in  holding  them.  After  a  short 
interval  he  suggested  looking  to  see  if  there  was  any  writing,  and 
the  slates  were  lowered  to  tlie  table,  the  sitters  removed  their  hands, 
and  Mr.  Davey  took  olf  the  top  slate  (the  second),  showing  the 
under  surface  of  it  where  there  was  no  writing,  and  placing  it  on. 
the  table  close  to  the  third  slate.  Moving  the  chalks  slightly,  to- 
be  assured  that  there  was  no  writing,  he  "  replaced  " — not  the 
second  slate  which  he  had  just  removed,  hut — the  thij-d  slate,  which 
already  had  the  writing  on  the  under  surface.  He  then  placed  his 
hands  upon  the  slates,  and  so  also  did  one  or  more  of  the  sitters.  After 
another  short  interval,  Mr.  Davey  suggested  holding  them  up  in  the  air ;, 
the  sitters  lifted  their  hands,  Mr.  Davey  seized  the  slates,  raised  them, 
turned  them  over  together  and  requested,  I  believe,  Mrs.  Y.  to  join  in 
holding  them.  At  this  stage  I  think  that  the  sitters  all  stood  up  and 
that  Mr.  Davey  then  called  upon  Mr.  Y.  to  think  of  three,  colours  to  be 
used  in  the  writing.  Very  shortly  the  sound  as  of  writing  was  heard. 
When  the  sound  ceased,  Mi;.  Davey  let  go  of  the  slates,  and  the  writing 
was  found  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  lower  slate. 

It  is  probaljle  that  my  remembrance  of  the  scene  even  where  it  is 
clear  and  distinct  is  wrong  in  some  points,  and  on  others  even  my 
remembrance  is  not  clear.  I  cannot  recall  very  clearly,  for  example,  at 
what  point  Mr.  Y.  was  asked  to  think  of  three  colours.  He  may  have 
been  asked  earlier  to  choose  mentally  three  colours,  and  the  request  may 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  &c.  263- 

have  been  repeated  later.  But  these  points  are  unimportant  for  my 
present  purpose,  which  is  to  show  the  reader  how  the  trick  was  done. 
I  witnessed  Mr.  Davey  abstract  the  slate ;  I  witnessed  him  in  the  act 
of  writing  the  message  in  the  adjoining  room  ;  I  witnessed  him  return 
the  slate  to  the  table,  and  afterwards  substitute  it  for  the  other  slate, 
and  I  witnessed  him  turn  both  slates  over  together  as  he  raised  them  in. 
the  air.  These  were  the  important  points  for  me  to  watch,  as  I  knew 
beforehand. 

ISTow  for  the  omissions  in  the  reports.  In  the  first  jjlace,  Mr.  Y.  and 
Miss  Y.  refer  nowhere  in  their  whole  reports  to  the  fact  of  Mr.  Davey's 
leaving  the  room.  Mrs.  Y.  refers  to  it,  but  supplements  her  reference 
by  stating  that  "  the  slates  were  all  the  time  in  full  view  on  the  table 
with  the  rest  of  us  who  remained  behind  "  !  If  she  could  but  have 
seen  Mr  Davey's  huri-y  and  excitement  iu  the  other  room  while  he 
was  preparing  the  message  on  one  of  her  own  slates  ! 

In  the  second  place,  there  is  not  the  slightest  indication,  in  any  one 
of  the  three  rejDorts,  that  the  slates  were  separated  during  the  experi- 
ment after  they  had  once  been  placed  together,  yet  they  were  not  only 
separated,  but  the  separation  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  substituting 
a  third  slate  for  one  of  the  two  cleaned  for  the  experiment.  (All  three 
slates,  I  believe,  had  been  marked  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  but 
no  special  markings  were  made  for  this  particular  experiment.) 

We  may  now  turn  to  the  other  cases  where  this  particular  ti'ick 
was  performed,  and  notice  certain  variations  in  the  details.  In  Sitting 
I.,  the  reader  will  easily  be  able  now  to  sujjply  the  omission  made  by 
the  two  recorders  ;  the  top  slate  was  removed  and  the  third  slate  sub- 
stituted in  a  mamier  similar  to  that  described  above.  But  in  this  case 
Mr.  Davey  wrote  on  the  slate  before  the  sitting  began.  Mr.  R.  took 
three  slates  to  the  sitting,  and  he  states  that  there  "  could  not 
possibly  "  have  been  "  any  tampering "  with  them,  "  as  during  the 
whole  seance  they  never  for  one  moment  left  the  room."  This  last 
assertion  is  true,  but  Mr.  R..  gives  7.30  p.m.  as  the  time  of  his  going 
to  Mr.  Davey's  house,  and  the  sitting  did  not  Ijegin  till  8.30  p.m.  In 
the  meantime  Mr.  Davey  had  taken  one  of  Mr.  R.'s  slates  and  Mr. 
R.'s  box  of  chalks  also  into  another  room,  and  written  upon  the  slate, 
and  rubbed  away  the  corners  of  some  of  the  fragments  of  chalk  and 
pencil,  and  brought  them  back  to  the  room.  What  occasion  was  there 
for  the  intending  sitters  to  watch  their  slates  then  ?  The  sitting  had 
not  beg-un,  and  besides,  Mr.  Davey  had,  let  us  say,  given  them  some 
interesting  curios  or  remarkable  photographs  to  examine  while  he  ex- 
cused himself  for  a  few  moments.  Later  on,  the  sitting  begins.  Mr. 
Davey  takes  the  parcel  of  slates  :  "  Ah  !  these  are  your  slates,  Mr.  R. 
Very  glad  you've  brought  your  own  slates.  If  anything  comes, 
you  see,  it's  so  much  more  satisfactory.    We'll  try  first  if  we  can  get 

264 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

any  writing  on  one  of  your  own  single  slates.  Better  clean  it 
thoroughly,"  at  the  same  time  holding  up  the  top  slate  for  Mr.  E,. 
to  take,  and  of  course  he  takes  it.  The  slate  upon  which  Mr.  Davey 
has  written  is  the  lower  one  of  the  remaining  two,  the  writing  being 
on  the  under  surface  ;  and  these  two  slates  remain  on  the  table  in  full 
view  while  the  experiments  with  the  single  slate  are  in  progress.  This 
important  lower  slate,  however,  becomes  completely  forgotten,  tempo- 
rarily at  least,  when  the  sitters  are  preparing  the  other  two  slates  for 
the  second  form  of  experiment,  at  which  time,  had  there  been  any 
need,  Mr.  Davey  might  have  written  upon  it  again.  Hence  Mr. 
Davey's  note  to  this  sitting  that  "  although  Mr.  R.'s  slates  did 
not  leave  the  room  during  the  stance,  one  of  them  was  left  unguarded 
on  the  table  on  one  occasion  for  about  sixty  seconds."  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  however,  as  Mr.  Davey  assured  me,  he  wrote  upon  this  slate 
before  the  sitting  began. 

The  next  instance  of  this  "  manifestation  "  occurs  in  Sitting  IV"., 
held  in  my  rooms  ;  Mr.  Padshah  had  taken  three  new  slates,  but  had 
left  them  in  my  rooins  while  he  made  a  call  upon  some  friends.  In  the 
meanwhile  Mr.  Davey  arrived,  and  used  the  opportunity  to  write  on 
one  of  Mr.  Padshah's  slates,  which  he  then  placed  at  the  bottom. 
When  we  were  ready  for  the  sitting,  Mr.  Padshah  having  returned, 
Mr.  Davey  began  by  passing  round  his  locked  slate  for  insjjection, 
cleaning,  (fee.  He  then  took  the  top  one  of  Mr.  Padshah's  slates  for 
trials  with  a  single  slate  held  under  the  table,  leaving  the  two  other 
slates  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  Later  on,  in  the  midst  of  experi- 
ments with  the  single  slate,  he  lifted  the  top  slate  of  these  two,  placed 
some  coloured  chalks  on  the  lower  one,  and  placed  the  other  slate  again 
on  top.  The  other  important  movements  I  may  give  in  the  words  of 
my  friend,  Mr.  J.  Russell,  who  saw  them.  He  had  not  been  initiated 
into  the  modus  operandi,  but  he  did  know  definitely  and  positively 
that  Mr.  Davey's  performances  were  not  "  mediumistic,"  and  he  was 
acquainted  with  the  object  of  Mr.  Davey's  investigations.  Mr.  Russell 
is  naturally  an  exceptionally  keen  observer,  and  he  noticed  and  re- 
corded the  important  trick-movements,  of  which  there  is  no  mention  in 
the  reports  of  the  other  two  uninitiated  witnesses.  I  therefore  add  his 
testimony  to  my  own.     Mr.  Russell  writes  in  his  report : — ■ 

In  the  meantime,  Mr.  Davey  had  once  more  examined  the  two  slates 
where  the  coloured  chalks  were,  but  finding  notliing,  had  jDlaced  them  side  by 
side,  and  cai-elessly,  as  if  in  a  fit  of  absent-mindedness,  had  taken  the  chalks 
from  the  slate  which  had  been  at  the  bottom,  and  placed  them  on  the  other. 
He  had  then  put  them  together  as  before,  except  that  the  original  position  of 
the  slates  was  reversed,  the  old  bottom  one  being  now  at  the  top,  and  the  old 
top  one  at  the  bottom.  Presently,  asking  Mr.  Padshah  if  in  a  former  sitting 
with  Eglinton  the  medium  had  not  got  some  writing  on  his  shoulder,  he  took 
up  the  two  slates  and  placed  them  on  Mr.  Padshah's  shoulder,  but  in  less 

Mr.  Daveys  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  &c. 

265 

than  a  minute  took  them  off,  reversing  them  as  he  did  so,  and  replaced  them 
on  the  table.  The  old  bottom  slate  was  now  once  more  at  the  bottom,  and 
the  old  top  one  at  the  top,  but  each  slate  had  been  reversed,  so  that  the  two 
sides  whicli  had  originally  been  turned  to  the  table  were  now  turned  ujd.  In 
a  few  minutes  Mr.  Davey  had  a  sort  of  convulsion,  Mr.  Hodgson  and  Mr. 
Hughes  said  they  heard  sounds  like  writing,  the  slates  were  opened,  and 
there,  on  the  lower  one,  was  a  message,  half  in  green,  half  in  red  (nearly 
the  colours  chosen  by  Mr.  Padshah  and  my  wife),  expressing  a  hope  that  we 
should  be  satisfied  with  writing  given  thus,  under  such  excellent  test  con- 
ditions. 

ISTow,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  psychologist  analysing  the  value 
of  human  testimony,  I  regard  Mr.  Padshah's  reports  as  in  several 
respects  the  most  instructive  of  the  whole  series.  Mr.  Padshah's  mind 
is  pre-eminently  clear  and  sincere,  and  his  report,  written  immediately 
after  the  sitting,  is  an  excellent  expression  of  the  effects  produced  upon 
him.  We  can  see,  so  to  speak,  a  piece  of  wonderful  testimony  (as 
regards  this  particular  manifestation)  in  the  act  of  making,  hut  not  made. 
Describing  the  commencement  of  the  sitting,  Mr.  Padshah  wrote  : — 

There  was  full  light  on  every  corner  of  the  table  ;  two  of  my  (?)  slates, 
one  washed  by  myself,  the  other  by  Mr.  Davey,  were  put  very  nearly  in  the 
centre  with  a  number  of  small  chalk-pieces  between  them  of  different  colours. 

Later  on,  in  discussing  this  manifestation,  Mr.  Padshah  wrote  : — 

I  confess  I  do  not  remember,  even  after  such  a  brief  lapse  of  time,  whetlier 
I  had  examined  the  two  slates  not  washed  by  me,  and  found  them  unwritten. 
I  imagine  I  must  have,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  very  stupid. 

Here,  in  the  first  place,  we  see  that  while  Mr.  Padshah's  memory  told 
him  at  the  commencement  of  his  report  that  one  of  these  two  slates  had 
been  washed  by  himself,  his  memory  told  him,  apparently,  a  short  time 
later  that  neither  of  these  slates  had  been  washed  by  himself.  This,  at 
least,  seems  to  be  the  fair  inference  from  his  words.  But  the  next 
point,  concerning  the  examination  of  the  slates,  is  more  important.. 
He  imagines,  he  says,  that  he  must  liave  examined  the  slates,  "  foi- 
otherwise  it  would  be  very  stupid."  In  the  case  of  ninety-nine  out 
of  a  hundred  hand  fide  witnesses  the  statement  in  their  report  would 
not  have  taken  this  form.  Their  imagination  that  they  must  have 
examined  the  slates  would  have  usurped  the  place  of  their  failing 
remembrance,  and  they  would  have  written,  with  perfect  sincerity,, 
"  I  examined  the  two  slates  and  found  them  perfectly  clean." 

The  same  general  method  was  employed  in  Sittings  V.,  VI.,  VII.,, 
IX.,  XII.,  and  XV.,  the  slates  being  Mr.  Davey's,  and  the  communica- 
tions having  been  prepared  beforehand,  and  I  think  that  the  reader 
will  have  no  difficulty  now  in  supplying  the  omissions  which  vitiate  the 
records.  The  choice  of  colours  and  the  transcription  of  passages  from 
books  chosen  by  the  sitters,  and  the  writing  in  foreign  languages,  I- 
shall  consider  later. 

266 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson, 

In  Sitting  VIII.  the  word  Yes  was  found  on  the  upper  surface  of  the 
lower  of  two  of  the  sitters'  slates  held  together.  This  word  was  written 
on  the  top  of  one  of  the  sitter's  slates  while  the  sitter  was  glancing  over 
the  books  on  the  shelves  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  one  for  the  locked- 
slate  experiment.  I  saw  Mr.  Davey  write  it  on  the  slate,  as  the  slate 
lay  on  tlie  middle  of  the  table,  and  then  turn  the  slate  over.  This  slate 
afterwards  re;"iched  the  required  position  by  the  regular  method.  After 
this  experiment  came  that  of  the  locked  slate,  which  was  also  a  success, 
and  while  the  sitt:"r  was  wondering  over  the  locked-slate  message,  Mr. 
Davey  took  one  of  his  slates  into  another  room  and  covered  one  side  of 
it  with  Avriting.  This  interva,l  the  sitter  speaks  of  parenthetically  as  a 
"  momentary  absence."  After  Mr.  Davey "s  return  the  two-slate  experi- 
ment vras  conducted  in  the  regular  way,  and  was  indeed  completed;  but 
Mr.  Davey  got  nervous,  shuffled  the  slates  out  of  position  again,  and 
hardly  knew  himself  what  had  become  of  the  writing.  In  trying  to 
make  up  for  this  false  move  he  slipped  again,  the  sitter  noticed  a 
shuffle  of  the  slates,  seized  them,  and  discovered  the  writing  "  before 
its  time." 

As  regards  the  "  two-slate "  incident  which  occurred  in  Sitting 
XYI.,  Mr.  Davey  informed  me  that  before  the  sitting  began,  and  while 
exchanging  greetings  in  the  ordinary  manner,  he  undid  the  parcel  con- 
taining the  slates  brought  by  Miss  Symons,  took  out  one  of  her  slates, 
substituted  fov  it  a  new  slate  brought  by  himself,  and  tied  up  the 
parcel  again, — all  this  with  his  back  to  the  pai'cel  so  that  his  move- 
ments might  be  concealed  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Symons.  He 
then  left  the  room,  ostensibly  to  fetch  his  own  slates,  &c.,  from  another 
room,  and  while  a))sent,  wrote  on  the  slate  belonging  to  Miss  Symons. 
Miss  Symons  herself  carried  the  j^arcel,  now  containing  Mr.  Davey's 
slate,  to  the  seance  table  Avithout,  of  course,  noticing  anything  wrong. 
Her  slate,  with  Avriting  on  it,  was  placed  among  Mr.  Davey's  own 
slates,  and,  wlicn  the  time  came,  in  the  course  of  the  two-slate  experi- 
ment, Avas  re-substituted  openly,  as  described  in  detail  by  Mrs.  SidgAvick 
in  the  folloAving  account,  Avhich  Avas  written  the  da,y  after  the  experi- 
ment, and  before  she  kncAv  hoAv  and  when  the  trick  Avas  done.  (The 
footnotes  are  a  later  addition.) 

Miss  Symons  had  brought  two  common  slates  and  a  locked  one.  Mr. 
Davey  had  also  slates  witli  hiiu  of  various  shapes  ;  one  of  them  with  round 
•corners  as  Miss  Symons's  had,  and  some  with  square  corners.  Miss  Symons's 
two  slates^  Avere  held  together  on  the  table  and  under  the  table  by  her  and 
Mr.  Davey.  Then  one  of  Mr.  Davey's  square-cornered  slates  was  substi- 
tuted for  one  of  tliein,  then  again  removed,  and  the  two  round-cornered  ones^ 

1  This  is,  of  course,  a  mistake.  It  was  the  two  slates  out  of  the  parcel,  but  one 
•of  these  Avas  really  Mr.  Davey's. 

-  Really  Miss  Symons's  this  time. 

il/r.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  <L:c.  207 

again  held,  on  tlie  ground  that  though  it  might  be  easier  to  get  writing  one 
Mr.  Davey'g  wlate,  it  would  be  more  satisfactory  to  get  it  on  Miss  Symons's. 
We  waited  a  considerable  time.  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  draw  the  curtains 
between  the  two  rooms.  Then  we  sat  as  before,  the  two  slates  on  one 
another  on  the  table,  and  oi'.r  h;inds  on  tliem.  The  sound  of  writing  was 
heard,  and  presently  on  lijoking  between  the  two  slates,  one  of  them  was 
found  to  be  written  on  all  over  one  side.  I  cannot  remember  every  detail 
of  what  occurred,  but  the  impression  produced  on  my  mind  most  distinctly 
was,  that  one  of  Miss  Symons's  slates  had  been  written  on  all  over  one  side, 
and  that  there  had  been  no  possible  opportunity  for  Mr.  Davey  to  have 
done  this. 

Y/e  now  come  to  the  experiments  with  the  locked  slate.  In  addition 
to  the  two  similar  locked  slates  of  small  size  which  I  have  already 
mentioned,  Mr.  Davey  had  some  other  similar  locked  slates  o£  large  size, 
of  the  Faber  make.  One  of  these  is  represented  in  Proceedinys,  Vol. 
IV.,  pp.  466,  467.  My  impression  is  that  he  had  three  similar  slates  of 
the  large  pattern.  He  most  frequently,  however,  used  the  smaller  size, 
described  by  Mr.  H.  Y^.  S.  in  Sitting  XI.,  as  "  composed  of  two 
ordinary  pieces  of  slate,  about  six  by  four  inches,  mounted  in  ebony 
covers  hinged  on  one  side  with  two  strong  plated  hinges,  and  closed  in 
front,  beyond  the  question,  of  a  doubt,  with  a  Chatv^^ood's  patent  lock." 
Let  us  call  these  two  locked  slates  A  and  B,  and  suppose  tha,t  A  is  the 
first  locked  slate  exhibited.  I  shall  now  describe  in  detail  the  locked 
slate  incident  in  Sitting  II.     Mrs.  Y.'s  account  of  this  is  as  follows  : — 

He  gave  me  a  locked  slate  of  his  own,  wliich  I  thoroughly  vrashed  and 
locked  myself,  and  put  the  key  in  my  own  pocket.  We  then  joined  hands, 
and  Mr.  Davey  and  my  daugliter  placed  one  hand  each  on  the  slate  as  it  was 
lying  on  top  of  the  table.  Different  questions  were  asked,  and  we  waited 
some  time,  but  no  response  came.  Mr.  Davey  seemed  to  me  very  much 
exhausted,  and  I  urged  him  to  desist  from  any  further  efforts.  But  he 
seemed  loth  to  do  this,  and  said  he  would  rest  a  little  while,  and  would  then, 
perhaps,  be  able  to  go  on.  After  a  short  time  of  conversation,  the  slates  all 
the  while  being  in  full  view  and  carefully  watched  by  me,  Ave  again  tried  it, 
under  the  same  conditions  as  before,  only  that  this  time  Mr.  Davey  requested 
us  each  to  take  a  book  at  random  from  the  shelves  in  the  room,  and  mentally 
think  of  two  numbers  representing  a  page  and  a  line,  and  he  would  see  if  he 
could  reproduce  it.  This  also  failed  of  any  result,  and  Mr.  Davey  said  he 
feared  he  was  too  tired  to  produce  anything,  as  he  had  been  very  much 
exhausted  by  a  long  and  xevj  successful  seance  the  night  before.  We  again 
begged  him  to  desist,  but  after  a  short  rest  ...  he  insisted  on  another 
trial.  The  slates  still  remained  all  the  time  in  full  view  on  the  table.  Mr. 
Davey  asked  my  daughter  to  choose  another  book,  which  she  did  at  random, 
he  having  his  back  to  her  and  standing  at  some  distance  while  she  did  it. 
This  book  was  at  once  tied  up  and  sealed  by  one  of  the  party,  Mr.  Davey 
never  touching  it  from  first  to  last.  I  then  held  it  in  my  lap,  while  we 
joined  hands  as  before,  and  Mr.  Davey  and  my  daughter  each  put  one  hand 
on  the  slate.    Still  nothing  came.    Then  we  changed  positions,  and  I  placed 

268 

3Ir.  B.  Hodgson. 

my  hand  on  the  slate  instead  of  my  daughter,  giving  her  the  book  to  hold. 
During  this  change  slie  kept  her  hand  on  the  slate  until  I  had  jjlaced 
mine  beside  it,  and  the  book  was  awaiting  her  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  table,  my  husband  all  the  while  holding  Mr.  Davey's  other  hand.  I 
am  confident  that  Mr.  Davey  could  not  possibly  have  manipulated  the  slate 
during  this  change,  f(jr  it  was  in  full  sight  all  the  while,  and  our  hands 
were  on  it,  and  the  book  was  tied  and  sealed  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
table.  A  few  minutes  after  this  readjustment  Mr.  Davey  seemed  to  have 
a  sort  of  electric  shock  pass  through  him,  the  perspiration  started  out  in 
great  drojjs  on  his  forehead,  and  the  hand  that  was  touching  mine  quivered 
as  with  a  nervous  sj^asm.  At  once  we  heard  tlie  pencil  in  tlie  slate  moving, 
and  in  a  few  moments  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  unlock  the  slate.  My 
daughter  took  tlie  key  out  of  her  pocket  and  lianded  it  across  the  table 
to  me,  and  I  unlocked  the  slate,  and  found  it  covered  on  both  the  inner  sides 
with  writing.  When  read,  this  writing  proved  to  be  a  sort  of  essay  or  exhorta- 
tion on  the  subject  of  jisychical  research,  with  quotations  from  the  book 
chosen  intermingled  througliout.  I  forgot  to  say  that  Mr.  Davey  had  asked 
us  all  to  choose  in  our  minds  two  numbers  under  ten  to  represent  a  page  and 
a  line  of  the  book,  but  liad  finally  concentrated  his  thought  on  what  my  hus- 
band was  thinking.  In  the  writing  there  were  quotations  from  every  page 
we  had  any  of  us  thought  of,  but  not  always  the  line  ;  but  in  the  case  of  my 
husband  the  line  was  correct,  but  not  tlie  page.  He  had  thought  of  page  8, 
line  8.  Tlie  line  was  quoted  from  page  3,  and  Mr.  Davey  said  this  confusion 
between  8  and  3  frequently  occurred,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the 
numbers.  This  test  seeuied  to  me  perfect.  The  slate  was  under  my  own  eye 
on  top  of  the  table  the  whole  time,  and  either  my  daughter's  hand  or  my  own 
Avas  placed  firmly  upon  it  without  the  intermission  of  even  a  second.  More- 
over, we  closed  and  oijened  it  ourselves. 

This  sitting  was  held  in  my  rooms  in  the  evening.  In  the  morning 
Mr.  Davey  came  to  my  rooms,  and  re-arranged  some  of  my  books.  Pie 
placed  a  series  of  greyish-white  books  (chiefly  Cambridge  University 
Calendars)  on  a  shelf  easy  of  access,  and  in  the  middle  of  therti  he  put 
a  volume  of  selections  from  Mrs.  Browning's  poems  after  first  copying- 
some  phrases  from  it.  This  book  had  a  blue  binding  with  gilt  lettering 
on  the  Ijack.  The  communication  afterwards  found  by  the  sitter  em- 
bodying these  phrases  from  the  book,  I  saw  Mr.  Davey  then  and  there 
in  the  morning  write  in  the  locked  slate.  At  the  first  trial  of  this 
experiment,  the  volume  of  Mrs.  Browning  was  not  chosen.  No  result, 
therefore,  was  obtained.  At  the  next  trial  Miss  Y.  chose  the  required 
book.  Now,  Mrs.  Y.  states  that  Mr.  Davey  had  his  l)ack  to  her 
daughter  and  was  "standing  at  some  distance  wliile  she  did  it."  Mr.  Y. 
also  says,  "  My  daughter,  leaving  him  at  the  table,  replaced  on  the 
shelves  the  hook  she  had  first  taken  down,  and  took  at  random  a  copy 
of  Mrs.  Browning's  poems."  Miss  Y.'s  own  account  of  this  part  of 
the  incident  is  also  jDositive  : — ■ 

We  sat  as  before  around  the  table,  discussing  the  failure  of  the  experi- 
ment.   Finally  Mr.  Davey  started  up  and  said,  ' '  We  must  try  it  with  one 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  <i:e.  269 

book  alone.    Will  you  choose  one,  Miss  ? "   I  supposed  that  he  asked  me 

to  do  it  because  my  seat  was  nearest  to  the  bookcase.  I  got  up  and  went  to 
the  bookcase.  Mr.  Davey  stood  by  the  table  with  his  back  to  me.  That 
latter  fact  I  feel  as  if  I  remember  most  distinctly.  I  mention  it  to  show 
that  I  chose  my  book  at  random  and  was  not  influenced  in  my  choice  by  him. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  Mr.  Davey  escorted  Miss  Y.  up  to  the  book- 
case and  led  her,  as  it  were,  up  to  the  very  shelf  where  the  required 
book,  in  bright  contrast  to  its  dingy  neighbours,  was  "  forcing  "  itself 
to  be  chosen.  "  Choose  a  book,  any  book,  take  any  book  at  random," — 
with  a  wave  of  the  hand  in  front  of  the  special  shelf,  and  Miss  Y.,  quite 
naturally,  reached  out  her  hand  and  took  the  book  that  "fixed"  her 
gaze.  I  gave  in  my  previous  notes  what  I  thought  was  the  probable 
explanation  of  the  agreement  of  all  the  witnesses  in  the  erroneous 
statement  that  Miss  Y.  went  alone  to  the  bookcase  to  choose  her  book. 
After  the  writing  had  been  produced  in  the  locked  slate,  Mr.  Y.  asked 
Miss  Y.  if  she  had  gone  alone  to  the  bookcase,  and  she  replied  that  she 
had,  and  that  Mr.  Davey  had  remained  by  the  table  with  his  back 
towai'ds  her.  I  conjectured  also  that  Miss  Y.'s  lapse  of  memory  was  an 
instance  of  transposition,  that  she  remembered  correctly  Mr.  Davey's 
xictions,  but  connected  them  wrongly  with  her  second  choice  of  a  book 
instead  of  with  her  first. 

By  the  "  forcing  "  of  this  book  the  first  step  in  the  trick  was  per- 
formed. The  next  step  was  to  substitute  locked  slate  B  for  A.  But 
the  sitters  were  very  careful,  as  the  reader  may  notice  from  the 
■accounts  of  their  actions  when  Mr.  Davey  suggested  that  Miss  Y. 
should  change  places  with  her  mother.  Miss  Y.  kej^t  her  hand  upon 
the  slate  as  she  walked  round  the  table,  and  correctly  says  that  she 
■did  not  relax  her  hold  of  the  slate  till  her  mother  had  her  hand  upon 
it.  Nevertheless  the  time  came  when  Mr.  Davey  did  substitute  B  for 
A.  But  there  is  no  mention  whatever,  in  Mrs.  Y.'s  report,  of  the  cir- 
cumstances which  enabled  Mr.  Davey  to  perform  the  substitution. 
Nor  is  there  any  mention  whatever  of  these  circumstances  in  Mr.  Y.'s 
report.    They  are  mentioned,  however,  in  the  report  of  Miss  Y. 

Mr.  Davey  asked  us  each  to  think  of  two  numbers  as  before.  Finally  he 
tisked  us  to  write  them  down  on  a  slate.  I  wrote  mine  on  one  of  our  own 
slates  so  that  he  could  not  possibly  see  what  I  liad  written,  and  I  placed  it 
on  the  table  away  from  Mr.  Da-\"ey,  and  leaned  my  elbow  on  it.  I  think  the 
■others  did  the  same  with  the  other  slates.  To  my  remembrance,  some  of  us 
watched  the  locked  slate  all  the  time  while  we  were  writing. 

Miss  Y.'s  remembrance,  about  which  she  was  apparently  not  sure, 
is  not  coiTect.  At  this  juncture  all  the  sitters  forgot  the  locked  slate 
and  left  it  unguarded  on  the  table.  My  impression  is  that  all  the 
sitters  left  tbe  table,  Mr.  Davey  having  so  candidly  remarked  that  they 
must  not  let  him  see  the  numbers  they  wrote^  and  not  let  him  even  se© 

270 

Mr.  R.  HuJgson. 

the  movements  of  the  end  of  the  pencil.  I  then  saw  Mr.  Davey  with 
the  help  of  his  duster  (see  p.  258)  sul)stitute  locked  slate  B  for  A. 
I  may  meutit)n  that  Mr.  Davey  gave  a  plausible  reason  for  desiring  the 
sitters  to  write  their  numbers  down,  viz.,  that  a  previous  sitter  had 
forgotten  the  numbers  which  he  had  finally  chosen,  and  therefore  could' 
not  tell  whether  the  passages  quoted  in  the  writing  were  according  tO' 
the  chosen  numbers  or  not, 

In  Sittings  I.,  III.,  V.,  VIII.,  IX.,  and  XV.  the  modus  operandi 
will  iiosv  be  obA'ious.  In  each  case  the  communication  was  prepared 
beforehand,  and  an  opportunity  was  given  for  the  substitution  of  B' 
for  A. 

In  connection  with  Sitting  IV.  it  is  iKite^'orthy  that  Mr.  Padshah, 
who  was  not  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  had  taken  due  precautions  in 
examining  the  two  single  slates,  and  in  seeing  that  all  the  surfaces  were 
clean,  did  l^ecome  absolutely  convinced  that  the  locked-slate  writing,  if 
not  produced  by  chemical  means,  was  "  undoubtedly  genuine."  Mr. 
Davey,  as  he  had  done  for  Sitting  II.,  came  to  my  rooms  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  i^laced  in  a  "  forcing  "  position,  "svith  the  neutrally  tinted 
numbei's  of  the  periodical  Mind  in  its  neighbourhood,  Bastian's  volume 
on  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of  Mind,  a  bright  red  book  of  the  Intei'na- 
tional  Scientific  Series.  Mr.  Davey  wrote  on  the  locked  slate  in  my 
j^resence  the  communication  afterwards  found  there  by  Mr.  Padshah, 
including  the  words,  "  The  Brain  an  Organ  of  Mind."  When  asked  to 
choose  a  book  Mr.  Padshah  finally  chose  (ment;dly)  the  periodical  Mind, 
aftei'  having  thought  both  of  Tlie  Brain  as  an  Organ  of  Mind  and  of 
International  Laiv.  Mr.  Padshah's  conclusion  about  this  experiment! 
was  that  it  is  "evident  that  Mr.  Davey  must  have  minutely  studied  the 
time  it  takes  for  complete  precipitation  ;  or  that  the  whole  precipitation 
takes  place  simultaneously  ;  or  that  the  phenomenon  is  undoubtedly 
genuine.  The  theory  of  writing  without  a  chemical  and  then  bam- 
boozling me  would  be  really  contemptible."  As  I  pointed  out  in  my 
contemporary  notes  to  this  sitting,  Mr.  Padshah  did  nevertheless  lose 
perception  of  the  slate  A  for  a  short  time,  and  during  this  interval  Mr. 
Davey  substituted  B. 

In  Sitting  VI.  a  double  substitution  was  made.  The  sitter  wrote  a 
question  in  A.  Mi\  Davey  substituted  B,  opened  A,  read  the  question 
and  answered  it,  and  re-substituted  it  again.  Mr.  Davey's  usual  method 
in  these  cases  was  to  take  A  out  of  the  room  for  the  jiurpose  of  reading 
and  answeiing  the  question.  Later  on,  the  su])stitution  was  made  again 
for  another  experiment,  B  having  been  prepared  beforehand,  and  the 
book  to  be  chosen  by  the  sitter  jDlaced  in  a    forcing  "  jjosition. 

Sitting  X.  was  with  a  Japanese  gentleman,  and  the  locked  slate  used 
was  of  the  large  size.  The  first  locked-slate  experiment  involved! 
merely  a  simple  substitution.    This  was  all  that  was  iiiA'olved  in  the 

Mr.  Davcys  Imitations  hy  Coiij wring,  cCr.  271 

second  locked-slate  experiment  also.  The  Japanese  pai't  of  the 
message  was  easily  enough  obtained.  Mr.  Davey  had  met  the  sitter 
before  and  had  obtained  some  information  about  him.  He  then  went 
to  the  "Japanese  Village"  on  exhibition  in  London,  and  for  a  con- 
sideration procured  the  services  of  an  interpreter  in  translating  and 
writing  in  Japanese  on  the  locked  slate  the  communication  which  Mr. 
Davey  provided  in  English.  The  sitter  says  :  "  Once  more  I  locked  the 
double-slate  .  .  .  and  put  the  key  in  my  pocket  and  even  sealed  it 
myself."  Mr.  Davey  suggested  the  sealing,  but  he  substituted  the 
second  locked  slate  for  the  first  before  the  sealing  took  place.  (Com- 
pare Ztillner's  experiment  with  Slade.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sujiposes  that 
Slade  substituted  for  two  slates  put  together  by  ZoUner  two  other  slates 
upon  which  he — Slade — had  just  written.  Journal  8.P.R.,  December, 
1886,  p.  481.    This  case  of  Mr.  Davey's  is  exactly  parallel.) 

In  Sitting  XI.  there  was  a  double  substitution  in  experiment  [a]. 
In  experiment  [e]  there  was  a  single  substitution.  Expei'iment  [cZ]  is 
described  by  the  sitter  as  follows  : — - 

Lastly,  as  requested  by  Mr.  Davey,  I  took  a  coin  from  my  pocket  with- 
out looking  at  it,  placed  it  in  an  envelope  and  sealed  it  up.  I  am  certain 
that  neither  Mr.  Davey  nor  myself  knew  anything  about  the  coin.  I  then 
placed  it  in  the  book-slate  together  with  a  piece  of  pencil,  closed  it  as 
previously  and  deposited  it  un  the  table  ;  and  having  placed  my  hands  with 
those  of  Mr.  Davey  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  slate,  waited  a  short  time. 
I  then  unlocked  the  slate  as  requested,  and  to  my  intense  amazement  1  found 
the  date  of  the  coin  written,  by  the  side  of  the  envelope  containing  it. 

The  seal  and  envelope  (which  I  have  now)  remained  intact. 

I  do  not  recall  with  certainty  what  the  coin  was.  Let  us  suppose  it 
was  a  shilling.  Mr.  Davey  beforehand  vvrote  the  date  of  a  shillmg  of  his 
own  in  locked-slate  A,  placed  this  shilling  in  an  envelope  and  sealed  it 
up,  and  placed  this  envelope  also  in  locked-slate  A,  which  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  experiment  he  had  concealed  about  his  person.  He  then 
requested  the  sitter  to  take  a  shilling  from  his  pocket  without  looking 
at  it,  to  place  it  in  an  envelope  and  seal  it  up,  place  it  in  the  locked- 
slate  (B),  etc.  The  sitting  was  at  Mr.  Davey's  house,  and  Mr.  Davey 
provided  the  envelope,  fi-om  the  same  packet,  of  course,  as  the  one 
already  containing  Mr.  Davey's  shilling  in  locked-slate  A.  The  sitter 
was  requested  not  to  look  at  his  coin,  ostensibly,  I  believe,  on  the 
ground  of  precluding  thought-transfei'ence,  but  really  so  that  the  sitter 
might  not  know  the  difFei-ence  between  his  own  coin  and  Mr.  Davey's. 
It  is  now  plain  that  all  the  dexterity  required  in  this  experiment  was 
a  simple  substitution. 

In  the  locked-slate  experiment  described  in  Sitting  XII.  there  was 
a  douijle  substitution.    In  the  first  locked-slate  experiment  in  Sitting- 

272 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

XIII.  there  was  a  double  substitution.  For  the  second  there  was  a 
single  substitution. 

Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  furnished  the  following  account  of  the  locked- 
slate  experiment  in  Sitting  XV,  : —  ' 

We  then  [after  the  writing  of  the  word  Melbourne]  again  sat  at  the 
table,  Miss  Symons  next  to  Mr.  Davey.  She  now  took  charge  of  the  locked 
slate,  which  at  this  period  was  examined  and  was  blank.  [Then  follows  the 
account  of  obtaining  the  message  with  the  SjDanish  sentence  in  it.]  It  was 
not  easy  to  read,  and  while  we  were  engaged  in  deciphering  it  Mr.  Davey 
was  still  gasping  and  suffering  apparently  from  the  efiects  of  the  effort.  He 
wandered  restlessly  about  the  room,  with  convulsive  movements,  &c.  After 
a  time  he  seemed  better,  and  we  determined  to  try  another  experiment. 
A  book  was  chosen  out  of  Mr.  Podmore's  bookshelf  and  laid  on  the  table 
imder  our  hands,  and  Miss  Symons  and  Mr.  Davey  sat  next  each  other,  this 
time  holding  the  locked  slate. 

The  locked  slate  was  unguarded  while  we  were  poring  over  the  first  long 
message,  and  there  was  plenty  of  time  and  opportunity  then  eitlier  to 
substitute  another  similar  one  or  to  write  the  message.  Moreover,  the  book 
chosen  was  the  one  wished  for  by  Mr.  Davey.  He  made  various  objections 
and  suggestions  till  I  perceived  that  for  some  reason  he  wanted  that  one  and 
chose  it.  I  tried  at  fii'st  to  choose  a  small  book  because  I  wanted  the  trick 
to  succeed,  and  fancied  it  would  be  done  by  holding  the  book  on  the  slate 
inider  the  table  and  opening  it  there.  Whether  I  should  have  been  conscious 
•of  acting  on  anything  but  my  vniaided  impulse  [in  choosing  the  large  book] 
if  1  had  not  wanted  to  help  Mr.  Davey  [by  choosing  a  small  one]  I  do  not 
know. 

I  shall  now  desciilje  the  method  of  producing  writing  on  the  interior 
surfaces  of  common  slates  screwed  and  corded  toajether  and  the  knots 
of  the  coi'ds  sealed.  For  accounts  of  this  experiment  see  Sittings  XIII. 
and  XIV.    I  quote  here  the  account  given  in  Sitting  XIII. 

I  now  took  the  two  new  slates  which  I  had  purchased,  and  which  had 
never  for  a  moment  passed  out  of  my  jjossession,  I  even  taking  the  pre- 
caution of  sitting  on  them  during  the  foregoing  proceedings.  I  placed  a 
piece  of  red  crayon  therein,  and  screwed  them  down  top  and  bottom  so 
tiglitly  that  by  no  possibility  could  even  the  tliin  edge  of  a  penknife  l)e 
introduced.  I  then  corded  the  slates  twice  across  and  across,  sealing  them  in 
two  places  with  red  and  blue  wax  (for,  of  course,  any  attempt  to  remove  the 
seals  by  heat  would  cause  the  colours  to  fuse,  and  thus  immediately  detect 
the  artifice),  stamjDing  them  with  my  own  private  signet.  Mr.  Davey  ijlaced 
the  slates  under  the  table,  and  requested  me  to  name  some  word  I  would 
like  written.  I  stipulated  for  "April."  After  a  few  minutes,  during  which  I 
most  carefully  watched  liim,  he  returned  them,  and  after  10  minutes'  work, 
•SO  tightly  were  they  closed,  I  found  exactly  what  I  had  desired. 

After  perusal  of  above,  considering  tliat  the  expression,  "I 
found  exactly  what  I  desired,"  might  be  liable  to  a  possible  misconstruction, 
I  think  it  better  to  add  that  I  state  in  the  most  unequivocal,  exi^licit,  and 

Mr.  Daveys  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  d-c.  273 

emphatic  manner,  that  after  Mr.  Davey  had  returned  me  my  two  slates, 
secured  as  above  described,  and  which  I  most  carefully  and  minutely  ex- 
amined to  detect  any  signs  of  tampering,  finding,  however,  my  seals  intact 
and  the  cording  and  screws  in  exactly  the  same  condition  as  when  they  left 
my  possession  a  few  moments  before,  and  that  the  word  "April,"  which  I 
had  asked  for,  was  legibly  written  with  the  crayon,  on  one  of  the  inside 
surfaces.  Whether  the  top  or  bottom  I  did  not  observe.  The  apparently 
impossible  having  thus  been  solved  as  I  hereby  testify. 

The  sitter  might  also  have  sealed  the  screw-heads  without  preventing 
the  performance  of  the  trick.'  Mr.  Davey  takes  the  slates  thus  prepared 
and  places  them  in  a  horizontal  position  between  his  right  leg  and  the 
adjoining  leg  of  the  table.  He  holds  them  in  that  position  by  the  pres- 
sure of  his  right  leg.  He  then  takes  from  his  hip  pocket  a  wedge  with 
a  fairly  sharp  edge  for  insertion,  but  with  the  other  edges  smoothened 
so  as  to  avoid  indenting  the  frames  i:)f  the  slates.  I  think  that  the 
wedge  that  Mr.  Davey  used  was  made  of  brass,  and  was  somewhat 
more  than  two  inches  long  and  about  half  an  inch  wide.  He  forces 
this  wedge  Ijetween  the  frames  of  the  two  slates  at  a  point  farthest  from 
the  screws.  Thus  if  the  screws  are  on  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  slates, 
he  forces  the  wedge  in  at  the  middle  of  one  of  the  sides.  There  is 
enough  elasticity  in  the  frames  and  the  cords  to  prevent  any  injury  to 
the  frames  or  the  cords  or  the  seals.  An  opening  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
wide  is  easily  produced  in  this  way.  Lea^-ing  the  wedge  in  position  he 
takes  from  the  hip  of  his  trousers,  where  it  has  been  fixed  by  the 
insertion  of  its  ends  in  two  small  rubber  loops,  a  piece  of  an  umbrella 
I'od,  say  seven  or  eight  inches  long,  in  the  end  of  which  is  fastened  a 
piece  of  pencil  or  chalk.  This  he  inserts  through  the  aperture  produced 

^  111  this  connection  the  following  extract  from  an  account  of  a  seance  by  Mr.  T. 
O.  Roberts,  whom  Mr.  Davey  cliaractei'ises  as  "  without  exception  the  keenest  witness 
I  have  ever  met,"  may  be  of  interest.  The  stance  took  place  on  April  23rd,  1887, 
later  than  any  recorded  in  Mr.  Davey's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Part  IV.  Mr.  Roberts 
■was,  I  beUeve,  aware  that  Mr.  Davey  was  a  conjurer. 

Mr.  Roberts  "purchased  two  common  slates  with  wooden  frames  (Sin.  x  Sin.)  and 
rounded  corners."    He  continues  : — 

I  cleaned  the  slates  myself  and  placed  a  small  piece  of  grey  chalk  .  .  .  between 
the  slates,  which  I  then  i^laced  together,  noting  which  were  the  inner  surfaces  by  a 
f)rinted  heading  at  the  top  of  each  ;  I  next  drilled  six  holes  through  the  frames,  one  at 
each  end,  and  two  at  either  side,  into  which  I  drove  six  screws,  these  tightly  binding 
the  two  slates  together,  place  !  my  seal  on  the  head  of  each  screw,  then  bound  the 
slates  with  thick  cord  and  sealed  the  ends  after  tying  the  final  knot. 

When  I  handed  the  slates,  thus  prepared,  to  Mr.  Davey,  he  told  me  that  the  test 
was  too  severe,  and  that  he  did  not  think  that  it  would  be  possible  to  produce  the 
writing  under  such  circumstances,  but  expressed  his  willingness  to  try. 

Operations  commenced  by  his  placing  the  slates  under  the  flap  or  leaf  of  the  table 
near  the  corner,  supported  by  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  while  his  thumb  rested  on 
the  table  ;  with  my  right  hand  I  held  his  left  above  the  table  and  with  my  left  I  assisted 
in  supporting  the  weight  of  the  slates  in  the  same  manner  as  adopted  by  him. 

Air.  R.  Hodgson. 

by  the  %yedge,  and  writes  the  vrords  required.  He  withdraws  the  rod 
and  the  Avedge,  replaces  them  in  their  private  receptacles,  and  brings 
the  slate  above  the  table. 

The  writing  or  drawing  produced  under  an  inverted  tumbler  placed 
on  a  slate  on  top  of  the  table  is  described  in  several  accounts.  (Sittings 
I.,  II.,  and  XVI.)  The  following  is  Mrs.  Y.'s  account  of  this  experi- 
ment in  Sitting  II.  : — ■ 

He  placed  one  of  our  slates  on  tln-ee  little  china  salt-cellars  that  lifted  it 
up  about  an  inch  from  the  table.  Upon  tlie  middle  of  this  he  placed  several 
pieces  of  different  coloured  chalks,  and  covered  them  with  a  tumbler.  Then 
he  told  my  husband  to  form  a  mental  picture  of  some  figure  he  wished  to 
have  drawn  on  the  slate  luider  the  glass,  and  to  name  aloud  the  colour  he 
would  have  it  drawn  in.  He  thought  of  a  cross,  and  chose  aloud  the  blue 
colour.  I  suggested  that  Ijlue  was  too  dark  to  be  easily  seen,  and  asked  him 
to  take  white,  which  he  agreed  to.  We  sat  holding  hands  and  watching  the 
pieces  of  chalk  under  the  tumbler.  No  one  was  touching  the  slate  this  time, 
not  even  Mr.  Davey.  In  a  few  minutes  Mr.  Davey  was  again  violently 
agitated  as  witli  an  electric  shock,  which  went  through  him  from  head  to  foot, 
and  immediately  afterv/ards  we  saw,  with  our  own  eyes,  each  one  of  us,  the 
pieces  of  chalk  under  the  glass  Ijegin  to  move  slowly,  and  apparently  to  walk 
of  their  own  accord  across  the  space  of  the  slate  under  the  tumbler.  My 
husband  had  said  just  before  that  if  the  piece  of  red  chalk  inider  that 
tumbler  moved,  he  would  give  his  head  to  anyone  who  wanted  it,  so  sure 
was  he  that  it  could  not  possibly  move.  The  first  piece  of  chalk  that  began 
to  walk  about  was  that  very  red  piece  I  Then  the  blue  and  white  moved 
simultaneously,  as  though  uncertain  which  was  the  one  desired.  It  was 
utterly  astounding  to  all  of  us  to  see  these  pieces  of  chalk  thus  walking  about 
under  the  glass  with  no  visible  agency  to  move  them  !    All  the  while  Mr. 

The  word  selected  by  me  to  app;ar  lietween  the  slates  was  "  Parnell." 

After  remaining  in  this  position  for  some  fifteen  minvites,  during  which  time  I 
watched  his  hand  most  carefully,  and  thwarted  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  his  several 
devices  for  diverting  my  attention,  he  informed  me  he  could  not  produce  the  writinc/ 
unless  I  allowed  him  to  cake  the  slates  out  of  the  rjom,  ! 

To  this  I  assented,  feeling  that  I  was  beginning  to  expose  his  inability  to  rival  the 
"spirit-mediums"  if  only  ordinary  watchfulness  were  exercised.  While  these  and 
similar  thoughts  crossed  my  mind, the  door  opened,  he  returned  with  the  slates,  having 
only  been  absent  from  the  room  .3  minutes.  I  then  examined  the  slates  most  carefully, 
and  I  solemnly  assert  that  my  seals  were  intact  in  every  case  and  that  the  slates  were 
bolted  together  so  tightly  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  introduce  even  the 
blade  of  a  penknife  between  them,  while  my  cord  round  them  was  as  tight  as  when  it 
left  my  hands,  and  the  sealed  ends  were  undisturbed. 

The  task  of  unscrewing  the  slates,  &c.,  occupied  several  minutes,  and  this  I  per- 
formed myself,  when  I  confess,  greatly  to  my  surprise,  that  the  word  "  Parnell  "  was 
clearly  and  distinctly  written  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  slate.  This  I  was  at  a 
loss  to  account  for,  especially  as  the  piece  of  chalk  that  was  enclosed  had  no  sign  of 
friction  whatever  uiJon  it,  this  being  evident  at  a  glance,  as  the  ends  thereof  had  been 
nev/ly  broken. 

I  neither  know  nor  pretend  to  understand  how  this  trick  is  done,  but  I  congratu- 
late Mr.  Davey  on  the  celerity  displayed  by  him,  and  the  skill  he  undoubtedly 
possesses. 

Mr.  Daveys  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  tCr. 

275 

Davey,  whose  hands  were  held  on  one  side  by  myself  and  on  the  other  side 
by  my  husband,  seemed  to  be  on  a  great  nervous  strain,  with  hot  hands  and 
great  beads  of  perspu-ation.  Wlien  the  chalks  stopped  moving,  we  lifted  the 
tumbler,  and  there  was  a  cross,  partly  blue  and  partly  v/hite,  and  a  long  red 
line  marking  the  path  taken  by  the  red  chalk  I  We  were  impressed  by  this 
test  beyond  the  power  of  words  to  declare.  The  test  conditions  were  perfect, 
and  the  whole  thing  took  jjlace  tuider  our  eyes  on  top  of  the  table  v.'ith  no- 
hands  of  anybody  near  the  slate. 

The  ostensible  reason  for  jjlacing  the  slate  on  the  salt-cellars  was:- 
that  the  slate  might  be  insulated,  so  that  the  explanation  of  "electri- 
city "'  might  not  be  offered  !  Mr.  Davey  has  a  fine  silk  thread  attached 
to  one  end  of  a  button  on  his  waistcoat.  To  the  other  end  is  fixed  a 
small  piece  of  red  wax,  which  except  v/hen  in  use  in  the  exjjeriment 
is  in  his  j)Ocket  together  with  the  slack  of  the  siik  thread.  While 
placing  the  slate  on  the  salt-cellars  with  his  left  hand  he  takes  the  piece 
of  wax  between  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand,  picks  up  with  these 
same  fingers  some  pieces  of  chalk, — moves  his  right  hand  forward  to 
the  other  side  of  the  slate — not  yet  placed  iir  position — so  that  the 
thread  shall  be  under  the  slate  when  the  slate  is  placed  on  the  salt- 
cellars. He  then  places  the  slate  in  position,  brings  his  hand  down 
from  the  far  side  of  the  slate  and  places  the  pieces  of  chalk  and  the 
23iece  of  wax  on  the  middle  of  the  slate,  and  places  the  inverted  tumbler 
over  them.  But  while  he  is  making  a  little  heap  of  the  chalks  on  the 
middle  of  the  slate,  befoi'e  placing  the  tumbler  in  position,  he  also- 
draws  a  figure  (or  a  number,  as  the  case  may  be)  that  he  thinks  the 
sitter  is  most  likely  to  choose.  He  draws  this,  of  course,  very  rapidly 
and  dexterously,  and  he  arranges  the  chalks  over  it  so  as  to  conceal  it. 
Further,  he  has  placed  the  piece  of  wax  on  the  side  of  the  heap  which 
is  nearest  to  himself.  He  now  takes  his  place  very  carefully  so  that 
the  thread,  the  length  of  which  has  been  well  calculated,  shall  not  be 
tightened  too  soon.  The  reader  will  now  see  that  by  withdrawing  his 
body  from  the  table,  Mr.  Davey  can  finally  cause  the  wax  to  move  in 
the  opposite  dii'ection,  i.e.,  away  from  himself,  and  through,  so  to  speak, 
the  little  group  of  chalk  fragments,  producing  a  movement  in  them 
also.  The  tumbler  is  then  lifted  in  excitement,  usually  by  Mr.  Davey,, 
the  slate  is  inspected,  and  a  figure  discovered.  In  the  meantime  JMr. 
Davey  gives  a  jerk  to  the  thread,  moves  away  from  the  table,  and 
gathers  the  wax  and  thread  once  more  into  his  pocket. 

There  are  several  minor  details  of  Mr.  Davey 's  performances  ^^•hich 
hardly  need  explaining.  Thus  many  of  the  sitters  describe  the  j^ieces 
of  pencil  or  chalk  as  being  worn  at  the  conclusion  of  bai  experiment. 
Usually  they  would  have  been  found  ecjually  worn  at  the  beginning  of 
the  expei-iment  had  the  attention  of  the  sitters  been  then  called 
to  them.  Sometimes,  indeed,  they  were  not  worn  at  the  beginning, 
but  Mr.  Davey  then  took  care  to  substitute  v>'orn  pieces  before  the 

276 

Mr.  11.  Hodgson. 

"writing  was  produced.  Thei*e  are  several  specific  cases  (Sittings  I., 
IX.,  and  XIII.)  where  the  pencil  was  found  resting  at  the  end  of  the 
message.  These  were  in  locked-slate  experiments.  Mr.  Davey  had 
■chosen  and  placed  the  pencil  so  that  when  the  slate  (to  be  substituted) 
was  closed,  the  pencil  did  not  move  when  the  slate  was  shaken.  When 
the  slate  was  carefully  opened,  right  side  up,  the  pencil  was  found 
Avhere  Mr.  Davey  had  placed  it. 

After  the  foregoing  explanations  I  believe  that  the  reader  will  find 
little  difiiculty  in  explaining  to  himself  Mr.  Davey's  modus  operandi  in 
most  of  the  experiments  in  the  series  of  sittings  with  him  recorded  in 
Vol.  IV.  of  our  Proaedings.  But  I  shall  give  the  details  of  a  few 
other  cases  where  either  possibly  the  reader  may  still  be  unable  to  see 
the  exact  method  used,  or  where  a  special  additional  trick  was  in- 
volved. 

In  Sitting  III.  occurs  the  following  description  : — 

Tlie  next  experiment  was  the  x^lacing  of  3  bits  of  coloured  chalk  on  the 
table,  and  of  a  clean  slate  (selected  and  placed  by  myself)  over  them.  I  put 
my  hand  on  the  slate,  Davey  his  on  mine,  and  we  joined  contact.  Again  we 
heard  the  sound  of  writing,  and  when  I  lifted  the  slate  there  was  written 
large  and  neatly  in  the  coloured  chalks  (tliree  lines  or  so  in  each  colour)  this 
message  ; — "Don't  you  think  I've  done  enough  for  you  to-night  I'm  tired 
•Joey."  I  noticed  the  chalks  seemed  worn,  showing  signs  of  work,  just  like 
tlie  little  bit  of  pencil  in  tlie  previous  experiment. 

Mr.  Davey  very  rarely  used  the  "  trick  slate,"  but  the  case 
•described  above  was  one  instance  of  its  use.  The  slate  was  neither 
selected  nor  placed  by  the  sitter.  Mr.  Davey  first  placed  some  coloured 
nibs  of  chalk  on  the  table  just  in  front  of  the  sitter.  He  then  took 
■one  of  his  own  slates  which  the  sitter  had  not  touched,  and  apjjarently 
sponged  both  sides  thoroughly.  Mr.  Davey  himself  then  placed  the 
slate  over  the  pieces  of  chalk,  and  asked  the  sitter  to  place  his  hand 
upon  the  slate.  The  sitter  then  for  the  first  time  touched  the  slate. 
The  slate  used  in  this  case  had  a  false  flap,  which  fitted  the  frame.  On 
the  surface  of  the  slate  itself,  under  this  fla}?,  was  a  prepared  communi- 
cation. The  exterior  surface  of  the  flap  resembled  the  exterior  surface 
■of  the  true  slate.  The  interior  surface  of  the  flap  was  covered  with  a 
piece  of  blotting-paper  which  bore  marks  of  use  in  the  form  of  casual 
Ijlots  and  lines,  itc.  On  the  table  in  close  juxtaposition  lay  a  pile  of 
blotting-paper,  the  top  of  which  was  also  marked  by  casual  blots,  &c. 
This  blotting-paper  was  there  for  the  ostensible  purpose  of  drying  the 
slates.  Mr.  Davey  took  the  slate  with  false  flap  uppermost,  and  sponged 
the  exterior  surface  of  the  flap.  He  then  turned  the  slate  over  on  top 
of  the  blotting-paper,  and  sponged  the  other  surface  of  the  slate.  He 
then  lifted  the  slate  and  placed  it  above  the  chalks,  leaving  the  false 

Mr.  Daveys  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d-c,  277 

flap  behind  upon  the  pile  of  blotting-paper,  but  with  the  blotting-papei- 
side  of  it  uppermost.  The  sitter  was  watching  the  slate  "  with  all  his 
eyes,"  but,  of  course,  saw  nothing  which  it  was  undesirable  that  he 
should  see.  "  The  chalks  seemed  worn,"  as  the  sitter  says,  but  then 
the  sitter  did  not  examine  the  chalks  beforehand,  or  he  would  have 
found  them  equally  worn  then. 

There  are  two  reports  of  Sitting  VII.,  and  I  may  refer  to  an 
experiment  where  the  reports  differ  in  a  very  important  point.  Mr. 
V.'s  report  is  : — 

The  medium  tore  off  half  a  sheet  of  letter-pai)er  bearing  the  address  of 
his  house  ;  this  he  gummed  to  the  surface  of  an  ordinary  slate,  a  fragment 
of  lead  pencil  was  put  on  the  paper,  and  the  slate  then  transferred  beneath 
the  table-flap,  and  held  by  Mr.  P.  and  the  medium.  Writing  immediately 
audible.  At  our  request  the  slate  was  exposed  before  it  had  ceased.  To  the 
best  of  my  remembrance  the  slate  could  not  have  been  beneath  tlie  table-flap 
for  more  than  20  seconds.  On  examination  Ave  found  the  following-  messao'e 
written  in  a  hand  which  bore  a  much  greater  resemblance  to  the  medium's, 
than  any  of  the  otliers. 

Mr.  M.  writes  :— 

Mr.  Pinnock  asked  if  we  could  not  get  the  writing  on  a  piece  of  paper 
instead  of  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  said  we  might  try,  and  tliereupon  tore  a 
sheet  of  writing-paper  into  two,  and  pasted  one  half  on  to  a  slate  by  the  four 
corners  ;  he  cut  off  a  small  piece  of  black  lead  from  the  end  of  a  pencil,  put 
it  on  the  paper  and  covered  the  slate  with  another  slate.  Writing  was  heard 
at  once,  and  we  separated  the  slates  and  found  the  paper  written  over 
diagonally  as  in  the  case  of  the  first  slate.  Tlie  paper  was  not,  however, 
quite  full,  and  it  looked  as  if  the  slates  were  sejiarated  too  soon,  as  tlie 
sentence  was  not  finished.  The  writing  was  evidently  written  witli  the  point 
of  the  pencil. 

This  experiment  was  actually  "  led  up  to  "  by  Mr.  Davey,  who  had 
already  prepared  the  message,  and  who  substituted  the  slate  containing 
the  prepared  message  by  the  two-single-slates  method  already  described 
(p.  257).  Mr.  Davey  also  suggested  that  the  slates  should  be  examined 
before  the  sound  as  of  writing  had  ceased. 

In  her  report  of  Sitting  XVI.  Miss  Syiuous  describes  one  experi- 
ment as  follows  : — • 

He  took  up  12  squares  of  paper,  asked  me  to  name  any  12  animals  I  liked, 
whose  names  he  wrote  on  the  12  squares  of  paper.  These  were  shuffled 
together,  and  I  was  asked  to  choose  one,  which  I  was  to  glance  at  and  tlien 
instantly  to  burn.  Mr.  Davey  at  the  same  time  threw  the  other  squares  into 
the  fire.  I  next  wrote  the  first  and  last  letters  of  the  animal  I  had  chosen  on 
another  piece  of  paper,  this  Mr.  Davey  burned  in  the  gas,  bared  his  arm  and 
showed  us  that  there  was  nothing  written  there,  rubbed  the  ashes  of  the 
burnt  paper  over  the  bare  arm,  and  presently  what  looked  like  letters  became 
very  faintly  visible.  Tliey  did  not,  however,  become  sufficiently  distinct  to 
enable  us  to  read  them,  and  Mr.  Davey  said  he  would  presently  get  the 

278 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

.miinal's  name  written  on  a  slate.  .  .  .  Before  he  left,  Mr.  Davey  held  a 
slate  with  nie  under  tlie  table,  and  asked  that  the  name  of  the  animal 
Avritten  on  the  slip  of  paper  I  liad  chosen  should  be  written  on  the  slate. 
Writing  was  heard,  the  slate  brought  up,  and  I  found  "rhinoceros" — 
wrongly  s^Jelt — in  red  chalk.  This  was  correct,  thougli  how  Mr.  Davey 
k;new,  or  by  what  means  the  word  was  written,  I  have  no  idea,  for  the  slate 
ajjpeared  to  me  to  be  clean  when  we  j^ut  it  under  the  taVjle. 

This,  though  not  on  this  occasioji  completely  successful,  is  a  very 
easy  trick.  Before  the  experiment,  write  on  the  arm,  with  a  brush  or 
a  feather,  in  uric  acid,  the  narne  of  an  animal  (or  a  flower,  or  a  country, 
ttc.)  likely  to  be  one  of  twelve  chosen.  AVait  till  it  dries.  There 
is  then  no  visible  trace  upon  the  arm.  When  the  sitter  names  an 
animal,  write,  on  the  square  of  paper,  the  name  that  you  have  written 
upon  your  arm.  Do  the  same  with  every  piece  of  paper,  no  matter 
what  animal  the  sitter  names.  The  slip  chosen  afterwards  l)y  the 
sitter  Y>dll  necessarily  contain  the  name  written  upon  your  arm.  Rub 
the  ashes  of  this  paper  upoir  the  arm,  and  the  letters  will  "  stand  out  " 
in  the  colour  of  the  ash.  I  have  performed  this  experiment  myself 
successfully  two  or  three  Incurs  after  writing  the  name  upon  my  arm. 
Tlie  word  "  I'hinocoros  "  was  already  written  on  the  slate  when  Mr. 
Davey  placed  it  under  the  table,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  good  ground 
for  stating,  for  Mr.  Davey  w^rote  it  openly  in  her  presence  and  showed 
it  to  her  while  INIiss  Symons  was  out  of  the  room. 

Those  who  have  read  thus  far,  and  who  have  taken  pains  to  compare 
ray  explanations  not  only  v.-ith  those  accounts  which  I  have  re-qu(jted 
in  this  article,  ljut  with  the  reports  as  originally  given  in  Vol.  IV.  of 
our  Proceedings,  will  realise  now,  I  trust,  if  they  have  }iot  done  so 
pi'eviously,  the  extreme  imperfection  of  those  repoi'ts,  and  therefore  the 
great  unreliability  of  a,ny  testimony  to  the  ordinary  "slate-writing" 
performa.nces  of  professional  mediums.  The  medium  may  leave  the 
room,  he  may  witlidi'aw  a  slate  several  times,  he  may  separate  slates 
placed  together  on  the  tal>le,  and  alter  their  respective  positions,  he 
may  turn  slates  over  together,  and  yet  not  one  of  these  circumstances 
may  jxppear  in  the  report  of  the  sitter.  These  points  and  others  the 
student  might  easily  have  discovered  for  himself  by  comparing  the 
-dilFerent  rejDorts  given  of  the  same  sittings  by  the  uninitiated  witnesses, 
and  yet  these  points  are  ail  of  the  most  fundamental  importance  as 
regards  the  question  of  trickery.  Thus  in  Sitting  II.  only  one  witness 
out  (^f  three  refeivs  to  Mr.  Davey 's  leaving  the  I'oom,  and  only  one 
witness  out  of  three  mentions  the  withdrawals  of  the  slate  before  the 
writing  Avas  manifest.  In  Sitting  IV.  only  one  witness  out  of  three 
records  the  separation  of  slates  placed  together  on  the  table,  &c. 
Furthei',  in  Sitting  II.  only  one  witness  out  of  three  records  a  highly 
important  incident  (the  sitters'  writing  down  on  slates  the  numbers  of 

il/")-.  Davey's  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  <l'C.  279 

which  they  were  thinking),  which  v/as  specially  brought  al^out  by  Mr. 
Davey  for  the  express  pui'pose  of  makiiig  a  substitution,  and  during 
T\4iich  the  substitution  was  actually  made. 

Yet  here  I  must  confess  that  A\  liile  it  is  gratifying  to  learn  that 
Mr.  Davey 's  labours  have  been  so  successful  in  producing  the  conviction 
that  his  "  manifestations  "  and  those  <^f  certain  professional  mediums  do 
actually  belong  to  the  same  category,  it  is  disappointing  to  find  that 
the  chief  object  of  at  least  my  own  Introduction  to  Mr.  Davey's  investi- 
gation seems  to  have  met  with  but  little  apjDreciation  by  Mr.  Wallace 
and  those  whom  he  represents.  I  admitted  that  "  there  ai'e  numerous 
records  of  'psychographic'  phenomena  that  have  occurred  with  mediums 
(and  also  with  Mr.  Davey)  which,  as  described,  are  inexplicable  by 
trickery,"  and  I  endeavoured  to  show  '•liov\^  far  such  records  might  be 
misdescriptions,  and  what  were  the  chief  causes  of  the  misdescriptions." 
The  notes  to  the  records  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  showing  to 
investigators  some  of  the  important  misdescriptions  that  actually  oc- 
curred, and  that  are  therefore  to  be  expected  in  such  records.  Further, 
there  were  five  sittings  each  of  which  was  i-eported  hy  more  than  one 
witness,  and  opportunity  was  giveii  to  the  student  to  discover  for  him- 
self, by  a  comparison  of  different  reports  <:)f  the  same  sitting,  numerous 
other  instances  of  misdescription.  Tlae  question  of  primary  importance 
concerns  the  value  of  human  testimony  under  the  circumstances  in- 
volved. Why  do  we  not  accept  such  testimony?  Because  it  is 
demonstrably  fallible  in  precisely  those  particular  points  where  it  must 
be  shown  infallible  before  the  iihenomena  can  be  accepted  as  super- 
normal. I  have  already  briefly  adverted  to  some  of  the  instances  of 
this  fallibility  in  the  explanations  v\-hich  I  have  given  of  Mr.  Davey's 
methods,  but  it  seems  to  me  needful  to  further  empha^sise  it  in  view  of 
the  fact  that  Mr.  V/allace  has  been  aisle  to  eiitertain  the  idea  that 
Mr.  Davey  was  a  "medium."  My  purpose  will,  I  think,  be  sufficiently 
conserved  if  I  refer  to  one  or  two  additional  striking  cases  of  dis- 
crepancies between  reports  of  the  same  sittings. 

In  Sitting  I.  a  long  message  v/as  obtained  on  the  locked  slate,  but 
the  message  was  incomplete,  ending  "  We  hope  to."  Mr.  Davey  ended 
the  message  purposely  in  this  vray  a;id  afterwards  "  led  up  to  "  the 
request  that  the  message  might  be  concluded.  In  the  meantime  Mr. 
Davey  had  written  the  conclusion  of  the  message  on  one  of  Mr.  E.'s 
slates,  which  was  lying  on  the  table,  writing  downw-ards,  ready  for  the 
experiment. 

Mr.  R.  writes  as  follows  : — 

I  desired  after  this  to  have  the  writing  on  the  double  slate  of  Mr.  Davey's 
continued  at  the  point  where  it  had  been  broken  off,  and  obtained  this  result 
on  one  of  my  slates  which  I  held  underneath  the  table  and  which  began 
immediately.    "We  hope  to  see  you  again — Joey."    I  was  also  anxious  to 

280 

Mr.  B.  Hodgson. 

know  what  tlie  VII  signified  as  I  have  ah-eacly  said  before.  On  the  first 
attempt  we  got  the  answer — "  good-bye  Joey  " — but  we  were  more  success- 
ful on  again  putting  the  question,  the  result  being  a  distinct  "  Sef)te  "  ; 

whether,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  was  intended  for  September  I  cannot  tell. 

Mr.  L.'s  account  is  : — 

The  writing  having  stopped  so  abruptly,  two  ordinary  slates  were  placed 
upon  the  table  in  tlie  manner  before  descril)ed,  and  it  was  asked  by  Mr.  R. 
that  the  letter  should  be  concluded.  Within  a  jieriod  of  15  seconds  from  the 
time  of  asking  such  question  and  after  completing  the  circle  with  our  hands, 
the  words  "  to  see  you  again,  Joey,"  were  written. 

The  two  slates  were  again  placed  in  the  same  position  as  before,  and  Mr. 
R.  having  put  an  unimportant  question,  after  the  completion  of  the  circle 
as  before,  I  saw  upon  the  slate  "  Good-bye,  Joey  "  ;  but  on  a  second  trial  a 
scrawl  was  obtained  which  looked  very  much  like  "Sept.  Joey,"  but  it  was 
impossible  to  say  definitely  what  it  was  intended  for. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Mr.  L.  makes  this  exj^eriment  follow  imme- 
diately aftei-  the  loeked-slate  message,  and  places  the  "  tumbler  "  trick 
last,  while  Mr.  R.  makes  it  follow  the  "  tumliler ''  trick,  which  he  puts 
immediately  after  the  locked-slate  experiment.  I  do  not  recall  what  Mr. 
Davey  told  me  al^out  his  precise  operations  in  connection  with  these 
writings,  but  from  my  knowledge  of  his  methods,  aided  by  his  note,  I 
infer  that  he  cleaned  the  top  of  the  slate,  the  underside  of  which  was 
already  prepared  with  the  conclusion  of  the  message,  that  he  placed 
this  slate  under  the  table,  turning  it  over  in  the  process  according  to 
the  singie-slate  method  described  on  p.  2-50.    He  then  wrote  "  Good 
bye,  Joey,"  on  the  then  under  surface  of  the  slate  with  his  thimble- 
pencil,  brought  the  slate  up  and  laid  it  upon  the  table,  when  the  words 
"hope  to  see  you  again,  Joey,"  were  manifest.    These  vt'ords  were 
rubbed  out,  and  this  slate  placed  upon  another  slate,  and  both  slates 
together  placed  under  the  table,  being  reversed  in  the  process.  He 
then  wrote  "  Sept.  Joey  "  on  the  under  surface  of  the  bottom  slate, 
brought  both  slates  together  to  the  top  of  the  table,  and  lifted  the  top 
slate,  when  the  words  "  Good-bye,  Joey,"  appeared  on  the  upper  surface 
of  the  bottom  slate.    He  ruljbed  these  out,  put  this  slate  upon  the 
other,  and  placed  them  once  more  under  the  table,  reversing  them  as 
he  did  so,  and  then  possiljly,  as  though  changing  his  mind,  placed  them 
on  top  of  the  table  again.    When  the  top  slate  was  removed,  "  Sept. 
Joey  "  appeared  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  bottom  slate. 

But  I  wish  to  draw  the  reader's  j^aiticular  attention  here,  for  a 
reason  which  will  aj^pear  later,  to  the  fact  tliat  one  witness  states  that 
the  communication  came  upon  a  single  slate  held  underneath  the  table 
(a  statement  which  Mr.  Davey  confirms),  ;ind  the  other  that  it  came 
between  two  slates  placed  on  top  of  the  table.  Nor  is  this  the  only 
instance  of  a  mistake  of  this  kind  in  the  reports.  Comparing  the 
accounts  of  the  letter-paper  incident  which  occurred  in  Sitting  VII., 

Mr.  Dcivey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d-c. 

281 

and  which  I  have  quoted  on  p.  277,  it  will  be  noticed  that  in  one  account 
the  experiment  is  described  as  having  been  made  with  a  single  slate 
held  underneath  the  table,  in  the  other  as  having  been  made  with  two 
slates  above  the  table.  The  experiment  was  actually  made  with  two 
slates  which  were  probably  finally  held  under  the  table. 

Another  important  discrepancy  between  the  reports  of  Sitting  "VII. 
occurs  in  the  case  of  the  ordinaiy  two-slates  experiment.  Mr.  V.,  after 
referring  to  the  locked  slate  and  the  v/riting  of  a  question  therein,  ikc, 
describes  experiments  [a]  aird  [6],  and  then  proceeds  to  describe  experi- 
ment [c]  as  follows  : — 

Two  ordinary  slates  taken,  cleaned  by  us,  but  not  marked,  pieces  of  red 
and  green  clialk  introduced  between  theni,  the  slates  then  deposited  in  front 
of  the  medium  in  full  view,  and  about  four  or  five  inches  from  the  edge  of 
the  table  and  from  the  medium's  body  ;  the  medium  rested  one  of  his  hands 
on  the  upper  surface  of  the  top  slate,  and  my  hand  reposed  on  his. 

After  a  pause  the  sound  of  writing  distinctly  audible  ;  this  continued  for 
about  15  seconds,  then  the  medium  remarked,  ' '  What  a  pity  I  forgot  to  ask 
you  what  colour  you  would  have  it  in."  Mr.  M.  suggested  green  ;  sound 
of  writing  continued  for  about  five  seconds  longer,  then  ceased.  On  the 
removal  of  the  top  slate,  the  bottom  slate  was  found  to  be  completely 
covered  with  writing.  The  writing  ran  in  diagonal  lines  across  the  slate  ; 
the  writing  was  upside  down  with  respect  to  the  medium  ;  the  writing  was 
firm  and  distinct  in  character.  The  first  three-quarters  of  the  message  were 
written  in  red,  the  last  quarter  in  green. 

Mr.  M.  is  much  more  accurate  in  his  account  of  this  incident,  and 
I  include,  in  the  quotation  which  I  give,  his  reference  to  other 
experiments  which  came  between  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the 
two-slates  experiment.  There  is  no  clue  to  the  modus  operandi,  for 
the  uninitiated  reader,  in  Mr.  V.'s  account,  but  there  are  very  obvious 
clues,  for  any  careful  student  of  the  series  of  reports,  in  Mr.  M.'s 
account.  Mr.  M.  describes  the  locked  slate,  kc,  tkc,  and  then, 
proceeds : — ■ 

Mr.  Davey  then  showed  me  some  ordinary  slates,  in  wooden  frames. 
These  I  helijed  him  to  wash  and  dry.  We  then  took  our  seats  round  the 
table.  .  .  .  Mr.  Davey  asked  Mr.  Pinnock  to  place  the  locked  slate 
under  his  (Mr.  Pinnock's)  coat  and  then  button  up  the  coat. 

[c]  We  now  took  three  slates,  on  one  of  them  we  placed  three  fraguients 
•of  crayon,  two  of  which  were  red,  the  other  green,  we  then  covered  uj)  this 
slate  with  another  and  left  them  on  the  table  in  full  view. 

[a]  On  the  third  slate  we  also  put  a  piece  of  crayon  and  then  held  the 
slate  underneath  one  flap  of  the  table  which  we  put  up  for  the  pur- 
pose. .  .  .  We  sat  in  this  way  talking  and  smoking  for  some  time, 
twenty  minutes  to  half  an  hour  I  should  say,  nothing  whatever  occurring. 
At  last  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  change  places  vvitli  Mr.  Pinnock.  This  I  did 
and  thus  had  one  of  my  hands  on  the  slate.  Mr.  Davey  now  said,  that  in 
the  manner  usual  at  seances  we  would  ask  questions  of  an  imaginary  being  ; 

U 

282 

Mr.  JR.  Hodgson. 

and  he  said,  "  Are  you  going  to  do  anything  to-night,  Joey  1 "  After  a  sliorfc 
pause  he  repeated  the  question,  and  then  I  felt  the  slate  vibrate  as  if  being- 
written  on,  and  could  hear  a  scratching  noise  ;  we  took  the  slate  from  under 
the  table-flap  and  saw  the  word  "yes"  written  over  Mr.  V.'s  initials,  and 
I  particularly  noticed  that  the  writing  was  towards  Mr.  Davey,  and  upside 
down  to  him,  and  in  all  we  saw  afterwards  this  was  the  case. 

[U]  I  now  asked  a  question  as  to  tlie  whereabout  of  a  person  at  that  time, 
not  knowing  the  answer  myself  ;  we  waited  for  some  time  without  any  result, 
when  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  again  change  places  with  Mr.  Pinnock. 

[d,  f,  </,  &c.]  I  did  so,  and  Mr.  Davey  told  Mr.  Pinnock  to  place  the  locked 
slate  on  the  table  beside  the  two  slates  we  liad  left  face  to  face,  and  we  also 
lifted  the  uppermost  of  these  two  slates  and  found  tlie  slates  still  quite  clean, 
with  the  three  pieces  of  crayon  between  them.  We  again  waited  some  time 
with  no  results  ;  meantime,  having  a  discussion  as  to  mediumship  of  different 
people,  and  then  Mr.  Davey  asked  if  I  were  a  medium.  After  a  pause  I 
heard  vigorous  scratchings  on  the  two  slates  left  face  to  face  on  the  table  and 
on  which  Mr.  Davey's  arm  was  resting,  his  two  hands  being  engaged,  one  in 
holding  the  slate  under  the  table  flap,  the  other  in  holding  Mr.  V.'s 
hand  ;  the  scratching  lasted  roughly  under  ten  seconds,  and  I  expected  to  see 
a  dozen  words  or  so,  and  was  therefore  amazed  to  discover,  when  the  top  slate 
was  lifted,  that  the  underneath  slate  was  covered  with  writing  from  corner  to 
corner,  and  also  the  writing  was  not  straight  across  the  slate,  but  was  across 
it  diagonally  ;  three-quarters  of  the  writing  was  in  red,  the  other  quarter  in 
green,  and  no  cruijon  was  left. 

Now,  the  reader  will  easily  infer  from  Mi'.  M.'s  account  that  the  two 
slates  wei'e  placed  in  position  by  Mr.  Davey  and  were  wrongly  supposed 
by  the  sitters  to  have  been  taken  from  those  cleaned  by  them  some  time 
— not  immediately — previously.  After  studying  the  accounts  of  Sittings- 
IV.,  especially  the  reasoning  by  Mr.  Padshah,  and  after  considering  that 
the  slates  used  wei'e  Mr.  Davey's,  the  reader  will  also  infer  that  the 
under  sui-face  of  the  bottom  slate  was  already  covei'ed  with  the  writing 
afterwards  found.  He  will  then  argue  that  if  a  series  of  movements 
such  as  those  described  by  Mr.  Russell  (see  p.  264)  could  be  completely 
oniittetl  from  the  I'eport  of  Mr.  Padshah,  they  might  also  have  occurred 
in  Sitting  VII.,  although  they  are  not  recorded  in  the  reports  of  that 
sitting.  But  more  instructive  even  than  these  clues  in  Mr.  M.'s  account 
to  Mr.  Davey's  modus  ojjerandi,  is  the  fact  that  Mr.  V.  describes  the 
steps  of  the  experiment  as  though  they  came  in  immediate  sequence; 
whereas  we  learn  from  Mr.  M.  that  aljuut  half  an  hour  elapsed  between 
the  first  and  last  steps  of  the  experiment,  and  that  during  this  interval 
experiments  were  being  made  with  a  single  slate.  These  experiments 
[a]  and  [6]  are  described  by  Mr.  V.,  but  they  are  described  as  occurring- 
before  the  commencement  of  [c]. 

I  shall  give  one  more  illustration  of  differences  between  reports  of 
the  same  sitting  before  proceeding  to  consider  in  detail  those  (slate- 
jvriting)  sittings  which  Mr.  Wallace  has  mentioned  as  being,  apparently, 

Mr.  Bavey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  dr.  283 

particularly  hard  to  explain.  In  his  report  of  Sitting  VII.  Mr.  V. 
writes : — ■ 

At  the  request  of  the  medium,  Mr.  P.  wrote  a  question  in  the  book-slate 
(I  shall  call  this  slate  A  in  future)  ;  he  then  locked  it  and  pocketed  the  key. 
Neither  Mr.  M.  nor  I  knew  the  nature  of  the  question  at  the  time.  The  slate 
was  left  for  some  minutes  upon  the  seat  of  an  arm-chair,  but  was  subsequently 
transferred  first  to  Mr.  P.'s  coat,  and  then  to  the  table  at  which  we  sat. 

Later  on,  after  recounting  experiments  with  a  single  slate  and  with 
two  slates,  Mr.  V.  continues  : — 

The  medium  and  Mr.  P.  placed  tlieir  hands  upon  slate  A,  which  had 
remained  in  sight  in  front  of  the  latter  since  the  commencement  of  the 
stance.  The  sound  of  writing  audible  almost  immediately.  Mr.  P.  opened 
slate,  and  we  found  tlie  question  he  had  written,  together  with  the  accom- 
panying answer. 

Turning  now  to  Mr.  M.'s  account,  we  find  that  he  also  mentions 
that  Mr.  Pinnock,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  wrote  a  question  in 
the  slate,  locked  it  and  kept  the  key.  He  says  nothing,  however,  as  to 
what  was  done  with  the  slate  at  that  time,  but  goes  on  to  describe,  as 
the  next  events,  the  examination  of  the  table,  the  cleaning  of  ordinary 
slates,  seating  themselves  at  the  table,  &c.  He  then  writes  :  "  Mr. 
Davey  asked  Mr.  Pinnock  to  place  the  locked  slate  under  his  (Mr.  Pin- 
nock's)  coat  and  then  button  up  the  coat."  Then  follows  his  description 
of  the  two-slates  experiment,  which  I  have  quoted  above  (p.  282),  on 
reference  to  which  it  will  be  seen  that  Mr.  Pinnock  placed  the  locked 
slate  on  the  table  before  any  writing  had  been  obtained  between  the 
two  single  slates.  After  the  writing  between  the  two  slates  was  obtained,, 
the  locked-slate  expei-iment  was  proceeded  with. 

Mr.  Davey  now  put  his  hand  on  the  locked  slates  which  had  been  left 
on  the  table  since  Mr.  Phuiock  took  them  from  under  his  coat ;  we  heard 
scratching  inside. 

Putting  these  accounts  together,  it  is  obvious  where  the  opportunities, 
for  substitution  were  given.  B  might  have  been  substituted  for  A 
shortly  after  A  was  locked  up  and  while  it  was  resting  on  the  arm- 
chair as  described  by  Mr.  V.,  so  that  it  was  really  B  that  Mr.  P.  placed 
in  his  pocket  (a  desirable  place  lest  the  sitter  should  think  of  examining 
it  before  A  was  re-substituted).  The  re-substitution  of  A  was  easy 
while  the  sitters  Avere  absorbed  in  the  long  message  that  appeared 
between  the  two  slates.  ■ 

Compare,  with  these  reports,  those  of  Mr.  R.  and  Mr.  L.  of  the- 
locked-slate  experiment  in  Sitting  I.  The  first  mention  of  this  ex- 
periment by  Mr.  L.  occurs  after  the  experiments  with  the  single  slate 
and  with  the  two  slates  together.    He  writes  : — 

Mr.  Davey  then  produced  a  "locked  slate,"  which  I  examined  most 
minutehj,  and,  as  far  as  I  was  able  to  judge,  the  surfaces  were  genuine  slata 

u  2 

284 

Mr.  M.  Hodgson. 

and  had  not  undergone  any  process  of  preparation  which  would  aid  him  in 
obtaining  writing.  A  small  crumb  of  pencil  was  inserted,  and  the  slate 
closed  and  locked  by  Mr.  R.  The  key  was  then  given  into  my  possession. 
We  then  placed  our  hands  in  an  exactly  similar  position  as  before,  and  Mr. 
R.  having  repeated  the  question,  ' '  Will  the  Emperor  of  Germany  live 
tlirough  the  year  ?  "  I  very  soon  heard  the  pencil  travelling  over  the  surface  of 
the  slate.  After  the  lapse  of  about  four  minutes  the  slate  was  carefully 
unlocked  by  Mr.  R. ,  and  the  pencil  very  much  worn  was  found  at  the  place 
where  the  writing  ended. 

From  this  account  it  would  seem  that  the  first  inspection  of  the 
locked  slate  almost  immediately  preceded  the  production  of  the  writing, 
but  it  appears  from  Mr.  R.'s  account  that  the  slate  was  inspected  and 
locked  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  sitting,  and  was  put  by  him  in  the 
pocket  of  his  coat.  After  describing  the  exjDeriments  with  a  single 
slate  and  with  double  slates,  he  continues : — ■ 

The  next  experiment  was  with  Mr.  Davey's  closed  slate.  After  it  had 
been  produced  from  my  pocket  we  laid  it  on  the  table  locked  and  with  the 
small  piece  of  jjencil  inside,  joined  hands  as  before' and  the  question  was  put, 
"  Will  the  Emperor  of  Germany  live  through  the  presel^t  year?"  Imme- 
diately the  writing  began,  exactly  the  same  as  on  previous  occasions,  and 
v/hen  after  the  space  of  4  minutes  (about)  I  carefully  unlocked  the  slate  we 
found  the  following  wonderful  message. 

If  the  reader  will  compare  these  accounts  with  the  accounts  of  the 
locked-slate  experiment  in  Sitting  VII.,  and  especially  with  that  by  Mr. 
M.,  he  will  at  once  surmise  that  the  locked  slate  was  produced  from 
Mr.  R.'s  pocket  before  the  communication  was  obtained  between  the 
two  slates  in  the  preceding  experiment,  and  that  while  the  sitters  were 
absorbed  in  its  contemplation  Mr.  Davey  substituted  B  for  A.  But  the 
important  point  to  notice  is  not  how  the  trick  was  done.  The  impor- 
tant point  is  that  just  as  we  have  seen  from  the  reports  of  Sitting  VII. 
that  a  witness  may  describe  the  steps  of  the  Uoo-slates  ex^xriment  as 
though  they  occurred  in  immediate  sequence,  with  no  other  experi- 
ments intervening,  whereas  in  reality  the  last  steps  were  sej^arated 
from  the  first  by  an  interval  of  half  an  hour,  during  which  other  ex- 
periments were  made  with  a  single  ordinary  slate,  and  the  locked  slate 
also  claimed  attention  : — so  here  we  find,  from  the  reports  of  Sitting  I., 
that  a  witness  may  describe  the  steps  of  the  locked-slate  exjKriment  as 
occurring  in  immediate  sequence,  with  no  other  experiments  intervening, 
whereas  in  reality  the  last  steps  were  separated  from  the  first  by  an 
interval  during  which  various  experiments  were  made  with  a  single  slate 
and  with  two  slates  together. 

Bearing  in  mind,  then,  these  two  special  possibilities  of  error  and 
also  the  other  possibilities  of  error  to  which  I  have  drawn  attention  on 
pp.  260,  263,  269,  all  of  ivhich  are  sufficiently  demonstrated  hy  comjmring 
the  reports  of  the  sitters  themselves,  let  us  now  consider  in  detail  the 

Mr.  Daveys  Iviitations  by  Conjuring,  dx.  285 

reports  of  Sittings  XI.  and  XII.,  which  Mr.  Wallace  has  particularly 
mentioned  [Joxirnal  S.P.R.,  March,  1891)  as  needing  explanation. 

The  report  of  the  experiments  in  Sitting  XI.  is  as  follows  : — ■ 

[a]  After  I  had  finished  examining  the  [locked]  slate,  Mr.  Davey  asked 
me  to  write  in  the  slate  any  question  I  liked  while  he  was  absent  from  the 
room.  Picking  up  a  piece  of  grey  crayon,  I  wrote  the  following  question  : 
"What  is  the  specific  gravity  of  platinum?"  and  then  having  locked  the 
slate  and  retained  the  key,  I  placed  the  former  on  the  table  and  the  latter  in 
my  pocket. 

After  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  I  heard  a  distinct  sound  as  of  writing, 
and  on  being  requested  to  unlock  the  slate  I  there  discovered  to  my  great 
surprise  the  answer  of  my  question  :  ' '  We  don't  know  the  specific  gravity, 
Joey."  The  pencil  with  which  it  was  written  was  a  little  piece  which  we  had 
enclosed,  and  which  would  just  rattle  between  the  sides  of  the  folded  slate. 

Having  had  my  hands  on  the  slate  above  the  table,  I  can  certify  that  the 
slate  was  not  touched  or  tampered  with  during  the  time  the  writing  was 
going  on. 

[6]  Next ;  having  taken  an  ordinary  scholar's  slate  and  placed  a  fragment 
of  red  crayon  upon  it,  Mr.  Davey  placed  it  under  the  flap  of  the  table.  I  held 
one  side  with  my  hand  as  before.  I  then  heard  the  same  sound  as  previously, 
and  when  the  slate  was  placed  on  the  table  I  found  the  following  short 

address  distinctly  written  :  ' '  Dear  Mr.  S  ,  — The  substitution  dodge  is 

good  ;  the  chemical  is  better,  but  you  see  by  the  writing  the  spirits  know  a 
trick  worth  two  of  that.  This  medium  is  honest,  and  I  am  the  only  true 
Joey."  The  writing  was  in  red  crayon,  and  was  in  regular  parallel  straight 
lines. 

[c]  Then,  again,  Mr.  Davey  requested  me  to  place  a  small  fragment  of 
slate  pencil  in  the  lock  slate,  which  latter  had  been  previously  cleansed  with 
sponge  by  me.  Respecting  the  method  of  closing  the  slate,  &c.,  everything 
was  done  as  in  t]ie  first  instance  ;  the  slate  was  locked,  and  I  retained  the  key. 

As  soon  as  the  sound  of  writing  was  over  I  picked  the  slate  from  off  the 
table,  where  it  had  been  lying  right  under  my  eyes,  unlocked  it,  and  read  as 
follows  :  "  We  are  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  you  this  writing  under  these 
conditions,  because  with  your  special  knowledge  upon  the  subject  you  can 
negative  the  theory  of  antecedent  preparation  of  this  slate  as  advanced  by 
certain  wiseacres  to  explain  the  mystery. — '  Joey.'  "  The  fact  that  the  pencU 
when  removed  from  the  interior  of  the  slate  had  diminished  in  size  and  showed 
distinct  traces  of  friction  convinces  me  that  it  was  the  pencil  and  nothing  else 
which  produced  the  caligraphy.  If  the  particles  talien  from  the  pencil  by 
friction  did  not  go  on  the  surface  of  the  slate,  where  could  they  go  ? 

[(£]  Lastly,  as  requested  by  Mr.  Davey,  I  took  a  coin  from  my  pocket 
without  looking  at  it,  placed  it  in  an  envelope  and  sealed  it  up.  I  am  certain 
that  neither  Mr.  Davey  nor  myself  knew  anything  about  the  coin.  I  then 
placed  it  in  the  book-slate  together  with  a  piece  of  pencil,  closed  it  as 
previously  and  deposited  it  on  the  table  ;  and  having  placed  my  hands  with 
those  of  Mr.  Davey  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  slate,  waited  a  short  time.  I 
then  unlocked  the  slate  as  requested,  and  to  my  intense  amazement  I  found 
the  date  of  the  coin  written,  by  the  side  of  the  envelope  containing  it. 

286 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

The  seal  and  envelope  (which  I  have  now)  remained  intact. 

This  last  feat  astonished  me  more  than  the  others,  so  utterly  imj^ossible 
and  abnormal  did  it  appear  to  me.  I  may  also  mention  that  everything 
wliich  was  used,  including  the  cloth  and  sponge  with  which  the  slates  were 
cleansed,  were  eagerly  and  thoroughly  scrutinised  by  me,  and  I  failed  to 
detect  anything  in  the  shape  of  mechanism  of  any  kind. 

Now,  that  this  report  is  very  scanty  and  inadequate  is  obvious  on 
the  face  of  it,  and  Mr.  Davey  assured  me  that  there  were  other  ex- 
periments tried  of  which  no  mention  appears  in  the  report.  But  I  do 
jiot  propose  to  depend,  for  my  explanations  of  this  sitting,  simply  and 
merely  upon  either  my  remembrance  of  conversations  with  Mr.  Davey 
or  my  detailed  knowledge  of  his  methods.  I  am  anxious  that  students 
should  learn  how  to  interpret  for  themselves  such  accounts  as  these, 
and  it  seems  to  me  that  I  can  best  achieve  this  result  by  pointing  out, 
to  begin  with,  some  of  the  most  obvious  indications,  which  we  iind  in 
the  report  itself,  of  its  deficiencies,  afterwards  amending  the  rej^ort  as 
I'egards  its  most  flagrant-  misdescriptions.  We  shall  then  easily  see 
how  the  tricks  were  performed. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  let  us  note  that  various  important  circum- 
stances receive  no  mention  whatever  in  the  report.  Mr.  S.  tells  us 
that  after  he  locked  the  slate  in  experiment  [a]  he  placed  it  on  the 
table,  and  "after  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes"  he  heard  "a  distinct 
sound  as  of  writing,"  cfec.  But  he  tells  us  absolutely  nothing  as  to 
what  happened  during  this  interval  which  he  describes  as  a  "  few 
minutes."  He  does  not  even  mention  the  return  of  Mr.  Davey  to  the 
room.  The  locked  slate  might  have  been  changed  a  hundred  times  for 
all  that  ajjpears  to  the  contrary  in  the  sitter's  account.  What  he 
certifies  is  "  that  the  slate  was  not  touched  or  tampered  with  duri7ig 
the  time  the  [sound  as  of]  writing  ivas  going  on^  The  I'eader  may  also 
notice  that  the  sitter  does  not  say  anything  about  enclosing  a  piece  of 
2?encil  when  he  first  locked  the  slate,  but  it  appears  afterwards  that 
"  the  pencil  with  which  it  [the  answer]  was  written  was  a  little  piece 
which  we  had  enclosed."  Here  is  another  indication  of  circumstances 
omitted.    When  did  "  we  "  enclose  it  1 

Concerning  experiment  \h\  Mr.  8.  writes  :  "  Having  taken  an 
ordinary  scholar's  slate  and  placed  a  fragment  of  red  crayon  on  it,  Mr. 
Davey  placed  it  under  the  flap  of  the  table.  I  held  one  side  with  my 
hand  as  before."  Before  ?  wlien  .?  The  sitter  makes  no  mention  of 
any  previous  experiment  where  he  assisted  in  holding  a  slate  under  the 
table,  yet  his  remark  here  carries  a  clear  implication  that  there  was  at 
least  one  such  previous  experiment.  Again,  the  sitter  says  that  Mr. 
i)awe*/ placed  the  slate  under  the  table,  and  he  does  not  say  that  any  ex- 
amination of  it  was  made  by  himself.  There  is,  therefore,  nothing  in  his 
description  of  this  experiment  which  conflicts  with  the  supposition  that 

Mr.  Davey's  Tmitations  by  Conjuring,  <L-c.  287 

Mr.  Davey  took  a  slate  with  the  writing  ah'eady  on  one  side,  slipped 
it  under  the  table,  turned  it  over,  pressed  it  against  the  flap,  and  then 
asked  the  sitter  to  join  in  holding  it  against  the  table. 

Similarly,  in  his  account  of  experiment  [c]  there  is  no  express 
statement  that  conflicts  with  the  supposition  that  the  slate  might  have 
been  changed  during  the  interval  between  the  sitter's  examination  of 
the  slate  and  the  beginning  of  the  sound  as  of  writing.  The  sitter 
says  nothing  as  to  the  interval  that  elapsed  between  the  time  of  his 
depositing  the  slate,  after  locking  it,  on  the  table,  and  the  conclusion 
of  the  sound  as  of  writing,  except  the  remark,  "  where  it  had  been 
lying  right  under  my  eyes,"  and  he  does  not  expressly  say  that  it  had 
been  "  lying  right  under  his  eyes  "  during  the  whole  of  the  interval  in 
question.  The  inference  from  his  remark,  comparing  it  with  his  account 
of  experiment  [«],  is  that  what  he  meant  was  that  the  slate  had  l)een 
"lying  right  under  his  eyes"  dui'ing  "the  time  the  [sound  as  of] 
writing  was  going  on."  Other  experiments  occupying,  say,  half  an 
hour  might  have  been  in  progress  between  the  time  of  the  sitter's 
locking  the  slate  and  hearing  the  sound  as  of  writing. 

Now,  we  have  already  seen  that  witnesses  may  make  numerous 
positive  and  express  statements  which  are  entirely  erroneous,  the 
result  being  that  if  their  descriptions  an  taken  as  correct,  the 
phenomena  which  they  describe  are  inexplicable  by  ti'ickery.  But, 
curiously  enough,  in  the  report  before  us,  the  phenomena  described  in 
the  three  first  experiments  mentioned  by  the  sitter  are  perfectly 
exjilicable  by  trickeiy  without  altering  a  single  word  of  his  accounts  of 
them.  Only  in  his  account  of  experiment  [r/],  and  scarcely  in  that,  are  the 
details  narrated  in  such  a  way  that,  as  described,  trickery  seems  impossible. 

Let  us  now  revise  the  report  of  these  four  experiments.  We  may 
do  this  by  consideration  of  the  methods  usually  adopted  by  Mr.  Davey 
iis  revealed  in  the  whole  series  of  sittings,  and  by  consideration  also  of 
the  errors  to  which  a  witness  is  liable,  as  revealed  by  a  comparison 
of  the  different  reports  given  of  the  same  sitting.  We  find,  then,  that 
Mr.  Davey  usually  began  by  giving  the  locked  slate  to  the  sitter  to 
examine,  and  jjossibly  to  write  a  question  therein.  He  then  tried 
experiments  with  a  single  slate  and  with  two  slates  together,  and 
afterwards  recurred  to  the  locked  slate.  Observing  this  general  order, 
I  ameiid  the  report  as  follows,  correcting,  of  course,  by  no  means  all 
of  its  fundamental  misdescriptions  ;  but — and  I  desire  to  lay  very 
special  emphasis  on  this  fact — the  changes  which  I  do  make,  excepting 
the  descriptions  of  the  actual  substitution  of  one  slate  for  another,  and 
the  doings  of  Mr.  Davey  while  out  of  the  room,  are  all  tvarranted  by  a 
comparison  of  the  reports  of  those  sittings  ivhere  more  than  one  in- 
dependent  report  was  made.  The  additions  which  I  make  are  in  square 
brackets,  and  the  italicised  parts  explain  how  the  tricks  were  done. 

288 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

[a]  After  I  had  finished  examining  the  slate,  Mr.  Davey  asked  me  to  write 
in  the  slate  any  question  I  liked  while  he  was  absent  from  the  room. 
Picking  up  a  jiioce  of  grey  crayon,  I  wrote  the  following  question  :  "What 
is  the  specific  gravity  of  platinum  1  "  and  then  having  locked  the  slate  and 
retained  the  key,  I  placed  the  former  on  the  table  and  the  latter  in  my 
pocket. 

[When  Mr.  Davey  returned  to  the  roonx,  he  asked  me  to  examine  the 
table  carefully,  which  I  did.  It  was  an  ordinary  table,  without  any  trick- 
mechanism  of  any  sort.  During  this  interval  Mr.  Davey  suhstitnted  B  for 
A.  He  then  gave  me  some  ordinaiy  slates  to  wash  and  dry.  During  this 
interval  Mr.  Davey  left  the  room,  opened  A  and  answered  the  question,  and 
returned  and  re-suhstituted  A  for  B.  Mr.  Davey  now  took  three  slates. 
[?<]  On  one  of  them  {which  had  not  been  in  the  hands  of  the  sitter,  and  on 
the  under  surface  of  which,  was  the  j>'>'epared  message)  he  placed  a  fragment 
of  red  crayon.  He  then  covered  up  this  slate  with  another  and  left  them  on 
tlie  table  in  full  view.  On  the  third  slate  he  also  put  a  fragment  of  crayon 
and  held  it  under  tlie  table  against  the  flap  and  asked  me  to  liold  it  on  my 
side.  We  asked  if  we  sliould  get  any  phenomena,  and  after  a  short  time  the 
sound  of  writing  was  heard,  and  we  looked  at  the  slate  and  found  the  answer 
"  Yes."    We  then  put  oin-  liands  on  tlie  locked  slate.] 

[«]  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  I  heard  a  distinct  sound  as  of  writing, 
and  on  being  requested  to  unlock  the  slate  I  there  discovered  to  my  great 
surprise  the  answer  of  my  question  :  ' '  We  don't  know  the  sf)ecific  gravity, 
Joey."  The  pencil  with  which  it  was  written  was  a  little  piece  which  we  had 
enclosed,  and  wliich  would  just  rattle  between  the  sides  of  the  folded  slate. 

Having  had  my  hands  on  the  slate  above  the  table,  I  can  certify  that  tlie 
slate  was  not  touched  or  tampered  witli  during  the  time  the  writing  was 
going  on. 

[c]  Then,  again,  Mr.  Davey  requested  me  to  place  a  small  fragment  of 
slate-pencil  in  the  lock  slate,  which  latter  liad  been  previously  cleansed  with 
sponge  by  me.  Respecting  the  method  of  closing  the  slate,  &c.,  everytliing 
was  done  as  in  the  first  instance  ;  the  slate  was  locked,  and  I  retained  the 
key. 

[In  the  meantime  Mr.  Davey  lifted  tlie  top  slate  of  the  two  on  the  table, 
but  there  was  no  writing  there.  He  reversed  the  positions  of  the  two  slates  so 
that  the  slate  with,  the  message  on  the  under  surface  was  noio  on  top.  Mr. 
Davey  then  took  these  two  slates  and  jjlaced  them  under  the  flap  of  the  table, 
reversing  them  together  as  he  did  so.] 

[b]  I  held  one  side  with  my  hand  as  before.  I  then  heard  the  same  sound 
as  j)reviously,  and  wlien  the  slate  was  placed  on  tlie  table  I  found  the  following- 
short  address  distinctly  written  :  "Dear  Mr.  S  , — The  substitution  dodge 

is  good  ;  the  chemical  is  better,  but  you  see  by  the  writing  the  spirits  know 
a  trick  worth  two  of  that.  This  medium  is  honest,  and  I  am  the  only  true 
Joey."  The  writing  was  in  red  crayon,  and  was  in  regular  parallel  straiglit 
lines. 

[While  the  sitter  was  examining  this  message  Mr.  Davey  substituted  B  for 
A.  Mr.  Davey  now  put  his  hands  on  the  locked  slate.  Very  soon  the 
sound  of  writing  began.] 

[c]  As  soon  as  the  sound  of  writing  was  over,  I  picked  the  slate  from  oif 

Mr.  Lavey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d-e.  289. 

the  table,  where  it  head  been  lying  right  under  my  eyes,  unlocked  it,  and  read 
as  follows  :  "  We  are  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  you  this  writing  under 
these  conditions,  because  with  your  special  knowledge  upon  the  subject  you 
can  negative  the  theory  of  antecedent  preparation  of  this  slate  as  advanced  by 
certain  wiseacres  to  explain  the  mystery. — '  Joey.'  "  The  fact  that  the  pencil 
when  removed  from  the  interior  of  the  slate  had  diminished  in  size  and  showed 
distinct  traces  of  friction  convinces  me  that  it  was  the  pencil  and  nothing  else 
whicli  produced  the  caligraphy.  If  the  particles  taken  from  the  pencil  by 
friction  did  not  go  on  the  surface  of  the  slate,  where  could  they  go  1 

l^miile  iJtc  sitter  tvas  copyhig  the  communication  Mr.  Davey  left  the  room 
and  placed  the  coin  in  envelope,  and  envelope  in  slate  A,  and  ivrote  dcUe  (see 
p.  271)  and  returned.] 

[d]  Lastly,  as  requested  by  Mr.  Davey,  I  took  a  coin  from  my  jjocket 
without  looking  at  it,  placed  it  in  an  envelope  and  sealed  it  up.  I  am  certain 
that  neither  Mr.  Davey  nor  myself  knew  anything  about  the  coin.  I  then 
placed  it  in  the  book-slate  together  with  a  piece  of  pencil,  closed  it  as  previously 
and  deposited  it  on  the  table. 

[Mr.  D.  showed  and  explained  to  me  a  means  commonly  employed  ui 
producing  slate-writing  by  fraud.  While  the  sitter  iras  examining  the  trick 
slate,  Mr.  Davey  substituted  A  for  B.    I  then  took  the  locked  slate.] 

And  having  placed  my  hands  with  those  of  Mr.  Davey  on  the  upper  surface 
of  the  slate,  waited  a  short  time.  I  then  unlocked  the  slate  as  requested,  and 
to  my  intense  amazement  I  found  the  date  of  the  coin  written,  by  the  side  of 
the  envelope  containing  it. 

The  reader  now  will  surely  need  no  further  enlightenment  as  to  the 
details  of  events  in  Sitting  XII.,  or  indeed  in  any  other  sitting  of 
the  series,  and  will,  I  trust,  be  disposed  to  think,  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick 
and  myself,  that  the  most  stai'tling  result  of  Mr.  Davey's  investigation, 
is  not  the  wonder  of  the  tricks  themselves,  but  the  extreme  unreliability 
of  the  accounts  given  of  them  by  uninitiated  witnesses.  And  we  should 
remember  further  that  these  accounts  probably  represent  the  most 
accurate  reports,  as  a  wdrole,  of  such  performances,  ever  brought  to- 
gether in  a  series.  For  the  witnesses  knew  beforehand  that  they  were 
expected  to  write  out  accounts  of  what  occurred,  and  more  important 
still,  the  reports  wei'e  written  within  two  or  three  days  after  the 
sittings.  And  I  may  here  also  refer  the  reader  to  my  remarks  in 
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  396-399,  concerning  the  disadvantages 
under  which  Mr.  Davey  laboured  as  compared  with  the  ordinary  pro- 
fessional medium. 

The  reader  may  now  ask  how  far  his  knowledge  of  Mr.  Davey's 
methods  may  prevent  him  from  being  imposed  upon  by  fraudulent 
mediums.  Possibly  not  very  much.  Frequent  observation  and  practice 
of  them,  however,  would  no  doubt  be  of  great  assistance.  SurrejDtitious 
writing  on  slates  held  under  the  table,  the  substitution,  openly  made, 
in  the  case  of  slates  lying  on  the  table,  and  the  manipulations  of  two 
slates  where  the  writing  is  originally  on  the  under  surface  of  the  lower 

290 

Mr.  Ji.  Hodgson. 

slate,  and  eventually  is  found  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  lower  slate, 
are,  I  have  no  doubt,  in  frequent  use  by  fraudulent  mediums.  Eglinton 
was  apparently  in  the  haljit  of  using  all  these  methods.  Mr.  Davey 
purchased  some  of  his  devices  from  an  individual  who  gave  liim  to 
understand  that  they  had  been  procured  from  an  American  medium. 
The  author  of  Revelations  of  a  Sinrit-Medium  enumerates  eight  different 
methods  of  apparently  producing  "  independent  slate-writing  "  without 
the  help  of  a  confederate.  The  most  imj^ortant  of  these  is  a  variation 
of  the  two-slates  experiment  combined  with  the  trick-reading  of  pellets, 
and  as  I  have  reports  in  my  possession  written  by  a  member  of  our 
Society  who  witnessed  this  general  method  in  the  case  of  two  well- 
known  American  mediums,  Watkins  and  W.  A.  Mansfield,  I  quote 
Avhat  the  author  of  the  book  says  (pp.  124-126)  about  this  trick. 

Another  feat  that  is  astonishing  and  convincing  is  accomplished  with  two 
clean  slates.  They  are  thoroughly  cleaned  and  laid  side  by  side  upon  a  table, 
on  one  side  of  which  sits  the  "sitter,"  and  opposite  him  the  "medium."  The 
"  sitter  "  is  now  furnished  with  a  small  square  of  soft  white  i^aper  and  re- 
quested to  write  the  name  of  some  deceased  friend  or  relative,  and  with  it  a 
question.  This  being  done  he  is  requested  to  fold  it  ujo  small,  similar  to  the 
physician's  powder  papers.  The  "medium"  has  a  blank  one,  folded  in  the 
same  way  and  palmed  between  the  index  and  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand. 
When  the  "  sitter  "  has  folded  his  pellet,  the  "medium"  reaches  forth  his 
right  hand  and  takes  it  between  the  thumb  and  index  finger  and  carries  it  to 
liis  forehead.  While  raising  the  hand  to  the  head,  he  slips  the  written  pellet 
down  and  the  blank  one  in  view.  After  holding  it  to  his  forehead  a  few 
seconds  he  requests  the  "  sitter  "  to  take  it  and  hold  it  against  his  own  fore- 
head for  a  moment.  Of  course  the  "sitter"  gets  the  blank  pellet  and  the 
"  medium's  "  hand  droits  to  his  lap.  He  now  ojiens  the  pellet  and  reads  it. 
We  will  say  it  reads  :  "John  Smith.    Will  my  business  succeed  ?  George." 

Having  read  it  and  palmed  it  again,  he  now  requests  to  hold  the  pellet  to 
his  forehead  again.  He  effects  the  cliange  and  says  to  the  "  sitter  "  :  "  You 
now  hold  the  pellet  in  your  left  hand  and  I  will  write  the  answer." 

This  time  the  "sitter"  has  the  pellet  he  wrote,  and  holds  it  while  the 
"  medium"  takes  up  a  slate,  and  leaning  well  back,  holds  the  slate  with  his 
left  hand  and  body,  and  writes  with  the  right  hand  in  such  a  position  that 
the  "  sitter  "  cannot  see  the  writing.    He  writes  : 

"  Dear  George, — Your  business  is  sure  to  succeed  beyond  your  expecta- 
tions.   John  Smith." 

He  now  states  to  the  "sitter"  that  he  does  not  feel  at  all  sure  that  he  has 
Avr^tten  the  correct  answer,  and  reads  aloud  : 

"  The  papers  will  never  be  found.    Harry  White." 

Of  course  it  is  not  an  answer  to  the  question,  and  the  "  sitter"  so  states. 
The  "medium"  requests  that  he  open  tlie  pellet  and  see  if  it  is  plainly 
written,  with  no  omission  of  words. 

While  he  is  doing  so  the  slate  is  deftly  turned  the  other  side  \\\).  When 
tlie  sitter  reports  that  the  question  is  properly  and  plainly  written,  tlie 
"medium  "  apparcntlij  rubs  off"  the  line  of  writing  and  lays  the  slate  on  the 
table,  writing  underneath.    He  now  announces  that  lie  will  let  the  spirits  do 

2Ir.  Daveij's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  &c.  291 

their  own  writing,  and  putting  the  other  slate  on  top  of  the  one  containing 
tlie  writing  lays  his  liands  on  top  of  the  slate  a  few  seconds,  when  he  opens 
them,  and  of  course  there  is  no  writing. 

He  now  states  that  he  does  not  believe  he  can  get  anything — but,  wait, 
lie  says,  we  will  put  the  pellet  inside — that  may  help  them. 

The  jjellet  is  placed  on  the  blank  slate  and  the  one  containing  the  writing 
laid  on  top.  Now  the  writing  is  between  the  slates.  In  picking  up  the  two 
.slates  together,  he  turns  them  over,  and  the  writing  is  on  the  bottom  slate. 
He  now  allows  the  "sitter  "  to  hold  the  slates  alone,  and  indicates  when  to 
open  them.  They  are  opened,  and  much  astonishment  created  by  the  pointed 
answer  to  the  question  inside  the  pellet. 

It  is  obvious  that  there  may  be  many  variations  of  this  trick.  lu 
the  sittings  with  Watkins  and  Mansfield,  accounts  of  which  were 
written  by  Mr.  J ohn  F.  Brown,  an  Associate  Member  of  the  American 
Branch,  each  of  the  sitters  (three  at  one  sitting  and  two  at  the  other) 
wrote  sevei'al  questions  on  slips  of  paper  afterwards  crumpled  or  folded 
into  pellets.  Some  of  the  medium's  surreptitious  dealings  with  their 
pellets  were  observed  by  the  sitters.  Mr.  Brown's  account  of  the  two- 
slates  incident  at  the  sitting  with  Watkins  is  as  follows  : — ■ 

Watkins  ' '  gave  the  name  of  George  Hall,  and  soon  commenced  to  write 
rapidly,  covering  one  side  of  the  slate,  then  he  turned  the  slate  over  on  his 
arm  so  that  the  writing  could  not  be  seen,  and  wrote  a  few  lines  more.  He 
said  we  had  better  copy  the  messages  as  it  would  be  more  interesting  for  us 
to  have  them  to  refer  to.  A.  took  pencil  and  paper,  and  Watkins  read  slowly 
the  following  communication.  .  .  .  The  side  of  the  slate  containing  the 
signature  was  turned  towards  us  without  any  concealment ;  the  opposite  side 
was  kept  from  our  view.  After  he  had  finished  reading,  and  while  we  were 
looking  at  the  copy,  Watkins  erased  the  part  we  had  seen,  then  turned  the 
:slate  end  for  end,  rubljed  the  sponge  again  over  the  same  side  and  put  the 
slate  on  the  table  with  writing  on  its  under  side.  .  .  .  Not  long  after  the 
Oeorge  Hall  message,  a  second  attempt  was  made  to  get  independent  writing, 
a  first  attempt  having  been  unsuccessful.  The  previous  attempt  was  shortly 
before  the  first  message,  and  its  lack  of  success  gave  Watkins  the  excuse  for 
writing  himself.  A  bit  of  pencil  was  now  laid  on  the  top  of  a  clean  slate  and 
the  slate  with  the  writing  already  on  it  lifted  from  the  table  and  placed  ujjon 
the  other.  Watkins  then  took  hold  of  them  both,  waved  them  in  the  air, 
and,  as  he  brouglit  them  back,  turned  them  over  so  that  the  slate  now  under- 
neath had  writing  on  the  upper  side.  All  this  was  distinctly  followed  by  us 
both,  and  we  were  looking  for  writing  just  where  it  appeared." 

The  writing  that  appeared,  as  Mr.  Brown  points  out,  was  doubtless 
what  Watkins  had  written  when  he  was  pretending  to  write  the  first 
part  of  the  George  Hall  message  ;  and  when  he  pretended  to  read  the 
George  Hall  message  from  the  slate  he  "  made  it  up  "  as  he  proceeded 
until  he  tui'ned  the  slate  over. 

I  witnessed  yet  other  slight  variations  at  a,  sitting  with  a  Mrs. 
Gillett.  Under  pretence  of  "  magnetising  "  the  pellets  prepared  by  the 
sitter,  or  folding  them  more  tightly,  she  substitutes  a  pellet  of  her  own 

292 

3Ir.  H.  Hodgson. 

for  one  of  the  sitter's.  Reading  the  sitter's  pellet  below  the  table,  she 
writes  the  answer  on  one  of  her  own  slates,  a  pile  of  which,  out  of  the 
sitter's  view,  she  keeps  on  a  chair  by  hei'  side.  She  then  takes  a  second 
slate,  places  it  on  the  table,  and  sjaonges  and  diies  both  sides,  after 
which  she  takes  the  first  slate,  and  turning  the  side  upon  which  she 
has  written  towards  herself,  rubs  it  in  several  places  with  a  dry  cloth 
or  the  ends  of  her  fingers  as  though  cleaning  it.  She  then  places  it,, 
writing  downward,  on  the  other  slate  on  the  table,  and  sponges  and 
dries  the  upper  surface  of  it.  She  then  j^retends  to  take  one  of  the 
pellets  on  the  table  and  put  it  between  the  two  slates.  What  she  does, 
however,  is  to  bring  the  jjellet  up  from  below  the  table,  take  another 
of  the  sitter's  pellets  on  the  table  into  her  hand,  and  place  the  pellet 
which  she  has  brought  up  from  below  the  table  between  the  slates, 
keei^ing  in  her  hand  the  pellet  just  taken  from  the  top  of  the  table. 
The  final  step  is  to  place  a  rubber  band  round  both  slates,  in  doing 
which  she  turns  both  slates  over  together.  She  professes  to  get  the 
writing  without  the  use  of  any  chalk  or  pencil.  Some  of  her  slates, 
are  prepared  beforehand  with  messages  or  drawings.  More  interesting, 
perhaps,  because  of  its  boldness,  is  her  method  of  pi'oducing  writing  on 
the  sitter's  own  slates.  Under  pretence  of  "  magnetising  "  these  she 
cleans  them  sevei-al  times,  rubs  them  with  her  hands,  stands  them  up' 
on  end  together,  and  while  they  are  in  this  position  between  herself  and 
the  sitter  she  writes  with  one  hand  on  the  slate-side  nearest  to  herself, 
holding  the  slates  erect  with  the  other  hand.  Later  on,  she  lays  both 
slates  together  flat  on  the  table  again,  the  writing  being  on  the  under- 
most surface.  She  then  sponges  the  upper  surface  of  the  top  slate, 
turns  it  over,  and  sponges  its  other  surface.  She  next  withdraws  the 
bottom  slate,  places  it  on  top  and  sj^onges  its  top  surface,  keeping  its 
under  surface  carefully  concealed.  The  final  step,  the  reversal,  is  made, 
as  in  the  other  case,  with  the  help  of  the  rubber  band.  Mrs.  Gillett  has 
probably  other  methods  also.  Those  which  I  have  described  were  all 
that  I  witnessed  at  my  single  sitting  with  her. 

In  many  records  which  have  been  written  of  experiences  with 
"  pellet  mediums,"  the  writers  affirm  that  the  medium  never  touched 
their  pellets.  In  the  case  of  such  records  we  are  fully  justified  in 
applying  our  general  conclusions,  drawn  from  a  consideration  of  the 
errors  made  by  sitters  with  Mr.  Davey,  although  Mr.  Davey  did  not, 
at  any  of  the  sittings  reported,  use  the  "  pellet  "  device.  If  a  bond 
fide  witness  can  report  with  confidence  that  he  held  his  hands  on  the 
slate  and  watched  it  continuously  during  the  experiment,  when  in 
reality  he  completely  forgot  about  it  for  an  appreciable  interval  during, 
which  it  was  manipulated  by  the  "  medium,"  he  can  equally  report  that 
he  watched  his  pellets  the  whole  tune,  and  that  they  were  not  touched 
or  tampered  with  Ijy  the  medium,  although  as  a  matter  of  fact  the 

Mr.  Bavey's  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  d-c. 

293 

medium  did  tovich  them,  and  did  substitute  one  pellet  for  another.  A 
good  instance  of  this  has  l^een  brought  to  my  recollection  by  the 
following  memorandum,  which  I  have  just  found  among  my  notes  : —  : 

October  8th,  1888. 

On  Saturday  morning,  October  6th,  Mrs.  [Q.]  called,  and  during  the 
•conversation  referred  to  the  medium  Watkins,  and  a  conversation  we  had 
had  concerning  him  the  previous  week.  She  had  tlien  been  profoundly 
influenced  by  sittings  which  she  had  with  him,  and  had  been  most  strenuous 
in  denying  tliat  Watkins  touched  the  pellets  in  any  way,  although  admitting 
that  Watkins  had  rolled  up  one  jjiece  of  pajier  as  specimen,  and  left  it  on  tlie 
table,  and  she  was  unable  to  say  what  had  afterwards  become  of  it.  She  had 
also  been  positive  that  Watkins  did  not  tamper  with  the  slates  whicli  she 
was  holding. 

On  Saturday  morning  Mrs.  [Q.]  told  me  that  since  leaving  me  the  previous 
week  she  had  recalled  that  twice,  at  least,  Watkins  had  touched  the  pellets, 
once  when  he  moved  one  pellet  aside,  saying  "  this  is  mine,"  and  on  another 
occasion  when  he  took  up  a  pellet  and  asked  her  to  pinch  it  up  a  little 
smaller. 

Lapse  of  memory  again,  we  must  note,  I'ather  than  mal-observation. 
Similarly,  Mr.  Padshah  originally  scouted  the  suggestion  that  he  had 
lost  perception  of  the  locked  slate,  l)ut  when  I  assured  him  positively 
that  he  had  lost  perception  of  it,  he  was  finally  able  to  discover,  in  a 
dim  recess  of  memory,  on  its  way  to  oblivion,  the  occasion  of  the  loss. 
And  Mr.  Padshah's  report  was  written  immediately  after  the  sitting. 
TV^hen  we  reflect  on  circumstances  like  these,  how  manifestly  absurd 
appears  the  reliance  which  so  many  Spiritualists  place  upon  reports  of 
"  psychographic  "  and  kindred  phenomena,  where  the  lapse  from  memory 
jof  possibly  a  single  apparently  trivial  detail  vitiates  the  whole  record  of 
the  uninitiated  witness. 

Slade  also  uses  the  two-slates  method,  as  appears  from  the  following 
account  of  a  sitting  which  I  had  with  him  in  February,  1891  : — 

February  10th,  1891. 
Sitting  with  Slade,  11  a.m.,  February  3rd,  at  229,  East  14th-street,  New 
York,  with  Mr.  Z. 

Second  room — simple  table  with  two  leaves — large  Pembroke.  On 
further  side  of  table  was  a  small  table  close  to  the  large  table  and  close  to 
the  wall,  with  a  cloth  over  it  lianging  down.  [The  accompanying  rough 
^diagram  will  illustrate  the  positions.] 

294. 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

SMALL  TABLE. 

A. 

Slade. 

Mr.  Z. 

R.  H. 

Slade  took  two  .slates  from  the  little  table,  upon  which  there  were  four,  ancl 
showed  them  to  us.  He  turned  them  over  and  let  us  turn  them  over — 
they  were  clean.  He  tlien  replaced  them  on  the  small  table,  and  sug- 
gested trying  to  get  "raps."  He  asked  if  Mr.  Davis  was  present — three 
raps,  .lust  before  this  he  sat  somewhat  facing  me,  with  right  leg  visible  and 
left  leg  partly  so,  saying,  "Notice  my  position."  Almost  immediately, 
however,  he  turned  sijuare  towards  the  table  and  his  left  leg  disappeared 
from  view  entirely.  The  raps,  which  continued  for  some  time — two  or  three 
minutes — might  easily  have  been  produced  by  his  foot.  All  our  hands  were 
together  upon  tlie  table. 

Slade  then  took  one  of  the  replaced  slates  from  the  side  table,  put  a  piece 
of  pencil  on  it  (he  had  a  box  full  of  small  fragments  on  the  table),  and  held 
it  with  liis  right  hand  under  the  table  for  a  short  time.  He  did  not  keep  the 
slate  close  to  the  taljle.  No  result.  He  then  replaced  the  slate  on  the 
table,  and  then  took  from  the  side  table  one  of  the  two  slates  which  we  had 
not  inspected  (the  surface  of  which  was  much  newer  looking),  and  placed 
it  on  top  of  the  slate  No.  1.  Then  seizing  liotli  slates  together  with  his  left, 
hand,  he  turned  them  over  and  laid  them  on  the  right  arm  of  Mr.  Z., 
slanting  away  fr(_)m  me.  Almost  directly  the  soimd  as  of  writing  was  lieard. 
Slade's  fingers  were  concealed  behind  the  slate,  but  I  observed  the  tendons 
worlcing  in  his  wrist. 

The  message  was  an  ordinary  general  statement  signed  by  the  name 
Davis.  The  writing,  of  course,  was  already  on  the  under  surface  of  slate 
No.  3  when  Slade  took  it  from  the  side  table. 

Then  Slade  took  the  clean  slate  and  held  it  under  the  table — then  said, 
"  They're  taking  it  away  from  me,"  and  stooped  and  pressed  ujj  against  the 
table  as  though  his  arur  was  being  drawn  under.  Half  of  the  slate  then 
became  visiljle  [at  A]  facing  me  to  the  riglit,  tlien  disappeared,  and  shortly 

31r.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring ,  <£r. 

295 

after  struck  me  at  tlic  lower  part  of  my  waistcoat  and  fell  to  the  floor.  All 
this  might  easily  have  been  done  by  Slade  with  his  feet. 

He  jjlaced  the  slate  on  the  table  again  and  turned  it  over.  It  was  clean. 
Then  he  took  it  in  his  left  hand,  and  stooped  down  somewhat  to  the  left.  I 
then  heard  a  sound  as  of  a  slate  slipping  to  the  floor,  and  conjectured  from 
the  position  of  the  .upper  part  of  his  left  arm  that  he  was  substituting  the 
slate  which  we  had  just  seen  to  be  clean  for  slate  No.  5,  which  was  probably 
out  of  sight  and  leaning  against  the  leg  of  the  little  table.  (See  Tlie  Scijbert 
CommissioH  OK  Bpiritiialism,  p.  74.)  In  making  the  substitution  I  suppose 
that  one  of  the  slates  slipped  on  the  floor.  However,  he  Ijrought  this  slate 
(No.  5)  to  the  top  of  the  table,  took  No.  2  or  4  (I  am  not  sure  which)  and 
placed  No.  5  on  top  of  it.  Then  seizing  both  slates  together  with  his  right 
hand,  he  turned  them  over  and  laid  them  on  my  left  arm  slanting  away  from 
me  and  away  from  Mr.  Z.  Almost  immediately  the  sound  as  of  writing- 
began — but  the  slates  slid  along  my  arm  slightly,  bringing  Slade 's  fingers  in 
gentle  contact  with  my  arm,  and  I  could  feel  the  motion  of  a  finger  or 
fingers  moving  backwards  and  forwards.  Slade  also  noticed  the  contact,  and 
drew  the  slates  up  further  so  that  his  hand  did  not  touch  my  arm. 

The  writing  was  a  general  kind  of  message,  signed  by  T.  Z. — the  name  of 
Mr.  Z.'s  father, — but  as  Mr.  Z.,  at  a  sitting  ten  days  before,  had  been 
specially  asked  by  Slade  what  his  father's  name  was,  there  was  no  test.  The 
two  writings  were  evidently  by  the  same  hand. 

After  this,  Slade  asked  me  to  write  a  question  on  the  side  of  a  slate 
(No.  2  or  4)  remote  from  himself.  I  wrote,  ' '  Fred,  will  you  give  me  a  test 
if  y<  iu  are  here  ?  " 

Slade  took  the  slate  in  his  right  hand  with  the  question  on  the  under 
surface  and  held  it  under  the  table,  not  close  to  the  leaf.  Almost  imme- 
diately the  slate  rubbed  past  my  left  knee,  suggesting  that  Slade  was  turning 
the  slate  over.  I  then  observed  him  furtively  looking  downwards,  and  he 
shortly  asked  )ne  if  I  had  asked  two  questions.  I  replied.  No.  After 
waiting  a  little  longer,  he  said  that  he  felt  that  there  was  no  influence 
present — the  joower,  he  thought,  was  exhausted,  and  he  could  generally  tell 
when  it  left  him.  He  thought  it  was  no  use  sitting  any  longer.  He  suggested 
that  I  should  have  another  sitting  soon,  alone. 

(Mr.  Z.  thought  the  writing  between  the  slates  remarkable,  and  had  no 
idea  whatever  of  the  trick  movements,  &c.,  made  by  Slade.  I  explained  the 
details  to  him  immediately  after  we  left.) 

There  remained  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  my  conjecture  concerning  slate 
N(_).  5.  I  requested  permission  to  thoroughly  examine  the  large  table,  and 
began  by  turning  it  completely  over  to  my  right,  so  that  I  could  see  the  corner 
where  I  supposed  the  fifth  slate  to  be.  As  I  did  this,  Slade  carelessly  stooped 
down,  picked  up  the  fifth  slate  from  the  floor,  close  to  the  foot  of  the  small 
table,  and  laid  it  by  the  other  slates  on  the  table. 

Further,  I  have  proof  that  Mr.  Davey's  general  methods  are  easily 
discoverable  from  the  reports  themselves  by  persons  who  have  paid 
si^ecial  attention  to  the  production  of  such  phenomena  by  trickery. 
About  a  year  ago  I  became  acquainted  with  a  Mr.  AV.  8.  Davis,  of  New 
iTork,  a  printer  by  profession,  who  was  making  himself  familiar  witli 

29G 

3Ir.  B.  Hodgson. 

the  methods  used  l)y  fraudulent  mediums  in  rope-tying,  slate-writing, 
materialisation,  and  other  "  physical  phenomena."  I  requested  him  to 
read  the  accounts  of  the  sittings  with  Mr.  Davey  and  write  me  a 
description  of  the  methods  which  he  supposed  Mr.  Davey  used.  His 
descriptions  were  practically  connect  throughout,  and  indeed  he  gave 
additional  variations  of  some  of  the  methods.  The  only  cases  where 
the  reports  failed  to  give  him  sufficient  clues  were  the  book  incidents, 
where  the  communication  was  prepared  beforehand  and  the  book  was 
"forced."  Mr.  Davis  himself  has  given  some  sittings  which  have  been 
regarded  as  specially  remarkable  by  various  Spiritualists  of  New  York 
and  Brooklyn,  and  l^rief  accounts  of  these  have  appeared  in  some 
Spiritualistic  j^apers.  Mr.  Davis  informs  me  that  he  never  claimed 
that  he  was  assisted  in  any  of  his  performances  by  "  departed  spirits," 
and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  were  all  due  to  trickery,  and  he  has 
explained  to  me  his  methods  in  detail.  It  may  be  interesting  to  compare 
the  reports  given  by  "  Spiritualists  "  of  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Davis  with 
his  account  of  what  actually  occurred.  But  I  shall  first  give  the 
explanation  of  Mr.  Davey's  "  materialisation  "  seance  which  has  been 
furnished  by  Mr.  Munro,  who  assisted  Mr.  Davey,  or  rather,  I  should 
say,  actually  produced  the  phenomena. 

The  following  is  the  report  by  Mr.  R.  of  the  sitting  for  materiali- 
sation : — 

On  Thursday  evening,  the  7th  October,  1886,  I  was  present  at  a  seance 
lield  by  Mr.  Davey,  at  his  house.  There  were  in  all  eight  persons,  myself 
included.  We  took  our  seats  at  7.30  p.m.,  round  an  ordinary  dining-room 
tal)le  (in  the  dining-room  of  the  house),  which,  at  Mr.  Davey's  request,  we 
examined  carefully,  as  also  any  other  objects  in  the  room  which  demanded 
our  attention.  The  door  of  the  rooni  was  locked,  and  I  placed  the  key  in  my 
pocket,  it  was  also  sealed  with  a  slip  of  gummed  paper  ;  the  gas  was  then 
turned  out,  so  that  we  were  left  in  darkness.  A  musical  box  was  wound  iqj, 
and  set  to  play  an  air,  with  the  object,  as  I  suppose,  to  enliven  the  proceedings ! 
I  held  Mr.  Davey's  right  hand,  his  left  was  held  by  Mrs.  [J.]  ;  the  rest 
joined  hands,  so  that  during  the  seance  a  continual  chain  was  formed  which 
was  maintained  the  whole  time.  After  we  had  remained  some  time  thus, 
various  noises  as  of  a  shuffling  of  feet,  &c.,  were  heard  in  dilFerent  parts  of  the 
room,  and  I  distinctly  felt  something  grasp  my  right  foot  ;  almost  inmiediately 
I  was  touched  on  tlie  forehead  by  a  cold  liand,  which,  at  Mr.  Davey's  request, 
also  touched  those  that  wished  it.  Tlie  musical  box  was  lifted,  and  although 
it  was  dark  I  fancied  I  saw  it,  surrounded  by  a  pale  light,  descend  through  the 
air  ;  it  certainly  struck  me  lightly  on  the  side  of  the  head,  then  it  was  again 
raised,  and  deposited  on  the  table. 

The  hand  which  touched  me  was  cold  and  cUtmmii ;  it  evidently  belonged 
to  a  most  courteous  and  obliging  spirit,  for  it  did  exactly  what  we  desired  !  and 
at  my  wishing  to  feel  the  full  palm  on  the  back  of  my  head  (so  as  to  ascertain  its 
shape  and  size)  it  rested  there  for  fully  three  seconds  ;  it  was,  however,  a 
somewhat  weird  experience  I    Various  raps  were  now  heard,  a  gong  sounded 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d-c,  297, 

behind  my  back,  and  we  were  told  by  Mr.  Davey  to  pay  attention,  as  some- 
thing wonderful  was  about  to  take  place.  Faintly,  but  gradually  growing  more 
distinct,  a  bluisli  white  liglit  apjaeared  hovering  about  our  heads  ;  it  gradually 
developed  more  and  more  till  at  lengtli  we  beheld  what  we  were  told  was  the 
head  of  a  woman.  This  apparition  was  frightful  in  its  ugliness,  but  so  distinct 
that  everyone  could  see  it.  The  features  were  distinct,  the  cheek  bones 
prominent,  the  nose  aquiline,  a  kind  of  hood  covered  the  head,  and  the  whole 
resembled  the  head  of  a  mummy.  After  favouring  those  of  the  company 
who  wished  to  see  its  full  face  by  turning  towards  them,  it  gradually  vanished 
in  our  presence.  The  next  spirit  form  was  more  wonderful  still ;  a  thin  streak 
of  light  appeared  behind  Mr.  Davey,  vanished,  apj^eared  again  in  another 
part  of  the  room,  and  by  degrees  developed  into  the  figure  of  a  man.  The 
extremities  were  hidden  in  a  kind  of  mist,  but  the  arms,  shoulders,  and  head 
were  visible.  The  figure  was  that  of  an  Oriental,  a  tliick  black  beard  covered 
his  face,  his  head  was  surrounded  by  a  turban  ;  in  his  hands  he  carried  a  book 
wliich  he  occasionally  held  above  his  head,  glancing  now  and  then  from  under- 
neath it.  The  face  came  once  so  near  to  me  that  it  appeared  to  ^)e  only  twO' 
feet  from  mine.  I  tlius  could  examine  it  closely.  The  eyes  were  stony  and 
fixed  and  nevei-  moved  once.  The  complexion  was  not  dusky,  but  very  white  ; 
the  expression  was  vacant  and  listless.  After  remaining  in  the  room  for  a  few 
seconds,  or  rather  a  minute,  the  apparition  gradually  ri>se,  and  appeared  tO' 
pass  clean  through  the  ceiling,  brushing  it  audibly  as  it  passed  through.  The 
seance  here  terminated  ;  the  gas  was  turned  on  again,  and  everything  appeared 
the  same  as  when  we  first  sat  down  ;  the  door  was  unlocked,  the  seal  being 
found  intact.  I  will  mention  that  during  the  whole  of  the  seance  I  held  Mr. 
Davey's  right  hand,  with  but  one  exception,  when  it  was  found  necessary  for 
him  to  light  the  gas  to  see  to  wind  up  the  musical  box,  as  it  liad  stopped 
playing.  Nothing  tuas  prepared  beforehand  ;  the  seance  was  quite  casual ;  we 
could  have  sat  in  any  room  we  wished,  and  we  had  full  liberty  to  examine 
everything  in  the  room,  even  to  the  contents  of  Mr.  Davey's  pockets,  which 
were  emjjtied  (before  beginning  the  seaTice)  by  him  on  the  table  before  our 
eyes  ! 

October  8th,  1886.  John  H.  R.  • 

Mr.  Munro's  Account. 

Although  Mr.  Davey  was  kind  enough  to  instruct  me  in  the  methods  of 
his  slate-writing,  I  was  not  present  at  any  of  the  sittings  described  in  Vol.  IV. 
of  the  Proceedings,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  materialisation  seance, 
which  is  the  only  one  published  in  which  confederacy  was  employed. 

The  explanation  which  I  am  about  to  give  of  tliat  seance  may  be  of  in- 
terest as  indicating  how  much  or,  I  should  rather  say,  liow  little,  accounts  of 
such  phenomena  correspond  with  the  facts  which  actually  occur.  And  the 
sitting  for  materialisation  is  eminently  adapted  for  this  purpose,  inasmuch 
as  the  accounts  were  written  so  very  soon  after  the  sitting  ended,  two  of 
them  at  least  having  been  completed  on  the  same  evening.  At  the  same 
time  I  should  like  to  remind  the  reader  that  any  explanation  I  can  give  of 
the  phenomena  can  be  but  partial.  I  can  only  inform  him  of  the  mere 
mechanical  processes  which  were  employed.  A  full  explanation  would  involve 
a  description  of  the  mental  attitude  of  the  sitters  and  of  every  word  and  ges- 
ture of  the  medium  whereby  that  mental  state  was  altered.    This  I  canrOj 

X 

298 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

describe,  and  yet  it  is  of  infinitely  greater  importance  than  any  of  the  tricks 
and  devices  used  in  the  manufacture  of  the  spirit  forms.  The  latter  might 
have  been  produced  by  a  host  of  other  methods,  and  the  method  actually 
employed  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  a  matter  of  much  consequence.  It  is 
only  for  the  reason  stated  above  that  I  consider  its  jjublication  of  any  value. 

With  slate-writing  seances  it  is  quite  different,  for  in  them  the  mechanical 
processes — the  mere  "conjuring" — which  can  be  used  are  necessarily  very 
limited.  But  when  we  darken  the  room  and  keep  the  investigators  in 
ignorance  of  what  they  are  to  observe,  the  possibilities  for  trickery  are 
infinitely  increased,  whilst  the  control  which  the  medium  must  exercise  over 
the  thoughts  and  emotions  of  liis  sitters  need  not  be  so  great.  It  is  not, 
therefore,  surprising  that  Mr.  Davey  himself  introduced  the  accounts  of  the 
sittings  for  materialisation  with  a  sort  of  half  apology,  seeing  that  the  testi- 
mony for  such  plienomena  is  and  must  be  so  much  inferior  to  that  for  slate- 
writing.  To  myself  it  is  even  surprising  that  any  explanation  should  have 
been  called  for  in  the  case  of  a  seance  where  the  facilities  for  deception  were 
so  great,  and  it  is  almost  incredible  that  an  investigator  of  Mr.  Wallace's 
experience  should  regard  it  as  of  equal  ov  even  greater  importance  than  the 
slate-writing  experiments.  Considering  the  sensational  nature  of  the  phe- 
nomena observed,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  accounts  of  this  sitting  show 
an  even  greater  discrepancy  with  fact  than  do  those  of  the  slate-writing 
stances,  and  I  think  it  will  be  well  to  indicate  first  of  all  a  few  of  the  more 
imi^ortant  errors. 

In  the  first  place,  the  seance,  so  far  from  being  the  casual  affair  which  Mr. 
H.  supposed,  had,  in  fact,  been  carefully  arranged  beforehand.  I  had 
been  staying  with  Mr.  Davey  for  several  days  before  the  sitting,  and  we  had 
discussed  the  details  of  the  materialisation  process,  and  even  rehearsed  it 
through,  the  night  before  it  was  given.  Mr.  Davey  had  also  given  a  similar 
seance  in  the  spring  of  the  sanre  year. 

In  the  second  place,  the  locking  and  sealing  of  the  door,  so  carefully 
recorded  in  all  three  accounts,  was  by  no  means  so  well  calculated  to  jjrevent 
the  entrance  of  agencies  from  without  as  the  reporters  appear  to  have 
imagined.  The  process  of  "locking"  the  door,  which  was  performed  by  Mr. 
Davey  himself,  although  he  subsequently  gave  the  key  to  Mr.  R.,  consisted 
in  first  locking  and  then  unlocking  it.  Sealing  a  door  with  a  piece  of 
gummed  paper  is  now  a  well-known  trick.  The  gummed  paper,  if  i^roperly 
adjusted,  adheres  firmly  to  the  door  when  it  is  opened,  and,  when  it  is  again 
shut,  i^resents  all  the  apfiearances  of  never  having  been  moved.  The 
interesting  pait  about  the  sealing  in  this  case  is  tliat  the  paper  was  not 
properly  adjusted,  and  at  the  end  of  the  seance,  Mr.  Davey,  noticing  that 
the  gummed  paper  had  fallen  down  on  to  tlie  ground,  hastily  stuck  it  back 
in  its  place  and  called  Mr.  R.'s  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  door  was  still 
sealed — a  fact  to  which  he  and  tlie  other  sitters  readily  gave  their  testimony. 

Tlie  third  point  to  whicli  I  would  call  especial  attention  is  the  exami- 
nation of  the  room,  with  which  every  one  of  the  three  reporters  was  quite 
satisfied,  Mrs.  J.  even  going  so  far  as  to  state  "  we  searched  cvcnj  article  of 
furniture."  In  spite  of  this  positive  statement,  the  examination  was  im- 
jjerfectly  performed,  for  in  that  cupboard  beneath  the  bookstand,  which 
was  situated  furthest  from  the  door,  were  concealed  a  gong  and  several  other 
aijpliances,  including  the  female  spirit  herself.     Mr.  Davey  showed  his 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d;c.  299 

sitters  that  the  other  cupboard  was  empty,  but  diverted  their  attention  from 
this  one  so  skilfully,  that  they  were  afterwards  convinced  that  they  had 
examined  it  also. 

I  will  now  describe  what  took  place  at  the  seance,  step  by  step  so  far  as 
I  can  remember  it. 

It  had  been  arranged  to  hold  the  meeting  in  the  dining-room,  and  Mr. 
Tl.'s  statement,  "we  could  have  sat  in  any  room  we  pleased,"  is  not  correct. 
Mr.  Davey  did,  indeed,  I  believe,  offer  his  sitters  their  choice  of  rooms. 
But  had  they  selected  any  other  room  (and  there  were  only  two  others 
-which  could  conveniently  have  been  used  for  the  purpose)  he  could  easily 
liave  found  some  excuse  for  rejecting  it  in  favour  of  the  dining-room.  There 
was  no  peculiar  advantage  in  this  room.  It  was  selected  chiefly  on  account 
of  its  size,  and  because  it  was  not  overcrowded  with  furniture.  At  the  same 
time  the  cupboard  behind  the  medium's  chair  was  conveniently  situated. 

With  regard  to  the  sitters,  four  had  been  expected.  The  arrival  of  Mrs. 
J.  and  Miss  W.  was,  as  Mi's.  J.  remarks,  quite  unexpected.  Mr.  R.  cer- 
tainly intended  to  be  present,  but  I  am  not  sure  whether  he  anticipated  a 
seance.  On  their  entrance  into  the  dining-room,  free  leave  was  given  the 
sitters  to  search  every  article  of  furniture,  and  I  think  the  search  was 
pretty  well  performed  until  it  came  to  the  cupboard  under  the  bookshelf. 
From  it  Mr.  Davey  diverted  attention  by  emptying  out  his  pockets  before 
his  audience — a  proceeding  which  they  did  not  fail  to  remember  as  a  con- 
clusive proof  of  the  completeness  of  their  search. 

Mr.  Davey  now  "  locked  "  the  door  in  the  manner  already  described  and 
the  gas  was  turned  down.  At  the  same  moment  I,  who  had  by  this  time 
found  my  way  into  the  passage,  and  could  hear  everything  which  was  taking 
place  in  the  room,  turned  down  the  gas  outside,  in  order  that  no  light  might 
enter  the  room  when  the  time  for  my  own  entry  should  arrive.  A  large 
ntiusical  box  was  then  started,  not,  however,  as  Mr.  R.  supposed,  ' '  to  enliven 
the  proceedings,"  but  that  it  might  help  with  Mr.  Davey's  shuffling  of  feet 
i}0  cover  any  noise  which  I  might  make  in  entering  the  room. 

WINDOW. 

X 

X 

TABLE. 

X 

X 

Mrs.  J. 

Mr.  R. 

Mr.  D. 

DOOR. 

BOOKSHELF  WITH  3  CUPBOARDS  BEN13ATH  IT. 

X  2 

300 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

I  must  now  explain  tliafc  Mr.  Davey  sat  at  the  end  of  the  table  with  his 
back  turned  towards  the  bookshelf  and  with  the  door  on  his  left.  Mr.  R. 
was  on  the  right,  Mrs.  J.  on  the  left  of  the  "medium,"  the  other  sitters- 
being  seated  on  either  side  of  the  table  nearer  to  the  window.  Having  put 
out  the  gas  in  the  passage  I  opened  the  door  very  slowly  and  came  in 
barefooted,  closing  the  door  behind  me  as  noiselessly  as  I  could.  In  so  doing 
I  will  not  be  certain  that  I  was  not  responsible  for  one  or  two  of  the  very 
conclusive  spirit-raps  mentioned  in  the  reports.  I  now  went  up  to  behind 
Mr.  Davey's  chair,  and,  after  tapping  him  on  the  back  to  indicate  my  safe 
arrival,  proceeded  to  raise  the  musical  box  and  wave  it  to  and  fro  above  the 
heads  of  the  sitters,  and  to  make  raps  in  different  i:)arts  of  the  room. 

Throughout  the  seance  I  maintained  a  position  behind  Mr.  Davey's  chair,, 
never  advancing  at  any  time  in  the  direction  of  the  window.  The  knocks  at 
the  far  end  of  the  room  and  on  the  ceiling  were  made  with  a  long  stick  which 
I  had  brought  in  with  me.  Touching  the  sitters  on  the  face,  feet,  or  hands, 
was  of  course  easily  managed,  and,  inasmuch  as  I  had  rolled  up  my  sleeves, 
and  held  my  whole  hand  and  forearm  in  a  jug  of  C(jld  water  before  coming  in, 
Mr.  R.'s  description  of  the  cold  clammy  hand  which  touched  him  was  not 
purely  imaginative. 

I  next  opened  the  cupboard  beneath  the  bookshelf  behind  and  to  the  left 
of  the  medium.    It  contained  the  gong,  which  I  sounded  for  some  minutes, 
and  also  the  first  spirit-form,  which  I  afterwards  divested  of  the  black  cloth 
with  which  it  was  draped.     This  spirit  is  graphically  described  by  Mr.  R. 
as  ' '  an  apparition  frightful  in  its  ugliness,  with  cheekbones  prominent  and 
nose  aquiline,  the  whole  resembling  the  head  of  a  mummy."  It  was  prepared 
as  follows  : — A  mask  was  taken  and  fixed  upon  a  thick  piece  of  cardboard. 
Muslin  was  arranged  round  the  mask,  and  a  thick  collar  of  cardboard  coated 
with  luminous  paint  encircled  the  whole.    The  collar  had  been  exposed  to 
the  sun  throughout  the  day,  so  that  when  I  uncovered  the  form  it  was' 
rendered  distinctly  visible  by  the  light  thrown  upon  it  by  the  now  luminous- 
collar.    This  spirit-face  is  interesting  as  indicating  one  method  of  producing 
materialisation  phenomena  without  the  aid  of  an  accomplice,  for  a  conjurer 
of  Mr.  Davey's  skill  would  have  had  but  little  difficulty  in  manipulating  it 
in  my  absence. 

The  second  spirit  was  personated  by  myself.  A  turban  was  fixed  upon 
my  head,  a  tlieatrical  beard  covered  my  chin,  muslin  drapery  hung  about  my 
shoulders.  The  book  from  which  I  read  was  a  j^ortfolio  coated  inside  with 
luminous  paint.  It  was  concealed  in  the  cupboard,  where  it  lay  wrajDped  up- 
in  black  cloth,  and  when  this  covering  was  removed  the  book  gaped  a  little, 
and  so  gave  rise  to  the  thin  streak  of  light  whicli  Mr.  R.  describes.. 
Before  materialising,  I  mounted  up  on  to  the  back  part  of  Mr.  Davey's. 
chair,  from  which  position  I  gained  several  advantages.  ,  At  one  moment  I 
could  bend  forwards  so  as  to  appear  close  to  the  table  in  front  of  tlie  medium, 
and  at  another,  by  standing  upright,  I  could  bring  my  head  close  to  the 
ceiling.  Iiideed,  the  range  of  jjossible  movement  is  so  great,  and  the  effects 
so  startling,  that  many  people  have  difficulty  in  believing  the  above  explana- 
tion until  they  have  seen  the  process  rejDeated  in  a  lighted  room.  My  face 
and  shoulders  were  rendered  visible  by  the  light  thrown  upon  them  by  the- 
open  "book"  which  I  was  supposed  to  be  reading,  so  that  Mr.  R.  could 

31r.  Baveys  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d-c.  :301 

not  possibly  have  seen  me  when  I  held  it  above  my  head.  For  the  "fixed 
and  motionless"  condition  of  my  eyes  I  cannot  account,  the  pallor  of  my 
face  was  due  to  flour,  "the  vacant  and  listless  expression "  is  natural  to  me. 

The  statement  that  the  apparition  appeared  to  pass  clean  through  the 
■ceiling  with  a  scraping  noise  occurs  in  all  three  reports.  It  is  a  curious  mis- 
take, founded  on  a  blunder  which  I  made  in  the  acting  of  my  part — a  blunder 
■so  serious  that  at  the  time  I  thought  I  had — in  part  at  any  rate — betrayed 
the  secret  of  our  ghostly  methods.  When  I  had,  still  standing  on  Mr. 
Davey's  chair,  risen  to  my  whole  height,  I  gradually  elevated  the  "  open  " 
book  above  my  head,  shut  it  and  firmly  pressed  the  two  sides  of  the  cover 
together.  But  the  portfolio  had  been  exposed  to  the  sun  all  the  day  and  the 
cover  had  in  consequence  become  warped,  so  that  its  free  margins  were  bent 
away  from  one  another.  When  I  pressed  them  together,  they  adhered  for 
an  instant  and  then  burst  asunder  with  a  loixd  report  which  was  mistaken  by 
the  listeners  for  the  brushing  of  the  spirit  form  against  the  ceiling. 

The  seance  did  not  terminate  immediately  after  this,  as  Mr.  R.  's  account 
seems  to  suggest,  but  a  very  considerable  interval  elapsed,  during  which  I 
slowly  found  my  way  out  of  the  room.  Mr.  Davey  then  lit  the  gas  in  the 
dining-room,  whilst  I  at  the  same  time  turned  up  tlie  gas  in  the  passage 
outside  and  then  retreated  upstairs — there  to  remain  till  the  sitters  should 
depart.  I  believe  the  statement  that  the  medium's  hands  were  held  con- 
tinuously throughout  the  seance  except  when  he  was  turning  on  the  musical 
box  or  lighting  the  gas  is  perfectly  correct. 

And  now  I  think  I  have  sufficiently  explained  the  methods  em^sloyed  in 
■this  materialisation  seance,  and  the  reader  has  probably  already  long  ago 
■come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  sitters  were  in  this  case  peculiarly  unscien- 
tific and  ill-suited  for  the  investigation  of  these  phenomena.  To  have 
neglected  to  lock  the  door  themselves  and  yet  to  suppose  it  had  been  carefully 
locked,  to  have  omitted  to  search  in  one  of  the  cupboards  and  yet  to  imagine 
they  had  searched  "  every  article  of  furniture,"  does  indeed  appear  extraor- 
dinary neglect  and  carelessness.  And  yet  I  do  not  think  there  are  many  per- 
•sons  who  would  have  taken  these  precautions,  simple  as  they  seem,  or,  if 
they  had  done  so,  would  not  have  neglected  other  tests  equally  important. 
After  all,  their  omitting  to  lock  the  door  themselves  was  not  an  important 
error  on  the  part  of  the  sitters,  since  nothing  would  have  been  easier  than 
for  Mr.  Davey  to  have  provided  me  with  a  duplicate  key,  although  I  will 
not  be  sure  whether  he  had  two  keys  in  this  particular  case. 

I  may  also  add  that  the  cupboard,  in  which  the  gong  and  other  materiali- 
sation apparatus  were  concealed,  was  only  a  small  side  cupboard  wliolly 
hidden  from  view  by  the  door  of  the  large  central  comj^artment  when  the 
latter  was  opened,  and  it  needed  a  very  careful  investigation  to  discern  that 
it  did  not  form  part  of  the  central  cuf)board  itself.  The  omissions,  therefore, 
of  the  sitters  are  not  so  absurd  as  they  at  first  appear.  Let  the  reader  also 
remember  that  Mr.  Davey  had  given  seances  more  or  less  similar  to  this  one 
Ijefore  other  sitters,  and  yet  in  no  case  had  any  suspicion  of  his  modus 
operandi  entered  their  heads.  I  maj'  further  mention  that  in  one  case  I  had 
assisted  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena  (which,  however,  did  not  in  this 
case  include  materialisation)  when  the  sitting  was  not  held  in  the  medium's 
own  house. 

302 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

For  my  own  part,  I  think  that  the  three  published  reports  of  this  sitting- 
are  by  no  means  extraordinary  for  their  inaccuracy,  and  this  conclusion  is 
borne  out  by  a  reference  to  other  rej^orts  of  seances — reports  by  both  sceptics 
and  Spiritualists.  Except  in  those  rare  cases  in  whicli  I  was  myself  present 
at  the  sitting,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  say  where  exactly  the  misstatements 
came  in.  But  in  most  of  the  accounts  which  I  have  read  there  are  grave 
omissions,  in  many  there  are  positive  statements  about  facts,  which  the 
"writer  could  not  possibly  have  known,  and  in  almost  all  there  is  a  confusion 
between  the  phenomena  observed  and  the  inferences  drawn  from  those 
phenomena.  And  this  is  true  even  of  tlie  accounts  written  by  trained 
scientific  men — even  of  what  I  may  call  the  classic  literature  of  Sjjiritualism. 

The  errors  of  the  reports  appear  even  less  striking  when  we  take  into 
account  the  fact  that  the  accuracy  of  a  report  naturally  varies  inversely  with 
the  miraculous  and  sensational  nature  of  the  plienomena.  If  reports  of 
slate-writing  seances  are  full  of  mistakes,  tliose  of  materialisation  seances 
must  be  much  more  so.  Indeed,  I  doubt  whether  the  most  scientific  and 
unemotional  of  men  would  be  capable  of  giving  an  accurate  account  of  every 
detail  they  had  seen  after  having  been  in  the  joresence  of  tlie  ' '  figure 
frightful  in  its  ugliness,"  or  of  that  other  form  with  the  stony  and  fixed  eyes 
Vfhicli  Mr.  R.  describes.  But,  even  so,  the  results  are  extraordinary,  unless, 
one  recognises  their  true  explanation,  w"hich  is  to  be  found  not  in  the  in- 
feriority of  the  sitters  but  in  the  superiority  of  the  medium. 

The  methods  devised  by  Mr.  Davey  were  simple  enough — so  simple  that  one 
is  astonished  at  his  boldness  in  using  them.  But,  as  I  have  already  pointed 
out,  the  mere  mechanical  means  which  he  used  were  nothing,  the  personality 
of  the  medium  was  everytliing.  Had  silence  been  maintained  throughout 
the  seance,  success  would  have  been  impossible.  Had  Mr.  Davey  and 
myself  changed  parts  it  would  liave  been  equally  impossible.  There  are 
few  men,  indeed,  wlio  with  such  simple  contrivances  could  have  ju'oduced  so 
amazing  an  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  sitters.  Professional  mediums  would 
probably  laugh  at  tlie  clumsiness  of  his  methods.  But  lie  had  a  power  which 
they  lack — a  power  which  more  than  compensated  f(_)r  any  want  of  conjuring 
dexterity  or  experience  in  deceiving.  He  had  such  a  control  over  the 
sitters'  minds  that  he  could  divert  their  attention  almost  whenever  he 
pleased  ;  he  could  persuade  them  they  had  seen  what  they  had  not  seen  ;  he 
could  make  their  very  tests  a  trap  into  whicli  they  should  themselves  fall. 
And  Mr.  Wallace  is  quite  right  in  supposing  that  this  seance  cannot  be 
exi:ilained  as  a  simple  mechanical  or  sleight  of  hand  trick.  But  the  extra 
something  wliich  is  wanting  is  not  Spiritualism,  it  has  no  connection  witli 
Si^iritualism.  It  is  nothing  else  than  the  extraordinary  genius  of  Mr. 
Davey. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  an  account  ])y  Spiritualists  of  a  sitting  with 
Mr.  W.  S.  Davis,  to  whom  I  have  referred  above  (p.  295).  Prior  to 
his  giving  sittings  himself,  Mr.  Davis  had  been  very  aggressive  in 
denouncing  bogus  mediums,  and,  moreover,  not  a  few  persons  were  made 
aware  that  he  had  no  "  mediumistic  "  power  at  all.  Further-,  the  iYew 
York  Herald,  of  June  13th,  1891,  contained  an  article  on  the  subject 

Mr.  Daveys  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  &c. 

303 

explaining  what  Mr.  Davis  pi'oposed  to  do,  and  quoting  some  letters 
written  by  Mr.  Davis  to  a  reporter  in  proof  of  its  assertions.  Mr. 
Davis  wrote,  inter  alia  : — 

The  great  argument  with  the  Spiritualists  is  this  : — Are  we  deceived  ? 
Are  we  not  as  capable  of  detecting  trickery  as  you  are  ?  We  are  shrewd  in 
business  matters,  why  should  we  be  less  shrewd  in  this  ?  .  .  .  Now. 
my  object  in  giving  these  seances  is  to  get  evidence  that  people  can  be 
deceived  very  easily.  .  .  .  All  that  I  do  is  trickery,  and  I  am  doing  just 
exactly  what  all  of  their  famous  mediums  have  been  and  are  now  doing. 

This  article  and  another  warning  article  which  appeared  in  The 
Banner  of  Light,  a  Spiritualistic  paper,  caused  consideraljle  disquiet 
among  the  Spiritualists  who  were  endorsing  Mr.  Davis's  manifestations 
as  genuine.  Finally,  Mr.  Davis  "  expressed  a  desire  to  give  a  seance 
under  strictly  test  conditions  and  let  a  committee  judge."  This  olFer 
was  accepted.  In  the  following  account  I  abi'idge  from  the  statement 
made  by  Mr.  Davis  : — 

The  date  for  the  test  seance  was  July  23rd,  1891,  and  only  15  persons 
were  permitted  to  attend.  The  seance  was  a  success,  and  congratulations 
were  plentiful.  The  following  report  apjieared  in  T/ie  Better  Way  of 
August  15th,  1891  :  — 

' '  An  Endorsement. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  The  Better  Way. 

"  Dear  Sir, — We,  the  undersigned,  tested  the  powers  of  W.  S.  Davis 
on  Thursday  evening,  July  23rd,  1891,  by  applying  such  conditions  as,  in  our 
judgment,  al^solutely  precluded  the  possibility  of  fraud.  The  medium  sub- 
mitted to  severe  tying.  The  only  door  leading  into  the  seance-room  was 
locked,  sealed,  and  carefully  watched.  The  medium  jjermitted  us  to  put  him 
into  a  large  bag  so  that  not  even  his  head  was  exposed,  and  the  sealing,  &c. , 
was  done  by  us,  and  not  by  confederates.  We  practically  had  charge  of  the 
seance  from  beginning  to  end,  and  tliere  were  no  friends  of  the  medium 
present  not  equally  known  to  us.  The  room  was  carefully  examined  before 
the  seance,  and  during  the  seance  the  cabinet  was  opened  for  examination  at 
very  frequent  intervals.  Under  these  stringent  conditions  wonderful  mani- 
festations of  sf)irit-power  were  given  without  delay,  and  immediately  after 
the  cabinet  curtain  was  drawn  in  each  case. 

"It  is  worthy  of  note  that  writing  was  obtained  on  a  slate  which  was 
locked  up  in  a  box  and  doubly  secured  by  the  liberal  application  of  sealing' 
wax,  when  the  medium  did  not  touch  the  box  or  slate. 

"  James  B.  Bogert,  Elizabeth  F.  Kurth,  Mrs.  M.  T.  Morris,  Hermann- 
Handrich,  Wm.  C.  Coss,  Elizabeth  A.  Smith,  John  M.  Coombs,  Eleanor 
Dailey,  Elizabeth  S.  Davis,  Alexander  S.  Davis,  Louis  Sherk,  W.  P.  Munroe, 
Mrs.  W.  P.  Munroe,  Margaret  Smith." 

The  following  report  also  appeared  in  The  Progressive  Thinker  for  August 
8th,  1891,  and  an  account  by  Mr.  Handrich  was  published  in  Psychische: 
Studien  for  October,  1891  : — 

"The  undersigned,  a  correspondent  for  the  Psychische  Studien,  of  Leipsig, 
Germany,  and  a  number  of  prominent  Spiritualists  and  mediums  of  Brooklyn, 

Mr.  M.  Hodgson. 

received  invitations  from  Mr.  W.  S.  Davis  to  attend  a  seance  under  test 
conditions,  in  order  to  convince  his  friends  of  the  genuineness  of  his 
mediumistic  gifts.  Tlie  handsome  residence  of  Mrs.  M.  Towers,  a  hidy 
higlily  esteemed  hy  her  friexids,  and  of  prominent  social  standing,  liad  been 
phiced  at  the  disposition  of  Mr.  Davis  and  members  of  the  circle.  As  I  have 
previously  mentioned  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Davis  (in  relation  to  a 
former  seance  which  was  held  in  the  same  premises),  that  confederates,  if 
any,  could  find  an  easy  access  behind  the  curtain  which  fenced  off  a  corner 
of  the  large  sitting-room,  I  was  requested  by  the  medium  to  seal  the  only 
door  leading  to  the  room  from  the  vestibule  of  the  house,  to  which  I  gladly 
■consented.  Doulile  walls,  trap  doors,  and  other  hiding  places  are  out  of 
•question  ;  notwithstanding,  I  convinced  myself  by  ocular  inspection,  and 
guided  by  Mr.  Bogert,  Inspector  of  Buildings.  Next,  I  assisted  in  tying 
the  wrists  of  the  medium,  and  I  know  positively  that  it  was  not  legerdemaiuly 
done,  as  the  bhuid  liardly  could  circulate  under  the  firm  pressure  of  a  hard 
rope  which  was  used  for  this  purpose.  A  few  minutes  after  the  medium  took 
his  seat  in  the  corner,  hidden  by  the  curtain  which  separated  him  from  tlie 
spectators,  brilliant  sparks  and  lights  appeared  in  front  of  it ;  no  electric 
press-the-button  affair,  but  genuine  phenomena  of  occult  jjower.  Bells  were 
ringing  ;  one  of  them,  and  likewise  a  slate,  were  thrown  over  the  curtain, 
■which  extended  in  height  only  about  four  feet  from  the  f3o(3r.  Mr.  Wicks, 
the  master  of  ceremonies,  drew  back  the  curtain.  The  medium  extended  his 
hands,  which  by  close  examination  and  bright  liglit  bore  witness  that  they 
had  not  been  untied,  as  the  rope  actually  cut  itself  into  tlie  flesh,  and  the 
impressions  of  its  texture  were  distinctly  visible  on  the  skin  of  the  upper 
jjart  of  the  wrists  after  the  rope  was  cut  through  with  a  knife. 

"Unbound,  the  medium  again  sat  himself  in  tlie  corner.  The  curtain 
was  drawn  ;  a  long  rope,  besides  the  small  one,  was  handed  over  the  curtain 
by  Mr.  Wicks,  and  a  few  minutes  after  it  was  drawn  back  again  and  the 
medium  was  securely  tied  to  the  chair.  Remaining  in  this  position,  his  coat 
was  taken  oft"  and  put  on  again  ;  musical  instruments  were  played,  accom- 
panying the  songs  of  the  audience,  and  other  manifestations  witnessed,  whilst 
the  rope,  after  repeated  examinations,  proved  not  to  have  been  tampered 
with  in  any  way  or  manner,  of  which  I  gladly  and  conscientiously  bear 
witness,  as  I  convinced  myself  of  the  fact. 

' '  Tlie  next  test  to  v/hich  the  medium  submitted,  after  having  l)een  delivered 
of  his  fetters  by  the  same  occult  intelligence  which  bound  him  to  the  chair, 
was  to  be  put  into  a,  bag.  I  also  assisted  in  this  operation,  and  after  the 
bag  was  shut  and  sealed  over  the  medium's  head,  I  knew  that  tliere  was  no 
other  exit  for  him  except  by  getting  out  where  he  was  put  in.  In  this 
position  the  medium  was  placed  on  his  chair  in  the  corner,  and  with  him  a 
small  wiKjden  chest  containing  an  unprepared  clean  slate.  The  chest  was 
tlii_)r(.)U  ghly  examined  by  me  and  others  ;  the  padlock,  tlie  cover,  a)id  buttons 
sealed  up,  and  then  placed  in  the  corner  where  tlie  medium  was  seated. 
After  a  short  pause,  Mr.  Wicks  and  myself  got  the  medium  out  of  the  bag 
and  the  slate  out  of  the  chest,  and  found  written  tliereon  :  '  We  have  done 
onougli.  H.'  (H.  stands  for  Haicidoka,  the  n.om  de  plume  of  the  medium's 
contr(jl.)  The  seals  on  the  door,  padlock,  bag,  and  chest  were  found  un- 
broken, to  which  I  testify  without  fear  or  favour. 

"Hermann  Handrich." 

Mr.  Bavei/s  .Imitations  by  Conjuring,  d'c.  305 

I  will  now  describe  just  exactly  wliat  did  occur  at  the  test  seance. 

After  the  company  was  seated,  I  took  a  seat  in  the  "  cabinet."  Mr.  Wicks 
asked  the  people  to  sing.  Wliile  they  were  singing  "Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee," 
Mr.  Wicks  extinguished  the  liglit  and  handed  to  me,  in  the  darkness,  an 
electric  battery,  to  which  was  connected  hy  a  wire  a  small  incandescent  lamp. 
Lights  were  shown  by  "jiressing  the  button,"  although  Mr.  Handrich  states 
tliat  such  was  not  the  case.  Various  results  were  produced  by  moving  the 
lamp  from  one  place  to  another,  by  short  and  long  pressure  on  tlie  ljutton, 
and  by  wrapping  different  coloured  tissue  paper  around  the  lamp,  Arc. 

Mr.  Wicks  then  gave  me  a  "transparency"  which  had  been  hidden 
behind  a  large  picture  hanging  on  the  wall.  The  lamp  was  jjlaced  inside  of 
the  thin  box.  The  button  was  pressed  and  a  life-sized  hand  was  shown. 
This  was  the  end  of  that  part  of  the  show,  and  in  a  few  minutes  Mr.  Wicks 
asked  if  a  little  singing  would  increase  the  forces,  and  was  answered  by  two 
raps,  meaning  "don't  know."  Being  anxious  to  get  more  phenomena  they 
sang,  which  enabled  Mr.  W.  to  get  tlie  lamjj  and  "transparency"  away  fro)n 
me  without  being  heard. 

After  the  room  was  lighted,  the  cabinet  curtain  was  removed  and  I  came 
■out  of  the  231'etended  trance  and  stated  to  the  company  that  conditions  seemed 
to  be  favourable  and  that  we  would  commence  to  test  matters. 

Mr.  Handrich  and  Mr.  Bogert  fastened  the  door  shut  by  locking  it  and 
.sticking  strij^s  of  paper  from  the  door  to  the  door-case  with  sealing  wax.   .    .  . 

The  "first  test"  consisted  of  being  tied  by  occult  agency,  having  my  coat 
removed  without  tampering  with  the  ropes,  and  permitting  the  company  to 
examine  the  fastenings  as  long  and  as  often  as  desired. 

After  I  got  well  "  under  control  "  Mr.  Wicks  hid  me  from  view  by  drawing 
the  curtain.  He  then  tlirew  over  the  curtain  a  long  and  a  short  rope.  The 
short  rope  was  not  used,  but  was  substituted  by  another  rojje  carefully  knotted, 
&c.  This  prepared  rope  is  well  arranged,  it  generally  requiring  considerable 
time  to  make  it.  Braided  cotton  sash  cord  is  used.  The  knots  are  made 
when  the  rope  is  wet  and  are  held  togetlier  by  driving  in  soft  smooth  iron 
nails  which  are  filed  ofi'  close  and  hidden  by  working  the  rope  over  them. 
This  is  the  "  Spirit  Tie  Harness."  I  got  it  from  Frank  Vanderbilt,  an  old- 
time  medium  who  flourished  when  the  Eddy  family,  Eva  Fay,  tlie  Davenport 
Brothers,  and  many  others  were  in  the  business. 

•  •  •  •  «  •  « 

In  my  tie  the  principal  knot  is  in  plain  view  and  people  tliink  it  is  the  last 
knot  tied  and  they  know  it  is  a  slip  knot.  They  never  for  a  minute  seem  to 
think  that  any  .other  knot  is  of  any  importance.  After  a  very  careful 
examination  of  the  rojoes  it  is  generally  settled  that  the  trick  is  in  my  coat,  if 
the  investigator  happens  to  be  of  the  ojiinion  that  it  is  a  trick. 

In  talking  with  me  about  this  particular  manifestation,  tlie  Spiritualists 
argue  in  this  way  :  ' '  Kellar  and  otliers  do  this  in  the  theatres,  but  tliey  do 
not  believe  that  Kellar  could  do  it  under  test  conditions  unless  he  is  a 
anedium — and  where  is  tlie  proof  that  he  is  not  a  medium  ?  " 

The  next  "  test  "  consisted  in  permitting  tlie  company  to  bind  my  wrists 
together  with  stout  twine.  When  I  announced  that  I  would  submit  to  this 
test,  Mr.  Handrich  took  from  his  pocket  a  thin  copper  wire  covered  with 
cloth,  and  asked  permission  to  bind  me  with  it.  I  said  certainly,  and  walked 

306 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

over  to  him  remarking  that  it  was  immaterial  to  me  who  did  the  tying  or 
brought  the  string.  He  said  it  isn't  string,  it  is  wire.  I  said  I  thought  that 
inetals  of  any  kind  would  produce  very  uncomfortable  sensations  in  my  wrists, 
.as  wire  would  act  as  a  conductor  of  electricity.  He  apologised  and  said  that 
the  twine  would  serve  tlie  purpose  fully  as  well.  ...  I  then  bared  my 
left  arm  and  asked  Mr.  Bogert  to  tie  the  twine  around  the  wrist.  He  did  the 
tying  so  loose  that  I  could  have  pulled  my  hand  through.  I  told  him  to 
untie  it  and  make  a  better  job  of  it.  He  declined  to  do  so,  saying  that  he 
had  implicit  confidence  in  me  and  would  not  stop  the  circulation  of  blood  for 
anyljody.  (You  see  he  would  have  been  as  good  as  a  confederate,  so  far  as 
the  tying  is  concerned,  and  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  for  me  to  resort 
to  the  regular  trick  of  stealing  slack  either.)  I  pretended  to  show  a  little 
temper,  and  said  it  was  a  test  seance,  and  that  I  wanted  everything  done 
thoroughly.  Mr.  Bogert  then  tied  the  cord  around  my  wrist  very  tightly, — ■ 
the  knot  being  on  the  inside  of  the  wrist.  I  presented  my  left  arm  with  the 
palm  of  the  hand  up.  I  then  went  to  another  person  and  had  another  knot 
added  to  the  ones  Mr.  Bogert  had  made — I  went  to  other  persons,  allowing 
each  to  make  more  knots.  All  of  this  looked  as  though  I  was  being  well 
tied,  but  my  real  oVjject  in  going  from  one  to  anotlier  to  have  more  knots, 
made  was  to  take  a  turn  around  my  wi-ist  with  one  end  of  the  twine.  This, 
is  sleight  of  hand,  and  is  not  noticed  when  done  properly.  One  end  of  the 
twine  is  wound  around  the  wrist  after  the  last  knot  on  tlie  left  wrist  has  been 
made,  just  as  I  am  in  the  act  of  telling  a  person  to  take  the  other  end  and 
pull  <  m  it  ;  then  after  taking  the  hitch  on  the  first  end  I  ask  another  person, 
to  jiull  on  tliat  end.  Then  I  put  my  right  arm  exactly  over  my  left  and 
reijuest  the  two  persons  to  bring  the  two  ends  together  and  tie  them  tightly. 
Then  I  go  from  one  to  another,  asking  each  person  to  add  a  knot.  Then  the 
knots  are  fastened  with  sealing  wax.  I  then  take  a  seat  in  the  cabinet  and 
sit  there  in  full  view  until  I  get  "  under  control,"  then  the  curtain  is  drawn. 
I  immediately  turn  my  arms  in  (opposite  directions,  which  takes  the  turn  out 
of  the  rope,  and  my  hands  are  free.  I  can  take  my  hands  out  of  and  get. 
back  into  the  fastening.s  with  great  quickness,  which  I  did  on  tliis  occasion. 

The  next  te.st  consisted  of  being  tied  up  in  a  bag.  The  end  of  the  bag  is 
gathered  togetlier  by  passhig  a  twine  through  brass  eyelet-holes  and  drawing 
the  bag  together  by  jtulling  tlie  two  ends  of  the  string.  When  the  bag  is. 
being  drawn-  up  over  my  head,  I  catch  one  of  the  loops  of  the  twine  and  pull 
in  as  much  slack  as  I  can.  This  is  similar  to  Mrs.  Martin's  neck-tie  ex- 
posed by  you  [At  a  roj^e-tying  materialisation  seance  wliicli  I  attended  in. 
New  York. — R.H.],  but  is  much  better,  since  I  do  not  have  to  close  a  door 
to  pull  in  slack.  Mr.  Wicks  is  prepared  to  erase  any  marks  i>nt  on  the 
ropes,  and  after  the  fastenings  are  pronounced  intact  he  immediately  cuts  the 
rope  in  a  number  of  places  while  he  holds  the  bag  up  and  while  I  am  getting 
the  extra  rope  in  my  pocket.  The  bag  tie  knot  is  also  fastened  with  wax. 
This  looks  good  to  the  audience  and  it  apparently  increases  the  value  of  the 
test,  but  the  sealing  is  really  a  help  to  the  trick,  as  it  makes  it  imjjossible  ta 
untie  the  knot  after  the  performance,  and  the  string  has  to  be  cut. 

The  next  "test "  was  to  get  writing  on  a  slate  locked  up  in  a  box  while  I 
was  in  the  bag.     You  should  have  seen  them  examine  the  slate.  They 

Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring,  <L-c.  307 

washed  it  very  carefully  ;  held  it  against  a  light  to  burn  off  a  possible  pre- 
pared message  written  in  sympathetic  inks.  Little  or  no  attention  was  paid 
to  the  box.  The  slate  was  put  into  the  box.  The  box  was  then  closed  and 
locked.  The  key-hole  of  the  lock  was  covered  by  a  piece  of  paper  which  was- 
fastened  witli  sealing  wax.  Several  strips  of  paper  were  wound  around  the 
padlock  and  fastened  with  sealing  wax.  Then  the  lid  and  box  were  fastened 
together  by  sticking  paper,  &c. 

After  I  got  "  under  control  "  again  (in  the  bag)  and  while  they  were  sing- 
ing another  hymn,  the  lights  were  lowered,  the  cabinet  curtain  di'awn,  and 
the  box  was  put  into  the  cabinet.  All  that  I  had  to  do  was  to  get  my  head 
and  arms  out  of  the  bag,  and  push  in  one  end  of  the  box  and  take  the  slate 
out.    [Here  Mr.  Davis  describes  the  trick-box,  with  diagrams. — R.  H.] 

The  most  singular  thing  in  connection  with  this  "test  seance"  is  the 
fact  that  the  tests  were  all  "forced"  and  nobody  thought  of  it.  But  why 
should  they  have  thought  of  it  since  nearly  everything  called  "tests,"  so  far 
as  public  mediums  are  concerned,  are  forced The  manifesta- 
tions occurring  while  I  was  tied  in  the  bag,  &c.,  consisted  of  performing  on 
the  banjo,  flute,  violin,  bones,  writing  on  slates,  exhibiting  tambourine,  bell» 
and  hands  over  the  curtain,  &c. 

Mr.  Davis,  at  my  request,  repeated  the  above  performances  in  detail 
before  a  group  of  our  members,  including  myself,  in  New  York,  and 
after  each  performance  he  illustrated  his  methods  in  full  light  to  the 
complete  satisfaction  of  all  the  persons  present.  Mr.  Davis  informs- 
nie  that  he  and  Mr.  Wicks  "  will  undertake  to  explain  the  methods  of, 
and  reproduce  the  performance  of,  any  slate-writing,  hre-test,  rope- 
tying,  etherealising,  and  materialising  medium  who  will  go  before  a 
committee  of  your  Society  and  permit  us  to  be  present." 

Returning  now  to  the  accounts  which  I  have  given  of  Mr.  Davey's 
methods, — in  connection  with  the  statement  made  hy  Mr.  Wallace  that 
unless  all  Mr.  Davey's  phenomena  can  be  explained  by  "trick,"  he  will 
be  confirmed  in  his  "  belief  that  Mr.  Davey  was  really  a  medium  as 
well  as  a  conjurer," — what  is  the  value  of  the  testimony  to  such 
phenomena  given  by  persons  who  are  in  the  position  of  Mi".  Wallace, 
unaljle  to  distinguish  between  the  avowed  medium  and  the  avowed  and 
proved  conjurer?  Many  other  Spiritualists  have  apparently  held  the 
same  position.  Thus,  Mr.  Dixon,  writing  to  Tlie  Spiritualist  in  1875, 
said  that  he  was  "  thoroughly  nonplussed "  by  Dr.  Lynn's  cabinet 
performance. 

L^nlcss  the  spirits  did  "it,"  I  am  utterly  at  a  loss  how  to  account  for 
it,  and  my  only  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  when  questioned  by  my  friends, 
was  to  claim  this  part  of  the  performance  as  a  genuine  piece  of  Spiritual- 
ism. ...  I  am  sure  the  cause  of  Sj^iritualism  would  gain  immensely 
if  Lynn's  seance  [?]  could  be  explained.  ...  If  I  had  not  -paid  my 
money  for  an  evening  with  Dr.  Lynn  I  should  have  come  away  from  it  as  a 

308         ,  ■       '  ,  '     Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

Spiritualist  .se.ance  with  the  most  jjerfect  assurance  that  the  manifestations 
were  genuine. 

Mr.  (xledstanes,  writing  in  the  same  year,  1875,  points  to  the  prob- 
ability of  the  medium's  doubles  doing  the  feats,  and  strongly  suggests 
that  Maskelyne  and  Cook  project  arms  fi'(jni  their  bodies  !  Mr. 
Coleman,  writing  in  1874,  says  : — 

All  inquirers  who  desire  to  study  the  ijsychological  character  of 
spiritual  manifestations  should  be  recommended  to  visit  Messrs.  M.  and  C. 
[Maskelyne  and  Cook],  who  have  gone  on  practising  them  with  a  persever- 
iiuce  worthy  of  a  better  aim,  and  who  are,  in  my  opinicjii,  the  best  of  living 
mediums. 

iSomewhat  similai'ly,  Mr.  Wallace  in  1877  describes  a  performance 
of  Dr.  Lynn's  at  the  Royal  Aquarium,  including  a  cabinet  trick,  and 
the  moving  and  floating  of  a  table  about  the  stage,  two  feet  from  the 
floor.    He  says  : — 

Y<_>ur  readers  must  be  told  that  Dr.  Lynn  is  not  the  performer  ;  but  a 
gentleman  who  is  introduced  as  "a  medium — a  real  medium  "  ;  and  I  must 
say  I  believe  him  to  be  one. 

A  week  later  "  M.  A.  (Oxon.)"  added  his  testimony  as  follows,  in  a 
passage  which  I  quoted  in  my  previous  article  : — 

I  am  glad  to  see  that  Mr.  Alfred  "Wallace  agrees,  after  seeing  Lynn's 
medium,  with  the  substance  of  my  letter  in  your  issue  of  July  6th.  Given 
mediumship  and  shamelessness  enough  so  to  prostitute  it,  and  conjuring  can, 
no  doubt,  be  made  sufficiently  bewildering.  It  is  sheer  nonsense  to  treat 
such  jjerformances  as  Maskelyne's,  Lynn's,  and  some  that  have  been  shown 
at  the  Crystal  Palace,  as  "  common  conjuring."  Mr.  Wallace  positively  says, 
"■  If  you  think  it  is  all  juggling,  point  out  exactly  where  the  difference  lies 
between  it  and  nu^diumistic  phenomena." 

It  is  not  surprising  that  statements  of  this  kind  should  have  called 
forth  such  an  emjjhatic  remonstrance  as  the  following  from  Mr.  Coates, 
who  at  the  same  time  professed  his  belief  in  Spiritualism  : — 

The  man  who  cannot  distinguish  between  anediumshiij  and  conjuring, 
though  he  ha  a  doctor  of  law,  science,  medicine,  ov  divinity — his  evidence  is 
shaky,  his  theories  not  worth  the  paper  they  are  written  on,  and  his  advocacy 
the  cause  had  l)ettor  ))e  without. 

Mr.  Wallace,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have  made  any  advance 
since  1877  in  his  discrimination  between  conjuring  and  alleged  medium- 
ship  of  the  kind  we  are  considering.  Why  ?  Is  it  not  oliviously  because 
no  discrimination  can  be  made  ?  And  accordingly  many  Spiritualists 
continue  to  call  conjurers  "  mediums."  A  recent  instance  occurs  in  a 
communication  to  Light  for  October  24th,  1891,  by  "  T.  W."  He 
writes  that  "  we  may  say,  without  prevarication,  that  the  conjurers 
have  utilised  physical  Spiritism."  He  refers  to  a  coin  trick  by  Bosco, 
and  apparently  regards  it  as  involving  "  mediumship."  (It  was 
probably  a  variation  of  the  coin  trick  described  in  Modern  Magic, 

ifr.  Baveys  Imitations  hy  Conjuring,  &c.  309 

p.  161.)  He  also  mentions  the  "famous  conjm'er,"  M.  Duprez, 
and  says  :  "  He  must  be  a  powerful  physical  medium.  I  saw  his 
performance  some  years  ago,  and  ...  I  believe  that  there  is 
scarcely  a  '  trick '  performed  in  which  he  is  not  aided  or  supplanted 
by  unseen  force."  Now,  statements  like  these,  absurd  as  they  seem  to 
persons  familiar  with  conjuring  operations,  do  not  originate  simply  and 
merely  from  ignorance  of  conjuring,  and  the  remedy  is  not,  simply  and 
merely,  to  become  acquainted  with  certain  trick-devices.^  The  remedy 
for  such  absurdity  is  to  learn  that  an  uninitiated  witness  cannot 
describe  to  himself  the  real  conditions  under  which  the  feats  were 
performed,  because  his  powers  of  obseiwation  and  memory  are  inade- 
quate for  the  purpose.  He  may  rigidly  conclude  that  under  such  and 
such  conditions  the  feats  are  inexplicable  by  conjuring,  but  he  tcronghj 
concludes  that  the  conditions  were  as  he  describes  them. 

The  plain  result  from  our  investigation  is  that  the  great  bulk  of  the 
testimony  to  the  "  physical "  marvels  of  Modern  Spiritualism  is  not 
entitled  to  serious  consideration  as  affording  any  evidence  of  supei'- 
normal  phenomena.  I  may  conclude  with  a  warning  which  I  venture 
to  give  specially  to  our  members  in  America,  viz.,  that  nearly  all  pro- 
fessional mediums  form  a  gang  of  vulgar  tricksters  who  are  more  or 
less  in  league  with  one  another.  Associated  with  this  combination, 
here  and  there,  are  certain  other  persons  who  either  have  been,  or 
intend  to  be,  professional  mediums,  and  who  are  equally  untrust- 
worthy. These  tricksters  are  continually  deceiving  fresh  groups  of 
uninitiated  observers  of  their  performances,  and  I  frequently  receive- 

^Of  course  a  knowledge  of  trick-devices  is  likely  to  make  a  witness  hesitate  in 
many  cases  before  concluding  that  a  certain  "phenomenon"  was  not  produced  by 
ordinary  means.  But  it  sometimes  acts  the  other  way,  especially  if  the  witness 
thinks  that  he  is  already  an  expert.  The  well-known  conjurer  Kellar  was  nofe 
familiar  with  special  "slate-writing"  methods  when  he  was  in  India  in  1882,  and 
Eglinton  was  able  to  deceive  him.  Kellar  afterwards  changed  his  opinion  as  to- 
Eglinton's  phenomena  when  he  became  familiar  with  the  methods.  Yet  even  at 
this  later  date,  he  was  unable,  in  conversation  with  me,  to  offer  any  explanation 
of  the  production  oF  writing  between  slates  screwed  together  and  sealed,  &c.,  as 
described  above,  though  he  did  not  suppose  it  was  other  than  a  trick.  Similarly 
it  seems  to  me  quite  likely  that  an  expert  in  the  diiferent  trick-methods  of  open- 
ing sealed  envelopes  might  be  bafHed  by  the  trick  described  as  follows  in  Eevela- 
tions  of  a  Spirit- 3Iediu}n,  pp.  178-9: — 

"But  the  smoothest  thing  in  the  sealed  letter  reading,  and  the  one  that  has. 
puzzled  the  people  for  years,  is  usually  done  in  connection  with  '  slate-writing.' 
The  '  sitter  '  is  furnished  with  a  heavy  white  envelope,  of  small  size,  and  a  white 
card  of  the  size  of  an  ordinary  visiting  card.  He  is  requested  to  write  the  name- 
of  a  spirit  friend  on  the  card,  and  to  write  one  or  not  more  than  two  questions 
with  it.  After  he  has  written  as  requested,  he  is  instructed  to  place  the  card  in 
the  envelope  with  the  writing  next  the  smooth  side  and  away  from  the  glue.  This- 
being  done,  he  is  furnished  -with  letter-wax  with  which  he  seals  the  seams  to 
prevent  the  envelope  being  opened. 

"The  •medium  '  now  takes  his  seat  at  the  table  opposite  his  sitter  and  near  % 

310 

Mr.  R.  Hodgson. 

accounts  of  them  which,  I  need  hardly  say,  are  entirely  worthless  for 
the  purposes  of  our  investigation.  It  is  not  from  the  professional 
mediums — so  numerous  in  the  United  States — for  "  slate-writing," 
"  matei'ialisation,"  and  kindred  performances,  that  we  can  look  for  any 
enlightenment  whatever,  on  the  positive  side,  in  the  course  of  Psychical 
Kesearch. 

window.  Placing  the  envelope  on  a  slate  he  thrusts  it  beneath  the  table.  After 
sitting  long  enough  to  do  his  work,  raps  are  heard  on  the  slate,  and,  withdraw- 
ing it,  he  hands  it  to  the  '  sitter. '  The  envelope  still  lies  on  the  slate,  and  there 
is  no  evidence  of  its  having  been  touched.  The  seals  are  intact,  and  there  is  not 
a  mark  or  mar  on  it. 

"On  the  slate  is  written  the  replies  to  his  questions,  and  the  name  of  the 
spirit  addressed  is  signed  at  the  bottom  of  the  message." 

The  expert  in  opening  letters  would  rightly  conclude  that  the  envelope  had 
not  been  opened,  and  if  he  did  not  allow  a  margin  for  his  ignorance  of  special 
devices,  he  might  be  disposed  to  attribute  the  phenomenon  to  some  "clairvoyant" 
power. 

"In  order  to  perform  this  trick,  do  just  as  the  '  medium  '  did  up  to  the  time 
he  placed  or  held  the  slate  beneath  the  table.  Instead  of  holding  it  there  with 
your  hand,  slip  one  corner  between  your  leg  and  the  seat  of  the  chair.  Thus  you 
are  holding  it  by  sitting  on  it.  Your  hand  is  now  free  to  do  as  you  choose  with. 
Your  '  sitter  '  cannot  see  your  movements,  for  the  table  is  interposed.  Put  j'our 
fingers  into  the  ticket  pocket  of  your  coat  and  bring  out  a  small  sponge  that  is 
saturated  with  alcohol ;  dampen  the  envelope  over  the  card  and  you  can  easily 
read  the  name  and  question.  Write  the  answer  and  sign  the  name  addressed,  and 
your  '  sitter  '  will  be  '  paralysed  '  with  astonishment. 

"Nothing  will  serve  to  dampen  the  envelope  but  alcohol.  Nothing  else  will 
allow  of  your  reading  the  writing  on  the  enclosed  card,  and  nothing  else  will  dry 
out  quickly  enough  and  leave  absolutely  no  traces  of  any  manipulation.  Water 
will  not  dry  out  quick  enough,  and  when  it  does  dry  leaves  the  envelope  shrunken 
where  it  was  applied,  thus  leading  your  '  sitter  '  to  suspect  that  you  have  not 
played  fair." 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

311 

III. 

RECORD  OF  A  HAUNTED  HOUSE. 
By  Miss  R.  C.  Morton. 

Prefatory  Note. 

[The  first  intimation  which  I  received  of  the  series  of  j^henomena 
described  below  was  in  a  letter  received  in  December,  1884,  from  Mr.  J,  W. 
Graham,  now  Principal  of  Dalton  Hall,  Manchester.  Mr.  Graham  had  heard 
an  account  from  the  gentleman  mentioned  below  as  Cajatain  Morton  ;  had 
written  this  account  out  from  memory,  and  had  got  it  revised  by  Captain  and 
Miss  Morton.  This  account,  and  Miss  Morton's  letters  to  Miss  Campbell, 
which  begin  with  the  first  appearance  of  the  figure,  are  the  earliest  written 
records.  Captain  Morton  was  for  a  time  unwilling  to  give  further  accounts, 
lest  the  house,  which  belonged  to  a  friend  of  his,  sliould  again  become 
depreciated  in  value  ;  as  it  appears  from  Miss  Morton's  recijrd  that  it  has 
previously  been.  But  on  May  1st,  1886,  he  ijermitted  me  to  call  ujjon  him  ; 
iind  from  that  date  onwards  I  visited  him  at  intervals  and  took  notes  of  what 
he  told  me.  I  also  saw  Miss  Morton  and  Miss  E.  Morton,  and  I  interviewed 
^t  their  own  homes  Mrs.  Twining,  a  charwoman,  and  Mrs.  Brown,  a  former 
parlourmaid.  In  this  case  it  is  observable  that  the  phenomena  as  seen  or 
heard  by  all  the  witnesses  were  very  imiform  in  character — even  in  the 
numerous  instances  where  there  had  been  no  previous  communication 
Ijetween  the  percipients.  I  have  found  no  discrepancy  in  the  independent 
testimonies,  when  collected,  with  the  unimportant  exception  of  General  A.'s 
inability  or  unwillingness  to  recall  one  incident,  which  was  already  included 
in  Mr.  Graham's  first  account,  soon  after  its  occurrence,  and  six  years  before 
General  A.,  an  old  man,  was  asked  to  repeat  it. 

Captain  Morton's  reluctance  to  allow  tlie  evidence  to  he  collected  until 
the  haunting  had  ceased — a  reluctance  based  on  consideration  for  the  owner 
of  the  house — has  thus  done  less  harm  than  might  have  been  feared.  It 
must  be  added  that  Captain  M.  and  the  members  of  his  family  in  general, 
while  feeling  little  scientific  interest  in  the  apparition,  were  unusually  free 
from  superstitious  fears.  Miss  Morton,  whose  account  is  given  below,  is  a 
lady  of  scientific  training,  now  preparing  to  be  a  physician  ;  and  her 
jiarrative  has  received  no  accretions  since  I  first  heard  it.  The  name 
Morton  is  substituted  for  the  real  family  name.  With  that  exception  the 
names  and  initials  are  the  true  ones. — F.W.H.M.] 

The  house  is  a  typical  modern  residence,  square  and  commonplace 
in  appearance.  It  is  only  separated  from  the  road  in  front  by  railings 
with  high  gates  and  a  short  carriage-sweep.  On  one  side,  but  com- 
pletely detached,  is  another  similar  residence  ;  on  the  other  side  runs  a 
cross  road,  shut  out  from  the  house  by  the  small  orchard,  referred  to 
in  the  account,  and  by  the  garden,  which  also  extends  some  way  at  the 

312 

Miss  R.  C.  Morton. 

back,  being  altogether  of  a  very  fair  size.  At  the  end  of  the  garden 
are  stabling  and  a  small  cottage,  neither  of  which  is  in  present  use. 

The  whole  is  in  thoroughly  good  repair  ;  neither  rats  nor  mice  have 
ever  been  seen  in  the  house,  and  there  are  no  owls  in  the  neighbour- 
hood to  account  for  any  of  the  sounds  heard. 

It  was  built  about  the  year  1860,  on  a  site  occupied  by  a  market 
garden  ;  while  yet  imfinished  it  was  bought  from  the  builders  by  the 
first  occupant,  Mr.  S.,  an  Anglo-Indian,  who  lived  in  it  for  about  16 
years.  During  this  time,  in  the  month  of  August,  year  uncertain,  he 
lost  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  passionately  attached,  and  to  drown  his 
grief  took  to  drinking. 

About  two  years  later,  Mr.  S.  manied  again.  His  second  wife,  a 
Miss  I.  H.,  was  in  hopes  of  curing  him  of  his  intemperate  habits, 
but  instead  she  also  took  to  drinking,  and  their  married  life  was  em- 
bittered hy  constant  quarrels,  frequently  resulting  in  violent  scenes. 
The  chief  subjects  of  dispute  were  the  management  of  the  children 
(two  girls,  and  either  one  or  two  boys,  all  quite  young)  of  the  first 
Mrs.  S.,  and  the  possession  of  her  jewellery,  to  preserve  which  for 
her  children,  IMr.  S.  had  some  of  the  boards  in  the  small  front  sitting- 
room  [c]  taken  up  by  a  local  carpenter  and  the  jewels  inserted  in  the 
receptacle  so  formed.  Finally,  a  few  months  Ijefore  Mr.  S.'s  death,  on 
the  14th  July,  1876,  his  wife  separated  from  him  and  went  to  live  in 
Clifton.  She  was  not  present  at  the  time  of  his  death,  nor,  as  far  as  is 
known,  was  she  ever  at  the  house  afterwards. 

She  died  on  the  2.3rd  Septeml^er,  1878,  and  her  remains  were 
brought  Ijack  to  the  town  to  be  interred  in  a  churchyard,  about  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  house  in  which  slie  had  lived. 

Aftei'  Mr.  S.'s  death  his  affairs  were  f(jund  to  be  much  involved,, 
and  the  house  was  sold  as  soon  as  a  purchaser  could  be  found.  It  was 
bought  by  Mr.  L.,  an  elderly  gentleman,  who,  after  thoroughly 
doing  up  the  house,  which  was  in  a  very  dirty  state,  went  there  to  live, 
with  his  wife,  a  lady  of  about  his  own  age  ;  two  sons  wei'e  there  from 
time  to  time,  but  never  for  long  together. 

Old  Mr.  L.  died  rather  suddenly  within  6  months  of  going  into  the 
house,  and,  rather  a  curious  coincidence,  in  the  same  small  sitting-room 
(marked  c)  in  which  Mr.  S.  had  also  died,  and  where  the  jewels  had 
been  hidden,  but  in  which  the  figure  has  never  been  seen. 

Mrs.  L.  the  widow  (still  alive)  moved  into  a  smaller  house,  very 

soon  after  her  husband's  death,  and  [  ]  remained  empty  for  some 

years — probaljly  four. 

During  this  time  there  is  no  direct  evidence  of  haunting,  but 
when  inquiiy  was  made  later  on  much  hearsay  evidence  was  brought 
forward  :  for  example,  an  old  job  gardener,  who  often  worked  at  the 
house  opposite,  is  said  to  have  frequently  seen  the  figure  of  a  tall  lady 

Record  of  a  Haunted  Souse. 

313 

in  black  in  the  garden  of  [  ].    This  old  man  was  on  inquiry 

found  to  be  dead  and  his  widow  could  not  be  traced. 

A  lady  (Mrs.  P.),  who  had  at  one  time  resided  in  the  same  town, 
and  after  an  absence  of  some  years  returned  there  to  live,  was  met 
by  me  at  a  friend's  house,  and  expressed  great  interest  in  the 
apparition,  which  she  said  seemed  to  be  identical  with  one  seen  in  the 
jsame  house  shortly  after  the  death  of  Mrs.  S.  After  the  lapse  of  time 
it  was,  however,  found  impossible  to  trace  this  story  to  its  source. 
I  was  also  told  by  a  friend  that  dui'ing  the  summer  of  1879  or 
1880,  the  house  was  offered  to  a  lady  at  a  reaital  of  £60,  which  is  less 
than  half  of  what  is  now  asked  and  given.  In  April,  1882,  the  house 
was  let  by  the  representatives  of  the  late  Mr.  L.  to  Captain  Morton, 
and  it  is  during  his  tenancy  (not  yet  terminated)  that  the  appearances 
recorded  have  taken  place. 

The  family  consists  of  Captain  M.  himself  ;  his  wife,  who  is  a  great 
iiivalid,  neither  of  whom  saw  anything  ;  a  married  daughter,  Mrs. 
Iv.,  then  about  26,  who  v/as  only  a  visitor  from  time  to  time, 
sometimes  with,  but  more  often  without,  her  husband  ;  4  unmarried 
daughters,  myself,  then  aged  19,  who  was  the  chief  percipient  and 
now  give  the  chief  account  of  the  apparition ;  E.  Morton,  then 
aged  18  ;  L.  and  M.  Morton,  then  15  and  13  ;  2  sons,  one  of  16,  who 
was  absent  during  the  greater  part  of  the  time  when  the  apparition 
was  seen;  the  other,  then  6  years  old. 

My  father  took  the  house  in  March,  1882,  none  of  us  having 
±hen  heard  of  anything  unusual  about  the  house.  We  moved  in 
towards  the  end  of  April,  and  it  was  not  until  the  following  June  that 
I  first  saw  the  apparition. 

I  had  gone  up  to  my  room,  but  was  not  yet  in  bed,  when  I  heard 
someone  at  the  door,  and  went  to  it,  thinking  it  might  be  my  mother. 
On  opening  the  door,  I  saw  no  one  ;  but  on  going  a  few  steps  along  the 
passage,  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  tall  lady,  dressed  in  black,  standing  at 
the  head  of  the  stairs.  After  a  few  moments  she  descended  the  stairs, 
and  I  followed  for  a  short  distance,  feeling  curious  what  it  could  be. 
I  had  only  a  small  piece  of  candle,  and  it  suddenly  burnt  itself  out ; 
and  being  unable  to  see  more,  I  went  back  to  my  room. 

The  figure  was  that  of  a  tall  lady,  dressed  in  black  of  a  soft  woollen 
material,  judging  from  the  slight  sound  in  moving.  The  face  was 
liidden  in  a  handkerchief  held  in  the  right  hand.  This  is  all  I  noticed 
then ;  but  on  further  occasions,  when  I  was  able  to  observe  her  more 
closely,  I  saw  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  and 
a  little  of  the  hair  above.  Her  left  hand  was  nearly  hidden  by  her 
sleeve  and  a  fold  of  her  dress.  As  she  held  it  down  a  portion  of  a 
widow's  cuff  was  visible  on  both  wrists,  so  that  the  whole  impression 
was  that  of  a  lady  in  widow's  weeds.    There  was  no  cap  on  the  head 

X 

314 

Miss  R,  C.  Morton. 

but  a  general  effect  of  blackness  suggests  a  bonnet,  with  long  veil  or  a 
hood. 

During  the  next  two  years — from  1882  to  1884 — I  saw  the  figure 
about  half  a  dozen  times ;  at  first  at  long  intervals,  and  afterwards  at 
shorter,  but  I  only  mentioned  these  appearances  to  one  friend,  who  did 
not  speak  of  them  to  anyone. 

During  this  period,  as  far  as  we  know,  there  were  only  3  appear- 
ances to  anyone  else. 

1.  In  the  summer  of  1882  to  my  sister,  Mi's.  K.,  when  the  figure 
was  thought  to  be  that  of  a  Sister  of  Mercy  who  had  called  at  the 
house,  and  no  further  curiosity  was  aroused.  She  was  coming  down 
the  stairs  rather  late  for  dinner  at  6.30,  it  being  then  quite  light,  when 
she  saw  the  figure  cross  the  hall  in  front  of  her,  and  pass  into  the 
drawing-room.  She  then  asked  the  rest  of  us,  already  seated  at 
dinner,  "  Who  was  that  Sister  of  Mercy  whom  I  have  just  seen  going 
into  the  drawing-room  1 "  She  was  told  there  was  no  such  person,  and 
a  servant  was  sent  to  look  ;  but  the  drawing-room  was  empty,  and  she 
was  sure  no  one  had  come  in.  Mrs.  K.  persisted  that  she  had  seen  a 
tall  figure  in  black,  with  some  white  about  it ;  but  nothing  further  was 
tliought  of  the  matter. 

2.  In  the  autumn  of  1883  it  was  seen  ])y  the  housemaid  about  10 
p.m.,  she  declaring  that  someone  had  got  into  the  house,  her  description 
agreeing  fairly  with  what  I  had  seen  ;  but  as  on  searching  no  one  was 
found,  her  story  received  no  credit. 

3.  On  or  about  December  18th,  1883,  it  was  seen  in  the  drawing- 
room  by  my  brother  and  another  little  boy.  They  were  playing- 
outside  on  the  terrace,  when  they  saw  the  figure  in  the  drawing-room 
close  to  the  window,  and  ran  in  to  see  who  it  could  be  that  was  crying 
so  bitterly.  They  found  no  one  in  the  drawing-room,  and  the  parlour- 
maid told  them  that  no  one  had  come  into  the  house. 

Aftei'  the  first  time,  I  followed  the  figure  several  times  downstairs 
into  the  drawing-room,  where  she  remained  a  variable  time,  generally 
standing  to  the  right  hand  side  of  the  bow  window.  From  the  draw- 
ing-room she  went  along  the  passage  towards  the  garden  door,  where 
she  always  disappeared. 

The  first  time  I  sjioke  to  her  was  on  the  29th  January,  1884.  "  I 
opened  the  drawing-room  door  softly  and  went  in,  standing  just  Ijy  it. 
She  came  in  past  me  and  walked  to  the  sofa  and  stood  still  there,  so  I 
went  up  to  her  and  asked  her  if  I  could  help  her.  She  moved,  and  I 
thought  she  was  going  to  speak,  but  she  only  gave  a  slight  gasp  and 
moved  towards  the  door.  Just  by  the  door  I  spoke  to  her  again,  but 
she  seemed  as  if  she  were  quite  unable  to  speak.  She  walked  into  the 
hall,  then  by  the  side  door  she  seemed  to  disappear  as  before."  (Quoted 
from  a  letter  written  on  January  31st.)    In  May  and  June,  1884,  I 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

315 

tried  some  experiments,  fastening  strings  with  marine  glue  across  the 
stairs  at  diffei'ent  heights  from  the  ground — of  which  I  give  a  more 
detailed  account  later  on. 

I  also  attempted  to  touch  her,  but  she  always  eluded  me.  It  was 
not  that  there  was  nothing  there  to  touch,  but  that  she  always  seemed 
to  be  beyond  me,  and  if  followed  into  a  coi'ner,  simply  disappeared. 

During  these  two  years  the  only  noises  I  heard  were  those  of  slight 
pushes  against  my  bedroom  door,  accompanied  by  footsteps  ;  and  if  I 
looked  out  on  hearing  these  sounds,  I  invariably  saw  the  figure.  "Her 
footstep  is  very  light,  you  can  hardly  hear  it,  except  on  the  linoleum, 
and  then  only  like  a  person  walking  softly  with  thin  boots  on." 
(Letter  on  January  31st,  188-1.)  The  appearances  during  the  next 
two  months — July  and  August,  1884 — became  much  more  frequent ; 
indeed  they  were  then  at  their  maximum,  from  which  time  they  seem 
gradually  to  have  decreased,  until  now  they  seem  to  have  ceased. 

Of  these  two  months  I  have  a  short  record  in  a  set  of  journal 
letters  written  at  the  time  to  a  friend.  On  July  21st  I  find  the 
following  account.  "  I  went  into  the  drawing-room,  where  my  father 
and  sisters  were  sitting,  about  9  in  the  evening,  and  sat  down  on  a 
couch  close  to  the  bow  window.  A  few  minutes  after,  as  I  sat  readings 
I  saw  the  figure  come  in  at  the  open  door,  cross  the  room  and  take  up 
a  position  close  behind  the  couch  where  I  was.  I  was  astonished  that 
no  one  else  in  the  room  saw  her,  as  she  was  so  very  distinct  to  me. 
My  youngest  brother,  who  had  before  seen  her,  was  not  in  the  room. 
She  stood  behind  the  couch  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  then  as  usual 
walked  to  the  door.  I  went  after  her,  on  the  excuse  of  getting  a  book, 
and  saw  her  pass  along  the  hall,  until  she  came  to  the  garden  door^ 
where  she  disappeared.  I  spoke  to  her  as  she  passed  the  foot  of  the 
stairs,  but  she  did  not  answer,  although  as  before  she  stopped  and 
seemed  as  though  about  to  speak."  On  July  31st,  some  time  after  I  had 
gone  up  to  bed,  my  second  sister  E.,  who  had  remained  downstairs 
talking  in  another  sister's  room,  came  to  me  saying  that  someone  had 
passed  her  on  the  stairs.  I  tried  then  to  persuade  her  that  it  was  one 
of  the  sei'vants,  but  next  morning  found  it  could  not  have  been  so,  as 
none  of  them  had  been  ovit  of  their  rooms  at  that  hour,  and  E.'s  more 
detailed  description  tallied  with  what  I  had  already  seen. 

On  the  night  of  August  1st,  I  again  saw  the  figure.  I  heard  th& 
footsteps  outside  on  the  landing  about  2  a.m.  I  got  up  at  once,  and 
went  outside.  She  was  then  at  the  end  of  the  landing  at  the  top  of 
the  stairs,  with  her  side  view  towards  me.  She  stood  there  some- 
minutes,  then  went  downstairs,  stopping  again  when  she  reached  the 
hall  below.  I  opened  the  drawing-room  door  and  she  went  in,  walked 
across  the  room  to  the  couch  in  the  bow  window,  stayed  there  a 
little,  then  came  out  of  the  room,  went  along  the  passage,  and  dis- 

316 

Miss  R.  C.  Morton. 

appeared  by  the  garden  door.  I  spoke  to  her  again,  but  she  did  not 
answer. 

On  the  night  of  August  2nd  the  footsteps  were  heard  by  my  three 
sisters  and  by  the  cook,  all  of  whom  slept  on  the  top  landing — also  by 
my  married  sister,  Mrs.  K.,  who  was  sleeping  on  the  floor  below.  They 
all  said  the  next  morning  that  they  had  heard  them  very  plainly  pass 
and  repass  their  doors.  The  cook  was  a  middle-aged  and  very  sensible 
person  ;  on  my  asking  her  the  following  morning  if  any  of  the  servants 
had  been  out  of  their  rooms  the  night  before,  after  coming  up  to  bed, 
she  told  me  that  she  had  heard  these  footsteps  before,  and  that  she  had 
seen  the  figure  on  the  stairs  one  nioht  when  soing  down  to  the  kitchen 
to  fetch  hot  water  after  the  servants  had  come  up  to  bed.  She  described 
it  as  a  lady  in  widow's  dress,  tall  and  slight,  with  her  face  hidden  in  a 
handkerchief  held  in  her  right  hand.  Unfortunately  we  have  since 
lost  sight  of  this  servant ;  she  left  us  about  a  year  afterwards  on  her 
mother's  death,  and  we  cannot  now  trace  her.  She  also  saw  the  figure 
outside  the  kitchen  windows  on  the  terrace-walk,  she  herself  being  in 
the  kitchen  ;  it  was  then  about  11  in  the  morning,  but  having  no  note 
of  the  occurrence,  I  cannot  now  remember  whether  this  appearance  was 
sul^sequent  to  the  one  above  mentioned. 

These  footsteps  are  very  characteristic,  and  are  not  at  all  like  those 
of  any  of  the  people  in  the  house  ;  they  are  soft  and  rather  slow,  though 
decided  and  even.  My  sisters  would  not  go  out  on  the  landing  after 
hearing  them  pass,  nor  would  the  servants,  but  each  time  when  I  have 
gone  out  after  hearing  them,  I  have  seen  the  figure  there. 

On  August  5th  I  told  my  father  about  her  and  what  we  had  seen 
and  heard.  He  was  much  astonished,  not  having  seen  or  heai'd  anything 
himself  at  that  time — neither  then  had  my  mother,  but  she  is  slightly 
deaf,  and  is  an  invalid. 

He  made  inquiries  of  the  landlord  (who  then  lived  close  by)  as  to 
whether  he  knew  of  anything  unusual  about  the  house,  as  he  had 
himself  lived  in  it  for  a  short  time,  but  he  replied  that  he  had  only 
been  there  for  three  months,  and  had  never  seen  anything  unusual. 

On  August  6th,  a  neighbour,  General  A.,  who  lived  opposite,  sent 
his  son  to  inquire  after  my  married  sister,  as  he  had  seen  a  lady  crying 
in  our  orchard,  which  is  visible  from  the  road.  He  had  described  her 
to  his  son,  and  afterwards  to  us,  as  a  tall  lady  in  black,  and  a  bonnet 
with  a  long  veil,  crying,  with  a  handkerchief  held  up  to  her  face.  He 
did  not  know  my  sister  by  sight,  as  she  had  only  been  with  us  a  few 
days,  and  had  been  out  very  little,  but  he  knew  that  she  was  in 
mourning  for  her  baby  son.  My  sister  was  not  in  the  oi'chard  that  day 
at  all,  is  rather  short,  and  wore  no  veil. 

This  was  the  second  time  the  figure  had  been  mistaken  for  that  of 
a  real  person,  the  outlines  being  very  distinct,  and  the  whole  aj^pearance 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

317 

solid.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  gentleman,  who  is  a  friend  of  the 
landlord's,  now  tells  us  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  this  incident. 

The  same  evening  this  General  A.  came  over  to  our  house,  and  we 
all  took  up  various  stations  on  the  watch  for  the  figure,  which,  however, 
was  not  seen  by  anyone. 

That  night  my  bi'other-in-law  and  sister  distinctly  heard  footsteps 
going  first  up  the  stairs  and  then  down.    This  was  aljout  2  a.m. 

On  the  evening  of  August  11th  we  were  sitting  in  the  drawing- 
room,  with  the  gas  lit  but  the  shutters  not  shut,  the  light  outside 
getting  dusk,  my  brothers  and  a  friend  having  just  given  up  tennis, 
finding  it  too  dark  ;  my  eldest  sister,  Mrs.  K.,  and  myself  both  saw  the 
figure  on  the  balcony  outside,  looking  in  at  the  window.  She  stood 
there  some  minutes,  then  walked  to  the  end  and  Ijack  again,  after 
which  she  seemed  to  disappear.  She  soon  after  came  into  the  drawing- 
room,  when  I  saw  her,  but  my  sister  did  not. 

The  same  evening  my  sister  E.  saw  her  on  the  stairs  as  she  came 
out  of  a  room  on  the  upper  landing. 

The  following  evening,  August  12th,  while  coming  up  the  garden,  I 
walked  towards  the  orchard,  when  I  saw  the  figure  cross  the  orchard, 
go  along  the  cari-iage  drive  in  front  of  the  house,  and  in  at  the  open 
side  door,  across  the  hall  and  into  the  drawing-room,  I  following.  She 
crossed  the  drawing-room,  and  took  up  her  usual  position  behind  the 
couch  in  the  bow  window.  My  father  came  in  soon  after,  and  I  told 
him  she  was  there.  He  could  not  see  the  figure,  but  went  up  to  where 
I  showed  him  she  was.  She -  then  went  swiftly  round  behind  him, 
across  the  room,  out  of  the  door,  and  along  the  hall,  disappearing  as 
usual  near  the  garden  door,  we  both  following  her.  We  looked  out 
into  the  garden,  having  first  to  unlock  the  garden  door,  which  my 
father  had  locked  as  he  came  through,  but  saw  nothing  of  her. 

On  August  12th,  about  8  p.m.,  and  still  quite  light,  my  sister  E. 
was  singing  in  the  back  drawing-room.  I  heard  her  stop  abrujatly, 
come  out  into  the  hall,  and  call  me.  She  said  she  had  seen  the  figure 
in  the  drawing-room,  close  behind  her  as  she  sat  at  the  j^iano.  I  went 
back  into  the  room  with  her,  and  saw  the  figure  in  the  bow  window  in 
her  usual  jDlace.  I  spoke  to  her  several  times,  but  had  no  answer. 
She  stood  there  for  about  10  minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  then 
went  across  the  room  to  the  door,  and  along  the  passage,  disappearing 
in  the  same  place  by  the  garden  door. 

My  sister  M.  then  came  in  from  the  garden,  saying  she  had  seen  her 
coming  up  the  kitchen  steps  outside.  We  all  three  then  went  out  into 
the  garden,  when  Mrs.  K.  called  out  from  a  window  on  the  first 
storey  that  she  had  just  seen  her  pass  across  the  lawn  in  fi-ont,  and 
along  the  carriage  drive  towards  the  orchard.    This  evening,  then, 

318 

Miss  R.  C.  Morton. 

altogether  4  people  saw  her.  My  father  was  then  away,  and  nay 
youngest  brother  was  out. 

On  the  mornmg  of  August  14th  the  parlourmaid  saw  her  in  the 
dining-room,  about  8.30  a.m.,  having  gone  into  the  room  to  open  the 
shutters.  The  room  is  very  sunny,  and  even  with  all  the  shutters 
closed  it  is  quite  light,  the  shutters  not  fitting  well,  and  letting 
sunlight  through  the  cracks.  She  had  opened  one  shutter,  when,  on 
turning  round,  she  saw  the  figure  cross  the  room.  We  wei'e  all  on  the 
look-out  for  her  that  evening,  but  saw  nothing  ;  in  fact,  whenever  we 
had  made  arrangements  to  watch,  and  were  especially  expecting  her, 
we  never  saw  anything.  This  servant,  who  afterwaixls  married,  was 
interviewed  by  Mr.  Myers  at  her  own  house. 

On  August  16th  I  saw  the  figure  on  the  drawing-room  balcony, 
about  8.30  p.m.  She  did  not  afterwards  come  into  the  room,  as  on  the 
former  occasion.  On  looking  out  at  the  side  door,  nothing  could  be 
seen. 

The  gardener  said  that  he  had  seen  the  figure  on  the  balcony  that 
morning  early,  about  6  o'clock. 

On  August  19th,  3  days  after,  we  all  went  to  the  seaside,  and  were 
away  a  month,  leaving  three  servants  in  the  house. 

When  we  came  back  they  said  that  they  had  heard  footsteps  and 
noises  frequently,  but  as  the  stair-carpets  were  up  ])a.vt  of  the  time  and 
the  house  was  empty,  many  of  these  noises  were  doubtless  due  to 
natural  causes,  though  by  them  attributed  to  the  figui'e. 

The  cook  also  spoke  of  seeing  the  figure  in  the  garden,  standing  by 
a  stone  vase  on  the  lawn  behind  the  house. 

During  the  rest  of  that  year  and  the  following,  188.5,  the  apparition 
was  frequently  seen  through  each  year,  especially  during  July,  August, 
and  September.  In  these  months  the  three  deaths  took  place,  viz.  : — ■ 
Mr.  S.,  on  July  14th,  1876,  the  first  Mrs.  S.  in  August,  and  the  second 
Mrs.  S.  on  September  23  rd. 

The  apparitions  were  of  exactly  the  same  type,  seen  in  the  same 
places  and  by  the  same  people,  at  varying  intervals. 

The  footsteps  continued,  and  were  heard  by  several  visitors  and 
new  servants,  who  had  taken  the  places  of  those  who  had  left,  as  well 
as  by  myself,  4  sisters  and  brother  ;  in  all  by  aljout  20  people,  many 
of  them  not  having  previously  heard  of  the  api^arition  or  sounds. 

Other  sounds  were  also  heard  in  addition  which  seemed  gradually 
to  increase  in  intensity.  They  consisted  of  walking  up  and  down  on 
the  second-floor  landing,  of  bumps  against  the  doors  of  the  bedrooms, 
and  of  the  handles  of  the  doors  turning.  The  bumps  against  the 
bedroom  doors  were  so  marked  as  to  terrify  a  new  servant,  who  had 
heard  nothing  of  the  haunting,  into  the  belief  that  burglars  were 
breaking  into  her  room,  while  another  servant,  who  had  a  slight  attack 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

319 

of  facial  hemiplegia,  attributed  it  to  terror  caused  by  attempts  at 
door  worse  than  usual  one  night ;  the  doctor,  however,  thought  the 
attack  was  caused  by  cold  rather  than  fright. 

A  second  set  of  footsteps  was  also  heaxA,  heavy  and  irregular, 
constantly  recurring,  lasting  a  great  part  of  the  night,  often  3  or  4 
times  a  week.  On  the  first  floor  the  same  noises  are  heard,  especially 
in  the  front  right-band  room,  formerly  used  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S. 

Louder  sounds  were  also  heard  in  the  summer  of  1885,  heavy  thuds 
and  bumpings,  especially  on  the  upper  landing. 

These  facts  Avere  kept  quiet,  on  account  of  the  landlord,  who  feared 
they  might  depreciate  the  value  of  the  house,  and  any  new  servants 
were  not  told  of  them,  though  to  anyone  who  had  already  heard 
of  them  we  carefully  explained  the  harmless  nature  of  the  apparition. 
Some  left  us  on  account  of  the  noises,  and  Ave  never  could  induce  any 
of  them  to  go  out  of  their  rooms  after  they  had  once  gone  up  for  the 
night. 

During  this  year,  at  Mr.  Myers's  suggestion,  I  kept  a  photographic 
camera  constantly  ready  to  try  to  photograph  the  figure,  but  on  the  few 
occasions  I  was  able  to  do  so,  I  got  no  result ;  at  night,  usually  only  by 
candle-light,  a  long  exposure  Avould  be  necessary  for  so  daik  a  figure, 
and  this  I  could  not  obtain.  I  also  tried  to  communicate  with  the 
figure,  constantly  speaking  to  it  and  asking  it  to  make  signs,  if  not  able 
to  speak,  but  with  no  result.  I  also  tried  especially  to  touch  her,  but 
did  not  succeed.  On  cornering  her,  as  I  did  once  or  twice,  she 
disappeared. 

Some  time  in  the  summer  (.if  this  year  (1886),  Mrs.  Twining,  our 
regular  charwoman,  saw  the  figure,  Avhile  waiting  in  the  hall  at  the 
door  leading  to  the  kitchen  stairs,  for  her  payment.  Until  it  suddenly 
vanished  from  her  sight,  as  no  real  figure  could  have  done,  she  thought 
it  was  a  lady  visitor  who  had  mistaken  her  way.  Mr.  Myers  inter- 
viewed her  on  December  29th,  1889,  and  has  her  separate  account. 

On  one  night  in  July,  1886  (my  father  and  I  being  away  from 
home),  my  mother  and  her  maid  heard  a  loud  noise  in  an  unoccupied 
room  over  their  heads.  They  Avent  up,  but  seeing  nothing  and  the 
noise  ceasing,  they  went  back  to  my  mother's  room  on  the  first  storey. 
They  then  heard  loud  noises  from  the  morning-room  on  the  ground 
floor.  They  then  Avent  half  Avay  doAvnstairs,  Avhen  they  saAv  a  bright 
light  in  the  hall  beneath.  Being  alarmed,  they  Avent  up  to  my  sister 
E.,  who  then  came  down,  and  they  all  three  examined  the  doors, 
>vindoAvs,  &c.,  and  found  them  all  fastened  as  usual.  My  mother  and 
her  maid  then  went  to  bed.  My  sister  E.  went  up  to  her  room  on 
the  second  storey,  but  as  she  passed  the  room  where  my  tAvo 
sisters  L.  and  M.  were  sleeping,  they  opened  their  door  to  say  that 
they  had  heard  noises,  and  also  seen  Avhat  they  described  as  the  flams 

Miss  R.  G.  Morton. 

of  a  candle,  without  candle  or  hand  visible,  cross  the  room  diagonally 
from  corner  to  door.  Two  of  the  maids  ojaened  the  doors  of  their  two 
bedrooms,  and  said  that  they  had  also  heard  noises ;  they  all  5  stood  at 
their  doors  with  their  lighted  candles  for  some  little  time.  They  all 
heard  steps  walking  up  and  down  the  landing  between  them  ;  as  they 
passed  they  felt  a  sensation  which  they  described  as  "a  cold  wind," 
though  their  candles  were  not  blown  aliout.  They  saiv  nothing.  The 
steps  then  descended  the  stairs,  re-ascended,  again  descended,  and  did 
not  return. 

In  the  course  of  the  following  autumn  we  heaixl  traditions  of  earlier 
haunting,  though,  unfortunately,  in  no  case  were  we  able  to  get  a  first- 
hand account. 

1.  A  jol)  gardener,  who  had  worked  several  times  a  week  at  a 
house  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road,  was  reported  to  have  several 
times  seen  a  figure  in  our  garden  before  we  occupied  the  house.  This 
figure  he  knew  not  to  be  that  of  a  real  person.  On  tracing  him,  we 
found  he  had  died,  and  his  widow  had  left  the  town,  and  her  where- 
abouts was  not  known. 

2.  I  met  a  lady  at  a  friend's  house,  who  told  me  that,  when  living 
in  the  town  7  or  8  years  before,  she  had  frequently  lieen  told  that 
the  house  and  garden  were  haunted  by  Mrs.  S.  After  the  lapse  of 
time  she  could  not  remember  the  names  of  any  people  who  were 
reported  to  have  seen  anything,  and  we  could  not  trace  anyone. 

3.  The  apparition  was  mentioned  by  my  uncle  (since  dead)  at  a 
mess-table  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  when  an  officer  then  jaresent  said 
that  while  in  the  town  7  or  8  years  before,  he  had  been  told  that 
the  house  was  haunted,  and  remembered  looking  up  at  the  windows  with' 
interest  as  he  rode  past  to  see  if  he  could  see  anything  at  them.  ■ 

We  also  now  heard  from  a  carpenter  who  had  done  jobs  in  the 
house  in  Mrs.  S.'s  time,  that  Mrs.  S.  had  wished  to  possess  herself  of 
the  first  Mrs.  S.'s  jewels.  Her  husband  had  called  him  in  to  make  a' 
receptacle  under  the  Ijoards  in  the  morning-room  on  the  ground  floor, 
in  which  receptacle  he  placed  the  jewels,  and  then  had  it  nailed  down 
and  the  carpet  replaced.  The  carpenter  showed  us  the  jjlace.  My 
father  made  him  take  up  the  boards  ;  the  receptacle  was  there,  but 
empty. 

My  father  thought  that  there  might  be  something  hidden  near  the 
garden  door,  where  the  figure  usually  disappeared.  The  lioards  were 
taken  up,  and  nothing  was  there  but  the  original  shavings  and  dust. 

My  father  went  to  Bristol,  and  there  found  the  register  of  Mrs. 
S.'s  death,  which  had  taken  place  on  September  23rd,  1878,  from 
dipsomania  and  intervening  sub-gastritis.  He  called  on  the  doctor 
who  had  attended  her,  and  asked  him  if  there  had  been  any  disfigure- 
ment of  the  face  which  would  account  for  its  persistent  concealment. 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

321~ 

He  remembered  the  case,  and  said  that  there  had  not  been,  though  the 
face  had  become  more  full  and  round. 

During  1887  we  have  few  records ;  the  appearances  were  less 
frequent. 

On  Friday,  February  4th,  my  sister  E.  was  coming  downstairs  at 
about  7.30  p.m.,  when  she  saw  the  figure  moving  across  the  hall  from 
the  front  door  to  the  drawing-room,  she  herself  being  at  the  top  of  the 
first  flight  of  stairs.  The  gas  was  lighted  in  the  hall  at  the  time. 
In  an  interview  with  Mr.  Myers  on  Februaiy  14th,  she  told  him  that 
she  thought  this  was  about  the  10th  time  she  had  seen  the  figure.  She 
went  on  into  the  dining-room  and  told  my  father  ;  they  called  me  from 
the  morning-room,  and  we  all  three  went  into  the  drawing-room,  of 
which  the  door  was  shut.    Nothing  was  to  be  seen  or  heard. 

During  the  next  two  years,  1887  to  1889,  the  figure  was  very 
seldom  seen,  though  footsteps  were  heard;  the  louder  noises  had 
gradually  ceased. 

From  1889  to  the  present,  1892,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  figure  has 
not  been  seen  at  all ;  the  lighter  footsteps  lasted  a  little  longer,  but 
even  they  have  now  ceased. 

The  figure  became  much  less  substantial  on  its  later  appearances. 
Up  to  about  1886  it  was  so  solid  and  life-like  that  it  was  often  mistaken 
for  a  real  person.  It  gradually  became  less  distinct.  At  all  times  it 
intercepted  the  light ;  we  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  if  it  cast  a 
shadow.  I  should  mention  that  it  has  been  seen  through  window-glass, 
and  that  I  myself  wear  glasses  habitually,  though  none  of  the  other 
percipients  do  so.  The  upper  part  of  the  figure  always  left  a  more 
distinct  impression  than  the  lower,  but  this  may  partly  be  due  to  the 
fact  that  one  naturally  looks  at  people's  faces  before  their  feet. 

Proofs  of  Immateriality. 

1.  I  have  several  times  fastened  fine  strings  across  the  stairs  at 
various  heights  before  going  to  bed,  but  after  all  others  have  gone  up 
to  their  rooms.  These  were  fastened  in  the  following  way  :  I  made 
small  pellets  of  marine  glue,  into  which  I  inserted  the  ends  of  the  cord, 
then  stuck  one  pellet  lightly  against  the  wall  and  the  other  to  the 
banister,  the  string  being  thus  stretched  across  the  stairs.  They  were 
knocked  down  by  a  very  slight  touch,  and  yet  would  not  be  felt  by 
anyone  passing  up  or  down  the  stairs,  and  by  candle-light  could  not 
be  seen  from  below.  They  were  put  at  various  heights  from  the  ground, 
from  6  inches  to  the  height  of  the  banisters,  about  3  feet. 

I  have  twice  at  least  seen  the  figure  pass  through  the  cords,  leaving 
them  intact. 

2.  The  sudden  and  complete  disappearance  of  the  figure,  while  still 
in  full  view. 

822 

MiSs  R  C.  Morton., 

3.  The  impossibility  of  touching  the  figure.  I  have  repeatedly 
followed  it  into  a  corner,  when  it  disappeared,  and  have  tried  to 
suddenly  pounce  upon  it,  but  have  never  succeeded  in  touching  it  or 
getting  my  hand  up  to  it,  the  ligure  eluding  my  touch. 

4.  It  has  appeared  in  a  room  with  the  doors  shut. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  figure  was  not  called  up  by  a  desire  to  see  it, 
for  on  every  occasion  when  we  had  made  special  arrangements  to  watch 
for  it,  we  never  saw  it.  On  several  occasions  we  have  sat  up  at  night 
hoping  to  see  it,  but  in  vain, — my  father,  with  my  brother-in-law, 
myself  with  a  friend  3  or  4  times,  an  aunt  and  myself  twice,  and  my 
sisters  with  friends  more  than  once ;  but  on  none  of  these  occasions 
was  anything  seen.  Nor  have  the  appearances  been  seen  after  we  have 
been  talking  or  thinking  much  of  the  figure. 

The  figure  has  been  connected  with  the  second  Mrs.  S. ;  the  grounds 
for  which  are  : — 

1.  The  complete  history  of  the  house  is  known,  and  if  we  are  to 
connect  the  figure  with  any  of  the  previous  occupants,  she  is  the  only 
pei'son  who  in  any  way  resembled  the  figure. 

2.  The  widow's  garb  excludes  the  first  Mrs.  S.  .  - 

3.  Although  none  of  us  had  ever  seen  the  second  Mrs.  S.,  several 
people  who  had  known  her  identified  her  from  our  description.  On 
being  shown  a  photo-album  containing  a  number  of  portraits,  I  picked 
out  one  of  her  sister  as  being  most  like  that  of  the  figure,  and  was 
afterwards  told  that  the  sisters  were  much  alike. 

4.  Her  step-daughter  and  others  told  us  that  she  especially  used  the 
front  drawing-i'oom  in  which  she  continually  appeared,  and  that  her 
habitual  seat  was  on  a  couch  placed  in  a  similar  position  to  ours. 

5.  The  figure  is  undoubtedly  connected  with  the  house,  non^ 
of  the  j^ercipients  having  seen  it  anywhere  else,  nor  had  any  other 
lialluci'nation. 

Conduct  of  Animals  in  the  House. 
We  have  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  apparition  was  seen, 
by  two  dogs. 

1.  A  retriever  who  slept  in  the  kitchen  was  on  several  occasions 
found  hy  the  cook  in  a  state  of  terror,  when  she  went  into  the  kitchen 
in  the  morning — being  a  large  dog,  he  was  not  allowed  upstairs  ; 
he  was  also  seen  more  than  once  coming  from  the  orchard  thoroughly 
cowed  and  terrified.  He  was  kindly  treated  and  not  at  all  a  nervous 
dog. 

2.  A  small  skye-terrier,  whom  we  had  latei-,  was  allowed  about  the 
house  ;  he  usually  slept  on  my  bed,  and  undoubtedly  heard  the  foot- 
steps outside  the  door.  I  have  notes  of  one  occasion,  on  October  27th, 
1887.     The  dog  was  then  suffering  from  an  attack  of  rheumatism,  and 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

323 

very  disinclined  to  move,  but  on  hearing  the  footsteps  it  sprang  up 
and  sniffed  at  the  door. 

Twice  I  remember  seeing  this  dog  suddenly  run  up  to  the  mat  at 
the  foot  of  the  stairs  in  the  hall,  wagging  its  tail,  and  moving  its  back 
in  the  way  dogs  do  when  expecting  to  be  caressed.  It  jumped  up, 
fawning  as  it  would  do  if  a  person  had  been  standing  there,  but 
suddenly  slunk  away  with  its  tail  between  its  legs,  and  retreated, 
trembling,  under  a  sofa.  We  were  all  strongly  under  the  impressioii 
that  it  had  seen  the  tigui'e.  Its  action  was  peculiar,  and  was  much 
more  striking  to  an  onlooker  than  it  could  possibly  appear  from  a 
description. 

We  have  no  liorses,  and  the  cat,  as  a  rule,  lives  only  in  the  kitchen; 
we  have  never  noticed  anything  peculiar  about  her  behaviour. 

In  conclusion,  as  to  the  feelings  aroused  by  the  presence  of  the 
figure,  it  is  very  difficult  to  describe  them  ;  on  the  first  few  occasions, 
I  think  the  feeling  of  awe  at  something  unknown,  mixed  with  a  strong 
desire  to  know  more  about  it,  predominated.  Later,  when  I  was  able 
to  analyse  my  feelings  more  closely,  and  the  first  novelty  had  gone  off, 
I  felt  conscious  of  a  feeling  of  loss,  as  if  I  had  lost  power  to  the  figure. 

Most  of  the  other  percipieiits  speak  of  feeling  a  cold  wind,  but  I 
myself  have  not  experienced  this. 

In  writing  the  above  account,  my  memory  of  the  occurrences  has 
been  largely  assisted  by  reference  to  a  set  of  journal  letters  written  at 
the  time,  and  by  notes  of  interviews  held  by  Mr.  Myers  with  my  father 
and  various  members  of  our  family. 

R.  C.  Morton. 

A2wil  1st,  1892.         .  .  ■ 

See  also  separate  accounts  of  : — 
I.  Miss  Campbell. 
II.  Miss  E.  MoETOx. 

III.  My  brother,  W.  H.  C.  Mortox. 

IV.  Mrs.  K. 

V.  Mrs.  Browx. 
VI.  Mrs.  Twining, 

,  I- 

I  beg  to  certify  that  the  letters  from  which  Miss  Morton  has 
largely  quoted  were  wiitten  to  me  by  her  on  the  dates  mentioned,  and 
are  still  in  my  possession,  but  being  of  the  nature  of  a  diary,  contain 
so  many  allusions  to  private  matters  that  neither  Miss  Morton  nor  I 
at  present  see  our  way  to  making  them  over  to  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.  : 

Miss  Morton  wishes  me  to  state  that,  although  I  have  never  seen 
the  figure,  I  have  heard  the  footsteps,  and  that  they  certainly  are 

Miss  R.  G.  Morton. 

unlike  those  of  any  member  of  the  M.  family,  and  could  not  possibly 
be  attributed  to  them.     The  servants  are  exckided  by  the  fact  that, 
they  were  all  changed  during  the  time  that  the  footsteps  continued, 
and  were  unaltered  in  character. 

I  may  add  as  a  curious  circumstance  that  on  the  night  on  whick 
Miss  Morton  first  spoke  to  the  figure,  as  stated  in  her  account,  I  myself 
saw  her  telepathically.  I  was  in  my  room  (I  was  then  residing  in  the 
North  of  England,  quite  100  miles  away  from  Miss  Morton's  home), 
preparing  for  bed,  between  12  and  half-past,  when  I  seemed  suddenly 
to  be  standing  close  by  the  door  of  the  housemaid's  cupboard  (see  plan 

of  second  floor)  at  ,so  facing  the  short  flight  of  stairs  leading  to- 

the  top  landing.  Coming  down  these  stairs,  I  saw  the  figure,  exactly 
as  described,  and  about  two  steps  behind  Miss  Morton  herself,  with  a 
dressing-gown  thrown  loosely  round  her,  and  carrying  a  candle  in  her 
hand.  A  loud  noise  in  the  room  overhead  recalled  me  to  my  surround- 
ings,  and  although  I  tried  for  some  time  I  could  not  resume  the 
impression. 

The  black  dress,  dark  head-gear,  widow's  cuffs  and  handkerchief 
were  plainly  visible,  though  the  details  of  them  were  not  given  me  by 
Miss  Morton  till  afterwards,  when  I  asked  her  whether  she  had  not 
seen  the  apparition  on  that  night. 

(Signed)      Catherine  M.  Campbell. 
77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  W.  ' 
March  31s<,  1892. 

To  this  account  Miss  Morton  adds  : — "  Miss  Campbell  was  the 
friend  to  whom  I  first  spoke  of  the  apparition.  She  suggested  to  me 
that  when  next  I  saw  her  I  should  speak  ;  but  of  course  she  had  no 
idea  when  this  would  be.  She  wrote  an  account  to  me  the  next  day 
of  what  she  had  seen,  and  asked  me  if  I  had  not  seen  the  figure  that 
night ;  but  naturally  did  not  know  that  I  had  done  so,  until  she 
received  my  reply.  Miss  Campl:)ell  asks  me  to  say  that  this  is  the  only 
vision  she  has  had,  veridical  or  otherwise." 

II. 

(1)  The  first  time  I  saw  anything  unusual  in  the  house  was  in  July, 
1884.  Crossing  the  upper  landing,  after  having  come  to  bed  at  about 
11.15  p.m.,  I  had  an  impression  of  something  unusual,  which  caused 
me  to  start  back,  and  then  some  little  way  in  front  of  me  I  saw  a. 
figure  as  of  a  widow  in  black  preceding  me  down  the  stairs.  I  watched 
it  down  one  flight,  and  it  then  disappeared ;  of  course,  in  this  position 
it  had  its  back  to  me. 

(2)  The  next  time  I  saw  the  figure  was  one  evening  at  about 
8  o'clock,  in  July,  1885,  a  fine  evening  and  quite  light.    I  was  sitting 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

;325 

■alone  in  the  drawing-room  singing,  when  suddenly  I  felt  a  cold,  icy 
shiver,  and  I  saw  the  figure  bend  over  me,  as  if  to  turn  over  the  pages 
of  my  song.  I  called  my  sister,  who  was  in  another  room.  She  came 
at  once,  and  said  she  could  see  it  still  in  the  room,  though  I  then 
could  not. 

(3)  After  coming  up  to  bed,  one  night  in  July,  1886,  my  mother, 
myself,  and  one  of  the  maids  heard  noises  downstairs  in  the  hall.  On 
■going  down  to  investigate  the  cause,  we  saw  nothing,  and  the  noises 
ceased.  After  again  returning  to  the  top  landing,  the  "  noises " 
began  again.  It  sounded  as  if  people  were  throwing  heavy  articles, 
such  as  boots,  across  the  passage  and  down  the  stairs.  Door  handles 
seemed  to  rattle  too,  the  night  being  still  and  no  one  about.  Two 
maids  and  my  two  sisters  and  myself  listened  on  the  top  landing,  with 
lighted  candles  in  our  hands,  when  we  distinctly  heard  the  footsteps 
pass  and  repass  us  quite  close,  but  saw  nothing,  most  of  us  feeling 
what  we  term  the  "icy  shiver." 

(4)  I  had  just  gone  upstairs,  on  February  4th,  1887,  to  fetch  some 
prescrijjtions  for  my  father,  when  I  saw  the  same  figure  preceding  me 
down  the  stairs.  It  went  into  the  drawing-room,  which  was  then  not 
heing  used.  My  father  and  I  lighted  a  candle,  and  stayed  in  the  room 
for  some  little  time,  but  saw  nothing. 

The  figure  appears  to  me  as  that  of  a  tall  woman  in  old-fashioned 
widow's  weeds,  with  the  left  hand  partly  hidden  under  the  folds  of  her 
dress,  and  the  right  hand  with  a  handkeichief  placed  to  her  face, 
almost  obscuring  the  whole  of  the  face,  with  the  exception  of  the  upper 
part  of  the  forehead  and  hair.  The  hands  are  long  and  very  well 
shaped.  Edith  Morton. 

III. 

(1)  On  or  about  December  18th,  1883,  I  was  playing  with  a  school- 
friend  on  the  path  in  front  of  the  drawing-room  windows,  when  on 
looking  up  at  the  drawing-room  we  both  saw  a  tall  figure  in  black, 
holding  a  handkerchief  to  her  face  with  her  right  hand,  seated  at  the 
writing-table  in  the  window,  and  therefore  in  full  light.  We  came  in  at 
once,  but  on  goin^t  into  the  room  found  no  one  there,  and  on  makino- 
inquiries  found  that  no  stranger  had  been  in  the  house  that  afternoon. 
As  far  as  I  can  remember,  this  was  about  3.15  in  the  afternoon.  At 
all  events,  it  was  full  daylight  at  the  time.  .  ■ 

Since  then  I  have  seen  the  figure  twice. 

(2)  Once  when  coming  out  of  the  drawing-room,  about  half-past 
eight  (just  after  the  gas  had  been  lit  throughout  the  house),  I  saw  the 
figure  going  down  the  passage  towards  the  side  door,  thus  having  her 
back  to  me.  It  finally  disappeared  in  the  direction  of  the  kitchen, 
stairs. 

326  .       Hiss  R.  G.  Morton. 

(3)  The  other  time,  on  coming  out  of  a  room  at  the  end  of  a  passage 
on  the  first  landing,  I  saw  it  going  along  the  passage  towards  the  stair- 
case, but  it  turned  back  and  finally  disappeared  through  the  door  of 
another  bedroom.  This  was  about  6  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  gas 
not  yet  being  lit,  and  so  the  light  was  somewhat  dim. 

(4)  Another  time  I  was  in  the  morning-room,  and  had  a  momen- 
tary glimpse  of  the  figure,  but  not  long  enough  to  be  absolutely  certain 
of  having  seen  it.  This  was  in  the  evening,  the  gas  having  been  lit 
both  in  the  room  and  in  the  passage  outside. 

Besides  these  appearances  I  have  occasionally  heard  noises  like  a. 
person  walking  about  with  soft  slippers,  but  on  looking  out  I  have  seen 
nothing,  and  sometimes  the  noises  have  stopped,  but  at  other  times, 
have  gone  on  without  interruption. 

Previously  to  seeing  the  a^jpearances  (1)  and  (2)  I  had  heard 
nothing  about  anything  unusual  being  seen  in  the  house. 

W.  H.  C.  Morton. 

December  3Ls^,  1891. 

Whilst  staying  at  ,  in  the  autumn  of  1883,  I  Avas  coming  dowrt 

the  stairs,  abovit  five  in  the  afternoon,  when  I  saw  a  tall  figure  in 
black  cross  the  hall,  push  open  the  drawing-room  door,  and  go  in. 
At  the  time  I  thought  she  was  a  Sister  of  Mercy,  from  her  long  veil, 
the  figure  being  entirely  substantial,  and  like  that  of  a  real  person, 
although  on  others  making  inquiries,  no  one  had  called. 

This,  I  may  mention,  was  the  year  before  I  heard  of  any  appear- 
ance being  known  of  in  the  house.  At  another  time  I  thought  I  saw 
her  in  the  summer  of  1884  looking  in  at  the  drawing-room  Avindow 
from  outside.  This  time  the  figure  was  not  so  distinct,  the  gas  being 
lit  in  the  room,  while  it  was  semi-dark  outside.  Soon  after  my  sister, 
who  had  also  seen  her,  saw  her  enter  the  room  ;  but  she  was  not  then 
visible  to  me. 

I  saw  the  figure  once  more  in  the  spare  room  at  night,  having  been 
awakened,  as  I  constantly  was,  by  footsteps  in  the  room.  I  often 
heard  footsteps  at  night  up  and  downstairs,  like  a  person  wearing  flat 
list  or  cloth  slippers,  and  I  have  heard  the  swish  of  woollen  drapery, 
and  on  several  (jccasions  the  sound  of  heavy  bodies  on  the  landings  and 
against  the  doors,  and  overhead  the  handles  of  doors  turned,  the- 
sound  of  something  heavy  being  dragged  overhead,  on  the  top  storey. 
My  husband  and  nurse  have  heard  the  same. 

I  myself  was  much  terrified  at  the  sounds. 

F.  M.  K. 

■    March  29th,  1892. 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House.  327 

Y.  '  • 

[I  called,  February  15th,  1890,  on  Mrs.  Brown,  10,  Mitre-street,  St. 
Luke's,  C,  and  heard  from  her  the  following  account,  which  I  wrote 
down  the  same  evening  and  took  to  her  to-day,  February  16th,  when 
she  read,  corrected,  and  signed  it. — F.W.H.M.] 

About  7  years  ago  I  went  as  parlourmaid  to  .    At  that  time 

nothing  had  been  said  about  the  ghost,  although  I  believe  that  Miss 
Rose  (the  eldest  Miss  M.)  had  seen  it  for  about  a  year. 

I  think  that  the  first  person  besides  Miss  Rose  who  saw  it  was 
Master  Willy.  He  was  then  about  8  or  9  years  old,  and  was  playing 
in  the  garden  with  another  young  gentleman,  when  they  both  looked 
in  through  the  drawing-room  window,  and  saw  a  widow  in  the  room. 
They  ran  up  to  their  mother's  room ; — she  was  an  invalid  and  seldom 
left  her  bed, — and  told  her  what  they  had  seen,  but  Miss  Rose,  who 
was  there,  laughed  it  off. 

The  next  time  that  it  was  seen  was  hj  Mrs.  K.,  the  married 
sister,  who  used  to  come  and  stay  a  month  or  so  in  the  house  every 
year.  She  had  been  there  three  days  when  she  said  that  she  had  seen 
a  widow  in  the  drawing-room.  Then  Master  Willy  called  out  that  that 
must  have  been  the  same  woman  whom  he  had  seen ;  and  after  that 
Miss  Rose  told  that  she  had  been  in  the  hal)it  of  seeing  the  figure. 

So  all  those  in  the  house  knew ;  but  when  a  new  servant  came  we 
used  to  take  care  not  to  tell  her,  because  it  was  hard  to  get  a  girl 
to  stay. 

Some  months  after  the  thing  became  known  I  was  alone  in  the 
house  one  evening  with  Lizzie,  a  new  cook,  (I  do  not  know  her  address 
now),  and  we  were  standing  at  the  door  of  the  servants'  hall,  on  the 
basement  floor.  The  passage  was  lit  with  gas.  Lizzie  had  heard 
nothing  of  the  ghost,  I  am  sure.  Suddenly  we  both  saw  a  dark 
shadowy  figure,  dressed  in  black,  and  making  no  noise,  glide  past  us 
along  the  passage  and  disappear  round  a  corner.  Neither  of  us  spoke 
as  it  passed  ;  but  directly  aftei'  we  looked  at  each  other,  and  each  saw 
that  the  other  had  seen  it,  and  we  mentioned  it  to  each  other.  We 
had  seen  just  the  same  thing.  I  have  myself  never  seen  any  white 
about  the  figure ;  but  I  know  that  others  have  seen  her  hold  a 
handkerchief  up  to  her  face.  The  figure  has  never  looked  to  me  quite 
solid ;  but  it  has  always  vanished  too  quickly  for  me  to  look  closely 
at  it. 

The  next  time  that  I  saw  it  was  in  the  drawing-room,  when  I  went 
in  to  light  the  gas  at  dusk  on  a  summer's  evening.  I  saw  a  dark  figure 
walk  round  the  ottoman  and  disappear.  I  was  not  much  frightened. 
The  next  time  I  saw  no  figure,  but  I  was  more  frightened  than  any 
other  time.  I  was  going  off  next  day  on  a  holiday,  and  I  sat  up  late 
in  my  room  with  some  sewing.     My  room  was  between  Miss  Morton's 

328 

Miss  R.  C,  Morton. 

and  the  schoolroom,  on  the  top  floor,  where  the  sounds  were  apt  to  be 
Avorst.  I  heard  a  loud  noise  and  looking  up  I  saw  the  handle  of  my 
door  twisted  round,  as  if  someone  were  trying  to  come  in.  The  door 
Avas  locked,  and  this  Avas  not  a  mere  slip  of  the  handle.  The  handle 
was  quite  firm  and  never  slipped  of  itself.  I  knew  that  no  one  Avas 
up  or  about  and  I  Avas  motionless  Avith  fear.  I  could  scarcely  go  to  bed. 
Next  morning  when  I  looked  at  myself  in  the  glass  I  saw  that  one 
side  of  my  face  Avas  twisted  by  a  slight  stroke.  I  had  been  perfectly 
well  the  night  before,  and  I  could  not  believe  that  such  a  thing- 
had  happened.  I  thought  it  must  be  my  fancy.  But  when  I  Avent 
downstairs  the  other  serA^ants  saw  it.  I  went  for  my  holiday,  Saturday 
to  Wednesday,  and  Avhen  I  got  back  I  went  at  once  to  Dr.  F.,  and  he 
apj^lied  blisters  to  my  face  and  it  gradually  got  straight  again.  He 
said  that  the  tAvisted  face  might  have  been  caused  by  a  draught  as 
well  as  l^y  a  fright — l)ut  I  had  been  in  no  draught.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  it  Avas  the  fright  ;  and  for  some  time  afterAvards  my  hand  Avas  very 
shaky  and  my  nerves  upset.  But  I  went  on  Avith  my  Avork  as  usual,  as 
I  kneAv  tlie  thing  could  not  really  hurt  me. 

I  saw  it  twice  more,  both  times  in  the  drawing-room.  Once  it  Avas 
as  I  Avas  lighting  the  gas,  as  I  had  seen  it  before.  The  other  time  Avas 
Avhen  I  entered  the  room  in  the  morning  and  had  taken  down  one 
shutter.  I  then  saAv  it  close  by  me,  and  Avas  frightened,  and  called 
another  servant  to  come  to  me.  I  stayed  on  in  the  place  and  Avas 
married  from  thence.  One  housemaid  while  I  was  there  saw  the  figure, 
she  said,  on  the  I'oad  just  outside  the  gates.  She  said  that  she  saw 
her  face. 

We  often  heard  someone  running  doAvn  the  steps  from  the  approach 
to  the  back  door,  and  Avent  to  oi^en  the  back  door,  and  found  no 
one  there. 

I  often  heard  noises  on  the  attic  landing  near  my  room — scuffling 
and  knocking.  Sometimes  I  Avoukl  hear  Miss  Rose  open  her  door  and 
go  downstairs.  I  knoAv  now  that  she  Avas  following  the  ghost.  But  I 
beard  her  before  I  kncAV  about  the  ghost  at  all. 

M.  E.  Brown. 

[  December  29th,  1889,  5  p.m. 

[I  haA^e  just  called  on  Mrs.  Twining,  charwoman,  Chapel-place,  Great 
NorAvood-street.  Mrs.  TAvining  is  a  sensible,  trustworthy  person,  Avho 
has  Avorked  for  the  Mortons  for  8  or  9  years.  She  is  illiterate,  and  I 
dispensed  with  her  signature,  but  made  notes  during  my  visit  from 
which  this  account  is  taken. — F.W.H.M.] 

"  Aljout  3  years  ago,  one  summer  evening  between  eight  and  nine, 
Avhen  it  Avas  twilight,  I  had  Ijeen  at  Avork  at  the  Mortons  and  Avas 

Recorfl  of  a  Haunted  House. 

329 

waiting  for  my  pay.  I  stood  at  the  top  of  the  kitchen  stairs,  where 
there  is  a  door  into  the  garden  behind  the  house.  I  saw  a  lady  pass 
by,  rather  tall,  in  black  silk,  with  white  collar  and  culfs,  a  handkei'chief 
in  her  hand,  and  a  widow's  fall.  I  had  heard  about  the  ghost,  but  it 
never  struck  me  that  this  figure  could  be  a  ghost — it  looked  so  like  an 
ordiiiary  person.  I  thought  that  someone  had  come  to  call  and  missed 
her  way  to  the  door.  The  family  were  at  tea  and  I  was  merely 
waiting,  so  out  of  curiosity  I  followed  the  lady  round  the  house.  Just 
outside  the  morning-room  window  she  suddenly  disappeared.  I  was 
quite  near  her ;  it  was  quite  impossible  that  a  real  person  could  have 
got  away. 

"  I  went  into  the  house  and  began  telling  the  housemaid  that  I  had 
seen  the  ghost.  She  stopped  me, — pointing  to  the  parlourmaid,  a  new 
one,  whom  they  were  anxious  to  keep  in  ignorance  of  the  ghost — as  the 
maids  often  left  on  account  of  it.  The  pai'lourmaid  had  seen  from 
one  of  the  windows  the  same  figure,  though  she  had  not  known  that  it 
was  the  ghost.   .1  believe  that  she  left  at  the  jnonth's  end. 

"  I  was  there  when  a  former  parlourmaid,  now  Mrs.  Brown,  got  the 
■  fright  which  caused  a  stroke  so  that  hei-  face  was  twisted.  I  believe 
;  that  she  saw  the  figure  ii:^  her  bedroom.  She  had  seen  it  several  times 
before.  She-  went  away  by  the  doctor's  orders  and  then  came  back  and 
;  married  from  the  house,.  The  Morton  family  are  very  good,  kind 
■people."  j  i  i 

Z 

330 

Miss  M.  C.  Morton. 

Garden  terrace 

Bow  window 

Balcony 

02 

IT 

Back  Drawing-room  p 

ront 

Drawing-room 

Grand  piano 

Stairs 

I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I 

I  111 

c 

Morning-room 

Hall 

door 

B 

Dining-room 

Plan  of  Ground  Flooe. 

The  two  drawing-rooms  are  separated  by  a  wide  archway  formerly  filled  by  folding 
dooTs. 

1.  Position  of  music  stool,  while  sitting  on  which  E.  M.  saw  figure  behind  her. 
12/7/84. 

2.  Sofa  on  which  figure  sat,  dot  marking  position  behind,  which  it  took  up  whea 
sofa  was  occupied. 

*  Marks  spot  where  figure  usually  disappeared.  ^ 
II  Marks  position  of  mat. 

  Marks  usual  track  of  figure  when  followed  downstairs,  into  drawing-room, 

along  passage  to  garden  door,  whei-e  it  disaiipeared. 
X  Window  looking  011  to  orchard. 
TT  Garden  door  by  which  figure  disajipeared. 
->-  Shows  direction  in  which  doors  open. 

D  Small  lobby  from  which  stairs  go  down  to  basement,  and  a  servants'  staircase 
leads  up  to  half-landing  between  ground  and  first  floors. 

Record  of  a  Haunted  House. 

331 

Bow  window 

l"'ootsteps  heard  in  this  room 
by  Mrs.  M. 

Bedroom  occupied  by  Mrs.  M. 

Bedroom 

Bedroom  occupied  by  Mrs. 
M.  's  maid  and  another 
servant 

](3) 
](2)' 

Stairs  to  Second  Floor. 

o  y 

Box-room 

(1) 

Eigure  seen  in  this  room  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  K. 

Bedroom — the  one  occupied 
by  Mr.  and  second  Mrs,  S. 

Bedroom — the  one  occupied 
by  Mr.  and  first  Mrs.  S. 

Plan  of  Fiest  Flooe. 

*  Half-landing  between  ground  floor  and  first  floor. 

(1)  Door  opening  from  servants'  staircase. 

(2)  Stairs  from  ground  floor. 

(3)  Stairs  up  to  first  floor. 

833  /:  ■    Miss  B.  G.  Morton. 

House- 
maid's 
Cup- 
board 

Bedroom  occupied  by  L.  and 
M.  M.,  in  which  lights  were 
seen 

[] 

Bath- 
room 

Schoolroom,  and  afterwards 
bedroom,  in  which  loud 
sounds  were  heard 

Nursery  in  time  of  Mrs.  S.  (-') 

02 

Bedroom  occujsied 
by  E.  M, 

Cook's  bedroom 

Bedroom  occupied  by  Miss  M. 

Nursery  in  time  of  Mrs.  S.  {^) 
and  also  (-) 

'.  Pi,AN  OF  Second  Floor. 

■*  Half-landing  between  first  and  second  floors. 

X  Marks  position  of  figure  when  first  seen  by  Miss  M. 

  Marks  course  from  Miss  M.'s  bedroom  door  to  head  of  stairs,  where 

figure  usually  paused,  looking  towards  bath-room  door,  and  then  continued  straight 
down  the  stairs,  not  stopping  on  the  first  floor,  and  on  the  ground  floor  pursuing 
the  course  marked. 

The  Subliminal  Gonsciousness. 

333 

:■  :  ■  THE  SUBLIMINAL  CONSCIOUSNESS. 

■  "  .      By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.  - 

Chapter  III.  .  • 

•  •  .  •      The  Mechanism  of  Genius. 

Gavaros  icrriv  oxocra  iyepBivres  6piojj.€v,  oKoaa  be  evSovres,  vttvos. 

Heraclitus.  ■ 

In  the  present  series  of  papers  I  am  endeavouring .  to  trace  the' 
manifestations,  and  to  discriminate  the  powers,  of  those  subjacent  strata 
of  our  being  which,  although  they  possess,  (as  I  claim,)  a  conscious  in- 
telligence of  their  own,  nevertheless  do  not  habitually  rise  above  the 
threshold  of  our  ordinary  waking  consciousness.  I  believe  that  an- 
uprush  of  subliminal  faculty  may  be  detected  at  many  points  ;  and' 
moreover  that  subliminal  perception,  memory,  power  over  the  organism, 
— hyperfBsthesia,  hypermnesia,  and  what  we  may  term  hyperboulia, — 
extend  over  a  range  wider  than  that  which  is  covered  by  the  supra- 
liminal consciousness  with  which  we  identify  ourselves  in  ordinary 
speech. 

For  the  sake  of  clearness,  and  of  course  without  pretending  to  logical 
accuracy,  I  have  arranged  these  subliminal  phenomena  in  three  groups 
according  to  the  position  which  they  occupy  with  reference  to  a 
figurative  spectrim  of  consciousness, — which  is  conceived  as  including, 
but  transcending,  the  range  of  perceptivity  and  of  reactive  capacity 
which  is  covered  by  our  ordinary  supraliminal  life. 

Some  of  these  hidden  powers,  I  have  said,  lie  below  the  physiological 
limit — call  it  the  red  end — of  the  ordinary  conscious  spectrum.  They 
involve,  that  is  to  say,  an  action  upon  the  physical  organism  profounder 
than  our  waking  will  can  exert.  Of  these  powers,  especially  as  revealed 
by  hypnotic  suggestion,  I  have  spoken  in  the  last  chapter.  And  the 
hy2Krhoulia  thus  shown, — it  is  well  to  remember, — forms  the  exact 
contrast  to  the  aboulia,  or  defect  of  will-power  over  the  organism,  which 
is  characteristic  of  the  supraliminal  life  of  the  hysterical  subject. 

It  is  however  beyond  the  other — call  it  the  violet — end  of  our 
imaginary  spectrum  that  these  signs  of  hidden  capacity  are  mainly  tO' 
be  sought.  The  bright  lines  corresponding  to  telepathy  and  clairvoy- 
ance lie  above  the  psychological  limit  of  the  range  of  ordinary  con- 
sciousness. They  involve,  that  is  to  say,  not  so  much  an  increased 
power  of  the  mind  over  the  body  as  an  increased  power  of  one  mind 

334 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

over  another  mind  ;  or  a  perceptivity  independent  of  such  corporeal 
conditions  as  limit  the  perception  which  we  already  know.  It  is  from 
this  ultra-violet  tract  of  our  spectrum  that  the  themes  of  our  future  dis- 
cussion Avill  for  the  most  part  be  drawn. 

But  there  remains,  of  course,  a  region  of  perception  not  included  in 
either  of  these  two  classes, — the  region,  namely,  over  which  the  ordinary 
red  to  violet  spectrum  itself  extends.  If  subliminal  action  be  traceable 
beyond  each  end  of  that  spectrum,  should  it  not  be  traceable  also  along 
the  range  of  that  spectrum  itself  ?  I  claim  that  it  is  so  traceable  ;  and 
in  this  chapter  I  shall  try  to  indicate  some  ways  in  which  the  working 
of  our  ordinary,  familiar  faculties  is  reinforced  by  impulses  or  messages 
from  the  consciousness  which  exists  below. 

Our  difficulty  here  will  be  of  a  kind  somewhat  different  from  that 
■which  we  encounter  in  the  two  other  classes.  In  the  ultra-violet  tract,  for 
instance,  our  difficulty  lies  in  proving  that  telepathy  is  a  fact  in  nature. 
If  such  a  power  exist  at  all,  few  will  deny  that  its  characteristic  bright 
line  lies  far  above  our  ordinary  psychological  limit.  But  touch,  hearing, 
sight, — these  are  already  appropriated  as  the  functions  of  the  waking 
self.  How  are  we  to  prove  that  any  exercise  of  these  powers,  though 
unusual  in  degree,  is  different  in  kind  from  our  familiar  operations  ?  If 
it  be  different,  is  it  not  a  merely  accidental,  or  even  morbid,  extension 
of  ordinary  capacity  %  In  answer  to  this  question  I  shall  tiy  to  show 
that  in  the  domain  of  each  sense  in  turn  there  are  "flashes  of  inspira- 
tion," to  use  the  popular  term,  which  surpass  the  products  of  conscious 
effort  not  only  in  sensory  intensity  but  in  intelligent  co-ordination,  and 
seem  to  have  been  elaborated  below  the  threshold  by  an  active  and 
reminiscent  mind.  i 

Now  these  "flashes  of  inspiration," — these  fugitive  bright  lines 
referable  to  our  subliminal  strata, — will  on  this  view  be  likely  to  be  more 
conspicuous  when  the  glare  of  the  supraliminal  spectrum  is  deadened 
by  sleep  or  trance.  That  is  to  say,  we  shall  expect  that  traces  of 
hypertesthesia  or  hypermnesia  will  be  most  observable  in  the  hypnotic 
trance,  next  in  dreams,  and  least  conspicuous  in  ordinary  waking  life. 
And  to  this  expectation  the  facts  do  on  the  whole  correspond.  It  will 
be  generally  admitted,  in  the  first  place,  that  liyperiEsthesiEe  of  all  senses 
are  wont  to  occur  in  the  hyi^notic  trance.  This  fact,  I  say,  will  not  be 
denied ;  but  in  most  text-books  its  meaning  has  Ijeen  greatly  obscured 
by  a  misdescription  depending  on  one-sided  theory.  Thus  the  phrase 
"  cramp  of  attention  "  is  often  employed,  and  the  subject  is  supposed 
to  be  alive  to  every  whisper  of  his  hypnotiser's  simply  from  the  fact  that 
his  whole  mind  is  directed  in  that  chamiel,  and  that  he  observes  nothing 
else.  And  this  is  true  enough  in  many  of  the  simpler  cases  ; — as  in  the 
platform-experiments,  where  the  suggested  rapport  which  keeps  the 
subject's  gaze  fixed  in  fascination  upon  the  hypnotiser's  eye  may  well 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

335 

be  described  as  cramp  of  attention.  But  hardly  any  phrase  can  be  less 
fitting  to  describe  the  kind  of  perceptivity  on  the  subject's  part  against 
Avhich  it  is  most  needful  to  guard,  if,  for  instance,  we  are  trying  an 
experiment  from  which  all  possibilities  of  external  suggestion  have  to  be 
excluded.  It  is  not  the  absorbed  and  staring  platform-subject  who  is 
most  likely  to  notice  the  little  signs  which  are  not  meant  for  him  to 
see ; — rather  it  is  the  lethargic  slumberer,  who  does  not  wake  when 
you  shout  at  him,  nor  stir  when  you  stick  pins  into  him, — yet  who 
all  the  while  may  be  treasuring  up  the  most  casual  words  of  the 
hypnotiser,  ready  to  act  upon  them, — in  a  spirit  of  no  dishonesty,  but 
of  sheer  obedience, — when  the  time  comes  to  exhibit  the  phenomena 
which  he  has  thus  learnt  that  his  physician  expects.  This  capacity  has 
often  been  ignored  even  by  experienced  hypnotisers' ;  whose  error  fol- 
lowed almost  inevitably  from  their  conception  of  hypnotism  as  a  mere 
morbid  dissociation  of  ordinary  faculties, — a  narrowing  of  the  field  of 
attention.  Attention  was  therefore  supposed  to  be  contracted  in 
lethargy  into  a  single  point, — the  mere  readiness  to  wake  up  again  when 
A  given  stimulus  was  applied.  From  the  point  of  view  here  taken,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  because  the  supra- 
liminal self  is  stilled  into  abeyance, — because  every  superficial  token 
of  attention  or  perception  has  disappeared, — there  need  be  any  corre- 
sponding stagnation  in  the  deeps  below.  Any  sense  whose  channel  is 
still  left  open  may  continue  at  work,  undemonstratively  indeed,  but 
perhaps  more  efiectively  than  ever. 

Any  sense,  I  say,  whose  channel  is  open  ; — for  I  do  not  wish  here 
to  enter  on  the  question  of  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  avenues  of  know- 
ledge. These  I  for  the  present  waive  ; — but  no  one  familiar  with  the 
phenomena  will  deny  that,  if  these  powers  are  waived,  much  hyper- 
sesthesia  at  least  will  remain  to  be  taken  account  of.  In  point  of  fact, 
believers  in  telepathy  have  often  had  to  argue  against  strangely 
exaggerated  estimates  of  what  hypertesthesia  could  do.  For  example,  I 
remember  that  when  the  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  in  Paris 
were  discussing  the  action  a  distance  exerted  by  Dr.  Gibert  upon 
Madame  B.  at  Havre,  one  distinguished  physician.  Dr.  Ruault,  main- 
tained that  Madame  B.,  at  a  distance  of  nearly  half  a  mile  from  Dr. 
Gribert's  house,  had  perceived  by  auditory  hyperesthesia  the  change  iii 
the  condition  of  Dr.  Gibert's  arteries,  caused  by  his  concentrating  him- 
self upon  the  act  of  tvilling, — and  had  obeyed  that  signal  and  come  to 
him, — as  a  war-horse  follows  the  trumpet-call.  He  who  believes  in  this 
rather  than  in  telepathy  has  chosen,  I  think,  his  horn  of  the  dilemma 
amiss  ;  but  I  quote  the  incident  to  show  to  what  extent  the  school 

■^When  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  first  visited  the  Salpetriore,  in  1885,  Dr.  A. 
Voisin  was,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  sole  physician  there  who  thought  it  needful  to  guard, 
against  impressions  thus  received  in  the  lethargic  state. 

836' 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

"which  is  now  conservative,  as  against  our  telepathic  innovations,  is 
"willing  to  push  its  belief  in  the  hypnotic  extension  of  ordinary  sensory 
powers.  And  I  will  not  occupy  further  space  by  dwelling  on  the 
numberless  instances  in  which  we  shall  agree  with  our  sometime 
opponents  in  considering  that  hypnotic  hypersesthesia  has  in  fact  been ' 
at  work.  I  shall  take  such  hyperassthesia  of  sight,  hearing,  smell, 
touch,  sensitiveness  to  heat  and  cold,  etc.,  as  an  admitted  thing  ;  and 
I  shall  merely  point  out  that  we  have  here  precisely  the  evidence  of 
which  my  thesis  of  this  chapter  stands  in  need ; — evidence,  namely, 
that  within  the  range  of  the  ordinary  spectrum, — among  the  senses 
■which  we  familiarly  know, — a  subliminal  perceptivity  exists  which  sur-' 
passes  the  supraliminal  ; — which  kindles  the  bright  lines  at  least  of  our 
habitual  spectrum  into  a  more  than  common  glow. 

Were  my  object  merely  to  win  assent  to  a  proposition,  I  could 
hardly  do  better  than  dwell  at  length  on  these  hypnotic  phenomena, 
and  try  to  show  in  detail  how  little  the  increased  powers  can  be 
deduced  from  any  mere  narrowing  of  the  channel  or  concentration  of 
the  output  of  known  waking  capacity.  My  task,  howevei',  in  these 
papers  is  one  of  exploration  rather  than  of  exposition.  I  wish  rather 
to  discuss  in  instructive  connection  all  the  phenomena  which  I  can  link 
together  than  to  ari"ange  them  in  a  rigid  series.  And  I  pass  on  to  the 
inquiry, — (from  my  special  standpoint  a  less  promising  one), — whether 
any  of  these  uprushes  of  subliminal  capacity,  within  the  limits  of  our 
ordinary  spectrum,  ai'e  noticeable  apart  from  dream  or  trance,  and  in 
ordinary  waking  hours. 

It  so  happens,  as  we  shall  presently  observe,  that  one  special  group 
of  these  uprushes  of  subliminal  capacity, — those,  namely,  which  per- 
form the  marvels  which  make  an  "  arithmetical  prodigy," — have 
attracted  enough  attention  to  furnish  us  with  several  pertinent  ex- 
amples of  our  present  theory.  But  for  sjaecimens  of  some  other  kinds 
of  these  uprushes  we  must  depend  for  the  present  upon  mere  chance- 
records  ; — since  no  one  as  yet,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  has  thought 
such  experiences  worth  collecting. 

Before  we  proceed  to  the  highly-specialised  senses  of  hearing  and 
sight,  let  us  see  whether  we  can  find  traces  of  subliminal  intensification 
of  those  perceptions  of  a  less  specialised  kind  which  underlie  our  more 
elaborate  modes  of  cognising  the  world  around  us.  The  sense  of  the 
efflux  of  time,  and  the  sense  of  loeight,  or  of  muscular  resistance,  are 
amongst  the  profoundest  elements  in  our  organic  being.  And  the  sense 
of  time  is  indicated  in  several  ways  as  a  largely  subliminal  faculty. 
There  is  much  evidence  to  show  that  it  is  often  more  exact  in  men 
sleeping  than  in  men  awake,  and  in  men  hypnotised  than  in  men 
sleeping.  The  records  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  are  full  of  pre- 
dictions made  by  the  subject  as  to  his  own  case,  and  accomplished, 

Tlte  SiMiminal  Consciousness. 

337 

presumably  by  self-suggestion,  but  without  help  from  clocks,  at  the 
precise  minute  foretold.  Or  this  hidden  knowledge  may  take  shajDe  in 
the  imagery  of  dream,  as  in  a  case  published  by  Professor  Royce,  of 
Harvard,'  where  his  correspondent  describes  "  a  dream  in  which  I  saw 
an  enormous  flaming  clock-dial  with  the  hands  standing  at  2.20. 
Awaking  immediately,  I  struck  a  match,  and  upon  looking  at  my  watch 
found  it  was  a  few  seconds  past  2.20." 

I  should,  however,  have  been  puzzled  to  produce  any  clear  example 
of  the  subliminal  time-sense  as  manifesting  itself  in  a  sane  and  waking- 
person  had  not  a  Mr.  Higton  sent  to  me  some  years  ago  the  following- 
record  of  personal  experiences  on  which  he  desired  my  opinion.  I  made 
his  acquaintance,  and  found  him  a  sensible,  serious  witness  ;  but  I  did 
not  then  perceive  the  full  significance  of  his  communication,  and  I  haA'e, 
unfortunately,  lost  sight  of  him. 

P.  138. 

Mr.  W.  Higton,  27,  St.  Leonard-street,  Pimlico,  S.W.,  sends  me, 
September,  1889,  the  following  experiences — abbreviated  from  a  long  paper 
which  I  have  returned  to  him. 

1.  "It  is  now  some  three  years  since  the  exact  time  of  day  jiresented  itself 
to  my  mind  independently  of  any  internal  knowledge  or  of  any  external 
physical  appearances  "  (as  of  clock,  &c.). 

Mr.  Higton  had  no  idea  of  the  exact  time,  when  "  within  a  few  yards  of 
Tattersall's  there  instantaneously  appeared  before  me  the  face  of  a  clock  of 
an  immense  size.  Every  figure  was  perfectly  visible  ;  and  the  huge  black 
hands  distinctly  indicated  11.25  ;  while  at  the  same  moment  or,  correctly 
speaking,  a  fraction  of  a  second  later,  I  felt  convinced  and  absolutely  cer- 
tain that  the  time  indicated  on  the  dial  was  the  right  time  "  (as  in  fact  it  was 
by  his  watch).  "  The  phenomenon  has  recurred  during  the  past  3  years  at 
least  5  and,  I  think,  6  times  ;  the  first  3  occurring  at  intervals  of  about  3 
anonths,  and  the  last  2  or  3  being  divided  by  a  considerably  longer  interval." 

2.  On  another  occasion  Mr.  Higton  was  walking  through  a  field  as  to 
which  a  legend  ran  that  a  young  lady  was  murdered  there,  while  she  held  a 
sprig  of  thyme,  and  that  anyone  passing  througli  the  field  and  not  thinking 
of  the  murder  would  smell  thyme.  Mr.  Higton  paid  no  credit  to  this  legend  j 
— often  walked  through  the  field,  but  thought  about  the  murder.  ' '  How- 
ever, I  did  walk  through  the  field  one  gloomy  November  afternoon,  absorbed 
so  deeply  in  some  new  practical  scheme  that  I  did  not  think  about  the 
murder,  and  most  certainly  should  not  have  thought  about  it  if  the  strtjugest 
conceivable  smell  of  thyme  that  ever  rose  to  human  nostrils  had  not  risen 
to  mine.  The  odour  of  it  lasted  at  least  a  quarter  of  a  minute,  until  my 
concentrated  thoughts  were  disorganised,  and  made  to  dwell  on  the  magical 
subject." 

3.  "  When  I  was  at  home  assisting  my  father  in  his  business  it  used  ta 
be  my  work  to  weigh  the  hides  which  were  taken  from  the  beasts  we  killed, 
preparatory  to  sendmg  them  to  the  dealer  ;  and  it  was  my  custom  before 

^  Proceedings  of  American  S.P.R.,  No.  4,  p.  360.  .  ' 

338 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

placing  them  in  the  scale  to  see  how  near  the  weiglit  I  would  guess  them  to 
be.  By  tliis  means  I  became  tolerably  expert  in  estimating  their  weight, 
invariably  being  not  more  than  3  or  4  pounds  out.  Now  on  several 
occasions  before  I  guessed,  or  even  thought  of  guessing,  a  certain  weight 
came  into  my  mind  which  (as  in  the  case  of  the  time  indicated  on  the  dial) 
I  was  inwardly  assured  was  correct.  I  remember  one  case  distinctly,  in 
which  the  hide  weighed  87|lb.,  which  were  the  exact  figures  which  occurred 
to  me  prior  to  weighing,  and  independently  of  any  computation  whatever. 
Indeed,  on  one  occasion,  the  fourth,  I  think,  I  ventured  to  ticket  the  hide, 
without  weighing  it,  in  accordance  with  the  figures  which  came  into  my 
mind  ;  and  on  the  following  Tuesday  exactly  the  number  of  pounds  named 
on  the  ticket  were  paid  for  at  the  market  to  which  the  hides  were  delivered. 
As  you  will  easily  believe,  I  did  not  tell  my  father  I  had  not  weighed  the 
hide  on  the  ground  that  I  knew  the  weight  without  doing  so  !  " 

Setting  aside  for  the  moment  the  hallucination  of  the  sense  of 
smell,  I  would  point  out  that  we  have  here  precisely  such  uprushes  of 
subliminal  faculty,  concerned  v/ith  the  deep  oi'ganic  sensations  of  the 
efflux  of  time  and  of  muscular  resistance,  as  theory  had  led  us  to  expect. 
We  need  not  postulate  any  direct  or  supernormal  knowledge, — but 
merely  a  subliminal  calculation,  such  as  we  shall  see  in  the  case  of 
"arithmetical  ^jrodigies,"  expressing  itself  supraliminally,  sometimes  in  a 
phantasmal  picture,  sometimes  as  a  mere  "  conviction,"  without  sensory 
clothing.  And  I  would  interpret  in  much  the  same  way  the  story  of 
the  smell  of  thyme  in  the  haunted  field.  We  may  suppose,  I  think, 
that  although  Mr.  Higton  was  not  "  consciously  "  thinking  of  the  local 
legend,  his  subliminal  self  remembered  it,  and  produced  the  appropriate 
hallucination  of  smell  in  the  same  way  in  which  it  produced  the 
picture  of  the  clock-face,  as  indicating  that  it  knew  the  precise  hour. 
Thus  we  have,  I  think,  a  reasonable  explanation  of  what  seems  at 
first  sight  an  extravagant  ghost  story ; — an  explanation  which  is  the 
more  probable  insomuch  as  it  is  deduced  from  our  own  analysis  of 
Mr.  Higton's  evidence,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  himself. 

In  somewhat  the  same  way  I  should  be  disposed  to  explain  certain 
"  monitions  "  of  impending  illness,  or  even  death,  which  may  occur 

1  Mr.  Higton  has  also  had  coincidences  in  the  matter  of  meeting  people  in  the 
streets  ;  but  such  coincidences  are  difficult  to  make  evidential.  The  following  moni- 
tion, however,  deserves  record.  "  Walking  towards  my  lodgings  about  3  years  ago, 
the  conviction  seized  me  that  if  I  went  my  usual  way  I  should  meet  a  friend  whom  I 
greatly  desired  just  then  not  to  meet.  I  therefore,  without  hesitation,  took  another 
road,  and  having  arrived  at  one  of  the  street  corners,  whom  should  I  see 
at  the  end  of  the  street  but  my  friend,  walking  down  the  road  on  which,  but  for 
my  premoniticm,  I  sliould  have  met  him.  Whether  he  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  that 
liarticular  road  at  that  time  of  day,  or  not,  I  cannot  say  ;  as  only  on  one  occasion 
before  had  I  met  him  out  of  doors  ;  and  that  was  almost  a  mile  distant  from  the  street 
now  referred  to.  Besides,  I  knew  absolutely  nothing  about  either  his  business  or  his 
habits  ;  and,  be  it  remembered,  my  premonition  was  not  an  idea— a  conjecture — but 
an  instantaneous  intimation  to  my  soul."' 

Tlie  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

339 

while  the  supraliminal  self  is  unconscious  of  any  danger.  In  the 
following  case,  for  instance,  Lady  Eardley's  subliminal  self  may  have 
foreseen  the  impending  fainting  fit,  and  generated  the  hallucinatory 
voice  which  averted  the  perhaps  fatal  result. 

P.  139. 

When  I  was  a  gu-l  of  about  sixteen  I  had  a  mild  attack  of  measles.  I  was 
staying  with  my  godfather  and  godmother.  After  two  or  three  days  in  my 
room  I  was  told  that  I  might  have  a  warm  bath  ;  greatly  pleased,  and  feel- 
ing well  again,  I  went  to  the  bathroom,  locked  the  door,  undressed,  and  was 
just  about  to  get  into  the  bath,  when  I  heard  a  voice  say  "  Unlock  the  door." 
The  voice  was  quite  distinct  and  apart  from  myself  and  yet  seemed  to  come 
somehow  from  inside  myself.  I  could  not  say  whether  it  was  a  man's  or 
a  woman's  voice.  I  was  startled,  and  looked  round,  but  of  course  no  one 
was  there.  Again  I  heard  the  voice,  "Unlock  the  door. "  I  began  to  get 
frightened,  thinking  that  I  must  be  ill  and  delirious — but  I  did  not  feel  ill. 
I  resolved  not  to  think  of  the  voice,  and  had  stepped  into  the  bath,  when  I 
heard  it  a  third  time — and  I  think  a  fourth  time — still  saying  ' '  Unlock  the 
door."  On  this  I  jumped  out  and  I  did  unlock  the  door  ;  and  then  stepped 
into  the  bath  again.  As  I  got  in,  I  fainted  away  and  fell  fiat  down  in  the 
water.  Fortunately  as  I  fell  I  was  just  able  to  catch  at  a  beU-handle,  which 
was  attached  to  the  wall  just  above  the  bath.  My  pull  brought  the  maid, 
who  found  me  (she  said)  lying  with  my  liead  under  water.  She  picked  me 
up  and  carried  me  out  of  the  bathroom — knocking  my  head  against  the 
doorpost  as  she  did  so,  which  brought  me  partly  round  for  a  moment.  If 
the  door  had  been  locked  I  should  certainly  have  been  drowned,  as  far  as  I 
can  tell. 

I  have  never  heard  a  similar  voice  or  had  any  other  hallucination  what- 
ever. 

At  one  time,  however,  I  had  a  curious  extension  of  ordinary  powers  of 
hearing.  I  was  in  a  state  of  great  nervous  prostration,  from  mental  distress  and 
other  causes,  and  was  lying  in  bed  on  the  second  floor  front  room  in  a  house  in 
a  London  street.  Under  ordinary  cncumstances  I  cannot  from  this  room  hear 
any  letters  fall  into  the  letterbox.  [I  tried  this  experiment  and  could  not 
hear  letters  fall  in. — F.W.H.M.]  But  during  this  illness  I  not  only  could 
hear  them  fall,  but  I  seemed  to  know  from  whom  each  letter  came.  I  felt 
a  sort  of  shock  at  the  heart  as  each  fell,  and  would  say  to  my  maid  (who 
is  dead)  "there  is  a  letter  from  my  lawyer,"  or  such  other  person  as 
the  case  might  be.  Of  these  letters  some  were  more  or  less  expected  by  me 
)5ut  others  not.  Yet  I  knew  at  once  from  whom  they  came.  As  I  grew 
better  and  stronger  the  power  of  distinguishing  the  letters  left  me  ;  but  for 
some  time  yet  I  could  hear  the  letters  being  dropped  into  the  box. 

E.  F.  De  Lousada 

(Lady  Eardley). 

And  here  among  the  vaguer  or  less  measurable  modes  of  sensation 
some  brief  mention  may  be  made  of  various  ill-established  or  ill-under- 
stood sensory  powers,  which,  if  they  exist,  seem  to  belong  mainly  to 
subliminal  strata.     Such  is  the  metallEesthesia,  or  sensitiveness  to 

340 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

special  metals,  so  often  described  in  hysterical  cases,  especially  in 
France.    Such  is  the  dubious  "  magnetic  sense,"  widely  believed  in  in 
France,  with  its  possible  extensions  to  crystals,  &c.,  if  Reichenbach's 
isolated  experiments  are  to  be   trusted.     Such  is  "  meteorological 
sensitiveness,"  which  recognises  or  anticipates  the  changes  of  the 
barometer.    Such,  too,  is  the  apparent  sensibility  of  certain  persons  to 
the  nearness  of  undergi'ound  water.    Unless  the  accounts  printed  in 
Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  and  elsewhere  are  due  to  accident  and  exaggera- 
tion,— (for  there  are  many  which  wilful  fraud  will  not  explain), — we 
must  apparently  suppose  that  some  physical  indications  of  the  near- 
ness of  water,  subliminally  apprehended,  produce  in  the  "  dowser  "  an 
automatic  impulse  which  prompts  him  unconsciously  to  twist  the 
"divining-rod,"  in  just  the  same  way  as  it  prompts  automatic  writers  to 
move  the  pencil.    But  on  all  this  conti'oversial  matter  I  must  not  here 
dwell.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  if  any  of  these  forms  of  sensitivity  be  estab- 
lished they  will  be  additional  instances  of  capacity  mainly  if  not 
wholly  exercised  by  the  subliminal  self,  and  emerging  into  supraliminal 
existence  in  ways  which  no  conscious  calculation  can  foretell.  Such 
powers,  in  my  metaphor,  will  be  represented  by  the  conversion  of  dark 
lines  into  bright  lines  within  the  limits  of  our  habitual  spectrum.  For 
they  differ  in  kind  both  from  hyper?esthesia  of  known  senses  and  from 
such  novelties  as  telejjathy  and  clairvoyance.   Thus  hypersesthesia  of  the 
sense  of  contact,  for  instance,  is  the  mere  extra  brightening  of  a  line  in. 
our  spectrum  already  bright.    But  metalltesthesia  (if  not  depending  on 
intensified  perceptions  of  temperature,  surface,  &c.)  is  the  substitution 
of  a  bright  line  for  a  dark  one, — though  in  the  vicinity  of  the  bright 
tactile  lines  already  familiar.    We  cannot  at  any  rate  assume  that  its 
line,  like  the  novel  bright  line  of  telepathy,  will  lie  clearly  beyond  the 
psychological  end  of  our  spectrum.    Whereas  in  telepathy  we  get  at^ 
something  generically  unlike  our  known  senses,  in  metallfesthesia  we  get. 
at  something  cognate  to  our  known  senses  ; — as  it  were  a  sense  which 
has  dropped  out  from  among  its  congeners,  or  has  not  yet  taken  its  due 
place  among  them.  Metalkestliesia,  like  telepathy  itself,  will  thus  repre- 
sent one  of  the  n  original  cajjacities  of  protoplasm,  of  which  capacities 
a  small  proportion  only  inay  have  been  developed  into  deiiniteness  by 
the  training  which  protoplasm  has  up  to  this  date  undergone. 

But  let  us  pass  on  from  these  lower  forms  of  sensitiveness  to  the 
higher,  the  more  intellectual  senses  of  hearing  and  sight.  And 
here  our  first  reflection  will  be  that  as  a  form  of  sense  becomes  more 
intellectual,  its  internal  operation, — the  form  of  imagination,  as  we 
say,  connected  with  it, — gains  rapidly  in  complexity  and  importance. 
Internal  audition,  internal  visualisation,  are  for  our  present  argument 
even  more  significant  than  the  perception  of  sounds  and  sights  outside  us. 
But  to  begin  with  external  hearing.    Hypnotic  hyperacuity  of  hearing  is 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

341 

already  familiar.  The  same  phenomenon  has  been  frequently  observed 
in  spontaneous  somnambulism,  in  hysteria,  and  in  various  morbid 
■conditions.  An  experiment  of  Dessoir's,  already  noticed  in  these 
Froceedings,  shows,  (in  close  analogy  to  the  phenomena  of  crystal- 
^dsion,)  that  sounds  which  fall  unnoticed  on  the  waking  ear  may  be  all 
the  while  intelligently  treasured  up  in  some  hypnotic  or  other  sub- 
liminal stratum.  Mr.  X.,  absorbed  in  his  book  amongst  friends  who 
were  talking,  was  suddenly  roused  to  attention  by  catching  his  own 
name.  He  asked  what  his  friends  had  been  saying  of  him.  No  reply 
was  made,  but  he  was  hypnotised.  In  the  hypnotic  trance  he  was 
able  to  repeat  the  whole  conversation  which  his  waking  self  had  missed. 
Still  more  remarkable  is  the  fact,  shown  l)y  the  late  Edmund  Gurney 
and' other  observers,  that  the  hypnotised  subject  can  pick  out  the 
distant  whisper  of  his  hypnotiser  from  amidst  a  Babel  of  unnoticed 
sounds  made  by  persons  with  whom  he  is  not  in  rapjyort.  It  is 
abundantly  clear  that  the  external  audition  of  the  hypnotic  or  other 
-  subliminal  strata  may  greatly  exceed  in  delicacy  the  external  audition 
'  of  common  life. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  internal  audition  ; — to  the  sounds  which  we 
imagine  within  us  ; — and  let  us  consider  by  what  test  the  degree  of 
'  such  audition  is  capable  of  being  estimated.  The  good  audile  (more 
■strictly  auditile)  subject  of  Galton  will  dififer  from  the  l^ad  one  in  two 
principal  ways, — namely,  in  the  intensity  and  in  the  coimplexity  of  his 
intra-cereljral  ^  sensations  of  sound.  That  is  to  say,  the  good  auditile 
will  summon  up  the  sound  of  voices,  &c.,  more  easily  and  more  dis- 
tinctly than  other  men ;  and  he  will  also  be  better  able  than  others 
to  recollect  and  represent  to  himself  complex  sequences  or  co-existences 
of  sound.  We  shall  find  subliminal  faculty  markedly  in  excess  of 
supraliminal  in  each  of  these  directions, — in  the  intensity  of  internal 
audition,  which  leads  to  hallucination ;  and  in  the  complexity  of  in- 
ternal audition,  which  leads  to  poetic  and  musical  genius. 

Let  us  take  first  the  intensity,  or  apparent  externalisation,  of 
imagined  sounds.  We  do  not,  of  course,  here  encounter  hallucinations 
for  the  first  time.  Not  hearing  and  sight  alone,  but  every  sense,  may 
be  hypnotically  stimulated  into  a  vividness  which  refuses  to  believe  that 
the  excitement  proceeds  only  from  within.  We  can  produce  hallucina- 
tions of  heat,  cold,  weight,  contact,  pain,  smell,  taste.  In  each  case 
the  intensity  of  the  sensation  thus  emerging  from  its  subliminal  factory 
may  be  far  greater  than  any  intensity  of  similar  sensation  which  con- 
scious supi'aliminal  effort  can  initiate  or  maintain.    All  this  is  familiar 

1  On  the  analogy  of  "  entoptic  "  and  "  entotic "  these  inward  auditions  might 
conveniently  be  described  as  "entencephalic," — leaving  "intra-cerebral,"  like 
"intra-ocular,"  to  express  objective  or  material  arrangements  or  changes  within 
eye  or  brain. 

342 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

to  every  observer  of  hypnotism  ;  but  few  observers  have  as  yet  grasped 
the  important  lesson  which  even  the  commonest  platform  phenomena 
should  teach  ; — namely,  that  the  hypnotic  self  is  here  performing  a 
sensory  function  beyond  the  possible  achievement  of  the  ordinary 
Avaking  self.  One  of  the  causes  of  this  ignoring  of  the  true  signifi- 
cance of  hallucinations  has  been  (as  I  have  elsewhere  observed) 
the  fact  that  when  they  occur  spontaneously  it  is  often  in  connection 
with  morbid  states.  Inquiry  into  human  vital  phenomena  has  usually 
been  undertaken  with  a  therapeutic  and  not  with  a  purely  scientific 
purpose  ;  and  consequently  the  morbid  aspect  of  hallucination,  although 
really  accidental,  has  been  insisted  upon  in  preference  to  its  absolute 
psychological  significance.  This  is  eminently  the  case  with  regard  to 
the  hallucinations  of  hearing, — imaginary  voices,  kc, — with  which  we 
are  at  this  moment  concerned.  Frequently  accompanying  insanity, 
they  have  been  discussed  as  though  they  were  simply  an  indication  of 
insanity.  How  narrow  and  imperfect  such  a  view  of  them  is  I  have 
tried  to  show  in  a  previous  paper  on  "  The  Dsmon  of  Socrates  "  [Pro- 
ceedings, Vol.  v.,  p.  522),  to  which  I  must  here  be  content  to  refer 
the  reader.  He  will  there,  I  hope,  find  some  reason  for  supposing  that 
that  intensification  of  internal  audition  which  at  last  suggests  exter- 
nality in  the  imagined  voices  may  sometimes  succeed  in  manifesting  no 
disease  or  disintegration,  but  rather  a  subliminal  faculty  to  which  the 
supraliminal  may  be  glad  to  appeal. 

It  is,  however,  the  other  branch  of  internal  audition, — that  which 
involves  complexity  rather  than  intensity  of  imagined  sounds, — which 
offers,  so  to  say,  the  richest  opportunities  for  subliminal  manifestation, 
— the  readiest  vent-holes  for  the  uprush  of  the  hidden  fire.  The 
sounds  that  I'ise  within  our  waking  consciousness  from  a  source  beyond 
the  will  do  iiot  confine  themselves  to  the  mere  shaping  of  scattered 
sentences, — the  airy  syllabling  of  phrases  that  tend  to  nought.  There 
is  an  inward  consonance,  an  obscure  concent,  which  forms  the  ground- 
work of  Poetry,  the  fount  of  Song, — the  cradle  from  whence  those 
"  sphere-born  harmonious  sisters,  Voice  and  Verse,"  issue  in  preformed 
divinity  into  the  common  day.  This  is  true  not  only  for  Song,  strictly 
so  termed,  ))ut  also  for  Poetry  unaccompanied  by  music  ; — that  is  to 
say,  for  interrelations  of  rhythm  and  articulation  taken  apart  from 
interrelations  of  pitch,  definite  time-intervals,  or  timbre.  Por  the  true 
poet, — as  Goethe  has  somewhere  said, — the  melody  of  his  coming  poem 
floats  as  a  self-created  and  impalpable  entity  within  him,  before  Avords 
have  shaped  themselves  or  thought  itself  is  born.  lo  mi  son  un,  said  a 
greater  even  than  Goethe, — 

lo  mi  son  un,  che  quando 
Aniore  spira,  note,  ed  a  quel  mode  ^■ 
Che  detta  dentro,  vo  significando.  ■.  \. 

The  Suhlimincd  Consciousness. 

343 

And  here  a  reflection  may  be  made  which,  while  it  clears  up  (as 
seems  to  me)  an  old  confusion,  will  also  well  illustrate  the  latent 
capacities  of  the  subliminal  consciousness; — its  power  to  convey  potent 
and  intimate  messages  through  mechanism  of  the  slenderest  kind.  We 
know  that  as  we  advance  from  sounds  non-human  to  human  sounds, 
from  sounds  non-vocal  to  sounds  which  the  human  throat  can  produce, 
our  conception  of  any  given  sound  increasingly  needs,  to  make  it  com- 
plete, a  motor  as  well  as  an  auditory  representation  within  us.  Our 
grasp,  say,  of  the  word  London  is  imperfect  if  we  cannot  articulate  the 
word  with  our  mind's  voice  as  well  as  hear  it  with  our  mind's  ear. 

In  all  definite  inward  audition  there  is,  then,  probably  a  motor 
element  as  well  as  a  sensoiy.  And  I  hold  that  one  difference  between 
imagined  poetry  and  imagined  music  or  song  lies  in  the  fact  that 
imagined  verbal  rhythm  may  be  almost  wholly  motor,  while  imagined 
tunes  must  be  largely  sensory  as  well.  To  those,  then,  who  are  per- 
plexed at  the  fact  that  many  poets  have  lacked  musical  ear  it  may  be 
answered  that  the  mental  imagery  of  such  poets  may  have  been  mainly 
motile  ; — may  have  consisted  in  a  delicate  imagination  of  such  laryngeal 
movements  as  are  concerned  in  the  utterance  of  melodious  speech.  I 
believe  that  with  careful  self -observation  many  men  with  "  an  ear  for 
verse  "  will  recognise  that  the  essential  part  of  poetic  excitation  has  lain 
in  scarcely  perceptible  changes  of  tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  throat. 
The  rhythmical  modulations,  indeed,  have  their  birth  beyond  the  will ; 
but  it  is  about  that  physical  centre  of  imagined  utterance  that  the  emo- 
tional stress  will  gather  and  the  inexplicable  promptings  throng ;  through 
that  motor  channel  the  reverberating  tremors  rise  and  fall ; — and  flood 
the  flats  of  common  consciousness  as  with  the  earthquake- wave  of  an 
Tinfathomed  sea. 

And  there  is  yet  another  and  even  stranger  form  of  inward  audition. 
There  exists  among  men  a  mighty  complex  of  conceptions  which  lie 
apart  from, — some  say  beyond, — articulate  speech  and  reasoned  thought. 
There  is  a  march  and  uprising  through  ideal  spaces  which  some  hold  as 
the  only  true  ascent ;  there  is  an  architecture  which  some  count  as  alone 
abiding, — 

seeinsr  it  is  built 
Of  music,  therefore  never  built  at  all. 
And,  therefore,  built  for  ever. 

Whether  considered  in  regard  to  its  development  in  the  race,  or  to 
its  activity  in  the  individual.  Music  resembles  not  so  much  a  product 
of  terrene  needs  and  of  natural  selection  as  a  subliminal  capacity  attain- 
ing to  an  accidental  manifestation  independently  of  the  requirements  or 
of  the  external  stimuli  of  the  supraliminal  self.  We  know  the  diffi- 
culty of  explaining  its  rise  on  any  current  theory  of  the  evolution  of 
human  faculty.    We  know  that  it  is  like  something  discovered,  not  like 

344 

Mr.  F.  W:  H:  Myers., 

something  manufactured  ; — like  wine  found  in  a  walled-up  cellar,  rather 
than  like  furniture  made  in  the  workshop  above.  And  the  subjec- 
tive sensations  of  the  musician  himself  accord  with  this  view  of  the 
essentially  subliminal  character  of  the  gift  with  which  he  deals.  In  no 
direction  is  "  genius  "  or  "  inspiration  "  more  essential  to  true  success. 
It  is  not  from  careful  poring  over  the  mutual  relations  of  musical  notes 
that  the  masterpieces  of  melody  have  been  born.  They  have  come  as 
they  came  to  Mozart, — whose  often-quoted  words  I  need  not  cite  again, 
— in  an  uprusli  of  unsummoned  audition,  of  unpremeditated  and  self- 
revealing  joy.  They  have  come,  as  to  Browning's  Abt  Vogler,  with  a 
sense  of  irrecoverable  commingling  of  depths  of  soul  and  heights 
of  lieaven.^  Translating  the  phrases  of  poetry  into  such  terms  as  we 
,  here  employ,  we  may  say  that  we  have  reached  a  point  where  the  sub- 
liminal uprush  is  felt  l>y  the  sui^raliminal  personality  to  be  deeper, 
truer,  more  permanent  than  the  j^roducts  of  voluntary  thought.  In 
the  genesis  of  poetry  and  of  music  we  have  gained  a  tirst  glimpse  into 
the  mechanism  of  genius.  But  before  generalising  further,  we  have  yet 
to  consider  the  subliminal  operation  of  the  most  intellectual,  the  most 
delicately  measurable  sense  of  all ;  the  sense  whose  internal  operation 
may  perhaps  be  the  deepest  inlet,  as  its  external  is  the  farthest-reaching 
excursion,  into  the  reality  of  things. 

I  need  not  dwell  on  the  hypersesthesiEe  of  external  vision  so  often 
noted  in  association  with  hystei'ia,  with  spontaneous  somnambulism, 
with  the  hypnotic  trance.  The  difficulties  to  which  they  introduce  us 
•show  no  sign  of  early  or  easy  solution.  Precisely  in  the  region  where 
the  anatomical,  the  optical,  limits  appear  most  definite  we  have  the 
most  vmpredictable,  the  most  capricious  extensions  of  faculty.  I  will 
give  here  two  cases  in  which,  as  I  conceive,  the  subliminal  self  has 
observed  what  the  supraliminal  has  failed  to  notice,  and  has  generated 
a  hallucination,  in  order  to  check  the  mistaken  action  to  which  that 
inadvertence  was  leading.  In  the  first  case,  all  that  needs  correction  is 
a  mere  act  of  distraction, — a  failure  to  look  carefully  at  an  object  fully 
in  sight.  In  the  second  case  it  appears  as  though  the  subliminal 
actually  saw  better  than  the  supraliminal  self. 

P.    140.  .  .  . 

From  Mrs.  E.  K.  Elliott,  wife  of  the  Rev.  E.  K.  Elliott. 
.    About  20  years  ago  I  received  some  letters  by  post,  one  of  which  con- 

^  More  definite  than  most  of  the  descriptions  of  this  type  innwsical  literature  are 
■  the  following  words  of  Schumann's  [Robert  Schumann's  Earhj  Letters,  ]>.  268) :  "  The 
-  i)iano  is  getting  too  limited  for  me.    It  is  most  extraordinary  how  I  write  almost 
everything  in  canon,  and  then  only  detect  the  imitation  afterwards, — and  often  find 
inversions,  rhythms  in  contrary  motion,  &c."   And  again,  p.  271:  "I  do  not  realise 
all  this  while  I  am  composing ;  it  only  comes  to  me  afterwards  ;  you  who  are  at 
,  the  top  of  the  tree  will  understand  what  I  mean."      ..      .      , ,      ,  . 

The  SiMiminal  Consciousness. 

345 

tained  £15  in  bank  notes.  After  reading  the  letters  I  went  into  the  kitchen 
with  them  in  my  liands.  I  was  alone  at  the  time,  no  one  being  near  me, 
except  the  cook,  and  she  was  in  the  scullery.  Having  done  with  the  letters, 
I  made  a  motion  to  throw  them  into  tlie  fire,  when  I  distinctly  felt  my  hand 
arrested  in  the  act.  It  was  as  though  another  hand  were  gently  laid  upon 
my  own,  pressing  it  back.  Much  surprised,  I  looked  at  my  hand,  and  then 
saw  that  it  contained  not  tlie  letters  I  had  intended  to  destroy,  but  the  bank 
notes,  and  that  tlie  letters  were  in  tlie  other  hand.  I  was  so  surjjrised  that 
T  called  out,  "Who  is  here  ? "  I  called  the  cook  and  told  her,  and  also  told 
my  husband  on  the  first  opportunity.  I  never  had  any  similar  experience 
before  or  since. 

Statement  by  Rev.  E.  K.  Elliott. 

I  remember  my  wife  describing  tlie  al)ove  adventure  to  me  at  the  time, 
and  also  that  she  was  nearly  fainting  from  the  excitement  caused  by  it. 

E.  K.  Elliott. 

The  following  incident  was  recorded  in  the  Boston  Budget  by  the 
percipient  herself,  a  lady  well  known  to  Mr.  Hodgson. 

P.  141. 

The  Bodon  Buxhjd,  Aiigiist  31st,  1890. 

A  strange  incident  occurred  one  night  last  week  at  one  of  the  Boston  Back 
Bay  hotels.  It  was  just  before  the  gas  was  lighted,  and  was  already  growing 
dusky  in  the  corridors,  when  a  resident  guest  stepped  out  of  her  room  to  go 
to  the  elevator.  She  touched  the  electric  bell  and  then  went  down  to  tlie  end 
of  another  corridor  to  look  out  of  the  window  for  a  moment,  while  the 
elevator  was  coming  up.  Returning  to  it,  she  was  about  advancing  pre- 
cipitately to  the  side  of  it  that  the  door  was  on,  when  the  sight  of  a  man 
.standing  exactly  in  front  of  the  elevator  door  caused  her  to  stop  short,  tliat 
slie  miglit  not  be  so  rude  or  awkward  as  to  run  into  him,  so  to  speak,  as  she 
was  in  danger  of  doing  in  her  rather  heedless  haste.  The  hall  was  dim,  but 
a  window  opposite  the  elevator  showed  the  form  of  the  man  plainly  enough, 
and  tlie  lady  waited  at  a  decorous  distance.  But  what  was  her  amazement 
when  tlie  elevator  came  up,  brightly  lighted  inside,  to  see,  first,  that  the 
upper  door  was  wide  open,  and  that  thus  the  entire  well  of  tlie  elevator 
was  exposed.  The  lady  had  been  a  guest  for  many  years  'in  the  house, 
and  had  never  known  such  a  thing  as  an  elevator  door  left  open  to  happen 
before.  But  tlie  second  fact  was  far  more  startling,  there  was  no  man 
there!  Now,  the  apjiearance  of  this  man,  or  her  impression  of  his  appear- 
ance there,  undoubtedly  saved  her  from  plunging  head  first  down  the 
elevator  well. 

The  rapidity  with  which  she  was  rushing  toward  tlie  elevator — with  the 
true  national  haste  that  characterises  every  movement  of  tlie  American,  and 
makes  him  crowd  to  the  door  of  the  cars  before  a  train  stops,  that  he  may  be 
the  first  one  out — with  the  true  spirit  of  her  country  she  was  rushing  towards 
the  elevator  with  a  haste  whose  momentum  would  almost  certainly  have 
carried  her  into  the  fatal  well,  had  not  the  appearance  of  the  man  standing 
there  checked  her  steps,  and  caused  a  sudden  accession  of  demure  dignity 

2  A 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

and  a  little  flush  of  embarrassment  at  being  caught  hurrying  through  the 
hotel  corridor  like  a  rude  child  let  loose  from  the  nursery.  Now,  here  is  a 
fact  for  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson  and  his  Psychical  Society.  It  may  be  added 
that  the  lady  in  question  immediately  went  to  the  hotel  desk  to  report  tlie 
terrible  carelessness  of  the  boy  who  had  left  this  door  open,  but  not  ambitious 
to  acquire  the  reputation  of  a  lunatic,  or  even  a  seer  of  visions  or  dreamer 
of  dreams,  she  took  very  good  care  not  to  relate  the  other  half  of  the  occur- 
rence, although  it  was  just  as  palpable  a  fact  as  the  material  fact  that  the 
door  was  open.  Was  this  the  apparition  of  a  spiritual  presence,  which  had 
materialised  to  save  her  from  a  terrible  fate  ?    Who  shall  say  ? 

Boston,  September  bfh,  1890. 
My  dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — No,  I  did  not  recognise  the  form  at  all.  I 
simply  didn't  notice — didn't  think  anything  about  it,  as  it  is  rather  the  rule 
than  the  exception  to  meet  people  at  the  elevator  in  a  hotel.  Then,  too,  I . 
am  very  near-sighted,  and  I  did  not  have  my  eye-glasses  on,  so  I  shouldn't 
have  recognised  even  my  most  intimate  friend  in  the  dusky  light  and  at  tlie 
little  distance. 

It  occurred  on  Tuesday  night,  August  2dth. 

•  ••-•••>» 

Faithfully  yours, 

(Signed)  A.  B. 

The  account  in  the  Budget  was  written  by  the  witness  herself,  a  lady  well 
known  to  me. — R.  H. 

Assuming  this  second  incident  to  be  correctly  reported,  the  least 
marvellous  way  of  explaining  it  will  perhaps  be  to  sujjpose  that 
Miss  A.  B.'s  subliminal  self  perceived  the  open  doorway  at  a  distance 
somewhat  beyond  the  eyesight  of  her  supraliminal  self,  and  then 
generated  the  hallucinatory  figure  in  order  to  avert  the  fall. 

Such  an  explanation  of  course  takes  for  granted  that  the  subliminal 
strata  j^ossess  a  power  which  the  supraliminal  can  rarely  rival  ; — the 
power,  namely,  of  externalising  a  hallucination, — of  projecting  fi'om 
some  hidden  workshop  a  lifelike  figure  amid  the  actual  surroundings, 
and  into  the  common  day.  And  indeed  this  point  is  probably  too 
familiar  to  my  readers  to  need  further  insistence  here.  The  question 
really  before  us  is  not  simj^ly  whether  the  subliminal  self  can  generate 
hallucinatory  pictures, — a  fact  of  which  the  most  ordinary  post-hypnotic 
suggestion  will  furnish  ample  pi'oof.  Rather  we  wish  to  understand 
hoAv  much  intelligence  these  pictures  imply ; — to  discover  how  far 
experiment  can  be  jiushed  in  the  way  of  evoking  or  modifying  them. 

And  here  I  must  pause  to  introduce  a  passage  which  I  only  came 
upon  when  this  chapter  was  nearly  completed ; — but  which  seems  to  me 
to  give  in  germ  the  very  theory  for  which  I  am  now  contending,  on  the 
authority  of  one  of  the  most  lucid  thinkers  of  the  last  generation. 

The  passage  occurs  in  an  article  by  Sir  John  Herschel  on  Sensorial 
Yisiou,  in  his  Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  1816.  Sir 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

347 

John  describes  some  experiences  of  his  own,  "which  consist  in  the 
invohintary  pi'oduction  of  visual  impressions,  into  which  geometrical 
regularity  of  f(jrm  enters  as  the  leading  character,  and  that,  under 
circumstances  which  altogether  preclude  any  explanation  drawn  from  a 
possible  regularity  of  structure  in  the  retina  or  the  optic  nerve. Twice 
these  patterns  appeared  in  waking  daylight  hours, — with  no  illness  or 
discomfort  at  the  time  or  afterwards.  More  frequently  they  appeared 
in  darkness  ;  Init  still  while  Sir  John  was  fully  awake.  They  appeared 
also  twice  when  he  was  placed  under  chloroform  ;  "  and  I  should 
observe  that  I  never  lost  my  consciousness  of  being  awake,  and  in  full 
possession  of  my  mind,  though  quite  insensible  to  what  was  going 
on.  .  .  .  Now  the  question  at  once  presents  itself — What  are  these 
Geometrical  Spectres  ?  and  how,  and  in  what  department  of  the  bodily 
or  mental  economy  do  they  originate  ?  They  are  evidently  not  dreams. 
The  mind  is  not  dormant,  but  active  and  conscious  of  the  direction  of 
its  thoughts  ;  while  these  things  obtrude  themselves  on  notice,  and  Ijy 
calling  attention  to  them,  direct  the  train  of  thought  into  a  channel  it 
would  not  have  taken  of  itself.  .  .  .  If  it  be  true  that  the  con- 
ception of  a  regular  geometrical  pattern  implies  the  exercise  of  thought 
and  intelligence,  it  would  almost  seem  that  in  such  cases  as  those  above 
adduced  we  have  evidence  of  a  thought,  an  intelligence,  working  within 
our  own  organisation  distinct  from  that  of  our  own  jjersonality. "  And 
Sir  John  further  suggests  that  these  complex  figures,  entering  the  mind 
in  this  apparently  arbitrary  fashion,  throw  light  upon  "  the  suggestive- 
principle  "  to  which  "  we  must  look  for  much  that  is  determinant  and 
decisive  of  our  volition  when  carried  into  action."  "  It  strikes  me  as 
not  by  any  means  devoid  of  interest  to  contemplate  cases  where,  in  a 
matter  so  entirely  abstract,  so  completely  devoid  of  any  moral  or 
emotional  bearing,  as  the  production  of  a  geometrical  figure,  we,  as  it 
were,  seize  upon  that  principle  in  the  very  act,  and  in  the  performance 
(jf  its  oflice." 

From  my  point  of  view,  of  course,  I  can  but  admire  the  acumen 
which  enabled  this  great  thinker  to  piei'ce  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  by 
the  aid  of  so  few  observations.  He  does  not  even  seem  to  have  per- 
ceived the  connection  between  these  "  schematic  phantasms,"  to  borrow 
a  phrase  from  Professor  Ladd,'^  and  the  hallucinatory  figures  of  men  or 
animals  seen  in  health  or  in  disease.  But  even  from  his  scanty  data 
his  inference  seems  to  me  irresistible  ; — "  we  have  evidence  of  a 
thought,  an  intelligence,  working  within  our  own  organisation,  distinct 
from  that  of  our  own  personality."    I  shall  venture  to  claim  him  as  the 

'  On  this  point  see  James'  Psychology,  Vol.  II.,  p.  81,  note.  Goethe's  well- 
known  phantasmal  flower  was  clearly  no  mere  representation  of  retinal  structure.  A 
near  analogy  to  these  patterns  lies  in  the  so-called  "spirit-drawings,"  or  automatic, 
arabesques,  which  I  hope  to  discuss  in  a  later  pajier. 

-  See  Professor  Ladd's  paper  on  this  subject  in  Blind,  April,  1892.  ;- 

2  A  2 

348 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

fii'st  originator  of  the  theory  to  which  the  far  fuller  evidence  now  acces- 
sible had  independently  led  myself. 

These  visions  of  Sir  J ohn  Herschel's  seem  to  have  been  intermediate, 
so  far  as  apparent  externalisation  was  concerned,  between  ordinary 
mind's  eye  visions,  and  those  full-fledged  hallucinatory  quasi-percepts 
which  seem  to  occupy  a  definite  place  in  the  room,  and  to  hide  the 
chair  on  which  they  sit.  Perhaps  their  nearest  parallel  lies  in  the 
crystal-visions  to  which  I  have  repeatedly  called  attention.  This 
empirical  method  of  inducing  hallucinations,  by  concentration  of  mind, 
aided  by  gazing  into  some  clear  depth  or  dark  mirror,  has  already  illus- 
trated with  singular  vividness  many  forms  of  that  "  subliminal  uprush  " 
with  which  this  chapter  is  concerned.  It  has  been  found  that,  just  as 
automatic  writing  systematises  and  renders  intelligible  the  vague 
impulses  of  motor  automatism,  so  also  does  this  steady  gaze  at  once 
educe,  clarify,  and  prolong  those  incipient  intensifications  of  internal 
percejsts  which  the  subliminal  self  seems  ever  ready  to  develop,  but 
which  are  usually  dissipated  before  they  attain  to  the  consistency 
either  of  dream  or  of  waking  hallucination.  Crystal-vision,  however, 
has  hardly  yet  been  received  within  the  purview  of  science.  The  first 
attempt  so  to  introduce  it, — the  series  of  experiments  printed  in  Pro- 
ceedings, Vol.  v.,  p.  486,  sqq., — has  not  as  yet  led  to  any  wide  imitation. 
And  since  in  this  chapter  I  am  cai^efuUy  excluding  all  supernormal  or 
strongly-controverted  phenomena,  I  will  here  mention  one  only  of  the 
forms  of  subliminal  faculty  which  these  experiments  illustrated; — a 
form  which  can  be  paralleled  from  ordinary  psycho-physical  experiment, 
and  from  the  experience  of  conspicuous  and  well-known  persons.  I 
allude  to  the  hypermnesia  of  crystal-vision  ; — shown  in  three  ways  : 
(1)  the  power  of  reproducing  facts  once  known,  but  forgotten,  (2)  the 
power  of  presenting  conclusions  without  awareness  of  the  intermediate 
steps,  and  (3)  the  power  of  reproducing  facts  never  consciously  known  to 
the  supraliminal  self,  although  they  may  at  some  time  have  fallen 
within  the  field  of  external  vision.  These  powers,  although  bearing- 
somewhat  different  relations  to  ordinary  memory,  are  found  so  much 
intermingled  in  practice  that  I  must  stretch  the  term  hypermnesia  to 
include  them  all. 

I  regard  this  hypermnesia  as  eminently  a  subliminal  faculty,  of  which 
examples  of  many  kinds  will  present  themselves  as  we  j^roceed.  And 
I  begin  here  by  quoting  an  ingenious  experiment  by  which  Dr.  Scripture, 
of  Clark  University,  has  shown  that  in  the  most  ordinary  act  of  vision 
we  must  discriminate  between  that  which  is  remembered  by  the  super- 
ficial consciousness  and  that  which  remains, — hidden,  but  educible, — in 
some  depth  below,  i 

1  Scripture,  Ueber  den  associativen  Vorlauf  der  Vorstellungen,  Leipzig,  1891 : 
p,  90,  sqq. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

349 

Dr.  Scripture  shows  to  the  percipient  a  card  with  a  picture  in  the 
middle  and  a  small  letter  of  the  alphabet  printed  beneath  the  picture. 
The  exposure  is  so  short  that  the  percipient  observes  only  the  main 
picture,  and  has  no  conscious  knowledge  whatever  of  the  letter  of  the 
alphabet.  Yet  when  afterwards  the  letter  is  shown  by  itself  to  the 
percipient,  it  often  recalls, — gradually,  but  at  last  distinctly, — the 
picture  of  star  or  elephant  or  whatever  it  may  have  been  which  was  on. 
the  centre  of  the  card  in  whose  corner  the  letter  was  printed.  It  often 
happens  that  the  percipient  cannot  tell  in  what  way  this  obscure 
association  of  letter  and  picture  has  heen  effected.  He  merely  feels  that 
there  is  a  connection,  say  between  the  letter  M  and  the  elephant.  "  Er 
hatte  nur  ein  Gefiihl  der  Richtigkeit."  The  subliminal  self,  as  I  should 
express  it,  has  sent  up  its  message  in  a  feeble  current,  not  yet  articu- 
lated into  sensory  terms. 

In  this  happy  contrivance  we  have  both  the  advantages  and  the 
disadvantages  of  a  laboratory  experiment  as  contrasted  with  a  spon- 
taneous incident.  We  have  great  definiteness  in  the  upheaval  of 
subliminal  memoi'ies,  but  that  upheaval  is  on  the  very  smallest  scale. 
The  pictures  which  escape  the  notice  of  the  supraliminal  self  are  retained 
by  the  subluninal  for  but  a  short  time,  and  at  a  short  distance  below 
the  threshold.  They  resemble  pebbles  which  the  earthworm  sucks  into 
its  burrow  and  re-ejects  upon  the  lawn,  rather  than  an  uprushing  lava- 
stream  from  caves  of  hidden  tire.  They  represent,  one  may  say,  the 
first  stage  of  a  process  which,  although  often  inconspicuous,  is  not 
likely  to  be  discontinuous, — the  sustenance,  namely,  of  the  supraliminal 
life  by  impulse  or  guidance  from  below. 

I  pass  on  to  an  example  on  a  larger  scale  of  subliminal  visualisa- 
tion, subliminal  hypermnesia,  which  Nature  herself  has  again  and  again 
supplied ; — involving  the  hidden  manipulation  of  mind's-eye  pictures 
of  great  complexity. 

On  this  topic  again  we  shall  find  help  in  work  done  by  Dr.  Scrip- 
ture ;  although  he  has  here  worked  with  a  different  object,  and  has 
indicated  no  connection  between  his  two  inquiries. 

During  the  course  of  the  present  century, — and  alas  !  the  scientific 
observation  of  unusual  specimens  of  humanity  hardly  runs  back  farther, 
or  so  far, — the  public  of  great  cities  has  been  fi'om  time  to  time  sur- 
prised and  diverted  by  some  so-called  "  calculating  boy,"  or  "  arith- 
metical prodigy,"  generally  of  tender  years,  and  capable  of  performing 
"  in  his  head,"  and  almost  instantaneously,  problems  for  which  ordinary 
workers  would  require  pencil  and  paper  and  a  much  longer  time.  In 
some  few  cases,  indeed,  the  ordinary  student  would  have  no  means 
whatever  of  solving  the  problem  which  the  calculating  boy  unriddled 
with  ease  and  exactness.  These  calculating  boys  have  simply  been 
noted  as  anomalies,  and  no  attempt  (so  far  as  I  can  find)  has  been  made> 

350 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

to  explain  their  powers,  that  is  to  say,  to  include  this  special  gift 
under  any  wider  generalisation.  Recently,  indeed.  Dr.  Scripture  has 
made  a  careful  attempt  to  collect  the  hints  or  explanations  which  these 
prodigies  have  given  of  their  methods  of  work  ;  methods  which  one 
might  naturally  expect  to  be  of  use  in  ordinary  education.^  For  our 
jiresent  purpose  that  task,  although  needful,  was  only  preliminary.  We 
wish  to  know  how  much  of  his  achievement  the  phenomenal  calculator 
can  explain,  mainly  in  (jrder  that  we  may  realise  how  much  remains 
inexplicable  to  himself  as  to  others. 

And  the  records  left  to  us,  imperfect  as  they  are,  are  enough  to  show 
that  the  main  and  primary  achievement  has  in  fact  been  subliminal, 
while  conscious  or  supraliminal  effort  has  sometimes  been  wholly  absent, 
sometimes  has  supervened  only  after  the  gift  has  been  so  long  exercised 
that  the  accesses  between  different  strata  have  become  easy  by  frequent 
traversing.  The  prodigy  grown  to  manhood,  who  now  recognises  the 
arithmetical  artifices  which  he  used  unconsciously  as  a  boy,  resembles 
the  hypnotic  subject  trained  by  suggestion  to  remember  in  waking- 
hours  the  events  of  the  trance. 

In  almost  every  point,  indeed,  where  comparison  is  possible  we  shall 
find  this  computative  gift  resembling  other  manifestations  of  subliminal 
faculty, — such  as  the  power  of  seeing  hallucinatory  figures, — rather  than 
the  results  of  steady  supraliminal  effort, — such  as  the  power  of  logical 
analysis.  In  the  first  place,  this  faculty,  in  spite  of  its  obvious  connec- 
tion with  general  mathematical  grasp  and  insight,  is  found  almost  at 
random, — among  non-mathematical  and  even  quite  stuj^id  persons,  as 
well  as  among  mathematicians  of  mark.  In  the  second  place,  it  shows 
itself  mostly  in  early  childhood,  and  tends  to  disaj^pear  in  later  life  ; — in 
this  resembling  visualising  power  in  general,  and  the  power  of  seeing 
hallucinatory  figures  in  particular,  which  powers,  as  both  Mr.  Galton's 
inquiries  and  our  own  tend  to  show,  are  habitually  stronger  in  child- 
hoijd  and  youth  than  in  later  yeai's.  Again,  it  is  noticeable  that  when 
the  power  disappears  early  in  life  it  is  apt  to  leave  behind  it  no  memory 
whatever  of  the  processes  involved.  And  even  when,  by  long  persistence 
in  a  reflective  mind,  the  power  has  become,  so  to  say,  adopted  into  the 
supraliminal  consciousness,  there  nevertheless  may  still  be  flashes  of 
pure  "inspiration,"  Avhen  the  answer  "comes  into  the  mind"  with 
absolutely  no  perception  of  intermediate  steps.  I  subjoin  a  table, 
compiled  by  help  of  Dr.  Scripture's  collection,  which  will  broadly 
illustrate  the  main  points  above  mentioned.  Some  more  detailed 
remarks  may  then  follow.^ 

1  "  Arithmetical  Prodigies,"  in  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol.  IV.,  No.  1. 
{April,  1891.) 

2  No  adequate  account  of  Jacques  Inaudi,— the  present  "  prodigy,  "—has  as  yet 
come  under  my  notice. 

The  StMiminctl  Consciousness. 

351 

Table  of  Principal  Arithmetical  Prodigies. 

Name  (alphabetically). 

Age  when  gift 
was  observed. 

Duration  of  gift. 

Intelligence. 

Ampere 
Bidder 
Buxton 
Colburn 

4 
10 

1 

6 

through  life 

few  years 
through  life 

average 
very  low 
low 

eminent 
average  ? 

good 
low 

eminent 

Dase  [or  Dahse] 

boyhood 
boyhood 

Fuller 
Gauss 

Jlangiamelo 
Monde  ux 
Prolongeau 
Safford 

"Mr.  YanR,  of  Utica  "  ... 
Whately 

3 
10 
10 
6 

6 
6 
3 

few  years 
few  years 
few  years 
few  years 
few  years 
few  years 

9. 

low 

low 

good 

average  '? 
good 

Now  among  these  thirteen  names  we  have  two  men  of  transcendent, 
;ind  three  of  high  ability.  What  accounts  have  they  given  us  of  their 
methods  ? 

Of  the  gift  of  Gauss  and  Ampere  we  know  nothing  except  a  few 
striking  anecdotes.  After  manifesting  itself  at  an  age  when  there  is 
usually  no  continuous  supraliminal  mental  effort  worth  speaking  of,  it 
appears  to  have  been  soon  mei'ged  in  tlie  general  hl&ze  of  their  genius. 
With  Bidder  the  gift  persisted  through  life,  but  grew  weaker  as  he  grew 
older.  His  paper  in  Vol.  XV.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Institute  of 
Civil  Engineers,  while  furnishing  a  number  of  practical  hints  to  the 
calculator,  indicates  also  a  singular  readiness  of  communication  between 
different  mental  strata.  "Whenever,"  he  says  (p.  255),  "I  feel  called 
upon  to  make  use  of  the  stores  of  my  mind,  they  seem  to  rise  with  the 
rapidity  of  lightning."  And  in  Vol.  CIII.  oi  the  same  Proceedings, 
Mr.  W.  Pole,  F.R.S.,  in  describing  how  Mr.  Bidder  could  determine 
mentally  the  logarithm  of  any  number  to  7  or  8  places,  says  (p.  252) : 
"  He  had  an  almost  miraculous  power  of  seeing,  as  it  were,  intuitively 
what  factors  would  divide  any  large  number,  not  a  prime.  Thus,  if 
he  were  given  the  number  17,861,  he  would  instantly  remark  it  was 
;337  X  53.  .  .  .  He  could  not,  he  said,  explain  how  he  did  this ; 
it  seemed  a  natural  instinct  to  him." 

Mr.  Bidder's  case  is  well  known ;  but  it  may  be  of  interest  to 
quote  some  passages  from  an  autobiographical  statement  kindly 
furnished  to  me  by  Mr.  Blyth,  of  Edinburgh,  the  well-known  civil 
engineer,  whose  own  gift,  like  that  of  the  younger  Mr.  Biddei', 
though  not  such  as  to  entitle  him  to  I'ank  as  a  "  prodigy,"  yet  marks 
Jiini  out  distinctly  from  ordinary  mankind. 

352 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

P.    141.  . 

12,  Belgrave-crescent,  Edinburgh. 
,  Febmary  28th,  1892. 

I  shall  now  endeavour,  in  resjjonse  to  your  request,  to  give  some  account 
of  my  late  brother's  and  my  own  faculty  of  arithmetical  calculation  men- 
tally, and  it  may  be  interesting  if  I  allude  to  influences  even  before  birth 
which  I  have  always  felt  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  niy  brother's 
great  power. 

Benjamin  Hall  Blyth  was  born  on  July  6th,  1819.  Our  mother  had  a  natural 
arithmetical  gift — not  to  any  very  marked  degree,  but  decidedly  above  the 
average,  and  especially  so  among  females.  Some  months  before  Benjamin's 
birth  the  wonderful  calculating  boy.  Bidder  (then,  I  think,  about  12  or  14 
years  of  age),  was  exhibiting  in  Edinburgh,  and  made  a  private  exhibition  in 
my  father's  house.  My  mother  was  greatly  astonished  and  interested,  put 
various  questions  to  Bidder,  and  some  weeks  later  requested  my  father  to 
invite  him  to  another  seance,  whicli  was  done.  Her  interest  increased  on 
this  second  occasion,  and  the  wonderful  hoy  continued  to  occupy  her  mind 
frequently. 

It  is,  I  believe,  admitted  by  physiologists  that  anything  greatly  occupy- 
ing a  mother's  mind  certainly  may,  and  frequently  does,  influence  the 
character  of  her  unborn  child.  At  all  events,  my  brother,  whether  from  tliis 
or  heredity,  or  both,  very  early  manifested  a  marvellous  power  of  mental 
calculation.  When  almost  exactly  six  years  of  age  Benjamin  was  walking- 
with  his  father  before  breakfast,  when  he  said,  "Papa,  at  what  hour  was  I 
bom?"    He  was  told  four  a.m.  -  . 

Ben.  :  What  o'clock  is  it  at  present  ? 

Ans. :  Seven  fifty  a.m.  [My  father  always  took  exercise  before  breakfast 
in  summer.] 

Tlie  child  walked  on  a  few  hundred  yards,  then  turned  to  his  father  and 
stated  the  number  of  seconds  he  had  lived.  My  father  noted  down  the 
figures,  made  the  calculation  when  he  got  home,  and  told  Ben  he  was  172, 80D 
seconds  wrong,  to  which  he  got  a  ready  reply  :  ' '  Oh,  papa,  you  have  left  out 
two  days  for  the  leap  years — 1820  and  1824, "  which  was  the  case. 

This  latter  fact  of  the  extra  day  in  leap  year  is  not  known  to  many 
children  of  six,  and  if  anyone  will  try  to  teach  an  ordinary  child  of  these 
years  the  multiplication  table  up  to  12  x  12  he  will  he  better  able  to  realiso 
how  extraordinary  was  this  calculation  for  such  an  infant. 

I  am  conscious  of  an  intuitive  recognition  of  tlie  relation  of  figures.  For 
instance,  in  reading  statements  of  figures  in  newspapers,  which  are  very 
often  egregiously  wrong,  it  seems  to  come  to  me  intuitively  that  sometliing  is 
wrong,  and  when  that  occurs  I  am  usually  right. 

I  have  always  felt  that  there  were  times  when  my  power  was  much  weaker 
than  others,  not  only  when  tired,  but,  like  a  musician,  when  not  in  the  mood. 
I  have  not  tlie  same  confidence  now  at  66  years  of  age  as  when  younger. 
That  is  to  say,  I  like  to  check  a  calculation  before  stating  it,  though  I  can 
do  nearly  as  difficult  ones  as  at  any  time  of  my  life,  tliough  not  so  rapidly. 

As  to  there  being  any  degree  of  connection  Ijetween  this  aritlimetical 
power  and  ambidexterity,  there  is  none,  I  think,  in  my  case.  I  do  not 
possess  the  latter  gift  consciously,  though  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to  use  the 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

333 

left  hand  better  than  the  average  of  jDeople,  but  I  should  not  for  a  moment 
claim  to  be  ambidextrous.  My  daughter,  in  saying  that  I  was,  may  have 
confused  me  with  my  eldest  son,  who  certainly  is,  but  I  attribute  that  to  his 
being  born  left-handed  and  compelled  as  a  child  to  use  his  right,  as,  for 
instance,  in  use  of  knife  or  spoon,  playing  cricket,  golf  with  right-hand  clubs, 
&c.  ;  he  can  bowl  or  bat  with  either  hand,  paint  with  both  hands ;  will  draw 
the  fore  legs  of  an  animal  with  one  hand,  the  hind  legs  with  another,  just  as 
the  bends  or  curves  suit  one  hand  more  readily.  He  is  fond  of  mechanical 
work,  and  can  use  either  hand  in  turning  articles  on  a  lathe.  Left-handed- 
ness  runs  in  our  family  on  both  sides,  and  so  I  say  I  may  have  some  little 
ambidexterity  without  knowing  it. 

Edward  L.  I.  Blyth. 

Mr.  Blyth's  interesting  record  contains  other  illustrations  of 
several  points  above  mentioned  ; — the  early  and  instinctive  appearance 
of  the  faculty  ;  its  gradual  subjection  to  supraliminal  guidance  ;  yet 
the  persistence  of  occasional  "  subliminal  uprushes,"  which  give  the 
jjroblem's  answer  without  its  intermediate  steps. 

Passing  on  to  the  two  other  men  of  high  ability  known  to  have 
possessed  this  gift.  Professor  Safford  and  Archbishop  Whately,  we  are 
struck  with  the  evanescence  of  the  power  after  early  youth, — or  even 
before  the  end  of  childhood.  I  quote  from  Dr.  Scripture  Archbishop 
Whately's  account  of  his  own  powers. 

"  There  was  certainly  something  peculiar  in  my  calculating  faculty.  lb 
began  to  show  itself  at  between  five  and  six,  and  lasted  about  three  years. 

I  soon  got  to  do  the  most  difficult  sums,  always  in  my  head,  for  I 
knew  nothing  of  figures  beyond  numeration.  I  did  these  sums  much  <[uicker 
than  anyone  could  upon  paper,  and  I  never  remember  committing  the 
smallest  error.  When  I  went  to  school,  at  whicli  time  the  passion  wore  off,  I 
was  a  perfect  dunce  at  ciphering,  and  have  continued  so  ever  since." 

Still  more  remarkable,  perhaps,  was  Professor  SalFord's  loss  of  power. 
Professor  Safibrd's  whole  bent  was  mathematical  ;  his  boyish  gift  of 
calculation  raised  him  into  notice  ;  and  he  is  now  a  Professor  of 
Astronomy.  He  had  therefore  every  motive  and  every  o^aportunity  to 
retain  the  gift,  if  thought  and  practice  could  have  retained  it.  But 
whereas  at  ten  years  old  he  worked  correctly  in  his  head,  in  one  minute 
a  multiplication  sum  whose  answer  consisted  of  36  figures,  he  is  now,  I 
believe,  neither  more  nor  less  capable  of  such  calculation  than  his 
neighbours. 

Similar  was  the  fate  of  a  personage  who  never  rises  above  initials, 
and  of  whose  general  capacity  we  know  nothing. 

"Mr.  Van  R.,  of  Utica,"  says  Dr.  Scripture  on  the  authority  of 
Gall,  "at  the  age  of  six  years  distinguished  himself  by  a  singular 
faculty  for  calculating  in  his  head.  At  eight  he  entirely  lost  this 
faculty,  and  after  that  time  he  could  calculate  neither  better  nor  faster 
than  any  other  person.  He  did  not  retawi  the  slightest  idea  of  the 
manner  in  whicli  he  performed  his  calculations  in  childhood." 

354 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Turning  now  to  the  stupid  or  uneducated  prodigies,  Dase  alone 
seems  to  have  retained  his  power  through  life.  Colburn  and  Mondeux, 
and  apparently  Prolongeau  and  Mangiamele,  lost  their  gift  after  child- 
hood. 

A  few  hints  as  to  processes  have  been  gleaned  from  this  group  ; — the 
most  interesting  point  being  that  Colburn  was  for  some  years  unable, 
\mt  afterwards  to  some  extent  able,  to  explain  his  own  processes.  "  His  ■ 
friends  tried  to  elicit  a  disclosure  of  the  methods  by  which  he  performed 
his  calculations,  but  for  nearly  thiee  years  he  was  unable  to  satisfy 
theii'  inquiries.  He  positively  declared  that  he  did  Jiot  know  how  the 
answers  came  into  his  mind."  ^  Later  on  he  did  give  an  account  of  his 
artifices,  which,  however,  showed  no  great  ingenuity. 

But  on  the  whole  the  ignorant  prodigies  seldom  appear  to  have 
been  conscious  of  any  continuous  logical  process,  while  in  some  cases 
the  separation  of  the  supi'aliminal  and  sijljliminal  trains  of  thought 
must  have  been  very  complete.  "  Buxton  would  talk  freely  whilst 
doing  his  questions,  that  being  no  molestation  or  hindrance  to  liim.'"^ 
Fixity  and  clearness  of  inward  visualisation  seems  to  have  been  the 
leading  necessity  in  all  these  achievements ;  and  it  apparently  mattered 
little  whether  the  niental  blackboard  (so  to  say)  on  which  the  steps 
of  the  calculation  were  recorded  were  or  were  not  visible  to  the  mind's 
eye  of  the  suj^raliminal  self. 

I  have  Ijeen  speaking  only  of  visualisation  ;  \mt  it  would  be  interest- 
ing if  we  could  discover  how  much  actual  mathematical  insight  or  in^ 
ventiveness  can  be  subconsciously  exercised.  Here,  however,  our 
matei'ials  are  very  imperfect.  From  Gauss  and  Ampere  we  have,  so  far 
as  I  know,  no  record.  At  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  we  know  that 
Dase  (perhaps  the  most  successful  of  all  these  prodigies)  was  singulaiiy 
devoid  of  mathematical  grasp.  "  On  one  occasion  Petersen  tried  in 
vain  for  six  weeks  to  get  the  first  elements  of  mathematics  into  his 
head."  "  He  could  not  be  made  to  have  the  least  idea  of  a  proposition 
in  Euclid.  Of  any  language  but  his  own  he  could  never  master  a 
Avord."  Yet  Dase  received  a  grant  from  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
Hamljurg,  o\\  the  recommendation  of  Gauss,  for  mathematical  work  ; 
and  actually  in  twelve  years  made  tables  of  factors  and  prime  numlDers 
for  the  seventh  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  eighth  million, — a  task 
which  probably  few  men  could  have  accomjalished,  without  mechanical 
aid,  in  an  ordinary  lifetime.  He  may  thus  be  ranked  as  the  only  man 
who  has  ever  done  valuable  service  to  mathematics  without  being  able 
to  cross  the  Ass's  Bridge. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  Mangiamele,  there  may  have  l)een 

1  Scripture,  op.  cit.,  )>.  50. 

-  Scripture,  op.  ci<.,  p.  54.  •  .  •  .  ■ 

The  Suhlimincd  Conscioasness. 

355 

real  ingenuity  subliminally  at  work.  Our  account  of  this  prodigy  is 
authentic,  but  tantalising  from  its  brevity. 

"  In  the  year  1837  Vito  Mangiamele,  who  gave  his  age  as  10  years  and 
4  months,  j^resented  himself  before  Ai-ago  in  Paris.  He  was  the  son  of  a 
shepherd  of  Sicily,  wIkj  was  not  able  to  give  his  son  any  instruction.  By 
chance  it  was  discovered  that  by  methods  peculiar  to  himself  he  resolved 
problems  that  seemed  at  the  first  view  to  require  extended  mathematical 
knowledge.  In  the  presence  of  the  Academy  Arago  proposed  the  following 
4[uestions  :  'What  is  the  cubic  root  of  3,796,4161'  In  the  sj^ace  of  about 
lialf  a  minute  the  child  resjjonded  156,  wliich  is  correct.  '  What  satisfies  the 
condition  that  its  cube  jjIus  five  times  its  square  is  equal  to  42  times  itself 
increased  by  40  '] '  Everybody  understands  that  this  is  a  demand  for  the  root 
of  the  equation  x"'  +  5  — 42  x — 40  =  0.  In  less  than  a  minute  Vito  responded 
tliat  5  satisfied  the  condition  ;  which  is  correct.  The  third  question  related 
to  the  solution  of  the  equation  — ix — 16779  =  0.  This  time  the  cliild 
remained  four  to  five  minutes  without  answering  :  finally  lie  demanded  with 
some  hesitation  if  3  would  not  be  the  solution  desired.  The  secretary  having 
informed  him  that  he  was  wrong,  Vito,  a  few  moments  afterwards,  gave  the 
number  7  as  the  true  solution.  Having  finally  been  requested  to  extract  the 
10th  root  of  282,475,249  Vito  found  in  a  short  time  that  the  root  is  7. 

"At  a  later  date  a  committee,  composed  of  Arago,  Cauchy  and  otliers, 
complains  that  '  the  masters  of  Mangiamele  have  always  kept  secret  the 
methods  of  calculation  which  he  made  use  of.' 

Thei'e  is  another  point  on  which  something  might  have  been  leai'nt 
from  the  study  of  so  marked  a  group  of  automatists — utilisers  of  sub- 
liminal capacity — as  these  "  prodigies  "  form.  Their  bodily  charac- 
teristics might  have  been  examined  with  a  view  to  tracing  such  j^hysical 
concomitants  as  may  go  with  this  facility  of  communication  between 
psychical  strata.  "We  have,  however,  few  data  available  for  this  pur- 
pose. Colburn  inherited  supernumerary  digits,  and  Mondeux  is 
I'eported  to  liave  been  hysterical.  On  the  other  hand  the  "  prodigies  " 
of  wliose  lives  after  childhood  anything  is  known  seem  to  have  been 
free  from  nervous  taint.  No  one,  for  instance,  could  well  be  more 
I'emote  from  hysteria  than  the  elder  Bidder  ; — or  than  Mr.  Bidder, 
Q.C.,  or  Mr.  Blyth,  of  Edinburgh,  the  best  living  English  representa- 
tives of  what  we  may  call  the  calculating  diathesis. 

It  is  plain,  then,  that  no  support  is  given  by  what  we  know  of  tliis 
group  to  the  theoiy  which  regards  subliminal  mentation  as  necessaiily 
a  sign  of  some  morbid  dissociation  of  psychical  elements.  Is  there,  on 
the  other  hand,  anything  to  confirm  the  suggestion  which  I  have  else- 
where made  that, — inasmuch  as  the  addition  of  subliminal  to  supra- 
liminal mentation  may  often  be  a  completion  and  integration  rather 
than  a  fractionation  or  disintegration  of  the  total  individuality, — we  are 
likely  sometimes  to  find  traces  of  a  more  than  common  activity  of  the 

}  Scripture,  op.  cit.,  p.  17. 

356 

Mr.  F.  W.  R  Myers. 

right  or  less  used  cerebral  hemisphere?  Finding  no  mention  of  ambidex- 
terity in  the  meagre  notices  which  have  come  down  to  us  of  the 
greater  "prodigies,"  I  begged  Mr.  Blyth  and  Mr.  Bidder,  Q.C.,  to  tell 
me  whether  their  left  hands  possessed  more  than  usual  power.  Mr. 
Blyth's  reply  has  been  ali'eady  quoted.    I  now  quote  Mr.  Bidder's. 

"  Ravensbury  Park,  September  11th,  1891. 

"As  to  ambidexterity.  Of  course  I  am  ignorant  of  the  train  of  thf)ught 
that  led  you  to  ask  the  question  ;  but  oddly  enough  I  am  a  very  good 
example  of  it.  I  am  not  aware  that  my  father  was  ambidextrous  ;  nor  are 
any  of  my  children,  so  far  as  I  know.  For  myself,  in  all  sports, — bowling, 
throwing,  fishing,  tennis,  racquets,  Ac, — I  almost  invariably  use  the  left 
hand.  I  crwinof.  throw  to  any  purpose  with  tlie  right.  In  cricket,  however,  I 
bat  with  the  right  hand.  In  shaving,  I  shave  one  half  of  the  face  with  the 
left  hand  and  the  other  with  the  right,  in  each  case  taking  the  part  which 
shaves  forirards,  so  as  to  have  no  backwdvd  shaving.  In  writing  I  write 
with  the  right  hand,  being  so  tauglit  ;  but  some  years  ago  I  discovered  that  if 
I  let  my  left  hand  move  unconstrainedly  and  without  conscious  thought  as  to 
how  it  should  f(.)rm  the  letters,  I  covild  write  with  equal  fluency,  though  not 
so  well  formed  letters.  But  the  direction  of  the  writing  is  reversed ;  so  that 
it  is  requisite  either  to  look  tlirough  the  paper  or  view  it  in  a  looking-glass, 
to  read  the  writing.  My  left  hand  and  nerve  system  seems  to  have  learnt 
by  sympathy  what  tlie  right  had  ac(|uired  by  education  and  practice. 

"Further,  I  hamd  that  taking  two  pencils  one  in  each  hand  I  could  write 
simultaneously  with  both  hands, — the  two  writings  proceeding  in  opposite 
directions.  I  have  occasionally  found  since  that  other  people  could  to  some 
extent  do  tlie  same.  I  repeatedly  tried  very  hard  to  write  one  word  with 
one  liand  and  another  with  the  other  ; — but  it  won't  do  ;  the  result  is  always 
a  nondescript  jiroduction  of  parts  of  both  words, — something  like  the  non-, 
sense  words  in  Alice  in,  Woiuledand.  I  enclose  a  specimen  which  will  show 
the  simultaneous  writing." 

It  thus  appears  that  in  the  only  two  cases  in  which  I  have  been 
able  to  make  inquiry  there  is  somewhat  moi'e  dextro-eerebral  capacity 
than  in  the  mass  of  mankind. 

If  I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  these  aiithmetical  prodigies,  it  is 
not,  of  course,  because  I  regard  this  gift  of  subliminal  conqjutation  as 
a  high  form  of  genius,  but  because  the  definiteness  of  the  achievements 
presents  some  vague  and  elusive  problems  in  a  comparatively  manageable 
foi'm.  Thus  it  is  easier  in  the  case  of  a  Mangiamele  than  in  the  case 
of  a  Dante  to  ask  oneself  with  exactness  which  is  the  least  improbable 
of  the  conceivable  answers, — all  of  them  largely  conjectural, — to  the 
question,  "Where  did  the  child  get  his  genius?" — a  question  which  the 
evolutionist,  though  he  cannot  solve  it,  must  not  ignore. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  answers  which  have  been  iniplicitly  or 
explicitly  given  to  such  a  question  are  reducible  under  four  main  heads. 
I  shall  cite  these  in  the  order  in  which  they  push  the  required  answer 
further  and  further  back.    But  the  reader  must  remember  that  there 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

357 

is  absolutely  no  difference  in  point  of  the  mystery  involved  between 
one  reply  and  another.  All  have  to  deal  with  the  same  ultimately 
inexplicable  facts,  and  the  most  Lamarckian  of  answers  is  in  reality  as 
mystical  as  the  most  Platonic. 

(1)  First,  then,  I  place  what  I  have  called  the  Lamarckian  reply. 
The  eminent  capacity  of  the  individual  under  discussion  was  inherited 
from  the  acquired  capacities  of  self-improving  ancestors.  To  this  we 
must  here  answer  that  even  assuming  acquired  characteristics  to  be 
inheritable,  there  were  as  a  rule  no  such  acquired  capacities  for  our 
prodigies  to  inherit.  Mangiamele  the  father,  the  rough  Sicilian 
peasant,  who  did  not  teach  his  son  his  letters  ; — Mondeux  the  father, 
the  woodcutter  of  Tours,  who  did  not  teach  his  son  the  numerals  ; — 
these  were  not  men  who  had  developed  their  mathematical  gifts  as  the 
Lamarckian  giraffe  developed  the  bones  of  his  neck.  The  only  case 
where  heredity  could  be  pleaded  is  that  of  the  younger  (not  of  the 
elder)  Bidder  ; — unless  we  count  under  this  head  the  pre-natal  sugges- 
tion which  Mr.  Blyth  believes  to  have  been  efficacious  in  his  own  and 
his  brother's  case. 

(2)  Next  comes  the  reply  which  I  suppose  would  now  be  commonly 
given,  and  which,  to  avoid  the  ambiguities  of  the  word  Darwinian,  I  will 
call  the  protoplasmic  solution.  Mangiamele's  gift,  in  this  view,  was  a 
spoi-t  or  bye-product  occun-ing  in  the  course  of  evolution  ; — a  new 
quality  derived  from  old  qualities  not  obviously  resembling  it.  It  was 
one  of  those  favourable  spontaneous  variations  of  which  natural  selection 
has  often  been  able  to  take  advantage ; — and  whose  occasional  unpre- 
dictable occurrence  has  raised  our  race  to  its  present  level.  Now  the 
cause  of  such  sports,  I  need  not  say,  Darwin  expressly  leaves  unex- 
plained. All  that  he  says  is  that  to  spoi't  in  this  way  is  characteristic 
of  living  matter.  Sudden  differentiation  in  unpredictable  directions 
must,  in  short,  be  a  latent  capacity  of  protoplasm  ;  and  the  explana- 
tion of  Mangiamele's  gift  is  virtually  referred  to  the  nature  of  the  stock 
of  protoplasm  -with  which  his  earliest  ancestors  started  oj^erations. 

This  answer  has  the  logical  advantage  over  the  Lamarckian  answer, 
(which,  of  course,  at  bottom  is  protoplasmic  also,)  that,  being  hardly 
more  than  a  mere  restatement  of  the  facts,  it  cannot  help  being  true  so 
far  as  it  goes.  But  it  is  not,  and  was  not  propounded  by  Darwin  as 
being,  an  explanation  of  the  ultimate  source  of  faculty,  but  only  of 
certain  incidents  in  its  terrene  development. 

(3)  In  direct  contrast  to  these  terrene  explanations  comes  the  pre- 
terrene  explanation  of  Plato.  A  man  learns  geometrical  truths  easily, 
Plato  said,  because  in  reality  he  is  only  remembering  them.  He  is 
remembering  them  beause  he  learnt  them  originally  in  the  ideal  world, 
before  his  incarnation  "  in  this  body,  which  is  our  tomb."  One  wishes 
that  Plato  had  had  the  facts  now  before  us  to  work  up  into  a  dialogue. 

358 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myer.^. 

"  Dase,  or  Inspiration."  If  he  thought  his  hypothesis  of  reminiscence 
necessary  in  order  to  explain  the  mental  effort  of  an  intelligent  adult 
mastering  what  were  then  the  startling  novelties  contained  in  the  first 
books  of  Euclid, — what  would  he  have  said  of  Pascal,  who  irals  iwv 
(Wupe  jxeyaXa  epya, — sported  with  cosmic  laws  in  childish  play  ; — of  Gauss 
flinging  down  his  slate  with  the  answer  alone  written  upon  it, — Da 
liegt  es  ! — the  moment  that  the  master  had  dictated  the  question 
which  was  to  occupy  the  class  for  an  houi'  ; — or  above  all,  as  I  say,  of 
the  crass  and  stolid  Dase, — as  it  were  an  idiot  supported  from  the 
Prytaneum,  to  declare  secrets  which  the  gods  had  hid  from  men  1 

(4)  Lastly,  the  view  which  I  am  here  suggesting  is  in  some  sort  a 
renewal  of  the  old  Platonic  "  reminiscence,"  in  the  light  of  that  fuller 
knowledge  which  is  common  property  to-day.  I  hold,  of  course,  that 
in  the  protoplasm  or  primary  liasis  of  all  organic  life  there  must  have 
1)een  an  inherent  adaptability  to  the  manifestation  of  all  faculties 
which  organic  life  has  in  fact  manifested.  I  hold,  of  course,  that  sports 
or  vai'iations  occur,  which  are  at  present  unpredictable,  and  which 
reveal  in  occasional  offspring  faculties  which  their  jjarents  showed  no 
signs  of  possessing.  But  I  differ  from  those  who  hold  that  the  faculty 
itself  thus  manifested  is  now  for  the  first  time  initiated  in  that  stock 
by  some  chance  combination  of  hereditary  elements.  I  hold  that  it  is 
not  initiated,  but  only  revealed  ;  that  the  "  sport "  has  not  called  a 
new  faculty  into  lieing,  hut  has  merely  raised  an  existing  faculty  above 
the  threshold  of  supraliminal  consciousness. 

This  view,  if  pushed  back  far  enough,  is  no  doubt  inconsistent  with 
tlie  way  in  which  evolution  is  generally  conceived.  For  it  denies  that 
all  human  faculties  need  have  been  evoked  by  terrene  experience.  It 
assumes  a  subliminal  self,  with  unknown  faculties,  oiiginated  in  some 
unknown  way,  and  not  merely  by  contact  with  the  needs  which  the 
terrene  organism  has  had  to  meet.  It  thus  seems  at  first  sight  to  be 
introducing  a  new  mystery,  and  to  be  introducing  it  in  a  gratuitous, 
way. 

To  this  I  reply  in  the  first  place  that  so  far  as  the  origin  of  man's 
known  powers  is  concerned,  no  fresh  mystery  is  in  fact  introdviced.  All 
human  j^owers,  to  put  the  thing  broadly,  have  somehow  or  other  to  be 
got  into  pi'otoplasm  and  got  out  again.  You  have  to  explain  first  how 
they  liecame  implicit  in  the  earliest  and  lowest  living  thing,  and  then 
how  they  have  become  thus  far  explicit  in  the  latest  and  highest.  All 
the  faculties  of  that  highest  being,  I  repeat,  existed  virtually  in  the 
lowest,  and  in  so  far  as  the  admitted  faculties  are  concerned  the 
diflierence  between  my  view  and  the  ordinary  view  may  be  said  to  be 
little  more  than  a  difference  as  to  the  sense  which  that  word  virtually 
is  here  to  assume. 

The  real  difference  between  the  two  views  appears  when  the  facul- 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

359 

ties  which  I  have  called  unknown  come  to  be  considered.  If  they  are 
held  to  be  I'eal,  my  view  is  certainly  the  better  able  to  embrace  them. 
I  hold  that  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  do  in  fact  exist  ; — telepathy,  a 
communication  between  incarnate  mind  and  incarnate  mind,  and  per- 
haps between  incarnate  minds  and  minds  unembodied  ; — clairvoyance,  a 
knowledge  of  things  terrene  which  overpasses  the  limits  of  ordinary 
perception, — and  ^\•hich  perhaps  also  achieves  an  insight  into  some  other 
than  terrene  world.  And  these  faculties,  I  say,  cannot  have  been 
acquired  by  natural  selection,  for  the  preservation  of  the  race,  during 
the  process  of  terrene  evolution.  In  some  sense  they  pre-existed  ;  they 
were  (as  we  may  phrase  it)  the  products  of  pre-terrene  evolution.  And 
if  they  were  so,  man's  other  powers  may  well  have  been  so  also.  Per- 
ception pre-existed  ;  and  the  specialised  forms  of  terrene  perception 
were  not  real  novelties  in  the  universe,  but  imperfect  adaptations  of 
protoplasm  to  the  manifestation  of  the  indwelling  general  perceptive 
power.  The  mathematical  faculty,  for  instance  (I  say  with  Plato),  pre- 
existed. "When  Dase  solved  all  those  sums  in  his  head,  his  power  of 
solving  them  was  not  a  fresh  development  in  his  ancestral  stock,  but 
depended  on  the  accidental  adaptation  of  his  organism  to  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  indwelling  computative  powei'.  I  do  not  indeed  venture 
to  follow  Plato  in  his  o)itogenetic  argument, — his  claim  that  the 
individual  computator  has  had  already  an  individual  training  in  com- 
putation. I  do  not  say  that  Dase  himself  learnt  or  divined  the  multi- 
plication-table in  some  ideal  world.  I  only  say  that  Dase  and  all  the 
rest  of  us  are  the  spawn  or  output  of  some  unseen  world  in  which  the 
multii^lication-table  is,  so  to  speak,  in  the  air.  Dase  trailed  it  after 
him,  as  the  poet  says  of  the  clouds  of  glory,  when  he  "descended  into 
generation  "  in  a  humble  position  at  Hamburg. 

In  him  and  in  his  ancestors  were  many  faculties  which  were  called 
^  out  by  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  became  supraliminal.  But  there 
were  many  faculties  also  which  were  not  thus  called  out,  and  which 
consequently  remained  subliminal.  To  these  faculties,  as  a  rule,  his 
supraliminal  self  could  get  no  access.  But  by  some  chance  of  evolution, 
— some  sport, — a  vent-hole  was  opened  at  this  one  point  between  the 
different  strata  of  his  being,  and  a  subliminal  uprush  carried  his  com- 
putative faculty  into  the  open  day. 

It  is  to  work  done  by  the  aid  of  any  such  uprush  that  the  word 
"  genius  "  may  be  most  fitly  applied.  "A  work  of  genius,"  indeed,  in  com- 
mon parlance,  means  a  work  which  satisfies  two  quite  distinct  require- 
ments. It  must  involve  something  original,  spontaneous,  unteachable, 
unexpected  ;  and  it  must  also  in  some  way  win  for  itself  the  admiration 
of  mankind.  Now,  psychologically  speaking,  the  first  of  these  require- 
ments corresponds  to  a  real  class,  the  second  to  a  purely  accidental 
one.    What  the  poet  feels  while  he  writes  his  poem  is  the  psychological 

360 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

fact  in  Ins  history  ;  what  his  friends  feel  while  they  read  it  may  be  a 
psychological  fact  in  tlieir  history,  but  does  not  alter  the  poet's  creative 
effort,  which  was  what  it  was,  whether  anyone  but  himself  ever  reads  his 
poem  or  no. 

And  popular  phraseology  justifies  our  insistence  upon  this  subjective 
side  of  genius.  Thus  it  is  common  to  say  that  "  Hartley  Coleridge  " 
(for  example)  "  was  a  genius,  although  he  never  produced  anything 
worth  speaking  of."  Men  recognise,  that  is  to  say,  from  descriptions 
of  Hartley  Coleridge,  and  from  the  fragments  which  he  has  left,  that 
ideas  came  to  him  with  what  I  have  termed  a  sense  of  subliminal  up- 
rush, — with  an  authentic,  although  not  to  us  an  instructive,  inspiration. 

The  especial  advantage  of  the  study  of  arithmetical  prodigies  is  that 
in  their  case  the  subjective  impression  coincides  closely  with  the  objec- 
tive result.  The  subliminal  computator  feels  that  the  sum  is  right,  and 
it  is  right.  Forms  of  real  or  supposed  genius  which  are  more  interest- 
ing are  apt  to  be  less  undeniable. 

In  conclusion  we  must  dwell  for  a  moment  upon  another  and 
higher  kind  of  intei'nal  visualisation.  I  have  spoken  of  the  arithmetical 
prodigy  as  possessing  a  kind  of  internal  blackboard,  on  which  he 
inscribes  with  ease  and  permanence  his  imaginary  memoranda.  But 
blackboards  are  not  the  only  surfaces  on  which  inscriptions  can  be 
made.  There  are  other  men, — prodigies  of  a  dilferent  order, — whose 
internal  tabula  is  not  of  lilackened  wood,  but  of  canvas  or  of  mai'ble  ; 
— whose  inscriptions  are  not  rows  of  ai'abic  numerals  but  living  lines  of 
colour,  or  curves  of  Ijreathing  stone.  Even  the  most  realistic  art  is 
.something  more  than  transcript  and  calculation  ;  and  for  art's  higher 
imaginative  achievements  thei'e  must  needs  be  moments  of  inward 
idealisation  when  visible  beauty  seems  but  the  token  and  symbol  of 
beauty  unrevealed  ; — when  Praxiteles  must  "  draw  from  his  own  heart 
the  archetype  of  the  Eros  that  he  made  "  ; — when  Tintoret  must  feel 
with  Heraclitus  that  "  whatsoever  we  see  waking  is  but  deadness,  and 
whatsoever  sleeping,  is  but  dream." 

It  would  be  easy  to  quote  many  a  passage  in  which  these  gifted 
visualisers  have  described,  more  impressively  than  Colburn  or  Bidder, 
the  unexpected,  the  incalculable  flashing  of  the  perfect  conception 
upon  the  eye  within.  But  such  self-revelations,  however  genuinely 
expressed,  might  only  produce  upon  the  reader  a  feeling  of  grotes- 
queness  or  confusion.  For,  as  I  have  said,  the  subjective  sensation  of 
triumphant  genius  is  hy  no  means  always  coincident  with  the  corre- 
•sponding  objective  effect.  In  the  diaries  of  the  luckless  Haydon  we 
should  And  ample  utterance  of  the  sense  of  complete  achievement.  In 
the  sonnets  of  Raphael  or  of  Michael  Angelo  we  should  find  all  moods 
of  haunting  search,  of  deep  desire  ; — descending  to  that  profoundest 
note  which  declares  that  sovereign  sweetness  is  in  itself  incompatible 

The  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

361 

with  the  life  of  earth  ; — che  soverchia  dolcezza  a  morte  mena.  It 
would,  I  repeat  once  more,  be  useless  for  the  psychologist  to  attempt 
to  classify  works  of  genius  on  the  basis  of  their  objective  merit.  In 
his  eyes  the  word  genius  will  have  the  truest  meaning  when  it  depends 
wholly  on  the  mind's  mode  of  interior  working, — when  it  is  made  to 
include  phenomena  as  disparate  as  Mr.  Higton's  vision  of  the  weight 
of  the  hides,  and  Lady  Eardley's  warning  voice,  and  Zerah  Colburn's 
answers  to  multiplication-sums,  along  with  Sappho's  odes,  and 
Beethoven's  sonatas,  and  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles ; — aye,  and  even, 
— what  seems  still  stranger, — along  with  the  poorest  art  which  has 
carried  with  it  a  genuine  sense  of  inspiration, — along  with  Smith's 
verses  to  Miss  Jones,  and  Miss  Jones'  water-colour  sketch  of  her 
guardian  angel.  Only  let  those  of  us  who  may  have  shared  this  glow 
remember  that  our  uprush  of  subliminal  faculty  may  be  of  no  deeper 
interest  to  mankind  than  was  Mr.  Higton's  equally  inspired  vision  of  a 
clock-face,  which  revealed  to  him,  while  his  watch  was  in  his  pocket, 
that  it  was  11.25  a.m.  The  only  I'eward  of  inspiration  which  we  are 
entitled  to  look  for  is  the  sense  of  inspiration  itself. 

Das  Lied,  das  aus  der  Kehle  dringt, 
Ist  Lohn,  der  reiclilich  lolinet. 

And  if  these  cautions  are  needed  in  the  realm  of  Art,  where  there 
are  at  least  some  accepted  canons  to  which  our  productions  must 
conform,  how  much  more  necessarj^  will  they  be  in  those  wider,  more 
emotional  fields  in  which  inspiration — subliminal  or  extraneous — is  so 
often  claimed, — in  the  realms  of  Love  and  Faith  '  But  the  questions  of 
the  subliminal  guidance  of  emotion,  of  the  origins  of  prophetic  utterance, 
although  not  alien  to  my  genei'al  subject,  lie  outside  of  my  present 
intention.  I  am  dealing  here  with  the  subliminal  self  as  it  operates 
within  the  limits  of  our  familiar  and  definite  capacity,  and  adds  to  that 
capacity,  which  seemed  strictly  conditioned  by  the  very  structure  of 
our  organism,  a  new  vividness  or  enei'gy  of  its  own.  I  have  urged 
that  the  spectrum  of  our  ordinary  consciousness, — even  without  con- 
sidering its  possible  prolongations  beyond  either  limit, — may  undergo 
a  general  accession  of  luminosity  from  the  uprush  from  some  central 
glow.  Bright  lines  may  thus  be  brightened  ;  and  dark  aljsorption-bands 
may  disappear.  And  there  is  ground  for  seiious  hope  in  the  thought 
that  this  intensification  of  radiance  may  be  the  destiny  of  the  faintest 
as  of  the  most  brilliant  luminary.  The  difference  between  human  spirit 
and  spirit,  as  between  blazing  sun  and  sun,  is  a  diiFerence  of  magnitude 
rather  than  of  constitution.  One  star  may  differ  from  another  star  in 
glory  ;  but  all  are  fashioned  of  the  same  primal  elements,  and  kindled 
with  the  same  cosmic  fire. 

362; 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Chapter  IV.  .  . 

Hypermnesic  Dreams.  ■  •  ■  ■ 

In  the  chapter  just  concluded  we  have  been  reviewing  certain  indi- 
cations of  subliminal  operation  which  are  discernible  in  ordinary 
wakijig  life,  and  within  the  range  of  man's  familiar  and  admitted 
powers.  It  has  been  shown  that  sensory  perceptions  of  more  than 
normal  acuteness,  sensory  memories  of  more  than  normal  distinctness 
and  tenacity,  ai'e  sometimes  initiated  or  preserved  beneath  the  threshold 
and  outside  the  control  of  the  waking  supraliminal  Self.  And  I  have 
urged  that  Ave  thus  olatain  glimpses  of  an  activity  which  I  Iselieve  to 
be  constantly  going  on  within  us ; — of  a  source  of  light  (to  retuiui  to  a 
previous  metaphor)  which  is  able  to  add  illumination  to  the  Ijright  lines 
of  our  familial'  sj^ectrum,  as  well  as  to  prolong  that  spectrum  beyond 
both  its  physiological  and  its  psychological  limits. 

The  main  interest  of  our  inquiiy  will  probably  be  found  in  excur- 
sions into  regions  of  faculty  as  yet  unmapped  and  unregistered.  But 
before  passing  on  to  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  we  must  complete  the 
task  of  the  last  chapter  by  reviewing  those  subliminal  indications  of 
quickened  sensory  perception,  intensified  memory,  which  are  discerned 
during  the  dominance  of  that  secoiid  phase  of  personality  which  we  are 
wont  to  class  as  e(jually  normal  with  our  waking  life. 

The  definition  of  sleep  is  a  task  which  the  physiologist  prudently 
declines  to  attempt.    The  causes  which  lead  to  its  onset; — the  condi- 
tion of  the  ])rain  and  other  organs  during  its  persistence  ; — the  precise 
Avay  in  Avhieh  it  {)ro(.lueps  its  I'estorative  or  other  effects ; — all  these  are 
still  matters  of  hypothesis,  not  of  knoAvledge.    And  the  old  difficulties 
of  explanation  have  been  increased, — to  an  extent  which  has  not  yet 
been  grasped  by  the  writers  of  ordinary  text-books, — by  all  these  recent 
■experiments  in  the  induction  of  hypnotic  slumber.    "  Accumulation  of 
waste  products,"  "de-oxygenation,"  "periodicity"  ; — causes  such  as  these, 
whatever  their  importance  in  inducing  ordinary  nocturnal  sleep,  can 
hardly  be  invoked  to  explain  a  long  deep  slumber  produced  by  mere 
suggestion  in  an  unfatigued  subject.    Nor  can  any  facile  simplification, 
■<jn  one  side  or  on  the  othei',  extricate  us  from  this  dilemma.  If,  with  the 
»Salpetriere  school,  we  pronounce  the  hypnotic  trance  a  morbid  pheno- 
menon, quite  dift'erent   from   true  sleep,  Ave  are  met  by  a  series  of 
■sleep-states  too  continuous  for  any  logical  break  ; — till  at  last  we  should 
have  to  call  the  baby's  slumber  in  the  cradle  a  morbid  thing,  Ijecause 
its  mother  has  used  monotonous  stimulation  in  the  form  of  rocking  and 
pats.    If  on  the  other  hand,  Avith  the  school  of  Nancy,  Ave  assert  that 
hypnotic  trance  is  virtually  identical  Avith  ordinary  sleep,  the  difference 
being  only  in  degrees  of  "  suggestibility," — then  Ave  have  but  imported 

The  Snhlimival  Consciousness. 

333 

into  our  conception  of  ordinary  sleep  that  unsolved  enigma  of  "  sugges- 
tion "  of  which  so  much  has  already  been  here  said. 

From  the  point  of  view  taken  in  these  papei's  such  attempts  at 
simjjlification  as  either  of  these  must  necessarily  be  crude  and  inadequate. 
We  are  regarding  the  liumau  individuality  as  a  practically  infinit(j 
reservoir  of  personal  states  ; — as  a  kaleidoscope  which  may  be  shaken 
into  a  thousand  patterns,  yet  so  that  no  pattern  can  emjiloy  all  the 
pieces  contained  in  the  tube.  We  shall  therefore  regard  sleep  as  a 
phase  of  personality  neither  more  nor  less  natural,  neither  more  nor  less 
explicable,  than  vigilance  ;~Jiatural  or  explicable,  indeed,  only  in  the 
historical  oi'  evolutionary  sense,  as  having  played  a  part  of  manifest  use- 
fulness in  the  C(_)nservation.  of  living  races. 

Ami  looking  to  the  origins  of  animal  life  we  shall  recognise  that 
the  permanent  state  of  lower  organisms,  the  primary  state  of  higher 
•organisms,  is  one  much  more  analogous  to  sleep  than  to  waking.  So 
long  as  food  comes  without  seeking  there  is  no  need  to  watch  or  wake. 
And  as  sleep  precedes  vigilance  so  do  dreams  precede  thought.  Such 
consciousness,  that  is  to  say,  as  may  exist  in  organisms  in  which  the 
alternation  of  waking  and  slumber  is  not  yet  definitely  established 
is  likely,  in  its  confused  dimness,  in  its  impei'fect  response  to  external 
stimuli,  to  resemble  our  slumber-sense  of  cold  or  pi'essure  far  moi/e 
closely  than  it  resembles  the  alert  attention  of  our  daylight  hours. 

Then  comes  into  play  that  agency — call  it  what  you  will — the 
•evolutionary  nisus — the  ci'eative  Power — the  "Jupiter  ipse  "  implanting 
in  each  organisnr  the  capacity  (jf  develoj^ing  new  faculties  under  new 
stress, — 

Nee  torpere  gravi  passus  sua  regna  veterno. 

When  hnjd  must  be  sought,  we  learn  to  seek  it ;  to  seek  it  first  by  aid 
•of  one  sense-organ  aftei'  another,  specialised  from  a  diffused  sensibility 
according  to  our  need ; — and  to  seek  it  afterwards  by  aid  of  inward 
reflection, — of  those  molecular  cerebral  changes  which  make  the  (jutput 
•of  muscular  movement  in  a  Stephenson  more  effective  in  food-produc- 
tion than  the  apparently  greater  output  of  the  navvy  working  on  his 
railway's  track. 

As  evolution  advances,  then,  we  in  some  sense  become  more  and 
more  awake.  Our  secondary  condition  diverges  further  and  further 
from  our  primaiy,  by  growing  adaptation  to  the  more  complex  needs 
of  life.  But  nevertheless  we  retain  the  habit  of  reversion  to  our 
primitive  phase  of  personality  ;  occasional  periods  of  the  slumber  in 
which  our  bodies  were  first  framed  are  needful  for  their  due  main- 
tenance and  renewal.  Why  this  should  be  so, — whether  it  always 
must  be  so, — we  caiuiot  say.  We  have  no  clue  to  the  forces  which 
•shake  the  kaleidoscope  of  our  psychical  being  now  into  this  pattern, 
now  into  that. 

364 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

But  although  our  suggested  mode  of  regarding  sleep  cannot  itself 
claim  to  be  regarded  as  an  explanation,  it  may  be  serviceable  in  guarding 
us  against  explanations  of  an  incomplete  or  one-sided  kind.  Thus,  foi- 
instance,  liowever  important  may  be  the  function  of  sleep  in  facilitating 
the  elimination  of  the  products  of  nervous  waste,  we  shall  not  think  it 
probal>le  that  the  accumulation  of  such  products  in  the  system  should 
be  the  sole  inducing  cause  of  sleeja.  Consequently  there  will  be  nothing 
to  surprise  us  in  the  discovery  that  sleep  can  be  induced  by  hypnotic 
suggestion  at  moments  when  no  lactates,  &c.,  can  have  accumulated  in 
the  system. 

Again,  important  as  the  influence  2yeriodicify  may  be  in  inducing- 
sleep,  we  shall  not  be  willing  to  assume  that  sleep  is  necessarily  a 
periodical  function.  It  will  in  no  way  sui'prise  us  to  find  that  sleep  in 
certain  subjects  can  be  almost  indefinitely  prolonged,  if  food — and  often 
if  very  little  food — is  supplied  to  the  sleeper,  or  placed  within  reach  of 
his  automatic  or  subliminal  impulse  to  grasp  it.  Attaques  de  sommeil 
are  becoming  familial'  now  ;  liut  it  should  be  remembered  that  they 
were  once  as  scornfully  and  even  cruelly  disbelieved  as  was  the  mesmeric 
trance  itself.^  In  our  view,  on  the  other  hand,  such  prolonged  slumbers 
will  foi-m  a  n(jt  sj^ecially  surprising  I'eversion  to  the  habit  of  pre-human 
ancestors,  and  to  our  own  earliest  phase  of  physical  and  psychical  being. 

As  regards  the  prolongation  of  the  waking  state,  on  the  other  hand,, 
the  influence  of  this  view  ( )f  sleep  will  ])e  mainly  negative.  I  mean  that  we 
shall  not  consitler  it  st)  impossible  as  it  appears  on  ordinary  physiological 
theories  of  sleejj  that  some  kind  of  active  state  should  be  abnormally 
extended  ; — that  some  variety,  whether  evolutive  or  dissf)lutive,  of 
vigilance  should  be  develo2>ed  which  is  less  prone  to  frequent  reversion 
to  the  primary  slumber. 

We  shall  not  be  surprised,  then,  to  meet  with  states  either  of 
ecstacy  or  of  disease  in  which  (ordinary  sleep  seems  for  the  time  to  be 
superseded.  With  ecstacy  we  shall  have  to  deal  later  on  ; — a  striking- 
example  of  prolonged  A'igilance  in  mania  may  be  quoted  from  the  well- 
known  alienist,  8ir  J.  Crichtoii  Browne." 

"  Nothing  can  well  be  more  unexpected  than  the  replaceability  of 
sleep  by  maniacal  excitement.  Chronic  maniacs  are  in  a  state  of  perpetual 
mental  and  bodily  restlessness.  They  talk  to  themselves,  they  chatter 
throughout  the  night,  they  dance,  clap  their  hands,  gesticulate,  indulge 
in  shouts  of  laughter,  or  tear  their  clothing  to  pieces.  The  length 
of  time  during  which  they  can  continue  to  discharge  nervous  energy 
uninterruptedly  in  this  excessive  and  almost  semi-convulsive  manner 

1  See  Zoist,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  381,  sqq.,  wliere  Elliotson's  robust  and  manly  common- 
sense  once  more  showed  its  superiority  over  the  professional  prejudice  of  his  time. 

2  West  Riding  Lunatic  Asylum  Medical  Reports,  Vol.  V.,  p.  2S8. 

The  Sabliininal  Consciousness. 

865 

is  truly  astonishing.  I  have  had  under  my  care  a  chronic  maniac 
who  worked  energetically  as  a  navvy  all  day,  and  who  sat  up  in  bed 
talking  and  shouting  all  night,  for  six  months  together.  During 
these  six  months  he  was  never  known  to  sleep.  By  day  he  manifested 
not  the  slightest  drowsiness,  and  by  night  he  was  never  caught 
nodding.  The  night  attendants  visited  him  hourly,  and  at  every 
visit  he  was  in  the  same  position,  propped  up  in  his  bed,  and  at 
the  same  occupation,  pouring  out  vociferously  a  torrent  of  incohei-ence. 
Not  less  remarkable  than  the  length  of  time  during  which  uninter- 
mitting  excitement  can  be  kept  up  in  chronic  mania  is  the  smallness  of 
the  effect  which  the  long-sustained  and  severe  exertion  and  the  pro- 
tracted sleeplessness  exert  upon  the  Ijodily  health.  Exhaustion  is  rare 
in  chronic  mania.  The  man  to  whom  I  have  alluded  had  not  lost 
weight  after  his  six  months'  noisy  vigil." 

The  condition  here  described  is  assuredly  more  remote  than  either 
prolonged  fasting,  prolonged  natui'al  sleep,  or  prolonged  hypnotic  trance, 
from  the  ordinary  physiological  current  of  man's  existence.  It  is  one 
of  the  obscure  liints  which  reach  the  physician  from  many  quarters 
that  we  are  dealing  with  a  machine  whose  original  motive  power 
is  in  fact  considerably  greater  than  its  ordinary  operation  would  lead  us 
to  suppose. 

In  our  present  discussi(3n,  however,  which  is  concerned  with  the 
3iatui'e  of  sleep  only  on  its  psychological  side,  the  main  interest  lies  in 
the  analysis  of  such  manifestations  of  thought  or  sensation  as  the  sleeping 
■state  affords.  And  to  begin  with,  our  conception  of  sleep  as  no  mere 
abeyance  of  waking  activities,  but  rather  as  a  phase  of  personality  with 
characteristics  definitely  its  own,  will  lead  us  to  set  aside  as  fallacies 
vaiious  current  notions  as  to  the  natui-e  of  dreams.  Thus  it  is  often 
supposed  tliat  the  dreams  which  are  in  themselves  the  m(3st  vivid  will 
also  be  the  best  remembered ; — and  that  such  dreams  will  occur  in  states 
of  imperfect  sleep.  To  this  we  shall  reply  that,  on  the  analogy  of  other 
severances  of  pei'sonality,  Ave  shall  expect  that  the  impressions  carried 
from  one  phase  into  another  are  likely  to  be  the  confused  impressions 
of  transitional  states  ;  and  that  the  deeper  and  more  characteristic 
the  experience  of  any  subliminal  state  may  be,  the  more  unlikely  is  it 
to  pass  into  the  supraliminal  chain  of  memory. 

Somewhat  similarly  we  shall  refuse  to  take  for  gi'anted,  as  is  com- 
monly done,  that  dreams  cannot  possibly  be  anything  more  than  echoes 
or  fragments  of  waking  experience,  fantastically  combined.  Such  an 
assumption  implies  what  we  altogether  deny  ; — that  the  supraliminal 
personality  is  identical  with  the  true  Self, — that  the  supraliminal  chain 
of  memory  is  the  only  coherent  or  continuous  chain.  Our  minds,  on 
the  other  hand,  will  be  absolutely  open  as  regards  the  possible  content 
of  dreams  ;  and  we  shall  desire  that  dreams  should  be  subjected  to 

36© 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

all  analysis  far  more  searching  than  they  have  as  yet  received  from 
any  quai'ter. 

One  great  general  lesson  the  world  may  be  said  to  have  learnt 
from  dreams.  Dreams,  says  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  "are  the  experi- 
ence out  of  which  the  conception  of  a  mental  self  eventually  grows." 
Only  so  soon,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  savage  realises  that  he  has 
not  been  out  hunting  in  lif)dily  form  during  sleep, — "  as  this  sui^posed 
duplicate,  once  thought  of  as  like  the  original  in  all  things,  becomes 
gradually  modified  by  the  dropping  of  physical  characters  ineconcilable 
with  the  facts,  does  the  hypothesis  of  a  jneiital  self,  as  we  understand 
it,  become  established."  ^ 

Extending  this  remark  in  the  direction  which  later  knowledge 
suggests,  we  may  say  that  just  as  some  slight  dissociation  of  elements 
habitually  associated  in  supraliminal  activity  was  thus  necessary  in 
order  to  enable  the  savage  to  conceive  even  of  a  supraliminal  Self, — 
so  for  us  also  the  more  complex  dissociations  involved  in  somnambulismr 
hypnotic  trance,  itc,  are  necessary  in  order  to  enable  us  to  conceive  of 
that  completer  self  of  which  the  supraliminal  self  is  only  a  partial 
manifestation. 

Looked  at  in  this  wide  and  genei'al  manner,  dreams  have  afforded 
to  minds  at  every  stage  of  culture  some  kind  of  permanent  suggestion 
of  possibilities  lying  outside  the  familiar  course  of  things.  But  when 
we  come  to  anything  like  detailed  analysis,  we  find  the  field  almost 
uuwoiked.  The  shallower  dreams,  if  T  may  so  term  thein, — those 
which  occur  in  disturbed  sleep,  or  at  the  moment  of  waking, — have 
received  some  ingenious  explanations  ;  but  little  attention  has  been  paid 
to  the  deeper  dreams, — those  which  occur,  (as  the  dreamer  believes,)  in 
profound  sleep,  and  sometimes  leave  upon  waking  hours  an  impression 
of  reality  which  the  confused  fancies  of  fevei",  or  the  nightmares  oli 
indigestion,  cannot  rival. 

And  there  is  of  course  this  difficulty, — that  the  quality  of  any  given 
dream  can  be  estimated  only  by  the  dreamer  ;  while  of  all  waking- 
memories  the  memory  of  dreams  is  (and  in  our  view  inevitably)  the 
most  uncertain  and  evanescent.  This  difficulty,  however,  which  at  first 
seems  as  though  it  must  infect  all  conclusions  with  the  observer's  own 
subjectivity,  can  Ije  overcome  by  a  simple  exjiedient.  Let  a  man 
register  all  those  dreams  whose  quality  impresses  him  ;  and  let  hun 
then  observe  whether  such  dreams,  when  they  admit  of  confirmation,, 
are  actually  confirmed  by  fact.  They  are  capable  of  being  thus  con- 
firmed whenever  the  di-eam  incidents  are  such  as  subsequently  to  show 
coincidence — or  want  of  coincidence — with  some  event,  past,  pi'esent,  or 
future,  which  was  unknown  to  the  dreamer's  waking  selL    All  tliat  is 

1  Principles  of  Sociologij,  Vol.  I.,  p.  157. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness^. 

367 

heeded  is  that  a  man  who  attaches  importance  to  any  of  his  dreams 
should  make  immediate  record  of  any  dream  which,  on  subjectiA-e 
grounds,  he  thinks  likely  to  belong  to  a  clairvoyant  oi-  coincidental  class. 
If  all  the  dreams  which  he  intends  to  count  are  tlius  recorded  befoi'e 
their  fulfilment  or  non-fulfilment  is  known, — and  if  he  scrupulously 
abstains  from  counting  any  dream  not  thus  recoided,  however  strikingly 
it  may  be  fulfilled, — we  shall  be  able  to  calculate,  with  no  fear  of 
exaggeration,  the  proportion  of  coincidences  between  dream  and  fact. 
For  any  mistakes  which  he  may  make  in  his  subjective  estimate  of  his 
dreams  will,  on  the  supposition  that  all  the  coincidences  are  due  to 
chance,  be  exactly  as  likely  to  tell  against  him  as  foi-  him, — while,  on 
the  supposition  that  a  certain  class  of  his  dreams  ai'e  really  veridical, 
his  mistakes  in  distinguishing  beforehand  the  true  members  of  this 
class  will  tell  wholly  against  him.  Aiid  if  his  im2:)ressive  dreams, 
whenever  they  involve  a  possible  coincidence  with  provable  fact, 
do  so  coincide,  he  will  have  some  reason  foi'  attaching  importance 
to  other  dreams  subjectively  similar,  but  less  capaljle  of  definite 
testing. 

There  is  another  way  of  gauging  a  dream's  intensity, — of  picking 
out  a  small  and  significant  class.  Dreams  which  have  led  to  action  are 
extremely  rare, — rarer,  probably,  even  than  waking  hallucinations. 
Most  of  the  dreams  referred  to  in  this  chapter  belong  to  that  group. 
The  dreamer  has  actually  done  something  in  Avaking  hours  as  a  direct 
result  of  his  nocturnal  experience. 

In  practice  it  will  be  found  that  although  many  men,  and  often, 
dream  confused  dreams,  few  men,  and  rarely,  dream  dreams  to  Avhich 
they  can  attach  importance  even  on  purely  subjective  grounds.  It 
would  be  an  easier  thing  than  at  first  appears  to  keep  a  record  of  all 
such  dreams  as  were  not  easily  explicable  by  f ragmen  taiy  memories  or 
corporeal  conditions  ;  and  such  a  record  would,  even  apart  from  the 
coincidental  class  of  dreams,  yield  much  of  value  to  the  psychologist.^ 
If,  at  least,  our  waking  life, — our  supraliminal  personality, — is  only 
one  of  many  possible  patterns  into  which  the  elements  of  our  fuller 
individuality  may  arrange  themselves  ; — those  elements  not  being  all  of 
them  employed  in  any  one  of  such  patterns  ; — then  we  may  fairly 
expect  that  even  the  simplest  and  most  primitive  pattern  may  reveal 
elements  absent  from  other  patterns,  or  at  least  may  teach  us,  by  its 
new  arrangements,  something  fresh  as  to  the  elements  already  known. 

And  here  Ave  may,  I  hope,  find  it  useful  to  have  already  discussed 
some  of  the  subliminal  phenomena  revealed  l)y  hypnotism,  before 

1  Dr.  Nelson,  of  Johns  Hopkins  University,  with  a  statistical  object  of  a  different 
kind,  has  recorded  over  1,000  dreams  of  his  own  per  annum  for  some  years.  [American 
Journal  of  Psycholoyy,  Vol.  I.,  Part  3,  p.  374.) 

868 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Alyers. 

approaching  the  subject  of  spontaneous  sleep.  For  spontaneous  sleep 
—whether  or  not  it  differs  from  hypnotic  sleep  (as  Liebeault  maintains) 
only  in  being  the  result  of  self-suggestion  instead  of  suggestion  from 
without, — is  at  least  in  some  sense  a  halfway  house  between  hypnotic 
trance  and  waking  life  ;  and  we  may  well  begin  our  inquiry  into  the 
sensory  and  mental  phenomena  of  common  sleep  by  considering  what 
phenomena  could  really  be  classed  as  intermediate  between  those  of 
vigilance  and  those  of  induced  somnambulism. 

I  am  of  course  here  speaking  of  positive,  not  of  merely  negative 
characteristics  ; — not  of  the  abstraction  from  waking  interests,  the 
subsidence  of  muscular  energy,  which  are  common  to  most  forms  of 
sleep  and  trance,  but  of  the  additions  to  faculty  which  those  states 
reveal;  whether  those  additions  take  the  form  of  an  increased  command 
over  the  present,  the  future,  or  the  past. 

1.  To  take  hrst  an  increase  of  power  in  the  present, — of  grasj:)  over 
the  world  without  oi"  over  the  sensory  centres  within.  We  have 
observed  that  in  the  hypnotic  trance  there  is  often  a  heightening  of 
sensory  faculty,  in  its  two  main  forms  of  external  and  internal  hyperses- 
thesia, — a  quickened  capacity,  say,  for  reading  small  print  or  discerning 
minute  specks  on  a  card, — and  also  a  quickened  "mind's  eye"  crea- 
tivity,— a  power  of  projecting  hallucinatory  images  more  vivid  than  any 
which  waking  effoi't  could  induce.  We  shall  expect,  then,  that  in 
dream  or  somnolence  there  will  be  some  trace  of  added  power  of  this 
kind  ; — something  seen  as  waking  eyes  cannot  see,  or  imagined  as 
waking  attention  cannot  imagine. 

2.  And  to  take  next  another  power  which,  exercised  of  course  in  the 
present,  becomes  manifest  by  its  influence  upon  the  future,  we  know 
that  ideas  or  suggestions  carried  over  from  the  hypnotic  into  the 
normal  state  often  exert  a  much  stronger  and  more  permanent  influence 
than  similar  statements  or  recommendations  would  exert  if  originally 
made  to  the  waking  subject.  We  shall  therefore  think  it  probable  that 
some  dreams  may  in  this  respect  resemble  hypnotic  suggestions,  and 
may  influence  waking  life  in  a  way  which  the  waking  personality 
cannot  justify  or  exjilain. 

3.  Passing  on  now  to  memory,  or  control  over  the  past,  the 
character  of  sleep, — roughly  intermediate  between  waking  life  and  the 
hypnotic  trance, — will  suggest  that  its  memory  will  have  links  of  almost 
equal  strength  with  the  memory  of  waking  life  and  the  memory  of 
hypnotic  states.  Thus  far,  then,  it  will  resemble  the  hypnotic  memory 
— which  is  apt  to  be  the  more  compi-ehensive  of  the  two  ; — although  we 
cannot,  of  course,  assume  that  it  will  be  identical  with  that  memory. 

4.  And  yet  again  ;  it  is  not  only  over  periods  rendered  ecmnesic 

 cut  out  of  waking  memory— by  hypnotic  trance  that  we  may  expect 

■  dream-memory  to  extend  some  kind  of  sway.      Ecmnesic  periods  of 

Tlte  Siibliminal  Consciousness. 

369 

other  kinds  occur  ;  gaps  of  memory,  for  instance,  sometimes  follow  upon 
concussion  of  the  brain.  It  will  l)e  interesting  to  see  whether  the 
memory  of  any  of  these  periods  is  recoverable  in  sleep. 

5.  But  apai't  from  hypiKjtic  trance,  from  ecmnesic  lacunse,  may  there 
not,  we  may  well  ask,  be  something  else  in  dream  -  memory  which 
Avaking  memory  does  not  contain  1  In  our  discussion  of  "  The 
Mechanism  of  Genius  "  we  saw  that  even  during  our  ordinary  waking 
life  there  was  something  within  us  which  obsei'ved  more,  felt  more, 
remembered  more  than  the  supraliminal  consciousness  by  itself  could 
ever  tell  us.  May  not  dream  recall  to  us  some  of  those  deeply-hidden 
impressions  which  form  the  mateiial  on  which  genius  woi'ks  Dream 
often  recalls  to  us  facts  of  our  waking  life  which  we  have  known  and 
forgotten.  May  it  not  also  recall  to  us  facts  which  our  supraliminal 
selves  have  never  known  1 

6.  Lastly, — and  giving  to  oui-  anticipations  above-mentioned  a  more 
extended  form, — we  shall  expect  that  those  supernormal  powers  which 
emerge  with  difficulty  through  the  vigorous  but  superficial  cui-rent  of 
ordinary  waking  life  will  show  more  frequently  at  the  surface  through 
the  stiller  waters  of  sleep.  Telepathy,  clairvoyance,  premonition  ; — 
powers  like  these,  if  they  exist  in  us  anywhere,  must  surely  leave  some 
traces  upon  our  dreams.  I  must,  however,  for  the  present  postpone 
inquiry  into  these  p(jints  ;  since  the  verification  of  the  five  pi'evious 
suggestions  as  to  what  may  be  anticipated  from  sleep  and  dreams  will 
afford  more  than  enough  material  for  this  chapter. 

(1)  First,  then,  as  to  the  heightening  of  sensory  faculty  in  sleep  or 
dream.  There  seems  at  first  sight  something  of  paradox  in  expecting 
hyperpesthesia  from  somnolence  ; — vivid  sensation  from  a  condition 
usually  described  as  a  pr(jgressive  dulling  or  subsidence  of  one  sense 
after  another.  And,  naturally,  it  will  he  in  the  generation  of  internal 
rather  than  in  the  perception  of  external  imagery  that  we  may  expect 
to  find  the  closed  eye  active, — 

opSivTa  Xa/xTTpov  iv  fTKilro)  vcop-oivT  ocjipiiv. 

There  is  in  fact  a  phenomenon,  by  no  means  uncommon,  and  very 
conspicuous,  which,  like  many  other  human  phenomena  whose  interest 
is  scientific  rather  than  therapeutic,  remained  unnoticed  until  a  very 
recent  date.  Baillarger  in  Finance  and  Griesingei'  in  Germany  (both 
about  1845)  were  among  the  first  to  call  attention  to  the  vivid  images 
which  rise  before  the  internal  vision  of  many  persons,  between  sleep 
and  waking.  M.  Alfred  Maury,  the  well-known  Greek  scholar  and 
•antiquary,  gave  to  these  images  a  few  years  later  the  title  of  illusions 
hyjyiiagogiques,  and  published  a  remarkable  series  of  observations  upon 
himself.  Mr.  Galton  has  further  treated  of  them  in  his  Inquiry  into 
Human  Faculty  ;  and  Cases  will  be  found  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living, 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  .390,  474,  &c. 

370 

Mr.  F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers. 

These  visions  maybe  hypnojiomjnc  as  well  as  hypnagogic; — may 
appear,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  mument  when  slumbei'  is  depai-ting  as  well 
as  at  the  moment  when  it  is  coming  on ; — and  in  eithei-  case  they  are 
closely  related  to  dreams;  the  "hypnagogic  illusions"  or  pictui-es 
being  sometimes  i-epeated  in  dream  (as  with  Maury),  and  the  hypno- 
ponipic  pictures  consisting  generally  in  the  persistence  of  some  dream 
image  into  the  first  moments  of  waking.  In  either'  case  they  testify  to 
an  intensified  power  of  inward  visualisation  at  a  very  significant 
moment ; — a  moment  which  is  actually  or  virtually  one  of  sleep,  but 
which  yet  admits  of  definite  comparison  with  adjacent  moments  of 
waking.  We  may  call  the  condition  one  of  cerebral  or  "  mind's  eye  " 
hyperaesthesia, — an  exalted  sensibility  of  special  brain-centres  in 
response  tf)  those  unknown  internal  stimuli  which  are  always  giving 
rise  to  similar  but  fainter  inward  visions  even  in  broadly- waking  hours. 

Por  those  who  are  already  good  visualisers  such  phenomena  as  these, 
though  striking  enough,  present  no  quite  unique  expeiience.  For  bad 
visualisers,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vividness  of  these  hypnagogic  pictures 
may  be  absolutely  a  revelation.  For  myself  I  may  say  that  were  it  not 
for  an  occasional  flasli  of  this  kind,  between  sleep  and  waking,  I  should 
be  una1)le  to  conceive  what  good  visualisation  really  is.  The  dim, 
T)lurred,  unstable  images  which  are  all  that  my  waking  will  can  summon 
up  are  every  now  and  then  replaced  in  a  moment  of  somnolence  by  a 
picture — say  of  a  wet  hedge  in  the  sun — which  seems,  to  my  hurried 
glance,  to  be  absolutely  as  clear  and  Ijrilliant  as  the  object  itself  could 
be.  The  difference  is  like  that  between  an  instantaneous  photograph 
(and  in  natural  colours !)  and  a  dim  dissolving  view  cast  by  a  magic- 
lantern  on  the  point  of  going  out.  Many  men  must  have  had  this 
experience  ;  and  nuist  have  Iseen  struck  with  the  unguessed  reserve  of 
faculty  which  fV)r  a  inomeut  was  thus  revealed. 

Equally  remarkable  are  the  Jiypnopompic  pictures,  as  I  have 
termed  them  ; — those,  namely,  which  accompany  the  departure  of  sleep. 
For  it  often  happens  (as  in  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney)  that  a  figure 
which  has  formed  part  of  a  dream  continues  to  be  seen  as  a  hallucina- 
tion for  some  moments  after  waking  ; — a  strong  testimony  to  the  vivid- 
ness of  dream-visualisation.  As  already  observed,  the  generation  of  a 
hallucinatory  figure  (however  useless  an  achievement)  mai'ks  probably 
the  highest  point  which  man's  visualising  faculty  ever  reaches  ;  and  it 
is  noteworthy  that  with  many  persons  this  point  should  be  attained  in 
dream  alone.  Sometimes,  it  may  be,  this  prolongation  of  hallucination 
may  best  be  described  as  an  after-image,  sometimes  as  the  result  of  a 
"  suggestion  "  inspired  Ijy  the  dream. 

The  degree  of  acuteness  of  all  the  senses  in  dream  is  a  subject  for 
direct  observation,  and  even — for  persons  who  can  at  all  control  their 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

371 

dreams — for  direct  expeiiment.  I  have  elsewhere  descriljed^  some 
efforts  of  my  own  to  test  my  own  power  of  visualisation  in  (h'eam  ; 
with  the  result,  as  I  must  confess,  that  I  have  not  found  it  superior 
to  my  very  low  waking  capacity.  Some  correspondents,  however,  report 
a  considerable  accession  of  sensory  power  in  dream.  An  impressive 
dream,  dreamt  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  of  Cambridge,  and  at  once  care- 
fully recorded,  had  for  its  theme  an  intensification  of  each  sense  in  turn. 
Mts.  Verrall  has  poor  musical  perceptions,  and  when  told  in  her  dream 
that  the  sense  of  sound  was  next  to  be  exalted,  she  anticipated  little 
pleasure.  The  sensation  came,  however,  as  something  entirely  new, — 
as  "  very  harmony,  which  I  had  only  heard  till  then  in  echoes, — in  the 
rhythm  of  verse,  or  in  the  sighing  of  the  wind  among  the  pine-trees. 
My  hearing  was  purified,  not  by  the  fulfilment  of  desire,  but  by  the 
creation  of  desire,  which  in  its  very  birth  attained  fruition."  Others 
speak  of  the  increased  vividness  of  dramatic  conception,  or  of  what  is 
called  in  a  hypnotic  subject  "  objectivation  of  types."  "  In  each  of  these 
dreams,"  writes  one  lady,  "  I  was  a  man  ; — in  one  of  them  a  low  In-ute,. 
in  the  other  a  dipsomaniac.  I  never  had  the  slightest  conception  of  how 
such  persons  felt  or  thought  until  these  experiences."  Another  corre- 
spondent speaks  of  dreaming  two  disconnected  dreams, — one  emotional 
and  one  geometrical, — simultaneously,  and  of  consequent  sense  of  con- 
fusion and  fatigue. 

In  Mr.  R.  L.  Stevenson's  recent  volume.  Across  the  Plains,  will  be- 
found  a  "  Chapter  on  Dreams,"  which  contains  the  description  of  the 
most  successful  dream-experiments  thus  far  recorded.  By  self-sugges- 
tion before  sleep  Mr.  Stevenson  can  secure  a  visual  and  dramatic- 
intensity  of  dream-representation  which  has  furnished  him  with  the 
motives  for  some  of  his  most  striking  romances.  His  account,  written 
with  admirable  psychological  insight,  is  indispensable  to  students  of 
this  subject.  Once  more,  the  singular  intensity  which  happiness  may 
assume  in  dreams, — "  that  thoughtless  sense  of  joy  bewildering  "  which 
seldom  recurs  in  waking  life  after  early  youth, — is  probably  familial'  tO' 
many  of  my  readers.  It  seems  analogous  to  the  rise  in  spirits  generally 
observed  in  somnambulic  states, — and  perhaps  to  the  ecstacy  which 
often  seems  to  accompany  some  profound  upheaval  of  subliminal  strata. 

I  am  not  in  this  chapter  dealing  with  sijontaneous  somnambulism  ; 
which,  if  regarded  as  a  form  of  sleep,  would  of  course  supply  many 
illustrations  to  my  preseiit  argument.  But  before  we  leave  the 
topic  of  dream-hyperiBsthesia,  it  may  occur  to  the  reader  to  ask 
whether  ordinary  sleep  alFords  any  parallel  to  that  form  of  exalta- 
tion of  sight  so  often  recorded  in  somnambulism  which  enables  the 
subject  to  "  see  in  the  dai'k  "  ; — to  perform  complex  operations  of  sewing 
or  writing  in  what  appears  to  others  absolute  night.    This  power 

^  S.P.H.  Proccedmr/s,  YoLlY.,  p.  2il.  '.    .      .  ". 

372 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

however  its  highest  manifestations  may  be  explained,  is  in  some  cases 
almost  certainly  a  form  of  hypera'sthesia.  Can  we  lind  anything  of  the 
■same  kind  in  the  condition  of  the  eyes  during  ordinary  sleep  ? 

I  believe  that  Avith  most  people,  as  with  myself,  there  is  no  special 
clearness  of  vision,  but  rather  at  first  some  indistinctness,  on  opening 
the  eyes  from  sleep  upon  a  dimly  lit  i-oom.  But  we  have  several 
cases  where  there  is  an  impi'ession  of  light  on.  sudden  awakening, 
which  may  be  a  centrally  initiated  hallucination, — a  simple  phantasm 
prolonged  from  a  dream  ; — or  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  due  to  retinal 
hyperiiesthesia.'  We  owe  the  following  well-observed  instance  to  Miss 
Mason  (the  Inspectress  of  l)oarded-out  children  under  the  Local 
Government  B<jard),  who  is  already  kmjwn  to  our  readei'S  as  a  care- 
ful witness. 

M.  652. 

Wliatcombe,  Blandford,  July  12th,  1883. 
Dear  Mr.  Myers,- -Faithful  to  my  promise  to  you,  I  report  that  the 
night  before  last,  the  window  being  open  as  usual,  the  wind  suddenly  rose, 
.sliook  my  window  and  d(jor,  and  awoke  me  out  of  a  sound  sleep  witli  a  start. 
I  am  not  sure  that  I  saw  tlie  whole  room,  but  I  saw  the  door  and  the  window 
from  wliich  the  sound  proceeded,  (_)r  that  very  small  jjart  of  the  window 
■whicli  was  not  (juite  covered  by  a  heavy  curtain,  and  I  saw  the  curtain. 
Tlie  light  faded  almost  immediately,  and  I  then  perceived  that  it  was  a 
pifccli  dark  niglit,  no  moon  (whicli  fact  I  had  observed  by  looking  out  of  my 
window,  as  I  always  do,  just  ))efore  getting  into  bed),  and  that  I  could  not 
see  anytliing  wliatever  with  niy  eyes  straining,  not  even  where  the  window 
was.  Tlie  two  clocks  I  can  hear  both  struck  one  as  I  was  trying  to  see 
any  light. 

As  I  saw  the  door,  I  also  saw  against  it,  as  it  seemed,  a  sort  of  lighter 
•coloured  framework  of  bars,  and  as  I  knew  that  there  was  nothing  of  the 
sort  in  front,  or  beside  the  door,  I  concluded  that  it  was  a  sudden  dream, 
■and  I  had  only  fancied  that  I  saw  what  I  did.  Having  lieard  the  clock,  I  did 
not  strike  a  light,  and  went  to  sleep  again.  I  was  awakened  twice  after  in 
the  same  way  by  the  wind,  but  saw  no  light,  nor  any  object  whatever,  though 
I  tried  my  best.  I  had  been  asleep  a  shorter  wliile  each  time,  seemingly, 
than  tlie  first. 

When  I  woke  at  dayliglit,  I  discovered  tliat  tlie  bars  I  thought  I  must 
have  dreamt  of  were  those  of  the  foot  of  my  brass  bedstead,  and  that  they 
stood  between  me  and  the  door  exactly  where  I  had  seen  them. 

I  have  been  staying  here  since  the  5th  inst.,  long  enough  to  have  become 
acquainted  with  the  objects  in  my  room,  though  not  familiarised  with  them 
as  at  home,  and  I  am  too  absent  and  preoccupied  to  be  very  observant  of 
furniture.  And  I  had  never  thought  of  observing,  nor  noticed,  the  relative 
position  from  where  I  was  of  the  foot  of  the  bedstead  and  the  door.  I 
have  thus  been  accidentally  submitted  to  the  test  we  proposed,  that  a  strange 

1  Compare  Professor  .Joseph  Le  Conte's  account  of  a  supposed  spatial  representa- 
tion of  the  blind  spot,  seen  on  awakening.  (American  Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol. 
III.,  No.  3,  p.  3G4.)    ,  :    _  ..      ,  • 

The  Sahliminal  Consciousness. 

373 

object  should  be  jjlaced,  unknown  to  me,  in  luy  room,  so  tliat  on  waking 
suddenly  in  the  dark,  I  could  not  fancy  it  unless  I  really  saw  it.  Of  course, 
as  I  have  no  witness,  this  rests  only  on  my  word,  but  I  am  satisfied  myself. 

My  room  has  two  windows,  having  thick  white  l)linds,  and  thick  curtains, 
with  thick  lining.  I  saw  only  the  window  from  which  the  noise  came.  The 
curtain  may  have  been  Ijlown  a  little  aside,  but  at  any  rate  I  could  not  see 
the  window  in  another  few  seconds. — Yours  very  truly, 

M.  H.  Mason. 

I  quote  this  case,  liecause  I  can  find  no  lietter  experiment  of  a  like 
kind  ;  but  the  possibility  of  a  reproduction  of  imcoiiscious  perception 
is  of  course  not  here  excluded. 

I  do  not  think  that  it  is  yet  proved  that  it  is  the  rested  condition  of 
the  retina  which  facilitates  these  vivid  j^ercejJtions.  llhisions  Injjynago- 
yiques  occur  when  the  retina  is  presumably  fatigued  ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall 
has  had  hypersesthetic  perceptions  of  light  in  a  dark  liedroom  (the  dim 
chink  under  the  door  seen  brightly  lit),  on  suddenly  waking  after  a 
short  or  restless  sleep.  I  shall  be  glad  to  receive  communications  on 
tliis  subject. 

In  thus  illusti^ating  the  reserves  of  faculty  manifested  to  us  by  sleep 
and  dream  I  have  chosen  by  preference  certaiir  forms  of  visiud 
hyperiiesthesia.  The  indications  which  ai-e  to  ))e  found  of  other- 
hyperiesthesia?, —  as  where  a  dream  foretells  a  malady  whose  onset  has 
not  yet  become  perceptible  to  the  waking  self, — cannot,  by  the  nature 
of  the  case,  admit  of  comparisons  so  definite  as  degrees  of  the  sense 
of  sight  afford.  Enough,  I  hope,  may  have  been  said  to  suggest 
some  lines  of  psychological  experiment  which  offer  little  difficulty, 
and  may  bear  much  fruit. 

(2)  The  second  characteristic  of  dream  to  which  the  discussion 
leads  us  indicates  a  force  or  vividness  of  a  different  kind.  The 
permanent  result  of  a  dream  is  sometimes  such  as  to  show  that  the 
dream  has  not  been  a  mere  superficial  confusion  of  past  waking- 
experiences,  but  has  liad  an  unexplained  potency  of  its  own  ; — drawn, 
like  the  potency  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  from  some  depth  in  our 
being  which  the  waking  self  cannot  reach.  Two  main  classes  of 
this  kind  are  conspicuous  enough  to  be  easily  recognised ; — those, 
namely,  where  the  dream  has  led  to  a  "  convei'sion "'  or  marked  religioua 
change,  and  those  where  it  has  been  the  starting-point  of  an  "insistent 
idea  "  or  a  fit  of  actual  insanity. ^  The  dreams  which  convert,  reform, 
change  character  and  creed,  have  of  course  a  facie  claim  to  be 

considered  as  something  other  than  ordinary  dreams ;  and  their 
discussion  may  be  deferred  till  a  later  stage  of  our  inquiry.  Those,^ 
on  the  other  hand,  which  suddenly  generate  an  insistent  idea  of  an 

^  See  Dr.  Fere  in  Brain  for  January,  1887. 

374 

Mr.  F.  W.  ff.  Myers. 

irrational  type  are  closely  and  obviously  analogous  to  post-hypnotic 
self-suggestions,  which  the  self  that  inspired  them  cannot  be  induced 
to  countermand.  Such  is  the  dream  related  by  M.  Taine,^  where  a 
gendarme,  impressed  l)y  an  execution  at  which  he  has  assisted, 
dreams  that  he  is  himself  to  be  guillotined,  and  is  afterwards  so 
influenced  by  the  dream  that  he  attempts  suicide.  Several  cases  of 
this  kind  have  been  collected  by  Dr.  Faure" ;  and  Dr.  Tissie,  in  his 
interesting  little  work,  Les  Heves,  has  added  some  striking  instances 
from  his  own  oljsei'vation.  I  quote  one  of  M.  Faure's  cases  as  a 
sample,  showing  that  m  an  apparently  healthy  subject  an  apparently 
causeless  dream  may  leave  traces  quite  as  pei'sistent  as  any  hypnotic 
suggestion  cf)uld  implant  from  without.  The  dream  is  in  fact  a 
iself-suggestion  of  the  most  potent  kind. 

M.  26. 

"  A  sliop  assistant,  strongly  built  and  regular  in  habits,  awoke  one  morn- 
ing in  a  state  of  fever  and  agitation,  perspiring  copiously,  anxious  and 
Tineasy.  He  announced  tliat  all  his  savings  were  gone  ;  lie  was  ruined,  done 
for.  He  said  that  on  the  previous  day,  while  driving  a  van,  lie  had  got  into 
a  quarrel  with  a  coachman  ;  and  that  in  the  confusion  his  van  liad  broken  in 
the  front  window  of  a  mirror-maker.  He  would  have  to  pay  for  the  damage. 
He  told  the  story  with  great  detail  ;  and  still  saw  himself  caught  round  the 
neck  by  his  adversary,  who  had  struck  him  so  violently  that  he  had  lost 
<;onsciousness,  and  that  they  had  had  to  carry  him  into  a  wine-merchant's 
sliop  to  bring  him  to.  His  wife  assured  us  that  when  he  returned  home  the 
evening  before  he  was  in  his  usual  condition  ;  that  he  had  seen  to  his  busi- 
ness, p;issed  the  evening  at  home,  and  gone  to  bed  with  no  trouble  upon 
him. 

"  For  three  days  X.  continued  in  this  frame  of  mind,  unable  to  calm  him- 
self for  a  moment,  although  he  was  taken  to  the  actual  place  where  the 
imaginary  accident  had  occuri'cd.  It  was  some  days  later  before  he 
thoroughly  understood  that  it  liad  been  a  dream.  And  for  a  whole  month  he 
would  fall  daily  into  the  same  confusion  of  memory  ; — would  sit  down  in 
despair,  crying  and  repeating  '  We  are  ruined  ! '  Even  seven  years  after- 
wards he  still  had  occasional  crises  of  this  nature,  when  he  forgot  the  truth, 
and  lived  for  several  days  under  the  shock  of  this  imaginary  disaster." 

We  may  compare  with  this  a  case  where  "  the  touch  of  a  A-anished 
liand "'  appeared  to  bring  physical  relief  to  a  dreamer. 

M.  27. 

From  Mr.  H.  L.  Holbrook,  M.D.,  Editor  of  the  Herald  of  Health. 

13  and  15,  Laight-street,  New  York,  Jioly  30th,  1884. 
In  the  spring  of  1870,  I  had  an  attack  of  acute  bronchitis,  Avhich  was 
very  severe,  and  from  the  fact  that  I  had  had  a  similar  attack  every  winter 
and   spring  for  several  years,  I  felt  considerable  alarm,  and  believed  it 

^  JJe  Vintdliijcnce,  Vol.  I.,  p.  119. 
^  Archives  de  Midecine,  Vol.  I.,  187C,  p.  554. 

TIlg  Sahliminal  Consciousness. 

375 

would  ultimately  become  chronic,  and  perliajjs  terminate  niy  life.  As  I  was 
tlien  young,  and  liad  just  entered  on  a  career  of  labour  which  I  wished  to 
follow  for  a  long  time,  I  became  very  despondent  at  such  a  prospect.  In 
this  depressed  condition  I  fell  into  a  sleep  which  was  not  very  profound,  and 
the  following  circumstance,  which  is  still  fresh  in  my  mind,  appeared  to  take 
place.  My  sister,  who  had  been  dead  more  than  20  years,  and  whom  I  had 
almost  forgotten,  came  to  my  bedside,  and  said,  "Do  not  woriy  about  your 
health,  we  have  come  to  cure  you  ;  there  is  much  yet  for  you  to  do  in  the 
world.  '  Then  she  vanished,  and  my  brain  seemed  to  lie  electrified  as  if  by 
a  shocii  from  a  battery,  only  it  was  not  jjainful,  l)ut  delicious.  The  shock 
spread  downwards,  and  over  the  chest  and  lungs  it  was  \  ei'y  strong.  From 
here  it  extended  to  the  extremities,  where  it  apjteared  like  a  delightful  glow. 
I  awoke  almost  immediately,  and  found  myself  well.  Since  then  I  have 
never  had  an  attack  of  the  disease.  Tlie  form  of  my  sister  was  indistinct, 
but  tlie  voice  was  very  plain,  and  I  have  never  before  had  such  an  experience, 
nor  since,    v  M.  L.  Holbrook,  M.D. 

Compare  this  again  with  Dr.  Tissie's  account  of  Ids  hysterical 
subject,  Albert.  "  Every  time,"  said  Albert,  "  that  I  dream  that  I  have 
been  bitten  or  beaten  I  suffer  all  day  in  the  part  attacked."^ 

A  still  more  striking  illustration  may  be  drawn  from  the  following 
incident  in  the  story  of  Krafft-Ebing's  patient,"  lima  S.,  already  men- 
tioned : — 

M.  28. 

"  May  Gth,  1888.- -The  patient  is  disturbed  t<.)-day.  Slie  complains  to  the 
sister  of  severe  pain  under  the  left  breast,  thinks  that  the  [trofessor  has  burnt 
her  in  the  night,  and  begs  the  sister  to  obtain  a  retreat  for  her  in  a  convent, 
where  she  will  be  secure  against  such  attacks.  The  sister's  refusal  causes  a 
hystero-epileptic  attack.  [At  length,  in  tlie  hypn(jtic  trance]  the  patient 
gives  the  following  explanation  of  the  oi'igin  of  the  pain  : — '  Last  night  an  old 
man  came  to  me  ;  he  looked  like  a  priest  and  came  in  company  with  a  sister 
•of  charity,  on  whose  collet  there  was  a  large  golden  B.  I  was  afraid  of  her. 
The  old  man  was  amiable  and  friendly.  He  dipped  a  pen  in  the  sister's 
pocket,  and  with  it  wrote  a  W  and  B  on  my  skin  under  tlie  left  breast.  Once 
he  diiJjied  his  pen  badly  and  made  a  lilot  in  the  middle  of  the  figure.  This 
spot  and  the  B  pain  me  severely,  but  the  W  does  not.  The  man  explained 
the  W  as  meaning  that  I  should  go  to  the  M  church  and  confess  at  the  W 
■confessional. ' 

"After  this  account  the  patient  cried  out  and  said,  '  There  stands  the  man 
again.    Now  he  has  chains  on  his  hands.' 

"  When  the  patient  woke  into  ordinary  life  she  v.as  suffei'ing  pain  in  the 
place  indicated, where  there  were  'superficial  losses  of  substance,  penetrating 
to  the  corium,  which  have  a  resemblance  to  a  reversed  W  and  B, '  with  '  a 
hyperajmic  raised  spot  between  the  two.'  Nowhere  in  this  peculiar  neuro- 
trophic alteration  of  the  skin,  which  is  identical  with  tliose  previously  pro- 

■  1  Tissie,  Les  Rives,  p.  121. 

37G 

Mr.  F.  ^Y.  H.  Myers. 

duced  experiiueiitally,  are  there  traces  ol  inflammation."  The  jjain  and  the 
memory  of  the  dream  were  removed  by  the  doctor's  suggestion  ;  but  the  dream 
.self-suggestion  to  confess  at  the  M  chiu'ch  persisted  ;  and  tlie  patient,  with- 
out knowing  wliy,  did  actually  go  and  confess  to  the  priest  of  her  vision. 

It  is  plain  that  we  must  be  very  slow  to  assume  that  any  apparent- 
result  of  a  dream  proves  that  the  phantasmal  j^ersonage  whom  the 
dre;im  has  shown  possessed  independent  reality. 

We  must  (jbserve,  however,  that  this  self-suggestion  in  dreams, — if 
self-suggestion  it  be, — has  sometimes  worked  itself  out  wath  a  complete- 
ness exceeding  anything  that  we  know  to  lia^  e  followed  upon  hypnotic 
suggestion.  It  has  induced  no  fictive  murders,  but  death  itself.  We 
have  several  cases  where  an  announcement  made  in  dream  of  the  date 
of  the  dreamer's  decease  has  been  punctually  fulfilled.  In  Proceedings, 
Vol.  v.,  p.  291,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  quoted  a  case  of  this  kind,  where  the 
death  was  not  traceable  to  any  known  disease.  I  give  here  a  case 
rendered  still  more  perplexing  by  the  rejDetition  of  the  warning  dream. 

P.  27. 

A))out  60  years  ago  a  Mrs.  Carleton  died  in  the  County  of  Leitrim.  She 
and  niy  late  mother  were  very  intimate,  and  a  few  days  after  her  death  she 
ap])eared  to  my  mother  in  a  dream,  and  said  tliat  never  again  even  in  dreams 
.sliould  my  mother  see  her  except  once,  wliieh  would  be  24  hours  before  she 
should  die.  In  March,  1864,  my  mother  was  living  with  my  son-in-law  and 
daughter,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Lyon,  in  Dalkey.  On  the  evening  of  the  2nd  March 
my  mother  went  to  her  room  in  very  good  spirits,  laughing  and  joking  with 
Mrs.  Lyon.  That  night,  or  rather  early  next  morning.  Dr.  Lyon,  hearing 
some  noise  in  my  mother's  room,  awoke  Mrs.  Lyon,  and  sent  her  in  to  see  if 
all  was  right.  She  f  mnid  my  mother  hanging  half  out  of  bed  with  an  exjares- 
sion  of  horror  on  her  countenance.  Tliey  got  her  into  bed  and  all  right. 
Next  morning  she  seemed  in  lier  usual  health,  and  ate  her  breakfast  aa 
usual,  in  bed,  but  heartily.  On  my  daughter  leaving  her  she  asked  the 
servant  t(j  bring  up  water  for  a  bath,  which  slie  took.  She  then  sent  for 
Mrs.  Lyon,  and  told  her  that  Mrs.  Carleton  had,  after  a  delay  of  56  years, 
at  last  come,  and  told  her  of  her  speedy  deatli,  and  that  she  would  die  next 
morning  at  the  same  hour  as  tliey  had  found  her  as  described.  Slie  added 
that  she  had  bathed  preparatory  to  her  death  to  avoid  liaving  her  body 
waslied.  She  now  gradually  began  U>  sink,  and  died  on  tlie  morning  of  the 
4th  Mai'ch,  at  tlie  liour  slie  had  said. 

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Lytm  can  corroborate  this  account.  My  mother  always  told 
lue  she  would  once  more,  just  before  deatli,  see  Mrs.  Carleton. 

Thomas  James  Norms. 

Dalkey,  Ireland. 

From  Dr.  Lyon,  1,  Tempe-teri-ace,  Dalkey,  Co.  Dublin. 

August  30th,  1883. 
Tlie  late  Mrs.  Dorcas  Norris,  referred  to  in  your  letter,  frequently  in  her 
lifetime  mentioned  that  a  Mrs.  Eliza  Carleton  had  appeared  to  her  in  a  dream, 
aud  promised  to  appear  once  more  to  her  24  liours  Ijefore  her  death.    On  the 

The  SvMiminal  Gmisciousness. 

night  before  her  death  my  wife  went  into  her  room,  and  found  her  almost^ 
insensible  ;  next  day  she  said  that  the  warning  she  had  been  waiting  for  for 
56  years  had  been  given,  and  that  she  would  die  during  next  night,  which 
she  did.  ...  ' 

Richard  St.  John  Lyon. 

This  narrative  is  capable  of  interpretation  in  any  one  of  three  ways. 
As  readers  of  these  Proceedings  know,  I  am  myself  quite  willing  to 
admit  the  supposition  that  the  departed  Mrs.  Carleton  really  knew  of  her 
friend's  impending  decease ; — and  that  both  dreams  were  impressed 
telepathically  by  a  discarnate  upon  an  incai'nate  mind.  But  we  may  also 
suppose  that  the  first  dream,  though  purely  accidental,  made  so  deep 
an  impression  that  when  it  recurred — also  by  accident — it  proved 
tantamount  to  a  self-suggestion  of  death.  Or  we  may  suppose  that  the 
first  dream  was  accidental,  but  that  the  second  was  symbolic,  and  in- 
duced by  some  organic  sensation  which  preluded  imminent  death,  but 
was  jjerceptible  in  sleep  befoi'e  it  was  felt  on  awaking. 

There  are,  however,  cases  in  which  these  dream-predictions  of 
death  are  made  so  long  beforehand,  and  with  so  much  latitude  as  to 
the  exact  date  fixed  for  the  decease,  that  it  is  difiicult  to  conceive  that 
a  self-suggestion  is  bringing  its  own  fulfilment.  The  following  case,  for 
instance,  may  be  a  mere  coincidence,  as  Mr.  Browning  suggests  ;  but  if 
it  be  more  than  a  coincidence  it  is  probably  also  more  than  a  self- 
suggestion. 

P.  142. 

Life  and  Letters  of  Robert  Browning.  By  Mrs.  Sutherland  Orr.  1891,  p.  277. 

"In  June,  1868,  Miss  Arabel  Barrett  (Mrs.  Bro\raing's  sister)  died  of  a 
rheumatic  affection  of  the  heart.  As  did  her  sister  seven  years  before,  she 
passed  away  in  Mr.  Browning's  arms.  He  wrote  the  event  to  Miss. 
Blogden  as  soon  as  it  occurred,  describing  also  a  curious  circumstance 
attendant  on  it  :  19bh  June,  1868.  You  know  I  am  not  superstitious — here 
is  a  note  I  made  in  a  book,  Tuesday,  July  21st,  1863  :  '  Arabel  told  me 
yesterday  that  she  had  been  much  agitated  by  a  dream  which  happened  the 
night  before  Sunday,  July  19th.  She  saw  her  [Mrs.  Browning],  and  asked 
"  When  shall  I  be  with  you  ? "  The  reply  was,  "Dearest,  in  five  years,"  where- 
upon Arabella  woke.  Slie  knew  in  her  dream  that  it  was  not  to  the  living 
she  spoke.'  In  five  years,  within  a  month  of  completion — I  have  forgotten 
the  date  of  the  dream  and  supposed  it  was  only  three  years  ago,  and  that 
two  had  stni  to  run.    Only  a  coincidence,  but  noticeable." 

Our  choice  of  explanation  in  such  cases  must  largely  depend  upon 
our  view  as  to  a  problem  discussed  in  another  paper  ; — the  question 
whether  phantasms  of  the  departed  do  really  in  any  case  indicate  a  con- 
tinued knowledge  of  any  terrene  event  or  eventuality.  But  bs  it  noted 
that  if  in  cases  like  these  we  reject  the  more  marvellous  explanation, — 
the  hypothesis  that  the  departed  friend  is  actually  warning  the  sur- 
vivor,— we  are  driven  to  admit  that  dream  has  an.  unequalled  potency" 

378 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

of  suggestion, — is  linked  with  those  forces  which  we  have  already  noted 
as  like  springs  in  a  river-bed,  perturbing  the  stream  of  our  being  by 
uprushes  which  we  can  neither  fathom  nor  foresee. 

(3)  T  pass  on  to  the  lessons  which  are  to  be  learnt  from  the 
peculiarities  of  dream-memory.  The  first  point  which  I  have  marked 
for  notice  need  not  delay  us  long.  Most  persons  experienced  in  hyp- 
notism have  come  across  incidents  illustrating  the  affinity  between 
memory  in  dream  and  memory  in  hypnotic  trance.  We  know  of 
course  that  dreams  can  be  inspired  by  hyjmotic  suggestion  ; — as  when 
M.  de  Rochas,  in  a  case  personally  known  to  me,  caused  a  young  man 
who  was  neglecting  his  pai'ents  to  dream  that  he  himself  was  a  father, 
and  that  his  children  were  neglecting  Inm.  The  salutary  distress  which 
this  dream  inspired  led  to  a  more  filial  line  of  conduct.  But  there  is  a 
connection  closer  than  this.  For  without  any  suggestion  to  that  effect, 
acts  accomplished  in  the  hypnotic  trance  may  be  remembered  in  dream  ; 
— and  remembered  under  the  illusion  which  was  thrown  round  them  by 
the  liypnotiser.  Thus  Dr.  Auguste  Voisin  suggested  to  a  hypnotised 
subject  to  stab  a  patient  (really  a  stuffed  figure)  in  a  neighbouring  bed.^ 
The  subject  did  so ;  and  of  course  knew  nothing  of  it  on  waking. 
But  three  days  afterwards  he  returned  to  the  hospital,  complaining  that 
his  dreams  were  haunted  by  the  figure  of  a  woman,  who  accused  him  of 
having  stabl^ed  and  killed  her.  Appropriate  suggestion  laid  this  ghost 
of  a  doll. 

Conversely,  dreams  forgotten  in  waking  life  may  be  remembered 
in  the  hypnotic  trance.  Thus  Dr.  Tissie's  patient,  Albert,  dreamt 
that  he  was  about  to  set  out  on  one  of  his  somnambulic  "fugues," 
or  aimless  journeys,  and  when  hypnotised  mentioned  to  the  physician 
this  dream,  which  in  his  waking  state  he  had  forgotten.^  The  prob- 
jible  truth  of  this  statement  was  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  did 
actually  set  out  on  the  journey  thus  dreamt  of, — and  that  his  journeys 
were  usually  preceded  and  incited  by  remembered  dreams. 

I  need  not  dwell  on  the  existence,  ljut  at  the  same  time  the 
incompleteness,  of  our  dream-memory  of  waking  life  ;  nor  on  the 
occasional  formation  of  a  separate  chain  of  memory,  constructed  from 
successive  and  cohering  di'eams. 

(4)  My  next  anticipation  was  that  dream-memory  would  occasionally 
be  found  to  fill  up  gaps  in  waking  memory,  other  than  those  due  to 
hypnotic  ti'ance  ; — such  so-called  ecmnesic  "  periods,  for  instance,  as 
sometimes  succeed  a  violent  shock  to  the  system, — and  may  even  embrace 
:Some  space  of  time  anterior  to  the  shock.    Such  accidents,  however, 

'  Revue  de  V Hypnotisme,  June,  1891,  p,  302. 

-  Les  Reves,  p.  135.  This  remarkable  patient  afforded  examples  of  many  forms 
jjf  communication  of  memory  between  different  states  of  personality.  See  pp.  192-200 
for  a  conspectus  of  these  complex  recollections. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

37^ 

are  so  rare,  and  such  dream-memory  so  hard  to  detect,  that  I  me»tion 
the  point  mainly  for  the  sake  of  theoretical  completeness  ;  and  must 
think  myself  fortunate  in  being  able  to  cite  a  recent  case  of  M. 
Charcot's  which  aiFords  an  interesting  confirmation  of  the  suggested 
view.' 

M.  29. 

A  certain  Madame  D.,  a  liealthy  and  sensible  woman  of  thirty-four,  was 
subjected  on  August  28tli,  1891,  to  a  terrible  shock.  Some  scoundrel  who 
has  not  been  identified  entered  her  cottage  and  told  her  brusquely  that  her 
husband  was  dead,  and  tliat  his  corpse  was  being  brought  home.  This  was 
absolutely  false  ;  but  the  news  threw  her  into  a  state  of  jjrofound  agitation  ; 
and  when  some  indiscreet  friend,  seeing  the  husband  approach,  cried  out 
Le  voila  !  the  poor  woman,  supposing  that  the  corpse  was  thus  announced, 
fell  into  a  prolonged  hysterical  attack.  After  two  days  of  raving  she  came 
to  herself  ; — but  liad  lost  the  memory  of  all  events  since  July  14th  ; — 
i.e.,  since  a  date  six  weeks  before  the  shock.  This  kind  of  retroactive 
ecmnesia — inexplicable  as  it  is — is  known  to  occur  s<_)iiietimes  after  a 
physical  concussion.  In  Madame  D.'s  case  the  shock  had  been  wholly 
a  mental  one  ;  yet  the  forgetfulness  continued,  and  had  spi-ead  over  all  the 
period  up  to  M.  Charcot's  lecture  on  the  case,  December  22nd,  1891. 
Madame  D.  was  then  possessed  of  full  recollection  of  her  life  up  to  July  14th, 
1891 ; — but  slie  could  recall  no  event  whatever  which  had  occurred  since 
that  date.  She  endeavoured  to  continue  her  domestic  duties  ;  but  if  she 
wished  to  recollect  anything  she  had  to  write  it  down  instantly  in  a  note- 
book, to  which  she  constantly  referred.  For  instance,  she  was  bitten  by  a 
dog  believed  to  be  mad.  She  instantly  made  a  written  note  of  the  fact  ; — 
but  except  when  actually  referring  to  her  note-book  she  retained  no 
i-ecoUection  whatever  of  the  bite  or  of  her  subse(pxent  treatment  in  M. 
Pasteur's  laboratory. 

Here,  surely,  was  a  case  where  it  might  have  seemed  that  there  had 
been  some  absolute  evanescence,  absolute  abolition  of  whatsoever  traces 
or  tendencies  may  be  held  to  constitute  memory. 

But  one  fact  was  observed  which  threw  a  decisive  light  upon  this 
puzzling  case.  The  patients  in  the  two  beds  adjoining  Madame  D.'s  were 
told  to  observe  her  at  night.  They  reported  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of 
talking  in  her  sleep  ; — and  that  in  the  fragments  (jf  dreams  thus  revealed  she 
made  frec£uent  allusions  to  the  mad  dog's  bite,  and  to  other  events  which  had 
'Occurred  during  her  ecurnesic  period.  Tliis  hint,  of  course,  was  enough  for 
•JVI.  Ciiarcot.  Classing  her  ecmnesia  as  a  kind  of  prolongation  of  a  hystero- 
■epileptic  attack,  he  hypnotised  the  patient,  and  found  that  in  the  hypnotic 
trance  her  memory  for  the  ecmnesic  period  was  absolutely  intact.  Post- 
hypnotic suggestions  to  remember  the  lost  days  are  now  slowly  restoring  the 
poor  woman  to  the  possession  of  her  whole  past. 

The  fact  which  interests  us  here  is  the  accidentally-discovered 
persistence  in  dream  of  memories  which  had  vanished  from  the  supi'a- 
liminal  consciousness.     This  shows  that  in  dream  Madame  D.  had  got 

1  Kevue  de  Medecine,  February,  1892. 

380  .   .     Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  I 

down — not  merely  to  a  stratum  of  confusion, — but  to  a  state  so  far, 
deeper  than  the  waking  state  that  the  memories  of  which  shock  oi* 
hysteria  had  robl^ed  the  waking  state  wei'e  there  found  to  he  un- 
injured. This  well-observed  case  may  here  stand  as  representative  of 
the  gap-filling  dream-memory  which  T  ventured  to  anticipate.  Other- 
cases  will  be  noticeable  when  spontaneous  somnambulism  comes  under 
review, — in  its  complex  I'elations  with  common  dreams,  hypnotism^ 
hysteria,  and  even  epilepsy. 

(5)  I  pass  on  to  the  still  more  novel  and  curious  questions  involved  in 
the  apparent  existence  of  a  dream-memory  which,  while  accompanying- 
the  memory  of  ordinary  life,  seems  also  to  have  a  wider  purview,  and 
to  indicate  that  the  record  of  external  events  which  is  kept  within  us 
is  far  fuller  than  we  know. 

Let  us  consider  what  stages  such  a  memory  may  show. 

I.  It  may  include  events  once  known  to  the  waking  self,  but  now 
definitely  forgotten. 

II.  It  may  include  facts  which  have  fallen  within  the  sensory  field, 
but  which  have  never  been  supraliminally  "  apperceived  "  or  cognised 
in  any  way. 

III.  It  may  indicate  that  from  this  wider  range  of  remembered 
facts  (\veiim-i7ifefe7ices  have  been  drawn  ; — which  inferences  may  be 
retrospective,  prosjiective,  or, — if  I  may  use  a  word  of  Pope's  with  a  new 
meaning, — circumspective, — that  is  to  say,  relating  not  to  the  past  or  to 
the  future,  but  to  the  present  condition  of  matters  beyond  the  range- 
of  oi'dinary  perception.  It  is  plain  that  inferences  of  this  kind  (if  they 
exist)  will  be  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  direct  retrocognition,  dii'ect 
prenwnition,  direct  clairvoyance  ;  while  yet  they  need  not  actually 
prove  anything  more  than  a  perception  on  the  part  of  the  subliminal 
self  more  far-reaching, — a  memory  more  stable, — than  is  the  perception 
or  the  memory  of  the  sui^raliminal  self  which  we  know. 

Up  to  this  point  I  propose  to  follow  dream-memories  in  the  present 
chapter  ; — \xy>  to  this  j^oint,  or  rather  into  this  dubious  borderland 
where  it  is  not  certain  whether  supernormal  powers — direct  telepathy, 
clairvoyance,  prevision, — need  or  need  not  be  invoked  to  explain  the 
phenomena  of  dream.  As  my  reader  knows,  I  shall  not  shrink  from 
invoking  such  powers,  when  they  seem  indispensable.  But  with  our 
present  knowledge  we  must  not  assume  them  until  other  explanations 
are  exhausted ;  and  these  hypermnesic  dreams  afford  a  means  of  drawing- 
our  lines  of  evidence  more  exactly  ; — of  relegating  some  marvellous 
narratives  to  a  realm  of  lesser  marvel,  and  at  the  same  time  of 
realising  more  clearly  what  it  is  in  the  most  advanced  cases  which 
ordinary  theories  are  really  powerless  to  explain. 

I.  As  to  the  ^^rs^  of  the  above-mentioned  categories  no  one  will  raise 
SMj  doubt.    It  is  a  familiar  fact — or  a  fact  only  sufticiently  unfamiliar 

The  Subliminal  Gons_ciousness. 

m 

to  be  noted  with  slight  surprise — that  we  occasionally  recover  in  sleep 
a  memory  which  has  wholly  dropped  out  of  waking  consciousness.  As 
an  example,  we  may  take  the  dream  of  M.  Delbaeuf 's,  discussed  in  his 
interesting  book,  Le  Sontmeil  et  les  Reves.  In  that  dream  the  name 
of  the  "  Asplenium  Ruta  Muralis  "  iigured  as  a  familiar  phrase.  On 
waking  he  puzzled  himself  in  vain  to  think  where  he  could  have  learnt 
that  botanical  appellation.  Long  afterwards  he  discovered  the  name 
"Asplenium  Ruta  Mui'aria"  in  his  own  handwriting, — in  a  little  col- 
lection of  flowers  and  fei'ns  to  which  he  had  added  their  designations, 
imder  the  dictation  of  a  l:)otanical  friend. 

In  this  and  similar  cases  the  original  piece  of  knowledge  had  at  the 
time  made  a  definite  impress  on  the  mind, — had  come  well  within  the 
span  of  apprehension  of  the  supraliminal  consciousness.  Its  reappeai'ance 
after  however  long  an  interval  is  a  fact  to  which  there  are  already 
plenty  of  parallels.  But  the  conclusion  to  which  the  cases  about  to  be 
cited  seem  to  me  to  point  is  one  of  a  much  stranger  character.  I  think 
that  thei'e  is  evidence  to  show  that  many  facts  or  pictures  which  have 
never  even  for  a  moment  come  within  the  apprehension  of  the  supra- 
liminal consciousness  are  nevertheless  retained  l:)y  the  subliminal 
memory,  and  are  occasionally  presented  in  dreams  with  what  seems  a 
definite  purpose. 

The  I'eader  may  remember  that  this  claim  has  already  been  ad- 
vanced for  crystal- vision.-  Miss  X.  saw  in  the  crystal  the  announce- 
ment of  the  death  of  a  friend; — a  piece  of  news  which  certainly  had 
never  been  apprehended  by  her  ordinary  consci(jus  self.  On  referring 
to  the  Times,  it  was  found  that  the  announcement  was  contained  in  a 
sheet  with  which  Miss  X.  had  screened  her  face  from  the  lire ; — so  that 
the  words  may  have  fallen  within  her  range  of  vision,  although  they 
had  not  reached  what  we  call  her  waking  mind. 

This  instance  was  of  value  from  the  completeness  of  the  pi'oof  that 
the  news  could  nevei'  have  been  supraliminally  known  at  all ; — since  it 
was  too  important  to  have  been  mei-ely  glanced  at  and  forgotten. 

We  shall  find  that  in  some  dream-presentations  the  proof  of  supra- 
liminal ignorance  is  eqtially  strong.  Let  us  begin,  however,  with  some 
intermediate  instances.  ..: 

M.  30. 

From  Mr.  A.  Brockelbank,  20,  Marsden-road,  East  Dulwich,  S.E. 

July  lUh,  1884.  ■ 

Some  years  ago  I  lost  a  pocket-knife.  I  think  it  was  some  six  iiKjnths 
afterwards — when  I  had  forgotten  entirely  the  loss  of  tlie  knife,  and  the  sub- 
ject never  recurred  to  my  memory  in  any  way  whatever — I  dreamt  one  night 
that  it  was  in  the  pocket  of  a  certain  pair  of  trousers  I  liad  cast  off,  I  suppose 

'  Proceedings,  Vol,  V.,  p.  507. 

382 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

about  the  same  time  as  the  loss  of  my  knife.  T  awoke,  and  lay  awake  some 
time,  till  it  ^)ccurred  to  me  to  prove  the  truth  of  my  dream.  I  went  upstairs 
in  search  of  the  said  pair  of  trousers,  and  sure  enough  there  it  was  as  I  had 
dreamt.  The  peculiarity  of  the  above  is  this,  tliat  wlien  I  was  awake  and  in 
my  senses  no  train  of  thought  or  retracing  of  my  memory  would  carry  me 
back  to  the  pair  of  trousers  or  to  the  knife,  and  it  was  quite  as  an  experi- 
ment that  1  went  in  search  of  them. 

Augustus  Brockelbank. 

This  is  much  such  a  flash  of  memory  as  might  sometimes  occur  in 
waking  hours,  for  it  is  pi'obable  that  Mr.  Brockelbank  had  at  one  time 
observed  that  the  knife  was  in  that  pocket.  He  may  have  very  rapidly 
forgotten  the  fact  ;  but  nevertheless  there  was  probably  some  supra- 
liminal knowledge  foi-  the  dream  to  revive. 

Next  let  us  take  another  case  of  a  lost  object,  where  waking  effort 
soon  after  the  loss  fails  to  recall  any  supraliminal  knowledge  of  the  place 
of  deposit.    This  case  was  i:)rinted  in  the  S.P.R.  Jouryial,  October,  1889. 

M.  31. 

-        •  Ffhruary  Mh,im). 

On  reaching  Morley's  Hotel  at  5  o'clock  on  Tuesday,  29th  January,  1889, 
I  missed  a  gold  brooch,  which  I  supposed  I  had  left  in  a  fitting  r(^om  at 
Swan  and  Edgar's.  I  sent  there  at  once,  but  was  very  disapjjointed  to  hear 
that  after  a  diligent  search  they  could  not  find  the  brooch.  I  was  very  vexed, 
and  worried  about  the  brooch,  and  that  night  dreamed  that  I  should  find  it 
shut  up  in  a  number  of  tlie  Queen  newspaper  that  had  been  on  the  table,  and 
in  my  dream  I  saw  the  very  page  where  it  would  be.  I  had  noticed  one  of 
the  plates  on  that  page.  Directly  after  breakfast  I  went  to  Swan  and  Edgar'.s 
and  asked  to  see  the  papers,  at  the  same  time  telling  the  young  ladies  about 
the  dream,  and  where  I  had  seen  the  brooch.  The  papers  had  beeji  moved 
from  that  room,  but  were  found,  and  to  the  astonishment  of  the  young  ladies, 
I  said,  "This  is  the  one  that  contains  my  brooch"  ;  and  there  at  the  very 
page  I  expected  T  found  it. 

A.  M.  Bickford-Smith. 

We  received  a  substantially  similar  account  from  Mrs.  Bickford- 
Smith's  brother-in-law,  Mr.  H.  A.  Smith,  who  was  a  witness  of  the 
trouble  taken  to  find  the  Ijrooch,  lioth  at  the  hotel,  and  by  sending  to 
Swan  and  Edgar'.s,  on  the  previous  evening. 

Yet  here,  be  it  observed,  Mrs.  Bickford-Smitli  had  not  had  an 
opportunity  of  herself  inspecting  the  scene  of  the  loss.  Had  she 
returned  to  Swan  and  Edgai''s  before  the  dream,  it  is  230ssible  that  the 
sight  of  the  books  on  the  table  might  have  revived  some  recollection  of 
seeing  the  Ijrooch  between  the  leaves  of  the  Queen. 

In  the  next  case  we  cannot  absolutely  prove  that  Mrs.  Yates  did 
not  put  the  photogi'aphs  in  the  drawer  herself, — or  casually  see  that 
a  parcel  was  in  the  drawer,  if  someone  else  put  them  there, — but  the 
fact  of  the  long  search,  of  the  I'efusal  to  believe  the  dream,  makes  this 

The  SvMiminal  Consciousness. 

383 

explailatiori  dubious.  I  may  add  that  Mrs.  Yates  (known  to  Mr. 
Gurney  and  myself)  has  had  other  experiences, — of  a  telepathic  or 
clairvoyant  kind. 

M.  315. 

From  Mrs.  Yates,  44,  Montpelier-road,  Brighton.  1884. 

About  five  years  since  I  had  sent  me,  by  a  friend,  some  unmounted 
photographs  of  "The  Stations  of  the  Cross,"  taken  in  miniature  from 
frescoes  at  Rome,  with  the  request  that  after  inspection  I  would  immediately 
return  them,  as  they  were  valued.  I  placed  them  in  an  envelope,  and,  as. 
I  thought,  in  the  secretaire,  but  on  finishing  a  letter  in  which  I  intended  to 
return  them,  to  my  dismay,  they  were  nowhere  to  be  found.  We  searched 
unceasingly,  but  fruitlessly.  I  submitted  meekly  to  reproofs  for  my  care- 
lessness, and  so  the  matter  passed  out  of  thought. 

More  than  a  twelvemonth  after  I  dreamt  I  took  out  a  top  short  drawer  in 
a  wardrobe  that  stood  in  a  then  unused  dressing-room,  and  found  the  little 
pictures.  It  will  naturally  be  asked,  "  Did  you  not,  the  first  thing  in  tlie 
morning,  ascertain  whether  your  dream  liad  anything  in  it,  by  removing  tlie 
drawer  ? "  I  did  not.  I  mentioned  it  to  my  family,  but  it  had  no  special 
interest  for  them,  and  it  was  no  more  thought  of  ;  but  several  months  after, 
on  the  removal  of  tlie  wardrobe  to  another  part  of  the  house,  the  drawers 
beihg  taken  out  to  lighten  it,  there,  snugly  enough,  lay  the  envelope  and  the 
little  pictures  I    I  have  them  mounted  and  framed. 

I  subjoin  another  case  of  the  same  type.  ■ 
M.    32.  • 

The  wife  of  the  Rev.  "VV.  F.  Brand,  Emmorton,  Harford  Co.,  Mary- 
land, writes  as  follows,  under  date  Findowsay,  Mai-ch  29th,  1884  : — 

Mr.  Brand  asked  me  one  day  to  give  him  the  100  dollars  that  he  liad 
given  me  to  put  away  for  him.  I  felt  startled,  for  I  did  not  remember  that 
he  had  given  them  to  me.  However,  I  went  to  the  jilace  where  I  usually  put 
money  and  looked.  It  was  not  tliere.  I  looked  in  several  other  not 
improbable  places,  but  could  not  find  it.  By  degrees  I  searched  in  every 
drawer,  and  box,  and  corner,  likely  or  milikely,  or  even  impossible,  but 
without  success.  Night  came  and  I  had  not  found  it.  I  was  much  disturbed, 
for  the  loss  was  a  large  one  for  vis  ;  ljut  even  more  than  for  the  loss  we  wero 
concerned  at  the  thought  of  anyone  about  me  liaviiig  taken  it.  Before 
going  to  bed  I  prayed  very  earnestly  that  I  miglit  find  it  ;  or,  if  not,  that 
suspicion  might  not  fall  upon  an  innocent  person.  In  tlie  course  of  the  niglit 
I  dreamt  that  I  found  tlie  money  in  the  middle  of  a  bundle  of  shawls  that 
had  been  put  away  during  tlie  summer,  and  carefully  wrapped  up  for  protec- 
tion against  moths.  In  my  daylight  mind  this  place  seemed  to  me  an  absurd 
one  to  look  in,  but  my  dream  impressed  me  a  good  deal,  and  I  unfastened 
the  shawls — (I  ihink  they  were  sewed  up) — and  there  was  the  lost  treasure. 

I  should  like  to  say  whetlier  my  dream  wakened  me  in  the  night,  but  I 
do  not  remember.  I  did  not  looh  until  the  morning.  I  never  have  been 
able  to  recall  the  fact  of  my  putting  the  money  away,  nor,  indeed,  of  Mr. 
Brand  giving  it  into  my  care,  although  it  was  an  unusual  thing  fur  him  to  do 
in  those  days. 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

• '  I  think  Nydie's  finding  her  ring  by  a  dream  was  a  more  curious  circum-r 
stance  than  this  with  regard  to  my  money,  but  I  always  am  afraid  to  tell 
botJb  dreams,  as  they  happened  to  sisters,  lest  one  should  discredit  the  other, 
and  we  should  be  regarded  as  fanciful.^ 

Next  let  us  take  two  cases  where  it  seems  quite  impossible  to 
■suppose  that  the  seeker's  supraliminal  consciousness  was  ever  aware  of 
the  lost  object's  true  position, — as  the  object  would  then  at  once  have 
been  picked  up.  But  on  the  other  hand  (as  in  Miss  X.'s  crystal  case, 
above  cited),  the  object  may  have  come  within  the  seeker's  Held  of 
vision,  and  may  thus  have  become  enrolled  in  the  subliminal  memory. 

M.    (CI.)  30.3. 

From  Mrs.  Crellin,  62,  Hilldrop-crescent,  N.  1884. 

When  a  school  girl  I  one  day  foolishly  removed  from  my  French  teacher's 
hand  a  ring,  Avhich  I,  in  fun,  transferred  to  my  own.  On  removing  it  from 
my  finger  just  before  going  to  bed,  I  found  that  a  stone  had  fallen  out  of  the 
ring,  and  I  was  much  troubled  about  it,  esi^ecially  as  the  ring  had  been 
(jlven  to  my  teacher.  We  had  four  class  rooms,  and  as  I  had  been  moving  from 
one  to  another  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  I  could  not  hope  to  find  the  lost 
•stone.  I,  however,  in  my  dreams  that  night  saw  the  stone  lying  on  a 
certain  ])lank  in  the  floor  of  our  "  drilling  room,"  and  on  awaking  I  dressed 
hastily  and  went  direct  to  the  spot  marked  in  my  dream,  and  recovered  the 
lost  stone.  This  narrative  has  nothing  thrilling  in  it,  but  its  simplicity  and 
exactness  may  commend  it  to  your  notice. 

Mr.  Grurney  adds  : — In  conversation  with  me,  Mrs.  Crellin  described  the 
four  class  rooms  as  good  sized  rooms,  which  it  would  have  taken  a  long  time 
to  search  over.  Slie  had  been  about  in  all  of  them  in  the  course  of  the 
evening.  She  is  positive  that  slie  went  quite  straight  to  the  spot.  She  is  an 
excellent  witness. 

Mrs.  J.  Windsor  Stuart,  of  Foley  House,  Rothesay,  N.B., — well 
known  to  me, — contributes  a  similar  experience,  but  with  the  additional 
point  of  interest  that  the  ring  was  seen,  not  as  it  must  have  looked 
when  searched  for,  but  glistening  with  dew,  as  it  actually  was  at  the 
time  of  the  dream.  The  incident  is  i-eniote  ;  hwt  Mr.  Stuart  remem- 
bers l)eing  told  of  the  incident  in  the  same  form  much  nearer  tlie 
actual  date. 

M.  33. 

January  30th,  1892. 
In  the  early  autinini  of  1864,  my  father  (the  late  Captain  Wm.  Campbell) 
was  living  at  Snettisliam  Hall,  Norfolk.  We  had  had  a  croquet  jjarty.  Among 
tlie  guests  was  a  young  man,  George  (jlambier  (nephew  of  tlie  late  artist, 
Mr.  Gambler  Parry),  at  the  time  an  agricultural  pupil  of  the  late  Mr.  Cliarles 
Preedy,  agent  on  the  Hunstanton  estate.    As  Mr.  Gambler  was  about  to 

1  This  case,  endorsed  for  publication,  was  found  among  Mr.  Gurney's  papers. 
Mrs.  Brand  appears  to  have  left  her  then  address,  so  the  date  of  her  dream  and  the 
particulars  of  her  sister's  dream  cannot  now  be  obtained.  ■    ,  ' 

The  Subliminal  Conacioiisness. 

885 

mount  his  horse  and  ride  home,  he  suddenly  said,  ' '  I  have  lost  the  opal  out 
of  my  ring.  I  would  not  have  done  this  for  the  world  ;  it  belonged  to  my 
father.  I  remember  seeing  it  as  I  rang  the  bell,  on  arriving,  so  that  it  must 
have  dropped  out  since  I  came  here."  We  all  set  to  work  to  hunt  for  the 
stone  by  walking  up  and  down  the  lawn  in  line,  but  without  success. 

There  were  two  copper-beech  trees,  one  just  on  the  lawn  near  the  house, 
the  other  a  little  further  back,  above  the  embankment  made  in  hiying  off  the 
lawn,  but  spreading  a  little  over  it.  In  the  early  morning  I  dreamed  I  saw 
the  stone  shining  under  a  leaf  that  had  fallen  from  the  tree,  close  to  the  edge 
of  the  bank.  I  saw  the  whole  scene  vividly,  the  dew  drops  sparkling  in 
the  sun,  and  the  stone,  in  my  dream.  I  woke  so  much  impressed  hj  my 
dream  that  I  at  once  got  up  and  dressed,  and  went  out.  It  was  about  six 
o'clock  on  a  lovely  morning.  I  went  out  by  the  garden  door  directly  on  to 
tlie  lawn,  and  walked  up  to  the  tree,  seeing  everything  as  in  my  dream,  and 
found  the  stone  without  furtlier  looking,  just  under  the  leaf,  as  I  had  seen  it. 

Flora  Stuart. 

The  three  cases  which  follow  were  published  by  Professor  Royce, 
of  Harvard  (who  knows  the  real  names  of  the  informants),  in  the  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  American  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.,  No.  4,  March,  1889.' 

"The  first  case,"  says  Professor  Royce,  "comes  to  us  from  a  lady 
{M.  B.)  to  whom  we  had  applied  for  an  account  of  another  and  more 
remarkable  experience,  which  she  was  unable,  however,  to  relate  to  us 
at  present.  As  a  compensation  she  gave  us  this  less  important 
experience,  of  whose  incidents  she  feels  very  sure  " : — 

M.  35. 

A  number  of  years  ago  I  was  invited  to  visit  a  friend  who  lived  at  a  large 
and  beautiful  country-seat  on  the  Hudson.  Shortly  after  my  arrival  I  started, 
with  a  number  of  other  guests,  to  make  a  tour  of  the  very  extensive  grounds. 
We  walked  for  an  hour  or  more,  and  very  thoroughly  explored  the  place 
IJpon  my  return  to  the  house  I  discovered  that  I  had  lost  a  gold  cuff- 
stud,  that  I  valued  for  association's  sake.  I  merely  remembered  that  I  wore 
it  when  we  started  out,  and  did  not  think  of  or  notice  it  again  until  my 
return,  when  it  was  missing.  As  it  was  quite  dark,  it  seemed  useless  to 
searcli  for  it,  especially  as  it  was  the  season  of  autumn  and  the  ground  was 
covered  with  dead  leaves.  That  night  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  a  withered 
grape-vine  clinging  to  a  wall,  and  with  a  pile  of  dead  leaves  at  the  base. 
Underneath  the  leaves,  in  my  dream,  I  distinctly  saw  my  stud  gleaming. 
The  following  morning  I  asked  the  friends  with  whom  I  had  been  walking  tlie 
previous  afternoon  if  they  remembered  seeing  any  such  wall  and  vine,  as  I 
did  not.  They  replied  that  they  could  not  recall  anything  answering  the 
description.  I  did  not  tell  them  wliy  I  asked,  as  I  felt  somewhat  ashamed  of 
the  dream,  but  during  the  morning  I  made  some  excuse  to  go  out  in  the 
grounds  alone.  I  walked  hither  and  thither,  and  after  a  long  time  I  suddenly 
came  upon  the  wall  and  vine  exactly  as  they  looked  in  my  dream.  I  had  not 
the  sUghtest  recollection  of  seeing  them  or  passing  by  them  on  the  previous 

^  Since  the  American  S. P. R.  became  a  Branch  of  our  Society,  it  has  ceased  to 
publish  separate  Proceedings,    No.  4  is  the  last  Part  published. 

386 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

day.  The  dead  leaves  at  the  base  were  lying  heaped  ujj,  as  in  niy  dream.  I 
approached  cautiously,  feeling  ratlier  uncomfortable  and  decidedly  silly,  and 
pushed  them  aside.  I  had  scattered  a  large  number  of  the  leaves  when  a, 
gleam  of  gold  struck  my  eye,  and  there  lay  the  stud,  exactly  as  in  my  dream. 
My  friends  refused  to  believe  when  I  told  them,  and  vowed  there  was  some 
trick  about  it,  but  as  I  had  not  told  anyone  the  j)articulars  of  the  dream, 
that  was  impossible,  and  the  matter  wiU  always  be  somewhat  "  uncanny  "  in 
my  memory. 

"The  next  case,"  continues  Professor  Royce,  "depends  upon  a  memory 
of  many  years'  standing,  and,  were  it  not  for  the  cleverness  and  the 
freedom  from  superstition  which  the  narrator  shows,  I  should  lay  no 
stress  upon  the  incident.  But  pretty  plainly  something  of  the  sort  did 
occur  to  our  correspondent,  although,  after  twenty-five  years,  memory 
is  a  poor  guide,  and  obviously  his  story  has  been  often  told  by  him  " : — 

M.  36. 

(From  C.  H.  H.,  C.E.,  and  Surveyor.) 

California,  December  26i/i,  1887. 
Upwards  of  twenty-five  years  ago  I  was  residing  on  the  banks  of  the 
Delaware  river,  in  Sullivan  co.,  State  of  New  York.  Before  I  left  home 
my  only  sister  had  presented  me  with  a  gold  ring  and  told  me  to  never 
lose  it.  In  a  beautiful  little  grove  near  the  Ijank  of  said  river  a  lot  of 
us  young  folks  had  fixed  up  a  scup,  or  swing,  among  the  trees,  and  we 
indulged  in  that  pastime  to  that  extent  that  the  land  immediately  under  the 
swing  became  so  lively  that  my  foot  would  make  a  deep  impression.  One. 
beautiful  moonlight  night,  after  getting  tired  of  swinging,  I  had  seen  my 
best  girl  home,  as  in  duty  bound,  and  was  returning  along  towards  morning, 
as  usual,  wheii  I  missed  my  ring.  It  gave  me  quite  a  shock  when  I  made 
that  discovery  ;  tlie  first  impression  I  had  was — there,  I've  lost  that  ring, 
but  it  must  be  found,  and  that  I  would  find  it.  Went  home  and  searched 
round  my  room  and  went  to  bed.  Had  a  hazy  sort  of  dream  about  the  ring, 
but  nothing  definite.  Got  up  early  and  searched  before  breakfast.  After 
breakfast  followed  tlie  direction  we  had  taken  the  night  before  to  the 
swing,  and  from  there  to  the  young  lady's  home  ;  but  found  it  not.  In  fact, 
I  searched  diligently  all  day,  and  went  to  bed  thinking  very  seriously  of 
the  ring.  Along  towards  morning  had  a  very  impressive  dream.  I  saw 
the  ring,  covered  by  a  little  ridge  of  sand,  between  two  footprints  under 
the  swing.  That  dream  was  so  vivid  that  on  awaking  I  could  see  the  road, 
buildings,  fences,  trees,  swmg,  and  sand,  with  the  footprints  therein,  the 
same  as  in  the  dream,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  light  enough  to  see  I  started 
for  tliat  swing,  not  attempting  to  look  for  it  on  the  way.  On  arriving  at 
the  swing  I  walked  deliberately  into  tlie  sand  until  I  readied  the  before- 
mentioned  ridge,  between  said  footjjrints,  and  witli  the  toe  of  my  Ijoot  re- 
moved a  little  sand  from  the  top  of  the  ridge,  and  out  rolled  the  ring.  The 
birds  were  singing  overhead  in  the  trees,  the  river  was  rushing  on  its  way 
to  the  sea,  a  train  of  cars  on  the  York  and  Erie  R.R.  across  the  river  passed 
along.  I  banged  my  liead  several  times  with  my  fist,  to  make  sure  I  was 
not  still  in  tlie  land  of  dreams  ;  no,  I  was  there,  standing  in  tlie  sand,  and 
there  laid  the  ring.    There  was  no  hallucination  about  that,  but  a  good, 

The  SuMiminal  Consciousvess. 

387 

square,  honest,  useful  dream.  I  picked  up  the  ring,  and  went  home,  and 
ate  more  for  breakfast  than  I  had  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  and  I  kept 
up  an  awful  thinking,  and  am  thinking  yet.  I  would  state  I  was  about  nine- 
teen years  of  age  at  that  time,  enjoyed  perfect  health,  and  thought  I  knew 
more  than  all  creation  ;  but  don't  think  so  now.  My  sister  was  also  living  at 
that  time. 

Several  years  after  the  above  I  had  anotlier  dream,  and  the  last  one  ;  but 
this  has  been  so  long  that  I  will  close  for  this  time  to  see  what  you  think  of 
it,  and  whether  the  second  will  be  of  interest  to  you,  and  will  merely  remark 
that  I  have  endeavoured  to  work  this  dream  business  up  to  a  practical  use  in 
the  years  gone  by  ;  but  it  has  been  a  total  failure,  so  far — can't  concentrate 
the  mind  with  that  intenseness  that  seems  to  be  necessary  with  me  to  bring 
forth  dreams. 

"Anyone  used  to  narratives,"  continues  Professor  Royce,  "recognises 
at  once  that  this  story,  as  I  have  suggested,  has  grown  not  a  little  with 
years,  and  I  am  not  sure  of  more  than  that  it  has  a  probable  founda- 
tion in  fact,  and  is  no  doubt  sincerely  told. 

"The  third  case  to  be  quoted  in  this  connection  has  a  better  l)asis, 
and  is  more  critically  told. 

"The  narrator  is  a  Southern  gentleman,  Col.  A.  v.  S.,  of  Texas." 

In  the  New  York  Herald  of  December  11th  inst.  I  have  noticed  your 
interview,  in  which  you  say  that  you  request  any  person  having  some 
unusual  experience,  such  as  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream,  &c.,  &c.,  should 
address  you.  The  following  seems  to  me  a  very  extraordinary  dream,  for 
the  trvith  of  which  I  pledge  you  my  word  of  honour. 

About  five  years  ago  I  lived  with  my  four  children,  one  boy  and  tliree 
girls,  on  a  farm  in  Massachusetts.  This  only  son,  at  the  age  of  about  four- 
teen years,  lost  his  life  in  an  accident,  about  six  months  previous  to  this 
narration.  The  youngest  of  my  girls  was  the  pet  sister  of  liis  since  lier 
birth.  My  wife  had  died  some  six  years  previ(jus  to  this  story  ;  being 
motlierless,  made  these  children  unusually  affectionate  toward  each  other. 
One  day  I  had  occasion  to  buy  for  my  girls  each  a  very  small  lady's  knife, 
about  two  and  a  half  inches  long.  A  few  days  afterwards  the  girls  received 
company  from  our  neighbours'  girls,  some  five  or  six  of  them.  My  youngest 
one,  some  eight  or  nine  years  old,  was  so  delighted  with  this,  her  first  knife, 
that  she  carried  it  with  her  at  all  times.  During  the  afternoon  the  children 
strolled  to  the  large  barn,  filled  with  hay,  and  at  ojice  set  to  climbing  the 
mow  to  play,  and  jumping  on  the  hay.  During  the  excitement  of  the  play 
my  little  girl  lost  her  knife.  This  terrible  loss  nearly  broke  her  heart,  and 
all  hands  set  to  work  to  find  the  lost  treasure,  but  without  success.  This 
finally  broke  up  the  party  in  gloominess.  In  spite  of  my  greatest  efforts  to 
pacify  the  cliild  with  all  sorts  of  promises,  she  went  to  bed  weeping.  During 
the  night  the  child  dreamed  that  her  dead  dear  beloved  brother  came  to  her, 
taking  her  by  the  hand,  saying,  "Come,  my  darling,  I  will  show  you  where 
your  little  knife  is,"  and,  leading  her  to  the  barn,  climbing  the  mow,  showed 
her  the  knife,  marking  the  place.  Tlie  dream  was  so  life-hke  that  she  awoke, 
joyfully  telling  her  sister  that  her  brother  had  been  here,  and  showincr  lier 
where  she  would  find  her  knife.    Both  girls  liastily  dressed,  and  running  tq. 

388 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

the  barn,  the  little  girl,  assisted  by  her  sister,  got  on  top  of  the  hay,  and 
walked  direct  to  the  spot  indicated  by  her  brother,  and  found  the  knife  on 
top  of  tlie  hay.    The  whole  party  said  that  they  all  looked  there  many  times 
tlie  day  before,  and  insisted  that  the  knife  was  not  there  then. 
This,  I  think,  is  a  very  remarkable  dream. — Yours,  etc. 

"In  answer  to  a  request  for  further  confirmation,"  continues  Pro- 
fessor Royce,  "  our  correspondent  writes,  under  date  of  December  29th, 
1887":^ 

M.    37.  -  ■  ...  ' 

Yours  of  December  22nd  inst.  to  hand.  According  to  your  request  I  Avill 
give  the  statement  of  my  girls.    The  little  dreamer  says  : — 

' '  I  have  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  my  dream  uji  to  tliis  day.  I  could 
to-day  walk  every  step  that  I  walked  in  my  dream  with  brother.  I  cannot 
recollect  at  what  time  of  the  night  I  had  my  dream.  I  don't  think  I  ever 
was  awake  during  the  night,  but,  on  waking  in  the  morning,  I  had  the  feel- 
ing that  I  was  sure  I  could  go  and  get  the  knife.  I  told  my  sisters.  They 
;at  first  laughed  at  my  dream,  but  I  insisted  that  brother  had  shown  me  the 
knife,  and  I  could  not  have  peace  in  my  mind  until  I  went  to  the  barn  to  get 
it.  One  sister  went  with  me.  On  reaching  the  hay,  I  told  her  to  let  me  go 
ahead,  and  walked  direct  to  the  spot  without  hesitating  a  moment,  and 
picked  up  my  knife  !  " 

She  never  had  any  other  similar  experience,  and  no  other  similar  expe- 
rience happened  in  my  family.    The  sister  who  went  along  with  her  says  : — 

' '  As  we  got  up  and  were  dressing,  sister  told  me  she  knew  where  her 
knife  was  ;  that  brother  took  her  out  to  the  barn  during  the  night  and 
showed  it  to  her.  I  laughed  and  tried  to  persuade  her  that  this  Avas  only  a 
dream,  but  she  said  that  she  was  so  sure  of  seeing  the  knife  that  she  would 
show  it  to  me.  She  said  that  brother  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led 
her  to  the  place,  talking  to  her  all  the  way,  and  tried  to  quiet  her.  She, 
would  not  give  peace  until  I  went  along.  On  getting  on  top  of  the  hay  she 
walked  direct  to  the  spot,  saying,  '  Here  Iji'other  picked  the  knife  up  out 
of  the  hay,'  and  at  once  said,  'and  oh,  here  it  is,'  picking  up  the  knife. 
"\Ve  had  been  lociking  this  place  all  over,  again  and  again,  tlie  jirevious 
evening." 

For  the  following  incident,  resembling  those  just  quoted  from 
Professor  Royce,  we  have  the  independent  account  of  the  dreamer 
himself,  written  two  years  later  ;  but  as  his  narrative  is  somewhat 
disjointed  Ave  prefer  to  give  that  kindly  sent  to  us  by  Miss  Ada 
Hunt,  of  Pen  Villa,  Yeovil,  which  has  the  further  advantage  of  having 
been  written  at  the  time. 

M.  38. 

The  following  rather  remarkable  dream  took  place  on  the  20th  November, 
1886.  On  that  day  I  gave  to  our  gardener,  G.  Wilmot,  his  wages,  15s.,  in  a 
half-sheet  of  jjapei',  some  letters  to  jjost,  and  two  jjarcels  and  a  note  to  leave 
at  various  liouses  on  his  way  home.  This  was  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening. 
.    .    .    Aljout  an  hour  after  the  gardener  returned  to  tell  me  he  had  lost  his 

The  Subliniinal  Covscioufniess. 

389 

■wages.  I  advised  him  to  carefully  retrace  his  steps  and  make  every  inquiry, 
but  this  he  did  without  success;  and  as  it  was  "fair"  night  and  the  town 
full  of  people,  he  at  last  gave  it  up  as  hopeless  and  returned  to  his  home 
quite  a  mile  distant.  During  the  niglit  he  dreamt  that  he  went  to  one  of  the 
houses  where  he  had  left  a  note,  and,  crossing  tlie  road  after  leaving  it,  he 
walked  into  a  mud  heap,  and  that  there  liis  foot  struck  the  paper  containing 
the  money  ;  the  half-sovereign  rolled  away  and  the  5s.  remained  under  liis 
foot.  He  told  his  wife  the  dream,  and  falling  asleep  again  he  dreamt  the 
same  dream  again.  Early  in  the  morning  he  went  to  the  place  and  found 
his  dream  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  even  to  the  rolling  away  (jf  the  gold,  and 
the  silver  remaining  in  its  place. 

He  is  a  most  intelligent,  truthful  man.  ... 

The  gardener's  own  account  differs  from  this  in  giving  fewer  details 
as  to  the  dream  ;  his  account  of  it  is  :  "I  dreamt  I  had  found  it  and 
kicked  the  half-sovereign  off  the  heap."  Miss  Hunt  thinks  that  his 
nervousness  at  writing  himself  made  him  foi'get  tu  say  that  he  dreamt 
exactly  where  the  money  was  found.  He  had  so  little  belief  in  his 
dream  that  he  tossed  up  as  to  wliether  he  should  go  to  look  for  the 
money  again  or  not. 

In  the  following  case  the  dream  itself  first  calls  the  attention  of 
the  sujDraliminal  self  to  the  loss. 

We  owe  this  case  to  the  kindness  of  Miss  J.  H.  Symons,  of  91, 
Wigmore-street,  W.,  to  whom  the  case  was  sent  by  the  percipient, 
Mrs.  Bell,  of  7,  Albert-road,  Gloucester  Gate,  Regent's  Park. 

M.    39.  ■  ■ 

One  morning  in  the  early  part  of  December  (December  9th,  1890),  I 
awoke  remembering  my  dream,  and  repeated  it  to  Mr.  Bell  as  being  a  piece 
of  good  fortune  that  my  diamond  had  not  been  lost  I  I  dreamed  that  I 
had  lost  the  large  centre  diamond  in  some  sand.  I  was  much  distressed, 
and  Imnted  in  the  sand  and  found  it,  and  wrapped  it  in  paper,  and  asked 
my  daughter  to  take  care  of  it  for  me.  I  very  often  leave  my  brooch  on  the 
mantel  shelf  at  night  and  put  it  away  witli  my  other  jewellery  in  the  morning. 
While  I  was  dressing  my  dream  haunted  me  and  I  thought,  ' '  Well,  I  had 
lietter  look  and  see  where  my  brobch  is."  I  looked— there  was  no  brooch. 
I  hunted  in  the  cinders — I  opened  all  my  drawers — no,  no  brooch.  My 
daugliter  came  into  my  room  and  I  told  her  my  trouble.  She  hunted  for  it 
also,  and  again  looked  into  the  cinders — and  found  it  1 

Miss  Bell  also  writes  to  us  :  "I  did  search  the  ashes  in  my  mother's 
bedroom  after  her  dream  about  her  brooch." 

The  next  case  raises  a  somewhat  curi(jus  point  as  to  the  relation  of 
what  I  may  call  tlie  subliminal  gaze  to  defects  of  ordinary  vision. 

P._316.      .  :  - 

0 

From  Mr.  Herbert  J.  Lewis,  19,  Park-place,  Cardiff. 
In  September,  1880,  I  lost  the  landing  order  of  a  large  steamer  containing 
a  cargo  of  iron  ore,  which  had  arrived  in  the  port  of  Cardiff.    She  had  to 

390 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

commence  discharging  at  six  o'clock  the  next  morning.  I  received  the  landing 
order  at  four  (/clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  when  I  arrived  at  the  office  at  six 
I  found  tliat  I  had  lost  it.  During  all  tlie  evening  I  was  doing  my  utmost  to 
find  the  officials  of  the  Custom  House  to  get  a  permit,  as  the  loss  was  of  the 
greatest  importance,  preventing  the  ship  from  discharging.  I  came  home  in 
a  great  degree  of  trouble  about  tlie  matter,  as  I  feared  tliat  I  should  lose  my 
situation  in  consequence. 

That  night  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  tlie  lost  landing  order  lying  in  a  crack  in 
the  wall  under  a  desk  in  the  Long  Room  of  the  Custom  House. 

At  live  the  next  morning  I  went  down  to  the  Custom  House  and  got  the 
keeper  to  get  up  and  open  it.  I  went  to  the  spot  of  which  I  liad  dreamed, 
and  found  the  paper  in  the  very  place.  The  ship  was  not  ready  to  discharge 
at  her  proper  time,  and  I  went  on  board  at  seven  and  delivered  the  landing 
order,  saving  her  from  all  delay. 

Herbert  J.  Lewis. 

I  can  certify  to  the  truth  of  the  above  statement. 

Thoaias  Lewis. 
(Herbert  Lewis'  father), 
Julij  lUh,  1884.  H.  Wallis. 

From  E.  J.  Newell,  George  and  Abbotsford  Hotel,  Melrose. 

Awpid  Uth,  1884. 

I  made  some  inquiries  about  Mr.  Herbert  Lewis'  dream  before  I  left 
Cardiff.  He  had  been  searching  throughout  the  room  in  which  the  order  was 
found.  His  theory  as  to  how  the  order  got  in  the  place  in  whicli  it  was  found, 
is  tliat  it  was  probably  \mt  there  by  someone  (perliaps  witli  malicious  intent), 
us  he  does  not  see  how  it  could  liave  fallen  so. 

The  fact  that  Mr.  H.  Lewis  is  exceedingly  short-sighted  adds  to  the 
probaliility  of  the  thing  which  you  suggest,  tliat  the  dream  was  simply  an 
unconscious  act  of  meuKjry  in  sleep.  On  the  other  hand  he  does  not  believe 
it  was  there  when  he  searched. 

E.  J.  Newell. 

Is  it  conceivable  here  that  the  percipient's  myopia  may  have  inter- 
fered less  with  his  sul)liminal  than  with  his  supraliminal  perception;  so 
that  the  missing  paper  may  thus  have  fallen  within  his  visual  field,  but 
escaped  his  waking  recognition  ?  It  is,  again,  in  a  discussion  of  somnam- 
"bulism  that  this  point  can  be  most  fitly  considered.  It  may  suffice  here 
to  quote — that  my  suggestion  may  not  seem  too  fantastic — a  few  lines 
from  a  personal  observation  of  a  somnambule  by  Dr.  Dufay.' 

"  It  is  eight  o'clock:  several  workwomen  are  busy  around  a  table,  on 
■which  a  lamp  is  placed.  Mdlle.  R.  L.  directs  and  shares  in  the  work, 
chatting  cheerfully  meantime.  Suddenly  a  noise  is  heard  ;  it  is  her 
head  which  has  fallen  sharply  on  the  edge  of  the  table.  This  is  the 
beginning  of  the  access.  She  picks  herself  up  in  a  few  seconds,  pulls 
off  her  spectacles  with  disgust,  and  continues  the  work  whicli  she  had 

Revue  Scicntifique,  3'  serie,  XXXII.,  p.  1G7. 

The  Sicblimincd  Consciousness. 

391 

begun  ; — having  no  further  need  of  the  concave  glasses  which  a  pro- 
nounced myopia  render  needful  to  her  in  ordinary  life ; — and  even 
placing  hei'self  so  that  her  work  is  less  exposed  to  the  light  of  the  lamp." 
*'Miss  X."  has  had  an  experience  Avhere  the  title  of  a  book  quite  unknown 
to  her,  which  she  had  vainly  endeavoured  to  read  where  it  lay  at  some 
distance  from  her,  presented  itself  in  the  crystal.  Nor  can  we  in  her 
case  suppose  any  such  spasmodic  alteration  in  ocular  conditions  as  may 
perhaps  occur  in  trance. 

The  percipient  in  my  next  case  has  had  at  least  one  other  experience, 
— of  a  kind  hard  to  explain  without  invoking  something  like  clairvoyance. 
(Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  154,  note.)  The  precise  date  of  the  dream 
here  given  camiot  now  be  recovered  ;  and  although,  as  Mr.  Gurney,  to 
whom  the  case  was  sent,  has  remarked,  "  Even  an  absent  person  would 
be  struck  by  encountering  so  dangerous  an  implement  in  so  unusual  a 
position,"  we  should  not  be  justified  in  claiming  proof  of  clairvoyance 
from  a  narrative  whose  details  must  now  be  uncertain.  The  dream- 
incident  of  the  severed  toe  may  be  regarded  as  a  mere  symbolical 
rendering  of  the  fact  that  the  knife  was  likely  thus  to  injure  anyone 
who  might  walk  down  the  stairs. 

P.  333. 

From  Mrs.  Wheeler,  106,  High-street,  Oxford.  1883. 

I  dreamed  I  went  down  the  back  stairs  at  Hasten  into  the  kitchen, 
and  as  I  stepped  ofl'  the  last  step  on  to  the  floor,  something  severed  my 
big  toe  (without  hurting  me  at  all),  and  I  saw  it  roll  across  the  floor. 
The  next  morning  I  went  down  those  stairs  before  the  kitchen  shutters 
were  open,  and  with  bare  feet  (I  wanted  some  water),  and  just  as  I  got 
to  the  last  step  I  remembered  my  dream  and  looked  carefully  (I  tliink  I 
took  the  shutter  bar  down  and  partly  opened  the  shutter,  but  I  do  not 
feel  quite  certain),  and  then  saw  a  knife  lying  on  its  back  on  the  floor 
with  the  edge  up,  just  where  I  should  have  put  down  my  foot  had  I 
stepped  off  the  bottom  stair.  I  am  not  given  to  having  vivid  dreams 
particularly. 

Somewhat  the  same  caution  must  be  observed  in  estimating  the 
following  case.  It  comes  from  a  gentleman  whom  we  believe  to  be  a 
careful  informant ;  but  it  is  a  recollection  of  a  schoolboy  dream ;  and 
we  cannot  now  be  sure  that  a  glimpse  of  the  desired  map  may  not  have 
been  unwittingly  caught.' 

M.  314. 

IFrom   Mr.  Geiwase   Marson,    Birk   Crag,    Great    Clower-street,  Higher 

Broughton,  Manchester. 
When  I  was  a  boy,  about  14  years  of  age,  I  was  Hving  with  my  parents 
as  aforesaid.  There  came  to  tlie  town  one  day  a  sort  of  travelling  bazaar. 
The  proprietors  of  this  bazaar  lived  in  a  large  room  in  the  princijsal  hotel, 
for  the  display  of  their  wares,  which  consisted  of  workboxes,  toys,  chimney 
ornaments,  &c.    As  soon  as  the  exhibition  opened  I  went,  at  the  request  of 

392 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers, 

my  sister,  to  inspect  the  same,  being  deputed  by  niy  sister  to  purchase  for  her  a 
dissecf  imi  map  of  Europe.  I  looked  over  tlie  stalls  very  carefully,  but  could 
see  no  dissecting  map  at  all.  I  tlien  addressed  myself  to  the  female  who  was. 
presiding  over  the  shows,  and  told  her  what  I  wanted.  She  said  she  did  not 
think  they  had  anything  of  the  kind,  but,  to  make  sure,  she  would  look. 
She  then  Looked  carefully  over  all  the  stalls,  and  returned  to  tell  me  that 
they  had  nothing  of  the  kind  I  asked  for  in  the  place.  I  was  very  much 
disappointed  at  this  news,  and  returned  home  in  quite  a  dejected  state  of 
mind.  The  next  night  I  dreamed  that  I  went  again  to  the  exhibition,  and, 
after  a  short  search,  found,  up  in  a  corner  and  hidden  under  other  larger- 
articles,  the  very  thing  I  wanted.  I  dreamed  tlie  map  in  question  was  in  a 
foreign  language,  that  it  was  enclosed  in  a  box  having  a  glass  lid,  and  that 
the  glass  of  the  lid  was  cracked  in  a  peculiar  star-like  manner.  This  dream 
influenced  me  so  much  that,  as  soon  as  I  had  finished  my  breakfast,  I  set  off 
again  for  the  exhibition-room.  On  entering  it  I  walked  straight  to  the 
corner  of  the  room  indicated  in  my  dream,  and  there  found  the  exact  article 
I  had  dreamed  of.  The  map  was  in  the  French  language,  the  box  containing' 
it  had  a  glass  lid,  and  the  glass  was  cracked  just  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my 
dream.  The  mistress  of  the  exliibition  was  as  much  astonished  at  the 
occurrence  as  myself.    I  Ijought  the  map  and  took  it  home  to  my  sister. 

G.  Marson. 

In  tlie  cases  Avhich  I  have  thvis  fai'  quoted  the  dream-self  has 
presented  a  significant  scene, — has  chosen,  so  to  say,  from  its  gallery  of 
photographs  the  special  picture  which  the  waking  mind  desired, — but 
has  not  needed  to  draw  any  more  complex  iiifei'ence  fi'om  the  facts 
presumably  at  its  disposal.  I  have  now  to  deal  with  a  small  group  of 
dreams  which  reason  as  well  as  remember  ; — if  indeed  in  some  of  them 
there  be  not  something  more  than  mere  reasoning  on  facts  already  in 
some  way  acquired, — something  which  overpasses  the  scheme  prescribed 
for  the  present  chapter. 

In  the  first  place  we  cannot  doubt  that  definite  data  already  known 
may  sometimes  be  treated  in  somnambulism  or  ordinaiy  dream  witk 
more  than  waking  intelligence.  Such  are  the  cases  of  mathematical 
problems  solved  in  somnambulism,  ov  of  the  skeletal  arrangement^ 
discovered  by  Agassiz  in  common  sleep  for  scattered  bones  which  had 
baffled  his  waking  skill.  Mr.  F.  W.  Hayes,  an  artist  who  does  not 
pay  much  attentii)n  to  mathematics,  contributes  an  interesting  and 
recent  example  of  di'eam-capacity  of  this  kind. 

M.  40. 

12,  Westcroft-square.,  W.,  Fehrminj  Id,  1892. 
Early  in  Januai-y,  1892,  I  began  to  teach  one  of  my  children  geometrical 
drawing,  using  one  of  the  shilling  books  on  the  subject.  After  arriving  at 
Problems  IV.  and  Y.,  "  draw  a  straight  line  perjiendicular  to  a  given 
straight  line  A  B,  from  a  given  2}oint  C  outside  it:  Case  I.,  ivhen  the  point  i» 
opposite,  or  nearly  opposite,  the  middle  of  the  line  A  B  ;  and,  Case  II.,  ty/ien 
the  poiid  is  opposite,  or  nearhj  opposite,  the  extremity  of  A  B,"  I  one  night 
dreamt  that  I  was  looking  over  the  diagrams  of  these  problems  in  E.  S. 

The  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

393 

Burchett's  standard  work  on  Practical  Geometry,  Plate  IV.,  and  noticed 
(without  any  sense  of  novelty)  that  the  riglit  hand  top  corner  of  the  plate 
was  occupied  with  a  diagram  relating  to  a  third  case,  viz.,  "  When  the  jMint 
G  is  beyond  A  B." 

I  recollect  studying  the  clearness  and  neatness  of  the  lines  in  the  steel- 
plate  engraving  (the  required  line  lying  vertically  opposite  to  the  riglit  hand 
end  of  the  line  A  B,  and  about  a  quarter-inch  away  from  it)  as  compared 
with  the  coarser  wood-cuts  in  the  book  I  had  used  for  teaching,  and  also 
commented  mentally  on  the  unjustifiable  omission  of  Case  III.  from  the 
latter  merely  to  save  space. 

An  evening  or  two  afterwards,  having  Burchett's  work  in  my  hands 
accidentally,  my  dream  recurred  to  me.  As  I  could  not  recollect  the  solution 
of  Case  III.,  while  the  diagram  remained  vividly  in  my  mind's  eye,  I  turned 
to  Plate  IV.,  and  was  completely  taken  by  surprise  to  find  no  Case  III.  there 
at  all.    (It  is  not,  I  find,  in  any  work  known  to  me,  or  of  which  I  can  hear.) 

Turning  my  attention  to  the  required  solution  of  the  hypothetical  Case 
III.,  it  almost  instantly  occurred  to  me  as  follows  :  From  two  points  in 
A  B,  as  A  and  B,  ivitli,  radii  A  C  and  B  C,  describe  arcs  intersecting  at  C  and 
D  ;  join  C  D.  (The  contingency  of  C  lying  in  a  prolongation  of  A  B  is  met 
by  an  earlier  problem.) 

As  this  solution  is  the  correct  one  (i.e.,  involving  no  anticipation  of  later 
problems),  it  seems  probable  that  its  prompt  occurrence  to  my  mind  was  in 
reality  a  recollection  of  the  working  lines  in  the  dream  diagram,  which  I  did 
not  in  my  dream  consciously  notice  at  all. 

It  may  be  noted  that  while  the  various  given  solutions  of  Cases  I.  and  II. 
do  not  apply  to  Case  III. ,  the  above  solution  of  Case  III.  is  also  a  general 
method  for  the  two  others. 

P.S. — The  jDOsition  on  Plate  IV.  occupied  by  the  dream  diagram  was  not 
quite  the  proper  one,  being  two  places  too  early  (Figure  4  instead  of  6). 

F.  W.  Hayes. 

Since,  this  was  in  print,  Mr.  Hayes  has  discovered  the  missing 
demonstration  in  another  text-book.  "  It  is  thus  not  physically  im- 
possible," he  says,  "for  me  to  have  seen  the  problem;  but,  if  so,  the 
book  and  the  page  must  have  been  before  me  unconsciously ; — I  retain 
the  certain  con\iction  that  I  never  saw  or  thought  (_»f  the  matter  before 
I  dreamt  it." 

Another  informant — Mr.  F.  J.  Jones,  of  257,Uxbridge-road,W. — tells 
us  that  as  an  engineering  student  he  once  dreamt  the  ansiver,  "  a  number 
with  several  places  of  decimals,"  to  a  pi'oblem  which  had  baffled  him  over- 
night, apparently  with  no  recollection  of  the  j^'i'ocess  used  in  its  solution. 
Mrs.  Verrall,  already  quoted,  has  also  solved  in  dream  a  problem  in  the 
Differential  Calculus,  which  had  baffled  her  during  the  day. 

Cases  of  this  sort  seem  closely  akin  to  the  subliminal  faculty  which 
the  "arithmetical  prodigies"  whom  we  have  already  dwelt  upon  display 
in  waking  hours.  After  studying  their  performances  one  can  hardly  be 
surprised  at  any  amount  of  subliminal  manipulation  of  tixed  data.  The 

394 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

case  is  a  little  different  when  the  problem  involves  the  mixed  and 
contingent  facts  of  lousiness  experience.  I  will  first  quote  a  case  where 
the  needed  data  had  passed  before  the  waking  eyes,  although  it  was 
left  for  dream  to  interpret  them  fruitfully.  The  narrative  was  sent  to 
Dr.  Elliotson,  at  first  hand  fi'om  a  friend,  ])y  a  physician  well  known  in 
his  day. 

M.  648. 

Vol.  VIII.,  Zoist,  p.  328. 
Instance  of  clairvoyance  during  sleep.    Communicated  by  Dr.  Davey, 
of  the  Colney  Hatch  Lunatic  Asylum. 

"  My  Deak  , — In  accordance  with  your  request,  I  herewith  transmit 

you  jiarticulars,  as  they  occurred,  of  the  peculiar  dream,  if  such  it  may  be 
called,  which  proved  of  so  essential  service  to  me. 

"  As  I  mentioned  to  you,  I  had  Ijeen  Ijotliered  since  September  with  an 
error  in  my  cash  account  for  that  montli,  and  despite  many  hours'  examina- 
tion, it  defied  all  my  efforts,  and  I  almost  gave  it  up  as  a  liopeless  case.  It 
had  been  the  subject  of  my  waking  thoughts  for  many  nights,  and  had 
occupied  a  large  portion  of  my  leisure  hours.  Matters  remained  thus 
unsettled  until  the  11th  December.  (Jn  tliis  night  I  had  not,  to  my  know- 
ledge, once  thought  of  the  subject,  but  I  had  not  long  been  in  bed,  and 
asleep,  when  my  brain  was  as  busy  with  the  books  as  though  I  had  been  at 
my  desk.  The  cash-book,  banker's  pass-books,  &c.,  &c.,  appeared  before 
me,  and  without  any  apparent  trouble  I  almost  immediately  discovered  the 
cause  of  the  mistake,  whicli  liad  arisen  out  of  a  complicated  cross-entry.  I 
perfectly  recollect  liaving  taken  a  slip  of  paper  in  my  dream  and  made  such  a 
meuiorandum  as  v/ould  enable  me  to  correct  the  error  at  some  leisure  time  ; 
aiul,  liaving  done  this,  that  the  whole  of  the  circumstances  had  passed  froiu 
my  mind  When  I  awoke  in  the  morning  I  had  not  the  slightest  recollection 
of  my  dream,  nor  did  it  once  occur  to  me  throughovit  the  day,  although  I  had 
the  very  books  before  me  on  which  I  had  apparently  l)een  engaged  in  my 
.sleep.  When  I  returned  houie  in  the  afternoon,  as  I  did  early  for  the 
purpose  of  dressing,  and  proceeded  to  shave,  I  took  up  a  piece  of  j)aper  from 
my  dressing  table  to  wijje  my  raz(jr,  and  you  may  imagine  my  surprise  at 
finding  thereon  the  very  memorandum  I  fancied  had  been  made  during  the 
previous  niglit.  Tlie  effect  on  me  was  such  that  I  returned  to  our  office  and 
turned  to  the  cash-hook,  when  I  found  that  I  had  really,  wlien  asleep, 
detected  the  error  which  I  could  not  detect  in  my  waking  liours,  and  had 
iictually  jotted  it  down  at  the  time. 

"I  have  no  recollection  wliatever  as  to  where  I  obtained  the  writing 
materials,  or  ratlier  paper  and  pencil,  witli  which  I  made  the  memorandum 
referred  to.  It  certainly  must  have  been  written  in  the  dark,  and  in  my 
bedroom,  as  I  found  botli  paper  and  jiencil  there  the  following  afternoon,  and 
could  not  for  a  long  time  understand  anytliing  about  it.  The  jjencil  was  not 
one  which  I  am  in  the  habit  of  carrying,  and  my  impression  is  that  I  must 
have  either  found  it  accidentally  in  tlie  room,  or  gone  downstairs  for  it. 
''January  Uth,  1850.  "  C.J.E. 

"  P.S. — I  may  add  that,  on  a  former  occasion,  nearly  a  similar  occurrence 
took  place  ;  with,  liowever,  this  difference,  that  I  awoke  at  the  conclusion  of 

The  Sahlinihra.l 

Consciousness. 

395 

the  dream,  and  was  perfectly  aware,  when  certainly  awake,  of  liaving  made 
the  memorandum  at  that  time.  This,  liowever,  was  not  the  case  in  the 
occurrence  I  have  above  detailed.  Should  you  be  likely  to  print  the  above, 
please  let  it  appear  with  initials  only,  as  althougli  I  would  corroborate  it  to 
anyone  wishing  for  a  personal  satisfaction  by  inquiry,  I  have  ni3  desire  to  see 
my  name  in  type  ;  it  might  also  be  prejudicial  to  me."^ 

The  two  cases  of  Mr.  Peterson's  which  I  shall  next  (juote  have 
some  resemblance  to  Di-.  Davey's,  although  the  percipient,  who  is  a 
strong  believer  in  spiritual  intei'course,  would  certainly  not  interpret 
them  in  the  same  way.  The  length  of  time,  however,  which  elapsed 
loetween  the  incidents  and  the  record  must  be  credited  with  its  usual 
effect  of  blurring  the  accuracy  of  details  ;  and  it  is  conceivable  that 
some  clue,  now  forgotten,  may  have  sujaplied  the  dream-self  with  a  basis 
on  which  to  work. 
P.  335. 

From  Mr.  A.  T.  T.  Peterson,  Arnwood  Towers,  Lymington. 

Fchruary  Uth,  1884. 

I  am  deeply  interested  in  coal  mines  in  Bengal.  Early  in  1876  I  was 
out  there  investigating  matters  connected  witli  a  large  deficiency  in  the  cash 
account.  There  was  no  means  of  getting  at  the  truth.  One  evening  I  was 
sitting  in  an  easy  chair,  a  little  before  sunset,  under  the  shade  of  a  tree 
opposite  the  bungalow  where  I  was  staying  and  I  fell  fast  asleep,  my  brain 
being  full  of  perplexity  as  to  which  account  was  correct.  In  my  sleep  I 
fancied  I  heard  someone  say,  "  Ask  Baboo  So  and  So."  This  name  remained 
on  my  memory  when  I  awoke,  and  I  imt  it  down  on  paper.  When  my  head 
confidential  native  came  to  me  an  hour  or  two  afterwards  I  asked  who  was 
Baboo  So  and  So,  and  I  was  told  that  he  had  been  in  the  service  of 
several  gentlemen  named,  during  the  previous  10  years,  and  was  then  the 
liead  Baboo  to  a  friend  named.  Some  days  after  this  I  sent  for  the  native, 
iind  managed  to  get  information  which  led  me  to  discover  written  evidence 
which  satisfied  my  mind  as  to  whose  head  the  cap  fitted. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Peterson  adds  : — 

In  answer  to  your  remark  as  to  the  Baboo's  name,  I  knew  there  was 
such  a  person,  but  I  had  neither  seen  nor  heard  of  him  for  10  years,  and  I 
do  not  think  I  had  ever  sjjoke  to  him  twice  in  my  life.  He  was  in  no  way 
coimected  with  the  object  I  had  in  view,  although  he  gave  collateral  evidence 
that  led  to  the  object.  A.  T.  T.  P. 

P.  336. 

February  Uth,  1884. 
I  can  give  you  another  very  curious  incident  in  a  dream.  In  the  year 
1861  or  1862,  I  was  engaged  in  a  very  lieavy  equity  suit  between  the  repre- 
sentatives of  a  deceased  Indigo  planter  and  his  surviving  partner.  The 
surviving  partner  wanted  to  show  that  the  deceased  partner  at  time  of 
death  was  in  debt  to  the  partnership ;  my  contention  was  that  he  was  creditor 
to  a  considerable  amount.  The  accoimts  of  the  firm  were  all  in  the  Bengalee 
language.    My  clients  were  too  poor  to  get  translations  by  the  official  inter- 

^  We  have  the  gentleman's  name  and  address. — Zoist. 

2  D  2 

396 

Mi:  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

,j(reters,  which  would  have  cost  several  thimsand  rupees  ;  the  surviving 
])artner  claimed  a  portion  and  a  prolitable  item  in  the  account  as  belonging 
to  him  separately  ;  I  claimed  it  for  tlie  partnership  ;  hut  Jio  accounts  were 
forthcoming  to  show  which  way  the  books  showed  it  to  be.  There  was. 
simply  the  viva  voce  evidence  of  the  defendant  and  his  partisans.  The  Chief 
Justice  rt^jjeatedly  during  the  hearing  remarked  tliere  must  be  some  accounts 
somewliere  that  would  throw  a  light  on  the  matter. 

I  always  sjjent  my  Saturday  evening  and  Sunday  and  inrtil  Monday 
morning  at  my  country-house,  14  miles  from  Calcutta.  One  Sunday  night, 
or  rather  early  on  Monday  morning,  whilst  the  liearing  was  still  pending, 
I  had  a  dream.  I  fancied  I  was  arguing  in  the  case,  and  I  was  addressing 
the  court  and  was  saying  "That  in  answer  to  your  lordship,  as  to  whetlier 
there  was  not  anything  in  the  accounts  tliat  would  throw  a  light  on  the 
question  as  to  whether  this  account  was  joint  or  separate,  I  had  found 
accidentally  an  entry,  althougli  only  for  a  small  sum,  26  rupees,  some  anna.s, 
and  some  pice,  at  jjage  so  and  so  of  such  a  year,  wliich  cleared  up  the^ 
mystery,"  begging  to  the  court  to  send  for  the  book  and  make  the  official 
interpreter  read  it  out,  and  I  went  on  making  strong  remarks  on  the 
character  of  the  defendant ;  when  the  opposite  counsel  got  up  and  denounced 
me  as  a  liar,  on  which  I  took  a  large  lead  inkstand  and  threw  it  at  his  head, 
cutting  his  head  open,  and  laying  him  senseless  on  the  floor  of  the  court  p 
and  the  Chief  Justice  ordered  me  instantly  into  the  custody  of  the  court  bailifi", 
— when  I  awoke.  This  was  a  dream,  about  2.30  a.m.,  Monday.  I  instantly 
jumped  out  of  bed,  got  a  light,  and  jjut  down  on  paper  the  heads  of  my  dream. 
I  had  my  grooms  roused  up,  my  horses  fed,  and  the  relay  sent  on  half  way, 
and  left  for  Calcutta  a  little  after  4  and  got  there  a  little  before  6,  and  sent 
for  the  head  native  Baboo  of  the  firm  of  solicitors  in  the  case,  told  him  to  get- 
the  head  native  in  the  master's  office  (if  he  could)  to  come  at  once  and  let  him,, 
in  his  presence,  examine  a  particular  V>ook  for  a  particular  year,  which  he  did, 
and  to  my  surprise  found  the  entry,  and  the  sum  at  the  page  indicated  by  my 
dream.  I  need  not  say  that  I  succeeded.  Afterwards  I  told  the  story,  when 
asked  what  led  me  to  the  accidental  discovery  ;  and  when  I  said  "a  dream," 
I  got  well  laughed  at.  A.  T.  T.  P. 

In  answer  to  inqviiries,  Mr.  Peterson  says  : — 

My  head  Baboo  is  dead,  the  counsel  opposed  to  me  is  dead,  the  person  to' 
whom  the  account  book  belonged  is  dead,  and  the  chances  are,  as  the  concern 
to  which  tlie  books  belonged  is  l^roken  up,  that  the  white  ants  have  eaten  the 
books  ;  22  years  in  Bengal  destroys  documents,  vuiless  specially  guarded. 

In  these  last  cases  the  dream-intimation  was  of  a  kind  to  secure  a. 
wished-for  end.    In  the  following  cases  it  averts  an  unthought-of  evil. 

The  Rev.  A.  J.  Macdonald,  a  careful  collector  of  evidence,  obtained 
for  us  the  following  narrative, — with  the  true  names,  which  must  be 
here  suppressed.  "The  following,"  he  says,  "I  took  down  yesterday 
from  the  dictation  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  a  Fire  Insurance- 
Company." 

P.C.  600. 

April  Isf,  1884. 

Xiast  year  I  dreamt  that  a  certain  cotton  mill,  insured  in  our  company,. 

The  SnJjliminal  Consciousness. 

397 

was  l)urnt.  The  uiill  was  one  that  T  had  never  seen,  nor  was  I  ao|uainted 
"with  any  nieniber  of  tlie  tirni  ;  anil  nothing  to  my  recollection  had  been 
before  me  connected  with  tlie  insurance  for  some  years.  On  reaching  the 
office  tlie  following  morning  I  turned  up  the  surveyor's  rej^ort,  which  I 
found  to  be  rather  meagre,  and  one  that  had  been  made  some  years  before. 
I  accordingly  gave  instructions  to  have  the  place  re-inspected  ;  and  when 
this  was  done  it  was  found  that  the  mill  was  in  an  unsatisfactory 
condition.  Not  being  able  to  relieve  ourselves  during  the  current  year 
for  any  portion  of  tlie  amount  for  wliicli  it  was  insured,  we  re-insured 
with  another  office  for  part  of  tlie  amount.  A  few  months  afterwards  the 
mill  was  partially  destroyed,  our  company  saving  through  the  action  I 
took  in  consequence  of  the  dream  near  upon  a  tliousand  pounds. 

[Tlie  true  name  of  the  secretary  is  signed,  but  is  not  for  publication.] 
The  next  case  is  from  Colonel  Eeynolds,  now  of  Cheltenliain,  who  iS; 
jjersonally  known  to  me,  and  is  an  excellent  witness. 

About  the  year  1870  I  was  in  charge  of  a  length  of  roadway,  together  with 
the  bridges  large  and  small  that  carried  it.  Sometimes  there  were  floods 
which  endangered  the  bridges,  and  I  was  therefore  always  on  the  lookout  to' 
prevent  .serious  damage  which  Avcjuld  have  impeded  the  traffic.  At  the  same' 
time  this  had  been  my  daily  life  for  so  long  that  no  anxiety  remained  in  my 
mind  about  it.  I  regarded  my  duties  as  merely  routine  work.  I  was  in  a 
fairly  good  state  of  health.  One  night  I  dreamt  in  a  most  vivid  manner  that 
I  saw  an  exact  picture  of  a  certain  small  bridge.  All  the  surroundings  were 
complete  and  left  no  doubt  as  to  which  Ijridge  it  was.  A  voice  at  the  same 
moment  said  to  me  :  "Go  and  look  at  that  bridge."  This  was  said  distinctly 
three  times.  In  the  morning  the  dream  still  persisted  in  my  mind  and  so 
impressed  me  tliat  I  rode  off  at  once  alxjut  six  miles  to  the  bridge.  Nothing 
was  to  be  seen  out  of  the  ordinary.  The  small  stream  was,  however,  coming 
down  in  flood.  On  walking  into  tlie  water  I  found  to  my  astonishment  that 
the  foundations  of  the  bridge  had  been  entirely  undermined  and  washed 
away.  It  was  a  marvel  that  it  was  still  standing.  Of  course  the  work  neces- 
sary to  preserve  the  bridge  was  done.  There  is  no  doubt  that  but  for  the 
dream  the  bridge  would  have  fallen,  as  there  was  no  reason  whatever  to  attract 
my  attention  specially  to  this  bridge.  Though  small,  the  bridge  was  an 
important  one,  as  its  situation  was  peculiar.  The  picture  that  was  dreamt 
was  so  strong  that  it  is  even  now  fixed  in  my  mind  as  plainly  almost  as  it  was 
then.  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  a  special  warning  was  given  me  by  a 
higher  intelligence.  I  have  never  at  any  time  had  any  other  similar  experience. 

Cheltenham.  H.  C.  Reynolds. 

December  13th,  1891. 

Now  in  each  of  these  cases  we  are  dealing  with  the  anxieties  of  a 
conscientious  man,  deeply  concerned  in  the  safety  of  a  particular  struc- 
ture. In  neither  instance,  however,  was  any  cause  for  apprehension 
obvious  to  the  supraliminal  self. 

As  a  pendant  to  these  two  cases  where  a  motionless  and  inanimate 
danger  was  discerned,  I  will  quote  two  cases  where  an  active  scene — of 
a  nature  which  the  sleeper  was  especially  concerned  to  prevent — seems 

398 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

to  have  heen  witnessed  in  dream.'  Tlie  introduction  of  living  persons  at 
the  other  end  of  the  chain  suggests  telepathy  as  a  possible  explanation ; 
and  indeed  the  cases  which  remain  to  1)6  cited  in  this  chapter  are 
avowedly  introduced  as  a  transition  from  mere  hyperajsthesia  and 
hypermnesia  to  the  indications  of  supernormal  powers  with  which  Ave 
shall  hereafter  have  to  deal. 

L.    (519.  1884. 

Mr.  Francis  Alvey  Darwin,  of  Creskekl  Hall,  Pool,  Leeds,  sends  us  the 
following  narrative,  taken  down  by  liiiu  from  tlie  lijjs  of  William  Myers, 
bailiff  and  ex-keeper  on  the  Creskekl  estate,  and  Elizal)eth  his  wife,  both  of 
whom  sign  the  account. 

Some  years  ago,  I  was  asleep  in  bed  here  about  12  to  1  a.m.,  and  dreamt 
that  I  was  out  watching  in  a  certain  placo  where  two  gates  face  each  other, 
near  my  house  ;  that  four  jjoachers  came  up  to  me  through  those  gates  and 
that  I  seized  hold  of  two  of  them,  one  in  each  hand,  and  shook  them  and 
struggled  with  them,  at  the  same  time  shouting  for  assistance.  My  cries 
and  struggles  awoke  juy  wife,  who  woke  me  up  ;  at  once  I  told  her  what  my 
dream  had  been,  and  that  I  had  had  a  hard  light.  Just  about  that  very 
time,  and  at  the  very  place  I  saw  in  my  dream,  four  poachers  did  make  their 
appear;ince  and  stoned  some  of  our  men  who  were  watching  there. 

When  they  came  to  see  me  in  the  morning,  l)efore  I  had  had  any  conversa- 
tion witli  anyone,  I  told  them  at  once  I  knew  all  al)out  it,  describing  tO' 
them  in  presence  of  my  wife  both  the  number  of  men  and  the  place  where 
they  had  come  across  them. 

My  wife  will  corroborate  all  I  say  as  to  my  cries  and  struggles,  (.)f  which. 
I  myself  was  (i[uite  unconscious  till  she  woke  me.  We  thought  it  a  curious- 
dream  at  the  time. 

(Signed)  William  Myers. 

Elizabeth  Myers. 
3,  Pump-court,  Temple,  E.C.,  March  14^/^,  1884. 
Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  10th  inst.,  I  have  no  doubt 
that  the  place  near  the  gates  referred  to  was  a  jjlaco  wliicli  lie  knew  perfectly 
well  that  poachers  would  be  almost  sure  to  pass  in  order  to  set  a  certain 
wood.  I  do  not  think  that  the  place  was  ever  regularly  watched,  as  there  is 
no  cover  to  hide  any  men  in,  but  the  gates  would  certainly  be  frequently 
marked  in  order  that  it  might  be  ascertained  if  anyone  had  gone  through 
them  or  not. — Yours  truly,  Francis  Alvey  Darwin. 

Before  dismissing  this  dream  as  a  mere  accidental  coincidence,  the 
reader  should  refer  to  Dr.  A.  K.  Young's  case  (Phantasms  of  the  Living, 
Vol.  I.,  p.  381),  where  the  dreamer  strikes  out  violently  at  imaginary 
foes, — in  a  scene  where  an  assault  is  being  actually  committed  upon  a 
tenant  of  his  own. 

'  A  tran.sitional  case,  where  an  object  wliich  had  been  purposely  concealed  was. 
discovered  by  a  sudden  impression,  was  sent  to  nie  in  18S7  by  the  well-known: 
.surgeon,  Dr.  Whitehead,  of  24,  St.  Ann's-square,  Manchester.  The  impression  was 
received  in  waking  hours,  and  not  in  dream,  but  seemed  to  depend  upon  no  external 
indication  whatever. 

The 

Subliminal 

Consciousness. 

399 

111  the  next  case  there  is  no  suggestion  of  matter  on  which  the 
dream-self  could  have  worked,  except  the  fact  that  on  the  previous 
evening  the  dreamer  had  heard  a  cart  rapidly  driven. 

L.  841. 

Tumours  Hall,  nr.  Chigwell,  Essex,  Jiihj,  1888. 
Statement  by  William  Bass,  farm  baililf  to  Mrs.  Palmer  : — ■ 
On  the  night  of  Good  Friday,  1884,  I  went  to  bed  at  half  past  10,  and 
very  soon  fell  asleep.  Just  before  the  clock  struck  one  I  awoke  in  violent 
agitation  and  profuse  perspiration.  I  told  niy  wife  I  dreamt  that  something 
was  wrong  at  the  farm  stables,  and  I  was  so  convinced  it  was  the  fact  that 
I  should  get  up  at  once  and  go  there.  She  persuaded  me  to  lie  d(jwn  again 
(I  was  sitting  up  in  bed  and  the  night  was  cold).  Still  I  could  not  I'est.  At 
a  quarter  to  two  I  dressed  hastily,  and  taking  a  lamp  and  matches  with  me 
went  as  fast  as  I  could  to  the  stables  (distant  about  a  tliird  of  a  mile).  I  at 
once  perceived  the  place  Iiad  been  broken  into  and  that  a  grey  mare  had  been 
stolen.  From  appearances  where  the  mare  had  lain  I  judged  she  had  been 
taken  away  about  two  hours  previously. 

William  Bass. 

Mr.  J.  B.  Surgey,  enclosing  this  account,  writes  as  follows  : — 

22,  Holland-street,  Kensington,  J^dy  9th,  1888. 

Dear  Mr.  Myers, — Probably  a  few  lines  will  be  acceptable  to  you 
beyond  those  to  which  William  Bass  has  signed  his  name.  Before  being 
employed  as  bailiff  he  was  coachman  at  Tumours  Hall,  and  has  been  32 
years  in  his  place — a  thoroughly  trustworthy,  straightforward,  and  the  most 
unimaginative,  matter-of-fact  fellow  conceivable.  Before  his  dream  of  G-ood 
Friday,  1884,  he  was  never  known  to  sjDeak  of  one.  I  had  all  particulars  of 
it  almost  immediately,  but  only  jotted  them  down  la,st  week.  I  asked  if  he 
could  guess  how  long  he  had  been  dreaming  when  he  awoke.  No,  not 
possible  to  guess  ;  but  he  was  in  a  horrible  friglit  and  his  shirt  was 
"dripping  "  with  perspiration,  by  which  he  supposed  he  might  have  been  in 
a  state  of  excitement  a  good  while. — Very  truly  yours, 

J.  B.  Surgey. 

Mr.  Bass  has  since  been  interviewed  by  Mr.  Barkworth,  who 
writes  : — 

Ajyril  18th,  1890. 

William  Bass  confirmed  his  previous  evidence  to  me  this  day. 

About  the  time  when  the  incident  occurred  (and  for  a  long  while  after- 
wards) systematic  horse-stealing  had  gone  on  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  Bass 
has  no  recollection  of  being  specially  anxious  about  this.  Pressed  as  to  the 
details  of  the  dream,  he  recollected  that  he  saw  the  horses  in  the  dream,  and 
had  a  vivid  impression  of  "something  wrong,"  but  what  it  was  he  did  not, 
know.  Although  thus  vague,  the  impression  was  so  strong  as  to  be  irresis- 
tible, so  that  although  his  wife  begged  him  to  go  to  sleep  again,  he  lay  awake 
for  about  1^  hours  until  he  could  bear  it  no  longer,  when  he  got  up  and  went 
to  the  stable. 

His  wife  confirmed  all  this,  particularly  as  to  his  having  twice  said  there 
was  something  wrong  in  the  stable  and  he  must  go  and  see  to  it.    He  had 

400 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

■iilways  rejoroaclied  her  since  with  having  prevented  his  going  to  the  stable 
when  he  first  woke.  Bass  states  he  is  not  in  the  liabit  of  dreaming. 
Pressed  as  to  any  previous  expei-ience  of  the  kind,  he  said  that  about  20' 
years  ago  he  dreamt  he  saw  his  fatlier  dead.  The  fatlier,  who  was  quite 
well  at  the  time,  died  suddenly  10  days  afterwards. 

On  the  evening  before  the  horse  was  stolen  he  had  heard  a  cart  driven 
by  very  fast.  The  neighbourhood  is  so  lonely  that  anything  unusual  is 
remarked  upon,  and  he  said  to  his  wife,  "  There  is  something  wrong."  He 
had  made  the  same  remark  on  previous  occasions  when  a  vehicle  was  driven 
rapidly  by. 

When  he  interviewed  the  police  in  Scotland  Yard,  they  asked  him  how 
lie  knew  the  horse  had  been  stolen  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  when  he 
told  his  dream  they  ridiculed  him,  and  evidently  suspected  complicity  on  his 
part.  Mr.  Bass  is  a  most  respectable  man,  Avell  kn<_iwn  and  esteemed  in  the 
parish.    He  has  lived  in  his  present  situation  for  many  years. 

I  will  conclude  with  two  visions  not  easy  to  class,  but  ajjparently  well 
attested.  Mr.  Brighten  is  known  to  Mr.  Podmore, — who  concurs  in  what 
<ippear.s  to  be  the  estimate  generally  formed  of  that  gentleman,  namely, 
that  he  is  a  shi'ewd,  unimaginative,  practical  man. 

P.  117. 

I  owned  a  35  ton  schooner,  and  in  August,  1876,  in  very  calm  weather, 
I  dropped  anchor  in  the  Thames  at  the  Nortli  shore,  ojaposite  Gravesend, ' 
as  it  was  impossible  to  get  to  the  other  side,  there  being  no  wind. 

The  current  being  excssdingiy  swift  at  that  part  we  let  out  plenty  of 
chain  cable  before  going  to  bed.  I  had  captain  and  crew  of  3  men  on 
])oard,  besides  visitors.  Towards  nmrning  I  found  myseK  lying  awake  in 
my  (owner's)  cabin  with  the  words  ringing  in  my  ears,  "Wake,  awake, 
you'll  be  run  down."  I  waited  a  few  moments,  then  drof)ped  off  to  sleep, 
but  was  again  awakened  by  the  same  words  ringing  in  my  ears.  Upon 
this  I  leisurely  put  on  some  clothes  and  went  on  deck  and  found  the  tide 
rushing  past  very  swiftly,  and  that  we  were  enveloped  in  a  dense  fog,  and 
all  was  calm  and  quiet  in  the  early  morning,  and  there  was  already  some 
dayliglit.  I  jmced  the  deck  once  or  twice,  then  went  below,  undressed, 
got  into  my  berth,  and  fell*  asleejj,  only  to  be  again  awakened  by  the  same 
words.  I  tlien  somewhat  more  hastily  dressed,  went  on  deck,  and  climbed 
some  way  up  the  rigging  to  get  above  the  fog,  and  was  soon  in  a  bright, 
clear  atmosphere  with  the  fog  like  a  sea  at  my  feet,  when  looking  round 
I  saw  a  large  vessel  bearing  down  directly  upon  us.  I  fell,  rather  than 
scrambled,  out  of  the  rigging,  rusliod  to  the  forecastle,  shouted  to  the 
•captain  who  rushed  on  deck,  explained  all  in  a  word  or  two,  he  ran  to 
the  tiller,  unlashed  it,  put  it  hard  a  port,  the  swift  current  acting  upon 
the  rudder  caused  the  boat  to  slew  across  and  upward  in  tlie  current, 
when  on  came  the  large  vessel  passing  our  side,  and  it  would  have  cleared 
us  but  her  anchor  whicli  she  was  carrying  (having  lifted  it  in  consequence 
of  having  heaved  anchor  at  low  tide  with  very  little  cable)  caught  in  our 
chain  when  she  swung  round  and  came  alongside,  fortunately,  lioweveri 
doing  us  very  little  damage.  I  at  once  jumped  on'  lier  deck  and  woke  up 
some  men  who  apjieared  on  deck  in  various  stages  of  intoxication,  who 

The 

Suhliminal 

Consciousness. 

401 

stupidly  ■w-aiited  to  remain  as  tliey  were,  but  by  dint  of  coaxing  and 
threatening  in  turn  I  induced  them  to  take  some  turns  at  their  capstan, 
which  had  the  eifect  of  freeing  tlieir  anchor  from  my  chain,  and  she  soon 
left  us  and  dropped  her  anchor  a  little  lower  down.  I  at  once  narrated 
the  above  facts  to  the  cajjtain,  and  next  day  informed  my  visitors  of  the 
voice  to  whicli  we  all  owed  our  preservation.  I  cannot  tliink  that  it  was 
really  a  human  voice,  as  in  consequence  of  the  fog  no  one  coidd  have 
seen  the  relative  position  of  the  vessels,  and  no  other  vessels  were  near 
us  within  half  a  mile  or  more.  My  visitors  at  once  desired  me  to  return 
to  Greenhithe,  and  discontinued  their  tilp. 

Argyle  House,  Southend-on-Sea.  AVm.  E.  Brighten. 

December  6th,  1884. 

I  was  one  of  the  visitors  on  the  occasion  above  referred  to,  and  Mr. 
Brighten  related  tlie  (.iccurrence  to  us  on  the  folhnving  day. 

Robert  Parker. 

31,  Liverpool-street,  London,  Solicitor. 
P.  118. 

I  was  serving  my  articles  to  a  solicitor  in  tlie  city  of  Norwich  at  the  time 
of  the  following  dream,  and  although  it  happened  in  March  of  tlie  year  1861 
it  is  as  fresli  and  vivid  in  my  memory  as  if  it  liappened  yesterday,  and  I  have 
frequently  narrated  it.  In  that  year  Mr.  C.  (also  an  articled  clerk),  having 
purchased  a  long  paddle  steamer  for  river  use  (of  a  class  since  supplanted 
by  the  launches  of  tlie  present  day),  arranged  with  me  tliat  we  should  have  a 
week's  holiday  in  the  steamboat,  so  putting  our  jjrovisions  on  board,  we 
(perhaps  rashly)  started  without  any  engineer  or  attendant  of  any  kind.  Our 
trip  was  a  pleasant  one  from  Norwich  to  Yarmouth,  and  we  proceeded  uj)  the 
North  River,  i.e..  River  Bure,  as  far  as  Acle,  returning  that  night  to  the 
North  Quay,  Great  Yarmouth,  where  we  were  conveniently  moored  stena  and 
stern  to  a  wherry  {i.e.,  the  local  name  for  barges  conveying  goods)  and  we 
turned  in  about  9.30  p.m.  The  cabin  was  comfortable  and  we  were  able  to 
enjoy  our  beds  as  at  home,  and  I  must  describe  the  doors  as  two  small 
folding  doors  secured  by  shutting  from  the  inside  against  the  threshold,  and 
at  the  top  by  a  hatch  coming  over  and  secured  with  bar  top  and  bottom.  I 
must  have  slept  some  hours  before  my  dream  commenced.  I  thought  my 
eyes  opened,  and  that  the  top  of  the  cabin  had  become  transparent,  and  I 
could  see  two  dark  figures  floating  in  the  air  about  the  funnel.  They 
appeared  to  be  in  earnest  converse,  pointing  towards  the  moutli  of  the  river, 
and  then  at  the  ropes  hy  which  the  boat  was  moored  ;  at  last  they  tvu-ned  to 
eacli  other,  and  after  some  gestures  they  seemed  to  have  resolved  upon  a 
plan  of  action,  and  each  floated  in  the  air,  one  to  tlie  stem  and  the  other  to 
the  stern,  liolding  out  a  forefinger,  and  at  the  same  moment  eacli  forefinger 
touched  a  roj^e  and  instantly  burned  it  like  a  red-hot  iron.  Tlie  boat 
tlius  freed  at  once  drifted  witii  the  rapid  ebb,  first  past  the  quay  under 
the  suspension  bridge,  then  under  the  iron  bridge,  then  across  the  broad 
waters  of  Braydon  towards  Yarmouth  bridge,  then  down  between  the  long 
lines  of  shipping  tliere.  All  this  time  tlie  two  figures  were  floating  in  the 
air  above  the  boat,  and  both  giving  forth  musical  sounds.  I  thought  I  tried 
to  break  the  spell  upon  me  and  wake  my  companion,  for  I  knew  that  if  we 

402 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

drifted  out  to  sea  we  sliould  certainly  be  swamped  crossing  the  bar,  but  I  lay 
there  helpless.  My  eyes  apparently  saw  every  familiar  object  along  the  two 
and  a-half  miles  to  the  sea.  At  last  we  passed  Southtown,  then  the  village 
<jf  Gorleston,  and  we  came  to  the  sliarp  last  turn  of  the  river  where  the  swift 
waters  were  hurrying  and  tumbling  over  the  bar  to  the  broad  sea  beyond  ; 
and  in  those  w^aters  we  were  soon  whirling,  when  the  musical  sounds,  w^hich 
had  never  ceased,  were  exchanged  l^y  the  two  dark  figures  for  hideous  screams 
of  triumph  as  tlie  Ixiat  rapidly  began  to  sink.  At  last  the  waters  appeared 
to  reach  my  mouth,  and  I  was  drowning,  choking.  With  a  wild  effort  I 
bounded  from  the  couch,  burst  the  doors  outwards,  shivering  them  to  pieces, 
and  found  myself  (in  my  night-clothes)  awake  outside  the  ruined  doors  on  a 
calm,  bright  moonlight  night,  and  instinctively  turned  to  the  head  rope  ;  to 
my  horror,  it  had  just  parted.  Turning  for  the  boathook  I  saw  beside  me 
my  friend  C,  who  had  been  aroused  by  the  crash,  and  he  shouted  that  he 
saw  the  stern  rojje  go  at  the  same  time.  We  both  held  on  despairingly  to 
the  boathook,  bruising  our  unprotected  shins,  but  our  cries  woke  up  the 
wherryman,  who  came  to  our  assistance,  supplying  fresh  ropes,  and  we  were 
made  snug  for  the  rest  of  the  night.  My  friend  upbraided  me  for  the  w^reck 
of  his  doors,  and  I  at  once  told  him  the  whole  of  the  above  dream,  by  which 
I  was  then  very  much  excited.  Next  day  I  could  calmly  reflect  that  had  we 
remained  asleep  when  the  ropes  parted  the  tragedy  I  dreamed  of  must 
inevitably  have  taken  place  in  all  its  literal  detail. 

William  E.  Brighten. 

Argyle  House,  Southend,  Essex. 
1884. 

Witness,  Mr.  J.  W.  Claldnirn,  Guild  House,  Thorpe,  Norwich,  states  : — 
I  was  with  Mr.  Brighten  on  the  occasion  referred  to,  and  my  knowledge  of 
the  matter  commenced  with  being  awakened  by  the  crash  of  the  doors,  upon 
which  I  went  out  and  saw  Mr.  Brighten  with  the  boathook,  in  an  excited 
state,  trying  to  hold  the  bows  of  the  boat.  I  saw  the  stern  rope  part,  the 
bow  rope  had  already  gone.  The  whole  scene  passed  in  a  moment.  Mr. 
Brighten  at  once  related  his  dream  to  me  as  above. 

1884.  James  W.  Clabburn. 

Each  experience  is  nni(|ue,  and  1  have  never  liad  any  other  dream  or 
voice  warning  of  impending  danger. 

Neither  am  T  a  dreamer  at  all  beyond  the  ordinary  run  ol  mankind. 
I  can  have  ni>  possible  objection  to  have  my  name  appended  to  th& 
statements. 

Argyle  House,  Southend.  William  E.  Brighten. 

December  (if/i,  1884. 

Few  of  our  narratives  are  more  difficult  than  these  to  range  under 
any  one  of  our  definite  classes.  In  some  way  Mr.  Brighten  obtained  a 
connaissance  supi'rieure,  as  M.  Richet  terms  it; — in  some  way  he  be- 
came aware  of  impending  dangers  which  no  ordinary  faculty  could  have 
revealed.  Are  we  t  >  call  it  clairvoyance  ?  or  premonition  ?  or  com- 
munication from  any  embodied  or  unembodied  mind? 

I  should  not  be  frank  if  I  were  to  leave  the  impression  that  in  any 
of  these  cases  I  regard  the  explanation  which  seems  to  lie  nearest  to  our 

The  SiiMiminal  Consciousness. 

403 

existing  knowledge  as  Jiecessarily  the  true  one.  >Such  an  explanation- 
should  be  the  tirst  suggested  ;  and  should  be  pressed  as  far  as  it  will 
go.  But  we  cannot  philosophically  sever  one  group  of  these  new  and 
strange  phenomena  from  other  groups  newer  to  Science  and  stranger 
still.  Much  has  already  been  published  in  these  Proceedings  whicli 
may  well  remind  us  that  the  most  familiar  things  are  not  therefore  the 
simplest  ;  that  what  for  iis  is  supernormal  may  for  a  wider  purview  be. 
the  norm  itself  ;  that  what  to  us  seem  widest  generalisations  may 
be  but  the  special  incidents  of  some  remoter  law.  All  our  classifica- 
tions must  needs  l)e  provisional  in  the  absence  of  any  true  knowledge 
as  to  the  mode  of  operation,  the  mutual  interrelations,  of  powers  which 
we  are  just  learning  to  detect,  just  endeavouring  to  define.  If  it  is,  aa 
we  know,  impossible  to  describe  the  senses,  say,  of  iiisects  in  terms  of 
our  own  senses ; — if  we  are  obliged  in  dealing  e^'en  with  faculties 
beneath  our  own  to  make  use  of  remote  and  perhaps  misleading  analogies 
in  order  to  get  any  nomenclature  which  shall  be  at  all  intelligible, — 
how  much  more  shall  we  be  perplexed,  when  we  deal  with  faculties 
above  our  own,  to  classify  them  in  any  way  except  as  the  counterparts 
or  extensions  of  the  limited  and  specialised  faculties  whicli  oui'  terrene 
life  commands  ! 

We  know,  for  instance,  that  thoughts  are  conveyed  from  one  mind 
to  another  by  certain  familiar  channels.  When  we  learn  that  thoughts 
are  also  conveyed  hy  other  and  unknown  channels,  we  set  that  group  of 
phenomena  apart,  and  call  it  telepathy.  We  know  that  we  discern  the- 
facts  around  us,  within  ceitain  limits,  by  sight  and  hearing.  When 
our  perception  seems  to  pass  beyond  those  limits,  we  set  apart  that, 
group  of  phenomena,  and  call  them  clairvoyance  or  lucidity.  We 
know  that  we  can  to  a  certain  extent  infer  from  the  jJresent  both  the- 
near  future  and  the  recent  past.  If  we  learn  that  the  future  is  some- 
times foreseen  in  a  manner  which  no  ordinary  inferences  will  explain, 
we  set  apart  that  fact  as  prevision  ; — or,  as  I  should  prefer  to  say,, 
^^recognition.  And  similarly, — although  the  conception  has  hardly  as 
yet  been  isolated,  nor  has  received  a  name, — we  must  needs  set  aparfc 
such  knowledge  of  the  past  as  no  ordinary  retrogressive  inferences  will 
explain  under  some  such  title  as  retrocognition. 

But  while  thus  inevitably  arranging  these  ultra-terrene  powers  with 
reference  to  terrene  conceptions,  we  must  beware  of  assuming  that  such 
powers  are  differentiated  from  each  other  by  any  such  limit  (jr  variety  of 
function  as  exists  for  terrene  nerves  and  brains.  Our  human  eye  collects- 
into  a  single  prospect  the  scene  which  the  insect  views  scatteringiy  through 
a  hundred  facets  ;  and  thus,  too,  in  realms  of  higher  law,  the  distinction 
between  all  our  adits  of  knowledge  may  be  merged  in  some  simple 
intuition.  Men  have  learnt  long  since  that  the  Universal  Mind  does 
jiot  sniff  up  the  smoke  of  sacrifices,  nor  gaze  from  Olymjjus  on  th& 

404 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

fortunes  of  a  single  fray.  Our  newer  speculations  bring  home  to  us 
afresh  the  thought  that  to  such  a  Mind  all  knowledge  must  arrive  with 
■equal  immediacy,  and  that  Past  and  Future  must  be  included  in 
one  eternal  Now.  If  we  endeavour  to  repi'esent  the  World-soul  to  our- 
selves, we  must  imagine  one  of  its  aspects  (as  I  have  elsewhere  urged) 
as  a  World-record  ; — a  transcript  of  each  cosmic  moment  so  complete 
■and  living  that  the  remotest  past  is  there  more  real  than  is  to  our  dim 
perception  the  current  and  actual  hour.  Is  man  then  cognisant  of  his 
own  history?  Are  the  annals  of  his  separate  individuality  imprinted 
■without  him  ov  within  ?  Does  he  come  to  them  hereafter  like  ^neas 
■at  the  Carthaginian  shrine, — discovering  in  an  unknown  land  the  image 
•of  his  own  environment  and  the  symbol  of  his  own  fate  ? 

Se  quoque  principibus  permixtuiii  adgnovit  Achivis, 
Eoasque  acies,  et  nigri  Memnonis  arma. 

Or  do  his  long-past  actions  stand  about  him  in  his  soul's  presence- 
chamber, — ever  changeless  but  ever  living, — like  the  golden  watch- 
dogs in  Alcinous'  palace-hall  which  Hephsestus  fashioned  with  cunning 
heart  1  There  is  signiticance,  there  is  dignity,  in  even  the  pettiest 
incidents  which  seem  to  link  man's  secret  memory  with  this  chronicle 
of  imperishable  things.  Poor  and  brief  is  all  the  life  he  knows  ;  but 
yet  some  chapter  of  that  cosmic  record  is  writing  itself 'unceasingly 
within  the  bounds  of  his  being ; — however  perishing  or  however  per- 
durable those  walls  of  Mansoul  may  be. 

Further  Information,  <tc. 

405 

Y. 

FURTHER  INFORMATION  AS  TO  DR.  BACKMAN'S 
EXPERIMENTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE. 

We  have  received  various  items  of  infoi'ination  with  regard  to  the- 
cases  of  clairvoyance  reported  by  Dr.  Backman  in  Proceediniis,  Yol. 
YII.  (Part  XIX.),  p.  199,  sqq.,  Avhich  we  will  here  give  under  separate 
headings.  The  most  important  of  these  items  is  a  certified  trans- 
lation of  an  account  Ijy  the  Director-General  of  Pilotage,  Mi'.  Ankar- 
krona,  of  the  seance  of  September  21st,  1888,  described  at  page  205. 
This  account,  which  is  dated  January  28th,  1889,  is  the  first  written 
record  which  we  possess  of  that  seance  ;  and  it  will  Ije  seen  that  it  on 
the  whole  confirms,  and  considerably  enlarges,  Baron  von  Rosen's  later 
account.  The  English  of  this  and  othei'  certified  translations  mentioned 
below,  although  cjuite  clear  and  intelligil^le,  is  defective  in  grammar 
and  diction,  ^"e  ha"s  e  corrected  the  language  ;  but  the  origiiials  of 
the  translations,  and  of  Mr.  Wicksell's  paper  mentioned  belov/,  are 
preserved  in  our  archi\es  for  reference  if  necessary. 

I.  Account  by  Mr.  Ankarkrona  of  Alma  RAdberg's  Clairvoyance. 

At  the  end  of  last  September  I  made  a  tour  along  the  coast  of  Westervik 
on  H.M.  service,  to  inspect  some  newly  built  lighthouses  there.  At 
Oskarshaum  I  went  on  board  tlie  pilot-steamer  lialmar.  Besides  the  crew, 
there  were  present  on  hoard  the  Captain  of  Pilotage  Baron  von  Rosen,  the 
Baroness,  and  a  young  woman  in  his  service,  named  Alma.  On  the  coast  of 
Westervik  we  met  with  the  Captain  of  Pilotage  Mi'.  Smith,  from  Norrkoping. 
On  the  evening  of  September  21st  we  were  lying  at  anchor  in  the  Kahnar  in 
a  creek  on  the  coast.  Knowing  Alma  to  be  an  uncommon  "medium,"  I 
asked  her  if  Baron  von  Rosen  might  hypnotise  her.  "Yes,  with  pleasure, 
as  soon  as  I  have  washed  up  the  china,"  she  rejjlied.  I  had  already  spoken 
to  Baron  von  Rosen.  Soon  after  ten  Alma  went  down  into  the  cabin  and 
declared  herself  ready.  Baron  von  Rosen  sent  her  to  sleep,  and  I  then 
asked  him  to  ask  her  whether  she  would  like  to  go  to  my  house  at  Stockholm, 
give  a  description  of  it,  and  see  what  the  inmates  were  doing.  ' '  I  never 
tried  such  an  exjieriment  before,  l)ut  I  will  try  it,"  the  Baron  rejilied.  And 
so  the  experiment  proceeded  in  about  the  following  manner  [Baron  von 
Rosen  asking  the  questi(jns]. 

Baron  von  Rosen  :  Will  Alma  go  to  the  house  of  the  Commander 
Ankarkrona  at  Stockholm  and  see  how  it  is  there  ?  Alma  :  Yes  (her  voice 
was  feeble  and  as  it  were  hissed  out).  Q.  :  Is  Alma  there  ?  A.  :  Yes.  Q. : 
What  do  you  see  1    A.  :  A  small  room  with  very,  very  dark  tapestries  with 

406         Further  Information  as  to  Dr.  Bachnutv's 

yokl  on  the  walls.  Q.  ;  How  many  windows  1  A.  :  One.  Q.  :  What  else  do 
you  see  ?  A.  :  Two  paintings  ; — one  a  landscape,  the  other  a  marine  scene. 
Several  other  pictures.  In  one  corner  a  bookshelf  ;  in  another  a  bouquet, 
but  not  of  flowers.  On  one  wall  a  portrait  of  a  lady,  in  oils.  On  the  floor 
;i  carpet,  not  covering  the  whole  floor  ;  on  the  carpet  a  talile  ;  on  the  table  a 
lamp  ;  by  the  table  a  chair,  on  which  Mrs.  Ankaikrc^na  is  sitting.  Q.  : 
What  is  she  doing  1  A.  :  She  is  looking  at  a  newspaper.  Q.  :  What  news- 
paper ?  A.  :  Daahladet.  [The  name  commonly  given  to  the  Stockholms 
Daxihlad. — A.  Backman.]  (I  said,  I  do  not  take  tlie  Daijhladet.)  Q.  :  You 
nuist  look  better  for  the  name.  What  newspaper  is  it  I  A.  :  Svenska.  (I 
take  tlie  Sfcnska  Daijhladet.)  Q.  :  How  is  Mrs.  A.  dressed  i  A.  :  In  black, 
with  the  bodice  brocaded  [/afoiine]. 

Q.  :  Can  you  go  into  the  drawing-room  ?  A.  :  Yes.  Q.  :  How  many 
windows  are  there A.:  Three.  Q.  :  What  more  do  you  see  ]  A.:  Plenty 
<jf  furniture  ;  two  chaises  lorujues,  such  as  I  never  saw  Ijefore.  Two  large 
tables  and  several  small  ones.  Great  brown  draperies  for  the  doors,  of  the 
same  stufi'  as  that  which  covers  the  furniture.  The  wind(nv  curtains  are 
double,  with  broad  lace.  On  the  tables  and  everywhere  are  bibelots.  Easels 
with  portraits  of  ladies  and  gentlemen.  A  number  of  plants  ;  several  made 
of  paper.  A  magnificent  cliandelier.  On  the  wall  a  large  landscape.  On 
one  wall  a  peculiar  draj>ery  <.>f  plush  with  a  Ijroad  golden  cornice.  Every- 
where small  pieces  of  plate,  with  something  written  on  them  ; — I  cannot  say 
what.  Two  very  beautiful  vases.  Q.  :  (At  my  suggestion  von  Rosen  asked). 
Is  not  the  chandelier  covered  with  stuff"  ?  A.  :  No.  (When  I  left  Stockholm 
the  chandelier  had  been  covered  ;  but  the  cover  had  been  removed  on  the 
sa7ne  day.)  Q.  :  What  have  they  been  doing  [in  the  house]  to-day?  A.  : 
Sweeping  I    (The  furniture  had  been  taken  out  and  beaten.) 

Q.  :  Where  has  Mi's.  A.  been  to-day  ?  A.  :  Out  of  the  house.  Q.  :  Can 
you  go  into  the  kitchen  ?  A.  :  Yes.  Q.  :  How  are  you  coming  into  it?  A.  : 
Now  I  am  going  through  a  dining-room  ;  now  through  a  long  narrow  passage, 
which  is  a  service-room  ;  now  I  am  in  the  kitchen.  Q.  :  What  do  you  see 
there  ?  A.  :  Two  maidservants  ;  one  older,  one  younger.  The  elder  one  is 
standing  by  the  fireplace.  The  younger  one  is  sitting  on  a  chair  with  some 
needlework.  This  one  I  have  seen  before.  Q.  :  C:\n  you  go  to  the  place 
where  Mrs.  A.  has  been  to-day  1  You  must  go  out  by  the  lobljy.    A.  :  Yes. 

:  How  does  the  lobby  look  ?  A.  :  Long,  narrow,  and  dark  ;  on  the  floor 
.a  thick  carpet,  covering  about  half  the  floor  ;  a  lamj)  in  a  glass  case  is 
hanging  from  the  ceiling.  Q.  :  Is  Alma  tliere  now  ?  A.  :  Yes.  Q.  :  Was 
the  way  long  ?  A.  :  Not  very.  (The  houses  are  in  the  same  street.)  Q.  : 
What  do  you  see  ?  A.  :  A  gentleman,  a  lady,  and  a  baby  about  two  months 
■old.  I  have  seen  the  lady  before.  Q.  :  What  is  she  like  '!■  A.  :  She  is  dark, 
witli  brown  eyes.  Q.  :  And  the  gentleman  ?  A.:  He  is  fair.  (Grey-haired.) 
Q.  :  What  is  the  gentleman  ?  A.  :  I  cannot  see.  Q.  :  Look  in  the  ward- 
robe ?  A.  :  An  officer.  Q.  :  What  is  the  lady  doing  ?  A.  :  She  is  sitting 
on  a  chair,  with  the  child  on  her  knees.  Q.  :  Is  she  suckling  it  ?  A.  :  No, 
«he  oidy  looks  at  it.  On  the  floor  is  standing  an  old  maidservant.  (A  nurse 
jirrived  that  same  day,  or  a  few  days  before.)  Q.  :  VMiat  is  the  name  of  the 
lady  ?    A.  :  I  do  not  remember. 

Q.  :  Will  you  go  to  Norrkoping  and  see  what  it  is  like  at  Captain  Smith'.s? 

Experiments  hi  Clairvoyance. 

407 

A.  :  No.  Q.  :  Pray  do  so  ;  Cajjtain  Smith  wishes  it.  A.  :  Yes.  Q.  :  Is  Ahiia 
there  ?  A.  :  Yes.  Q.  :  What  do  you  see  1  A.  :  A  hidy  and  a  little  child.  The 
child  is  ill  ;  but  it  is  nothing  dangerous.  There  are  two  Ijedsteads  for  children 
in  this  room.    (The  child  was  ill  before  Mr.  Smith  left  Norrkoping.) 

When  Alma  had  slept  calmly  a  little  time  she  was  awakened,  and  then 
remembered  everything  perfectly.  Altout  ten  days  afterwards  she  completed 
her  account  to  the  Baroness  von  Rosen,  who  took  notes  of  it.  When  she 
awoke  she  rubbed  her  arm,  and  when  we  asked  her  why  she  did  so,  she 
answered  that  she  had  been  sleeping  so  deeply  that  the  arm  liad  grown  numb. 

Asked  where  she  had  seen  the  younger  maidservant,  she  replied  :  "  I  saw 
her  this  sunnner  from  the  Kalniar  thi.irough  a  telescope — she  was  standing 
«n  the  pilot-steamer  Rinfj."  (She  had  in  fact  been  liousemaid  on  the  Iliiaj.) 
While  we  were  talking  and  wondering  over  what  had  just  passed,  we  men- 
tioned the  name  RvaeiMad.  Alma  exclaimed  with  pleasure,  "■  Rosenblad  is 
the  name  of  the  lady."  She  had  seen  her  in  Kalmar  during  the  summer. 
When  shown  )ny  photograph,  standing  in  a  glass  frame  in  the  cabin,  she 
said  that  "the  photographs  standing  in  the  Commander's  drawing-room  were 
like  that." 

The  remarks  between  round  brackets  ai'e  mine. 

No  one  of  the  persons  on  board  the  steamer  had  ever  visited  my  house  at 
Stockholm.  Alma's  descrij^tion  corresponds  perfectly  with  the  reality. 
The  only  points  in  which  she  was  mistaken  were — (1)  That  she  saw  "  two 
beautiful  vases  "  in  the  drawing-room.  These  may  have  been  two  branched 
candelabra  of  china  which  stood  on  the  stove.  (2)  She  saw  a  gilded  cornice 
above  the  drapery  in  the  drawing-room.  It  is,  however,  only  painted  in 
oil  ;  but  in  a  certain  light  it  has  the  look  of  Ijeing  gilt. 

Stockholm,  January  28th,  1889. 

H.  J.  AXKARKRONA. 

That  the  above  is  rightly  translated  fiom  the  original,  which  we  also  saw, 
we  hereby  certify. 

Ph.  von  Tell,  Captain.    A.  E.  Lindqvlst,  Lieutenant. 

Kalmar,  February  25th,  1892. 

II.  In  Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  2Ul,  aii  account  is  given  of  the 
first  occasion  on  which  clairvoyance  was  shown  by  Anna  Samuelsson. 
8he  then  saw,  appar  ently  in  Mrs.  Backman's  house,  a  young  girl  whom 
Dr.  Backman  recognised  from  the  description  as  Miss  H.  W.  After- 
seeing  this  young  lady,  the  clairvoyant  saw  Mrs.  Backman  go  to  a 
.shop  and  buy  something.  Mrs.  B.  had  in  fact  spoken  by  telephone 
with  Miss  H.  W.  and  then  gone  to  a  sliop.  So  Dr.  B.  informed  us ; 
but  he  could  not  at  the  time  find  any  contemporary  letter.  He  lias 
now  found  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Backman's  (the  second  which  she  wrote  on 
the  subject),  dated  Dorby,  June  19th,  1888,  from  which  he  quotes 
the  following  extr-acts  :  "I  went  out  at  11.30  to  Inry  something  at 
Lofberg's.  ...  A  few  moments  before  I  had  talked  with  H.  W.  by 
telephone." 

408 

Fiirther  Information  as  to  Br.  Bachnan's 

III.  Auothei-  occurrence  about  which  Dr.  Backmau  has  oljtained 
further  evidence  is  the  finding  of  the  body  of  a  drowned  man  through 
Anna  Samuelsson  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  203-4).  This  was 
reported  by  Dr.  Backmau  from  his  recollection  of  what  Anna  had  told 
him  and  of  an  account  in  a  newsj^aper.  He  has  tried  to  find  this 
newspaper,  l)ut  without  success.  He  has,  however,  obtained  the 
following  written  testimony  from  Amia  herself,  and,  through  her,  from 
two  m(Mi  wIkj  were  concerned  in  the  finding  of  the  Ijody. 

Hultsfred,  Fehriianj  17th,  1892. 
.  it  has  taken  some  time,  liecause  I  wished  that  the  persons  who 
assisted  in  recovering  the  body  should  certify  wliat  they  themselves  knew  to 
l)e  true,  and  if  you  wisli  for  further  information  about  this  case,  the  young 
man's  father  will  tell  you  more  about  it  from  the  beginning,  and  I  can  only 
s;iy  wliat  is  true  about  what  I  myself  saw  and  witnessed,  and  you,  Mr.  Doctor,, 
know  that  I  continually  see  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  reality,  and  so  it 
liiiljpened  in  this  case  that  he  lay  to  the  left  and  I  saw  him  to  the  right  .  .  . 

(Signed)       Anna  Samuelsson. 

That  in  a  trial  made  by  Anna  Samuelsson,  being  in  hypnotic  trance,  to 
point  out  the  place  where  the  body  of  the  young  man  Samuelsson,  drowned 
in  1890,  lay,  a  jjlace  was  pointed  out  by  Anna,  who  added  that  the 
dead  body  would  be  in  the  mid-stream,  where  it  I'eidly  was  found.  The 
immber  of  feet  we  cannot  give,  as  there  was  no  question  of  that.  Anna 
was  at  her  house  when  the  sleep  was  induced  ;  she  saw  him  to  her  right,  but 
lie  was  found  in  the  contrary  direction,  to  the  left.  This  we  the  undersigned 
hereby  certify  on  our  honour  and  conscience. 

Hultsfred,  Fehyuar;/  im,,  1892. 
(Signed)    C.  <  ).  Swensson.  F.  L.  Petteksson. 

That  the  above  two  papers  are  translated  exactly  according  to  the 
originals,  which  were  shown  to  me,  I  hereljy  certify. 

.    .  Kalmar,  March  lOth,  1892. 

Ex-offi,cio. 

OSKAR  MeLLIN, 

Not.  Public. 

\)v.  l>aekman  adds  tlie  following  note  : — 

It  may  be  remarked  that  the  lake  is  very  large  and  that  there  is  in 
reality  only  one  place  where  there  is  a  mid-stream,  viz.,  where  the  stream 
liows  into  the  lake,  where  the  body  was  found. 

IV.  Mr.,  Knut  Wicksell,  of  Stockholm,  has  forwarded  to  us  a  long 
criticism  on  Dr.  Backman's  experiments,  which  practically  consists  of 
three  lines  of  argument,  as  follows  :  (1)  Mr.  Wicksell  points  out  obvious, 
defects  in  the  record  of  some  of  these  experiments,^ — defects  of  the  kind 
at  once  admitted  by  Dr.  Backman  in  the  hrst  paragi-aph  of  his 
original  paper  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  199).  (2)  He  suggests  some 
ways  in  which  the  clairvoyants  might  have  obtained  knowledge  of  the 
facts  which  their  communications  contained  l)y  ordinary  means. 

Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.    '  409 

To  the  particular  suggestions  made  by  Mr.  Wicksell,  Dr.  Backmaii 
has  sent  us  what  seem  to  us  satisfactory  replies  ; — as,  for  instance,  tO' 
the  suggestion  that  Alma  Radberg  had  learnt  the  facts  as  to  Mr. 
Ankarkrona's  and  Captain  Smith's  households  from  members  of  their- 
steamers'  crew  (p.  206)  Dr.  Backman  answers  that  Mr.  Ankarkrona's 
steamer  was  not  at  Krakelund  at  all,  and  that  Captain  Smith's  steamer 
was  anchored  so  far  from  Captain  von  Rosen's  (on  which  the  experi- 
ments were  made)  that  communication  was  only  possible  by  shouting, 
A  more  important  suggestion  relates  to  an  incident  recorded  on  p.  205 
of  Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.  Mr.  Wicksell  remarks  that  if  Alma  "  knew 
that  Captain  0.  had  sent  a  trunk  containing  clothes  to  his; 
mother-in-law  ['s  house]  and  enclosed  the  key  in  a  letter,  she  might 
perhaps,  without  the  faculty  either  of  clairvoyance  or  even  thought- 
reading,  have  been  able  to  guess  that  that  letter  '  s^joke  about  clothes.' 

To  judge  from  the  expressions  in  the  Proceedings,  it  seems 
as  if  Captain  0.  was  at  the  time  staying  with  Alma's  master,  and 
if  this  be  so,  it  would  indeed  be  wonderful  if  she  had  not  known  any- 
thing about  the  trunk."  To  this  Dr.  Backman  replies  that  Captain  O. 
was  living  at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  and  that  he  no  doubt  selected 
the  question  as  one  respecting  which  neither  Dr.  Backman  nor  Alma 
could  have  any  information.  It  is  desirable,  of  course,  that  all 
such  points  should  be  carefully  thought  of,  and  mentioned  in  the 
contemporary  accounts  of  experiments. 

V.  (3)  In  the  third  place,  Mr.  Wicksell  describes  letters  to  himself 
from  Captain  Braun  and  Lieutenant  Hageus  which  at  first  sight 
impugn  the  accuracy  of  two  of  Di'.  Backman's  reports.  In  the  second 
instance  at  least,  however,  the  discrepancy  almost  certainly  resolves 
itself  into  a  not  unnatural  confusion  of  memory.  Captain  Braun's 
objection  is  to  the  experiment  of  predicting  lottery  tickets  (p.  203). 
He  himself  drew  the  numbers  on  this  occasion,  but  it  is  not  easy  to 
discover  exactly  what  he  recollects,  as  he  has  sent  no  reply  to  a  letter 
from  Dr.  Backman,  and  the  words  which  Mr.  Wicksell  quotes  from 
him  are  somewhat  A'ague  :  "  I  don't  remember  the  exact  numbers 
drawn,  but  I  remember  that  Dr.  Backman  afterwards  tried  to  advocate 
his  cause,  saying,  for  instance,  that  the  sum  of  the  figures  in  the  drawn 
ISTo.  18  was  the  same  as  the  predicted  No.  9,  or  that  the  predicted  4  or 
8  was  contained  in  the  drawn  No.  48  or  84  ! " 

In  reply.  Dr.  Backman  transcribes  a  letter  from  the  officer  who  won 
on  the  No.  18  (who  does  not  wish  his  name  published),  and  two  letters 
from  other  officers  of  the  group,  but  not  present  at  the  drawing.  It 
appears  that  no  one  now  retains  any  independent  recollection  of  what 
the  first  of  the  drawn  numbers  was.  There  is  therefore  nothing  to 
overthrow,  though  nothing  to  confirm,  Dr.  Backman's  recollection  of 

410 

Farther  Information  as  to  Dr.  Backman's 

the  report  (p.  203)  made  to  liiiii  at  the  time  that  it  was  4.  All  the 
three  officers  who  write  to  Dr.  Backman  agree  that  the  second  number 
was  18.  As  to  Captain  Braun's  impression  that  it  was  only  after  the 
drawing  of  the  numbers  that  Dr.  Backman  said  that  the  clairvoyant's 
prediction  of  "9"  might  mean  9  or  18,  we  have  one  man's  memory 
against  another's.  Dr.  Backman's  recollection  is  that  he  said  it  before 
the  drawing ;  and  as  he  tells  us  that  he  took  pains  to  look  into  the 
matter  at  the  time,  lest  (not  having  l>een  present  at  the  drawing)  he 
might  have  been  made  the  victim  of  a  practical  joke,  his  memoiy  is 
perhaps  the  more  likely  to  he  right  of  the  two.  The  question  is,  of 
course,  a  fundamental  one  for  this  incident,  and  we  have  here  an  illus- 
tration of  the  great  importance,  now  fully  admitted  by  Dr.  Backman, 
of  recording  observations  and  experiments  at  the  time. 

VI.  The  second  letter  (|U(jted  by  Mr.  Wicksell  is  from  Lieutenant 
Hageus,  one  of  the  signatories  to  a  report  (p.  202)  of  a  sitting  where, 
jimongst  other  matter,  Anna  Samuelsson  is  described  as  truly  declaring 
that  the  number  of  coins  in  Quarter-master  Ericsson's  pocket  is  live. 

Lieutenant  Hageus,"  says  Mr.  "Wicksell,  "  in  a  letter  to  me  for  another 
purpose,  chanced  to  speak  als(j  about  this  experiment,  and  his  version 
(wonderful  to  say)  was  different  from  the  account  given  in  Dr.  Back- 
man's  paper,  and  signed  by  Lieutenant  H.  himself,  among  others.  '  I 
especially  remember,'  he  wiites,  '  when  Anna  was  asked  how  many  coins 
the  Quarter-master  Ericsson  had  in  his  purse ;  to  which  she  answered 
(as  far  as  I  remember)  "seven."  On  searching  it  was  found  that  the  purse 
contained  only  six  ;  but  as  she  stuck  to  hei'  assertion,  one  more  seai'ch 
was  made ;  when,  besides  the  six  coins,  a  trousers  button  was  also 
found,  which  completed  the  number.' 

"  This,  no  doubt,"  continues  Mr.  Wicksell,  "  is  the  very  experiment 
described  in  Dr.  Backman's  paper,  although  the  number  of  coins  is 
there  differently  given ;  and  as  it  is  most  improbable  that  the  detail 
stated  by  Lieutenant  Hageus  is  the  result  of  a  lack  of  memory,  no  other 
explanation  is  left  but  that  he  and  three  other  persons  (no  doubt  in  good 
faith)  signed  with  their  names  an  account  which,  as  they  all  kneiv,  was 
inexact  in  at  least  one  important  2)oint." 

It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  Lieutenant  Hageus  and  other  gentlemen 
■could  have  signed,  as  Mr.  Wicksell  suggests,  "  in  good  faith  "  an  account 
which  they  knew  to  l)e  inexact.  There  is,  however,  as  Dr.  Backman's 
reply  shows,  no  reason  whatever  to  charge  these  gentlemen  with  either 
voluntary  or  involuntary  inaccuracy  ;  as  the  experiment  now  described 
by  Lieutenant  Hageus  was  made,  as  will  be  seen,  on  a  different 
occasion,  and  no  account  of  it  has  yet  been  published.  "  The  notes  in 
question,"  says  Dr.  Backman,  "  were  written  down  by  me  immediately 
jiftei'  the  experiment,  were  copied  by  a  lawyer,  and  were  read  by  me  to 

Experiments  in  Clairvoyance. 

411 

Tfche  four  psrsoiis  ;incl  signed  by  them  on  the  following  day.  3Ir. 
Ericsson,  who  is  pi-incipally  attacked,  writes  to  me  that  he  in  every 
poMit  contirms  the  notes  and  what  he  signed.  .  .  .  The  account 
now  given  by  Lieutenant  Hageus  is  also  perfectly  true,  if  we  write 
''Ahlgren'  in  place  of  'Ericsson.'  Amongst  the  'other  experiments' 
mentioned  in  my  account,  the  following  took  place.  ]Mr.  Ahlgren 
.asked  that  Anna  should  say  how  many  coins  he  had  in  the  pocket 
of  his  waistcoat ;  and  of  what  different  kinds  they  were.  She  replied, 
let  us  say,  '  Seven,'  (I  think  it  was  eight),  stating  that  there  was, 
let  us  say,  one  piece  of  two  crowns,  one  of  one  crown,  three  <jf  25 
ore,  and  two  of  1  ore.  Captain  Ahlgren  now  tofik  up  what  he 
had  in  his  pocket.  The  coins  were  as  Anna  had  said  ;  but  one 
piece  of  one  ore  was  represented  by  a  black  button  (if  the  same 
size.  Mr.  Ahlgren  has  told  me  that  he  does  not  remember  the 
incident  with  the  button,  but  that  he  perfectly  well  remeniljers 
that  Anna  was.  quite  right  about  the  coins  in  Mr.  Ericsson's  purse."" 
Lieutenant  Hageus'  written  statement  at  the  time,  contirmed  by  all  the 
other  witnesses,  may  certainly  be  preferred  to  his  present  recollection, 
in  which  the  events  of  two  separate  experiments  seem  to  have  become, 
not  unnaturally,  confused.  As  to  the  fact  of  frequent  failure  mentioned 
by  Captain  Braun,  Dr.  Backman  replies  that  he  has  never  denied  this ; 
his  contention  having  been  throughout, — not  that  all  his  experiments 
succeeded, — but  that,  as  he  says  (Vol.  VII.,  p.  219),  "such  trials, 
though  we  can  never  command  success  in  them,  prove  that  we  have  to 
do  here  with  a  human  faculty  not  yet  recognised  and  which  is  worthy 
of  being  studied  and  established  by  scientific  experiments." 

We  are  glad  that  Dr.  Backman's  records  have  thus  Ijeen  sul»- 
jected  to  a  searching  local  criticism.  That  criticism  seems  to  us  to  have 
brought  out  evidence  which  has  strengthened  rather  than  weakened  our 
confidence  in  his  accuracy.  At  the  same  time  we  thoroughly  agree 
with  Dr.  Backman's  own  view,  as  above  expi^essed,  that  the  faculty 
■whose  sporadic  and  fugitive  existence  in  certain  human  beings  these 
experiments  and  others  resembling  them  have  often  already  indicated 
needs  for  its  complete  scientific  establishment  experiments  both  more 
numerous  and  moi'e  ligid  than  it  has  yet  been  possil^le  for  even  the 
most  conscientious  and  diligent  investigator  to  make. 

General  Meetings. 

PROCEEDINGS   OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS. 

The  54tli  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West- 
minster Tovm  Hall,  on  Friday,  October  2'Sth,  1892,  at  -i  p.m.  ;  the 
President  in  the  chair. 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  the  late  Mr.  AV.  Staintoa 
Moses,  which  is  ^srinted  in  the  Supplement. 

A  paper  by  Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw,  printed  below,  on  "  Some  Experi- 
ments in  Thought-transference  "  was  read  i3y  Mr.  Podjioee. 

Mr.  Myers  read  a  paper  on  "  Sensory  Automatism  and  Induced 
Hallucinations,"  forming  part  of  Chapter  Y.  oi  his  discussion  on  "  The 
Subliirdnal  Consciousness,"  printed  below. 

The  55th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday^ 
December  2nd,  at  8.30  p.m.,  the  President  in  the  chair. 

A  paper  was  read  on  "  The  Lourdes  Miracles  and  other  Cures  by 
Mental  Impression." 

Mr.  Myers  read  a  further  part  of  Chapter  V.  on  the  "  Subliminal 
Consciousness." 

414 

M.  J.  Delhcmif. 

I.  : 

DE   L'APPRECIATION   DU   TEMPS   PAR  LES 
SOMNAMBULES, 

Par  M.  J.  Delbceuf,  Frofessp-ur  d  V  Universite  de  Liege. 

Dans  la  seance  du  10  Aout  du  Congres  International  de 
Psychologie  Physiologique,  qui  s'est  tenu  a  Paris  en  1889,  j'ai  souleve 
la  question  de  cette  faculte  myst^rieuse  que  nous  avons  d'apprecier 
d'une  maniere  plus  ou  moins  ajiproximative  I'ecoulement  du  temps, 
surtout  sous  I'influence  hypnotique.  Je  disais  ceci  :  "Si  je  suggere 
a  une  somnambule  qui  ne  sait  pas  du  tout  compter,  de  faire  un  acta 
quelconque  dans  3,500  minutes,  par  example,  elle  le  fait  au  moment 
indiqu^,  et  cela  sans  avoir  pu  evaluer  la  quantite  du  temps."  J'ajoutais 
que  je  n'avais  pas  encore  public  mes  r<$sultats,  parceque  je  n'en  avals  pas 
encore  trouve  Texplication. 

Je  ne  suis  pas  plus  avanct;  aujourd'hui  qu'alors.  II  est  vrai  que 
je  n'ai  pas  repris  I't^tude  du  probleme.  Mais  je  j^ense  que  le  nouveau 
Congres  me  fournit  une  occasion  de  publier  les  chiffres  que  j'ai  autrefois 
recueillis.    lis  pourront  amorcer  d'autres  travailleurs. 

Voici  ce  que  j'ecrivais  dejaa  ce  propos  dans  la  Revue  de  V Hyjmotisme 
de  Decembre,  1886,  p.  166  : — 

"  Le  numero  de  Novembre  de  la  Revue  de  V Hyjmotisme  contient  la 
relation  d'une  suggestion  se  realisant  a  un  an  de  distance. 

"  Ce  r^cit  m'inspire  deux  i-emarques.  La  premiere  concerne 
I'appreciation  du  temps  j^ar  le  sujet ;  

"  Quant  au  premier  point,  il  a  deja  ete  autre  iDart(-)  I'objet  de  mes 
reflexions.  C'etait  a  propos  d'un  r&ultat  du  meme  ordre  obtenu  par 
M.  Beaunis  ;  une  suggestion  donn^e  par  lui  s'etait  realisee  apres  172 
jours  d'attente. 

"  De  cette  experience,  comme  de  celle  de  M.  Liegeois,  on  ne  peut 

{})  Congris  Internationale  de  Psi/chologie  Physiologique,  Cowpte  Renihi,  p.  15G. — 
Je  copie  le  compte-rendii.  Je  saisis  cette  occasion  de  rectifier  ce  qu'on  m'a  fait  dire 
&  cette  meme  page  h,  propos  des  tritons  cretes.  C'est  dans  la  localite  oti  je  reside 
pendant  les  vacances,  h,  Ramet,  pres  de  L'fege,  et  non  en  France,  que  je  n'ai 
jamais  vu  que  deux  tritons  cretds.  Dans  nn  petit  abreuvoir  d'un  mfetre  de 
diametre  et  de  80  centimetres  de  profondeur,  alimented  par  une  source  naturelle 
•et  situ^  au  pied  de  collines  accidentees  et  bois^es,  je  trouvai  xm  jour  une 
femelle,  que  j'emportai.  CJuatre  jours  aprl-s,  j'y  voyais  le  male.  II  etait  de 
tijute  impossibilite  que  le  male  eflt  pu  <5chapper  a  ma  vue  les  jours  precedents. 
Je  citais  ceci  comme  un  exemi^le  des  facultes  dtonnantes  d'orientation  ou 
d'odorat  ou  d'autres  sens  qui  guident  les  sexes  I'un  vers  I'autre. 

('-)  Bcvuc  Philosophique,  Novembre,  1885,  p.  514. 

De  V Appreciation  die  Temps  pcx?-  les  Somnamhules.  415 

tirer  d'autre  conclusion  que  celle-ci,  a  savoir  que  le  somnambule  est  en 
etat  de  retenir  fidelement  une  date  donnee.  Cependant,  I'une  et  I'autre 
portent  le  meme  en-tete  :  'Suggestion  a  172,  a  365  jours  cVintervaUe  ' 
et  tendent  a  faire  croire,  sinon  a  etablir,  que  le  somnambule  auraifc 
la  faculte  de  compter  les  jours  a  son  insu. 

"Telle  n'est  par  leur  portee.  II  s'agit  dans  toutes  deux  d'une 
suggestion  d  date  fixe. 

"  Dans  celle  de  M.  Beaunis,  le  172'^  jour  se  trouvait  etre  precisement 
le  jour  de  la  nouvelle  amiee,  et  le  sujet  en  avait  ete  averti.  M.  Beaunis 
lui  avait  ainsi  parle  :  'Le  ler  Janvier,  1885,  a  10  heures  du  matin, 
vous  me  verrez,  etc'  Apres  cela,  que  la  suggestion  soit  faite  le  14 
Juillet,  ou  bien  le  11  ou  le  30  Decembre,  a  172  jours,  ou  bien  a  17  ou 
a  2  jours  d'intervalle,  le  sujet  n'a  toujours  qu'a  retenir  une  date  et  une 
date  remarquable.  Pas  n'est  besoin  jDOur  cela  qu'il  conipte  les  jours 
qui  s'ecoulent. 

"Meme  precede  chez  M.  Liegeois.  Le  12  Octobre,  1885,  il  a  dit  a 
P.N  .  .  .  .  :  '  Dans  un  an,  a  pareil  jour,  voici  ce  que  vous  aurez  envie 
de  faire.'  Ici  la  date  est  un  annivei'saire.  Et  cette  date,  le  somnam- 
bule I'a  gravee  dans  sa  memoire,  comme  I'avait  gravee  aussi  M.  Liegeois, 
qui,  lui,  n'avait  pas  ete  hypnotise. 

"  D'une  autre  nature  serait  I'experience,  si  Ton  disait  au  sujet  : 
'Dans  autant  de  jours,  par  exemple,  dans  237  jours,  vous  ferez  telle 
chose.'  II  faudrait  voir  si  le  sujet  realiserait  la  suggestion  apres 
I'intervalle  fixe.  Dans  ce  cas,  et  dans  ce  cas  seulement,  on  pourrait 
I'intituler  :    '  Suggestion  a  237  jours  d'intervalle.' 

"Mais  il  est  a  craindre  qu'il  n'en  serait  pas  ainsi.  J'ai  fait  de 
nombreuses  experiences  dans  cette  voie — j'en  donnerai  prochainement  le 
detail — et  a  cote  de  reussites,  il  y  a  bon  noml^re  de  non-reussites  :  par 
exemple,  des  ordres  qui  devaient  etre  executes  apres  cinq  jours,  apres 
neuf  jours,  ne  I'ont  pas  ete.  Neanmoins,  je  me  hate  de  I'annoncer,  les 
reussites,  dans  les  conditions  ou  je  les  ai  obtenues,  sont,  pour  moi, 
parmi  les  choses  les  plus  extraordinaires  que  presente  le  somnambulisme 
provoque.  Et,  si  meme  je  n'ai  pas  encore  public  mes  experiences,  c'est 
par  une  espece  de  pudeur  scientifique  ;  c'est  parceque  je  n'aime  pas  a 
offrir  au  lecteur  I'etonnant.  sous  I'habit  du  merveilleux. 

"  J'ajouterai  encore,  par  rapport  aux  insucces,  qu'il  pourrait  se  faire 
qu'ils  fussent  plus  apparents  que  re'els,  comme  on  le  verra  tantot. 

.  .  .  "  Par  deux  fois,  il  est  arrive  a  un  de  mes  sujets  d'accomplir 
la  suggestion  sans  quitter  son  fauteuil  et  sans  faire  un  mouvement.  II 
se  rendormait  visiblement  et  revait  qu'il  faisait  ce  qui  lui  etait 
commande.  Quand,  apres  une  attente  plus  ou  moins  prolonge'e, 
croyant  que  la  suggestion  n'avait  pas  porte,  je  le  reveillais  et  lui 
reprochais  son  peu  de  condescendance,  il  me  soutenait  m'avoir  obei,  me 

416 

M.  J.  Delbceuf. 

racontait  son  reve,  et  etait  grandement  etonne  en  apprenant  qu'il 
n'avait  pa,s  bouge. 

"  C'est  pourquoi  je  disais  plus  liaut,  a  propos  des  suggestions  a 
echeance  non  realisees,  qu'il  est  possible  que  la  realisation  en  ait  eu 
lieu  de  cette  fagon,  c'est  a  dire,  en  imagination." 

Get  article  a  ^te  ecrit  quelques  jours  avant  les  experiences  que  je 
vais  relater  et  que  je  me  proposait  de  jjoursuivre.  On  remarquera  que 
j'y  exprime  la  crainte  de  voir  qu'un  intervalle  de  temps  enonce 
numeriquement  ne  donne  pas  prise  a  la  memoire  de  I'hypnotise,  a 
moins  qu'il  ne  songeat  immediatement  a  faire  le  calcul  necessaire  pour 
determiner  la  date  de  I'eche'ance,  a  se  dire,  par  exemple,  que  le  37*^  jour 
apres  le  14  Juillet«st  le  20  Aout.  Sous  I'empire  des  doutes  formules. 
par  M.  Paul  Janet,  je  ne  pouvais  me  figurer  que  la  suggestion  put  faire 
d'un  cerveau  humain  une  espece  de  r^veil  automatique  (voir  ra:rticle 
precite  de  la  Revue  PhilosopJdque).  Mais  comme  il  ne  faut  jamais  se 
laisser  guider  par  des  idees  preconQues,  je  resolus  de  soumettre  mes 
scrupules  a  une  veiification  experimentale.  C'est  pourquoi  j'imaginais: 
d'exprimer  les  intervalles  de  temps  en  miniites  et  non  plus  en  jours> 
Ce  changement  jDermettait  de  faire  beaucoup  d'epreuves  en  un  temps 
relativement  court. 

Les  deux  sujets  qui  ont  servi  a  mes  experiences  etaient  deux  jeunes 
fiUes,  deux  sreurs,  aujourd'hui  mariees  et  meres  de  famille,  alors  agees  de 
20  et  de  23  ans.  Ce  sont  celles  que,  dans  mes  premieres  etudes  publiees 
par  la  Hei-ue  Pliilosojihique  en  1886  et  1887,  j'ai  designees  par  les 
initiales  M.  et  J.  Toutes  deux,  campagnardes  saines  et  fortes,  sont 
bonnes  somnambules.  J.  est  celle  qui  a  consenti  a  I'exp^rience  des 
brulures  symetriques,  et  qui  a  ete  accouchee  sans  douleur  a  I'etat 
apparent  de  veille,  elle  primipare,  en  Janvier  de  I'annee  derniere  (voir 
B^vue  de  V Ilypnotisme,  Avril,  1891). 

Mes  experiences  ont  pi  is  juste  une  semaine,  du  Samedi,  2  Octobre, 
au  Samedi,  9  Octobre,  1886,  avec  mi  jour  d'interruption.  Ellesont  ete 
presque  toutes  calquees  sur  le  type  suivant :  par  exemple,  a  6  h.  45  du 
matin,  je  donnais  au  sujet  un  ordre  a  executer  dans  1,150  minutes,  par 
consequent  a  1  h.  55  du  matin. 

Or,  M.  et  J.  sont  incapables  de  reduire  en  heures  un  nombre  un 
pen  considerable  de  minutes,  tel  que  400.  EUes  doivent  proc^der  par 
additions  successives  :  une  heure,  60  minutes  ;  une  heure  et  une  heure 
font  60  +  60  =  120;  120  +  une  autre  heure  font  180  ;  et  ainsi  de 
suite.  Avant  d'etre  arriv^es  au  chiffre  de  360,  elles  ont  couru  mainte 
chance  de  se  tromper,  et,  dans  le  fait,  souvent  elles  se  trompent,  surtout 
J.,  qui  est  plus  vive  et  plus  impatiente.  C'est  assez  dire  qu'elies  sont 
absolument  incapables  de  reduire  en  heures  un  nombre  de  minutes 
tel  que  1,150. 

Ce  n'est  pas  tout.     En  sujjposant  qu'au  moment  du  reveil  apres  la 

Be  I' Appreciation  da  Temps  p)ar  les  Somnamhules.  417 

suggestion  donne,  elles  eussent  songe  a  iioter  I'heure — ce  qu'elles  ne 
faisaient  ni  ne  pouvaient  faire — elles  auraient  eu  a  determiner  par  nn 
calcul  de  tete  quelle  est  I'heure  qui  correspond  a  celle  de  6h.  45 
augmentee  de  1,150  minutes.  Or,  pareil  calcul  n'est  pas  chose  facile. 
C'est  ce  dont  on  pourra  s'assurer  en  essayant  de  resoudre  soi-meme 
raentalement  le  probleme.  Je  I'ai  pose  a  un  biillant  ele^'e  en  medecine, 
qui  a  doime  successivement  les  trois  reponses  suivantes  :  une  heure  de 
I'apres-niidi  ;  4  lieures  du  matin ;  2  heures  du  matin.  II  lui  a  fallu 
trois  minutes  de  reflexion  pour  trou\'er  cette  derniere  reponse,  et  encore 
faut-il  noter  qu'il  etait  averti  chaque  fois  de  son  erreur.  On  n'avance 
done  pas  une  chose  temeraire  en  affirmant  que  ce  probleme  exige  des 
efforts  de  raisonnement  depassant  certainement  les  facultes  de  deux  filles 
de  la  campagne  se  placant  comme  servantes. 

Enfin,  ni  I'une  ni  I'auti'e,  mais  J.  prineipalement,  ne  savent  pas  tres 
bien  lire  I'heure  au  cadran.  - 

II  est  clair  des  lors  que  si  le  sujet  accomplit  I'ordre  au  moment 
designe,  on  pent  en  conclure  qu'il  a  en  lui  comme  un  mecanisme  de 
reveil  remonte  pour  un  temps  limite.  Cette  comparaison  paraitra  plus 
juste  encore  si  Ton  veut  bien  considerer  que  les  ordres  donnes  etaient 
ou  grotesques  ovi  sans  importance,  et  cjue  parfois  I'echeance  tombait  au 
milieu  de  la  nuit. 

Je  n'ai  plus  qu'un  mot  a  ajouter.  En  fait  d'exp<^riences  de  I'esp^ce, 
ce  sont  surtout  les  reussites  qui  doivent  entrer  en  ligne  de  compte. 
Les  echecs  sont  peu  significatifs.  II  est  evident  qui  si,  sur  clix  sugges- 
tions, les  sujets  en  realisent  la  moitie,  on  ne  peut  iiivoquer  le  hasard. 
C'est  le  cas  de  leur  appliquer  le  mot  de  I'Abbe  Galiani  et  de  pretendre 
qu'ils  sont  pipes. 

II  ne  me  reste  plus  qu'  a  rappeler  que  M.  et  J.  etaient  dressees  a 
se  souvenir,  siir  ma  deniande,  de  ce  qu'elles  avaient  fait  et  pense  en 
etat  d'hypnose.  L'interrogatoire  etait  conduit  p.vec  la  plus  grande 
p)rudence.  J'usais  toujoiirs  de  termes  vagues  :  "  N'avez-vous  pas  eu 
une  drole  d'envie  aujourd'hui  ?  Quelle  envie  ?  Vers  quelle  heure  1 
Qu'avez-vous  fait  1  &c." 

Sans  plus  long  pre'ambule,  voici  la  serie  complete  de  mes  experiences, 
Je  les  expose  toutes  suivant  le  meme  plan.  Je  donne  d'abord  I'heure 
ou  la  suggestion  a  ete  faite  ;  puis  rintervalle  commande ;  I'objet  de  la 
suggestion ;  le  resultat. 

Samedi,  2  Octobre. 

1.  J. — 6  heures  du  matin — 350  minutes,  done  pour  llh.  50.  EUe 
doit  me  demander  s'il  ne  faut  pas  harnacher  I'ane.  If.B. — En  cette 
annee,  1886,  ma  femme,  malade,  faisait  des  promenades  a  ane. 
Naturellement,  c'etait  elle,  ou  plus  ordinairement  moi  c[ui  donnais 
I'ordre  en  question.  La  demande  que  J.  doit  me  faire  est  done 
insolite. 

418 

M.  J.  Delhceuf. 

HesuUaf.—'Elle  en  a  eu  I'idee  vers  I'heure  juste,  mais  n'y  a  pas 
domie  suite. 

2.  M. — 8  heures  du  matin — 350  minutes,  done  a  Ih.  50.  Elle  doit 
demandei'  a  ma  femme  si  elle  ira  se  promener  avant  son  cafe  (qu'elle 
prend  vers  4  heures).    JV.JB. — Cette  demande  est  aussi  insolite. 

Resultat. — L'envie  lui  a  pris  vers  I'heure  dite  ;  mais  elle  etait 
justement  sortie  pour  une  commission  dans  le  village.  Elle  est  rentree 
a  2  h.  30  et  a  realise  la  suggestion. 

Resume. — Deux  presque  reussites. 

Lundi,  4  Octobre. 

3.  J. — 9  h.  15  du  matin — 900  minutes,  done  pour  mardi  a  minuit  \. 
Elle  doit  aller  tirer  par  I'oreille  mon  fils  Ch.  dans  son  lit.  Mon  fils 
avait  alors  14  ans. 

Besultat. — Elle  s'est  levee  apres  Ijeaucoup  d'hesitation,  et  est  allee 
tii'er  Ch.  a  10  h.  40.    Eri'eur  :  95  minutes  trop  tot,  environ 

4.  M. — 9  h.  25  du  matin — 700  minutes,  done  j^our  le  meme  jour  a 
9  h.  05  du  soir.     Elle  doit  aller  embrasser  ma  fille  H. 

Residtat. — A  8  h.  40,  done  avec  une  erreur  en  moins  de  25  m.,  rry, 
elle  a  cherche  apres  H. ;  elle  ne  I'a  pas  trouvee.  A  8  h.  55,  son  envie 
avait  passe.  Ayant  vu  H.  a  ce  moment,  elle  ne  I'a  pas  embrassee ;  elle 
ne  se  souvenait  plus  de  ce  qu'elle  lui  voulait. 

5.  M. — 10  h.  04  du  soil- — 900  niinutes,  done  pour  le  mardi  a  1  h.  04 
de  I'apres-midi.    Elle  doit  venir  embrasser  ma  fille  C. 

Resultat. — Elle  est  venue  a  1  h.  04  precise.  Elle  etait  justement 
en  train  de  dejeuner  avec  sa  sceur  et  la  cuisiniere.  Celle-ci  I'a  vue 
changer  de  figure  quand  elle  s'est  levee  de  table.  ■ 

Resume. — Une  reussite  avec  une  erreur  pas  notal^le ;  une  autre 
avec  une  faible  erreur,  et  sans  accomplissement  de  I'oi'dre ;  une  reussite 
complete. 

Mardi,  5  Octobre. 

6.  J. — 6  h.  30  du  matin — 1,600  minutes,  c'est  a  dire  pour  le  merci'edi 
a  9  h.  10  du  matin.    Elle  doit  tirer  L.  par  le  nez.    L.  est  la  cuisiniere. 

Resultat. — Le  mercredi  a  8  h.  10  du  matin,  elle  a  realise  la 
suggestion.  Comme  L.  riait :  "  Prends  garde,"  lui  a-t-elle  dit,  "ouje 
vais  encore  te  tirer  par  le  nez."   Erreur,  60  minutes  trop  tot,  t>V 

7.  M. — 6  h.  45  du  matin — 1,150  minutes,  done  pour  le  mercredi  a 
1  h.  55  du  matin.  Elle  doit  entrer  dans  la  mansarde  ori  couche  L. 
et  tirer  celle-ci  par  I'Dreille  (L.  a  ete  prevemie). 

Resultat. — Vers  2  heures  (done  a  I'heure  exacte),  l'envie  lui  a  pris. 
Elle  a  resists  ;  a  4  h.  15,  elle  a  cede,  et  est  allee  trouver  L.  dans  son 
lit.  Comme  L.  se  mit  a  rire,  elle  lui  a  dit  d'un  ton  serieux.  "Si  tu  ris. 
je  vais  te  tirer  par  I'oreille." 

Remarqiie. — II  est  vrairaent  curieux  que  le  sujet  resiste  pendant 
deux  lieures  a  une  suggestion  aussi  saugrenue,  et  ne  songe  pas  que  ce 

De  V A'ppreciation  da  Temps  par  les  Somnamhides.  419 

pourrait  etre  uue  de  ces  idees  comme  je  lui  eii  donne  depuis  quelques 
jours. 

Resume. — Deiix  reussites  presque  parfaites.  L'avance  de  J.  est 
insignifiaute,  et  le  retard  de  M.  se  justitie  par  la  lutte  qu'elle 
a  soutenue  coutre  elle-meme. 

Mercredi,  6  Octobre. 

8.  J. —  9  h.  55  du  matin — 1,300  minutes,  done  pour  le  jeudi  a  7  h. 
35  du  matin.  Venir  demander  a  ma  femme,  s'il  ne  faut  pas  la  coiffer. 
Priere  de  bien  remarquer  I'heure  bizarrement  matinale. 

Resioltat. — Elle  est  venue  a  6h.  26  (!),  c'est  a  dire  avec  69 
miinutes  d'avance,  erreur 

9.  M. —  6h.  55  du  matin — 1,500  minutes,  done  pour  le  jeudi  a 
7  h.  55  du  matin.  Venir  demander  a  ma  femme  si  elle  n'a  besoin  de 
rien. 

Resulted. — Elle  est  arrivee  a  I'heure  juste,  7  h.  55. 
Resume. — Deux    I'eussites,    dont  I'une   parfaite,    I'autre  presque 
parfaite. 

Comme  on  le  voit,  M. —  est  plus  exacte  que  J.  Mais  d'une 
maniere  generale,  on  peut  dire  que  I'une  et  I'autre  ont  le  sentiment 
de  Tecoulement  du  temps.  II  faut  done  admettre  —  sans  quoi 
on  tomberait  absolument  dans  le  merveilleux  —  que  leur  cerveau 
se  livre  a  un  travail  inconscient,  et  calcule  plus  ou  moins 
exactement  I'epoque  de  I'echeance.  Ce  qui  corrobore  cette  conclusion, 
c'est  le  fait  que  c'est  justement  celle  des  deux  qui  calcule  le 
mieux,  a  savoir  M.,  qui  accomplit  les  ordres  le  plus  pres  du 
moment  voulu. 

Je  crus  alors  pouvoir  pousser  plus  loin  mes  experiences ;  celles-ci 
n'ont  pas  aussi  bien  reussi ;  mais  cejjendant  I'insucces  n'est  pas  de 
nature  a  intirmer  les  resultats  precedents. 

Notons  encore  que,  dans  la  premiere  experience,  singulierement 
compliquee,  les  4cheances  sont  determinees  d'une  maniere  jalus  simple. 

Vendredi,  8  Octobre. 

10.  M. — 6  h.  30  du  matin.  Elle  aura  sommeil  a  10  lieures  du  soir, 
gagnera  son  lit  et  s'y  endormira  profondement.  Pendant  son  sommeil 
quelqu'un  viendra  lui  donner  un  ordre. 

J. — 9  h.  15  du  matin.  A  11  heures  du  soir  elle  montera  dans  la 
chambre  de  M.,  lui  dii'e  ce  qui  suit  :  "  Demain  Samedi,  a  5  li.  i  du 
matin,  tu  entreras  dans  la  chambre  des  etrangers  ;  tu  y  verras  la  dame 
de  la  maison  assise  dans  un  fauteuil  et  ayant  froid  aux  pieds  ;  tu  lui 
apporteras  une  chaufferette,  et  tu  t'eveilleras." 

A  10  h.,  J.  est  montee  a  sa  chambre.  A  10  h.  50,  je  I'ai  entendue 
qui  se  levait  et  allait  trouver  sa  sceur.  Je  ne  sais  rien  de  ce  qui  a  suivi 
que  par  le  recit  de  J. :  "  Quand  elle  a  montee  a  sa  chambre,  il  y  avait 
deja  plus  de  quatre  heures  cpi'elle  se  sentait  mal  a  I'aise.    Elle  s'est 

420 

ili.  /.  Delhceuf.. 

dressee  plusieurs  fois  dans  son  lit  avant  de  s'endormir,  essayant  de  se 
tenir  tranqiiille  et  se  disant  que  je  lui  avais  sans  doute  fait  une  sugges- 
tion. EUe  a  cependant  fini  par  aller  tvouver  sa  sanir  au  lit,  mais  elle  ne 
sait  plus  ce  qu'elle  est  allee  faire  ni  dire." 

Quant  a  M.,  elle  n'etait  pas  descendue  dans  la  cliambre  des 
etrangers,  et  elle  ne  se  souvenait  pas  que  sa  sosur  lui  eut  parle. 

Samedi,  9  Octobre. 

11.  J. — 9  h.  30  du  matin — 3,300  minutes,  done  pour  le  lundi  a 
4  h.  30  apres  midi.  Elle  doit  venir  me  demander — demande  bizarre— 
s'il  ne  raut  pas  porter  la  petite  eclielle  double  sous  le  grand  poirier. 

12.  M. —  10  li.  du  matin — 3,300  minutes,  done  pour  le  lundi  a  5  h. 
a.pres-midi.  Elle  doit  venir  me  demander  s'il  faut  laisser  la  grande 
echelle  sous  le  grand  poirier — demande  aussi  singuliere  ;  elle  ne  poui-rait 
remuer  cette  grande  echelle. 

Aucune  des  deux  n'est  venue.  Mais  le  soir,  j'ai  appris  qu'a  6  h., 
c'est  a  dire  avec  un  retard  de  90  minutes,  soit  t/^,  J.  a  eu  I'idee  de  mo 
faire  cette  demande;  elle  se  souvient  nettement  de  I'objetde  la  demande. 

Quant  a  M.,  interroge'e,'_elle  se  souvient  qu';i  3  h.  30 — elle  m'explique 
pourquoi  elle  fixe  cette  lieure — elle  a  eu  envie  de  me  demander  quelque 
chose ;  mais  elle  ne  salt  plus  quoi ;  done  une  avance  de  90  minutes,  soit 
aussi  g\. 

Reflexion  finale. 

J'ai  du  abandonner  mes  experiences,  a  cause  de  la  reprise  des  cours. 
Je  comptais  les  poursuivre  ;  mais  les  circonstances  ne  s'y  sont  pas 
pretees.  M.  se  mariait,  la  sante.  de  ma  fenime  allait  s'aggravant ; 
d'autres  etudes  me  prirent  mon  temps.  Du  reste,  le  peu  de  faits  que 
j 'avais  recueiDis,  me  paraissaient  suffire  a  mettre  en  evidence  cette 
singuliere  faculte  de  notre  esprit  d'apprecier  le  temps  a  notre  insu. 
Bieu  des  personnes — j'en  suis — savant  s'^veiller  a  une  heure  donnee  de 
ia  nuifc.  Mais  d'ordinaire,  elles  sont  tenues  a  demi-eveillees  par  une 
preoccupation  plus  ou  moins  marquee,  et  souvent  le  reveil  est  anticipe. 
Dans  le  cas  de  mes  deux  campagnardes,  il  n'y  a  pas  de  ces  preoccupations ; 
les  ordres  a  accomplir  n'ont  aucun  ca.i'act^;i'e  d'urgence ;  enfin,  ils 
doivent  etre  precedes  d'un  calcul  mental  que,  dans  leur  etat  normal, 
elles  ne  peuvent  reussir  a  mener  a  bonne  fiji.  Et  cependant,  il  resulte 
de  mes  essais,  qu'elles  font  ce  calcul.  Comment  ?  Je  n'en  sais  rien. 
Je  laisse  ^  ceux  qui  voudront  apres  moi  poursuivre  ce  probleme,  le  soin 
de  le  resoudre. 
Mars,  1892. 

P.S. — Je  me  suis  apergu  en  relisant  ces  notes  que  je  n'ai  pas  songe 
a  m'enqueiir  si,  dans  1  etat  dliypnose,  ces  sujets  pouvaient  faire  des 
calculs  au-dessus  de  leurs  moyens  a  I'etat  de  veille.  Je  n'ai 
inalheureusement  plus  M.  sous  la  main.    Mais  J.  est  encore  a  ma 

De  V Ai>preciation  dii  Temps  par  les  Somnamhules.  421 

disposition.  Je  I'ai  done  a.  deux  reprises  diffe rentes,  le  jeudi  3  Mai's, 
mise  en  I'etat  d'hypnose. 

1.  Combien  font  350  m.  ?  P^eponses'assez  promptes  :  6  h. — non  ! — ■ 
-5|-  heures. 

Combien  font  1,200?  Reponses  assez  promptes  :  15heui-es — non  ! — 
121  heures  (i) 

2.  Je  procede  m^thodiquement,  je  marque  Tintervalle  qui  s'ecoule 
entre  la  question  et  les  reponses. 

Combien  font  150  m.  1 — apres  7  secondes,  2^  heures. 

Combien  font  210  m.  1 — apres  5  secondes,  2  heui'es. 
Heflechissez  bien  !  " — apres  2  minutes — 4  heures. 

Combien  font  300  m.  ? — apres  5  secondes,  4^  heures. 

Apres  30  seconds,  5h  heures. 
Apres  1  minute,  5|  heures. 

Je  demande  au  sujet  de  m'expliquer  son  calcul.  Je  copie  textuelle- 
ment  la  reponse  :  "  Ca  fait  5^  h. +  3  fois  10,  ce  qui  fait  5^h.  tout 
juste."  Je  m'avise  de  vouloir"  I'aider  :  "  60  +  60  ?— 120  m.  II  120  +  60  ? 
(courte  hesitation)  :  180  m.  ||  180m. +  60  ?  (longue  hesitation)  :  240  m.  || 
240  m. +  60  ? — le  sujet,  manifestement  fatigue  :  290  m."  J'insiste  ;  le 
sujet  palit  et  suffoque.  Je  m'arrete.  Ce  dernier  interrogatoire  a  pris 
pres  de  10  minutes. 

J'avais  prepare  des  colonnes  contenant  les  nombres  540,  et  ceux 
qui  figuraient  dans  mes  experiences.  Les  resultats  precedents  m'ont 
paru  assez  signiticatifs  pour  qu.e  je  me  crois  dispense  de  continuer. 

The  abo  ve  2^apeT'  was  read  at  the  International  Congress  of  Experi- 
mental Psychology  in  London,  August,  1892.  ■ 

422 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Tliaw. 

11. 

SOME  EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 
By  Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw. 

It  is  manifest  that  in  experiments  intended  to  prove  thought- 
transference  all  possibility  of  perception  by  the  senses  must  be 
excluded.  With  this  object  the  following  rules  were  adopted  in  the 
experiments  about  to  be  described  and  any  infringement  of  them  is 
noted  in  its  proper  place. 

1st,  with  regai'd  to  the  Muscular  sense  :  There  must  be  no  contact 
between  the  person  who  is  to  take  the  active  part  and  the  person  who 
is  to  try  to  receive  the  impressions. 

2nd,  a,s  to  the  sense  of  Sight  :  The  percipient  must  have  his  eyes 
carefully  covered  with  a  dark  bandage,  and  the  object  must  be  outside 
his  field  of  vision,  supposing  no  bandage  were  used. 

3rd,  as  to  Hearing  :  The  agent  or  agents  must  maintain  pei'fect 
silence,  speaking  only  Avhen  it  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  the' 
experiments,  as  foi'  instance,  to  tell  tlie  percipient  what  kind  of  objects 
he  is  to  look  for,  as  colours,  numljers,  etc.    All  caixls,  numbers  and 
colours  should  be  chosen  at  random. 

It  is  not  an  easy  matter  to  name  the  conditions  which  will  tend  to 
give  the  best  results.  As  has  been  said  elsewhere,  it  is  important  to 
remember  that  "  Questions  of  mood,  of  goodwill,  of  familiarity,  may 
liold  the  same  place  in  psychical  investigation  as  questions  of  tempera- 
ture in  a  physical  laboratory." 

It  is  2>rol)ably  true  that  the  passive  condition  in  the  percipient,  so 
necessary  for  success,  is  most  easily  attained  through  hypnotism.  In 
some  of  my  expeiiments,  however,  the  best  results  were  obtained  with 
the  23ei'cipient  in  a  normal  state.  A  question  arises  here  :  whether  the 
difference  of  condition  is  not  a  merely  apparent  one,  considering  the 
possibility  of  self-hypnotisation  on  the  part  of  the  so-called  normal 
percipient.  On  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  observed  that,  in  these 
experiments,  in  every  instance  when  the  percipient  was  hypnotised  at 
the  beginning  of  a  series,  the  suggestible  condition  may  in  itself  have 
lasted  but  a  short  time,  while  the  suggested  state,  of  a  passive, 
receptive  nature,  lasted  more  or  less  to  the  end  of  the  trials,  the 
percipient  always  l^eing  in  a  natural  state  at  the  end. 

The  fleeting  nature  of  all  phenomena  of  this  kind  is  one  of  the 
chief  difficulties  encountered  in  investigating  them.  If  a  percipient 
can  be  put  in  tlie  right  condition  by  a  word  or  two,  oi'  l:iy  a  moment's 

Sortie  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  423 

pressure  on  the  forehead,  as  in  the  cases  here  mentioned,  the  distinction 
between  such  a  state  and  that  of  a  percipient  who  reaches  what  is 
apparently  the  same  condition  spontaneously,  is  possibly  a  distinction 
without  a  difference.  It  is,  perhaps,  just  this  fleeting,  elusive  quality 
which  lends  to  the  experimental  study  of  these  phenomena  much  of  the 
interest  which  attaches  to  the  more  remote  and  rarer  spontaneous 
manifestations,  while,  in  these  experiments,  the  safeguaixls  against  error 
of  judgment  can  be  easily  applied.  In  any  case,  to  try  to  secure  the 
best  conditions  for  an  experiment  is  an  axiom  of  science,  as  "organised 
common  sense,"  and  this  has  been  our  chief  object  of  endeavour. 
■'■  The  experiments  in  themselves  are  simple  and  interesting,  and  the 
material  is  always  at  hand.  N"o  great  amount  of  time  is  required  ;  an 
hour  every  few  days  will  suffice  ;  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the 
study  of  thought-transference  occupies  a  primary  position  as  a  branch 
of  psychical  research,  in  more  than  one  sense. 

It  was  for  such  reasons  that  the  writer  promised  to  read  a  report  of 
some  experiments.  It  may  add  something  to  the  interest  of  the  report 
to  state  here  that  the  greater  part  of  the  trials  themseh-es  were  made 
during  the  month  that  passed  between  the  making  of  the  promise  and 
the  writing  of  the  present  paper. 

Before  proceeding  with  the  details,  it  may  be  well  to  quote  and 
apply  to  our  experiments  the  following  sentence  of  Mr.  Gurney's  :  "  We 
may  venture  to  say'  that  a  candid  critic,  present  during  the  whole 
course  of  the  experiments,  would  have  carried  away  a  far  more  vivid 
impression  of  their  genuineness  than  any  printed  record  can  convey.'' 
The  effect  on  those  present  at  such  experiments  is  often  due  quite  as 
much  to  half  successes  and  indirect  evidence  as  to  more  directly 
successful  results. 

The  first  series  of  experiments  was  made  with  the  percipient  in  a 
light  trance.  The  objects  looked  at  l)y  the  agent  being  of  a  miscel- 
laneous character,  and  taken  from  different  parts  of  the  house  Avithout 
the  percipieiit's  knowledge.  The  house  happened  to  be  rented,  furnished, 
of  friends,  who  left  their  bric-a-brac,  &c. 

The  report,  made  verbatim,  at  the  time  of  the  experiments,  is  as 
follows  : — ■ 

First  Series. 

■ ;  •  New  York,  April  3ril,  1892. 

Mrs.  Thaw  Percipient.    Dr.  Thaw  Agent.    Witness,  Mrs.  Dow. 

After  each  experiment  the  agent  touched  the  percipient's  forehead  to 
help  her  into  the  passive  state,  but  never  selected  an  object  for  the  next 
experiment  until  after  the  contact  was  discontinued. 

Agent  holds  first  two  objects  against  white  paper. 

1st  Object.  Bronze  Statuette,  Classic  Bust,  Helmet  and  Beakd. — 
Percipient  in  one  or  two  minutes  says  :  Is  it  a  picture  ?    At  this  point, 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw. 

referring  to  percijaient's  putting  it  in  form  of  a  question,  witness  says  impul- 
sively, "That's  not  quite  right."  But  this  remark  would  hardly  suggest 
what  foUovvrs.  After  long  pause,  percipient  continues  :  A  reprorhictiun  of 
the  human  face.  Dark.  A  statuette.  Bronze.  Beard.  Hat  on  it.  Slouch 
hat,  cap.  Has  a  ruff.  (Back  of  bust  suggests  a  ruff.)  (Experiment  took  10 
minutes.) 

Slid  Object.  A  Pair  of  Scissors. — Agent  writes  above  report  on  paper 
in  his  hand.  Percipient  says  :  Something  lohite.  Agent  says  "  No." 
Writiivj  on  it.  Agent  puts  away  paper  here,  as  it  was  evidently  in  perci- 
pient's mind.  Percipient  continues  :  If  not  white,  shiny.  A  ivliite  shine,  not 
a  gold  shine.  RunndisJi.  Engraved.  A  pair  of  scissors.  (Percipient  says 
something  long  and  sharp  Vi^as  in  her  mind  from  the  beginning.)  (Experiment 
lasted  4  minutes.) 

3rd  Object.  A  Cabinet  Photo  of  "  X  "  brought  by  agent  from  upstairs 
before  sitting. — Percipient  says  :  SometJiiug  sc[uare.  A  picture.  A.  p)icture 
of  a  brass  bed.  Agent  says  "  Wrong."  Fhotograph  of  "A'."  (Experiment 
took  two  or  three  minutes.) 

Jfth  Object.  An  old  soiled  $10.00  Bill. — Percipient  says  :  Square.  (Per- 
cipient on  being  asked  what  slie  means  by  "square"  says  "  Square-cornered.") 
It  is  a  book  with  corners.  Dark  in  colour.  Hade  of  two  colours.  It  is  a, 
kindergarten  mat  made  bij  a  child.  Agent  says  "Wrong."  It  is  another 
picture.  Has  letters  on  it.  A  picture  not  of  something  human,  but  of  something 
in  nature.  Has  a  big  G  cm  it,  or  like  an  0  or  t\co  O's  together.  It  is  a  pict  ure 
in  colour.  The  colour  darker  than  the  thing.  The  colonr  like  ink.  (Experiment 
took  ten  to  fifteen  minutes.) 

5th  Object.  A  Red-covered  Book  with  Black  Cross  and  Letters  on  cover, 
"Saint  Paul,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  Percipient  saj's  :  I  think  this  is  some- 
thing darlz  in  colour.  Is  it  anijiliing  squxire  ?  Square  and  dark.  It  is  a  paper - 
covered  book.  Agent  says  "  No."  Percipient  continues  :  Tliis  time  it  is  a,  book. 
It  has  writing  on  the  outside.  Reddish  brownish  colour.  CapitcdE  on  outside. 
Is  it  the  book  on  Evolution?  "Wrong."  Is  there  anything  stuck  on  it? 
"  No."    (Experiment  took  from  five  to  ten  minutes.) 

Percipient  was  told  the  name  of  the  book  and  insisted  that  the  name 
of  Mr.  Myers  was  in  her  mind  all  the  time,  but  connected  with  the  paper- 
covered  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  when  told  the  book  Avas  not  paper- 
covered  gave  up  the  name  of  Mr.  Myers. 

GtJi  Object.  Agent's  Watch  (with  Chain). — Percipient  says  :  Brigli.t. 
Wliite  Bright.  No,  gold  bright.  Either  ct  watch  or  chain.  (Experiment 
took  2  minutes.) 

7th  Object.  Spectacle  Case. — A  shining  black  with  letters  and  arabesques 
and  an  eagle  in  gold  on  it.  Percipient  says :  It's  squccre  ;  has  corners.  There's 
■loriting  on  it.  If  not  writing^  has  a  picture  on  it.  I  tldnkit's  a  book  or  « 
picture  on  a  paper.  I  see  it  reddish  .  Long  ra  ther  thcin^  square.  Like  a^  pencil 
or  ptaper  cv.tter,  or  knife.  It  shines.  White  shine  or  silver  shine.  Agent 
asked  colour  of  letters.    Gold,  toitJi  one  or  two  arcdjesques.  (Correct.) 

8th  Object.  Long  Round  Brass  Wire  Helical  Spring.  Larger  at  one  end. 
• — Percipient  says  :  Tliis  is  dark  coloured.  No  shine.  Black  or  brown.  It's 
hard.    It  shines,  lohite  shine,  meted.    A  silver  thing.    It's  long.    It's  roundish. 

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

425 

Is  it  a  spoon  ?  Is  it  a  knife  ?  I  v:onder  if  it  has  any  glass  on  it.  I  think  it's- 
part  silver  and  part  cut  glass.  Magie  it's  a  steel  shine.  Is  it  a  hat-pin?  (The 
outline  (jf  the  object  very  mucli  resembles  that  of  an  ordinary  straight  hat- 
pin.) 

April  m,  1892. 

Mrs.  Thaw  Percipient.    Dr.  Thaw  Agent.    Mrs.  Dow  Witness. 

9th  Object.  S^i.iXL  China  Cup,  flowers  painted  on  it. — Percipient  says  r 
Hound.  Bright.  Steel.  Top  of  r,incilage.  Rather  flat.  Moneg.  Has  another 
jpart.  Perhaps  something  of  glass.  Partlg  glass  or  crockery.  Ink-hottle.. 
Colour?  Gi'ceni^h. 

10th  Object.  ToEToiSE-SHELL  I^APKiN  RiNG,  with  name  in  script  on  side. 
— Percipient  says  :  Not  bricjhK  Not  light  colour.  Scpiare.  Writing  on  it. 
(This  object  was  familiar  to  agent  not  so  much  as  a  ring  as  for  the  writing  on. 
it,  and  from  that  point  of  view  it,  of  course,  appears  square.)  A  book. 
Bark  ivith  white  rim.  (Rim  reflecting  light.)  Bottomhas  corners.  Something- 
breakable. 

11th  Object.  A  Small  Beass  Key. — Percipient  says  :  Smcdl.  Smcdler 
than  the  other  object.  Shines.  Stiines  lohite.  (True  in  some  lights.  Alight- 
coloured  brass.)  Is  it  sharp  ?  Eoundness  of  some  kind.  Agent  asks,  "  What 
kind?"  Bonndness  flat.  Roundness  cdso  of  a  long  thing.  It  has  a  handle. 
Is  it  silver?    Is  it  a  toilet  article  ?    Colour  ?    It  has  a  gold  shine. 

12th  Object.  A  Small  Eae  Syringe.  Round  Bulb.— Percipient :  Dark, 
Brownish.    Flat.    Corners.    long.    A  book. 

13th  Object.  The  last  object  of  this  series  is  a  book  of  Mother  Goose's- 
Melodies,  with  a  picture  of  Mother  Goose  playing  piano  on  the  cover. — Per- 
cipient :  No  shine.  Not  dark.  Not  white.  At  this  point,  agent  being  a 
little  tired,  stopped  actual  visualisation  of  the  book  as  an  object,  leaned  back, 
in  his  chair,  and  for  the  first  time  noticing  Mother  Goose  was  playing  with, 
her  claws  on  the  piano,  being  amused  by  this,  fell"  to  thinking  of  the  general 
intellectual  conception  of  the  book.  Percipient  suddenly  says,  It  has  some- 
thing to  do  with  the  mind.  Agent  in  surprise  exclaims,  "  With  the  mind  ?  " 
in  a  tone  which  discouraged  percipient  at  first.  Percipient  continues  :  It 
has  to  do  with  library  raiher  than  bedroom.  It  has  to  do  with.  Art.  Agent 
asks,  "What  Art?"  (This  is  an  error  of  an  impulsive  character  such  as- 
sometimes  is  made.)  It  is  one  of  my  crayons.  It  has  something  to  do  irith 
im-iling,  composition.  Music  too.  It  has  been  in  the  library.  Either  ivith- 
something  done  in  Art  or  with  somebody  doing  something  in  an  Art.  Agent 
looking  at  Mother  Goose  at  this  time.  Bither  work  done  or  person  doing  if. 
It  has  something  to  do  unth  a  book.  It  has  something  to  do  with  a  book  with  a 
picture  in  it.  It  has  something  to  do  with  a  book  of  pictures  or  of  music.  It 
is  a  book.   It  is  the  Mother  Goose  book. 

The  Mother  Goose  book  was  in  percipient's  mind  from  the  beginning,  but 
she  wanted  to  see  if  it  would  persist.  It  continued  to  appear  at  times.  The: 
image  was  so  clear  that  percipient  was  afraid  of  its  being  a  conscious  thought 
or  guess  and  so  put  it  off. 

Thus  of  thirteen  objects  six  were  correctly  named,  the  fifth  object 
■being  called  a  book  correctly,  though  the  particular  book  was  not. 

426 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Them. 

named.  (Five  of  the  eight  objects  on  the  first  day  were  named  cor- 
rectly.) In  five  of  the  remaining  seven  objects,  the  answers  indicated 
that  the  percipient  was  on  the  right  track,  and  only  two  of  the  experi- 
ments can  be  regarded  as  complete  failures. 

In  the  next  series  of  experiments  (April  17th)  of  the  same  kind, 
Avith  similar  objects,  with  the  same  agent  and  pei'cipient,  and  under 
the  same  conditions,  except  that  the  percipient  was  not  hypnotised,  the 
results  were  not  so  good.  Of  six  objects  not  one  was  named.  At  the 
same  time  the  results  were  better  than  mere  chance  would  give.  Of 
twelve  statements  as  to  colour  (including  light,  dark,  itc.)  eight  were 
right,  two  partly  right,  and  two  wrong.  The  nearest  approach  to  cor- 
rect description  of  outline  was  with  a  ptiir  of  spectacles  (described  as 
sort  of  round,  round  in  one  place  and  then  long,")  and  a  cigar 
(described  as  "  little,  roundish,  longer  than  round  "). 

The  percipient,  who  acted  as  such  in  all  the  experiments  so  far  re- 
ported, while  she  is  the  best  one  I  have  found,  generally  speaking,  is 
especially  sensitive  to  some  sudden  change  of  idea  or  sensation,  and 
more  likely  to  succeed  when  such  a  change  is  made,  while  in  anything 
like  an  extended  series  of  routine  experiments,  such  as  those  with  play- 
ing cards,  she  seems  perhaps  to  have  less  success  than  some  of  the 
others.  In  one  series  of  fifteen  playing  cards  she  had  no  success  at  all, 
and  in  a  series  of  colour  experiments  succeeded  but  little  better.  These 
formed  part  of  a  series  of  experiments  of  a  routine  character,  with 
percipients  taken  at  random,  in  a  normal  state,  and  guessing  rapidly, 
with  no  effort  to  secure  good  conditions.  It  is  a  short  series  in  itself 
and  shows  a  number  of  successes  slightly  greater  than  pure  chance 
Avould  give,  as  seems  to  be  the  case  in  all  experiments  of  this  indiscrimi- 
nate sort.  In  detail  they  do  not  make  very  interesting  reading,  and 
will  serve  chiefly  to  luring  down  the  general  percentage  of  our  successes. 
For,  of  course,  every  trial  must  he  counted  in  a  i-eport. 

After  the  various  experiments  had  been  brought  together  and  tab- 
ulated, Ave  had,  fortunately,  on  April  26th  and  28th,  two  remarkably 
good  series  of  experiments.  They  are  interesting  for  one  reason, 
because  in  one  case  the  percipient  was  in  a  normal  condition,  and  in  the 
other  case  hypnotised.  They  are  particularly  interesting  to  the  writer, 
because  he  was  himself  one  of  the  percipients,  happening  to  feel  confi- 
dent at  the  time  of  attaining  the  passive  condition  which  is  so  essential 
to  success. 

In  the  first  series,  the  percipient  was  a  friend,  a  good  hypnotic 
subject,  v/hom  I  put  in  a  light  trance  before  the  experiments  began. 

The  follovv'ing  is  a  report  of  this  sitting  : — ■ 

April  26th,  1892. 

Mr.  M.  H.  Wyatt  Percipient.    Dr.  Thaw  Agent.    Mrs.  Thaw  present. 
Percipient  knows  notliing  of  experiments.    Hypnotised.  Blindfolded, 

Some  Experiments  in  Tliotight-Transference. 

427 

and  ears  covered  with  handkerchief,  sitting  in  liigli  chair  witli  back  to  agent, 
and  about  8  feet  distant. 

1st.  Ohject.  The  Number  8. — Percipient  sees  clouds.  Little  blue  flames. 
Told  to  see  a  number  he  sees  a  curl  and  a  tail.  No  form.  Percipient  says 
Semi. 

*  2iul  Ohject.  A  Red  Disc  is  chosen. — Percipient  is  not  told  anytliing. 
Percipient  continues  to  see  clouds  and  blue  flames.  On  being  asked  to  see 
colour,  percipient  says  :  Finl:  or  red.    It  is  red.    It  is  a  disc. 

Percipient  possibly  saw  coloured  discs  in  a  pile  in  the  house  a  week  before, 
l)ut,  on  being  asked,  said  he  did  not  remember  them.  He  thought  it  was  a 
disc  pasted  on  square  of  white  paper.  Tlie  discs  used  are  of  the  kind  sold 
for  kindergartens. 

3rd  Ohject.    Green  Disc. — Purple.  Blue. 

t  Jfth  Ohject.    Yellow. — Light  green.  Yellowish. 

i  5th  Object.    Light  Green. — Yellowish.  Green. 

f  6th  Ohject.    Dark  Blue. — Dark.    Black.    Dark  blue. 
7th  Object.    Bright  Red. — While.    Green.  Blue. 

Percipient  becomes  confused.  Percipient  very  slow  and  continues  to  see 
"blue  flames  and  smoke. 

Without  telling  percipient,  objects  changed  to  Playing  Cards. 

t  8th  Ohject.  6  Hearts. — Percipient  says  :  Wliite,  a  card.  Is  it  a  one  spot  ? 
Red.  Orange.  Diamonds.  The  nine  of  Diamonds.  It  has  spots  np  and 
down  the  sides ;  either  a  nine  or  «  six.  It  has  noth  ing  in  the  centre.  No,  it  is 
not  Diamonds    It's  Hearts. 

t  9th  Ohject.    6  Hearts  chosen. — Percipient  says  :  6  Hearts  or  Di.am.onds. 

i  10  th  Ohject.  10  Hearts  chosen. — Percipient:  Hearts  again.  8  Diamonds. 
10  Diamonds. 

■[  11th  Ohject.    King  Diamonds  chosen.- -Percipient :  Red.    4  Diamonds. 

New  York,  April  28th,  1892. 
Mr.  M.  H.  Wyatt  Percipient.     Dr.  Thaw  and  Mrs.  Thaw  Agents. 
Conditions  as  on  April  26th. 

1 1st  Ohject.  10  Diamonds. — Percipient,  not  told  anything,  sees  confused 
shapes  and  colours.  After  a  long  and  unusual  effort  on  part  of  both  agent  and 
percipient,  we  moved  into  another  room  on  account  of  the  noise  in  the  street. 
During  this  move  agent  held  card  on  top  of  pack,  face  downwards. 

Admitting  the  agent's  assertion  as  to  card  being  face  downwards  while 
moving,  the  following  is  a  curious  result. 

2nd  Object.  A  Blue  Disc. — Percipient  (after  a  long  pause)  :  It  is  a 
big  Diamond,  eight  or  ten.  I  think  it  is  the  ten.  The  previous  object  was 
ten  of  Diamonds. 

Further  Cards  chosen.  1st  Guess.  2iid  Guess. 

1 5  Spades    9  Hearts    7  Sjxtdes. 

9  Diamonds    4  Hearts    3  Clubs. 

t  Knave  Spades         ...       Spades,  a  picture  card. 

Then  follow  three  miscellaneous  objects  of  which  percipient  gets  the  third 
virtually  right.    It  was  a  Cigarette  Case.*    Leather  with  embossed  picture 

428 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaiv. 

and  figures  on  it. — Percipient :  It's  a  picture.  Looks  like  filigree  on  the  cover. 
Ifs  of  leather.  (Percipient  may  possibly  have  seen  object  once,  about  two 
years  before.) 

April  28th. 

Dr.  Thaw  Percipient.    Mrs.  Thaw  Agent.     Mr.  M.  H.  Wyatt  present. 

*lst  Ohjcct.  Silk  Pincushiox,  in  form  of  Orange-Red  Apple,  quite 
round. — Percipient  :  A  Disc.  When  asked  what  colour,  said,  Bed  or  Orange. 
When  asked  what  object,  named  Pincushion. 

\  2nd  Object.  A  Short  Lead  Pencil,  nearly  covered  by  the  nickel  cover. 
Never  seen  by  percipient.  Percipient :  Something  ivhite  or  light.  A  Card. 
I  thought  of  Mr .  Wgatt's  silver  pencil. 

3rd  Object.  A  Dark  Violet  in  Mr.  V/yatt's  button-hole  but  not  known 
to  be  in  the  house  by  percipient. — Percipient :  SorneiJmig  darJ:.  Not  verg  big. 
Longish.  Narroiv.  Soft.  It  can't  be  a  cigarette  because  it  is  dark  browv-. 
A  dirty  colour.  A.sked  about  smell  said  :  Not  strong,  but  what  you  might  ccdl 
pungent;  a  clean  smell. 

Percipient  had  not  noticed  smell  before,  though  sitting  by  Mr.  Wyatt 
some  time,  but  when  afterwards  told  of  the  violet  knew  that  this  was  the  odour 
noticed  in  expeiiment. 

Asked  to  spell  name,  percipient  said  :  Phrggian,  Phrigi.d,  or  first  letter  V 
if  not  Ph. 

t  Jfth  Object.  Watch,  dull  silver  with  filigree.  Percipient  :  Yelloiv  or 
dirtg  ivory.  Nat  rcrg  big.  Like  carving  on  it.  Watch  is  opened  by  agent, 
and  percifjient  is  asked  v/hat  was  done.  Percipent  says  :  Yon  opened  it.  It 
-is  shc(2)ed  like  a  buttcrfig.  Percipient  held  finger  and  thumb  of  each  hand 
making  figure  mucli  like  that  of  opened  watch.  Percipient  asked  to  spell  it 
said  :  I  get  r-i-n-g  with  a  W  at  first. 

Playing  Cards. 

t  King  Spades. — Spades.  Spot  i it  middle  and  spots  outside.  7  Spades.  9 
Spades. 

*4:Clvbs.—4  Clubs. 

t  5  Spades. — 5  Diamonds. 

Numbers  out  of  Nine  Digits. 
*4. — Percipient  said  :  It  stands  vp  straight.  4. 

+  6. — Percipient  said  :  Those  tioo  are  too  much  cdike,  oidy  a  little  gap  in  one 
of  them.    It  is  cither  5  or  G. 
*3.—S. 

+  1. — Percipient  said  :  Cover  }ip  that  vpper part  if  it  is  the  1.  It  is  either  T 
or  1. 

2.-9,  S.  • 
From  acting  so  much  as 'agent  in  previous  trials',  1  knew  the  shapes  of 
these  numbers  printed  on  cardboard,  and  as  agent  found  tlie  5  and  0  too 
much  alike.  After'looking  hard  at  one  of  them  I  can  hardly  tell  tlie  differ- 
ence, and  always  cover  the  upj^er  projection  of  the  1  because  it  is  so  much 
like  a  7. 

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

429 

The  numbers  were  printed  on  separate  pieces  of  cardboard  and  there  were 
about  a  hundred  in  the  box,  being  made  for  some  game. 

COLOUKS,  CHOSEN  AT  llANDOM. 
Chosen.  1st  Guess.  2nd.  Guess. 

*Bp,ight  Red      ...  Bright  Bed. 

*LiGHT  Geeen     ...  Light  Green. 

tYELLOW  ...        ...  Dark  Blue   Yellow. 

■^Bright  Yellow...  Bright  Yelloii: 

+Dark  Red         ...  Blue  Bark  Bed. 

tDAKK  Blue       ...  Orange    Dark  Blue. 

Or.'LNGE   Green         ...       ...  Heliotrope. 

These  successes  with  cards,  numbers  and  colours  are  the  most  remark- 
able of  all.  The  percipient  himself  told  the  agents  to  change  character  of 
object  after  each  actual  failure,  thus  getting  new  sensations. 

Percipient  was  told  to  go  into  next  room  and  get  something. 

*lst  Object.  Silver  Inkstajnd  chosen. — Percipient,  without  moving,  says  : 
J  think  of  something  but  it  is  too  bright  and  easy.    It  is  the  silver  inkstand. 

Percipient  told  to  get  something  in  next  room. 

2nd  Object.  A  Glass  Candlestick. — Percipient  went  to  right  corner  of 
the  room  and  to  the  cabinet  with  the  object  on  it,  but  could  not  distinguish 
which  object. 

Percipient  liad  handkerchief  off"  to  be  able  to  walk,  but  was  not  followed 
by  agents,  and  did  not  see  them.  Agents  found  percipient  standing  with 
hands  over  candlestick  undecided. 

In  the  first  series  of  experiments  of  April  26th  and  28tli,  Mr. 
Wyatt,  who  was  hypnotised,  named  or  described,  out  of  a  total  of 
nineteen  objects,  two  completely  right  (marked  above  by  an  asterisk  *), 
ten  partly  right  (marked  above  by  a  cross  f),  and  seven  wrong  ;  while 
the  writer,  who  was  in  what  would  be  called  a  normal  state,  named 
or  described,  out  of  a  total  of  twenty-one  objects,  eight  completely 
right  (marked  above  by  an  asterisk  nine  partly  right  (marked  above 
by  a  cross  f)  and  only  four  wrong. 

Both  series  were  conducted  under  the  same  conditions  as  regards 
checks  on  error ;  i.e.,  the  percipient  had  both  eyes  and  ears  tied  up, 
and  the  agents  kept  silent  except  when  it  was  necessary  to  say  when 
cards  or  numbers  or  colours  were  to  be  used. 

It  is  from  such  trials  as  these  last,  and  those  first  described  with 
Mrs.  Thaw  as  percipient,  that  we  may  learn  something  as  to  the 
conditions  for  success. 

"We  have  not  noticed  that  the  condition  or  the  general  visualising 
power  of  the  agent  has  much  direct  effect  on  results,  except,  of  course, 
that  fatigue  after  too  prolonged  a  sitting  will  interfere  with  active  exer- 
tions. An  hour  is  about  the  limit ;  the  only  important  function  of  the 
agent  being  that  he  should  use  his  mind  and  his  senses  to  the  utmost 
capacity  and  at  the  same  time  try  to  impress  the  percipient  with  the 

2  G 

430 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw. 

idea.  The  latter  seems  to  be  as  necessary  as  the  former  effort  on  the 
part  of  the  agent. 

The  observations  of  the  English  experimenters  on  thought-trans 
ference,  in  regard  to  the  conditions  in  the  percipient  which  conduce  to 
success,  apply  very  precisely  to  my  experiments.  A  serious  failure 
often  interferes  with  further  success,  and  after  a  success  others  are 
most  likely  to  follow.  In  tlie  ordinary  routine  experiments,  even  when 
the  general  results  are  poor,  the  successes  are  often  successive.  For 
instance,  while  Mrs.  Thaw  guessed  only  two  right  out  of  twenty-five 
cards,  allov/ing  two  guesses,  these  two  were  the  tliird  and  fourth  cards  of 
the  series,  and  she  guessed  the  second  card  of  the  series  on  a  third  guess 

This  expectancy  is  something  which  must  be  added  to  the  merely 
passive  condition.  The  presence  of  a  stranger  does  not  necessarily 
spoil  the  phenomena.  It  depends  rather  on  the  percij^ient's  feelings 
with  regard  to  him. 

All  the  percipients  except  myself  seem  to  have  some  sort  of  clear 
vision  of  the  object,  more  so,  often,  when  the  object  is  afterwards  rightly 
named  ;  many  of  the  successes  are  reached  with  a  certain  decision 
which  adds  to  the  effect  on  those  present.  For  myself,  I  cannot 
describe  my  sensation  as  a  visualisation  of  any  kind.  It  seemed  rather 
to  be  by  some  wholly  subjective  process  that  I  knew  what  the  agents 
were  looking  at.  This  is  true  even  in  the  cases  when  I  had  to  distin- 
guish between  the  five  and  the  six,  or  the  one  and  the  seven.  Those 
percipients  who  seem  really  to  see  the  object  often  find  that  there  are 
many  in  view  from  time  to  time,  but  that  one  persistently  recurs. 
Mrs.  Thaw  found  it  so  particularly,  and  jjerhaps  this  accounts  both  for 
her  variety  of  visualisation,  her  successful  description  of  complicated 
objects,  and  her  tendency  to  failure  in  the  routine  experiments,  as  in 
cards,  when  the  whole  pack  seemed  to  march  across  the  mental  stage. 

There  seems  to  be  a  case  of  latency  in  the  percipient's  mind,  or  of 
deferred  transference  from  the  agent's  mind,  in  the  trial  of  April  28th, 
in  which  Mr.  Wyatt  named  the  10  of  Diamonds  some  minutes  after  it 
had  been  exchanged  for  another  object.  A  similar  tendency  will  be 
noticed  during  some  experiments  still  to  be  described,  in  which  the 
percipient  selects  the  first  of  two  ideas  which  have  been  in  the  agent's 
mind,  when  the  agent  is  consciously  thinking  only  of  the  second  one. 

The  general  results  show,  as  has  been  noticed,  a  mai'ked  tendency 
to  fail  with  monotony  of  sensation,  and  to  succeed  with  new  and 
distinct  objects,  or  by  changing  the  class  of  objects  frequently. 

The  table  of  experiments  on  colours  shows  a  distinct  fact,  so  far  as 
isuch  a  short  series  may  carry  weight.  Of  55  guesses  made  by 
the  percipients  35  were  distributed  among  the  first  four  colours 
of  the  spectrum,  or  not  much  more  than  might  be  expected  by  chance  ; 
while  of  the  14  correct  guesses  13  were  made  with  these  first  four 

Some  Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transfereiice. 

431 

colours.  It  would  seem  more  than  probable  that  this  result  was 
due  to  the  more  vivid  impression  made  on  the  agent's  mind  by  these 
more  brilliant  colours.  In  the  same  w-ay,  of  ten  trials  made  with  the 
sensation  of  taste,  the  more  distinct  tastes  were  perceived  and  named 
correctly,  as  salt  and  mustard,  while  weak  or  mixed  tastes  were  not 
named. 

To  sum  up  the  results  of  all  the  experiments,  we  have  as  follows  : 
Cards  and  numbers  show  only  a  little  more  than  the  average  of  chance. 
Of  8-1  playing  cards  2  were  right  on  the  first  guess.  Counting  first  and 
second  guesses,  there  were  10  right,  while  chance  would  give  4  right 
at  the  most.  In  naming  the  suit  there  were  27  successes  to  a  probable 
21  if  hj  chance  alone. 

Of  41  numbers  (using  the  nine  digits)  8  were  right  on  the  first 
guess,  while  chance  would  give  4  right.  Counting  two  guesses  1 4  were 
right,  while  chance  would  give  9  right. 

Of  26  miscellaneous  objects,  6  were  rightly  named  on  the  first  guess, 
and  2  on  the  second  guess,  or  8  in  all,  while  chance  would  give  a  very 
small  fraction  of  probable  success. 

Of  55  colors,  14  were  correct  on  the  first  guess  and  11  on  the 
second  guess,  while  chance  gives  6  on  the  first  guess  to  14  actually 
named,  and  12  on  the  two  guesses,  to  25  actually  named. 

The  last  trial  of  April  28th  consisted  of  the  transference  to  the 
percipient's  mind  of  the  agent's  thought  in  regard  to  an  ol)ject  in  the 
next  room  ;  the  percipient  being  simply  told  to  get  something  in  the 
next  room,  goes  in  there  and  reaches  the  vicinity  of  the  object  but 
fails  to  pick  it  up.  This  introduces  a  class  of  experiments  much  like 
the  Avilling  game,  but  without  contact.  In  these  experiments,  with 
motion  necessary  on  the  part  of  the  percipient,  it  is  sometimes  the  idea 
of  an  object  that  is  transferred,  and  it  sometimes  seems  to  be  an 
indistinct  motor  impulse  of  some  kind,  leadmg  him  near  the  object. 

Insomuch  as  the  percipient  was  not,  and  could  not  be  blindfolded, 
these  experiments  do  not  fulfil  the  conditions  we  laid  down  for  ourselves, 
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  percipient  did  not  look  at  the  agents.  The 
experience  of  an  honest  percipient  in  such  experiments  is,  however, 
sometimes  the  best  kind  of  evidence  for  the  tendency  to  involuntary 
deception.  At  the  same  time  he  may  sometimes  get  first-class  personal 
proof  as  to  actual  transference  of  the  agent's  thought. 

The  tendency  to  get  the  first  of  two  ideas  which  may  have  distinctly 
entered  the  agent's  mind  seems  to  afford  evidence  of  thought-transference 
as  distinct  from  involuntary  guidance.  For  the  agent's  conscious  effort 
is  entirely  toward  the  second  of  the  two,  while  the  percipient  may 
persist  in  the  direction  of  the  first  object.  Sevei-al  cases  of  this  kind 
Avere  noted.  In  one  of  the  last  trials,  the  percipient,  after  much  con- 
fusion, brings  both  objects  thought  of — the  bag  and  the  book. 

432 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw. 

One  useful  object  of  this  kind  of  experiment  is  for  diversion ;  at 
the  same  time  they  serve  as  an  indirect  aid  to  the  study  of  the  condi- 
tions to  be  sought  for,  in  conducting  exj)eriments  of  the  more  routine 
sort,  with  all  the  usual  checks  on  error  applied.  If  we  accept  the 
evidence  for  thought-transference  as  sufficient,  these  latter  trials  may  be 
as  useful  as  any  others  for  the  study  of  these  conditions. 

Of  the  30  trials  to  be  described,  13  (marked  below  with  an 
asterisk*)  were  complete  successes  and  12  more  (marked  below  with  a 
crossf)  were  partially  successful. 

Experiments  like  the  Willing  Game,  bxjt  Without  Contact. 

March  5th,  1892. 

Mrs.  Thaw  Percipient  and  Dr.  Thaw  Agent. 

Mrs.  Tliav/,  after  a  few  exjjeriments  in  liyimotism,  while  apparently  fully 
conscious,  but  in  passive  condition,  was  told  to 

*lst  Experiment.  Get  object  on  table  on  which  were  a  dozen  l^ooks,  lamp, 
bag,  fan,  &c.  The  fan  was  the  object  the  agent  had  in  his  mind. — Percipient 
fumbled  witli  bag,  then  touched  fan  suddenly.  (Mrs.  Thaw  during  this 
evening  resisted  original  impulses  except  in  No.  5.)  Again  told,  "Go  get  it 
for  me,"  and  at  once  picked  up  fan. 

*:2nd  Ex2:icrhncnt.  Select  book  from  case.  (Case  containing  200  books,  and 
23  sets.) — First  took  third  or  fourth  book  from  right;  tlien  on  second  command 
took  right  book. 

3rd  Experiment.  To  do  something  in  room.  The  agent  intended 
percipient  to  imitate  jiouring  water  for  pitcher. — Not  done. 

*Jith  Experiment.  Told  to  do  something  on  mantel.  Mantel  has  eleven 
articles,  clock,  vase,  bell,  &c.  The  agent  intended  percipient  to  ring  bell. — 
After  some  fumbling  percipient  takes  up  the  bell  and  rings  it. 

*5</i.  Experiment.  Told  to  do  something  on  one  side  of  room,  where  are 
mantel,  piano,  &c. ,  and  small  table  with  music  box.  Agent  intended  her  to 
open  musical  box. — Percipient  went  to  music  box  at  once.  On  second 
command  opened  it. 

*Gth  Experiment.  Told  to  do  something  on  mantel. — After  some  fumbling 
around  took  minute  hand  of  clock  (clock  stopjjed  at  quarter-past  and  no 
glass  over  face)  and  moved  it  to  half -past  when  it  rang.  (Correct.) 

7th  Experiment.  Dr.  Thaw  thought  first  to  will  her  to  lie  on  the  sofa, 
then  changes  to  picking  ujj  a  pajier  from  the  sofa. — Percipient  goes  and  lies 
down  on  sofa. 

8th  Experiment.  Dr.  Thaw  went  into  tlie  next  room  (half-lit),  saw  a  red 
book  on  the  table  with  twenty  others,  but  tliouglit  it  too  noticeable  and 
chose  a  bottle  ;  then  came  back  and  told  Mrs.  Tliaw  to  get  sometliing  from 
the  next  room. — She  went  ui  and  got  the  red  book. 

iOth  Experiment.  Told  to  move  a  large  article  to  middle  of  the  room. — At 
once  proceeded  to  move  one  of  two  cliairs  from  far  end  of  the  room,  but  took 
the  wrong  one. 

ilOth  Experiment.    Told  to  do  sometliing. — After  some  hesitation  and 

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  433 

wandering  about,  went  to  upper  shelf  of  bookcase  and  set  up  straight  a  little 
fallen  statuette  which  was  broken  from  its  base. 

Thing  selected  was  to  set  up  broken  pieces  of  small  vase  near  by.  Subject 
has  this  in  mind  first  and  was  about  to  do  so  Avhen  stopped. 

March  Gth,  1892. 

*llth  Experiment.    Told  to  get  book. — Right  on  second  trial. 

ilSth  Experiment .  Told  to  get  a  book. — Chose  one  set  out  of  a  set  of 
eight  or  ten.  There  were  two  dozen  (23)  sets  in  the  case.  Got  the  right  set 
on  second  trial,  but  the  wrong  book. 

i  13th  Experiment.  Told  to  get  a  book. — Got  the  right  set  again  and  the 
wrong  book. 

nth  Experiment. — Told  to  pick  up  something  and  hand  it  to  somebody. 
Dr.  Thaw's  thouglit  was  to  hand  a  stool  to  Mrs.  Tliaw's  mother.  Dr.  Thaw's 
brother  and  Mrs.  Thaw's  mother  had  a  distinct  idea  in  mind  that  Dr.  Thaw 
had  selected  a  nursery  book  to  hand  to  Mrs.  Thaw's  child. — Mrs.  Thaw  did 
the  latter  at  once.    Coincidence  1 

floth  Expjeriment.  Told  to  do  something.  The  thing  intended  was  to 
open  piano. — Went  to  the  piano  at  once,  then  played  on  it. 

March  8th. 

*16th  Experiment.  Mr.  M.  H.  Wyatt,  after  some  successful  hypnotic 
experiments,  was  awaked  and  told  to  do  something  on  table. — Percijjient 
picked  up  the  hat,  which  was  the  thing  intended.  Table  had  a  hundred 
miscellaneous  things  on  it,  many  as  noticeable  as  the  hat. 

"^ITth  Experiment. — -Mrs.  Thaw  picked  up  a  paper  roll.  (Correct.) 

ilSth  Experiment.    Subject,  Mr.  Wyatt.    Told  to  do  something  on  desk. 
Dr.  Thaw  first  thinks  of  putting  a  pen  m  a  bristle  pen-wiper,  then  of  lighting 
a  match  from  an  ordinary  matchbox  at  a  desk  full  of  things. 
(«)  Mr.  Wyatt  puts  the  pen  in  the  pen-wiper. 

Qj)  Mrs.  Thaw,  who  was  present,  and  witli  no  more  knowledge  or 
information  of  Dr.  Thaw's  thought  than  Mr.  Wyatt  had,  says  she 
knows,  and  scratched  the  match.  Had  immediate  transference 
apparently. 

\19th  Experiment.  Both  told  to  arrange  things.  The  room  in  disorder. — 
Mrs.  Thaw  picks  up  paper  on  the  floor.  (Correct.)  Mr.  Wyatt  aiTanges  the 
desk. 

April  17th,  1892. 

Name  of  object  written  on  paper  and  passed  around.  Present,  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Thaw,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dow,  and  Miss  C.  Miss  C.  Percipient.  All 
Agents. 

*lst  Experiment.  Willed  to  kiss  Mrs.  Thaw.  Percipient  touched  the 
piano  in  passing  but  did  not  stop.  Went  directly  to  Mrs.  Thaw  and  stood 
over  her,  saying,  "  I  must  come  here,"  and  then  stooped  and  kissed  her. 

j2nd  Experiment .  Willed  to  go  to  Mrs.  Dow  and  remove  her  glasses. 
Went  at  once  to  Mrs.  Dow  and  stood  over  her,  but  did  not  remove  glasses. 

Dr.  Thaw  Percipient.  All  present  Agents.  The  percipient  in  high-backed 
upholstered  chair  with  back  toward  the  rest. 

434 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Them. 

*ld  Experiment.    Willed  to  pick  up  handkerchief.    Many  papers  and 
things  having  been  strewn  around  the  room  at  the  time. — Percipient  said  : 
"  Well,  this  is  the  end  of  the  room.    I  can't  and  won't  go  the  other  way.' 
Then  went  to  a  chair  and  picked  up  the  handkerchief. 

iSnd  Experiment.  Willed  percipient  to  sit  in  a  small  chair,  there  being 
two  in  that  end  of  the  room,  just  alike. — Percipient  said  again  :  "Well,  it's 
this  end  of  the  room  anyway."  (Going  to  right  end  as  in  first  experiment.) 
Went  directly  to  chair,  one  of  the  two,  and  sat  down,  not  in  the  one  decided 
in  by  the  company,  but  in  the  one  first  thought  of.  (After  percipient  had  sat 
down,  Mrs.  Dow  said  that  she  understood  the  wrong  chair  and  that  she  had 
been  willing  him  to  sit  in  the  chair  he  was  sitting  in. ) 

fSrd  Experiment.  Willed  not  to  get  up  from  the  high-backed  chair. — • 
Stayed  so  long  in  the  chair  we  thought  him  going  to  sleep.  Then  got  up, 
swaying  back  and  forth,  then  staggered  around  the  room,  without  offering 
to  touch  anything.  Then  said,  ' '  I  think  the  best  thing  I  can  do  is  to  go  and 
sit  down  again  in  my  chair." 

nth  Experiment.  Willed  to  close  piano. — Went  at  once  to  piano  but  did 
not  close  it. 

iuth  Experiment.  Willed  to  pour  some  water  from  a  pitcher  on  mantel  on  a 
fiower,  also  on  mantel. — Went  to  the  mantel,  but  did  not  succeed  in  doing 
what  we  desired. 

April  2Sth 

Mrs.  Thaw  Percipient.  Mr.  M.  H.  Wyatt  and  Dr.  Thaw  Agents.  In  the 
next  four  experiments  an  object  was  selected  in  another  room  and  then  the 
2>ercipient  sent  in  for  it.    No  clue  was  given  as  to  what  part  of  the  room. 

"^Id  Object  Selected.  A  Wooden  Cupid,  from  a  corner-piece  in  room  with 
eight  other  objects  on  it. — Percipient  first  brought  a  photo  from  the  lower 
shelf  of  corner-piece,  then  said  :  "  It's  the  wooden  Cupid." 

*3)id  Object.  Matchbox  on  mantel.  — Percipient  seemed  confused  at  first 
and  brought  two  p»liotos,  then  said  :  "  It's  the  brass  matchbox  on  mantel." 

*3rd  Object.  A  Vellum  Book  on  table,  among  twenty  other  books, 
chosen  ;  but  a  bag  imder  one  window  was  thought  of  first. — Percipient  went 
to  table,  put  her  hand  on  the  book,  then  went  to  the  bag  and  took  it  up, 
then  back  to  the  table  and  took  the  vellum  liook  and  then  the  bag,  and 
ajjpeared  with  both.  Percipient  was  in  sight  of  agents  during  this  time,  but 
did  not  see  them. 

4th  Object.    Book  on  small  table,  among  ten  others. — Missed. 

EXPEBIMENTS    IN    GuESSING    IMAGINED    ScENES  WHICH  HAD  NO  EXISTENCE. 

Mrs.  Thaw  Percipient.    Dr.  Thaw  and  Mr.  Wyatt  Agents. 
1st  Scene.    Locomotive  running  away  without  engineer,  and  tears  up 
station. — Missed. 

2ncl  Scene.  The  first  real  Flying  Machine  going  over  Madison  Square 
Tower,  and  the  people  watching. — Percipient:  I  see  lots  of  pieople.  Crowds 
are  going  to  vxir.  They  ewe  so  excited.  Are  theij  tlmnving  water  ?  (Percipient 
said  afterwards  she  thought  it  was  a  fire  and  that  was  the  reason  of  the 
crowd.)  Or  sailors  pulling  at  ropes.    Agent  said,  "  What  are  they  doing  ? ' 

Some  Experiments  in  Tkought-Transference.  435 

Percipient  :  They  are  all  looking  up.  It  is  a  balloon  vr  someone  in  trouble  vp 
there.  Agent  said,  "  Why  balloon  ?  "  Percipient:  They  are  all  looking  up. 
Agent  said,  "  I  thought  of  a  possible  scene  in  the  future."  Percipient :  Oh, 
if  s  the  first  man.  filling.  Tliat' s  what  he"  s  doing  up  there .  Agent:  "  Where  is 
it  1 "    Percipient  :  In  the  city. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  so  much  can  be  done  with  so  little  effort 
in  the  way  of  actvially  testing  for  oneself  the  evidence  for  thought- 
transference,  the  wonder  is  that  a  greater  number  of  persons  do  not 
take  up  this  subject.  It  could  be  made  a  matter  for  summer  recreation, 
and  by  obser\dng  or  studying  the  conditions  for  success  as  well  and  as 
carefully  as  those  against  error,  the  results  are  likely  to  be  very  interest- 
ing, if  nothing  more,  to  those  personally  engaged  in  the  trials. 

436 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

III. 

THE  SUBLIMINAL  CONSCIOUSNESS. 
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 

Chapter  V. 

Sensory  Automatism  and  Induced  Hallucinations. 

BXeTTOjuev  yap  apvL  Si  icroirrpov  iv  al'jiypaTi. 

ARGUMENT. 

I. — This  paper  forms  one  of  a  series  of  chajjters  intended  to  illustrate 
the  emergence  into  ordinary  or  supraliminal  consciousness  of 
faculties  haljitually  sifti^i^iJMifii; — acting,  that  is  to  say,  below  the 
conscious  threshold. 
TI. — We  are  now  to  discuss  sensory  automatism,  or  the  supraliminal 
emergence  of  images  not  due  either  to  external  stimuli  or  to 
voluntary  attention.  iSuch  images  are  called  hallucinations,  and 
they  may  be  either  spontaneous  or  induced. 

III.  -— The  experimental  induction  of  hallucinations  forms  a  penetrating 

method  of  psychological  experiment. 

IV.  — It  has  been  practised  already  in  hypnotism  ;  and  "  suggested  " 

hallucinations,  during  or  after  the  hypnotic  trance,  have  already 
afforded  much  instruction.  Discussion  of  the  source,  the 
optical  beh.aviour,  and  the  content  of  such  hallucinations. 
V. — But  can  we  got  at  such  instruction  in  a  convenient  form,  without 
using  hypnotism  ?  We  are  familiar  with  after-images,  memory- 
images,  and  imagination-imagss.  To  what  extent  can  any  of 
these  be  recalled,  intensified,  or  fixated  for  our  study  ? 
VI. — Experiments  of  Mr.  C.  M.  Bakewell  on  postponed  or  persistent 
after-images.  Explanation  of  certain  supposed  "ghosts"  as 
postponed  after-images. 

Vll. — Transition  from  true  after-images,  which  are  entoptic,  to  memory- 
images,  which  are  "  mind's-eye  "  or  central  pictures.  Observa- 
tions of  Professor  Flournoy  on  his  own  illusions  hypnagogiqiies. 

,  III. — How  far,  then,  is  it  possible  voluntarily  to  externalise  images 
from  the  subliminal  storehouse  ?  Spontaneous  externalisation 
of  number  forms  and  other  visual  schemata  of  thought.  Case  of 
M.  Yowanovitch. 

IX. — Audition  color ee,  or  sound-seeing,  with  its  allied  synajsthesiiB, 
affords  a  further  example  both  of  definiteness  of  character,  and 
of  capacity  of  externalisation,  in  these  entencephalic  quasi- 
percepts.    Case  reported  by  Professor  Gruber. 
X. — Crystal-vision  as  an  empirical  artifice  for  externalising  centrally- 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

437 

initiated  pictures.  Experiments  with  hypnotised  suhjects  at 
Brighton,  illiistrcating  the  transmission  of  crystal-pictures  as 
post-hypnotic  suggestions,  conveyed  to  the  subject  either  by 
verbal  injunction  or  by  telepathy. 
XI.— Experiments  of  Dr.  Gibotteau,  involving  the  telepathic  trans- 
mission of  analogous  pictures  to  himself,  and  l)y  him  to  another 
subject. 

XII.— Experience  seems  to  show  that  these  sensory  automatisms  do  not 
necessarily  indicate  any  actual  or  latent  disease  or  abnormality 
in  the  automatists,  but  may  occur  in  persons  whose  senses  and 
general  physique  are  above  the  average  standard. 

XIII.  — Experiments  in  crystal- vision,  etc.,  made  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Yerrall, 

and  comments  thereon. 

XIV.  — Experiments  in  crystal-vision  made  by  Professor  Pierre  Janet. 
XV.— Experiments  in  crystal-vision  and  shell-hearing  made  by  Miss  X. 

XVI.— Experiments  in  crystal-vision  by  Miss  A,  and  cognate  spontane(3US 
phenomena. 

XVII.— Experiments  of  a  cognate  type  by  Mr.  Keulemans. 
XVIII.— Experiments  by  the  Princess  di  Cristoforo,  and  by  Major  Schreiber. 
XIX.-  From  these  experiments,  which  indicate  the  emergence  in  induced 
hallucinations  of  various  forms  of  supernormal  knowledge,  it  is 
•  inferred   that   our  centrally-initiated  sensations   may  convey 
instruction  as  to  the  external  world  as  veritable  as  that  which 
peripherally-initiated  sensations  convey.     The  rarity  and  the 
practical  uselessness  of  such  phenomena  tell  in  favour  of  the 
view  that  this  supernormal  perceptivity  has  n(^t  been  acquired 
by  terrene  evolution. 
XX.— Review  of  the  forms  of  vision  known  to  us,  external  and  internal. 

Starting  from  the  symesthesife  of  which  sound-seeing  is  a  con- 
spicuous example,  and  which  stand  on  the  dividing  line  between 
external  and  internal  percepts,  we  first  follow  external  vision 
through  entoptic  vision  and  after-images  into  our  ordinary  sight 
of  the  world  around  us.  We  next  follow  intern;d  vision  through 
"  memoiy-images  and  imagination-images  to  those  subliminally- 

initiated  images,  post-hypnotic,  hypermnesic,  hypera;sthetic,  &c., 
of  which  the  crystal-visions  above  cited  have  sujjplied  examples. 
XXI.— The  wide  scope  and  promising  future  of  this  novel  form  of  psycho- 
logical experiment.  Invitation  to  send  records  of  experiment  to 
the  writer,  at  Leckliampton  House,  Cambridge. 

[Some  part  erf  the  following  paper  was  read  at  the  International 
Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology,  London,  August  3rd,  1892,  as  a 
€ommunicatioii  on  "  The  Experimental  Induction  of  Hallucinations."] 

I. — We  have  already  discussed  in  several  papers  certain  modes  in 
which  the  coruiciousness  and  the  faculties  ordinarily  known  to  us  appear 

438 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

to  l^e  interrupted  or  supplemented  hj  the  emergence  of  some  kind  o£ 
faculty  presumably  inherent  in  our  own  being,  yet  not  included  in  the 
stream  of  thought  and  feeliiig  with  which  we  are  accustomed  to 
identify  ourselves. 

The  nature  of  this  faculty  is,  to  begin  with,  entirely  obscure  ;  and 
the  word  subliminal  has  been  chosen  for  it  expressly  as  assuming 
nothing  more  than  the  obvious  fact  that  its  operation  is  in  some  sense 
beneath  what  we  are  accustomed  to  term  the  thi'eshold  of  conscious- 
ness. Again,  this  suljliminal  activity  has  been  regarded  as  a  kind  of 
consciousness  because  the  hidden  form  of  activity  seems  strongly  to 
resemble  the  superficial  and  familiar  one  to  which  the  word  conscious- 
ness is  commonly  applied.  The  oljserved  operations  of  the  subliminal 
part  of  the  self  are  often  such  as,  Avhen  occurring  in  supraliminal  life, 
involve  the  presence  of  consciousness.  And  moreover,  one  of  the  most 
striking  of  the  phenomena  which  we  are  trying  to  collect  and  explain 
consists  in  the  occasional  com23lete  rejilacement  of  the  supraliminal 
consciousness  hy  the  subliminal,  which  then,  of  course,  though  tempor- 
arily and  as  it  were  accidentally,  becomes  supraliminal  in  its  turn. 

Only  a  few  groups  of  subliminal  jahenomena  have  as  yet  l^een  dis- 
cussed. But  it  has  already  become  evident  that  such  phenomena  are 
too  numerous  and  too  imperfectly  known  to  he  at  present  arranged  in 
any  completely  logical  series.  We  must  be  content  to  indicate  several 
possible  modes  of  arrajigement,  and  to  use  each  mode  in  turn  as  may 
best  subserve  that  clearness  which  it  is  not  easy  to  attain  when  facts  at 
once  complex  and  fragmentary  have  to  be  pieced  together. 

For  the  sake  of  clearness  I  introduced  the  metaphor  of  a  spectrum 
of  total  consciousness,  prolonged  at  either  end  beyond  tlie  limits  of 
supraliminal  consciousness — extending  at  the  red  end  into  the  deeps  of 
organic  life,  and  at  tlie  violet  end  into  a  world  of  supersensory  percep- 
tions ;  sujiersensory  at  least  in  the  sense  that  the  recognised  external 
senses  can  here  no  longer  be  employed.  I  have  illustrated  the  opera- 
tion of  subliminal  percejitions  and  powers  lying  beyond  the  red  end  by 
certain  facts  of  hypnotic  suggestion.  I  have  then  tried  to  show  that 
similar  subliminal  activity  is  going  on  also  along  the  red  to  violet 
spectrum  of  which  we  are  supraliminally  as  well  as  subliminally 
cognisant.  For  this  purpose  I  cited  certain  facts  connected  with 
genius  and  with  dreams.  I  have  now  to  follow  these  subliminal  activities 
beyond  the  violet  end  of  the  spectrum — into  the  region  of  telepathy, 
clairvoyance,  retrocognition,  premonition. 

Observe,  however,  that  the  two  subliminal  prolongations  of  my 
imaginary  spectrum — say  the  phenomena  of  power  over  organic  pro- 
cesses, and  of  clairvoyance — do  in  fact  approach  each  other,  instead 
of  lying  more  and  more  widely  apart,  so  that  my  spectrum  ought 
to  be  imagined  as  circular,  not  linear,  and  with  the  infra-red  and 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

439 

ultra-violet  regions  running  into  each  other  in  some  deeply  hidden  way^ 
And  observe  in  the  second  place  that  any  real  glimpse  which  we  get  of 
the  subliminal  spectrum  is  apt  not  only  to  show  us  certain  lines  or  ijands 
with  special  clearness,  but  to  give  us  also  a  dimmer  view  of  distant 
portions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  lessons  of  hypnotic  suggestion  are  by 
no  means  limited  to  its  profounder  oi'ganic  effects.  We  shall  have  to 
recur  to  it  in  connection  with  clairvoyance  and  precognition  also. 

II. — And  we  are  coming  now  to  a  point  where  it  seems  convenient- 
no  longer  to  confine  our  attention  to  one  region  of  the  sj)ectrum,  but 
rather  to  take  a  certain  definite  group  of  phenomena,  and  trace  the 
lines  and  bands  which  correspond  to  those  phenomena  in  all  parts  of 
our  spectrum.  I  propose  to  attempt  this  task  in  the  present  paper  for 
the  jshenomena  of  sensory  automatism. 

First,  however,  I  must  define  what  I  mean  by  the  automatic  action 
of  the  senses.  Up  to  this  point,  the  indications  or  messages  sent 
upwards  by  the  subliminal  self  have  been  of  a  kind  not  easy  to  aj^por- 
tion  between  the  two  groups — sensory  and  motor — into  which  ordinary 
supraliminal  nervous  activity  is  commonly  divided.  Under  which  head 
should  we  have  classed  the  production  of  a  blister  by  suggestion  1  or 
the  musical  impulse  of  Mozart  1  or  even  ordinary  dreams, — which  mix 
sensory  imagery  with  representation  of  motion,  finding  outlet  occa- 
sionally in  actual  movements  of  head  and  limbs? 

But  we  are  now  coming  to  subliminal  "  messages "  of  a  more 
precise  and  definite  character.  We  are  passing  from  messages  which 
carry  all  their  meaning  in  the  phenomenon  itself  to  messages  which 
contain  apparently ^jw^osire  signs  ; — gestures,  pictures,  or  verbalisation. 
And  the  verbalisation  (for  instance)  may  come  in  any  one  of  the  four 
ways  in  which  we  verbalise  in  common  life ;  in  the  mainly  sensory  modes, 
namely  reading  and  hearing,  or  in  the  mainly  motor  modes,  namely  speak- 
ing and  writing.  We  shall  find,  no  doubt,  that  among  these  verbal  and 
pictorial  messages  the  interchange  between  sensory  and  motor  phe- 
nomena will  be  subtle  and  frequent.  But  still  we  shall  gain  in  clearness 
if  at  first  we  ignore  such  interchange ;  if  we  take  first  the  group  of 
sensory  automatic  messages,  and  then  the  group  of  motor  automatic 
messages,  beginning  in  each  case  with  messages  whose  content  falls 
well  withm  the  habitual  range  of  supraliminal  perception,  and  going 
on  to  messages  of  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  type. 

And  I  shall  define  the  automatic  action  of  each  sense  in  turn  as  the 
jjroduction  and  presentation  of  images  due  neither  to  external  stimuli  nor 
to  the  voluntary  direction  of  attention  from  within.  Let  us  take  the  most 
important  sense  as  a  type.  Vision  is  usually  divided  into  external  and 
internal ;  external  vision  resulting  from  the  impression  made  by  the 
world  around  us  upon  the  retina,  and  constituting  our  only  source  of 
fresh  visual  knowledge ;  and  internal  vision  consisting  of  memory- 

440 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

images  and  imagination-images ; — the  voluntary  or  involuntary  recall 
■or  rearrangement  of  images  originally  received  through  the  retina  from 
the  world  without  us.  Such  recall  or  rearrangement  may,  of  course, 
help  us  to  new  icUas  (as  to  the  first  conception  of  a  steam-engine),  but 
cannot,  in  the  ordinary  view,  inform  us  of  any  fi'esh  facts  external  to 
ourselves.  And  inasmuch  as  this  internal  visualisation  seems  useful 
only  as  an  aid  to  the  carrying  on  of  our  mental  processes,  most  men  are 
apt  to  dwell  mainly  on  that  part  of  it  which  is  voluntary,  and  to 
treat  as  insignihcant  or  even  morbid  that  part  of  it  which  is  involun- 
tary or  automatic.  They  attach  imjjortance  to  Watt's  povver  of  seeing 
distinctly  in  his  mind's  eye  the  behaviour  of  saturated  vapour  inside 
a  vessel  of  varying  temperature  and  capacity ;  but  they  regard  di'eams 
as  triHing,  and  waking  hallucinations  as  mere  indications  of  disease. 
As  to  the  vague  fragmentary  pictures,  amounting  neither  to  dream 
nor  to  hallucination,  which  are  constantly  welling  ujj  "  of  their  own 
accord  "  in  most  men,  it  is  only  quite  lately  that  they  have  been  traced 
iind  noted  down  even  as  a  curiosity. 

The  reader  will  have  already  inferred  that  my  own  arrangement  of 
modes  of  visualisation  is  different  in  an  important  particular.  I 
recognise,  of  course,  that  external  vision  is  the  only  means  of  obtain- 
ing 02}tical  knowledge — I  do  not  say  of  obtaining  visual  knowledge  of 
any  kind — of  the  material  world.  And  I  recognise  voluntary  internal 
visualisation — recollection  and  rearrangement  of  images  under  the 
guidance  of  the  supraliminal  self — as  an  important,  though  not  an 
essential  aid  to  ordinary  mental  operation.  But  out  of  the  refuse, 
,so  to  say,  of  the  ordinary  classification  ; — out  of  those  I'esidual  phe- 
nomena tif  internal  vision,  those  unbidden  and  meaningless  images  which 
are  commonly  regarded  as  the  mere  sparks  that  fly  from  the  mind's 
hurrying  engine, — out  of  these  I  make  a  third  class,  of  automatic 
visualisations,  which  I  hold  for  at  least  as  important  as  either  of  the 
other  two  classes.  I  maintain  that  visual  knowledge,  both  of  the 
material  world  and  of  what  we  at  present  call  immaterial  relations, 
is  in  fact  attainable  through  visions  which  I  term  automatic,  as  being 
neither  evoked  nor  evocable  by  the  supraliminal  self,  but  which,  as 
I  hold,  have  their  origin  (or  proximate  origin)  in  the  subliminal  self, 
and  carry  up  its  messages  into  our  current  and  familiar  conscious- 
ness. I  of  course  admit  that  in  some  cases  these  messages  merely 
indicate  disease  and  disintegration  ;  and  that  in  most  cases  they  are 
rjieaningless,  fragmentary,  or  abortive.  But  I  claim  that  in  some 
cases  they  convey  real  knowledge,  acquired  by  some  perceptivity 
which  is  possessed  only  by  the  subliminal  and  not  by  the  supraliminal 
self.  What  the  relation  of  that  original  perceptivity  may  he  to 
sight,  as  we  know  sight,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say.  Since  the  knowledge 
2)resents  itself  in  pictorial  form  we  may  conjecture  that  it  normally 

The  Suhlimincd  Consciousness. 

441 

involves  the  activity  of  those  parts  of  the  Ijrain  which  are  concerned 
with  vision  ;  but  whether  the  unimpaired  existence  of  those  parts  is  neces- 
sary to  this  automatic  visualisation  I  cannot  tell.  We  know  that  usually 
the  external  eye  must  work  for  six  or  seven  years  after  birth  if  the  parts 
of  the  brain  which  govern  vision  are  to  retain  through  life,  after  the  eye's 
destruction,  their  power  of  internal  sight.  It  is  conceival:)le  that 
in  some  such  way  as  the  eye's  activity  is  required  to  develop  the  power 
of  voluntary  inward  visualisation,  so  also  the  i^ower  of  voluntary 
inward  visualisation  may  be  required  to  develop  (though  it  need  not 
create)  the  power  of  automatic  inward  visualisation.  This  point  deserves 
notice  because,  as  we  shall  see  before  long,  it  can  to  some  extent  be 
settled  by  actual  obser^'ation  and  experiment. 

Such,  then,  is  my  first  definition  of  the  sensory  automatism  with 
which  I  have  now  to  deal.  But  where,  it  may  be  asked,  am  I  to  get  my 
examples  1  How  am  I  to  fill  up  this  wide  framework  with  the  scrappy 
materials  which  others  have  deemed  of  so  little  worth  1  I  reply  that 
I  draw  my  material  mainly  from  sensory  hcdlucinations,  spontaneous 
or  experimental ;  and  that  no  one  can  set  a  limit  to  the  material  thus 
forthcoming,  inasmuch  as  it  Avas  only,  so  to  say,  yesterday  that  spon- 
taneous hallucinations  wei'e  first  registered,  or  experimental  hallucina- 
tions induced. 

One  word,  in  passing,  upon  the  term  liallucination — so  often  occur- 
ring in  these  Proceedings,  antl  now  emphasised  for  even  wider  use.  A 
hallucination  of  the  senses,  as  defined  by  Edmund  Gurney,  is  "  a  per- 
cejjt  which  lacks,  but  which  can  only  by  distinct  reflection  be  recognised 
as  lacking,  the  objective  basis  which  it  suggests."  ^ 

The  word  as  thus  defined  is  mainly  of  negative  connotation  ;  and 
for  that  very  reason  was  all  the  more  appropriately  applied  to  phe- 
nomena as  to  whose  nature  we  wislied  to  take  as  little  for  granted  as 
possible.  But  for  the  same  I'eason  it  has  been  objected  to  by  some 
critics  as  involving  in  popular  parlance  so  marked  an  absence  of  truth 
or  reality  that  the  prefix  to  this  noun  of  the  adjective  veridical,  or 
truth-telling,  seemed  almost  to  involve  a  paradox.  The  word  still 
seems  to  me  indispensable,  but  I  may  point  out  that  something  more 
of  positive  is  now  given  to  the  same  conception  if  for  hallucination  we 
substitute  "  sensory  automatism  "  ;  thus  implying  not  so  much  that 
the  picture  fails  truly  to  represent  the  objects  present  to  supraliminal 
vision,  as  that  it  aims  at  representing  objects  present  to  suljliminal  per- 
ception in  some  unknown  way. 

I  have  said  that  neither  the  observation  of  the  spontaneous  halluci- 
nations of  sane  persons  nor  the  induction  of  experimental  ones  has 
until  quite  lately  received  any  serious  attention.  The  very  idea  of  a. 
"Census  of  Hallucinations" — in  default  of  which  speculation  on  the 

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  459. 

442 

Mr.  F.  }V  II.  Myers. 

subject  was  mere  guesswork — was  due  to  Edmund  Gurney ;  and  to 
his  first  effort  was  indirectly  owing  that  wider  International  Census 
over  which  Professor  Sidgwick  has  presided  in  England,  and  of  which 
it  is  hoped  that  a  report  will  appear  in  an  early  number  of  these 
Proceedings.  In  view  of  this  expected  accession  of  knowledge  I  will 
here  postpone  any  detailed  consideration  of  spontaneous  hallucina- 
tions, merely  reminding  the  reader  that  in  some  hundreds  of  cases 
already  printed  we  have  shown  ground,  more  or  less  strong  in  each 
case,  for  supposing  that  the  hallucination  was  in  some  sense  veridical ; 
■ — implied  either  a  clairvoyant  knowledge  of  past,  present,  or  futui'e 
facts,  or  a  tele]3athic  correspondence  with  the  minds  of  living  or 
departed  persons  other  than  the  percipient  himself.  With  the  general 
lines  of  this  evidence  the  reader  will  be  familiar ;  and  he  will  have 
observed  also  that  such  veridical  hallucinations  have  been  treated 
throughout  by  Edmund  Gui'ney  and  myself  as  belonging  in  some  sort 
to  subjacent  strata  of  the  intelligence,  rather  than  to  the  ordinary 
stream  of  life.  It  is  this  view,  often  before  hinted  at  in  these 
rroceodings,  which  I  am  here  endeavouring  to  develop  in  especial  con- 
nection with  various  experimental  facts  which  point  the  same  way. 

III. — It  is,  I  say,  to  exiKrimentally-induced  hallv^cinations  that  I 
must  now  turn.  Specimens  of  various  tyjoes  of  these  have  been  already 
puljlished,  but  since  there  seems  still  to  exist  in  many  minds  some 
•dislike  to  this  whole  group  of  experiments,  it  will  be  well  to  explain 
briefly  the  position  which,  in  my  view,  the  group  in  question  holds 
among  the  researches  of  experimental  psychology  ;  to  show  how  inevit- 
ably we  are  led  to  seek  in  this  very  direction  if  experiment  is  ever  to 
penetrate  as  deeply  as  introsjsection  in  its  own  way  penetrated  into  the 
springs  of  our  being. 

The  movement  which  is  now  striving  to  convert  psychology  into  a 
truly  experimental  science  may  Ije  seen  on  analysis  to  have  originated 
mainly  in  two  impulses,  which  were  not  at  first  closely  allied  to  each 
other,  and  are  even  now  l)ut  imperfectly  fused  together. 

The  first  of  these  impulses  was  due  to  the  genei'al  scientific  s^^irit  of 
the  age.  Savants,  accustomed  to  the  exactitude  of  modern  biology,  and 
finding  one  Ij ranch  hereof,  namely  neurology,  conterminous  with  a 
psychological  region  mapped  out  in  so  much  ^-aguer  a  style,  have 
naturally  wished  to  push  their  methods  as  far  as  possible  over  the 
border.  But  here  two  great  difficulties  are  encounte)'ed.  The  first 
and  obvious  difficulty  depends  on  the  fact  that  psychology  and  neuro- 
logy, the  oljjective  and  subjective  aspects  of  the  work  of  mind  or  brain, 
although  in  one  sense  identical  in  their  subject-matter,  are  in  another 
sense  separated  l)y  a  gulf  wider  than  that  which  separates  neurology 
from  any  other  physical  science  whatever.  Neurology  can  but  photo- 
graph the  outside  of  the  fortress ;  it  has  no  direct  testimony  as  to  what 

The  Subl'hninal 

Consciousness. 

443 

goes  on  within.  A  second  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  cannot 
deal  with  the  human  race  in  the  same  way  as  biology  deals  with 
animals  and  plants.  Interbreeding,  environmental  changes,  vivisection, 
are  impossible.  We  can  indeed  study  tlie  sense-organs,  cerebral  and 
external,  in  life  and  death.  But  beyond  this,  the  psycho-physiologist 
is  mainly  reduced  to  the  employment  of  physical  methods  not  even 
special  to  biology  ;  determinations  of  time,  weight,  movement,  etc.,  such 
as  in  one  form  or  another  are  common  to  all  sciences. 

Here  again,  then,  there  is  a  danger  that  the  experiments  will  not  be 
sufficiently  intimate  to  bring  real  discovery  in  their  train.  They  hel2) 
lis  rather  to  define  accurately  facts  already  roughly  known,  than  to  get 
at  underlying  facts  of  which  common  consciousness  does  not  inform  us. 
To  do  this  we  must  pass  from  general  mechanical  artifices  to  artifices 
special  to  psychology.  "We  may  say  that  psychology  is  j^assing  from  the 
initial  state  of  each  science  in  turn,  when  the  new  science  depends  on 
observation  only  without  experiment,  into  the  second  state  when  it 
depends  on  experiment ;  but  that  thus  far  it  remains  in  that  early  stage 
of  the  second  state  when  the  methods  of  experiment  are  such  as  other 
sciences  have  suggested,  not  such  as  this  special  branch  of  inquiry 
suggests  for  itself,  or  can  use  with  unique  effect.  Thus,  for  instance, 
in  the  study  of  crystals  men  began  by  measuring  their  external  angles. 
Then  they  sliced  them  and  found  their  plaiies  of  cleavage  ;  and  it 
seemed  as  though  the  crystals  had  been  examined  through  and 
through.  But  with  the  discovery  of  the  polarisation  of  light  came  a 
more  intimate  analysis  ;  and  we  classify  the  crystal  now  Ijy  the  be- 
haviour of  the  ray  within.  What  we  want  to  get  hold  of  in  psychology 
is  some  experiment  which  shall  compare  with  the  registry  of  reflexes 
and  the  description  of  end-organs  as  the  polariscope  compares  with  the 
goniometer ;  which  shall  avail  to  detect  double  or  multiple  refraction 
within  a  personality  which  to  less  subtle  analyses  seems  still  a  limpid 
homogeneous  whole. 

But  in  order  to  hit  upon  these  specifically  psychological  experiments 
we  must,  so  to  say,  become  as  little  children ;  we  must  put  ourselves 
back  into  a  state  of  scientific  infancy ;  we  must  reach  at  the  moon  to 
see  if  by  any  chance  we  can  pull  it  down.  We  must  he  content  to 
grope,  as  pioneers  have  always  groped,  among  a  forest  of  obscure  possi- 
bilities, rather  than  to  march  by  a  series  of  small  Init  indisputable 
advances  along  a  road  whose  bearing  is  already  known.  This  attitude 
is  unwelcome  to  men  who  have  grown  accustomed  to  definite,  irrefra- 
gable progress ;  and  discoveries  in  a  nascent  science  are  consequently 
apt  to  fall  to  outsiders. 

And  thus  it  came  about  that  that  second  main  impulse  towards  an 
experimental  psychology  of  which  I  have  already  spoken  took  its  rise 
in  the  crude  theory,  but  fruitful  experiments,  of  a  discoverer  who  was 

444  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

also  a  charlatan.  It  was  Mesmer  who  started  the  first  really  intimate, 
really  2:)enetrating  method  of  psychological  experiment.  And  so  new, 
so  unwelcome,  was  that  conception  of  profoundly  modified  personality 
which  mesmerism  or  hypnotism  implies,  that  it  has  taken  a  century — - 
I  do  not  say  to  work  it  out — but  to  get  it  recognised  as  worth  serious 
study  by  official  savants. 

The  path  which  this  priceless  method  of  experiment  has  actually 
followed  has  Ijeen  lengthened  and  deflected  by  much  of  accident^ 
prejudice,  and  error.  But  we  have  noAv  advanced  far  enough  to  be  able 
to  look  back  through  the  Avinding  ways,  and  to  ask  ourselves  what 
really  was  the  short  cut  which  we  ought  to  have  taken; — the  hint  which 
ought  to  have  set  us  on  the  right  road.  Undoubtedly  that  hint  was 
offered  to  us  by  spontaneous  som7iamhidism.  In  spontaneous  somnam- 
bulism might  at  any  time  have  been  observed  on  a  small  scale  the  very 
phenomena  whose  existence  has  been  established  with  so  much  effort. 
Hypersesthesia,  anaesthesia,  alternating  memory,  suggestibility, — all 
these,  not  to  speak  of  certain  other  phenomena  not  yet  equally  accepted,, 
might  have  been  studied  in  the  sleep-walkers  and  sleep-talkers  who  used 
to  be  noted  as  mere  curiosities,  as  residual  phenomena  which  it  was 
not  worth  while  to  try  to  explain. 

Surely  we  ought  to  learn  something  from  this  experience.  "We 
ought  to  realise  that  experimental  psychology  cannot  afford  to  push 
aside  adventurous  experiments,  inexplicable  observations.  For  her, 
as  for  other  sciences,  it  is  the  anomalies,  the  residual  phenomena,  which 
open  out  fresh  paths  of  discovery.  And  I  believe,  therefore,  that  I 
am  merely  treading  in  the  ordinary  paths  of  progress  when  I  suggest 
that  in  the  odd,  inexplicable  phenomena  of  hallucination,  or  sensory 
automatism,  lies  the  hint  and  germ  of  discoveries  which  shall  embrace 
man's  whole  self,  whether  lying  above  or  below  our  transitory  and 
shifting  thi-eshold  of  conscious  life. 

IV. — But,  it  will  be  asked,  can  we  make  this  a  really  experimental 
study  1  Must  we  not  content  ourselves  with  simply  watching  these 
fleeting  hallucinatory  images  as  they  rise  and  pass  away  1  Is  it 
possible  to  induce  hallucinations  1  And,  if  possible,  is  it  safe  ?  ^ 

1  I  do  nut  recommend  my  readers  to  take  drugs  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  hallu- 
cinations. But  since  the  action  of  drugs  in  generating  hallucinatory  sounds  or  images, 
is  at  x>resent  ill-understood,  it  might  be  interesting  if  jjersons  to  whom  such  drugs  are 
administered  for  other  reasons  would  attempt  crystal-vision  and  report  results.  I 
add  a  brief  account  (mainly  summarised  from  some  notes  kindly  sent  to  me  by  Dr. 
Mitchell  Bruce)  of  some  of  these  toxic  hallucinations,  which  probably  result  in- 
varying  proportions  from  affection  of  the  end-organ  or  of  the  brain.  Salicylate  of 
soda  in  some  pers  jns  causes  visions,  mostly  unpleasant,  when  the  eyes  are  shut.  This 
efifect  has  been  noted  after  five  fifteen-grain  doses  of  salicylic  acid.  Faces,  &c.,  are 
seen,  as  in  illusions  hyjmagogiqucs.  Digitalis  in  large  doses  may  cause  subjective 
sensations  of  light.  "After  taking  nearly  one  grain  of  digitalin,"  says  Dr.  Laudei- 
Brunton,  '"in  the  course  of  forty-eight  hours,  I  suffered  from  the  centre  of  the  field  o£ 

1 

The  Sahlvminal  Consciousness.  445 

A  satisfactory  answer  to  these  questions  is  furnished  by  the  con- 
tinual exjjerimentation  in  hypnotic  hallucinations  which  has  been 
carried  on  of  late  years  at  Nancy  and  elsewhere.  Professor  Bernheim 
and  his  friends  have  conclusively  proved  that  hallucinations  can  l^e 
induced  in  very  many  subjects,  healthy  both  in  body  and  mind, 
without  any  kind  of  consequent  ill  effect.  There  is  no  necessary 
injuiy  even  from  what  looks  most  dangerous,  namely,  the  very  frequent 
induction  of  hypnotic  hallucination  in  a  diseased  subject.  "  In  one 
of  my  patients,"  says  Dr.  Bernheim,^  "  a  very  intelligent  woman^ 
affected  with  locomotor  ataxy,  I  have  allowed  myself  to  make,  with  her 
consent,  certain  experiments  [with  the  view  of  testing  the  effect  of 
repeated  hallucinations],  while  carefully  watching  her  psychical  con- 
dition, and  keeping  myself  prepared  to  stop  the  experiment  at  the 
slightest  alarming  indication.  I  have  on  several  occasions  suljjected 
her  for  several  days  in  succession  to  complex  and  rejaeated  hallucina- 
tions— hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic,  immediate  and  deferred — and  no 
trace  has  remained  of  all  this.  During  three  years  that  she  has  passed, 
in  my  ward,  in  spite  of  very  frequent  suggestions  given  in  waking- 
hours  and  in  the  trance,  her  intelligence  has  continued  equally  alert,  nor 
has  her  power  of  initiative  been  impaii-ed." 

This  is  by  no  means  an  isolated  case.  Professor  Bernheim  himself 
has  several  other  living  examples,  some  of  whom  he  has  allowed  me  to 
see.  And  in  a  long  series  of  experiments  begun  by  Edmund  Gurney  at. 
Brighton  in  1883  and  continued  at  intervals  (mainly  by  Professor  and 
Mrs.  Sidgwick),  up  to  the  present  time,  the  same  healthy  and  intelligent, 
young  men  have  been  subjected  (1887-92)  to  scores  of  hypnotic  and 
post-hypnotic  hallucinations,  with  no  bodily  or  mental  injury  whatever. 
There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  mere  fact  of  under- 
going a  hallucination  is  in  itself  either  injurious,  or  an  indication  of 
weakness  or  disease.  ^ 

vision  being  occupied  by  a  bright  spot  surrounded  by  rainbow  colours. "  Cannabis 
indica  {lndia,n  hemp:  hashisch).  The  liaUucinations  caused  by  this  drug  are  well  known,, 
although  their  agreeable  quality  has  been  much  exaggerated.  An  unusual  degree  of 
motor  automatism, — uncontrollable  speech,  gesture,  and  the  like, — accompanies  the 
visual  hallucinations.  Automatic  writing  should  be  tried  with  these  patients, 
especially  when  the  effect  of  the  drug  is  going  off,  and  the  patient's  mind  appears  to 
himself  to  be  in  a  normal  state.  To  the  hallucinations  caused  by  alcohol  and  opium  I 
need  do  no  more  than  refer.  The  singing  in  the  ears  caused  by  quinine  sometimes 
develoi^s  into  a  definite  sound,  as  when  a  patient  of  Dr.  Mitchell  Bruce's  begged  his 
nurse  to  send  away  the  barrel-organ  which  was  perpetually  repeating  the  same  tune. 
"  Shell-hearing  "  might  be  tried  here. 
1  De  la  Suggestion,  188G,  jj.  414. 

^  I  am  assuming,  of  course,  that  the  experiments  are  conducted  on  suitable  sub- 
jects, and  with  proper  care.  Harm  may  no  doubt  be  done  by  hallucinating  weak- 
minded  subjects,  or  even  by  forgetting  to  remove  the  hallucination  which  has  been 
induced.  I  have  seen  a  healthy  and  intelligent  young  man  much  imr.yAed  at  a 
distressing  sensation  of  lameness  after  being  awakened  from  a  trance  in  wliich  scveraL 

2  H 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Hypnotic  Tiallucinations  have  now  been  made  in  sufficient  numbers 
to  allow  us  to  gather  from  them  some  instruction  which  will  simplify 
our  further  inquiries.  I  will  arrange  these  results  briefly  under  three 
heads  : — • 

1.  Source  or  initiation  of  the  hypnotic  hallucination.  ■  ■: 

2.  Its  intensity,  dui-ation,  and  optical  behaviour. 

3.  Its  specific  nature  or  content. 

1.  "Suggestion"  is  noAv  the  regular  answer  to  any  question  as  to 
the  source  of  a  hypnotic  hallucination.  A  suggests  to  B  that  there  is  a 
cat  on  the  sofa  ; — or  B,  if  very  sensitive,  suggests  to  himsdlf  that  there 
is  a  cat  on  the  sofa  ; — and  B  then  sees  the  cat.  In  my  chapter  on  "  The 
Mechanism  of  Suggestion  "  I  have  tried  to  show  that  the  most 
intelligible  definition  which  we  can  give  to  that  too  fashionable  word 
is,  "an  appeal  which  somehow  reaches  the  subliminal  consciousness," — 
whether  that  appeal  emanates  from  the  supraliminal  consciousness  of 
the  operatoi'-subject  himself,  or  from  either  the  supraliminal  or  the 
subliminal  consciousness  of  some  operator  other  than  himself.  In 
ordinary  verbal  suggestion,  A's  supr.aliminal  self  gives  the  order  which 
B's  subliminal  or  hypnotic  self  hears  and  obeys.  In  ordinary  self- 
suggestion,  B's  supraliminal  self  gives  the  order  and  his  subliminal 
self  hears  and  obeys  it.  But  there  may  be  "  spontaneous  "  self-sugges- 
tion, in  which  B's  subliminal  self  both  originates  and  carries  out  the 
suggestion,  without  any  supraliminal  knowledge  on  B's  part.  And  there 
may  be  telepathic  suggestion,  when  A's  subliminal  self — perhaps  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  his  supraliminal  self — conveys  the  message  to  B 
at  a  distance.  None  of  these  four  possible  forms  of  suggestion 
absolutely  need  the  hypnotic  trance,  Ijut  the  trance-condition  seems  to 
facilitate  all  of  them. 

2.  Next,  as  to  the  duration,  intensity,  and  optical  behaviour  of 
the  hallucinatory  image  thus  induced.  No  absolute  limit  can  be 
assigned  to  the  duration  of  such  an  image,  especially  if  occasionally 
renewed  by  fi'esh  suggestion.  Its  intensity  may  vary  from  mere  float- 
ing vagueness  to  a  mimicry  so  complete  that  the  subject,  asked  to 
decide  between  &  real  rose  and  a  hallucinatory  rose,  will  sometimes  be 
unable  to  say  which  is  which.    To  make  this  mistake  possible  there 

suggestions  had  been  made  to  him  and  had  then  been  dispelled.  The  fact  was  tliat 
■one  of  the  suggestions  made  was  that  he  was  lame,  and  the  operator  had  forgotten  to 
remove  this.  A  word  set  the  matter  right ;  but  had  this  word  not  been  spoken  the 
inconvenience  might  have  lasted  for  some  hours.  The  evil  effects  sometimes  noticed 
in  persons  who  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  hypnotised  by  Donato  or  other  perambu- 
latory  mesmerists  are,  I  believe,  largely  due  to  the  mere  culpable  neglect  of  the 
mesmerist  to  abolish  the  hallucinations  which  he  has  inspired.  "  I  have  seen,"  .says 
Dr.  Hamilton  Osgood,  the  well-known  physician  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  "  many  neuroses 
cured ;  I  have  never  seen  one  caused  by  suggestion.  I  have  seen  the  intelligence 
restored  ;  I  have  never  seen  a  mind  enfsebled  by  suggestion." 

The 

Siihliminal 

Consciousness. 

447 

must  generally  be  a  great  intensification  of  the  subject's  ordinary 
visualising  power.  Very  few  persons  can  voluntarily  summon  up  an 
image  of  a  rose  so  life-like  as  to  be  indistinguishable  from  a  real  rose. 

As  to  the  obedience  or  otherwise  of  these  hallucinatory  images  to 
optical  laws,  the  question  is  by  no  means  easy  to  decide.  There  are  two 
well-known  views,  commonly  assigned  to  the-  Nancy  and  Paris  schools 
respectively ;  there  is  a  third  view  of  Professor  Lombroso's,  vvhich  tlius 
far  lacks  confirmation  ;  and,  finally,  my  own  way  of  regarding  the 
matter  differs  from  all  these  views,  although  in  some  sense  it  combines 
them. 

A.  Simplest  of  all  is  the  opinion  of  the  Nancy  school,  which  main- 
tams  that  the  optical  behaviour  of  the  image  is,  like  the  ima,ge  itself, 
a  pui'e  result  of  suggestion.  The  subject  sees  the  image  modified  as  he 
expects  to  see  it  modified.  He  follows  the  hypnotiser's  hints  ;  and  if 
told  that  he  is  looking  at  it  through  a  magnifying  glass  he  sees  it 
enlai'ged,  although  the  glass  may  be  a  j)lain  one.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  this  is,  at  least,  sometimes  the  case  ;  that,  whatever  other 
laws  may  be  at  work,  the  brute  force  of  suggestion,  so  to  say,  can  some- 
times overrule  them  all. 

Jj.  Equally  simple,  and  almost  equally  demonstrable  in  certain  cases, 
is  the  \'iew  of  Binet  and  Fere,  which  treats  the  hallucination  as  a  kind 
of  monstrous  development  of  some  real  tract  or  speck  of  light,  or  shade, 
or  colour  which  serves  as  a  foint  de  repere,  a  peg  on  which  the  subject 
hangs  his  fancied  image.  Thus  the  image  will  behave  just  as  the 
point  de  repih'e  behaves  ;  that  is  to  say  it  will  follow  optical  laws,  and 
will  be  magnified  by  a  real  magnifying  glass  and  not  by  a  false  one.  The 
common  experiment  of  the  hallucinatory  picture  recognised  on  a  white 
card  by  the  aid  of  some  trilling  mark  exempli.fies  this  view. 

C.  A  theory  which  has  found  few,  if  any,  supporters  has  been 
advanced  by  Professor  Lombroso.^  He  holds  that  he  has  produced  by 
suggestion  hallucinatory  images  of  the  solar  spectrum,  which  have  then 
been  modified  correctly  by  looking  through  a  glass  of  some  given 
(hallucinatory)  colour.  The  images  have  thus,  he  thinks,  followed  optical 
laws  unknown  to  the  subject,  and  not  suggested  by  the  operator.  He 
seems  to  suppose  that  this  is  the  result  of  a  high  degree  of  exteriori- 
sation.  The  experiment  should  be  repeated  ;  but  even  if  the  imaginary 
spectra  are  more  correctly  modified  than  the  subject's  conscious  optical 
knowledge  would  explain,  this  need  not  show  more  than  that  the 
subject's  subliminal  consciousness  was  better  iirformed  optically  than 
his  supraliminal.  The  subliminal  memory  is,  in  my  view,  much  better 
stored  than  the  supra.liminal,  and  from  better  memory  truer  inferences 
may  be  drawn. 

1  Congrfes  de  Psj^chologie  Physiologique,  1889  :  Rapport  p.  140. 

2  n  2 

448 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

D.  My  own  view,  briefly,  is  that  all  hallucinations,  including  the 
hypnotic,  are  essentially  modifications  by  the  subliminal  self  of  the 
supraliminal  field  of  vision  or  other  sensation  ;  and  that,  therefore, 
"we  cannot  expect  hyjjnotic  hallucinations,  as  such,  to  follow  any 
one  physiological  or  psychological  laAV.  To  understand  this,  let  tis  look 
round  a  little  among  the  varieties  of  hallucination  which  hypnotic 
suggestion  can  produce. 

The  simplest  case — the  case  which  Ave  have  been  assuming  thus 
far — is  when  the  hypnotiser  merely  suggests  to  the  subject  to  see  some 
object  which  is  not  really  present.  "  You  see  that  cat,"  he  says,  and 
the  suljject  sees  a  cat ;  which  may  be  either  the  definite  memory-image 
of  some  given  cat,  or  an  imagination-image  of  a  cat — generalised,  of 
course,  from  many  cats  ali-eady  seen.  Now  let  us  go  a  step  further  and 
suggest  something  more  complex,  say  a  country  chui-chyard.  Here 
also  what  is  seen  may  be  some  special  remembered  churchyard,  or  an 
imagination-image, — of  course  quite  different  in  vividness  from  any- 
thing that  the  Avaking  sul)ject  could  call  up.  But  here  a  neAv  j^oint 
rises.  The  cat  could,  of  course,  easily  be  combined  Avith  the  actual 
scene,  although  it  necessarily  hid  some  part  of  that  scene.  But  the 
churchyard  cannot  thus  Ije  combined ;  it  must  supplant  the  actual 
scene  ;  and  if  Ave  make  adroit  inquiry  Ave  shall  find  that  it  supplants 
that  scene  in  different  Avays,  and  Avith  different  degrees  of  completeness, 
in  each  individual  case.  Now  suggest  a  hallucination  purely  of 
su2:>2)ression  ; — Avhat  has  been  called  a  "  negative  hallucination,"  or  a 
"  systematised  antesthesia."  Say,  for  instance,  that  Mr.  X  has  left  the 
room,  Avhile  he  is  in  reality  still  present.  It  will  soon  be  obAdous  that 
much  more  than  a  mere  optical  iDhenomenon  may  be  here  produced. 
Closely  linked  Avith  the  apparent  absence  of  Mr.  X  from  the  then 
visual  field,  may  be  a  number  of  hallucinations  of  other  senses, — hearing 
and  touch, — Avhich  group  themselves  about  the  central  hallucination 
in  such  a  way  as  to  maintain  it  Avith  as  little  interruption  as  possible. 
I  say  as  little  as  possible  ;  for  it  often  happens  that  some  act  of  the 
artificially  invisible  personage  is  marked  enough  to  break  the  spell. 

But  surely,  Avhen  the  hallucination  reaches  this  degree  of  com- 
plexity, Ave  must  recognise  that  this  is  no  simple,  isolated  phenomenon. 
Kather  it  is  an  intelligent  adaptation  of  means  to  ends.  The  object  is 
to  indvice  and  maintain  a  certain  erroneous  idea  ;  and  this  "  trunk  lie," 
to  use  an  American  term,  is  bolstered  up  by  sensoiy  deceptions  Avhich 
vary  from  minute  to  minute  according  to  need.  We  have  here,  in 
short,  a  continuous  modification  of  the  supraliminal  field  of  perception 
effected  by  the  subliminal  self. 

The  question  as  to  the  optical  behaviour  of  these  hallucinatory 
images  will  therefore  take  another  form.  We  must  noAv  ask,  "  What 
resources  does  the  subliminal  self  command  ?    In  Avhat  directions  is  it 

The  Subliminal  Oonsciotisness. 

449 

able  to  modify  the  svipraliminal  outlook  ? "  At  the  answer  to  such 
a  question  we  can  only  guess  from  observing  the  more  comiDiex 
hallucinatory  images,  or  visions.  And  we  note  that  such  visions  fre- 
quently fail  in  conformity  to  optical  laws ; — for  lack,  if  I  may  so  say,  of 
optical  laws  to  which  they  can  conform.  The  crystal-visions,  with 
which  we  shall  soon  deal,  will  afford  various  examples  of  what  is  at  the 
least  a  strange  optical  confusion.  I  hold,  therefore,  that  the  repre- 
sentation of  a  subliminal  message  in  visual  terms  is  a  process  whose 
relation  to  optical  laws  is  uncertain  and  variable.  And,  therefore, 
although  I  believe  from  actual  observation  that  simple  hallucinatory 
images  generally  conform  either  to  Bernheim's  or  to  Binet's  view,  I 
cannot  accept  either  view  as  possessing  more  than  a  partial  and 
emjsirical  truth. 

3.  The  natui'e  of  the  content  of  these  hypnotic  hallucinations  has 
])eeii  often  discussed  in  these  Proceedings.  My  readers  know  that, 
whereas  in  the  usual  view  that  content  depends  wholly  on  suggestion 
hy  word  or  sign  acting  upon  the  pre-existing  ordinary  knowledge  of 
the  subject,  in  my  view  it  often  manifests  knowledge  subliminally 
acquired  by  the  subject,  either  by  telepathic  transmission  from  his 
hypnotiser,  or  by  the  exercise  of  independent  clairvoyant  faculty.  And 
it  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed  that  I  claim  an  equally  wide  range  for 
hallucinations  induced  by  waking  experiments. 

V. — But  putting  aside  controverted  points,  we  see  that  these 
hypnotically  suggested  hallucinations  have  already  supplied  us  with 
facts  of  deep  concern  to  experimental  psychology.  Plainly  the  experi- 
ment is  full  of  instruction.  But  we  know  that  experiments  are  not 
apt  to  present  themselves  to  us  at  once  in  their  best  and  simplest 
form.  Can  we  improve  on  this  experiment  1  Can  we  get  rid  of  the 
superfluous  and  intensify  the  interesting  part  1 

We  have  been  studying  the  hallucinatoi'y  images  generated  in 
obedience  to  A's  suggestion  in  the  mind  of  the  hypnotised  B. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  no  longer  interesting  to  us  that  A 
should  have  any  directing  voice  in  starting  the  images.  It  is  B's 
mind  that  we  want  to  study,  and  we  would  rather  leave  it  undisturbed 
by  ordinary  verbal  suggestion ;  although  of  course  we  shall  be  glad  to 
observe  telepathic  impact,  if  we  can. 

In  the  second  place  it  would  plainly  be  more  convenient  if  we 
could  dispense  v/ith  hypnotisation  and  get  B  to  see  and  describe  the 
hallucinations  in  his  waking  state.  But  can  B  get  at  these  subliminal 
pictures  by  any  mere  effort  of  will  1  Can  he  do  anything  more  than 
merely  summon  up  memory-images  and  combine  them  in  fantastic 
ways  1  Can  he  get  at  anything  deeper  than  vague  day-dreams  or 
scrappy  recollections  ?  Let  us  consider  whether,  apart  from  such  a 
rare  and  startling  incident  as  an  actual  hallucination,  there  is  any 

450 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

incident  in  the  couree  of  our  ordinaiy  visual  imagery  which  may  give 
a  hint  of  .  its  possible  recall,  intensification,  or  fixation,  by  some 
lucky  artifice. 

As  a  general  rule  the  visual  impression  of  any  given  object  gets 
progressively  weaker.  Say  that  I  see  a  painted  window  with  a  figure 
of  Fortitude.  Immediately  after  its  direct  perception  it  may,  under 
favouraljle  circumstances,  appear  as  an  after-image.  After  a  few  minutes 
it  can  no  longer  be  recalled  as  such,  ])ut  it  can  be  summoned  with  less 
distinctness  and  less  apparent  objectivity  (though  often  with  truer 
coloration)  as  a  memory-image.  As  a  memory-image  it  gradually 
l>ecomes  less  definite  and  more  generalised.  After  a  time  I  cease  to  be 
aljle  to  recall  by  any  efl^ort  what  the  figure  on  the  window  was.  But 
it  still  jDersists  as  material  for  imagination-images.  If  I  am  called  upon 
to  sketch  a  figure  of  Fortitude,  my  sketch  will  probal^ly  be  influenced 
by  the  forgotten  figure  on  the  window. 

VI. — This  gradual  effacement  of  the  image  is  usually  treated  as 
though  it  represented  a  real  dissolution.  In  my  view  it  is  more  likely 
to  represent  a  mere  subsidence  or  percolation  of  the  image,  so  to  say, 
into  some  suljliminal  stratum,  where  it  is  kept  along  with  all  other  past 
experiences  i)f  the  organism,  in  a  reservoir  not  generally  accessible. 
But  since  I  believe  that  what  has  sunk  down  as  rain-water  may  be 
forced  up  again  as  springs,  I  shall  anticipate  that  there  may  be  recru- 
descences of  decadent  images, — suddenly  regaining  all  (or  more  than 
all)  the  vividness  of  an  after-image  a  few  seconds  old.  Nay  more, 
just  as  I  know  that  the  rain-fed  spring  may  carry  up  in  its  fountain 
traces  of  the  salts  through  which  the  water  has  flowed  in  its  subter- 
ranean course,  so  also  I  conjecture  that  these  resurgent  images  may  be 
other  than  exact  copies  of  the  original  impressions ;  that  they  may 
show  signs  of  generalisation  (I  mean  a  generalisation  diagrammatic  and 
intelligent  ratlrer  than  vague  or  l^luri-ed),  or  again  of  that  intermixture 
of  imagination,  that  working  uj)  into  new  combinations,  which  I  con- 
ceive to  be  a  continuous  subliminal  process  essential  to  all  supraliminal 
exercise  of  inventive  faculty.  I  will  give  some  instances  of  these  resur- 
gent images,  beginning  with  a  remarkable  case  of  postponed  or  T^ev- 
sistent  after-images  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  C.  M.  Bakewell,  lately  a  puj^il 
of  Professor  W.  J ames,  who  has  sent  me  a  concordant  account. 

I.  The  Experiment. 
M.  42.  18,  North  Weber-street,  Colorado  Springs,  California. 

On  retiring  at  lught  I  look  fixedly  at  my  lamp,  or  some  otlier  conspicuous 
object,  for  a  few  seconds,  varying  the  time  according  to  the  brilliancy  of  the 
object. 

With  my  eyes  still  fixed  on  the  object,  I  put  out  my  light,  at  the  same 
time  closing  my  eyes.    I  am  then  careful  to  keep  my  eyes  closed  until  I 

The 

SiMiminal 

Consciousness. 

451 

fall  asleep,  when,  presumably,  nature  keeps  them  closed  for  me.  If  I 
awake  in  the  night  I  am  still  careful  not  to  open  my  eyes. 

On  awaking  in  the  morning  I  open  my  eyes  on  a  plain  white  ceiling, 
and  iiidantlij  close  them  again,  having  just  admitted  a  vague  flash  of  light 
into  the  eye. 

II.  The  Result. 

Observing  these  rules,  I  often  found  that  in  the  morning  the  light - 
flashed  retina  would  vibrate  to  the  picture  which  had  last  occupied  it  the 
night  before.  Or,  if  this  is  assuming  too  much,  since  an  objector  might  say 
I  had  not  proved  that  the  sensation  was  mot  "centrally  initiated  "  ; — at  least, 
there  would  stand  the  object  before  my  closed  eyes  in  all  the  vividness  of 
objective  reality. 

I  will  not  trouble  you  with  a  detailed  account  of  all  my  experiments,  but 
shall  mention  one  which  will  serve  as  the  type  of  a  class  of  results,  which 
seem  to  throw  doubt  on  the  suggestion  that  these  sensations  are  ' '  centrally 
initiated  "  ;  and  which  also  seem  to  differentiate  my  pictures — which  I  call 
tardy  jDositive  after-images — from  the  picture  which  flows  in  the  hijpnopompic 
train.  I  quote  from  my  note-book,  from  the  record  made  the  same  morning: — 

"  Last  evening,  when  ready  for  bed,  I  took  hold  of  my  lamp-extinguisher, 
glanced  at  a  frame  on  my  v^all  containing  a  number  of  pictures,  immediately 
pulled  the  string  of  the  extinguisher,  at  the  same  time  closing  my  eyes.  I 
was  careful  to  keep  them  closed  all  the  time  before  going  to  sleep — not  an 
easy  matter  vvlien  I  felt  I  could  not  open  them — and,  as  I  was  somewhat 
excited  in  anticipation  of  the  picture  I  was  to  see  in  the  morning,  it  took 
longer  than  usual  to  fall  asleep.  When  I  awoke  day  had  dawned.  I  opened 
my  eyes  and  immediately  closed  them.  To  my  surprise  I  saw  before  me 
the  lamp,  and  not  the  picture  I  was  intent  on  seeing.  But  the  lamp  stood 
out  clearly — rather  an  ugly  lamp — v.'ith  its  pink  shade  and  pink  china  base, 
with  flowered  pattern  in  green  and  white,  and  with  its  brass  trimmings,  just 
as  it  appears  at  night  when  the  light  is  streaming  through  tlie  shade  and 
lighting  up  the  base.  Novf,  in  trying  to  see  why  this  and  not  the  picture 
I  was  looking  for  appeared,  the  obvious  explanation  occurred  to  me  that  as 
I  had  glanced  at  the  lamp  just  before  looking  at  the  picture,  and  as  the 
latter  was  comparatively  quite  a  dark  object,  my  instantaneous  glimpse  of  it 
had  not  left  a  strong  enough  trace  behind  to  appear  in  the  morning  ;  nor 
had  it  been  strong  enough  to  destroy  the  image  ^vdiich  I  had  got  from  my 
lamp." 

On  several  other  occasions  have  I  been  equally  surprised  by  seeing  start 
out  before  me  objects  whicli  I  was  not  expecting.  But  in  every  such  case 
the  pictures  seen  in  the  morning  have  been  of  objects  seen  the  evening  be- 
fore, shortly  before  retiring. 

I  am  by  no  means  always  successful,  but  the  successes  when  tliey  do  come 
are  startling  in  their  vividness. 

I  am  most  successful  wlien  awaking  at  or  very  soon  after  daybreak. 

Once,  after  failing  to  get  my  image  in  tlie  morning,  I  dozed  oft",  and  was 
fortunate  enough  to  awake  in  the  midst  of  a  beautiful  "  hypnojjompic  "  traiir 
of  images  ;  and,  recollecting  my  failure  the  same  morning  to  get  my  tardy 
after-image,  I  immediately  directed  my  attention  to  tlie  object  I  had  then 
been  expecting — tlie  same  lamp  mentioned  above — and  it  at  once  took  its 

452 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

place  vividly  in  that  train.  But  this  case  seems  to  be  of  a  very  different  sort 
from  the  others,  and  meets  with  a  much  simpler  explanation. 

III.  Corroboration  of  Experiments  by  Others. 

Three  out  of  six  students  of  psychology  who  have  faithfully  tried  the  ex- 
periment have  been  successful. 

Professor  Scott,  of  Michigan,  I  am  told,  has  been  quite  successful.  It 
was,  in  fact,  through  learning  of  his  success  one  time  with  his  pincushion 
that  I  was  led  in  the  first  place  to  try  the  exjieriments. 

IV.  Difficulties,  Conclusions,  &c. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  fact  that  I  am  by  no  means  always  success- 
ful in  getting  the  morning  image  even  wlien  I  have  faithfully  observed  the 
rules  of  observation.  I  at  fii'st  explained  tliis  to  my  own  satisfaction  by 
supposing  that  the  tardy  positive  after-image  was  a  function  of  (1)  the  time 
of  the  original  stimulus  ;  (2)  the  time  elapsing  between  tliis  stimulus  and  tlie 
morning  light-flasli  ;  and  (3)  the  amount  of  light  which  had  penetrated  the 
eyelids  and  had  been  softly  stimulating  tlie  retina  before  I  awoke  to  open 
my  eyes  and  close  them  for  the  exjiected  image.  But  I  have  not  been  able 
to  prove  this  to  my  own  satisfaction. 

Another  difficulty  has  come  uj),  however,  in  my  discovery  that  my  best 
successes  came  with  my  first  attempts. 

It  seems  as  if  we  have  in  tliese  morning  pictures,  secondary  or  tardy 
positive  after-images  ;  as  if,  in  addition  to  the  first  positive  after-image 
immediately  arising,  there  was  a  feeble  series  of  vibrations,  which,  if  left 
luidisturbed  by  counter-vibrations,  gradually  by  their  summation  came  to  be 
of  suflicient  imjjortance  to  give  a  bright  positive  image,  provided  any  sudden 
vmiform  stimulation  of  the  retina  should  set  these  banked-up  energies  off. 

If  this  be  the  explanation,  we  ought  to  be  able  to  get  these  images,  it 
would  seem,  after  a  shorter  interval,  with  tlie  pi'oper  initial  stimulus,  and  the 
proper  subsequent  light-flash.  On  this  line,  too,  I  Iwpe  to  carry  out  my 
ex2ieriments  when  I  have  more  leisure,  and  get  my  room  arranged. 

Anotlaer  question  that  arises  is,  how  far  are  these  remnant  vibratiinicles 
(if  I  may  be  allowed  to  borrow  a  word  from  Hartley)  destroyed,  or 
neutralised,  by  such  sequent  retinal  stimulation  ?  It  would  seem  from  my 
experiments  tliat  a  certain  amount  of  such  stimulation  may  be  received 
without  preventing  the  summation  of  the  vibratiuncles. 

If  the  explanation  above  suggested  be  the  true  one,  we  seem  to  have 
some  light  thrown  on  the  problem  of  crystal-vision  (a  suggestion  whicii  I  had 
jnade  to  a  friend  before  hearing  from  Professor  James). 

It  seems  to  me  that  these  experiments  may  also  throw  some  light  on  the 
question  of  dream  imagery,  but  I  shall  not  trespass  further  on  your  time. 

Chas.  M.  Bakewell. 

Mr.  Bakewell's  experience,  which  shows  us  after-images  of  an  unjjaralleled 
persistence,  and  a  rarely  jiaralleled  definiteness  of  coloration,  suggests  an 
explanation  for  a  special  group  of  ghost  stories  (which  we  have  never  regarded 
as  evidential),  where  a  face  seen  overnight  in  a  picture  presents  itself 
during  the  night  as  an  apparition.     The  following  narrative,  illustrating 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness.  453 

this  class  of  hallucinations  possibly  reducible  to  mere  after-images,  was  sent 
to  us  by  tlie  Rev.  A.  Horsbrugh  (Bengal  chaplain  retired),  of  GranviUe- 
terrace,  Edinburgh  : 

A2yril  KUh,  1891. 

In  September,  1888,  I  was  staying  in  a  farmhouse  in  the  Kyles  of  Bute. 
My  friend  and  I  were  out  sailing,  and  were  becalmed  and  much  delayed  on 
our  homeward  run.  We  did  not  get  in  till  12  p.m.  After  eating  a  hearty 
supper  we  turned  in  for  the  night.  My  bed  was  one  of  those  old-fashioned, 
lieavily-curtained  beds  often  seen  in  the  Highlands.  Being  tired,  I  soon  fell 
asleep.  About  2  a.m.  I  awoke  with  the  feeling  that  someone  was  looking 
at  me,  and  for  the  space,  say,  of  10  to  15  seconds  I  distinctly  saw  a  face 
gazing  at  me  from  the  opening  in  the  curtains.  It  was  a  face  I  had  never  seen 
before.  My  hair  stood  up  on  my  head,  and  I  felt  cold  ;  but  reason  prevailed  as 
I  thought  of  my  late  and  heavy  supper,  and  soon  again  I  was  fast  asleep.  In 
the  morning  the  first  thing  I  saw  was  a  miniature  portrait  of  the  face  I  had 
seen  hanging  over  the  mantelpiece.  On  making  inquiry,  I  heard  that  this 
man  had  lived  in  the  house  and  died  in  that  room,  but  this  event  had  occurred 
so  long  since  that  this  information  was  second-hand  from  hearsay.  My  theory 
accounting  for  this  supposed  apparition  is  this  :  that  one  of  the  last  things  I 
saw  before  turning  in  was  the  small  portrait,  which,  as  it  were,  remained 
photographed  on  my  retina,  and  the  disordered  digestion  did  the  rest. 

Lewis  C.  Bkuce. 

"VII. — The  distinction  between  after-images  and  memory-images, 
although  sometimes  neglected  by  careless  writers,  is  a  marked  one  ; 
since  after-images,  properly  so  called,  are  a  form  of  entoptic  vision,  due 
to  the  actual  condition  of  the  retina  at  the  moment ;  while  memory- 
images  are  a  form  of  that  "  mind's-eye "  vision  (central,  cerelaral, 
internal,  subjective)  which  lacks  as  yet  a  recognised  scientific  name. 
Nevertheless,  a  transitional  phenomenon  is  found  in  illusions  hyima- 
gogiques,  the  vivid  pictures  (already  so  often  mentioned  here)  which 
with  many  persons  rise  before  the  "inward  eye"  at  the  moment  of 
falling  asleep,  or  even  in  waking  hours.  These  may  closely  resemble 
postponed  after-images  ;  or  again,  they  may  assume  the  more  generalised 
character  of  memory-images  ;  or  (and  this  perhaps  is  the  commonest 
case)  they  may  show  combinations  as  novel  and  fantastic  as  any  which 
deliberate  imagination  could  summon  up.  A  good  example  of  this 
transition  from  after-images  to  memory-images  is  afforded  by  the 
following  careful  account,  which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Th. 
riournoy,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Geneva  : 

M.  43.  August,  1892. 

Although  not  habitually  subject  to  hypnagogic  hallucinations,  I  have 
experienced  some  ten  or  twelve,  of  the  visual  type,  and  concerned  with 
objects  which  had  engaged  my  prolonged  attention  during  the  day. 

In  1875,  after  my  first  day  of  anatomical  dissection,  I  had  the  hallucina- 
tion of  an  aponeurosis,  sjiread  out  widely.  In  1879,  after  a  long  afternoon 
spent  at  chess,  the  vision  of  a  chessboard  came  to  me  before  I  went  to  sleep. 

454 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

Several  times  in  1878,  after  a  day  of  microscopical  work,  the  image  of  a 
pi'eparation  came  before  me  as  a  hypnagogic  hallucination.  These  three 
cases  struck  me  forcibly,  because  at  that  date  I  had  never  heard  any  mention 
of  such  phenomena.  Since  then  I  have  had  a  few  more  experiences,  under 
the  following  conditions  : — 

(1)  When  after  a  long  interval  I  occupy  myself  earnestly  v^ith  some, 
given  subject  I  see  that  evening  a  corresponding  hypnagogic  hallucination  ; 
— as  of  chessboard,  geometrical  figures,  microscopical  preparation  ; — which 
does  not  I'epeat  itself  if  I  continue  to  attend  to  the  same  matter  on  subsequent 
days.  (2)  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  sometimes  see  in  the  daytime,  two  or 
three  days  later,  a  very  distinct  image  of  the  object  in  question.  This  image 
does  not  amount  to  a  hallucination  ; — it  is  not  externalised,  nor  is  it  as  vivid 
as  a  23erception  ; — but,  as  I  am  a  very  bad  visualiser,  this  vivid  and  precise 
image  is  broadly  distinguished  from  my  habitual  images,  which  are  weak, 
fragmentary,  and  indistinct.  (3)  Neither  the  hypnagogic  image  nor  the 
diurnal  image  are  exact  reproductions  of  the  given  object  at  a  given 
moment.  They  are  typical  images  of  ajooneurosis  or  chessboard — not  re- 
productions of  some  specific  aspect  which  has  strongly  impressed  me.  Yet 
they  are  concrete  and  precise. 

I  regard  these  hypnagogic  images,  and  ail  memory-images,  however 
recent  and  intense,  as  radically  difl'erent  from  the  "after-images"  of  the  eye. 
These  last  have  a  quality  sui  generis,  a  "sensational  co-eflicient "  which 
makes  them  seem  to  me  to  exist  outside  me,  if  I  see  them  with  open  eyes  ; 
or  to  belong  to  my  eye,  as  though  stuck  inside  niy  eyelid,  if  I  see  them  with 
eyes  closed.  All  other  images  seem  to  me  to  be  seen  with  the  mind's  eye.  I 
class  after-images  with  external  perceptions ;  all  other  images,  whether  as 
vivid  as  my  hypnagogic  hallucinations  or  as  faint  as  the  ordinary  visual  furni- 
ture of  my  mind,  I  place  in  a  quite  difl'erent  category. 

In  this  case  two  points,  on  which  I  have  already  dwelt,  come  clearly 
out  : — namely,  (1)  the  resurgence  of  a  decadent  image  with  something 
like  its  original  brilliancy ;  (2)  the  process  of  generalisation  which  this 
image  has  subliminally  undergone.  There  are  other  well-known 
instances  of  the  same  kind  :  Newton  and  the  spectrum  ;  Baillarger  and 
the  ga.uze  which  he  had  been  using  in  anatomical  preparations  ;  Pouchet 
and  the  microscopical  objects. ^  In  all  these  cases  the  resurgent  images 
appear  to  have  been  of  a  genei-alised  type, — but  generalised,  so  to  say, 
diagrammatically,  not  Ijlurred  or  uncertain,  but  as  one  would  prepare 
them  for  a  demonstration.'-    For  this  reason  it  is  certainly  better  not  to 

1  See  W.  James's  Principles  of  Psycholor/i/,  Vol.  II.,  p.  G6,  &c.  ;  Binet's  La 
Psycliologic  du  Raisonntmcnt,  p.  48,  &c. 

-  It  is  probable  that  something  of  the  same  kind  takes  place  in  hypnotio  hallucin- 
ations, where,  say,  a  dog  seen  by  suggestion  is  not  necessarily  any  special  remembered 
dog.  On  the  other  hand  if  the  order  is  to  see  some  special  object,  it  will  be  seen  more 
accui ately  than  it  is  remembered; — as  is  curiously  iUnstrated  by  the  frequent  dis- 
satisfaction of  a  female  subject  when  told  to  see  her  own  portrait  on  a  blank  card. 
The  idealised  memory-picture,  which  modifies  even  her  perception  of  her  own  image 
in  the  looking-glass,  is  ruthlessly  displaced  by  the  subliminal  fidelity  to  truth.  "  J'ai 
bieu  des  taches  de  rousseur,"  said  a  subject  of  Binet's,  "  mais  je  n'en  ai  pas  tant  que  ga." 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

455 

class  them  as  "  after-images,"  reserving  that  term  for  cases  of  purely 
physiological  reproduction  of  external  images.  And  in  fact  we  find 
that  these  liallucinations  hyimagoijiques  depart  further  and  further 
from  mere  reproductions  of  objects  seen.  They  assume  all  kinds  of 
grotesque  forms,  and  show  remarkable  inventiveness  in  producing 
hundreds  of  faces  which  the  percipient  has  never  seen  before. 

Similarly  the  patterns  seen  by  Sir  John  Herschell  in  waking  life 
{Proceedings,  Vol. VIII.,  p.  317),  were  neither  after-images  nor  memory- 
images.  They  were  of  the  same  general  type  as  illusions  hypnagogiques, 
although  so  far  surpassing  (so  to  say)  in  initial  energy  these  half-asleep 
pictures  that  they  forced  themselves  upwards  through  the  waking; 
thoughts  of  one  of  the  most  alert  of  recorded  minds. 

We  may  indeed  say  more  generally  that  vv'henever  a  perception 
sinks  ever  so  little  below  the  threshold,  and  reappears,  it  is  liable  to 
reappear  in  a  generalised  or  symbolic  form.  A  little  anecdote  of  M. 
Binet's  (Psychologie  du  Raisonnement,  p.  12)  may  serve  to  illustrate 
how  very  slight  a  dip  into  the  subliminal  is  enough  to  metamorphose 
a  very  commonplace  perception.  A  friend  of  M.  Binet's,  Dr.  A.,  was. 
walking  along  a  Paris  street,  his  mind  full  of  an  examination  in  botany 
which  he  was  about  to  undergo.  Suddenly  he  noticed  on  the  glass 
door  of  a  restaurant  the  words  verbascum  tiiapsus.  Astonished  at 
this  inscription,  he  turned  back  and  read  the  real  word — bouillon. 
Now  the  popular  French  name  for  the  plant  verbascum  or  mullein  is 
"  bouillon  blanc."  The  inscription  had,  then,  been  first  observed  (in  my 
phraseology)  by  the  subliminal  and  not  by  the  supraliminal  self,  and  in 
its  short  plunge  had  become  infected,  so  to  say,  with  that  incoherent  or 
accidental  association  which  is  the  basis  of  a  "  play  upon  words." 
Exactly  the  same  process,  of  course,  is  fi-equently  observable  in 
dreams. 

VIII. — But  I  need  not  further  multiply  instances.  Enough  has  been 
said  to  show  that  in  ordinary  life,  and  undei'  conditions  falling  far  short 
of  definite  hallucination,  there  is  a  storehouse  of  imagery  just  below  the 
threshold  of  consciousness,  from  which  pictures  rise  on  slight  provoca- 
tion into  the  field  of  vision  of  the  inward  eye.  What  we  need  is  to 
systematise  such  insurgences  ;  to  hit  upon  some  empirical  process  which 
will  enable  us  to  get  at  subliminal  pictures  whenever  we  will.  And  we 
want  not  only  to  summon  them  up,  l)ut  to  keep  them  steady  ; — to 
externalise  them  as  far  as  we  can,  that  we  may  study  them  at  our 
leisure. 

Let  us  look  round,  then,  for  any  mode  in  which  mental  imagery  has 
been  observed  to  attain  to  externalisation.  And  here  I  speak  only  of 
visual  externalisation  ;  not  of  the  motor  externalisation  observed  by 
Fere  and  others,  when  exciting  inward  ideas  are  accompanied  by  a 
more  forcible  grip  of  the  dynamometer. 

456 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

It  is  probable  that  many  imperfect  externalisations  have  passed 
unnoticed,  since  this  whole  group  of  subjects  has  but  I'ecently  received 
■attention.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  are  all  aware  of  a  certain  forward 
direction  of  our  inward  images  in  the  act  of  attention.  And  since  Mr. 
■Galton's  well-known  work  we  have  become  familiar  with  "number-forms" 
and  other  visual  schemata  of  thought,  which  tend  to  shape  themselves 
in  many  minds.  These  number-forms  involve  a  complex  internal  visualisa- 
tion, the  mind's  eye  following  their  apparently  fixed  lines  and  angles ; 
but  I  do  not  remember  to  have  heard  till  now  of  their  being  external- 
ised by  the  subject.  Professor  Flournoy,  however,  has  recently 
described  the  case  of  M.  Yowanovitch,  an  intelligent  student  at 
Cieneva.'' 

M.  44. 

"  M.  Y.  is  an  excellent  visual,  of  the  geometrical  rather  than  the 
picturesque  type.  He  has  no  trace  of  coloured  audition  ;  but  on  the  other 
Jiand  possesses  well  defined  and  localised  visual  schemata  for  the  numerals, 
the  days  of  the  week,  the  months,  &c.  His  number-form,  composed  of 
parallel  lines  representing  the  hundreds,  occupies  the  right  half  of  the  space 
in  front  of  him.  In  the  left  half  floats  his  diagram  of  the  week  in  the  form 
■of  a  horizontal  rectangular  figure  divided  into  seven  bands,  something  like  a 
leaf  of  ruled  paper,  floating  in  the  air  about  a  metre  from  him,  opposite  his 
left  thigh.  Still  more  to  the  left,  and  at  the  height  of  his  head,  is  situated 
Iiis  year-form,  an  ellipse  of  small  eccentricity  presented  in  a  nearly  vertical 
plane.  Whenever  M.  Y.  thinks  of  a  date  of  the  year,  of  a  day  past  or 
future  of  the  current  week,  or  of  a  number,  he  perceives  it  in  its  proper  place 
on  the  corresponding  schema.  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  make  him  write 
down  rapidly  a  series  of  figures  at  random  ;  now  these  figures  do  not  flow 
of  themselves  from  his  pen  ;  nor  are  they  preceded  in  him  by  their  auditory, 
motor,  or  graphic  image  ;  but  he  is  obliged,  in  order  to  write  them,  to  choose 
them  on  his  number-form  as  oir  a  picture  placed  in  front  of  hiiu.  For  this 
purpose,  he  does  not  look  straight  at  the  page  over  which  his  pen  is  travel- 
ling, ljut  looks  to  the  side  and  aljove  the  jjaper  in  the  direction  of  the  internal 
diagram,  which  is  the  central  object  of  his  attention.  He  follows  what  he  is 
writing  only  with  an  indirect  vision,  like  a  hurried  copyist  who  lets  his  hand 
work  of  itself  and  will  not  lose  sight  of  the  jiage  which  he  has  to  copy." 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  case  presents  a  curious  analogy  with 
the  "arithmetical  prodigies"  on  whom  I  dwelt  in  Proceedings,  XVII. 
AVith  some  of  them  there  was  a  kind  of  mental  blackboard  on  which 
the  figures  which  were  to  be  added  up  remained  visible  as  long  as 
needed.  But  in  their  case  the  subliminal  self  supplied  also  the  calcu- 
lating facility ;  in  M.  Y.'s  case  it  seems  only  to  have  stereotyped  the 
visual  framework  for  common  mental  operations. 

IX. — We  take  one  step  further  in  the  direction  both  of  the  definite 

^  Archiues  dcs  Sciences  Physiques  ct  Naturelles,Yo\.  XXVIII.,  No.  10,  October 
15th,  ]y92,  pp.  326-7.  Gwieva. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

45T 

character  and  of  the  potential  externalisation  of  these  subliminal 
quasi-percepts  Avhen  we  pass — by  gradual  transitions — from  number- 
forms  to  audition  coloree.  A  number-form  is  an  association  of  an  image 
with  an  idea, — -presumably  as  entirely  a  result  of  post-natal  experience 
as  is  my  association  of  my  friend's  face  Avith  his  name.  And  so  also 
indeed  audition  coloree, — the  perception  of  a  definite  "  imaginary  "  or- 
"  subjective  "  colour  in  association  with  each  definite  actual  sound, — 
may  in  some  slighter  cases  be  due  to  post-natal  (mainly  infantile) 
experience  working  upon  an  innate  predisposition.  But  when  the 
synsesthesife  of  which  sound-seeing  is  only  the  most  conspicuous  example 
are  found  in  fuller  development ; — when  gradated,  peremptory,  inexplic- 
able associations  connect  sensations  of  light  and  colour  with  sensations 
of  temperature,  smell,  taste,  muscular  resistance,  kc,  etc.  ; — for  M., 
Gruber  finds  that  these  links  exist  in  yet  unexplored  variety  ; — then 
it  becomes  probable  that  we  are  dealing,  not  with  the  casual  asso- 
ciatio2is  of  childish  experience,  but  with  some  reflection  or  irradiation 
of  specialised  sensations  which  must  depend  on  the  connate  structure 
of  the  brain  itself.^  And  the  degree  of  precision  shown  in  these 
entencephalic  reflexes, — if  I  may  so  term  them, — •  seems  to  exceed  the- 
precision  attainable  by  the  voluntary  attention  of  the  supraliminal  self. 
I  must  here  confine  myself  to  an  allusion  to  one  striking  case,  com- 
bining both  the  subliminal  intelligence  and  the  visual  externalisation, 
which  was  described  by  Professor  Gruber,  of  the  University  of  Jassy, 
Roumania,  at  the  recent  International  Congress  of  Experimental 
Psychology  in  London,  August,  1892.  In  one  self-observer  of  excep- 
tional endowment,  M.  Gruber  finds  that  the  "chromatisms,"  as  he  calls 
them, — the  patches  of  colour  accompanying  the  audition  of  particular 
words, — follow  certain  definite  rules  as  to  size  and  shape,  depending- 
partly  on  the  phonetic,  and  partly  on  the  intellectual,  significance  of  ' 
the  word  which  the  subject  heard.  This  curious  fact  (whose  details. 
I  must  not  here  give)  would  obviously  have  remained  unprovable  had 
there  been  no  possibility  of  objective  measurement.  But  tliis  possibility 
fortunately  exists. 

"My  subject,"  says  M.  Gruber,  "has  the  power  of  externalising  his. 
chromatisms  ;  he  projects  them,  for  instance,  upon  the  opposite  wall,  at  no- 
matter  what  distance.    I  chose  a  distance  of  three  metres,  which  is  that  at 
which  his  vision  is  most  distinct.    I  then  made  a  circle  of  white  paper  which 
I  supposed  to  be  of  the  same  size  as  liis  chromatism  of  the  number  doi  (two), 
and  bordered  it  with  bright  scarlet.    He  projected  his  chromatism  into  this. 

1  This  view  is  consistent  with  the  results  of  an  Enqucte  sur  Vaudition  coloree- 
recently  conducted  by  Professor  Flournoy,  from  which  it  appears  that  of  213  persons- 
presenting  these  associations  only  4.S  could  assign  the  date  of  their  origin  ;  and  is. 
supported  by  a  case  described  in  the  Rcvuc  de  VHypnotisme,  December,  1892,  p.  185, 
where  a  man  who  had  long  exhibited  a  limited  form  of  audition  coloree  developed. 
gustation  coloree  in  addition  when  in  a  low  state  of  health. 

45B 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

■circle.  But  the  circle  was,  in  fact,  smaller  than  his  chromatic  circle,  and  a 
ring  of  orange  was  made  by  the  superposition  of  the  subjective  yellow  of  his 
cliromatism  upon  the  objective  scarlet.  I  enlarged  the  circle.  This  time  he 
saw  a  white  ring  between  the  objective  frame  of  scarlet  and  the  subjective 
yellow.  At  last  we  got  the  edges  of  the  chromatism  to  touch  precisely  the 
edges  of  the  white  circle.  We  had  found  the  exact  size  of  the  chromatism 
and  could  now  measure  it  to  a  millimetre." 

The  foregoing  passage  will  show  how  clearly  defined  these  enten- 
cephalic  percepts  may  be.  It  is  sometimes  possible  also  to  show  that  they 
represent  (as  I  should  expect  them  to  represent)  a  memory  more  com- 
plete and  a  perception  more  exact  than  the  supraliminal  self  can 
command.  Thus,  Mr.  Galton  had  already  raentioned  a  case  where  a 
lady  used  her  chromatisms  to  correct  her  spelling — the  chi'omatism 
showing,  say,  whether  or  not  there  were  two  c's  in  agreeable,  and 
correcting  her  supraliminal  picture  of  the  word  by  the  symbolic  coloured 
equivalent  of  each  successive  letter  which  thus  rose  from  a  memory 
deeper  in  her  being.  At  the  recent  Congress  of  Experimental 
Psychology,  Mr.  Galton  mentioned  Lepsius  the  Orientalist  as  having 
been  similarly  guided  in  philological  investigation.  And  one  of  M. 
Gruber's  subjects,  a  professional  singer,  when  taught  to  analyse  his  own 
chromatisms,  found  that  they  corrected  his  ear  in  singing ;  so  that  if  he 
sang  a  false  irote  without  detecting  it  hy  ear  the  accompanying  patch 
of  colour  showed  him  his  mistake.' 

X. — I  have  cited  these  instances  of  quasi-externalisation  of  sub- 
liminally  initiated  images  in  oi'der  to  show  that  we  might  have 
gradually  reached  the  mode  of  experiment  on  which  I  am  about  to  dwell 
at  length,  namely  "crystal-vision" — or  "speculation"  in  a  narrow 
primaiy  sense — by  an  unexceptionable  and  orthodox  road.  As  a  matter 
of  fact  T  personally  was  led  to  it  by  a  kind  of  short  cut,  permissible 
enough,  I  think,  when  one  is  groping  al)out  for  some  empirical  process 
which  may  help  one  over  a  purely  experimental  difficulty  to  a  result 
which  ought  logically  to  be  possible.  The  object  was  to  get  our  sub- 
liminal mental  pictures  externalised  for  supraliminal  study  ;  in  other 
words,  to  induce  harmless  and  manageable  hallucinations.  But  little 
acquaintance  with  the  history  of  superstition  was  enough  to  suggest 
that  in  many  ages  and  countries  some  form  of  crystallomancy,  or 
specular  gazing,  had  l^een  ^^I'actised  as  a  main  method  of  divination. 

i  This  curious  case  may  be  compared  with  that  of ,  Pcdrono,  cited  by  Dr.  Krohn, 
in  his  useful  historical  sketch  of  "  Pseudo-Chromestliesia,"  American  Journal  of 
Psycholofjij,  Vol.  v.,  Part  I.,  p.  2-5  :  "These colour  impressions  he  describes  as  sudden, 
and  spontaneous.  The  sounds  are  translated  into  colour  before  he  can  stop  to  think 
whether  the  voice  is  high  or  low."  In  other  experiments  it  has  been  found  that  the 
colour  was  seen  before  the  meaning  of  the  word  which  determined  the  colour  was  coa- 
sciously  observed. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

■459 

Of  this  fact,  Miss  X  has  set  forth  abundant  evidence  in  her  paper, 
"  On  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal- Vision,"  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V., 
p.  486. 

I  will  add  an  example  from  Icelandic  Saga,  as  represented  by 
William  Morris,  in  his  Story  of  Sigurd  the  Volsitng.  Sigurd  consults 
the  sage  Gripir  as  to  the  fates  to  be. 

Nought  answered  the  ancient  wise-one,  and  not  a  whit  had  he  stirred 

Since  the  clash  of  Sigurd's  raiment  in  his  mountain  hall  he  lieard  ; 

But  the  hall  that  imaged  the  earth  was  set  in  his  hand  grown  old  ; 

And  belike  it  was  to  his  vision,  as  the  wide-world's  ocean  rolled, 

And  the  forests  waved  with  the  wind,  and  the  corn  was  gay  witli  the  lark, 

And  the  gold  in  its  nether  places  grew  up  in  the  dusk  and  the  dark. 

And  its  children  built  and  departed,  and  its  King-folk  conquered  and  went, 

As  over  the  crystal  image  his  all-wise  face  was  bent  : 

For  all  his  desire  was  dead  ;  and  he  lived  as  a  God  shall  live. 

Who  the  prayers  of  the  world  hath  forgotten,  and  to  whom  no  hand  may  give. 

It  is,  then,  this  "  crystal-vision,'"'  or  steady  gaze  into  any  speculum 
or  clear  depth,  which  I  recommend  as  an  empirical  method  of  inducing 
hai'mless  and  easily  observable  hallucinations.  Here,  as  in  the  parallel 
case  of  the  motor  phenomena  of  automatic  sci'ipt,  we  must  begin  by 
assuring  ourselves  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  mere  exaggeration 
of  vague  subjective  sensations.  As  with  automatic  writing,  so  here, 
we  can  soon  prove  this  by  experiments  on  known  hypnotised  subjects. 
It  will  be  found  that  a  subject  who  is  told  when  asleep  that  he  will 
see  a  given  scene,  and  who  is  then  awakened  and  told  to  look  in  a  glass 
of  water  or  a  crystal,  will  see  the  suggested  scene  depicted  in  action, 
while  his  waking  self  remains  quite  ignorant  of  its  purport.  Such 
experiments  are  obviously  a  mere  development  of  the  ordinary 
command  to  see  a  photographic  picture  on  a  blank  card,  &c.  But  at 
the  same  time  they  lead  on  directly  to  my  cases  of  crystal-vision  in  the 
normal  state.  It  seems  useful,  therefore,  to  cjuote  some  notes  of  experi- 
ments made  by  me  with  two  of  the  subjects  with  whom  the  late  Edmund 
Gurney  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  have  worked  so  long. 

M.  45. 

Experiments  made  at  Brighton,  March  9th,  26th,  27th,    28t]i,  1891. 
Extract  from  account  written  out  after  the  experiments  from  notes  made 
at  the  time,  with  some  comments  added  later. 

March  dth.  Present,  G.  A.  Smith  and  the  two  subjects,  P.  and  T. 

1.  I  began  with  repeating  the  experiment  already  frequently  made  with 
these  and  other  subjects,  viz.,  suggesting  to  the  hypnotised  P.  that  he  would 
see  a  given  picture  on  a  card  when  awakened.  [G.  A.  S.  hypnotised  and 
awoke  the  subjects  throughout.]  I  told  P.  that  on  awaking  he  would  be 
shown  a  card  with  a  picture  of  a  baby  on  it.  I  said  the  one  word  "  baby  " 
without  detail  in  order  to  see  how  his  mind  developed  the  idea.  He  was 
shown  a  blank  card  and  saw,  not  a  veritable  baby,  but  a  child  of  six. 

460 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

!"2.  Next  time  I  suggested  a  l\ippopotamus — an  animal  wliicli  P.  had  never 
seen  in  the  flesh.  On  being  awakened  lie  saw  on  the  card  what  he  called  a 
rhinoceros.  He  complained  that  it  was  rather  indistinct  ;  he  was  not  sure 
whether  it  had  horns  or  tusks.  There  is  a  certain  interest  in  this  as  indica- 
ting that  the  hallucination  was  founded  upon  a  mental  picture  suggested  by 
my  words,  rather  than  on  the  words  themselves.  One  miglit  have  supposed 
that,  since  my  whole  suggestion  consisted  of  the  word  hippopotamus,  the 
awakened  subject,  however  vaguely  he  saw  the  beast,  would  have  known 
that  it  was  meant  for  a  hippopotamus.  But  the  picture,  vague  as  it  was, 
seemed  to  he  move  communicaljle  from  the  hypnotic  to  the  supraliminal  self 
than  tlie  wt)rd  which  had  originally  generated  it.  A  picture  was  what  had 
been  ordered,  and  a  picture  came. 

3.  I  repeated  this  form  of  experiment  once  more,  telling  P.  that  he  would 
see  a  picture  of  T.  ;  which  he  saw  clearly. 

4.  I  next  determined  to  try  the  effect  of  a  glass  of  water,  arranged  as  a 
speculum,  in  giving  additional  vividness  to  these  post-hypnotic  pictures.  I 
suggested  to  each  young  man  separately  a  different  scene,  and  then  set  them 
to  gaze  into  the  same  glass  of  water,  behind  which  I  placed  a  dark  back- 
ground. T.  had  once  looked  into  ink  :  but  beyond  this  neither  of  them 
knew  anything  of  crystal-gazing,  and  they  were  told  that  they  were  to  see  an 
optical  illusion  of  my  invention.  Tliey  naturally  assumed  that  they  would 
both  equally  see  whatever  there  was  to  be  seen. 

I  told  P.  (hypnotised)  that  the  electric  light  on  the  Eastbourne  Parade 
had  gone  out  on  the  previous  evening,  ljut  had  been  relighted  in  a  few 
minutes. 

I  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  at  Barnuni's  Circus  there  was  a  race  of  jDonies 
with  monkeys  on  their  backs. 

P.,  though  generally  the  better  seer  of  hallucinatory  pictures,  began 
(when  awakened  and  set  before  the  glass  of  water)  by  saying  that  all  was 
quite  black. 

T.  said:  "Look,  tliere's  something  going  round  and  round  in  the 
water  !  " 

P.  :  "  It's  your  fancy  ;  it's  all  dark." 

T.  :  "No,  it's  horses — they're  horses  going  round  and  round — they've 
got  something  small  on  their  backs,  not  so  big  as  those  girls  who  jump 
througli  hoops.    It's  like  a  circus." 

Suddenly  P.  looked  sharply  up  at  me  as  tliough  to  see  what  I  was  doing. 
"What  have  you  done  with  the  light  ?  "  he  said  ;  "you've  made  a  great  ball 
of  light  in  the  glass,  like  a  round  thing  with  alight  in  the  middle  of  it."  He 
did  not  see  the  meaning  of  this  ;  but  it  ajijieared  that  he  had  begun  with 
simply  a  vision  of  darkness,  and  then  had  seen  the  electric  light  rekindled. 
This  was  not  the  way  in  which  I  had  coiiceived  my  picture — (I  had  tliought 
of  the  look  of  the  long  Parade  and  a  line  of  lamps  going  out) — but  it  gave 
the  essential  point. 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  experiment,  as  in  that  of  the  hippopota- 
mus, and  in  most  of  those  that  follow,  neither  jDercipient  recognised  the  full 
meaning  of  the  picture  seen.  The  undistinguished  "small  things  "inT.'s 
picture  were,  of  course,  the  monkeys  of  my  story.  I  shall  recount  later  on 
ijome  attempts  to  make  similar  obscure  details  clear  by  magnification.  Both 

Tlie  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

461 

a  true  and  a  pretended  or  suggested  magnifying-glass  should  be  tried  with 
many  subjects  under  such  conditions  as  these. 

5.  I  next  told  P.  (hypnotised)  the  story  of  Robinson  Crusoe  finding  the 
footprint  and  fearing  savages. 

I  told  T.  tliat  Moses  Primrose  took  a  cow  to  the  fair  and  returned  with 
a  gross  of  green  spectacles,  to  the  derision  of  his  family. 

Awakened  and  set  before  the  glass  of  water,  P.  at  once  exclaimed  ; 
"Why,  there's  Buffalo  Bill  1  He's  dressed  in  feathers,  and  skins  round  him  ; 
almost  like  a  savage.  He's  walking  about  in  a  waste  place."  T.  :  "Is  he 
leading  a  cow  along  ?  "  P.  :  "  No,  no,  he's  all  alone."  T.  :  "  That's  a  cow, 
not  Buffalo  Bill."  P.  :  "I  can  see  something  else  coming  from  another 
part, — it's  a  blackie."  T.  :  "No,  it's  a  sack,  a  sack  on  his  back."  P.  : 
"  Look  at  them  now,  how  they're  arguing  !  Buffalo  Bill  and  his  black  man." 
T.  :  "J  can  see  them  arguing  now — he's  got  into  a  house— tliere's  four  of 
them."  P.  :  "No,  no,  only  two."  T.  :  "No,  four, — look  at  them  roaring  !  " 
((.e.,  with  laughter).  P.  :  "No,  they're  behind  some  trees."  T.  :  "They're 
crying  now." 

Observe  that  in  P.'s  case  the  foutmaric,  which  was  the  point  on  which  I 
liad  chiefly  dwelt,  was  not  observed  ;  althougli  I  suspect,  from  P.'s  insistence 
on  the  long  paclnrj  about  of  his  Buffalo  Bill,  that  the  footmark  was  in  some 
sense  intended  to  form  part  of  the  picture,  although  too  small  to  be  noticed 
by  an  observer  not  aware  of  its  importance.  P.  had  read  Bubinson  Crusoe  ; 
but  Buffalo  Bill  was  plainly  fresher  in  his  memory. 

T.  saw  no  moaning  in  his  story  v/hatever.  He  did  not  know  what  was  in 
the  sack — (a  detail  of  his  own  adding,  as  I  had  not  clearly  conceived  how 
the  spectacles  were  brought  home)— and  he  saw  no  reason  for  the  laughter 
or  weeping.  The  crying  was  added  from  his  hypnotic  self's  own  conception 
of  the  probable  effect  of  such  a  bargain  upon  the  family,  after  their  first 
amusement.    T.  had  never  read  the  Vicar  of  Wa'l:cfield. 

6.  Observing  the  attempts  made  by  the  two  seers  to  harmonise  these 
divergent  stories,  I  chose  tv/o  scenes  which  liad  a  certain  similarity,  to  see 
Avhether  either  seer  would  be  able  to  persuade  the  other  to  accept  his  version 
of  what  was  going  on. 

I  told  P.  briefly  that  Banquo's  ghost  had  appeared  to  Macbeth,  his 
murderer,  as  he  sat  with  warriors  and  nobles  round  him  at  a  feast. 

I  told  T.  (what  he  already  knew  to  have  happened)  that  at  the  North 
Kilkenny  election  Mr.  Parnell,'  while  addressing  tlie  crowd,  received  a  bag 
of  lime  in  his  face  from  a  political  opponent.  Thus  each  scene  had  its 
central  and  commanding  figure  ;  I  wished  to  see  if  the  two  could  be 
combined. 

P.  :  "I  see  two  or  three  men  standing — some  sitting — one  in  a  chair 
on  a  raised  place,  like  where  the  head  man  sits.  That's  the  Mayor,  I  sup- 
jjose."  [P.  is  more  familiar  with  municipal  government  than  with  militaiy 
or  Imperial  rule.] 

T.  :  "  ^^^^y,  there  are  a  whole  lot  of  men — a  town — a  lot  of  cars — not 
like  our  carriages." 

P.  (with  a  loud  whistle):  "  Oh,  here  he  comes,  the  bogey -man!' 
(apparently  quoting  a  song). 

462 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

T.  :  "There  he  is  standing  up  in  the  middle  of  them; — I've  seen  the 
man  at  Brighton." 

P.  :  "Look  at  that  chap  in  the  corner  !  isn't  he  frightened  of  liim  ?  The- 
Mayor's  quite  uj^set." 

T.  :  "I  know  the  man  well  enough  ;  he  has  a  beard — about  my  height. 
I've  seen  him  walk  up  and  down  the  front  (the  Parade)  with  two  dogs  after 
him." 

P.  :  ''Htisaghost!" 

T.  :  "  He's  no  ghost,  I  say  ;  he's  talking  to  them  ;  look  at  that  stuff  all 
gone  into  his  face  ;  now  three  or  fijur  men  are  up  talking  ;  they've  got 
some  sticks — there's  a  row." 

P.  (imitating  conventional  ghostly  action):  "Look  at  him  1  They  all 
stick  their  swords  through  him — it  doesn't  hurt  him  ;  he's  a  ghost  !  " 

T.  :  "Nonsense  ;  how  can  he  be  a  ghost  ?  I  tell  you  I've  spoken  to  him 
in  the  [telegraph]  office  ;  he's  a  man  anyone  would  remember — a  stand-ofF 
man.  He's  all  white  now  ;  they're  all  running."  "  Was  his  name  Parnell  ?  " 
I  asked.  "Yes,  yes,"  said  T.,  "Parnell,  of  course."  Here  also,  it  will  be 
observed,  as  in  the  case  of  the  hij^popotamus,  it  was  the  picture  framed  by 
the  percipient's  subliminal  self,  not  the  mere  name  as  uttered  by  me,  which 
was  transmitted  to  his  supraliminal  consciousness. 

These  scenes  excited  the  seers  ;  and  there  was  some  absurdity  in  their 
endeavours  to  imitate,  and  to  conciliate,  the  attitudes  of  hovering  ghost  and 
impassioned  orator. 

7.  March  2(ith,  1891.    Ma<jn  !fication. 

I  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  he  would  see  in  the  crystal  (a  real  one)  a  play- 
bill of  Jacl:  SlwpparJ,  which  had  recently  been  acted  in  Brighton,  the 
large  print  distinct,  but  not  the  small  j^rint.  Awakened,  he  saw  a  girl  in 
man's  clothes — something  like  knickerbockers— could  make  out  J  C  K  T  H. 
On  looking  through  a  (real)  magnifying-glass  he  easily  read  JACK  SHEP- 
PARD,  THEATRE  ROYAL,  and  recognised  that  the  knickerbockers  were 
jack -boots.  He  said  tliat  the  letters  jjersisted,  but  were  clearer  when  the 
magnifier  was  applied  to  the  crystal.  The  picture  seen  was  remembered 
from  an  actual  poster. 

8.  Forgotten  Memories. — T.  was  told  (same  conditions)  that  he  would  see 
scenes  of  his  past  life.  He  was  greatly  interested  by  seeing  a  number  of  old 
schoolfellows  sitting  in  liis  old  sclmol  ;  some  whom  he  could  not  identify  ; 
.some  of  whom  he  had  scarcely  thought  since  he  left  school.  On  being  re- 
hypnotised  lie  did  not  remember  seeing  these  pictures— only  remembered 
my  talking  to  him  about  his  boyliood.  We  could  not  therefore  get  the 
hypnotic  self  to  identify  tlie  unknown  boys. 

9.  Mcerclh  27th.  Test  of  disaj^peai-ance  from  waking  memory  of  words 
spoken  to  hypnotised  subject. — I  offered  each  subject  £10  if  he  could  explain 
to  me  the  next  picture  which  he  saw.  It  was  plainly  necessary  to  choose 
some  scenes  whose  meaning  they  could  not  gi'.ess,  if  my  description,  given 
to  them  when  hypnotised,  was  forgotten  on  awaking.  I  told  P.  of  the 
Pindingof  Brynhild,  and  T.  of  the  Nil)lungs'  Need.  Each  saw  his  picture 
well,  (Greyfell,  the  flickering  flame-wall,  the  Sleejjful  Thorn,  i*tc.,)  but  was 
completely  puzzled  as  to  its  meaning. 

The  Siihliminal  Consciousness. 

463 

10.  March  28th.  Marjnifimtwn.—l  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  -n-heu 
awakened  he  would  see  a  telegraph  form  (he  is  a  telegrajihist)  in  a  glass  of 
water  ;  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  make  out  the  words,  but  only  to  count 
them  ;  then  witli  a  inagnifier  would  inake  them  out.  Awakened,  he  saw  a 
telegraph  form  so  bent  tliat  he  could  only  see  a  fragment  of  a  message,  con- 
taining seven  words  wliich  he  could  not  read.  Looking  in  tlie  glass  he  made 
out  "Met — B'ton  (abbreviation  used  for  Brighton) — Hotel — come."  We 
cannot  say  whether  a  coherent  message  in  any  sense  underlay  this  frag 
mentary  attempt  at  communication. 

11.  I  now  resolved  to  supply  the  message  myself  (same  conditions),  and 
told  him  that  he  would  be  able  to  see  tlie  lengths  of  the  words  with  the  naked 
eye,  and  to  read  them  with  the  magnifier.  The  telegram  was  to  be  [To} 
"  Myers,  Cambridge — Oxford  won  by  half  a  length.  Harris."  With  tho 
naked  eye  he  could  see  that  there  were  only  two  words  in  the  address,  the 
second  rather  long.  With  the  magnifier  he  gradually  picked  out  letters 
here  and  there — saw  tlie  capital  letters  right,  partly  saw  and  partly  guessed 
my  name — could  not  make  out  the  message.  Experiments  such  as  this 
show,  I  think,  that  there  is  some  ajjpropriatensss  in  speaking  of  messages 
or  cormnv'ibications  from  one  to  another  stratum  of  the  Self.  Judging  from 
the  analogy  of  many  other  post-Iiypnotic  suggestions  with  the  same  subject, 
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  whole  of  this  simple  telegram  was  remembered 
by  the  hypnotic  self,  and  could  have  been  reproduced  in  obedience  to  a  direct 
order.  But  the  order  was  to  rein-oduce  it  with  a  certain  degree  of  obscurity  ; 
and  that  obscurity  turned  out  to  be  slightly  greater  than  the  magnifying-glas.s 
(liowever  acting)  could  overcome.  The  suggestion  was  thus  sliglitly  too  com- 
plex ;  but,  although  never  fully  delivered,  the  "inter-state  "  or  "methectic  " 
message — call  it  as  you  will,  but  let  us  have  some  name  for  it — was  ready 
made  up,  and  waiting  to  be  transmitted  from  the  hypnotic  to  the  supra- 
liminal self. 

12.  The  experiments  thus  far  described,  although  presenting  some  novel 
points,  have  been  such  as  any  observer  with  good  hypnotic  subjects  at  hi.'* 
disposal  will  probably  be  able  to  rejjeat.  Those  to  which  I  now  come  involve 
the  rarer  phenomenon  of  thought-transference,  which  cannot  be  guaranteed 
in  the  case  of  any  hypnotic  subject,  although  it  would  doubtless  be  often er 
found  if  it  were  oftener  looked  for.  The  evidence  for  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith's 
power  of  transmitting  ideas,  without  the  use  of  ordinary  means,  to  the  minds 
of  these  and  other  subjects  has  been  so  often  discussed  in  these  Proceedinrjs 
that  I  need  liere  only  remark  that  in  all  these  experiments  a  close  watch 
was  kept  by  Dr.  Dill  or  myself,  or  both  of  us,  to  guard  against  indications 
(which,  of  course,  may  be  quite  involuntarily  given),  while  at  the  same  time 
the  picture  to  be  discerned  in  the  crystal  involved  conceptions  more  com- 
plicated than  a  jnere  card-name  or  number.  I  omit  the  first  of  these  ex- 
periments, which  was  successful,  but  during  which  I  left  the  room  to  speak 
to  Dr.  J.  Gordon  Dill,  a  phy,sician  who  had  previously  assisted  in  similar 
experiments,  and  who  kindly  consented  to  Iielp  me  in  these,  in  which  it  is 
naturally  desirable  to  have  two  observers .  In  each  case  Dr.  Dill  or  I  wrote 
down  the  desired  picture  carefully  on  a  piece  of  paper  out  of  sight  of  tlie 
subject  and  showed  it  to  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  while  the  subject  was  entranced 
(in  the  last  two  experijnents  after  he  was  awakened).    Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  theu 

'464 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

stood  at  some  distanco  from  the  percipient,  and  out  of  his  sight,  wliile  the 
percipient  fixed  h.is  eyes  on  the  glass  of  water,  and  made  remarks  to  which 
(unless  otherwise  stated)  no  one  replied.  Dr.  Dill  watched  Mr.  Smith,  and  I 
watched  the  percipient,  or  vice  versa.  Such  precautions  imply  no  distrust  of 
either  agent  or  percipient,  but  should  be  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  in  all 
expei'iments  of  this  kind.  Were  I  myself  acting  as  agent  I  should  prefer  to 
be  watched,  since  no  one  can  be  absolutely  certain  as  to  wliat  sounds  or 
movements  he  may  unconsciously  make.  If  it  is  once  for  all  assumed  that 
the  human  organism,  when  used  in  experiments  which  do  not  in  themselves 
present  any  means  of  eliminating  the  "  jjersonal  equation,"  needs  some  other 
eye  to  guard  against  possible  idiosyncrasies  which  may  confuse  the  experi- 
ments, then  such  supervision  may  be  submitted  to  with  no  more  sense  of 
discredit  than  the  astronomer  feels  when  his  individual  observations  are 
accepted  not  as  absolute  truth,  but  as  data  to  be  corrected  in  a  special  recog- 
nised way.  I  wrote  down  "  Two  cats  fighting,"  and  showed  the  paper  care- 
fully to  Dr.  Dill  and  Mr.  Smith  -whom  T  will  call  D.  and  S.  T.  (in  waking 
state)  at  once  saw  "two  cats — both  with  their  backs  up — fighting,  one  black 
and  striped,  the  other  with  patches  of  white."  "Where  are  the  cats?" 
"On  a  wall."  S.  had  mentally  reproduced  a  pictm-e  of  two  cats  fighting, 
done  in  whitewash  on  a  v/all — so  tliat  his  cats  were  both  white.  During 
this  experiment  D.  left  the  room  for  a  few  minutes  :  I  watched  T.,  whose 
eyes,  as  I  believe,  never  left  the  glass  of  water. 

13.  Next  time  both  subjects  (hypnotised  and  awakened  as  usual)  were  to 
see  in  the  same  water-glass  the  same  theme,  written  down  by  D.  and  shown  to 
S.  and  myself  :  "Boat  putting  off  from  beach."  P.  sav/  nothing.  T.  saw  "A 
room  cleared  for  dancing,  the  gas-branches  wreathed  with  flowers."  This 
appeared  to  be  a  deferred  picture  belonging  to  a  previous  series.  He  had 
been  told,  in  an  experiment  which  T  have  omitted,  to  see  four  scenes  of  his 
past  life,  at  different  ages.  He  had  seen  three,  and  this  scene  was  probably 
enough  the  fourth,  which  was  to  be  typical  of  his  adolescence.  At  any  rate, 
be  was  simpljf  hyjjnotised  again,  and  again  awakened  (D.  and  I  watching 
throughout}.  On  reawaking  he  said  :  "  There  are  Ijoats — several  steamers  and 
two  boats  rowing  in  front,  like  a  picture  of  a  boat-race  in  the  Graphic.'' 
This  was  an  approximation  to  the  desired  picture. 

14.  In  the  next  experiment  (same  conditions)  the  theme,  written  down  by 
me,  which  S.  was  mentally  to  suggest,  was  "  acrobats  swinging  from  trapeze." 
Neither  P.  nor  T.  saw  anything  at  first.  They  were  rehypnotised  and  re- 
awakened. P.  sees  a  man.  T.  sees  nothing.  P.  :  "He  has  got  something  round 
on  his  hand  like  a  sailor  with  a  life-buoy,  and  a  rope  hanging  from  his  hand." 
T.  :  "I  imagine  that  I  see  the  same  thing."  P.  :  "  I  believe  he's  standing  on  a 
Yessel — on  the  deck  of  a  boat — now  he's  still  there  but  the  vessel's  gone — you 
can  only  see  his  feet  and  nuthing  beneath  him."  T.  :  "He  looks  to  me  like 
a  half -photograph."  T.  then  had  to  leave.  We  told  P.  to  put  liimself  into 
the  man's  attitude.  The  pose  assumed  was  just  that  of  a  man  who  lias  lifted 
himself  half  over  his  trapeze,  the  rope  which  P.  saw  being  across  his  body, 
just  about  where  the  trapeze's  scat  (of  rope  or  wood)  would  come.  Such  a 
picture  would  also  correspond  to  T.'s  "  half  [length]  photograph." 

15.  Same  conditions.  I  chose  the  subject,  "  a  house  on  fire."  This  time 
both  D.  and  I  watched  P  and  S.,  who  stood  behind  P.  (of  course  not  in  con- 

The 

Suhliminal 

Consciousness. 

465 

tact),  looking  at  the  lamp,  and  imagining  (as  he  afterwards  told  us)  a  great 
square  of  flame.  P.  :  "I  see  something  like  a  bright  light ;  there's  a  ladder 
up  at  the  window — a  liouse  on  fire — no  doubt  about  it." 

16.  Same  conditions.  Subject  written  down  by  D.  :  "Mr.  Gladstone."  P.  : 
"  I  think  I  see  something  like  a  man — a  man's  head — comes  and  goes  in  a 
tiash.  I  know,  it's  Gladstone,  a  photograpl> — head  and  shoulders."  Here  I 
had  to  leave,  but  Dr.  Dill  continued  the  experiments.  I  now  quote  his 
account.  Mrs.  G.  A.  Smith  was  now  present,  but  was  not  informed  of  the 
scene. 

17.  [Same  conditions.]  "Jack  the  Ripper  committing  a  murder." 
[Subject  written  down  by  D.]  P.  :  "I  can  see  something  now — it's  a  man — 
rather  faint.  Very  awful-looking  man.  Nothing  like  Gladstone.  Repulsive 
and  dirty  looking.  Has  something  in  his  liand — it's  a  knife.  Good  gracious  ! 
vvhat  a  terrible  looking  man — in  rags — witli  his  hat  coming  over  his  eyes — 
looks  like  a  murderer."  D.  :  "Is  anyone  with  him?"  P.  :  "No,  he's 
alone."  Presently:  "Yes,  he  is  talking  to  someone — another  man.  No, 
it's  a  woman."    [A  few  more  details  are  seen  and  P.  recognises  the  murderer.] 

18.  Same  conditions.  "  St.  George  and  the  Dragon."  P.:  "  Oh  I  can  see 
what  that  is — it's  a  picture  of  St.  George  and  the  Dragon.  The  usual  picture. 
Not  moving,  simply  a  picture." 

19.  Here  P.,  as  D.  tells  me  in  a  letter,  became  anxious  to  go  oft  to  catch 
a  train,  a  preoccupation  which  generally  interfered  with  success.  On  this 
and  the  next  occasion  S.  was  not  shown  the  theme  vuati]  aff-er  P.  had  been 
awakened.  [He  was  hypnotised,  as  already  stated,  between  each  experiment.] 
Subject:  "A  pantomime — clown  and  policeman  on  stage.  P.  .  'I  see 
something  like  a  lion,  I  think.  Can't  tell  what  it  is  till  it  comes  closer.  Quite 
gone.  Saw  something  like  a  man  in  a  wliite  hat — gone — looks  like  one 
of  the  circus  clowns — very  smudgy,  with  a  mist  in  front  of  it."  Then 
about  15  minutes  during  wiiich  he  saw  nothing.  Then  "  Tlie  clov\-n  again  1 
but  I  lose  sight  of  Iiim  wlien  he  moves." 

20.  Subject:  "  A  photograph  of  Mr.  Myers."  [This  time  S.  opened  and 
read  the  pajDer  designating  the  desired  jjicture  downstairs,  and  did  not  enter 
the  room.    P.  saw  the  beach — boats — nothing.] 

XI. — I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  record  these  experiments  at 
some  length,  because  they  seem  to  me  to  illustrate  the  gradual  transition 
between  the  common  forms  of  post-hypnotic  hallucination,  which, 
however  surprising  at  first,  are  now  undisputed,  and  the  crystal-vision 
which  I  am  anxious  to  pi'esent  as  no  "  occult  practice  "  or  sujoerstitious 
fancy,  but  as  the  empirical  development  of  jjrocesses  more  familiar  but 
quite  equally  empirical. 

But,  indeed,  as  with  automatic  script,  so  here  also  we  shall  soon 
find  that  hypnotic  experiments  of  this  kind  are  not  necessary  in 
order  to  convince  us  that  the  crystal-pictures  are,  in  their  own 
sense,  a  reality.  Quite  apart  from  the  vcridicality  of  some  of 
them  ; — the  intrinsic  evidence  which  they  contain  of  knowledge 
outside  the  experimenter's  ordinary  knowledge  ; — they  occur  to  a  greater 
or  less  extent  with  so  many  persons  of  sanity  and  jDrobity  that  we  can 

436 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

no  more  doubt  their  existence  than  we  can  doubt  the  existence  of  the 
aUied  i^henomena  of  hypnagogic  hallucinations  or  coloured  audition, 
already  discussed. 

The  feature  in  the  al:)0ve  experiments  for  which  corroborative  paral- 
lels are  most  needed  is,  of  course,  the  telepathic  transference  of  the 
pictures  directly  from  one  mind  to  another.  On  this  point  (with  which 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson  are  dealing  in  this  part  of  the  Pro- 
ceedings) I  may  refer  my  reader  to  two  papers  by  Dr.  Gibotteau  (a 
French  physician,  formerly  interne  at  a  Paris  hospital,  and  now  prac- 
tising at  Biarritz,)  published  in  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Fsychiques  for 
October  and  December,  1892.  The  whole  paper  should  be  studied,  but 
I  can  here  quote  only  a  few  experiments  (made  in  1888)  which  resemble, 
and  in  some  ways  surpass  in  interest,  those  which  I  have  just  detailed. 

1.  I  begin  with  the  telepathic  transference  of  a  picture  resembling  the 
transferred  picture  of  the  electric  light  at  Eastbourne,  mentioned  above.  But 
ill  Dr.  Gibotteau's  case  the  agent  was  some  half-mile  or  so  distant  from  the 
percipient,  who  was  Dr.  Giliotteau  himself.  This  "  agent "  was  a  woman 
employed  in  the  creche  of  the  hospital  to  which  Dr.  Gibotteau  was  attaclied, 
but  herself  in  good  health  and  of  tall  and  vigorous  build  ; — wi  type  cle 
cuisiiiiere.  (She  has  since  died  of  consumption.)  She  was  remarkable  as 
being  at  once  herself  extremely  suggestible,-— so  that,  for  instance,  Drs.  Gibot- 
teau and  Houeix  produced  on  her  a  blister  by  suggestion  in  twenty-four 
liours, — and  also  extremely  capable  of  conveying  suggestions  toothers.  Dr. 
Gibotteau,  although  not  himself  easily  thus  influenced,  received  from  her 
many  motor  and  emotional  and  a  few  visual  suggestions.  It  is  with  one  of 
these  last  that  we  have  now  to  deal. 

"I  am  a  sound  sleejier,  and  I  never  remember  having  awoke  spon- 
taneously in  the  middle  of  my  sleep.  But  one  night,  abovit  two  or  three 
o'clock,  I  was  suddenly  aroused.  Before  I  opened  my  eyes  I  thought,  '  This 
is  some  trick  of  B.  's  !  What  is  she  meaning  to  make  me  see  1 '  I  then 
Ljoked  at  the  wall  in  front  of  me,  and  saw  a  round,  luminous  tract,  and  in 
the  middle  a  brilliant  object,  of  the  size  of  a  melon,  which  I  gazed  at  for 
several  seconds,  being  fully  awake  before  it  disappeared.  I  could  not  dis- 
tinguish any  clear  shape,  or  any  detail ;  but  the  object  was  rounded,  and 
tliere  seemed  to  be  parts  less  luminous  than  the  rest.  I  fancied  that  she  had 
meant  to  show  me  a  skull,  but  I  could  not  recognise  one.  Tliat  part  of  the 
wall  was  illuminated  as  it  would  have  been  by  a  jiowerful  lamp.  The  room 
was  not  absolutely  dark,  since  there  were  no  shutters  and  the  window  cur- 
tains were  not  drawn.  But  no  light  seemed  to  be  diflused  by  this  bright 
object  outside  that  area  on  the  wall  of  which  it  occupied  tlie  centre.  That 
was  all.  I  waited  for  a  moment  and  saw  nothing  else  ;  then  I  fell  sound 
asleep  again.  Next  day  I  met  Barthe  at  the  hospital,  and  I  questioned  her 
witli  due  precaution.  She  had  endeavoured  to  make  me  see  dogs  round  my 
bed  ;  then  men  quarrelling,  and  finally  a  lantern.  The  two  first  attempts 
had  failed  ;  the  third  had  succeeded  perfectly." 

2.  Equally  interesting,  in  the  case  of  an  agent  so  often  successful  as  Dr. 
Gibotteau's  paper  shows  Berthe  to  have  been,  are  tlie  cases  of  more  or  less 

The 

Siihliminal 

Coriseiotisness. 

467 

abortive  hallucination  apparently  clue  to  her  effort  from  a  distance.  "  One 
summer  evening,"  says  Dr.  Gibotteau,  "at  about  8  jj.m.,  T  was  expecting 
Berthe  at  my  lodgings.  I  stood  on  the  balcony,  looking  into  the  street. 
For  some  minutes  past  I  had  strongly  felt  her  j^resence,  and  I  supposed  that 
she  was  probably  lingering  somewhere  near  at  hand.  Then  I  saw,  passing 
across  the  wall  behind  me,  a  white  reflection  [nji  reflet  blanc — what  another 
informant  has  called  "a  bright  shadow  "].  Tlie  I'eflection  from  the  sun  on  a 
■window  wliich  is  being  moved  would  imitate  what  I  saw  ;  but  tliere  was  neither 
sun,  nor  moon,  nor  lighted  lamps,  for  it  was  still  daylight.  I  strongly  felt 
Berthe's  influence.  Almost  immediately  I  thought  that  I  heard  in  the  room 
behind  me  one  or  two  sharp  little  cries,  like  those  of  a  mouse.  Berthe 
arrived  almost  at  once  ;  and,  (j^uestioned  with  due  precaution,  told  me  that 
she  had  just  attempted  to  show  herself  to  me  on  the  balcony,  and  then  to 
make  me  hear  cries  like  those  of  her  baby,  a  child  a  few  months  old." 

3.  Dr.  Gibotteau,  I  need  not  say,  does  not  depend  upon  this  coincidence 
as  a  proof  of  Berthe's  powers  ;  but  assuming  those  powers  as  sufficiently 
23roved  by  the  many  more  definite  successes  of  which  Dr.  G.  speaks,  it  is 
interesting  to  trace  the  parallelism  between  the  stages  of  decreasing  vivid- 
aiess  in  experimental  and  in  spontaneous  hallucinations.  Tlie  following 
instance  of  actual  failure  of  an  intended  hallucination — reduced  to  mere 
emotional  disturbance  without  visual  image — will  remind  the  reader  of 
various  cases  of  vague  fear  and  depression  felt  at  the  time  of  a  friend's 
death,  with  no  sensory  phantasm.  "One  night,"  says  Dr.  Gibotteau,  "I 
returned  home  at  midnight.  On  the  landing,  as  I  turned  the  handle  of  the 
tloor,  I  said  to  myself,  '  What  a  bore  1  Here  is  some  other  trick  of  Berthe's. 
She  is  going  to  make  me  see  something  horrible  in  the  passage  ; — it's  very 
disagreeable  ! '  In  a  nervous  state  I  opened  the  door  with  my  eyes  shut, 
and  seized  a  match.  In  a  few  minutes  I  was  in  bed  ;  blew  out  the  light, 
and  put  my  liead  under  the  bedclothes,  like  a  child.  Next  day  Berthe 
asked  me  wliether  I  had  not  seen  in  my  passage  or  bedroom  a  skeleton  which 
had  greatly  frightened  me.  I  need  not  say  that  a  skeleton  was  the  last 
thing  in  the  world  likely  to  terrify  me  ; — and  frankly  I  do  not  think  tliat  in 
cold  blood  I  am  a  greater  coward  than  my  neighbours." 

4.  There  will  be  more  to  add  as  to  the  transference  of  emotional  states 
when  we  deal  with  motor  messages.  Meantime  the  last  case  of  Berthe's 
"agency"  wliich  I  will  now  give  is  one  where  the  intended  transfer 
absolutely  failed  ;  but  with  a  concomitant  result  curiously  illustrating  the 
views  as  to  the  subliminal  activity  involved  in  such  transference  on  which  I 
have  already  insisted. 

"  One  day,"  says  Dr.  Gibotteau,  "when  we  wereawaiting  Berthe's  arrival, 
for  some  experiments,  she  came  in  in  a  state  of  terror.  '  Oh,  I  have  liad 
such  a  fright  !  I  will  never  do  it  again  I  I  am  sure  that  you  have  seen 
nothing.'  And  she  told  us  that  at  the  foot  of  the  staircase  she  had  endea- 
voured to  transmit  to  me  a  hallucination, — to  make  me  see  a  death's  head. 
'  I  tried,  I  tried,  but  you  would  not  see  anything.  Then  it  came  back 
against  me.  I  saw  it  in  the  staircase.  Oh,  what  a  fright  it  gave  me  1  '  The 
impression  made  upon  her  had  really  been  very  strong.  According  to 
Berthe's  explanation  :  '  When  one  works  very  hard  to  make  someone  see  a 
figure  and  he  keeps  it  off,  the  figure  conies  back  against  oneself,  just  as  if 

468 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

someone  else  had  sent  it  to  one.'  I  should  interpret  this  incident  as  follows: 
A  hallucination  transmitted  to  me  is  the  result  of  a  series  of  successive  efforts, 
each  of  -which  transmits  itself  in  turn  to  the  unconscious  strata  of  my  mind, 
until  their  sum  has  attained  the  intensity  necessary  to  cause  the  image  to 
emerge  into  the  conscious  stratum.  At  other  times  the  threshold  of  con- 
sciousness is  not  reached.  The  force  is  transmitted,  but  it  remains  unutilised 
in  the  unconscious  strata.  [In  certain  cases]  the  sensation  accumulates  in 
the  unconsci(jus  strata  of  tlie  agent  himself,  which  thus  gradually  become 
overcharged,  until  the  image  emerges  in  the  form  of  a  sjjontaneous  hallu- 
cination. The  mechanism  of  some  other  spontaneous  hallucinations,  those  of 
the  insane  especially,  is  probably  much  the  same  ;  depending  upon  the  sub- 
conscious accumulation  of  a  series  of  identical  and  successive  images  evoked 
by  voluntary  reverie." 

5.  I  will  conclude  these  citations  witli  a  striking  series  of  exjjeriments  in 
which  Dr.  Gibotteau  was  liiuiself  tlie  agent,  the  percipient  being  a  head 
nurse  at  his  hospital  ; — a  nervous  subject  over  whom  he  gradually  gained 
great  power,  without  emjiloying  hyjjnotism.  It  will  be  seen  that  these 
experiments  form  a  close  parallel  to  the  Brighton  series  already  given, 
except  that  Dr.  Gibotteau's  subject  was  far  more  rapidly  receptive,  and 
developed  the  transmitted  pictures  without  the  use  of  a  speculum  of  any 
kind. 

"During  the  wliole  sitting  Mme.  R.  remained  seated  on  a  sofa  at  about 
a  yard  from  where  I  sat  on  ;in  armchair  at  right  angles  to  her.  A  small 
table  stood  before  her.  She  at  once  lialf  closed  her  eyes,  and  her  look 
became  somewliat  vacant,  but  there  was  no  change  in  her  voice,  no  subse- 
quent awakening,  no  interruption  of  memory,  so  that  her  state  cannot  be 
said  to  have  been  one  of  sleep.  I  did  not  take  her  hand  (which  I  had  some- 
times previously  done)  at  any  point  during  these  experiments.  I  began  by 
giving  her  hallucinations  as  to  the  objects  on  the  table  before  her.  I  am 
not  myself  a  good  visualiser  ;  but  after  looking  at  the  real  objects  I  shut  my 
eyes,  called  up  a  mental  image  of  one  of  the  objects,  and  modified  it 
according  to  my  fancy.  As  the  subject's  eyes  were  closed,  I  think  that  for 
her,  as  for  me,  it  was  the  mental  image  ratlier  than  the  real  image  of  the 
object  which  underwent  change.  Hallucination  is  therefore  perhaps  too 
strong  a  word  to  apply  to  the  results  produced.  It  was  only  at  the  end  of 
the  three  hours'  sitting  that  Mnie.  R.  ceased  to  be  able  to  distinguish 
between  my  suggested  pictures  and  tlie  realities  round  her.  Up  till  then 
slie  understood  the  true  nature  of  the  phantasmal  pictures  ;  but  nevertheless, 
when  they  were  of  a  terrible  kind,  she  became  alarmed  and  begged  me  to 
.stop. 

"  A  large  inkstand  with,  a  sj^ring  was  en  the  table.  She  saw  it  move  first 
to  the  right,  then  to  the  left,  to  tlie  edge  of  the  table  ;  move  about  irregularly  ; 
open  briskly  as  though  by  jjressxire  on  the  spring  ;  ujjset  and  sjiill  the  ink  ; 
then  lastly  it  opened  and  a  small  snake  came  out  of  it. 

"  I  then  determined,  mentally,  to  suppress  the  inkstand,  and  to  see  only 
the  table-cover.  Tliesiiccess  was  immediate  ;  the  inkstand  disappeared  from 
Mme.  R.'s  view,  and  continued  absent  as  long  as  I  cliose. 

"In  front  of  the  firejilace  there  lay  a  large  piece  of  brown  packing-paper, 
which  kept  the  sliape  of  the  parcel  which  it  had  covered  and  left  a  hollow 

The  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

469 

Tinder  it.  This  paper  took  to  undulating  and  rising,  and  from  underneath 
it  came  a  guiiiea-pig  and  several  rabbits.  I  imagined  one  of  these  rabbits  as 
white  ;  then  the  fancy  took  me  to  add  a  few  patches  of  colour.  'Ha,'  said 
she,  'a  white  rabbit  I — no,  it  has  a  brown  or  yellow  ear.'  An  enormous 
serpent  succeeded  to  the  rabbit.  First  it  was  coiled  up  under  the  paper,  then 
it  uncoiled  itself  and  appeared  in  front  of  the  table,  to  the  terror  of  Mme. 
R.  I  cannot  remember  whether  I  succeeded  in  making  the  serpent  hiss,  as 
I  tried  to  do. 

' '  Then  I  attempted  larger  animals.  Near  the  door  of  the  room  I  made  her 
see  a  bay  laorse,  tlien  a  white  one,  then  a  lion  (which  she  guessed  rather  than 
saw,  for  I  imagined  it  very  imperfectly),  then  a  bear  .  .  .  which  took  my 
place  in  the  armchair.  Sometimes  I  displaced  myself  in  imagination,  and  I 
saw  the  armchair  with  a  great  brown  bear  sitting  in  my  place  ;  sometimes  I 
tried  to  transform  myself  into  the  animal,  seeing  its  paws  in  the  place  of  my 
arms,  &c.  These  two  methods  are  quite  distinct  ;  the  second—a  direct  trans- 
formation—seemed to  me  the  easier  of  the  two.  I  put  successively  in  my 
place  a  dog  (very  well  seen),  a  horse  (rearing  where  the  armchair  stood),  and 
a  lion  (which  was  still  imperfectly  evoked).  Then  I  imagined  the  armchair 
empty ;  and  Mme.  R.  cried  :  '  Where  are  you  ?  you  are  no  longer  in  the 
armchair  ;  it  frightens  me.'  I  tried  this  illusion  repeatedly,  alternating  it 
with  the  animals  ;  and  there  was  never  any  mistake.  '  I  do  not  see  you 
disappear  suddenly  :  but  in  your  place  there  is  a  kind  of  raist,  wlaicli  rapidly 
shrinks,  and  when  it  is  gone  the  armchair  is  empty.'  I  profited  by  this 
hint  ;  and  I  found  it  more  effective  and  less  fatiguing  to  imagine  in  my  place 
a  grey  fog  which  dissolved  from  tlie  circumference  to  the  centre.  I  much 
regret  that  I  did  not  try  to  show  myself  in  anotlier  part  of  the  room,  leaving 
empty  the  armchair  v,-here  I  was  really  sitting. 

"At  about  nddnight  I  put  an  end  to  the  sitting,  which  had  lasted  nearly 
three  horu-s,  and  I  accompanied  my  subject  to  her  home.  My  influence  over 
her  had  not  diminislied,  and  all  along  the  street  she  saw,  as  I  chose,  lamps 
falling  on  her  from  the  lamp-posts,  heaps  of  stones  which  obliged  her  to  quit 
the  footpath,  houses  tottering,  windows  opening,  and  mattresses  .or  men 
falling  out  of  them.  All  these  images  were  very  fugitive.  I  passed  rapidly 
from  one  to  another,  but  I  always  succeeded. 

'"I  have  never  again  succeeded  in  obtaining  results  so  remarkable  either 
with  Mme.  R.  (over  whom  I  soon  lost  power)  or  with  any  other  subject.  I 
must  have  transferred  some  four  hundred  or  five  hundred  images,  of  which 
very  few  failed.  ...  I  need  hardly  say  tliat  I  gave  no  opportunity  of 
guessing  what  I  wished  to  be  seen.  Mme.  R.  had  never,  I  believe,  taken 
part  in  any  similar  experiments  ;  and  in  point  of  fact  the  very  notion  of 
most  of  these  came  to  me  as  I  perceived  that  my  first  attempts  succeeded. 
I  had  no  written  notes  or  scheme  of  the  sitting.  It  is  unfortunate  that  I 
was  alone  ;  but  I  doubt  whether  I  should  have  succeeded  in  the  presence  of 
others.  I  am  sure  that  tlie  details  have  been  faithfully  preserved  in  my 
memory.  I  will  try  and  procure  an  independent  account  from  Mme.  R. 
[Mme.  R.  had  since  remarried,  and  Dr.  G.  has  lost  sight  of  her.] 

"I  ought  to  add  that  next  day  I  found  myself  extremely  fatigued  ;  almost 
as  if  I  had  passed  several  nights  without  sleep.  No  other  sitting  has  ever 
exhausted  me  to  a  like  degree." 

470 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

XII. — The  subject  of  these  singularly  successful  experiments, 
although  a  surveillante  in  the  Parisian  hospital  where  Dr.  Gibotteau  was 
then  interne,  was  herself  decidedly  hystei'ical.  The  young  men,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  whom  the  Brighton  experiments  were  made,  are 
strong  and  healthy  ; — T.,  indeed,  i-anking  as  a  formidable  boxer.  This 
contrast  suggests  a  point  of  controversy  between  M.  Janet  and  myself 
which  has  both  theoretical  and  practical  importance,  and  which 
I  am  the  more  concerned  to  deal  with  as  M.  Janet  has  l^een  the  lirst 
foreign  savant  to  take  up  the  study  of  these  automatisms,  sensory  and 
motor,  to  which  attention  was  called  hy  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  and 
myself,  and  has  performed  experiments  of  great  interest  first  with 
.automatic  script  and  now  with  crystal-gazing.  Those  experiments 
liave  amply  confirmed  the  real  existence  and  real  importance  of  these 
modes  of  suljliminal  manifestation,  at  a  time  when  few  persons  are  in 
&  position  either  to  confirm  or  to  contest  them  from  any  personal  experi- 
ence. M.  Janet  has  experimented  solely  with  patients  known  to 
be  hysterical,  and  generally  under  conditions  which  allowed  him  full 
and  prolonged  opportunities  of  observation  and  control.  He  has 
therefore  made  a  very  complete  analysis  of  some  very  exceptional  cases, 
while  I  have  surveyed  a  wider  field  in  less  detail.  His  results  are  not 
inconsistent  with  my  own,  and  have  specially  brought  out  the 
existence  of  a  suljliminal  memory  more  complete  than  the  supraliminal, 
which  is  one  of  the  points  most  essential  to  my  own  general  argument. 

But  M.  Janet  regards  all  such  automatisms  as  indications  of  a 
"  disintegration  of  personality  "  which  is  necessarily  a  morbid  thing. 
Any  sj^lit,  in  his  view,  must  be  a  weakening ;  any  part  of  memory  or 
perception  or  faculty  which  is  separated  off  from  the  ordinary  waking 
consciousness  must  leave  that  consciousness  by  so  much  the  j^oorer.  In 
support  of  this  view,  if  I  mistake  not,  he  would  urge  that  in  all  the  cases 
of  automatism  which  he  has  himself  investigated  there  has  been  a  more 
or  less  conspicuous  tendency  to  hysteria.  The  automatism,  he  would  add, 
has  sometimes  disappeai'ed  with  the  hysteria.  And  to  meet  the  obvious 
rejoinder  that  his  cases  were  all,  or  almost  all,  chosen  by  himself  from 
among  patients  already  known  t(j  be  hysteiical,  he  would  say  that  the 
hysterical  tendency  is  often  latent  and  unnoticed,  and  that  veiy  likely 
a  more  careful  examination  would  have  shown  it  to  exist  in  the  cases 
claimed  as  healthy  by  Gurney  and  myself.  And  he  would,  I  think, 
further  consider  that  there  was  a  clear  a  2yTiori  jjrobability  in  his  view, 
inasmuch  as  if  you  split  up  a  machine  meant  to  work  as  a  whole,  you 
must  inevitably  weaken  it.  Automatism,  he  concludes,  cannot  exist  in 
quite  normal  persons  ;  it  must  in  itself  he  a  sign  of  abnormality,  that  is 
to  say,  of  actual  or  latent  disease. 

I  certainly  feel  that  had  I  mei'ely  I'ead  M.  Janet's  arguments  with- 
out having  any  experience  of  my  own  by  which  to  test  them,  I  should 

Tlte  Siibliminal  Consciousness.  471 

regard  them  as  extremely  plausible.  But  I  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  the 
automatists  of  various  kinds — automatic  writers,  crystal  seers  and  the 
like — whom  I  have  myself  actually  known  during  the  past  twenty  years 
would  now  form  a  group  of  at  least  200  persons,  and  that  this  group 
would,  to  the  ordinary  eye,  be  indistinguishable  from  the  ctrdinary  world. 
I  can  hardly  think  that  they  have  all — men  and  women  alike — been 
hysterical  without  my  finding  it  out.  I  anight  indeed  say  with  truth 
tliat  these  informants  have  (apparently  at  least)  been  on  the  whole 
above  the  average  physically  as  well  as  mentally.  But  I  lay  no  stress 
on  this,  and  I  think  that  such  superiority  is  fully  explained  by  the  fact 
that  I  have,  of  course,  suggested  experiments  and  sought  for  informa- 
tion among  my  OAvn  friends,  or  other  persons  whom  I  believed  to  be  sane 
and  trustworthy,  and  thus  have  not  taken  mankind  at  random.  Thus, 
if  I  wished,  I  might  make  a  point,  just  opposite  to  M.  Janet's,  out  of  the 
four  cases  which  are  here  to  be  cited  at  length.  One  (_)f  these  infor- 
mants, I  might  say,  is  a  man  of  quite  exceptionally  sound  physiqvie  and 
good  sense-organs.  He  it  is  who  feels  the  most  mai-ked  results  from 
the  steady  gaze — being  speedily  self-hypnotised.  Two  others  are 
thoroughly  healthy  and  vigorous,  and  they  are  excellent  crystal  seers. 
The  fourth  has  occasional  accesses  of  ill-health,  and  although  she  is  an 
excellent  crystal  seer  when  well,  if  she  is  at  all  ill  her  power  leaves  her 
altogethei". 

But  I  do  not  myself  hold  that  these  automatisms  are  a  sign  of 
health  any  more  than  of  disease,  or  of  intelligence  any  more  than  of 
"  misere  'psyclwloyiquer  So  far  as  we  really  know  as  yet,  the  power 
seems  a  kind  of  physical  accident,  scattered  at  random,  and  indicating- 
nothing  beyond  its  own  existence.  Quite  possibly  hysterical  patients 
may  very  often  be  automatists.  Hysterical  patients  are  very  often 
young  women,  but  that  does  not  pro^^e  that  all  young  women  are 
hysterical. 

But,  indeed,  this  question  links  itself  with  a  larger  one,  which  has 
been  settled  by  experience  far  wider  than  either  M.  Janet's  or  mine.  I 
]nean  the  question  whether  hypnotism  is  morlsid  ;  that  is  to  say 
whether  the  capacity  of  being  hypnotised  is,  in  itself,  a  sign  of  any 
kind  of  weakness,  and  especially  of  a  hysterical  tendency.  My  readers 
know  that  this  was  the  view  of  Charcot  and  the  Salpetriere  school ;  and 
that  that  view,  even  Avhen  most  "widely  accepted,  was  regarded  l3y 
Edmund  Gurney  and  myself  with  absolute  distrust.  It  has  now 
practically  collapsed  ;  the  wide  experience  of  the  Nancy  school  having 
proved  afresh  and  conspicuously  what  had  been  abundantly  Nvell 
known  since  Elliotson's  day  to  practical  students  of  hypnotism  outside 
hospitals,  namely,  that  robust  and  healthy  persons  are  often  even  more 
susceptible  to  hypnotisation  than  feeble-minded  persons  or  invalids. 
Yet  in  hypnotism  there  may  be  almost  every  kind  of  desagregation — 

472 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

of  splitting  up — of  the  Ego ;  and  it  is  certainly  hard  to  maintain  that 
the  subject  carrying  out  an  elaborate  post-hypnotic  suggestion  may  be 
normal,  but  that  the  experimenter  wlio  hnds  that  he  can  hold  a  pencil 
and  write  automatically  is  ipso  facto  jjroving  himself  diseased. 

As  for  the  theoretical  meaning  to  be  assigned  to  such  phenomena,  I 
have  already,  I  hope,  made  it  plain  that  in  my  A'iew  there  is  not  a  mere 
disintegration  of  the  ordinary  oi-  supraliminal  personality,  but  rather  a 
manifestation  (in  many  cases)  of  suljliminal  strata  of  personality  which 
are  rarely  accessible  except  by  automatisms  of  this  kind.  We  are  not 
dealing  with  the  cracks  in  a  plate,  but  with  fissures  which,  like  those  of 
the  earth's  crust,  testify  to  unknown  depths  and  a  volcanic  power  beneath 
them.  In  short,  the  sj^litting-up  of  our  total  individuality  has,  in  my 
view,  taken  ^jlace  already,  and  before  our  supraliminal  memory  begins ; 
and  the  i-esult  of  these  experiments  is  more  often  to  reunite  than 
further  to  sunder. 

Time  and  experience  will  show  vi'hether  Professor  Janet,  who  has 
the  difficult  task  of  proving  a  negative,  Avill  be  able  to  maintain  his 
position,  or  whether  he  will  change  his  view,  as  M.  Binet  has  "already 
done.^  The  practically  important  point,  in  my  view,  is  that  intending 
experimenters  should  not  be  deteri'ed  by  supposing  that,  if  they  suc- 
ceed, they  will  thereby  in  some  way  be  proving  their  own  unsoundness. 

It  is  important  thus  to  insist  on  the  easiness  and  hai'mlessness  of 
the  experiment,  inasmuch  as  I  have  not  as  yet  been  able  to  persuade 
any  large  number  of  people  to  attempt  crystal-gazing  with  even  the 
moderate  degree  of  care  and  jDatience  required.  Possibly  some  fifty 
persons  may  have  made  the  attempt,  and  from  these  I  have  about 
ten  accounts  of  some  amount  of  success,  which  almost  all  come  from 
personal  acquaintances  of  my  own — sometimes  already  known  to  me 
as  automatists  in  other  ways — and  thus  give  no  real  clue  as  to  the 
percentage  of  crystal  seers  in  the  population  at  large.  All  my  infor- 
mants are  leading  ordinary  healthy  lives ;  and,  as  will  be  seen,  in  the 
case  of  one  lady  who  has  occasional  attacks  of  illness,  the  power 
altogether  leaves  her  at  such  times,  returning  when  her  strength  is 
re-established.  Most  of  the  crystal  seers  known  to  me  are  women  ;  but 
this  cannot  be  taken  as  indicating  any  real  fact  as  to  distribution  of 
the  power  of  vision.    It  merely  shows,  I  think,  that  in  the  educated 

]  M.  Binet,  wlio  formerly  belonged  to  the  f^trict  Salpetriere  school,  now  says  in  his 
hook  Lcs  Alterations  dc  la  Pcrsonnalite,  p.  1<J7  :  "11  est  aujourd'hui  devenu  banal  de 
remarquer  que  la  plupart  des  experiences  qu'on  a  pratiquees  sur  des  personiies 
hysteriques  se  r^petent  avec  des  resultats  a  pen  pres  equivalents,  niais  amoindris,  chez 
les  personnes  saines,  et  que  par  consequent  I'hysterie  .  .  .  doit  etre  confidere 
comme  un  r^actif  permettant  de  lendre  plus  apjjarents  certains  phenomfenos  delicats 
de  rintelligence  norniale."  It  is  gratifying  to  find  that  the  view  that  these  automatisms 
are  '■  delicate  ijhenomenaof  the  normal  intelligence  "  has  passed  thus  noiselessly  from 
a  heresy  into  a  commonplace. 

The 

SiMimhial 

Consciousness. 

473 

classes  women  liave  more  time  to  spai'e  than  men.  It  is  not  until  the 
experiment  is  introduced  into  psycho-physiological  laboratories  (as  T 
have  reason  to  hope  may  shortly  be  done  in  several  universities)  that 
we  shall  have  statistics  enough  to  determine  points  of  this  kind.  Four 
of  my  cases  have  exceptional  interest,  and  shall  be  given  at  length  ;  to 
the  rest  it  will  be  enough  to  make  briefer  allusion. 

XIII. — I  will  begin  with  a  record  contributed  by  Mrs.  A.  W. 
Verrall,  a  lecturer  at  Newnham  College,  and  known  to  the  classical 
world  as  the  translator  of  Pausanias.  Mrs.  Verrall  made  the  experi- 
ments simply  at  my  request,  v.dthout  pi'evious  knowledge  of  the  subject 
or  interest  in  it.  Jt  will  be  seen  that  her  crystal-visions  do  not  involve 
any  telepathy  or  clairvoyance.  They  present  in  somewhat  developed 
form  what  appear  to  be  usual  early  stages  in  this  form  of  experimeiit. 
The  numbers  v/ithin  brackets  represent  the  chronological  order  of  the 
experiments,  all  of  which  have  been  recorded  without  delay. 

M.  46.  Case  I. — Mrs.  Verrall. 

It  is  a  little  more  than  three  years  ago  that  I  first  began  experiments  in 
"  crystal-gazing."  I  am,  I  believe,  a  good  visualiser,  and  am  in  the  liabit  of 
embodying  the  greater  part  of  my  ideas  in  some  .pictorial  form.  The  mention 
of  any  name  calls  up  a  mental  picture  instantly,  and  I  am  often  aware  of  the 
picture  of  an  idea  before  I  have  grasped  the  means  of  expressing  it  in  words. 
I  have  tried  to  find  faces  in  the  fire,  and  shapes  in  the  clouds,  with  the  usual 
success,  and  I  have  liad  some  spontaneous  imf)ressions  of  persons  or  scenes  ; 
but  the  visions  obtained  by  looking  intentionally  into  a  glass  of  water  or  a 
crystal  are  in  some  respects  unlike  all  other  visual  impressions  which  I  liave 
recaived.  I  should  perhaps  say  that  the  sight  of  my  two  eyes  is  very  unlike, 
so  unlike  that  I  believe  that  I  never  use  both  at  once.  The  left  eye  is  very 
far-sighted  and  the  right  quite  short-sighted.  I  habitually  use  tlie  short- 
sighted eye  for  reading,  writing,  &c.,  but  am  often  conscious  of  a  difficulty 
of  vision  if  I  shift  the  position  of  my  book  so  as  to  bring  it  a  little  bej'ond 
the  range  of  tlie  short-sighted  eye.  In  that  case  the  words  seem  to  alter  in 
size  and  move  to  and  fro  as  they  do  when  one  is  adjusting  a  telescope  to  suit 
the  sight.    I  have  never  been  able  to  use  an  opera-glass. 

I  have  tried  various  objects  in  crystal-gazing,  such  as  a  cut  crystal,  a 
globular  crystal,  a  glass  paper-weight  and  a  glass  full  of  water,  and  I  find  no 
difference  in  their  efiicacy.  I  have  also  tried  under  varying  conditions  of 
light,  with  the  conclusion  that  a  dim  light  is  the  most  likely  to  result  in  the 
seeing  of  a  picture.  I  have  sometimes  seen  pictures  in  quite  bright  light,  but 
never  in  absolute  darkness.  Often  I  see  nothing  at  all  but  the  bright  points 
of  light  in  the  crystal,  and  often  I  see  nothing  in  the  crystal,  but  get  a  mental 
picture  suggesting  something  I  have  forgotten  to  do.  Indeed,  I  find  crystal- 
gazing  a  very  convenient  way  of  recalling  things  forgotten,  but  in  that  case  I 
see  nothing  in  the  crystal.  The  diflerence  between  a  picture  in  the  crystal 
and  a  mental  picture  is  quite  marked  but  diflicult  to  describe  ;  it  will 
perhaps  help  to  show  v\'hat  1  mean  if  I  say  that  tlie  recalled  image  of  what  I 
have  seen  in  the  crystal  differs  as  much  from  the  actual  image  as  tlie  mental 

474 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

image  of  a  person  difters  from  the  actual  person.  I  believe  that  with  me 
the  crystal  picture  is  built  up  from  the  bright  points  in  the  crystal,  as 
they  sometimes  enter  into  it  ;  but  the  picture,  when  once  produced,  has  a 
reality  which  I  have  never  been  able  to  obtain  when  looking  into  the  fire  or 
trying  to  call  up  an  imaginary  scene  with  my  eyes  shut.  It  has  occasionally 
happened  that  I  have  been  able  to  see  more  on  a  closer  investigation  than  on 
the  first  glance,  l)ut  if  I  try  to  interpose  a  magnifying-glass  betvi^een  my  eye  and 
the  crystal  the  picture  instantly  goes  and  only  the  recollection  remains.  The 
following  case  is  almost  the  only  one  where  I  have  seen  a  real  person,  and 
here  the  picture  grew  distinct  as  I  looked. 

I  saw  (27)  a  black  object  which  defined  itself  into  the  head  of  a  man  ;  then  I 
saw  that  it  was  my  husband's  head  turned  nearly  in  profile  towards  my  left. 
Behind  it  was  a  square-backed  chair  of  brown  leather.  He  was  reading,  his 
eyes  being  on  a  book,  which  I  could  not  see.  I  tried  to  see  the  whole  figure, 
in  order  to  know  what  the  book  was,  and  shut  my  eyes.  On  opening  them  I 
saw  the  whole  figure  for  a  moment,  l)ut  it  was  too  small  for  me  to  distinguish 
anything.  In  a  moment  the  head  came  back,  and  I  had  an  impression  tliafc 
the  book  was  red,  though  I  could  not  see  it. 

As  far  as  I  could  ascertain,  this  picture  was  not  telepathic.  This  is  not 
the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have  liad  a  distinct  impression  of  colour  coupled 
with  a  consciousness  that  I  had  not  seen  the  colour.  Once  I  saw  a  flower  (20) 
which  "I  knew  to  be  pink,  though  I  saw  no  colour,"  and  again  (12)  I  once 
saw  a  "  black  cat  with  ribbon  j-oinid  neck  which  I  knew  to  be  red  tliough  it 
had  no  colour. "  In  these  last  two  cases  I  spent  some  time  trying  to  see  the 
colour  which  I  hieio  to  be  there,  but  I  was  not  successful.  In  the  greater 
number  of  cases  the  picture  has  been  coloured,  but  sometimes  I  am  (3,  32) 
only  aware  of  luminosity  and  darkness,  sometimes  (23)  of  black  and  white  as 
in  a  pen-and-ink  sketch.  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  that  the  colour  of  the 
background  for  the  crystal  produces  any  effect  on  the  colour  of  the  j^icture. 
I  have  tiied  placing  the  crystal  on  white  linen,  dark  blue  silk,  bright  blue 
stuff  and  red  leather,  Init  have  never  been  conscious  of  any  suggestion  of 
colour  from  the  background,  or  able  to  trace  any  connection  between  the 
background  and  the  vision. 

Movement  occurs  not  infrequently  in  the  pictures  and  so  does  change. 
I  use  the  word  movement  when  I  see  in  tlie  crystal  a  picture  within  which 
occurs  an  alteration,  and  the  word  rlianrje  when  the  whole  picture  undergoes: 
alteration  and  is  succeeded  by  another.  Thus  there  was  movement  in  the 
following  case  :  (8)  "  Landscape,  large  jjiece  of  still  water  in  evening  light, 
beyond  it  mountains  and  hills,  two  snowy  peaks,  one  sharjjly  defined  dark 
hill  in  front — open  space  on  riglit  of  mountains.  Steamer  jjassing  from 
right  to  left  till  it  touched  shore  and  was  lost  to  sight." 

The  next  case  (20)  illustrates  what  I  mean  by  change.  "I  saw  nothing 
for  some  time.  Then  a  flower  like  a  convolvulus,  wliich  I  knew  to  be  pink 
though  I  saw  no  colour,  first  sideways,  then  facing  with  a  hard  round  knob 
in  the  middle.  Tlien  I  knew  it  was  not  pink,  hut  metal.  I  knew  this  from 
the  hardness  of  outline,  not  the  colour.  It  kei)t  changing  from  one  position 
to  the  other." 

I  will  now  give  a  case  (32) — tlie  only  one — in  wliich  occurred  cliange  as 
well  as  movement  :— 

The  Sahliminal  Consciousness. 

475 

"  Saw  sphere  in  circle,  only  mjper  half  visible — suggested  globe  on  stand. 
Then  tlie  thing  turned  aslant  and  the  outer  ring  was  fiery,  the  sphere  black, 
outer  ring  revolving,  sphere  apparently  still  ;  presently  I  saw  that  the  sphere 
was  also -revolving. " 

I  have  sometimes  been  aware  of  development  in  the  picture — things  at  ' 
first  dim  and  confused  becoming  clear  and  distinct,  but  I  distinguish  l.ietweeu 
this  gradual  development  and  the  movement  and  change  described  above. 

The  variety  of  pictures  seen  is  considerable  ;  I  have  classified  as  follows, 
the  33  crystal-visions  recorded,  covering  a  period  of  21  months. 

a.  Animals,  5. 

b.  Human  figures,  7. 

c.  Connnon  objects,  5  (such  as  clock,  ring,  melon,  &c.). 

d.  Geometrical  figure,  1. 

e.  Written  words,  2. 
/.  Scenes,  4. 

g.  Fanciful  groups  or  scenes,  9. 

With  regard  to  the  written  words  (e),I  may  say  that  botli  instances  occurred 
after  a  distinct  suggestion  from  myself.  On  the  first  occasion  I  looked  in  the 
crystal  immediately  after  writing  to  ask  for  an  address  which  I  had  known  but 
forgotten.  I  saw  a  row  of  small  letters,  wondered  if  they  represented  the 
address  required,  then  saw  plainly  39,  Onsliiw-square.  It  was  only  the  number 
which  I  wanted,  and  I  found  that  the  numljer  was  not  correct.  On  the  second 
occasion  (10)  I  had  been  trying  to  obtain  automatic  writing  while  looking  in  the 
crystal.  I  was  also  wondering  who  had  put  a  pair  of  lost  scissors  in  a  very 
conspicuous  place,  where  I  had  just  found  them.  I  saw  a  name  Avritten, 
and  foiuid  that  my  right  hand  liad  written  tlie  same  name  ;  it  was  a. 
name  likely  to  occur  to  me.  Under  the  seventh  head  (g),  ' '  Fanciful  groups  or 
scenes,"  come  the  largest  number  of  cases.  The  first  picture  I  ever  saw  (1) 
was  one  of  this  class.  A  friend  of  mine  had  been  telling  me  of  Miss  X.'s 
experiences,  of  which  I  then  heard  for  the  first  time,  and  the  idea  occurred 
to  me  of  trying  whether  I  had  any  similar  faculty.  I  looked  into  a  glass  of 
water  on  a  white  pocket-handkerchief,  in  broad  daylight,  for  a  quarter  of  an 
hour.  I  saw  a  group,  consisting  of  a  beautiful  draped  figure  (on  my  right) 
with  curly  hair,  and  something  uplifted  in  its  left  hand.  The  right  hand  was 
held  downwards,  but  not  quite  close  to  tlie  side.  The  figure  sometimes 
looked  to  my  left,  sometimes  faced  me,  shifting  from  one  position  to  the 
other.  The  right  hand  was  not  defined.  On  my  left,  on  a  flat  stone,  was  a 
huge  toad,  its  back  towards  me,  gazing  at  the  figure. 

On  another  occasion  (4),  I  saw  a  large  snail-shell,  with  a  baby's  face 
looking  out  of  the  end  where  the  snail  should  be  ;  it  was  not  veiy  distinct, 
but  the  markings  of  the  shell  were  visible,  and  it  was  coloured. 

One  other  (16)  of  these  fancy  pictures  I  will  give  in  detail,  as  it  was  rather 
more  elaborate  than  most.  I  was  looking  at  the  crystal  on  a  blue  ground, 
with  a  single  lamp  at  some  distance  in  the  room. 

My  eyes  soon  got  tired,  then  the  colour  on  the  crystal  grew  pale  primrose, 
then  the  colour  of  pale  burnished  brass.  Then  I  saw  a  small  biiglit  fairy 
figure  fly  across  from  left  to  right,  followed  by  a  large  black  swallow-like 
creature.    When  the  swallow  reached  the  right  edge  of  the  picture  it  turned 

476 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

back  (without  turning  round),  moving  towards  the  left,  and  presently  the 
fairy  came  into  sight,  but  turned  round  with  its  head  towards  the  swallow 
and  arms  uplifted,  as  if  beating  it  off.  The  swallow  seemed  smaller  than 
before.  But  with  a  swoop,  the  swallow,  huge  as  before,  swept  again  to  the 
right,  pushing  the  fairy  before  it.  I  saw  a  faint  light,  like  an  evening  sky, 
behind  the  tail  of  tlae  swallow,  and  then  all  was  black  darkness. 

I  find  it  very  difficult  to  say  what  size  the  pictures  a,ppear  to  me  to  be, 
•as  I  have  notliing  to  compare  them  with.  They  seem  to  me,  however,  not  to 
be  bounded  by  the  size  of  tlie  crystal,  and  they  vary  in  the  impression 
jiroduced.  But  though  the  things  certainly  appear  to  me  sometimes  to  be 
"  large,"  and  sometimes  "  small,"  I  am  quite  unable  to  determine  how  such 
an  impression  is  produced. 

I  have  taken  considerable  pains  to  endeavour  to  trace  connections  oetween 
the  pictures  in  tlie  crystal  and  ideas  or  objects  lately  present  to  my  mind, 
but  there  are  only  nine  cases  out  of  the  thirty-tliree  where  I  have  perceived 
any  possible  connection  between  my  thoughts  and  my  visions.  I  will  give 
these  nine  cases  in  detail.  In  seven  cases  the  vision  was  possibly  due  to 
■something  in  the  thoughts  or  experience  immediately  preceding  the  crystal- 
gazing  ;  in  the  eighth  case  tliere  is  perhaps  a  likeness  between  the  vision  and 
an  object  constantly  seen  during  some  days  before  and  after  the  crystal- 
vision  ;  the  ninth  case  is  difficult  to  classify. 

Two  of  these  seven  (4,  10)  have  already  been  mentioned  ;  they  are  the 
cases  where  vmtten  words  appeared.  In  the  next  case  (5)  I  had  been 
wondering  what  people  we  should  meet  at  a  luncheon  party  to  which  we  were 
going,  and  I  saw  in  the  crystal  a  human  figure,  tliat  of  ' '  an  old  lady  in  black, 
with  a  veil  or  hood  on,"  not  a  very  likely  guest,  perhaps.  In  the  fourth  case 
(24)  after  "endless  fleeting  pictures,  single  figures,  groups,  sense  of  rush, 
figure  witli  arm  out,"  suddenly  the  whole  became  clear  "and  I  saw  a  man  in 
uniform  and  cap,  with  gold  or  silver  braid,  holding  out  his  arm  to  signal,  and 
a  train  rushing  on  full  speed,  and  I  knew  there  was  an  accident,  though  I 
saw  none. "  I  had  been  to  town  and  back  on  that  day.  The  next  two  (29,  30) 
were  seen  in  immediate  succession  ;  I  saw  first  the  letter  A  in  small  briglit 
stars,  with  a  comet  overhead,  and  on  looking  again,  a  ijyramid  dark  against 
a  red  sky.  I  find  a  note  in  the  book  that  we  had  been  ' '  noticing  the  red 
glow  of  the  sky,  and  a  star,"  just  before  I  looked  in  the  crystal.  The  last 
of  these  cases  (32)  is  one  already  described  ;  I  need  only  add  the  suggested 
explanation,  that  I  had  been  in  the  late  afternoon  at  a  lecture  illustrated  by 
lantern,  and  that  tliis  vision  occurred  about  an  liour  after  my  retiu'nfrom  the 
lecture. 

In  the  next  case  I  have  to  mention  (15),  the  connection  is  not  obvious,  and 
possibly  tliere  is  none  at  all,  but  I  give  the  note  and  the  comment  as  they 
stand  in  my  bonk.  I  "  saw  a  floating  figure  holding  something  outstretched 
in  the  right  liand,  vvdiich  became  defined  as  a  wand.  The  figure  faced  me, 
had  trailing  robes.  It  was  approaching  a  bright  object,  which  defined  itself 
gradually  as  a  crescent  moon  with  a  face.  The  figure  was  dark  ;  the  outline 
of  the  figure  was  indistinct,  and  the  general  effect  that  of  a  dark,  irregular 
cross  ;  the  crescent  was  very  brilliant."  Two  days  after  this  vision,  as  I  took 
up  a  l)ook  which  I  had  been  reading  aloud  every  evening  for  some  days,  I 
noticed  on  the  cover  a  picbnre  of  a  moon  witli  a  figure — not,  however,  a  face 

The  Subliminal  Gonscioiisness. 

477 

— wliich  reminded  me  of  my  crystal  i^icture.  On  looking  again  I  could  see 
no  close  resemblance,  but  the  book  may  have  suggested  the  "  vision,"  just 
as  it  certainly  recalled  it. 

In  the  next  case  also  (25)  the  actual  sight  of  an  object  recalled  a  crystal 
picture  which  it  may  have  originally  suggested.  On  August  25tli,  1890, 
I  was  at  Brighton,  where  I  had  been  for  some  time.  I  saw  in  the  crystal,  at 
10.15  p.m.,  an  "ugly  clock  in  white  alabaster,  round  face  on  hideous  stand, 
dial  black,  letters  gold."  I  made  a  rough  sketch  of  the  outline  of  this  clock, 
but  it  suggested  nothing  to  me  at  the  time.  On  September  9th,  im- 
mediately after  returning  to  Cambridge,  I  v.'ent  to  the  house  of  a  woman  I 
knew  to  inquire  after  a  servant  of  mine  who  had  been  suddenly  attacked 
with  mania  and  removed  to  this  house — her  sister's — and  thence  to  the 
asylum.  On  entering  the  room  I  noticed  the  clock,  having  some  unexplained, 
association  with  it.  Tlien  it  flashed  upon  me  that  it  was  the  clock  I  had 
seen  in  the  crystal.  It  was,  however,  not  perfectly  like.  The  real  clock  is. 
in  shape  like  the  visionary  clock,  and  is  of  the  same  material.  The  dial, 
however,  is  white,  not  black,  with  gold  letters  ;  but  there  are  in  the  real 
clock  two  round  black  ornamental  sjjots  on  the  stand,  which  did  not  appear- 
in  the  vision.  I  had  heai-d  on  August  22nd  that  my  servant  had  been  taken  tO' 
this  house,  and  had  been  tliinking  a  great  deal  al)out  both  the  servant  and 
her  sister.  I  had  once  been  in  the  house,  about  a  year  before,  and  probably 
seen  the  clock,  though  I  had  no  conscious  recollection  of  it.  I  found, 
however,  that  they  had  had  the  clock  when  they  went  into  the  house,  and 
that  it  had  always  stood  on  the  mantelpiece,  so  that  I  must  have  seen  it  on 
my  first  visit.  I  have  never  since  seen  any  clock  at  all  like  the  ' '  crystal 
clock,"  though  I  have  taken  special  notice  of  my  friends'  clocks. 

Two  other  incidents  I  have  recorded  in  connection  with  crystal-gazing, 
but  they  are  not  included  in  the  thirty-three  cases  mentioned  above.  On  on& 
occasion  (14),  while  looking  into  the  crystal,  I  had  a  sudden  vision,  not  con- 
nected with  any  points  of  light  in  the  crystal,  and  not  in  any  way  resembling- 
a  crystal-vision.  I  noted  the  exact  minute  of  the  ajjpearance,  which  I  have 
never  done  except  in  the  case  of  what  I  may  call  external  visions,  such  as  I 
have  sometimes  seen  when  I  have  not  been  seeking  to  obtain  them.  I  \\a,v& 
had  at  least  three  such  visions,  once  on  looking  up  suddenly  towards  a 
■window  and  twice  on  turning  to  a  looking-glass.  But  they  are  quite  unlike 
the  crystal-visions,  and  I  only  mention  this  here  to  make  the  record  complete. 

On  another  occasion  (18),  I  was  reading  and  looked  up  towards  the  fire, 
when  I  saw  in  my  crystal,  which  was  on  the  mantelpiece  as  usual,  a  small 
figure  spring  up  and  run  across  the  crystal.  The  figure  was  dressed  in  close- 
fitting  green  clothes  and  might  have  been  a  monkey  or  a  man.  It  disappeared 
with  a  skip  out  of  the  right-hand  side  of  the  crystal.  This  vision  differs  from 
the  usual  ones,  in  that  the  figure  was  distinctly  inside  the  crystal  and 
disappeared  when  it  reached  the  limit  of  the  crystal.  It  was  also  spontaneous, 
as  I  had  no  intention  of  looking  at  the  crystal. 

I  have  not  attempted  to  draw  any  inferences  from  the  crystal  visions  I 
have  had,  but  have  only  recorded  them,  classifying  them  roughly  in  order 
that  they  may  be  a  little  less  unintelligible  than  the  bare  record  of  them 
would  otherwise  be.  I  hope  to  obtain  some  further  results  when  I  have 
time  to  look  regularly  in  the  crystal,  but  I  find  it  of  no  use  to  look  for 

478 

Mr.  F.  W.  H  Myers. 

visions  unless  I  am  fairly  free  from  absorbing  interests  or  occupations  of  any 
Jvind.  I  sliall  be  very  glad  to  receive  any  suggestions  for  experiments  to  be 
tried  in  future. 

I  may  add  that  my  liealth  is  usually  good,  and  was  good  during  the  time 
■of  my  experiments  in  crystal-gazing.  I  felt  no  fatigue,  nor  any  evil  or 
unjjleasant  result  from  tlie  experiments. 

M.  DE  G.  Vekeall. 

These  experiments  suggest  several  reflections 

1.  This  is  almost  the  only  case  where  I  have  as  yet  found  that  the 
influence  of  })omts  de  repere  was  manifest  to  the  experimenter  herself. 
Such  23oints  or  specks  of  reflection  may  sometimes  have  been  influential 
even  when  not  consciously  observed.  But  in  most  cases  the  conditions 
of  vision  seem  to  make  this  unlikely ;  —the  vision  generally  beginning 
with  a  bright  light  followed  by  a  smoky  cloud  in  the  crystal.  lu  fact 
the  genesis  of  crystal  pictures  is  apt  to  resemble  the  genesis  of  spon- 
taneous, rather  than  that  of  hypnotically-suggested,  hallucinations. 

A  Camljridge  undergraduate  known  to  me — another  crystal  seer,  by 
the  way,  whom  it  would  be  diflicult  to  suspect  of  hysteria — thinks  that 
the  first  picture  seen  by  him  in  the  crystal,  a  mere  delta  of  light,  took  its 
origin  from  a  bright  point  of  reflection.  But  with  him  the  pictures 
almost  at  once  followed  quite  another  analogy  ;  they  became  like  very 
brilliant  illii.sions  hypnagogiques,  and  soon  seemed  to  come  close  to 
the  eye,  whei'ever  the  crystal  might  be  placed.  I  defer  further 
account  of  this  case  (Mr.  S.  W.  S.)  until  more  experiments  have  been 
made. 

2.  Mrs.  Verrall's  subjective  conviction  that  such  and  such  an 
object  was  pink  when  no  pink  was  visible,  suggests  two  interesting 
parallels.  In  the  first  place  it  somewhat  resembles  the  conviction  of 
a  blind  correspondent  of  Professor  W.James  {PrincAples  of  Psychology, 
Vol.  II.,  p.  323)  that  the  coat,  say,  of  a  figure  in  his  mental  picture,  or 
quasi-hallucination,  was  "  pepper-and-salt,"  although  he  had  no  true 
visual  memory  of  colours.  And  in  the  second  place  it  reminds  us  of 
some  of  the  subjects  of  midition  colorc'e  (see  esjaecially  Professor 
Gruber's  paper  already  referred  to)  who  know  that  a  certain  sound  is 
accompanied  by  a  certain  colour,  but  do  not  actually  see  the  colour. 

When  the  idea  of  a  colour  is  thus  cerebrally  initiated  we  may  expect 
that  it  will  present  vaiious  degrees  of  intensity.  Below  the  point  at 
which  such  an  idea  becomes  (so  to  say)  definite  entencephalic  ^  vision 
tliere  may  be  a  feeling  of  obscure  subliminal  connection  between  the 
one  form  of  sensation  and  the  other.    The  colours  seen  by  "  sound- 

'  I  cannot  avoid  using  this  word,  already  suggested  [Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p  34t, 
Note),  as  correlative  to  cntnptic.  The  "  chromatisms "  which  the  sound  seer  sees 
"in  his  brain"  are  comparable  to  the  phosphenes  which  we  all  may  see  "  in 
our  eyes."  They  are  a  quite  different  thing  from  imagination-images,  or  "mind's-eye" 
vision. 

The  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

479 

seers  "  (a  shortei"  term  than  "  subjects  of  audition  colore'e  ")  are  often 
of  a  special  indescribable  sliade.^  The  light  in  "  photopsy  from  shock  " — 
which  shock,  as  Fere  points  out,  need  not  necessarily  affect  the  head 
directly — is  also  of  a  tint  and  quality  hard  to  parallel  in  external 
vision.  Professor  James's  absolutely  Ijliud  correspondent,  already 
mentioned,  insists  that  he  has  sensations — for  himself  quite  definite  and 
sui  generis — corresponding  to  the  names  of  colours.  If  any  fresh  case 
ivere  to  occur  of  the  I'estoration  to  sight  of  persons  blind  from  infancy, 
it  would  be  very  desirable  to  get  them  to  compare  previous  notions  of 
colour  with  the  reality.  Our  increasing  knowledge  of  this  enten- 
cephalic  chromatopsy  adds  a  fresh  interest  to  the  question, — important 
alike  for  the  physiologist  and  the  psychologist, — as  to  what  is  really 
involved  in  the  "  externalisation  "  of  an  inwai'd  picture.  Are  actual 
changes  set  up  in  the  retina  ?  such  chemical  or  other  changes  as 
habitually  induce  retinal  fatigue,  and  tend  to  induce  complementary 
colours  1  In  earlier  writings  on  hallucinations  Gurney  and  I  assumed 
as  probable  that  in  the  case  of  a  comjDletely  externalised  hallucination 
there  was  some  retinal  change.  Fere  takes  this  view  as  regai'ds 
hypnotic  hallucinations,  and  asserts  that  he  himself  can  call  iip  a 
mental  image  of  a  red  spot  so  strongly  that  he  gets  a  green  after- 
image of  the  imaginary  red  spot.  Wundt  also  takes  such  after- 
images as  a  proved  fact,  both  in  the  case  of  illusions  hypnago- 
giques  and  of  hallucinations  in  general.  "  The  phantasms  of  sight," 
he  says,  "  which  present  themselves  before  falling  asleep,  are  some- 
times so  vivid  that  (as  J.  Miiller,  H.  Meyer,  and  others  have 
observed)  they  may  be  followed  by  after-images.  In  such  cases  the 
excitation  from  the  central  sensory  tracts  seems  to  have  extended  itself 
to  the  retina."  -  And  again  :  "  Hallucinations  do  not  only  resemble 
ordinary  sense-perceptions  in  all  their  directly-given  subjective  peculiari- 
ties but  they  may  also  be  followed  by  positive  and  negative  after-images, 
such  as  follow  on  the  fatigue  of  the  sensory  apparatus."  ^  A  hint, 
however,  kindly  given  by  Dr.  A.  W.  Waller,  to  the  effect  that 
we  need  that  such  cases  should  be  "observed  with  full  appreciation 
of  the  astonishing  minuteness  of  excitation  capable  of  acting  as 
suggestion  to  certain  subjects,"  has  suggested  to  me  to  press  my  crystal 
seers  to  careful  observation  of  their  own  experience  in  the  matter. 
The  result,  briefly,  is  that  of  the  four  crystal  seers  whose  cases  I  give 
at  length  two  good  visualisers  believe  that  they  do  see  complementary 
colours  following  on  phantasmal  images,  while  the  third  good  visualiser, 
Mrs.  Verrall,  with  Miss  A.,  who  is  a  bad  visualiser,  can  see  no  such. 

'  Fere,  Pathologie  dcs  Emotions,  p.  3G. 

2  Wundt,  Phi/s.  Psych.,  3rd  Edition,  Vol.  II.,  p.  433. 

3  Wundt,  Philosoph.  Studicn,  VI.,  p.  18. 

480 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

colours.  Miss  X's  experience  on  this  point  will  be  found  in  the- 
course  of  her  own  narrative.    Mr.  Keulemans  writes  : — 

After  calling  up,  mentally,  a  bright  red,  I  can  see  (tliough  not  always)  the 
complementary  colour,  when  looking  up  to  the  ceiling  immediately  afterwards. 
Yet  I  have  never  succeeded  in  thus  obtaining  the  comijlementaries  of  pale 
shades,  such  as  lemon  yellow  and  lilac,  greys  or  browns. 

Mrs.  Verrall  sends  the  following  remarks,  which  are  of  interest  on 
the  whole  question  of  the  externalisation  of  images,  and  also  as  to  the 
transformation  into  visual  terms  of  a  tactile  impression  subliminally 
received. 

Since  recording  my  experimonts  in  crystal-vision  I  have  been  trying 
some  further  experiments  of  a  different  kind,  with  a  view  to  testing  my 
power  of  visualisation. 

I  find  that  I  am  able  to  call  up  a  voluntary  picture  of  an  object  or  a  scene 
with  extreme  distinctness  ;  indeed,  in  the  case  of  a  simple  object,  the  visual 
image,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,  differs  from  the  actual  object  only  in  having 
no  sulidity — that  is,  it  casts  no  shadow  and  ajjpears  to  be  all  on  the  same 
plane.  The  form  is  as  well  defined  and  the  colour  appears  as  vivid  in  the 
visualisation  as  in  the  real  thing.  I  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether 
form  and  colour  are  equally  well  reproduced  in  the  visualisation,  and  as  far 
as  my  own  impression  goes  there  is  no  difference  ;  I  never  think  of  a  coloured 
object  without  its  colour,  hut  I  have  not  been  able  to  produce  complementary 
after-images  from  gazing  at  an  iuiaginary  colour.  I  may  say  that  it  is  only 
after  a  prolonged  gazing  at  a  real  colour  that  I  can  see  the  complementary 
after-image,  and  the  colour  of  the  after-image  is  never  anything  but  very 
faint. 

My  visualisations  usually,  as  I  have  said,  have  no  solidity,  but  I  am  able 
at  any  time  to  invest  them  with  solidity  by  imagining  that  I  see  the  real 
thing  and  not  a  memory  or  imagination  picture.  In  that  case  they  cast 
shadows,  and  I  am  able  to  realise  distance.  I  have  much  more  control  over 
theui  when  once  they  are  there  than  I  have  over  crystal-visions. 

At  one  time,  some  three  years  ago,  I  tried  a  longish  series  of  experiments 
with  cards  with  a  view  to  seeing  whether  I  could  educate  my  sense  of  touch 
sufhciently  to  distinguish  the  cards  after  passing  my  thumbs  once  swiftly 
over  the  face  of  each  card.  I  had  some  success,  but  the  reason  I  record  the 
experiment  here  is  this :  At  first,  while  my  attention  was  consciously 
directed  to  uiy  fingers,  I  was  aware  that  I  could  detect  differences  in  smooth- 
ness of  surface,  which  I  learnt  gradually  to  interpret  ;  but  after  a  couple  of 
hundred  trials,  wlien  I  grew  more  expert  and  more  familiar  with  the  exj^eri- 
ment,  I  lost  all  consciousness  of  the  means  which  enabled  me  to  guess,  and 
"saw"  pictures  of  the  cards  which  "determined"  the  particular  guess. 
This  experiment  seems  to  show  that  conclusions  arrived  at  by  other  means 
are  presented  to  my  uiiud  in  the  forui  of  visual  images,  and  suggests  that 
sudden  visual  impressions,  spontaneous  as  well  as  induced,  may  in  my  case 
be  projected  visually  after  they  have  been  produced  in  some  other  way. 

3.  Mrs.  Verrall  has  on  two  occasions  had  spontaneous  visions  of 
scenes,  not  resembling  the  crystal-visions,  but  appearing  to  alter  her 

The  HiMiminal  Consciousness. 

481 

whole  surroundings.  These  visions  she  beUeves  to  have  been  veridical ; 
to  have  conveyed  a  more  or  less  accurate  knowledge  of  what  was  pass- 
ing or  had  passed  elsewhere.  If  this  be  so,  then  in  her  case  the 
-experimental  visions  appear  less  profound  than  the  spontaneous  ;  which 
is  in  accordance  with  analogy.  Once,  after  an  apparently  complete 
recovery  from  illness,  she  had  a  purely  pathological  hallucination, 
which  she  at  once  recognised  as  such  and  which  was  several  times 
repeated. 

The  veridical  visions  represented  sceiies  of  no  special  or  exciting 
character  ;  but  rather,  as  often  in  these  cases,  seem  to  have  been  flashed 
upon  the  percipient  "  by  mere  chance."    I  subjoin  her  account. 

M.  48. 

As  sujjplementary  to  tlie  pictures  I  have  seen  in  the  crystal,  I  ;k1cI  brief 
accounts  of  otlier  visions  I  liave  had  spontaneously,  which  may  have  been 
produced  by  causes  somewhat  similar,  as  I  was  in  each  case  looking  towards 
looking-glass.  Tlie  first  was  in  1885,  some  years  before  I  had  heard  of 
crystal-gazing,  and  a  few  months  after  I  had  received  an  impression  about 
my  husband  which  seemed  to  be  telepathic. 

1885,  Maij  5th,  Tuesday,  8.45  a.m.  This  morning,  about  8.10,  as  I  was 
.standing  before  my  glass,  after  A.  had  gone  down  to  breakfast,  I  had  a  sudden 
sensation  of  absolute  stillness — cessation  of  sound — and  looking  up  saw  A. 
across  the  breakfast-table  with  pajjers  in  his  hand,  which  he  was  reading. 
As  he  was  not  standing  in  his  usual  place,  but  on  my  side  of  the  table,  I 
inferred  that  it  was  my  letters  he  was  reading,  and  ran  downstairs  to  see. 
He  was  standing  as  I  had  seen  him  (i.e.,  opposite  my  place,  not  his  own) 
with  Trlibner's  catalogue  in  his  hands  ;  I  told  him  of  my  vision  as  soon  as  I 
came  down. 

The  second  case  occurred  on  July  29th,  1890.  I  was  in  my  roum  in  the 
afternoon,  thinking  about  a  paper  I  had  just  read  in  the  Proceedings  and  of  a 
friend  with  whom  I  had  talked  of  the  matter  in  t{uestion,  when  "as  I  turned 
to  the  glass  I  had  a  sudden  impression  of  Mr.  Y.,  in  Swiss  mountaineering 
costume,  light  dittos  and  hat,  sitting  astride  on  an  arete,  face  downwards, 
with  a  stick  or  ice-axe  across  the  figure.  Some  other  man  was  staudhig 
below,  looking  up."  The  picture  did  not  imjjress  me  as  veridical,  though  it 
was  very  vivid.  But  the  feeling  in  my  mind  was  one  of  amusement,  not 
alarm,  nor  interest — the  attitude  being  obviously  absurd,  and  impossible  in 
an  ascent  of  any  real  difficulty  or  danger.  It  suggested  ratlier  a  person 
sliding  down  a  stair  rail,  but  I  saw  the  snow  and  rocks  of  an  arete  quite 
plainly.    I  believed  Mr.  Y.  to  be  in  Dauphine  at  the  tune. 

I  wrote  to  him  later  in  the  autunm  asking  him  what  he  was  doing  on  July 
29th,  at  4.15  p.m.,  and  heard  that  it  was  an  oft' day,  and  that  he  was  prob- 
ably loitering  about  in  front  of  the  hotel.  'When  I  saw  huu  in  November 
I  told  him  what  I  had  seen,  and  he  then  said  that  he  had  actually  been 
astride  of  an  arete  for  a  moment  on  the  day  before,  July  28tli,  but  had  not 
remained  so  long,  thinking  the  attitude  unnecessary.  The  guide  had  crossed 
first,  sitting  astride,  and  Mr.  Y.  was  second,  the  whole  number  of  the  party 
being  four.  The  arete  did  not,  however,  slope  downwards,  but  was  nearly 
level. 

482 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

I  append  a  copy  of  the  note  of  the  possibly  telepathic  impression  of  my 
husband  above  referred  to  : — 

"  1884,  October  20th,  Monday,  2.45  p.m.  I  waited  lunch  to-day  for  A. 
[who  was  in  College,  as  usual  on  Monday]  till  two  o'clock,  without  thinking 
why  he  should  be  late,  as  he  often  is  not  home  much  before  two.  But  at 
two  o'clock  [by  the  dining-room  clock]  I  began  luncli.  Then,  as  I  was  think- 
ing that  A.  had  said  he  should  be  home  at  the  '  usual  time  '  [1-45]  there 
suddenly  flashed  across  me  " — I  was  facing  the  window — "a  picture  of  A. 
standing  with  papers  in  his  hand  and  Mr.  Z.  sitting  in  a  chair  not  quite 
close  or  straight  to  a  square-cornered  taljle.  And  there  followed  the  thought 
'Oh,  yes;  A.  has  left  those  proofs  .  .  .  v/ith  Mr.  Z.'  The  next 
moment  it  struck  me  as  odd  that  I  should  have  had  the  im2>ression  first  and 
tlie  explanation  after,  so  I  looked  at  the  clock.  It  was  2.5.  I  felt  certain 
that  A.  would  not  be  home  for  eiglit  or  nine  minutes,  which  is  the  time  it 
takes  him  to  walk  from  College,  and,  indeed,  when  he  rang  the  bell  it  was 
2.14.  As  soon  as  he  came  into  the  room  I  said,  '  Have  you  been  to  Mr.  Z. 
to  look  at  the  proofs  ? '  Wlien  ho  said  '  Yes, '  I  asked  again,  '  Have  you 
come  straight  from  there  ?  '  And  on  liis  saying  '  Yes '  again,  I  told  him  of 
my  impression. " 

My  husband  confirms  this  account,  and  adds  that  during  the  latter  part 
of  the  interview  with  Mr.  Z.  ho  had  been  standing  and  Mr.  Z.  sitting  at  a 
tal)le.  The  coincidence  of  time  must  have  been  pretty  nearly  exact.  I 
ought  to  say  that  I  knew  that  Mr.  Z.  had  received  the  proofs  to  look  over 
the  night  before,  but  neither  A.  nor  I  had  the  least  expectation  of  their 
being  so  soon  done,  and  A.  would  not  have  called  on  Mr.  Z.  that  morning  if 
he  had  not  gone  to  A.'s  rooms  in  the  course  of  the  morning  to  ask  him  to 
do  so. 

M.  i)E  G.  Verrall. 

XIV. — It  may  Ije  fui'ther  observed  that  the  tendency  of  automa- 
tism to  hypermnesia  is  shown  in  its  nascent  fomi  in  Mrs.  Verrall's 
haljit  of  remembering  forgotten  names,  etc.,  by  gazing  into  the  crystal. 
And  as  it  is  on  this  point  that  Professor  J anet's  experiments  have 
largely  turned,  I  may  here  quote  a  report,  revised  by  himself,  of  the 
remarks  with  which  he  followed  this  paper  when  it  was  read  (in 
part)  to  the  International  Congress  of  Exjjerimental  Psychology,, 
August  3rd,  1892  :— 

M.  49. 

Professor  Janet,  having  been  invited  to  speak  upon  the  paper,  said  that 
he  would  content  himself  Avith  certifying  the  reality  of  the  facts  described  by 
Mr.  Myers.  In  certain  circumstances  there  were  patients  who  could  not 
lo<ik  long  on  a  sliining  surface  without  experiencing  illusions  and  a  kind  of 
hallucinations.  Sometimes  tliose  hallucinations  possessed  interest  ;  some- 
times they  might  furnish  imiiortant  information  on  the  state  of  mind  of  the 
patient.  He  cited  some  of  the  hallucinations  which  he  had  studied.  (1)  It- 
Avas  known  that  after  serious  attacks  of  natural  soumambulism  there  was  a. 
complete  loss  of  memory  of  what  had  passed  during  the  attack.  Sometimes 
recollection  could  be  restored  easily,  by  divers  processes,  and  in  particular 
by  suggestion.    Too  often  it  was  impossible  to  restore  recollection  in  tliis 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

483 

way  ;  and  it  was  then  necessary  to  use  artificial  means.  That  of  which  he 
had  availed  himself  most  often  was  the  well-known  process  of  automatic 
writing  ;  but  other  methods  might  he  adopted.  One  day  a  young  female 
patient  had  an  attack  of  somnambulism,  during  which  she  had  written  a 
letter  which  she  had  afterwards  torn  up,  and  the  contents  of  which  she  had 
forgotten.  By  causing  her  to  gaze  upon  a  shining  surface  he  succeeded  in 
making  her  read  by  hallucination  the  whole  of  that  letter.  (2)  Many  patients 
were  tormented  by  fixed  ideas.  Some  had  full  consciousness  of  those  ideas 
and  openly  stated  what  they  were.  Others  could  not  well  describe  them, 
and  did  not  clearly  know  what  it  was  which  tormented  tliem.  Others  had  no 
notion  of  those  fixed  ideas,  which  provoked  only  states  of  emotion  and 
impulsions  in  them.  For  example  :  a  young  man  had  continual  fear,  without 
being  able  to  explain  what  he  was  afraid  of.  It  was  suflicient  to  make  him 
gaze  on  a  shining  surface  for  some  time  for  him  to  see  the  flames  of  a  fire  ; 
and  after  listening  to  a  monotonous  sound  for  some  time  he  became  aware  of 
certain  other  sounds,  those  of  the  bugle  of  the  fire  brigade  ;  in  a  word,  that 
process  revealed  the  persistent  idea  of  a  fire  which  he  had  witnessed  at  some 
previous  date.  (3)  Certain  patients  attacked  by  abonlie  (loss  of  volitional 
power)  needed  to  see  from  time  to  time  a  person  who  acted  as  the  director 
of  their  conscience.  When  the  patient  had  quitted  this  director  he  or  she 
was  well  ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  variable  time  again  fell-  ill  and  needed,  so  to 
speak,  to  be  wound  vip  again.  It  was  diflicult  to  know  Avhat  characterised 
the  period  of  health.  A  patient  of  that  kind  had,  at  the  time  when  she 
gazed  steadily  at  an  object,  the  hallucination  of  seeing  M.  Janet's  portrait, 
which  acted  as  a  kind  of  moral  direction  which  persisted  unconsciously.  As 
for  the  explanation  of  the  facts,  he  agreed  that  Mr.  Myers  was  right  in 
suggesting  very  difi'erent  causes  according  to  the  cases.  It  was  impossible 
to  explain  all  those  complex  phenomena  by  a  single  word.  There  was 
suggestion,  certainly  ;  but  there  were  also  other  very  difi'erent  things,  such 
as  the  associations  of  ideas,  the  modifications  of  the  state  of  consciousness, 
dreams,  etc.  As  to  the  patients  whom  he  had  observed,  he  had  always  been 
struck  by  the  phenomena  concerning  the  power  of  attention.  They  were 
always  weak  j^atients,  who  were  incapable  of  fixing  their  attention  long  on 
the  same  object  ;  when  they  were  forced  to  do  so  for  a  long  time  they 
experienced  every  kind  of  psychological  modification.  In  particular  they 
lost  the  control  of  their  movements  and  of  their  ideas.  He  had  seen,  for 
example,  a  child  of  that  character  who  could  not  pay  attention  at  school 
without  having  a  kind  of  convulsion.  With  his  patients  the  dreams  which 
they  had  been  made  to  undergo  automatically  manifested  themselves  easily 
when  the  conscious  thought  was  almost  suppressed  by  fatigue.  In  a  word,  it 
was  an  ingenious  process  for  bringing  to  light  dreams  which  had  been  dreamt 
withovit  the  knowledge  of  the  dreamer. 

With  crystal-seers  at  an  early  stage  confused  reminiscences  often 
supply  the  staple  of  the  pictures.  Thus  Miss  Z,  a  cousin  of  the 
Marquis  of  Bute,  to  whom  pictures  come  slowly  and  obscurely,  saw- 
several  scenes  which  to  her  seemed  new,  but  which  Lord  Bute,  with 
much  probability,  traced  to  memories  of  scenes  well  known  to  him, 
and  which  this  lady  knew  less  intimately.     Somewhat  similarly,  I 

484 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

have  watched  an  expei'iment  in  which  Miss  Z  described  the  slow 
formation  of  a  crystal-picture  of  a  man's  head,  which  only  after  a  long 
time  she  saw  to  be  almost  certainly  ijitended  as  a  picture  of  Tito — the 
hero-villain  of  Romola,  which  she  had  just  been  reading.  This  slow 
and  difficult  vision  was  found  somewhat  fatiguing ;  nor  should  I  recom- 
mend any  experimenter  to  push  the  trial  to  a  point  at  which  any 
strain  on  mind  or  eyes  is  felt.  I  leave  for  comment  on  a  futuie 
occasion  several  similar  cases,  which,  though  still  at  this  early  stage, 
seem  likely  to  develop  into  more  of  interest. 

XV. — With  the  experiments  of  my  next  infoi'mant,  Miss  X,  readers 
of  these  Proceedings  are  already  familiar.  It  is  gratifying  to  know  that 
it  was  her  paper  on  Cry stal-gaziug  in  Part  XIV.  (to  which  all  who  have 
not  read  it  should  here  refer)  which  led  Professor  Janet  to  undertake 
the  interesting  experiments  above  narrated.  It  will  be  seen  that  Miss 
X's  phenomena  continue  pretty  steadily,  and  that  her  earlier  conclu- 
sions fi'oin  them,  although  in  several  ways  developed,  have  not  needed 
any  important  modification.  Her  results  increase,  of  course,  in  value 
with  each  yeai-'s  continuance.  As  to  the  relation  of  the  visions  to 
health,  for  instance,  Miss  X's  expeiience  should  now  carrj^  much 
weight.  I  will  leave  her  to  speak  for  herself,  beginning  with  this  topic 
of  health,  and  gradually  ascending  the  scale  of  intrinsic  interest  in  the 
visions  recorded. 

Case  II.— Miss  X. 

M.  50. 

Health. — In  view  of  certain  statements  which  are  current  as  to  the 
physical  conditions  of  crystal-gazing,  I  wish  to  say,  as  emphatically  as 
possible,  tliat  in  my  own  case  these  experiments  are  neither  the  cause  nor 
the  effect  of  any  morbid  condition. 

I  can  say  positively,  from  frequent  exjjerience,  that  to  attempt  experi- 
ments when  mind  and  body  are  not  entirely  at  ease  is  absolute  waste  of  time. 
The  very  conditions  -whicli  miglit  make  crystal-gazing  a  fatiguing  and 
exhausting  process  render  it  impossible.  I  can  with  equal  certainty  disclaim, 
for  myself,  the  allegation  that  success  in  inducing  hallucinations  of  this  kind 
is  due  in  any  way  to  an  etcd  maJadif.  The  four  years  dvn-ing  whicli  I  have 
carried  on  experiments  in  crystal-gazing  have  been  among  the  liealtliiest  of 
my  life.  I  cannot  describe  myself  as  rolnist  ;  and  indeed  I  was  for  more 
than  three  years  an  invalid — tlie  direct  cause  of  my  illness  being  a  railway 
accident  ; — but  my  incapacity  is  for  the  endurance  of  vitiated  atmosphere 
and  late  hours,  and  not  for  habits  of  early  rising,  systematic  mental  work, 
and  a  walk  of  from  six  to  twelve  miles  a  day  in  almost  all  weathers.  I  belong 
to  no  effete  race,  but  to  a  family  which  for  jihysique  and  bmgevity  might 
cliallenge  any  in  the  annals  of  Mr.  Francis  Galton  a  family  which  lias 
never  lived  in  cities,  and  which,  for  many  generations,  has  expended  its 
energies  and  amljitions  on  horses  and  hounds. 

Classification  of  Pictures. — I  may  divide  my  crystal-visions  into  three 
classes,  which  pass  into  each  other  by  gradual  transition.  First  and  lowest 
1  place  the  most  numerous  class,  consisting  jjartly  of  mere  reijroductions, 

The  Siihliminal  Consciousness. 

485 

■which  may  be  voluntary  or  may  be  spontaneous,  of  objects  recently  seen — 
arranged,  perhaps,  in  some  fantastic  way  ;  but  more  largely  of  pictvires 
"which  are  merely  fanciful,  and  have,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  actual  counterpart 
in  fact.  These,  of  course,  I  discourage  as  mere  waste  of  time.  Such 
pictures  plainly  bring  no  fresh  knowledge  ;  they  seem  merely  to  objectify 
ordinary  mind's-eye  pictin-es,  or  the  meaningless  scraps  of  inward  visions, 
which  float  before  one  when  attention  is  relaxed.  These  are  quite  as  vivid  as 
any  other  crystal-pictures,  and  will  come  at  any  time,  if  I  am  not  over-tired. 
Above  these  comes  a  class  of  pictui  es  which,  though  tliey  may  not  communi- 
cate any  new  fact,  yet  imj^ress  me  as  containing  some  memory  or  some  imagin- 
ative eflect  which  does  not  come  from  my  ordinary  self.  In  tliis  class  I  should 
place  revivals  of  memory,  and  also  illustrations  of  thought  : — e.  g. ,  pictures 
ajjpropriate  to  a  story  of  which  I  have  thought,  or  to  the  sentiment  of  a  piece 
■of  music,  or  to  a  place  of  whicli  I  have  lieard  some  mention.  I  feel  that  my 
ordinary  self  has  not  invented  these  pictures  ;  and  that  they  show  a  coherent 
intelligence  ;  but  that  intelligence  is  working  on  data  which  I  have  at  some 
time  or  other  consciously  acquired.  The  third  class,  which  is  the  rarest, 
consists  of  pictures  which  are  in  some  sense  veridical  ;  which  bring  me 
iiiformation  as  to  something,  past,  present,  or  future,  which  I  have  no  other 
means  of  knowing. 

Class  I. — I  can  generally,  but  not  always,  see  in  a  crystal,  or  other  clear 
tlejjth  or  smooth  surface,  a  life-like  picture  of  some  object  which  has  lately 
occupied  my  attention — as  a  book  which  I  have  been  reading,  an  advertise- 
ment in  a  railway  carriage,  &c.  These  pictures  do  not  resemble  tlie  after- 
images which  seem  to  blur  my  retina  after  I  have  looked  at  a  bright  scene. 
Those  after-images  are,  with  me,  indistinct,  and  show  no  true  colours,  only  a 
contrast  of  bright  and  dark.  The  crystal-pictures,  on  the  other  hand,  show 
true  colours,  and  are  like  memory-images,  only  more  distinct.  If,  however, 
I  only  see  images  of  this  kind,  I  generally  cease  to  look.  Their  only  interest 
lies  in  the  facility  which  they  ofi'er  for  optical  experiments. 

These  experiments,  however,  have  been  for  the  most  part  imsatisfactory, 
as  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  how  far  the  results  are  due  to  mere  exjjecta- 
tion.  In  no  case  thus  far  have  I  obtained  an  optical  result  which  surprised 
me,  nor  a  result  capable  of  such  exact  measurement  as  to  prove  that  it  was 
either  optically  wrong,  or  more  exactly  right  than  my  general  knciwledge 
could  have  made  it.    I  mention  a  few  exjjeriments. 

1.  Distortion . — If  I  look  in  a  spoon  I  see  the  image  distorted  in  the 
familiar  way.  But  I  cannot  say  whether  it  is  distorted  jarecisely  as  a  real 
image  would  be.  For  in  the  first  place  the  picture  does  not  always  appear 
to  be  on  the  surface  of  the  spioon  or  otlier  speculum.  For  instance,  in  a 
globular  crystal,  or  semi-globular  ring-stone,  the  picture  ajDpears  as  on  a  flat 
surface.  In  the  second  place,  I  could  not,  at  any  rate  in  the  short  time 
allowed,  draw  the  distorted  picture  accurately  enough  to  admit  of  subsequent 
comparison  with  the  reflection  of  the  real  object  itself  in  tlie  spoon. 

2.  Reflection. — If  I  see  a  picture  under  circumstances  which  suggest  tliat  it 
is  a  reflection,  I  see  it  reversed  as  in  a  mirror.  Thus,  in  a  railway  carriage,  I 
experimented  with  a  small  crystal  and  small  mirror,  both  hanging  at  my 
chatelaine.  I  easily  reproduced  in  the  crystal  p/cinres  (not  real  reflections)  ot 
the  advertisements  on  the  carriage  walls,  and  just  as  Lane's  Egy^Jtian 

486 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

magician  told  him  that  the  crystal  "made  left  ajjpear  right,"  so  were  these 
pictures  reversed,  and  the  print  ajDjieared  as  Spiegel-schrift.  But  I  could 
then  reflect  the  imaginary  picture  from  the  crystal  into  the  mirror,  and  there 
the  letters,  "  Compton's  Hotel,"  appeared  set  right  again,  and  legible  in  the 
ordinary  way. 

On  the  other  hand  I  once  suddenly  entered  a  drawing-room  where  there 
was  a  large  mirror,  and  saw  a  name  for  which  I  had  been  hunting  in  vain, 
printed  as  though  on  a  visiting  card  fastened  on  the  wall,  and  not  reversed, 
in  the  middle  of  the  mirror,  which  thus  acted  as  a  speculum.  But  note 
that  when  I  saw  the  word  I  had  for  the  instant  forgotten  that  there  was  a 
mirror  there,  and  I  took  the  reflected  wall  in  the  mirror  for  a  real  wall. 
So  that  the  j^icture  confoi'med  to  my  erroneous  conception,  and  not  to  any 
true  optical  law. 

3.  Magiufication. — I  have  used  the  magnifying-glass  11  times  and  it  has 
always  appeared  to  magnify.  In  one  case  already  recorded  (Vol.  V. ,  p.  513)  the 
apparent  enlargement  of  the  picture  enabled  me  to  read  significant  letters, 
without  which  the  picture  would  have  been  meaningless.  But  this,  of  course, 
may  be  classed  as  merely  one  form  of  the  picture's  development  ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  letters  mujht  liave  become  visible  without  the  magnifying-glass, 
although  they  seemed  to  be  vanishing  and  to  be  only  just  caught.  I  have 
three  times  used  a  bogus  glass  of  similar  size  and  appearance,  and  that  glass 
did  not  magnify.  However,  I  have  never  felt  sure  that  I  did  not  in  some 
way  distinguish  between  the  true  and  the  false  magnifier  even  in  the  act  of 
carrying  them  to  my  jjicture. 

4.  DovMe  Befyaction. — I  once  tried  a  flake  of  Iceland  sj^ar,  an  object 
which  I  had  never  before  handled.  I  knew,  however,  its  projaerty  of  double 
refraction,  so  that  the  duplication  of  the  picture  which  followed  may  have 
been  due  to  expectation,  although  it  looked  to  me  rather  more  curious  than 
I  consciously  antic  ijiated. 

5.  Colour  Contrast. — It  is  my  impression  that  there  is  retinal  fatigue,  and 
consequent  sequence  of  complementary  colours,  from  gazing  at  crystal-jjictures 
as  mucli  as  from  gazing  at  real  objects.  I  never  doubted  this  until  the 
question  was  put  to  me,  although  I  now  find  it  diflicult  to  prove  that  uncon- 
scious expectation  may  not  account  for  this  also. 

I  will  first  mention  spontaneous,  and  then  experimental  instances. 

I  received  one  day  a  visit  from  a  friend  in  a  rather  striking  blue  gown, 
which,  some  hours  later,  the  crystal  reproduced.  This  picture  was  followed 
by  another  of  the  lady's  little  boy,  whom  I  had  not  seen  lately,  dressed  in  a 
bright  orange  garment,  which  I  feel  sure  he  does  not  possess. 

Again,  one  afternoon  someone  was  talking  about  Palis.sy  ware.  I  was  not 
specially  addressed,  and  was  staring  aindessly  at  a  dark  green,  almost  black 
glass  scent-bottle.  I  observed  in  it  a  picture,  all  in  pale  green,  of  a  man 
hastily  tearing  up  some  wooden  garden  palings  ;  and  before  I  had  time  to 
wonder  what  this  meant,  it  was  followed  by  another  picture,  all  in  red,  of 
the  corner  of  the  library  where  as  a  child  I  kept  my  books,  including  one 
distinctly  recognisable,  which  I  have  not  seen  these  fifteen  years,  called 
The  Provocations  of  Mme.  Palissy.  Then  I  remembered  that  one  of  this, 
lady's  provocations  consisted  in  the  fact  that  her  husband  fed  his  furnace 
with  the  household  furniture,  or  even  the  fixtures  of  the  house  itself. 

The  Subliminal  C'onscioiosness. 

These  are  the  only  spontaneous  colour-sequences  which  I  can  recall,  as 
the  pictures  do  not  usually  show  any  one  predominating  colour.  By  experi- 
nient  I  find  that  if  I  tire  tlie  retina  by  staring  at  a  red  flower,  I  see  a  green 
one  in  the  crystal ;  and  conversely  that  if  I  summon  up  (as  I  sometimes  can  do)- 
a  red  flower  in  the  crystal,  I  then  see  a  green  jjatch  on  the  wall.  If  I  use 
two  crystals  there  is  a  similar  change  of  colour  between  the  first  picture  and 
the  second.  Or  if  I  merely  desire  a  change  of  colour  in  a  crystal-picture  I 
find  that  blue  is  followed  by  orange,  yellow  by  purple,  green  by  red.  But 
this  may,  of  course,  be  due  to  unconscious  self-suggestion,  although  I  am  not 
so  familiar  with  the  sec^uence  of  colours  that  I  could  without  hesitation  name 
the  complement  of  any  given  colour. 

The  same  result  would  occur  if  my  hlne  picture  were  merely  conjured  up- 
with  closed  eyes.  On  being  transferred  to  the  crystal — I,  as  it  were,  remaining 
entirely  passive — it  would  ap2:iear  as  orange.  When  I  first  discerned  this  fact 
it  was  distinctly  to  my  own  surprise,  and  it  required  a  moment's  thought  to 
assure  myself  tliat  this  was  in  the  natural  course  of  events.  It  may  be 
worth  noting  that  a  distinct  efibrt  is  required  to  convert  a  scene — lighted,  for 
example,  with  red — to  its  natural  colouring  or  even  to  a  neutral  tint.  It  is- 
necessary  to  close  tlie  eyes  or  to  look  away  for  a  moment  ;  so  that  what 
follows  is  a  second  edition  rather  than  a  prolongation  of  the  first  picture. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  mere  desire  for  change  Avill  produce  a  green  light 
rapidly  alternating  with  the  original  hue. 

6.  Size  of  Picttires. — The  pictures  always  seem  to  fit  into  the  crystal,  or  to 
be  seen  witliin  tlie  limit.s  of  any  larger  speculum.  They  never  ajjpear  larger 
than  the  speculum,  nor  lose  their  distinct  location,  though,  if  they  are  fairly 
simple  in  outline,  I  can  generally  reproduce  them  at  will  of  any  desired  size, 
when  I  raise  my  eyes  to  any  flat  background, — as  the  wall,  a  screen,  A'c,  in 
front  of  me. 

7.  Bise,  Deration,  and  Dimppearance. — I  liave  looked  at  a  jiicture  for 
eight  minutes  without  its  disappearing.  I  tlien  was  tired  and  looked  away. 
Generally  the  jiictures  last  two  or  three  minutes.  If  there  is  movement  in 
the  picture,  e.;/.,  if  it  reijresents  a  street  with  carriages  passing,  it  usually 
lasts  longer  than  if  it  represents  an  inanimate  object.  Sometimes  the 
picture  is  there  suddenly  and  completely  ;  others  are  built  up  by  degrees,, 
sometimes  with  grotesque  results.  These  are  generally  fanciful  pictures, 
partly  shaped  by  my  conscious  mind.  I  do  not,  however,  perceive  that  any 
use  is  made  points  de  repcre.  There  is  a  similar  variety  in  their  departure. 
Some  I  can  dismiss  at  will.  Some  disappear  slowly  ;  and  the  essential  part, 
so  to  say,  may  disappear  before  the  accessories.  I  once  stood  outside  a  door 
with  a  ground-glass  pattern,  waiting  to  hear  news  of  a  friend  dangerously  ill 
within.  This  scene,  which  I  suppose  had  unconsciously  impressed  me  as 
scenes  witnessed  in  moments  of  emotion  will  do,  reappeared  on  the  same  daj' 
in  the  crystal.  Then  all  faded  excejit  the  pjattern  on  the  door  ;  and  when  I 
took  the  crystal  out  again  at  the  end  of  a  week  the  pattern  still  persisted. 

I  have  mentioned  these  points,  some  of  which  belong  equally  to  all  my 
pictures,  in  connection  with  the  first  or  lowest  class,  that  of  mere  memory- 
images,  brighter  indeed  and  more  permanent  than  those  which  I  can  summon 
up  "  in  my  mind's  eye,"  but  not  otherwise  very  different. 

Class  II. — My  second  class  consists  of  fanciful  pictures,  and  of  pictures. 

-488 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

•of  scenes  once  consciously  known,  but  now  forgotten  by  my  ordinary  self. 
Tlie  fanciful  pictures  much  reseml)le  tZ^ifSiovis  /i)/;:)(ia(/o(/igi!.es,  to  which  lam 
subject.  I  can,  however,  see  the  illusions  hypnagogiques  in  the  dark  and  with 
my  eyes  shut,  while  to  see  the  crystal-pictures  I  need  at  least  just  enough 
light  to  make  a  bright  point  on  the  ring  or  crystal.  These  fancy  pictures  in 
the  crystal  often  take  tlie  form  of  scenes  in  some  little  story  which  I 
have  amused  myself  by  composing.  I  have  quoted  in  my  jn-evious  paper  one 
or  two  cases  where  the  scene  thus  shown  differed  from  wliat  I  had  meant  to 
happen  in  my  story.  But  I  have  a  habit  of  inwardly  visualising  imaginary 
scenes  ;  and  these  develojaments  in  the  crystal,  though  they  may  strike 
me  as  unexpected  improvements,  move  witliin  the  ordinary  limits  of  my 
thought,  like  ideas  of  1113'  own,  rather  happier  than  usual. 

Sometimes  when  crystal-vision  recovers  for  me  a  memory  which  has  not, 
so  to  say,  sunk  far  out  of  sight,  I  get  at  it  by  a  symbolic  picture  which  shows 
that  my  unconscious  self  has  gone  through  some  chain  of  association,  of  a 
trifling  but  characteristic  kind.  For  instance,  I  have  been  studying  trees 
lately,  and  one  day  was  annoyed  by  a  vague  impression  of  having  made 
acquaintance  with  something  new  and  interesting  which  I  could  not  recall. 
In  the  crystal  I  recognised  exactly  the  spot  where  I  knew  that  I  had  seen 
this  interesting  tree  ;  but  I  could  see  no  trees,  only  piles  and  piles  of  indis- 
tinguishable dead  leaves.  Then  the  recollection  flashed  upon  me.  The  tree  I 
Avanted  was  the  "red-flowered  buck-eye"  chestnut;  and  the  link  between 

■dead  leaves  and  chestnut-trees  lay  in  a  line  of  Mrs.  Browning's  : 

"  Not  a  grand  nature.  Not  my  chestnut  woods 
Of  Vallonibrosa  "— 
which  I  had  happened  to  notice  a  few  days  previously  as  a  variety  on  the 
Miltonic  picture  of  Vallombrosa  as  it  looks  when  the  leaves  have  fallen. 
Trivial  as  the  incident  was,  it  seemed  to  show  that  the  same  sort  of  verbal 
links  are  used  in  the  association  of  ideas  below  as  above  tlie  conscious 
tthreshold. 

Here  is  a  case  probably  due  to  forgotten  knowledge.  Some  friends  coolly 
sent  me  a  letter  addressed  "  Dr.  Henderson  "  (I  do  not  give  the  real  names), 
with  orders  to  look  for  tlie  rest  in  tlie  crystal.  I  looked,  and  was  rather 
staggered  to  read,  "Dr.  Henderson,  Taunton  Gaol."  I  could  assign  no 
grounds  for  sucli  a  libel,  but  on  consulting  a  relative  as  to  what  Hendersons 
we  had  ever  known,  slie  re)nembered  that  amongst  otliers  "there  was  a 
■chaplain  of  that  name  at  Taunton  Gaol,  but  long  before  your  time."  In  )ny 
pre-crystal  days  I  could  have  sworn,  that  I  had  never  heard  of  tliis  chaplain. 

In  this  second  class  I  may  also  count  the  cases  where  the  crystal  has  brought 
•  a  revival  of  some  sight  or  word  which  might  easily  have  reached  my  conscious 
-attention,  but  has  been  prevented  from  so  doing  by  distraction  on  my  part. 
I  give  four  instances  of  this  not  uncommon  type. 

1.  I  saw  in  the  crystal  a  pool  of  blood  (as  it  seemed  to  me)  lying  on  tlie 
pavement  at  the  corner  of  a  terrace  close  to  my  home.  This  suggested  nothing 
to  me.  Then  I  remembered  that  I  had  j^assed  over  that  spot  in  the  course 
■  of  a  walk  of  a  few  hundred  yards  home  from  the  circulating  library  ;  and 
that,  the  street  being  empty,  I  had  been  looking  into  the  books  as  I 
^walked.  Afterwards  I  found  that  my  boots  and  the  bottom  of  my  dress  were 
^stained  with  red  jjaint,  which  I  must  have  walked  through  unobservingly 

The  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

during  the  sliort  frajet  just  described.  I  cannot  tell  which  part  of  me  it  was 
that  mistook  jjaint  for  blood — whether  it  was  my  misinteriH-etation  of  the 
crystal-picture,  or  a  mistake  in  tlie  picture  itself. 

2.  I  saAv  in  the  crystal  a  young  girl,  an  intimate  friend,  tvaving  to  me 
from  her  carriage.  I  observed  that  her  hair,  which  had  hung  do^vn  her  back 
when  I  last  saw  lier,  was  now  put  up  in  young-lady  fashion.  Most  certainly 
I  had  not  consciously  seen  even  the  carriage,  the  look  of  whicli  I  knew  very 
well.  But  next  day  I  called  on  my  friend  ;  was  reproached  by  her  for  not 
observing  her  as  she  passed  ;  and  perceived  tliat  she  had  altered  her  hair  in 
the  way  which  the  crystal  had  shovi'n. 

3.  Next  as  to  sounds  not  attended  to.  I  was  writing  at  an  open  window 
and  became  aware  that  an  elderly  relative  inside  the  room  liad  said  some- 
thmg  to  me.  But  the  noise  of  the  street  prevented  my  liearing,  and  a  wish 
to  discourage  conversation  prevented  my  asking  what  had  been  said.  My 
ink  began  to  run  low,  and  I  took  up  the  inkstand  to  tip  it.  Looking  into  the 
ink  I  saw  a  white  florist's  parcel  as  though  reflected  on  its  surface.  Going- 
into  another  room  I  there  found  the  parcel  in  question,  of  which  I  had  had  no 
knowledge.  I  returned  carrying  it,  and  was  greeted  with  the  remark,  "I 
told  you  half  an  hour  ago  to  attend  to  those  flowers  ;  they  will  all  be  dead." 

4.  A  relative  of  mine  was  talking  one  day  with  a  caller  in  the  room 
next  to  that  in  which  I  was  reading,  and  beyond  wishing  that  they  were 
furtlier  I  paid  no  attention  to  anything  they  said,  and  certainly  could  have 
declared  positively  that  I  did  not  hear  a  word.  Next  day  I  saw  in  a  polished 
mahogany  table,  "1,  [Earl'sJ-square,  Notting  Hill. "  I  had  no  idea  whose 
this  address  might  be.  But  some  days  later  my  relative  remarked,  "  H. 
(the  caller  aforesaid)  has  left  Kensington.  She  told  me  her  address  the 
other  day,  but  I  did  not  write  it  down.  "  It  occurred  to  me  to  ask,  "  Was  it 
1,  [Earl'sJ-square  ? "  and  this  turned  out  to  be  the  case. 

Class  III. — In  these  cases,  and  in  the  somewhat  similar  case  of  an 
announcement  of  deatli  seen  in  the  Times  ^  {Proceeclinrjs,  Yol.  V.,  p.  507)  I 
cannot  prove  that  I  could  not,  if  I  had  tried,  have  heard  or  seen  the  word  or 
object  wliich  appeared  in  the  crystal  without  having  previously  appeared  in 
my  consciousness.  It  may  have  been  distraction,  and  not  sheer  sensory 
disability,  which  prevented  me  from  noticing  these  details.  But  in  some 
other  cases— and  with  these  I  may  perhaps  begin  my  third  class— I  have 

1  I  may  liere  remind  the  reader  of  the  large  group  of  ill-understood  phenomena 
at  pre.sent  grouped  together  under  the  name  of  Dynamorjenij  (F^re,  Rev.  IhiL,  XX., 
3C4,  &c.)  These  are  cases  where  either  muscular  power,  as  tested  by  grip  of  the- 
dynamometer,  or  the  acuteness  of  some  one  sense,  is  increased  by  a  stimulus  to  some- 
other  sense.  Thus  the  Viennese  aurist  Urbantschisch  (.James  s  Psi/cholorii/,  II.,  p.  29  ; 
Pfluger's^rcfeiV.,XLII.,  p.  154)  finds  that  "a tuning  fork  sounded  close  to  the  ear  will 
sometimes  increase  acuteness  of  vision  so  that  letters  can  be  read  at  a  greater  distance. 
Conversely  sounds  became  audible  when  lights  were  exhibited  to  the  eye."  Simi- 
larly Fere  finds  that  in  healthy  subjects  lost  after-images  can  be  recalled  by  the  applica- 
tion of  a  tuning  fork  in  vibration  to  the  top  of  tlie  head  {Pathologic  dcs  Emotions,  p.  29)._ 
So  with  hy.sterical  subjects  red  light  quickens  perceptions  of  taste  and  smell.  '  And,, 
in  many  healthy  subjects  an  increased  acuteness  of  vision  and  other  senses  m.ay 
be  produced  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  It  is  the  subliminal  self,  in  my  termin- 
ology, which  h.as  to  supply  this  extra  acuteness  ;  and  the  crystal-vision  is  merely 
another  way  of  getting  at  this  reserve  of  power.— [F.  W.  H.  M.] 

490 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

■actually  tried  iny  best  to  see  or  hear  something,  but  failed  ;  and  Alien  the 
•crystal  has  shown  me  that  something  witliin  me  has  been  able  to  see  or 
hear  at  longer  range  than  I  knew. 

1.  From  a  letter,  written  July  1st,  1891,  I  take  the  following  account  :  "  I 
looked  across  the  room  this  morning  to  a  distant  table,  where  I  expected  to 
see  a  book  I  wanted .  It  was  not  there,  but  my  eye  was  caught  by  another 
book  which  I  saw  was  strange  to  me.  I  tried,  but  could  not  read  the  title 
at  that  distance  (I  have  since  proved  that,  even  now  I  know  it,  this  is 
impossible)  ;  and  turned  away  to  resume  my  writing.  On  my  blank  paper 
— as  in  a  crystal-scene — I  read,  'The  Valley  of  Lilies,'  which  I  found  to  be 
the  title  of  the  book.  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  seeing  the  book  before, 
certainly  not  in  this  house,  though  it  may  have  caught  my  eye  in  a  shop." 
On  July  2nd  I  add  :  ' '  The  book  was  brought  into  the  house  in  my  absence, 
and  placed  [by  a  relative]  on  her  special  table,  on  which  mij  things  are  never 
put,  and  which,  therefore,  I  should  not  necessarily  glance  at  on  entering  tlie 
room,  as  at  my  own  table,  for  cards  or  letters.  I  did  not  enter  the  room 
till  after  lunch  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  went  straight  to  my  own  seat,  not  pass- 
ing her  table,  which  is  in  the  opposite  corner.  The  book  is  of  rather  peculiar 
apj)earance — an  imitation  of  wood.  If  I  had  consciously  seen  it  in  a  shop  I 
should  jjrobably  have  Ijought  it,  for  it  purports  to  be  by  my  favourite  a, 
Kempis." 

2.  I  give  another  instance  in  whicli  a  similar  slight  extension  of  the 
power  of  hcariiuj  seems  to  be  involved  : — 

In  August,  1891,  we  went  for  a  few  weeks  to  a  small  country  place,  where 
we  had  taken  a  house  for  the  autumn,  and  which  I  had  never  visited  before, 
except  once  for  a  single  day.  One  day  a  kindly  neighbour  called  to  offer  us 
the  use  of  his  garden  during  his  own  absence  from  home.  As  he  left  the 
house  he  looked  uj^  in  passing  the  window,  and  said  something,  of  which 
neitlier  I  nor  a  girl  who  was  staying  with  me  could  catch  a  single  word. 

The  same  evening  I  saw  in  the  crystal  a  picture  of  some  extraordinarily 
tall  and  bushy  sweet-peas  trained  over  wire  fencing — a  picture  to  which  I 
could  assign  no  meaning.  The  next  day  we  met  our  friend's  housekeeper, 
who  referred  to  the  invitation,  and  added,  "  Mr.  P.  says  he  hopes  you  heard 
his  warning  not  to  lose  yourselves  among  the  sweet-peas  "  !  On  visiting  the 
garden,  I  found  the  fencing  covered  exactly  as  the  crystal  had  shown,  the 
sweet-peas,  of  which  Mr.  P.  was  justly  so  jiroud,  having  been  arranged  to 
intercept  a  view  of  the  railway. 

Next  above  these  apparent  extensions  of  faculty — though  next  with  a 
•great  gap  between — come  the  telepathic  visions,  where  some  fact  quite  out 
of  my  normal  cognizance  seems  to  be  flashed  upon  me  from  another  mind — 
a  mind  not  necessarily  thinking  of  me  at  the  time.  I  have  had  several  intima- 
tions of  this  sort  otherwise  than  by  crystal-vision  since  my  last  paper  was 
published  (S.P.R.  ProceecUiirjs,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  358)  ;  but  I  think  only  three  by 
aid  of  the  crystal. 

1.  A  friend  wrote  to  tell  me  that — acting  on  some  suggestion  of  mine 
— she  had  secured  an  engagement  on  a  newspaper,  adding  ' '  that  she 
was  not  obliged  to  fill  all  her  columns  with  fashions. "  This  2:iln'ase  suggested 
the  Queen,  or  some  paper  of  the  kind  ;  but  the  crystal  on  being  interro- 
gated showed  a  magazine  about  the  size  of  the  English  Illustrated,  with 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

491 

the  title  The  Princess.  I  took  this  for  a  cynical  joke  on  the  part  of 
the  crystal — a  "  not  quite  Quecii."  But  I  have  since  found  that  there  is  such 
a  paper,  and  that  my  frieiid  is  engaged  on  it.  Tlie  look  of  the  j)aper  is 
difierent  from  what  I  saw,  as  though  the  name  only  had  been  transferred 
to  me. 

2.  On  October  12th,  1891,  I  was  discussing  the  question  of  crystal- 
pictures  with  a  gentleman  to  whom  I  had  been  but  that  day  introduced,  aird 
of  whose  friends  or  surroundings  I  knew  nothing  whatever,  and  wlio  was  so 
deeply  interested  in  the  subject  that  I  proanised  to  look  into  the  crystal  with 
the  definite  hope  of  seeing  something  which  he  might  find  jjersonally 
interesting.  I  was  rewai-ded  by  three  pictures,  of  which  one  was  as  follows  : — 

A  room  containing  a  high  glass  screen,  round  the  end  of  which  came, 
after  a  few  moments,  a  lady,  short,  plump,  dressed  in  blue  serge  dress,  with 
a  short  jacket,  in  the  pockets  of  which  she  rested  her  finger-tips  :  elbows 
stuck  out,  hair  dark,  dressed  in  a  low,  loose  knot,  fine  dark  eyes,  and  a 
white  sailor  hat.  As  she  walked  across  the  jiicture,  she  turned  and  seemed 
to  look  at  me  with  some  curiosity. 

We  had  occasion  a  few  days  later  to  visit  Mr.  R.'s  office  on  business,  when 
I  described  my  pictures.  No.  2,  the  picture  aljove-described,  he  rec<.)gnised 
as  representing  his  lady-secretary,  though  some  female  clerks  in  the  office 
denied  that  she  wore  a  sailor  liat.  She  was  not  in  at  the  time,  but  he  was 
able  to  show  me  the  glass  screen  in  the  room  in  which  she  habitually  sat. 
I  made  her  acquaintance  later,  and  found  that  I  was,  for  special  reasons,  an 
object  of  some  curiosity  to  her,  and  also  that  she  Jiad  had  a  white  sailor  hat, 
which,  only  a  day  or  two  before  my  vision,  had  been  blown  into  the  Thames, 
leaving  her  to  walk  down  the  Embankment  bareheaded. 

My  other  two  visions  Mr.  R.  regarded  as  also  reflected  from  his  mind 
and  thoughts  at  the  time,  but  I  had  not  the  same  degree  of  proof  as  in  the 
one  wliich  I  have  described. 

3.  On  August  10th  of  this  year  D.  went  with  her  family  to  sjiend  tlie 
autumn  at  a  country  house  which  they  had  taken  furnislied,  and  wliich 
neither  of  us  had  ever  seen.  I  was  also  avi'ay  from  home,  the  distance 
between  us  being  at  least  200  miles. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th  I  received  a  pencil  note  from  her,  evidently 
written  with  difficulty,  saying  that  she  had  been  very  fiercely  attacked  by  a 
savage  dog,  from  whicli  she  and  our  own  little  terrier  had  defended  them- 
selves and  each  other  as  best  they  could,  receiving  a  score  or  so  of  wounds 
between  them  before  they  could  summon  anyone  to  their  assistance.  She 
gave  me  no  details,  assuming  that,  as  often  happens  between  us,  I  should 
have  received  intimation  of  her  danger  before  the  news  could  reacli  me 
by  ordinary  methods. 

D.  was  extremely  disappointed  on  hearing  that  I  had  known  nothing.  I 
had  not  consulted  the  crystal  on  the  day  of  the  accident,  and  Jiad  received 
no  intimation.  Begging  her  to  tell  me  nothing  further  as  to  the  scene 
of  her  adventure,  I  sought  for  it  in  the  crystal  on  Sunday,  14th,  and  noted 
the  following  details.  Tlie  attacking  dog  was  a  lai'ge  Ijlack  I'etriever,  and 
•our  terrier  held  him  by  the  throat  while  D.  beat  at  him  in  the  rear.  I  saw 
also  the  details  of  D.'s  dress.  But  all  this  I  knew  or  could  guess.  What  I 
could  not  know  was  that  the  terrier's  collar  lay  upon  the  ground,  that  the 

492 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

struggle  took  i^lace  upon  a  lawn  beyond  which  lay  earth — a  garden  bed 
pi'obably — overshadowed  by  an  aucuba  bush. 

On  September  9th  I  had  an  opportunity  of  rejDeating  all  this  to  Mr. 
Myers,  and  on  the  10th  I  joined  D.  at  tlieir  country  house.  The  rest  of  tlie 
story  I  give  in  lier  own  words  :  — 

' '  As  we  were  somewhat  disappointed  that  no  intimation  of  the  accident 
which  had  occurred  to  me  had  reached  Miss  X,  she  determined  to  try  to 
call  up  a  mental  picture  of  the  scene  where  it  had  occurred,  and  if  jjossible 
to  verify  it  when  visiting  us  later  on. 

' '  On  the  night  of  her  arrival  at  C  ,  we  were  not  able  to  go  over  the 

wliole  of  the  grounds  alone,  and  it  was  tlierefore  not  until  the  following 
morning  that  we  went  together  for  tlie  special  purpose  of  fixing  on  the  exact 
spot.  Miss  X.  was  in  front,  as  I  feared  some  unconscious  sign  of  recogni- 
tion on  my  part  might  spoil  the  effect  of  her  choice.  The  garden  is  a  very 
large  one,  and  we  wandered  for  some  time  witliout  fixing  on  a  sjjot,  the  sole 
clue  given  l)y  Miss  X.  being  that  she  '  could  not  get  the  right  jilace,  it 
wanted  a  liijht  bush.'  I  pointed  out  several,  silver  maples,  &c.,  in  various 
directions,  but  none  wc)ukl  do,  and  she  finally  walked  down  to  the  j^lace 
where  the  accident  had  occurred,  close  to  a  large  aucuba  (the  only  one,  I 
believe,  in  the  shrubbery),  and  said,  '  This  must  be  it  ;  it  has  the  path  and 
the  grass  and  the  bush,  as  it  should,  but  I  expected  it  to  be  much  further 
from  the  house.' 

' '  I  may  add  that  T  was  not  myself  aware  of  this  bush,  but  as  I  was  studying 
them  all  at  the  time  we  were  attacked  by  the  dog,  and  as  this  one  is  close  to 
the  spot  where  I  was  knocked  down,  it  seems  jaossible  that  it  was  the  last 
I  noticed,  and  it  may  tlierefore  have  influenced  me  more  than  I  knew." 

[I  understand  that  there  are  a  good  many  acres  of  grounds  round  the 
house  in  question,  and  that  the  dog's  attack  was  made  within  50  yards  of 
the  house — jilainly  an  unlikely  })lace  for  a  struggle  so  long  protracted  without 
the  arrival  of  help.— F.  W.H.M.] 

Thei'e  seems  no  d  priori  reason  why  the  induction  of  manageable 
and  instructive  hallucinations  should  be  confined  to  the  sense  of  sight. 
Most  of  the  visual  phenomena  which  led  up  to  crystal-seeing  can  be 
paralleled  with  auditoiy  phenomena  of  the  same  types.  Thus  there  are 
light-hearers  as  well  as  sound-seers  ;  and  illusions  hypnagogiques 
sometimes  take  the  form  of  auditory  as  well  as  of  visual  impressions.  I 
will  not  23ui'sue  the  subject  further  until  I  have  more  experimental 
cases  to  comjaare  ;  but  I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  start  my  collection  with 
the  following  communication  from  Miss  X.,  whose  example  may  I  hope 
be  followed  hy  others  in  shell-hearing  as  profitably  as  in  crystal-vision. 

Notes  on  Shell-Hearing. 

M.  51. 

In  the  course  of  some  widely  varied  reading  on  historical  methods  of 
divination  I  liave  found  much  that  has  seemed  to  me  esijecially  interesting- 
and  suggestive  amotig  the  stories  of  voice  oracles — not  the  articulate  utter- 
ances of  seer  or  priestess,  which,  j^ossibly,  find  their  modern  counterpart  in 
"trance  mediums  " — l)ut  the  more  mysterious  Rumour  of  Homer,  the  vocal 

Tlie  Suhlimmal  Consciousness. 

493 

trees  of  Dodona,  the  Hebrew  Batli  Kol,  the  '  daughter  of  a  voice. '  Coming 
to  a  later  date,  the  shell  divination  practised  by  the  Thibetan  Buddhists,  and 
by  the  Chinese  and  Hindus,  presents  more  detail,  and  brings  to  mind  the 
shells  of  the  Tritons,  the  shell  on  the  Tower  of  the  Winds  at  Athens,  and  the 
stories  told  of  tlie  reverence  for  shell-sounds  among  the  South  Sea  Islanders. 

But  still,  this  all  seemed  too  remote  and  mysterious  to  turn  to  practical 
account,  and  it  was  with  a  sense  of  special  iaterest  that  I  read  in  C.  G. 
Leland's  work  on  Gypsy  Sorcery  (Fisher  Unwin,  1891),  that  to  this  day  the 
gipsies  of  Hungary  listen  for  tlie  voice  of  the  Nivasha,  or  Spirit  of  the  Air,  in 
the  sea-shell.  To  read  that  interesting  results  were  observed  as  lately  as 
1886  was  more  stimulating  than  even  the  weirdly  suggestive  "sound  of  a 
going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees,"  which  insi^ired  the  Israelites  to 
war. 

I  have  naturally  exceedingly  acute  and  sensitive  hearing,  which  was 
developed  by  four  years  of  scientific  musical  education,  and  it  was  with  some 
hope  that  I  possessed  myself  of  a  smooth-lipped  cowrie  of  a  size  convenient 
to  hold  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  applied  it  to  my  ear,  and  yyaited. 

First  came  the  monotonous  murmur  of  the  sea — familiar  to  childhood  ;  but 
after  a  few  minutes  of  concentrated  attention  the  ear  grew  accustomed  to 
this  sound,  which,  as  it  were,  became  a  mere  background  for  those  more 
articulate  which  followed. 

I  find  the  experiment  decidedly  more  fatiguing  than  that  of  crystal-gazing, 
and  I  did  not  persist  on  that  occasion  ;  nor  do  I  ever  j^rolong  the  effort 
beyond  six  or  eight  minutes. 

After  twenty  experiments,  I  was  able  to  tabulate  results  as  follows  : — 

1.  On  eleven  occasions  I  heard  human  voices.  These  follow  each  other 
rapidly  in  the  course  of  a  single  experiment,  and  may  be  divided  into  two 
groups. 

(a)  Those  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  recognisable  ;  sometimes  coming 
singly,  sometimes  rising  out  of  a  confused  Babel  of  sound,  with  the  effect 
with  which  we  are  all  familiar  at  any  large  gathering.  These  v.'ere  all  pro- 
bably recollections  of  something  to  which  I  had  in  fact  listened,  though  often 
of  a  kind  which  might  not  have  come  to  the  surface  in  the  ordinary  way. 
Sometimes  I  have  heard  fairly  accurate  rehearsals  of  some  conversation 
recently  addressed  to  me,  or  still  more  often,  which  I  have  overheard.  For 
instance,  the  shell  is  more  likely  after  a  dinner-party  to  repeat  the  conver- 
sation of  my  neighbours  on  the  right  than  that  of  my  lawful  interlocutor 
on  the  left.  This,  I  think,  has  its  analogy  in  crystal-vision — the  crystal 
more  often  presents  what  is  unconsciously  than  what  is  consciously  observed. 

(6)  Voices  which  are  unrecognised  and  are  without  specially  distinguishing 
characteristics,  and  which  convey  information  or  advice  which  my  conscious 
self  is — though  possibly  with  an  effort — quite  able  to  supply,  such  as  a 
quotation  in  verse  or  prose,  a  number,  an  address,  or  a  monition  to  write  a 
letter  or  send  off  a  parcel. 

2.  On  nine  occasions  I  heard  musical  sounds,  and  I  am  certain  that  on. 
five  of  these  the  shell  definitely  supplied  an  aid  to  memory — that  my  shell 
memory  liearing  transcended  my  ordinary  memory  hearing.  I  was  able  to 
distinguish  and  readily  follow — as  I  commonly  do  in  a  concert-room — first 
one   part  and  then  another  in  the  chorus  or  orchestra  alternately,  and 

2  h 

494 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Afyeri 

changing  these  at  will  as  1  can  sehhjm  do  without  the  score,  even  by  a 
qonscious  eftort,  more  than  a  few  hours  after  listening  to  the  symphony  or 
concerto. 

It  maj''  be  worth  while  to  note  that  the  shell  does  not,  haj^pily,  reproduce 
mere  street  sounds  or  unpleasant  noise  of  boys  and  barrel-organs,  though  I 
am  exceedingly  im2:)atient  of  such  annoyance.  May  it  not  be  that,  as  in 
crystal-vision,  the  fatigue  or  irritation  which  might  be  a  source  of  danger  in 
itself  suffices  to  hinder  the  success  of  the  experiment  ? 

All  this,  however,  might  be  attributed,  in  varying  degrees,  to  expectation, 
and  as  such  was  disaiipointing.  However,  on  June  3rd,  a  sliglit  incident 
occurred  which  I  found  encouraging. 

I  had  been  out  for  a  coujDle  of  hours,  and  on  returning,  let  myself  in 
with  a  latchkey,  specially  noticed  that  no  letters  or  cards  awaited  me,  and 
spoke  to  no  one  before  entering  the  drawing-room,  where  my  friend  A.  sat 
reading.  It  was  close  on  luncheon-time,  and  I  took  up  the  shell  as  a 
momentary  occupation.  As  I  have  noticed  in  crystal-visions,  a  definite 
fact  does  not  wait  to  be  built  up,  but  is  at  once  thrown  out,  and  the  shell 
lost  not  a  moment  in  greeting  me  with  a  clear  nmrmur  of  "  Endsleigh- 
street — Endsleigh-street,"  which  I  found  absolutely  unmeaning.  Presently 
A.  looked  up  to  remark  that  our  friend,  G.  H.,  had  called,  and  had  waited 
more  than  an  hour  on  the  chance  of  my  return.  "  Has  he  come  up  from 
Oxford  for  the  day?"  I  asked,  "or  is  he  staying  (as  usual)  near  here?" 
"No,"  said  A.,  "he  has  taken  rooms  in  Endsleigh-street."  So  far  as  I 
know  I  have  never  been  in  such  a  street  in  my  life,  and  I  have  absolutely  no 
association  with  the  name.  I  could  hardly  sujipose  the  coincidence  to  be 
merely  accidental. 

A  few  days  later  I  received  further  encouragement.  On  Saturday, 
June  l]th,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  spent  some  time  with  us  attempting  some 
thought-transference  experiments,  which  were  fairly  successful,  and  interested 
me  greatly.  Mr.  Smith  left  the  house  soon  after  seven.  After  dinner,  I 
took  up  the  shell  which  had  played  some  part — not  very  successfully — in  our 
experiments.    What  occiured  is  best  given  in  the  following  extracts 

''[June  lltli.,  1S0.2]  Sutunlaij  Evemng,  S.30.    [X  to  G.  A.  S.] 

"  Why — when  the  shell  was  repeating  to  me  just  now  what  you  said  about 
clambering  over  rocks  at  Ramsgate — did  it  stop  suddenly  to  ask, still  in  your 
voice,  '  Are  you  a  vegetarian  then  ? '  .  .  .  Perhaps  you  dined  at  [your 
next  ajjpointmcnt],  and  declined  animal  food  ?  Do  tell  me  whether  you 
are  responsible  for  this  irrelevance." 

"  June  ISfh,  Mondaii.    [G.A.S.  to  X.] 

"  .  .  .  Without  doubt  the  shell  spoke  the  truth.  ...  As  you  know,  I 
loft  you  soon  after  7-  After  walking  some  15  minutes  I  suddenly  met  Mr.  M. 
...  I  was  thinking  aljout  points  in  connection  with  the  experiments  we 
bad  been  engaged  in,  and  am  afraid  I  did  not  follow  his  remarks  very  closely 
.  .  .  but  he  made  some  nllusion  to  little  dishes  at  a  vegetarian  restaurant  some- 
where, and  immediately  feeling  an  interest  in  the  question  whether  he  was 
a  champion  of  the  vegetarian  cause,  I  interrupted  him  with    'Are  you 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

495 

«  vegetaruiii  then  ?  '  I  believe  these  are  the  exact  words  I  used.  He  will  be 
sure  to  remember  this,  and  must  be  questioned." 

''Jvne  23rd.    [G.  A.  S.  to  X.] 

"I  have  to-day  walked  over  the  course  which  I  took  on  June  11th,  from 
[your  house]  to  the  spot  where  I  met  Mr.  M.  It  took  just  11  minutes.  If 
I  left  you  at  7.15,  it  was  probably  about  7-30,  or  a  very  few  minutes  later, 
that  I  put  the  query  to  Mr.  M." 

Mr.  M.  was  away  from  home,  and  though  at  once  applied  to  for  corro- 
boration, did  not  send  a  written  statement  till  J une  22nd,  when  he  writes 
to  Mr.  Smitli  (after  failing  to  recall  the  exact  particulars  of  the  previous 
conversation)  : — 

"The  main  fact  remains  that  you  asked  me,  to  the  best  of  my  Ijelief — 
bearing  on  my  strong  praise  of  the  cooking  at  the  Oxford-street  Caf(5 — whether 
'  I  was  a  vegetarian. '  That  is  the  core  of  the  whole  matter,  and  that  is 
sound." 

The  very  triviality  and  grotesqueness  of  the  incident  suggests  points  for 
speculation  outside  of  its  connection  with  shell-liearing,  which,  however, 
affords  a  curious  example  of  a  means  of  arriving  at  unexpected  knowledge. 

I  have  since  recorded  about  fifty  further  experiments,  but  those  already 
described  may  be  taken  as  typical  of  the  whole  series.  Not  above  half-a- 
dozen  could  bo  counted  as  evidences  of  telepathy,  perhaps  twenty  may  be 
classed  among  recrudescent  memories  which  might  never  otherwise  have 
been  brought  to  light,  and  another  dozen  may  be  considered  the  result  of 
mere  exjiectation.  The  remainder  have  all  consisted  of  musical  sounds,  some 
of  which  have  been  purely  fanciful.  These  have  been  very  definite  in 
character,  so  much  so  that  I  ha\'e  succeeded  in  reproducing  them  on  the 
piano,  or  in  scoring  them  at  the  moment,  but  they  in  no  way  diii'er  from  what 
I  might  extemporise  in  the  ordinary  way. 

On  two  occasions  only  have  I  heard  reasonable  consecutive  sentences  for 
which  I  could  not  at  tlie  time  account  in  connection  either  with  memory  or 
imagination,  but  in  both  cases  I  ultimately  discovered  their  origin  ;  the  one 
in  a  book,  the  other  on  the  fourth  sheet  of  a  letter  which  I  had  supposed  to 
be  finished  on  the  third,  but  which  I  might  conceivably  have  read  in  taking 
the  letter  from  its  envelope,  though  I  cannot  rememljer  having  done  so. 

I  have  as  yet  no  other  examples  of  the  deliberate  induction  of 
auditory  hallucinations  by  shell-hearing  or  any  similar  artifice.  But 
this  externalisation  of  inward  auditions  could  doubtless  be  cultivated 
in  the  same  way  as  crystal  vision, — of  which,  indeed,  it  formed  an 
accompaniment  in  the  case  alcove  cited  from  Professor  Janet.  I  should 
not  wish  at  present  to  recommend  the  practice  except  to  thorouglily 
sound  and  strong  persons,  as  the  frequency  of  insistent  voices  as  an 
early  symptom  of  insanity  rather  suggests  that  induced  voices  may  be 
less  easy  to  keep  in  check  than  induced  visions  have  thus  far  proved  to 
be.  At  the  same  time,  I  have  known  several  sane  and  healthy  persons 
who  have  experienced  spontaneous  externalised  voices,  either  rarely  or 
frequently,  with  no  resulting  injury.    One  of  these  was  the  late  Rev. 

496 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

P.  PI.  Newnliam,  so  often  cited  in  these  Proceedings,  and  assuredly 
one  of  the  sanest  and  cahnest  of  men.  Some  discussion  of  this  topic 
will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  305.  I  will  content  myself 
here  with  citing  two  cases, — the  lirst  curiously  parallel  to  Miss  X's 
case  of  the  sweet-peas,  given  above,  as  implying  a  slight  suliliminal 
extension  of  the  auditory  field  ;  and  the  second,  as  I  construe  it, 
illustrating  that  revival  of  forgotten  memories  of  which  mention  has' 
so  often  been  made. 

The  first  case  consists  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Newnham,  written  about 
1884:— 

C 

Owing  to  iiiy  sj^inal  malady,  I  am  sometimes  obliged  to  use  two  walking- 
sticks  ;  and  can  only  crawl  uj)  the  steep  hills  of  this  parish  with  much  diffi- 
culty and  pain.  One  winter  evening  (pro):)al)ly  in  December,  1882)  I  was 
creeping  home  about  5  p.m.,  wlien  I  saw  in  the  distance  a  lot  of  some 
20  young  apprentices  from  the  Ijoatyard  in  my  parisli  coming  home  after 
the  day's  work.  Instantly  the  voice  said  to  me,  " They  are  saying,  'Here 
comes  old  Four-legs.'  "  Sure  enough,  as  tlicy "passed  me,  one  said,  "There 
goes  old  Four-legs."  Now,  I  had  never  heard  this  nickname  before,  or 
imagined  anything  like  it. 

This  last  is,  of  course,  simply  a  case  of  thouglit-transference,  identifying 
itself  with  the  voice  as  its  vehicle.  I  am  not  (pute  sure  whether  the  words 
were  spoken  to  me  ah  extra  in  this  case.     My  memory  is  not  (j[uite  clear. 

This  may,  as  Mr.  Newidiam  supposes,  have  been  a  case  of  thought' 
transference.  But  I  rather  incline  to  suppose  that  the  boys  were 
uttering  the  words  just  out  of  "earshot,"  but  within  the  subliminal 
auditoiy  field.  I  need  hardly  add  that  an  incident  so  incapable  of 
external  corroboration  derives  its  value  from  the  known  care  and 
accuracy  of  the  percipient — one  of  the  best  informants  whom  we  have 
ever  encountered. 

The  next  case  is  from  an  informant  of  whom  we  know  less,  and  has 
twice  been  printed  in  part  ;  once  in  the  Blackburn  Times,  soon  after  the 
event,  and  once  in  the  Reviexv  of  Revie  ws.  We  have  now  obtained  an 
important  corroboration  ;  and  the  date  of  the  incident  has  T^een  ap- 
proximately fixed  in  September  or  October,  1883.  Mr.  Wolstenholme 
writes  to  Professor  Sidgwick  from  62,  King-street,  Blackburn, 
December  3rd,  1891  :— 

P.  143. 

A  few  years  ago,  at  the  time  the  following  incident  occurred,  I  was 
residing  at  4  and  6,  Preston  New-road,  Blackburn. 

After  explaining  a  call  of  business  which  summoned  him  to  Preston,  Mr. 
Wolstenholme  continues  : — 

At  that  time  I  was  keeinng  a  pony  "Fanny,  "and  as  I  had  not  much 

The  SuMiminal  Consciousness.  497 

-work  for  her  I  determined  to  drive  over  to  Preston,  a  distance  of  nine  miles. 
On  the  morning  of  the  trial  I  yoked  "  Fanny  "  to  the  trap  in  a  passage 
Taehind  my  house.  On  each  side  of  the  passage  is  a  wall  about  eight  feet 
high,  the  wall  on  one  side  forming  the  boundary  to  the  backs  of  the  houses, 
the  wall  on  the  other  side  forming  the  boundary  to  a  large  wood  yard.  I 
had  everything  ready  for  starting  on  my  journey,  and  had  gone  into  the 
house  for  a  knee-rug  and  my  whip.  When  I  returned  with  these  articles, 
and  was  standing  in  the  trap  arranging  the  rugs,  &c. ,  I  heard  what  soun.ded 
like  the  voice  of  a  man  speaking  within  a  foot  of  my  ears  these  words  : 
"Put  some  string  in  your  pocket."  I  immediately  turned  round  to  see  who 
was  speaking,  ]jut  to  my  surprise  there  was  no  one  in  the  passage  or  any- 
where in  the  neighbourhood. 

A  cab-stand  is  in  the  open  street  at  the  bottom  of  the  passage,  and 
thinking  it  must  he  one  of  the  "  cabbies  "  who  had  spoken,  I  got  out  of  the 
trap  and  went  to  the  bottom  of  the  passage  to  see  who  the  person  was.  The 
cab-stand  was  empty,  not  a  cab  about,  and  the  only  person  I  could  see  was 
a  lady  who  was  70  or  80  yards  up  the  street  on  the  opposite  side. 

There  was  no  one  about  to  account  for  the  voice,  neither  was  there  any 
apparent  cause  that  I  was  aware  of  why  I  should  put  the  string  in  my 
pocket.  I  went  into  the  house  again  and  told  my  wife  what  I  had  heard. 
Her  reply  was,  "  Well,  take  some  string  with  you,  it  will  be  no  great  weight 
to  carry,"  so  I  put  several  yards  in  my  pocket. 

I  arrived  in  Preston  all  right,  and  drove  to  the  Dog  Hotel,  and  gave 
"Fanny"  into  the  hands  of  the  ostler.  After  the  trial  was  over  we  all 
returned  to  the  "Dog"  to  tea,  and  at  20  minutes  ti3  9  I  comriienced  my 
journey  home.  The  night  was  very  dark,  but  as  I  had  good  lamjis  with 
me  I  did  not  heed  the  darkness.  "Fanny"  trotted  along  the  road  at  a 
brisk  speed,  and  all  was  going  on  well,  when  suddenly  she  stopped,  and 
no  matter  how  I  used  the  whip  or  coaxed  her  she  would  not  stir  another 
step  forward,  but  began  to  back  until  she  backed  the  trajj  into  the  hedge 
on  the  road  side. 

I  jumped  out,  and  taking  one  of  the  lanaps  ran  to  her  head  to  see  what 
was  the  matter.  I  immediately  found  that  the  strap  which  stretches  from 
the  horse's  collar,  and  is  secured  to  the  bottom  end  of  the  shafts,  the 
trace  by  which  the  trap  is  dragged  along,  had  broken  inside  a  piece  of 
metal  which  connected  it  with  the  collar.  The  defect  being  covered  by 
the  metal  plate  had  escaped  my  observation,  and  I  had  no  idea  that  any 
thing  was  wrong  with  tlie  harness  in  any  part. 

I  remo-\red  the  broken  strap,  and  I  now  saw  a  use  for  the  string  I  had  in 
my  i:)ocket.  With  it  I  rigged  up  a  temporary  arrangement  by  means  <if 
which  "Fanny"  was  able  to  take  the  trap  and  myself  home.  Had  I  not 
taken  the  string  with  me  I  should  have  had  to  leave  the  trap  on  the  road  side 
and  walk  home  a  distance  of  six  miles. 

Who  or  what  spoke  I  know  not ;  all  I  know  is  tliat  the  "  voice  "  sounded 
close  to  me,  not  more  than  a  foot  from  my  ears,  and  was  a  man's  voice.  The 
nearest  person  I  could  see  was  a  lady,  and  she  was  70  or  80  yards  away. 

You  are  at  liberty  to  use  this  article  if  you  think  fit. 

R.  WOLSTENHOLME. 

498 

31r.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

62,  King-street,  Blackl>urn, 

December  30th,  1891. 
I  was  at  home  on  the  evening  of  Mr.  M.'s  lawsuit  hi  1883,  and  dis- 
tinctly remember  liearing  my  father  tell  my  mother  about  the  accident  to  the' 
h:irness.  The  circumstance  of  the  warning  voice  made  the  incident  very- 
remarkable,  and  one  not  easily  forgotten  ;  since  then  I  have  heard  both  of 
my  parents  on  many  occasions  relate  the  circumstance  and  never  have- 
either  of  them  doulited  that  my  father  heard  the  voice. 

Mary  Jane  Wolstenholme. 

P.iS. — I  do  not  remember  any  accident  to  the  harness  before  that  time- 
and  had  no  reason  to  suspect  one  then.  R.  Wolstenholme. 

Mrs.  Wolstenhi)lme  is  now  dead,  so  that  Miss  W.'s  is  the  only  corrobora- 
tion now  attainable. 

This  case  is  l:)y  no  means  unlike  the  subliminal  discovery  of  hidden  ob- 
jects, of  whicli  we  have  had  several  examples.  The  weak  place  in  the 
harness,  although  "hidden  behind  a  metal  plate,"  was,  jjerhaps,  not  so 
completely  hidden  but  that  it  may  have  been  "  unconsciously  "  noted. 

Case  III.— Miss  A. 

XVI. — In  the  next  case  which  I  propose  to  give  at  length,  crystal- 
^•ision  forms  but  a  small,  and  an  ill-recorded,  part  of  a  long  and  complex 
group  of  phenomena  centering  in  a  lady  who  wishes  here  to  be  known 
as  IMiss  A.  I  liave  had  the  privilege  of  an  intimate  acquaintance  with 
Miss  A  and  her  family  iov  eight  years,  and  ha^'e  personally  witnessed 
many  of  these  phenomena.  But  it  nnist  be  remembered  that  I  am  no 
longer  dealing,  as  in  the  two  previous  cases,  with  rccoixls  of  experi- 
ments undertaken  at  my  own  request,  and  for  a  definite  scientific 
purpose.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  here  merely  Ijeen  invited  to  hear  or 
to  witness  fragments  of  a  continuous  series  of  phenomena,  which  have 
l:)een  observed  only  for  private  interest  and  satisfaction,  and  to  which 
Miss  A  and  her  family  were  long  iinwilling  to  give  any  kind  of 
]:>uljlicity.  I  have  now  to  thank  them  for  permission  kindly  accorded 
to  print  the  following  pages.  But  the  material  which  has  been  pre- 
served forms  but  a  fraction  of  the  whole,  and  was  not  originally 
selected  with  a  view  to  scientific  proof.  In  Miss  A's  case,  as  in  that 
of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  with  which  I  shall  afterwards  have  to  deal, 
it  has  Ijeen  to  the  dogmatic  content  of  automatically  written  messages 
that  most  attention  has  Ijeen  given.  That,  also,  is  important  in  its 
way  ;  but  it  belongs  to  a  later  stage  of  our  inquiry.  For  the  present  I, 
have  confined  myself  mainly  to  crystal-visions,  and  have  asked 
Miss  A  to  reply  to  certain  questions,  and  to  give  such  instances  of 
veridical  visions  as  now  admit  of  corroboration.  For  convenience' 
sake,  I  have  interspersed  between  square  brackets  some  notes  made  by 
the  Countess  of  liadnor,  the  friend  in  whose  presence  many  of  the 

Tlie  SuMiminal  Consciousness. 

499 

phenomena  occun-ed,  and  who  has  revised  these  pages,  and  some 
unsigned  notes  of  my  own. 

M.  52. 

1.  Health. — I  do  not  know  if  my  health  affects  the  ciystal -seeing  ;  I  am 
so  seklom  ill  that  I  have  not  tried.  If  I  have  a  headache  I  never  look  in 
the  crystal ;  but  I  should  imagine  I  should  see  equally  well  anyway. 

2.  VisualisUwi  Power,  dx. — I  see  in  the  crystal  much  more  distinctly  than 
I  could  ever  imarjinc  things.  I  am  a  very  bad  visualiser  ;  and  when  I  think 
of  people  I  do  so  much  more  by  the  sound  of  their  voice  than  by  their  faces 
or  figures.  I  don't  think  I  ever  imagined  a  group  in  motion  in  my  life.  I 
am  very  short-sighted,  and  seldom  wear  glasses  ;  consequently,  I  rarely  get  a 
clear  picture  of  any  room  or  scene.  But  when  I  look  in  the  crystal  I  see  every- 
thing as  clearly  as  though  I  had  strong  glasses  on.  I  cannot  be  sure  whether 
either  my  short  sight  or  my  visualising  power  is  better  in  dreams  tlian  in 
waking  hours  ;  but  I  think  both  are  better.  Certainly,  however,  I  never  see 
in  dreams  any  scene  at  all  comj)arable  in  clearness  to  what  I  see  in  the 
crystal. 

I  have  no  artistic  gift,  although  I  have  received  a  few  lessons  in  drawing 
and  painting.  I  have  automatically  dra"\vn  tlowors,  figures,  a  snake,  Arc, 
much  better  than  I  can  draw  by  conscious  eflbrt.  [These  drawings  will  be 
described  along  with  the  automatic  writings.] 

3.  Visions  Apart  from  Cnjdal  or  Other  Speculum. — I  have  sometimes, 
generally  as  the  result  of  effort,  seen  hallucinatory  figures — all  of  them,  I 
believe,  in  some  sense  veridical,  never  mere  subjective  hallucinations, — stand- 
ing or  sitting  in  the  room.  And  I  have,  once  at  least,  seen  the  room  itself 
alter.  I  saw  a  lai'ge  modern  room  change  into  the  likeness  (as  shown  after- 
wards by  independent  record)  of  what  it  was  200  years  ago  ;  and  I  saw 
persons  in  it  wlio  apparently  belonged  to  that  date. 

[The  history  of  the  room  was  known  to  Lady  Radnor,  who  attests  : 
' '  Miss  A  has,  without  looking  into  anything,  described  a  room,  whose  history 
was  unknown  to  her,  as  I  have  reason  to  lielieve  tliat  it  was  200  years  ago. 
It  was  the  Long  Parlour  at  Longford,  which  in  1670  was  used  as  the  chapel. 
— H.  M.  Radnor."    Other  visions  of  tliis  kind  will  be  dealt  with  later.] 

4.  First  Discovery  of  the  Power. — It  is  now  some  years  since  I  first  began 
to  look  in  the  crystal.  I  had  already  written  automatically,  but  knew  ncjthing 
of  crystal-vision.  I  happened  one  day  to  be  lunching  with  some  friends  who 
talked  on  the  subject,  and  said  that  they  believed  that  a  glass  of  clear  water 
acted  in  the  same  manner.  Two  or  three  of  us  looked  in  glasses  of  water, 
and  after  a  little  while  I  seemed  to  see  at  the  bottom  of  my  glass  a 
small  g(jld  key.  This  was  so  distinct  that  I  looked  on  the  tablecloth, 
thinking  that  there  must  be  a  real  key  there.  There  was  none,  and  nothing 
to  explain  what  I  saw. 

5.  Speculum  and  Mode  of  Gazing. — We  bought  a  glass  ball,  and  I  gradually 
began  to  see  a  good  deal  in  it.  I  have  since  seen  in  several  crystals,  in  a 
moonstone  in  a  bracelet,  &c.  [I  have  known  her  see  things  in  a  polished 
table. — H.  M.  Radnor.]  It  does  not  seem  to  matter  much  what  the  smooth 
surface  is  ;  but  I  have  sometimes  fancied  that  the  scenes  were  blighter  if  seen 

500 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

in  a  real  crj^stal.  Occasionally  I  see  things  in  a  niirroi',  or  even  without  any 
clear  surface,  as  tliough  I  were  in  the  midst  of  them. 

I  either  take  the  crystal  into  a  dark  corner  of  the  room,  or  wrap  it  up  in 
lilack  with  only  a  little  bit  vuicovered,  or  if  it  is  small  I  hold  it  inside  my 
liand  and  look  right  into  it.  I  can  see  equally  well  in  the  dark.  After  a 
minute  or  two  I  seem  to  see  a  very  liright  light  in  it,  which  disappears  after 
a  few  seconds,  and  then  the  surface  appears  cloudy  and  thick.  This  mist 
clears  away,  and  I  see  sometimes  views,  sometimes  faces,  sometimes  letters, 
and  all  kinds  of  things  in  it.  They  only  last  for  a  few  seconds  or  sometimes 
minutes,  and  between  each  new  picture  I  see  the  same  light  and  then  mist. 
I  c:innot  look  in  the  crystal  for  long,  as  it  makes  my  eyes  water  with  the 
brightness  of  the  light  and  gives  me  a  feeling  as  if  a  band  w&tq.  tied  round 
my  head  ;  but  if  I  only  look  a  little  while  it  does  not  hurt  me  at  all.  The 
crystal  seems  to  become  a  globe  of  light.  If  a  sunlit  scene  appears,  the 
light  may  continue,  or  it  may  disapj^ear  before  the  figure  shows  itself.  [Her 
eyes  often  stream  with  tears  from  "the  brightness  of  the  light." — H.  M. 
RadnoPw]  I  am  in  a  perfectly  normal  condition  when  I  look  ;  not  sleepy, 
nor  in  a  trance,  nor  unconscious  of  my  surroundings. 

G.  Magnijication,  (tc. — I  have  tried  the  magnifying-glass.  The  results 
are  just  the  same  as  without  it  ;  only  the  glass  being  on  the  top  I  suppose  I 
see  in  it  instead  of  in  the  crystal.  I  cannot  tell  when  people  ask  me  v/hether 
the  figures  which  I  see  are  big  or  small  ;  for  I  feel  as  if  I  were  in  some  way 
close  to  them  ;  so  I  cannot  define  their  size.  [I  have  often  remarked  that 
when  Miss  A  looks  in  the  crystal  she  describes  things  not  as  if  she  saw  them 
in  a  picture,  but  as  if  she  were  actually  there,  and  the  phices  and  people 
were  round  her. — H.  M.  Radnor.]  Before  the  figures  come  I  see  the 
crystal  in  my  usual  short-sighted  manner,  so  that,  for  instance,  I  could  not 
distinguish  my  own  reflection  in  it.  But  the  figures  are  quite  clear  ;  and  I 
can  follow  a  figure  even  if  it  appears  to  be  walking  to  a  great  distance.  But  if 
I  specially  look  at  some  detail  in  the  picture,  that  detail  generally  seems  to 
get  clearer  to  me. 

If  I  move  my  eyes  from  the  crystal,  or  if  I  close  my  eyes,  the  jjicture 
disappears.  If  I  move  the  crystal  about  I  seem  to  shake  the  picture  out  of 
it.  When  the  picture  is  once  lost  I  can  seldom  get  it  again.  Once  or  twice 
I  have  succeeded  in  doing  so,  but  there  have  always  been  other  pictures 
between. 

7.  Verhal  Messages  in  the  Crystal. — When  I  see  writing  in  the  crystal 
I  see  it  only  one  letter  at  a  time  ;  and  when  the  letters  are  put  down  they 
are  found  to  be  words  spelt  backwards. 

[Each  letter  in  turn  seems  to  fill  tlie  crystal  ;  and  the  letters  succeed  each 
other  so  rapidly  that  it  is  hard  to  take  them  down  from  Miss  A's  dictation. 
The  words  may  come  to  explain  a  picture,  or  may  form  a  message  by  them- 
selves. The  backward  spelling  is  probably  adopted  in  order  to  prevent 
Miss  A's  supraliminal  intelligence  from  guessing  at,  and  thereby  disturbing, 
tlie  message  which  is  being  given.] 

8.  General  Characteristics  of  the  Pictures. — Sometimes  the  things  which 
I  sec  are  interesting,  and  sometimes  just  the  reverse  ;  sometimes  true  and 
sometimes  not.  If  I  wish  to  see  a  particular  person,  I  cannot  do  so,  but  I 
prol)ably  see  something  quite  diflerent.    I  cannot  tell  if  what  I  am  seeing  is 

The  Siihlhnincd  Consciousness. 

501 

past,  present,  or  future.  I  do  not  think  that  the  pictures  have  anytliing  to 
do  with  what  I  read  and  see  in  the  ordinary  way. 

[I  can  expand  this  statement  from  personal  observation.  When  Miss  A 
looks  in  crystal  or  ring  there  is  almost  always  a  continual  series  of  pictures, 
each  generally  quite  disconnected  from  its  predecessor,  although 
occasionally  several  scenes  of  the  same  story  may  follow  each  other.  No 
complete  record  has  been  made  of  these  pictures  ;  and  therefore  in 
estimating  the  probability  that  the  coincidence  which  some  of  them  show 
with  fact  is  not  due  to  chance  alone,  we  can  make  no  exact  calculation  of 
percentages  ;  but  after  making  the  largest  reasonalile  allowance  for  tlie  cases 
in  which  no  coincidence  has  been  observed,  it  appears  to  me  that  ni  many 
instances  the  details  seen,  and  the  verbal  explanations  automatically  given, 
are  so  full  and  precise  that  accident  cannot  be  invoked  to  explain  them.  The 
unintelligible  pictures,  on  the  other  hand,  remind  one  of  a  series  of  views 
thrown  on  the  taljle  of  a  camera  obscura  ;  but  whether  the  views  come  from 
the  macrocosm  or  the  microcosm,  from  the  solid  world  or  from  the  subhunnal 
imagination,  there  is  generally  nothing  to  show.] 

9.  [Let  us  C(jnsider  the  cases  which  have  a  pvimd  facie  claim  to  be 
veridical.  These  may  represent  scenes  past— beyond  the  range  of  hyper- 
mnesia, — scenes  present — whether  derived  from  another  mind  cognisant  of 
them,  or  from  some  kind  of  direct  extended  perception  ;  and  possibly  things 
future  ;— although  (besides  Lady  Barnby's  case  given  below)  only  one  appa- 
rently clear  case  of  precognitive  picture — foretelling  a  death  then  absolutely 
unexpected — has  been  observed. 

Inasmuch  as  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  are  ideas  less  unfamiliar  than 
either  retrocognition  or  precognition,  it  may  be  weU  to  take  first  some  pictures 
of  events  seen  about  the  time  of  their  occurrence.  Such  record  of  these  as 
I  can  offer  at  present  is  unfortunately  extremely  incomplete.  Miss  A  has 
never  made  a  continuous  series  of  experiments  witli  a  friend  at  a  distance, 
and  has  no  belief  that  deliberate  experimentation  of  this  kind  would  succeed. 
Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  Miss  A  herself  and  her  family  have  naturally  been 
reluctant  to  test  the  accuracy  of  pictures  which  i)rofessed  to  relate  to 
strangers, — who  either  might  not  exist  or  might  dislike  the  inquiry.  There 
is,  nevertheless,  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  suljlivuinal  self  is  less  regard- 
ful of  others  than  the  supraliminal ;  nor  have  pictures,  I  think,  ever  occurred 
whose  possible  verification  could  have  caused  pain.  J ust  as  in  the  hypnotised 
subject  the  feeling  of  the  bienseances  seems  the  most  persistent  element  of 
character,  so  also  among  all  the  incoherences  of  automatic  message  by  script 
or  vision  a  certain  control  of  this  kind  seems  to  be  exercised  by  the  liidden 
agency.  Returnmg  to  the  present  case,  the  result  of  the  limitations  above 
mentioned  is  that  1  can  hardly  quote  more  tlian  the  few  instances  where 
Lady  Radnor  happens  to  have  been  able  to  identify  the  scene  from  her  own 
experience  or  that  of  friends.] 

A.  Pktnre  of  scene  pvobahlij  pasi>in(j  at  the  moment. 

Some  time  ago  I  was  looking  in  my  crystal  and  saw  Lady  Radnor  sitting 
in  a  room  I  had  never  seen,  in  a  big  red  chair  ;  and  a  lady  in  a  black  dress 
and  white  cap  whom  I  had  never  seen  came  in  and  put  her  hand  upijii  Lady 
R.'s  shoulder.  It  was  about  7.30,  I  think.  I  immediately,  that  same  evening, 
wrote  to  Lady  R.  to  ask  her  to  write  down  what  she  was  doing  at  7.30,  as  I 

502 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

had  seen  lior  in  the  crystal.  Shortly  afterwards  I  saw  Lady  R.,  and  she  said 
she  had  done  as  I  asked  her,  and  told  me  to  tell  her  what  I  saw.  It  was  quite 
right  ;  she  had  been  sitting  in  a  red  armchair,  and  Lady  .JaneE.,  dressed  as  I 
described  her,  had  c(jme  in  and  put  her  hand  on  her  shoulder.  Afterwards, 
wlaen  I  met  Lady  Jane  E.,  I  recognised  her,  without  knowing  who  she  was, 
as  tlie  lady  I  had  seen.  Also,  Avhen  I  went  to  the  house  I  recognised  the 
chair. 

[This  is  perfectly  correct.  Miss  A  had  never  been  to  Longford  when 
she  described  my  rcjom,  wliich  was  right  in  every  particular,  even  to  tlie  fact 
that  my  chair  was  (piite  touching  the  corner  of  the  high  fender. — H.  M. 
Radnor.] 

[Lord  Radnor  tells  me  that  he  remembers  the  incident  perfectly.  The 
cliair  was  of  a  kind  unusual  in  a  Ijedrooni.  The  description  of  the  lady 
entering  was  riglit  as  to  personal  appearance  as  well  as  dress.] 

B.  Second  conimqxn  aneous  scene. 

In  one  case  I  saw  and  described  Mr.  B  (a  well-known  writer),  whom  I 
knew  slightly,  as  liunting  for  a  paper  in  the  drawers  of  a  writing-table.  He 
used  a  particular  pen,  which  I  described,  and  with  his  hands  ruffled  his  hair 
till  it  stood  up  in  a  kind  of  halo.  A  lady  came  in  and  pointed  to  his  hair  and 
laughed.  Lf)rd  Radnor  inquired  of  Mr.  B,  and  all  this  was  found  to  be 
correct.  He  was  writing  with  a  pen  unusual  to  him  (silver  instead  of  quill, 
or  vice  versa),  and  was  looking  for  a  jjaper  which  he  wanted  to  send  by  j^ost. 
His  sister  (I  did  not  know  that  she  lived  with  him,  and  had  never  seen  her) 
entered  the  room,  and  pointed  laughing  to  liis  hair,  just  as  I  had  seen. 

[Confirmed.— H.  M.  Radnoe.] 

A  group  of  cases  may  here  convcnieirtly  be  given  together,  as  included 
m  the  same  narrative.  Case  C  is  probably  exactly  contemporaneous.  Case 
D  also  seems  contemporaneous.  Case  E  is  retrocognitive,  and  case  F  seems 
precognitive. 

C.  Sir  Joseph  Barnljy,  the  well-known  musician,  writes  as  follows  : — ■ 

November,  1892. 

I  was  invited  hy  Lord  and  Lady  Radnor  to  the  wedding  of  their  daughter. 
Lady  Wilma  Bouverie,  wliich  took  place  August  lotli,  1889. 

I  was  met  at  Salisbury  by  Lord  and  Lady  Radnor  and  driven  to  Longford 
Castle.  In  the  course  of  the  drive.  Lady  Radnor  said  to  me  :  ' "  We  liave  a 
young  lady  staying  witli  us  in  whom,  I  think,  you  will  be  much  interested. 
She  possesses  the  faculty  of  seeing  visions,  and  is  otherwise  closely  connected 
with  the  spiritual  world.  Only  last  night  she  was  looking  in  her  crystal  and 
described  a  room  which  she  saw  therein,  as  a  kind  of  London  dining-room. 
[The  room  described  was  not  in  London  but  at  L.,  and  Miss  A  particularly 
remarked  that  the  floor  was  in  large  squares  of  black  and  white  marble — as  it 
is  in  the  big  hall  at  L.,  where  family  prayers  are  said. — H.  M.  Radnor.] 
Witli  a  little  laugli,  slie  added,  '  And  the  family  are  evidently  at  prayers,  the 
servants  are  kneeling  at  the  chairs  round  the  room  and  the  prayers  are 
being  read  by  a  tall  and  distinguished-looking  gentleman  with  a  very  hand- 
some, long  grey  beard.'  With  another  little  laugli,  she  continued:  'A 
lady  just  behind  him  rises  from  her  knees  and  speaks  to  him.  He  puts 
her  aside  with  a  wave  of  the  hand,  and  continues  his  reading. '    The  young 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

503 

lady  here  gave  a  careful  description  of  the  lady  who  had  risen  from  her 
knees. 

Lady  Radnor  then  said:  "From  the  description  given,  I  cannot  help 
tliinking  that  the  two  principal  personages  described  are  Lord  and  Lady  L., 
but  I  sliall  ask  Lord  L.  tliis  evening,  as  they  are  coming  by  a  later  train, 
and  I  should  like  you  to  be  present  when  the  answer  is  given." 

That  same  evening,  after  diimer,  I  was  talking  to  Lord  L.  wlien  Lady 
Radnor  came  up  to  liim  and  said  :  "  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question.  I  am  afraid 
you  will  think  it  a  very  silly  one,  but  in  any  case  I  hope  you  will  not  ask  me 
why  I  have  put  the  question  1 "  To  this  Lord  L.  courteously  assented.  She 
then  said  :  "Were  you  at  home  last  night?  "  He  replied,  "Yes. "  She  said : 
"Were  you  having  family  prayers  at  such  a  time  last  evening  ?"  With  a 
slight  look  of  surprise  he  replied,  "Yes,  we  were."  She  then  said :  "During 
the  course  of  the  prayers  did  Lady  L.  rise  from  her  knees  and  speak  to  you, 
and  did  you  put  her  aside  with  a  wave  of  the  hand  ? "  Much  astonished, 
Lord  L.  answered:  "Yes,  that  was  so,  but  may  I  inquire  wliy  you  have 
asked  this  question?"  To  which  Lady  Radnor  answered  :  "You  promised 
you  wouldn't  ask  me  that  I  " 

D.  The  day  following  was  the  day  of  the  wedding,  and  at  a  dinner  party 
held  in  the  evening  my  attention  was  called  by  Lady  Radnor  to  Miss  A,  who 
seemed  to  be  listening  to  something.  On  inquiring  the  cause,  Lady  Radnor 
asked  me  "  If  I  had  not  heard  the  raps,"  as  she  supposed  Miss  A  "  was 
receiving  a  message. " 

I  had  not  heard  the  raps,  but  I  Ijegged  to  be  made  acquainted  as  soon 
after  dinner  as  possible  with  the  purport  of  the  message. 

On  rejoining  the  ladies,  I  incpiired  at  once  what  tlie  message  might  be  % 
Lady  Radnor  replied  :  ' '  The  message  is  somewhat  mysterious  and  there  is  a 
I^ortion  of  it  we  cannot  make  out,  but  the  general  purport  is :  '  There  is  danger 

in  the  reservoir  belonging  to  the  Liverpool  Y/aterworks  Company.'" 

About  twenty  minutes  later  tlie  additional  message  was  rapped  out  :  "The 
danger  is  in  tlie  left-hand  corner."  Here  I  laughed  the  laugh  of  the  scornful, 
and  remarked  :  ' '  There  is  a  beautiful  vagueness  about  that,  seeing  that  it 
depends  entirely  uj^on  which  side  of  a  parallelogram  you  stand  l)efore  you 
can  determine  tlie  left-liand  corner  1  "  Four  days  later  [According  to  my 
recollection  ^luo  days  later  only. — H.  M.Radnor.]  a  paragraph  appeared  in 

most  of  the  London  dailies  to  tlie  efl'ect  that  the  inhabitants  of    were  in 

a  state  of  considerable  alarm  on  account  of  some  signs  of  weakness  having 
appeared  in  tlie  [Welsh]  reservoir  belonging  to  the  Liverpool  Waterworks 
Company.  They  had  sent  a  deputation  to  the  company  requesting  that  an 
expert  should  be  got  down  from  London  to  examine  the  defect.  Needless  to 
fcay.  Miss  A  had  never  heard  of  the  name  of  the  place,  "  an  unpronounceable 
Welsh  name,"  had  no  interest  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  had  never 
been  in  the  neighbourhood. 

E.  Two  days  after  the  wedding  I  was  driven  by  Lady  Radnor  and  Miss  A  to 
Salisbury  Cathedral  to  play  on  the  organ,  a  magnificent  specimen  of  cathedral 
organs.  I  was  much  interested  in  the  instrument  and  Ijecame  absorbed  in  my 
playing.  At  the  end  of  two  hours  I  rejoined  the  ladies,  who  had  been  sitting 
in  the  body  of  the  vast  church.  On  our  drive  back  to  Longford,  Lady 
Radnor  asked  Miss  A  why  she  was  so  silent  and  thoughtful,  to  which  Miss  A 

504 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

unsweretl :  "  I  have  had  such  strange  exjjeriences  in  the  Catliedral  during  the 
time  Mr.  Barnby  was  playing."  On  being  asked  to  rehxte  them,  Miss  A 
begged  to  be  excused  until  she  arrived  at  the  Castle,  as  the  grinding  of  the 
carriage  wheels  over  the  newly  metalled  roads  )uade  it  difficult  to  hear  one 
another  speak. 

Whether  this  promise  was  forgotten,  or  whether  callers  put  it  out  of  her 
head,  I  cannot  say,  but  I  left  Longford  without  hearing  any  more  of  the 
matter.  Eleven  montlis  later  Lady  Radnor,  during  a  call  upon  my  wife,  told 
me  the  following  :  "Miss  A's  statement  was  to  the  effect  that  she  had  seen 
vast  processions  of  gorgeously  ajiparelled  Catholic  ecclesiastics  with  jewelled 
crosses  carried  before  them,  gorgeous  canopies  and  baldachinos  held  over 
them  and  clouds  of  incense  filling  the  place.  Amongst  the  dignitaries  was 
one  who  came  near  them  and  gazed  at  them  with  a  singularly  sad  expression 
of  countenance.  On  being  asked  why  he  looked  so  sad,  he  said  :  "  I  have 
been  a  great  sinner.  I  was  greatly  responsible  for  the  beheading  of  Anne 
Boleyn.  What  adds  to  the  sadness  of  it,  her  father  and  I  were  boys  together, 
-and  our  homes  were  in  close  proximity  to  each  other."  0)i  being  asked  his 
name,  he  said  :  "  My  name  is  John  Longland."  On  being  furtlier  questioned 
he  rejjlied  :  "  Mr.  Barnby's  music  brought  me  here.  I  often  hear  it  in 
Eton  Chapel." 

Lady  Radnor  then  went  on  to  say  :  "  I  was  naturally  desirous  of  finding 
out  who  this  John  Longland  might  be,  Init  after  several  unsuccessful  eftbrts 
I  was  beginning  to  despair  of  solving  the  mystery,  when,  five  months  later,  I 
found  it  recorded  in  a  long,  thin,  worm-eaten  book  [I  found  tlie  book  in  an  old 
loljby  cujjboard  at  Longford.  It  was  there  recorded  that  John  Longland  had 
been  Dean  of  Salisbury  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIIL,  and  also  that  he  had 
been  translated  to  the  See  of  Liiicoln. — H.  M.  Radnok.]  containing  the  name 
of  John  Longland,  Dean  of  Salisbury  in  the  reign  of  King  Henry  the  Eighth." 
This  was  sufficiently  extraordinary  ;  but  on  my  inquiring  i\'hat  connection  he 
had  with  Eton,  her  ladyship  remarked  that  she  had  already  told  me  all  she 
knew.  Thereupon  I  said,  "  I  wonder  if  he  is  mentioned  in  Maxwell  Lyte's 
Hidory  of  Eton  College  1  "  and  I  rose  at  once  to  get  the  book.  There  I 
found  he  was  mentioned  on  pages  103  and  124  as  having  been  Dean  of 
Salisbury  and  Confessor  to  King  Henry  the  Eighth.  He  was  soon  translated 
to  the  more  dignified  see  of  Lincoln,  which  carried  with  it  the  a23pointment 
of  "Visitor  to  Eton  College."  It  appears  that  during  one  of  his  visits  he 
called  upon  tlie  Fellows  to  make  up  their  number  which  had  fallen  from  10 
to  7  (?)  (See  Maxwell  Lyte's  Hidorij.)  This  they  exialaincd  they  were  unable 
to  do  as  the  value  of  their  property  had  decreased  and  tliey  were  conse- 
quently unable  to  pay  their  full  number.  The  Bishop  came  forward  vnth  the 
necessary  funds.  He  likewise  gave  largely  to  the  other  members  of  the 
college,  the  ministers  of  the  "queere,"and  even  the  bell-ringers  were  not 
forgotten  ;  and  by  his  will  he  left  money  for  the  annual  performance  of  a 
requiem  Mass  on  eacli  anniversary  of  his  death,  and  gave  instructions  like- 
wise that  his  heart  sliould  be  buried  "afore  the  holy  aultar  in  Lincoln 
Cathedral  and  his  body  in  Eton  College  Chaiiel."  All  of  which  was  done. 
His  grave  at  Eton  was  covered  by  a  magnificent  brass,  which,  l)y  an  act  of 
vandalism,  was  destroyed  about  200  yeai's  ago.  Here,  then,  is  the  explana- 
tion of  his  connection  with  Eton  and  his  love  of  music. 

The  Sublimincd  Consciousness. 

505- 

F.  One  more  incident  in  connection  with  the  extraordinary  powers  of  this 
young  lady  remains  to  be  noted.    Whilst  looking  in  her  crystal  during  one 
of  the  days  I  spent  at  Longford,  she  described,  amongst  a  number  of  things 
unnecessary  to  mention,  a  room  which  appeared  to  her  to  be  a  bedroom. 
She  appeared  to  be  viewing  the  room  from  just  oufside  the  op«i.  door,  for  she 
said  :  "If  there  bo  a  bed  in  tlie  room  it  must  be  behind  the  door  on  the 
left "  ;  in  any  case  the  room  was  a  long  one  and  the  end  of  it  was  occupied 
by  a  krge  window  which  formed  the  entire  end  of  the  room.    She  added  r 
"Therels  a  lady  in  the  room,  drying  her  hands  on  a  towel."  She  described  the 
lady  as  tall,  dark,  slightly  foreign  in  appearance  and  with  rather  "an  air" 
about  her.     This  described  with  such  astonishing  accuracy  my  wife,  and 
the  room  she  was  then  occupying  at  an  hotel  at  Eastlxjurne,  that  I  was  im- 
pelled to  ask  for  particulars  as  to  dress,  &c.    She  stated  that  the  dress  was 
of  serge  with  a  good  deal  of  braid  on  the  bodice  and  a  strip  of  braid  down 
one  side  of  the  skirt.    This  threw  me  off  the  scent,  as  before  I  had  started 
for  Longford  my  wife  had  expressed  regret  that  slie  had  not  a  serge  dress 
with  her.    My  astonishment,  therefore,  was  great  on  returning  to  East- 
bourne to  find  my  wife  wearing  a  serge  dress  exactly  answering  to  the 
description  ^iven  above.     The  sequel  to  this  incident  comes  some  sixteen 
months  latei^on,  when  my  wife  and  I  attended  a  performance  given  by  the 
Macrpie  Minstrels  (a  society  of  musical  amateurs)  at  Princes'  Hall,  Piccadilly. 
We°arrived  early,  and  after  placing  my  wife  in  a  seat  I  moved  about  the 
room  speaking  to  friends  here  and  there.    In  the  course  of  ten  minutes  or- 
so   Lady  Radnor  and  Miss  A  entered  the  room.     During  the  greetings 
which  ensued.  Miss  A  called  my  attention  to  a  standing  figure,  saying  : 
"You  will  remember  my  seeing  a  lady  in  her  bedroom  while  looking  m 
my  crystal  ;  that  is  the  lady  I  saw."    That  u-as  my  wife  !  I  only  need  add 
that  she  had  never  seen  my  wife.  J oseph  Bakxby. 

Lady  Barnby  writes  as  foUows  in  corroboration  of  the  incident  relating- 
to  her  own  dress  : — 

9,  St.  George's-square,  S.W. 

Satin-day,  Novemher  mil, 

The  account  alwut  me  and  my  dress  is  remarkable  as  being  out  of  the 
o-eneral  course  of  things  in  this  way  :  I  had  been  remarking  to  Sir  Josepn 
that  it  was  a  mistake  to  come  to  the  seaside  without  a  serge  dress,  that  being" 
a  material  particularly  suited  for  wear  at  the  seaside,  but  I  added  :  1  do  not 
think  there  is  much  use  in  ordering  one  now,  as  Madame  D.  will  be  gone  for- 
her  holiday,  it  being  August."  Sir  Joseph  left  the  next  day  for  Longfoi^, 
■xnd  I  wrote  to  Madame  D. .  telling  her  to  make  me  this  gown.  She  got  the 
letter  rnesfZay  [August  13th,  1889],  and  in  the  marvellou.sly  short  time  by 
Saturday,  I  received  my  gown.  Then  again,  it  is  not  usual  in  an  hotel 
to  have  one's  bedroom  door  open  when  one  is  occupying  the  r,)om 
but  the  reason  for  it  on  this  occasion  was  the  fact  that  I  .v^s  to  meet 
Sir  Joseph  on  his  return  from  Longford  [Tuesday,  August  20th]  (as  a 
si.rprise  in  this  new  serge  gown)  and  having  no  clock  in  our  l,edroom  which 
was  at  the  end  of  the  corridor,  with  my  daughter's  room  at  an  angle  to  ours, 
where  she  slept  with  her  maid,  I-thinking  I  was  somewhat  late  for  meeting- 
the  train-opened  the  door  to  call  to  the  maid  to  tell  me  the  time  as  I  washed 

506 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

my  hands  standing  at  the  washhand-.stand  in  a  line  with  the  open  door.  I 
do  not  suppose  I  have  ever  done  such  a  thing  at  an  hotel  before  or  since. 

Edith  Mary  Barnby. 

[These  dates  have  been  confirmed  by  Lady  Barnby  from  lior  diary.  Lady 
Barnby  also  tells  me  that  her  nurse  confirms  the  little  incident  of  the 
wearing  of  the  serge  dress  fii-st  on  August  20th.  The  crystal-scene,  there- 
fore, seems  to  have  anticipated  a  certain  definite  moment,  which  happens 
to  have  been  well  remembered.  But,  of  course,  each  apparently  precognitive 
case  must  be  judged  in  connection  with  all  the  rest.  See  Proceedings, 
Vol.  v.,  p.  288.] 

E.  In  Fel)ruary,  1890,  Lady  Radnor  gave  me  the  following  independent 
account  of  the  Longland  incident.  Sir  J.  Barnby  had  not  seen  this  account 
wlicn  his  was  written  (in  November,  1892)  : — 

' '  In  August,  1889,  when  Mr.  Barnby  was  here  (from  Eton  College)  Miss 
A  had  some  writing  of  that  kind  which  can  only  be  read  reflected  in  a 
looking  -  glass,  and  written  in  a  curling,  snake-like  way,  from  John 
Longland,  who  said  he  was  brought  tlirough  the  influence  of  Mr.  Barnby, 
whose  beautiful  music  he  heard  at  Eton  as  he  was  buried  there.  He  wished 
to  say  that  he  had  written  letters  to  his  friend  Anne  Boleyn's  father,  and 
tliat  it  was  owing  to  him  in  great  measure  that  Henry  VIII.  divorced 
Catherine,  married  Anne,  and  afterwards  beheaded  her,  &c.  Unfortunately 
these  papers  were  destroyed.  As  inquii'ies  having  been  made  at  Eton,  and  no 
tomb  of  John  Longland  found,  ;igain  we  thought  we  had  been  misled.  Next 
time,  in  August,  1889,  he  came  at  the  Cathedral,  announcing  his  presence  by 
raps  : 

Q.  Who  are  you  ?    A.  John  Longland.    Q.  What  were  you  !    A.  Dean 
of  Salisbury.    Q.  Wlien  ? 
3 

A.  15(19)  ?  (39)  ?    Could  not  quite  maKC  out  which. 

"  We  could  not  find  out  anything  aliout  John  Longland  [by  inquiries  at 
Eton],  and  though  lie  came  many  times  we  tliought  it  unsatisfactory  and 
Avould  not  listen  to  him. 

"This  morning,  February  24th,  1890,  I  was  looking  through  a  list 
of  the  Deans  of  Salisbury  Cathedral  {Hidorij  of  Salishttyij  CatJtedral  : 
Dodsworth,  181.5).  I  found  [Appendix  III.]  that  in  1514  a.d.  John 
Longland  was  Dean  of  Salisbury  and  was  made  Bishop  of  Lincoln 
in  1521.  [He  was  made  Henry  VIII. 's  Confessor  in  1519,  accord- 
ing to  Clialmcrs'  Bio<jyaphdcal  Dictionary.']  I  then  turned  to  Brit- 
ton's  History  of  Lincolnshire  and  found  on  page  623  that  '  John  Longland, 
Dean  of  Salisl^ury,  was  ciinsecrated  May  3rd,  1521 .  A  man  of  learning,  but 
generally  l)lamed  for  taking  advantage  of  his  situation  as  Confessor  to  Henry 
VIII.  to  promote  the  divorce  between  that  monarch  and  his  Queen 
Catherine.  .  .  .  Dying  at  Woburn,  he  was  privately  interred  in  Eton 
College  Chapel.' " 

[Those  cases  suggest  a  few  remarks.  Case  C  (Lord  L.  at  prayers). — This 
incident  has  Ijeen  independently  recounted  to  me  both  by  Lady  Radnor  and 
by  Miss  A  herself.  Another  small  2K)int  not  given  by  Sir  J.  Barnby  is  that 
Miss  A  did  not  at  first  understand  tliat  family  prayers  were  going  on,  but 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

507 

exclaimed:  "Here  are  a  number  rif  people  coming  into  the  room.  Why, 
they're  smelling  their  chairs  I  "  This  scene  may  have  been  exactly  contem- 
fioraneous.  If  we  assume  any  intelligent  guidance  of  all  this  sul)liuunal 
cognition,  this  is  one  of  the  few  scenes  which  seem  to  have  been  presented 
expressly  for  the  purpose  of  verification  ;  but  the  verification,  of  course, 
depended  upon  Lady  Radnor's  presence.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  any 
indication  is  given  as  to  when  a  message  will  prove  verifiable.  The  pictures 
seem  to  come  at  haphazard,  and  no  wishing  or  asking  for  "  tests  "  will  secure 
them. 

Case  D. — Tlie  intimation  of  danger  in  certain  waterworks  was  not  given 
by  crystal-vision  and  is  only  inserted  here  as  forming  jmrt  of  Sir  J.  Barnby's 
account.  The  diflicult  question  as  to  the  nature  of  so-called  "raps"  may 
be  deferred  till  the  next  chapter.  But  it  must  be  noted  that  they  have 
occurred  at  intervals  throughout  Miss  A.  's  experiences,  and  in  close  connection 
,  with  crystal-gazing  or  automatic  writing.  The  messages  tlius  communicated 
do  not  aj^pear  to  be  in  themselves  eitlier  more  or  less  trustwortliy  than  those 
which  are  written  or  seen  in  the  crystal. 

Case  E. — This  case,  again,  I  give  here  as  forming  apart  of  Sir  J.  Barnliy's 
account.  For  the  present  we  may  assume  that  the  scene  or  figure  liere 
presented  was  analogous  to  a  crystal-vision,  although  seen  without  a  speculum, 
and  under  the  aspect  of  reality.  I  hope  to  discuss  the  possible  explanations 
of  retrocognitive  scenes  in  a  future  paper,  when  we  come  to  deal  with  retro- 
cognitive  written  messages. 

[Three  more  cases  connected  with  Salisbury  Cathedral  may  be  added  here.] 

Aug.,  Sept.,  1889.  &  Feb.,  1890.  In  tlie  presence  of  myself.— H.  M.  Radnor. 

(x.  Retrocognitive  Scene. 

The  first  time  Miss  A  went  to  the  Cathedral  she  noticed  standing  in  the 
door  of  the  chapel  opposite  the  "Cage"  (or  Hungerford  Chapel),  a  monk, 
dressed  in  dull  sort  of  muddy  brown  ^  with  a  knotted  cord  round  his  waist, 
a  sort  of  tippet  and  hood,  and  something  Avhite,  either  cloth  or  flesh  {'.) 
where  the  hood  or  tippet  was  not  drawn  close.  He  carried  in  his  hands  a 
brown  rosary  and  silver  (?)  cross  hanging  to  it. 

Subsequently  she  saw  a  good  many  of  tliem  apparently  filing  out  of  the 
door  of  the  chapel,  and  back  again,  holding  books  and  rosaries.  The  cross 
of  the  rosary  was  rather  a  peculiar  shape. 

She  has  seen  these  monks  nearly  every  time  she  has  been  to  the  Cathedral, 
and  one  gave  his  name  one  day  by  raps,  but  owing  to  the  fact  that  the 
Bishop  and  the  head  verger  both  said  that  no  order  of  monks  had  ever  been 
connected  with  the  Cathedral,  we  thought  that  perhaps  it  was  an  liallucina- 
tion.  Yesterday,  however,  February  23rd,  1890,  Miss  A  again  saw  the  monks, 
and  asked  what  Order  they  belonged  to  ;  the  answers  were  by  raps. 

Q.  :  What  Order  do  you  belong  to  ?    A.  :  St.  Francis  d'Assisi.    Q.  :  Do 
you  mean  Franciscans  ■?    A.:  Yes.    Q.  :  Did  you  live  here  ?    A.:  No.  Q. 
Where  then  1    A.  :  Palace. 

'  In  Steven's  Continuation  of  Dugdale's  Monasticon  there  is  a  plate  of  a  Franciscan 
wliicli  exactly  corresponds  with  what  Miss  A  saw.    We  only  found  this  afterwards. 

508 

Mr.  F.  W.  11.  Myers. 

Having  obtained  this  clue,  on  my  return  home  I  looked  in  Britton's  Hidorxj 
of  Wiltshire,  and  found  on  an  tmcut  page  that  there  had  been  a  Monastery 
t>f  Greyfriars  (Fi'anciscans)  at  the  S.E.  corner  of  the  Cathedral  (wliere  the 
Palace  and  grounds  now  are),  and  that  Bishop  Poore  gave  them  the  land. 

The  present  Bishop  has  just  unearthed  from  the  cellars  of  the  Palace  a 
beautiful  vaulted  crypt  room,  which  was  supposed  to  exist  in  or  previous  to 
the  time  of  Bishop  Poore.  This  is  a  curious  coincidence,  and  may  have  been 
where  the  Greyfriars  lived.  Sir  Richard  Colt  Hoare  mentions  that  tliere 
existed  an  Order  of  Friars  taking  their  name  from  St.  Francis  d'Assisi, 
who  were  settled  at  Salisbury. 

II.  lietrocognitive  Scene.  (Brian  Dupim.) 

On  February  23rd,  1890,  Miss  A  and  I  were  in  the  "Cage"  and 
she  told  me  she  saw  a  grand  ceremonial  taking  place.  There  appeared 
to  be  a  tall  chair  v/hicli  obstructed  the  view  down  the  choir,  and 
gradually  the  place  appeared  tilled  with  clericals  and  others  dressed  in  their 
best  attire.  Then  she  saw  a  tall  big  man,  slowly  walking  up,  dressed  in  red 
with  white  and  lace  over  it,  sometliing  that  hung  round  his  neck  and  down 
to  his  feet  of  broad  gold  embroidery,  and  a  Ijroad  sort  of  mitre  (but  not  peaked) 
more  like  a  biretta,  of  beautiful  embroidery. 

Then  tliere  were  three  or  four  dressed  very  much  like  him,  gorgeously 
dressed,  and  lots  of  little  boys  about  in  red  and  white  and  lace — holding- 
candles,  books,  &c.  The  whole  place  was  very  full  of  people,  and  it  was 
evidently  a  great  occasion.  After  the  principal  figure  had  knelt  in  front  of 
the  chair — li>oking  to  the  west  for  some  little  time — he  stood  up  and  ten 
little  boys  lifted  up  the  chair,  and  carried  it  higher  up  and  placed 
it  in  front  of  the  altar,  still  facing  west.  Then  the  principal  figure 
walked  up  two  .steps  and  faced  the  east.  (The  whole  of  the  arrangements 
of  the  altar,  &c.,  as  Miss  A  saw  tliem,  are  (juite  different  from  what  they  are 
now. )  [It  is  here  meant  that  Miss  A.  's  descrii:)tion  was  correct  for  that  past 
date  ;  as  Lord  Radnor  exjjlicitly  told  me  was  the  case.]  He  had  nothing  on 
his  head  now.  He  knelt  some  little  time,  and  then  the  most  gorgeously 
dressed  of  the  other  figures  placed  something  like  a  mitre  on  his  head  and 
retired,  and  the  principal  figure  walked  up  to  the  chair,  and  sat  down  on  it 
facing  the  congregation.  Miss  A  said  she  saw  him  later  dead  in  a  coffin, 
with  the  Winchester  Crf)ss  over  him.  She  says  he  was  tall,  big,  clean- 
shaven, a  little  curling  hair,  and  blue-grey  eyes. 

Miss  A  asked  what  she  was  seeing,  and  the  answer  came  by  raps. 
A.  :  The  induction  of  Briant  Uppa. 

Then  Miss  A  said  :  There  can't  be  such  a  name  ;  it  must  be  wrong. 
She  tried  again,  and  got — 

A.  :  You  are  wrong.  It  is  Duppa,  not  Uppa.  Brian  Duppa.  Q.  :  Who- 
was  Brian  Duppa  ?  A.  :  Chister.  Q.  :  What  was  he  ?  A.  :  Bishop  here. 
Q.  :  When  ?  or  what  was  his  date  1  A.  :  44-1(5.  His  researches  would 
help  you.    Manuscripts  should  lay  at  Winchester. 

On  returning  home,  we  were  talking  after  tea,  and  I  casually  took  up- 
Britton's  History  of  Wiltshire,  and  said  to  Miss  A,  laughing :  "Now  I  will  look 
for  your  Bishop."    .    .    .    The  pages  where  the  Bishops' names  were  were 

Tlie  Suhliminal  Consciousness. 

509 

uncut,  sides  ami  top.  I  cut  tliem,  and  to  our  delight  -vve  found  on  p.  149  :— 
"  Brian  Duppa  or  De  Uphaugh,  D.D,  .  .  .  tutor  to  Prince  Charles 
.  .  .  .  translated  to  the  See  of  Chichester  (Chister  0  ....  Bishop 
of  1641  ....  (deposed  soon  after  by  Parliament)  ....  pre- 
ferred soon  after  the  Restoration  to  the  See  of  Winchester."  He  was  at  Caris- 
hrooke  with  Cliarles  I.,  and  is  supposed  to  have  assisted  him  in  the  writing 
of  the  Eihon  BasLWce,  which  book  Miss  A  had  been  looking  at  in  my  boudoir 
a  few  days  previously,  but  which  contains  no  mention  of  him  nor  his  name. 

J.  Betroco(jmtive:  (Rayne  Stevens.) 

In  the  "Cage"  the  same  day  that  "  Longland  "  came,  August,^  1889, 
there  were  loud  raps.  Miss  A  asked  who  it  was  and  got  the  following  :— 
"  Rayne  Ste(v-ph  ?)ens.  He  was  the  first  metz-tenor  in  1796.  He  went  to 
Canterbury  in  1805.  He  received  a  watch  from  William  Bouverie,  Lord  Folke- 
stone's—(?)— because  he  perilled  his  limbs  to  stop  his  horse  in  Salisbury." 

I  have  been  unable  to  verify  this  entirely  at  present,  Imt  I  found  an , 
entry  in  tlie  old  account-books  (the  first  A^iscount's)  in  1755  : — 

"Dr.  Stephens  for  teaching  Billey  the  Harpsichord,  etc." 

' '  Billey ' '  was  grandson  to  the  first  Viscount.  The  said  ' '  Billey  ' '  was  M.  P. 
for  Salisbury,  and  I  find  that  according  to  Britton  (p.  182),  J ohn  Stephens, 
Mus.Doc,  was  organist  of  the  Cathedral,  and  was  buried  there  in  1780. 
He  was  possibly  the  father  of  Rayne,  but  that  I  have  not  yet  made  sure  of. 

K.  Tk'trocofjnitive  Scene.    (White  Webs. ) 

I  was  looking  in  the  crystal  a  year  or  two  ago  at  Longford  Castle.  Lady 
Radnor  was  in  the  room  with  me.  I  saw  amongst  other  things  a  large 
carved  fireplace  with  a  coat  of  arms  in  the  middle  and  curious  serpents 
entwined.  There  seemed  to  be  a  secret  passage,  which  opened  on  touching 
one  of  the  serpents'  heads.  I  seemed  to  follow  this  path  until  it  led  out  by 
a  river,  and  I  saw  figures  pass  along  it  in  old-fashioned  dress.  The  nama 
Edwye  de  Bovery  was  then  spelt  out  in  the  crystal  ;  and  Lady  Radnor  said 
that  the  vision  must  be  all  wrong,  as  the  name  had  never  been  spelt  like  that. 
The  name  "White  Webs  "  was  also  spelt  out— a  name  of  which  I  had  never 
heard.  A  few  days  afterwards,  when  I  was  looking  at  some  books  in  the 
Kbrary  I  saw  a  curious  old  book  with  crests  and  coats  of  arms,  drawn  by 
hand,  not  printed  ;  and  in  this  book  I  found  one  of  the  coats  of  arms  which 
I  had  seen  in  the  crystal ;— only  the  one  in  the  book  was  quartered  with 
another,  and  the  one  I  saw  in  the  crystal  was  quite  by  itself.  Lady  Radnor 
found  that  it  was  the  coat  belonging  to  an  heiress,  a  Miss  Smith.  A  little 
while  afterwards,  in  an  old  church  register  or  account-book  or  somethmg,  the 
name  of  Sir  Edwye  de  Bovery  was  found.  [It  was  in  an  extract  from  a 
parish  register  at  Britford  Church,  in  which  parish  Longford  is.— H.  M. 
Radnoe.] 

[Sir  Edward  des  Bouverie,  Kt.,  whose  name  I  have  since  found  spelt 
in  old  deeds  de  Bovery,  though  he  signed  it  himself  des  Bouverie,  lived 
at  the  Red  House,  Cheshunt,  Herts,  and  died  there  1694.  His  son,  Sir 
William,  sold  the  house,  and  lived  partly  at  the  Parsonage  of  Cheshunt. 
There  is  a  place  called  White  Webs  in  that  neighliourhood.  Sir  Edward's 
grandson,  Edward  des  Bouverie,  sold  the  property  and  settled  at  Longford  nx 

2  M 

510 

Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers. 

1717.  In  1718  he  married  Mary  Smith,  daughter  and  co-heiress  of  John 
Smith  of  London,  one  of  the  fii-st  Governors  of  the  Bank  of  England. 
There  were  many  secret  passages  leading  to  and  from  the  Red  House  at 
Clicshunt  ;  but  I  have  not  tried  to  identify  the  house  at  White  Webs. — H. 
M.  Radnor.  June  9th,  1892.]  [Miss  Porter  reports  that  she  cannot  find  a 
list  t)f  the  owners  of  White  Wel)s.  "  An  old  liistorical  mansion  with  secret 
passages,  and  mysterious  underground  accommodation,  was  taken  down  to- 
wards the  end  of  last  century."] 

L.  Retyocognitivc  Scene.    ("Jolly  Dick  Scrope.") 

On  June  28th,  1892,  Miss  A  met  for  the  first  time  the  Hon.  Percy  Wynd- 
ham  at  Lady  Radnor's.  A  scene  and  then  writing  appeared  in  the  crystal, 
vfhich  was  repeated  to  me  verbally  by  Lord  Radnor  on  July  1st,  1892,  with 
tlie  ambiguity  between  Prince  and  King  below  mentioned  by  Lady  Radnor. 
A  scene  of  festivity  appeared,  with  persons  in  old-fashioned  dress  ;  and  then 
'the  message  (as  v.aitten  by  Lady  Radnor,  July  8th)  "Jolly  Dick  Scrope  with 
his  Prince  (or  King)  l)lufi  Harry,  at  the  wedding  of  his  daughter  Nell." 
"  Then  thinking  that  it  might  liave  taken  place  in  Wiltshire  [where  Scrope  s 
are  neighboui's  of  Wyndhams]  we  asked  '  Where  is  it  taking  place  ? '  and  the 
answer  came,  very  quickly,  KROY  (York). — H.  M.  Radnor.  " 

[In  the  hope  of  clearing  the  matter  up,  I  begged  Miss  Porter,  who  is 
accustomed  to  research  in  the  British  Museum,  to  search  for  any  trace  of  a 
Dick  Scrope  with  a  daughter  Nell,  at  whose  wedding  at  York  Henry  YIII. 
was  likely  to  have  been  present.  Miss  Porter  replied  (July  6th,  1892)  : 
"Yorkshire  and  Wiltshire  were  the  haunts  of  the  Scrope  family.  I  spent 
some  time  at  first  with  the  pedigrees  of  the  Wiltshire  branch,  but  found 
no  'Dick'  with  daughter  'Nell.'  [Enclosure  with  pedigree  confirms 
this.]  Then  I  turned  to  Yorkshire,  the  Scropes  of  Bolton,  and  found 
the  following  facts. 

"  Controversy  between  Sir  Ricliard  Scroi^e  and  Sir  Ri)bert  Grosvenor. 

Sii;  N.  Harris  Nicolas. 

London,  1832. 
11.    Pedigree  of  the  Family  (.if  Scrope  of  Bolton. 

Sir  Richard  Scrope,  Knt. , 
2nd  son  of  Sir  Henry  Scrope, 
4th  Baron  Scrope  of  Bolton. 

Eleanor,  dau.  of  Norman  Wash- 
bourne,  of  Worcestershire,  Esq. 
She  marr.  secondly.  Sir  John 
Wyndham,  of  Felbrigge,  co.  Nor- 
folk. Will  dated  11  Dec.  1505  : 
proved  Jan.  1506.  Buried  in 
the  Austin  Friars,  Norwich. 

Elizabeth       Eleanor  S  c  r  o  p  e,  =  Sir  Thomas  Wyndham*  Marg 
dau.  and  co-lieir,  of    Felbrigge,  co. 

living   Dec.   1505  Norfolk.    Will  dated 

(Will  of  mother)  21  r)ct.  1521  ;  proved 

4  March  1522. 

See  Lansdoiviie  MS.  205. 
Harl.  MS.    1074.  §65 

*  Son  of  Sir  Joliii,  by  Margaret 
daugh.  of  John  Duke  of  Norfolk.' 

TAe  Sahlimincd  Consciousness. 

511 

My  next  step  was  to  look  up  the  Wyndhams  of  Felbrigge,  and  I  found  a 
satisfactoiy  connection  between  Sir  Thomas  and  King  Henry  YIII.  : — 

Bloniefield's  NorfuU;. 
IT. 

7  Tombs  in  Xorwich  Cathedral. 

"  '  The  figure  (6)  shows  the  place  where  the  tomb  which  now  stands  in 
Jesus  Chapel,  marked  with  figure  (7).  was  removed  from  ;  it  was 
■erected  to  tlie  memory  of  Sir  Thomas  Windham,  who  ^v&s  knighted  by 
Sir  Edward  Howard  Lord  Admiral  of  England  in  the  4th  year  of  King 
Hem-y  VIII.  at  Croitou  Bay  in  France,  in  whicli  expedition  he  was  very 
serviceable,  doing  much  towards  'the  winning  of  Tournay,  Turenne,  and 
other  places  ;  he  was  Pri^-y  Councellor  to  that  King,  one  of  the  kniglits 
retained  for  his  bodyguard,  and  vice-admiral,  being  son  of  Sir  John 

8  Windham  of  Crownthorp  in  Norfolk  ;  he  was  buried  between  his  two 
wives,  Eleanor,  daughter  and  co-heir  of  Rich.  Scroop  of  Upsale,  Esq., 
and  Elizabeth,  daugliter  of  Sir  Henry  Wentworth  of  Letheringham 
(widow  of  Sir  Roger  Darcy  of  Danbur}-  in  Essex.  YIII.,  p.  113)  and  died 
about  1521. 

The  following  entry  was  found  on  consulting  the  "  Letters  and  Papers  in 
the  reign  of  Henry  A'lII." 

J.  S.  Brewer,  London,  1863. 

I 

54    4  Aug.    (399)    For  Elizabeth  Darcy,  widow  of  Roger  Darcy, 
1509  and  Thomas  Wyndham.    Licence  to  marry. 

Sunninghill.    1  Aug.,   1  Hen.  YIII.  Del. 
Oxford,  4  Aug. 

Eleanor  Scrope  was  dead  before  Henry  was  king,  for  in  1509  Thomas 
Wj-ndhani  obtained  a  licence  to  marry  his  second  wife,  Elizabeth  Darcy. 
And  from  the  Testameuta  EJioracensia  (Durham,  1865  :  Surtees  SocietjO  III., 
297,  cxxii.,  it  appears  that  Richard  Scrope's  will  was  proved  in  1485,  before 
Henry  YIII.  was  born.  The  sentence,  therefore,  given  in  explanation  of 
the  picture  contains  an  error.  On  tlie  other  liand  it  is  tlie  case  that  Henry 
YIII.  showed  various  favours  to  the  Scrope  family. 

"As  a  Scrope  of  Bolton  it  seems  j^robable  that  Eleanor  was  married  at 
York.  But  the  registers  of  marriages  in  the  Minster  do  not  extend  so  far 
"back  as  Tudor  times,  and  the  marriage  licences  filed  at  the  Diocesan  Registry 
do  not  commence  till  1661." 

From  these  documents  it  apj^eared  that  the  conjectured  connection 
between  tlie  Scrope  family  and  INIr.  Percy  Wpidham  depended  not  merely  on 
neighbourhood  in  Wiltshire,  but  on  the  fact  that  Xell  Scrope's  liusband  was 
fi  Wjmdham.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  ^A^j-ndham  asking  as  to  his  connection  with 
Sii-  Thomas,  and  received  reply  dated  Clouds,  Salisbury,  July  12th,  1892  : — 
"  Sii-  Thomas  vras  my  direct  ancestor.  There  has  never  been  but  one  family 
of  the  Wj-ndhams,  and  bej'ond  one  or  two  actors  and  actresses  who  have 
taken  the  name,  it  has  never  been  usurped."  [The  TFii(.'?/iai/isarea  ditierent 
family  altogether.] 

This  case  is  remarkable  because  the  theory  of  unconscious  memory  on  the 
seer's  own  part  is  practically  excluded.  On  the  other  iiand  it  is  of  course 
probable  that  ]Mr.  Wyndham  had  at  some  time  known  of  the  Wyndham- 
Scrope  marriage,  fe/iyj.  Henry  YIL,  although  he  had  so  completely  forgotten 
the  fact  when  the  message  came.     We  camiot  positively  assert  tlmt  the 

512 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

knowledije  may  not  have  jiassed  from  Mr.  Wyndham's  subliminal  seK  to  Misis 
A's,  and  assumed  the  dramatic  form  of  "Jolly  Dick  Scrope,"  &c.  In  the 
jaedigree  of  the  A  family,  given  in  the  history  of  their  county,  there  is 
mention  of  the  marriage  of  the  5th  Baron  Scrope  (of  Bolton)  to  the  widow  of 
Sir  Robert  A,  a  collateral  ancestor.  But  even  assuming  (as  we  are  bound  to. 
do)  that  this  fact,  although  not  consciously  remembered  by  any  of  the  A 
family,  may  have  at  some  time  been  known  to  Miss  A,  this  brings  us  little 
nearer  to  Dick  Scrope,  who  is  not  mentioned  in  the  pedigree,  and  whose 
relationship  to  Lord  Scrope  is  only  to  be  seen  in  the  Scrope  pedigree.  I 
will  add  that  Miss  A  has  never  shown  any  sort  of  interest  in  genealogical  or 
antiquarian  research. 

Tlie  origin  or  origins  of  these  retrocognitive  scenes  can  only  he  gradually 
guessed  at  by  comparing  many  instances.  In  order  tliat  the  reader  may  at 
once  realise  tlieir  frequent  element  of  inacruniaj  I  introduce  here  a 
message  given  not  by  the  crystal  but  Ijy  automatic  script. 

Case  of  Jack  Creasy. 

On  June  27th,  1891,  Miss  A  took  pencil  in  hand.  Tlie  following  notes 
were  made  directly  after  the  sitting,  and  the  automatic  script  is  in  my 
hands.  The  handwriting  of  the  sui-disant  Jack  Creasy  is  barely  legible 
and  of  an  uneducated  type. 

Mucli  scrib))ling.  At  last,  very  illegiljly,  and  many  times,  was  written 
"Jrtc/,-.' 

Jack  "  wh(.)  ?  Miss  A  said  "  I  daresay  '  Jack  the  Ripper,'  or  some  one  of 
that  kind." 

Jarh  Crcasii." 
What  do  y(.)U  want  ?    "Help  pore  Mary. " 

Where  did  you  live  ?  (Very  illegible)  "  FUlcrs  "  (or)  "  Tillers  Buildings." 
Where  ?    "  Greenwich.'' 

Are  you  in  the  flesh  ?  "  No — fie»h  oil  hurut."  Then  a  rude  drawing  not 
recognisable. 

Were  you  burnt?    "  Yes — piehe  litl." 

In  Fillers' Buildings  ?       In  Blachwall  Ee>ad." 

When  ?    "  Lomj — perliaps  tivoitij  month." 

AVas  it  an  accident  ?    "  Airfnl.   3Iister  Lennard  lyiit  ns  to  shift  the  rnixter  ; 
jBoh  Hnd  pi(t  the  li(jht  for  me  the  pitch  mt  cort." 
What  works?  ''Tor." 
At  Greenwich?    ''  Yes,  Blachvcdl  Mode." 
AVhat  kind  of  works  ?    "  /I  hot. ' 

Do  you  mean  Abbot's  works  ?    "  Abots — yes — yes — Blachivedl." 
Were  many  killed  ?    "J  hioiu  notliin." 

What  lielp  do  you  want  for  Mary?    '' Dont  hnoxo  notliin— find  her— 
and  help  her — ask  after  pore  Jack  Greasys  Mctnj." 
Is  she  at  Greenwich  ;  can  you  give  her  address  ? 
"  Gont  tell — cant  see — she  ims  there." 
Where  ?    "  Fvlhis  (or  Fillers)  Buildiiujs— bless  you." 
Could  get  no  more. 

From  the  Registry  of  Deaths  it  was  found  that  Jack  Creasy  died  from 
an  accident,  July  4th,  1880.    Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  reports  as  folloAvs  : — 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

513 

July  22nd,  1891. 

The  reports  of  the  accident  appeared  in  the  Kcntisli  Mercicry,  T]ie  South 
Eastern  Herald,  Greenwich  and  Deptfurd  Observer  for  July  12th,  and  accounts 
of  the  inquest  appeared  in  the  same  papers  for  August  2nd,  1889.  Other 
papers  would  probably  contain  accounts,  but  it  would  be  almost  impossible 
to  discover  them,  I  think  ;  the  above-named  are  local  papers.  These  accounts 
.are  all  practically  alike,  and  there  is  much  detail  of  the  accident  and  subse- 
quent official  inquiry  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  in  any  of  them  of  '  Pore 
Mary,'  '  Fullers  (.'')  Buildings,'  or  '  Bol)  Heal.'  Creasy 's  address  is  given 
<is  28,  Lethbridge-road,  Lewisliam. " 

Juhj  23rd. 

"I  went  to  the  tar-distilling  works  of  Messrs.  Forbes,  Abbot  and  Lennard 
to-day  at  Ordnance  Wharf,  Greenwich  Marshes,  and  saw  Mr.  Lennard,  who 
took  a  good  deal  of  interest  in  the  matter.  He  said  Creasy  had  a  wife  who 
is  still  living,  lie  thinks,  at  28,  Lethbridge-road,  and  he  (Lennard)  had  met  her 
find  corresponded  in  arranging  to  get  her  boy  into  an  orphan's  asylum.  He 
did  not  know  whetlier  her  name  was  Mary  or  not.  He  could  throw  no  light 
on  Fullers  (?)  Buildings,  nor  could  the  workmen  amongst  whom  he  caused  the 
inquiry  to  be  circulated  ;  nor  can  I  after  searching  the  directiiry  and  asking 
the  police. 

"  The  works  are  bounded  on  one  side  by  Blackwall  Lane. 

"  The  statement  about  Mr.  Lennard  putting  Creasy  to  '  shift  the  mister ' 
is  altogether  wrong.  Mr.  Lennard  did  not  put  him  to  the  job — it  was  a  part 
of  Creasy's  routine,  and  there  was  ncjthing  to  shift.  No  man  of  the  name 
of  Bob  Heal  was  ever  on  the  works.  There  was  no  question  of  anyone 
'putting  the  light,'  though  the  explosion  was  certainly  caused  by  Creasy 
breaking  the  rule  by  having  an  uncovered  safety  lump.  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  a  pitch  vat,  so  it  could  not  get  '  cort.'  Tlie  accident  was  an 
explosion  caused  by  an  escape  of  vapour  from  defective  pipes  Ijecoming 
ignited  by  a  naked  flame  in  the  vicinity,  viz.,  Creasy's  uncovered  Davey 
lamp."  G.  A.  Smith. 

[The  description  of  the  accident  in  the  Kentish  Alercurn  says  that  The 
night  watchman  told  Creasy  to  get  a  little  fire  oS  the  still,  there  being  too 
much  heat.  Twenty  minutes  after  there  was  a  report ;  the  place  was  in 
flames,  and  the  deceased  was  found  fifteen  or  twenty  yards  from  the  still." 
The  verdict  of  the  Coroner's  inquest  (before  Mr.  E.  A.  Carttar)  gives  as 
cause  of  death  :  "  Burns  from  ignition  of  vapour  from  a  tar  still  tlirougli 
defective  condition  of  plant." 

A  pitch  kettle  is  not  a  tar  still  ; — though  perhaps  it  comes  as  near  to  it  as 
Piche  Kitl  comes  to  pitch  kettle.  And  someone  certainly  "put  the  light  " 
where  it  caught  the  vapour,  only  that  someone  was  not  the  mythical  Bob 
Heal,  but  Creasy  himself. 

One  other  point  is  worth  notice.  Long  names  of  firms  are  generally 
abbreviated  in  common  speech  ;  bift  there  seems  nothing  in  the  reports,  so 
far  as  we  have  seen  them,  to  indicate  that  the  middle  name  was  thus  used  in 
this  case.  I  asked  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  what  name  was  most  used  on  the  sjiot, 
and  he  replies  :  "In  finding  out  the  works,  those  who  directed  me  generally 
spoke  of  '  Forbes  and  Abbot's  '  works,  and  the  wharf  attached  to  the  place 

514 

Mv.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

seemed  better  known  as  Abbot's  Wliarf  than  by  its  proper  title,  Ordnance 
Wharf.  On  the  whole  I  should  say  that  the  works  are  commonly  knoAvn  as 
Abbot's." 

M.  Retrocognitive  Scene. 

Mrs.  A  gives  the  following  account:  "  In  October,  1886,  my  daughter 
saw  in  the  stone  in  her  bracelet  a  scene  which  considerably  impressed  me, 
as  it  was  one  which  I  at  once  identified,  while  I  was  absolutely  sure  tliat  I 
had  never  mentioned  it  to  her  or  to  any  of  my  children.    She  saw  a  man  in 
a  barge-like  boat  witli  a  very  large  gun  fixed  in  it,  tlie  object  of  which  she. 
could  not  understand.     The  man  was  alone  and  lying  in  the  bottom  of  th& 
boat,  and  this  also  puzzled  her.     Waves  seemed  to  get  wp,  and  the  man_ 
rowed  extremely  hard,  as  though  trying  to  get  to  shore.      Then  she  saw 
him  throw  himself  dovrn  motionless  on  to  the  low  beach,  as  if  dead.  Now 
this  plainly  refers  to  a  sad  crisis  in  my  father's  life.    He  went  out  duck- 
shooting  alone  on  a  Norfolk  Broad,  witli  an  opening  to  the  sea.     A  storm 
got  up  and  he  was  all  but  blown  out  to  sea.    He  was  a  very  strong  man, 
and  by  great  exertion  he  got  to  land.      Then  he  threw  himself  down 
absolutely  spent  ;  and  the  exhaustion  of  that  day  was  the  beginning  of 
an  illness  whicli  idtimately  killed  him." 

lietrocogniticc  l^isioii.  (Strafford.) 

Lady  Radnor  writes,  February  23rd,  1890,  from  Longford  Castle, 
Salisbury  :  "  [Miss  A]  has  been  with  me  now  for  three  weeks  ;  but  the  fact 
is  she  sees  and  hears  so  many  things  that  we  really  canlt  keep  f)ace  with 
them  all  in  the  matter  of  chronicling.  The  most  interesting  thing  we  have 
had,  I  think,  is  that  slie  has  several  times  seen  in  the  crystal  and  at 
"sittings"  a  figure  purjjorting  to  be  Lord  Straff'ord  (tlie  one  executed  by 
Charles  I.),  who  declares  that  a  paper  signed  by  Henrietta  Maria  about 
himself  is  hidden  in  this  house.  He  keeps  on  saying,  '  Find  the  Queen's 
seal. '  Oddly  enougli,  since  this  occurred  I  have  found  a  scrap  of  paper  in 
the  late  Lady  Radnor's  handwriting,  mentioning  the  things  in  Queen 
Elizabeth's  cabinet,  and  amongst  others  there  is  a  deed  or  document  signed 
by  Henrietta  Maria  and  tlie  great  officers  of  her  household,  including  the 
Keejjer  of  the  Queen's  Great  Seal.  Tliis  paper  is  nowhere  to  be  found  now, 
though  the  other  articles  are  all  there  as  named  in  the  list.  The  figure  .says 
the  pajjerhad  to  do  with  his  (Strafford's)  release." 

In  reply  to  my  questions  I^ady  Radnor  further  writes,  February  25th  : 
"  By  no  possibility  could  [she]  have  seen  the  list  I  refer  to  [of  objects  in  the 
cabinet].  It  was  locked  u]j  among  a  lot  of  old  i^apei's  that  I  knew  notliing 
of  ;  and  as  I  had  forgotten  the  fact  myself  I  could  not  have  mentioned  it. 

[An(jther  case,  which  in  one  sense  at  least  is  retrocognitive,  is  supplied 
by  the  Hon.  Eric  Barring-ton,  and  confirmed  by  Mrs.  Barrington.  I  have  also 
received  a  concordant  account  of  the  crystal-message  from  Lady  Radnor, 
the  hostess  on  the  occasion  alluded  to.] 

0.  62,  Cadogan-place. 

November  21sf.,  1892. 

Two  years  ago  I  met  Miss  A,  I  think  for  the  first  time,  at  dinner  at  a 
friend's  house.  She  told  my  wife  that  she  had  seen  standing  behind  my 
chair  a  figure  which  from  her  descrijjtion,  though  somewhat  vague,  seemed 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

515 

to  be  that  of  a  very  great  friend  of  snine,  an  officer  who  had  died  about 
seven  years  ago  on  active  service.  She  referred  particularly  to  the  attitude 
assumed  by  the  figure,  which  was  like  the  one  in  a  photograph  I  possess  of 
him,  but  which  she  had  never  seen.  She  knew  nothing  of  this  friendship,  and 
the  name  of  the  officer  was  not  mentioned  to  her. 

Last  summer  we  met  again  at  the  same  house,  and  although  in  the  in- 
terval we  had  become  better  acquainted  with  Miss  A  and  her  family,  I  am 
not  conscious  of  having  ever  said  anything  to  her  on  the  subject  of  my 
friend.  On  reaching  the  drawing-room  after  dinner  I  found  her  looking 
into  a  crystal  and  dictating  with  extraordinary  rapidity  a  number  of  letters 
of  the  alphabet  which  were  passing  before  her,  and  were  being  taken  down 
by  the  lady  of  the  house,  who  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  keeping  pace 
with  her.  When  the  letters  ceased,  it  was  discovered  by  marking  them  off  from 
tlie  end  that  they  formed  a  complete  message,  of  which  each  word  was  spelt 
backwards.  Before  the  letters  began  to  show  themselves  Miss  A  saw  in  tlio 
crystal  the  same  figure  that  she  had  seen  two  years  before,  dressed  in  what 
appeared  to  be  a  dark  uniform,  and  in  the  same  peculiar  attitude,  but  I  was 
not  in  the  room  when  this  occurred.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  message  was 
deciphered  by  our  hostess,  it  became  evident  that  it  purported  to  proceed 
from  the  person  whose  likeness  had  just  been  reproduced.  It  was  addressed, 
not  to  me,  who  was  absent  from  the  room  when  the  letters  first  appeared, 
but  to  my  wife,  and  was  to  the  following  effect  : — 

' '  Ask  your  husband  whether  he  still  remembers  T.  T.  Tell  him  that  I 
am  constantly  with  him,  and  that  death  makes  no  difference  in  friendship." 

The  full  surname  was  given,  preceded  by  a  nickname  whicli  had  been 
dropped  when  he  grew  up,  and  was  only  known  to  those  who,  like  myself, 
had  been  intimate  with  him  from  childhood. 

It  cannot  be  suggested  that  Miss  A  had  been  in  any  way  impressed  by 
my  thoughts,  for  it  was  not  until  I  sat  by  my  hostess  and  helped  her  to  spell 
out  the  words  of  the  message  that  I  realised  from  whom  it  came,  when  I  v;as 
able  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  nickname  that  had  completely  puzzled 
her,  though  she  had  been  well  acquaiiited  with  the  bearer  after  he  entered 
the  army.  Eric  Babrington. 

This  entirely  agrees  with  my  recollection  of  the  circumstances.  The 
moment  Miss  A  described  the  figure  on  our  first  meeturg,  I  felt  a  very 
peculiar  sensation,  accompanied  by  a  certainty  as  to  the  identity  of  the 
person  she  saw.  Cheisxina  Bakringtok. 

[There  is  a  privately  printed  life  of  the  officer  in  question,  in  v.-hich  an 
early  nickname  of  his  is  given.  But  I  find  that  this  nickname  is  not  the 
same  as  that  shown  in  the  crystal,  which  was  appropriate  for  recognition 
by  friends  of  boyhood  only.] 

The  possible  sources  of  retrocognitive  messages  will  be  discussed, 
I  hope,  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  j^aper.  At  present  I  will  only 
observe  that,  assuming  the  probity  of  the  seer,  which  does  not  in  this 
case  need  my  testimonial,  the  danger  is  of  unconscious  memory  of  some 
book  or  conversation  read  or  heard  unheedingiy,  and  perhaps  long  ago. 
In  a  case  discussed  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  July,  1891,  I  considered 
that  explanation  of  the  messages  probable.    Here,  in  my  judgment,  it 

51G 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

is  improljaljle  in  the  extreme.  But,  apart  frDiu  the  discussion  of  such 
chances,  the  evidential  value  of  retrocognitive  scenes  is  of  course  greatly 
strengthened  if  (as  in  the  present  case)  the  same  percipient  has  seen 
contemporary  scenes  also,  and  has  had  veridical  visions  or  messages  which 
cou.ld  not  l)y  their  very  nature  have  been  derived  in  a  normal  manner 
from  any  existing  source. 

Case  TV. — Mr.  Keulemans. 

XVII. — My  next  witness,  Mr.  Keulemans,  has  been  known  to  me, 
personally  and  hy  correspondence,  for  ten  years.  He  has  contributed 
several  cases,  mentioned  below,  to  our  Proceedings.  Mr.  Keulemans,  as 
the  world  of  naturalists  well  knows,  is  a  scientific  draughtsman, 
especially  strong  in  Ornithology.  His  works  may  be  seen  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society,  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  British 
Museum,  in  the  Ibis  (Journal  of  the  Ornithologist's  Union),  etc.,  ifec. 
He  has  illustrated  many  monographs,  and  some  large  treatises.  See 
article  "  Ornithology,"  in  if/icyc/o^Jfef^ift  Brifaunica,  jjp.  13,  16,  17. 

M.  53. 

"  Healtli  . — My  health  is  excellent,  and  has  ahvays  been  so.  I  was  once  ill 
with  yellow  fever  when  in  Sierra  Leone  ;  hut  owing  to  my  robust  constitution 
I  recovered,  whilst  about  forty  per  cent,  of  tlie  other  victims  died.  I  have 
also  had  rheumatic  fever.  But  as  a  rule  I  never  suffer  from  any  derange- 
ment whatsoever.  Perfect  digestion,  good  sound  sleep,  and  a  happy  home- 
life  are  my  special  lilessings.  But  perhaps  the  French  mmn.ts  may  suggest 
that  tliough  my  pliysique  is  normal,  my  nerves  or  brain  may  be  wrong.  I 
do  not  think  there  is  anything  aljnormal  in  any  of  my  functions  or  faculties. 
I  have  a  very  strong  memory  f(_)r  names,  &c. ,  but  no  great  power  of  mental 
calculation.  I  have  a  rare  ear  and  memory  for  ]nusic.  I  know  about  twenty 
operas  by  heart,  and  could  rej^ruduce  the  most  striking  parts  of  about  fifty 
more.  I  have  a  strong  feeling  for  '  harmony  '  of  all  kinds — in  sound, 
movement,  colour,  and  form.  I  take  a  great  interest  in  Nature,  and  am 
perpetually  making  observations  and  experiments,  and  liave,  besides, 
produced  over  20,000  original  drawings  of  ])irds  and  animals.  All  tliis  sounds 
very  much  like  'brag,'  hut  as  you  ask  me  the  questions  I  cannot  hut  state 
all  particulars  that  may  have  a  Ijearing  on  the  point. 

"  Visiialimtion.. — [Mr.  Keulemans'  2)ower  of  visualisation  is,  as  his  artistic 
work  indicates,  very  strong.]  I  am  not  suhject  to  illusions  lujpnagogiqiies, 
but  have  often  very  vivid  dreams  of  towns  and  other  beautiful  scenery.  I 
rarely  dream  of  anything  horrible  ;  perha^JS  because  I  do  not  sup  or  dine 
late. 

'■'Mode  of  Scmorij  Automatism. — I  can  sometimes  become  aware  of  certain 
events  that  are  taking  jjlace,  or  have  already  taken  place,  at  a  distance,  by 
means  of  what  is  usually  called  '  clairvoyance. '  But  my  clairvoyance  is 
p)assive  ;  it  is  not  the  active  clairvoyance,  as  I  may  call  it,  M'hich  enables 
some  people  to  start  in  search  of  events  occurring  elsewliere — by  crystal- 
gazing,  &c.    In  my  cases  there  was  actually  sometliiug  happening  elsewhere 

TJi.e  SiMiminal  Consciousness. 

517 

ivMch  came  to  me;  and  if  I  became  aware  of  it  this  was  owing  to  my  having, 
.at  first  unconsciously,  placed  myself  in  a  pseudo-hypnotic  state. 

' '  My  profession  is  that  of  a  scientific  artist.    1  draw  a  good  deal  on  stone  ; 
.and  my  principal  subjects  are  birds  and  animals.  It  so  happens  that  the  eye 
of  a  bird,  during  the  slow  process  of  drawing  it,  forms  a  capital  point  for 
concentration  of  the  mind  and  consequent  distraction  from  ordinary  iiows 
of  thouo-ht.    I  noticed  that  whenever  strong  impressions  had  got  hold  of  my 
inind  thev  had  a  tendency  to  develop  themselves  into  a  vivid  mind-jncture 
as  soon  as  my  eye  and  attention  were  concentrated  upon  the  eye  m  the 
drawing  ;  and  that  whenever  I  began  darkening  the  iris,  leaving  the  light 
.speck  the  most  prominent  part,  I  would  slowly  pass  off  into  a  kind  of 
■dream-state.    The  mere  act  of  drawing  the  eye  is  not  enough  to  bring  me 
into  this  state,  or  I  should  experience  such  a  state  at  least  once  a  day,  which 
I  do  not.    But  if  a  strong  mental  impression  takes  hold  of  me  I  begin 
drawing  an  eye,   since  I  know  from  experience  that  sucli  an  impression 
means  that  something  has  occurred  which,  so  to  say,  comes  withm  reach  of 
my  centre  of  mental  attraction.    The  drawing  will  then  convey  to  me  the 
aiews,  either  in  the  form  of  a  vague,  imperfect  representation  of  the  person 
indicated  in  the  impression,  or  by  a  correct  hallucinatory  picture  of  the 
event  as  it  actually  occurred,  both  as  regards  the  person  and  the  sur- 
-  roundinc's.    Sometimes  I  cannot  get  at  the  vision  at  once  ;  other  thoughts 
and  scenes  interfere.    But  when  I  begin  to  feel  drowsy  T  know  I  shall  have 
it  rio-ht  in  a  second  ;  and  here  I  lose  normal  consciousness.    That  there  is 
an  actual  loss  of  consciousness  I  know  from  the  fact  tliat  on  one  occasion 
my  wife  had  been  in  the  room  talking  to  me,  and  not  receiving  a  reply 
thought  that  something  was  wrong  with  me  and  shook  my  shoulder.  The 
shake  brought  me  liack  t(j  my  waking  state. 

'  Telejxithk  Instance.— A.  Last  summer,  in  Paris,  I  experienced  a  picture 
of  the  vaguer  class.  I  first  had  a  strong  notion  that  something  was  wrong 
somewhere,  affecting  a  near  relative.  As  the  notion  kept  disturbing  me, 
I  resorted  to  my  bird's-eye  experiment,  and  saw  my  wife  and  mother-in- 
law  moving  hurriedly  in  my  liedroom  here  at  Southend.  I  then  heard  my 
child,  little  Marie,  scream  ;  not  a  painful  outcry,  rather  an  outburst  of 
temper.  This  happened  at  about  1  p.m.  I  wrote  home  asking  for  par- 
ticulars and  posted  the  letter  at  4  p.m.  At  «  p.m.  I  was  with  a  friend 
at  Montreuil,  near  Paris.  The  family  were  finishing  their  dinner,  and  I 
walked  into  the  garden,  when  I  saw  hallucinatorily,  without  any  experi- 
mental means,  a  picture  of  our  bedroom,  and  little  Marie  in  sound  sleep. 
T  heard  my  boys  laugh.  It  was  all  right  again  at  home,  said  the  telepathic 
'  message. '  Two  days  later  my  wife  wrote  that  I  had  been  correct  in  my 
perception  of  little  Marie's  condition.  She  had  been  very  ill  during  the 
day— a  kind  of  fit  caused  by  the  presence  of  thread-worms  ;  but  by  nine 
o'clock,  after  vigorous  treatment,  was  better,  and  went  to  sleep.  Here  the 
message  was  correct  so  far  as  the  person  was  concerned  ;  but  there  was  a 
flaw  in  the  visualisation  of  the  surroundings,  since  Marie  had  not  Ijeeii  in 
our  bedroom,  but  in  the  nursery. 

Clairvoyant  Instances.— B.  Some  three  years  ago  I  experienced  what  I 
believe  to  have  been  a  correct  representation  of  actual  facts.  I  saw  in  my 
mind's  eye  one  of  my  aunts  walking  in  a  room,  with  her  right  side  bent,  as 

518 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

though  in  pain.  I  saw  the  room,  even  to  the  pattern  of  the  wall-paper. 
By  my  'bird's-eye  '  experiment  I  went  into  the  room,  and  saw  it  just  as  I 
had  visualised  it  a  few  moments  before,  but  more  distinctly.  Tlie  sensation 
was  akin  to  a  dream,  not  of  the  most  vivid  kind.  But  I  woke  np  from  it  • 
I  found,  tliat  is  to  say,  that  I  had  actually  lost  normal  consciousness. 

' '  I  wrote  to  my  father,  not  asking  whether  my  Aunt  Marie  was  ill,  but 
simply  stating  that  she  was  so,  as  though  I  had  heard  it  as  a  jjiece  of  news. 
In  fact,  I  had  not  seen  this  aunt,  nor  heard  from  her,  for  over  twenty  years. 
My  parents  had  not  seen  her  for  several  years.  But  she  died  a  few  days 
after  my  father  received  my  letter.  She  lived  in  a  little  village  in  Brabandt, 
and  I  have  never  seen  her  house  ;  but  one  of  my  sisters  knew  a  room  in  her 
house  very  like  that  which  I  described.  My  father  has  not  preserved  my 
letter.  H  e  laughs  at  clairvoyance,  and  finds  it  funny  that  I  should  practice 
'  conjuring.' 

"  C.  About  five  years  ago  I  had  a  similar  experience.  I  was  drawing  an^ 
animal  on  stone,  and  when  I  came  to  the  eye  I  saw  my  grandmother  sitting, 
in  her  room,  knitting  stockings.  Tiie  same  visualisation  returned  whenever 
my  chalk  passed  over  that  same  part  of  my  drawing,  initil  at  last  I  '  went 
ofi", '  and  was  in  the  room.  I  noticed  clairvoyantly  the  pattern  of  the 
American  cloth  covering  the  table.  I  had  been  in  the  room  in  person  some 
years  previous.  Two  days  later  my  brother  wrote  that  our  grandmother 
was  very  ill,  and  not  likely  to  recover.  About  a  week  after  this — again  when 
drawing  the  eye  of  an  animal  or  bird — the  sound  of  an  aria  from  the  opera 
'  La  Dame  Blanche  '  strongly  aifected  my  mentid  ear.  I  heard  it  just  as 
though  it  was  actually  being  played  upon  a  musical-box  just  outside  my 
room.  I  then  remembered  that  my  grandmother  had  a  clock  playing  that 
tune.  I  heard  the  tune  at  about  7  p.m.,  and  my  grandmother  died  some 
five  hours  later  on  the  same  day." 

It  may  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Keulemans  has  already  contributed  five 
coincidental  experiences  to  Pliantasms  of  the  Living.^  In  referring  to  one 
of  these  cases  {Pruceediiujs,  XIV.,  jj.  516,  note)  Miss  X  remarked  that  "Mr. 
Keulemans  seemed  able  to  get  definite  pictures  transferred  from  the  uncon- 
scious region  of  the  mind  without  needing  a  crystal  to  aid  in  their  fixation." 
This  set  Mr.  Keulemans  ujwn  more  careful  observation,  and  he  says:  "I 
have  since  discovered  that  all  my  cases  of  seeing  happened  while  I  was  doing 
some  kind  of  work  like  the  gradual  '  graining-in  '  of  part  of  a  drawing." 

He  adds  another  case  which,  although  very  remote,  stands  out  so 
definitely  in  Mr.  Keulemans'  memory  that  it  may  be  briefly  given  here. 

D.  Mr.  Keulemans,  when  a  boy,  was  to  be  taken  by  his  uncle  on  a  fishing 
expedition.  There  was  a  mistake  about  hours,  and  the  boy,  running  hurriedly 
to  the  boat,  found  that  he  was  there  before  the  rest  of  the  party.  He  sat 
down  to  rest,  with  head  oir  hands,  and  fell  into  a  dream  or  state  of  changed 
consciousness.  In  this  state  he  saw  a  man  vniknown  to  him  trying  to  strike 
a  fowl  with  a  walking-stick  in  a  known  country-lane,  completely  out  of  sight 
and  hearing.  "I  heard  him  laugli,  and  noticed  how  a  lock  of  his  long,  fair  hair 

^  Cases  numbered  21,  38,  50,  184  :  and  see  case  in  note  Vol.  I.,  p.  250. 
See  also  Vol.  I.,  p.  441  note,  and  Vol.  II.,  pp.  33,  34,  for  cases  somewhat  similar  to 
Mr.  Keulemans'  experiences. 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

519 

fell  over  his  face,  and  how  he  tried  to  remove  it  by  throwing  hack  his  head." 
This  man  was  in  fact  one  of  the  uncle's  fishing  party,  and  had  acted  just 
as  described  a  few  minutes  before.  He  charged  the  boy  with  having 
followed  and  watched  him,  and  run  round  some  other  way.  But  the  boy's 
pulse  was  found  tranquil,  and  the  boatman  testified  to  his  having  rested 
there  for  some  time. 

We  have,  therefore,  nine  cases,  more  or  less  well-evidenced,  and  all  of 
somewhat  similar  type,  which  Mr.  Keulemans  regards  as  certaiiily  coinci- 
dental. 

Mr.  Keulemans  adds,  however,  that  between  12  and  17  he  had  almost 
daily  cases  of  "  ecstasy,"  which  he  believes  to  have  often  contained  true 
claii-voyance  but  which  he  kept  to  himself  and  rarely  endeavoured  to  test. 
He  still  has  these  ecstasies  occasionally  ;  and  some  of  his  non-coincidental 
cases  should  be  read  in  order  that  his  faculty  should  be  estimated  from  data 
as  full  as  possible.    I  abbreviate  from  a  letter  of  January  11th,  1891  : — 

"  Last  year,  when  sitting  outside  a  London  omnibus,  I  noticed  what  I 
tliought  to  be  a  '  darting  spider  '  sitting  on  a  dark  board.  I  closely  watched 
it,  expecting  to  see  it  make  a  sudden  dart,  when,  strange  to  say,  both 
.spider  and  board  vanished — and  J  was  in  Paris.  There  was  the  Rue  de 
Lafayette — I  passed  the  Opera — down  the  Rue  du  4  Septembre,  when  a  real 
person  asked  me  a  question  which  I  had  just  sense  enough  to  understand  to 
be  in  English,  and  I  found  myself,  to  my  great  surprise,  at  the  Mansion 
House. " 

"Last  winter  I  had  been  ill  of  rheumatic  fever,  and,  although  at  work 
before  my  easel,  still  felt  pain  all  over.  My  mind  was  clear,  but  vt'ith  an 
inclination  to  get  into  the  comatose  condition  in  which  real  clairvoyance  has 
often  manifested  itself.  So  I  gave  in,  like  an  hyjinotised  subject,  and  pur- 
posely forced  ray  eyes  upon  some  particidar  sjjot  in  my  picture,  trying 
difierent  colours  alternately.  Red  gave  me  a  headache,  and  I  had  to  avert 
the  influence.  Very  dark  spots  had  no  effect  whatsoever.  Then  the  coma- 
tose sensation  went  ofl"  until  I  was  again  at  wi^rk  at  some  particular  spot 
requiring  but  meclianical  labour.  Blue-grey  and  light  yellow  seemed  the 
most  likely  to  send  me  off.  I  was  looking  intently  at  a  blue-green  line 
bounding  a  grey  one,  when  gradually  I  found  picture  and  surroundings  go  in  a 
mist,  which  cleared  up,  and  I  was  now  looking  at  some  two  or  three  children 
climbing  over  a  gate.  They  were  very  indistinct,  but  the  landscape  on  their 
right  now  became  very  clear  and  beautiful.  It  represented  a  lovely  farmyard 
scene,  which  I  recognised  as  a  place  known  to  me  betvreen  Southchurch 
and  Wakering,  in  Essex.  I  was  tliere,  as  really  as  I  am  now  writing  at  my 
desk — nay,  more  really  than  in  the  normal  state,  for  all  my  pain  v.-;is  gone  in 
the  genial  temperature  and  under  the  beautiful  summer  sky.  I  felt  per- 
fectly hajDpy,  healthy,  and  more  than  usually  vigorous.  Also  I  seemed 
conscious  of  possessing  a  far  greater  knowledge  of  things  in  general  than  in 
normal  life.  But  there  was  here  no  actual  clairvoyance.  I  saw  a  familiar 
land.scape  in  its  summer  aspect,  whereas,  had  I  been  transcendentally  present 
there,  I  should  have  witnessed  a  winter  scene  with  falling  snow,  for  it  was  on 
a  dirty  .January  day  that  I  saw  the  vision.  I  have  always  thought  that  there 
may  be  some  afllnity  between  the  conditions  in  which  non-veridical  and  those 
in  which  veridical  or  clairvoyant  impressions  are  experienced." 

-520 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

It  is  noticeable  that  in  this  case  the  hallucinatoi-y  sensation  pervaded  the 
f)ercipient's  whole  being,  giving  a  sense  of  extraordinary  hien-Hvn  and  of 
unwonted  insight  into  reality.  A  similar  case  is  cited  by  Professor  James 
{Principles  of  Psiiclwlvgij,  Vol.  II.,  p.  120),  where  the  informant  had  a  single 
experience  of  the  same  ecstatic  and  exhilarating  kind.  "I  had  only  just  sat 
down  and  become  interested  in  the  circular  when  I  seemed  to  lose  myself  for  a 
minute  and  then  found  myself  in  tlie  top  storey  of  a  high  building,  very  white 
iind  shining  and  clean,  with  a  noble  window,  through  which  I  looked  out  upon  a 
marvellous  reach  of  landscape  entirely  new.  I  never  had  before  such  a  sense  of 
infinity  in  nature,  such  sujierb  stretches  of  light  and  colour  and  cleanness. 
When  I  began  to  come  to,  so  to  speak,  sitting  in  that  other  world,  I  debated 
for  three  or  four  minutes  more  as  to  which  was  dream  and  which  was  reality. 
Sitting  there  I  got  a  faint  sense  of  C.  [the  town  in  which  the  writer  was] 
away  off  and  dim  at  first.  Then  I  remembered  thinking, '  Why,  I  used  to  live 
in  C. ,  perhaps  I  am  going  back.'  Slov/ly  C.  did  come  back,  and  I  felt  myself 
at  my  desk  again.  The  whole  experience  was  perfectly  delightful — there 
was  such  a  sense  of  brilliancy  and  clearness  and  lightness  about  it." 

Cases  like  these  (of  which  I  have  heard  some  others)  should  not,  I  think, 
be  confounded  with  ordinary  dreams  ;  nor  with  cases  where  a  series  of  day- 
dreams, at  first  voluntary,  gradually  becomes  involuntaryi  ;  still  less  with  the 
vague,  iu\comfortable  sensations  of  "  being  somewhere  else  "  which  form  a 
frequent  element  in  epilej^tic  aurre.  They  are  more  akin  to  the  sensory 
automatisms  discussed  in  this  paper,  and  it  will  be  remembered  that  Miss  A 
has  often  the  feeling  that  she  is  the  scene  which  she  sees.  But  the  change 
in  subjective  sensation  recalls  rather  the  experiences  of  Dr.  Wiltse  and  M. 
Bertrand  -  at  tlie  moment  when  tliey  were  apparently  dead.  The  fittest  name 
for  all  such  experiences  is  ecstasy,  for  they  involve  a  "  standing  forth  "  froui 
the  habitual  environment  —the  environment  of  corporeal  sensations  as  well  as 
of  material  surroundings  ;  and  they  carry  with  them  "  that  tliouglitless  sense 
of  joy  bewildering  "  which,  as  I  have  elsewhere  noted,  seems  the  frequent,  the 
unexpected  accompaniment  of  these  prof(jund  shocks  to  waking  personality. 
It  is  (  iljvious  that  in  these  modern  and,  so  to  say,  secular  cases  of  ecstasy  we 
need  not  expect  to  find  the  special  theological  colouring  familiar  in  the 
ecstasy,  for  instance,  of  S.  Theresa. 

A  curious  illustration  of  tlie  connection  between  these  ecstasies  and 
telepathy  is  afforded  by  a  recent  experience  of  Mr.  Keulemans'  at  or  about 
the  moment  of  his  father's  death.  His  father  died  at  Rotterdam,  3.30  p.m. 
Rotterdam  time,  3.12  i).m.  English  time,  on  August  29th,  1892.  This  event 
was  preceded  fi.ir  Mr.  Keulemans  by  several  externalised  auditions  (of  the 
"  Demon  of  Socrates  "  type)  and  by  a  symbolical  vision  ;  to  him  significant, 
though  liardly  definite  enough  for  citation  as  evidence.  On  August  29th  he 
•was  aware  of  his  father's  dangerous  illness,  and  expecting  to  return  to 
Rotterdam  in  a  few  days  ;  but  an  immediate  end  was  not  looked  for.  "  On 
Monday,  August  29th,  at  3.10  p.m.  l)y  my  watch,  whilst  I  was  in  the  garden 
holding  a  little  trowel  in  my  liand,  there  suddenly  came  over  me  a  strange 
feeling,  like  a  call  from  tlie  unseen  to  be  aUentii-e,  to  be  prepared  for  some 

1  See  Fere,  Pathologic  dcs  Emotions,  p.  347. 
"  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  180,  sqr^. 

The  SMiminal  Consciousness.  521. 

strange  occurrence.  I  stood  ui^right  in  ans'n-er  to  the  call,  and  stood  looking- 
upon  a  lane  of  summer  beans.  They  looked  lieavenly  beautiful  ;  my  garden 
seemed  all  glorified.  I  felt  my  father's  influence.  If  I  had  held  both  hi.s 
hands  and  looked  him  in  the  eyes  I  could  not  have  felt  his  influence  niore- 
strongly  than  I  did  at  that  moment.  But  there  was  no  vision  of  him.  This 
lasted  perhaps  six  seconds.  Then  it  seemed  that  the  garden  liad  resumed 
its  normal  aspect,  and  I  felt  the  influence  gone  ;  and  with  it  all  the  sad 
gloomy  thoughts  about  my  father  which  had  occupied  my  mind.  '  This- 
means  that  father  is  gone,'  I  said  to  myself.  I  therefore  noted  the  time 
(3.10  jD.m.),  went  indoors,  and  told  my  wife  what  had  hapj)ened  tome.  I 
thought  of  telegraphing  to  my  brother  in  Holland,  but  changed  my  mind,  as 
it  might  have  seemed  to  my  relatives  that  I  treated  my  father's  death  as  a 
subject  for  experiment. 

"  Next  day  I  heard  from  my  brother  that  my  father  had  died  peacefully  at 
half -past  three  on  Monday  afternoon." 

Mrs.  Keulemans  confirms  as  follows:  "The  above,  as  far  as  the  main 
points  are  concerned,  is  quite  correct ;  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  my 
husband  describing  the  garden  scene  as  appearing  more  beautiful  to  him 
than  at  other  times." — A.  Keulemaxs. 

Here  again  we  have  the  points  so  often  noticed, — the  entire  removal  of 
sorrow  from  the  moment  when  the  departed  friend  has  got  his  hold,  so  to 
say,  on  the  survivor's  mind  ; — the  association  of  joy  and  ecstasy  with  these 
deep  upheavals  of  personality,  and  with  the  upheaval  which  we  call  death. 

I  must  ni5t  here  pursue  this  topic.  But  one  further  remark  may  be  made 
as  to  Mr.  Keulemans'  habit  of  mind,  or  tyj^e  of  intelligence,  with  reference 
to  the  view  which  would  make  of  such  experiences  as  his  an  indication  of 
"  mental  disintegration,"  an  approach  to  hysterical  incoherence  or  lack  of 
well-controlled  personality.  My  contention  is  tliat  althouglr  a  weak  person- 
ality may  be  subject  to  such  disintegrations  against  its  will,  it  is  character- 
istic also  of  a  strong  personality  to  be  cajjable  of  using  concealed  resources  ; 
or  say,  altering  its  focus  of  crystallisation  with  more  readiness  than  is  possible 
to  an  ordinary  man.  I  have  claimed  this  in  the  case  of  various  forms  of  genius, 
and  I  note  that  Mr.  Keulemans'  vigorous  and  eager  versatility  is  accom- 
panied by  a  marked  power  over  memory  and  capacity  for  forming  and  separat- 
ing mnemonic  chains.  Thus  he  has  a  stronger  tendency  than  most  men  to 
form  a  continuous  dream-memory,  going  on  from  one  night  to  another.  And, 
leading  a  busy  life  divided  between  Paris  and  liOndon,  he  has  a  tendency  to 
form  two  memories  for  these  two  lives,  and  to  forget  when  in  Paris  the 
incidents  of  his  London  life.  This  tendency  to  a  certain  extent  exists  in  all 
of  us  ;  but  in  Mr.  Keulemans  it  would,  if  not  controlled,  lead  far  towards  a 
duplication  of  consciousness.  He  can,  however,  1)y  voluntary  efibrt,  control  it 
completely.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  to  regard  it  as  disadvantageous  ; 
rather,  it  efi'ects  automatically  that  act  of  putting  away  from  tlie  mind  need- 
less encumbrances  wliich  is  one  of  the  first  needs  of  the  busy  man.  In  my 
view,  therefore,  Mr.  K. 's  intellectual  history  illustrates  the  interest  and 
knowledge  added  to  a  healthy  and  capable  man  by  a  slightly  increased  power 
of  sitting  loosely  to  the  bonds  of  supraliminal  jjersonality — of  altering  the 
focus  of  mental  crystallisation  to  suit  a  change  in  environment. 

The.  cases  which  I  have  thus  far  cited  have  come,  with  hardly  an 

522 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

exception,  from  the  limited  circle  of  persons  already  independently 
Ivnown  to  me,  and  the  experiments  recorded  have  for  the  most  part 
been  undertaken  at  my  request. 

XVIII.— I  will  add  a  few  detached  cases  of  crystal-vision  for  which 
the  authority  seems  good.  In  the  first  case  the  seer,  now  married  to  an 
Englishman,  is  known  to  me,  and  the  witnesses,  Colonel  Wickham  and 
his  wife,  Princess  di  Cristoforo,  (whose  acquaintance  I  made  in  conse- 
quence of  their  publication  of  the  following  incidents  in  Light),  have 
assui'ed  me  that  the  following  incidents,  although  now  the  only  ones 
which  can  be  clearly  remembered,  were  paralleled  by  several  others 
during  the  time  of  Ruth's  possession  of  the  power  which  seems  now  to 
liave  left  her.  She  has  never  been  in  any  way  a  professional  clair- 
voyant, and  is,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  a  trustworthy  person.  The  value 
of  the  following  case,  however,  does  not  depend  upon  her  trustworthi- 
ness, but  on  the  recollection  retained  by  Colonel  AVickham  and  his  wife 
of  incidents,  which,  even  if  we  suppose  errors  of  memory  as  to  details, 
were  of  a  very  definite  type. 
M.  54. 

Early  in  the  spring  of  tlie  year  1885,  I  was  living  at  Colaba  with  my 
husband,  a  major  of  the  Royal  Artillery.  Colaba  is  the  Royal  Artillery 
station,  and  is  situated  about  two  miles  from  Bombay.  For  some  little  time 
I  had  been  studying  Gregory's  Animal  Magnetism.  The  subject  possessing 
a  peculiar  fascination  for  me,  I  had  experimented  occasionally,  with  varying 
success,  on  the  different  servants  (Indian  for  the  most  part)  of  my  establish- 
ment. Over  one  girl,  a  'half-caste,  my  children's  nui-se,  I  possessed  great 
influence,  and  used  frequently  to  magnetise  a  tumbler  of  water,  so  that  by 
making  lier  look  therein  I  might  learn  what  my  friends  at  a  distance  were 
doing. 

This  girl  was  no  ignorant  native,  but  a  well-educated  j'oung  woman,  able 
to  read  and  write,  who  spoke  English  nearly  as  well  as  I  do  myself,  having 
been  educated  in  the  Protestant  training  school  at  Belgaum.  Many  things 
which  tills  girl  told  me  I  have  since  discovered  to  have  actually  occurred  : 
others  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  verify. 

One  day,  tlie  morning  Lord  Reay  was  expected  to  arrive  in  Bombay,  the 
Royal  Artillery  (of  which  my  husband  was  then  in  command)  was,  together 
with  the  other  European  troops  quartered  at  Colaba,  ordered  to  line  the 
ajJiJroach  to  the  landing-place  at  the  Apollo  Bunder,  all  officers  having  to 
appear  in  full  regim-jnt.ils.  We  were  still  sitting  at  breakfast  when  my 
luisband  called  to  his  orderly  to  get  out  his  uniform  and  place  it  ready  for 
him  to  put  on.  The  man  soon  returned,  and,  with  a  bewildered  air, 
stammered,  as  he  salaamed  before  his  master  :  "  Sahib,  me  no  can  find  the 
dress  pouch-belt." 

"Don't  talk  nonsense,  you  must  be  blind  as  a  bat,"  ejaculated  the  Major, 
as,  rismg  impatiently  from  his  seat,  he  walked  into  his  dressing-room.  Soon, 
his  voice,  raised  in  angry  exclamation,  burst  on  my  cars.  From  what  I  heard 
I  gathered  that  the  dress  pouch-belt  was  really  not  to  be  found,  and  further 
that  my  enraged  husband  was  accusing  each  and  all  of  his  servants  of  having 

Tlie  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

523 

appropriated  it.  Piteous  cries  of  "Not  me,  sahib,  me  very  good  man,  me 
not  tief, "  filled  the  air.  The  jabbering,  yelling,  and  hooting  was  perfectly 
deafening.  My  husband  returned  to  the  breakfast-room.  "Now  then,"  he 
said,  "here  is  a  brilliant  opportunity  of  testing  the  verity  of  Ruth's  clair- 
voyance. Get  her  up  here  and  ask  her  to  find  my  pouch-belt."  I  called 
Ruth,  who  appeared  pale  and  trembling,  half  imagining  we  suspected  her  of 
tlie  theft. 

When  I  explained  to  her  what  I  required  of  her  she  at  first  begged  to  be 
excused,  declaving  that  her  fellow  servants  would  never  forgive  her  should 
the  thief  be  discovered  through  her  instrumentality.  I  quieted  her  fears  by 
promising  her  that  should  she  see  the  face  of  the  thief  in  the  tumbler  she 
need  only  reveal  the  fact  to  me  ;  that  I  would  not  tell  the  Sahib,  but  would 
speak  to  the  pilferer  of  the  belt  myself,  and  on  his  restoring  the  missing 
article  would  condone  the  theft,  not  letting  my  husband  kniaw  who  had 
purloined  the  belt. 

Filling  a  tumbler  with  water,  I  placed  my  left  hand  under  it,  and  made 
passes  with  my  right  over  it.  I  then  bade  Ruth  taste  it.  ' '  It  is  bitter 
enough,  I  think,"  she  said.  "If  Mem  Sahib  pleases  to  mesmerise  me,  I 
think  I  can  see  now."  Perhaps  it  may  be  as  well  to  mention  here  that  Ruth 
always  declared  the  mesmerised  water  acquired  a  bitter  flavour  after  being 
operated  on.  I  have  frequently  mesmerised  one  tumbler  of  water  and 
placed  another,  similar  in  appearance  in  every  respect,  beside  it.  I  have 
then  called  Ruth  and  asked  her  which  was  the  mesmerised  and  which  the 
untouched  water  ;  she  would  taste  both  and  each  time  invariably  detected 
the  difi'erence.  Strange  to  say,  also,  when  I  at  one  time  purchased  a 
powerful  magnet  (thinking  that  perhaps  it  would  f)rove  a  more  powerful 
magnetiser  than  my  own  hand),  Ruth  declined  to  look  into  tlie  water  so 
magnetised,  declaring  that  she  saw  flames  in  it,  and  that  they  leapt  up  as  if 
they  wanted  to  scorch  her  face  !  It  was  of  no  use  my  trying  to  deceive 
her — she  invariablj'  knew  which  was  the  "condemned  tumbler "  (as  she 
called  it). 

Having  made  this  lengthy,  though  somewhat  necessary  digression,  I  will 
now  proceed  with  my  story.  We  left  Ruth  just  ready  to  look  in  the  tumbler. 
She  bent  her  head  over  it,  and  a  silence  of  a  few  seconds'  duration  ensued. 
"Can  you  see  anytlung,  Ruth?"  at  last  I  said.  "No!  Mem  Sahib- 
nothing."  "  Look  for  the  tliief, "  I  commanded  firmly,  making  fresh  passes 
over  her  head  and  the  back  of  her  neck,  l3ut  all  to  no  jjurpose.  Ruth  per- 
sisted that  she  saw  nothing.  I  began  to  think  that  she  was  an  impostor 
and  had  humbugged  me  systematically  throughout. 

Suddenly  an  idea  struck  me.  We  would  try  another  vi'ay.  "Ruth,"  I 
said,  "  look  for  Sahib  the  day  he  last  wore  the  dress  jjouch-belt."  Silence 
again.  Then,  "  I  see  Sahib,"  said  the  girl  dreamily.  "He  is  dressing,  he 
puts  on  his  uniform,  now  the  pouch-belt.  Ah  I  he  has  left  the  room." 
"Follow  him,"  I  said  firmly.  "  Sahib  is  getting  on  his  horse  :  he  is  riding 
away."  "Don't  leave  him  a  moment,"  I  cried.  "  Ah  !  but  he  goes  so  fast. 
I  am  tired,"  gasped  the  girl  breathlessly.  "Goon,"  I  said.  "Sahib  is 
with  other  Sahibs,  and  there  are  many  soldiers  and  people.  It  is  a  gi-and 
Tomasha  ;  some  great  person  is  going  away.  They  all  stand  near  the  water," 
"Then  rest,"  I,  said  "  but  don't  take  your  eyes  ofi'  Sahib."    She  was  silent} 

524 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

for  a  brief  space,  then  .said,  "  Sahib  has  gone  into  a  big  house  by  the  water. 
He  goes  into  a  dressing-room.  He  changes  his  clothes,  all  his  regimentals 
are  put  in  his  tin  case,  but  the  pouch-belt  is  left  out.  It  is  hanging  on  a. 
peg  in  the  dressing-room  of  the  house  by  the  sea." 

"The  Yacht  Clubl"  cried  my  husband.  "Patilla"  (to  his  orderly),, 
"  send  someone  at  once  and  see  if  the  belt  has  been  left  there." 

Patilla  salaamed  and  retired,  followed  by  the  rest  of  the  servants. 

"I  wonder,"  nuised  my  husband,  "  if  I  really  left  it  at  the  Yacht  Club- 
after  all  ?    The  last  day  I  Avore  it  was  when  Lord  Ripon  left  for  England." 

"^Ve  shall  soon  learn,"  said  I,  triumphantly.  I,  for  one,  had  no  doubt 
whatever  that  the  belt  would  be  found  there. 

In  as  short  a  time  as  was  compatible  with  -the  distance  to  be  traversed 
the  messenger  returned.  Tlie  rush  of  many  feet  and  the  jabbering  of  many 
voices  convinced  me  before  we  saw  him  that  his  quest  had  been  a  successful 
one. 

He  ran  panting  up  the  stairs,  the  belt  lield  liigli  above  his  head.  He 
had  found  it  as  Ruth  had  seen  it — in  the  house  by  tlie  sea,  hanging  on  a  peg; 
in  a  dressing-room  of  the  Yacht  Club. 

Ruth  could  have  had  no  idea  where  the  lielt  was  left.  She  had  been  with 
me  a  very  sliort  time,  and  entered  my  service  long  after  Lord  Ripon's  depar- 
ture from  Bombay. 

In  tlie  spring  of  tlie  same  year  I  was  mucli  interested  in  a  jjolo  tourna- 
ment about  to  be  held  at  Meerut. 

A  then  great  friend  of  mine  was  to  take  part  in  this,  and  as  he  was- 
addicted  to  falling  off  occasionally,  though  in  reality  a  splendid  rider  and 
player,  I  was  feeling  rather  anxious  on  his  account.  I  again  called  Ruth  to 
niy  assistance.  We  shut  ourselves  up  in  my  room  and  I  mesmerised  the 
water  as  Ijefore,  Ruth,  however,  requesting  me  to  place  a  piece  of  brown 
paper  under  tlie  tumbler  of  water,  declaring  she  ccjuld  see  more  i^lainly- 
when  that  was  beneath  it. 

Slie  placed  her  hands  round  the  glass  to  exclude  the  liglit. 

"  Go  to  Meerut,"  I  said,  steadily. 

After  impatiently  waiting  for  about  ten  minutes,  Ruth  said.  "I  am  there."' 

"  Find  Sahib  "  I  said,  mentioning  the  name  of  my  friend. 

' '  I  see  a  tall,  dark  man,  dressed  in  blue  and  white  ;  he  has  a  slight  black 
moustache,  and  is  thin,  with  large,  fierce  eyes." 
"Follow  him  and  tell  me  how  he  gets  on." 

"  He  gets  on  all  right  ;  but  the  other  side  is  winning.  Ah  !  "  she  cried 
out,  piteously,  ' '  a  gentleman  has  been  bitten  by  a  horse  in  the  leg.  He  is. 
in  great  pain." 

"  Not  my  friend  ?  "  I  inquired  anxiou.sly. 

"  No  !  not  Mem  Sahib's  friend  ;  this  is  a  fair  gentleman,  red  faced,  with 
very  light  hair." 

"Ask  his  name,"  I  said,  fixing  my  eyes  intently  on  her,  and  exerting  mj 
will-power  to  its  uttermost. 

"  I  can't  ;  how  can  I  ?  "  she  said,  doubtfully. 
"Do  as  I  bid  you,"  I  rejalied  firmly. 

"  I  will  a.sk  his  syce,"  she  said,  "  if  you  can  make  me  visible  to  him."' 
I  tried  with  all  my  might.    All  to  no  use  ! 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

525 

"  Stop  !  I  hear  his  name,  it  is  Captain  ." 

I  ahnost  juiupecl  out  of  my  chair  with  delight.  My  friend,  I  thought, 
she  might  have  recognised  from  his  photograph  ;  but  this  other  man  she  had 
"never  seen,  never  heard  me  mention.  Indeed,  I  had  never  even  thought  of 
liim  since  I  left  the  up-country  station  in  which  my  husband's  battery  and 
his  regiment  had  previously  been  quartered. 

I  don't  remember  now  which  side  it  was  that  eventually  won  the 
tournament,  fully  five  years  having  elapsed  since  that  time  ;  but  this  I  do 
Temember,  however.  When  my  husband  returned  in  the  evening,  I  asked 
liini  if  he  had  any  news  of  the  polo  tournament.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  we  shall 
not  hear  until  to-morrow." 

"I  can  give  you  some  news,  though,"  I  said.    "Ruth  asserts  that 

"Captain  ,  of  the  17th  Lancers,  has  been  bitten  in  the  leg.   is  all 

Tight,  though,  but  from  what  Ruth  saw  I  fancy  our  friends  were  losing." 
BIy  husband  laughed.  "We  shall  see  to-morrow  if  Ruth  is  again  right,"  he 
said. 

He  told  the  officers  of  the  Royal  Artillery  m.ess  of  my  last  "tumbler- 
telegram,"  as  they  called  thena,  and  I  believe  nauch  merriment  was  excited 
at  my  gullibility.  Let  those  laugh  who  win,  though.  The  telegrams  the 
next  day  proved  Ruth's  story  to  be  perfectly  correct  in  every  particular. 

Soon  after  this  a  friend  of  my  husband's  came  to  see  us.  This  gentleman 
was  the  cantonment  magistrate  at  Assigurgh.  My  husband  was  telling  him 
about  Ruth  and  her  strange  powers,  when  he  asked  me  if  I.  had  any 
objection  to  his  testing  them,  to  the  end  that  he  might  recover  some  valuable 
propei'ty  he  had  lost. 

"I  must  tell  you,  however,"  he  said  to  me,  "  that  I  am  an  utter  sceptic  ; 
and  it  will  require  strong  proof  to  convince  me. "  I  felt  rather  offended  ;  for 
if  the  girl  was  a  hiunbug,  I  was  a  dupe  or  woi'se.  I  sent  for  Rutli,  who  was 
as  indignant  as  myself.  At  first  she  distinctly  refused  to  do  the  Sahib's 
bidding,  but  I  impressed  it  upon  lier  that  the  credit  of  both  of  us  was  at 
stake,  on  which  she  at  length  unwillingly  consented.  The  usual  prelimina- 
ries having  been  gone  through,  he  questioned  her  through  me,  as  follows  : — 

"  Go  to  Assigurgh  and  describe  my  bedroom  in  it." 

This  she  did,  correctly  too,  as  he  at  once  acknowledged. 

"  Now  tell  me  what  I  have  lost." 

' '  I  see  a  box,  not  a  large  box.  It  is  a  tin  one,  it  contains  money  and  a 
roll  of  papers." 

"Right  you  are,"  exclaimed  the  astonished  Major.  "Now  tell  nie 
where  that  box  is  now." 

"  It  is  in  a  small  room.    Shall  I  open  it  ?  " 
"Yes,  and  tell  me  what  is  in  it." 

She  paused  a  little.  . 
"  Only  papers.  Sahib,  the  money  is  gone." 
"  Describe  the  man  who  took  it. " 
"He  is  not  there,  the  room  is  empty." 
"Look  for  him." 

' '  He  is  in  Sahib's  room.  He  is  a  little  dark  man  with  a  jjleasant  face  ; 
his  dress  is  white  ;  he  has  a  scarlet  cummerbund,  and  a  scarlet  and  gold 
turban.    He  has  a  scar  on  his  left  hand." 

2  N 

526 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

"My  butler,  by  Jingo!  The  very  man  I  suspected,  too,"  cried  the 
Major. 

****** 

A  few  days  afterwards,  when  Major  had  returned  to  Assigurgh,  he 

"wrote  to  me  and  told  me  he  had  found  the  box,  as  described,  in  his  servant's 
house,  or  rather  cabin  ;  but  that  no  papers  remained  in  it.  It  was  empty. 
This  was  the  only  thing  that  was  not  correct  in  Ruth's  statement. 

I  conclude  she  saw  the  box  before  the  papers  were  removed  from  it.  I 
often  found  that  she  did  not  seem  to  have  much  control  over  time,  as 
regarded  pad  events,  though  she  would  describe  the  actual  occurrence  rightly 
enough. 

At  another  time  I  lost  a  piece  of  pale  pink  satin  embroidered  with  silver. 
It  could  be  found  nowhere.  I  was  unwilling  to  believe  that  either  of  my 
servants  had  taken  it,  for  they  were  devoted  to  me,  and  had  one  and  all  been 
in  my  service  a  long  time,  with  the  exception  of  my  Dirzee.^  I  could  not 
suspect  him  of  having  taken  it,  as  he  never,  by  any  chance,  so  far  as  I  was 
aware  of,  had  access  to  my  rooms.  However,  through  Ruth  he  was  detected 
as  the  thief,  and  returned  the  missing  article,  though  he  spread  the  report 
that  I  Avas  a  witch  afterwards  on  hearing  how  the  theft  had  been  discovered. 

In  this  case,  as  Avill  liaA'e  been  observed,  the  visions  are  of  the 
retrocognitive  type.  Of  the  same  class  is  the  incident  that  follows, 
Avhich  I  qviote  from  a  recent  article  in  the  Contemporary  Revieiv, 
called  "  Trace,"  signed  with  the  j^seudonym  of  "  J.  M.  Soames."  Its 
writer,  as  I  am  allowed  to  state,  is  Major  Schreil^er,  a  retired  officer, 
known  to  me. 

M.  55. 

We  arranged  an  afteruo(in  f(,ir  our  experiments  on  the  crystal,  and  after 
tea  Avas  over  Ave  set  to  Avoi'k.  My  Avife  Avas  jjlaced  in  a  very  comfortable 
chair,  and  tlie  lights  Avere  turned  doAvn — not  out  by  any  means,  but  so  as  not 
to  dazzle  the  eye,  while  at  the  same  time  everything  Avas  distinctly  visible  in 
the  room.  I  put  her  to  sleeji,  and  gave  her  the  crystal.  The  effect  was 
instantaneous.    She  commenced  speaking  at  once,  and  said  : — 

"Oh,  what  lovely  flowers,  and  Avhat  a  perfume!"  And  she  began  to 
draAv  her  breath  through  her  nose,  as  if  inhaling  the  scent  of  floAvers.  I 
asked  her  then  Avhere  she  Avas.  She  said,  "  I  am  in  the  most  lovely  garden  I 
have  ever  seen.  It  is  not  in  England.  I  am  standing  in  a  broad  patliAvay  ; 
on  one  side  is  a  liedge  of  Avhite  azaleas,  and  on  the  other  pink.  They  are 
about  six  or  seA'en  feet  high  ;  betAveen  these  hedges  and  the  path  there  are 
broad  borders,  in  which  are  planted  these  SAveet-smelling  floAvers.  Tliere  are 
beautiful  trees  all  about  the  garden,  such  as  I  haA'e  never  seen  before  ;  and 
at  the  end  of  the  path  is  a  little  black  and  gold  house,  with  such  a  funny 
little  man  sitting  outside." 

This  dream  I  ordered  her  to  remember  Avlien  she  aAvoke.  and  there  is  a 
sefjuel  to  it  that  I  Avill  relate  further  on. 

She  resumea  :  "I  can  see  noAv  a  small  shop  at  the  junction  of  two  streets, 
with  a  door  ojiening  on  tc  each  street.    In  the  middle  of  the  shop  is  a  glass 

A  native  tailor. 

The  SiMimincd  Consciousness. 

627 

case  like  those  one  !?ees  in  a  jeweller's.    There  is  a  tall  man,  very  like  a 
Jew,  with  a  long  black  beard.    He  is  bargaining  with  another  man." 
"  What  is  the  other  man  like  1 "  I  asked. 

' '  He  is  about  the  middle  height,  and  he  has  grey  hair  and  moustache,  a 
plain  face.  I  know  him.  I  have  seen  him,  but  I  cannot  tell  you  his  name. 
The  funny  little  man  has  come  down  from  the  garden,  and  is  sitting  outside. 
He  seems  very  much  interested  in  what  is  going  on  in  the  sliop." 

Tl^en  followed  a  few  more  details  that  I  do  not  remember.  I  then 
asked  : 

"  Can  you  describe  the  .situation  of  the  town  in  which  tliis  sliop  is  1 " 
"The  town  is  a  seaport,  standing  in  a  large  bay.    The  coast  seems  nearly 
to  join  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.    On  the  land  side  it  is  backed  by 
mountains  covered  nearly  to  the  summits  with  the  most  luxuriant  vege- 
tation." 

Then  came  a  pause,  and  she  continued:  "I  am  on  board  ship.  The 
man  I  recognised  is  here  too.  Oh,  sucli  a  dreadful  storm ;  the  shij^  is 
rolling  abovit  most  fearfully.  I  cannot  go  on.  I  must  go  and  lie  down.  I 
feel  so  ill." 

My  wife  exhibited  all  the  symptoms  of  sea-sickness,  and  as  I  feared  a 
full  realisation  of  the  malady  might  follow,  I  woke  her  up,  thinking  we  had 
obtained  sufficient  information  for  what  we  wanted. 

Tlie  memlier  of  the  society  who  had  brought  the  crystal  took  it  back 
next  day  to  the  owner,  who  was  the  man  with  the  grey  hau-  and  moustache, 
and  gave  him  the  information  we  had  obtained  the  evening  before.  He  told 
our  friend  the  name  of  the  town  ;  and,  although  he  would  not  own  up  to 
the  truth  of  the  story,  it  was  easy  to  see  that  the  information  we  liad 
obtained  was  true  in  every  detail.  People  of  his  sort  are  very  unsatisfactory 
to  deal  with. 

The  curious  sequel  that  I  alluded  to  lies  in  the  fact  that  my  wife  and 
myself  were  one  day,  some  months  afterwards,  going  through  one  of  tlie  big 
museums  in  London.  I  was  looking  at  a  case  of  curiosities,  and  my  wife 
was  some  little  way  from  me,  when  I  heard  her  exclaim  : 

' '  I  have  been  here  ;  I  know  the  place  quite  well.  That  is  where  the 
little  man  was  sitting,  and  there  is  the  little  black  and  gold  house." 

"  What  nonsense  are  you  talking  ? "  I  said.    "  That  is  impossible." 

But  then  I  remembered  the  experiment  with  the  crystal,  and  upon  going 
up  to  see  what  my  wife  was  looking  at,  I  found  it  was  a  model  of  tlie  garden 
in  the  town  where  our  grey-haired  friend  had  owned  to  having  obtained  the 
crystal. 

XIX. — Enough,  i^erhaps,  has  now  been  said  to  suggest  to  the 
reader  that  this  crystal-vision,  which  has  so  long  been  disregarded  as  a 
mere  superstition,  may  in  reality  be  used  with  profit  as  an  empirical 
method  of  educing  from  the  subliminal  self  a  number  of  pictures — 
very  unequal,  indeed,  in  value — but  of  which  some,  at  least,  appear 
to  imply  a  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  extension  of  ordinary  knowledge. 

Stated,  then,  in  its  most  general  form,  the  lesson  which  sensory 
automatism  teaches  us  is  that  our  centrally  initiated  sensations  majr 

2  N  2 

528 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

convey  instruction  as  to  the  external  world  as  veritable  as  that  which 
peripherally  initiated  sensations  convey.  Internal  percepts — arising 
independently  of  evident  sensory  stimuli — are  of  course  just  as  normal 
as  external  percepts — consequent  upon  known  peripheral  stimuli.  I 
here  contend  that  those  internal  percepts  may  bring  to  \is  actual 
knowledge  which  external  perception  could  never  reach.  It  may,  of 
course,  be  replied  that  this  so-called  extension  of  ordinary  knowledge  is 
a  farrago  of  error  and  triviality  which  can  never  be  of  practical  service, 
and  to  which,  such  as  it  is,  only  a  few  favoured  individuals  can,  on  my 
own  showing,  hope  to  attain.  "  Is  it  reasonable,"  it  will  be  asked,  "  to 
attribute  so  much  importance  to  phenomena  extremely  rare  and  abso- 
lutely useless  V  I  reply  that  to  my  argument  it  is  no  disadvantage 
that  the  phenomena  should  be  rai-e,  and  it  is  a  jiositive  advantage  that 
they  should  be  useless.  I  am  trying  to  discover  the  furthest  limits  of 
human  faculty ;  and  I  have  already  endeavoured  to  define  and  unify 
this  scattei'ed  experimental  inquiry  by  a  wide  hypothesis — the  hypo- 
thesis, namely,  that  the  evolutionary  process  of  which  we  men  are  the 
result  is  not  a  terrene  process  only,  l^ut  a  cosmiaal  ;  and  that  our 
supraliminal  faculties,  our  specialised  sensitivities,  are  bvit  a  selection 
from  those  which  we  potentially  possess — a  selection  determined  by 
our  race's  terrene  history,  and  the  capabilities  of  organic  matter.  My 
end,  therefore,  will  l)e  attained  if  I  can  render  it  proba])le  that  -here 
and  there  in  humanity  we  discern  powers  which  terrene  evolution  as 
we  conceive  it  could  in  no  way  have  produced.  The  rarity  of  these 
powers  is  no  drawback  to  the  theory,  if  only  we  find  sufficient  instances 
of  them  to  make  us  certain  that  they  exist  at  all.  No  one  will  suppose 
that  in  matters  so  fundamental  we  men  are  built  on  differing  plans. 

Again,  if  powers  in  one  sense  so  transcendent  are  from  a  terrene 
point  of  view  unmanageable  and  ineffective  ;  if  this  unsteerable  balloon 
of  supernormal  faculty  is  less  practically  serviceable  than  tlie  humblest 
pony-carriage  of  common-sense ; — this  surely  is  in  itself  precisely  the 
indication  which  I  desire  that  such  faculty  has  not  been  developed  on 
earth  ))y  the  struggle  for  earthly  existence,  but  must  rather  date  from 
some  earlier  and  foreshadow  some  later  evolution ;  even  as  the  rudimen- 
tary organs  of  the  imago  within  the  larva  indicate  that  it  has  sprung 
from  a  free-flying  insect,  and  will  thereto  itself  return.  And  in  the 
.same  way  as  we  use  artifice  to  help  us  to  i-ealise  the  detail  of  our 
external  or  optical  percepts,  so  also  ought  we  to  use  artifice  to  realise 
the  detail  of  our  internal  percepts.  To  speak  paradoxically,  the  eye  is 
not  our  only  means  of  seeing,  nor  is  the  world  around  us  the  only 
thing  that  M'e  see. 

XX. — Let  me  try  to  explain  my  meaning  by  a  biief  review  of  the 
forms  of  vision  known  to  us,  so  arranged  as  to  show  the  two  diverging 
lines  of  visual  perception  ;  the  one  tending  outwards,  the  other  in- 

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. 

529 

wards  ;  but  both  alike  starting  from  a  perceptivity  whose  primary  or 
central  seat  I  must  here  place  vaguely  in  "the  brain." 

A.  The  whole  group  of  synsesthesite,  of  which  so-called  coloured 
audition — better  named  "sound-seeing" — is  merely  the  most  conspicuous 
member,  stand  as  it  were  on  the  dividing  line  or  watershed  between 
external  and  internal  percepts.  I  speak  of  the  synfesthesiiie  of  specialised 
senses  ;  of  the  response  given  by  one  sense  to  a  stimulus  capable  of 
exciting  the  end-oro-an  of  another  sense  alone.  We  seem  here  to  have 
a  kind  of  vestige  of  that  undifferentiated  continuous  sensitivity  from 
which  we  suppose  our  existing  senses  to  have  been  specialised  in  the 
struggle  for  life.  And  such  repercussions  or  irradiations  of  sensitivity, 
when  they  take  a  visual — I  can  hardly  say  an  oi)tical — form  in  the 
chromatisms  of  the  sound-seer,  can  scarcely  be  called  a  purely  mental 
phenomenon.  For  in  some  subjects  they  seem  to  be  determined  before 
birth,  and  to  precede  all  conscious  mentation.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
can  we  exactly  class  them  as  external  vision,  since  it  is  probable  that 
in  some  other  individuals  they  are  developed  only  as  the  result  of 
mental  associations.  As  above  suggested,  it  may  be  safest  merely  to  call 
them  entencepJicdic — on  the  analogy  of  entojdic — since  they  seem  to  be 
due  to  something  in  brain-structure  somewhat  in  the  same  way  as 
entoptic  percepts  are  due  to  something  in  the  structure  of  the  eye. 

B.  From  these  entencephalic  photisms,  at  any  rate,  we  seem  to  pass 
by  an  easy  transition  to  the  most  inward  form  of  entoptic  vision — ■ 
which  is  therefore  the  most  mward  form  of  all  external  vision — the 
flash  of  light  consequent  on  electrisation  of  the  optic  nerve.  Next  on 
our  outw-ard  road  we  may  place  the  phosphenes  caused  by  pressure  on 
the  optic  nerve  or  irritation  of  the  retina.  Next  Purkinje's  figures, 
or  shadows  cast  by  the  blood-vessels  of  the  middle  layer  upon  the 
bacillaiy  layer  of  the  retina.  Then  muscce  volifantes,  or  shadows  cast 
by  motes  in  the  vitreous  humour  upon  the  fibrous  layer  of  the  retina. 

C.  Midway,  again,  between  entoptic  and  ordinary  external  vision 
we  may  place  after-images ;  which,  although  themselves  perceptible 
with  shut  eyes,  presuppose  a  previous  retinal  stimulation  from  v>'ithout ; 
. — forming,  in  fact,  the  entoptic  sequela;  of  ordinary  external  vision. 

D.  Next  comes  our  ordinary  vision  of  the  external  world — and  this, 
again,  is  pushed  to  its  highest  degree  of  externality  by  the  employment 
of  artificial  aids  to  sight.  He  who  gazes  through  a  telescope  at  the 
stars  has  mechanically  improved  his  end-organs  to  the  furthest  point 
now  possible  to  man. 

E.  And  now,  standing  once  more  upon  our  watershed  of  enten- 
cephalic vision,  let  us  trace  the  advancing  capacities  of  internal  vision. 
The  forms  of  vision  now  to  be  considered  are  virtually  independent  of 
the  eye  ;  they  can  persist,  that  is  to  say,  after  the  destruction  of  the 
eye,  if  only  the  eye  has  worked  for  a  few  years,  so  as  to  give  visual 

530 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

education  to  the  brain.  We  do  not,  in  fact,  fully  know  the  limits  of 
this  independence,  which  can  only  be  learnt  by  a  fuller  examination  of 
intelligent  blind  persons  than  has  yet  been  made.  Nor  can  we  say 
with  certainty  how  far  in  a  seeing  person  the  eye  is  in  its  turn  influenced 
by  the  brain.  I  shall  avoid  postulating  any  "  retropulsive  current  " 
from  brain  to  retina,  just  as  I  have  avoided  any  expression  more  specific 
than  "  the  brain"  to  indicate  the  primary  seat  of  sight.  The  arrange- 
ment here  presented  is  a  psychological  one,  and  can  be  set  forth  with- 
out trespassing  on  controverted  physiological  ground. 

We  may  take  memory-images  as  the  simplest  type  of  internal  vision. 
These  images,  as  commonly  understood,  introduce  us  to  no  fresh  know- 
ledge ;  they  preserve  the  knowledge  gained  by  conscious  gaze  upon  the 
outer  woi'ld.  In  their  simplest  spontaneous  form  they  are  the  cerebral 
.sequel;*  of  external  vision,  just  as  after-images  are  its  entoplic  sequelfe. 
And  we  have  seen  that  in  some  cases  these  two  classes  of  vision  are 
confounded.  But  we  have  seen  also  that  into  the  cerebral  storage  of 
impressions  one  element  habitually  enters  which  is  totally  absent  from 
the  mere  retinal  storage,  namely  a  psychical  element — a  rearrangement 
or  generalisation  of  the  impressions  retinally  received. 

F.  And  by  this  imperceptible  transition  we  j^ass  from  memo7"y 
images  to  imaffinatioii-unages — voluntary  or  involuntary  recombina- 
tions of  retinal  impressions  which,  although  they  do  not  bring  us  new 
statements  of  external  fact,  do,  nevertheless,  bring  us  new  ideas — new 
explanations  of  the  observed  facts,  and,  in  short,  the  greater  part  of 
our  power  of  controlling  Nature.  Among  the  more  marked  and 
peculiar  developments  of  this  class  are  illusions  Inj-pnagogiques,  and 
.some  of  the  hallucinations  of  disease. 

G.  And  here,  a  generation  ago,  our  categories  of  inward  visuali- 
sation would  have  come  to  an  end.  Our  ordinary  consciousness  takes 
us  thus  far  and  no  farther  ;  and  we  should  be  inclined  to  say  that 
Watt,  lying  in  l)ed  in  a  dark  room  and  conceiving  the  steam-engine, 
illustrated  the  utmost  limit  to  which  internal  visualisation  could  go. 

But  somewhat  as  physical  artifice  came  to  the  aid  of  external  vision, 
and  showed  us  through  telescope  and  microscope  external  objects  which 
were  in  their  own  nature  visible,  ljut  which  our  clumsy  end-organs 
could  not  reach ;  so  here  also  psychological  artifice  has  come  to  our  aid, 
and  has  shown  us  internal  images,  cajjable  of  \'isual  presentation,  but 
Avhich  our  clumsy  supraliminal  consciousness  could  not  reach.  We 
come  to  subliminal  visualisations,  rendered  supraliminal  by  various 
empirical  methods. 

The  simplest  case  is  that  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  en- 
tranced subject  is  told  to  see  a  cat  when  he  awakes,  and  sees  it,  with- 
out remembering  the  suggestion,  or  knowing  whence  that  cat  really 
comes.    Here  we  have  a  simple  subliminal  picture — in  itself  belonging 

The  SiMiminal  Consciousness. 

531 

to  tlie  class  of  imagination-images,  but  increased  in  intensity,  and 
changed  in  psychological  import,  by  the  fact  of  its  transference  from 
one  stratum  of  the  personality  to  another.  It  has  become  what  I  have 
■called  a  message  ;  a  new  piece  of  knowledge  (in  this  case  fictitious) 
introduced  into  the  ordinary  iiow  of  waking  life,  but  not  directly  from 
the  external  world.  Or,  if  preferred,  suppose  that  a  real  cat  has  been 
shown  to  the  entranced  subject,  and  that  this  special  cat  is  then 
recalled  to  him  as  a  post-hypnotic  hallucination.  Here  is  a  memory- 
image — a  piece  of  real  knowledge — introduced  into  ordinary  waking- 
life  ;  but  not  directly  from  the  external  woild.  That  cat's  image  has 
heen  cerebrally  stored  in  a  different  compartment  fi'oni  that  in  which 
the  memories  of  waking  life  are  stored  ;  in  a  compartment  whose  key 
■can  only  be  turned  (by  the  subject  himself  or  by  his  hypnotiser)  during 
the  temporary  abeyance  of  the  supraliminal  self.  And  if,  indeed,  the 
retina  is  used  at  all  in  the  perception  of  this  hallucinatory  cat,  it  obeys 
•a  retropulsive  current,  an  impulse  not  from  without  but  fi-oni  within. 

//.  This  last  described  class  of  visualisations,  so  significant,  and  as 
yet  so  imperfectly  understood,  foi"ms,  as  I  have  already  implied,  the 
most  recent  addition  to  the  categories  of  vision  Avhich  established 
Science  recognises.  But  the  next  category  in  my  scheme  is  one  for 
wliich  I  hope  ere  long  to  obtain  recognition.  I  allude  to  that  class  of 
visual  presentations  which  are  not  only  subliminal  in  origin,  but 
]iypermnesic  in  content.  In  my  last  paper,  on  "  Hypermnesic  Dreams," 
and  in  this  present  paper,  I  have  tried  to  show  that  both  dream  and 
crystal  vision  occasionally  bring  up  into  supraliminal  consciousness 
visual  facts  which  provably  were  not  observed  by  the  supraliminal 
self,  although  they  were  within  the  range  of  ordinary  vision.  A 
typical  case  of  this  kind  is  when  someone  hunts  for  a  ring,  fails  to  find 
it,  and  then  dreams  of  it  in  a  spot  over  which  he  has  searched  in  vain — 
i\n<\.  finds  it  tliere.  In  such  a  case  the  ring  has  lain  within  the  field  of 
vision,  but  has  provably  not  been  noted  by  the  supi-aliminal  self.  It 
has,  however,  been  subliminally  noted,  and  dream  or  crystal  vision 
brings  to  the  surface  this  hidden  knowledge.  To  this  class  also  many 
.spontaneous  hallucinations  belong. 

J.  I  have  said  that  this  hypermnesic  faculty,  although  not  as  yet 
commonly  recognised,  is  nevertheless  likely,  in  my  view,  to  be  I'ecog 
iiised  before  long  ;  for  it  involves  nothing  which  can  be  reckoned  as 
antecedently  very  improbable.  But  from  this  category  we  slip  almost 
insensibly  into  another  which  soon  introduces  us  to  novelties  of  a  more 
startling  kind.  From  hypermnesia  we  pass  into  hyperjesthesia ;  and 
hypersesthetic  visualisations  are  soon  indistinguishable  from  clairvoyance. 
Thus,  I  have  spoken  of  cases  where  some  subliminal  message,  as  by 
dream  or  crystal  vision,  presents  to  the  supraliminal  self  a  picture  of 
an  object  which,  though  never  "  consciously "  noted,  has  yet  come 

532 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

within  the  range  of  ordinary  vision.  But  we  have  seen  also  that  there 
are  cases  where  the  ol^ject  thus  subhminally  depicted  has  not  come  within 
the  range  of  ordinaiy  vision.  Uj)  to  a  cei'tain  point  we  can  explain  this 
liy  assuming  that  some  such  hyperjesthesia  as  is  often  noticeable  in  the 
hypnotic  trance  may  be,  in  fact,  habitual  in  the  subliminal  conscious 
ness.  But  this  will  not  carry  us  far.  A  point  comes  at  which  we  can  no> 
longer  explain  the  far-reaching  perceptions  by  any  excitement  of  the  end- 
organs,  but  ai'e  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  the  hypothesis  of  telfesthesia^ 
instead  of  hyperesthesia ;  and  to  ascribe  the  supernormal  knowledge 
to  some  central  perceptivity,  apparently  of  a  less  specialised  kind.  In 
short,  we  here  reach  clairvoyance,  im  which  some  evidence  is  given  in 
the  i^resent  paper,  but  more  in  the  articles  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Proceed- 
ings, Vol.  VII.,  p.  30,  and  p.  .3.56. 

K.  It  is  plain  that  when  we  have  reached  this  j^oint  of  generalised 
perceptivity  our  series  of  forms  of  vision  has  reached  its  close.  Just  as, 
when  we  follow  the  development  of  sensitivity  in  an  ouhvard  direction^ 
we  come  to  ever  increasing  specialisation ;  so  when  we  turn  inivards 
we  come  to  ever  increasing  genercd isation.  That  is  to  say,  while  our 
outward  progress  in  perception  consists  in  recognising,  by  ever  more- 
elaborate  end-organs,  an  ever  wider  range  of  external  facts,  so  does, 
our  inward  progress  consist  in  recognising,  by  increased  facility  of 
transmission  from  the  subliminal  to  the  supraliminal  strata  of  our 
consciousness  an  ever  deeper  range  of  forms  of  knowledge  not 
thus  specialised,  but  acquired  by  a  subliminal  percejativity  which, 
though  it  may  send  up  its  messages  in  visual  or  auditory  tenns,  does  not 
itself  depend  upon  any  optical  or  acoustic  mechanism.'    Various  kinds 

1  This  word,  which  I  originally  suggested,  along  with  telepathy,  in  1883,  still 
seems  to  me  abetter  term  for  perception  at  a  distance,  assumed  not  to  come  directly 
from  another  mind,  than  (for  instance)  tdopsy  or  telakousia,  which  I  have  seen  proposed. 
For  it  is  desirable  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  such  distant  perception  is  not  effected  in 
accordance  with  optical  or  acoustic  laws; — is  not  conveyed  by  light-waves  or  sound- 
waves acting  as  we  know  them  to  act. 

-  Specially  good  illustration  of  this  mode  of  generalised  perception,  only 
gradually  attaining  to  definite  visual  symbolism,  is  afforded  by  a  long  case  publisheil 
by  Professor  Royce,  of  Harvard,  in  No.  4,  pp.  31)7-400  of  the  Proceedings  of  the 
American  S.P.R.  (now  a  branch  of  the  English  S.P.R.).  I  quote  the  description 
given  by  the  percipient  "N,"a  lady  physician.  The  experience  was  a  veridical  one — 
that  is  to  say,  the  friend  who  was  thus  supernormally  discerned,  a  Boston  gentleman 
well  known  to  Pi-ofessor  Royce,  testifies  that  an  interchange  of  letters  at  the  time 
proved  conclusively  to  him  that  ''N's  "  vision  was  coincident  with  a  moment  when 
he  had  in  fact  thrown  himself  face  downward  on  his  bed,  in  a  large  square  room  at  a 
hotel,  at  2  p.m.,  in  great  mental  distiess.  There  have  been  other  telepathic 
communications  between  the  same  two  persons. 

"  N  "  writes  to  Professor  Royce,  August  Kith,  18SG  :— 

"In  the  convalescence  from  a  malarial  fever,  during  which  great  hypcraesthesia 
of  brain  had  obtained,  but  no  hallucinations  or  false  perceptions,  I  was  sitting  alone 
in  my  room  looking  out  of  the  window.  My  thoughts  wore  of  indifferent  trivialities  ; 
after  a  time  my  mind  seemed  to  become  absolutely  vacant ;  my  eyes  felt  fixed,  the 
air  seemed  to  grow  white.    I  could  see  objects  about  me,  but  it  was  a  terrible  effort  of 

The  SuMiminal  Consciousness. 

533 

of  cognition  may  be  thus  visually  presented, — as  apparitions  of  living  or 
of  dead  persons,  retrocognitive  or  precognitive  pictures.  But  althougli 
the  methods  by  which  these  various  forms  of  knowledge  may  be  origin- 
ally reached  may  be  widely  different,  these  differences  are  not  necessarily 
differences  of  mode  of  vision.  The  visual  forin  (so  far  as  we  can  tell)  is 
merely  the  form  in  which  the  message  is  sent  up  from  the  subliminal  to 
the  supraliminal  strata,  and  the  mere  mechanism  of  these  messages  may 
be  the  same,  whether,  for  instance,  the  message  be  the  telepathic 
announcement  that  our  fellow  experimenter  is  at  this  moment  looking- 
at  the  ace  of  diamonds,  or  the  retrocognitive  announcement  (as  in  a 
case  given  above)  that  many  years  ago  a  grandfather  was  all  but  blown 
out  to  sea  when  duck-sliooting 

XXI. — If  this  be  so,  is  there  reason  to  hope  that  any  exjDeriment  which 
we  can  make,  any  artifice  Avhich  we  can  use,  will  be  able  to  extend  our 
internal  vision,  as  telescope  and  microscope  have  extended  the  external  t 
Such  artifice,  it  would  seem,  must  he  directed  to  improving, — not  the 
supernormal  presensory  percej^tivity  itself,  which  we  cannot  hope  directly 
to  reach, — but  the  facility  of  transmission  of  the  visual  symbols  of  that 
unknown  perceptivity  from  a  subliminal  "to  a  supraliminal  strata.  And 
the  crystal  vision  described  in  this  paper  is  an  empirical  artifice 
of  precisely  this  kind.  It  aims  not  at  extending  the  purview  of 
the  subliminal  self,  but  at  eliciting  visual  messages  from  that 
self  in  a  clear  and  convenient  foim.  Some  such  messages  it  does 
provably  and  undoubtedly  obtain.  Many  men,  indeed,  will  deny  this, 
just  as  many  men  denied  the  reality  of  the  cognate  j^henomenon  of 
automatic  wiiting  when  I  first  urged  that  method  of  exj^erimentation 
upon  the  attention  of  readers  of  these  Proceedinys.  But  just  as  I  then 
felt  confideii  -—with  a  confidence  which  the  event  has  justified — that 
so  soon  as  sufficient  experiments  should  be  tried,  the  reality  and 

will  to  perceive  auj'thing.  I  then  felt  great  and  painful  sense  as  of  sympathy  with 
someone  suffering,  who  or  where  I  did  not  know.  After  a  little  time  I  knew  with 
whom,  but  how  I  knew  I  cannot  tell ;  for  it  seemed  some  time  after  this  knowledge  of 
jiersonality  that  I  s.-^w  distinctly  in  my  brain,  not  before  my  eyes,  a  large,  square 
room,  evidently  in  a  hotel,  and  saw  the  person  of  whom  I  had  been  conscious,  lying 
face  downwards  on  the  bed,  in  the  throes  of  mental  and  physical  anguish.  I  felt 
rather  than  heard  sobs  and  grieving,  and  felt  conscious  of  the  nature  of  the  grief 
subjectively ;  its  objective  cause  was  not  transmitted  to  me.  Extreme  exhaustion 
followed  the  experience,  which  lasted  forty  minutes  intensely,  anil  then  very  slowly 
wore  away.    Let  me  note : — 

"  1.  I  had  not  thought  of  the  person  for  some  time,  and  there  was  no  reminder  in 
the  room. 

"2.  The  experience  was  remembered  with  more  vividness  than  that  seen  in  the 
normal  way,  while  the  contrary  is  true  of  dreams. 

"3.  The  natural  order  of  perception  was  reversed,  i.e.,  the  emotion  came  first,  the 
sense  of  a  personality  second,  the  vision  or  perception  of  the  person  third. 

"I  should  be  glad  to  liavc  a  theory  given  of  this  reverse  in  the  natural  order  of 
perception." 

534 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 

impoi'tauce  of  automatic  script  would  Ijecome  evident,  whatever 
view  might  be  taken  as  to.  the  limit  to  which  its  revelations  extended  ; 
.so  now  also  do  I  feel  confident — and  Professor  Janet's  experience  has 
already  confirmed  my  confidence — that  so  soon  as  sufficient  experiments 
have  been  made  in  crystal  vision,  its  reality  and  importance  will 
become  evident,  whatever  view  may  be  taken  as  to  the  limits  to  which 
its  revelations  extend. 

It  is  to  the  rising  generation  of  experimental  psychologists — to  the 
students  in  psycho-physical  laboratoiies — that  my  appeal  is  in  the  first 
instance  made.  But  so  scattered  is  the  capacity  of  sensory  automatism, 
so  unknown  its  conditions,  that  I  am  anxious  that  all  my  readers 
.should  try  my  suggested  experiments,  and  should  send  to  me  at 
Cambridge  full  reports  of  the  results  obtained. 

It  is  this  need  of  wide  co-operation  which  must  be  my  excuse  for 
the  bold  and  comprehensive  way  in  Avhich  I  have  set  forth  the 
hypotheses  to  which  this  experiment  points.  If  there  is  to  be  wide- 
spread effort  thei'e  must  be  widespread  interest ;  and  such  interest  can 
only  be  evoked  by  an  understanding  of  the  vast  importance  of  the 
discovery  to  which  these  small  and  scattered  inquiries  do  manifestly, 
although  remotely,  tend. 

The  question  is  of  nothing  less  than  the  possilile  establishment  of  a 
cosmic  law  of  the  first  order — a  law  which  shall  lie  at  the  root  of 
Psychology,  in  the  same  way  as  the  law  of  Evolution  lies  at  the  root  of 
Biology,  and  the  law  of  Conservation  at  the  root  of  Physics,  and  the 
law  of  Uniformity  at  the  root  of  Science  itself.  The  possible  law  of 
which  I '  sj^eak  is  that  of  the  Interpenetration  of  Worlds  ; — some 
statement  in  terms  as  scientific  as  may  be  possible  of  the  ancient  belief 
in  a  spiritual  universe,  co-existing  with,  and  manifesting  itself  through, 
the  material  universe  which  we  know  ; — somewhat  as  our  hypothetical 
ether,  neither  mateiial  nor  spiritual,  co-exists  with,  and  manifests 
itself  through,  our  world  of  jaonderable  things.'    I  believe  that  the 

1  Or  if  the  interstellar  ether  be  in  itself  a  conception  too  remote  and  disputable 
to  serve  as  starting-point  for  speculations  more  remote  and  disputable  still,  let  us 
embody  in  a  short  apologue  the  attitude  of  mind  which  might  have  existed  on  the 
eve  of  a  much  simpler  discovery.  I  quote  a  stray  paragrajih  from  the  Cosmic 
Oazette ;  but  I  beg  the  reader  not  to  suppose  that  I  identify  myself  with  the  hero  of 
the  tale. 

"  Science  among  the  Planetaries  ;  an  Aphrodisian's  Lucky  Hit. 
"Our  readers  are  doubtless  aware  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  small  planet 
Venim,  although  civilised,  and  endowed  with  a  degree  of  mathematical  insight  very 
creditable  to  planetaries,  hav«  never  possessed  the  sense  of  sight.  It  appeal's  that 
that  sense  has  recently  been  evolved  amongst  them,  at  a  singular  moment  in  their 
.scientific  history.  It  has  long  been  the  first  principle  of  Aphrodisian  science  that  the 
material  organism  could  be  affected  only  by  stinmli  jjropagated  through  material 
media ;  as  in  the  senses  of  touch,  taste,  and  smell.  Heat  they  exxilained  as  propa- 
gate^l  by  atmospheric  conduction  from  some  indiscoverable  but  intra-atmosiaheric 
source.    The  sense  of  hearmg  was  long  a  difficulty,  and  the  ignorant  were  fond  of 

The  Sahliminal  Consciousness.  535 

future  of  Experimental  Psychology — to  say  no  more  than  this — lies 
in  the  question  whether  she  can  prove  this  law  or  no.  If  she  fails,  her 
knowledge  must  needs  remain  for  ever  superficial  and  fragmentary. 
If  she  succeeds,  then  indeed  she  may  claim  that  all  other  Science 
is  but  the  ancilla  ■psycltologice,  and  all  other  quests  the  preparation  and 
preliminary  for  this  quest  which  knows  no  end. 

Mark,  then,  the  inward  pictures  ;  for  now  we  see,  as  St.  Paul  has 
it,  "  in  a  mirror,  darkly  ";  and  to  pierce  deepest  into  the  universe 
it  may  be  needful  to  gaze  within.  To  these  messages  perchance, 
we  have  l^een  slowly  tending,  through  all  the  tidings  borne  to 
us  on  air-wave  or  ethereal  ray.  For  it  may  be  that  our  out- 
ward senses  have  been  leading  us  towards  a  sense  profounder  than 
they  all ; — have  been  shaping  the  symbolism,  piercing  the  channels — 
ccecce  fores  et  pervius  usus — whereby  these  sensory  and  motor 
automatisms  of  script  and  voice  and  vision  shall  guide  us  among  ihe 
inward  palace-halls  which  hold  the  hope  of  our  race.  Aclparet 
domus  intus,  et  atria  longa  patescrmt ; — who  shall  inventory  Priam's 
wealth  within  %  or  prophesy  from  those  secret  bride-chambers  what 
truth  shall  yet  be  born  % 

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 

quoting  it  as  a  miraculous  exception  to  tlie  settled  order  of  tilings.  But  when  a 
leading  Aphrodisian  satant  proved  that  sound  was  transmitted  by  material  atmo- 
spheric waves,  the  triumph  of  orthodox  Science  ^vas  complete,  and  the  doctrine  of 
'molecular  transmission  '  was  inculcated  as  self-evident  truth. 

"It  hajjpened,  however,  that  on  one  of  the  days  of  clear  sky  so  rare  on  that 
planet,  a  random  experimenter  observed  that  the  heat  passing  through  a  glass  bowl 
of  water  stvmg  his  hand  at  a  particular  point.  He  proved  that  no  conduction  could 
thus  concentrate  the  heat ;  he  assumed  a  new-  form  of  energy,  which  he  called 
radiation  ;  and  he  attempted  to  show  that  his  so-called  rays  need  not  be  transmitted 
through  a  material  medium  at  all.  Continuing  his  experiment  for  years,  whenever 
the  climate  allowed,  he  gradually  i^lotted  out  the  apparent  path  of  his  imaginary 
source  of  radiant  heat ;  and  even  located  it  at  a  distance  far  outside  atmospheric 
limits.  He  was  naturally  censured  as  flying  in  the  plain  face  of  reason  in  order  to 
solve  the  puzzle  of  a  useless  toy.  Gradually,  however,  certain  Ajjhrodisians 
developed  pigment-spots,  which  received  a  vague  but  novel  sensation  when  turned  in 
the  direction  from  whence  the  iutensest  heat  came.  These  men  felt  with  uneasiness 
that  there  was  something  odd  about  the  workings  of  Nature  ;  but  they  joined,  never- 
theless, in  the  outcry  against  tlie  innovator  ;  remarking  v.'ith  force  that  to  revo- 
lutionise the  Laws  of  the  Universe  in  order  to  exjilain  a  few  paltry  residual 
phenomena  was  like  invoking  Satanic  agency  t(j  explain  how  the  guinea-pig  got  into 
the  conjurer's  hat.  Evolution,  however,  pursued  its  wonted  course  ;  and  at  last  a 
number  of  Aphrodisians  found  themselves  possessed  of  eyes.  Some  excuse  was  then 
made  for  the  long-deceased  innovator's  eccentricity,  for  it  was  e\'ident  that  this  blind 
observer  had,  in  poiut  of  fact,  discovered  the  Sun." 

536         Mrs.  H.  Sldgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

lY. 

EXPERIMENTS    IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Introductory. 

The  experiments  here  to  be  recoidecl  were  a  continuation  of  those 
described  in  a  paper  on  "  Experiments  in  Thought-transference  "  by 
Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  pubUshed  in  the 
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  128.  The  percipients  were  two  young  clerks, 
P.  and  T.,  with  whom  most  of  the  previous  experiments  were  made, 
and  a  young  lady,  Miss  B.,  who  was  also  one  of  our  former  percipients. 
In  addition  we  had  some  experiments  with  three  men  in  a  less 
established  f)Osition  in  society,  named  Whybrew,  Major  and  Adams, 
who  had  come  to  Brighton  in  the  train  of  a  man  giving  hypnotic 
exhibitions  and  had  remained  behind  thei'e. 

Professor  Sidgwick  was  prevented  by  other  engagements  from  taking 
much  part  in  the  present  series,  which  has  l^een  carried  out  by  Mrs. 
Sidgwick,  generally  assisted  by  Miss  Alice  J ohnson,  and  occasionally 
by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  others.  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  again  acted  as 
hypnotiser  throughout,  except  on  one  evening  when  T.  was  hypnotised 
by  Professor  Barrett,  and  on  two  or  three  occasions  when  several  of 
the  subjects  were  hypnotised  by  Miss  Charlesworth,  a  lady  who  came 
to  help  us  in  the  experiments  for  a  few  days  in  July,  1891,  but  who  did 
not  succeed  in  obtaining  thought-transference  with  these  subjects.  The 
experiments  were  all  made  at  Brighton,  where  the  principal  per- 
cipients lived,  and  we  made  them  sometimes  in  Mr.  Smith's  rooms  and 
sometimes  in  our  own  lodgings. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  previous  series  of  experiments  con- 
sisted chiefly  in  the  guessing  of  numbers  of  two  digits.  Mr.  Smith  was 
in  all  cases — of  success  at  least — the  agent,  and  wheii  agent  and  per- 
ci^jient  wei-e  in  the  same  room  the  success  was  ^s  ery  marked.  With 
agent  and  percipient  in  different  rooms  there  was  some  slight  success 
when  P.  was  percipient,  but  none  with  T.,  and  with  Miss  B.  it  was 
scarcely  tried. 

The  oliject  of  the  present  series  of  experiments  was  in  the  hrst 
place  to  obtain  more  complete  evidence  of  thought-transference  Avith 
agent  and  percipient  in  different  rooms  and,  if  possible,  at  greater 
distances.      We  also  varied  the  experiments  partly  with  a  view  to 

Experiments  in  TJtougld-Transference.  537 

obtaining  additional  proof  that  no  physical  indications  reached  the 
percipient  consciously  or  unconsciously,  and  partly  in  the  hope  of 
learning  something  about  the  conditions  necessary  to  success.  With 
these  objects,  we  made  experiments  in  the  transference  of  ideas  other 
than  numbers,  and  sometimes  employed  automatic  writing,  table-tilting 
and  hallucinations  as  a  means  of  getting  at  the  percipient's  impressions. 
In  addition  we  cari-ied  out  a  series  of  experiments  in  producing  local 
antesthesia  and  rigidity  by,  as  we  believe,  mental  suggestion. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  arrange  the  account  of  our  experiments 
under  three  heads,  namely,  experiments  in  transferring  numbers, 
experiments  in  transferring  ideas  other  than  numljers,  experiments  in 
jiroducing  local  aniiesthesia  and  rigidity  by  mental  suggestion. 

I.   EXPERIMENTTS  IN  TRANSFERRING  NuMBERS  OF  TwO  DiGITS. 

The  later  trials  made  with  P.  and  T.  in  1889  wei'e,  it  v/ill  be 
remembered,  veiy  unsuccessful.  Considering  the  brilliant  success 
obtained  before  with  these  percipients,  this  later  failure  led  us  to  think 
that  their  capacity  might,  for  some  unknown  reason,  be  exhausted — at 
least  for  the  time.  Possibly  it  was  owing  to  the  interest  of  the  process 
having  worn  off  with  its  novelty,  and  the  whole  thing  having  become 
dull  and  tiresome.  For  though,  in  their  normal  or  v/aking  state,  they 
knew  little  or  nothing  of  it,  their  hypnotic  consciousness  I'ecurred  to 
the  number-guessing  as  a  familiar  and  somewhat  monotonous  task. 

In  January,  1890,  we  were  fortunate  in  again  obtaining  the 
assistance  of  Miss  B.,  with  whom  v/e  had  previously  been  able  to  try 
experiments  on  two  occasions  only,  and  with  this  change  in  our  per- 
cipients, success  returned.  We  were  able  to  carry  on  experiments  with 
her  at  intervals  through  1890. 

It  will  be  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  experiments  in  numl)er-guessing 
carried  on  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room,  as  the 
possibility  of  this  with  P.,  T.  and  Miss  B.  was  sufficiently  shown  by 
the  experiments  of  1889.  In  the  course  of  the  present  series,  we  only 
tried  experiments  under  these  conditions  in  order  to  encourage  the 
percipients,  or  in  the  hope  of  throwing  light  on  the  causes  of  failure 
under  different  conditions. 

Descrijition  of  Rooms  in  lohich  the  Experiments  tuere  carried  on. 

Our  first  attempts  with  agent  and  percipient  in  different  rooms, 
Avith  Miss  B.  as  percipient,  were  made  at  an  "  arch  "  on  the  beach  at 
Brighton,  occupied  at  the  time  by  Mr.  Smith.  The  ai'ch  was 
l&tted  up  with  two  floors,  the  upper  entirely  occupied  by  a  sitting-room, 
measuring  aljout  15  feet  square,  out  of  which  a  staircase — not  enclosed 

538         Mrs.  IT.  SidgivicJc  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

above,  but  closed  at  the  bottom  by  a  door — led  down  to  a  lobby.  The 
ground  floor  consisted  of  this  loliby  with  small  rooms  at  the  back  and 
on  one  side.    A  rough  plan  will  make  the  arrangement  clearer.    ■  . 

Upstairs 
Room 

Back  I'oom 

Kitchen  Loiaby 

-|  Window 

Door 

The  partitions  were  of  matchboarding.  The  upper  floor  was  covered 
with  a  very  thick  Axminster  carpet  with  felt  underneath  it.  The  height 
of  the  lower  rcwms  was  7  feet  5  inches,  and  the  space  between  the  upper 
and  lower  i-ooms  fully  10  inches,  including  the  floor  above  and  match- 
board ceiling  below.  The  sepai-atioii  of  agent  in  the  lobby  and  -per- 
cipient  upstairs  was  not,  for  auditory  purposes,  so  great  as  it  would  have 
been  in  two  floors  of  an  ordinary  house,  because  of  the  staircase,  but 
the  words  in  ordinary  conversation  could  not  be  distinguished  from  one 
floor  to  the  other  by  persons  of  normal  powers  of  hearing,  except  by 
placing  the  ear  against  the  door  or  the  partition  of  tlie  staircase.  We 
tried  whether  Miss  B.  when  hypnotised  could  catch  any  words  of  a. 
conversation  going  on  below,  but  though  she  has  very  good  hearing  she 
ajipeared  to  be  unable  to  do  so. 

When  upstairs  at  the  Arch,  the  jsercipients'  position  in  the  room 
was  often  varied,  as  well  as  the  direction  in  which  they  faced. 

Details  of  the  Tivo  First  Evenings. 

The  flrst  experiments  of  this  series  with  Miss  B.  were  made  on 
January  6th,  1890.  The  persons  present  wei-e  Miss  B.,  Professor- 
Barrett,  Mr.  Smith,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Miss  Johnson  and  T.;  but  T.,  with 
whom  we  had  been  experimenting,  was  hypnotised  and  not  attending" 
to  what  was  going  on.  Mr.  Smith  hypnotised  Miss  B.  and  tried  three 
numbei'S  while  in  the  room  with  her  and  speaking  to  her.  There  was. 
some  success  with  these,  and  then  Mr.  Smith  and  Miss  Johnson  went- 
downstairs  to  the  lobljy.  Miss  Johnson  drew  a  numljer  at  random  out. 
of  a  bag  containing  all  the  numbers  from  10  to  90  and  handed  it  to  Mr. 
Smith,  who  then  tried  to  communicate  it  mentally  to  Miss  B.  A  little 
bell  or  gong  was  rung  iipstairs  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  as  soon  as  a  guess  had 
been  made  and  again  when  the  party  upstairs  were  I'eady  to  begin 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

53& 

another.  As  the  bell  was  rung,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  had  previously 
been  put  en  rappo)-t  with  Miss  B.,  said  :  "  There's  another,  Miss  B.," 
or  words  to  that  effect ;  and  Miss  B.  began  to  look  out  for  an  impres- 
sion, which  usually  came  to  her  in  a  visual  form.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  noted 
down  her  guesses  and  remarks,  while  Miss  Johnson  noted  the  numbers 
that  she  drew  from  the  bag,  and  at  intervals  we  compared  notes. 

Eight  guesses  were  made  in  this  way.  The  first  two  were  failures, 
but  in  the  remaining  six  the  first  digit  was  right  in  each  case.  More- 
over, in  two  out  of  the  six,  Miss  B.  first  gave  the  completely  right 
number,  but  then  changed  her  mind  as  to  the  second  digit.  Thus,  the 
number  being  21,  she  said  :  "It's  never  another  2,  is  it  1  2  and  a  1  ? 
8 — 28."  And  again,  with  the  last  of  the  six,  which  was  41,  she  said  : 
"  4 — better  not  go  on  doing  any  more  or  I  shall  never  be  right,  I'm 
sui'e.  4 — 1  ?  Looks  like  a  1  :  46."  This  occurred  on  other  occasions 
also.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  herself 
wholly  ignorant  of  the  number,  it  was  impossible  for  her  remarks  to 
give  any  indications  to  Miss  B. 

On  the  next  evening,  seventeen  experiments  were  made  under  the 
same  conditions,  except  that  at  first  Professor  Barrett  took  Miss  John- 
son's place  downstairs,  and  that  after  the  first  eleven  guesses  T.  came 
in,  was  hypnotised,  and  also  tried  guessing  upstairs.  Miss  B.'s  success 
"was  about  the  same  in  proportion  as  on  the  previous  evening.  T.'s 
guesses  were  different  from  hers,  and  she  did  not  seem  to  be  influenced 
by  them  at  the  time,^  but  it  seems  possible  that  they  affected  her 
impressions  afterwards,  for  out  of  the  six  numbers  guessed  after  T. 
had  come,  two  of  Miss  B.'s — one  quite  wrong,  and  one  with  the  second 
digit  only  right — were  numbers  that  had  been  guessed  by  T. — in  one 
case  two,  and  in  the  other  three,  guesses  before.  In  her  other  four 
guesses,  out  of  these  six,  the  first  digit  was  right. 

Attempts  made  on  this  evening  to  transfer  impressions  of  coloured 
light  flashed  in  Mr.  Smith's  eyes,  and  of  other  sensations  and  objects, 
failed.  Nor  could  Miss  B.  tell  in  what  position  the  number  looked  at 
by  Mr.  Smith  was  held. 

It  would  be  tedious  to  describe  each  day's  experiments  minutely, 
and  the  following  table  will,  perhaps,  show  sufiiciently  what  was  done. 
We  add  at  the  end  of  it,  for  comparison,  the  results  of  experiments 
with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room. 

''  They  were  not  put  cn  rapport  with  one  another,  but  on  one  occasion,  at  least. 
Miss  B.  must  have  heard  T.'s  gness,  for  she  said  emphatically  that  she  saw  a  different 
number. 

540        Ilrs.  H.  Sidgivick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

TABLE  I. 

Experiments  in  guessing  numhers  of  ttvo  digits,  the  agent  and ^?er- 
cipient  being  in  different  rooms,  or  in  a  room  and  passage  divided  by  a 
■closed  door.    Percipient,  Iliss  B.    Agent,  Mr.  Smith  only. 

(1)  Place,  the  Arch.    Percipient  upstairs  ;  Agent  downstairs. 

Number  of  Trials  and 
Degree  of  Success. 

Date  1890. 

o 

Digits  reversed. 

First  Digit  only 
right. 

C 

S 
? 

c 

NOTES. 

Jan.  0 
7 

„  8 

„  11 
„  12 
Mar.  17 

18 

s>  " 

„  23 

July  8 
„  9 

Nov.  0 
„  10 

1 

1 

1 

9 
3 
1 
1 

2 

1 
1 

1 

If 

It 
1 

1 

C* 
10 
2 

8 
13 

o 

1 

5 
6 

1 

1 

1 

2 
1 
1 
1 

1 

3 
1 

2 
4 

3 

10 

8 
6 
4 
4 

10 

2 
2 

2 

8 
17 
6 

20 
33 
12 
8 
11 

18 

3 
6 
3 
3 

'\  Professor  Barrett  present  in  addition 

f    to  the  usual  party. 

This  set  was  done  under  very  unfa- 
vourable conditions,  as  there  were 
three  other  percipients  in  the  room 
guessinr,^  at  the  same  time,  which 
was  very  confusing. 

Drs.  Myers,  Penrose  and  Lancaster 
present   in  addition  to  the  usual 
party. 

Drs.  Myers  and  Rolleston  present  in 
addition  to  the  usual  party. 

Dr.  Myers  present. 

Totals 

20 

.5 

55 

11 

57 

148 

(2) 

Place,  the  Arch. 

Percipient  downstairs ;  Agent  upstairs. 

Mar.  17 
, ,  23 
June  16 

4 
2 
1 

1 

3 

1 

7 

18 
12 

3 

Miss  McKerlie  present. 

Totals 

7 

4 

22 

33 

*  Two  of  these  were  guessed  quite  rightly  first  and  then  changed.  Miss  B.^ 
like  all  our  percipients,  generally  made  only  one  guess  for  each  numljer.  When  she 
had  more  than  one  impression,  we  counted  the  one  that  she  finally  decided  on.  As 
■she  was  never  told  before  the  conclusion  of  an  experiment  whether  her  first  gues.s  was 
right  or  not  (and  this  was  also  unknown  to  the  person  tallying  to  her)  the  final 
guess  was,  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  probabilities,  equivalent  to  a  first  guess. 

+  The  first  digit  of  the  number  drawn  was  guessed  first. 

Experiments  in  Thou-gJd-Transference. 

541 

(3)  Place,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  lodgings.    Percipient  in  room  and 
Agent  in  passage. 

Date  1890. 

Mar.  19 
Dec.  17 

19 
19 

„  20 
„  20 

Totals 

Number  or  Trials  and 
Degree  of  Success. 

Totals  of 
(1)  (2)&(3) 
toy;etlier 

2  ] 

I 

1 
1 

27 

It 

1 

ir 

5  fr 

23 

85 

2 
12 

2.3 

2 
4 
G 

30 

109 

26 

27 

21 

69 

Notes. 

3 
27 

14 
71 

These  guesses  were  made  by  table- 
tilting,  Miss  B.  normal,  having  her 
hands  on  the  table.  Miss  Robertson 
present  on  December  17,  19  and  20. 
Agent  in  room  across  jjassage,  but  only 
one  of  the  two  intervening  doors 
closed. 

Guesses  made  verbally  by  Miss  ]]. 
hypnotised,  having  lier  hands  on 
the  table. 

Guesses  tilted  by  the  table,  at  the 

same  time  as  the  above. 
Miss  B.  hypnotised,  guessing  in  the 

usual  way. 
Guesses  made  by  table-tilting,  Miss 
normal, having  herhands  on  the  table. 

146 

These  were  the  results  obtained  during 
the  same  period  by  Mr.  Smith  as 
sole  atrent  in  the  room  with  Miss  B. 

Remarks  on  Tahle  I. 

We  may  iirst  remind  the  reader  that  the  most  probable  numl^er  of 
completely  right  guesses  by  chance  alone  was  1  in  81,  or  between  3  and  4 
in  2-52.  The  odds  against  getting  as  many  as  27  right  in  252  trials  by 
chance  are  enormous. 

There  is  a  rather  marked  culmination  of  success  on  January  12th 
— an  evening  on  w^hich  we  did  a  large  number  of  experiments — and  it 
is  interesting  that,  of  the  complete  successes,  six  occurred  in  the  last 
twelve.  The  fact,  however,  of  our  success  on  this  occasion  made  us 
desirous  of  obtaining  the  same  success  under  other  conditions  of  place 
and  subject  to  be  guessed,  so  that  less  time  was  devoted  to  this  par- 

*  Two  of  these  were  guessed  quite  rightly  first  and  then  changed. 
%  This  was  guessed  quite  rightly  first  and  then  changed. 

2  O 

542        Ifrs.  H.  Sidgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

ticular  form  of  experiment  after  this.  External  noises  did  not  seem 
to  interfere  with  success.  On  the  12th  of  January  the  noise  of  the 
sea  and  of  people  passing  and  talking  was  very  distinct,  the  window 
Ijeing  open,  and  there  were  also  a  great  many  people  walking  on  the 
■esplanade  over  the  Arch,i  as  it  happened  to  be  a  particularly  fine 
■evening. 

Another  noticeable  point  is  the  very  large  prevalence  of  guesses  in 
which  the  first  digit  was  light  over  those  in  which  the  second  was  right. 
The  first  digit  ought  of  course  to  be  right  by  chance  more  often  than 
the  second  in  the  proportion  of  10  to  S-1,  because  of  the  exclusion  of 
nimibers  above  90,  and  the  impossibility  of  the  first  digit  being  0.  But 
the  difference,  especially  in  January,  was  enormously  in  excess  of  what 
could  he  thus  accounted  for.  And — what  is  more  remarkable — the  same 
excess  does  not  appear  in  experiments  in  which  both  agent  and  per- 
cipient were  in  the  same  room.  "We  can  only  suggest  that  Mr.  Smith 
first  unconsciously  concentrated  his  mind  on  the  first  digit  and,  when  he 
was  in  the  I'oom  and  knew  therefore  when  one  had  been  guessed,  then 
transferred  his  attention  to  the  other.  When  out  of  the  room,  he 
could  not,  of  course,  follow  the  process  of  guessing  in  the  same  way. 
Against  this  hypothesis,  however,  we  must  observe  that  Miss  B.  some- 
times seemed  to  see  first — or,  at  any  rate,  named  first — numbers 
which  she  ultimately,  and  sometimes  rightly,  placed  second.  And  that 
P.,  M'hose  guesses  will  be  spoken  of  presently,  also  exhibited  a 
tendency  to  guess  the  first  digit  more  often  right  than  the  second  ; 
but  that  he  did  so — contrary  to  his  practice  in  1889— with  the  agent 
in  the  room  with  him  as  well  as  when  they  were  in  separate  rooms. 

The  next  point  we  would  call  attention  to  is  the  large  proportioji  of 
failures  when  the  agent  was  upstairs  and  the  i^ercipient  downstairs  at 
the  Arch.  "We  think  this  may  possibly  have  been  due  to  Miss  B.'s  not 
being  at  her  ease  downstairs.  She  was  always  sensitive  to  appear- 
ances, whether  hypnotised  or  not,  and  some  of  her  remarks  showed 
that,  though  she  made  no  objection  to  being  led  downstairs  in  the 
hypnotic  trance  and  seated  in  the  lobby,  yet  she  knew  where  she  was, 
and  was  a  little  afraid  of  someone  coming  in  from  outside  and  seeing  her. 
This  supposition  is  somewhat  confirmed  by  the  difficulty  being  overcome 
on  June  17th,  when,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sug- 
gested for  the  first  time  placing  Miss  B.  in  the  back  I'oom.  On 
this  occasion  P.  was  joint  agent  with  Mr.  Smith,  so  that  the  experiments 
■do  not  appear  in  the  foregoing  table,  liut  in  Table  II.,  Avhere  it  will  be 

1  On  tlie  other  hand,  a  great  hubbub  outside,  which  sometimes  occurred  owing  to 
■a  fjuarrel  or  a  sho^vman  on  the  beacli,  was  liable  to  disturb  the  hyjinotised  person 
without  his  exactly  knowing  why  he  was  uneasy.  Our  notes  do  not,  however,  record 
jiny  such  disturbance  in  the  case  of  Miss  B. 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transfe7'ence. 

543 

seen  that  there  were  three  completely  successful  trials  in  eighteen.  The 
conditions  as  regards  possible  auditory  indications  were  naturally  less 
good  with  the  agent  upstairs,  his  movements  being  then  more  audible 
to  the  percipient  and  to  those  with  her.  Having  succeeded  under 
these  conditions,  therefore,  w^e  thought  it  needless  to  multiply  ex- 
periments. 

In  sixty-one  of  the  above  experiments,  either  P.  or  T.  v/ere  joint 
percipients  with  Miss  B.,  that  is  to  say,  they  were  also  trying  to  guess 
the  number.  This  does  not  seem  on  the  whole  to  have  modified  the 
result  in  any  marked  way,  the  proportion  of  Miss  B.'s  correct  guesses 
under  these  circumstances  being  very  much  the  same  as  when  she  was 
guessing  by  herself.  In  such  experiments  the  percipients  were  rarely 
eji  rap2)ort  with  one  another  and  were  not  aware  of  hearing  each  other 
speak.  Nevertheless,  it  is  pi-etty  certain  that  they  were  influenced 
occasionally  l)y  each  other's  guesses,  as  mentioned  aboA'e  (see  also 
Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  163,  164).  It  happens  that  no  completely 
successful  guess  was  ever  made  jointly. 

Distances  bettoeen  Agent  and  Percipient. 

At  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  lodgings,  the  distance  between  the  agent  and 
percipient  was  generally  greater  than  at  the  Arch.  The  passage,  or 
landing,  where  Mr.  Smith  was,  was  6  feet  wide,  and  he  was  on  the 
further  side  of  it,  Miss  Johnson  sitting  between  him  and  the  door.  On 
December  20th,  the  percipient  sat  13  feet  from  the  door.  On  the  17th, 
she  sat  about  9  feet  from  it,  in  another  direction.  On  the  1 9th,  her 
position  w^as,  we  believe,  the  same  as  on  the  17th,  but  any  statement  as 
to  this  was  accidentally  omitted  from  our  notes.  The  corresponding 
distances  between  agent  and  percipient  in  a  straight  line  must  have 
been  about  17  feet  and  12  feet,  whereas,  at  the  Arch,  the  distance 
between  their  heads  was  from  10  to  12  feet  according  to  Miss  B.'s 
position. 

Nature  and  Development  of  tlie  Percipients'  Impressions. 

During  all  the  above  recorded  experiments  up  to  December,  Miss  B. 
was  hypnotised,  and  her  impressions  about  the  numbers  came  to  her  in 
a  visual  form,  generally  seeming  to  develop  gradually.  Sometimes 
(though  only  on  July  8th,  among  the  experiments  so  far  enumerated) 
we  opened  her  eyes  and  made  her  see  the  number  as  a  hallucination 
on  paper,  telling  her  to  trace  it  in  pencil.  When  she  did  this,  the 
number  sometimes  appeared  in  a  fragmentary  way,  so  that  she  could 
not  tell  at  first  what  it  was.  It  was  liable  to  appear  and  disappear,  as 
happened  when  the  images  were  seen  w-ith  closed  eyes,  and 
occasionally  one  number  would  come  on  the  top  of  another  and  then  go 
away  again. 

544        3Irs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

When  the  agents  were  at  considerably  gi'eater  distances  than  those 
a]:)Ove  recordetl,  the  impressions  were  apt  to  be  unusually  transient  and 
sometimes  were  not  visualised  at  all.  In  these  more  distant  experi- 
ments, too,  Miss  B.  frequently  complained  of  the  numbers  being  far 
off.  "  They're  all  muddled  up,  the  numbers  seem  miles  off,"  she  said 
on  one  occasion.  She  did  not  recognise  this  as  due  to  the  distance 
of  the  agent  (who  was  then  in  a  room  two  floors  below  her),  of  which, 
indeed,  she  was  not  supposed  to  be  aware.  T.  also  complained  of 
the  apparent  distance  of  the  numbers  when  the  agent  was  out  of  the 
TOom.  Sometimes  the  percipient  had  no  impression  at  all,  and  this 
occurred  much  more  often  when  the  agent  was  at  a  distance  than 
when  he  was  near. 

On  one  evening,  when  the  agent  (P.)  was  at  our  lodgings  and  the 
percipients  Miss  B.  and  T.  at  the  Arch,  we  told  them  that  they  would 
hear  the  numbers  repeated,  instead  of  seeing  them.  The  suggestion 
took  effect  without  difficulty,  but  the  illusion  of  the  nearness  of  the 
agent  could  not  be  produced.  T.,  on  being  asked  if  he  could  distinguish 
P.'s  voice,  replied  :  "  Oh,  you  know  it  is  so  low,  so  far  away.  He  says, 
hush  !  hush  !  and  then  whispers." 

Eyyperiments  ivith  Tahle-tilting. 

In  December,  we  tried  whether  good  results  would  obtained 
by  placing  the  hypnotised  subjects'  hands  on  a  table,  which  they 
tilted  unconsciously,  tilting  out  the  numbers,  etc.  They  had  not 
tried  table-tilting  Ijefore,  they  told  us,  and  we  had  to  educate  them  to 
it,  Init  this  was  quickly  done.  The  first  attempt  was  made  on 
December  15th,  when  Miss  B.  and  T.  had  their  hands  on  the  table 
and  some  experiments  with  Mr.  Smith  as  agent  in  the  same  room  were 
sxtccessful.  In  the  experiments  recorded  in  Talkie  I.  for  December 
17th,  Miss  B.  in  a  normal  condition  was  sitting  at  the  table  with  Mrs. 
Sidg"\vick  and  IMiss  Robertson,  and  tilted  out  the  numbers  with  it. 
During  both  the  sets  of  experiments  recorded  in  Table  I.  for  December 
19th  she  was  hypnotised  and  her  hands  were  on  a  tilting  table,  but  P.'s 
or  T.'s  were  also  on  the  same  table,  so  we  have  only  included  the  verbal 
guesses  she  was  making  at  the  same  time,  the  results  of  the  table-tilting 
not  being  clearly  due  to  her.  On  this  day  we  also  tried  some  rathei* 
unsuccessful  experiments  in  which  Miss  B.  tried  to  guess  numbers  by 
table-tilting  in  a  normal  state,  T.  being  agent  with  Mr.  Smith. 

On  December  20th,  four  exj^eriments  were  made  in  which  Miss  B., 
hypnotised,  guessed  in  the  usual  way  and  by  table-tilting  at  the 
same  time.  The  results  are  shown  bracketed  together  in  Table  I.  and 
are  both  counted.  Then  seven  exj^eriments  were  made  with  Miss  B. 
guessing  in  the  usual  way,  without  the  table,  and  the  last  fourteen  were 
made  while  she  was  in  a  perfectly  normal  state,  not  guessing  verbally  at 

Experiments  in  Thoibght-TraAisference. 

545 

all,  but  tilting  out  the  numbers  by  the  table  automatically,  apparently 
quite  unconscious  that  her  own  muscles  Avere  moving  it. 

We  had  tried  a  few  experiments  with  Miss  B.  in  January  in 
which  she  simply  tried  to  get  a  mental  impression  of  the  number  in 
the  normal  state,  and  we  obtained  three  complete  successes  in  fifteen 
trials,  but  in  these  trials  the  agent  was  in  the  room  with  her. 

Agency  of  P.  and  T. 

Between  June  and  Decembe  1890,  a  number  of  experiments 
were  tried  under  conditions  similar  to  the  above,  but  with  P.  or  T.  as 
joint  agents  with  Mr.  Smith,  and  sometimes  as  sctle  agents.  We  have 
thought  it  best  to  tabulate  these  separately,  because  P.  and  T.  cannot 
be  regarded  as  responsible  for  the  hona  Jides  of  the  experimeiits  in  the 
same  way  that  Mr.  Smith  and  ourselves  are.  At  the  same  time,  in  the 
particular  class  of  experiment  we  are  at  present  discussing — the 
transference  of  numbers  from  one  room  to  another  with  a  closed  door 
Ijetween — all  methods  of  signalling  except  rather  coarse  auditory  ones 
seem  to  be  excluded  and,  although  the  agents  (who  were  of  course 
under  close  observation  all  the  time)  were  not  always  noiseless,  no  such 
signals  were  detected.' 

^  There  were  a  few  indications  that  sounds  may  now  and  then  have  det«nnined 
guesses,  just  as  the  guess  of  a  co-percipient  sometimes  did.  On  one  occasion,  when  P. 
was  agent  and  Miss  B.  percipient  in  the  same  room,  Mrs.  Verrall  who  was  present 
tried  to  infer  the  number  from  sounds  (couglis,  etc.,)  made  by  P.,  and  out  of  four 
guesses  twice  guessed  tlie  same  as  Miss  B.,  but  they  were  not  the  right  nnmbei's. 

On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  several  times,  while  experiments  were  going  on, 
tried — without  telling  the  subjects  so, — to  suggest  numbers  to  them  by  indications  such 
as  tapping  slightly  on  their  hands,  or  their  chairs,  in  order  to  test  their  sensitiveness  to 
hints  of  the  kind.  They  never  named  the  number  she  was  trying  to  suggest,  though 
sometimes  the  sum  of  the  two  digits  was  the  same  in  both  cases,  c.().,  37  was  guessed 
for  IG  and  85  for  70  consecutively  in  a  group  of  four  trials,  but  little  .stress  can  be  laid 
on  so  few  instances. 

54)6         Airs.  H.  SidgwicJc  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

TABLE  II. 

Experiments  in  guessint/  numbers  of  ttoo  digits,  the  agent  and  j}er- 
cipient  being  in  different  rooms,  or  hi  a  room  and  passage  divided  by  a 
closed  door,     rerciinent,  Miss  B.    Agents,  Mr.  Smith  and  P.  or  T. 
(I)  Place,  the  Arch.    Percipient  upstairs  ;  Agents,  Mr.  Smith  and  P., 

d(jwnstairs. 

Date  1890. 

Quite  riglit. 

Digits  reversed 

First  Digit  only 
right. 

Second  Digit 
only  right- 

Wrong. 

No  impression. 

Totals. 

NOTES. 

June  l(i 

3 
3 

1 

.1 
1 

1 

3 

3 

6 
11 

Miss  McKerlie  present,  besides 

usual  party. 
Dr.  ]Mi)ll  present.    T.  joined  the 

agents  durini;'  two  experiments. 

(2)  Place,  the  Arch.    Percipient  downstair.s  ;  Agents,  Mr. 
Smith  and  P.  upstairs. 

Jinie  16 

3 

5 

1 

3 
9 

2 

5 
18 

This  set  was  done  innneiiiately 
after  the  succetssful  set  al)ove,ou 
June  16,  and  without  awaking 
]Miss  ]>.  in  between.  She  com- 
plained )Hncli  that.slie  could  not 
see  the  numbers.  Miss  McKerlie 
present  on  June  16th  and  17tli. 

(3)  At  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  lodgings.    Percipient  in  room  ; 
Agents,  Mr.  Smith  and  P.  or  T.,  in  passage. 

Dec.  19 

J  J 
>■> 

»  J- 
19 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

2 
*> 

.3 

3^ 

1 

\ 
I 

1 

3j 
1 

3 
3 

Guesses  made  verbally  by  Miss 
B.  liypnotised,  with  her  hands 
on  the  table.  Mr.  Smith  and 
T.  agents. 

Guesses  tilted  by  the  table  at 
the  same  time  as  tlie  above. 

Miss  B.  normal,  guessing  by 
table-tilting.  Mr.  Smith  and 
T.  agents. 

Miss  B.  normal,  guessing  l)y 
table-tilting.  Mr.  Smith  and 
T.  agents,  in  room  across  pas- 
sage, but  only  one  of  the  two 
intervening  doors  closed. 

Miss  B.  hypnotised,  guessing 
verbally  ;  T.  joint  percipient ; 
the  table,  with  both  their  liands 
on  it,  tilting  at  the  same  time. 
Mr.  Smitli  and  P.  agents  in 
room  across  passage,  but  only 
one  door  closed. 

Total.-^ 

9 

2 

0 

7 

24 

2 

.i3 

1  7 

4 

4 

10 

2 

•27 

Ilesults  obtained  during  June 
and  July  with  the  agents,  Mr. 
Smith  anil  P.  or  T.,  in  the  same 
room  with  the  percipient. 

Experiments  in  Thoiight-Transference.  547 

TABLE  III.    Percipient,  Miss  B.    Agents,  P.  or  T.  alone. 

Place,  the  Arch.    Percipient  upstairs  ;  Agent  downstairs.  Period, 
July,  August  and  December,  1890. 

5 

Agent. 

Quite  riglit. 

> 
•n 

To 

5 

o 

sl 

•n 

^% 

l§ 

Wrong. 

'•n 
•n 
9 
S. 

O 

Totals. 

Notes. 

Jr. 

2 

1 

6 

10 

1 

22 

Both    the    successes    were  on 

August  25th, Avhen  eight  guesses 
were  made,  of  which  two  were 

T. 

1 

4 

6 

right  and  four  lialf  right. 

Totals 

1 

7 

2 

14 

1 

2s 

An;ent. 

Results  obtained  during  the  same 

■p. 

3 

2 

4 

1 

2 

2 

14 

period  with  P.  or  T.  sole  agent, 
in  the  same  room  witli  the  per- 
cipient. 

T. 

3 

7 

10 

(} 

2 

4 

1 

9 

2 

24 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  trials  made  with  P.  or  T.  as  sole  agents 
seem  sufficient  to  show  that  they  had  some  power  in  this  capacity. 
Mr.  Smith,  P.  and  T.  were  the  only  successful  agents  in  Miss  B.'s 
case  among  those  we  tried.  We  ourselves  both  failed,  whether  in 
the  same  room  with  her  or  not,  and  so  did  one  or  two  others  who  made 
a  few  trials. 

Distant  Experiments. 

We  were  extremely  anxious  to  succeed  with  agent  and  j^ercipient 
at  greater  distances  than  in  the  experiments  recorded  alcove,  and 
nearly  four  hundred  trials  were  made  with  Miss  B.  as  percipient, 
and  the  agent  or  agents  either  in  a  different  building  or  divided 
from  her  by  at  least  two  closed  doors  and  a  passage  ;  but  we  obtained 
practically  no  success. 

The  reason  of  the  failure  is  difficult  to  surmise,  unless  it  was  the 
effect  of  the  distance  on  the  imagination  of  the  agent  or  the  jiercipient. 
We  did  not  usually  tell  the  percipient  where  the  agent  was,  and  at  first 
used  to  try  to  produce  the  illusion  that  he  was  near,  but  we  think  that 
the  percipient  was  generally  aware  in  a  vague  way  of  his  absence. 
Experiments  of  this  kind  Avere  generally  much  more  wearisome  than 
those  at  closer  quarters,  especially  as  most  of  them  were  timed  by 
watches,  instead  of  signals  being  given  for  beginning  and  ending,  and 
this,  on  account  of  the  varying  length  of  time  before  the  percipient 
had  an  impression,  entailed  a  good  deal  of  tiresome  waiting  on  the  part 

5-i8         Mrs,  H.  Siclgiuick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

of  the  percipient  and  of  tediously  prolonged  thinking  of  the  number 
■on  the  part  of  the  agent.  We  usually  found  it  necessary  to  allow  two 
minutes  for  each  guess.  But  we  do  not  think  that  this  is  by  itself 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  failure,  as,  in  aljout  one  hundred  of  the 
experiments,  we  communicated  with  each  other  at  the  conclusion  of 
each  guess  without  better  results. 

Deferred  Successes. 

As  in  the  experiments  of  1889  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  161),  it 
happened  in  a  few  instances  that,  when  the  agent  was  looking  at  a 
number,  the  percipient  guessed  the  numljer  he  had  been  looking  at 
in  the  trial  immediately  preceding,  without  having  had  any  opportunity 
of  learning  by  normal  means  what  that  number  was.  Such  "deferred 
successes  "  are  seen  in  the  following  series  of  five  consecutive  trials 
with  Miss  B.  as  percipient,  which  occui/red  on  July  7th,  1890. 

Nos.  dratvii.  Nos.  guessed.  Agents. 

24  No  impression  1  Mr.  Smith  and  T.,  in  the  room 
16  24  /     beliind  a  screen. 

30  16  ^ 

47  39  y  T.  alone,  Ijehind  the  screen. 

65  65  I 

Other  examples  occurred  with  T.  as  percipient  in  the  following 
series  of  three  consecutive  trials  on  July  10th,  1891.  He  was  upstairs 
at  the  Arch  with  Miss  Johnson  and  Mr.  Smith,  and  the  agent  P.  was 
downstairs  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick. 

Nos.  drawn.  Nos.  guessed. 

63  28  . 

26  63 
46  26 

Miss  B.'s  N'umher  Habits. 

As  the  numbers  were  drawn  at  random.  Miss  B.'s  number  habits 
cannot,  of  course,  in  the  long  run  affect  the  probability  of  success. 
Still  there  is  a  certain  interest  in  analysing  her  guesses  and  comi^aring 
them  with  the  numbers  drawn.  She  made  997  guesses  altogether,  of 
which  eighty-nine  were  successful.  As  there  were  eighty-one  different 
numbers,  evenly  distributed  guesses  would  have  given  about  twelve  to 
each.  The  actual  frequency  of  her  naming  of  individual  numbers 
ranged  from  nought  to  thirty-five,  wliile  the  frequency  of  drawing  of 
individual  numbers  ranged  from  two  to  twenty -two.  The  number  least 
often  drawn  (only  twice)  was  39,  and  that  most  often  drawn  (twenty- 
two  times)  was  55.  She  guessed  55  only  seven  times  (once  rightly). 
The  number  named  Ijy  her  thirty-five  times  (three  times  rightly)  was  58, 
and  this  was  drawn  seventeen  times.  No  other  numbers  were  named 
.so  often  as  tliirty  times.    The  following  numbers  wei'e  named  twenty 

Experiments  in  Thourjht-Tra nsference. 

549 

times  or  more  U,  15,  18,  23,  24,  25,  26,  28,  32,  34,  35,  36,  37,  52, 
54,  56,  63,  64,  65,  67.  The  numbers  named  between  twelve  and  twenty 
times  were  12,  16,  27,  38,  43,  51,  53,  62,  68,  73,  74,  86.  Among  num- 
l)ers  named  less  than  twelve  times,  those  named  once  only  were  19,  49, 
79,  80  ;  those  named  twice  only  were  29,  60,  82  ;  those  named  three 
times  only  were  33,  39,  44,  66,  77,  88.  The  only  numbers  in  the  bag 
which  were  never  named  were  40  and  90.  Three  times  Miss  B.  named 
numbers  above  90. 

INIiss  B.  exhiljited  more  marked  number  habits  as  regards  indi^-idual 
digits,  and  these  differed  for  first  and  second  digits,  as  the  following 
table  shows  : — 

Digit  named  

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

Number  of  times  it  was 

named  as  the  first  digit. 

136 

171 

157 

70 

172 

135 

88 

65 

3 

Number  of   times  it  was 

named  as  the  second  digit. 

70 

109 

107 

153 

135 

124 

94 

146 

21 

38 

Her  successful  guesses  were  very  unequally  distributed.  It  will  be 
more  instructive  here  to  consider  only  those  made  under  the  conditions 
whicli  did  not  appear  to  interfere  with  success,  those,  namely,  in 
which  ]Mr.  Smith,  P.,  or  T.  were  agents  and  not  divided  from 
Miss  B.  by  more  than  one  closed  door.  There  ^vere  547  experi- 
ments under  these  conditions  (including  some  done  lay  table-tilting 
in  which  P.  and  T.  shared)  of  which  eighty-one  were  successes. 
This  gives  an  average  of  sLx  draws  and  one  successful  guess  to  each 
number.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  frequency  of  drawing  varied  from 
one  in  the  case  of  66'  to  sixteen  in  the  case  of  26,  and  the  frequency 
of  correct  guessing  from  nought  in  a  large  number  of  cases  (including 
26)  to  eight  in  the  case  of  51.  The  larger  proportion  of  correct, 
guesses  among  the  547  trials  now  under  consideration  involves,  as 
might  be  expected,  a  somewhat  closer  correspondence  between  the 
frequency  of  drawing  and  of  correct  guessing  than  is  observable  when 
the  whole  997  trials  are  considered,  but  the  only  very  marked  instance 
of  such  correspondence  is  the  case  of  51,  which  was  drawn  fourteen 
times  and  guessed  correctly  eight  times.  The  number  56,  which  was 
guessed  correctly  seven  times,  turned  up  eight  times.  The  number 
25  was  guessed  correctly  four  times  and  turned  up  seven  times  ; 
and  16,  41,  58,  62-  were  guessed  correctly  three  times  and  turned  up 
four,  eight,  eight  and  five  times  respectively.    Twelve  different  numbers 

1  It  turned  up  another  time,  but  was  then  accidentally  read  as  99. 

-  51,  56  and  25  were  named  by  Miss  B.  altogether  nineteen,  twenty-three  and 
twenty-nine  times  respectively.  10,  58  and  C2  wi-re  also  named  above  the  average 
number  of  times,  but  41  was  only  named  seven  times. 

550         Mrs.  H.  Sidgwich  and  Hiss  Alice  Johnson. 

were  guessed  correctly  twice  each.  Of  these,  nine  turned  up  more 
than  six  tunes,  two  six  times,  and  one  tive  times.  Twenty-six  numbers 
were  correctly  guessed  only  once,  and  tliirty-six  not  at  all.  Of  those 
never  guessed  cori-ectly,  thirteen  turned  up  over  six  times. 

Other  Percipients  than  Miss  B. 

Miss  B.  was  undoubtedly  our  best  percipient.  With  Mr.  Smith  as 
agent,  T.  had  no  success  in  number-guessing  worth  quoting  during  the 
nineteen  months  over  which  the  present  series  of  experiments  extended, 
even  when  agent  and  percipient  were  in  the  same  room.  P.  did  rather 
better,  for  in  ninety-one  attempts  with  agent  and  percipient  in  separate 
rooms  with  a  closed  door  between  them,  he  was  quite  right  five  times, 
and  in  addition  gave  the  iirst  digit  rightly  eighteen  times  and  the  second 
three  times.  This  is  perhaps  sutlicient  to  show  the  existence  of  some 
agency  other  than  chance,  and  the  success  is  not  very  inferior  to  that 
which  he  had  during  the  same  j^eriod  when  the  agent  was  in  the  room 
with  him.  Most  of  his  success  under  both  conditions  was  during  the 
latter  part  of  the  period. 

With  two  of  the  new  percipients  already  mentioned — Whybrew 
and  Adams — we  obtained  three  complete  successes  out  of  sixteen 
and  twelve  guesses  I'espectively,  agent  and  percipient  being  in  the 
same  room.  The  only  interest  of  this  is  in  the  fact  that  they  were 
fresh  percipients.  We  did  not  succeed  with  them  at  greater  distances, 
but  the  number  of  trials  made  was  small. 

It  is  curious  that  though  T.  was  the  least  successful  on  the  whole  of 
our  three  principal  percipients,  he  showed  greater  signs  of  success  with 
other  agents  than  P.  or  Miss  B.  did.  One  day,  when  he  had  been 
hypnotised  ]jy  Pi'ofessor  Barrett,  he  iiamed  two  numbers  rightly  and 
one  with  digits  in  reverse  order  out  of  thirteen  thought  of  by  Professor 
Barrett.  The  latter  had  his  hand  on  T.'s  forehead.  The  next  day  he 
failed,  but  in  1889  we  had  f(.iund  him  very  variable. 

Plis  success  with  ourselves  was  also  slightly  alcove  what  might  be 
expected  by  chance.  We  had  between  us  seventy  trials  with  him  and 
three  complete  successes,  all  of  which  occurred  on  the  same  day  out  of 
seventeen  trials,  l»ut  we  can  lay  no  stress  on  this,  because  the  number  of 
half  successes  was  below  the  most  probal)le  number,  which  renders  it  of 
course  more  likely  that  the  conq^lete  successes  were  the  result  of  chance. 

P.  showed  signs  of  success  one  day  with  Major  Hughes  as  agent, 
but  it  was  promise  rather  tlaan  performance,  and  no  completely 
successful  guesses  were  made.  . 

Coniparisoii  of  Verbal  Guesses  with  those  made  unconsciously. 

With  the  method — used  only  on  one  evening,  November  10th,  1890' 
— of  getting  the  percipient  to  guess  numbers  both  verbally  and  with  a 

Experiments  in  Th o ught-Tran.sference. 

551 

planchette,^  the  two  guesses  were  in  most  cases  different.  This  was- 
especially  so  with  Miss  B.,  the  amount  of  coincidence  between  the  two 
sets  of  guesses  being  decidedly  below  what  chance  would  give — only  one 
digit  the  same  in  the  same  place  in  twenty  pairs  of  guesses.  These 
guesses  took  place  all  on  one  evening  but  in  two  sets,  experiments  in  the 
transference  of  "  mental  pictures  "  being  tried  in  the  interval.  With 
P.,  on  the  other  hand,  the  connection  between  the  con-esponding  guesses- 
was  close.  Out  of  six  consecutive  trials,  in  one  case  the  two  gTiesses- 
■were  the  same,  in  two  cases  they  contained  the  same  digits  but  in 
reverse  order,  and  in  the  other  three  cases  the  second  digit  was  the 
same  in  both  guesses. 

There  was  a  curious  variety  in  the  results  with  T.  He  first  made 
six  consecutive  double  guesses,  the  only  coincidence  between  them  being 
that  the  first  digit  of  one  of  his  verbal  guesses  was  the  same  as  the 
second  digit  of  the  corresponding  guess  with  the  planchette.  He  was 
then  awakened  for  a  few  minutes  and  lehypnotised,  when  another 
double  guess,  with  no  coincidence  in  it,  was  made.  He  was  then  slightly 
roused  and  again  put  into  a  deeper  state  than  before,  in  which,  however,, 
no  impressions  occurred  to  him.  He  was  therefore  completely  awakened 
and  rehypnotised,  and  five  fresh  trials  with  the  planchette  were  made. 
In  the  first  four  of  these  he  said  exactly  what  the  planchette  wrote,, 
but  in  the  fifth  something  quite  different  again. 

In  the  course  of  this  whole  evening,  the  guesses  made  with  planchette 
both  by  Miss  B.  and  T.  were  decidedly  less  successful  than  their  verbal 
guesses. 

On  the  same  evening,  five  experiments  (fully  descriljed  in  a. 
later  part  of  this  paper)  -were  made  in  the  trajisference  of  "  mental 
pictures  "  to  Miss  B.  as  percipient,  in  which  she  was  writing  with 
the  j^lanchette  and  describing  her  impressions  verljally  at  the  same  time.. 
In  only  three  cases  did  the  planchette  write  anything  intelligiljle  and 
what  was  written  seemed  to  be  chiefly  vague  and  confused  reminiscences 
of  previous  impressions,  one  partially  correct  guess  only  being  made 
with  the  planchette,  while  Miss  B.  made  two  verbally. 

We  thought  that  the  subjects  were  not  aware  of  what  the  plan- 
chette was  writing,  whether  they  guessed  the  same  verbally  or  not.  Thus-. 
Miss  Johnson  once  asked  Miss  B. :  "What  did  planchette  write?  do  you 
know  1  "  Miss  B.  shook  her  head  and  answered  :  "No.  I  see  12  ;  I 
suppose  it  wi'ites  12."  It  had  actually  written  25.  She  proljably  supjjosed 
it  had  written  12  because  she  had  been  told  that  it  would  write  the- 
cori'ect  numbers,  and  her  seeing  12  made  her  sui^j^ose  that  was  correct. 

With  the  table-tilting,  the  subjects  were  certainly  sometimes  con- 
scious of  what  numbers  were  being  tilted.    In  the  first  experiments  of. 

^  A  well-known  instrument  for  facilitating  automatic  writing^. 

■552         Mrs.  II.  Sidgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

this  kind  they  Avere  not  guessing  verbally  at  the  same  time  and 
therefore  had  nothing  to  distract  their  attention  from  the  movements 
of  the  table,  in  which  they  were  much  interested.  This  was  Avhen  they 
were  hypnotised.  When  Miss.  B.  was  table-tilting  in  a  normal 
condition,  she  was  fully  aware  of  its  movements,  though  apparently 
not  at  all  aware  of  what  number  was  going  to  be  tilted,  as  her  conscious 
impression  as  to  the  number  hioked  at  by  Mr.  Smith  was  generally 
different  from  the  number  tilted  by  the  table,  whether  she  was 
hypnotised  or  not.  T.,  on  the  other  liand,  when  hypnotised,  folio \'.'ed 
the  table  almost  exactly  in  six  consecutive  verbal  guesses  without 
apparently  being  at  all  aware  that  he  was  doing  so.  Thus  the  table 
tilted  82,  after  which  he  said  "82,"  and  when  Miss  Johnson  asked 
him  what  the  table  had  tilted,  he  replied  that  he  did  not  take  any 
notice  of  it.  Probably  this  was  a  j^erfectly  genuine  remark,  as  there 
were  other  indications  of  the  table  movements  belonging  to  a  separate 
stratum  of  his  hypnotic  consciousness;  especially  the  fact  that  when  he 
was  not  en  rapport  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  apparently  not  awai'e  of 
a  woi'd  she  said,  the  table,  with  his  hands  on  it,  responded  to  her 
readily,  and  this  spontaneously,  without  any  suggestion  that  it  should 
be  so  having  been  made  by  Mr.  Smith  or  ourselves. 

With  Miss  B.  thirty-seven  trials  were  made  in  which  she  was 
guessing  verbally  and  by  table-tilting  at  the  same  time  (excluding 
those  in  which  P.  or  T.,  or  both,  had  their  hands  on  the  table  also). 
Her  vei'bal  guesses  were  slightly  more  successful  than  those  with  the 
taljle,  but  the  success  in  both  sets  of  guesses  was  very  far  below  her 
average.  It  seems  probable  that  the  condition  of  doing  two  things  at 
once  was  an  unfavourable  one,  though  she  showed  no  external  signs  of 
being  confused  oi'  in  any  way  disturbed  ])y  it. 

II.  Experiments  in  Transferring  Ideas  other  than  Numbers. 

Transference  of  Diagrams. 

Exj^eriments  were  tried  in  transferring  words,  letters,  playing  cards, 
objects  and  diagrams  looked  at  by  Mr.  Smith,  but  there  was  no  success 
worth  quoting  with  any  of  our  percipients  except  P.,  and  with  him  only 
with  a  set  of  diagrams  which  consisted  of  twenty-five  shapes  represent- 
ing familiar  objects  cut  out  in  gold  or  silver  paper  and  pasted  on  to 
)(lack  cards.  These  were  shuffled  together  and  one  drawn  at  random 
and  hung  on  to  a  screen  behind  the  percipient  and  between  him  and 
the  agent.  P.  was  so  much  accustomed  to  seeing  numbers  that  we 
thought  it  well  to  educate  him  to  other  impressions  by  telling  him 
definitely  in  the  first  instance,  on  June  14th,  1890,  what  he  was  to  see. 
Mr.  Smith  therefore  said  to  him  :  "  I  am  looking  at  a  star — a  picture 
or  diagram  of  a  star — you'll  see  it  presently."    P.  :  "I  don't  see  it." 

Experiments  in  Thought-Tranf^ference. 

553: 

(After  an  interval :)  "Yes,  I  do  :  a  golden  star  "  (right).  Mr.  Smith  :■ 
"  How  many  jjoints  has  it?"  P.:  "It  keeps  coming  and  going — wait  a. 
minute  "  ;  presently  he  said — "  Five  "  (right). 

He  was  then  told  to  look  out  for  another  picture,  no  hint  being 
given  of  what  it  was.  A  golden  cock  was  drawn  out  of  the  pack  and' 
he  gradually  made  the  following  statements,  without  any  hints  being- 
given  :  "  An  eagle  with  wings  spread  out — gold  on  a  dark  chocolate- 
ground."  '  The  next  one  drawn  was  a  golden  basket ;  as  to  this  he  had 
several  shifting  impressions,  none  right.  In  the  course  of  the  exj^eri- 
ments,  in  which  he  sometimes  took  the  part  of  agent  for  T.  and  Miss  B., 
P.  became  familiar  with  all  these  diagrams,  so  that  he  knew  what  sort 
of  thing  to  look  out  for  and  that  they  were  limited  in  number.  This 
enabled  us  to  calculate  the  most  probable  number  of  successes  by 
chance  alone,  namely  1  in  25. 

On  the  second  evening,  July  Snd,  1890,  he  named  correctly  two — a. 
iug  and  a  basket — out  of  five,  Miss  B.,  as  well  as  Mr.  Smith,  looking  at 
the  diagrams  on  this  occasion. 

Twenty-five  further  trials  of  the  same  kind  were  made  ;  in  fifteen  of 
these  Mr.  Smith  alone  was  agent,  and  P.  guessed  five  right  ;  in  ten 
Mr.  Smith  and  T.  together  were  agents,  and  P.  guessed  four  right,  but 
one  of  the  four  was  a  second  guess.  Thus,  out  of  a  total  of  30  trials, 
where  the  chance  success  would  have  been  1'2,  10  successes  were- 
actually  obtained.  The  five  successes  olitained  on  July  3rd,  when  Mr. 
Smith  alone  was  agent,  may  be  quoted.  After  three  failures  Miss 
Johnson,  who  was  sitting  behind  the  screen  with  Mr.  Smith,  selected 
the  jug.  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  knew  none  of  the  subjects  chosen,  was  the- 
only  one  who  spoke  to  P.,  the  others  remaining  silent  after  they  knew 
what  the  subject  was  in  each  case.  P.  said  :  "I  saw  a  black  thing  com- 
ing up — a  sort  of  square  thing."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  All  right,  that's  the 
background."  P.:  "  Why,  there  it  is,  that  jug  I  saw  the  other  week."  He 
then  explained  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that  the  jug  was  "  put  up"  (we  generally 
used  this  expression  in  telling  the  percipients  that  an  impression 
would  come  to  them)  where  he  could  see  it  much  better  than  the- 
pre-sdous  pictures  had  been,  and  tried  at  her  request  to  explain  to  her 
where  it  was.  "  You  see  that  hook  on  the  wall  there  and  the  shadow  it 
casts,"  etc.  His  eyes  were  closed,  so  that  any  image  he  had  of  the  room 
was  a  visionary  one,  but  he  spoke  and  pointed  as  though  clearly  localis- 
ing the  hook,  etc.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  could  not  discover  that  there  was  any 
real  object  corresponding  to  the  hook. 

5<7t  Diagram.  The  Cock. — P.  said  :  "  Why,  it's  the  bird,  but  it's  not- 
fair  putting  it  up  like  that — it's  not  in  the  same  place  as  the  jug." 
;      &th  Diagram.  The  Star. — P.  had  no  impression. 

The  cock's  wings  were  not  spread  out. 

554 

Mrs.  H.  Sidgivich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

7th  Diagram.  The  Basket. — P.  said:  "I  saw  a  handle.  I  do  believe 
that's  that  basket." 

Sth  Diagram.  The  Cross. — P.  said  :  "Across."  ■  ■'■ 

9th  Diagram.  The  Arroiv. — P.  said  :  "  The  dart — arrow,  I  mean.'' 
This  impression  was  slow  in  coming,  and  the  next  six  experiments  tried 
■on  this  evening  were  complete  failures.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  in 
four  out  of  the  five  successful  cases,  the  diagram  had  not  been  drawn  at 
random,  hnt  selected  by  Miss  Johnson — in  three  cases  on  the  ground 
that  P.  had  guessed  it  successfully  on  previous  occasions.  She  merely 
noted  the  fact  herself  at  the  time,  without  making  any  remark  on  it  to 
anyone  pr-esent,  and  it  does  not  seem  likely  that  the  selection  matei'ially 
affected  the  amount  of  success,  as  three  out  of  the  last  six  diagrams  on 
this  evening,  none  of  which  were  guessed  correctly,  were  selected  in  the 
same  way. 

We  had  also  a  set  of  diagrams  which  were  mere  nameless  arrange- 
ments of  lines,  but  with  these  P.  had  very  little  success.  He  had 
looked  at  all  of  them  beforehand,  and  the  impressions  that  came  to 
him  seemed  to  be  chiefly  memories  of  what  he  had  seen.  The  amount 
of  coincidence  with  what  the  agent  was  concentrating  his  mind  on  at 
the  moment  was  only  slightly  above  what  chance  would  have  given. 

Transference  of  J/allucinations. 

An  experiment  somewhat  like  the  transference  of  "mental  pictures  " 
• — to  be  described  below — sometimes  succeeded.  It  consisted  in  making- 
one  of  our  percipients  by  verbal  suggestion  see  a  hallucinatory  picture 
on  a  cai'd,  and  then  letting  hira  show  the  card  to  another,  who  would 
occasionally,  after  looking  at  it  for  a  few  minutes,  see  a  similar  jaicture 
without  verbal  suggestion  as  to  its  sul:)ject.  One  of  our  earliest  and  most 
csuccessf ul  experiments  of  this  kind  was  described  hy  Professor.  Sidgwick 
in  a  Presidential  address.  (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  434.)  They  were 
interesting  and  striking,  but  evidentially  of  less  value  perhaps  than  the 
others,  as  it  was  difficult  to  carry  them  out  under  strict  conditions,  and 
we  succeeded  less  well  with  them  later. 

Transference  of  "  Mental  Piclures."    Introdiictor)/ — Conditions. 

We  spent  more  time  and  obtained  more  success  in  experiments  in 
which  the  agent,  Mr.  Smith,  was  merely  concentrating  his  mind  on 
a  "mental  picture"  of  some  sort,  without  looking  at  any  real  I'e- 
presentation.  In  some  of  the  later  trials,  when  the  subject  was  a 
.simple  one,  he  used  occasionally  to  sketch  it  roughly  on  a  small  piece 
of  paper,  to  help  him  to  keep  his  attention  fixed  on  it.  But  we  did 
not  tiud  that  more  success  followed  when  this  was  done. 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

555 

We  generally,  though  not  always,  arranged  that  the  person  who  was 
put  en  rcqjport  with  the  percipient  and  carried  on  the  conversation  with 
him  during  the  course  of  each  experiment,  at  the  same  time  taking 
notes  of  his  remarks,  should  be  entirely  ignorant  of  the  subject  of  the 
picture. 

The  subjects  of  the  pictures  were  always  chosen  by  one  of  us  and 
communicated  to  Mr.  Smith  in  writing,  even  Avhen  he  was  not  in  the 
same  room  with  the  percipient.  Mr.  Smith  did  not  speak  to  the  perci- 
pient after  he  had  been  told  the  subject  of  a  "  mental  picture,"  until 
the  percipient's  impression  had  been  completely  described  and  written 
-down,  except  on  the  occasions  noted  at  the  time,  and  mentioned  below, 
-and  when  he  spoke  it  was  generally  at  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  request.  Nor, 
after  being  told  the  subject  of  the  picture,  did  he  hypnotise  the  perci- 
pient, or  ■  awake  him,  or  open  his  eyes,  or  put  him  into  a  deeper 
hypnotic  state,  or  do  anything  involving  contact,  except  in  the  fev;- 
•cases  where  we  shall  mention  it. 

Nature  of  the  Percipients'  Impressions. 

The  percipient  was  sometimes  made  to  receive  the  impression  as  a 
fully  externalised  visual  hallucination  seen  with  open  eyes  ;  usually  as  a 
picture  on  a  blank  white  card  on  which  he  had  been  told  that  a  picture 
would  appear,  but  occasionally  in  a  crystal  used  in  the  same  Avay.  Mr. 
Myers'  similar  experiments  with  P.  and  T.  in  which  a  crystal  was  used 
(described  above,  p.  459)  should  be  considered  in  connection  with  ours. 
Latterly,  the  percipients  were  generally  induced  to  see  the  pictures 
when  hypnotised  with  closed  eyes. 

Details  of  Experiments. 

In  order  that  the  reader  may  be  enabled  to  form  a  fair  estimate  of 
the  amount  of  success  obtained  and  to  judge  how  nuich  of  it,  if  any, 
was  due  to  verbal  suggestion,  deliberately  or  unconsciously  given,  we 
think  it  necessary  to  give  full  details  of  the  experiments  which  we  regard 
xis  successful,  and  we  have  added,  for  various  reasons  which  will  be 
apparent,  accounts  of  some  failures.  All  the  remarks  quoted  from 
any  speaker  were  taken  down  verbatim  at  the  time,  the  note-taker 
generally  endeavouring  to  record  at  least  all  that  was  said  by  the  agent 
and  percipient,  and  in  most  cases  the  whole  of  the  notes  are  repro- 
duced. The  result  is  that  this  part  of  our  paper  has  run  to  great 
length,  and  for  convenience  we  prefix  here  a  tabulated  list  of  all  the 
experiments  tried  (except  those  with  one  percij^ient,  Adams,  who 
obtained  no  success),  numbered  and  arranged  in  chronological  order. 
This  can  be  skipped  by  the  reader  who  does  not  wish  to  go  into  details. 

The  fourth  column  of  the  table  describes  the  way  in  which  the 

556         Mrs.  H.  Bidgioich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

impressions  came  to  the  percipient,  whether  as  hallucinations  seen  on  a 
card  or  in  a  crystal,  or  with  closed  eyes.    The  fifth  column  gives  the 
position  of    the  agent  in  relation  to  the  percipient.     The  words 
"upstairs  "  and  "  downstairs"  refer  to  the  two  rooms,  already  described, 
at  the  Arch.    The  percipient  was  never  downstairs  except  in  the  cases 
where  it  is  mentioned.    The  word  "  speaking  "  in  this  column  means 
tliat  the  agent  spoke  after  he  knew  what  the  subject  of  the  picture 
was  to  be.    Whenever  this  word  does  not  occur,  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  he  said  nothing  whatever  after  he  knew  the  subject.    Tn  the 
full  report  of  the  successful  experiments  that  follows,  his  remarks,  if 
any,  are  generally  given  as  well  as  the  percipient's.    In  onlj-  one 
experiment   (ISTo.   38)    was   contact    between  agent  and  percipient 
deliberately  emj^loyed,  and  then  without  success.    It  occurred,  how- 
ever, in  another  case,  No.  58,  accidentally ;  and  in  six  cases,  Nos.  9, 
12,  35,  51,  53,  and  98,  a  change  in  the  hypnotic  condition  of  the  perci- 
pient had  to  be  brought  about  during  the  expeiiment  which,  with 
Mr.  Smith's  methods  of  working,  practically  involves  contact.  The 
experiments  which  we  have  counted  as  successes  or  partial  successes 
are  mai'ked  with  an  asterisk. 

LIST   OF  EXPERIMENTS   IN   TRANSFERRING  MENTAL 

PICTURES. 

Date. 

181)0. 
.July  9. 

•July  10. 

All". -25 

N(jv.  9. 

Subject  of  Mental 
Picture. 

A  little  boy  witli  a  ball 

A  kitten  in  a  jar 
Noali'.s  Ark  &  animals. 
Christy  Minstrel  with 

a  t)anjo. 
Christy  Minstrel  with 

a  ban.jo  (contintiert). 
Sailing  boat  on  tlie  sea. 
A  sailing  l)oat  on  the 

sea  (continued). 
A  soldier. 

A  pony. 

A  donkey,  witli  ii  woman 

ridinsf  it. 
An  open  umbrella. 
An  excursionist  on  a 

<lonkey. 
Pony    cari'iaye,  witli 

lady  driving. 
Mi.ss  ii.  sitting  in  chair 

at  Arch. 
A  fisherman  witli  a 

barrow  of  fish. 
A  black  kitten  playing 

with  a  cork. 
"  Sanilwicli "  man  with 
advertisement  of  play. 

Percipient. 

Miss  ]>.  looking 
card. 

P.  looking  at  card. 

T. 
T. 

Position  of 
Agent. 

Sitting  near. 
Behind  screen. 

Sitting  near. 

I5ehi]id  screen. 
Sitting  near. 

Behind  screen, 

then  near. 
Mr.  Smith 
speaking.  Con- 
tact.'!', co-agent 
\ait  of  time. 
Mr. Smith  near, 
speaking. 

Speaking.  Con- 
tact. 
Behind  screen. 

Behind  P., 
speaking. 

Behind  P. 

Description  given  by 
Percipient. 

A  little  boy  witli  a  ball. 

A  cat,  sitting  down. 
A  fly,  or  bee. 
Something  long,  round, 

— a  cage,  a  can. 
A  man's  hand,  a  black 

hand. 

Black  man  with  guitar. 
A  sailing  boat. 

No  impression. 

Cliair  —  rabbit  —  pony. 

No  impression. 
A  woman. 

Horse,  pony,  donkey. 

No  impression. 

No  imjn'ession. 

Owl's  face,  laliljit. 

A  cat  with  saucer  (?)  of 
milk. 

A  man  that  goes  about 
witli  two  boards. 

Experiments  in  Thoiiglit-Transference. 

557 

Date. 

1890. 
Nov.  9. 

Nov.  10. 

Dec.  15. 

Dec.  16. 

Dee.  17. 

Dec.  18. 

n 

Dec.' 20. 

Subject  of  Mental 
Picture. 

A  choir  boy. 

A  vase  with  flowers. 

T.  with  hi.s  silver-liead- 
ed  .stick. 

A  blaclc  (loo-. 

The  Eiffel  Tower. 

A  boy  witli  bat,  play- 
ing cricket. 

Willing's  clock. 

A  pony  carriage. 

A  vase  with  flowei'S. 

A  jug. 

A  clock. 

A  man  and  woman 
dancing. 

A  ccw  being  milked  by 
dairy-raaid. 

T.  boxing 

A  big  Idack  dog. 
A  big  black  dog. 

A  sailor  smoking  a  pipe. 
A  boy  skating. 

f 

A  bedroom  candle-  j 
stick.  1 

An  open  umbrella. 

A  ro.se. 

A  baby  in  perambula- 
tor, with  nurse. 

A  man  with  a  barrel- 
organ. 

A  sailing  boat  with 
three  masts. 

A  cavalry  soldier  on 
liorseback. 

A  drummer-boy. 

Miss  B. 

Professor  Sidg^vick. 
Mrs.     Smith  playing 
the  piano. 

Percipient. 

P.  looking  at  card 

T. 

Mi.ss  B.,witliclosed 
eyes  and  hand  on 
plancliette,  up- 
stairs. P.  looking 
at  card  down- 
stairs. 

P.  looking  at  card. 
Miss  B.,eye3  closed? 

P.  looking  at  card 
V. 

T. 

Miss  B.  ,eyes  closed ' 
T. ,  eyes  closed  ? 

T.  looking  at  card 

T.  looking  in  ink. 
MissB.  eyes  closed. 

Position  of 
Agent. 

Behind  P. 

Behind  screen. 

Behind  screen, 

speaking. 
Beliind  T. 

Behind  T, 
speaking. 

Upstairs, 
o  p  p  0  s  ite 
Miss  B. 

D  owustairs, 
behind  P. 

Upstairs, 
o  p  p  0  s  ite  - 
Miss  B. 

Downstairs,  / 
behind  P.,  ( 
but  had ; 
been  u 
stairs  after  I 
he  knew  the  >v 
subject. 

Near,  speaking. 

P.  agent  ;  Mr 
Sniitli  know 
ing  subject 
speaking. 

Downstairs. 

Up  s  t  airs, 
speaking.  - 
Contact. 

Downstairs. 

Upstairs, hold-  f 
ing  baud  of 
Miss  B.,  & 
speaking.  v 

Behind  T. 

Dowiistairs. 

Near;  speaking. 
Beh.ind  T. 
Outside  room. 

Description  given  by 
Percipient. 

Figure  dressed  in  white 

—  a  ghost. 
A  glass— a  flower-pot. 
Tiie  number  14. 

S<imething  square— box 

A  black  dog. 

All  smudgy  and  black. 

The  same  as  before. 

Letters  assumed  by  T. 
to  belong  to  a  tele- 
graphic code,  sent  by 
flash  system.  1 

No  impression. 

Miss  B. :    A  jug. 

P  :  No  impression. 
Miss  B. :  A  « iue-glass. 
P.  ;  A  watch. 
Miss  1! :  No  impression. 
P 1  a,  n  c  h  e  1 1  e  wrote, 

"  Figure  &  animals." 
P.  ;  A  lady  and  gentle- 
man dancing. 
Mi.ss  B.  :  A  buffalo. 
Plancliette  wrote, 

"  Cow." 
P.  :     Painted  church 

windows. 
Miss  B.  :     A  man,  or 

child,  playing. 
I'lanchette  wrote,  "Cat 

drinking  milk, chair." 
P.  :    A  dog.    A  photo- 

giapli  of  T. 

No  impression. 

A  black  and  white  dog. 

A  boy  eating  an  apple. 
P. :  Frn-/.eu  water — some 

o!U'  sliiling  orskating. 
T. :  A  sliip  .sailing  along. 
Miss  J5.  :  A  cage. 
T.  :  .A  man  in  a  fog. 
Miss  B.  :  A  horse. 
T. :  Soraetliing  big. 
Miss  B.  :  A  man. 
T.  :  Woman  pushing 

perambulator. 

A  girl  with  a  perambu- 
lator. 

A  man  caught  in  a  fog. 

niree  boys  skating. 

A  man  playing  cricket. 

No  impression. 
Miss  B. 

No  impression. 
A  rose— a   little  girl 
playing  at  something. 

T.  is  .a  telegrnph  clerk. 

•2  p 

558 

Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc  and  Iliss  Alice  Johnson. 

Date. 

1890. 
Dec.  20. 

1891. 
Apr.  21. 

Apr.  22. 

July  6. 

July  7. 

July 

July  9. 

July  10. 

July  11, 

July  13. 

Subject  of  Mental 
Picture. 

A  donkey. 

A  sack-i-ace  of  four  / 

lioy.s 

A  dog-  sitting  up  beg- 
gint;. 

An  elejiliant  witli  a/ 
bear  on  its  back.  ( 

Tlie  Babes  in  tlie  Wood. 

A  crocodile  dancing/ 
on  a  table.  [ 

A  cavalry  soldier. 

A  goat  -  can-iage,  one 
goat,  two  children. 

A  sliip  in  full  sail. 

A  man  witli  ]>an'el- 
organ  and  monkey. 

Mouse  in  a  mouse-trap. 

A  mouse  in  a  mouse- 
trap (contiinied). 

A  liouse  on  fire. 

Cinderella's  coach. 

l^ears'    Boy  blowing 

soap-bnbI>Ies. 
The  American  flag — 

stars  and  stripes. 
Pears'    Boy  blowing 

soap-bubbles. 
A  man  playing  a  fiddle. 
An  eagle  pursuing  a 

sparrow, 
nie  Walrus  and  the 

Carpenter. 
A  donkey. 

A  Christy  Minstrel 

with  a  banjo. 
Christy  Minstrel  witli 

a  banjo  (continued). 
Coacli  witli  four  horses. 

A  clock. 

Punch  and  .Tudy. 
Man  paddling  a  ca  noe. 
A  lion  pur.suinga  deer. 

A  tiger. 

A  little  boy  throwing 

up  a  red  ball. 
A  man  riding. 

Bear,  climbing  a  pole. 
A  squirrel,  eatins  nuts. 
A  boat  in  full  sail. 
A  tall  hat. 

Italian  woman  with 
two  gi'een  Ijirds  in  a 
cage. 

Percipient. 

Miss  B., eyes  closed. 

P.  looking  in  crystal. 
T.  lookingin  another 

crystal. 
P.  looking  at  card. 

P.  with  closed  eyes. 
P.  looking  at  card. 

P. ,  eyes  closed. 
T. 

W  li  y  b  r  e  w ,  eyes 
closed. 

Major,  eyes  dosed. 

P.  looking  at  card. 

W  h  y  b  r  e  w,  eyes 
closed. 

P.,  eyes  closed. 

T.  looking  at  card. 
Major,  eyes  clo.sed. 

W  h  y  b  r  e  w,  eyes 
closed. 

I'.,  eyes  clo.sed. 
T. 

AVhybrew,  looking 
in  crystal. 

Position  of 
Agent. 

In  room. 

Near  ;  speak-  T 

Downs  fairs. 

U  p  s  t  a,  i  r  s  , 
s  p  e  a  k  i  n  g. 
Contact. 

Downstairs. 

Contact  and  , 
speaking. 

In  room. 

Downstaii-s. 

Contact  w  ith  JI, 

&  speaking. 
Domistairs. 

In  room. 
Downstairs. 

In  room. 
Dowiistairs. 

.Sitting  n  ear 
speaking. 

D  0  w  11  s  t  airs, 
then  upstairs, 
speaking. 

Downstaire. 

Sitting  n  ear, 
speaking. 

Description  given  by 
Percipient. 

A  large  black  dog. 

P. :  No  impression. 

T.  :  A  small  dark  man ,, 

holding  a  pole. 
A  piano  — an  organ. 

P.  :  53.  No  further  im- 
pression. 

T.  :  58.  The  sea -a  field, 
with  five  people  play- 
ing cricket. 

Balies  in  the  Wood. 

P.  ;  A  goat-chaise. 

T.  :  Photo  of  the  Aqua- 
rinni —  perambulator 
with  two  children  & 
nurse. 

V. ;  Coach — locomotive. 

T.  :  Large  thing — paint- 
ed all  red. 

P.  :  A  soldier  on  horse- 
back. 

A  man,  horse  and  cart. 

A  mast— a  ship. 

A  house,  a  woman 

standing  outside. 
No  impression. 
Trap  with  a  mouse. 

A  horse— an  elephant. 
A  ring,  green  fields,  a- 

gate,  a  star. 
A  tree. 

A  tree — square— like 

house — square. 
A  square. 

a. 

A  house  and  a  man. 

A  little  bird— then  an 
eagle— then  5. 

An  el  e  ph  a  n  t— some 
people  on  its  back. 

A  man  standing  out- 
side a  house. 

Aboatwith  people  in  it. 

A  iiegTo  with  a  hatchet 

or  axe. 
A  horse— man  holding 

it — light  cart. 
A  house. 

Something  like  a  dog. 
Plough  &  a  man  with  it. 
A  .ship. 

No  impression. 

A  ball  —  red  —  and  a 
little  boy. 

A  pair  of  le,gs— another 
pair— a  horse — a  man 
riding  it. 

No  impression. 

No  impression 

The  Pyraniiils  of  Egypt. 

No  impression. 

A  woman  like  organ- 
grinder,  with  a  bird 
in  a  cage. 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transjerence.  559 

Date. 

1891. 
July  13. 
Jiilv  14. 

July  15. 

■July  16. 

.Julv  20. 

Subject  of  Mental 
Picture. 

July  30. 

A  rowing"  boat. 
A  boat. 

Percipient. 

A  C  li  r  i  s  t  y  Minstrel 

with  a  banjo. 
An  eagle  pursuing  a 

sparrow. 
A  man  climbing  up  a 

ladder. 
A   locomotive,  green 

witli  red  .stripes. 

A  man  on  a  bicycle.  ^ 

A  boat  drawai  by  a  f 
swan.  \ 
A  man  with  a  baiTOw 

of  fish. 
A  chimney-swee])  with 

broom  &  l>:tg  of  soot 
Tlie  ".Skylark"  (a 

yacht). 
A  woman  and  child 

drinking  tea. 

Snake  witli  its  forked  / 
tongue  out.  \ 

A  clierub— head  and/ 
wings  only.  ( 

A  policeman  with  his 
cape  on. 

A  mouse  in  a  trap. 

A  clock. 

A  spider  in  the  middle 

of  its  web. 
Punch  and  .ludy  sliow, 

including  Toby. 
A  picture  of  Mr.  Smith. 

A  locomotive. 

A  baby  boy  with  a  toy 
rabbit. 

Two  boys  on  a  sea-saw. 
A  boy  standing  on  his 
head. 

A  cow  lieing  milked  by 
a  dairymaid. 

A  liee-liive,  vnth  bees 
flying  about. 

f   P.  eyes  closetl. 

^  I: 

eyes 

W  h  y  brew 

closed. 
P.  eyes  closed. 
T. 
P- 
T- 

li  y  1)  r  e  w,  eyes 
closed 

P.  eyes  closecL 
T. 

P.  looking'  at  card. 

P.  eyes  closed. 

Position  of 
Agent. 

Downstaii-s. 

Downstairs,  T. 

joint  agent. 
In  room,speak- 

Dowustaii-s. 

Sitting  n  e  a  r, 
speaking. 

Downstaii-s.  ^ 

J 
I 

Sitting  near. 
Downstairs. 

Upstaii's,  be- 
liind  sceen. 

Behind  screen, 
speaking. 

Speaking  and 
contact. 

l>eliind  screen. 

liehind  screen, 
speaking. 

Downstairs. 

Upstairs,  be- 
liind  screen, 
speaking. 

Downstaiivi. 

Description  given  by 
Percipient. 

P.  :  .4  wasp 
T.  :  An  eagle. 
An  elephant. 

A  fairy  or  angel— flying 

— carrying  a  c'aild. 
A  sea-gull. 

A  man  with  a  wooden 
leg. 

Wheels — long,  round 
piece  above — engine. 

P.  :  No  impression. 

T.  :  Lady  sitting  down. 

P.  :  No  impression. 

T.:  Boat  with  two  sails. 

A  man  witli  a  barrow  of 
fruit — or  fish. 

Four  sticks  in  a  row — 
a  horse. 

A  house. 

No  impression. 

P.  :  Man  with  ice- 
cream barrow — snake 
— and  snake  charmer. 

T. :  Man  irith  ban-el- 
organ. 

P. :  No  impression. 

T.  :  A  long  thing. 

No  impression. 

A  mouse-trap  with  a 

mouse  in  it. 
A  bullock's  head. 
A  spider's  web. 

Grace  Darling  in  a  boat. 

A  woman  pushing  a  per- 
ambulator. 

A  fisherman  sitting  on 

the  edge  of  a  boat. 
No  impression. 

No  impression. 

.\  basket  of  flowers. 

A  large  cat,  sitting 
down,  with  a  collar 
and  bell. 

A  small  elephant,  with 
an  attendant. 

2  f  2. 

560        Mrs.  H.  Hklgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Summary  of  the  Above.  ^ 
/.  Experiments  icith  Agent  and  Percipient  in  the  same  room 

Umi* 
Correct  or 

UKSSKlN. 

— 

Numhev  of 

Peroivjient. 

partially 

Wrong. 

Js'one. 

Trials. 

eorret-'t. 

Miss  B. 

7 

6 

1 

14 

P. 

14 

6 

7 

27 

T. 

2 

13 

O 
*J 

18 

Whybrew 

6 

2 

2 

10 

Major. 

2 

2 

Totals 

oi 

27 

13 

71 

//.  Experiments  tvith  Agent  and  Percipient  in  different  rooms. 

Miss  B 

5 

5 

P. 

1 

l(i 

6 

23 

T. 

12 

2 

14 

Whybrew 

7 

1 

8 

Major 

1 

4 

5 

Totals 

2 

44 

9 

55 

We  now  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  succe.ssful  experiments, 
numbered  as  in  the  al)ove  list,  l)ut  arranged  under  separate  headings 
for  each  percipient. 

Experiments  tvith.  Miss  B. 

The  first  experiments  with  Miss  B.  took  place  on  July  9th,  1890. 
The  percipient,  being  in  a  hypnotic  trance,  had  her  eyes  opened  and 
Ava.s  given  a  card  and  told  to  look  out  for  a  picture  which  would  come 
on  it. 

No.  1.  The  subject,  chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  was  a  little  hoy  with  a 
ball.  Mr.  Smith  sat  close  to  Miss  B.  but  neither  spoke  to  her  nor 
touched  her.  Miss  B.  pi'esently  said  :  "  A  figure  is  coming — a  little 
"boy."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  what  he  had  in  his  Irand  and  Miss  B. 
replied  ;  "A  round  thing,  a  ball  I  suppose." 

No.  2.  For  the  next  experiment  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind  a  screen. 
The  subject,  a  kitten  in  a  jar,  was  again  set  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  Miss  B. 
:said  :  "  Something  like  an  old  cat — a  cat — I  think  it's  a  cat."  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  :  "  What  is  the  cat  doing  ?  "  Miss  B.  (doubtfully) :  "  Sitting 

1  In  this  sunnnary,  eighteen  experiments  in  which  two  percipients  were  trying  at 
the  same  time  to  get  an  impression  of  the  "mental  pictures  "  are  counted  each  as  two 
experiments,  one  for  each  percipient,  whereas  in  the  preceding  list  each  of  them  is 
•counted  as  only  one  experiment. 

Experiments  in  Thouyht-Transference. 

561 

down."  Mi'S.  Sidgwick  :  "  Is  there  anything  else  but  a  cat  V  Miss  B.  : 
"No,  only  scratches  about." 

No.  3.  (Failure.)  The  next  subject,  set  by  Miss  Johnson,  a  Noalis 
Ark  and  animals,  failed.  It  was  probably  too  complicated  and  indefi- 
nite.   Miss  B.  saw  a  small  black  lump  which  turned  into  a  bee. 

There  was  a  curious  development  of  her  impressions  in  the  next 
two  cases. 

No.  4.  Subject,  a  Christy  Minstrel  ivith  a  banjo  (chosen  by  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  who  took  the  notes).  Miss  B.  said  :  "  There's  something  long, 
something  round  in  that  one — a  little  cage  of  some  sort — something 
that  looks  like  a  cage  ;  yet  there's  something  like  a  handle.  A  can  ! 
oh,  it's  a  can  !  It's  quite  clear  now."  We  then  gave  her  a  fresh  card, 
and  Mr,  Smith  moved  round  from  behind  the  screen  and  sat  close  to 
her,  still  without  speaking. 

No.  5.  The  same  subject  (continued).  Miss  B.  said  :  "  Something 
here  dark — a  hand."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  Is  it  a  woman's  hand  or  a  man's?" 
Miss  B.  :  "  A  black  hand."    This  seemed  to  be  a  partial  success. 

Mr.  vSmith  then  woke  Miss  B.  up  to  ask  her  when  she  had  to 
go,  but  finding  that  there  was  still  a  little  time  to  spare,  rehypnotised 
her.  and  tried  another  su]>ject. 

No.  6.  A  sailinci  boat  on  the  sea.  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind  the  screen. 
Presently  Miss  B.  said:  "A  man — black. — He's  got  something  in  his 
hand — an  instrument — sort  of  guitar  thing."  As  we  had  not  spoken 
about  the  Christy  JMinstrel  and  banjo,  this  tardy  emergence  of  the 
idea  when  Mr.  Smith  was  thinking  of  something  else,  and  after 
awaking  and  rehypnotisation,  was  interesting. 

We  then  changed  Miss  B.'s  card  and  Mr.  Smith  continued  to  think 
of  the  sailing  boat,  but  Miss  B.  only  saw  something  like  a  bear,  and 
we  changed  her  card  again.  Of  course  during  these  changes  we  told 
her  nothing  about  the  subject,  nor  whether  it  was  changed,  nor  whether 
she  was  right  or  wrong.  Miss  B.  then  said  :  "  Very  funny  thing " 
(shaking  her  head) ;  "  can't  see  it  coming  to  any  figure.  There's  a  mess 
— it  doesn't  come  to  any  shape." 

No.  7.  At  this  point,  Mrs.  Sidg-\vick  asked  Mr.  Smith  to  come  from 
behind  the  screen  and  sit  near  Miss  B.  Miss  Johnson,  who  did  not 
know  whcit  the  subject  of  the  picture  was,  asked  Miss  B.  whether  it 
was  anything  like  an  animal.  Miss  B.  said  :  "  No — got  some  prong  sort 
of  things — something  at  the  bottom  like  a  little  boat. — What  can 
that  be  up  in  the  air  1 — Cliffs  I  suppose — cliffs  in  the  air  high  up- — it's 
joining  the  boat — oh,  sails — a  sailing  boat — not  cliiis — sails."  This 
was  not  all  uttered  consecutively,  but  partly  in  answer  to  questions 
put  by  Miss  Johnson,  but  as  Miss  Johnson  was  ignorant  of  the  subject 
of  the  supposed  picture,  her  questions  could  of  course  give  no  guidance. 

562         Mrs.  H.  Hidgioich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson, 

It  is  obviously  desiraljle  in  experiments  of  this  sort  that  the  talking, 
■which  is  generally  necessary  in  order  to  draw  information  out  of  the 
percipient,  and  also  the  noting  down  of  what  the  percipient  says,  should 
if  possible  be  done  by  a  person  ignorant  of  the  idea  to  be  transferred. 
But  it  is  not  always  easy  to  carry  out  these  conditions  so  strictly  as  was 
done  in  this  case  of  the  boat. 

It  will  be  observed  that  so  far,  excejit  in  the  partial  success  of  the  cat 
seen  for  a  kitten  in  a  jar,  Miss  B.  was  only  successful  when  Mr.  Smith 
was  or  had  been  quite  close  to  her  after  the  idea  was  in  his  mind,  and 
in  the  case  of  the  Christy  INIinstrel  after  the  contact  required  for 
awaking  and  reliypnotisation. 

No.  8.  (Failure.)  On  July  10th  we  tried  the  same  kind  of  experiment 
again  as  so(in  as  Miss  B.  arrived.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  Mr.  Smith  to 
try  to  make  her  see  a  pictui'e  of  a  soldier,  but  she  had  no  impression 
at  all  either  while  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind  the  screen  or  when  he  moved 
up  close  to  her. 

On  ISTovemlier  10th,  at  the  Arch,  we  tried  the  experiment  with 
variations,  and  on  this  occasion  P.  was  percipient  as  well  as  Miss  B. 

No.  27.  Miss  B.  sat  with  her  eyes  closed  and  her  hand  on  a 
planchette,  hypnotised  as  usual.  She  was  told  that  she  would  see 
.something  and  that  the  planchette  would  write,  but  that  she  need  not 
trouble  herself  about  the  planchette.  Mr.  Smith  sat  opposite  to  her 
for  the  first  experiment,  not  in  contact,  ljut  with  no  screen  between 
them.  He  did  not  speak  after  the  suljject — a  jug — had  been  given 
him  in  writing  by  Miss  Johnson,  who  remained  upstairs  with  Miss  B. 
all  the  evening.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sat  downstairs  with  P.,  who  was  look- 
ing at  a  blank  card  on  which  he  had  been  told,  when  hypnotised,  that 
a  picture  would  aj^pear.  Mr.  Smith  was  trying  to  transfer  the  subject 
to  both  of  them.  Miss  B.  soon  said  :  "  Jug — I  see  a  jug,"  but  with 
the  planchette  nothing  legible  was  written,  and  P.  had  no  impression. 

No.  28.  Mr.  Smith  next  sat  downstairs,  behind  P.,  and  did  not 
speak  after  the  subject — a  clock — had  been  given  him  by  Mrs. 
Sidgwick.  Miss  B.  this  tinae  thought  she  saw  a  wine-glass,  but  P.  saw 
something  round  like  a  watch,"  the  hands  pointing  to  ten  minutes 
past  8.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "Is  it  a  watch?"  P.  said  it  was  indistinct — 
"plainer  now — a  ring  at  the  top."  It  seemed  as  if  the  suggestion  of 
the  watch  had  caused  the  ring  to  appear. 

No.  29.  The  next  subject,  chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  was  a  man 
and  woman  dancing,  and  Mr.  Smith  was  again  with  P.,  sitting  behind 
him.  The  result  was  a  failure  as  regards  Miss  B.  She  said  she  could  see 
nothing,  while  her  hand  wrote  with  the  planchette  "  figure  and  animals." 
But  P.,  after  long  waiting,  saw,  as  he  said,  "  A  man  and  a  girl  there — - 
a  lady  and  gentleman. — He's  got  his  arm  round  her  waist — they're 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transfercnce. 

563 

valsing  or  dancing'  something  or  other ";  each  point  with  an  air  of 
discovery — the  arm  round  the  waist  not  at  lirst  suggesting  the  dancing. 

No.  30.  A  cow  hsing  milked  hy  a  dairy-maid  was  the  next  subject 
chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  Mr.  Smith  sat  in  the  room  with  Miss  B., 
opposite  to  her  as  before.  P.  said  :  "  I  fancy  I  see  some  coloured  win- 
dows as  if  it  was  going  to  be  a  church,  but  when  I  look  again  I  can't 
.see  them."  He  had  no  further  impression  apjDarently,  but  said,  "You 
could  easily  fancy  anything  that  came  into  your  head."  Miss  B.  said  : 
"  There's  an  animal  I  can  see,  a  big  one  too — Ijiggish  looking — got 
.some  horns  I  think. — It's  a  buffalo."  Miss  Johnson  asked  if  she  saw 
.anything  besides  the  Imffalo  and  she  said  "  No."  She  also  said  that  it 
seemed  to  be  standing  up.  In  the  meanwhile  the  planchette  had 
written  "  Cow." 

No.  31.  The  next  subject,  chosen  by  Miss  Johnson,  was  T.  boxing^ 
JVIr.  Smith  was  informed  upstairs  what  the  subject  was  to  be  and  then 
,sat  downstairs.  Miss  B.  said  :  "  A  man — no,  looks  more  like  a  child — 
riding,  I  think  ;  child's  doing  something.  I  don't  know — figure  of  some 
.sort,"  etc.  Her  hand  on  the  planchette  meanwhile  wrote  illegibly,  but 
on  Miss  Johnson's  request  wrote  again,  and  finally  produced  :  "  Cat 
drinking  milk — chair. " 

P.,  downstairs,  said  :  "I  thought  I  saw  a  dog's  face  coming,  but  it's 
o;one  away  again. — I  see  some  faint  outline  of  a  dog  there. — I  see  a  lot 
of  different  things. — You  see  this  corner "  (pointing  it  out  to  jNfrs. 
.Sidgwick) — "  a  sort  of  tree  there,  all  curled  up. — A  portrait  ?  What  I 
took  for  the  dog's  face  seems  to  be  the  background.  I  imagined  it  was 
i\  photo  of  T.  just  now,  but  it  can't  be  that."  He  recurred,  however, 
to  its  being  a  portrait  of  T. 

That  P.  succeeded  when  Miss  B.  failed  and  vice  verstt  may  have 
been  due  to  the  distance,  or  may  have  l^een  due  to  Mr.  Smith  being 
unable  to  aim,  as  it  were,  at  the  distant  percipient  when  the  nearer  one 
obtruded  him  or  herself. 

No.  33  has  been  counted  as  a  success,  but  as  P.  was  in  this  case 
the  principal  agent,  it  hardly  Ijelongs  to  the  same  category  as  the 
iibove.  Before  this  exj^eriment  Mr.  Smith  had  been  trying  to  transfer 
the  same  subject — a  hiy  black  dog — to  P.,  without  success  ;  and  Miss 
B.,  who  came  in  in  the  middle,  was  also  told  to  try  to  see  the  picture 
without,  however,  being  hypnotised.  They  were  then  both  hypnotised, 
and  P.  was  told  that  he  would  he  able  to  make  Miss  B.  see  what  he 
thought  of,  and  that  he  would  be  told  in  writing  what  this  was  to  be 
He  was  then  awakened  and  the  subject  communicated  to  him,  Mr. 
Smith  also  knowing  it.     Miss    B.  said  :   "  It's  an  animal — a  dog.'' 

^  T.  had  recently  won  a  prize  in  a  boxing  match  and  had  brought  it  to  show  to  our 
party  one  evening,  so  that  the  idea  of  T.  boxing  was  a  familiar  one. 

564*        Mrs.  II.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Mr.  Smith:  "Yes,  Avhat  culour?"  Miss  B.  :  "  Dark— looks  like  a 
black  and  white  dog."  The  image  did  not  remain  long.  She  could  not- 
tell  what  size  it  w;^s  and  said  it  looked  like  a  cat  at  first. 

Only  five  more  experiments  of  this  kind,  on  three  different  days, 
were  made  with  Miss  B.  and  no  more  success  was  obtained. 

Ex'periments  tvith  P. 

'No.  9.  In  the  first  attempt  of  this  kind  made  with  P.  (on  July  10th, 
1890),  Mr.  Smith  at  first  sat  behind  a  screen  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick 
gave  him  a  subject — a  2^0 ny.  Miss  Johnson  was  en  rajyport  with 
P.  who  looked  for  the  picture  on  a  blank  card.  T.  came  in  in  the 
middle  and  was  asked,  in  writing,  to  think  of  the  same  subject.  P. 
so.id  he  saw  a  chair,  and  on  being  given  a  second  card  by  Miss  Johnson 
thought  he  saw  something  like  a  rabbit,  but  complained  that  the 
picture  was  not  clear — it  looked  as  if  it  was  covered  with  tissue 
paper.  Then  Mr.  Smith  came  round  the  screen  and  sat  behind  P., 
who  did  not  appear  to  see  him,  ljut  remarked  "  This  is  veiy  funny — 
I  don't  think  you  want  me  to  see  anything."  Mr.  Smith  then,  at 
a  sign  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  made  a  few  passes  over  him  and  told  him 
the  2:)icture  would  come  in  a  minute,  then  said  nothing  more.  P.  next 
said  :  "I  see  something  coming — it's  a  pony  or  a  horse."  Such  an 
experiment  as  this,  though  the  success  was  tardy  and  not  obtained 
"under  the  strictest  conditions  aimed  at,  yet  often  appeared  to  be  useful 
as  a  means  of  encouraging  both  agent  and  percipient  and  inducing 
in  them  that  expectation  of  future  success  which  probably  favours 
its  occurrence. 

On  this  evening,  however,  our  attempts  were  chiefly  in  other 
directions  and  we  had  no  further  opportunity  of  trying  exj^ei'iments  of 
any  kind  with  P.  until  August  25th,  1890,  when  we  began  at  once  with 
the  mental  pictures.  Three  consecutive  trials  (ISTos.  12,  1.3  and  14), 
then  failed  ;  in  No.  12,  the  subject  being  an  excursionist  on  a  donkey, 
he  said  he  saw  something  like  "  a  horse,  donkey  or  pony — like  a  donkey 
— -head  different,"  l^ut  in  Nos.  13  and  14  he  had  no  impressions  what- 
eve)-. 

The  next  attempts — fi\  e  in  number — were  made  on  November  9th, 
1890,  in  our  lodgings.  As  a  j^reliminary  to  each  experiment,  P.  was 
hypnotised  and  told  l)y  Mr.  Smith  that  he  would  see  a  picture,  then 
had  his  eyes  opened  and  was  given  a  blank  card  to  look  at.  The 
suljjects  of  the  pictures  were  chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  written 
down  by  her.  In  the  case  of  the  first  two,  the  subject  for  the  picture 
was  shown  in  writing  to  Mr.  Smith  before  his  final  i-emarks  to  P. 
about  looking  for  the  jiicture  to  come  on  the  card.  In  the  case  of  the 
last  three,  it  was  only  sliovv  ii  to  him  after  he  had  explained  to  P.  what 

Experiments  in  ThougJd-Transference. 

5G5 

he  was  to  do,  and  he  did  not  speak  at  all  after  he  knew  what  the 
subject  was.  He  sat  near  P.  but  behind  him  in  all  cases.  Miss  J ohn- 
son,  who  was  ignorant  of  the  sulijects,  took  notes  of  P.'s  conversation 
and  other  remarks  that  were  made  during  the  course  of  each  experi- 
ment. P.  occasionally  addressed  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  she  answered 
him,  being  of  course  very  cai'eful  to  avoid  giving  any  indications  by 
her  remarks. 

No.  15.  (Failure.)  Subject :  A  fisherman  tvith  a  barrov:  of  fish.  P. : 
" Something  like  two  eyes  there — a  face — more  like  an  owls  face  than 
anything  else — can't  see  anything  l^elow — only  a  face — still  I  keep 
looking."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  said  :  "  Shut  your  eyes  for  a  minute  and  then 
look  again."  P.  :  "  Somethmg  like  a  rabljit  now,  when  I  opened  my 
eyes  ; — rather  faint." 

No.  16.  Subject:  A  black  kitten  jdaying  tvith  a  cork.  P.:  "Some- 
thing like  a  cat,  it's  a  cat."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  "What  is  it  doing  1"  P.  : 
"  Something  it's  been  feeding  out  of — some  milk,  is  it  a  saucer  1  Can't, 
see  where  its  other  paw  is — only  see  three  paws." 

No.  17.  Subject  :  A  sandwich  man  2vith  advertisement  of  a  play. 
P.  said  :  "  Something  like  letter  A — stroke  there,  then  there."  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  :  "Well,  perhaps  it  will  become  clearer."  P.  :  "Something 
like  a  head  on  the  top  of  it ;  a  V  upside  down — two  legs  and  then  a 
head. — A  man  with  two  l)oards — looks  like  a  man  that  goes  about  the 
streets  with  two  boards.  I  can  see  a  head  at  the  top  and  the  body  and 
legs  between  the  boards.  I  couldn't  see  what  was  written  on  the 
boards,  because  the  edges  were  turned  towards  me."  Mr.  Smith  told 
us  afterwards  that  he  had  pictured  to  himself  the  man  and  one  board 
facing  him,  thus  not  corresponding  to  the  impression  which  P.  had. 

No.  18.  Subject  :  A  choir  boy. '  P.  said  :  "  Edge  of  card's  going  a 
dark  colour.  Somebody  dressed  up  in  white,  eh  1  Can  see  something  all 
white  ;  edge  all  black,  and  like  a  figure  in  tlie  middle.  There's  his  hands 
"up"  (  making  a  gesture  to  show  the  attitude)  "like  a  ghost  or  some- 
thing— you  couldn't  mistake  it  for  anything  but  a  ghost.  It's  not 
getting  any  better,  it's  fading — no,  it's  still  there.  It  might  frighten 
any  one."  He  also  made  remarks  about  the  difhculty  of  seeing  a  white 
figure  on  a  white  card  (the  blank  card  he  was  looking  at  was  white) 
which  Mr.  Smith  afterwards  said  corresponded  with  his  own  ideas. 

No.  19.  Subject :  A  vase  with  flowers  (Mr.  Smith,  still  behind 
P.,  was  looking  at  a  blue  flower-pot  in  the  window  containing  an 
indiarubber  plant).  P.  said  :  "  I  see  something  round,  like  a  round 
ring.  I  can  see  some  straight  things  from  the  round  thing.  I  think 
it's  a  glass — it  goes  up.    I'll  tell  you  what  it  is  ;  it  must  be  a  pot — a 

'  This  was  an  idea  extremely  familiar  to  P.,  who  had  been  a  chorister  and  was  still 
connected  with  the  choir  of  his  church. 

.5GG        Mrs.  H.  Sldgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

flowei'-pot,  you  know,  with  things  growing  in  it.  I  only  guessed  that, 
because  you  don't  see  things  growing  out  of  a  glass. — It's  not  clear  at 
the  top  yet.  You  see  something  going  up  and  you  can't  see  the  top, 
because  of  the  edge  of  the  paper — it's  cut  olf.  I  don't  wonder,  because 
it's  no  good  wondering  what  Mr.  Smith  does,  he  does  such  funny  things. 
I  should  fancy  it  might  be  a  gei'anium,  bvit  there's  only  sticks,  so  you 
can't  tell."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  What  colour  is  the  pot  ?  "  P.  :  "  Dark 
colour,  between  terra-cotta  and  red — dai'k  red,  you'd  call  it."  Here 
the  somewhat  confused  impression,  apparently  corresponding  to  the 
.struggle  of  ideas  in  Mr.  Smith's  mind  between  what  he  was  seeing  and 
what  he  was  trying  to  think  of,  is  an  interesting  point. 

The  experiments  of  the  next  day,  ISTov.  10th,  when  Mr.  Smith  was 
trying  to  transfer  impressions  to  Miss  B.  and  P.  at  the  same  time  have 
.already  been  described  above  (see  p. 562). 

The  next  trials  with  P.  took  place  on  Dec.  16th,  1890. 

No.  34.  (Failure.)  Subject :  A  sailor  smoking  a  pipe.  Mr.  Smith 
was  downstairs  at  the  Arch  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  P.  upstairs  with  Miss 
•Johnson.  P.  thought  he  "  saw  a  hoy  eating  an  apple,  only  one  boy." 

No.  35.  T.  having  come  in,  was  hypnotised  and  set  to  look  also — at 
another  cai'd — foi'  the  next  subject,  a  boy  skating.  Mr.  Smith  tried 
first  from  downstairs  and  then  came  upstairs,  and  sat  by  P.,  who 
seemed  extremely  dull  and  drowsy,  so  much  so  that  he  dropped  his 
card  without  knowing  it.  Mr.  Smith  had  to  rouse  him  by  passes 
and  talking  and  make  him  look  at  it.  Then  he  said :  "I  can  see 
a  black  smudge  all  the  way  along — looks  like  some  slippery — as  if  he's 
slipping — sliding  or  skating.  Can't  see  any  skates — water  frozen  over 
in  dark  j^atches."  T.  meanwhile  had  an  impression  of  a  ship,  sailing  or 
sliding  along. 

No.  51.  The  next  success — on  July  6th,  1891 — was  not  obtained 
without  a  certain  amount  of  information  being  given  to  P.  The  subject 
was  the  Babes  hi  the  Wood.  To  Ijegin  with,  P.  sat  with  closed  eyes, 
but  when  no  impression  came,  Mr.  Smith  opened  his  eyes,  without 
speaking,  and  made  him  look  f^»r  the  picture  on  a  card.  After  Ave  had 
waited  a  little  while  in  vain,  Mr.  Smith  said  to  him  :  "  Do  you 
see  something  like  a  straw  hat  ? "  P.  assented  to  this  and  then 
began  to  puzzle  out  something  more  :  "  A  white  apron,  something  dark 
— a  child.  It  can't  be  another  child,  unless  it's  a  boy — a  boy  and  a 
girl — the  boy  to  the  right  and  the  girl  to  the  left.  Little  girl  with 
white  socks  on,  and  shoes  with  straps."  Mr.  Smith  asked  :  "  What  ai'e 
they  doing  ?  Is  it  two  children  on  a  raft  at  sea  ?  "  P.  :  "  No,  it's  like 
trees  in  the  Ijackground — a  copse  or  something.  Like  a  fairy  story  — 
like  Babes  in  a  Wood  or  something." 

No.  53.  On  the  next  evening  again,  success  was  only  obtained  after 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

567 

-contact  and  talking  between  agent  and  percipients,  but  any  hint  as  to 
the  subject — a  cavalry  soldier — was  avoided.  P.  first  saw  successively 
a  coach  and  a  locomotive.  Then  T.,  who  was  also  looking  for  the 
picture,  saw  "  a  thing  painted  all  red — a  large  thing."  After  contact 
and  talking  with  Mr.  Smith,  P.  then  saw  "  a  man,  a  volunteer — only 
Jiead  and  shoulders — a  soldier  on  horseback." 

No.  65.  We  made  a  good  many  attempts  in  which  Mr.  Smith  was 
in  a  different  room  from  P.,  but  only  obtained  one  success,  on  July 
9th,  1891.  P.'s  eyes  were  not  opened  and  he  was  told  that  what 
he  would  see  would  be  a  magic-lantern  picture.  (This  idea  was 
suggested  to  us  by  Whybrew,  who  had  imagined  earlier  in  the  same  day 
that  he  was  seeing  magic-lantern  pictures  when  Mr.  Smith  was  trjdng 
to  transfer  mental  pictures  to  him.)  Mr.  Smith  made  him  see  the  sheet 
and  then  went  downstairs  with  Miss  Johnson  and  was  asked  by  her  to 
think  of  an  eoffle  j^uisuiuff  a  sj^arroiv.  Mi's.  Sidgwick,  who  remained 
xipstairs  with  P.,  in  a  few  minutes  induced  him  to  see  a  round  disk  of 
light  on  the  imaginary  lantern  sheet  and  then  he  saw  in  it  "  something 
like  a  bird  "  (?)^  which  disappeared  immediately.  He  went  on  looking 
(with  closed  eyes  of  course)  and  presently  thought  he  saw  "  something 
L'ke  a  bird — something  like  an  eagle."  After  a  pause  he  said  :  "  I 
thought  I  saw  a  figure  there — I  saw  5.  The  bird's  gone.  I  see  5  again, 
now  it's  gone.  The  bird  came  twice."  Mr.  Smith  then  came  ujDstairs, 
and  P.  had  another  impression  of  an  eagle.  He  was  told  that  the 
eagle  was  right  and  there  was  something  else  besides,  no  hint  being 
given  of  what  the  other  thing  was.  He  then  said  that  the  first  thing 
he  "saw  was  a  little  bird — a  sparrow  perhaps — he  could  not  say — about 
the  size  of  a  sparrow  ;  then  that  disappeared  and  he  saw  the  eagle. 
He  had  told  Mrs.  Sidgwick  so  at  the  time." 

No.  86.  (Failure.)  After  several  failures  on  intervening  days,  the 
same  subject  of  the  eagle  imrsuing  a  sparroiv,  was  set  again,  on  J uly 
14th,  on  the  chance  that  the  previous  success  might  be  a  favourable 
influence  in  this  case.  This  time  Mr.  Smith  was  in  the  room,  but  P. 
only  said  :  "  I  think  I  can  see  a  bird — I  forget  the  name  of  those 
birds  that  fly  over  the  water — it's  gone  now."  Mr.  Smith  said  :  "  You'll 
see  it  again  in  a  minute."    P.  went  on  :  "  Now  it's  plainer — a  sea-gull." 

No.  95.  On  July  16th  the  sul)ject  of  a  snake  witli  its  forked  tongue 
out  was  chosen  by  Miss  Johnson,  who  sat  behind  a  screen  with  Mr. 
Smith,  in  the  same  room  witli  P.  and  Mis.  Sidgwick.  P.  said  :  "  I 
thought  I  saw  something  like  one  of  those  men  with  an  ice-cieam 
barrow — caught  a  glimpse  of  it  " — then — "  I  just  thought  I  could  see 
something  like  a  snake.   I  can  see  it  now  still — something  like  a  snake- 

^  He  spoke  in  a  low  voice,  and  !Mrs.  Sidgwick  first  tliought  he  said  "  cliiki, ''  but  from 
his  subsequent  conversation  concluded  that  it  was  "  bird." 

568 

Mrs.  H.  Sidgivich  and  Hiss  Alice  Johnson. 

charmer  there  playing  with  it — isn't  afraid  of  it  a  bit.  I'm  not  going- 
to  say  this  is  it  yet,  because  I  saw  the  ice-cream  barrow  just  now.  It. 
seems  a  most  silly  thing  to  see  a  snake  after  an  ice-cream  barrow — but 
that  went  and  this  stays  longer — still  there."  The  whole  experiment- 
lasted  10  minutes. 

The  last  successes  with  P.  were  obtained  on  July  29th,  1891.. 
During  the  first  thi'ee  trials  Mr.  Smitli  sat  behind  a  screen  with  Miss 
Johnson,  in  the  same  room  with  P. 

No.  97.  (Failure.)  »Subject :  Foliceinan  iuith  cape  07i.  P.  appeared 
very  sleepy  and  had  no  impression  at  all. 

No.  98.  Subject  :  A  mouse  in  a  mouse-trap.  P.  was  in  too  deep  a 
condition  to  speak.  He  had  to  be  roused  and  spoken  to  hj  Mr.  Smith. 
Mr.  Smith  behind  the  screen  made  a  small  pencil  sketch  of  the  subject. 
P.  after  some  time  said  :  "  I  can  see  something — some  lines  coming  "' 
(pause).  "  Still  these  lines  and  something  like — oh,  I  think  I  know 
what  that's  going  to  be.  Is  that  meant  for  a  mouse-ti'ap  1 "  Mrs. 
Sidgwick  asked  :  "Any  mouse  ?  "  P.  said  :  "  I  think  it  looks  as  if  the 
mouse  was  trying  to  poke  its  nose  through  the  bars.  I  don't  think  it's 
fancy."  This  was  seen,  not  on  a  card,  as  usual,  but  with  closed  eyes. 
His  eyes  were  then  oj^ened  by  vei'bal  suggestion  from  Mr.  Smith  and 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  gave  him  a  card,  to  see  if  he  would  see  the  mouse-trap 
more  cleai'ly  on  it.  But  he  saw  nothing  at  all  on  the  card,  seemed  in  a 
stupid,  drowsy  condition  and  soon  dropped  it.  Mr.  Smith  then 
told  him  while  hypnotised  that  when  his  eyes  were  opened  he  would 
see  the  next  picture  develop  on  a  card. 

No.  99.  (Failure.)  Subject:  A  clock.  Mr.  Smith  behind  the  screen. 
P.  saw  something  like  a  Imllock's  head  on  his  card.  He  was  then 
rehypnotised. 

No.  100.  Sul)ject  :  A  spjuJer  in  the  middle  of  its  v:eh.  Mr.  Smith 
and  Miss  Johnson  downstairs  at  first  ;  P.  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  upstairs. 
Mr.  Smith  drew  the  subject.  P.  had  no  impression.  Mr.  Smith  came 
upstairs  and  sat  liehind  the  screen  and  talked  to  him,  avoiding  hints. 
After  some  time  P.  said  :  "  Now  I  can  see  something — funny  shape — 
don't  know  what  it  is  either — not  quite  round — octagonal  in  some 
places — lines  across  it — more  sides  than  eight — some  broken.  If  I 
was  to  compare  it  v/ith  anything,  it  would  l^e  a  spider's  web ;  but  it 
can't  be  that.    There  would  never  he  a  picture  of  a  spider's  web." 

Ex2')eriments  witli,  T. 

No.  39.  T.  had  only  two  successes  in  these  experiments.  The  first 
occurred  on  December  17th,  1890.  T.  having  been  hypnotised,  had 
his  eyes  opened  and  was  given  a  blank  card  to  look  at.  The  subject 
was  «  hahu  in  a  j^eramhulator  and  a  nursemaid.  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind 

Experiments  in  ThougJit-Transference. 

569 

T.  and  said  nothing.  T.  said  :  "  I  see  a  big,  tall  thing,  a  thing  they 
put  children  in — babies'  cai'riage — perambulator.  Yes,  I  think  there's 
a  girl.  Nothing  in  the  perambulator.  The  girl's  standing  here " 
(indicating  a  place  on  the  card),  "  irot  in  the  perambulator."  But  the 
success  in  this  case  may  be  accidental,  as  in  the  last  experiment  of  the 
day  before  T.  saw  a  woman  pushing  a  perambulator  when  he  ought  to 
have  seen  a  rose. 

No.  40.  (Failure.)  The  next  subject  was  a  man  icith  a  barrel-organ. 
Mr.  Smith  was  downstairs  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  T.  had  a  rather  vague 
impression  of  a  man  "  caught  in  a  fog "  and  no  more  success  was 
obtained  that  evening. 

No.  44.  On  the  next  day  he  Avas  told  when  hypnotised  that  he 
would  see  visions  in  a  black  fluid,  and  was  then  wakened  and  given  a 
saucer  of  ink  to  look  in.  The  tirst  subject  tried  fmm  d(jwnstairs 
failed.  The  next  subject  set  was  Miss  B.,  but  as  T.  had  no  imjiression 
Mr.  Smith  came  up  and  asked  if  he  had  seen  anything  and  told  him  to 
give  it  another  chance.  After  some  time  T.  said  :  "  Oh,  I  can  see 
now.  Is  it  a  girl  1  Yes,  I  can  see  the  face.  Oh,  yes  !  it's  a  girl.  I 
can  see  now.  A  short  girl  rather — standing."  Being  asked  what 
she  was  like,  he  said  :  "  Like  Miss  B.   It  is  Miss  B." 

He  had  also  one  case  of  what  was  perhaps  a  deferred  success,  No. 
21,  the  subject  being  a  black  dog.  T.  saw  "  Something  square,  like  a 
box."  The  next  siibject — No.  22 — was  tlie  Eiffel  Toiver,  and  he  then 
said  :  "  What  is  it  1  a  dog  or  something — a  black  one." 

Experiments  with  Wliyhreiv. 

The  first  two  experiments  of  this  kind  with  Whybrew,  on  July  8th, 
1891,  were  as  follows. 

No.  54.  (Failure.)  Subject  :  A  goat-carriage,  ivith  one  goit  and  tivo 
children  in  it.  Mrs.,  Sidgwick,  who  was  taking  notes,  gave  this  subject 
to  Mr.  Smith,  who  remained  in  the  room.  AYhybrew  said :  "  Looks 
like  a  horse  there — yes,  there's  a  horse  there.  Why,  that's  a  cart  at 
its  back — a  horse  and  cart."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked:  "Anything  in 
the  cart?"  Whybrew  replied  :  "  Is  that  a  whip?  and  there's  a  man 
there  with  the  horse  ; — man,  horse  and  cart — nice  little  turn-out  ! " 

No.  55.  Subject  :  A  ship  in  fidl  sail.  Set  by  Miss  Johnson  and 
ainknown  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  took  the  notes.  Mr.  Smith  still  in 
the  room.  Whyljrew  said :  "  I  see  something  up  in  the  air — looks 
.like  a  mast.  Why,  there's  a  ship  there — looks  something  like  a  ship 
— a  nice  ship.  One  or  two  heads — dots — they  look  like  heads — too 
■far  away  to  see — three  masts  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  drawn  out  some  of 
these  details  by  questions.  After  seeing  what  the  subject  was,  she 
.asked  if  the  ship  was  in  sail.    He  said  he  had  not  noticed. 

570         Mrs.  H.  Sidgunck  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Whybrew  was  made  to  see  these  impressions  with  closed  eyes — not 
on  a  card.  On  the  next  day,  when  told  to  look  out  for  a  picture,  he 
remarked  spontaneously  that  he  supposed  it  was  a  magic-lantern 
picture  that  was  coming.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  assented  to  this  idea  and 
got  him  gradually  by  verbal  suggestion  to  see  the  white  sheet,  etc., 
after  which  he  evolved  for  himself  a  tree  (a  totally  wrong  impression). 
From  that  time,  the  impressions  he  had  generally  came  to  him  as  magic- 
lantern  pictures,  which  to  a  certain  extent  accounted  to  him  satisfac- 
torily for  their  coming  at  all,  though  his  curiosity  was  constantly 
excited  l^y  his  not  being  able  to  see  any  sign  of  the  apparatus  which 
I^roduced  them. 

On  July  11th  the  first  two  trials  failed.  The  first  was  made  with 
Mr.  Smith  downstairs  and  Whybrew  upstairs  ;  in  the  second  Mr.  Smith 
sat  by  him  and  talked  to  him,  but  no  clear  impression  resulted. 

No.  76.  The  third  subject  was  a  little  hoy  throiving  up  a  red  ball. 
Mr.  Smith  sitting  l^y  Whybrew.  The  latter  said  :  "  Looks  like  a  shadow 
thei'e,  like  something  round.  That's  a  ball,  ain't  it  1  "  Mr.  Smith  : 
"Yes.  "  AVhybrew  :  "Is  that  supjjosed  to  be  a  coloured  ball?"  Mr. 
Smith  :  "  Yes  ;  what  colour  1 "  Whybrew  :  "  Why,  red  ;  a  red  ball,  that's 
what  it  is.  Is  there  anything  else  ? "  Mr.  Smith  :"  Yes."  Whybrew: 
"  It  looks  something  like  a  little  boy — a  little  boy  with  a  Ijall.  That's 
l)etter  than  the  others  "  (meaning  the  previous  pictures  on  this  day).  Mr. 
Smith  :  "  What's  he  doing  with  the  ball  1 "  Whybrew  :  "  I  should  imagine 
that  he's  going  to  throw  it."  He  proceeded  to  give  details  of  the 
pictui'e  showing  that  it  was  clearly  visualised. 

No.  77.  Subject  :  A  man  riding.  Mr.  Smith  downstairs  with  Miss 
Johnson  ;  Whybrew,  upstairs  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  said,  after  some 
remarks  on  the  former  jMctures  :  "There's  another  one — I  think  it's  like 
the  other  two — a  puzzle  [to  see]  if  I  can  find  the  picture.  I  hope  I'll 
l)e  able  to  see  it  propei'ly.  A  kind  of  a  square — square  shadow — blowecl 
if  I  can  understand  what  it's  meant  for — I  doii't  know  what  to  make- 
f)ut  of  that.  I  don't  know  if  that's  meant  to  be  the  lower  i^art  of  a. 
pair  of  legs.  Do  you  see  a  jjicture  1 "  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  I  see  something." 
Whybrew  :  "  I  see  them  two  spots,  but  I  don't  know  Avhat  to  make  of 
them.  If  they're  legs,  the  body  ought  to  come. — Don't  seem  to  come 
any  brighter,  \mt  there's  those  two  things  there,  that  look  like  a  pair  of 
legs."  Here  Mr.  Smith  was  asked  to  come  upstairs  and  talk  to  him. 
He  told  him  the  picture  was  coming  up  closer  and  that  he  had  turned 
the  gas  on  to  make  it  brighter.  Whybrew  :  "  There's  them  pair  of  legs 
there."  Mr.  Smith  :  "  Yes  "  (doubtfully).  Whybrew:  "Why,  there's 
another.  I  never  see  that  other  pair  before.  Why,  it's  a  horse.  I 
expect  it's  like  them  penny  j^ictures  that  you  fold  over.  That  horse — - 
that's  plain  enough  ;  luit  what's  that  other  thing  ?"  Mr.  Smith  :  "Yes, 
I  told  you  there  was  something  else."    Whybrew  :  "  Why,  I  see  what 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

571 

it  is  now — it's  supposed  to  he  a  man  there,  I  expect."  Mr.  Smith  r 
"Yes."  Whybrew  :  "  Riding  him.  But  that  ain't  so  good  as  the  boy 
and  the  ball."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  "  How  is  tlie  man  dressed  ?  "  Whybrew  : 
"  Ordinary." 

On  July  13th  we  tried  making  him  see  tlie  j^ictures  in  a  I'eal  crystal 
instead  of  by  means  of  an  imaginary  magic-lantern,  and  to  facilitate 
matters,  he  was  first  given  a  little  education  in  ciystal-vision.  Mr. 
Smith  hypnotised  him  and  gave  him  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  to  see 
in  the  crystal  himself  (Mr.  Smith)  reading.  He  then  woke  him,  and 
gave  him  the  crystal  to  look  at.  For  some  time  he  saw  nothing  and 
seemed  sceptically  amused  by  the  idea  that  he  ever  would ;  then, 
rather  suddenly,  his  hypnotic  manner  came  on.  (There  was  a  marked 
difference  between  his  behaviour  when  awake  and  when  hypnotised. 
In  the  latter  condition  he  spoke  always  with  a  soi-t  of  slightly  convulsive 
stuttering,  and  he  was  also  much  more  unrestrained  in  his  language  and 
manner.)  He  said  he  saw  a  man  there.  "I  think  I've  seen  his  face 
before.  That's  a  gentleman  that  lives  down  the  front "  (i.e.,  on  the 
parade).  "  Mr.  Smith — he's  sitting  down  ;  he's  got  a  book  there — he's 
looking  in  the  book."  Mr.  Smith  :  "  Reading,  probably  ? "  Whybi'ew  : 
"Yes,  or  looking  at  the  pictures."  It  was  clear  that  he  had  fallen  again 
into  the  hypnotic  trance  as  soon  as  the  suggestion  took  effect.  He  was 
then  given  another  post-hypnotic  suggestion  to  the  effect  that  he  would 
open  his  eyes  when  Mrs.  Sidgwick  clapped  her  hands  and  would  then 
see  another  picture  in  the  crystal. 

No.  82.  Miss  Johnson  then  went  downstairs  with  Mr.  Smith  and 
gave  him  the  su.bject  of  an  Italian  ivoman  tcith  tu-o  little  green  birds  in 
a  cage  (a  familiar  object  on  the  Brighton  beach).  After  they  had  gone, 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  clapped  her  hands  and  "Whybrew  opened  his  eyes, 
remaining  however  in  a  hypnotic  state,  and  she  gave  him  the  crystal 
to  look  in.  He  saw  nothing  at  first  but  some  shading  and  lines  which 
were  probably  the  lines  of  stitching,  etc.,  of  a  smoking  caj)  in  which  the 
crystal  was  placed.  Then  Mr.  Smith  was  asked  to  come  up  and  speak 
to  him.  He  saw  no  more  for  some  time,  but  finally  began  :  "  What's 
all  them  strokes  down  here  ?  Is  it  the  sea  ?  "  Mr.  Smith  :  "  Not 
the  sea."  Whybrew:  "  Why,  is  that  the  ground  ?"  Mr.  Smith:  "I 
shouldn't  wonder."  Whybrew:  "I  can  see  the  outsides  now.  Oh! 
there  looks  like  a  head  here.  W'hy,  it's  a  woman.  She  looks  like  a 
woman  that  plays  the  organ.  Don't  you  think  so '? "  Mr.  Smith 
"  What's  she  doing  now  ?  "  Whybrew  :  "  She  looks  like  she's  got  her 
hand  out — something  in  her  hand — looks  like  seeds.  Is  she  throwing 
anything  on  the  ground  ?  Is  there  some  sparrows  there  ?  Looks 
something  like  one  or  two — there's  one  bird  there."  Mr.  Smith  : 
"  What  kind  of  bird  is  it  ;  what  colour  1"  Whybrew  :  "  I  don't  know 
what  they  call  that.    It's  the  shape  of  a  sparrow.  I  can't  see  the  colour 

572 

iI7)'-s.  H.  Sidgioick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

<)£  it."'  Mr.  Smith  :  "  Where  is  that  bird  ?  "  Whybrew  pointed  out  its 
position  in  the  crystal.  Mr.  Smith  explained  that  he  did  not  mean 
that  and  asked,  "Is  it  on  the  ground?"  Whybrew:  "Not  on  the 
ground,  in  a  cage.  There's  the  girl,  she's  looking  at  it."  We  believe 
that  he  recovered  his  normal  state  at  this  point,  but  this  is  not  recorded. 
At  any  rate  he  was  rehypnotised  and  awakened  and  he  then  said  that 
he  had  been  looking  in  the  crystal,  but  had  seen  nothing. 

On  July  15th,  Whybrew  having  been  hypnotised  by  Miss  Charles- 
worth,  another  trial  was  made  with  Mr.  Smith  as  agent.  Mr.  Smith 
liad  to  be  introduced  to  Whyljrew  by  Miss  Charlesworth  and  put  en 
o-apport  with  him,  just  as  we  liad  to  be  when  Mr.  Smith  hypnotised 
him.  IMiss  Churleswortli,  though  she  had  hypnotised  him,  failed  as  an 
agent. 

No.  88.  The  subject  given  was  a  locomotive — green  in  colour,  with 
o~ed  stripes.  Mr.  Smith,  however,  did  not  notice  the  directions  as  to 
colour  and  thought  mei'ely  of  the  form.  He  sat  by  the  side  of  and 
rather  behind  Whybrew,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  holding  up  a  newspaper  as  a 
screen  between  them.  He  was  sketching  the  subject,  and  occasionally 
made  remarks — which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  thought  at  the  time  carefully 
selected  not  to  give  hints — in  response  to  Whybrew's.  The  latter  had 
no  impression  for  some  time,  then  said  :  "  Looks  like  something  round 
there — looks  like  a  wheel.  You  don't  call  that  a  picture,  do  you  1 
There's  another  one  the  other  side.  There's  something  above  them  two 
wheels,  but  it  don't  touch  the  wheels — a  piece  by  itself.  That's  round, 
only  it's  long — like  a  pipe  or  something.  Wonder  what  that's  going  to 
turn  out.  That  looks  like  it's  made  of  iron,  it's  black.  That  looks 
like  an  engine. — Here  ! — and  you've  put  the  chimley.  There  •was  no 
man."  The  wheels  in  Mr.  Smith's  sketch,  which  we  have  preserved, 
were  done  with  little  niggling  touches,  very  faint.  The  sound  of  the 
pencil,  even  if  there  was  any  audible  sound,  cannot  possibly  have 
suggested  the  form. 

No.  91.  On  July  16th,  Mr.  Smith  himself  hypnotised  Whyljrew,  as 
usual.  During  the  experiment  he  sat  l)y  him,  but  did  not  speak  to  him 
at  all  after  he  knew  the  subject — a  rnaii  ivith  a  barroto  of  Jish — given 
him  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  Miss  Johnson,  not  knowing  what  the  subject 
Avas,  carried  on  the  conversation  with  Whybrew.  He  said  :  "  It's  the 
shape  of  a  man.  Yes,  there's  a  man  there.  Don't  know  him.  He  looks 
like  a  bloke  that  sells  strawberries."  Miss  Johnson  asked  :  "  Are  there 
strawberi'ies  there  ?  "  Whybrew  :  "  That  looks  like  his  barrow  there. 
What's  he  selling  of  ?  I  believe  he's  sold  out.  I  can't  see  anything  on. 
his  liarrow — perhaps  he's  sold  out.  There  ain't  many — a  few  round 
things.  I  expect  they're  fruit.  Are  they  cherries  1  They  look  a  bit 
red.  Aren't  they  tish  1  It  don't  look  very  much  like  fish.  If  they're 
■fish,  some  of  them  hasn't  got  any  heads  on.    Barrow  is  a  bit  fishified 

Experiments  in  Thoiujht'Transference. 

573 

— it  has  a  tray  on.  What  colour  are  those  things  on  the  barrow  1  They 
looked  red,  but  now  they  look  silvery."  He  was  rather  j^leased  with 
this  picture  and  asked  afterwards  if  it  was  for  sale. 

Experiments  with  2Iajor. 

A  few  successes  were  obtained  with  Major,  he  Ijeiag  in  all  cases 
hypnotised  and  his  eyes  closed. 

No.  58.  In  the  first  trial  with  him,  on  July  8th,  1891,  Mr.  Smith 
sat  by  him,  in  contact  with  his  chair,  and  talked  to  him,  telling  him  he 
was  to  see  a  picture.  The  subject  given  was  a  mouse  in  a  mouse-trap. 
Regarding  himself  as  a  man  of  culture  and  being  generally  anxious  to 
exhibit  this.  Major  asked  if  it  was  to  be  an  old  master  or  a  modern 
"  pot-boiler."  He  was  told  the  latter,  and  he  then  discoursed  on  "  pot- 
boilers "  and  how  he  knew  all  the  subjects  of  them — mentioning  two  or 
three — in  a  very  contemptuous  manner.  He  did  not  seem  to  see  any- 
thing, however,  and  appeared  to  be  expecting  to  see  an  artist  producing 
a  rapid  sketch.  Then,  when  told  that  the  picture  was  actually  there, 
he  suddenly  exclaimed  :  "  Do  you  mean  that  deuced  old  trap  with  a 
mouse  1    He  must  have  been  drawing  for  the  rat  vermin  jjeople." 

No.  68.  (Failure.)  On  July  10th  we  tried  first  with  Mr.  vSmith 
downstairs  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Major  remaining  upstairs  with  Miss 
Johnson.  The  subject  was  a  Christy  Minstrel  tvith  a  banjo.  Major  had 
first  what  appeared  to  be  a  rather  vague  and  uncertain  impression  of  a 
boat. 

No.  69.  Then  Mr.  Smith  came  up,  ];ut  did  not  speak  and  Major 
was  told  thei'e  was  to  be  another  picture.  The  subject,  however,  was 
not  really  changed.  INIr.  Smith,  saying  nothing,  sat  behuid  and  a  little 
on  one  side  of  him^  sketching  the  subject  on  a  block  held  up  back  to 
Major,  whose  eyes  were  closed.  Major  then  said  :  "  That's  a  man,  isn't 
it  ?  Not  a  woman.  Very  dark  complexioned — thick  lips — negro  ? 
Not  an  Englishman  ;  half-caste  perhaps,  not  pure  Saxon."  Miss  John- 
son asked  :  "Is  he  doing  anything?  Is  there  anything  elsel"  Major 
said  :  "  Has  he  got  a  hatchet  or  axe  or  something'?"  He  got  no  clearer 
impression,  and  even  when  in  the  end  Mr.  Smith  spoke  to  him  and  told 
him  it  was  a  banjo,  said  he  thought  it  looked  more  like  an  Indian  club 
or  tomahawk. 

No.  70.  For  the  next  subject — a  coach  with  four  horses — Mr.  Smith 
was  downstairs  again  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Major  upstairs  with 
Miss  Johnson.  He  said  :  "  A  horse,  is  it  1  It  looks  to  me  something 
like  a  horse."  When  Miss  Johnson  asked  if  there  was  anything  else, 
he  thought  he  saw  a  man  holding  the  horse's  head,  not  so  clear  as  the 
negro  (in  the  pi-evious  experiment)  had  been,  but  the  horse  was  pretty 
clear,  "a  good  horse,  a  thoroughl^red  mare."  Miss  Johnson  then  went 
downstairs  and  fhiding  what  the  subject  really  was,  came  up  and  t<)ld 

2  Q 

"iT-i         3frs.  H.  SidgivicJc  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Major  the  horse  was  right,  but  there  was  something  more  to  see.  He 
supposed  it  was  a  cart  of  some  sort.  Mr.  Smith  came  upstairs  and 
inquired  what  sort  of  cart.  Major  thought  it  Avas  "  a  Ught  cart — not 
agricultural — not  carrying  a  heavy  weight." 

Besides  the  experiments  quoted  above,  only  three  others  were  tried 
with  Major,  all  of  which  were  failures.  In  all  of  these,  Mr.  Smith  was 
downstairs,  Major  being  upstairs.  Major's  remarks  during  these  latter 
experiments  generally  gave  us  the  impression  that  he  had  no  clear 
visualisations  at  all,  but  only  very  vague  ones,  on  which  his  imagination 
was  not  at  all  ready  to  work.  On  the  other  hand,  our  last  percipient 
— Adams — seemed  to  have  no  difficulty  in  filling  up  the  impressions 
that  he  experienced  with  the  most  elaborate  detail,  drawn  from  his  own 
imagination.  So  much  was  this  the  case,  that  the  correct  idea  appeared, 
as  it  were,  to  have  no  chance  of  penetrating  into  his  consciousness  at  all, 
and  he  was  invariably  unsuccessful  in  his  guesses.  It  is  possible  that 
Adams  was  started  on  a  wrong  line — that  of  deriving  his  impressions 
entirely  from  his  imagination — by  the  fact  that  we  began  these  experi- 
ments with  him  with  the  agent  in  another  room.  Plis  was  the  only  case 
in  which  we  did  this. 

Condition  of  the  Fercipients. 

The  percipients  were  always  hypnotised  to  begin  with  and,  when 
tlieir  eyes  Avere  not  opened,  remained  hypnotised  throughout  at  least 
the  course  of  one  experiment.  When  tlieir  eyes  were  opened,  their 
condition  varied  in  different  cases,  and  was  not  always  easy  to  define. 
We  often  attempted  not  to  rouse  them  completely,  but  to  let  them 
remain  in  the  hypnotic  state  if  possible.  P.,  however,  seemed  generally 
to  wake  completely  as  soon  as  his  eyes  were  opened,  so  that  his  im- 
pressions might  be  regarded  as  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.  But  some- 
times he  remained  hypnotised,  and  was  then  apt  to  be  heavy  and  drowsy 
and  in  a  state  of  mental  confusion.  Thus,  once  he  oljserved  T.,  who 
had  come  in  while  he  was  hypnotised,  and  seemed  quite  alarmed.  He 
stared  at  him,  saying:  "Is  that  T.  1  He  is  altered!"  This  state  did 
not  seem  favourable  to  thought-transference  in  his  case. 

It  was  easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  open  Miss  B.'s  eyes  without 
producing  any  obvious  change  in  her  mental  state,  and  her  attention 
seemed  to  be  then  no  more  distracted  by  surrounding  objects  than 
when  they  were  closed.  It  was  in  this  condition  that  she  saw  almost 
all  the  hallucinatory  pictures  and  numl^ers  on  cards  in  our  experiments. 

T.  was  generally  di'owsy  and  rather  stu^oid  v/hen  hypnotised,  and 
when  his  eyes  were  ojjened,  without  awaking  him,  and  the  sur- 
rounding ol)jects  therefore  not  so  much  shut  off  from  him  as  before, 
liis  intellectual  faculties  seemed  to  be  further  diminished.  This  was 
-still  more  the  case  in  some  experiments  with  which  we  are  not  now  con- 

Experiments  in  Thov.gld-Transference. 

575 

<>erned  when  he  was  exj^eriencing  negative  hallucinations  induced  by 
verbal  suggestion.  In  fact  he  appeared  then  to  Ije  reduced  almost 
to  imbecility. 

We  tried  varying  the  conditions  in  this  way,  because  we  thought  it 
possible  that  a  certain  depth  of  drowsiness — a  certain  stratum  of  the 
hypnotic  consciousness — might  be  the  most  favourable  state  for 
receiving  telepathic  impressions.  One  day  T.,  when  in  a  specially  deep 
condition,  certainly  succeeded  inuch  better  than  iisual,  and  we  often 
tried  to  repi'oduce  the  same  condition  in  him  afterwards,  but  did  not 
obtain  the  same  success.  Either  we  did  not  hit  on  the  same  stratum 
or  that  stratum  was  not  really  a  favourable  one. 

Development  of  the  Percipients'  Impressions. 

Impi'essions  of  the  form  of  the  picture  often  came  to  the  percipients 
in  a  piecemeal  way,  as  the  hallucinatory  impressions  of  numbers  some- 
times did  (see  p.  55-i).  This  was  markedly  the  case  with  Whybrew  (see 
the  ship,  No.  55  ;  the  little  boy  and  ball.  No.  76  ;  the  man  riding. 
No.  77  ;  the  Italian  woman,  No.  82  ;  the  locomotive,  No.  88  ;  the  man 
with  a  barrow  of  fish,  No.  91).  Miss  B.'s  impressions  of  the  Christy 
Minstrel  (Nos.  4,  5  and  G)  and  the  sailing  boat  (No.  7)  were  other 
striking  instances,  and  with  P.  the  same  kind  of  development  some- 
times occurred  (see  the  sandwich  man.  No.  17;  the  Babes  in  the  Wood, 
No.  51  ;  the  cavalry  soldier,  No.  5-3  ;  the  mouse-trap.  No.  98.) 

It  seemed  clear  from  this  piecemeal  development  and  from  the 
percipient's  frequent  slowness  in  interpreting  the  form  {e.g.,  P.'s  man 
and  woman  dancing,  No.  29,  p.  562),  that  he  became  conscious  of  the 
form  before  he  was  conscious  of  the  idea  and  that  the  correctness  of  his 
apprehension  of  the  idea  depended  partly  on  his  acutenes?  in  intei-pret- 
ing  the  often  impei'fectly  developed  form  {e.g.,  Miss  B.'s  buffalo.  No. 
30,  p.  563).  It  was,  however,  equally  clear  that  the  precise  form  seen 
depended  on  the  percipient's  imagination  and  not  on  the  agent's  ;  see, 
for  instance,  P.'s  sandwich  man.  No.  17,  p.  565,  and  the  numbers  seen 
on  cards  and  traced  for  us  (p.  51:3),  which  were  generally  quite  different 
in  form  from  those  Mr.  Smith  were  looking  at.  It  appeared  further  that 
the  interpretation  was  liable  to  react  on  the  form,  as  in  the  ca,se  of  the 
choir  boy,  No.  18,  p.  565,  whose  ghostly  attitude  was  apparently  a  conse 
quence  of  the  supposition  that  he  was  a  ghost,  and  of  the  watch.  No.  28, 
p.  562,  which  acquired  a  ring  after  it  had  been  identified  as  a  watch. 

If  we  compare  the  development  in  our  thought-transference  experi- 
ments with  that  in  post-hypnotic  pictures  or  crystal-visions — as  when 
Whybrew  was  made  to  see  Mr.  Smith  (p.  571),  and  in  Mr.  Myers' 
interesting  experiments  with  P.  and  T.  (see  present  number  of  Proceed- 
ings, p.  459)  the  conclusion  is  irresistible  that  after  the  first  introduc- 
tion into  the  percipient's  mind  of  the  idea  which  externalises  itself  in. 

2  Q  2 

576        3Irs.  H.  Sichjivick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

the  hallucination,  the  process  in  the  case  of  the  mentally  and  of  the 
verhaUy  suggested  ideas  is  identical.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  the 
scene  of  Banquo's  ghost.  Mr.  Myers  tells  the  hypnotised  P.  the  story 
from  Macbeth  accompanying  it  with  a  suggestion  that  he  will  see  it  in 
the  glass.  P.,  awakened,  has  no  recollection  of  this  idea,  but  presently 
he  sees  it  in  the  glass  of  water,  clothed  in  a  form  due  to  his  own 
imagination,  and  interprets  what  he  sees  according  to  his  ordinary 
ideas  and  without  any  direct  or  conscious  reference  to  the  idea  implanted 
in  his  mind  by  Mr.  Myers.  Rehypnotised,  P.  could  probably  have 
repeated  the  story  of  Banquo  and  would  have  known  that  Mr.  Myers 
had  told  it  to  him,  tliough  he  might  have  forgotten  seeing  it  in  the 
glass.  It  would  he  very  interesting  if  by  any  artifice  we  covild  recall 
that  stratum  of  consciousness  which  in  our  experiments  received  the 
purely  mental  suggestion  subsequently  developed  into  the  picture  seen. 

Influence  of  Memory  on  Ilullucinations. 

An  analysis  of  the  guesses  made  by  the  percipients  in  these  experi- 
ments shows  that  their  impressions  were  generally  reproductions  of 
familiar  objects  or  ideas,  while  there  are  some  slight  indications  of  what 
is  apparently  a  tendency  of  hallucinations  that  have  once  occurred — no 
matter  in  wliat  way  they  may  have  been  induced — to  recur  in  future 
hypnoses. 

The  earlier  experiments  with  diagrams  seemed  to  illustrate  the  diffi- 
culty of  producing  telepathically  in  P.'s  mind  an  impression  of  an 
unfamiliar  idea.  As  mentioned  above,  two  sets  of  diagrams  were  used, 
(«)  shapes  representing  familiar  objects  cut  out  in  gold  or  silver  paper, 
and  (b)  nameless  arrangements  of  lines,  drawn  in  black  on  white  paper. 
Roughly  speaking,  the  successes  obtained  with  (a)  occuri'ed  after  P. 
had  seen  all  the  diagrams  in  a  normal  state,  so  that  the  ideas  were  by 
that  time  ready-made  in  his  mind.  With  (6),  the  nearest  approach 
to  a  success  before  he  had  seen  the  diagrams  was  the  guess  of  some- 
thing like  an  H  for  one  which  distantly  resembled  that  letter.  After 
he  had  looked  through  them  all  in  a  normal  condition,  impressions  of  a 
very  similar  kind  ))egan  to  occur  to  him  when  hypnotised  and  told  to 
look  out  for  diagrams  of  that  sort.  In  twelve  trials  (in  which,  being 
hypnotised,  his  eyes  were  opened  and  he  traced  the  iuq^ressions 
that  came  to  him  as  hallucinations  on  a  sheet  of  paper,)  eight  of 
the  ten  different  figures  he  drew  had  some  clear  resemblance  to 
some  of  the  (b)  diagrams — three  of  them  being  successful  or  nearly 
successful  guesses — and  one  represented  an  («)  diagram.  While 
hypnotised  he  said  in  answer  to  questions  that  he  could  not 
remember  having  ever  seen  any  such  things  before,  except  the 
(a)  diagram  (which  as  a  matter  of  fact  had  been  successfully  guessed 
by  him  in  previous  hypnoses)      But  when  awakened  and  asked  to 

Experiments  i n  Though t-Ti xi nf<ference. 

577 

-draw  as  many  of  the  {b)  diagrams  as  he  could  from  memory,  he 
drew  nine,  all  but  one  of  which  he  had  given  as  i-eproductions  in 
the  course  of  the  evening.  His  drawings  represented  the  originals 
with  very  much  the  same  degree  of  accuracy  that  his  hallucinatory 
impressions  did.  It  seemed  clear  therefore  that  the  latter  depended 
entirely  on  his  memory. 

It  appeared  to  us  also  conducive  to  success,  that  the  agent  should 
be  familiar  with  the  idea  which  he  attempted  to  transfer.  Mr.  Smith 
tried  several  times  to  transfer  real  pictures  from  books,  but  with  no 
success.  Either  no  impression  at  all,  or  a  totally  wrong  one  was 
produced. 

III.    Production  of  Local  An.esthesia  and  Rigidity  by  Mental 

Suggestion. 

Inirodiiction  and  Genercd  Considerations. 

The  production  of  local  anaesthesia  and  rigidity  is  of  course  a 
phenomenon  that  has  often  been  observed  and  described  in  connection 
with  experiments  in  hypnotism,  and  is  familiar  to  all  hypnotic  operators, 
as  the  I'esult  of  a  definite  verbal  suggestion ;  and  it  can  also  be  pro- 
duced in  some  subjects  by  self-suggestion  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  pp. 
580-282).  The  physiological  action  involved  is  a  question  of  great 
theoretical  interest,  but  our  experiments  w-ere  not  directed  towards 
adding  to  the  present  state  of  knowledge  with  regard  to  this. 
They  were  carried  out  under  coirditions  which,  as  we  believe,  precluded 
.any  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  subject  as  to  which  of  his  fingers 
was  to  be  operated  on,  and  thus,  in  one  important  respect  at  least, 
they  differed  essentially  from  the  ordinary  experiments  referred  to. 
The  familiar  effects  were  produced  by  unfamiliar — or  not  generally 
recognised — means,  and  it  is  with  tlie  means,  and  not  with  the  effects, 
that  we  are  here  chiefly  concerned. 

Readers  of  the  Proceedings  will  be  aware  that  the  late  Mr.  Gurney 
was  the  fii'st  to  carry  out  a  series  of  expei'iments  of  this  kind,  and 
it  will  Ije  seen  that  ours  are  only  a  slight  extension  of  his.  He 
■described  the  conditions  under  which  his  later  experiments  of  this 
kind  were  performed  in  Proceedings,  "Vol.  V.,  pp.  14-17.  The  person  to 
he  operated  on  passed  his  hands  through  a  screen  extending  far  enough 
in  all  directions  to  conceal  them  and  Mr.  Smith  from  his  view,  and 
spread  out  his  ten  fingers  on  a  table  in  front  of  him.  A  finger  having 
heen  selected  by  Mr.  Gurney  without  the  knowledge  of  the  subject, 
Mr.  Smith  held  his  hand  above  it,  willing  that  it  should  be  affected 
in  the  usual  way — that  is,  become  rigid  and  insensitive, — and  this  with 
a  suital:ile  subject  almost  always  occurred  to  that  finger,  and  tliat 
linger  alone.    Generally,  Mr.  Gurney  himself   held  his  hand  at  the 

Mrs.  H.  Sklgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

samo  time  over  another  finger,  imitating  Mr.  Smitli's  action,  but  usually 
without  any  elFect  being  produced  in  this  other  finger.  The  subject 
was  in  a  normal  condition  throughout,  and  frequently  talked  or  read 
aloud  while  the  experiment  was  in  progress,  no  effort  or  attention 
on  his  pai't  being  apparently  necessary. 

Mr.  Gurney  varied  the  conditions  in  different  ways.  He  tried  a  few 
experiments  with  small  screens  of  paper  or  tin  over  the  fingers  to  be 
o2:)erated  on  (Proceedinr/s,  Vol.  V.,  p.  16).  Success  was  impeded  by 
these  devices,  but  not  apparently  prevented,  ))ut  the  trials  were  far  too 
few  to  base  any  conclusions  upon.  We  believe  that  he  tried  and  failed 
with  a  screen  over  the  whole  of  the  hand,  ljut  this  is  not  recorded. 
AVith  a  paper  screen  over  the  whole  hand,  but  having  a  narrow 
opening  thi'ough  which  the  finger  to  be  operated  on  could  be  seen, 
five  tri;ds  failed  and  one  succeeded.  More  important  were  the  negative 
results  oljtained  either  when  Mr.  >Sniith  held  his  hand  above  the 
finger  and  willed  that  no  effect  should  be  produced  (Proceedings,  Vol. 
v.,  p.  16),  or  when  he  willed  the  effect  to  be  produced  without  approxi- 
mating his  hand  to  that  of  the  sul^ject  (Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  p.  201). 

Mr.  Gurney  discusses  the  possiljle  explanation  of  his  results  in  the 
same  numljer  of  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  V.,  pp.  254-259).  He  assumes 
that  tlie  conditions  adojjted  secure — as  they  are  designed  to  secure — 
that  no  indications  as  to  which  finger  is  to  be  operated  on  should 
unintenti<_)nally  reach  the  subject  through  the  eye,  or  the  ear,  or  by 
touch.  There  renrain  then  three  hypotheses  : — (a)  tliat  this  knowledge 
may  reach  his  brain  hy  means  of  a  delicate  perception — conscious  or 
unconscious — of  temperature  or  air-currents,  caused  by  the  proximity 
of  Mr.  Smith's  fingers  ;  (b)  that  it  may  be  conveyed  from  Mr.  tSmith's 
mind  to  that  of  the  subject  Ijy  thought-transference  ;  and  (c)  that  some 
direct  physical  influence  in  which  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  are 
not  concerned  is  exercised  through  Mr.  Smith's  hand  on  that  of  the 
subject.'' 

Mr.  Gurney  considered  that  the  ineffectiveness  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand 
unless  his  wi!l  was  engaged  at  the  same  time  seemed  alone  fatal  to 
hypothesis  («),  which  was  also  rendei'ed  almost  untenable  hy  the 
difiiculty  of  supposing  that  the  delicate  perception  assumed  could  have 

^  i\lr.  Gurney  cx'plnins  thi.s  liypotliesis  at  ^'reatei-  length  on  pp.  257-259  Vol.  V.  He 
thinks  that  if  this  specific  influence  exists,  as  a  property  of  living  tissue,  there  can  ))e 
no  doubt  that  it  depends  on  the  brain  of  the  operator;  since  his  attention  and  will  to 
produce  the  effect  are  indispensable  and  the  same  proximity  of  his  hand  which  pro- 
duces the  effect  also  removes  it — the  only  change  of  condition  being  in  his  intention. 
It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  nervous  condition  of  the  operator  is  not  simply  repro- 
duced in  the  suliject — the  hand  operated  on  assuming  quite  a  different  condition 
from  that  of  the  hand  that  operates.  Therefore,  "  though  finding  its  nearest  analogue 
in  induced  electric  currents  and  though  be.st,  perhaps,  described  as  ncrvot's  induction, 
[the  influence]  is  essentially  vital  and  sui  fjcneris. " 

Experiments  in  TIiought-Transference. 

579 

been  delicate  enough  to  make  it  possible  to  distinguish  Mr.  Smith's 
hand  from  Mr.  Guniey's  held  similarly  over  another  linger  at  the 
same  time.  Hypothesis  (b),  Mr.  Gurney  says,  "seems  excluded  by 
the  fact  that  the  physical  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand  (no  less 
than  his  concentration  of  will  on  the  desired  result)  j^roves  to  be 
a  necessary  condition,"  and  he  concludes  that  the  balance  of  probability 
is  greatly  in  favour  of  hypothesis  (c) — a  direct  physical  influence, 
exercised  through  Mr.  Smith's  hand,  in  which  the  ordinary  channels 
of  sense  are  not  concerned. 

This  brief  introduction  seemed  necessary  in  order  to  explain  the 
state  of  the  question  and  the  bearing  of  our  own  experiments  on  it. 
These,  as  will  be  seen,  still  further  confirm  Mr.  Gurney's  view  as  to  the 
untenableness  of  his  hypothesis  («),  because  we  have  succeeded  in 
obtaining  the  result  with  a  thick  sheet  of  glass  between  Mr.  Smith's 
fingers  and  the  subject's.  They  also  exclude  hypothesis  (c)  and 
remove  Mr.  Gurney's  main  objection  to  hyjjotliesis  (b),  (thought-ti'ans- 
ference),  because  we  have  succeeded  when  Mr.  Smith  did  not  hold  his 
hand  over  the  subject's  at  all,  but  merely  stood  with  folded  arms 
looking  at  the  finger  to  be  affected.  We  therefore  believe  that  the 
true  explanation  of  the  results  is  thought-transference  or  mental 
suggestion,  received  in  some  unconscious  or  "  subliminal "  manner  by 
the  subject's  mind  and  acting  on  his  organism  in  the  same  way  that 
an  ordinary  verbal  suggestion  may  act.  The  process  would  thus  be 
analogous  to  that  supposed  by  Mr.  Guiiiey  to  occur  in  hypnotisation 
at  a  distance. 

Before  proceeding  to  a  detailed  description  of  our  own  expei'iments, 
we  may  remark  that  even  taking  Mr.  Gurney's  alone,  the  balance 
of  probability  seems  to  us  to  be  i-ather  on  the  side  of  thought-trans- 
ference than  of  a  direct  physical  influence.  His  contrary  opinion 
appears  to  us  to  rely  too  m^^ch  on  negative  evidence,  the  force  of 
which  it  is  easy  to  over-estimate.  In  his  unsuccessful  experiments 
where  willing  without  approaching  the  hand  was  used,  the  only 
ohseri;ed  difference  in  conditions  was  the  intentional  withholding  of  Mr. 
Smith's  hand ;  but  this  difference  may  easily  not  have  been  the  whole 
change  actually  produced  in  the  conditions,  and  therefore  may  not  have 
been  the  cause  of  the  '/ton-occurrence  of  the  phenomena  under  obser- 
vation.   Our  experiments  show,  in  fact,  that  it  was  not  the  cause. ^ 

But  we  also  think  some  of  Mr.  Gurney's  positive  results  hard  to 
interpret  on  any  hypothesis  of  a  physical  influence  acting  immediately 
on  the  subject's  nerves,  and  not  through  his  brain  by  means  of  sugges- 

1  Similarly  in  our  experiments  in  the  transfei-ence  of  numbers,  it  is  clear  from  our 
later  cKperiments  that  though  we  failed  in  1889  when  agent  and  perciiiient  were  in 
different  rooms,  we  should  have  been  wong  in  deducing  that  it  was  necessary  to 
success  that  they  should  be  in  the  same  room. 

580        ]\lrs.  If.  SidgwicJc  and  3Hss  Alice  Johnson. 

tion.  We  refer  especially  to  the  fact  that  occasionally  the  wrong 
finger  was  affected  instead  of,  or  as  well  as,  the  right  one.  For  instance, 
in  Mr.  Gurney's  experiments  with  little  paper  screens  already 
mentioned,  two  fingers,  the  selected  one  and  another,  were  protected 
by  them,  and  in  the  first  experiment  both  these  fingers  became  stiff 
and  insensitive.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  might  happen  if  the 
result  were  due  to  "  suggestion  " — that  is,  to  an  impulse  communicated 
to  the  percipient's  brain  which  set  the  machinery  to  work  to  produce 
the  nervous  effect — for  the  suggestion  can  easily  be  conceived  to  go 
wrong.  If  it  was  self-suggestion,  due  to  the  perception  of  the  little 
screens  through  the  senses,  it  might  natui'ally  affect  hoih  lingers  alike  ; 
and  if  it  was  mental  suggestion  thi'ough  the  action  of  the  operator's 
mind  on  that  of  the  subject,  it  is  easy  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Smith's 
attention  was  equally  directed  to  l)oth  the  marked  fingers,  though  his 
hand  only  pointed  to  one.  But  it  is  hard  to  see  how  any  specific 
influence  from  Mr.  Smith's  hand  could  affect  the  finger  he  was  and  the 
finger  he  was  not  pointing  at,  without  affecting  also  the  intervening 
ones. 

Details  of  the  Experiments. 

For  our  own  experiments  we  adopted  the  same  arrangements  as 
Mr.  Gurney.  The  subject,  who  was  always  in  a  normal  C(jndition  at 
the  time  of  the  experiments,  sat  with  his  hands  passed  through  holes 
in  a  screen  which  extended  sufficiently  above  and  on  each  side  of  him  to 
prevent  his  seeing  the  operator  or  his  own  hands.  The  hands  were 
spread  out  on  a  table  and  the  fingei'  to  be  operated  on  was  silently 
indicated  to  Mr.  Smith  behind  the  screen  ))y  one  of  ourselves,  either 
by  signs  or  in  writing.  Mr.  Smith  generally  said  nothing  while  an 
experiment  was  going  on,  and  lie  remained  behind  the  screen  until  the 
testing  was  finished.  The  suljject  was  frequently  engaged  by  one  of  us 
in  conversati<jn  on  topics  outside  the  matter  in  hand  during  the  process 
of  making  the  finger  insensitive,  but  sometimes  we  encouraged  him  to 
attend  to  his  own  sensations  with  results  which  will  be  described 
below.  When  we  believed  the  insensitiveness  to  have  been  produced, 
we  ascertained,  without  moving  the  screen,  which  finger  it  was  in  by 
touching  the  fingers  with  the  point  of  a  pencil  or  some  other  con- 
venient instrument,  taking  care  to  attack  them  in  varying  orders, 
sometimes  beginning  with  the  selected  finger  and  sometimes  taking- 
it  later  in  the  series,  so  that  no  indication  as  to  which  finger  we 
expected  to  find  affected  might  be  given  l)y  the  order  of  testing. 
Occasionally  the  testing  was  done  by  one  of  us  who  was  ignorant 
of  wliich  finger  had  been  selected.  Rigidity  was  ascertained  by  tell- 
ing the  subject  to  close  his  hands,  when  the  affected  finger  remained 
extended.       We  often  tried  this  before  testing  for  insensitiveness, 

Experiments  in  ThougJd-Transference. 

581 

because  it  was  free  from  the  objection  that  in  testing  we  might  possibly 
ourselves  indicate  the  finger.  In  some  experiments  we  attempted 
to  ascertain  roughly  the  degree  of  insensitiveness  by  means  of  a  small 
induction  coil.  To  this  we  shall  recur  later  when  we  discuss  the 
nature  of  the  effect  produced. 

Our  experiments  may  be  divided  into  six  heads,  according  to  the 
position  and  procedure  of  Mr.  Smith. 

(a)  First  we  have  those  in  which  Mr.  Smith's  hand  was  held  above 
the  selected  finger,  with  no  intervening  screen,  his  fingers  pointing 
<lownwards  towards  it,  and  their  tips  at  distances  varying  up  to  aljout 
four  inches  from  it.  This  position  we  shall  in  future  describe  as 
"pointing."  Under  these  conditions,  we  had  13  trials  with  P.,  and  a 
few  with  Miss  B.,  in  1890,  all  of  which  succeeded,  except  the  first  with 
P.,  when  no  effect  was  produced  on  any  finger.  As  this  was  the  first 
experiment  of  the  whole  series  and  made  after  a  long  interval  duiing 
which  Mr.  Smith  had  not  been  trying  anything  of  the  kind,  the 
failure  is  not  surprising.  In  1892,  out  of  12  trials  made  with 
pointing,  5  may  pei-haps  be  counted  as  failures.  In  one  of  these 
failures  a  wrong  finger  was  affected,  the  one,  namely,  which  Mr.  Smith 
had  been  vainly  trying  to  affect  without  pointing  in  the  experiment 
immediately  preceding.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  this  may  have 
been  a  defended  effect,  but  it  was  the  only  case  of  the  kind,  so  that  we 
have  not  sufficient  ground  for  forming  a  conclusion  about  it.  In 
the  other  4  failures,  after  prolonged  effort  some  slight  effect  appeared 
to  be  produced,  and  in  the  right  finger,  but  too  little  or  too  transiently 
for  us  to  regard  the  result  as  a  success.  In  one  of  these  cases  (wliich 
all  occurred  on  two  successive  days — the  two  last  and  least  successful 
days  of  our  experiments)  a  slight  effect  was  produced  in  the  selected 
finger,  which  disajDpeared  after  further  operation. 

This  is  perhaps  the  best  place  to  remark  that  there  is  a  certain 
indefiniteness  in  our  use  of  the  word  "  failure,"  owing  to  our  not 
prescribing  any  limit  of  time  during  which  the  effect  was  to  occur. 
The  time  required  varied,  but  to  attempt  to  ascertain  with  any 
exactness  what  it  was  would  have  interfered  somewhat  with  the  main 
object  of  our  experiments,  and  our  usual  practice  was  to  allow  what 
was  generally  ample  time — three  or  four  minutes — before  testing.^ 
If  on  testing  no  effect  had  been  produced,  we  sometimes  counted  the 
experiment  a  failure  and  proceeded  to  a  fresh  one,  at  other  times 

''  The  longest  time  recorded  as  having  elapsed  before  the  anaesthesia  was  observed 
in  any  successful  experiment  was  14  minutes  from  the  beginning  of  the  attempt. 
This  was  a  case  where  Mr.  Sinitli  tried  for  a  few  minutes  from  a  distance,  tlien  came 
nearer  and  finally  had  recourse  to  pointing.  The  shortest  time  recorded  was  |  minute, 
and  in  this  case  the  recovery  was  proportionately  rapid. 

582         Mrs.  II.  Sidgvjick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

we  continued  it ;  in  either  case  endeavouring  to  suggest  to  the  subject 
that  we  were  satisfied  and  that  a  new  expeiiment  was  beginning. 

(6)  In  the  second  division  of  our  experiments  come  those  in  which 
a  glass  screen  was  phiced  over  the  subject's  hands.  For  the  first  four 
of  these,  we  used  a  framed  window  pane  which  happened  to  be  handy. 
Then  we  obtained  and  used  a  sheet  of  32  oz.  glass,  measuring  22  by  10 
inches  and  ^  inch  in  thickness.  It  was  supported  on  two  large  books 
placed  beyond  the  subject's  hands  on  each  side.  In  this  position  the 
upper  surface  of  the  glass  was  2^  inches  above  the  surface  of  the  table, 
■so  that  there  was  am2:)le  room  for  the  hands  to  rest  underneath  the  glass 
without  touching  it.  Mr.  Smith  held  his  hand  in  the  usual  position 
over  the  selected  finger,  above  and  }iot  touching  the  glass.  Under 
these  conditions,  we  tried  21  exjseriments  with  P.,  of  which  18  were 
successful,  and  G  with  Miss  B.,  all  successful.  In  the  case  of  the  3 
failures  with  P.,  no  effect  was  produced  on  any  finger.  In  one 
successful  case,  the  time  taken  was  long,  and  we  interrupted  the 
experiment  by  premature  testing  in  the  way  explained  above. 

(c)  This  division  includes  those  expeiiments  in  which  Mr.  Smith  did 
not  approximate  his  hand  to  that  of  the  subject  at  all,  but  merely 
looked  at  the  selected  finger  from  some  place  in  the  same  room  as  the 
subject,  but  out  of  his  sight.  The  distances  between  him  and  the 
sul)ject  varied  from  al:)Out  2^-  to  about  12  feet.  Under  these  con- 
ditions we  tried  37  experiments  with  P.,  18  in  1890,  of  which  12  were 
successful,  but  2  of  these  only  partially  so,  and  19  in  1892  of  which  9 
were  successful.  The  proportion  of  success  was,  it  thus  appears,  much 
less  than  under  the  previously  described  conditions,  but  still  much 
beyond  what  chance  would  produce.  (The  most  probable  number  of 
successes  by  chance  alone  was  of  course  1  in  10.)  Of  the  6  failures  in 
1890,  one  was  a  case  in  which  Mr.  Smith  made  a  mistake  as  to  which 
finger  we  had  selected,  but  succeeded  with  the  one  he  thought  of.  In 
another  case  the  left  thiimb  instead  of  the  right  thumb  became  insensi- 
tive. In  the  other  4  cases  no  finger  at  all  was  affected.  Of  the  10  failures 
in  1892,  no  effect  was  2:)roduced  in  4  cases  ;  in  another  the  right  (namely, 
tlie  little)  finger  of  the  wrong  hand  became  insensitive^ ;  in  4  cases 
an  adjoining  finger  was  affected — once  only  slightly — instead  of  that 
selected,  and  in  the  remaining  case  a  finger  distant  fi-oui  the  selected 
one  was  slightly  affected. 

(d)  This  division  includes  G  experiments,  all  in  1892,  in  which 
Mr.  Smith  stood  in  another  room,  looking  through  two  doorways  at  P.'s 
hands  from  a  distance  of  22  to  25  feet.    In  order  to  see  the  finger 

'  It  happened  on  another  occasion  mider  those  conditions  that  the  right  little  finger 
was  slightly  affected  when  the  left  little  finger,  which  had  been  selected,  was  so  in  a 
more  decided  manner. 

Experhnents  in  Thought- Transference. 

583. 

better,  he  looked  through  an  opei'a  glass.  Three  of  these  expernneiits- 
succeeded  and  three  failed, — in  each  of  the  three  failures  a  wrong 
finger  being  affected.  One  of  these  was  the  right  (namely,  the  little) 
finger  of  the  wrong  hand. 

(e)  In  this  division  we  have  the  cases  when  Mr.  Smith  was  in 
a  different  room  from  P.  with  a  closed  door  preventing  his  seeing  P.'s 
hands.  The  number  of  trials  made  was  14,  and  12  of  them  were 
complete  failures,  only  partial  success  being  obtained  in  the  other  two. 
In  4  cases  of  failure,  no  effect  was  produced  and  in  the  other  8  a  wrong 
finger  was  more  or  less  decidedly  affected. 

It  is  perhaps  significant  that  in  so  large  a  jaroportion  of  failures 
under  the  more  diiiicult  conditions  (d)  and  (e),  a  wrong  finger  should 
have  been  affected  instead  of  no  effect  l^eing  produced.  Perhaps- 
the  weakness  of  the  impulse  from  Mr.  Smith  s  mind  jjrevented  P.'s 
"  subliminal  consciousness  "  from  distinguishing  it  from  slight  sugges- 
tions from  other  sources.  It  is  noticeable  also  that,  in  1892,  the 
tendency  for  a  wrong  finger  to  be  affected  rather  thaii  no  finger  at  all 
seems  to  have  been  much  greater  than  in  1890.  This  may  have  been 
because  P.  was  then  altogether  less  susceptiljle  to  thought-transference, 
for  the  experiments  on  the  fingers  succeeded  less  well  even  under  the 
easiest  conditions,  and  transference  of  numbers,  which  we  also  tried 
with  him  at  this  time,  practically  failed  altogether ;  or  the  effect  of  ex- 
periments under  unfavourable  conditions  may  have  been  to  educate  him 
to  follow  any  casual  suggestion.  We  do  not  think  that  there  is  suflicient 
ground  as  yet  for  adopting  eithei'  of  these  explanations,  excejat  provi- 
sionally, but  in  our  present  ignorance  of  the  way  in  which  thought- 
transference  oj^erates,  almost  any  possible  clue  is  worth  considering. 

(/)  This  division  consists  of  4  experiments  of  a  different  kind — those 
in  which  Mr.  Smith's  hand  was  approximated  to  the  subject's  and  point- 
ing at  a  selected  finger,  but  in  which  he  willed  to  produce  no  effect. 
These  all  had  the  negative  result  intended. 

We  now  give  a  list  of  all  the  expeiiments  with  P.  in  chronological 
order.  The  third  column  of  the  list  describes  the  position  and 
action  of  Mr.  Smith  in  relation  to  the  suljject,  and  each  expei'iment  is 
marked  (a)  or  (b),  etc.,  according  to  which  of  the  six  heads  already 
mentioned  it  belongs  to.  The  fourth  cohnnn  gives  the  finger  selected, 
to  be  operated  on  ;  R  stands  for  the  right  and  L  for  the  left  hand,  and 
the  fingers  are  numbered  in  order,  the  thumb  being  counted  as  the 
first.  The  fifth  column  gives  the  finger  affected,  if  any,  and  describes 
the  effect  produced.  It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  effect  described 
was  found  the  first  time  the  finger  was  tested,  whenever  stages  of 
testing  are  not  mentioned. 

584)         Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick  and  3Uss  Alice  Johnson. 

LIST  OF  EXPERIMENTS  IN  PRODUCING  ANAESTHESIA 
AND  RIGIDITY  IN  A  SELECTED  FINGER  BY  MENTAL 
SUGGESTION. 

Xo. 

Date. 

Conditions. 

Finger 
Selected. 

Result. 

Degree  of 
Success. 

1890. 

1 

Mar.  23. 

(a)  Pointing,  no  glass. 

R  2 

No  effect. 

Failure. 

2 

(ft)  Pointing,     no    glass ; 
others  held  tlieir  hands 
over  other  fingers. 

L  2 

L  2  alone  became  insensitive 
and  stiff. 

.Success. 

3 

i\Iav.25. 

(a)  Pointing,  no  glass. 

R  3 

R  3  alone  affected. 

Success. 

4 

(a) 

(/ )  Pointing,  but  willing 
no  effect ;  no  gia^s. 

L  2 

L  2  alone  affected. 

Success. 

5 

L  4 

None  of  the  fingers  were 

Success. 

affected. 

6 

(n)  Pointing,  no  ^lass. 

R  i 

R  4  alone  affected. 

Success. 

7 

(b)  Pointing,    with  glass 
over  hands. 

R  4 

Sensationt  in  R4.  R  I  alone 
affected. 

Success. 

8 

,, 

L  3 

.Sensation  first  in  L  2  ;  this 

Success. 

went  off,  tiiuii  sensati^)n  in 
L  3.  L  3  alone  became  stiff 
and  insensitive. 

9 

»i 

il>) 

R  2 

Sensation  in  R  2.    R  2  alone 

Success. 

affected. 

10 

(i) 

1j  2 

Sensation  in  L  2.   L  2  tested 

Success. 

and  found  sensitive.  Pro- 
cess   continued.  Tested 
again  and  found  slightly 
insensitive.    Process  con- 
tinued.   Tested  again  and 
L  2  alone  was  rigid  and 
insensitive. 

11 

" 

(./)  Pointing,  but  willing 
uo  effect ;  no  jilass. 

R  1 

No  insensitiveiiess  nor  stiff- 
ness in  any  finger. 

Succes.s. 

12 

M:ir.2C. 

(b)  Pointing,    with  glass 

R  3 

Sensation  in  R  3.    R  3  alone 

Success. 

over  hands. 

affected. 

Failure. 

13 

L  1 

Sensation  in  L  4,  gradually 

going  off.    No  effect. 

14 

11 

(6) 

R  i 

Sensation  in  R  4.    R  4  alone 

Success. 

affected. 

15 

, 

R  1 

Sensation  in  R  2,  which  goe-s 

Success. 

on.    yensatiuii  in  HI.  K 
1  alone  affcctcMl. 

le 

.1 

L  5 

Sensation  in  L  4.  which  goes 

Success. 

<.)tT.    Ji  o  alone  attecteci. 

17 

,1 

Pointing,  but  willing 

L  3 

None  of  the  fingers  affected. 

Success. 

no  effect ;  no  glass. 

18 

(b)  Pointing,  with  glass. 

L  3 

Sensation  in  L  3.     L  3  alone 
affected. 

Success. 

19 

(.b) 

L  1 

Sensation  in  R  2,  which  goes 

Success. 

off.  Sensation  in  L  1.  LI 
alone  affected. 

20 

)  1 

(I') 

R  i 

Sensation  in  R  4.    R  4  alone 

Success. 

affected. 

.21 

(/)  Pointing,  but  willing 
no  effec't ;  with  glass. 

L  2 

None  of  the  fingers  affected. 

Success. 

22 

(b)  Pointing,  with  glass. 

L  2 

Sensation  in  L  2.    L  2  alone 

Success. 

affected. 

(^j)  Pointing,  with  glass. 

R  2 

iilAii.;'!  f  i rm  ill  T?           T?  9  flloue 
iTt?Hr>il  L'l'.M  1  111  XI.  .i.       JLV  ^  o-lUili.. 

Success. 

affected. 

24 

R  5 

Sensation  in  R  5.    Tested  at 

Success. 

once,  and  found  slightly 
insensitive.    Process  con- 
tinued. Tested  again,  and 
found    more  insensitive. 
Process  continued.  Tested 
again,  and  found  com- 

pletely insensitive. 

Failure. 

25 

.Time  11 

L  3 

No  effect. 

26 

(n)  Pointing,  no  glas.^. 

R  1 

Sensation  first  in  L  2,  then 
in  L  3,  then  in  L  5,  then  in 
L  WTist,  each  gradually 
going  off.  Rl  alone  affected 

Success. 

11 

i  The  w»nl  "  sensatiou  "  as  used  in  this  column  refors  to  the  feeling  of  cold  and  numbness  sometimes 
omentioncj  liy  the-  subject  in  iiartitulur  fingers.   This  is  fully  describsd  and  discussed  later  on  (p.  591). 

Experiments  in 

Though  t-Transfere  nee. 

585. 

Date. 

Conditions. 

Finger 
Selected. 

1890. 
June  11 

June 12 

June  13 

June  14. 

June  16. 

June  17. 

(«)  Pointing,  no  glass. 

(c)  Not  pointing,  with  glass 
(a)  Pointing,  no  glass. 

(c)  Not  pointing,  no  glass. 
(h)  Pointing,  with  gla.s.s. 

(<•)  Not  pointing,  with  glas.s. 

((•) 

(c) 

((•)  Mr.  Sniitli  downstairs, 
P.  upstairs  at  Arch. 

(6)  Mr.    Smith  upstairs, 

pointing,  with  glass, 
(e)  Not  pointing,  with  glass. 

Mr.  Smith  downstairs, 
P  upstairs  at  Arch. 

Mr.  Smith  upstairs, 
about  8  ft.  from  P., not 
pointing. 

Near,  not  pointing, 
with  glass. 

Mr.  .Smith  downstairs, 
P.  upstairs  at  Arch. 

Mi:  Smith  upstairs 
about  Oft.  from  P., then 
nearer,  not  pointing  ; 
no  gla.'?s. 

Pointing,  no  glass. 

(c)  Not  pointing,  no  glass  ; 

about  5  ft.  off. 
(c)  Not  pointing,  no  glass, 

about  0  ft.  off. 
(e)  Mr.  Smith  downstairs, 

P.  upstairs. 
(b)  Pointing,  with  gla,ss. 
(o)  Pointing,  no  glass. 

(c)  Not  pointing,  with  glass 
(c) 

(c)  Not  pointing,with  gla.ss, 
about  i  ft.  off. 

(<>)  Mr.  Smith  downstairs, 
P.  upstairs  at  Arch. 

('■) 
(c) 

(a)  Pointing,  no  glas.s. 
('))  Pointing,  witli  glass. 

R  3 

L  2 

h  2 
continut'd 

L  4 

B  3 

L  2 

R  1 

L  3 
J.  5 
R  4 

L  3 
L  2 

R  4,  but 
Mr.  Smith 
under- 
tood  R  5. 
T,  4 
B  1 

R  2 

L  3 

R  5 

L  4 

R  3 

R  3 
continued 
L  2 

R  1 

R  4 

R  2 
R  2 
continued 

I,  3 
L  4 

R  1 

L  5 

R  1 

R  2 

L  2 

R  3 

Result. 

Degree  of 
Success. 

R  3  alone  affected :  insensi- 
tive to  touch  and  to  weak 
electric  shock,  but  sensi- 
tive to  strong  shock. 

No  effect. 

L  2  alone  affected,  but  sen- 
sitive to  strong  .shock, 
wliich  nearly  restored  sen- 
siliility. 

L  4  alone  affected. 

R  3  slightly  stiff,  but  not 
insensitive. 

No  effect  on  first  testing. 
Process  continued.  Tested 
again  and  L  2  alone  affect- 
ed. Insensitive  to  much 
stronger  shocks  than  in 
Nos.  27  and  29. 

L  1  alone  affected.  Insensi- 
tive to  strongest  shock  of 
machine  for  some  time. 

L  3  alone  affected. 

Lo  ,, 

R 1  slightly  atfected.but  soon 
recovered.  At  second  time 
of  testing  R  4  found  insen- 
sitive to  slight  touches  and 
shocks,  but  sensitive  to 
stronger  shocks. 

No  effect. 

L  2  alone  affected.  Insensi- 
tive to  strong  shock. 

R  5  alone  affected.  Insensi- 
tive to  f-trong  shock. 

I,  4  alone  affected. 
R  3  slightly  affected. 

No  effect. 

L  3  alone  affected, after  some 
time. 

L  1  slightly  affected. 
No  effect. 

No  effect  after  twice  testing. 

R  .3  alone  affected.  Insensi- 
tive to  strongest  shock.s. 

I,  2  alone  affected.  Insensi- 
tive to  strongest  shocks. 

R  1  alone  affected,  but  soon 
recovered  of  itself. 

R  2  alone  affected. 

No  effect. 

R  2  alone  affected.  Seii.si- 
bility  seemed  restored  by 
shock. 

No  effect. 

L  4  alone  affected.  In.sensi- 
tive  to  strong  shocks. 

R  1  insensitive  on  inner  sur- 
face of  first  phalanx  at 
third  time  of  testing 

No  effect. 

R  3  alone  affected. 
L  5 

L  2  alone  affected.  Sensi- 
bility restored  by  shocks. 

R  3  alone  affected.  Sensi- 
bility partially  restored 
by  shocks. 

Success. 

Failure. 
Success- 

Success- 
Partial. 

Success- 

Failure- 

Success- 
Success- 
Partial. 

Failure. 

Success- 

Failure- 

Success- 
Failure. 

Failure. 

Success- 
Failure. 

Failure- 
Failure- 

Success- 
Success- 
Success- 
Failure- 

Failure. 

Success- 

Failure. 
Success- 
Partial. 

Failure.. 

Failure- 
Failure. 
Success. 

Success. 

*  The  electric  test  was  used  in  the  experiments  marked  with  an  asterisk. 

1586 

Ilrs.  H.  Sidgivick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

No. 

Date. 

Coiiflitioiis. 

Finger 
Selected. 

Result. 

Degree  of 
Success. 

69 
.70 
71 
72 
73 
.74 
■75 
76 

77 

78 
7;) 
80 

81 

..S3 

■Sf. 
.87 
83 

83 
.90 
.91 

01 
9-3 

94 

95 
90 

•97 

■98 

1890. 
June  17. 

June  30. 

1892. ; 
Sept.  23. 

Sept.  24. 

Sept.  20. 

Sept.  27 

Sept.  28. 

(c)  Not  pointing,  with  glass 
about  8  ft.  off. 

(<■)  Mr.  Smith  downstairs, 
P.  upstairs  at  Arch. 

('■) 
(c) 

((/)  Pointing,  no  gla  s. 

(i/)  Pointing,  with  glass, 
(f)  Not  poiiiting,with  glass. 

(n)  Pointing, 
(c)  Not  pointing. 
(n)  Pointing. 
(c)  Not  pointing. 
(a)  Pointing. 
(0) 

(c)  Not  pointing. 
('■) 

(o)  Not    pointing,  about 

i  ft.  off. 
(c)  Not  pointing. 
(<■•■ 

Not  pr 
r<  ft.  off, 
((■)  Not  pointing,  about 
8  ft.  off. 

(<■■) 

((■)  Not  pointing,  about 

12  ft.  off. 
(u)  Not     pointing,  about 

5  ft.  off. 

(0) 

:<■•) 

((')  Not  pointing,  about 

(a)  Pointing,  near. 

((■)   Not  pointing,  about 

9  ft.  off. 
(<;)  Aliout  22ft.  off,  looking 

tlirough  opera-glass  at 

finger. 

{(I)  Tlie  same,  but  about 
25  ft.  off. 

01) 

{(■)  The  same  position,  but 
an  intervening  door 
cliised. 

(<■) 

(a)  Pointing. 

('I) 

{<■)  Not  pointing,  near. 

(d)  About  25  ft.  off,  using 
opera-glass. 

(c)  The  same,  but  after 
some  time  agent  came 
near,  not  pointing. 

L  5 

R  1 

L  5 

R  3 

R  2 

L  4 
R  1 
R  1 

L  2 

R  3 

R  2 

L  1 

R  ,5 

R  1 

L  3 

h  5 

R  2 

R  2 
R  4 
L  3 

L  1 

R  3 
L  5 

R  5 

R  3 

R  3 
continued 
L  2 

L  4 

E  5 

R  1 

R  2 

L  2 

R  2 

L  4 

R  5 

L  5 

L  5 

L  2 

I,  5  alone  affected,  at  second 
time  of  testing,  but  sensi- 
tive to  strong  sliocks. 

No  effect. 

R  5  aliine  affected.  Sensibi- 
lity restored  by  shocks. 

L  2  aliine  slightly  affected 

R  2  alone  affected  at  second 
time  of  testing.  Sensibility 
partially  restored  by  sliocks 

L  4  alone  affected. 

R  1 

R  1  alone  affected.  Shocks 
restiired  sensibility  and 
partially  uiistiffeiied  the 
finger. 

L  2  alone  affected. 

No  effect. 

R  3  alone  affected. 

L  3  slightly  affected. 

R  5  alone  affected. 

R  1 

L  3 

L  5  affected.  R  5  also  affected 

verv  slightly. 
Rl  and  R  3  affected. 

R  2  alone  affected. 
R  4 
L  3 

No  effect  after  twice  testing. 

R  2  alone  affected. 

L  5  alone  affected  at  second 

time  of  testing. 
L  5  alone  affected. 

No  effect  after  testing  three 

times. 
R  3  aliine  affected. 

L  2  alone  affected. 

L  4  liecame  more  or  less 
rigid,  and  insensitive  at 
tip,  in  3  minutes. 

L  5  alone  affected. 

R  1  alone  affected  at  second 
time  of  te.sting. 

This  experiment  was  stopped 
almost  at  once  owing 
to  some  hitch  and  L  4 
found  to  be  somewliat 
affected. 

L  2  slightly  insensitive  near 
tip  at  second  time  of  testing, 

R  2  slightly  affected  at  second 
time  of  testing,  but  re- 
covered of  itself. 

Hardly  any  effect. 

R,  5  alone  affected. 

Lowest  joint  of  L  5  became 
insensitive. 

Middle  and  lowest  joints  of 
L  5  rigid  and  insensitive, 
at  second  time  of  testing, 
))ut  middle  joint  soon  re- 
covered of  itself. 

No  effect  after  testing  four 
times  at  short  intervals. 

Success. 

Failure. 
Failure. 

Failure. 

Success. 

Success. 
Success. 
Success. 

Success. 
Failure. 
Failure. 
Failure. 
Success. 
Success. 
Success. 
Success. 

Failure. 

Success. 
Success. 
Success. 

Failure. 

Failure. 
Success. 

Failure. 

Failure. 

Success. 

Success. 

Success. 

Failure. 
Success. 
Failure. 

Partial. 
Doubtful. 

Failure. 
Success. 
Success. 

Succes.s. 

Failure. 

•  The  electric  ttst  was  used  iu 
J  Tlie  glass  screen  was  not  used 

the  experiments  marked  with  an  asterisk. 
.  at  all  in  the  experiments  of  1892. 

Experiments  in  Thoiight-Transference. 

587 

Date. 

CoiicUtions 

Finger 
Selected. 

Result. 

De^ii-ee  of 
S\iccess. 

1892. 
Sept.  28. 

Sept.  29. 

(a)  Pointing. 

((■)  Not  pointing,  about  2J 
ft.  off. 

(c) 

((i)  About  25  ft.  off,  using 
opera -glass. 

(a)  Pointiug,anil  Mr.  Smith 
once  accidentally 
touelied  the  finger. 

(c)  Not  pointing. 

(a)  Pointing, 
(a)  Pointing. 

L  2 

cuntinueil 

R  2 

R  1 

L  3 

L  2 

continued 
R  i 

T>  2  rigid,  and  middle  and 
lowestjoints  insensitive,  at 
second  time  of  testing,  but 
midjle.ioint  soon  recovered 
of  itself. 

R  3  alone  affected. 

R  2 

L  3  stiff  and  slightly  insensi- 
tive at  tip  at  third  time  of 
testing. 

L  5  affected  almost  up  to 
knuckle  at  second  time  of 
testing. 

L  3  became  stiff,  but  hardly 
at  all  insensitive  at  third 
time  of  testing. 

L  3  slightly  affected  at  second 
time  of  testing. 

L  2  became  stiff  and  insensi- 
tive near  tip. 

P.  thought  there  was  "some- 
thing wrong  with "  R  3 
and  R2.  R  4  slightly  affect- 
ed at  third  time  of  testing, 
but  soon  recovered  of  itself. 

Success. 

Failure. 

Succes.s. 
Failure. 

Failure. 

Doubtful. 

Failure. 
Success 
Doubtful. 

SuMAIARY. 

Number  of 

v; 
CJ 

CJ 

X 

Partial 
Successes. 

Failures.* 

Trials. 

{«)  With  Mr.  Smith  pointing  at  the  selected  \ 
finger.  J 

(b)  A  glass  screen  placed  over  P.  's  hand.s,  Mr.  i 

Smitli  pointing  at  the  finger.  / 

(c)  Mr.  Smith  not  pointing  at  the  finger,  in  \ 

the  same  room  witli  P.,  from  2h  to  > 
about  12  feet  off.  ) 

•(d)  Mr.  Smith  in   another   room   across  a^ 
passage,  both  intervening  doors  open,  \ 
looking  through  an  opera-glass  at  the  j 
finger.  J 

(e)  Mr.  Smith  in  a  different  room  from  P.,  \ 
an  intervening  door  closed.  / 

(/)  Mr.  Smith  pointing,  but  willing  that  no  \ 
effect  .should  be  produced.  / 

19 
18 

19 

o 
O 

4 

2 
2 

G 

O 

IC 

3 
12 

25 
21 

37 

6 

14 
4 

Totals 

63 

4 

40 

107 

*  This  column  include.s  the  cases  marked  "  doubtful  "  in  the  preceding  list. 

588        Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

Means  used  to  test  the  Ancesthesia. 
We  may  now  turn  to  the  discussion  of  the  effect  produced  on  the 
finger. 

The  first  question  is  as  to  the  reality  of  the  alleged  anesthesia  J 
Mr.  Gurney  had  tested  this  so  thoroughly  that — apart  from  our  confi- 
dence in  the  assertions  of  our  subjects — we  felt  ourselves  absolved  from 
applying  tlie  somewhat  unpleasant  methods  which  would  have  been 
necessary  for  complete  proof  of  it,  and  some  of  which  would  have 
interfered  with  such  fi'equent  and  continuous  experimenting  as  ours. 
Only  once  was  the  finger  operated  on  pricked  so  as  to  draw  blood,  and 
then  apparently  without  the  slightest  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the 
subject. 

Two  different  methods  of  testing  for  anaesthesia  were  employed. 
One  was  touching  all  the  fingers  at  various  points  in  varying  order 
many  times  in  succession,  the  subject  being  asked  to  say  whenever 
he  felt  the  touches.  It  would,  no  doubt,  have  l)een  perfectly  easy 
for  him,  had  he  wished  to  do  so,  to  simulate  amesthesia  in  a  particular 
finger  by  simply  saying  nothing  whenever  that  finger  was  touched. 
His  only  difficulty  would  have  been  to  discriminate  the  touches  on  it 
rapidly  enough  not  to  respond,  his  hands  being  hidden  from  him. 

The  second  test  used  was  a  current  from  a  small  induction  coil, 
Avhich  we  could  vary  in  intensity.  This  we  applied  through  tw» 
wire  terminals,  which  were  placed  at  a  shoi't  distance  apart  on 
the  finger  and  produced  a  sensation  resembling  a  prick.  We  could 
only  try  the  electric  current  freely  on  all  the  fingers  when  it  was 
wealc,  but  as  soon  as  any  finger  appeared  insensitive  to  it,  we  pro- 
ceeded to  test  the  degree  of  anajsthesia  l)y  gradually  increasing  the 
strength  of  the  current.  The  strongest  current  that  the  aj^paratus; 
could  give  would  have  produced  decided  pain  in  any  finger  in  a  normal 
condition.  The  sensibility  of  different  persons  to  pain  of  this  kind 
varies  a  good  deal,  hut  we  had  tried  it  roughly  with  all  the  party,  sO' 
that  we  had  an  approximate  notion  of  the  effect  produced  by  different 
strengths  of  the  current.  It  could  not  be  said  that  the  pain  produced 
by  the  strongest  current  was  unendurable,  ljut  it  would  certainly  have 
required  a  consideraljle  exercise  of  self-control  not  to  Ijetray  it  in  any 
wav.  It  must  be  remembered  too  that,  apart  from  their  prolial>ly  not 
being  aware  of  the  limits  of  the  machine,  the  subjects  were  without 
any  safeguard  that  we  might  not  apply  the  severest  tests  of  any 
other  kind  at  any  moment. 

'  It  may  V'e  wortli  while  to  remind  our  readers  that  even  on  the  supposition  that 
the  anaesthesia  was  simulated,  it  would  still  have  to  be  explained  how  it  came  to  be 
simulated  in  the  finger  selected  by  us  rather  than  in  any  other,  and  that  this  questiort 
was  of  more  immediate  interest  to  us  than  the  question  of  the  reality  of  the 
an;esthesia. 

Expo'iraerds  in 

ThougJd-Transference. 

589 

But  perhaps  the  strongest  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  effect  was 
the  excellent  and  sustained  acting  that  would  have  been  required  for 
simulation.  We  do  not  think  that  any  impartial  observer,  who  was  as 
well  acquainted  with  the  subjects  as  we  were  and  who  had  carefully 
watched  all  the  experiments  and  talked  to  the  subjects  while  they  were 
going  on,  would  belie^'e  that  the  ansesthesia  was  simulated. 

The  uniformity  in  the  sequence  of  effects  described  below  affords 
further  strong  evidence  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of  the  expeiiments, 
since  the  subjects  were  quite  unaware  that  we  were  making  these 
observations,  such  points  never  being  discussed  in  their  presence,  even 
when  they  were  hypnotised. 

Degree  of  Aiicesthesia  and  Means  used  for  Restoring  Sensibility. 

Assuming,  then,  that  the  experiments  were  genuine  in  the  sense  that 
the  alleged  effects  actually  took  place,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  in 
more  detail  the  nature  of  these  effects. 

The  amesthesia  was  sometimes  not  complete,  the  finger  being  sensi- 
tive to  strong  shocks,  while  retaining  its  insensibility  to  weak  stimuli. 
The  transition  from  not  feeling  to  feeling  the  current  seemed  sti"angely 
sudden  as  the  strength  was  increased,  as  we  noted  in  the  first  two 
experiments  (jSTos.  27  and  29)  in  which  the  electric  test  was  tried.  In 
No.  3-4  the  strongest  current  that  the  apparatus  could  give  was  felt  only 
after  it  had  been  applied  to  the  finger  for  some  time.  In  6  cases  with 
P.  it  was  observed  that  the  normal  sensibility  seemed  to  be  suddenly  and 
completely  restored  after  prolonged  application  of  the  electric  current, 
perhaps  when  applied  at  particular  points  on  the  finger.  Thus,  in  two 
cases,  it  seemed  that  the  shock  applied  on  the  right  side  of  the  finger 
brought  the  sensibility  back. 

Generally  Mr.  Smith  restored  the  finger  to  its  normal  condition  by 
making  upward  passes  with  contact  over  it.  He  made  six  attempts^ 
late  in  the  series,  to  restore  P.'s  fingers  by  a  mere  effort  of  will.  He 
remarked  to  us  at  first  that  he  did  not  feel  as  if  he  knew  how 
to  direct  his  mind  towards  the  required  result,  and  the  first  attempt 
failed.  In  the  second  trial  the  sensibility  only,  and  not  the  power  of 
movement,  returned  ;  the  third  failed  again  ;  the  fourth  succeeded,, 
while  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  the  sensibility  was  restored  completely  and 
the  flexibility  partially.  "With  Miss  B.  also  a  few  attempts  were  made 
on  one  day  to  pi'oduce  recoveiy  by  an  effort  of  will  on  Mr.  Smith's 
part,  without  his  stroking  the  finger,  and  without  taking  off  the  glass 
screen  which  covered  the  hands.  In  the  first  trial,  some  effect  in 
restoring  the  sensitiveness  seemed  to  be  produced ;  the  second  trial 
failed.  In  the  third,  the  hands  being  still  under  the  glass  screen  and 
the  finger  having  been  affected  when  Mr.  Smitli  was  looking  at  it,, 

2  R 

590         Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  3Hss  Alice  Johnson. 

without  pointing,  it  was  restored  under  the  same  conditions,  l)ut  there 
was  some  doubt  as  to  whether  it  did  not  simply  recover  of  itself,  as  the 
recovery  took  a  long  time. 

Spontaneous  recovery  took  place  in  5  cases  (in  one  of  them,  only 
after  the  electric  test  had  Ijeen  applied,  though  not  at  the  time  of  its 
application,  and  in  three  when  only  a  very  slight  effect  had  been  pro- 
duced). It  seems  most  likely  that  this  spontaneous  recovery  would 
liave  taken  place  always  if  the  finger  had  been  left  to  itself  for  a  suffi- 
cient length  of  time,  and  it  may  have  been  merely  this  that  occurred 
when  Mr.  Smith  was  trying  to  restore  the  finger  by  an  act  of  will.  It 
seemed  to  us  at  the  time,  liowever,  that  his  willing  was  effective  and 
that  he  could  have  succeeded  with  greater  certainty  and  completeness 
if  he  had  tried  oftener,  or  if  we  had  spent  more  time  on  each  attempt. 
But  this  was  not  worth  while,  because  the  experiments  could  never 
have  heen  very  conclusive  on  this  point,  and  the  upward  strokings  were 
a  rapid  and  convenient  means  of  restoring  the  lingers  to  their  normal 
state. 

Sequence  of  Effects. 

An  interesting  point  observed  was  that  the  loss  of  sensibility 
seemed  to  spread  from  the  lower  part  of  the  finger  upwards,  and  when 
the  effect  was  slight,  the  ti^i  of  the  finger  only  was  affected.  We  have 
recorded  14  cases  in  wliich  either  the  lower  part  only — or  the  lower 
part  first — became  insensitive,  or  more  insensitive  than  the  upper. 
The  only  case  ol)served  in  wliich  this  rule  did  not  appear  to  hold  good 
was  one  (No.  55)  in  which — after  an  attempt  longer  than  usual,  viz., 
from  5  to  10  minutes— the  only  part  of  the  selected  finger  (the  right 
thumb)  that  became  insensitive  was  the  inner  side  of  the  proximal 
joint.  Another  possible  exception  to  the  rule  was  an  experiment  with 
Miss  B.,  in  which  the  part  selected  to  be  made  anaesthetic  was  a  spot  in 
the  middle  of  the  l)ack  of  the  left  hand.  Here  the  anaesthesia  extended 
both  above  and  below  the  spot,  over  the  metacarpal  and  proximal  joints 
of  the  middle  finger. 

Recovery  seemed  to  proceed  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  sensibility 
spreading  downwards  towaitls  the  tij)  of  the  finger.  It  was  only 
possible  to  ol)serve  this  in  a  few  cases,  as  recovery  of  the  whole  finger, 
when  upward  passes  were  vised  for  the  purpose,  was  generally  very  rapid. 
One  case  is  recorded  when  the  sensibility  was  completely  restored  by  2 
such  passes.  In  7  cases,  however,  we  detected  the  gradual  recovery 
referred  to,  which  always  followed  the  rule  given.  Thus,  in  one  case, 
after  a  few  upward  passes,  the  tip  of  the  finger  only  remained  insensible  ; 
in  another  case,  after  3  passes  the  upper  joint  of  a  thumb  became 
completely  and  the  lower  joint  partly  sensitive,  the  sensibility  of  the 
whole  thumb  being  completely  recovered  after  2  more  passes  ;  in  a  third 

Experiments  in  Thouglit-Transference. 

591 

case,  after  7  passes  the  two  lowest  joints  of  a  finger  remained  completely 
insensitive  while  the  upper  joint  had  recovered. 

The  recovery  of  motor  power  and  of  sensibility  was  not  ;ilways  simul- 
taneous. We  have  noted  T)  cases  in  which  the  sensibility  was  recovei'ed 
first  and  none  in  which  the  motor  power  first  reappeared.  Also,  in 
making  the  experiments,  the  motor  power  was  sometimes  lost  while 
the  sensibility  was  wholly  or  partially  retained  (this  was  noted  in  5 
cases) ;  but  we  never  detected  any  case  in  which  the  loss  of  sensibility 
extended  further  than  the  loss  of  the  motor  power.  In  other  words, 
it  seemed  that  the  motor  effect  could  be  produced  both  more  easily  and 
more  completely  than  the  sensory. 

These  latter  observations,  though  only  made  casually  in  the  course 
of  our  experiments,  are  in  accordance  with  the  general  ex^ierience  of 
other  investigators.  In  the  paper  already  referred  to  {P roceedings, 
Vol.  v.,  P23.  280-282)  on  the  influence  of  self-suggestion,  it  is  said 
that  "muscular  rigidity  [was  the]  most  general  form  of  phenomenon 
produced  by  self-suggestion,"  whereas  local  anfesthesia  appeared  more 
rarely.  It  is  well  known  also  that  muscular  rigidity  is  one  of  the 
easiest  eflfects  to  produce  by  verbal  suggestion. 

Sensations  Descr  ibed  hy  the  Sidijects  in  the  course  of  the  Exiier  iments. 

When  their  attention  Avas  directed  to  their  hands,  the  subjects  were 
sometimes  aware  of  pecu.liar  sensations  in  one  or  more  of  their  fingers 
during  the  operation.  Mr.  Gurney  fnund  this  with  two  of  his  subjects, 
after  he  had  experimented  with  them  for  some  time  and  got  them  to 
attend  to  their  sensations  during  the  process,  and  the  finger  in  which  they 
occurred  was  nearly  always  the  one  under  experiment.  The  prevailing 
sensation  was  cold,  sometimes  also  "pins  and  needles,"  "numljness," 
and  the  like  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  15). 

Both  P.  and  Miss  B.,  when  asked  to  attend  to  their  hands,  often 
inentioned  a  sensation  of  cold  in  the  selected  finger,  and  if  we  tested 
at  once,  we  genei'ally  found  its  sensibility  reduced  below  the  normal. 
The  difference  of  temperature,  if  it  existed  at  all,  was  not  such  as  to 
be  perceptible  to  ordinary  touch.  The  sensation  of  cold  soon  went  off, 
and  the  finger  then  became  completely  anfesthetic.  It  would,  of  course, 
he  very  easy  —especially  under  the  circumstances  of  the  experiments — - 
to  imagine  such  a  feeling  as  this,  but  its  association  with  the  right  finger 
was  certainly  significant.  The  sensation,  however,  sometimes  occurred  in 
the  wrong  finger,  but  then  ansesthesia  never  followed  with  P.,  though  it 
occasionally  did  so  with  Miss  B.  In  13  successful  trials  on  two  days 
with  P.,  in  which  his  hands  were  covered  with  the  glass  screen,  the 
sensation  was  mentioned  in  the  right  finger.  In  4  of  these  trials,  he 
had  described  first  a  transient  feeling  in  another  finger,  and  in  another 

2  R  2 

592         Mrs.  H.  Sldgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

case,  v/hich  was  a  complete  failure,  a  transient  feeling  was  described 
in  a  Avrong  finger.  But  in  none  of  these  5  cases  did  the  ivronrj  finger 
become  rigid  or  anesthetic.  There  was  also  one  case  on  another  day 
(No.  26)  in  wliich  the  sensation  was  observed  transiently  in  several 
fingers  and  fijially  in  the  wrist  of  the  left  hand,  but  when  he  was  told 
to  close  his  hands,  the  right  thumb  (which  was  the  finger  selected) 
was  alone  found  to  be  stiff. 

Miss  B.  in  5  successful  experiments  mentioned  the  sensation  in  the- 
right  finger  only ;  in  one  case  she  said  it  was  in  all  her  fingers,, 
especially  one,  which  was  the  right  one  ;  and  in  two  cases,-  she  felt  it 
first  in  one  or  two  wrong  fingers  and  then  in  the  right.  In  all  8  cases,, 
the  right  fingers  only  Ijecame  rigid  and  ana?sthetic.  In  another 
successful  experiment,  when  Mr.  Smith  was  willing  that  no  efiect 
should  be  produced,  she  described  the  sensation  in  one  of  her  fingers. 
Again,  in  the  experiment  mentioned  above,  when  a  spot  in  the 
middle  of  the  back  of  her  left  hand  was  selected  to  be  influenced,  she 
had  the  sensation  in  the  middle  finger  of  her  left  hand,  and  in  this  case 
the  aniesthesia  extended  aljove  and  below  the  spot  over  the  metacarpal 
and  proximal  joints  of  the  finger. 

Care  was,  of  course,  always  taken,  when  the  subject  first  spoke  of 
the  sensation,  to  avoid  giving  him  hints  as  to  whether  the  finger  he 
mentioned  was  the  one  we  had  selected  for  experiment.  After  a  time 
we  left  off  encouraging  him  to  j^ay  attention  to  his  sensations,  for  fear 
of  rendering  the  fingers  too  susceptible  to  any  chance  suggestions. 
With  Miss  B.,  especially,  there  seemed  danger  of  this.  One  day  we 
tried  the  effect  of  using  no  screen  between  her  and  Mr.  Smith.  He 
stood  at  the  other  side  of  the  table  on  which  her  hands  were  placed  and 
tried  to  influence  the  chosen  finger  by  merely  looking  at  it  and  willing 
the  efl"ect  without  pointing.  Three  experiments  were  tried,  of 
which  the  second  only  was  successful.  In  the  first.  Miss  B.  described 
the  sensation  successively  in  two  fingers — a  wrong  one  and  the  right 
one — and  ))oth  became  insensitive  ;  in  the  third,  the  sensation  was 
mentioned  successively  in  three  fingers — the  right  one  and  two  others 
— and  all  three  l)ecame  insensitive.  These  experiments  could  not,  of 
course,  have  been  regarded  as  evidential  in  any  case,  because  if  they 
had  succeeded  it  would  have  been  uncertain  whether  Miss  B.  could  not 
have  seen  which  finger  Mr.  Smith  was  looking  at.  Their  chief  interest 
lies  in  their  showing  the  extreme  degree  of  suggestibility  attained, 
which  was  perhaps  greater  on  this  occasion  than  usual,  on  account  of 
the  operator  being  visible  to  the  subject ;  but  it  is  also  interesting  to 
obsei  ve  that  the  degree  of  success  obtained  was  much  less  than  usual, 
in  spite  of — or  perhaps  because  of  (cf.  below,  p.  596) — the  inadequacy  of 
the  means  taken  for  excluding  conscious  impressions  as  to  the  finger 
selected. 

Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. 

593 

With  T.  very  few  experiments  were  made,  since  it  was  found  that 
the  effects  could  not  be  generally  confined  to  one  finger,  the  right 
iiirger  and  one  of  its  neighbours  being  sometimes  affected.  Mr.  Gur)iey 
found  the  same  difficulty  with  some  subjects. 

Co>X'LUSION. 

It  will  probably  be  expected  of  us  that  we  should  state  wliat 
•conclusions  we  ourselves  draw  imm  the  long  series  of  experiments  and 
observations  here  recorded. 

In  the  first  place,  we  think  that  they  adtl  materially  to  the  already 
■accumulated  evidence  for  the  fact  of  telepathy  or  communication  between 
mind  and  mind  otlierwise  than  through  tlie  ordinary  channel.s  oi  sense. 

In  discovering  the  nature  of  this  communication,  however, — how  it 
works  and  what  conditions  are  favourable  to  it, — we  fear  that  haxe 
advanced  very  little.  Still,  our  experiments  suggest  some  reflexions 
and  some  tentative  conclusions  which  it  may  be  ^\  orth  while  to  put 
together  here. 

Among  these  we  may  refer  to  the  danger,  already  discnssed  on  p 
■579,  of  drawing  conclusions  from  negative  experiments.  We  Iiave 
-encountered  instances  of  this  on  two  lines  of  experiment — those  with 
fingers  and  those  with  numbers,  in  huth  of  which  conditions  apparently 
fatal  to  success  at  one  time  were  sul)sequently  found  to  present  no 
insuperable  obstacle.  Two  lessons  may  be  learnt  from  thi.s.  The  fi)-st 
is  merely  that  it  would  be  premature  to  despair  of  obtaining  success  at 
greater  distances  tlian  we  have  yet  done.  The  second  is  that  the  oljstacle 
overcome  in  each  case  cannot  have  been  merely  physical  or  it  would 
have  been  more  constant  in  its  action  ;  it  must  have  had  a  lai-ge 
psychical  elenient  in  it.  Possibly  it  may  have  been  of  the  nature  of 
the  want  of  confidence  that  soraethnes  makes  a  man  unable  to  jump  at 
all  when  he  fears  that  the  height  required  is  beyt)nd  hi,s  powei'. 

If  this  last  surmise  is  correct,  it  would  appear  natural  to  suppose 
that  it  is  the  agent  whose  efficiency  is  affected  hj  the  distance  or  other 
seeming  obstacle,  rather  than  the  percipient.  This  we  believe  to  be 
often  the  case  ;  for  in  the  fuiger  experiments  the  percipient  had,  we 
think,  no  means  of  knowing  through  his  senses  the  variations  in  the 
conditions, — e.g.,  whether  Mr.  Smith  was  pointing  or  not  pointing, — so 
long  as  he  remained  within  a  few  feet  of  him. 

It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  percipient  is  also  lial)le  to  be 
affected  by  supposed  difficulties  when  a^  are  of  changed  conditions,  for 
there  can,  we  think,  be  no  doubt  that  the  possibility  of  telepatliic 
communication  depeiids  on  both  agent  and  percipient,  and  perhaps  on  a 
relation  between  the  two.  The  principal  facts  observed  in  the  course  of 
our  own  experiments  which  support  this  conclusion  are  (1)  the  success 
of  Mr.  Smith  and  of  P.  and  T.  as  agents,  when  others  failed  ;  (2)  "Mr 

594         3Irs.  H.  Sldgwick  and  il/i.ss  Alice  Juhnson. 

Smith's  failure  with  various  persons  not  mentioned  in  our  paper,  some 
of  tliem  (juite  goofl  hypnotic  sulijects  and  easily  suggestible  ))y  him  ; 
(.'5)  Miss  Charleswort.h's  failure  with  Whybrew  (who  was  a  good  per- 
cipient relatively  ti>  Mr.  Smith),  though  she  had  hypnotised  him  (see  p. 
r)72),  and  though  she  had,  she  told  us,  succeeded  with  another  percipient 
— a  lady — some  months  before.'  This  failure  may,  however,  have  been 
due  to  some  change  in  the  conditions  affecting  herself  only. 

Success  in  thought-transference  depending  thus  on  l)oth  agent  and 
percipient  would  naturally  vary  Avith  conditions  affecting  eithei-.  That 
it  varied  with  conditions  affecting  the  percipient  is  certain  ;  for  it 
often  happened  that  Mr.  Smith  could  impress  one  of  the  percipients  on 
d.iys  A\hen  another  seemed  quite  imperAious  to  telepathically  trans- 
ferred ideas.  We  thought  that  there  was  also  some  ground,  besides 
tliat  derived  from  the  finger  experiments  and  already  mentioned,  for 
tliinking  that  failure  was  sometimes  due  to  unknown  conditions  affect- 
ing the  agent  only  ;  Ijecause  it  appeared  to  us  that  P.  or  T.  could  occa- 
sionally succeed  as  agents  better  than  Mi-.  Smith,  th(.)ugh  the  latter 
was  on  the  whole  the  more  eftective  agent. 

The  difficulty  and  uncertainty  of  these  experiments  are  chiefly  due 
to  the  great  varial^leness  in  conditions  Ijeyond  our  control,  and  if  we 
could  discover  something  alxjut  these  conditioiis,  decided  progress 
would  have  been  made  in  the  investigation.  But  here  we  have  very 
little  to  record  in  the  way  fif  conclusions  and  can  only  note  down  a 
few  scattered  (.)bservati(jns. 

We  had  some  reason  to  think  that  freshness  of  interest  in  the 
experiments  on  the  part  of  agent  and  percijiient  and  perhaps  in  others 
concerned  had  a  fa\ourable  effect,  so  that  new  kinds  of  experiment  or 
experiments  with  a  new  percipient  sometimes  succeeded  best  at  first. 
Thus  with  Miss  B.,  the  earlier  numl)cr  experiments,  the  earlier  picture 
ex}ieriments,  and  the  earlier  experiments  in  transfei'ring  hallucinations 
were  the  best.  On  the  other  hand,  a  development  of  power  seemed 
to  take  place,  such  as  made  it  ultimately  possible  to  transfer  numbers- 
from  a  distance  and  to  stiffen  fingers  without  ap2:)roximating  the  hand  ; 
and  success  certainly  had  a  tendency  to  produce  further  success. 

Attention  on  the  part  of  the  agent  both  to  the  idea  to  be  trans- 
ferred and  to  the  percipient  seems  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  an 
intentional  telepathic  transference,  and  it  is  in  fact  difficult  to  imagine 
liow  such  a  transference  could  l)e  cnnscwiishj  attempted  without  this. 
But  we  think  it  very  douljtful  wliether  this  attention,  is  at  all 
essential  to  the  process  of  transference  itself,  whatever  that  may  be  ; 
for  in  defended  successes  (see  above,  p. 548,  and  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,. 
p.  101),  the  agent's  attention  is  not  at  the  moment  on  the  object,. 

'  I'lifortunatcly  no  notes  wei-e  taken  at  the  tinie  uf  lier  experiments  with  tln'.-slady. 

Experiments  in  ThoagJd-Transference. 

595 

and,  as  we  found  once  or  twice  in  our  experiments  in  1889  {Proceedings, 
Vol.  VI.,  pp.  151,  163),  a  jaercipient  to  whom  the  agent  is  not  con- 
sciously attending  will  sometimes  receive  the  idea  to  be  transferred. 

Whether  conscious    attention   or   effort   was  ever  necessary  or 
advantageous  on  the  percipient's  part  is  questionaljle,  but  we  are  in- 
clined to  think  not.    In  the  linger  experiments  it  was  certainly  tin- 
necessary  ;  the  percipient  was  then  quite  normal  and  might,  and  often 
did,  talk  energetically  about  other  things  all  the  time,  and  the  finger 
might  he  rendered  ana?sthetic,  tested  and  restored  without  his  knowing 
that  anything  had  happened.    The  results  obtained  by  the  planchette 
and  by  table-tilting,  too,  seemed  entirely  automatic  and  independent  of 
the  percipient's  normal  consciousness,  so  that,  if  he  knew  what  he 
was  guessing,  it  was  by  observation  of  an  occurrence  with  which 
he  had  had  nothing  consciously  to  do.    With  numbers  or  pictures, 
when  the  object  guessed  was  seen  or  heard  as  a  hallucination  or  quasi- 
hallucination,  it  was,  of  coui'se,  necessary  that  this  should  Ije  con- 
sciously perceived,  or  it  could  not  have  been  described  to  us.  But 
there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  initial  process  in  these  cases  was 
different,  or  more  likely  to  be  affected  by  the  jjercipient's  conscious 
effort ;  for  the  idea  did  not  consciously  precede  the  hallucination,  the 
percipient  only  became  aware  of  it  through  the  hallucination.  AVhen 
impressions  were  long  in  coming,  we  used  sometimes  to  urge  the  per- 
cipient to  try  to  see  the  number  or  picture,  and  P.,  especially,  used 
spontaneously  and  emjihatically  to  protest  that  he  really  was  trying  his 
best ;  but  we  never  had  any  i-eason  to  think  that  this  trying  had  any 
good  effect  on  the  result.    Of  course,  we  do  not  mean  that  expectation 
on  the  percipient's  pait  was  not  a  favourable  condition  ; — it  probably 
was.    But  the  expectation  which  assists  or  produces  sensory  effects 
beyond  our  ordinaiy  control,  such  as  anresthesia  or  sensory  hallucina- 
tions, is  generally  of  a  subconscious  kind,  involving  n(j  consciously 
directed  attention.    What  we  conceive  to  happen  with  owr  j^ercipients 
is  that,  having  placed  themselves  in  a  general  readiness  to  see  some 
hallucinatoiy  number  or  picture,  or  for  one  finger  to  become  rigid  and 
aniesthetic,  the  particular  number  or  particular  finger  is  determined  by 
some  impulse,  and  the  desired  motor  or  sensory  effect  is  carried  out  by 
some  operation  of  the  mind,^  of  which  they  are  entirely  unaware. 

This  brings  us  to  the  last  point  to  which  we  wisli  U)  draw  atten- 
tion, namely,  the  much  greater  uniformity  of  success  in  the  experiments 

1  We  had  tVie  idea  that  it  might  help  us  if  we  could  make  use  of  the  subcon- 
scious part  of  the  agent's  mind  as  well  as  the  v>ei'cipient's,  and  that,  c.<j.,  a  iJost- 
hyi^notic  hallucination  experienced  by  the  agent  might  be  more  easily  transferred 
than  an  ordinary  idea,  )jut  most  of  our  experiments  under  this  condition  were  made 
A\-ith  agent  and  ])ercipient  in  different  liouees,  and  failed.  We  still  think  that  the 
condition  may  be  a  favourable  one  and  hope  to  make  further  experiments  on  this 
X)oint. 

59G        Mrs.  H.  Sidgwich  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson. 

with  fingers  than  in  any  others.  Practically,  with  P.  and  Miss  B.  and 
Y/ith  Mr.  Gurney's  subjects,  success  could  be  relied  on  in  these  experi- 
ments when  Mr.  Smith  pointed  at  the  finger  to  be  aff"ected  (at  any  rate, 
imtil  our  last  two  days,  Avhen,  if  we  may  use  a  metaphor,  we  had  perhaps 
jjut  the  machinery  out  of  gear  by  varying  the  exj^eiiments  too  much) ; 
while  in  all  our  other  forms  of  thought-transference  experiments,  success 
varied  from  day  to  day  in  the  most  inexplicable  manner.  Now,  the  most 
marked  difference  between  the  fing'er  experiments  and  others  is  that 
at  no  stage  do  the  finger  experiments  affect  any  process  with  which  the 
normal  consciousness  of  the  percipient  is  ever  concerned,  and  perhaps 
we  may  legitimately  draw  the  inference  that  the  more  his  conscious 
intelligence  can  be  kept  out  of  the  way  the  easier  success  will  he.  If 
this  be  so,  it  may  be  profitable  at  the  present  stage  of  our  inquiries  to 
tlirect  our  attention  more  than  we  have  hitherto  done  to  producing  by 
telepathy  physiological  effects,  and  such  sijnple  movements  as  are  con- 
stantly performed  unconsciouslj^,  taking  care  of  course  with  these  last 
that  they  are  not  such  as  the  conscious  intelligence  would  naturally 
inhibit,  since  this  would  probably  inti-oduce  an  element  of  difficulty. 
The  fact  that  such  effects  and  such  actions  are  among  those  most  easily 
produced  by  verbal  suggestion  adds  to  the  probability  that  mental 
suggestion,  too,  would  here  find  its  easiest  sphere  of  action. 

Supplement.] 

William  Stainton- Moses. 

597 

SUPPLEMENT. 

I. 

WILLIAM  STAINTON-MOSES. 

In  here  commemorating  the  decease,  on  September  5th,  at  the  age  of  fifty- 
three,  of  my  old  friend,  William  Stainton-Moses,  it  would  have  been  more 
congenial  to  my  feelings  to  have  confined  myself  to  a  brief  but  sincere 
expression  of  personal  respect  and  regard.  But  I  should  not  thus  do  justice 
to  the  deep  significance  of  certain  events  in  his  career.  I  personally  regard 
his  life  as  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  lives  of  our  generation  ;  and  from  few 
men  have  I  heard  at  first  hand  facts  comparable  in  importance  for  me  with 
those  which  I  heard  from  him.  Statements  like  these  need  serious  justifica- 
tion ;  nor  can  they  be  justified  without  a  perfectly  frank  discussion  both  of 
hi.s  gifts  and  of  his  limitations.  What  I  shall  now  say  I  have  said  in  efi'ect  to 
himself,  without  offence  ;  and  his  other  friends,  I  trust,  will  feel  that  it  is 
only  Ijy  recognising  his  points  of  deficiency — unimportant  in  themselves,  but 
v/idely  observable  and  observed — tliat  we  can  eff'ectively  claim  recognition  for 
his  substantial  v.'orth,  or  attention  iov  the  weighty  message  which  liis  personal 
experiences  hold  for  mankind. 

It  was  on  May  9th,  187 4,  tliat  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  met  Stainton-Moses 
for  the  first  time,  through  the  kindness  C)f  Mi's.  Cowiier-Temple  (now  Lady 
Mount-Temple),  who  knew  that  we  had  become  interested  in  "psychical" 
problems,  and  wished  to  introduce  us  to  a  man  of  honour  who  had  recently 
experienced  phenomena,  due  wholly  to  some  gift  of  his  own,  which  had 
profoundly  changed  hi.s  conception  of  life. 

That  evening  was  epoch-making  in  Gurney's  life  and  mine.  Standing  as 
we  were  in  the  attitude  natural  at  the  commencement  of  such  inquiries,  under 
-such  conditions  as  were  then  attainable— an  attitude  of  curiosity  tempered 
by  a  vivid  perception  of  difticulty  and  dra^vback — we  now  met  a  man  of 
University  education,  of  manifest  sanity  and  probity,  who  vouclicd  to  us  for 
a  series  of  phenomena — occurring  to  himself,  and  with  no  douljtful  or  venal 
aid — which  seemed  at  least  to  prove,  in  confusedly  intermingled  form,  three 
main  theses  unknown  to  Science.  These  were  (1)  the  existence  in  the  human 
spirit  of  hidden  powers  of  insight  and  of  communication  ;  (2)  the  personal 
survival  and  near  jiresencc  of  the  departed  :  and  (3)  interference,  due  to 
unknown  agencies,  with  tlie  ponderable  world.  He  spoke  frankly  and  fully  ;  lie 
showed  his  notebooks  ;  he  referred  us  to  Iiis  friends  ;  he  inspired  a  l)elief 
v.'hicli  was  at  once  sufficient,  and  wliich  is  still  sutticient,  to  j^rompt  to  action. 

The  facts  which  thus  imjiressed  us  found  printed  record  mainly  in  a  small 

598 

William  Stainton-Moses. 

[Supplement. 

hook  called  Si/irit  Identity,  now  out  of  print.  Some  were  described  in 
articles  in  Human  Nature,  ;i  magazine  since  defunct.  We  obtained  verbal 
corroboration  from  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival,  Fellow  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford, 
and  from  the  late  Serjeant  Cox.  And  quite  recently  the  contemporaneous 
notes  of  Mrs.  Speer,  fully  corroborating  Stainton-Moses'  own  account,  have 
been  appearing  in  the  pages  of  Li(jht. 

This  certainly  is  not  a  very  complete  or  satisfactory  manner  of  setting 
forth  a  message  of  great  import  to  mankind.  But  both  the  virtues  and  the 
defects  of  the  recipient  of  tliat  message  were  such  as  to  render  him  ill-suited 
to  obtain  for  it  tlie  serious  attention  of  the  scientific  world. 

The  experiences  which  Stainton-Moses  had  undergone  had  changed  his 
views  but  not  his  character.  He  was  already  set  in  the  mould  of  the  hard- 
working, conscientious,  dogmatic  clergyman,  with  a  strong  desire  to  do  good, 
and  a  strong  belief  in  preaching  as  the  best  way  to  do  it.  For  himself  the 
essential  part  of  what  I  have  called  his  "message  "  lay  in  the  actual  words 
automatically  uttered  or  written — not  in  the  accompanying  phenomena  which 
really  gave  their  uniqueness  and  imijortance  to  the  automatic  processes  now 
so  familiar.  In  a  book  called  Spirit  TeaclviiKjs  he  collected  what  he 
regarded  as  the  real  fruits  of  those  years  of  mysterious  listening  in  the 
vestibule  of  a  world  unknown. 

And  much  as  we  may  regret  this  too  exclusive  ethical  preoccupation  in  a 
region  where  the  establishment  of  actual  fact  is  still  the  one  thing  needful,  it 
must  be  admitted  that  twenty  yeai-s  ago  the  scientific  importance  of  these 
phenomena  had  hardly  dawned  on  any  mind.  Among  all  the  witnesses  of  D.  D. 
Home's  marvels  Mr .  Crookes  was  almost  the  only  man  who  made  any  attempt 
to  treat  them  as  reasonaljle  men  treat  all  the  facts  of  nature.  Most  of  the  wit- 
nesses, though  fully  believing  in  tlie  genuineness  of  the  wonders,  appear  to  have 
regarded  them  as  a  kind  of  uncanny  diversion.  The  more  serious  sought  for 
assurance  that  their  beloved  dead  were  still  near  them,  and  straitly  charged 
Mr.  Home  to  tell  no  inan  of  the  proofs  which  they  said  had  brought  to 
themselves  unspeakable  joy.  An  attempt  made,  in  1875,  by  Serjeant  Cox 
and  a  few  others  (among  whom  were  Stainton-Moses  and  myself),  to  get 
these  plienomena  more  seriously  discussed  in  a  "Psychological  Society" 
languished  for  want  of  suitable  coadjutors,  and  on  the  death  of  Serjeant  Cox 
(in  1879)  tlie  Society  was  dissolved.  During  these  important  years,  therefore, 
while  liis  exjjeriences  were  fresh  in  Stainton-Moses'  mind,  and  while  tliey 
were  t(j  some  extent  still  recurring,  he  had  little  encouragement  to  deal  with 
them  from  a  scientific  p(.)int  oi  view. 

When,  liowever,  in  1882,  Professor  Barrett  consulted  him  as  to  the  possi- 
bility of  founding  a  new  society,  under  better  auspices,  he  warmly  welcomed 
the  plan.  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  were  asked  to  join,  but  made  it  a  condi- 
tion that  the  consent  of  Professor  Sidgwick  (with  whom  we  had  already  been 
working)  to  act  as  our  President  should  first  be  obtained.  Under  his  guid- 
ance the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  assumed  a  more  cautious  and  critical 
attitude  than  was  congoiial  to  Stainton  Moses'  warm  heart,  strong  convictions,, 
and  impvdsive  temper,  and  in  1886  he  left  the  Society,  in  consequence  of  the 
jjublication  in  the  Procecdinris  of  certain  comments  on  phenomena  occurring 
through  the  agency  of  the  so-called  "  medium  "  Eglinton. 

From  this  time  he  frankly  confessed  himself  disgusted  with  our  attempts 

JSupplement.  ] 

William  Stainton-31oses. 

599' 

at  scientific  method,  and  as  main  contributor  to  Lhjld  and  afterwards  editor 
until  liis  death,  he  practically  reverted  to  "Spiritualism  as  a  religion  " — as 
opposed  to  jjsychical  research  as  a  scientific  duty.  And  assuredly  the  religious, 
implications  of  all  these  phenomena  are  wortliy  of  any  man's  most  serious 
'  thought.  But  those  who  most  feel  the  importance  of  the  ethical  super- 
structure are  at  the  same  time  most  plainly  bound  to  treat  the  establish- 
ment of  the  facts  at  the  foundation  as  no  mere  personal  search  for  a  faith,  to 
be  dropped  when  private  conviction  has  been  attained,  but  as  a  serious,  a 
continuous,  a  j^ublic  duty.  And  the  more  convinced  they  are  that  their  faith 
ifi  sound,  the  more  readyfshould  they  be  to  face  distrust  and  aversion, — tolay 
their  account  for  a  long  struggle  with  the  vis  inertia-  of  the  human  spirit. 

Stainton-Moses  was  ill-fitted  for  this  patient,  uphill  toil.  In  the  first 
jjlace  lie  lacked — and  he  readily  and  repeatedly  admitted  to  me  that  he 
lacked — all  vestige  of  scientific,  or  even  of  legal  instinct.  The  very  words 
"first-hand  evidence,"  "contemporary  record,"  "corroborative  testimony," 
were  to  him  as  a  weariness  to  the  fiesh.  His  attitude  was  that  of  the 
preacher  who  is  already  so  thort)ughly  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  he 
treats  any  alleged  fact  which  falls  in  with  his  views  as  the  nncriticised  text 
for  fresh  exhortation.  And  in  the  second  place — though  this  was  a  minor- 
matter — his  natural  sensitiveness  was  sometimes  exaggerated  by  gout  and 
other  wearing  ailments  intc)  an  irritability  wliich  he  scarcely  felt  compelled 
to  conceal  in  a  journal  circulating  mainly  among  attached  disciples. 

The  reason  for  ncjticing  these  defects  is  that  tliey  constitute  the  only 
ground  on  which  Stainton-Moses'  trustworthiness  as  a  witness  to  his  own 
phenijmena  could  jjossibly  be  imi^ugned.  I  mention  them  in  order  that  I 
may  say  that,  having  read,  I  think,  all  that  he  has  printed,  and  having 
watched  his  conduct  at  critical  moments,  I  see  much  ground  for  impugning 
his  judgment,  but  no  ground  whatever  for  doubting  that  he  has  narrated 
with  absolute  good  faith  the  story  of  his  own  experience.  He  allowed  me, 
before  he  left  the  Society,  to  examine  almost  the  whole  series  of  his 
automatic  writings  ;  those  especially  which  contain  the  evidence  on  whicli 
Spivit  Identitji  is  based  ;  and  in  no  instance  did  I  find  that  the  printed 
statement  of  any  case  went  beyond  the  warrant  of  tlie  manuscript.  On  the 
contrary,  although  that  book  contains  mucli  careless  writing  and  many 
general  phrases  of  a  loose  rhetorical  kind,  I  believe  that  the  cases  themselves, 
if  stated  with  proper  completeness,  would  often  lie  found  even  stronger 
evidentially  than  the  book  makes  out. 

Let  me  go  back  in  memory,  then,  to  1874,  and  ask  myself  Ikjw  far  the 
impression  then  made  has  stood  the  test  of  suljsequent  experience.  On  the 
negative  side  I  must  place  ;in  increased  knowledge  of  the  possil^ility  of 
unconscious  fraud  in  abnormal  states,  and  an  increased  realisation  of  what 
indeed  was  at  once  evident — the  unscientific  cast  of  Stainton-Moses'  mind. 

On  the  positive  side  I  place  the  important  corro])orative  testimony  of  Mi  s. 
Speer,  now  first  printed.  And  I  must  bear  in  mind  also  the  significant  fact 
that  new  and  independent  evidence  has  reached  us  from  many  quarters  of 
phenomena  closely  parallel  to  much,  though  not  to  all,  which  seemed  isolated 
and  exceptional  in  Stainton-Moses'  earlier  accounts.  On  the  positive  side, 
too,  I  must  reckon  the  way  in  which  his  character  has  worn  on  the  whole 
during  these  eighteen  years.    Those  years  contained  for  liini  mucli  of  moral 

William  Sta inton-Moses. 

[Supplement. 

trial,  I  if  pliy.sical  strain  and  suftering  ;  Init  although  they  brought  out  errors 
of  judgment  and  temper,  they  revealed  nothing  inconsistent  with  high  aims, 
intense  convictions,  a  conscience  heedful  of  the  end. 

If,  then,  on  some  future  f)Ccasion  it  is  permitted  to  me  to  analyse  the 
records  f>f  those  strange  experiences,  the  reader  will  understand  the  attitude 
in  which  I  shall  think  it  right  to  approach  them.  We  must  be  on  the  watch, 
no  doubt,  for  any  indication  of  self-deception,  of  misinterpretation,  of  narrow 
views.  But  we  ought  in  justice  to  feel  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  work  of 
a  sincere  fellow-laljourer  in  our  seldom-trodden  field. 

The  gift  which  Stainton-Moses  possessed  is  a  strange  and  perplexing  one. 
We  know  nothing  of  the  laws  which  govern  its  distribution.  It  is  not  yet 
recognised  as  constituting  a  claim  on  the  admiration  or  the  gratitude  of  man- 
kind. Yet  if,  indeed,  through  such  glimpses,  such  messages,  as  came  to  my 
friend,  our  race  is  being  obscurely  guided  int<j  an  avenue  of  eternal  hope,  it 
matters  little  whetlier  we  talk  of  chance  or  of  merit.  For  who  of  mortals 
need  ask  for  better  than  to  be  made,  whether  by  chance  or  merit,  a  landmark 
'on  such  a  way  ? 

Frederic  W  H.  Myers. 

Supplement.] 

International  Congress.  60i. 

II. 

THE    .SECOND   INTERNATIONAL   CONGREiSS  OF 
EXPERIMENTAL  PSYCHOLOGY. 

The  Second  Intern;ition;il  Congress  of  Experimental  Psycliok)gy^  met  in 
University  College,  London,  by  the  kind  permission  of  the  authorities,  on- 
the  first  four  days  of  August,  1892.  It  was  attended  by  over  300  persons, 
including  nearly  a  hundred  visitoi'.'*  from  all  parts  of  Europe,  and  fronv 
America  and  Australia.  This  Congress,  although  (as  will  be  seen)  it  was  in 
no  way  identified  with  the  S.P.R.,  presented,  nevertheless,  certain  jjoints  of 
contact,  whose  significance  we  may  here  endeavour  fnii'ly  to  estimate.  The- 
Congress  met  under  the  Presidency  of  the  President  of  our  Society  ;  one  of 
its  Hon.  Sees,  was  one  of  the  Hon.  Sees,  of  the  S.P.Ii.  ;  and  the  majority 
of  the  English  members  attending  were  either  members  of  the  S.P.R.  or 
at  least  in  avowed  sympathy  with  its  aims.  Taken  with  all  the  reservations, 
to  be  presently  mentioned,  we  think  that  these  facts  indicate  that  the  severe, 
taboo  long  imposed  upon  the  subjects  with  which  we  deal  has  been  tacitly 
removed  ;  and  that  although  little  or  no  scientific  credit  may  yet  attach  to- 
our  special  researches,  yet  they  are  no  longer  generally  regarded  as  invalidat- 
ing or  dej)reciating  such  claim  to  attention  as  work  in  other  dejjai-tments  may 
have  secured  for  any  inquirer.  Remembering  as  we  do  the  state  of  scientific 
feeling  some  twenty  years  ago,  when  our  own  attention  was  first  seriously 
directed  to  these  subjects  ; — or  even  the  state  of  scientific  feeling  some  ten 
years  ago,  when  the  S.P.R.  was  founded  ; — we  cannot  but  feel  that  this, 
forward  step  has  been  acliieved  more  rapidly  than  we  had  any  good  ground 
to  expect. 

But  while  we  thus  attacli  much  importance  to  the  fact  that  at  this  Congress,, 
for  the  first  time  in  England,  the  rejDresentatives  of  our  Society  have  claimed 
a  place  for  their  special  investigations,  as  a  recognised  dejjartment  of  the 
scientific  study  of  psychology,  and  have  had  their  claim  admitted  without, 
opposition  ;  and  while  we  set  great  value  on  the  harmonious  relations  that 
we  have  thus  established  with  jjsychologists  pursuing  more  beaten  lines  tif 
inquiry,  we  do  not,  of  course,  infer  from  these  relations  that  the  reality  of 
telepathy  or  thought-transference  is  now  generally  accepted  l^y  psychologists. 
No  vote  on  this  subject  was  taken  at  the  Congress,  and  we  did  not  desire 
that  it  should  be  taken  ;  indeed,  we  were  jiarticularly  anxious  that  it  should 
be  clearly  understood  that  no  one,  by  attending  the  Congress,  was  even  in 
the  most  indirect  way  committed  to  a  view  in  favour  of  the  conclusions  which 
the  workers  of  our  Society  have  put  forward.  We  were  quite  content  to 
have  the  unrivalled  ojiportunity  which  such  a  Congress  afiVjrds  of  drawing 

'  An  accoiint  of  the  First  Congress,  which  met  in  Paris,  August,  18Si»,  will  be- 
found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  i>.  171. 

002 

Tlie  Second  International  Congress  of 

the  attention  of  psyclKjlogists  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  our  evidence,  and 
■of  expLiining  fully  our  methods  of  statistical  and  exi^erimental  inquiry. 

In  order  adeij^viately  to  obtain  this  advantage,  it  was  necessary  that  the 
Congress  should  be — what  its  first  founders  in  Paris  intended  it  to  be — fairly 
and  fully  representative  of  the  whole  range  of  experimental  psychology,  and 
should  not  merely  represent  the  workers  in  a  limited  department  of  the 
subject.  When,  h<:>wever,  the  benevolent  interest  accorded  in  Paris  to  our 
sj^ecial  lines  of  inqviiry  had  led  us  to  undertake  the  duty,  offered  us  by  the 
first  Congress,  of  organising  an  International  Meeting  of  Experimental 
Psychologists  in  London,  we  were  aware  that  the  task  of  making  such  a 
meeting  fairly  and  fully  representative  of  the  whole  subject  would  not  be 
free  from  difficulties.  We  were  aware  that  the  amount  of  attention  given  in 
Pai'is  to  hypnotism  and  cognate  subjects  had  incurred  some  disajjproval, 
esj^ecially  in  Germany  ;  and  we  were  aware  that  if  a  Congress  in  Paiis  under 
M.  Ribot's  presidency  was  found  to  be  in  this  respect  unorthodox,  a  Congress 
in  London  2:)resided  over  by  the  President  of  the  S.P.R.  might  be  naturally 
exjiected  to  exhil)it  unorthodoxy  of  this  kind  in  a  still  more  alarming  degree. 
We  were  afraid  that  such  expectations  might  have  a  tendency  to  bring  about 
their  own  fulfilment,  by  leading  important  representatives  of  more  orthodox 
psychology  to  keep  aloof  iixmi  us. 

Accordingly,  we  thought  it  our  duty  to  show  clearly,  in  planning  the  work 
of  the  Congress  and  inviting  papers,  that  we  did  not  confound  our  functions 
as  organisers  of  the  Congress  with  our  functions  as  officials  of  the  S.P.R. 
We  therefore  took  great  care  to  avoid  giving  an  undue  place  to  the  inquiries 
in  which  we  were  sjjecially  interested  ;  and  aimed,  on  the  contrary,  at  making 
our  list  of  papers  as  adequately  representative  as  possible  of  the  various  lines 
of  inquiry,  pursued  by  very  diverse  methods,  whicli  come  within  the  range 
of  psychology, — understood  in  its  widest  sense  as  including  the  physiology  of 
the  brain  and  nervous  system.  We  think  the  list  of  42  j^ajiers  (including 
three  reports)  which  were  laid  before  the  Congress  shows  that  we  succeeded 
tolerably  well  in  this  endeav<iur.  But  we  could  hardly  have  lioped  for  any- 
thing like  this  degree  of  success  without  the  invaluable  aid  of  Professor 
Sully,  to  whose  intermediation  we  were  furtlier  indebted  for  the  privilege  of 
meeting  in  the  spacious  lecture-rooms  which  the  authorities  of  University 
College  liberally  placed  at  our  disposal. 

Reassured  by  the  comprehensive  nature  of  our  programme,  and  by  the 
names  of  the  contributors  who  had  responded  to  the  invitations  of  the  two 
secretaries,  tlie  foreign  jjsychologists  attended  in  numbers  that  realised  our 
highest  hopes.  The  greatest  (.)f  the  living  men  of  science  of  Germany— von 
Helmhi:)ltz — attended  the  afternoon  meetings  of  the  first  two  days,  before  he 
passed  on  to  tlie  British  Association  in  Edinburgh.  Besides  him,  the 
University  of  Berlin  was  represented  by  Professors  Preyer  and  Ebbinghaus, 
who  both  contributed  papers  on  the  interesting  subjects  of  the  "Origin  of 
Numbers"  and  "  Colour-Pex'ception "  respectively.  Dr.  Goldscheider,  of 
Bei'lin,  who  was  unable  to  come,  also  contributed  a  valuable  paper  on  "  The 
Muscular  Sense  of  the  Blind."  Professor  Miinsterberg,  of  Freiburg,  and 
Professor  Lange,  of  Odessa,  also  represented  the  German  school  of  psycliology 
by  cantributing  papers,  though  they  were  prevented  by  illness  from  being 
presjnt  in  person.  On  the  more  physiological  side,  Germany  was  represented 

Supplement.) 

Experimental  Psychology. 

603 

by  the  distinguished  name  of  Hitzig,  wlio  contributed  an  account  of  the  cure 
of  attacks  of  morbid  sleep  by  liypnotic  suggestion.  From  France  we  liad 
Professor  Richet  and  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  witli  whose  names  all  our 
readers  will  be  familiar  ;  Professors  Bernheim,  Delbieuf,  and  Liegeois,  known 
to  all  students  of  hypnotism  ;  as  well  as  Dr.  Berillon,  editor  of  the  Revue 
de  VHijpnotisme,  and  M.  Marillier,  who  has  had  the  conduct  of  the  Census  of 
Hallucinations  in  France.  All  these  contributed  jiapers  or  reports  ;  and  we 
also  received  papers  from  Dr.  Liebeault,  the  founder  of  tlie  ''School  of 
Nancy,"  and  Professor  Beaunis — formerly  at  Nancy — who  co-operated  in 
securing  for  the  School  of  Nancy  the  recognition  of  the  value  of  its  woi'k  in 
liypnotism  which  is  now  generally  accorded  to  it.  Belgium,  Denmark, 
Holland,  Norway,  Sweden,  R(.iumania,  and  Russia  also  furnislied  representa- 
tives and  contributors  ;  and  the  Transatlantic  activity  which  is  now  being 
turned  into  tlie  direction  of  experimental  psychology  found  expression  in 
four  papers — one  of  these  being  by  a  lady,  Mi\s.  Ladd  Franklin,  who  main- 
tained a  theory  of  "Colour-Perception"  opposed  to  that  of  Professor 
Ebbii^ghaus.  Among  the  well-known  English  psychologists  or  philosophers 
who  attended  we  may  mention  the  distinguished  names  of  Dr.  Bain,  Mr. 
Shadworth  Hodgson,  and  Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour,  the  first  of  wliom  oj^ened  the 
proceedings  with  a  weighty  paper  on  ' '  Tlie  Respective  Sphei'es  and  Mutual 
Aids  of  Introspection  and  Experiment  in  Psychology." 

The  abundance  of  our  material  having  rendered  a  division  into  sections 
necessary,  we  thought  it  ])est  to  allot  Neurology  and  Psychophysics  to  one 
section  (A),  and  Hypnotism  and  cognate  questions  to  another  section  (B). 
The  discussions  of  section  B  were  carried  on  for  tln-ee  mornings — Tuesday, 
Wednesday  and  Thursday  ;  along  with  tliese,  the  discussion  on  a  paper  by 
Professor  Janet,  read  on  Monday  afternoon,  on  a  peculiar  case  of  loss  of 
memory,  and  that  on  the  Report  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  which  was 
read  on  Wednesday  afternoon,  form  the  part  f)f  the  whole  proceedings  whicli 
properly  comes  within  the  scope  of  our  Society.  We  propose  accordingly, 
in  the  detailed  account  that  follows,  to  confine  ourselves  to  these  discussions, 
but  we  must  not  omit  to  notice  that  Professor  Richet  in  tlie  suggestive  sketch 
of  the  Future  of  Psycliology,  with  which  he  oijened  the  jiroceedings  on 
Monday  afternoon,  allotted  an  important  place  to  the  "  psychologic  trans- 
■cendentale  "  whicli  we  claim  as  our  special  concern. 

Professor  Janet  gave  a  description  of  a  case  of  amnesia  whicli  differed 
from  ordinary  loss  of  memory  in  being  not  merely  "retrograde"  but 
" antegressive,"  i.e.,  the  patient  had  not  merely  lost  a  jjortion  of  her  stored 
recollections  of  the  past,  but  also  her  power  of  acquiring  new  recollections. 
Tlie  malady  was  due  to  an  emotional  shock  caused — on  August  28t]i,  1891 — 
by  a  lieartless  practical  joke  :  in  consequence  of  the  shock  slie  appeared  not 
merely  to  have  lost  the  memory  of  all  events  that  had  occurred  during  the 
six  weeks  preceding  August  28th,  but  also  to  have  become  incapable  of 
remembering  anything  that  liad  occurred  since  :  all  impressions  seemed  to 
glide  over  her  without  leaving  the  least  trace.  But  some  sentences  uttered 
in  sleep  sliowed  that  though  these  recollections  were  now  lost  to  her  waking 
consciousness,  they  had  not  vanislied  altogether,  and  the  application  of 
liypnotism  was  found  to  restore  them  completely  during  the  hypnotic  trance. 
Professor  .Janet  also  found  that  even  in  liei-  waking  state  there  was  an 

604 

The  Second  International  Congress  of  [Supplement. 

unconscious  memory  of  these  apparently  forgotten  events,  of  wliich  he 
obtained  evidence  by  means  of  automatic  writing  or  speaking,  performed 
wlien  her  consciousness  was  concentrated  on  some  other  process.  His 
explanation  was  that  the  malady  had  not  affected  the  memory — taken  in  its. 
widest  sense — but  had  produced  a  peculiar  kind  of  "  desagrc^gation  psycho- 
logi(pie  "  by  weakening  the  jjatient's  power  of  "  attaching  to  her  personality  " 
her  more  recent  experiences. 

Professor  Ebbinghaus,  of  Berlin,  while  recognising  the  interest  of  the 
facts  brought  before  the  Congress  by  Professor  Janet,  was  inclined  to  suggest 
a  different  explanation  ;  viz.,  that  the  patient's  consciousness  was  so  com- 
pletely absorbed  by  present  feelings  and  perceptions  that  she  had  not  spare 
mental  energy  sufficient  for  the  work  of  reproducing  past  experiences  until 
the  distractions  of  the  present  were  shut  out.  Accordingly,  in  sleep,  or  in 
the  hypnotic  trance,  the  absence  of  such  distractions  was  naturally  accom- 
panied by  the  revival  of  memory. 

The  President  pointed  out  that  though  Dr.  Ebbinghaus'  explanation 
ingeniiiusly  met  the  facts  of  recovery  of  memory  in  dreams  and  the  hyjjnotic 
trance,  it  hardly  seemed  applicable  to  the  manifestation  of  unconscious  or 
subconscious  memory  through  automatic  speaking  and  writing  in  the  normal 
state. 

On  Tuesday  niorjiing,  after  a  paper  from  Dr.  Liebeault,  on  a  ' '  Case  of 
Suicidal  Mania  Cured  by  Suggestion,"  had  been  read  by  Professor  LitSgeois, 
an  interesting  discussion  was  introduced  by  a  paper  of  Dr.  Van  Eeden, 
advocating  strongly  the  use  of  siir/gestion  as  a  therapeutic  agency,  but 
deprecating  the  use  of  hypnotism  strictly  so-called  ;  on  the  ground  that  the 
heightened  suggestibility  of  the  hypnotic  state  Avas  an  ' '  abnormal  con- 
dition"  depending  on  "ataxia  or  di.sintegi-ation  of  the  ijsyche,"  which  must 
be  strictly  avoided.  In  Dr.  Van  Eeden's  view  thei-apeutic  suggestion 
should  be  addressed  ' '  to  the  intellect  and  conscious  volition  of  the  sufferer. 

Suggestibility,  as  defined  by  French  authors,  consists  of  two  parts, 
ideoplastic  power  " — i.e.,  influence  of  ideas  on  bodily  functions — "  and  im- 
pressionability." His  idea  is  to  increase  ideoplastic  jjower,  and  bring  it  as 
much  as  possible  under  the  influence  of  conscious  volitioxr,  without  in- 
creasing impressionability. 

The  discussion  on  this  paper  was  opened  by  Dr.  Bernheim,  who  denied 
the  "abnormality"  of  the  hypnotic  state.  The  heightened  suggestibility 
which  Dr.  Van  Eeden  regards  as  evidence  of  abnormality  is  found — urged 
Dr.  Bernheim — in  ordinary  sleep;  dreams  are  "sensorial  self-suggestions." 
At  the  same  time,  there  are  undoubtedly  many  ways  in  which  suggestion 
may  be  made  to  operate  apart  from  hypnotism,  e.(j.,  in  the  processes  of 
hydrotherapy  and  electrotheraj^y. 

Dr.  Bbrillon  considered  that  the  School  of  Nancy  went  too  far  iu 
identifying  hypnotic  suggestibility  and  the  hypnotic  trance  with  ordinary 
suggestibility  and  ordinary  sleep.  The  artificial  suppression  of  cerebral 
control  and  the  temporary  reduction  of  the  subject  to  an  automaton  in  the 
hands  of  the  hypnotiser— doubtless  in  conset[uence  of  the  temporary  torpor 
of  certain  cerebral  cells — must  l_)e  regarded  as  the  special  characteristic  of  the 
hypnotic  state.  It  was  therefore  abnormal,  though  Dr.  Berillon  by  no 
means  thought  that  it  ought  therefore  to  be  excluded  from  medical  use. 

Supplement.] 

Expe vimental  Psych oloijy. 

G05 

Dr.  Bernheim  said  that  the  susceptibility  to  external  suggestion  ■which 
Dr.  Berillon  regarded  as  peculiar  to  the  hypnotic  trance  might  also  be 
developed  in  ordinary  sleep,  if  suggestions  were  given  to  the  sleej^er  in  such 
a  manner  as  not  to  awaken  him. 

Professor  Delbceuf,  of  Liege,  agreed  with  Professor  Bernheim  that 
there  was  nothing  abnormal  in  the  hypnotic  state.  He  also  agreed  that 
curative  suggestion  might  be  equally  effective  without  hypnotisation  as  with 
it  ;  illustrating  this  by  some  striking  examples  from  his  own  experience. 

Dr.  Sperling,  of  Berlin,  said  that  as  we  do  not  yet  know  what  normal  sleep 
is,  it  is  not  easy  to  say  whether  the  hypnotic  trance  is  the  same  or  something 
different.  Also  we  must  avoid  falling  into  a  dispute  about  words.  The 
hypnotic  sleep  was  clearly  a  state  of  heightened  suggestibility,  but  it  was 
equally  true  that  high  suggestibility  was  sometimes  found  in  the  waking  state  ; 
and  undoubtedly'  suggestion  was  often  a  factor  in  other  modes  of  treatment 
than  the  hypnotic — such  as  electrotherapy,  to  which  Dr.  Bernheim  had 
referred.  Only  it  was  impossible  to  say  exactly  how  far  suggestion  operated 
before  we  had  estimated  what  electricity — or  any  similar  agent — could  do 
without  suggestion.  Tlie  determination  of  tliis  by  careful  experiment  was  a 
point  of  much  importance. 

After  this  discussion  there  was  an  interesting  controversy  Ijetween  Dr. 
Berxheim  and  Dr.  Mendelssohn,  from  St.  Petersbui-g.  The  former  con- 
tended, in  a  paper  on  "Hysterical  Amblyoj^ia,"  that  hysterical  defects  of 
vision  and  all  tlie  disorders  and  diminutions  of  sensibility  in  hysterical 
subjects  were  "purely  psychical"  ;  i.e.,  that  the  sense-perceptions  in  such 
cases  were  normal,  but  that  self-suggestion  prevented  them  from  having 
their  due  effect  on  the  subject's  mind.  Dr.  Mendelssohn,  on  the  other 
hand,  argued  that  some  more  constant  cerebral  cause  was  to  ba  inferred 
from  the  regularity  v^ith  which  similar  effects  manifested  tlremselves  in 
different  cases  of  hysterical  affections. 

On  Wednesday  morning  Professor  DELBtErF,  of  Liege,  began  the  first 
paper,  which  was  on  "The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambulists,  "and  which 
is  printed  in  full  in  this  part  of  our  Proceedings,  by  distinguishing  the  cases 
brought  forward  by  him  from  the  ordinary  cases  of  suggestions  called  ' '  Sug- 
gestions a  echeance  " — i.e.,  suggestions  to  be  realised  at  a  distant  date — 
which  only  proved  that  a  hypnotised  subject  was  capable  of  performing  an 
act  at  a  date  indicated  a  long  time  in  advance,  without  any  consciousness  of 
the  real  motive  force  that  prompted  the  act.  But  the  faculty  that  he  had 
studied  was  different ;  it  was  that  of  appreciating  more  or  less  apf)roximately, 
without  conscious  calculation  or  means  of  indication,  the  passing  of  time. 
He  had  studied  it  with  two  young,  robust  and  healthy  countrywomen,  now 
married  and  mothers,  good  somnambulists,  whose  names  were  constantly  to 
be  met  with  in  his  works  on  hyi^notism.  Those  two  subjects  were  incapable 
of  reducing  exactly  into  hours  and  minutes  a  number  of  minutes  such  as 
1,000  or  even  350,  much  more  of  calculating  at  what  hour  the  1,050th  minute 
after  6.35  p.m.  woidd  fall.  They  received  suggestions  which  they  were  to 
perform  after  350,  900,  1,G00,  1,150,  1,300,  3,300  minutes.  In  two  cases  out 
of  thirteen  the  suggested  acts  were  performed  exactly  at  the  time  ordered  ; 
in  the  other  eleven  cases  the  time  at  which  they  were  performed  differed 
from  the  time  suggested  by  a  period  varying  from  -^t\\  to  y'-th  of  the  whole. 

006 

Tli.e  Second  International  Co^iigress  of  [Supplement. 

interval  fixed.    M.  Delbceuf  ended  by  saying  that  he  drew  no  concluRi<m 
from  liis  experiments  except  that  the  subject  was  one  to  be  studied. 
After  the  conclusion  of  Dr.  Delbosuf's  paper 

The  President  said  tliat  lie  had  listened  with  great  interest  to  Professor 
Delbceuf's  account  of  his  experiments.  If  he  might  venture  to  rush  in  where 
the  caution  of  the  author  had  prevented  him  from  treading,  and  attempt  a 
solution  of  the  remarkable  results  described,  he  would  suggest  that  we  might 
suppose  that  both  the  power  of  estimating  the  lapse  of  time,  and  also  the 
power  of  counting,  ordinarily  possessed  by  M.  Delbceuf's  two  subjects,  had 
been  extended  in  consequence  of  the  hypnotic  condition,  perhaps  owing  to 
the  concentration  of  cerebral  energy  incident  to  that  condition.  Such  an 
extension  would  seem  to  be  more  or  less  analogous  to  the  extensions  of  the 
faculties  of  sense-percei^tion  that  frequently  occur  in  the  hypnotic  trance. 
It  seemed  to  him  that  this  exjjlanation  was  rendered  all  the  more  probable 
by  the  fact  that  the  act  ordered  was  not  performed  exactly  at  the  time  or- 
dered in  11  out  of  the  13  experiments  tried  by  M.  Delbceuf.  It  is  natural 
to  suppose  that  in  these  cases  the  reckoning  had  been  only  rough  and  ap- 
proximate. 

"  In  connection  with  this  c^uestion,"  he  continued,  "  it  seems  to  me  that 
it  would  be  worth  while  to  make  a  systematic  inquiry  into  the  supposed 
power  of  knowing  the  lapse  of  time  in  sleep,  which  many  persons  believe 
themselves  to  possess.    If  it  could  be  shown  that  the  liumau  organism  can 
somehow  measure  the  lapse  of  time  in  sleej)  more  accurately  than  it  can 
measure  this  lapse  through  an  equally  long  period  of  waking  life — without 
the  aid  of  clocks  or  watches — it  would  be  easier  to  understand  how  this  in- 
creased faculty  of  time-measurement  sliould  appear  in  the  hypnotic  state. 
Now,  probably  we  have  all  met  persons,  of  tlie  most  highly  educated  class, 
who  firmly  believe  themselves  to  have  the  power  of  waking  at  any  hour  they 
like — to  catch  a  train,  or  for  anj'  similar  object.   For  such  practical  purposes 
•A  very  rough  ajaproximation  would,  of  course,  be  sufficient,  and  the  explana- 
tion of  the  alleged  faculty  which  is  usually  accepted  among  scientific  persons 
who  do  not  possess  it  is  that  the  self-waker  has  really  only  the  power  of 
giving  himself  a  lighter  sleep  than  usual,  so  that  he  probably  wakes  several 
times  during  the  night,  or  wakes  early — when  the  morning  light  and  noises 
begin  to  assail  his  senses — and  then  dozes  and  wakes  at  brief  intervals  till 
the  appointed  time  arrives.    But  I  have  met  several  persons  who  altogether 
deny  that  their  own  experiences  can  be  explained  in  this  way  :  and  in  one  or 
two  of  the  experiments  that  I  have  persuaded  them  to  try,  a  remarkable 
degree  of  exactitude  without  previous  waking  has  been  reported.  Systematic 
experiments  on  the  point  are,  however,  much  to  be  desired,  and  my  object 
in  speaking  now  is,  if  possible,  to  persuade  some  of  the  persons  who  believe 
themselves  to  possess  this  power  to  make  such  experiments  in  sufficient 
numljer  and  with  the  care  and  exactness  in  recording  conditions  which  are, 
of  course,  indispensable,  if  the  result  is  to  have  any  scientific  value.  It 
would  be  necessary  to  write  down  overnight,  in  hours  and  minutes,  the  hour 
appointed  for  waking  ;  then  to  note  the  exact  time  of  waking  that  came 
nearest  to  this,  and  at  least  the  number — if  not  the  exact  times — of  the 
v^^akings  that  had  occurred  previously  during  the  niglit ;  to  exclude  all  sounds 
of  clocks  or  church  bells,  and,  if  possible,  by  varying  tlie  conditions,  to 

Supplement.] 

Experimental  Psychology. 

607 

■exclude  any  important  operations  of  changes  in  light  and  noise,  and  in  any 
case  to  note  these  last.  If  any  .self-waker  will  have  the  patience  to  try  such 
experiments  systematically  and  to  record  the  results,  I  shall  be  much  obliged 
to  him  if  he  will  either  send  me  such  record,  or  notify  me  ^vliere  it  is  pub- 
lished." 

Then  followed  a  paper  by  Professor  Hitzio,  describing  a  remarkable 
case  of  cure  of  morbid  sleep-attacks  by  liypnotic  suggestion.  After  this  Mr. 
Myers  read  a  paper  on  the  "Experimental  Induction  of  Hallucinations," 
■which  appears,  in  an  expanded  form,  in  this  part  of  our  Proceedings.  Some 
comments  from  Professor  Janet  which  followed,  are  now  embodied  in  the 
paper  itself  (p.  482). 

On  Wednesday  aftenioon  Professor  Sidgwick  read  in  an  abridged  form 
a  part  of  his  final  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations, — of  which  two 
Kid  interim  reports  have  been  already  published  in  our  Proceediiujs.  It  is 
lioped  to  publisli  the  whole  report  in  an  early  number  of  these  Proceed- 
hujs.  Professor  Sidgwick  began  by  describing  the  somewhat  elaborate 
method  used  to  secure  as  complete  accuracy  as  possible  in  the  statement  of 
the  results  of  the  17,000  answers  received  by  him  to  the  questions  circulated. 
Speaking  broadly,  it  appeared  that  about  one  in  ten  of  the  persons  (taken  at 
xandom)  from  whom  inquiry  was  made  remembered  experiences  of  the  kind 
inquired  into.  Among  these  the  largest  class  consisted  of  realistic  human 
Apparitions  of  living  people  or  unrecognised  human  figures,  the  number  of 
apparitions  of  dead  persons  being  relatively  small,  and  the  number  of  grotesque 
apparitions  still  smaller.  In  only  a  very  small  percentage  of  cases  was  there 
any  observed  disturbance  of  healtli  at  the  time  of  the  hallucination — the 
hallucinations  of  fever  and  madness  having  been  excluded  by  the 
original  definition.  A  remarkable  class  of  cases  was  that  of  collective 
apparitions,  the  same  hallucinations  being  simultaneously  perceived  by  two 
or  more  persons.  In  some  of  these  tliere  seemed  a  possibility  of  verbal 
suggestion  from  one  percipient  to  another  ;  in  otliers  no  communication 
seemed  to  have  been  possible  excejat  such  as  may  exist  independently  of  any 
of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense.  The  collective  class  led  on  to  the  stiU 
more  remarkable  class  of  coincidental  liallucinations,  or  those  which  occur 
simidtaneously  witli  some  distant  event  with  which  they  seem  to  be  con- 
nected, especially  the  death  of  the  jDerson  whose  figure  appears.  The  actual 
proportion  of  coincidental  to  non-coincidental  cases,  after  all  deductions  for 
possible  sources  of  error,  was  in  fact  such  that  the  probability  against  the 
supposition  of  chance  coincidence  became  enormous,  on  the  assumption  of 
ordinary  accuracy  on  the  part  of  informants.  If  tlie  theory  of  a  causal  con- 
nection was  to  be  set  aside  it  must  be  by  straining  the  assumj^tion  of 
inaccuracy  on  the  informant's  part  to  an  extreme  pitch. 

M.  Marillier,  in  the  course  of  his  report  on  the  inquii'ies  made  in 
Prance  on  the  same  subject,  stated  that  he  had  had  great  difficulty  in  obtain- 
ing any  replies  to  his  inquiries.  This  was  due  to  several  causes,  among  which 
the  chief  was  the  repugnance  of  the  French  public  to  give  any  information 
on  psychological  subjects.  The  statistical  results  obtained  by  M.  MariUier 
coincided  broadly  witli  the  result  of  the  English  investigation  :  and  the  same 
is  true  of  the  results  of  the  American  inquiry,  forwarded  by  Mi".  Hodgson. 

In  the  discussion  that  followed — 

2  s  2 

608 

The  Second  International  Congress  of  [Suppiemenf;. 

Dr.  Osler  (Johns  Hopkins  University)  remarked  that  no  one  who  saw 
a  haUucinatory  figure  could  be  said  to  be  in  good  health  of  body  and  mind. 
The  mere  fact  of  experiencing  a  hallucination  implied  some  serious  organic 
disturbance. 

Dr.  Elizabeth  Blackwell  said  that  a  new  meaning  seemed  to  have- 
been  given  to  the  term  "  hallucination  "  in  the  report  that  they  had  heard  ■: 
since,  as  commonly  used  in  medicine,  the  term  implied  morljidity. 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  said  that  Dr.  Osier's  view  was  hardly  tenable  in 
face  of  the  fact  with  which  hypnotism  had  made  us  familiar — that  a  full- 
blown hallucination  could  be  produced  in  many  healthy  subjects  by  a  mere 
"  post-hypnotic  order,"  with  no  concomitant  or  subsequent  organic  disturb- 
ance. A  rarer,  but  even  more  instructive,  class  of  experimental  hallucina- 
tions were  those  caused  from  a  distance  hy  an  eflbrt  of  concentration  on  the 
part  of  the  agent.  He  saw  among  the  audience  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck- 
Notzing,  who  had  made  a  successful  experiment  of  this  rare  kind. 

Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  then  described  briefly  the  exijeriment  more 
fully  recorded  in  the  Journal  for  October,  1888  (Vol.  III.,  p.  307).  The 
design  of  this  experiment  was  to  impress,  if  possible,  an  idea  of  himself  on  a. 
friend  at  a  distance,  who  had  no  knowledge  that  the  experiment  was  being 
tried.  What  in  fact  happened  was  that  the  friend  had  a  hallucinatory 
vision  of  him,  coinciding  in  time  with  the  experiment  ;  as  he  afterwards 
learnt,  both  from  tlie  percipient  herself,  and  from  a  friend  who  was.with  her 
at  the  time. 

Professor  Franklin  (Johns  Hopkins  University)  held  that  if  tlie  hallu- 
cinatory apparition  was  of  a  person  known  to  be  ill — even  if  tlie  knowledge 
were  not  accompanied  by  anxiety — tlie  chances  against  the  coincidence  of 
hallucination  and  death  would  be  very  much  reduced. 

The  Prb.sident  .said  that  no  doubt  the  chances  would  be  somewhat 
reduced  in  this  case  :  since,  if  the  percipient's  state  of  health  at  the  time 
were  such  as  to  cause  a  liallucination  it  would  perhaps  be  more  probable 
that  it  would  take  the  form  of  a  friend  known  to  be  ill  than  of  one  known 
to  be  well.  But  mere  knowledge  without  anxiety  could  not  be  regarded  as  a 
vera  cansa  of  hallucinations  :  therefore,  if — as  was  most  frequently  the  case 
in  his  collection — the  hallucination  were  the  x^ercipient's  only  experience  of 
the  kind,  the  chances  would  still  l)e  very  much  against  its  coinciding  acci- 
dentally with  the  death  of  a  friend.  In  reply  to  Dr.  Osier,  he  wished  to- 
explain  that  the  statements  witli  regard  t.o  health  in  the  report  were  made, 
after  careful  consideration  f>f  the  answers  received,  with  the  advice  and  con- 
currence of  a  physician  who  was  a  memlier  of  the  C(jnimittee. 

The  first  paper  on  Thursday  morning  was  read  l^y  Dr.  Berillon,  editor 
of  the  Revue  de  VHypnothme.  It  was  entitled  "  Les  AjJplications  de  la 
Suggestion  Hypnotique  a  I'Education. "  He  said  that  in  1886  he  had  first  called 
attention  to  the  application  wliich  might  be  made  of  suggestion  in  education. 
Since  then  he  had  tried  to  induce  hyijnotism  in  250  cliildren  of  both  sexes, 
from  which  experiments  he  had  deduced  the  following  conclusions.  Of  ten 
children  from  six  to  fifteen  years,  taken  from  all  classes  of  society,  eight  were 
suscejjtible  of  being  sent  into  a  jirofound  sleep  after  the  first  or  second  seance. 
JRobust,  healthy  children  whose  hereditary  antecedents  were  in  no  way  un- 

Supplament.] 

Experimental  Psychologi/. 

609 

favourable  were  generally  very  liable  to  suggestion,  and  consequently  very 
easily  hypnotised.  This  capacity  for  suggestion  and  hypnotism  had  been, 
utilised  to  treat  tlie  following  cases,  which  concerned  education  as  much  as 
medicine  : — Nervous  insomnia,  terror  manifested  at  night,  somnambulism, 
kleptomania,  tics,  stammering,  inveterate  idleness,  uncleanliness,  cowardice, 
the  habit  of  biting  the  nails,  and  moral  perversity.  These  facts  had  since 
been  verified  by  a  large  number  c)f  authors.  They  constituted  tlie  practical 
side  of  ijsychology.  Suggestion  afforded  a  process  of  ijsychological  investiga- 
tion wliich  enabled  them  to  submit  to  a  rigorous  auiilysis  the  development  of 
±he  various  intellectual  faculties  in  the  child,  and  t(j  benefit  education  by  the 
.use  of  the  experimental  method. 

Dk.  Van  Eedex  considered  tliat  artifices  such  as  paralysing  the  arm  by 
.suggestion,  which  Dr.  Berillon  had  described  himself  as  using  in  an  extreme 
.case  of  thie\  ish  disposition,  were  undesirable  with  children,  and  that  moral 
.suggestion  alone  should  be  employed. 

Dr.  Berkhei.m  was  of  ojjinion  that  regular  hypnotisation  was  not  often 
Jieeded  with  young  children.  The  mother  was  able  to  inspire  the  needed 
.suggestions  at  times  of  special  susceptibility,  as  during  the  act  of  falling 
Asleep.  Even  when  asleep  children  v.'ould  usually  i-espond  to  any  verbal  sug- 
gestion. It  was  impossible  to  create  either  an  intelligence  or  a  moral  sense 
not  born  in  a  child  ;  ljut  it  was  possible  and  desira})le  to  repair  by  suggestion 
those  perversions  of  )uoral  sense  which  were  merely  due  to  tlie  influence  of 
bad  companionsliip. 

M.  Berillon  replied  that  it  was  imjjossible  to  say  by  simple  inspection 
whether  the  lack  of  moral  sejise  in  a  child  was  due  to  original  defect  or  to 
subsequent  perversion.    The  result  of  treatment  alone  would  sliow. 

M.  Delbieuf  agreed  with  Dr.  Van  Eeden  that  physical  artifices  were  of 
little  service  in  curing  a  child,  say,  of  the  habit  of  theft. 

M.  Berillon  agreed  that  the  physical  artifice  should  be  regarded  as  a  last 
Tesort. 

Dr.  von  Sohrenck-Notzinw,  of  Munich,  expressed  the  hope  that  Dr. 
Berillon's  interesting  paper,  when  published,  would  contain  statistical  state- 
ments, indicating  the  proportion  of  successe.s  to  failures  in  his  exijerience, 
and  carefully  distinguishing  transient  from  permanent  efl:ects. 

The  President  (Professor  Sidgwick)  said  that  he  thought  tliey  would  all  - 
agree  that  Dr.  Van  Eeden's  method  of  appealing  to  the  child's  moral  sense 
should  be  the  only  one  tried  in  ordinary  cases.  But  he  thought  that  Dr. 
Berillon  had  sufficiently  guarded  himself  against  being  supposed  to  do  more 
than  recommend  hypnotic  treatment  as  supplementing,  not  supplanting, 
jnoral  suasion.  It  seemed  to  him  that,  so  restricted,  it  was  a  valuable  instru- 
ment which  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  reject. 

Mrs.  Sidgwick  then  read  a  paper  on  some  exjjeriments  in  thought- 
transference,  which  is  published  in  an  expanded  form  in  this  part  of  our 
I*roceedings. 

The  proceedings  of  the  morning  concluded  with  a  paper  by  Professoe, 
XiIeueois  (of  Nancy)  on  a  case  of  poisoning  under  the  influence,  as  lie  believed, 
of  suggestion  ;  which  led  to  a  discussion  on  the  justice  of  punishing  crimes 
committed  under  the  overmastering  influence  of  another  will. 

On  two  afternoons  during  the  Congress  Dr.  Bramwell  gave  interesting 

GIO 

The  Second  International  Congress  of  [Suppieinent. 

illustrations  of  some  of  the  effects  of  hypnotism,  and  described  some  of  liia 
ex]jeriences  iu  producing  analgesia,  relieving  from  sea-sickness,  &c.  One  of 
the  most  interesting  tilings  he  described  was  the  removal,  in  one  case,  of 
myopia  hy  suggestion.  He  especially  dwelt  on  the  fact  that  it  was  easy  to 
insure  that  patients  should  exercise  free  choice  as  to  whether  they  would 
accept  or  reject  any  particular  suggestion  of  their  hypnotiser. 

The  names  thus  mentioned  of  the  principal  speakers  in  tlie  Hyj^notia 
Section  seem  fairly  representative  of  the  study  and  practice  of  hypnotism  at 
tlie  present  moment,  and  although  the  papers  covered  a  wide  range,  the 
growth  of  certain  general  tendencies,  as  compared  with  the  Congress  held  in. 
Paris  three  years  since,  might  be  jalainly  noted.  Speaking  broadly,  tliere 
was  a  tendency  to  greater  agreement  as  to  fact,  and  to  greater  diffidence  as 
to  theory. 

I.  In  the  first  j^lace,  as  to  the  actual  observed  facts  of  hypnotism,  there  is. 
now  a  more  universal  admission  of  the  therapeutic  aJvautaije  derivable  from, 
hypnotic  suggestion.  The  former  doubt  as  to  this  beneficial  action  was 
mainly  connected  with  tlie  view,  now  rapidly  losing  ground,  that  hypnotisni 
was  in  itself  a  form  of  hysteria,  and  likely  to  induce  other  forms.  It  still 
remains  impossible  to  doubt  that  injudicious  hypnotisjii  may  do  serious, 
harm ;  but  the  mishaps  thus  far  recorded  have  been  fewer  than  was  probably 
expected  in  any  quarter.  On  the  otlier  hand,  many  of  the  cures  effected  by 
suggestion  have  now  had  time  to  prove  their  permajience.  Although  it  was. 
not  with  these  therapeutic  uses  of  hypnotism  that  the  Congress  was  primarily- 
concerned,  some  remai'kable  cures  were  recorded. 

II.  Along  with  this  fuller  agreement  as  to  tlie  desirability  of  frequent 
use  of  hypnotic  suggestion  in  medical  practice,  went  a  general  recognition  of 
the  important  fact  that  susceptibility  to  hyjsnotic  suggestion  is  not  in  itself 
an  indication  of  hysteria,  or  of  any  morbid  condition  wliatever,  in  the  sub- 
ject. The  School  of  Nancy,  of  course,  have  all  along  been  sound  on  this 
point  ;  and  the  strong  assertions  of  Dr.  Bernlieim  were  here  supjjorted  by  the 
experience  of  the  Parisian  Dr.  Berillon,  who  maintained  that  ' '  contrary  to  the 
current  opinion  "  (now  current  in  certain  small  gi-oups  alone)  "  the  difficulties 
of  inducing  profound  trance  are  greater  in  proportion  as  the  cliild  present.^ 
more  decided  traces  of  neuroj^athic  heredity.  " 

III.  A  tliii'd  conviction  to  which  independent  experience  was  seen  to 
have  led  many  observers,  is  that  of  the  great  imj^ortance  of  self-suggestion  in 
all  forms  of  psyclio-therajjy.  Dr.  Van  Eeden  laid  almost  exclusive  stress  on 
what  the  patient  could  accomplish  for  himself,  by  resolute  effort  of  will,  if 
properly  guided  and  encouraged  by  his  jDhysician.  Professor  Delboeuf 
also  insisted  tliat  in  perhaj^s  every  case  the  jjatient's  cure  was 
effected  merely  by  a  firmer  reliance  on  his  own  jjowers  of  will  ;  by  tlie 
intensification,  that  is  to  say,  of  a  moral  jJrocess  entirely  normal,  and  not 
really  dependent  upon  assistance  from  without.  Carried  away  by  his  grow-  ^ 
ing  sense  of  the  essential  power  of  the  patient's  own  will,  and  the  compara- 
tive superficiality  of  the  aid  afforded  l>y  liypiiotic  artifice,  the  eminent 
jjrofessor  of  Liege  went  so  far  as  to  exclaim  that  "  all  there  was  in  liyjinotism 
was  the  word  hypnotism  itself." 

IV.  But  such  a  dictum  is  of  course  not  a  solution,  but  only  a  displace- 
ment of  difficulties.    This  great  and  gi'owing  mass  of  phenomena,  these  new 

Supplement.] 

Exper ivie  n tal  Psych ology. 

611 

powers  over  the  organism,  these  unheard-of  eflects  for  good  and  ill,  depend 
upon  something  dee2Jer  than  tlie  mere  invention  of  a  name.    When  Prof. 
Bernheim  asserted  that  the  hypnotic  trance  was  neither  more  nor  less  thaiL 
ordinary  sleep,  it  was  well  rejjlied  by  Dr.  SperUng  that  to  define  thus  is 
simply  to  add  to  the  conception  of   common  sleep — already  mysterious 
enough — a  number  of  fresh  mysteries  -which  you  do  nothing  to  explain. 
The  true  meaning  indeed  of  this  refusal  fairly  to  face  the  j^roblems  of 
hypnotism  is  that  men  of  experience  are  coming  to  feel  that  those  problems 
do  not  really  form  an  isolated  group,  but  are  dependent  upon  some  deeper 
facts  in  the  constitution  of  man  on  which  neither  physiology  nor  psycliology 
as  yet  feels  itself  prepared  to  enter.     Nor  is  this  change  in  attitude  a 
thing  to  be  deplored.    For  a  time,  indeed,  the  baffled  sense  that  we  are 
dealing  witli  forces  beyond  our  reach  may   induce   some   barrenness  in 
liypnotic  discussions.    But  it  is  at  least  a  clear  gain  to  have  arrived  at  a 
general  agreement  that  hypnotism,  as  a  subject  of  psychological  study,  can- 
not be  limited  to  the   hystero-epileptic  phenomena  investigated  at  the 
Salpetriere,  and  to  have  got  beyond  the  various  crude  (^I'osi-physiological 
deductions  of  all  hypnotic  phenomena  from  hypothetical  changes  in  cerebral 
circvilation. 

This  is  not  the  place  for  any  attempt  to  foreshadow  the  more  comprehen- 
sive views  to  which  a  wider  and  freer  experimentation  already  appears  to 
l^oint.  It  must  be  enough  to  say  that  in  the  region  of  hypnotism,  as  in  the 
other  regions  which  ovu-  programme  of  Psychical  Research  embraces,  our 
hopes  must  mainly  depend  on  the  amount  of  actual  energy  with  which  Experi- 
mental Psychology  shall  be  puslied  forward  even  from  standjooints  which  at 
present  differ  from  our  own.  Just  as  the  conquest  of  Gaul,  which  for  so. 
long  seemed  a  chimerical  hope,  became  inevitable  so  soon  as  the  Roman 
Republic  had  reached  a  certain  pitch  of  military  force  and  ambition,  so  like- 
wise when  Experimental  Psychology  has  filled  its  ranks  and  perfected  its 
methods,  its  bolder  spirits  must  needs  enter  as  conquerors  the  mountain- 
guarded  region  which  we  are  now  imperfectly  surveying  as  pioneers  of  the 
scientific  host. 

H.S. 

F.  W.  H.  M. 

612 

Edmund  Gurney  Library. 

EDMUND    GURNEY  LIBRARY. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1892. 

Additions  since  the  list  ('/i-  '''  Pivceediags,"  Vol.  VII. 

ENGLISH. 

Bramwell  (J.  Milne,  M.B.),  Hypnotism  and  Humbug  (being 
portion  of  a  lecture  on  Hypnotism  delivered  before  the  York 
Medical  Society,  on  March  9th,  1892)  (2  cojnes)   1892 

OcHOROWicz  (Dr.  .J.),  Mental  Suggestion  (with  a  Preface  by  Pro- 
fessor Chas.  Richet).  From  the  French,  by  J.  FitzGerald, 
M.A  New  York,  1891 

Prince  (Morton,  M.D.),  The  Nature  of  Mind  and  Human  Auto- 
matism  Philadelphia,  1885 

RiBOT  (Til.),  The  Diseases  of  Personality.  Authoi'ised  Translation. 

Chicago,  1891 

Seppilli  (Dr.  Giuseppi),  Report  on  the  Therapeutics  of  Mental 
'DifieAaes{AmericauJottrncd  of  Insanity,  Ap.,  1891).  (Translated 
from  the  .4i-c/i..JiaL,  Sept.,  1890)  '.  Utica,  U.S.A.,  1891 

Tambc'rini  (Professor  A.),  On  the  Nature  of  the  Somatic  Pheno- 
mena in  Hypnotism.  From  the  Italian,  by  .J.  Workman,  M.D. 
{Tlie  Alienist  and  Nevrologist,  July,  1891). ..St.  Louis,  U.S.A.  1891 

Tuckey(C.  Lloyd,  M.D.),  On  Hypnotism (L'r((//(.,  Pt.  XIY.)London,  1892 

FRENCH. 

Journal  du  Macinetisme,  par  une  Societe  de  Magnetiseurs  et  de 
Medecins  sous  la  direction  de  M.  le  Baron  Du  Potet.    20  vols. 

Paris,  1845-1861 

Lettre  d'un  Medec'in  de  la  Faculte  de  Paris,  a  un  Medecin  du 
College  de  Londres,  Ouvrage  dans  le(iuel  on  prouve  contre 
M.  Mesmer  que  le  Magnetisme  Animal  n'existe  pas  {Im- 
perfect) TheHague,  1781 

Lettre  d'un  MjSdecin  a  M.  Court  de  Jebelin  en  reponse  a  celle 
que  ce  Savant  a  adressee  h  ses  Souscripteurs,  et  dans 
laquelle  il  fait  un  eloge  triomphant  du  Magnetisme-Animal 

Bordeaux,  1784 

Li^beault  (Dr.  A.    A.),  Le  Sommeil  Provoque  et  les  Etats 

Analogues  Paris,  1889 

Max-Soion  (Dr.  P.),  Les  Maladies  del'Esprit  Paris,  1892 

Mesmer  (Dr. ),  Memoiresur  la  Decouverte  du  Magnetisme  Animal 

{Imperfect)   Paris,  1779 

Philips  (Dr.  .J.  P.),  Cours  Theori(^ue  et  Pratique  de  Braidisme 

Po.ris,  1860 

Edmund  Gurney  Library.  613 

'HET  (Professor  C),  Essai  de  Psychologie  Generale  Paris,  1887 

Taec'Hanoff  (Jean  de),  Hypnotisme,  Suggestion  et  Lecture  des 

Pensees.    From  the  Russian,  by  E.  Jaubert  Paris,  1891 

WiiRTz,  Prospectus  d'un  nouveau  cours  theorique  et  pratique  de 

Magnetisme  Animal   Strasburg,  1787 

GERMAN. 

Dessoir  (Max),  Neues  iiber  den  Hypnotismus.  Feuilleton  des 

Deutschen  Roman-Zeitung   N.t>. 

Dreher  (Dr.  Eugen),  Der  Hypnotismus,  seine  Stellung  zum 

Aberglauben  und  zur  Wissenschaft  Berlin,  1889 

GROssiiANN    (Dr.    J.),    Die    Erfolge   der  Suggestionstherapie 

(Hypnose)  bei  Influenza  Berlin,  1892 

Kramer  (P.  W.),  Der  Heilmagnetismus  : — Seine  Theorie  und 

Praxis.    3rd  Edition  LeAp~i<j,  1884 

MuLLER   (Dr.    Egbert),  Entlitillung    des   Spukes   von  Resau. 

3rd  Edition   Berlin,  1889 

Reichel  (Willy),  Der  Heil-Magnetismus  Berlin,  1891 

Reichenbach  (Karl  Freiherr  von),  Ein  schwerer  Sensitiv- 
Somnanibuler  Krankheitsfall  geheilt  ausscliliesslich  mittelst 
einfacher  Anwendung  der  Gesetze  des  Odes.  Herausgegeben 
von  Dr.  A.  Freilierrn  von  Schrenck-Notzing  Leipd'j,  1891 

RiNGiER  (Dr.  Georg),  Erfolge  des  therapeutischen  HyiDnotismus 
in  der  Landpraxis.  Mit  einem  A^orworte  von  Prof.  Dr.  Aug. 
Forel   Milnchvn,  1891 

ScHMiDKUNz  (Dr.  Hans),  Psychologie  der  Suggestion,  mitAerzlich- 
Psychologischen    Ergiinzungen   von    Dr.    F.    C.  Gerster 

Stuttgart,  1892 

ScHRExcK-NoTziNi;  (Dr.  A.  Freiherr  von).  Die  Suggestions- 
Therapie  bei  Krankhaften  Erscheinungen  des  Gesclilechts- 
sinnes  Stuttgart,  1892 

Zeitschrift  fur  Hypnotismus,  Suggestionstherapie,  Sugges- 
tionslehre  und  verwandte  psychologische  Forschungen. 
Redigirt  von  Dr.  J.  Grossniann.    Heft  1  and  2  Biiiin,  1892 

Fajardo  (Dr.  Francisco),  Hypnotisrao   Bio  Janeiro,  1889 

Grimaldi  (A. ),  e  Fronda  (R.),  Trasmissione  del  Pensiero  e  Sugges- 

tione  Mentale   Najdes,  1891 

A  full  catalogue  of  the  hools  in  the  Edmund  Gurneg  Lihrary  vas  printed 
<it  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Supplcmerdarg  Catalogues  ivera 
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VI.  and  VII.  Separate  copies  of  these  catalogues 
are  still  on  hand,  and  may  he  obtained  frovi  the  Secretary. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

615 

LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  flSSOClATES. 

{December,  1892.) 

PRESIDENT. 
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge. 

VICE-PRESIDENTS. 
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  S.W. 
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin. 
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  IMount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute. 
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W. 
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham. 
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A. 

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.  A 

Hon.  Roden  Noel,  St.  Aubyns,  West  Brighton. 

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex. 

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon. 

COUNCIL  FOR  1892. 

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 
Frank  Pod.more. 

Professor  W.  Ramsay,  Ph.  D.  ,  F.  R.  S  . 
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S. 
C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D. 
Sydney  C.  Scott. 
H.  Arthur  Smith. 
H.  Babington  Smith. 
R.  Pearsall  Smith. 
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S. 
J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S. 

G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P. 
Thomas  Barkworth. 
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett. 

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C. 
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and 

Balcarres,  K.T.,  F.R.S. 
William  Crookes,  F.R.S. 
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley. 
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D. 
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S. 
Professor  Macalister,M.  D.  ,  F.  R.  S. 
A.  T.  Myers,  M.D. 

HON.  TREASURER. 

H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C. 

HON.  SECRETARIES. 
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge. 
Prank  Podmore,  .32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W. 

SECRETARY  FOR  FRANCE. 
LiEON  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,  Paris. 

SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES. 
Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass. 

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY. 
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C. 

616 

List  of  Memhers  and  Associates. 

HONORARY  MEMBERS. 

William  Cbookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park.gardens,  London,  W. 
The   Right   Hon.   W.   E.    Gladstone,   M.P.,   Hawarden  Castle, 
Chester. 

SiE  Fredekick  Leighton,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W. 
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire. 
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.G.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset. 
•G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W. 

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS. 

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  G,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg. 
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro. 
Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  Kalinar,  Sweden. 

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Louise,  Saint  Jean,  pres  Villefranche, 

Alpes  Maritimes,  France. 
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy. 

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditcii,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  U.S.A. 

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A. 

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris. 

Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W. 

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris. 

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany. 

Professor  Dr.  Heinricii  Hertz,  Tlie  University,  Bonn. 

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Bourg-la-Reine,  France.  •  ; 

Professor  Kovalevsky,  Tlie  University,  Kharkof,  Russia. 

Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France. 

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France. 

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy. 

Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelliof,  Berlin. 

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A. 
Dr.  F.  Freiherr  Goeler  von   Ravensburg,   4,  Nettelbeckstrasse, 
Berlin,  W. 

Tii.  PviBOT,  Office  of  tlie  Revue  riiUosopldque,  Paris. 
Professor  Charles  Riciiet,  1.5,  Rue  de  I'Universit^,  Paris. 
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Sciirenck-Notzing,    29,  Herzog-Wilhelmstrasse, 
Munich. 

H.  Taine,  Mentlion  St.  Bernard,  Haute  Savoie,  France. 
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg. 

List  of  Memhevs  and  Associates. 

MEMBERS. 

Allan, T.  S.,  L.R.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  Salford  House,  Tunbridge,  Kent.. 

AsiiBURTOX,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W. 

Atkinson,  Mlss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy-gardens,  Tynemouth. 

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W. 

Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-gai-dens,  S.W. 

Balfour,  G.  W.,  M.P.,  67,  Addison-road,  London,  W. 

Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,R.  A.,. Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,W. 

Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield. 

Barkworth,  Thomas,  J. P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex. 

Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin. 

Barrett,  Ashley  William,  M.B.  (Lond.),  42,  Finsbury-square,  E.G. 

Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W. 

Battersea,  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring. 

Bective,  The  Countess  of,  XJnderley  Hall,  Kirkby  Lonsdale. 

Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London. 

Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E. 

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gai-dens,  London,  S.W. 
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B. 
BiBBY,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambi'idge. 
Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcliam,  Surrey. 
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey. 
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W. 
Blakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield. 
Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W. 
Bramwell,  John  Milne,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square,  W. 
Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sar.Vwak,  12,  Hans-place,  London,  S.W. 
Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon. 
BusHELL,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow  on-the-Hill. 
Bote,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute, 
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  op,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W. 
Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury- road,  Oxfoi-d. 
Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-squai^e,  London,  S.W. 
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop. 
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin. 
Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W. 
Coles,  Donald  A.,  M.D.,  Sydney  House,  Sutton  Court-road,  Chiswick,W. 
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  Is.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Cavendish- 
square,  London,  W. 
Crawford,  F.  Marion,  Villa  Crawford,  Sant'  Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy 
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W. 
Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  36,  Sussex-square,  Brighton. 

618 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris. 

Dakin,  Hev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire, 

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  jNI.A.,  Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey. 

Damania,  Surgeon-Major  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W. 

Dawkin,  William,  61,  Clifton-street,  Larkhall-lane,  S.W. 

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B. 

Dixon,  Edward  T.,  12,  Barkstone  Ma,nsions,  South  Kensington,  S.W. 

DoDGSON,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford. 

Downing,  Charles,  Athelston,  High-road,  Streatham,  London,  S.W. 

Dugdale,  Mrs.  Stratford,  Mere  vale  Hall,  Atherstone. 

Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W. 

Elder,  Mrs.,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W. 

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset. 

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.  a..  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London,  E.G. 

Eno,  J.  C,  W^oodHall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E. 

EwiNG,  Lieut. -Colonel  A.,  The  Lasvn,  Taunton. 

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pamp-court,  Temple,  London,  E.O. 

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  RedclifFe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W. 

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  58,  Marine  Parade,  Brighton. 

Forster,  Anthony,  6,  Anglesea-terrace,  Geusing-gardens,  St.  Leonards. 

Foster,  Gerald  H.,  5,  Cleveland-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W. 

Fountain,  Alfred,  The  Elms,  Cornwall-road,  Uxbridge. 

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-road,  Hampstead,  N.W. 

Gardner,  Right  Hon.  Herbert,  M.P.,  46,  Down-sti-eet,  Piccadilly,  W. 

Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  Rue  d'Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris. 

Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.  D.,  Marton,  Basechurch,  Salop. 

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  Sheffield. 

Goodman,  Louis  Henry,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W. 

Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  6,  Westbourne  Grove-terrace,  London,  W. 

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G. 

Greener,  W.  O.,  7,  Pai-k  Hill-road,  Harborne,  Birmingham. 

Guest,  A.  H.,  L.R.C.P.E.,  Westbourne,  Whalley- range,  Manchester. 

GuRNEY,  Rev.  Alfred.  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  S.W. 

GuRNEY,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W. 

■GuRNEY,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W. 

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchard  wood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks. 

Hayward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge. 

Helme,  Captain  Burciiall,  J.P.,  Bishopstrow  House,  Warminster. 

Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby. 

Henry- Anderson,  Mrs.  I.,  Druids'  Mere,  Blairgowrie,  N.B. 

Hewetson,  H.  Bendelack,  F.L.S.,  M.R.C.S.,  11,  Hanover-square,  Leeds. 

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 

Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  JMelbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

619 

Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  B.A.,  75,  Eaton-square,  S.W. 
HoLLOND,  John  E,.,  M.A.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley -street,  Portman-square,  W. 
Holt,  H.  Sheewin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford. 
Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George' s-road,  London,  S.W. 
Howard,  Robert  Henry,  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham. 
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterliam 
Valley,  Surrey. 

Hutchinson,  Frederick  W.  H.,  B.A..  1,  Emmanuel-road,  Cambridge. 
Hutchison,  Rev.  R.  P.,  M.A.,  Martyr  Worthy  Rectory,  Winchester. 
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Pai'k-villas,  London,  W. 
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland. 

Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Ohester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W. 
Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-sti-eet,  London,  W. 

Joyce,  S.,  Junr.,  158,  Princess-road,  Alexandra  Park,  Manchester. 

Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W. 

Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester. 

Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh. 

Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors. 

Lafone,  Alfred  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames. 

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone. 

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C. 

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W. 

Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales. 

Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  op.  The  Deanery,  Lincoln. 

Lodge,  Professor  0.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool. 

MacColl,Rev.Canon  MALCOLM,M.A.,Devonshire  Club,  St. James's, S.W. 

Mackay,  Mrs.,  7,  Buckingham-gate,  London,  S.W. 

Mackenzie,  J.  Kenneth  D.,  Broadway  Chambers,  Westminster,  S.W. 

Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough. 

Marshall,  John  William,  M.  A.,  The  Holt,  Godalming. 

IMarten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E. 

Massey,  Charles  C,  121,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W. 

Matthews,FrankH.,M.A.,  Ivy  Villa,  Beulah  Hill, Upper  Norwood,  S.E. 

McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Garscadden,  Bearsden,  near  Glasgow. 

Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley. 

Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W. 

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,F.R.G.S. 

MoNEY-OouTTS,  Francis  Burdett,  Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly,  W. 

Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W. 

Mulholland,  Mrs.,  Woodrising  Hall,  Shipdham,  Norfolk. 

Murray'-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford. 

Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  2,  Manchester-square,  London,  W. 

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge. 

Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W. 

620 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

JSTicoLL,  Augustus,  M.B.,  99,  Elm  Park -gardens,  South  Kensington,  S.W. 

Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A. 

Penn,  John,  M.P.,  22,  Carlton  House-terrace,  London,  S.W. 

Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  TenerifFe,  Canary  Islands. 

Petrovo-Solovovo  [Solovoy],  Michael,  9,  Mohovaia,  St.  Petersburg.. 

PiLCHER,  Giles  T.,  United  University  Club,  Pall  Mall  East,  S.W. 

Phipps,  Miss,  Knel)worth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts. 

PoDMORE,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  IST.W. 

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C. 

PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W. 

PvE,  William  A.,  24,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W. 

Rayleigii,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.  .. 

Ridley,  Henry  IST.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Botanic  Gcirdens,  Singapore. 

Robertson,  C.  Lockiiart,  IM.D.,  Guns  Green,  The  Drive,  Wimbledon: 

Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N. 

Rogers,  R.ev.E.H.,M.  A. ,Yicarage,  Thames  Ditton,Kingston-on-Thames> 

Rogers,  G  eorge  F.,  B.A.,  1 2-3,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W^. 

Ross,  A.  Galt,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Yictoria-road,  London,  W. 

RiicKER,  Professor  Arthur  W.,  F.Pt.S.,  Errington,  Clapham  Pk.,  S.W^ 

Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead. 

Rylands,  Thomas  G.,  F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Hightields,Thelwal!,  nr. Warrington. 

Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  40,  Portland-place,  London,  W. 

Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill, London, S.E. 

Selous,  Edmund,  Barton  Mills,  near  Mildenhall,  Suffolk. 

Shove^Miss  E.,  K.Q.C.P.I.,M.B.,  25,  St.  Mark's-cres.,  Regent's  Pk.,  N.W. 

Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge. 

SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  H.,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge. 

Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford. 

Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W. 

Sisley,  PtiCHARD,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W. 

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C. 

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A. 

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W. 

SOLOVIOFF,  WSEVOLOD. 
SOLTYKOFF,  PrINCE  AlEXIS. 

Stanhope,  The  Plight  Hon.  E.,  M.P.,  111,  Eaton-square,  London,  W. 
Stanley-,  Henry  M.,  D.O.L.,  LL.D.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.W. 
Stead,  William  T.,  Mowbray  House,  Norfolk-street,  Strand,  W.C. 
Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge. 
Stephenson,  Sir  Augustus,  K.C.B.,  Q.C.,  46,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W. 
Stock,  St.  George,  M.A.,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford. 
Stogdon,  John  Cole,  M.A.,  18,  Clement's  Inn,  London,  W.C. 
Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,Portman-square,  London,  W. 
Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

621 

Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  Loudon,  W. 
Tatteksall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford. 
Taylor,  R.ev.  Cjiarles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey. 
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W. 
Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Cam- 

berley,  Surrey. 
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey. 
Thomas,  Joseph  William,  F.I.C,  F.C.S.,  Drunipellier,  Gloucester. 
Thomson,  Professor  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham. 
TucKEY,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  14,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W. 
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Milton  Hall,  Cambridgeshire. 
TwEEDiE,  George  R.,  F.C.S.,  54,  Hawley-square,  Margate. 
Vaguer,  William  H.,  .54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W. 
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W. 
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harro\v-on-the-Hill,  IMiddlesex. 
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  2,  Ridgeway-road,  Redhill. 
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  107,  Florence-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N. 
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley-place,  Great  Warley,  Essex. 
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Dunridge,  West  Hill,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea. 
WisDEN,  Lieut.  Thomas  Faulconer  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing. 
Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton. 

WooDRUFPE,  Miss  Adelaide,  c/o  National  Provincial  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, 88  Cromwell  I'oad,  S.W. 
Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W. 
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W. 

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES. 

Carlile,  W.  a.,  144-,  Albert-road,  Aston,  Birmingham. 

Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  V/aies. 

Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W. 

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff. 

Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  Rye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarl^orougli. 

Hayes,  Joseph  W.,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy. 

James,  Captain,  10,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W. 

Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  31,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford. 

Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery -road,  Southend. 

Kirk,  Joseph,  1,  Ripon  Villas,  Upper  R,ipon-road,  Plumstead,  Kent.. 

Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Heswall,  Cheshire. 

Mangin,  Louis,  130,  Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris. 

Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13,  The  Crescent,  Gateshead. 

Robertson,  Miss  N.,  1,  Oakley-street,  Chelsea,  S.W. 

Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon. 

Scudamore,  Mrs.,  3,  ToUington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N. 

G22 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gitford  Rectory,  Essex. 

.SuuFELDT,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution, Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A. 

SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Se.,  Bradford,  Yorkshire. 

Walwvn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol. 

Wing  FIELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon. 

ASSOCIATES. 

A  DAIR,  Mrs.,  Glenavon,  Cookstown,  Co.  Tyrone. 
Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge. 
AiNSLiE,  AiNSLiE  DouGLAS,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W. 
Alcock,  Richard,  M.B.,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole. 
Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford. 
Allen,  C.  F.  Egerton,  M.P.,  B.A.,  Heywood  Cottage,  Tenby. 
Allen,  Frederic,  Sidmouth-road,  Newcastle,  Staffordshire. 
Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  Co.  Dublin. 
Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  83,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W. 
Amery,  W.  C,  13,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham. 
Anderson,  James  Arbutiinot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W. 
Anderson,  Miss  Margery,  25,  Lansdowne-cres.,  Kensington  Park,  W. 
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough. 
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury. 
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I. 
Ashcroft,  Rev.  Thomas,  The  Manse,  West  Leigh,  near  Manchester 
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington. 
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah. 
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester. 
Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston. 
Barmby,  Rev.  James,  B.D.,  Pittington  Vicai-age,  Durham. 
Barrett,  Rev.  Canon,  M.  A.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Lincoln. 
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  GlengarifF,  Co.  Cork. 
Barkworth,  Lieut.  John  R.,  R.E.,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta. 
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  60,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  W. 
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone. 
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  Christ's  College,  Brecon. 
Bazley,  Sir  Thomas  S.,  Bart.,  J. P.,  M.A.,  Hatherop  Castle,  Fair-ford, 
Gloucestershire. 

Beazley,  Lieutenant-Oolonel  George  G.,  74,  RedclifFe-square,  S.W. 
Beatty,  Octavius,  Killevey,  Darleston-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey. 
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterfield-gardens,  London,  W. 
Bell,  Bainbridge  R.,  The  Club,  Colombo,  Ceylon. 
Bell,  Charles  W.,  .J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex. 
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W. 
1>enson,  R.  Hugh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

623 

Bergent,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavilgen,  Stockholm. 

Berkeley,  Captain-  H.  Fitzhardinge,  R.N.,  Warwick  Lodge,  Rivers 

court,  Hammersmitli,  "VV. 
Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "Nelson,"  Portsmouth. 
Berrey,  Walter  F.  M.,  M.A.,Westera  Lodge, Olapham  Common,  S.W. 
Bevan,  Rev.  0.  B.,  M.A.,  30,  St.  Andrew's-i-oad,  Southsea. 
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W. 
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W, 
BiiWLEY,  MiS3  Mary  M.,  Netherton  House,  Claphatn  Common,  S.W. 
Bickford-S-MITH,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,EQdymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W. 
BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy. 
BiCKNELL,  jSTorman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenham,  Kent. 
Bidder,  G-eorge  P.,  Jqnr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey. 
Bird,  George,  M.D,,  49,  Welbeck-street,  London,  W. 
BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Down  View-road,  Worthing. 
Blaikie,  Miss  J.  L.,  10,  Stratford-place,  London,  W. 
Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings. 
Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendoa-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  W. 
Boldero,  Lieut.-General  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone. 
BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton. 
Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  c/o  A.  Scott  and  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burmah. 
Bonus,  J.,  Major-Gen.,  R.E.,  The  Cedars,  Strawberry  Hill,  nr.  London. 
Boorne,  Herbert  H.,  Sydenham  House,  Reading. 
BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France. 
Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset. 
Bouverie,  Edward  O.  P.,  M.  A.,  93,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W. 
BoviLL,  Mrs.  Alfred,  9,  St.  Andrew's-place,  Regent's  Park,  N.AV. 
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Highclere  Rectory,  Newbury. 
BowLBY,  Arthur  S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London, W. 

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B. 

Boyd,  William  Henry,  Ballymacool,  Letterkenny. 

Bramston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester. 

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon. 

Brandretii,  Henry  S.,  Fairholrae,  Weybridge.  .  . 

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire. 

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.  :  •  - 

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham. 

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Rawdon  Hall,  near  Leeds.  . 

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A. 

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E. 

Brown,  Mrs.,  21,  Soutli-street,  Park -lane,  W. 

BitowN,  Miss  Johnson,  c/o  Miss  Holland,  35,  Duke-street,  Southport. 

2  T  2 

G24 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

r.ROWNE,  BnwARD  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge. 
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge. 
Brownlow,  The  Countkss,  iVahridge,  Berkhamstetl. 
BauHNS,  TuEODORE^  Simferopol,  Eussia. 

Bk'/ce,  Mi8s  Kathleen,  15,  Nobting  Hill-square,  Cainpdeu  Hill,  W. 

Buckle,  W.  T.,  M.B.  (LojuI.),  5,  Vicarage  Villas,  Willesden,  N.W. 

Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcliam,  Surrey. 

Bur,MER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York. 

Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenliall-street,  London,  E.C. 

Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury. 

Burton,  Miis.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W. 

Butcher,  Mlss,  22,  CoUingham-place,  London,  S.W. 

Butler,  G.  W.,  B.A.,  F.G.S.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton,  Surrey. 

Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming. 

Buxton,  Lady,  Shadwell  Court,  Thetford. 

Caird,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  Soutli  Hampstead,  London. 
Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  57,  Chestertou-road,  Cambridge. 
Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Sandon,  Wellington,  Salop. 
Campbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B. 
Cajipbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  69,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W. 
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton. 
Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield. 
Caudee,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  Pounders-court, 

Lothbury,  London,  E.C. 
Caye-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W. 
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking. 
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham. 
Chandler,  Rey.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge. 
Charlesworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  Maitland  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W. 
Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C,  F.R.A.S.,  F.R.G.S.,  2)Sth  Bombay 

Pioneers,  Kirkee,  Bombay. 
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  UniYersity  College,  Bristol. 
Guilders,  Miss  F.  L,  Villa  Dalgorouky,  Poggio  Imperiale,  Florence. 
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B  ,  M.R.C.S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill. 
Clayequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin. 
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  Hillcote,  Highcroft  Villas,  Brighton. 
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A. 
Coates,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  N.B. 

Colchester,  Rey.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  24,  Davies-street,  Berkeley -square,  W. 

Cole,  Alfred  C,  M.A.,  64,  Portland-place,  W. 

Coleridge,  Miss  Ohristabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay. 

Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher. 

Colthurst,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W. 

List  of  Memhers  and  Associates. 

625 

Cdlvile,  Colonel  Hexry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapsl-st.,  Belgra re-square,  W. 
CooNEY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  Tessauran  Rectory,  Banagher,  King's 
Co.,  Ireland. 

Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  64,  Rue  d'Orleans,  Brussels. 

CoRT  VAN  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  VY.  A.,  Amsterdam,  Holland. 

CouES,  Dr.  ELLioTf,  1,726,  iST.  Street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C,  U.S.A. 

Cox,  Mrs.,  9,  Bessborough-street,  South  Belgravia,  S.W. 

Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B. 

Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockliarton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B. 

Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal. 

Crews,  Richard  G.,  Gleuholme,  Mount  Park,  Ealing,  W. 

CitoWE,  W.  Leadham,  24,  Cornwall -road,  Westbourne  Park,  W. 

Crowther,  W.  Fearne,  Wellington-terrace,  Hailsham,  Sussex. 

Cruise,  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  Dublin. 

Cunningham,  G.,D,M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge. 
Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge. 
Daintrey,  Charles  J.,  Petworth,  Sussex. 
Daniel,  A.  M.,  B.A.,  Temple  Chambers,  London,  E.G. 
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge. 
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  WooUohra,  New  South  Wales. 
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro  Villas,  Cheltenham. 
Davis,  A.  E.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.L,  20,  Great  George-sq.,  Liverpool. 
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  35,  High-street,  Lewisham,  S.E. 
Dickinson,  Goldsworthy  L.,  M.i\..,  King's  College,  Cambridge. 
Dickinson,  Mrs.,  Woodlea,  Bedford  Hill,  Balham. 
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W. 
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton. 
Di.xON,  Hugh  N.,  jVLA.,  F.L.S.,  Wickham  Hou.se,  East  Pai-k  Parade, 
Northampton. 

DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia. 

DoBiE,  St.^.nley  L., Surgeon Lt.-Col.,  Supt.  Govt.  Lunatic  Asylum,Madras. 

Doubleday,  Mrs.  Frances  G.,  c,  o   Drexel,    Harris   and   Co.,  37, 

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris. 
Doveton,  F.  B.,  Glencroft  House,  Lyndhurst-i'oad,  Exeter. 
DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliffe- 

square,  London,  S.W. 
Dunn,  Edmund  A.,  92,  Regent-street,  London,  W. 
Eagle,  Frederick,  Newport,  near  Barnstaple. 
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W, 
E.ARLE,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W. 
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington. 
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York, 
Elliot,  Mrs.  Minto,  63,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W. 
Elliott,  Sir  Ch.arles  Alfred,  K.C.S.L,  LL.B.,  Calcutta. 

G26 

List  of  Memhers  and  Associates. 

Elliott,  Ruv.  W.  A.,  Matebele  Land,  via  Mafeking,  British  Bechuauit 

Land,  South  Africa. 
Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-sfcreet,  London,  S.W. 
Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  4,  Warwick-square^  London,  8. W. 
Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W. 
Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finboi'ough-road,West  Broinpton,  London,  B.W. 
Ermacora,  Dr.,  G.B  ,  Padua,  Italy. 
Evans,  Kirkiiam,  Adelaide,  8outii  Australia. 
Evans,  Mrs.,  Llanmaes  liouse,  near  Cowbridge,  South  Wales. 
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Technical  Institute,  Teramo,  Italy. 
Farncombe,  George  Richard,  B.  A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birminghan^. 
Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  Newman  House,  Kennington-road,  S.E. 
Felton,  Alfred,  xMelbourne,  Australia. 

Fielding,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  25,  Cardigan-road,  Richmond,  near  London. 
Finch,  Heneage  Wynne,  Junr.,  B.A.,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesley. 
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas. 
FitzGerald,De,smond  G.,M.S.T.E.,46,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W. 
Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of 

Adelaide,  South  Australia. 
Flynt,  AVilliam  GxVrnett,  7,  Walmer-road,  Birkdale  Park,  Southi)oLt. 
Fort,  Charles  Leyland,  B.A.,  Alderbury  House,  Salisbury. 
Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  66,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W. 
Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Palanicotta,  Madras  Presidency. 
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W, 
Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W. 
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W. 
Garbett,  Edward  H.,  Barcombe  House,  Hull. 
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  Wantage. 
Gardner,  The  Lady  Winifred,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  W. 
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladljroke-squaro,  W. 
Garet-Charles,  G. G.,Woodleigh,  Gough-road,  Edgbaston, Birminghaii.s. 
Garry,  Francis  N.,  M.A.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Reading. 
Gessmann,  Gustav.,  Junr.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altraansdorf,  Vienna. 
Gibotteatj,  Aime,  M.D.,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz. 
GiLCRiEST,  W.  F.,  A.I.C.E.  (Ireland),  Sligo. 
Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin. 
Godfrey,  ThOxMAs  H.,  M.B.,  The  General  Dispensary,  Jersey. 
Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.AV.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India. 
Goodier,  Miss  B.  M.,  Fulshaw  Bank,  Wilmslow,  Cheshire. 
Goodman,  Roger  N.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Brookheld,  Cambridge. 
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester. 

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  1,  Garden-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C. 

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W. 

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Meadowside,  Heald-place,  Rusholme,  Manchester. 

Lif^t  of  Meiiibers  and  Associates. 

627 

Grantham,  F.  W.,  100,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W. 

Gray,  Rev.  A.,  M.A.,  21,  Shakespeare-road,  Bedford. 

Green,  C.  T.,  M  R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-nit.,  Birkenhead. 

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn. 

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A,,  Cottenham  Rectory,  Cambridge. 

Grier,  Captain  George  R.,  Bagshot  Lodge,  Athlone. 

Griffith,  Miss  E.  G,  37,  York-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W. 

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  LlandafF. 

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  ]\r.A.,  Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts. 

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop. 

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  ISTational  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W. 

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket. 

Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta, 

GuNTON,  Rev.  Charles  P.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle. 

GuNTON,  Rev.  P.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge. 

Gurney,  Rev.  P.,  M.  A.,  St.  John's  Cottage,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton  Abbott. 

Hackett,  James  P.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia. 

Hall,  Charles  S.,  Cambridge  House,  Westgate  AVithout,  Canterbury. 

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  2,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Kensington,  W. 

Hansford,  Charles.  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester. 

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Grange,  Chorlton-cum-Hardy,  Manchester. 

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport. 

Harpuu,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark. 

Harris,  J.  C,  Bruce  Herald  Office,  L^nion  St.,  Milton,  Otago,  N.Z. 

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley, 

near  Pawkham,  via  Dartford. 
Hartshorn,  Miss  C,  5,  Philbeach  Gardens,  S.W. 
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburu-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W. 
Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W. 
Hayes,  Prederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W. 
Heaton,  Charles,  M.R.C.S.,  Watford,  Herts. 
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  55,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida-vale,  W. 
Henniker-Major,  The  PIon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W. 
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham. 
Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants. 
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C. 
Hibbs,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W. 
Higgin,  p.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin. 
Hildyard,  p.  W.,  St.  Nicholas  Club,  81a,  Queen  Victoria-st.,  London,  E.C. 
Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Cheltenham. 
Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham. 
Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh. 
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C. 
Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle. 

G28 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Hooding,  Miss,  8el\vood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury. 

Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixham. 

Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.Iv.C,  The  Vicarage,  Aylesford,  Kent. 

Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Canipden  Hill,  London,  W. 

HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris. 

Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  M.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds. 

Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,W. 

Hopkinson,Professor  A.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Lodge, 3 2,  Heme  Hill,  S.E. 

Horne,  Alderson,  10,  Norfolk-street,  London,  W. 

Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Cambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O. 

HovvoRTii,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester. 

HObbe-iSchleiden,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Steglitz,  near  Berlin. 

HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire. 

Hugiies-Hugiies,  Mrs.,  25,  Seymour-street,  Portman-square,  W. 

HuME-RoTHERY,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

HuMFREY,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  \V. 

Humphreys,  Edavard  H.  P.,  Denmark  Hill,  London,  S.E. 

HuTCiiiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town, 

Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton. 

Inglis,  Rev.  D.,  Douglas,  Isle  of  ]\Ian. 

Innes,  Lieut.-Colonel  P.  R.,  11  Cheniston-gardens,  London,  W. 

Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon-Major,  Govt.  House,  Ganesh  Kliind,  Bombay. 

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare. 

Jac^kson,  Miss  E.  R.,  Grammar  School  for  Girls,  Thetford. 

Jeaffreson,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W. 

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham. 

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge. 

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Myn-yr-Afon,  Ruabon. 

Jennings,  Mrs.,  16,  Lower  Sloane-street  S.W. 

Johnson,  William  Ernest,  M.A.,  LlandafF  House,  Cambridge. 

Johnston,  Miss  M.       16,  Gunterstone-road,  West  Kensington,  W. 

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk. 

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge. 

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  I/odge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin. 

Keatinge,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Lodgelands,  Balcombe,  Sussex. 

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M,A.,  Tiie  Rectory,  Navan,  Co.  Meath. 

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  2,  Lloyd-place,  Blackheath, London,  S.E. 

Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney. 

Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham. 

Kimber,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  Soutii  Kensington,  London,  S.W. 

Kingsbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackiwol. 

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W. 

Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia. 

Konstamm,  Edwin  M. 

Lid  of  Memhcrs  and  Associates. 

C29 

Lach-Szyrma,Rev.W.S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,  Barkiiio-side  Vicarage,  Ilford. 

Laing,  R.M.,  M.  a.,  B.Sc,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand. 

Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.B.,  1,  Northampton  Villas,  Swansea. 

La  Touche,  Mrs.,  Harristown,  Brannoxtown,  Co.  Kildare,  Ireland. 

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C. 

Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough. 

Leete,  Miss,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

Leete,  Miss  L.,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London, W. 

Leighton,  Miss,  19,  Wilton-place,  London,  S.W. 

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire. 

Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris. 

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia. 

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia. 

Limond,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W. 

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man. 

LiNDS-AY,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  59,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W. 

Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W. 

Lodge,  Robert,  Great  Gearies,  Ilford. 

LONGSTAFF,  G.  B.,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Highlands,  Putney  Heath,  S.W. 
Lucas,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  Drayton  Lodge,  Eastbourne. 
Lyttelton,  Sybella,  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W. 
Macalister,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Cambridge. 
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  W. 

MacNaughton,  Rev.  Samuel,  M.  A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston. 
Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W. 
Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-road,  London,  N.W. 
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Malmesbury,  Sus.an  Countess  of,  25,  Sloanc-gardens,  S.W. 
Mangin,  Marcet,  130,  Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris. 
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Surbiton. 
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber- 
land. 

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W. 

Marshall,  Thomas,  Leeds  Lil^rary,  Commercial-street,  Leeds. 

Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia. 

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C. 

Marson,  Gervase,  3,  Park-road,  Southport. 

Martin,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),  France. 
Martin,  W.  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W. 
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts. 

MATHE\vs,G.B.,B.A.,9,Menai  View-terrace,UpperBangor,North  Wales. 
McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin. 
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.      -  - 

630 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

MdSTEiLE,  Mrs.,  Admiralty  House,  Lewes. 
Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria. 
Miller,  Robert,  6,  Chester-street,  Edinburgh. 

Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire. 

MiLMAN,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

MiNOT,  Dr.  C.  Sedgwick,  2-5,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  U.S.A. 

Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W. 

MoLESwoRTii,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India. 

Money,  Charles  L.,  Northbrook  Cottage,  Petersfield. 

MoNTEAGLE,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Poynes,  Co.  Limerick. 

MoNTGOJiERY,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth. 

Moore,  Major-General  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Norwood,  S.K 

Mordan,  Miss  C.  E.^  15,  Queen-.square,  W.C. 

Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge. 

MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh. 

MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India. 

MouL,  Mrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W. 

MouLE,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts. 

MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  G,  Rue  Daubigny,  Place  Malesherbes,  Paris. 

MoYNiiiAN,  B.  G.  A.,  M.B.  (Lond.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds. 

MuNRO,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  17,  Vincent-squai-e,  S.W. 

Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C. 

Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W. 

Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London. 

Murray,  R.  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.O.P.(Edin.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh. 

Murray,  T.  Douglas,  33,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W. 

Muse,  Mrs.  Eva  S.,  Santa  Fe',  New  Mexico,  U.S.A. 

Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk. 

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham. 

Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge. 

Mylne,  Mrs.,  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W. 

Nathan,  S.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Med  way  Iron  Works,  Rochester. 
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  The  Rectory,  Southwick,  Brighton. 
Nevill,  The  Lady  Dorothy',  45,  Charles-street,  London,  W. 
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge. 
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  9,  Claro-terrace,  Richmond-road,  S.W. 
Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan. 
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison  avenue.  New  York,  U.S.A. 
NiCHOLL,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales. 
Nicholls,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth. 
Nichols,  Miss  Irene,  Lawford  Hall,  Mauningtree. 
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange, 
Totteridge,  Herts.  ^  .  • 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

G3I 

NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I. E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Embassy,  Constantinople. 

NoAKEs,  D.  W.,  23,  Nelson-street,  Greenwich,  S.E. 

Noel,  Hex.  Roden,  St.  Aubyns,  West  Brighton. 

NoRRis,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings. 

NuTTEK,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrothani,  Kent. 

Oakeley,  Miss  H.  D.,  97,  Warwick-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W. 

Ogilvie,  G.  M.,  10,  Selborne-road,  Brighton. 

Omax,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Painswick-road,  Cheltenham. 

Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford. 

O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,M.B.,140,Elizabeth-st.,Sydney,NewSouth  Wales.- 

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide. 

Osborne,  Jajies,  Ph.C,  Hersham,  near  Walton-on-Thames. 

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Richmond  Cottage,  Uley,  near  Dursley,  Gloucestershire. 

Paget,  Lady,  The  Embassy,  Vienna. 

Paige,  William,  M.A.,  1,  Portman  Mansions,  Baker-street,  W. 

Palmer,  Lieut.  H.Pt.,  R.A.,  Tlie  Grand  Depot  Barracks,  Woolwich. 

Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  Melrose,  Porus  P.O.,  Jamaica,  W.I. 

Parry,  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B.A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  Clewer, Windsor.. 

Passingham,  Mrs.,  11,  Morton-crescent,  Exmouth. 

Peake,  C.  W.,  B.  a,,  c/o  Mr.  AVood,  High-street,  Newport,  Salop. 

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  Apollo-st.,  Bombay. 

Perry,  Edwin  C,  M.A.,  The  College,  Guy's  Hospital,  London,  S.E. 

Pethybridge,  Walter,  29,  Methley-street,  Kennington  Cross,  S.E. 

Plenderleith,  William,  60,  Stroud  Green-road,  Einsbury  Park,  N. 

Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  1 26,  Holmesdale-rd.,South  Norwood,S.E„ 

Plummer,  J.  W.,  Cockermouth. 

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W. 

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-stjuare,  S.W. 

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  Co.  Dublin. 

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol. 

Porter,  Mrs.,  The  Hawthorns,  West  Cliff-road,  Bournemouth. 

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W„ 

Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Ptotherwuod,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E. 

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W. 

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W. 

Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A. 

Pribitkof,  v.,  23,  Troitzky  Pereoulok,  St.  Petersburg. 

Prickett,  Miss  L.  M.,  Ross  Cottage,  Fortune  Gate-road,  Harlesden.. 

Prothero,  Mrs.,  63,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge. 

Pryce,  R.  a.  Yaughan,  New  College,  Hampstead,  N.W. 

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.. 

Raalte,  Charles  van,  Aldenham  Abbey,  Watford. 

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  8,  Ennismore-gardens,  London,  S.W.. 

'632 

List  of  Members  and  Assochdes. 

Haleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbi-oke-road,  London,  W. 

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W. 

Ramsay,  Lady,  The  Old  House,  Wmibledon,  S.W. 

Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.  ■  ' 

Raupert,  Rev.  H.  G.,  139,  Walton-street,  Oxford. 

Rawson,  Henry  Cr.,  68,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W. 

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford. 

Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor. 

Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Thornclilfe,  Cheltenham. 

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington. 

Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  Farcliffe-place,  Bradford. 

Richardson,  Pi.obert  E.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

PtiDDiFORD,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Brooktield,  Hucclecote,  near  Gloucester. 

Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.  ■ 

RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J.,  B.A.,  General  Post  Office,  Sydney. 

Ritchie,  Miss,  131,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W. 

Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin. 

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  Brook  Dene,  1  -t,  Strawberry  Hill-road,  Twickenham 

Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B  ,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh. 

Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 

Robin,  Perc?  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia. 

Robinson,  Edward,  4,  Castelnau-gardens,  Barnes,  S.W. 

Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia. 

Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C. 

Rossi-Pagnoni,  Professor  G.F.,  4,  Via  Sabbatini,  Pesaro,  Italy. 

Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S  E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare. 

Russell,  John,  B.A.,  IG,  SomerHeld-road,  Finsbury  Park,  London,  N. 

Russell,  Mrs.  Rosetta,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst. 

■Sampson,  Colonel  Dqdley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hay  wards  Heath. 

-Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell. 

*Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow. 

Saunders,  Thomas  Bailey,  M.A.,  13,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  S.W. 

^oholefield,  Rev.  C.  C,  M.A.,  32,  Lowndes-street,  S.W. 

ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W. 

sSchreiber,  Ma.tor,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W. 

Schuster,  Miss,  Cannizaro,  Wimbledon,  S.W. 

■Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N. 

"Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg. 

Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W. 

SiiADWELL,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W. 

;Shaen,  Rev.  Richard,  M.A.,  West  Cottage,  Puoyston,  Herts. 

811AND,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W. 

Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone. 

Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  E.G.  .  , 

List  of  Mcmhers  and  Associates. 

6m 

SiiUTTLEWORTii,  Joiix,  Kenmare  Bridge,  by  New  Galloway,  Kirkcud- 
brightshire, N.B. 
SiDEBOTiiAM,  Edward  J.,  Earlsdene,  Bowden,  Clieshire. 
SiDGWiCK,  Mks.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W. 
Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W. 
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford. 
Sladen,  Douglas  B.  W. 

Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead. 
Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Junr.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham. 
Smart,  J.  Naish,  Sydney  House,  Burnhara. 

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  H.  B.,  M.A.,  32,  Royal  York-ter.,  Clifton,  Bristol.. 

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton. 

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Nortluimberland. 

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Riverbank,  Putney,  London,  S.W. 

Smith,  John  George,  Junr.,  Hill  House,  Surbiton. 

Smith,  R.  Morris,  3,715,  Ciiestnut-street,  W.  Philadelphia,  U.S.A. 

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin. 

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  52,  Stanhope-gardens,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W. 

Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W. 

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W, 

Snaith,  James  F.,  Ancaster  House,  48,  Granada-road,  Southsea,  Hants.. 

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton. 

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A. 
Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W. 

Sperling,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts. 

S  pinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia. 

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland. 

Stackhouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle. 

Stanway,  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton. 

Staple Y,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge. 

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.AV. 

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta- 

Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B. 

Stillman,  W.  J.,  3,  Challoner-street,  West  Kensington,  W. 

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport. 

Stout,  George  F.,  M.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge. 

Sturges,  Mrs.William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,W,. 

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W. 

SwANWiCK,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W. 

Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland. 

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W. 

Tancred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W. 

Tanner,  Ernest,  3,  Windsor-terrace,  Penarth. 

Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W. 

•034 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  Higli-street,  Oxford. 

Taunton,  Mrs.  Pv.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham. 

Taxis,  The  Princess,  10,  Mohrengasse,  Vienna. 

Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.  A.,  Cluirchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon 
Thackeray,  Mrs.   W.  G.,  Portland  House,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road 
Blackheath,  S.E. 

Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woodstock,  Waverley  rd.,  Liverpool 

TiiOROLD,  Edward  S.,  Larkby,  Exeter. 

Todd,  Mrs.,  Maclean,  Clarence  River,  New  South  Wales. 

Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon. 

Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville  Park,  Lewisham,  S.E. 

TiiuusTAN,  Frederick,  W.,  M.A.,  La  Martiniere,  Lucknow,  India. 

Townley,  Miss  F.  jNL,  47,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton. 

Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland. 

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris. 
TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.AV. 
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot. 

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  C.  W.,  M.A.,  Histon  Vicarage,  Cambridge. 

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy. 

Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W. 

Venn,  J.,D.Sc.,  F.  R.S.,  Summerleigh,  Chine  Crescent-rd.,  Bournemouth. 

Verrall,  Mrs  ,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge. 

Veurall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton. 

Vian-Williams,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields. 

Vicars,  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Bridge  House,  Revesby,  Boston,  Lincolnshire. 

ViLLAMARiNA,  TiiE  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome. 

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France. 

Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

VoRES,  Arthur,  M.R.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W. 

Warbuuton,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead. 

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick. 

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W. 

Waurand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B. 

Warter,  Mrs.  Tatham,  Longden  Manor,  Pontesford,  Salop. 

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Swinford, Stourbridge. 

W ATERnousE,C.H.,M.D.,56,  KarlLudwig  Strasse,Ober-Dobling, Vienna. 

Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W. 

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W. 

Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge. 

Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W. 
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Washwell  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire. 
Whately,  Mrs.  Henry,  14,  Campden  House-road,  Kensington,  W. 
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge. 
WiiisiiAW,  Mrs.  Berniiard,  27,  Upper  Bedford-place,  W.C. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates.  6i\5 

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily. 
Whitehead,  John,  Esplanade,  Guernsey. 
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Larkfield,  near  Maidstone. 
Wilde,  Mrs.  Oscar,  16,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  S.W. 
WiLLAN,  Miss  Florence  M.,  .50,  Weymoutli-street,  Portland-place,  W. 
WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Hay  wards  Heath,  Sussex. 
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  63,  Queen  Victoria-sti-eet,  E.G. 
Williams,  Rev.  ISTelson  G.,  M.A.,  East  Meon,  Petersfield,  Hants. 
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham. 
Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone. 

WiNDEYER,  The  Hon.  W.  C.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  Australia. 
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  J\I.A.,  42,  Tedwovth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W. 
Wingfield,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  W. 
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W. 
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Blbomsbury,  W.C. 
Wittig,  Gregor  C,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig. 
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  Moika  28,  St.  Petersburg. 
Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershii-e. 
Wright,  Mrs.  Almroth  E.,  Oakhurst,  Netley,  Hants. 
Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London, W. 
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W. 
Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Western  General  Dis- 
pensary, Marylebone-road.,  N.W. 
Young,  REv^  Charles  John,  F.R.A.S.,  Stafibrd-place,  Halifax. 
Young,  Professor  William  H.,  67,  Kriegstrasse,  Karlsruhe-in-Baden. 

N.B. — ]Mcniheis  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any 
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi, 
London,  W.C, 

G36  List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

MEMBERS  AND  MIIITES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH. 

(December  31.st,  1892.) 

All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  v:hen.  another  Country  is  named.. 

MEMBERS. 

Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central  Avenue,  Dover,  N.H. 

BiGELOW,  Dk.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Blackmar,  Paul,  406,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn. 

Blake,  Fraxcis,  Keewaydin,  Weston,  Auburndale,  P.O.,  Mass. 

BowDiTCii,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  179,  Commonweal th-ave.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass. 

Carey,  A.  A.,  191,  Comuionwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

Carnochan,  GrOUVERNEUR  M.,  1,  Kassau-st. ,  New  York  City,  N.Y., 

Casey,  Theodore  B.,  Minneapolis,  Minn. 

Cheney,  W.  T.,  220,  Broad-street,  Rome,  Georgia. 

Coffin,  C.  P.,  209,  Washington-street,  Room  3,  Boston,  Mass. 

Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  Iv.,  220,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa. 

Cory,  C.  B.,  8,  Arlington-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Cowles,  Dr.  E.,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,  Mass. 

Craig,  John  W.,  Box  291,  San  Bernardino,  Cal.  .  . 

Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Cardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass. 

Curtis,  W.  E.,  U,  West  20th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Davidson,  Thomas,  239,  West  lOSth-street,  New  York  City,  N.  Y.. 

DiETRiCK,  Mrs.  Ellen  B.,  176,  Huntington-a venue,  Boston,  Mass. 

Dodge,  J.  T.,  340,  W.  Washington-ave.,  Madison,  Wis. 

Dow,  Alexander,  331,  W.  85th-street,  New  York  City. 

Dunham,  Miss  E.  L.,  37,  East  36th  street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.^ 

Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  Keene,  N.H. 

Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  330,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  Mass, 

Fletcher,  J.  B.,  1,  Gai-den-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Frothingiiam,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Fullerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111. 

Cage,  Lyman  J.,  470,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111. 

Gale,  Harlow  S.,  43,  Bulowstrasse,  Berlin. 

Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

637 

^EREISH,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Portland,  Maine. 

'Gill,  Wm.  Fearing,  3,  East  86th-street,  New  York  City. 

Oilman,  Benjamin  I.,  62,  Cedar-street,  New  York  City. 

(Greeley,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Nashua,  Iowa. 

■Green,  Mrs.  Richmond,  Easthampton,  Mjxss. 

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansouia,  Conn. 

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia. 

Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass. 

Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  19,  IVlarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Hudson,  Woodward,  Concord,  Mass. 

Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I. 

James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Jayne,  H.  La  Barre,  505,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Maso. 

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Judah,  J.  M.,  545,  Shelby-street,  Memphis,  Tenn. 

Xidd,  Geo.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  Nev/  York,  N.Y. 

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

HiAWTON,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  E.  ISth-street,  New  York  City. 

Lodge,  Mrs.  John  E.,  31,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

X,0GAN,  AV.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Doisette,  Prof.  A.,  303,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 

LuKENS,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

McViCKER,  J.  H.,  McVicker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111. 

Newcomb,  C.  a.,  1,145,  Woodward-avenue,  Detroit,  Mich. 

Newell,  Miss  Lavinia  H.,  255,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City. 

Nims,  F.  a.,  Muskegon,  Mich. 

NuNN,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119  1-2,  York-sti-eet,  Savannah,  Georgia. 
Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston.  Mass. 
Palmer,  Hon.  Thomas  W.,  1,040,  Woodvv^ard-avenue,  Detroit,  Mich. 
Peabody,  John  E.,  183,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Plummer,  J.  W.,  200,  Randolph-street,  Chicago,  111. 
Preston,  Mrs.  William  G.,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston,  Mass. 
Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  IMarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
QuiNBY,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass. 
QuiNCY,  JosiAH  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Reece,  Mrs.  Lucy,  110,  Osborne-street,  La  Porte,  Ind. 
RoBBiNS,  Miss  A.  ]M.,  7,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass. 
Ropes,  John  C,  99,  MountYernon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
RoYCE,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

2  u 

638 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Pembroke-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.  ■ 

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y, 

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  229,  Madison-avenue,  New  York. 

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  336,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  305,  W.  76th-street,  New  York  City. 

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  305,  "W.  76th-street,  New  York  City. 

Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island. 

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  Elmira  College,  Elmira,  N.Y. 

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y. 

Watts,  H.  M.,  "  The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary-  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111. 

WoLCOTT,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

AYooDMAN,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES. 

Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich. 

Rees,  Mrs.  Ruutz,  Wayside,  Scarsclale,  New  York. 

Dr.  R.  W.  Shufeldt,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C. 

WiLTSE,  Dr.  a.  S..,  Kismet,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn. 

ASSOCIATES. 

Abbey,  Charlotte  S.,  M.D.,  717,  Franklin-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 
Adams,  Robert  C,  45,  Metcalfe-street,  Montreal,  Canada. 
Albree,  John,  Junr.,  56,  Bedford-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa. 
Alden,  T.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa. 
Alexander,  Don,  513,  McCallie-avenue,  Chattanooga,  Tenn. 
Alling,  Joseph  T.,  72,  Oxford-street,  Rochester,  N.Y. 
Almy,  Francis,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 

Andrew,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Old  Colony  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass. 
Andrews,  ]\Irs.  J.  A.,  307,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Annes,  a.  L.,  106,  So.  High-street,  Janesville,  Wis. 
Arnold,  J.  N.,  19,  College-street,  Providence,  R.I. 
Auel,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Lefferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y. 
Avery,  Miss  M.  H.,  137,  Academy-st.,  Poughkeepsie,  New  York. 
Ay'er,  J.  C,  Puritan  Club,  50,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Ayers,  George  D.,  Maiden,  Mass. 

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  1,712,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111. 
Baker,  Dr.  Smith,  Winston-building,  Utica,  N.Y 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

639 

Baldwin,  Henry  C,  172,  Commoiiwealth-aveaue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Ballou,  Mrs.  M.  B.,  Wliitaker  Flats,  Davenport,  Iowa. 
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Banker,  Mrs.  George  W.,  46,  Sterling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York. 
Barnes,  T.  W.,  c/o  H.  P.  Starbuck,  62,  Wall-street,  New  York. 
Barr,  James  M.,  c/o  Institute  of  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London, 

Central  Institute,  Exhibition-road,  S.W. 
Barrows,  C.  M.,  Prospect  Cor.  School,  Brookline,  Mass. 
Beale,  C.  W.,  Arden,  North  Carolina. 

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York  City. 
Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda,  4,726,  Woodlawn-ave,  Chicago,  III. 
Bigelow,  Horace  P.,  Waterville,  Oneida  County,  N.Y. 
Blackford,  A.,  322,  South  Main-street,  Findlay,  Ohio. 
Blackmar,  Gen.  W.W.,  70,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass. 
Blodgett,  Mrs.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass. 
BoARDMAN,  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada. 
Both-Hendriksen,  Mdlle.  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y. 
BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass. 
Braggiotti,  Isidore,  208,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Breed,  Stephen  A.,  17,  St.  James'-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Brennan,  Rev.  J  .  K.,  Louisiana,  Mo. 

Briggs,  Dr.  E.  C,  125,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass, 
Brimmer,  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama. 
Brooks,  Alexander  C,  c/o  P.R.R.,  Jersey  City,  N.J. 
Brooks,  Dr.  F.  D.,  524,  Van  Buren  street,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Brooks,  Henry,  15,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Brooks,  The  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Phillips,  233,  Clarendon-street, 

Boston,  Mass. 
Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Brown,  Delass  S.,  309,  Main-street,  Peoria,  111. 
Brown,  John  F.,  16,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass. 
Brown,  Mrs.  J.  F.,  16,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass. 
Brown,  Wilbur  C,  133,  St.  Botolph-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 
Browne,  Mrs.  L.  Andrews,  131,  Sargent  street,  Newton,  Mass. 
Brush,  Miss  Helen  C,  71,  West  47th-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Bryant,  Geo.  B.,  16,  East  70th-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Buffett,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.J. 
Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
BuNDY,  Mrs.  Mary  E.,  92,  La  Salle  Street,  Chicago,  111. 
BuRGE,  Miss  Marie  L.,  132,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y. 
Carey,  Mrs.  Arthur,  191,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston^  Mass, 

640 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Carletox,  Will  M.,  420,  Greene-avenue,  Brooklyn,  New  York. 
Carpenter,  Frank  B.,  Tiffany  Building,  337,  4th-avenue,  New  York,. 
Carpenter,  Franklin  R.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Rapid  City,  South  Dakota. 
Carr,  Lucien,  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass, 
Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio. 

Catlin,  Captain  R.,  1428.  Euclid-place,  Washington,  D.C. 
CiiANLER,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Morris  &  Steele,  16,  Exchange-place,. 
New  York. 

Chapman,  Mrs.  J.  J.,  327,  West  82nd-street,  New  York. 
Cheney,  Dr.  Fred.  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass. 
Chenoweth,  Mrs.  C.  Van  D.,  64,  E.  86-street,  New  York  City.. 
Clarke,  J.  E.,  Ph.D.,  214,  South  43rd-street,  Phila.,  Pa. 
Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-avenue,  Akron,  Ohio^ 
Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  3,  Central  Wharf,  Boston,  Mass. 
Cochran,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  1,306,  First-street,  Louisville,  Ky. 
Coffin,  Charles  A.,  109,  Nahant-street,  Lynn,  Mass. 
Oompton,  Prof.  Elias,  Wooster  University,  Wooster,  Ohio. 
Comstock,  C.  B.,  39,  Whitehall-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Cone,  J.  W.,  Union,  AVilson  Co.,  Texas. 
Cooper,  James,  P.O.  Box  1,9  42,  Montreal,  Quebec,  Canada. 
Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.. 
CoRNiNG,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  355,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
CoRSER,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  1,819,  Vine-place,  Minneapolis,  Minn. 
Cotton,  Mary  H.,  M.D.,  114,  West  123rd-street,  New  York  City.- 
Crafts,  James  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Crafts,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.        .  - 
Craigie,  Ernest  J.^  134,  Peel-street,  Montreal,  Canada. 
Crepin,  Ernest  E.,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111. 
Critchlow,  E.  B.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

Crocker,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  59,  Columbus  Junction,  Iowa. 
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass, 
Croswell,  James  G.,  17,  West  44th-street,  New  York  City. 
Cunningham,  S.  A.,  Altoona,  Florida. 
CuRRAN,  Richard  L.,  219,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y. 
Curtis,  Mrs.  Greely  S.,  28,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Curtis,  Professor  John  G.,  127,  East  35th-street,  NewYork  City. 
Cutler,  Miss  Anna  A.,  M.A.,  Rockford  Cottage,  Rockford,  111. 
Dailey,  Judge  Abram  H.,  16,  Court-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y. 
Davis,  Samuel  G.,  120,  Highland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass. 
Delabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  19,  Angell-street,  Rockford,  Providence,  R.T. 
De  Groot,  Mrs.  E.  K.,  c/o  Mrs.  J.  de  F.  Wlndle,  South-street,  Stam- 
ford, Conn. 

Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin,  112,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont- street,  Longwood,  Mass. 

Lii^t  of  Memhers  and  Associates. 

641 

DiMMOCK,  George,  P.  O.  Box  15,  Canobie  Lake,  N.H. 
DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbiidgo,  Mas?. 

Dole,  Nathan  H.,  "  Hedgecote,"  Glen-road,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass. 
Donald,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  Winchester,  7,  W.  lOth-street,  New  York  City, 
Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Dorr,  George  B.j  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Doty,  Asa  C,  Box  523,  Cuba,  N.Y. 

Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Duncan,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Congregational  House,  Boston,  Mass. 

Dunham,  Dr.  W.  R.,  Stoneham,  Mass. 

DwiGHT,  Mrs.  James,  Stockbridge,  Mass. 

Edmunds,  Albert  J.,  936,  Franklin-street,  Philadelphia. 

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass. 

Errani,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  118,  East  26th-street,  New  York  City. 

EsTERLY,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  104,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn. 

EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass. 

Evans,  Mrs.  Edgar  B.,  80,  Chester-square,  Boston,  Mass. 

Evans,  Mrs.  Edwin  T.,  189,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 

Evans,  Frederick,  Junr.,  Neivark  Daily  Advertise^-,  Newark,  N.J. 

Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass. 

Evans,  Miss  M.  S.,  80,  Chestei'-square,  Boston,  Mass. 

Everett,  Professor  0.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Everett,  Torrey,  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa. 

Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  148,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

FiLLEBROWN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  264,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Fillmore,  Dr.  0.  W.,  305,  Point-street,  Providence,  R.I. 

Fluiirer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  Grand  Rapids,  Michigan. 

Forbes,  John  M.,  Milton,  Mass. 

Ford,  Austin  E.,  Freeman's  Journal,  11,  Park-row,  New  York  City. 
Ford,  Professor  Darius  R.,  D.D.,  Elmii-a  College,  New  York. 
Foster,  Mrs.  Wm.,  82,  Huntington-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Fuller,  Miss  S.  E.,  124,  West  23rd-street,  New  York  City. 
Fullerton,  Professor  G.  S., 4,1 16,  Spruce-street,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa, 
Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass. 
Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Craft's-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass. 
Genung,  Prof.  J.  F.,  Ph.D.,  Amherst,  Mass. 
Ghost,  A.  M.,  Room  16,  Ghost  Block,  Denver,  Col. 
GiBBENs,  Jos.  M.,  421,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Gleason,  Adele  a.,  M.D.,  The  Sanitarium,  Elmira,  N.Y. 
Goddard,  Mrs.  Moses,  25,  Brown-sti-eet,  Providence,  R.I. 
Goodale,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-sti-eet,  New  York,  N.Y. 
Goodnow,  H.  R.,  32,  Remsen-street,  Brooklyn,  New  York. 
Goodwin,  W.  H.,  Junr.,  Sioux  City,  Iowa. 

642 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

GooDRiDGE,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.  ■ 

Griffing,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  2,024,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  Oity, 

Grover,  Bev.  G.  W.,  Nashua,  New  Hampshire. 

Hale,  George  S.,  5,  Exeter-sti'eet,  Boston,  Mass.      '  •  ^ 

Hall,  Miss  Harriet  M.,  45,  William-street,  Providence,  B.I. 

Hall,  Professor  James,  New  York  State  Museum,  Albany,  N.Y. 

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass. 

Hamblet,  Eugene,  Box  12,  Dracut,  Mass. 

Hamilton,  C.  M.,  50,  Main-street,  Salamanca,  N.Y. 

Hamilton-Williams,  Mrs.  Alice,  37,  East  50th-street,  New  York,  N.  Y- 

Hansen,  Otto  B.,  649,  Cass-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis. 

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

Harris,  Bev.  J.  A.,D.D.,  St.  Paul's  Bectory,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia. 

Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C. 

Harwood,  C.  H.,  M.D.,  112,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Hawkins,  William  M.,  6,  Coit  Block,  Buffalo,  New  York. 

Hawortii,  George  D.,  20,  Groveland  Park,  Chicago,  III. 

Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon- street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Heard,  John,  Junr.,  c/o  Messrs.  Bai-ing  &  Co.,  London,  England. 

Hedges,  Mrs.  Sidney  M.,  76,  Highland-street,  Eoxbury,  Mass. 

Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  N.Y.  . 

HiLES,  Ogden,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

Hodgson,  Bichard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass. 
Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y. 
Hogg,  Mrs.  John,  50,  Conniionwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.       .  . 
HoLBROOK,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York  City.  •  .•  ■ 

HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York  City.      •  ' 
HoLLADAY,  Prof.  Waller,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York  City. 
Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  112,  W.  118th-street,  New  York  City. 
Holmes,  Bev.  S.  V.  V.,  1,262,  New  Hampshire  Ave.,  N.W.  Wash.,  D.C. 
Hooper,  Miss  E.  B.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
HoYLE,  W.,  P.  O.  Box  407,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Hurley,  A.  M.,  cornerof  Firstand  Monmouth-sts.,  Independence, Oregon. 

HusE,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska. 

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Maiilon,  100,  State-street,  Chicago,  111. 

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York  City. 

Jackson,  Mrs.  E.  B.,  244,  Dallas-street,  Houston,  Texas. 

James,  Mrs.  C.  E.  L.,  c/o  Bleecher  Luce,  lOtli  and  Chestnut-streets, 

Fort-smith,  Ark.  ,, 
J EWETT,  Miss  S.  O.,  South  Berwick,  Maine. 

Johnson,  Charles  B.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass. 
JoLiNE,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Jones,  Geo.  H.,  561,  Madison  Avenue,  New  York  City. 
Jones,  Miss  Theresa  E.,  South  Evanstan,  111. 

Karns,  Prof.  T.  C,  University  of  Tennessee,  Knoxville,  Tennessee. 
Kehew,  Mrs.  William  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.        -     ■. ' 
Keith,  Miss  J.  B.,  44,  Stuyvesant-street,  New  York  City. 
Keith,  Mrs.  Boudinot,  126,  East  27tli-street,  New  York  City. 
Kelly,  W.  C,  Slielbyville,  IlL 

Kempton,  Charles  W.,  61,  Oro  Blanco,  Pima  Co.,  Arizona. 

Kerlin,  Isaac  N.,  M.D.,  Elwyn,  Delaware  Co.,  Pa.  /. 

Kibbe,  a.  B.,  M.D.,  3,267,  Bailey-building,  Seattle,  Washington. 

KiLNER,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  333,  West  78th-street,  New  Y^'ork  City. 

Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  12,  Harvard-place,  Worcester,  Mass. 

KuHN,  Mrs.  Hartman,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

Lang,  B.  J.,  Messrs.  Chickering  and  Sons,  Boston,  Mass. 

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C. 

Latham, Miss  V.  A  ,  B.Sc,  58,  East  XJniversity-ave.,  Ann  Arbor,  Micli. 

Lathrop,  John,  10,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Lawrence,  Mrs.  Amory  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

Lee,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  21,  Chauncey-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia. 

Leonhardt,  J.  S.,  M.Sc,  M.D.,  1,427,  0-street,  Lincoln,  Nebraska. 

Leubuscher,  a.  L.,  Humboldt  Pub.  Co.,  19,  Astor-place,  New  York 

Lewis,  P.  M.,  M.D.,  Lecompton,  Kansas. 

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine. 

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springtield,  Mass. 

Librarian,  Cutting's  Free  Library,  Lunenburg,  Vermont. 

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore. 

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass. 

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass. 

Librarian,  Mich.  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich. 

LiBRiVRiAN,  Nebraska  University,  Lincoln,  Nebraska. 

Librarian,  Ohio  University,  Athens,  Ohio. 

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111. 

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Denvei*,  Colorado. 

Librarian,  Rochester  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  New  York. 
Librarian,  San  Francisco  Free  Public  Library,  San  Francisco,  Cal. 
Littlefield,  J.,  c/o  AVhite  it  Co.,  12th  &  Chestnut-sts.,  Philadelphia. 
LivERMORE,  Mrs.  Mary  A.,  Box  565,  9,  Emerson-street,  Melrose,  ftlass, 
Lockwood,  Colonel,  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
LoMBARDi,  C,  1,314,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas. 
Long,  George  E.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jersey  City,  N..J. 
Long,  PvEV.  J.  D.,  Babylon,  Long  Island,  New  York. 
LouNSBERRY,  C.  A.,  U.  S.  Land  Otiice,  Fargo,  North  Dakota. 
Macdon.ald,  Dr.  R.  C,  34,  Parmenter-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

'644  List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

MacDonougii,  Thomas  B.,  25  AVest  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 

Macleod,  Miss  Gertrude  E.,  1,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Macqueary,  Rev.  Howard,  Sagiiicaw,  Mich. 

Manning,  F.  J.  H.,  28i-,  North  Front-street,  Portland,  Oregon. 

Marshall,  Henry  R.,  Macintyre  Bg.,  874,  Broadway,  New  York,N.Y. 

Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Wahiut-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York  City. 

Matthews,  Mrs.  F.  A  ,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley,  and  Co.,  London,  England. 

Matthews,  George  E.,  Buffalo  Morning  Express,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 

M'Arthur,  James,  3,848,  Lake-avenue,  Chicago,  111. 

McClelland,  Ma.jor  G.  P.,  Davenport,  Iowa. 

McEwen,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York. 

McGee,  W.  J.,  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  Washington,  D.C. 

McHenry,  Mrs.  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Balto.  Co.,  Tnd. 

McIlwraitii,  H.  p.,  Muskegon,  Mich. 

McQuigg,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  207,  Park-avenue,  Ironton,  Ohio. 

Mendenhall,  Mrs.  L.,  Duluth,  Minn. 

Mendenhall,  Nereus,  M.D.,  Guilford  College,  N.C. 

Metcalf,  Mrs.  J.  H.,  81,  Angell-street,  Providence,  R.I. 

Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterborough,  Madison  Co.,  New  York. 

Millet,  Josiaii  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

MiLLiKEN,  George,  3,G14,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Minot,  Professor  Charles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Minturn,  Miss,  109,  East  21st-&treet,  New  York,  N.Y. 

Mitchell,  James,  Stock  Exchange,  New  York  City. 

MooRE,  Dr.  F.  Ill,  East  45th-street,  New  York  City. 

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  34,  East  29th-street.  Chicago,  111. 

Morris,  Mrs.  Marian  L.,  Room  281,  Navy  Dept.,  Washington,  D.C. 

Nagles,  Miss  Maria  K.,  1,214,  Walnut-street,  Phila.,  Pa. 

Newbold,  Wm.  PtOMAiNE,  Ph.D.,  4,116,  Spruce-street,  Phila.,  Pa. 

Newcomb,  Prof.  Simon,  Washington,  D.C. 

Nichols,  Miss  A.  B.,  92,  La  Salle  St.,  Chicago,  111. 

Noble,  Louis  Spencer,  Leadville,  Colo. 

NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary  A.,  139,  AVest  42nd-street,  New  York  City. 
NoRRis,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Ohio. 

Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  opp.  P.O.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio. 

Oliver,  George,  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal. 

Page,  Dr.  F.  W.,  Hotel  Cluny,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Bulialo,  N.Y. 

Parke,  Miss  M.  P.,  117,  West  49th-street,  New  York  City. 

Parker,  (t.  H.,  Bank  of  Montreal,  Chicago,  111. 

Parker,  Prof.  J.  M.,  Junr.,  M.D.,  Mount  Pleasant,  Iowa. 

Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Lid  of  Members  and  Associates. 

645 

Parkman,  Miss  jM.  R.,  Hotel  Huntington,  Huntington-ave., Boston,  Mass. 

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N  Street,  Washington,  D.C. 

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass. 

Peckham,  Dr.  Grace,  25,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City,  ^.Y. 

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111. 

Pedigo,  Dr.  Lewis  G.,  Lock  Box  259,  Roanoke,  Virginia. 

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C. 

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Penfield,  Sophia,  M.D.,  Danbury,  Conn. 

Perkins,  Mrs.  A.  T.,  112,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Perkins,  Mrs.  E.  H.,  5,  East  40th-street,  New  York  City. 

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood  -avenue,  Buffalo,  New  York. 

Perrin,  Mrs.  E.  O.,  Stanton,  Florida. 

Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312,  Mai-lborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Peters,  E.  T.,  Box  265,  Washington,  D.C. 

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass. 

Petersen,  Dr.  Frederick,  829,  7th-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y. 

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Plumb,  D.  S.,  24,  Boudinot-street,  Newark,  N.J. 

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  71,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Pumpelly,  Raphael,  Bainbridge,  Georgia. 

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  108,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Putnam,  George,  2-1,  Quincy-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 
Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Raine,  R.  J.,  Carleton-place,  Ontario,  Canada. 
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass. 
Ranso-m,  Frank  H.,  137,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 
Ransom,  Paul  C,  1,298,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y. 
Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  New  York. 

Reynolds,  Edward,  M  D.,  130,  Mai-lborough- street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Richardson,  Charles,  608,  Chestnut-street,  Phila.,  Pa. 
Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 
Ricker,  James  W.,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,  Boston,  Mass. 
Rivers,  Miss  Mary,  Milton,  Mass. 

RoBBiNS,  Miss  H.  L.,  113,  West  21st-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 
Rodman,  Miss  Emma,  174,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Rolfe,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa. 
Rollings,  Rev.  Henry,  Manitowaning,  Ontario,  Canada. 
RoTcii,  Miss  Joanna,  Milton,  Mass. 

Rumsey,  Mrs.  B.C.,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  &  Tracey  st.,  Buffalo,  New  York. 
Ryan,  Carroll,  289,  St.  Martin-street,  Montreal,  Canada. 
■Salter,  W.  M.,  1,415^  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

64G 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

Sargent,  Mrs.  Wixthrop,  207,  Commonwealih-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utiea,  N.Y. 

Sawyer,  Roswell  D.,  58,  West  57th-street,  New  York  City. 

Schiller,  C,  109,  West  SSth-street,  New  York,  N.Y. 

ScHOFiELD,  Edward,  713,  N.  17th-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Scott,  C.  C,  Arkadelphia,  Arkansas. 

ScuDDER,  Samuel  H.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Sears,  John  D.,  Upper  Sandusky,  Ohio. 

Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  84,  Huntington-avenue,  Boston,  Mass. 

SiiAW,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass. 

Shed,  Z.,  8-32,  17th-street,  Denver,  Colorado. 

Sheets,  John  C,  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill,  Ohio. 

Shimmin,  Mlss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Sims,  John  C,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia. 

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich. 

Smith,  Horace  J.,  6,  East  Penn,  Germantown,  Philadelphia. 
Smith,  H.  W.,  410,  Laurel-avenue,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota. 
Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111. 

Smith,  Winfield,  Langham  Hotel,  Washington-street,  Boston,  Mass. 
Stansell,  Mrs.  E.  T.,  1,470,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111. 
Stebbins,  Walter  G.,  City  Hospital,  Boston,  Mass. 
Steffens,  J.  L.,  Credit  Lyonnais,  Paris,  France. 
Stillmann,  Mrs.  W.  O.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y. 
Stockton,  John  P.,  Junr.,  Highwood,  Bergen  Co.,  N.J. 
Stone,  Colonel  W.  L.,  Jersey  City,  N.J. 

Stone,  IMrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Storer,  Albert,  40,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Street,  Mi.ss  Ida  M.,  2,033,  Dodge-street,  Omaha,  Neb. 

Strong,  Charles  A.,  M.D.,  Hotel  SanRemo,  Sth-ave.,  New  York,  N.Y. 

Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon  street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Sutherland,  J.  G.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

Talbot,  Edward  A.,  2,  Elmo-street,  Dorchester,  Mass. 

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  247,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Taylor,  Edward  Wyllys,  M.D.,  Montelair,  N.J. 

Taylor,  Fredk.,  174,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass. 

Thayer,  Mrs.  S.  V.  R.,  191,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Thompson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

TiiORNDiKE,  S.  Lothrop,  2,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass. 

Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Junr.,  115,  Brattle-screet,  Cambridge^  Mass. 

Tickell,  I.  A.  Arscott,  Narcoossee,  Florida. 

Tighe,  Judge  J.  G.,Germanica  Bdg.,  375-379,  Fultou-st., Brooklyn,  N.Y. 
Tilton,  Howard  W.,  12,  Pearl-street,  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa. 
Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C. 

List  of  Members  and  Associates. 

G47 

Towner,  Judge  J.  W.,  Santa  Anna,  California. 

Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridf^'e,  Mass. 

TuRNBULL,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  Easfc  39th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y. 

Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  Quincy,  Mass. 

TuTTON,  Mrs.  Sara,  2,318,  Jay-street,  Denver,  Colorado. 

TwiNCH,  Frederick,  455,  West  57th-street,  New  York  Citj^ 

Tyler,  J.  C,  Magnolia-ave.,  cor.  Olive-street,  Knoxville,  Tenn. 

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  31 4,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Yan  Allen,  Wm.  H.,  St.  John's  School,  34,  Yarick-street,  New  York. 

Yan  Brunt,  Cornelius,  319,  East  57th-street,  New  York  City. 

Yan  Horn,  M.  L.,  104,  West  29th-street,  New  York  City. 

Yan  Norden,  Theodore  L.,  16,  West  4Sth-street,  New  York  City.  N.Y. 

Yan  Slyke,  J.  M.,  23,  North  Pinckney-street,  Madison,  Wis. 

Yaughan,  Miss  Yirginia,  226,  West  34th-street,  New  York  City. 

Yiele,  Herman,  1,722,  Conn.-avenue,  Washington,  D.C. 

Wade,  Miss  Julia  Frances,  Box  268,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal. 

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-ave.,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111. 

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  349,  North  Clark-street,  Chicago,  111. 

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa. 

Watson,  Mrs.  F.  S.,  263,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Watson,  Dr.  William  H.,  720,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y. 

Webb,  Mrs.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Saleni,  Mass. 

Webster,  David  L.,  332,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

Westbrook,  Dr.  R.  B.,  1,707,  Oxford-street,  Philadelpliia,  Pa. 

Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  cor.  6th  and  Ash-streets,  Fort  Smith,  Ark. 

Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  ]\Iass. 

lYiTtTK.  Mrs.  Florence  D..  765,  Broadv^^ay,  New  York. 

AVhite,  Professor  Frances  E.,  1,533,  North  15th-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Y/hite,  Henry  G.,  32,  Irving-place,  Buffalo,  New  York. 

White,  James  T.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York. 

White,  J.  T.,  M.D.,  Room  206,  Pioneer-bdg.,  Seattle,  Washington. 
Whiteside,  Miss   Hilda,  Coleshill    Lodge,    Sutton  Coldfield,  Bir- 
mingham. 

WniTON,  Rev.  James  M.,  Ph.D  ,  18,  W.  9th-street,  New  York  City. 

Williams,  Professor  H.  H.,  University  of  N.C.,  Chapel  Hill,  N.C. 

Wilson,  Mrs.  John  L.,  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass. 

Wilson,  Tom  L.,  Room  10,  Chopin  Block,  Buffiilo,  N.Y. 

Winter,  Mrs.  W.,  17,  3rd-ave.,  New  Brighton,  Staten  Island,  New  York. 

Wright,  Dr.  J.  P.,  36,  New  Montgomery-st.,  San  Francisco,  Cal. 

Wright,  James  A.,  1,127,  Sherbrook-street,  Montreal,  Canada. 

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass. 

WY^^NE,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass. 

ZuG,  C,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa. 

PROCEEDINGS    OF  THE 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH. 

INDEX    TO    VOLUME  VIIL 

1892. 

A. 

A.,  Miss,  Experiments  in  Crystal- Vision  and  Kindred  Plienoniena  ...  498 
A.,  Miss,  Seance  witli  Mrs.  Piper    25,  160 

A.  ,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by   514 

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psycliieal  Research,  List  of  JNIembers  636 
Ankarkrona,  H.  J.,  Evidence  relating  to  Dr.  Backnian's  Experiments    ...  405 

Anonynionsly  contributed  cases   233,  242,  345,  385,  396 

Aritlimetical  Prodigies,  ¥.  W.  H.  Myers  on  the  Genesis  of  the  Faculty  349-359 
Automatism,  Sensory,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on   436 

B. 

B.  ,  Miss,  Hypnotic  Experiments  ^Yith   536 

B.,  Miss  A.  A.,  Seance  ^\dth  Mrs  Piper   114 

B. ,  Mrs.  Case  contributed  by    238 

Backman,  Dr.  A.,  Furtlier  information  as  to  Experiments  in  Clair  voyance  405 

Bakewell,  C.  M.,  Case  contributed  by   450 

Barnby,  Sir  Joseph,  Ca.se  contributed  by         ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  502 

Barnes,  S.  E.,  Case  contributed  by    174 

Barrington,  Erie,  Case  contributed  by   ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  514 

Bass,  W.,  Case  contributed  by    399 

Bell,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  .■  389 

B&illon,  Dr.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism  (International  Congress  of  Experi- 
mental P.sychology)   604 

,,         ,,   Hypnotic  Suggestion  in  Education                                   608,  609 

Bernheim,  Prof.,  Hysterical  Amblyopia,  on    605 

,,  ,,       Remai-ks  on  Hypnotism   (International  Congress  of 

Experimental  P.sychology)    604,  605,  609 

Bertrand,  Rev.  L.  J.,  Case  contributed  by       ..:    194 

Bickford-Smith,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by    382 

Bidder,  Mr. ,  The  "Calculating  Genius, "  Powers  of                     ...       ...  351 

,,       ,,    Q.C.,  Case  contributed  by    ...                                     ...       ...  356 

Blackwell,  Dr.  Elizabeth,  Remarks  on  Hallucination  (International  Con- 
gress of  Expeiiniental  Psychology)    608 

11 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

Biuet,  M.,  Cases  recorded  by        ...       ..        ...    ...  454,45.5 

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  Seances  witliMrs.  Piper         ....      ...     4,  10-10,  19,  21,  22,  69 

Blyth,  E.  L.  I.,  "  Calculating  Genius,"  Powers  of   352 

Boddington^  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  ...       ...       ...        ..       ...       ...  234 

Booth,  Lady  Gore,  Case  contributed  by ...        ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  172 

Bowditcli,  Prof.  H.  P.,  Seances  witli  Mrs.  Piper   -  7,8 

Brand,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  383 

Brighten,  W.  E.,  Cases  contributed  by   400,  401 

Brocl^elbank,  A.,  Case  contributed  by   ...    ...    381 

Brown,  J.  F.,  Evidence  on  "Slate- Writing"  Phenomena    291 

,,       ,,      Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper...       ...       ...    85,  88,  89 

Brown,  Mrs. ,  Experiences  in  a  Haunted  House      327 

Browne,  Mrs.  G.  H. ,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   19,  125 

Browne,  Sir  J.,  On  Prolonged  Excitement  in  Mania  ...       ...       ...       ...  364 

Browning,  Robert,  Case  recorded  by      ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  377 

Bruce,  Lewis  C,  Case  contributed  l)y    ...        ..       ...    ...  453 

Bruce,  Dr.  Mitch^ell,  Hallucinations  induced  liy  Drugs      ..        ...     444,  445 

C. 

(.!.  A.  J.,  Seance  with  Mr.s.  Piper   '    17,  110 

C.  E.  D.,  Seance  witli  Mrs.  Piper    97 

C,  Mr.s.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    22,  138 

C'ampbell,  Miss  C,  Ex[)eriences  in  a  Haunted  House...       ...       ...       ...  323 

Charcot,  Dr.,  A  case  of  Persistence  of  Memory  in  Dreams  ...    379 

Clairvoyance,  Dr.  Alfred  Backman's  Experiments  in  ...       ...       ...  405 

Cases  of    180,194,490,491,501-506,517,518,522 

Cocke,  J.  R.,  Mrs.  Piper's  Seances  with   40,  47 

Conley  Ca.se,  tlie   200 

Consciousness,  Suliliniinal,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on    333,436 

Council  of  the  Society.  Sec  Officers  and  Council. 

Crellin,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by    384 

Cristoforo,  Princess  di.  Cases  contributed  l>y  224,  225,  522 

Crum,  A.,  Conley  Case,  The      202-204 

Crystal-Vision,  Experiments  in   460-465,  473,  492,  498,  522 

Retrocognitive  Visions  ...  477,  486,  488,  499,  504,  500-512,  514 
Telepathic  or  Clairvoyant        481,  482,  490-492,  501,  502, 

505,  515,  522,  526 

D. 

D.  C. ,  Se.VNCE  with  Mrs.  Piper  125 

Darwin,  F.  A. ,  Case  contributed  by      ...       ...  398 

Davey,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by    ...      394 

Davey,  S,  J. ,  Tmitations  by  Conjuring   of  Plienoniena  attributed  to 

"Spirit  Agency, "  Richard  Hodgson  on...       ...       ...  253 

,,         ,,        Modus  operandi     256-259 

,,  ,,  P;-0f('e(?//;,7«  XI. ,  Examination  of  evidence  recorded  in  259-289 
Davies,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by         ...       ...  ...        ..       ...  218 

Davis,  Rev.  W.  W.,  Case  contributed  by   214 

Davis,  W.  S.  Lnitationsof  "  Spiritistic  Phenomena  "   296,  302,  303 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

Ill 

Delboiuf,  Prof.,  Appreciation  of  Time  Ijy  >So!nnaiiiliulists   414,605 

Derhani,  T.  P.,  Seances  with  Mrs  Piper   10,  21,  08 

Downsliire,  Dowager  Marcliiones.s  of,  Case  contributed  by    177 

Dreams.  Sec  H ujicniniciic  Dreams. 

Drugs,  Effect  of,  in  Producing  Hallucinations   444,  445 

Dufay,  Dr.,  Case  of  Improvement  of  Vision  during  yomnamliulism       ...  390 

E. 

Eardley,  L.VDY,  Cases  contributed  liy   339 

Ebbingliaus,  Prof.,  Piemarks  on  Hypnotic  Phenomena  (luteruational  Con- 
gress of  Experimental  Psycliology)    004 

Edmunds,  Miss,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    22,  135,  154,  155 

Elliott,  Mrs.  E.  K.,  Case  contributed  by    344 

Entwistle,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by    208 

F. 

F.,  Dr.  C.  W.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    4,  51,  98 

Faure,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by      ...  374 

Finney,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by         ...   249 

Flournoy,  Dr.  Th.,  Cases  contributed  Ijy    ...       ...  453,450 

Franklin,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hallucination  (international  Congress  of 

Experimental  Psychology  )    008 

Genius,  Mechanism  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on   333 

Gibotteau,  Dr. ,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transf erence    460-409 

Grant,  Cameron,  Case  contributed  by  212 

Gruber,  Prof. ,  Case  recorded  liy  457 

Gurney,  Edmund,  ]\Iemorial  Library  Catalogue    612 

H. 

H.,  C.H.,  Case  contributed  by  386 

Hallucinations,  Census  of.    Report  before  the  International  Congress  of 

Experimental  Psychology  007 

*     .  „  Induced,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  430 

.    ,,       Sec  Crystal  Vision. 

Drugs,  Effect  of,  in  Producing    444 

,,      Experiments  in  Visualisation     450,  451-458,  480, 
"  499,  510-519 

,,     Shell-hearing    492-495 

Transference  of  Mental  Pictures,  &c.  459-409,554-577 

Haunted  House,  Record  of  a,  by  Miss  R.  C.  Morton    311 

Hayes,  F.  W.,  Case  contributed  by   392 

Herschell,  Sir  J.,  On  Hypnagogic  Hallucinations    340,  347,  45.5 

Higton,  W.,  Cases  contributed  by   337 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

Hodgson,  RicharJ,  Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  Ijy  Conjuring  of  riienoinena 

sometimes  attributed  to  Spirit  Agency    253 

})  ,,        Record  of  Observations  of  certain  Phenomena  of  Trance  1 

Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    9,  18,  20,  23,  43-45,  51,  54,  -56, 

60,  61,  63,  65,  66,  93,  131,  139-142,  146,  149 

Holbrooke,  Dr.  M.  L. ,  Case  contributed  by   374 

Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   23-25,  139-158 

Hopkins,  Dr.  S.  A.,  Stances  with  Mrs.  Piper   10,  68 

Howard,  A.  J.,  and  W.  T.,  Reports  on  the  case  of  Dr.  Wiltse      ...      188,  190 

Hunt,  Miss  A.,  Case  contributed  by   388 

Hypermnesic  Dreams,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on   362 

,,  ,,        Information  given  and  Troblems  solved      ...  392-396 

„  „        Telepathic  or  Transitional    397-402 

,,  ,,        Vividness  of  Sensory  Faculties    371 

Hypnotism  335,  405-411,  414,  42.3,  445,  448,  454,  459,  526,  536,.  603,  611 

,,        Action  at  a  Distance  ..      335 

,,        Amnesia  cured  by  means  of  ...       ...       ...       ...  379,603 

,,        Clairvoyance   405-411,  526 

Curative  Effects  of   603,604,609-611 

,,        Legal  and  Moral  Aspects  of   604,  608,  609 

,,  Suggestion,  Hypnotic  Hallucinations  ...  445,446,459-465,554 
,,  ,,        Memory  Conditions  of  ...       ...       ...  378,379 

,,  ,,        Self-suggestion   374,  375,  378 

,,        Time,  Appreciation  of,  by  Somnambulists        ...       ...      414,  605 

,,        Thought-transference-.-.    422,464,536.    Sec  Thoujht-tmnsfcrence. 

Intern.VTION.VL  Congress  of  Experijuental  Psychology,  Report  of  ...       ...  610 

J. 

J.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by   222 

James,  Prof.  W.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper      ...    4,  5,  44,  56,  133 

James,  Robertson,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    16,  92 

Janet,  Prof.,  On  a  case  of  Amnesia  cured  liy  Hypnotism    ...  603 

,,         ,,      Memory  restored  by  Artilicial  Means       ...    482 

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference    536 

K.  . 

K.,  Mrs. ,  Report  on  Experiences  in  a  Haunted  House        ...    326 

Keulemans,  J.  G.,  Clairvoyant  and  other  Experiences    516 

Knorr,  Dr.  L. ,  Case  contribu'ed  by    ,    238 

Kratt't-Ebing,  Dr.  R.  Von,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of   375 

L. 

L.,  Dr.  C,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 
Lewis,  H.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 

125, 159 
...  389 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

V 

Library,  "  Eilnmnd  Gurney,"  Supplementary  Catalogue      ...       ...       ...  G12 

Liebeiult,  Dr.,  Suicidal  Mania  Cured  by  Hypnotic  Suggestion  (luleriia- 

tional  Congress  of  E.xpcriniPntal  Psycholouy)    ...       ...       ...       ...  C04 

Liegcois,  Prof.,  Crime  Committed  under  the  Influence  of  Hypnotic  Sugges- 
tion (InternatioDal  Congres.s  of  Experimental  P.sych-dogy)        ...  009 

Lodge,  Prof.  Oliver  J. ,  Seances  with  Mrs.  I'iper    3 

M. 

M. ,  MR!3.  ,  Case  contributed  by   178 

MacDonald,  A.  J.,  Case  contrilrated  by  396 

Mangiamele,  Vito,  The  Calculating  Genius,  Powers  of   351,  3.")4,  3.5o 

Maribier,  Leon,  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  (International 

Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology)    ...       ...    607 

Man.sfield  and  Watkins,  Alleged  "  Slate- Writing  "  Phenomena  of    ...    290,  291 

Marson,  Gewase,  Case  contributed  by  391 

Mason,  Miss  M.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by   372 

Meetings  of  the  Society,  Ordinary    169,  413 

Members,  As.sociates,  and  Honorary  Members,  List  of    615-636 

,,        American  Branch,  List  of     ...    ...  636 

Mendelssohn,  Dr.,  On  Hysterical  Amblyopia  (International  Congress  of 

Experimental  Psychology)  605 

Menneer,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by   208 

Morton,  Miss  R.  C,  Record  of  a  Haunted  House   311 

Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Memoir  of,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers   597 

Munro,  Mr.,  On  Mr.  Davey's  Experiments    296,  297 

Myers,  F.  W.  H. ,  Indications  of  Terrene  Knowledge  in  Phantasms  of 

the  Dead   170 

,,  ,,         Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Memoir  of   597 

J,  Report  of  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental 

Psychology   601 

„  Subliminal  Consciousness,  The    333,  436 

,,  Hypermnesic  Dreams   362 

,,  ,,  Mechanism  of  Genius   333 

,,  ,,  Sensory  Automatism  and  Induced  Hallucinations  ..  436 
Myers,  W.,  Case  contributed  by  ...   398 

N.  M.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   17,  120 

Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by  496 

Noell,  M.,  Case  contributed  by-  175 

Norris,  T.  J.,  Case  contributed  by   376 

O. 

Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society   615 

Okie,  Mrs.  Howard,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   10,  67 

Orr,  Mrs.  Sutherland,  Case  recorded  l>y  377 

Osier,  Dr.,  Remarks  on  Hallucinations  (International  Congress  of  Experi- 
mental Psychology)  ')08 

vi    ■  .         Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

.  ,■    -P.      ^;  ..  ■  \     "      .  ' 

P.,  Hypnotic  Experhneiits  with   ■   -  ... :   4.59,536 

P.  Mrs.,  Seances  Avitli  Mrs.  Piper    ■    19,  84 

Padshah,  B.  J.,  Evidence  as  to  Mr.  Davey's  '•  Slate- Writing"  l*lienonenia 

264,  265,  270,  282,  29.3 

Paige,  E.,  Case  contributed  liy    227 

Pedley,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by   231 

Personality,  Problems  of    ...       ...    ...       ...       ...    28,  50,  54 

Peterson,  A.  T.  T.,  Cases  contributed  by    '  395 

Pliantasms  of  tlie  Dead,  Indications' of  Continued  Terrene  Knowledge  in, 

F.  W.  H.  Myers  on   170 

Pilkington,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by   ...       ...       ...  210 

Piper,  Mrs.,  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,  li. 

Hodgson  on       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...    1 

Psychology,  Second  International  Congress  of  Experimental    601 

Q. 

Q.,  The  Mis.ses,  Case  contributed  by  .. 
Q,. ,  Mr. ,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper  ... 
Quint,  Wilson,  Case  contributed  by 

220 
92 
200 

R. 

R.,  MIS.S  A  M.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   28,  111,  112 

Radljerg,  Alma,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  with   405,  409 

Radnor,  Countess  of.  Miss  A.'s  Experiments  in  C'rystal- Vision,  &c.  499-516 

Raynes,  S.  H. ,  Report  on  the  Case  of  Dr.  Wiltire   193 

Reynolds,  Col.,  Case  contributed  by   397 

Reynolds,  Mrs  ,  Case  contril)nted  by   231 

Rich,  J.  Rogers,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   18,  19,  22,  52,  126 

Richet,  Prof.  Ch.,  Case  contributed  by  228 

Roberts,  T.O.,  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-Writing  "  Phenomena       ...      273,  274 

Rochas,  M.  de,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of   378 

Romilly,  Hugh,  Case  contriljuted  by      211 

Royce,  Prof.,  Cases  recorded  by   337,  385-387,  532 

Russell,  J.,  Evidence  as  to  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate- Writing "  Phenomena  264,  282 

S. 

S.,  Col.,  a.  V.,  Case  contributed  by   387 

S.,  F.  S.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    119 

S.,  H.  ^y.,  Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-Writing"  Phenomena  267,  285-289 

S.,  lima.  Case  of    ...  375 

S.,  W.  S.,  Case  contributed  by      ...       ...       ...  478 

Samuelsson,  Anna,  Clairvoyant  Experiments  with    407,  408,  410 

Savage,  Miss,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   19,  101 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

vii 

Savage,  Revs.  M.  J.  and  W.  H.  Seanc&s  with  Mrs.  Piper   16,  .34,  100,10-):-106 
Schrenck-Notzing,  Baron  von.  Experiment  in  Tliouglit-Tran.sference  (Inter- 
national Congre.s.s  of  Experimental  Psycliology)  608 

,,         Remarks  on  Hypnotism  609 

Scripture,  Dr.,  Experiments  on  Unconscious  Vision  348 

,,        ,,     On  Arithmetical  Prodigies    350-35o 

Shell-Hearing,  Experiments  in    •  492 

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Evidence  as  to  Mr.  Davey's  "  Slate- Writing"  Pheno- 
mena   266,  272,  278 

,,         ,,       Thought-Transference  Experiments   536,  609 

Sidgwick,  Prof.,  Census  of  Hallucinations  (International  Congress  of 

Experimental  Psychology)   607 

Report  of  the  Intei'national  Congress  of  Experimental 

Psychology   ...  601 

,,         Remarks  on  Hypnotic  Phenomena   604,  606,  609 

Slade,  Henry,  Alleged  "  Slate- Writing  "  Phenomena  of    271,  293 

Smith,  G.  A.,  Thought-Transference  Experiments    ...    536 

Snow,  Herman,  Case  contributed  hy   248 

Spirituali-sm,  Mr.  A.  J.  Davey's  Imitations  of  Phenomena  of        ...       ...  253 

Sperling,  Dr.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotic  Phenomena  (Inte.national  Congress 

of  Experiment il  Psychology)   605 

Stevenson,  R.  L.,  Dream  Experiments  371 

Stuart,  Mrs.  J.  Windsor,  Case  contributed  by   ...  384 

Subliminal  Consciousness,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on         ...       ...       ...       333,  436 

,,  Hypermnesic  Dreams    362 

,,  Mechanism  of  Genius   333 

'       >j  Resume  of  Argument       ...    436,437 

)i  Sensory  Automatism  and  luduced  Hallucinations  436 

Symons,  Miss  J.  H.,  Case  contributed  by        .  ,,  389 

Evidence  on  Mr.  Davey's  Slate- Vv'riting  Phenomena  266,277 

T. 

T. ,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with   459  536 

T. ,  Miss  M.  A.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper     97 

T.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Seance  with  }ilrs.  Piper   28,  121.  123 

Telepathy.  See  Crystal  Vision  and  Thought-Transference. 

Thaw,  Dr.  Blair,  Experiments  in  Tliought-Transference    422 

Theobald  Morell,  Case  contributed  by     235  236 

Thought-transference,  Experiments  with  Colours      ...    427,429 

Ideas  and  Mental  Pictures  4,34,  459-465,  466-469,  552-577 
>]  Local  An;T?sthe.sia  and  Rigidity  Produced  ...  577-593 

Numbers   428,  537-552 

>.  Objects    423-425,  427-429 

„  Playing  Cards   407,  428 

,,  Tables  and  Summaries  of  Results  540,541,546, 

547,  556-560,  584-587 

,,  Willed  Actions  Performed     ..    432-434 

Time,  Appreciation  of,  in  Somnambulists        ...       ...       ...       ...  414,605 

Tissie,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of    ...       ...       ...    37g 

Trance,  Hodgson,  R.,  Record  of  Certain  Phenomena  of      ...       ...       ...  \ 

Twining,  Mrs.,  Experiences  in  a  Haunted  House    ...       ...  323 

VIU 

Index  to  Vol.  VIII. 

■V. 

Van  Eeden,  Dr.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotic  Plienomen<a  (Inteiiiational  Con- 

gress of  Experimental  Psychology)    604,  609 

Veith,  Fraiilein,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper      95 

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by    371 

,,  ,,  Experiments  in  Crystal- Vision  and  Kindred  Plienomena  473,480 
Voisin,  Dr. ,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of    ...    ...    378 

\V.  ■ 

W. ,  Mls.s  E.  G.  ,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    4,  28,  29-43 

W.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by   242 

W.,  Mrs.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper    17,  110 

Wadsworth,  0.  F. ,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    ■  ■  •       ...  84 

Wallace,  Alfred   Riissel,  R.   Hodgson    on  Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  of 

Spiritualistic  Plienomena,  A  Reply  to     ...       ...    253 

Watkins  and  Mansfield,  Alleged  "  Slate- Writing  "  Phenomena  of  ...  290-293 

Wendell,  Barrett,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    10,  97,  98 

Whately,  Arcdibishop,  Calculating  Powers  of  ...       ...    ...  353 

AVheeler,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  391 

Whitehead,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by         ...       ..        ...       ...       ...       ...  398 

Whiting,  Miss  L.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    28,  124 

Wicksell,  Knut,  Criticism  of  Dr.  Backman's  Experiments  ..  ...  408-411 
Wilson,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by        ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       ...  229 

Wiltse,  Dr.,  Case  contriliuted  by...    ...       ...    180 

Wolstenholme,  R.,  Case  contributed  by...       ...    ...  496 

Wyatt,  M.  H.,  Thought-Transference  Experiments  with    ...   426,  427,  429,  433 

X.,  Miss,  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision    381,484 

Y. 

Y.  A.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper   16,  96 

Y.,  Mr.,  Mrs.  and  Mi.ss,  Evidence  as  to  Mr.  Davey's  "Slate-Writing" 

Phenomena      259  263,  267-270,  274 

Yates,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by...       ...       ...   383 

Young,  Dr.  A.  K.,  Case  recorded  by   398 

Yowanovitch,  M.,  E.xperiments  in  Visualisation    ...  456 

Z. 

Z.,  Miss,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper    16,  19,  .34,  106 

I
